Foundation welcomes 24 new members to further accelerate cloud native computing

SONOMA, Calif., March 6, 2018 – Open Source Leadership Summit – The Cloud Native Computing Foundation® (CNCF®), which sustains and integrates open source technologies like Kubernetes® and Prometheus™, today announced that 24 new members have joined the Foundation.

These 24 new members illustrate growing support for CNCF and the wide range of developers, vendors and end users adopting high-quality projects that orchestrate containers as part of a microservices architecture. In joining the Foundation, the new members have the opportunity to help steer the success of the overall ecosystem and provide input on future technical momentum.

“CNCF includes an incredibly diverse and innovative group of companies dedicated to delivering cloud native technologies to enable cloud portability,” said Dan Kohn, Executive Director of the Cloud Native Computing Foundation. “These new members will help CNCF expand the cloud native ecosystem and encourage more rapid acceptance of cloud native computing across various industries.”

About the newest Silver Members:

Alcide delivers a cloud native security platform designed for any combination of container, serverless, VM and bare metal environments operated by multiple orchestration systems.

Capsule8 is developing the industry’s first and only real-time attack disruption platform purpose-built for the cloud-native world of Linux, containers and microservices.

CloudBees recently acquired Codeship and together are the hub of enterprise Jenkins and cloud native DevOps, providing companies with smarter solutions for accelerating software development and the fastest path from great ideas to impactful software. Its continuous delivery solutions provide developers and enterprises many choices, from on-premise to cloud native, from self-managed to self-service, from built-in best practices to fully customized, with enterprise-grade security, scalability, manageability and support.

Couchbase provides a data platform, powered by the world’s first Engagement Database, that enables businesses to deliver ever-richer and personalized customer experiences.

Cloud 66‘s container toolchain includes Skycap, a complete Continuous Delivery Pipeline: production-minded, opinionated, secure, and enables true automation, whether hosted or on-prem.

Creationline is a Japanese IT firm, specialized in DevOps, Big Data Analytics and container technology, and a leader in delivering speed and innovation solutions to major enterprise companies in this region.

EMQ Enterprise provides a scalable, enterprise grade, extensible open-source MQTT broker for IoT, M2M, Smart Hardware, Mobile Messaging and HTML5 Web Messaging Applications.

Hainan eKing Technology Co., Ltd., a member of HNA group, a Fortune Global 500 Corporation, is specialized in cloud-computing and smart solutions, covering multiple industries including e-government, finance, aviation, tourism

Inspur is the leading Chinese service provider of cloud computing and big data. Inspur Cloud focuses on providing cloud services to enterprises and government organizations, with applications, big data and container based IoT services.

Instana is the leading provider of Application Performance Management solutions for containerized microservice applications. It applies automation and artificial intelligence to deliver the visibility needed to effectively manage the performance of today’s dynamic applications across the DevOps lifecycle.

Jetstack helps enterprises in their path to modern, cloud-native infrastructure using Kubernetes. They provide consulting, training and open-source tooling to accelerate adoption and use of Kubernetes.

LightStep’s mission is to cut through the scale and complexity of today’s software to help organizations stay in control of their systems. Its first product, LightStep [x]PM, provides an accurate, detailed snapshot of the entire software system at any point in time, enabling organizations to identify bottlenecks and resolve incidents rapidly.

Monostream AG was founded in 2007 as a dynamic software boutique developing user-friendly operations through scalable and flexible software architectures.

OpenMake Software delivers highly reusable DevOps solutions that allow its customers to master agile’s last mile. The software is host to the DeployHub.org OSS project, the only open source, agentless ARA solution architected to support continuous deployments driven by CI/CD, integrated into common DevOps tools such as Jenkins and CloudFoundry.

ReactiveOps offers high-touch DevOps-as-a-Service packages to build and maintain world class Kubernetes-based cloud-native infrastructure.

RiseML is an open-source deep learning platform for Kubernetes.

YugaByte DB is an open source, transactional, high-performance database for planet-scale cloud applications. It enables enterprises to power their user-facing applications on public and private clouds with high resilience, low latency and multi-region scalability.

About the newest End-User Members & Supporters:

Comcast Corporation is a global media and technology company with two primary businesses, Comcast Cable and NBCUniversal.

Indeed is the world’s #1 job site, with over 200 million unique visitors every month from over 60 different countries. As a catalyst for putting the world to work, Indeed is passionate about delivering the right fit for every hire and does so by helping companies of all sizes hire the best talent and offering the best opportunities for job seekers to get hired.

Intuit provides global products and platforms, including TurboTax, QuickBooks, Mint and Turbo, designed to empower consumers, self-employed, and small businesses to improve their financial lives, finding them more money with the least amount of work, while giving them complete confidence in their actions and decisions.

Layer is an enterprise conversation platform that helps companies build customer lifetime value.

Nasdaq (NDAQ) is a leading global provider of trading, clearing, exchange technology, listing, information and public company services.

Shopify is the leading cloud-based, multi-channel commerce platform designed for small and medium-sized businesses.

Steelhouse is an AI-driven, self-service advertising software company for brands of all sizes.

Indeed, Intuit, Layer, Nasdaq, Shopify and Steelhouse join other end user companies including Box, Capital One, eBay, GitHub, Goldman Sachs, NCSOFT, Ticketmaster, Twitter, Vevo and Zalando in CNCF’s End User Community. This group meets monthly and advises the CNCF Governing Board and Technical Oversight Committee on key challenges, emerging use cases and areas of opportunity and new growth for cloud native technologies.

Additional Resources

Learn About CNCF Membership

Learn About CNCF End User Supporters

CNCF Blog

Join the CNCF Conversation on Slack

About Cloud Native Computing Foundation

Cloud native computing uses an open source software stack to deploy applications as microservices, packaging each part into its own container, and dynamically orchestrating those containers to optimize resource utilization. The Cloud Native Computing Foundation (CNCF) hosts critical components of cloud native software stacks, including Kubernetes and Prometheus. CNCF serves as the neutral home for collaboration and brings together the industry’s top developers, end users and vendors – including the world’s largest public cloud and enterprise software companies as well as dozens of innovative startups. CNCF is part of The Linux Foundation, a nonprofit organization. For more information about CNCF, please visit www.cncf.io.

The Linux Foundation has registered trademarks and uses trademarks. For a list of trademarks of The Linux Foundation, please see our trademark usage page: https://www.linuxfoundation.org/trademark-usage. Linux is a registered trademark of Linus Torvalds.

Media Contact

Natasha Woods

The Linux Foundation

(415) 312-5289

PR@CNCF.io