The U.S. National Science Foundation Directorate for Computer and Information Science and Engineering (CISE) advances research, innovation and education in computer science, information science and computer engineering fields. The directorate:

Invests in research and education in all areas of computer and information science and engineering.

Fosters broad interdisciplinary collaborations.

Invests in cyberinfrastructure for all areas of science and engineering.

Enables accessible participation in an information-based society.

Develops a computing and information technology workforce with skills necessary for success in an increasingly competitive global market.

Funding opportunities

Dear Colleague Letter

Posted July 22, 2024

Dear Colleague Letter

Posted July 18, 2024

Program

Posted July 12, 2024

Explore CISE

Division of Computer and Network Systems (CISE/CNS)

Invents new computing and networking technologies, while ensuring their security and privacy, and finds new ways to make use of current technologies.

Division of Computing and Communication Foundations (CISE/CCF)

Advances computing and communication theory, algorithms for computer and computational sciences and architecture and the design of computers and software.

Division of Information and Intelligent Systems (CISE/IIS)

Studies the interrelated roles of people, computers and information to increase the ability to understand data, as well as mimic the hallmarks of intelligence in computational systems.

Office of Advanced Cyberinfrastructure (CISE/OAC)

Advanced Cyberinfrastructure supports and coordinates the development, acquisition and provision of state-of-the-art cyberinfrastructure resources, tools and services essential for transforming science and engineering.

Focus areas

CISE areas supporting NSF priorities.

Advanced wireless

Supporting fundamental research and wireless infrastructure.

Artificial intelligence

Creating trustworthy and ethical AI.

Broadening participation

Research and programs to support underrepresented groups in computing.

Cyberinfrastructure

Resources to fuel scientific innovation.

Semiconductors

Powering the computers of the future.

Smart and connected communities

Collaborating to improve quality of life.