We have taken a big step forward for our customers and community as we officially joined the Linux Foundation and Cloud Native Computing Foundation.

Cloud-Native Computing Foundation - Silver Member

XenonStack has joined The Cloud Native Computing Foundation as a Silver member. We have joined the league of Accenture, Deloitte and many more. As members of CNCF, we look forward to working with the Cloud Native Community to help drive the ongoing development of cloud-native computing systems and technologies such as containers for the broader market. We will take the acquired insight back to Xenonstack from the CNCF community to influence how we design our solutions and how we support and educate our customers. XenonStack is a big supporter of CNCF's mission to make cloud-native computing ubiquitous.

About Cloud Native Computing Foundation

The Cloud Native Computing Foundation is creating a sustainable environment and building a community around a cluster of high-quality projects that orchestrate containers as part of a microservices architecture. CNCF acts as a vendor-neutral platform for many of GitHub's fastest-growing initiatives, including Kubernetes, Prometheus and Envoy, which promote collaboration between the industry's top developers, end-users, and vendors.CNCF has over 500 members, including the world's largest public cloud and enterprise software companies as well over a hundred innovative startups.

Linux Foundation - Silver Member

XenonStack has joined The Linux Foundation as a Silver Member. We now become part of the clan of LG, Linkedin and many more. This is an exciting collaboration with partnership our efforts not only help speed up our technology and innovation but are critical to creating billion-dollar businesses and ensuring that modern society remains open-source. Our Exposure to all the Linux Foundation initiatives like conferences, summit and workshops makes us more capable of accomplishing our mission.

Empowering enterprises with Cloud Native Solutions to Build, Run and Operate applications faster Cloud Native Application Development Services

About Linux Foundation

Founded in 2000, the Linux Foundation is a non-profit consortium that offers unprecedented support to open source projects through financial and intellectual resources software, services conferences and training. Together collectively, the Linux Foundation and its initiatives are the most critical and productive ventures in the development of open technologies. The Linux Foundation is developing collaborative communities around open source projects to drive technology development and market acceptance.

Explore about IT Infrastructure Managed Services

Discover Kubernetes Solutions for Applications can scale Independently

Related Insights

Enterprise Digital Platform

Application Modernization and its Challenges | Quick Guide

Enterprise Digital Platform

Composable Applications and its Technology | Know Everything Here

Enterprise Digital Platform

How Platform Engineering driving towards AutonomousOps ?