Thinking through your wedding day appearance can be both exciting and frustrating. Well, this doesn’t apply if you’re an expert at accessorizing. Even so, a wedding day isn’t like any other day. You want everything to be flawless, even perfect if possible. So, to help relieve your stress, here are some ideas you could incorporate. You’ll be glad you came across this post.

The Wedding Veil

The veil is sometimes thought to be part of the wedding dress. However, it also qualifies as an accessory because it enhances the wedding attire. The good thing is that there are several options available nowadays, so you can choose a veil that suits your taste and style. Here are some of the options you might consider:

Bird Cage Wedding Veil: 4-9″

This short and flirty wedding veil can cover just the eyes, skim the nose or fall at the jawline. Usually made of a net or lace, this style is also known as a bandeau veil.

Shoulder-Length Wedding Veil: 20-22″

As the name suggests, this wedding veil style hits your shoulders. Shoulder-length wedding veils are a great option for brides who want a traditional-looking veil that doesn’t compete with the details of their dress.

Blusher Wedding Veil: 30″

Also known as an angle veil or wedge veil, this style offers a less traditional look with vintage appeal. “A blusher is a short veil that falls over the face and ends near the top of the dress,” says Caravella. “During the ceremony, it’s pulled back to reveal the bride, which makes for an exciting and moving moment—the first time the groom sees his bride’s face.” Read more at Brides…

The Headpiece

This one creates a unique finish to a bride’s appearance. It could be a tiara, a hat or a flowery band that gives you that perfect glow. As you pick yours, there are several considerations to make. For example, your hairstyle, veil, and even the shape of your face may guide you as you make this decision. Whichever option you go for, just make sure it makes you feel as beautiful as you truly are.

How do you choose a bridal headpiece? What factors should you consider first? Here are some ideas?

Choose a headpiece to complement your gown.

Your headpiece should match your dress in color, and coordinate in style and decoration. An elaborately detailed gown calls for a more ornate headpiece, while a simpler or less formal dress calls for a less elaborate headpiece. Your veil length should coordinate with the length of your gown; the shorter the dress, the shorter the veil…

Find a headpiece that will flatter your face.

Try various styles until you find the perfect look. If your face is round and full, you need to add height with a tiara, pill box or a pouf added to the back of a headpiece. When your face is long and narrow, you need to add width; consider a wide-brimmed hat. Read more at The Knot…

Bridal Earrings

Many brides find it somewhat confusing to select their earrings. Should you choose golden ones or silver earrings? What about diamonds? You might find it helpful to get the views of your girlfriends or bridal consultants. This way, you won’t be second-guessing yourself on your big day.

When we offer advice to our brides, we always look at 3 things – your wedding dress, the neckline and your bridal hairstyle. These details will impact the overall silhouette as well as the vibe of your look…

A low V neckline or low V back is the ultimate in sensual sophistication. A low front doesn’t necessarily mean you need to wear a necklace to fill the space. Instead, consider statement earrings with a longer drop or a backwards facing headpiece can be the perfect details to accentuate the lines of the low V. Play on the long angular lines with unique accessories such as chain thread earrings, a long pearl drop or a clean wedding veil that highlights the strong V lines. Read more at Tania Maras…