Located in an idyllic spot near the River Stour, a small and welcoming church offers a unique opportunity for visitors to camp inside its Grade I-listed building. Church camping, also known as ‘champing’ is the best way to appreciate a building full of history and charm such as The Church of St Mary the Virgin in Fordwich.

The ancient church, which is in the UK’s smallest town, just three miles from Canterbury, dates back from the Norman era. It had later medieval additions, including the chancel and north aisle being added in the 12th century, then followed by the building of the west tower the following century.

The inside of the building features 17th-century fittings and wall painting, as well as carved stones dating from 1100. It was carved to give the appearance of a tomb. The windows in the nave contain medieval stained glass depicting the Coronation of the Virgin, the Virgin and Child and the emblems of Saint Mark and Saint Luke.

READ MORE: The best Kent restaurants for 2023 according to OpenTable

READ MORE:New restaurant set to open in Kent town after chef's massive success with pop-up

The disused church has been closed since 1995 for worship. Who wouldn’t want to stay in a place like this? For £49, You will sleep among the church pews on camp beds and cushions and have the freedom to arrange everything as you want, but you will need to bring your own bedding.

The next dates available to stay at the church are in April. In order to make your stay as comfortable as possible, guests will also be provided with hot beverages to warm you up. Champing is definitely a unique concept to protect historic churches at risk.

However, the church can only house up to ten people, which makes it perfect for a unique getaway for families and groups of friends

It reads on the Champing website: “Don’t forget that by supporting Champing, you’re also helping to preserve these ancient spaces for the future.

“The church itself is mellow and unspoilt. Slap-bang on the River Great Stour, the truly teeny-tiny town of Fordwich still has the feel of a quaint town of centuries past, with its totally titchy Town Hall, virtually untouched since it was built in 1544.”

Fordwich may not have as many restaurants as Canterbury, but it features a well-loved pub near the church. Fordwich Arms pub, is a Michelin-starred pub which offers visitors a chance to enjoy lunch or dinner in a beautiful old pub building.

It reads on its website: “The seasonal menus focus on provenance, showcasing the best of local Kentish ingredients, sourced directly from local farms and producers. Dan's cooking is accomplished yet approachable, served in a relaxed pub environment with a choice of a la carte or tasting menus.”