Fordwich is well known in Kent as the tiniest town in the UK - but beyond a top-notch pub and it's uniquely miniscule size, there's another hidden secret in the town.

The Church of St Mary the Virgin in Fordwich is ancient and disused.

It sits just across from the well-loved Fordwich Arms pub - but unlike almost any other church you'll have visited before, this one is available to hire as a place to stay.

It's not a renovation job either, as you'll be sleeping in and amongst church pews, where congregations of years past sat and worshipped.

Read more: The quirky Airbnb near Canterbury where you can spend date night in a secluded treehouse

For just £49 per night, per person, you'll get access to the entire church, with all the history and grandeur inside.

You are still very much camping inside a church rather than staying in a hotel though - with camp beds and cushions in place of proper beds, but you have the freedom to arrange everything as you want.

A kettle, coffee & tea, plates & cutlery, as well as hot chocolate, sugar, milk and breakfast are all included, but you'll have to bring along your own bedding to the site.

The church itself is a Norman relic perched on the bank of the River Stour, just over 3 miles from Canterbury.

It has been closed for 25 years, last in use in 1995, though the original structure dates back beyond the 12th century, making it around 900 years old.

It comes fit with medieval stained glass, as well as all the usual intricacies of a church, retaining a font, boards inscribed with the ten commandments and the lords prayer, and even the coat of arms of James II, dating back to 1688 - meaning you're really living in and around a piece of history.

The best part of the church is arguably just how big it is.

It can house up to ten people, making it a perfect and really unique getaway for families or groups of friends that want to try something really out of the ordinary.

It's also very close to the nearby historic city of Canterbury, home to it's own cathedral - though disappointingly that one isn't available to sleep in.