Actor and musician Corbin Bleu, best known for this role as Chad Danforth in the popular Disney film franchise, High School Musical, has joined the cast of One Life to Live.

"We are absolutely thrilled to have Corbin Bleu join the remarkable cast of One Life to Live. Corbin is multi-talented and we look forward to seeing this dynamic character unfold," said Jeff Kwatinetz, Chairman and CEO of Prospect Park.

Bleu will join the series as Jeffrey King, who is described as "a brilliant young reporter" who moves to Llanview to work for publisher Victoria Lord at Llanview's newspaper, the Banner. Jeffrey will also have an established friendship with Matthew Buchanan and Danielle Manning.

Bleu starred in the Emmy-award winning Disney Channel Original Movie High School Musical and its sequel, High School Musical 2, alongside Zac Efron, Vanessa Hudgens, and Ashley Tisdale. Bleu then reprised his role as Chad in High School Musical 3: Senior Year on the big screen.

Bleu's first leading film role was in Bart Freundlich's Catch That Kid, opposite Kristen Stewart and Max Thieriot. Other film credits include Paul W.S. Anderson's Soldier, Dean Parisot's Galaxy Quest, Kinka Usher's Mystery Men, and William Dear's Free Style, which Bleu also produced. Bleu can next be seen in Nurse 3-D which will be released by Lionsgate Films later this year.

Most recently, Bleu starred on Broadway as Jesus in a revival of Broadway musical Godspell. This was his second leading role on Broadway following his rave-reviewed performance as Bodega owner Usnavi in the critically acclaimed musical In The Heights.

On the small screen, Bleu starred in the smash hit Disney Channel Original Movie Jump In!. Bleu's other television credits include the Discovery Kids/NBC series Flight 29 Down, The Beautiful Life, Blue Bloods, The Good Wife, Hannah Montana, ER, The Amanda Show, Cover Me, and Malcolm & Eddie.

As previously reported, One Life to Live will return to the airwaves on April 29. The show will air exclusively on Hulu, Hulu Plus, and iTunes. Hulu.com is a free service, and fans will not incur any expenses or fees from watching the show.

For more One Life to Live casting news, please read:

Erika Slezak, Robert S. Woods close to signing

Jerry verDorn "thrilled" to be returning to Llanview

"Proud" Robin Strasser is headed back as OLTL's Dorian