Over a century old, the Cotton University was once known as the Cotton College. It was only recently that the name was upgraded to Cotton University. This was accomplished under the Cotton University Act, 2017 of the Assam Legislative Assembly to merge the Cotton College State University (CCSU) and Cotton College. Located in Guwahati in the state of Assam, the Cotton University is a public state university.

History of Cotton University

During the colonial rule, the state of Assam was the only province without a college. So, the British government was urged by Manick Chandra and the people to open a college in Guwahati. Their requests were granted by Sir Henry Stedman Cotton, the then Chief Commissioner of Assam, who announced on 3rd November, 1899 that a college would be opened in the city. And thus on 27th May, 1901, the Cotton College was established, which was named after the chief commissioner himself.

Initially, the college was affiliated to the Calcutta University and was started with 39 students and had five professors, which included Frederick William Sudmerson. The Cotton College was once a centre of freedom, literary and cultural movements of the state and when in 1948, the Guwahati University was established the college was affiliated to it and became its constituent college.

On October, 1992, the Cotton College was declared as a centre of excellence and officially became a post graduate college. Eventually on 2011, the Cotton College State University was created via an Act of the Government of Assam and the Cotton College thus became its constituent college. But soon conflicts arose between the university and the college, mainly on the custody of properties.

Thus, in 2015, the Assam Legislative Assembly made an amendment that the university and the college run as separate institutes. In 2017, a bill was passed called the Cotton University Act, as per which the university and college was to be completely merged. This bill completely resolved all the problems. Thus upon enforcement, the university was renamed to Cotton University. In July, 2017, by ordinance the Governor of Assam, Banwarilal Purohit became the Chancellor, who appointed Bhabesh Chandra Goswami as the first Vice Chancellor.

Courses Offered in Cotton University

Keeping at par with the traditions of the erstwhile Cotton College, the Higher Secondary School Level Certificate (HSSLC) is one of the courses that are still offered. Only possible in the Arts and Science streams, this qualification is awarded upon successful completion of two years of study followed by relevant examinations under Assam Higher Secondary Educational Council.

The Cotton University also offers graduate degrees in Bachelor of Arts and Bachelor of Science. The university also offers postgraduate degrees on Master of Arts, Master of Science and Master in Computer Application. Admissions for these postgraduate courses are done through a national level entrance examination (CPGEE). Along with this, the degree of Doctor of Philosophy (PhD) is offered in all postgraduate departments.

Having contributed significantly to the academic and cultural life of the region, the Cotton University has not only withstood the test of time but has also carved a niche for itself in the sphere of higher education in the country.

Visiting Information on Cotton University

The Guwahati railway station is the closest at a mere distance of 700 m from the university and the Lokpriya Gopinath Bordoloi International Airport is the nearest at about 22 km away from the Cotton University.