Cotton College State University is one of the top State University in Guwahati, Assam. Here are the details about Cotton College State University - Courses, Fees, Placements, cut off, Ranking, Facilities, Reviews.

Cotton University is a public state college placed in Guwahati, Assam, India. It turned to set up in 2017 through the provisions of an Act from the Assam Legislative Assembly which merged Cotton College State University and Cotton College.

Accreditation and Ranking

Cotton University was approved by UGC.

Courses Offered

There are courses for undergraduates like BA, B.Sc, and BCA courses. For graduates, there is an array of PG courses including M.Sc., MA, MCA, and a Ph.D.

Cotton College State University, Guwahati campus life

Campus life at Cotton College State University, Guwahati is just phenomenal. The Cotton College State University, Guwahati, Assam and its Campus life provides lots of extracurricular activities like talent in dance, singing, art, literature, anchoring, event management, modelling and drama. Cotton College State University Guwahati campus life and environment is lively and friendly. The premises have sufficient facilities- medical help, food, and departmental store, etc. to fulfil every need of the students.

At Cotton College State University campus you get chance to groom your personality, learn something new. Also, All the festivals are celebrated with extreme enthusiasm at Cotton College State University campus Guwahati so that students feel like home. Sports meet and annual college fests are huge stages for students to showcase their talent. Once you will graduate you will definitely miss the Cotton College State University, Guwahati campus life.

Facilities and Infrastructure

Residential Accommodations:

At present Cotton, University has five Boys' hostels particularly RKB hostel, SNBC hostel, MNDP hostel, and SMH hostel with a complete capacity of 212 boarders, and 3 Girls' hostels particularly NBD hostel, SKL hostel, and DKR hostel with a complete potential of 335 boarders. Two new boys hostels with a potential of 120 college students are under construction. All the Hostel are ready with cutting-edge amenities.

Library:

The Cotton University Library, currently called Dr. Suryya Kumar Bhuyan Library turned into began out withinside the yr of 1901, with the very inception of the university itself. During 1909-1910, the library accommodated approximately 2000 books.

Medical Facilities:

The University health unit is equipped with facilities for outpatients. It additionally has three(3) beds for emergency indoor patients.

Sports Facilities:

Cotton University owns an indoor stadium, named Dr. T. Ao indoor stadium. The stadium is ready with a bunch of indoor sports activities centers, particularly artificial floored badminton courts (2 no.), Table tennis boards (2 no.), etc. The stadium additionally has a cutting-edge gym ready with state of art multi-health gym equipment. The University additionally has outdoor games facilities along with volleyball, basketball courts, soccer field, etc.

Admission

Admission to all the courses is totally merit-based.

Scholarships

Cotton University offers a range of university and state-funded scholarships on a merit and needs basis.