Cotton University (formerly known as Cotton College) is a Public State University located in Guwahati, Assam, India. It was established in 2017 by the provisions of an Act enacted by Assam Legislative Assembly to merge the Cotton College State University and Cotton College. The university made its way to become one of the top 200 institutions of the country by figuring in the band of 150-200 in the National Institutional Ranking Framework rank list in May 2020. Cotton College was established in 1901 by Sir Henry Stedman Cotton, the Chief Commissioner of the erstwhile British province of Assam. It had been the oldest institute of higher education in Assam, and the whole Northeast India. The University is dedicated to impart high quality Education & Research in the region.

The University intents to fill the following Project positions in DBT sponsored projects through physical interview.

Applications are invited from motivated and eligible candidates for the position of Junior Research Fellow (Nos. 03) and Field Assistant (No. 01) position in a DBT funded research project. The position may be leading to Ph.D. and selected person should be willing to travel to remote areas for field study.

Major objectives of the project : The project is in consensus with the “Make in India scheme” run by the Government of India that holds the ability to convert knowledge into wealth and social goods through the process of innovation. Conversions of biodiversity and the associated traditional knowledge system into value added globally competitive commercial products with appropriate safeguards for Intellectual Property Rights (IPR) protection are some of the key strategies of the proposed study for achieving economic prosperity and well being for the people of this region.

1.Minimum Essential Qualification for Junior Research Fellow (JRF) : M.Sc. in Life Sciences (Botany/ Biotechnology/ Molecular Biology and Biotechnology/ Environmental Science/ Zoology/ Bioinformatics (with wet lab experience) /Pharmaceutical Sciences) or equivalent in streams Biochemistry and Molecular biology or M.Sc. in Chemistry (with experience in natural product research, bioinstrumentation or biological research) with minimum 55% marks or equivalent CGPA. Basic computer knowledge is must.

Desirables : Candidate having working experience (with documental prool) on advance instruments applicable in Life Sciences research such as Q-PCR, Flowcytomctry, IIPLC, CJCMS will be given preference. Experience in handling of laboratory animals is desired. Candidalc(s) with at least one publication in SCI indexed journals will be preferred.

2. Minimum Essential Qualification for Field Assistant (FA): U.Sc. in Life Sciences (Botany/ Bioleehnology/ Molecular Biology and Biotechnology/ in Environmental Science/Zoology/ Bioinformatics (with wet lab experience) /Pharmaceutical Sciences) or equivalent in streams Biochemistry and Molecular biology or B.Sc. in Chemistry (with experience in natural product research, bioinstrumcnlation or biological research) with minimum 55% marks or equivalent CGPA. Basic computer knowledge is must.

Desirables : Basic Computer knowledge, Candidate having working experience (with documental proof) on advance instruments applicable in Life Sciences research such as Q-PCR, Flowcytomctry, MPLC, GCMS will be given preference.

Monthly Fellowship :

1. Junior Research Fellow Rs. 31,000/- + 16% I IRA (Rs 35,960/-) for 2 years and Rs 35,000/- + 16% HRA (Rs 40,600/-) for rest 3 years.

2. Field Assistant: Rs. 20,000/- + 16% HRA (Rs 23,200/-) (increment of 15% after 3 years of experience).

Note : The above salary structure is for candidate qualifying NET-JRF conducted by UGC/CSIR or any National entrance lest exam conducted by any central Govt, department. For non-NET-JRF candidates the salary will be as per DBT norms.

Duration : Initial appointment will be for one year or less than that, which is extendable up to five years. Sincere and interested candidates will be encouraged to enroll for the Ph.D. program at Cotton University.

Age limit : 30 years, with relaxation to SC/ST/OBC/Woman candidates as per Government of India norms.

Contract : The selected candidate(s) shall be offered the fellowship as mentioned above and then s/he shall sign an undertaking for terms and conditions of the research ethics and fellowship. The recipient has to perform field study as well as laboratory work during the entire period of project.

How to apply and other details

1. Interested candidates are requested to submit on of page write up and a detailed CV to Project Coordinator, Email: dbtbuilder@cottonuniversity.ac.in with the subject line as "Application for JRF/FA position in DBT project”.

2. Last date of application: Within 20 days from the date of publication of advertisement.

3. In one page write-up, the candidate may write about his/her past research work, any relevant research project done by the candidate, his/her idea for future research or views on the above project based on (lie literature search.

4. CV should include complete information (with documental proof) such as academic grades/percentage starting from X standard with the details of year of passing, University or College, NET/JRF/GATE score with year, discipline, marks, all India rank, contact details and a valid email id. Kindly mention the work experience in detail. Incomplete applications will be rejected.

5. Only shortlisted candidates will be intimated by email for an interview (also will be displayed in CU website) in front of the selection committee involving VC nominee. Selected candidates will be intimated by email/ CU website. NO TA/DA will be paid for appearing for the interview, if conducted in person.

6. If at any stage during the recruitment and selection process, it is found that candidates have furnished false or wrong information, their candidature will be rejected.

7. Application once submitted cannot be altered / resubmitted, under any circumstances. Further, no request with respect to making changes in any data particular entered by the candidate in the application will be entertained, once the application is submitted successfully by Email.

8. Further, Cotton University, Guwahati also reserves the right NOT to fill any of the post advertised, in the event or exigency so decided.

9. The appointments are against the temporary project positions and will not continue in any circumstances beyond the duration of the said project. Any subsequent contract in the project or another project will be fresh appointment. The candidate cannot claim the regularization against any Institute post.

10. On the day of physical interviews, 2 dose of Vaccination certificate needs to be submitted at the venue of interview.

11. In case of any query related to present project, kindly email to dbtbuilder@cottonuniversitv.ae.in Cotton University, Guwahati, 01, Assam.

Last Date : 15th April, 2022

See All M.Pharm Alerts M.Sc Alerts B.Pharm Alerts

See All Other Jobs in our Database