Edward H. Kolb, M.D.

Dr. Edward Kolb is a board certified Orthopedic Surgeon who has been practicing in Central Illinois for the past 9 years. Dr. Kolb did his undergraduate training at the University of Illinois in Champaign/Urbana and completed his Medical School and Orthopedic Surgery Residency at Rush Medical College in Chicago. The Rush Medical College Orthopedic Surgery Program has consistently been ranked in the top 10 Orthopedic Surgery programs in the country and currently provides care for the Chicago Bulls and White Sox. Dr. Kolb has undergone outstanding Orthopedic Surgery training at Rush by many of the world’s leaders in shoulder and knee surgery. He specializes in minimally invasive arthroscopic surgery of the shoulder and knee and has been recognized with Honors at Rush for his research in cartilage transplantation. Dr. Kolb has been the only orthopedic surgeon in the Bloomington/Normal area to achieve 99th percentile in patient satisfaction by a nationally recognized organization awarded in both 2007 and 2008 by the OSF St. Joseph Hospital system. Dr. Kolb has presented numerous lectures in Illinois to organizations and universities regarding various topics and cutting edge techniques in orthopedic surgery. Dr. Kolb is the President of the Ireland Grove Center for Surgery in Bloomington, IL and takes great pride in providing the highest quality of care to his patients.

Physician’s Assistants

Shaun Rudicil, PA-C

Shaun grew up in Bloomington and attended Bloomington High School, where he met his wife Kristen. Shaun attended Southern Illinois University-Carbondale and played football for the Salukis for two years. He then transferred to Illinois State University where he played football and was admitted to the Athletic Training Program. After graduating in 2003, Shaun spent one year with the Chicago Bears as a seasonal intern before moving back to complete prerequisite classes for Physician’s Assistant school and work for OSMC. Shaun and Kristen then moved to Chicago where they spent a little over two years while Shaun attended Physician’s Assistant school and Kristen worked as an event planner. After completing graduate school, they moved back to Bloomington and purchased a house in Normal. Shaun has two dogs, a Weimaraner and Golden Lab. He enjoys boating, traveling, cheering for the Cubs and Bears, and hanging out with friends and family.

Nurse Practitioners

David “Tater” Kieser, CNP

Tater was born and raised in Bloomington/Normal. Drawn to healthcare he left the family farm and began working at Advocate BroMenn Medical Center (ABMC). He has been there for the past 21 years. He graduated cum laude receiving his Bachelor of Science in Nursing degree from Mennonite College of Nursing at Illinois State University (MCN @ ISU) in 2000. He also received the Alumni Award for Clinical Excellence. After working as a nurse in the Emergency Department for 5 years, he returned to MCN @ ISU to pursue his Master of Science in Nursing degree. While continuing to work full-time, he completed his MSN degree in 2007. Upon passing his national board certification through the American Nurses Credentialing Center (ANCC) as a family nurse practitioner, he began working as a nurse practitioner in the Emergency Department at ABMC. He was recruited by Dr. Kolb in October of 2010. He thrives in caring for others and feels grateful to be a part of the OrthoIL™ team. Tater enjoys spending time with his wife, Haley and their four children. Among many things, he enjoys the outdoors, staying active, and photography. Together, Haley and Tater run Roots. God, family and friends are very important to him.

Physical Therapists

Occupational Therapists