Des Moines has its share of great fries, from the loaded fries of Curbin’ Cuisine in Ankeny to the duck frites of Django in downtown Des Moines. The winner of our survey to find the best French fry restaurant in the Des Moines metro is now featured in USA TODAY, a sister publication of the Des Moines Register.

"In a poll on local websites, our USA TODAY Network food writers asked readers to choose their favorite local French fry," reads the USA TODAY story. "The winners of each local site were announced July 8 — and we've rounded up many of them here."

Only one restaurant in the Des Moines metro made the list of 20 from across the country.

More: We asked, you answered: Here are America's favorite french fries

Francie’s Bar & Grill in Des Moines featured in USA TODAY for its crinkle-cut French fries

Getting a table at Francie’s Bar & Grill is always about strategy, with diners consistently huddled at the entrance to get one of the few small wooden booths or the high-top tables. In the summer, diners can opt for seats on the patio, but inside is where the action is.

This sports bar on the south side of Des Moines, named for original owner Francis Anania, originally opened in 1958.

Current owners Greg and Suzanne Fontanini bought the restaurant, remodeled it with an all-wood interior and reopened as Francie’s Sports Bar & Grill in 1987. And it’s been crazy popular ever since.

More: The readers have spoken. Here's where to find the best fries in the Des Moines metro

Sit near the kitchen to watch the magic happen in this space, which feels like a flashback to the ’80s.

As for the fan-favorite crinkle cut fries, Suzanne estimates the restaurant goes through 950 pounds every week. And the ranch that fans love to dip their fries in is made in house.

Get your fries with a French dip or breaded pork tenderloin and order one of Francie’s famous mules to make a complete and memorable meal.

Details: 2100 Wakonda View Drive, Des Moines, Iowa; 515-285-5207 or franciesbarandgrill.com

More: Wine experts share their favorite Champagnes and sparkling wines to pair with French fries