2003

In July, Tesla Motors is founded by a group of Silicon Valley engineers. While Elon Musk, Tesla's current CEO, has led Tesla for the majority of its existence, he wasn't always at the helm of the company.

Tesla, named after the famous physicist Nikola Tesla, was incorporated in 2003 by two engineers, Martin Eberhard and Marc Tarpenning. Later co-founders included JB Straubel, Ian Wright, and Musk.

Eberhard served as CEO until August 2007, and left the company shortly thereafter.

2004

In February, Musk led the company's Series A funding round in 2004, contributing $6.5 million and joining Tesla's board as chairman.

2006

In August, Musk published a blog post entitled "The Secret Tesla Motors Master Plan (just between you and me)" in which he laid out Tesla's long-term mission: to help transition the world away from fossil fuels and toward clean energy.

"Some readers may not be aware of the fact that our long term plan is to build a wide range of models, including affordably priced family cars. This is because the overarching purpose of Tesla Motors (and the reason I am funding the company) is to help expedite the move from a mine-and-burn hydrocarbon economy towards a solar electric economy, which I believe to be the primary, but not exclusive, sustainable solution."

2008

In February, Tesla's first Roadster was delivered.

Drori managed to bring the Roadster into production on time and the first vehicle was delivered to Musk, who was serving as the company's chairman at the time.

To celebrate the occasion, Elon Musk jumped in the Roadster and led four other prototype Roadsters packed with engineers down Highway 101 and University Avenue in Palo Alto, California.

By mid-March, the company had met its goal of getting regular production of the Roadster up and running.

At the time, Drori referred to the event as a "milestone for the company and a watershed for the new era of electric vehicles."

Tesla produced the Roadster, which priced at $109,000, until January 2012 and in total sold 2,450 of them.

By October, Tesla was feeling pressure created by the financial crisis.

"The global financial system has gone through the worst crisis since the Great Depression, and the effects are only beginning to wind their way through every facet of the economy. It's not an understatement to say that nearly every business will be impacted by what has unfolded in the past weeks, and this is true for Silicon Valley as well," Musk said at the time.

Musk announced he would be taking over the company and that there would be layoffs. He also pushed the launch date of the Model S sedan, Tesla's next vehicle, from 2010 to mid-2011.

By November, the company's financial situation had worsened and Tesla was on the brink of bankruptcy.

To help restore Tesla's coffers and speed up Roadster production, the company's board of directors approved $40 million in convertible debt financing.

"Even then, we only narrowly survived...We actually closed the financing round on Christmas Eve 2008. It was the last hour of the last day that it was possible," Musk said in 2015.

2009

Tesla unveiled its second car, the Model S, in March 2009 in Hawthorne, California at the SpaceX headquarters.

By May 12, 2009, Tesla had already surpassed 1,000 reservations for the Model S.

The $40 million in financing helped get Tesla through its darkest hour, but the company needed more resources to further develop its battery technology.

Tesla and Daimler had already been in partnership for about a year working on an electric Smartcar. But by May, Daimler made a long-term bet on Tesla by taking a 10 percent stake in the company. The two companies agreed to work together on developing battery and electric drive systems.

In June 2009, Tesla also received a $465 million loan from the Department of Energy, which it repaid by May 2013.

2010

Tesla goes public. Tesla offered 13.3 million shares at $17 per share. The company raised $226.1 million.

Shares closed at $23.89, valuing Tesla at $2.2 billion.

2011

In October 2011, Tesla showed off a near-production version of the Model S to about 3,000 early reservation holders.

Musk revealed that the vehicle would get 320 miles per charge and go from 0 to 60 mph in 4.5 seconds.

"The oil companies said electric cars can't work, but the truth is, they don't want them to work. But here it is. They would say this car is the equivalent of a unicorn. Well, tonight you had the opportunity to ride a unicorn," Musk said at the event.

2012

Just a few months later, Musk unveiled a Model X prototype, the company's first SUV.

The vehicle's most novel feature was its falcon-wing doors. By February 2012, the company had amassed advance sales of more than $40 million.

At the time of its reveal, Tesla aimed to have the Model X in production by 2014. However, it wouldn't actually enter production until the end of 2015.

In a major milestone, Tesla started delivering the Model S to customers in June 2012.

The first Model S off the production line went to none other than venture capitalist and Tesla board member Steve Jurvetson, complete with a telltale personalized "TSLA S1" California license plate.

Jurvetson stunned an early 2009 Tesla board meeting by pulling a blank check from his wallet and filling it out on the spot to reserve the very first Model S to come off the line.

Doing so, he even beat Tesla CEO Elon Musk to the punch. Musk drives the first production Tesla Roadster, but he is apparently relegated to Model S # 002

April 2015

Tesla reveals the Powerwall, a giant rechargeable battery for your home, and its Powerpack, a battery for commercial use.

Tesla made a big push into energy when it unveiled the Powerpack and Powerwall at an event in Hawthorne, California in 2015.

Musk said that batteries were the "missing piece" of Tesla's business model and claimed that 160 million Powerpacks could power the United States.

The company followed up in a statement on its website declaring that "Tesla is not just an automotive company it's an energy innovation company."

September 2015

Tesla had originally planned to launch its Model X SUV in late 2013 or early 2014, but production delays forced the company to push back deliveries by almost two years.

The vehicle's highly-specialized features, like its signature doors made it complicated to manufacture on a mass scale.

May 2016

The first fatal Autopilot accident occurred in May 2016, but word didn't get out about the incident until more than a month later.

On June 30, government regulators revealed they were looking into a tie between the fatal accident and Tesla's Autopilot feature. Tesla issued a statement calling the incident a "tragic loss."

According to Tesla's statement, the Model S was driving down a divided highway when a tractor-trailer cut across the highway perpendicular to the vehicle.

"Neither Autopilot nor the driver noticed the white side of the tractor-trailer against a brightly lit sky, so the brake was not applied. The high ride height of the trailer combined with its positioning across the road and the extremely rare circumstances of the impact caused the Model S to pass under the trailer, with the bottom of the trailer impacting the windshield of the Model S," Tesla said.

June 2016

The company made a $2.6 billion bid to acquire SolarCity, a solar installation company run by Musk's cousin.

Not surprisingly, the SolarCity deal was controversial from the start, primarily because SolarCity was about $3 billion in debt and the deal was seen as a bailout.

Further complicating the matter, Musk was also the chairman of the company.

July 2016

In 2016, Musk revealed the second part of the Tesla master plan, which outlined four key goals:

1. Develop "stunning" solar roofs that seamlessly integrate with Tesla's battery storage.

2. Roll out more affordable vehicles "to address all major segments."

3. Advance its self-driving technology so that it is "ten times safer" than manual driving.

4. Roll out a car-sharing program that enables Tesla owners to make money by renting out their autonomous car.

Over the years, Musk has repeatedly touted Tesla's plans for self-driving vehicles that can earn their owners passive income. But this robotaxi vision is still a long way off.

November 2016

Musk made it clear in early 2016 that automation was the future for Tesla.

During a shareholder meeting in June, Musk said that he saw a huge opportunity in "building the machine that makes the machine."

So it wasn't all that surprising when Tesla announced it was buying Grohmann Engineering, a German firm that specializes in designing systems for manufacturing automation.

Tesla also closed its Tesla-SolarCity deal in November 2016.

Some Tesla shareholders alleged that the deal amounted to a bailout that unfairly enriched Musk's family, sparking off a lengthy legal battle. Musk won the case in April.

February 2018

In February 2018, the rocket company SpaceX, another Musk venture, launched its founder's Tesla Roadster into space during a test launch of its Falcon Heavy rocket. A dummy dubbed "Starman," wearing a SpaceX spacesuit, was strapped into the driver's seat.

The car is currently orbiting the Sun.

August 2018

Musk tweeted that he is "considering taking Tesla private at $420" a share.

He also said that he'd "secured" funding. The tweet would kick off an SEC investigation into Musk's tweeting habit.

September 2018

The SEC charged Musk with making "false and misleading statements" about taking Tesla private.

The SEC accused Musk of misleading the public, claiming that he knew he didn't have a deal to take Tesla private. Eventually, the two settled.

Musk had to step down as the chairman of Tesla's board of directors. Both he and Tesla were fined $20 million. The agreement stipulated that, going forward, Tesla lawyers needed to approve any of Musk's tweets containing material information about the company.

2021

Amid a cryptocurrency gold rush, Tesla bought bitcoin worth $1.5 billion in January of 2021. It said it planned to accept the currency as a payment for Tesla cars, but that didn't last long.

The value of bitcoin has plummeted in recent months, meaning Tesla's crypto bet is likely under water.

Tesla had announced the Model S Plaid at an event in September 2020. And by June of 2021, started shipping it to customers.

Tesla's fastest car and most powerful vehicle ever, the Plaid has three motors that propel it to 60 mph in a claimed 1.99 seconds.

The Plaid cost is now at $135,990.

Tesla's share price skyrocketed for the better part of 2020 and 2021 as the company proved its profitability and grew sales.

In October 2021, as its share price crested $1,000, Tesla's market cap surged past $1 trillion. It joined powerhouses like Apple, Alphabet, Amazon, and Microsoft.

After announcing the move in October, Tesla headquarters officially moved out of Silicon Valley to Austin, Texas in December 2021. Musk also moved to Texas, where SpaceX's launch site is.

2022

In March after months of bureaucratic delays and environmental protests, Tesla kicked off production at its new factory near Berlin in March. Tesla is building Model Y SUVs there for the European market.

In April, Tesla opened its Austin, Texas, Gigafactory.

Mere weeks after opening its third vehicle plant in Germany, Tesla opened a fourth, marking the occasion with a "Cyber Rodeo" party. The company makes the Model Y there. It also plans to eventually build the Cybertruck pickup at the sprawling facility.

In June amid a broader economic downturn, Musk outlined plans to for Tesla layoffs, cutting 10% of salaried staff.

In October, Tesla faced a criminal investigation into its "self-driving" claims, sources said.

Tesla's claims that its cars can drive themselves, which it calls "full self-driving capabilities," had been under investigation by the US Department of Justice since 2021, people familiar with the matter told Reuters. The investigation could lead to criminal charges.

In December, Tesla began delivering its electric Semi truck.

2023

In an April open letter, a group of 17 Tesla investors asked the board to rein in Elon Musk's attention, which they suggested had become too scattered across his various other companies.

In May, Elon Musk announced in an interview with Ford CEO Jim Farley that the Supercharger network of roughly 12,000 chargers will become available to the owners of Ford electric vehicles through a Tesla partnership.

That same month, Tesla's Model Y sales outsold all other vehicles in the first quarter of 2023, according to estimates from JATO Dynamics, marking the first time it happened for Tesla and for any EV.