Eva Green has a short dating history and admits that love is hard to maintain. The actress has been involved in two long-term relationships and one rumored. However, she doesn't have a husband and has never been married.

Advertisement

Green is a French actress known for appearing in fantasy movies and playing dark characters well. She rose to fame after starring in "The Dreamers" and "Kingdom of Heaven." However, her portrayal of Vesper Lind in James Bond's "Casino Royale" catapulted her to international stardom.

Off-screen, Eva Green's romantic life has also attracted considerable attention from fans curious about that aspect of her life. Therefore, a discussion about her love life is warranted.

Advertisement

Eva Green Used to Date Her "The Luminaries" Co-star

The magnificent chemistry enthralled many fans that Green and Marton Csokas displayed when they played Lydia Wells and Francis Carver, respectively, in the hit series "The Luminaries." A good reason that might have been was that the two used to date in reality.

The Mirror shared that the actors had been involved in a serious relationship for four years starting in 2005 when they starred in "Kingdom of Heaven." However, little is known about their relationship, which did not draw much attention back then.

Their time together as a couple is said to have ended in 2009 due to the demands of their careers affecting the health of their relationship. Green commented on their breakup, saying, "It can be difficult to keep a relationship going when you're apart, filming."

Marton Csokas poses during the reading by Marton Csokas of the poems at Tevere river on October 06, 2019, in Rome, Italy | Source: Getty Images

Advertisement

Csokas is an actor from New Zealand who was born on June 30, 1966. He attended Canterbury University and graduated with a Bachelor's degree in Art History. He had had an extensive acting career dating from as far back as 1990 when he made his Television debut as Terry Mercer in "Shark in the Park."

His career developed from there. He has since been credited with 73 television and movie appearances, plus three upcoming ones. Arguably, "The Lord of the Rings: The Return of the King" is the most prominent film he has been involved in, although "xXx" starring Vin Diesel and "The Bourne Supremacy" featuring Matt Damon follow closely.

Advertisement

Eva Green Once Opened up That She Doesn't Like Flirting

Green has a concise dating history, especially those known to the public. Besides Csokas, she has been reported to have been in one other long-term relationship with Yaan Claasen. He is an actor and production manager who has four film credits to his name. It is not clear when they were together, though.

Her short dating history reflects her views about love. Green feels that love takes too much effort and energy, especially after the honeymoon phase of a relationship. While speaking to the Telegraph, she discussed her opinion about love saying:

"[Love is] exhausting. I don’t like flirting, and when I love someone, I always give everything, maybe too much. And then you have to work at it all the time. I mean, the first months are always great, but afterward, it becomes hard work. It’s not as passionate and crazy."

Advertisement

Eva Green Was Linked to Tim Burton, but She Denied Their Romance

Green and Tim Burton have collaborated on several projects, which led to Esquire calling her his muse. Green had always imagined working with Burton from an early age, and her wishes came to pass a decade after she made her film debut in "Dark Shadows."

In 2016, four years after their first, the two were at it again, producing the fantasy movie, "Miss Peregrine's Home for Peculiar Children." Burton spoke passionately about Green, saying:

"Eva was not instantly knowable. There was something private and mysterious about her, and that's not common in this day and age. People think she's 'dark,' but she's more interesting than that. People assume I'm dark too, but I'm really not."

Eva Green and Tim Burton attend the “Dumbo” Paris Gala Screening at Cinema Le Grand Rex on March 18, 2019, in Paris, France | Source: Getty Images

Advertisement

Hence, after the Hollywood filmmaker split from his partner of 13 years, Harry Potter actress Helena Bonham Carter, there were rumors that Burton had moved on and was dating Green. This was after they had been spotted enjoying a night out in the streets of Fitzrovia.

However, Green addressed the speculation saying that it was not valid. In an Instagram post from November 2018, she straightforwardly denied that they were a romantic couple. She explained that she had enjoyed working with him in the two movies and was looking forward to the next one.