Eva Gaëlle Green, born on 5 July 1980, is a French actress, raised in Paris and living partly in London. She has been noted by Vogue for her "killer looks, intelligence and modesty", and described by The Independent as "gothic, quirky, and sexy". The daughter of actress Marlène Jobert, Green performed in theatre before making her film debut in The Dreamers (2003), which generated controversy over her numerous nude scenes. She achieved greater fame for her parts in Kingdom of Heaven (2005), and in the 2006 James Bond film Casino Royale, for which she won a BAFTA. She has also modeled for numerous brands. Director Bernardo Bertolucci discovered Green in 2002, and found her "so beautiful, it's indecent". She accepted his invitation to star in The Dreamers (2003), despite her parents' initial objections because of Maria Schneider's accounts of being traumatized while filming Bertolucci's Last Tango in Paris. Green performed extensive nude scenes, which she said felt natural on set, although she was embarrassed when her family saw the film. Her performance was well received, with some comparing her to Liv Tyler. Her performance in The Dreamers convinced Ridley Scott to cast Green in Kingdom of Heaven (2005), a film about the Crusades where she played Sibylla of Jerusalem. Campbell saw Green's performance in the director's cut of Kingdom of Heaven, and Green was approached again. She read the script, and found the character of Vesper far deeper than most Bond girls. Green's performance was well received: Entertainment Weekly called her the fourth best Bond girl of all time; IGN named her the best femme fatale, stating "This is the girl that broke — and therefore made — James Bond"; and she won a BAFTA and an Empire award for her performance. Both were voted for by the British public. Green lives alone, jokingly referring to her border terrier, Griffin, as her "husband". She is an atheist, having not been raised to follow any religion. She has dated New Zealand actor Marton Csokas since she met him on the set of Kingdom of Heaven. Green's favourite film is Cries and Whispers, and she is a fan of directors François Truffaut, Ingmar Bergman, Tim Burton, Lars von Trier, David Lynch, and David Fincher. She admires the actresses Lauren Bacall, Marlene Dietrich, Bette Davis, Jeanne Moreau,Cate Blanchett, Juliette Binoche, and Helena Bonham Carter. She credits Blanchett and Kirsten Dunst as her fashion influences, describing her own taste as, "bright pink lipstick, hot pink or geisha colors. Make up is allowed to be a bit weird, I feel."Her favourite artists are Gustav Klimt and Egon Schiele, and she is a keen museum visitor; she particularly likes Chinese and Indian architecture, and framed displays of butterflies and other insects. Green enjoys music, listening to film soundtracks and classical music when preparing for roles, and she plays the piano.

Eva Gaëlle Green, born on 5 July 1980, is a French actress, raised in Paris and living partly in London. She has been noted by Vogue for her "killer looks, intelligence and modesty", and described by The Independent as "gothic, quirky, and sexy". The daughter of actress Marlène Jobert, Green performed in theatre before making her film debut in The Dreamers (2003), which generated controversy over her numerous nude scenes. She achieved greater fame for her parts in Kingdom of Heaven (2005), and in the 2006 James Bond film Casino Royale, for which she won a BAFTA. She has also modeled for numerous brands.

Director Bernardo Bertolucci discovered Green in 2002, and found her "so beautiful, it's indecent". She accepted his invitation to star in The Dreamers (2003), despite her parents' initial objections because of Maria Schneider's accounts of being traumatized while filming Bertolucci's Last Tango in Paris. Green performed extensive nude scenes, which she said felt natural on set, although she was embarrassed when her family saw the film. Her performance was well received, with some comparing her to Liv Tyler. Her performance in The Dreamers convinced Ridley Scott to cast Green in Kingdom of Heaven (2005), a film about the Crusades where she played Sibylla of Jerusalem. Campbell saw Green's performance in the director's cut of Kingdom of Heaven, and Green was approached again. She read the script, and found the character of Vesper far deeper than most Bond girls. Green's performance was well received: Entertainment Weekly called her the fourth best Bond girl of all time; IGN named her the best femme fatale, stating "This is the girl that broke — and therefore made — James Bond"; and she won a BAFTA and an Empire award for her performance. Both were voted for by the British public.

Green lives alone, jokingly referring to her border terrier, Griffin, as her "husband". She is an atheist, having not been raised to follow any religion. She has dated New Zealand actor Marton Csokas since she met him on the set of Kingdom of Heaven. Green's favourite film is Cries and Whispers, and she is a fan of directors François Truffaut, Ingmar Bergman, Tim Burton, Lars von Trier, David Lynch, and David Fincher. She admires the actresses Lauren Bacall, Marlene Dietrich, Bette Davis, Jeanne Moreau,Cate Blanchett, Juliette Binoche, and Helena Bonham Carter. She credits Blanchett and Kirsten Dunst as her fashion influences, describing her own taste as, "bright pink lipstick, hot pink or geisha colors. Make up is allowed to be a bit weird, I feel."Her favourite artists are Gustav Klimt and Egon Schiele, and she is a keen museum visitor; she particularly likes Chinese and Indian architecture, and framed displays of butterflies and other insects. Green enjoys music, listening to film soundtracks and classical music when preparing for roles, and she plays the piano.... More.Less.

Filmography