Overview

Harlem is a very small city located in the state of Georgia. With a population of 3,958 people and just one neighborhood, Harlem is the 191st largest community in Georgia.

Occupations and Workforce

Unlike some cities where white-collar or blue-collar occupations dominate the local economy, Harlem is neither predominantly one nor the other. Instead, it has a mixed workforce of both white- and blue-collar jobs. Overall, Harlem is a city of service providers, professionals, and sales and office workers. There are especially a lot of people living in Harlem who work in personal care services (11.49%), law enforcement and fire fighting (9.14%), and office and administrative support (8.78%).

There are many members of the armed forces living in Harlem. You will notice when you visit or live here that some of the people you meet or see around town are employed by the armed services - even if they are not always in uniform.

Telecommuters are a relatively large percentage of the workforce: 11.50% of people work from home. While this number may seem small overall, as a fraction of the total workforce it is high relative to the nation. These workers are often telecommuters who work in knowledge-based, white-collar professions. For example, Silicon Valley has large numbers of people who telecommute. Other at-home workers may be self-employed people who operate small businesses out of their homes.

Setting & Lifestyle

Harlem’s overall crime rate ranks among the lowest in the nation, making it a very safe place to live.

Being a small city, Harlem does not have a public transit system used by locals to get to and from work.

Demographics

In terms of college education, Harlem is nearly on par with the US average for all cities of 21.84%: 19.22% of adults 25 and older in Harlem have a bachelor's degree or advanced degree.

The per capita income in Harlem in 2022 was $30,375, which is upper middle income relative to Georgia, and middle income relative to the rest of the US. This equates to an annual income of $121,500 for a family of four. However, Harlem contains both very wealthy and poor people as well.

Harlem is an extremely ethnically-diverse city. The people who call Harlem home describe themselves as belonging to a variety of racial and ethnic groups. The greatest number of Harlem residents report their race to be White, followed by Black or African-American. Important ancestries of people in Harlem include German, English, Irish, Scandinavian, and Scottish.

The most common language spoken in Harlem is English. Other important languages spoken here include Spanish and Italian.

The Neighbors

There are two complementary measures for understanding the income of a neighborhood's residents: the average and the extremes. While a neighborhood may be relatively wealthy overall, it is equally important to understand the rate of people - particularly children - who are living at or below the federal poverty line, which is extremely low income. Some neighborhoods with a lower average income may actually have a lower childhood poverty rate than another with a higher average income, and this helps us understand the conditions and character of a neighborhood.

The neighbors in the neighborhood in Harlem are upper-middle income, making it an above average income neighborhood. NeighborhoodScout's exclusive analysis reveals that this neighborhood has a higher income than 63.3% of the neighborhoods in America. In addition, 4.4% of the children seventeen and under living in this neighborhood are living below the federal poverty line, which is a lower rate of childhood poverty than is found in 66.6% of America's neighborhoods.

A neighborhood is far different if it is dominated by enlisted military personnel rather than people who earn their living by farming. It is also different if most of the neighbors are clerical support or managers. What is wonderful is the sheer diversity of neighborhoods, allowing you to find the type that fits your lifestyle and aspirations.

In the neighborhood, 32.6% of the working population is employed in sales and service jobs, from major sales accounts, to working in fast food restaurants. The second most important occupational group in this neighborhood is executive, management, and professional occupations, with 31.2% of the residents employed. Other residents here are employed in manufacturing and laborer occupations (20.5%), and 15.8% in clerical, assistant, and tech support occupations.

Ethnicity / Ancestry

Boston's Beacon Hill blue-blood streets, Brooklyn's Orthodox Jewish enclaves, Los Angeles' Persian neighborhoods. Each has its own culture derived primarily from the ancestries and culture of the residents who call these neighborhoods home. Likewise, each neighborhood in America has its own culture – some more unique than others – based on lifestyle, occupations, the types of households – and importantly – on the ethnicities and ancestries of the people who live in the neighborhood. Understanding where people came from, who their grandparents or great-grandparents were, can help you understand how a neighborhood is today.

In the neighborhood in Harlem, GA, residents most commonly identify their ethnicity or ancestry as German (15.2%). There are also a number of people of English ancestry (8.1%), and residents who report Irish roots (8.0%), and some of the residents are also of Dutch ancestry (1.6%), along with some Scottish ancestry residents (1.5%), among others.

Getting to Work

Even if your neighborhood is walkable, you may still have to drive to your place of work. Some neighborhoods are located where many can get to work in just a few minutes, while others are located such that most residents have a long and arduous commute. The greatest number of commuters in neighborhood spend between 30 and 45 minutes commuting one-way to work (43.0% of working residents), which is at or a bit above the average length of a commute across all U.S. neighborhoods.

Here most residents (85.3%) drive alone in a private automobile to get to work. In addition, quite a number also carpool with coworkers, friends, or neighbors to get to work (7.7%) . In a neighborhood like this, as in most of the nation, many residents find owning a car useful for getting to work.