Prime Video, Skydance Television, and Paramount Television Studios announced the casting of Anthony Michael Hall and Sonya Cassidy as series regulars for the upcoming Reacher season 3! Do you want to know all the details? Keep reading!

Here we go!

The action-packed drama series starring Alan Ritchson in the title role of Jack Reacher. As previously announced, Maria Sten will also return for Season 3 as Frances Neagley.

In the third season, which is based on the 7th book in Lee Child’s global best-selling series, Persuader, Reacher must go undercover to rescue an informant held by a haunting foe from his past.

Anthony Michael Hall has been cast as Zachary Beck. A formidable and successful businessman, Beck is a widow and single father of a 20-year-old son, Richard. He is the owner of a rug import company that Reacher and his cohorts suspect is a cover for a more nefarious operation. Hall is repped by Untitled, A3, and Jill Fritzo PR.

Sonya Cassidy has been cast as Susan Duffy, an extremely intelligent and tough DEA agent from Boston with a sharp and sarcastic sense of humor. Cassidy is represented by UTA and Independent Talent.

Reacher Season 3 is currently filming in Toronto. The renewal was announced in December 2023, two weeks before season two premiered on Prime Video.

Reacher Season 2 was the #1 title on Prime Video worldwide across both series and movies in 2023 during its premiere weekend (based on viewership). The series’ global audience grew 50% between seasons in the first three days after the second season’s debut on December 15, 2023. All episodes of the first two seasons of Reacher are now streaming on Prime Video.

Based on the novels by Lee Child, who is an executive producer on the series, Reacher stars Alan Ritchson and is produced by Amazon MGM Studios, Skydance Television, and Paramount Television Studios. Reacher is written for television by Emmy-nominated writer Nick Santora, who also executive produces and serves as showrunner.

In addition to Santora and Child, Ritchson will serve as an executive producer of Season 3, along with Don Granger, Scott Sullivan, Mick Betancourt, David Ellison, Dana Goldberg, and Matt Thunell for Skydance. Carolyn Harris and Kenny Madrid are the executives-in-charge of the series for Skydance Television.

Reacher season 3 will be available in Prime Video soon.