EDWARD Scissorhands was released in 1990 and has now become a fan favourite film.

Tim Burton directed the movie which starred Winona Ryder.

Who were the cast of Edward Scissorhands?

Johnny Depp played the lead Edward Scissorhands and was nominated for a Golden Globe in the Best Performance by an Actor in a Motion Picture - Comedy or Musical category.

This is just one of Depp's starring roles as she has gone on to have quite the career starring in the likes of Pirates of the Caribbean, Charlie and the Chocolate Factory and Sleepy Hollow.

Winona Ryder played Edward's love interest Kim Boggs in the movie.

She went on to receive a Saturn Award nomination for Best Actress for her role.

She's also had a big career, landing roles in Friends and Gone in the Night.

Oscar winner Dianne Wiest played the role of Peg Boggs, the kind lady who took Edward in after the passing of his inventor.

Other cast members include:

Jim - played by Anthony Michael Hall

Kevin Boggs - played by Robert Oliveri

Bill Boggs - played by Oscar winner Alan Arkin

Joyce - played Kathy Baker

Officer Allen - played by Dick Anthony Williams

You may even spot Nick Carter from Backstreet Boys who appeared as a neighbourhood extra in the movie.

How old was Winona Ryder in Edward Scissorhands?

Winona was just 19 years old when she filmed Edward Scissorhands.

Her character, Kim, was 17.

She had previously starred in Beetlejuice and Frankenweenie, both directed by Burton.

How old was Johnny Depp in Edward Scissorhands?

Depp was 26 years old when he was cast as the main character of Edward in the movie.

Edward is an ageless being but his appearance is that of a teenager.

He too, worked on other films directed by Burton, most famously, Charlie And The Chocolate Factory and Sweeney Todd: The Demon Barber Of Fleet Street.

Depp and Burton have a friendship which spans decades after first working together on Edward Scissorhands.

The Los Angeles TImes reported that Johnny said of their friendship: "Most of the times we’ve worked together he’s had to go into great big battles to get them to hire me. I feel so lucky to be along for the ride, more than a couple few times.

"For a lot of reasons. No. 1, Tim is a filmmaker I admire, but he’s much, much more than that.

"Without embarrassing him, he’s a true artist, which is something I wasn’t sure was possible in today’s cinema.

"But he’s the real thing. He’s a visionary, an auteur, totally uncompromising."

Is Edward Scissorhands a Christmas movie?

Fans of the cult-classic love to put the film on during the festive period.

But can Edward Scissorhands be classed as a Christmas movie?

Most would say yes. Despite the movie starting in the summer, it changes into a more wintery theme and does include Christmas later on.

Who can forget Kim dancing whimsically in the ice shavings as Edward carves an angel out of ice?

Most big movie reviewers believe that it should be considered a Christmas film.

One reviewer said: "If 1984's Gremlins and 1988's Die Hard are considered Christmas films, then so is Edward Scissorhands. They're all filed under the unconventional Christmas movie category."

However, some disagree and say that it is a all-rounder film which can be watched any time of year.

Where to watch and stream Edward Scissorhands

You can stream the movie on Disney+ with your subscription.

It is also available to rent or buy on Amazon Prime Video.

You can watch it on terrestrial TV on December 23, 2022, on BBC Two at 4.50pm and on BBC Three on December 28, 2022 at 8.40pm.