A tale of spiritual enlightenment and transcendence, EL TOPO, 1970. Written, directed and starring the amazing Alejandro Jodorowsky, a true artist that has dipped his toe in everything. He“s a playwright, a novelist, a poet, a philosopher, a filmmaker, a comic book creator, and just an all around genius who has no problems taking risks and standing by his art.

EL TOPO is a brave piece of cinematic art. Yeah, I know; that sounds scary and I“m sure there are those who might turn and run at this point in the review, but it“s true, because this film has a lot to say about the evolution and de-evolution of humanity. That“s a subject that is very difficult to articulate on film. The story is told in a stylistic manner that can inspire and shock at the same time. There are moments of sensual tenderness and extreme violence. When you watch this film you will remember it and you will think about it, whether you like it or not. It takes a master filmmaker and storyteller to make that happen.

One thing that I would like to point out is that I believe the film is all about how you as a viewer interpret it, and that“s a good thing because this is one of those rare cinematic experiences that will leave you guessing. For instance, the film is often categorized within the western genre. I don“t agree with the general categorization the film is constantly associated with; I believe the film to be otherworldly decorated with an old west style. But, once again, it“s all up to interpretation, and I say blah to those who must always categorize!

The story revolves around EL TOPO (The Mole in English, and yes; there“s a metaphor there), a vicious gunslinger Hell bent on punishing evildoers in what feels like a mystical land. When EL TOPO suddenly finds himself falling in love with a woman he has saved, she realizes she has the power to motivate him into glamorizing his killing skills to the point of eradicating the best of the best gunslingers in his mystical land for no other reason than pure vanity. After the fact, EL TOPO perceives that he has turned into nothing better than the evildoers that he has brought to justice in the past. In an attempt to punish himself for his indiscretions EL TOPO decides to orchestrate his own death. This only results in his rebirth and transcendence to a higher plain of existence and self-awareness. A rebirth that has him focus on saving the downtrodden and outcasts of so called civilized society.

Even though EL TOPO succeeds in liberating the outcasts, he soon realizes that he may be able to change, but humanity will not, because acceptance does not come easy. This realization once again takes him down a murderous path. It“s not often that you see a character in a film travel full circle.

EL TOPO is truly a mind-bending film ”” complete with amazing visual imagery and loaded with beauty and pure ugliness. It“s cinema worth experiencing.