Luis Scola Biography

Luis Scola is an NBA big man valued for his scoring and rebounding. Currently with the Indiana Pacers, Scola rose to prominence with the Houston Rockets, earning first-team All-Rookie honors in 2008. He was an important contributor in his five Rockets season, averaging 14.5 points and 7.7 rebounds. Scola also suited up for a season with the Phoenix Suns. Originally drafted by the San Antonio Spurs, it took him several seasons to come overseas from Spain. Scola was a Euroleague star for Tau Ceramica. He was a two-time All-Euroleauge first-team pick and two-time Spanish League MVP. His club went to three Euroleague Final Fours. The Buenos Aires native started his professional career in Argentina. Scola has played for Argentina in the 2004 and 2008 Olympics, winning a gold and bronze medal respectively. There is no question he has helped lead a golden era of Argentinian basketball along with Spurs’ star Manu Ginobli.

Book Luis Scola for your Next Event

Disclaimer: AthleteSpeakers assists companies seeking to hire talent like Luis Scola for speaking engagements, virtual meetings, appearances, product endorsements, and business sanctions. Our speakers bureau does not claim to exclusively represent Luis Scola. Our booking agency can help with finding an athlete or sports celebrity that aligns with your upcoming events date, location, and budget. When an organization request booking details for a celebrity like Luis Scola, we work closely with the client to make sure the proposed dates does not interfere with the requested athletes schedule. We then confirm the sports celebrity fee based on the details of the request. The fees listed on the speaker profile are rough estimates based on the previous market rate for the talent. Our team then works with Luis Scola's agent, manager or assistant on the booking request. For parties interested in hiring Luis Scola, we recommend filling out the booking request form so our booking agents can help with making your next event a success.

Interested in booking Luis Scola for a virtual meeting?

Contact Athlete Speakers today at 800-916-6008 to book Luis Scola for a virtual event, virtual meeting, virtual appearance, virtual keynote speaking engagement, webinar, video conference or Zoom meeting. The booking agents at Athlete Speakers work to get you the best price for your desired sports personality.

Athlete Speakers is a leader when it comes to booking virtual events in the sports world. Since 1999, we have built close relationships with top athletes, agents, publicists and managers. We assist all types of companies as well as event planners with booking athletes like Luis Scola for these virtual engagements. Companies continue to turn to Athlete Speakers to get Luis Scola’s latest virtual speaking fee, appearance cost and schedule availability.

Book Luis Scola for your Virtual Meeting