HOUSTON (NBA) - Luis Scola found his shooting rhythm in the second half and finished with 23 points and 10 rebounds to lead the Houston Rockets past the Sacramento Kings on Tuesday night.

The Argentina international, a member of the all-tournament team at the FIBA World Championship in Turkey, made six of his seven shots in the third quarter as the Rockets pulled away for a 118-105 triumph.

Houston improved to 10-14 with the win.

Scola is averaging 20.3 points and nine rebounds per game.

Jose Calderon’s status in Toronto isn’t looking too good right now.

The Charlotte Bobcats outscored the Raptors 25-19 in the last quarter en route to a 97-91 win over Toronto on Tuesday with Spain’s Calderon missing the game because of a foot injury.

Raptors coach Jay Triano may not give Calderon the playing time he desires after telling the Toronto Sun the point guard will have to "earn his minutes" when he returns from injury.

Jerryd Bayless has started in place of the Spaniard and done well, scoring 35 points in their weekend win over Detroit and pouring in 17 and handing out nine assists in the defeat to Charlotte.

"When Jose comes back everybody is going to be in a little bit of a fight and we're going to have to play the guys who are helping us win," Triano said.

The Philadelphia 76ers piled on the agony for the New Jersey Nets by claiming just their second win on the road this season.

Spencer Hawes poured in 18 points as the Sixers claimed an 82-77 victory in Newark.

The Nets have lost eight games in a row and 15 of their last 17.

The Los Angeles Lakers rode a strong performance from their recently crowned world champion of Team USA, Lamar Odom, to a 103-89 win at Washington.

Odom had 18 points and 10 rebounds.

The best news of the night for LA was the return of big man Andrew Bynum.

In his first game since having a knee operation in the close season, Bynum played 17 minutes and scored seven points.

Spain's Pau Gasol was also in fine fettle with 16 points, nine boards and seven assists.

Carmelo Anthony erupted for 35 points for Denver as they spanked Orlando, 111-94, in the Mile High City.

Golden State didn't have Team USA shooting guard Stephen Curry for a third straight game because of an ankle injury but still had enough firepower to win 108-99 over Minnesota.

FIBA