News

Emergency News Update

September 6, 2019

Hurricane Dorian Crisis Response

The Bahamas

Critical Path Foundation provides life saving support to thousands of severely impoverished children throughout the Caribbean Region. Our primary humanitarian efforts are focused on Haiti and the islands of the Bahamas.

The northern islands of The Bahamas were devastated this week by Cat 5 Hurricane Dorian. Most structures on Abaco and Grand Bahama Island have been destroyed leaving tens of thousands of people without shelter, food and clean water. As the rescue and recovery effort moves forward the death toll will continue to rise. Critical Path Foundation is currently mobilizing to participate in the humanitarian relief effort.

PureH2O, Ltd. is a leading water treatment technology company in The Bahamas and a major corporate partner of Critical Path Foundation (www.PureH2Ocaribbean.com). PureH2O builds seawater reverse osmosis desalination systems (SWRO) that convert seawater to ultra-pure drinking water.

PureH2O has generously offered to donate one containerized 10,000 GPD SWRO drinking water plant to the Hurricane Dorian humanitarian relief effort. The landed cost of the plant is approximately $125,000.00. The plant will be transported to either Abaco or Grand Bahama to supply clean drinking water to thousands of people in need. Critical Path hopes to purchase additional SWRO water plants for our humanitarian relief operations in Abaco and Grand Bahama if donations permit.

Over the next few months many tons of disposable plastic bottled water will be shipped to The Bahamas during the hurricane relief effort. Most of the plastic bottle trash will end up in the ocean and scattered across the landscape of Abaco and Grand Bahama.

The public water systems on both islands are completely destroyed and private wells are highly contaminated. The only source of safe drinking water in the months ahead will be imported or produced by desalination systems like the PureH2O mobile SWRO water plants. Each PureH2O SWRO water plant will provide ultrapure water for hundreds of people each day and reduce the amount of environmental pollution from disposable plastic bottle trash.

Critical Path Foundation also hopes to distribute at least 10,000 reusable BPA-Free water bottles in 1,2,3,&5 gallon sizes that can be refilled at the PureH2O mobile SWRO water plants.

If you would like to support the Critical Path humanitarian relief effort in Abaco and Grand Bahama, 100% of your donations will be used for the purchase of additional SWRO water plants and the 10,000 reusable BPA-Free water bottles for distribution on the islands. Please follow the instructions below to make a financial donation:

U.S. Dollar Donations

Critical Path Foundation is a U.S. 501(c)3, tax exempt International Humanitarian Relief Organization. Donations in U.S. Dollars to the CPF Hurricane Dorian Relief Fund are tax deductible and should be sent to:

Please confirm your donation via email and you will receive a receipt for your records. Email address: info@criticalpathfoundation.com.

Bahamian Dollar Donations

Make donations to PureH2O, Ltd. at

for the Critical Path Foundation Hurricane Dorian Relief Fund. Please confirm your donation via email and you will receive a receipt for your records. Email address: info@criticalpathfoundation.com.

Critical Path Foundation was established on the guiding belief that true human compassion and charity are voluntary, and flow from the hearts and hands of a free people. The present human suffering in Abaco and Grand Bahama is a painful reminder that each of us is meant to be our brothers keeper.