What is a critical path?

A critical path is the longest sequence of dependent tasks that must be completed to execute a project. The tasks are called critical activities because the whole project runs over if they’re delayed.

For example, if you’re building a house, the critical path might include activities like digging the foundations, building the walls, and installing the roof. If any of these critical activities fall behind schedule the whole project gets delayed.

Project managers use the critical path method (CPM) to find the critical path. The CPM — also known as critical path analysis (CPA) — is a project management technique used to plan and schedule complex projects. It’s an algorithm that identifies the longest sequence of dependent activities and measures the time required to complete them from start to finish.

What does a critical path look like?

Asking what a critical path looks like is like asking, “how long is a piece of string?” — i.e. there’s no definitive answer.

Traditionally, the critical path was a flow chart. For example, some house-building activities take longer than others, so the critical path highlights the longest duration:

[Image source]

A more complex diagram might look like this:

[Image source]

Nowadays, other more visually appealing ways of presenting a critical path exist. For example, using a Gantt chart allows you to visualize the critical activities:

Critical path vs. critical chain

Critical path and critical chain are two different approaches to completing a project.

The critical chain methodology pinpoints the bottlenecks or limiting factors that can cause businesses to miss project deadlines. It focuses on monitoring the use of resources — like materials and labor. For example, a project manager might delay the start of one task so that a skilled worker does not have to perform two tasks at the same time.

The critical path focuses on task management, assumes unlimited resources, and identifies the longest track of tasks. It helps identify tasks that may cause project delays and guides project managers to take preventive measures from the start.

On the other hand, the critical chain focuses on resource and buffer management, assumes limited resources, and identifies the longest chain of dependent events. It inserts buffers between dependent events to protect the project from delays.

Critical path vs. critical activity

Critical path and critical activity are related concepts in project management, both determined by the critical path method (CPM).

The critical path is the longest sequence of tasks that must be completed for the project and comprises critical activities. Any delay in completing tasks on the critical path will also delay the project.

A critical activity is a specific scheduled activity that is part of the critical path. It’s essential to the project’s timeline, and any delay in completing a critical activity will delay the entire project.

For example, if it takes twice as long to dig the foundations for a new house, then the entire house building project gets delayed. A critical activity typically has zero float, meaning there’s no flexibility in the start or finish dates.

Critical path vs. PERT

The critical path and PERT (Program Evaluation and Review Technique) are tools for planning and controlling projects.

PERT is a framework to map out task dependencies and estimate how long a project will last. It’s a statistical tool to visualize the overall project schedule — not just the critical path — and shows the relationship between tasks as well as the overall project duration.

For example, a project with seven key activities and a total project duration of 14 days, could have a chart that looks like this:

The critical path is used to schedule and manage project tasks, focusing on the longest sequence of tasks and considering task dependencies and slack time. It is suitable for projects with predictable task durations.

On the other hand, PERT is used to calculate the time required to complete project activities, especially when task durations are variable and uncertain. It allows for flexibility in project scheduling and focuses on time estimation and uncertainty.

Critical path vs. Gantt chart

The critical path and Gantt chart are both project management visualization tools, but they serve different purposes.

The critical path helps schedule and manage project tasks, taking into account task dependencies and slack time. It’s suitable for projects with predictable task durations.

On the other hand, a Gantt chart provides a visual overview of tasks, durations, and dependencies in a project schedule. It helps track progress, allocate resources, and communicate project timelines.

While a Gantt chart can highlight the critical path, its primary purpose is to visualize the project schedule.

How to find the critical path

Now, let’s identify the critical path from start to finish.

1. List all your project tasks

Before you even think about a critical path, you need to list what tasks to include in the project — i.e. your work breakdown structure.

Spend some time speaking with stakeholders to confirm the project details. Once you have all the information, you can identify all the activities that must happen to complete the project.

2. Put all the tasks in order

Once you’ve identified the tasks, it’s time to put them in chronological order and identify any task dependencies. This will help you work out the project timeline.

So what’s the best way to put them in order?

Whether you’d prefer to create a project roadmap, tracker, or overview, using an efficient, easy-to-use work management software — like monday work management — simplifies the process by giving you a clear visualization of all your tasks:

Get started

3. Estimate how long each task will take

There are several ways to estimate activity duration. To save you from sifting through all the methods out there, we’ve outlined our top three:

Bottom-up estimating: Add up the estimates of the lowest-level work tasks to arrive at your summary total. Bottom-up estimates take more time to complete, but they also are more accurate than other estimates.

Comparative estimating: Base your estimates on similar work or projects completed in the past. If you used time tracking in previous tasks, you’ll see precisely how long they took.

Parametric estimating: Calculate a portion of the work and then multiply to get the overall estimate — e.g. if you believe one ad takes 2 hours and you have five ads to do, it should take 10 hours in total.

Read also: Bottom-up vs. top-down

4. Find all the potential ‘paths’ or ‘strings’

Any project can have multiple paths or strings of connected and dependent tasks.

This part of the process involves finding all these possible paths and calculating how long each one will take so that you can pinpoint the one with the longest duration.

By hand, this can be a headache with a high chance of error, which is not ideal. Fortunately, project management platforms, like monday work management, can do this automatically.

Get started

5. Identify the critical path

Now for the main event — it’s time to find the critical path.

Once you — or your work management software — have listed all the paths and strings, you need to identify the longest path through the project from start to finish.

So, if you’ve got a string of tasks that takes eight days, one that takes six days, and another that takes 12, then the 12-day string is the critical path. It’s the one that can’t have any delays without moving out your project end date.

6. Monitor the critical path

The critical path can, and most likely will, change throughout the project. Some tasks may take longer than expected, or new tasks get added over time.

Any changes to the project can have a knock-on effect on the critical path. This means you’ll need to check continuously throughout the project and update your critical path diagram accordingly.

We know it’s not ideal. One of the limitations of using the critical path project management method is its lack of flexibility. That’s why we created a critical path feature in monday work management that accounts for more flexibility.