Pete is the Chief Business Development Officer for the University of Rhode Island’s Research Foundation and is responsible for the development and implementation of growth strategies to achieve the mission and revenue goals of the organization. The URI Research Foundation oversees the commercialization of protected intellectual property, and the development of business relationships and driving economic development with corporate and government partners for URI.

Pete joined URI with more than 30 years of high-tech experience focused on achieving top- and bottom-line results, building and coaching strong global customer-facing teams, and developing critical strategic partnerships. Pete has proven success in start-up, growth, enterprise/fortune and turn-around global organizations from $0 to $1.5B+ in revenues.

Immediately prior to his current role, Pete was the Director of the Rhode Island Innovation Campus Initiative, reporting to RI Commerce Secretary Pryor and Governor (now US Commerce Secretary) Gina Raimondo, and was responsible for overseeing the attraction of prospective participants, connecting stakeholders, and helping to administer the application and selection process. The RI Innovation Campuses bring together industry, academic, and research entities, in partnership with the University of RI, into a common physical facility and business sector focus, and foster collaboration on best-in-class innovative solutions, to create and grow high-value jobs while catalyzing private-sector investment in Rhode Island.

Pete’s prior background includes high-profile executive management and business roles with Lighting Science Group as Executive VP of Business Development; B2Q Technologies as a Co-founder and Principal; Boston-Power as Chief Customer Officer; Wright Line/Eaton Corp as VP of Sales and Marketing, where he was instrumental in its sale to Eaton Corp.; American Power Conversion, with influential sales, marketing and global operational positions over his 14-year tenure as Executive Vice President of Global Sales, VP of Global Enterprise Solutions Group, General Manager and Vice President of Asia and Latin America, and Director of Global Strategic Partnerships; and Equity National as Chief Operating Officer. Pete served as an officer in the United States Air Force Intelligence Command’s Electronic Warfare Center (AFEWC) during Desert Storm and Desert Shield and was a recipient of both the Meritorious Service and Air Force Achievement Medals. Pete earned a BSEE with honors from Cornell University, and attended executive development programs at both Stanford and Harvard University.

Hamza helps clients achieve their business objectives and goals through custom-tailored legal solutions. He represents clients in a wide range of civil matters in state and federal court. Hamza is committed to providing excellence to his clients through his solid work-ethic, combined with effective and efficient representation. His background in real estate and computer science assists him in advising clients in a wide range of matters.

Hamza has significant experience in cases involving real estate, land use and zoning matters, including all phases of development and permitting. Moreover, Hamza has successfully litigated land use and zoning matters in the Rhode Island Superior Court and Supreme Court, including winning a case on behalf of a client on a matter of first-impression. Hamza also uses his prior real estate experience in delivering results for clients in municipal tax appeal cases.

Prior to joining Adler Pollock and Sheehan, Hamza served as a real estate analyst for a commercial real estate firm appraising property across Rhode Island and Massachusetts. He also served as a lobbyist and spokesperson for several successful initiatives before the Connecticut Legislature. Hamza also served as an advisor and lecturer for the National Student Leadership Conference in Washington D.C., New York and in several countries across Europe.

Hamza is civic-minded and is committed to serving the community. In 2009, he coordinated a highly acclaimed symposium highlighting violence on college campuses and the appropriate institutional responses in light of the Virginia Tech tragedy and other events.

Oliver has spent his entire career in financial services beginning with Rhode Island Hospital Trust in 1989. He has held several positions of increasing responsibility including Vice President for a large Massachusetts based insurance company. In 2002, Oliver established Randall Financial Group, LLC, realizing a lifelong dream of creating a firm offering the very best in personalized financial planning and investment management to individuals in southern New England.

Oliver is a 1991 graduate of the University of Rhode Island with a degree in finance. He is a Certified Financial Planner designee, having received his certificate in financial planning from the Denver College of Financial Planning in 1996. He has also acted as an instructor at Bryant University in Smithfield, RI where he has taught investments toaspiring financial planners.

Oliver is currently the host of The Money Pro$ television show on Fox Providence. He has written a financial column for the East Bay News Papers and has been quoted in several financial publications including SmartMoney and U.S. New and World Report. He has hosted a weekly call-in talk radio show on personal finance and has led hundreds of workshops and presentations on investment management and financial planning. He is also a member of the RI and national chapters of the Financial Planning Association and serves on the board of the Barrington Yacht Club.

Oliver lives with his wife and four children in Barrington, RI. In his free time, he enjoys going to the beach with his family, sailing, and cruising the waters of Southern New England.

Ashia Graziano is the Associate Director of Parent and Family Giving at Brown University. Ashia is responsible for conceiving, developing, and implementing the external programming and internal relationships between the University and the non-alumni families of undergraduates. Additionally, she manages a portfolio of families who are philanthropically engaged with the University. Ashia’s work has contributed to Brown boasting the top parents program in the country for a number of years. Ashia brings over a dozen years of development experience to this role.

Prior to joining the Office of Parent and Family Giving, Ashia managed the Brown Women’s Leadership Council. In this role she oversaw the 72-member active presidential advisory council and managed the 125 Years of Women at Brown Conference which brought together over 700 Brown alumnae during a two-day conference with 26 distinct offerings featuring 77 female speakers including Janet Yellen, then Chair of the Federal Reserve, and world-renowned fashion designer, Diane von Furstenberg. The conference garnered significant attention and was covered by over 14 national media outlets including The New York Times, The Wall Street Journal, and CNN.

Ashia completed her undergraduate studies at Assumption University where she received her Bachelor of Arts in Global Studies with a minor in Theology. Ashia is a current member of the R.I.S.E. Women’s Leadership Conference Advisory Council and a graduate of the 2019 Leadership Rhode Island Core Program.

Ashia was born in Dominican Republic and has resided in Rhode Island since the age of six. She lives in Cranston with her husband John, and two young daughters, Olivia and Addison.

Ernie is currently the Executive Director of the RI League of Cities and Towns, having been appointed to this position in May of 2022. Ernie leads a team of professionals tasked with leadership and financial training, process improvement and advocacy for all thirty-nine cities and towns local governments in Rhode Island.

He was appointed by the Secretary of Defense to be the RI Chairman of the RI Employer Support of the Guard and Reserve in 2021, a position he held in the early 2000s. The Secretary of the Army recently appointed him as the Army Reserve Ambassador for the State of Rhode Island.

Ernie spent 16 years as the R.I. Auditor General where he was responsible for the State of Rhode Island financial, performance and fraud audits. He went on to become the Chairman of the Audit Committee for the Department of Defense appointed by both President George Bush and reappointed by President Obama. He worked for Secretaries of Defense Gates, Panetta, and Hagel. Ernie currently serves on the Blue Cross RI board of Directors and the Chairman of the RI Convention Center Authority.

He is a former Chief of Staff to Lt Governor Sabina Matos, an Associate Director of the RI Department of Health, and National Partner of RSM US LLP, the fifth largest accounting and consulting firm in the world.

He has served in numerous positions as Chairperson of audit committees including universities, the Department of Defense Audit Advisory Committee at the Pentagon, and as a member of the Government Auditing Standards Committee for the Comptroller General of the U.S. Ernie was named twice in the top 100 CPAs in the country by Accounting Today.

John has been building software and leading technology teams for 30 years. Currently, John is an independent consultant, helping his clients design, build and scale their software and teams to achieve the highest quality and reliability with small, highly effective teams. Security and the ethical use of software and data are always key considerations in his work.

John was previously a Principal at Nevo Technologies, a software consultancy based in Cambridge, MA. In that role, he was responsible for all aspects of client engagements, including business development, client relationships, software architecture and hands-on coding. As VP of Engineering at Huge - one of the world's leading digital agencies - John led a team of 80 developers, testers and architects, overseeing the delivery of projects for clients such as AARP, Comcast, Google, Mass Mutual, and NYU Langone Medical Center. As Principal Engineer at NBC News Digital, he spearheaded the design and development of a new software system used by NBC News websites and apps to support hundreds of millions of users, with hourly code deployments and near-zero downtime.

John is an active advisor at Providence's Social Enterprise Greenhouse. In the past, he has volunteered with iMentor, Malaika, and Blue Ridge Labs.

John lives in Warwick, RI. In his free time, he is an avid sailor, an amateur blacksmith and the parent of an extremely spoiled cattle dog. He majored in Russian and Soviet Studies at Harvard College.

Sean serves as Counsel in the Employment and Litigation practice groups for Partridge Snow & Hahn LLP (“PSH”), where he focuses on employment law compliance and employer-side litigation. Sean counsels businesses on new and existing employment law compliance, handles all aspects of collective bargaining agreements, and represents employers who have been sued by their employees for discrimination and wage and hour claims. Sean also provides trainings to employers on employee discipline, performance management, promotions and terminations, and union grievance procedures and best practices. Prior to PSH, Sean led the Legal Division at the Rhode Island Department of Labor and Training (“DLT”), serving under three administrations. This experience has given Sean the unique ability to render practical advice to employers regarding equal pay laws and corresponding self-audits.

Sean is a graduate of Boston College Law School and licensed to practice law in Massachusetts, Rhode Island, and New York. He has over 19 years of legal experience in labor and employment law, civil litigation, corporate law, and intellectual property law and is a frequent lecturer on current topics in labor and employment law.

Sean also holds an Executive Leadership Certificate from Harvard Kennedy School of Government and holds government and private board appointments for the Town of Randolph Zoning Board of Appeals, Town of Randolph Redevelopment Authority, Thurgood Marshal Law Society, the Boston College Black Alumni Network, and the Boston College Law School/Rappaport Center for Law. He is a member of the Sigma II class of Leadership Rhode Island and actively serves on their Board of Governors.

At an early age, Sean witnessed his mother return to school to get her high school general equivalency diploma and attend community college at night while working a full-time job during the day. His father worked multiple jobs in manual labor while tutoring Sean in additions and subtractions in the evening, even though he only had a sixth-grade education. Sean’s father left school in the sixth grade to help his sharecropping family on the plantations of Virginia.

In addition to a strong work ethic and the value of education, Sean’s parents taught Sean the importance and power of a multi-racial society. When Sean was about four years old, during the tail end of the Boston busing crisis in the late 1970s, Sean saw his mother and her best friend, Marie Doherty, an Irish woman from South Boston, maintain their sisterhood despite the racial calamity surrounding them, particularly with regard to the South Boston neighborhood, where it was understood that African Americans were not welcome and could face physical danger being in this neighborhood. Sean’s mother and Marie never let these issues get in the way of their relationship. In fact, Marie is the person who named Sean. While Sean’s mother was still pregnant with him, Marie explained to Sean’s mother and father that “Sean” was the Gaelic translation of Sean’s father’s name, “John,” and begged them to name him “Sean Michael,” which they did.

One of Sean’s most important philanthropic accomplishments has been providing pro bono legal services for the Community Mentoring Team, a non-profit organization that partners with licensed construction trade unions and commercial developers to mentor and get inner-city men and women of color into highly skilled and highly paid union apprenticeship programs and working on major commercial development projects. Over the last five years, the organization has gotten over 100 men and women of color into licensed construction apprentice programs, allowing for generational racial barriers to be broken and generational wealth to be achieved for the first time for many of the participants.

By day, Greg Garvin is a Preconstruction Manager and Purchasing Team Leader for Gilbane Building Company, a 150 year old, family-run, multi-national Construction Management firm. In his role he brings his eye for risk management and strategic thinking to ensure that large, complex construction projects are set up for success. During his 15 year career at Gilbane, Greg has performed roles across many different functions, which has provided him with a wide array of skills and a multidisciplinary perspective. Having operated primarily in Rhode Island and Boston, Greg has experience with a broad spectrum of markets such as: K-12, Life Sciences, Higher Education, Sports & Entertainment, Healthcare and Corporate Office.

Greg received a BS degree in Construction Management with a minor in Business in 2006 at Roger Williams University in Bristol, Rhode Island. Dedicated to reinvesting in his alma mater, Greg has sat on the CM Professional Advisory Board at Roger Williams for nearly a decade. Greg is currently the Vice-Chair of the Board and co-chair of the Academic Committee where he enjoys arranging and leading guest lectures that accents the curriculum with valuable industry experience. Greg also serves on the Board of Governors for Saha Global, a 501(c)(3) organization that helps entrepreneurial women provide safe, clean drinking water to rural villages in Northern Region of Ghana.

In life, Greg is passionate about rootedness and the power of place, which he attributes to his upbringing on a 3rd generation dairy and beef farm in rural New Hampshire. He believes that local communitarianism is the key to resiliency in the face of current and future social, economic and climate challenges. Greg is a member of Strong Towns and Southside Community Land Trust, and his hobbies include gardening, enjoying the outdoors, reading, and listening to podcasts & music. Greg lives in Providence, Rhode Island with his lovely wife and two energetic children.

Brett Gerstenblatt has led the development of corporate branding, marketing and communications programs for progressive companies for more than three decades. He has advised C-suite executives and collaborated with leadership at a broad range of organizations including nonprofits, startups and Fortune 500s, helping them pursue new strategies, respond to competitive challenges and adapt to changing environments.

From 2013-2023, while at CVS Health, he played a core role in the company’s campaign to exit tobacco, the development and launch of the CVS Health brand and the transformation of the company from being America’s corner drug store to the largest consumer healthcare company in the United States, moving it to 6th place on the Fortune 500. During that time, CVS earned the highest national reputation in healthcare, became the most trusted retailer in America and consistently gained market share.

As Vice President, Brand Experience, Creativity & Design, Brett founded and led the award-winning in-house creative agency, Heart Haus. He and his team partnered with senior leaders to advance the company’s purpose, strategy and values and led human-centered transformation efforts and the ideation and implementation of customer experience strategies — including the accompanying marketing, advertising, communications and activations.

Before joining CVS Health, he was a consultant and design expert at McKinsey & Company, as well as an entrepreneur, business owner, practice leader at a digital marketing agency and creative director at several preeminent design firms. He has been a guest lecturer and critic at Bryant University, Parsons New School of Design, the Hartford Art School, University of Hartford, the Graduate Center, CUNY and Columbia University. Brett completed his senior thesis at the Rhode Island School of Design and studied abroad at the Hogeschool voor de Kunsten Arnhem and the University of Haifa. He earned a Bachelor of Fine Arts in Visual Communications from the Hartford Art School, University of Hartford.

Jen is a master group facilitator, trainer, leadership coach and keynote who believes every person is worthy of learning, working and earning to their full potential.

Gifted for galvanizing audiences, Jen is a lightning bolt for engagement - in person and remote. She brings over 20 years experience in strength-based strategic planning (not SWOT, but SOAR), leadership development (to go higher, go deeper), and culture building (name, measure and manage your values - really). Her clients span cities, schools, Fortune 500 companies, government agencies, and indigenous villages around the world.

Jen has a knack for facilitating rich and brave dialogue, a skill that has supported some of the highest rankings of the CIA, refugee camp survivors in post-civil war Liberia, and a statewide strategic planning process that engaged over 13,000 persons on complex issues such as education equity and earning power. All of her work is grounded in positive psychology and neuroscience.

Prior to founding her own practice, Jen was an Organization Development (OD) consultant and leadership coach for BearingPoint, EDS, PriceWaterhouseCoopers, and IBM. Infusing her strength-based work into her personal life, she co-authored the book "Positive Family Dynamics: Appreciative Inquiry Questions to Bring Out the Best in Families". Jen holds a Masters of Science degree in Organization Development from Johns Hopkins University, as well as a dual BS in Economics and in International Studies from American University.

A serial mentor to women and youth, Jen also serves on the Board of the Girl Scouts of Southeastern New England. A TEDx speaker and emcee, champion of inclusive workplaces and student voice, and marathon coach turned soccer mom to two powerhouse girls, Jen is based in southern Rhode Island, where she is a paddle boarding trail hiking dog loving yogi.

Michelle Carr serves as the Executive Director at Leadership Rhode Island where she stewards talent and organizational development, operational excellence, thought leadership, and strategic initiatives. She was recruited to Leadership Rhode Island’s staff as the Director of Programs while a member of the 2014 Kappa II class and promoted to the organization's first Deputy Director in July 2016.

A Cuban-American and first-generation college graduate, Michelle has utilized her strengths and cross-cultural competencies throughout her career to spearhead statewide initiatives and national networks among intergenerational, cross-sector leaders. She is passionate about co-creating purpose-driven, human-centered experiences and cultures of belonging that facilitate trust, increase engagement, build community and drive performance.

Previous to Leadership Rhode Island, Michelle served as Director of Community Relations at Dorcas International Institute of Rhode Island where she led community outreach, public engagement, cross-cultural training and policy change. She founded Welcoming Rhode Island, an affiliate of Welcoming America and a recipient of the Metcalf Award for Diversity in the Media. Her initiatives were highlighted nationally (2014) and she was invited to share best practices at the White House for the first National Convening on Immigrant and Refugee Integration.

Michelle has been entrusted with scholarship selection, board and career recruitment, and leadership program oversight in several volunteer roles with organizations such as RI Latino Arts, Coalition of Advocates for Student Opportunities, New Leaders Council of RI, Latino Dollars for Scholars, the Juanita Sanchez Community Fund, RI Commerce Corporation Latino Entrepreneurs, and the RI Association of Former Legislators Scholarship Fund. She is a graduate of the Rhode Island Foundation’s Nonprofit Emerging Leaders program (2010) and currently serves as a Community Advisory Board member for United Way of Rhode Island.

In 2018 Michelle was awarded the Providence Business News 40 under Forty Award (2018), recognizing forty men and women, under the age of 40, who are successful in their careers and involved in their communities. Michelle holds a bachelor’s degree in Global Studies and Business Studies certificate from Providence College, where she is a Community Faculty Member in the Global Studies Department and Feinstein Center for Community and Public Service.

A native Rhode Islander with an unabashed love for her tiny home state, Kristin has a BA in Art History from Stonehill College and an MA from the University of Connecticut, a strong background in hospitality, non-profit event management, and program development. She thrives in settings where she has the opportunity to help others grow.

Kristin joined the LRI team in 2017, as the Programs Manager, overseeing the Core and College Programs. In 2021, she was promoted to Director of Development & Alumni Engagement, where she oversees and implements the organization’s fundraising strategy. She works closely with LRI’s Communications & Engagement team to develop new and meaningful ways for LRI alumni to stay engaged with the organization and the community. Kristin came to LRI from Johnson & Wales University, where she worked in the department of Providence Campus Events, subsequent to her role as the event and program coordinator at the Culinary Arts Museum at JWU, where she worked to grow the presence of the museum in the community through hands-on public programming, social media outreach, and student-centered events.

Kristin is a member of the Board of Directors for Girls on the Run Rhode Island, and is a parent volunteer, and cookie mom, for her daughters’ Girl Scout troops. She has volunteered as City Manager for the PVD Lady Project, and has served on the board of the Exeter-West Greenwich PTA. In 2020, Kristin was a recipient of the Providence Business News 40 under 40 award. In her spare time, you’ll likely find her on the beach, year-round, or running the streets training for her next road race. She has completed eight marathons, including the 2017 NYC Marathon, where she ran as a part of the Boston Children’s Hospital Charity Team.

Samantha joined the team at Leadership Rhode Island in 2019 as College Program and Alumni Coordinator. She oversaw College Leadership Rhode Island for 3 years and loved connecting young leaders throughout the state with their peers and introducing them to everything and everyone in little Rhody!

Samantha graduated from Providence College with a Bachelor’s degree in Public and Community Service and a Business Studies certificate. After her undergraduate degree, she completed a year of service with AmeriCorps at RI Campus Compact and earned a Masters of Education in School Counseling from Providence College. Before coming to Leadership Rhode Island, Samantha worked as a Wellness Coordinator at the Nonviolence Institute, an organization she had been involved with for years.

As Director of Community Engagement, she is looking forward to engaging with the broader community and building relationships with various community stakeholders.

Though originally from New Jersey, Samantha has been calling Rhode Island home for over 10 years and loves finding new things (mostly beaches!) to admire about Rhody!

Teresa DeFlitch has decades of experience in experiential learning, project and program management, and training. A leader in education innovation, she began her career in museums and public history. She oversaw national outreach for a history education project funded by the U.S. Department of Education, trained thousands of Congressional staffers for the Architect of the Capitol, and led the development of Winchester Thurston School’s nationally recognized City as Our Campus program. She has consulted with several organizations on projects that explore new boundaries in teaching and learning, including the crowdfunding platform Kickstarter, the Children’s Museum of Pittsburgh, and the Community Robotics, Education and Technology Empowerment (CREATE) Lab at Carnegie Mellon University. Most recently, as Director of People and Education, she led the development of a people-centered HR strategy for the James Beard-nominated Pittsburgh Distilling Company (Wigle Whiskey and Threadbare Cider) while leading special projects, including the launch of a new spirits tourism trail across Pennsylvania, Maryland, and Washington, DC. She holds a BA in History from Saint Vincent College and an MA in History from the Syracuse University Maxwell School of Citizenship and Public Affairs. Originally from Pittsburgh, Teresa fell in love with Rhode Island as a Buchanan-Burnham intern at the Newport Historical Society, knowing that one day she would call the Ocean State home. She lives in Barrington with her husband, Rick, and son, Silas.

Born in Peru, Renzo (he/him) and his mom immigrated to the USA when he was just five years old so he boasts that he was raised by Rhode Island. Renzo credits the Providence based youth advocacy program, Young Voices RI, for encouraging him to expand past his comfort zone. He studied Biology and Anthropology at the University of Rhode Island and was an outreach worker for the URI SNAP Outreach Project. The Outreach Project set Renzo up with knowledge about social services and assistance programs, as well as the opportunity to support struggling families in Rhode Island, which led him to become the Community Resource Coordinator at the Rhode Island Community Food Bank. Like Young Voices RI, the College Leadership Rhode Island program also helped Renzo learn about his strengths so that he could move beyond perceived limits. In this role as the Training Administrator, Renzo hopes to share that gift to other eager Rhode Islanders.

He is now a board member of Young Voices RI.

Renzo is a graduate of the 2019 Class of College Leadership Rhode Island (CLRI) and also served as the co-chair of the 2020 Class of CLRI.

While her path hasn't been linear, Lyanh has devoted her career to people development and team formation. At the tail-end of her undergraduate career, she found an opportunity to become an owner of a multi-million dollar business before the age of 21. From that experience, she has brought her zest for growing and optimizing organizations through the learning and development experience of their most important component: people. Having worked across several industries, Lyanh is always eager to share perspectives and experiences that will help those around her to learn and grow.

She graduated from Grand Valley State University with a Bachelor's degrees in Biomedical Science and Psychology, and in the thick of the pandemic, decided to return to academia for her Master's Degree in Project Management at Post University.

Born and raised in Michigan, she found herself in Rhode Island by way of Boston, where she met her now husband, Matthew. Growing up around the Great Lakes, she can't see herself ever being too far from water so landing in the Ocean State worked out pretty well.

Since living in New England, Lyanh volunteers with Sojourner House, Girls on the Run, Big Brothers Big Sisters of Massachusetts and Rhode Island, and the American Red Cross. In her spare time, she is usually with her two dogs, Shadow and Atlas. Otherwise, she can be found baking a new recipe for cheesecake or doing a crossword puzzle (in pen) by the beach- even in the winter.

Jane Nugent comes to Leadership Rhode Island with many years of experience in the nonprofit sector in Rhode Island. Jane was a Senior Vice President with the United Way of Rhode Island, having given 22 years of service. While at United Way Jane grant managed several million dollars per year in funding, and her major projects included: Needs for the Nineties, Making It Work, The Facts, Dollars and Sense, Building a Stronger Community, and Skill Up Rhode Island. Prior to her work in the nonprofit sector Jane taught for 15 years, five of which were spent in England. Jane has won several awards for her service to the community and has held membership on committees, boards, and task forces in Rhode Island. Jane received her Bachelor’s Degree from Bridgewater (MA) State University, and her Masters and Doctoral Degrees from the University of North Carolina at Greensboro.

Jane has been an active volunteer for LRI since the early nineties, having given presentations to both the Core Class and the College LRI Class on issues pertaining to the nonprofit sector, and has served on many LRI committees over the years. Jane currently gives professional development workshops at Children’s Friend and Service, and has recently volunteered with the RI Academic Decathlon, the ACE Charter High School in Providence, and the Tufts Certificate Program in Non Profit Practice. Jane was the Class Speaker for her LRI Class of 1995, the Omicron Class. In 2019 she was given the Habits of the Heart Award jointly awarded by LRI and the United Way of Rhode Island.

Richard retired from Fannie Mae at the end of 2014 after 12½ years with the company. His most recent assignment with Fannie Mae was as a member of the Foreclosure Prevention & Outreach Team, offering individualized counseling and assistance resources to homeowners across the country who are experiencing mortgage delinquency. Earlier he served on the company’s Ending Homelessness Team, Public Entity Loan Team, and Housing & Community Development Team. Prior to joining Fannie Mae, Richard worked for various banking institutions in a variety of management roles, including Community Reinvestment, Compliance, Marketing and Product Management.

Before retirement, Richard’s community interests focused primarily on issues related to affordable housing and homelessness prevention. He currently serves in board or committee capacities for the Community Housing Land Trust of Rhode Island, Local Initiatives Support Corporation (LISC), and was elected Moderator for the Town of Barrington in 2020. Also, Richard volunteered as an adaptive ski instructor for AbilityPLUS Adaptive Sports. at Attitash & Wildcat Ski Areas in New Hampshire for twenty years. He grew up in Barrington, is a graduate of The Colorado College, and now lives in Barrington with his wife Betsy. They have three grown children and three grandchildren. You can find him on Facebook, Instagram and Twitter at @rfstaplesjr and on LinkedIn.

This is Richard's eighth year volunteering as photographer for LRI and CLRI class session days and activities.

Carol J. Young, a graduate of Syracuse University, spent her entire 45-year newspaper career at the Providence Journal. After several years as an education writer, she moved into editing. She served as state editor, city editor, metro managing editor and deputy executive editor. She also had a major role in the recruiting and hiring for the reporting staff and managed a highly successful reporting internship program.

She received numerous reporting awards and was selected by the New England Association of Newspaper Editors to receive its first Spirit of Journalism Award. After retiring in 2010, Carol was inducted into the Rhode Island Journalism Hall of Fame.

A member of the Mu class (1992), Carol was a volunteer presenter for LRI’s Media Day program long before she went through LRI herself. Alumni in the l980s and l990s may remember the “page one game” she created just for LRI, the journalism ethics discussions she led, or the visits to the Providence Journal she orchestrated. In recent years, she has edited LRI’s newsletters and two of LRI’s publications: "Crossing the Line" and "Dear President".

In addition to volunteering for LRI, Carol serves on the Board of Directors for Inspiring Minds, the Advisory Council for the President of the University of Rhode Island, and the board for the Hummel Report.