NASRI: COIN OF TUNISIA

3¼ nasri, 1856: Ottoman Tunisia

Date on coin: AH 1272 (AH: Latin "Anno Hegirae" — "the year of the Hijra"; Islamic calendar) = 1856 (Gregorian calendar).

Rulers: Abdulmejid I (also Abdul Majid I or Abdulmecid I) as the 31st sultan of the Ottoman Empire (1839-1861) and Muhammad II ibn al-Husayn as the Husainid (ruling Turkish dynasty of the Beylik of Tunis) Bey of Tunis (1855-1859).

٣: 3 (in the center of the coin's obverse the denomination is indicated in the format of only one digit "3"; why all numismatic catalogs indicate the denomination as "3¼" — I still don't understand).

السلطان الغازي عبد المجيد خان: Sultan Al-Ghazi Abdul Majid Khan (Ghazi or Gazi — title used by several Ottoman Sultans as Islamic term for the Muslim soldier who crusades for their religion, land or territory).

بتونس مدة محمد: In Tunisia during the period of Muhammad.

١٢٧٢: 1272.

Copper: 25 mm - 5.78 g

Reference price: 26$

COIN NASRI — WHERE & WHEN (coins catalog: by names & emitents)

OTTOMAN TUNISIA (16th-19th centuries): nasri = 1/80 sultani

NASRI as coin name.

The theme of the collection presented on this website is the names of coins (mostly denominations).

Many such numismatic terms are characteristic of many countries at once (for example: cent, denar, franc, centime...). However, in the process of collecting, there are quite often denominations that are characteristic of only one state. For example, such a coin is nasri, — a historical coin of Tunisia.

Nasri was produced in the lands of modern Tunisia during at least the 16th-19th centuries. At first it was a silver coin (either rectangular or round). During the 19th century, only copper nasri were minted.

The coin was 1/80th of a gold Tunisian sultani.

Unfortunately, the origin and prerequisites for the appearance of the nasri coin name are not exactly known. However, it can be argued that this term is often used in the Arab world. But it occurs as a male name. Its meaning is interpreted in the context of the concepts "winner", "after victory"...

By the way, on one of the first Tunisian coins of the 16th century, which are called nasri in numismatic catalogs, the denomination is not indicated, but there is an Arabic legend "عز نصره" ("Eizz Nasrah" or "May he be victorious"). Perhaps the coin got its name from this inscription.