Using this website

This accessibility statement covers https://www.darlingtonhippodrome.co.uk/. This website is run by Darlington Borough Council. We want as many people as possible to be able to use this website. For example, that means you should be able to:

change colours, contrast levels and fonts

zoom in up to 200% without the text spilling off the screen

navigate most of the website using just a keyboard

navigate most of the website using speech recognition software

listen to most of the website using a screen reader (including the most recent versions of JAWS, NVDA and VoiceOver)

AbilityNet has advice on making your device easier to use if you have a disability.

How accessible this website is

Most of this website is compliant with the W3C WCAG 2.2 AA accessibility standard. However, there are some parts of this website that are not fully accessible:

most of our older pdf documents

The Google ReCAPTCHA error box doesn't have an accessible label

Feedback and contact information

If you find any problems not listed on this page or think we’re not meeting accessibility requirements, contact: mydarlington@darlington.gov.uk.

If you need information on this website in a different format like accessible PDF, large print, easy read, audio recording or braille:

email mydarlington@darlington.gov.uk

We’ll consider your request and get back to you in 7 days.

Enforcement procedure

The Equality and Human Rights Commission (EHRC) is responsible for enforcing the Public Sector Bodies (Websites and Mobile Applications) (No. 2) Accessibility Regulations 2018 (the ‘accessibility regulations’). If you’re not happy with how we respond to your complaint, contact the Equality Advisory and Support Service (EASS).

Technical information about this website’s accessibility

Darlington Borough Council is committed to making its websites accessible, in accordance with the Public Sector Bodies (Websites and Mobile Applications) (No. 2) Accessibility Regulations 2018.

Compliance status

The website has been tested against the Web Content Accessibility Guidelines (WCAG) 2.2 AA standard.

This website is partially compliant with the Web Content Accessibility Guidelines version 2.2 [external link] AA standard, due to the non-compliances listed below.

Non accessible content

The content listed below is non-accessible for the following reasons.

Non compliance with the accessibility regulations

The Google ReCAPTCHA error box doesn't have an accessible label

The ReCAPTCHA error message on the blog pages has a textbox that doesn't have a readable label. This doesn't conform to WCAG 2.1: Understanding Success Criterion 4.1.2: Name, Role, Value. This is an external plugin that we have no control over so there is no target fix date set for this at present.

Duplicate ID's on the News letter sign up page

The News letter signup form that appears in the footer of every page also appears on a dedicated sign up page. As its the same form there are duplicate IDs on the page. This doesn't conform to WCAG 2.1: Understanding Success Criterion 4.1.1: Parsing.

Content that’s not within the scope of the accessibility regulations

PDFs and other documents

Some of older PDFs and Word documents don’t meet accessibility standards - for example, they may not be structured so they’re accessible to a screen reader. This doesn’t meet WCAG 2.1 success criterion 4.1.2 (name, role value).

Some of our PDFs and Word documents are essential to providing our services. For example, we have PDFs with information on how users can access our services, and forms published as Word documents. By September 2024, we plan to either fix these or replace them with accessible HTML pages.

The accessibility regulations don’t require us to fix PDFs or other documents published before 23 September 2018 if they’re not essential to providing our services. Any new PDFs or Word documents we publish will meet accessibility standards.

What we are doing to improve accessibility

Our accessibility road map below shows how we aim to improve accessibility across this website.

Issue Target Fix Date 4.1.2: Name, Role, Value None set 4.1.1 Parsing None set

Preparation of this accessibility statement

This statement was prepared on 08/10/2019. It was last reviewed on 10/07/2024 and is updated monthly.

This website is tested every 7 days against the WCAG 2.2 AA standard.