Using this website

This accessibility statement is for https://www.enjoydarlington.co.uk/. This website is run by Darlington Borough Council. We want as many people as possible to be able to use this website. For example, that means you should be able to:

zoom in up to 200% without the text spilling off the screen

navigate most of the website using just a keyboard

navigate most of the website using speech recognition software

listen to most of the website using a screen reader (including the most recent versions of JAWS, NVDA and VoiceOver)

AbilityNet has advice on making your device easier to use if you have a disability.

How accessible this website is

Most of this website is compliant with the W3C WCAG 2.2 AA accessibility standard. However, there are some parts of this website that are not fully accessible:

pages with Google Maps

The recaptcha doesn't have an accessible label.

Feedback and contact information

If you find any problems not listed on this page or think we’re not meeting accessibility requirements, contact: mydarlington@darlington.gov.uk.

If you need information on this website in a different format like accessible PDF, large print, easy read, audio recording or braille:

email: mydarlington@darlington.gov.uk

We’ll consider your request and get back to you in 10 working days.

Enforcement procedure

The Equality and Human Rights Commission (EHRC) is responsible for enforcing the Public Sector Bodies (Websites and Mobile Applications) (No. 2) Accessibility Regulations 2018 (the ‘accessibility regulations’). If you’re not happy with how we respond to your complaint, contact the Equality Advisory and Support Service (EASS).

Technical information about this website’s accessibility

Darlington Borough Council is committed to making its website accessible, in accordance with the Public Sector Bodies (Websites and Mobile Applications) (No. 2) Accessibility Regulations 2018.

Compliance status

The website has been tested against the Web Content Accessibility Guidelines (WCAG) 2.2 AA standard.

This website is partially compliant with the Web Content Accessibility Guidelines version 2.2 AA standard, due to the non-compliances listed below.

Non accessible content

The content listed below is non-accessible for the following reasons.

Inline frame missing a text alternative

On the Contact page the Google Recaptcha doesn't have a descriptive title. This does not meet WCAG 2.2: Success Criterion 4.1.2: Name, Role Value. We are unable to fix this as the markup is generated from Google.

Non compliance with the accessibility regulations

Some of the PDF's on our website are not in an accessible format due to not being machine readable or missing certain landmarks such as headers. This doesn’t meet WCAG 2.1 success criterion 4.1.2 (name, role value). Where the documents have been created by us we will fix these issues. Where the documents are given to us by third parties such as pubs, shops and restaurants we will provide links to their websites and social media where the information within the PDFs should also be available.

What we are doing to improve accessibility

Our accessibility roadmap below shows when we aim to fix the issues on this site.

Issue Target Fix Date 4.1.2 Name, Role, Value No date set

This statement was prepared on 02/08/2019. It was last reviewed on 11/07/2024 and is reviewed every two months.

This website is tested every 6 days. The tests are carried out by the Darlington Borough Council web team using Siteimprove’s accessibility reports. Tests are scheduled automatically and are monitored by the web team.