Using this website

This accessibility state is for https://www.hopetowndarlington.co.uk/. This website is run by Darlington Borough Council. We want as many people as possible to be able to use this website. For example, that means you should be able to:

Change colours, contrast levels and fonts

Zoom in up to 200% without the text spilling off the screen

Navigate most of the website using just a keyboard

Navigate most of the website using speech recognition software

Listen to most of the website using a screen reader (including the most recent versions of JAWS, NVDA and VoiceOver)

AbilityNet has advice on making your device easier to use if you have a disability.

How accessible this website is

Most of this website is compliant with the W3C WCAG 2.2 AA accessibility standard. However, there are some parts of this website that are not fully accessible:

Pages with Interactive Maps

What to do if you can’t access parts of this website

If you need information on this website in a different format like accessible PDF, large print, easy read, audio recording or braille:

Email mydarlington@darlington.gov.uk

We’ll consider your request and get back to you in 10 working days.

Reporting accessibility problems with this website

We’re always looking to improve the accessibility of this website. If you find any problems that aren’t listed on this page or think we’re not meeting accessibility requirements, contact the Web team by emailing the issue to mydarlington@darlington.gov.uk.

Enforcement procedure

The Equality and Human Rights Commission (EHRC) is responsible for enforcing the Public Sector Bodies (Websites and Mobile Applications) (No. 2) Accessibility Regulations 2018 (the ‘accessibility regulations’). If you’re not happy with how we respond to your complaint, contact the Equality Advisory and Support Service (EASS).

Technical information about this website’s accessibility

Darlington Borough Council is committed to making its website accessible, in accordance with the Public Sector Bodies (Websites and Mobile Applications) (No. 2) Accessibility Regulations 2018.

This website is compliant with the Web Content Accessibility Guidelines version 2.2 AA standard.

Non accessible content

The content listed below is non-accessible for the following reasons.

Non compliance with the accessibility regulations

N/A

Content that’s not within the scope of the accessibility regulations

ESRI maps showing the location of Hopetown Darlington. We offer a text alternative listing our address and transport options to the museum on the 'Plan your visit' and 'Getting here' pages. Our address is also listed in the footer of every page.

How we tested this website

This website is tested every 10 days. The tests are carried out by the Darlington Borough Council web team using Siteimprove’s accessibility reports. Tests are scheduled automatically and are monitored by the web team.

What we are doing to improve accessibility

Our accessibility road map below shows how we aim to improve accessibility across this website.

This statement was prepared on 16 May 2024. It was last updated on 26/07/2024 and is updated monthly.