Darlington is a busy and attractive market town, surrounded by striking countryside and close to the North Yorkshire National Park and the Yorkshire Dales, with easy links to both London and Edinburgh (2.5 hours by train). As home to over 107,800 people, it is a bustling and exciting place to live and work.

With a thriving retail and entertainment sector, there is always plenty to see and do in and around the town. From restaurants and trendy cafes, to museums and sports facilities, there is something to appeal to everyone. Housing is varied and reasonably priced, and other major regional towns, cities and even other countries are within easy reach via the major road links, train station and airport.

Our schools offer a diverse range of provision, meeting the needs of the whole community (73% of our schools have been judged by Ofsted as either good or outstanding) and we also have two outstanding colleges.

Darlington has a clear ambition to maintain and develop its role as a regional and sub-regional hub, in areas as diverse as retail, office development, industry and entertainment. We are also committed to boosting the positive reputation of our town and continuing to improve the quality of life for all residents and workers.

The quite exceptional level of partnership working has led to solid achievements in attracting inward investment. Moreover, this has enabled the community, the council, health, education and police to crystallise a single, focussed vision for Darlington's future.

With a strong sense of civic purpose and community cohesion, Darlington is a truly remarkable place to live and work, and we would love for you to join us. Our employees cover a variety of roles such as social work, housing, leisure, engineering, IT and legal. We want ambitious and innovative individuals who will help us realise our true potential and in return, we will offer you a career that will allow you to flourish and a package of benefits that include competitive salaries, generous annual leave entitlement, family friendly policies and work life balance opportunities.

To find out more about Darlington, please visit https://www.enjoydarlington.co.uk/

www.darlington.gov.uk

www.darlington.gov.uk/jobs-and-careers/