Bugs Bunny At The Symphony Executive Producer David Ka Lik Wong was awarded with a coveted Emmy Award for his work as producer on Peter and the Wolf in 1996, and was also nominated for an Emmy in 1994 for his work as producer of Rhythm & Jam, the ABC series of Saturday morning music education specials for children.

He teamed with George Daugherty as principal producer for the Peter and the Wolf project, the animation and live-action production starring Kirstie Alley, Lloyd Bridges, Sleepless in Seattle's Ross Malinger, and the new animated characters of legendary animation director Chuck Jones. He also produced the interactive CD-ROM version of the production for Time Warner Interactive.

He was also the senior Producer for the Warner Bros. documentary film The Magical World of Chuck Jones, directed by George Daugherty and starring interviews by Steven Spielberg, Whoopi Goldberg, George Lucas, and Ron Howard, among many others.

He has been Producer for the Warner Bros. touring concert production Bugs Bunny On Broadway since 1991, and Bugs Bunny at the Symphony since 2010, as they have toured the world, and he co-produced the original audio CD album for Warner Bros. Records. Mr. Wong has also produced innovative symphony orchestra concerts for some of the world’s leading orchestras, including the New York Philharmonic at Lincoln Center, The Boston Pops, The National Symphony Orchestra, The Hong Kong Philharmonic, The Philadelphia Orchestra, the Royal Philharmonic, the Sydney Opera House, the San Francisco Symphony, the Los Angeles Philharmonic at The Hollywood Bowl, the Wales Millennium Centre, Sinfonia Britannia, and many others. Most recently, he produced critically acclaimed Christmas concerts for Canada’s National Arts Centre, and the National Arts Centre Orchestra. He is also Executive Producer and the co-creator of the touring concert Rodgers & Hammerstein on Stage and Screen, playing with such major orchestras as The Hong Kong Philharmonic, The Cleveland Orchestra, San Francisco Symphony, and Fort Worth Symphony.

Mr. Wong has teamed with George Daugherty, Amy Tan, and the legendary Sesame Workshop to produce and create the new Emmy Award winning PBS / Sesame Workshop children’s television series Sagwa, The Chinese Siamese Cat, based on the book by Ms. Tan, which premiered on PBS in the fall of 2001, and has since been one of the most highly rated children's television series on all broadcast networks.Mr. Wong also wrote a number of episodes for the series and story-edited all 80 segments.

Mr. Wong is also the producer of the new WaterTower Music CD release of Bugs Bunny At The Symphony, recorded at the Sydney Opera House with The Sydney Symphony.In addition to his Emmy Awards and nominations, he has won numerous other awards during his career, including the Grand Award of both the Houston and Chicago International Film Festivals, a Silver Award of the Chicago Film Festival, two Parents’ Choice Awards, and the Kids First Award.

Mr. Wong was born in Hong Kong, and moved to San Francisco with his family at the age of 12. He still called San Francisco home until 2020. He currently resides in Las Vegas.