& Juliet

Showing at: Sydney Lyric Theatre

Dates: 27 February to 12 July 2024

The Emmy®-winning writer from Schitt’s Creek, David West Read, flips the script on Shakespeare in a hilarious and poignant story of self-discovery and second chances which proves there’s life after Romeo. After premiering on the West End and earning a staggering eight Olivier Awards nominations, & Juliet has also been one of the most unexpected theatrical triumphs on Broadway, with Forbes Magazine boldly saying: “This is easily the best musical of the year”. Coming to Sydney for a 2024 season, come and sing along to this pop extravaganza, with music from Katy Perry, Britney Spears, The Backstreet Boys, Ariana Grande, Pink, Just Timberlake and more.

Chicago the Musical

Showing at: Capitol Theatre

Dates: 9 June to 28 July 2025

Murder, greed, corruption, exploitation, adultery, treachery and all that jazz... so begins the international multi-award-winning musical, Chicago. The longest-running musical on Broadway, this masterpiece is coming to the Capitol Theatre in 2024. Starring Anthony Warlow as Billy Flynn, Zoë Ventoura as Velma Kelly, Lucy Maunder as Roxie Hart, Peter Rowsthorn as Amos Hart and Asabi Goodman as Matron ‘Mama’ Morton, expect a glittering score that includes 'All That Jazz' and 'Razzle Dazzle'.

Hamilton

Showing at: Sydney Lyric Theatre

Dates: 30 July to 31 October 2024

A revolutionary story of passion, unstoppable ambition and the dawn of a new nation, the Tony®, Grammy®, Olivier and Pulitzer Prize-winning Hamilton is returning to Sydney in 2024. An epic saga that follows the rise of Founding Father Alexander Hamilton as he fights for honour, love and a legacy that would shape the course of a nation, this global phenomenon has had a profound impact on culture, politics and education the world over. Based on Ron Chernow’s acclaimed biography and set to a score that blends hip-hop, jazz, R&B, and Broadway, if you missed this smash-hit last time it was in town, this is your chance.

Sunset Boulevard

Showing at: Sydney Opera House

Dates: 28 August to 1 November 2024

Coming to Sydney stages this August, musical theatre and international recording superstar Sarah Brightman is leading a lavish new production of Andrew Lloyd Webber’s musical masterpiece. Weaving a magnificent tale of faded glory and unfulfilled ambition, Sunset Boulevard tells the story of Norma Desmond, a legendary silent movie star who is tortured by her longing for a return to the big screen, and her chance encounter and subsequent relationship with Joe Gillis, a struggling Hollywood screenwriter. Brightman played the original Christine Daae in 'The Phantom of the Opera' on both the West End and Broadway, and is playing her first role in a musical in more than three decades, right here in Australia.

Sister Act

Showing at: Capitol Theatre

Dates: 6 August to 1 September 2024

Sydney, your prayers have been answered! Direct from London's West End, the Broadway hit Sister Act is coming Down Under this August. If you aren't familiar with the story made famous by the 1992 film starring Whoopi Goldberg, let's recap: disco diva Deloris’ life takes a surprising turn when she witnesses a murder and is placed under protective custody, hidden in the one place she shouldn’t be found - a convent - where she helps the struggling choir find their true voices while rediscovering her own.

Flat Earthers: The Musical

Showing at: Griffin Theatre

Dates: 11 October to 9 November 2024

Somewhere on the fringes of the internet, Ria e-meets Flick and instantly falls in analogue love… until Ria learns with horror that Flick is a ‘Flat Earther’. And Flick learns with equal horror that Ria is a ‘Globe Earther’. Cue: a beautiful and chaotic musical epic that sees our star-cross’d lesbians plunge into the Dark Web and down YouTube rabbit holes to explore the one thing they know is real—their connection. The irreverent, ingenious minds behind acclaimed musical 'Romeo Is Not The Only Fruit' are back with a West Side Story-meets-QAnon queer pop spectacular.

SIX the Musical

Showing at: Theatre Royal Sydney

Dates: 25 October to 28 December 2024

Following sensational sell-out seasons across Australia, the pop musical phenomenon SIX the Musical is returning to Theatre Royal Sydney in October 2024. Having now won 35 major international awards, including two prestigious Tony Awards and a Grammy nomination, and with a global audience of 3.5 million people per year and a staggering 600 million soundtrack streams, this high-octane 80-minute musical experience has become a cultural sensation.

Jesus Christ Superstar

Showing at: Capitol Theatre

Dates: 13 November to 1 December 2024

After garnering an unprecedented amount of accolades and positive reviews during its US and UK tours – including winning an Olivier Award for Best Musical Revival – Jesus Christ Superstar is coming to Australia in 2024 with a mesmerising new production. Featuring lyrics and music by Emmy, Grammy, Oscar and Tony winners Tim Rice and Andrew Lloyd Webber, the sung-through rock opera, which has been wowing audiences for over 50 years, is set against the backdrop of an extraordinary series of events during the final weeks of the life of Jesus Christ, as seen through the eyes of Judas.

MJ the Musical

Showing at: Sydney Lyric Theatre

Dates: 1 to 28 February 2025

He is one of the greatest entertainers of all time. Now, Michael Jackson’s unique and unparalleled artistry is heading to Australia in the multiple Tony Award®-winning new musical MJ. Created by Tony Award®-winning director/choreographer Christopher Wheeldon and two-time Pulitzer Prize winner Lynn Nottage, the story is centred around the making of MJ's 1992 Dangerous World Tour, going beyond the singular moves and signature sound of the star, and taking a rare look at the creative mind and collaborative spirit that catapulted Jackson into legendary status.