A very promiscuous Premier: Lloyd George and how his wife and mistress struggled to cope with his insatiable sex drive

He started softly, making his listeners strain to hear his words, but then he built up the volume and pace until he was roaring out the passion of his beliefs, half-singing like a chapel preacher.

Standing there on the platform, handsome, tall, broad of shoulder, a flower in the button-hole of his well-cut suit, the charismatic Chancellor of the Exchequer, 48-year-old David Lloyd George, was working his old magic on an audience.

He was irresistible, certainly to Frances Stevenson, a respectable, good-looking 22-year-old teacher, who had come to see him for the first time that evening in 1911.

She was mesmerised. 'I fell under the sway of his silver voice and his electric personality. I felt myself drawn in some mysterious way into his orbit.'

Double life: David Lloyd George had a wife and a mistress

She would remain within that orbit for more than 30 years, secretly sharing his bed, his work, his homes, his troubles - and playing her part in one of the longest acts of deception in modern British politics.

Their love affair, a marriage in all but name, was carried out behind the back of his wife and children. In critical times and even through a world war, the country was run by a man leading a double life.

Today, there are no politicians whose words and presence come even close to the seductiveness of the Welsh Wizard.

When he spoke in the House of Commons, women, weak at the knees, crowded the public gallery. The sergeant-at-arms complained that he could never get them out.

But, then again, there are no politicians today who could ever think of getting away with the uber-sexed personal life, peppered with illicit lovers and illegitimate offspring, that Lloyd George led over 14 years in Downing Street, first as Chancellor, then as Prime Minister, from 1908 to 1922.

It was a different world then. These days such a scandal could not be concealed. He kept his sexual secrets, lied, dissembled, sued if necessary and held resolutely on to high office when a careless word or a cuckolded husband could have unseated him.

The extraordinary story of Lloyd George and his women is vividly brought to life in a new book by the woman in the life of another politician - Ffion Hague, wife of William Hague, one-time Tory leader and still a 'big beast' in the Shadow Cabinet.

She melds together mother, sister, wife, mistresses and daughters in a compelling account of what she calls 'the pain and privilege of loving and living with a great man'.

From the very start - and in defiance of his hell-and-damnation Calvinist roots - Lloyd George was a goat of a man, and one endowed like 'a donkey', according to an envious male aide who once chanced on him in the bath. 'No wonder women are always after him, and he after them,' he added.

That same political aide, who was with him for decades, noted: 'He is mental on matters of sex. In his view, a man and a woman could not possibly be friends without sexual intercourse. He judges everyone by his own standards.'

An outstandingly clever lawyer as a young man and already marked for genius, he was the town 'flirt' in Criccieth in North Wales.

Girls were warned off him, especially Maggie Owen, the deacon's daughter. But, with his eyes set on a future in politics, he saw something special in her, a grace and strength of character that could only be good for him.

Betrayed: Wife Margaret Lloyd had to share her husband with his mistress

Against much family opposition, he wooed and won her. In a letter, he set out his view of marriage: 'I am of the opinion that a woman's function is to soothe and sympathise, to pour oil on wounds and heal bruises of the spirit.' What he didn't tell her - though she soon found out - was that he felt entitled to seek other pleasures elsewhere if he chose.

Within a few months of their marriage, he strayed, with a Liberal Party activist known only as Mrs J. What was worse, at a time when he was about to stand as an MP, he got her pregnant. The scandal could have killed his political career before it had even begun.

She had the baby, but somehow he hushed it up, as he would do so with all other affairs for the next 50 years. In London, climbing up the political ladder and even at the top, there would be temptations he could not resist - society ladies, wives of colleagues, a typist named Miss Cheek, all willingly and swooningly succumbing to his advances.

The intellectual side of him preferred women who could make good conversation, but it was better still if they were dressed in silks and satins, 'anything that had a rustle'.

By reputation, he had progeny everywhere. Ffion Hague was astonished by the number of individuals who wrote to her suggesting that a parent or grandparent could have been one of his illegitimate children.

His son, Dick, once met a stranger in a pub who looked just like him. The man told him Lloyd George was his father and he was getting a pay-off of &pound;400 a year.

But the most shocking part of her book concerns not babies born but those unborn.

Frances Stevenson - 'my own sweet little Pussy', as he called her - first came into his life as a governess for his daughter Megan. She then went to work for him in 11 Downing Street as a French translator.

Soon he was giving her confidential government work to do. Then, declaring his love, he made her a proposition that today would be construed as the most heinous sexual harassment.

He told her he wanted her to be his private secretary, but only if she agreed to be his mistress, too. There was no other way he could continue to work beside her. If she didn't agree, she would have to go.

She was besotted with him, but this was a monumental step for her to take. She was giving up the prospect of a respectable marriage and children. She risked scandal and disgrace.

Her life would be one of lies and deception. Not even her best friends could know. 'Heart-shocking' as the decision was for her, she plunged in. 'I placed myself in his hands unconditionally.'

She became his gatekeeper and his sounding board, working long hours with him. When they could, they slipped away to be alone - 'two hours of bliss!' - or, if his wife was in Wales, to spend the night at his house in Surrey.

He showered her with gifts and supplemented her income from his own pocket. Oddly, he would sometimes sign off his letters to her 'from Papa'.

She gave him unadulterated adoration, which he liked and needed. She cooked and kept house for him, making him his favourite fried bacon and potatoes.

She steered a tricky course round Maggie when she came to London, playing the dutiful assistant, concealing her feelings. Many times, wife and mistress were cheek by jowl under the same roof.

But Frances, in turn, was being lied to. He told her his marriage of 25 years was a sham and he was only going through the motions. In fact, as his letters home show, he was as devoted as he always had been to Maggie and would never give her up.

Frances Stevenson was Lloyd George's mistress of 30 years

And not just because the scandal of a divorce would end his career, but because he loved her. He wanted both of them as fixtures in his life, and that is what he got.

Two years into their affair, Frances fell pregnant. At first she was set on having the baby, for all the furore it would cause. 'I would be proud to have his child. I would brave the coldness of the world.' But then, in great distress, she reconsidered. Too much was at stake. 'The idea of our love child will have to go.'

Frances indeed lost her baby and this has usually been put down to a fortuitous miscarriage.

But Ffion Hague sees clear evidence that she had an abortion. And this, in 1915, when abortion - whether through gin and hot baths, purgative pills or knitting needles in a back-street surgery - was not just shameful for a single woman like her, but also a serious criminal offence.

If Lloyd George was privy to this illegality, it would have been an extraordinary thing for a man who was the second most important member of the Cabinet to condone.

Just as remarkable was that he was beset by such distractions when, as minister in charge of munitions at a crucial moment in World War I, his focus should have been on what was happening in the trenches.

To forestall a repetition of the problem, Lloyd George came up with a scam that, if not illegal, was certainly immoral.

They would find a man to marry Frances as a smokescreen for her relationship with him, 'a respectable and compliant shamhusband', as Ffion Hague puts it.

He would have to agree not to have sex with her, of course. But what man would agree to such conditions? It was thought that an offer of political advancement by Lloyd George would do the trick.

They soon had someone in mind - Captain Billy Owen, a civil servant and described as 'moved by a consuming desire to get on'. He and Frances met, and after a weekend together an engagement was agreed.

In the end, Frances could not go through with it. Though it had been Lloyd George's idea in the first place, when the reality hit home he was distraught. While an inveterate philanderer himself, he was violently jealous if she looked at another man.

Frances wrote in her diary: 'He cried and sobbed as a child, begging me all the time to take no notice of him.

But I could not bear to give him pain, and I know that he is relieved now that I have broken it off.' She would endure another abortion before finally having the child she longed for many years later. Somehow she concealed her pregnancy, and her daughter Jennifer was born in October 1929 in secrecy.

Frances's name was on the birth certificate but the space for the father was blank.

The baby was lodged in a nursing establishment for several months before being returned to Frances as supposedly an adopted child. How she got away with this subterfuge is still a mystery, but she did.

Lloyd George was thrilled by the little girl and treated her as his daughter, while denying to the world that she was. The twist was that she may not have been his after all.

For Frances had been playing him at his own game. At the time of Jennifer's conception she had been having her only serious affair. After all, Lloyd George had not ceased his roving and by now she saw no reason why she should not do the same.

Her lover was a man named Thomas Tweed who worked with her in Lloyd George's political office. He was 40, against Lloyd George's 65, and she was very attracted to him.

She concealed the affair from Lloyd George, practised as she was at lying after so many years of deception on his behalf. She of all people knew how to arrange secret assignations and communicate privately with a lover.

Either man could have been the father. Both had the opportunity at the right time. If her letters can be believed, Frances wanted it to be Lloyd George, and she certainly assured him he was. But she told Jennifer years later that Tweed was her father.

There can be no certainty either way. Nevertheless, when, three years after Jennifer's birth, the 69-year-old Lloyd George learned that Tweed might have usurped him - told by his own family in a vindictive attempt to scupper him and Frances, whom they had now found out about - he was devastated and consumed with jealousy. It was a case of biter bit.

Through this convoluted history of love and lust in high places there was, however, one character who remained steadfast. Maggie Lloyd George has often been presented as the downtrodden other half, betrayed and taken for granted. When she married she had never wanted the high life the husband she called 'Dei' - a variation of the Welsh 'Dai' for David - was ambitious for.

She cried on the day he was elected to parliament, knowing that the peaceful home-life she treasured would be impossible.

The unfaithful side of his character was painful to her, and as the years went by it damaged their relationship. But she kept the household together, both in Wales and in Downing Street, where she was a much better hostess than she has ever been credited with.

But at no time did Lloyd George want to replace her. Without her he would have been lost, and he knew it. Like the spoilt genius he was, he managed to have his cake and eat it.

After Maggie's death, he made an honest woman of Frances, as he had always said he would, though, when it came to it, he needed a determined shove from her to do so. He was 80 when they married. Five months later he was dead.

Frances's love for him was at last out of the closet for all to see. She had the recognition she always craved. As his widow she had respectability and an income; as a secret mistress she would have had nothing.

Lloyd George's good fortune was to share his life with two outstanding women. Frances was his soulmate and kept him happy, but Margaret was his consort and his wife, and she kept him up to the mark.

In her Welshness, she also connected with Lloyd George in a way that Frances never could. On her coffin, his wreath bore the simple inscription 'I fy nghariad, Dei' ('To my love, Dei').

To Ffion Hague, 'reflecting, not for the first time, on the ambiguous position of women married to men in public life', Maggie remains the heroine of this tale.

She rates her as 'one of the most successful Prime Minister's wives of all time, famous for her dignity and her dedication. She achieved an immense amount for charity and took to public life with ease.

'Maggie Lloyd George never put a foot wrong. During wartime she worked harder than anyone around her, eschewing social glitter for austerity and public service.

She played a supporting role to Lloyd George in public, but never lost her own sense of identity. She was politically active, yet she never embarrassed or publicly contradicted her husband.

'I cannot think of a better role model for those who find themselves in this most difficult of situations.'

More recent and less scrupulous prime minister's wives might take note. As for Ffion Hague, if by happenstance she should ever find herself in that position, we know the standard she has set for herself.

• The Pain And The Privilege: The Women In Lloyd George's Life by Ffion Hague is published by HarperPress at £25. To order a copy for £22.50 (inc p&p) call 0845 606 4206.