Duane Lee Burrell was born February 11, 1938 in the same house as his father on a farm in Wayne

Township, Tuscarawas County, Ohio near the village of Dundee. He was involved in school activities,

his church and was Senior Patrol Leader of Boy Scout Troop #93. He graduated from Wayne Local

High School in 1955 and attended Kent State University where he was a member of Air Force

R.O.T.C.

Duane was employed by the Nickel Plate Railroad as a brakeman, the F. W. Woolworth Company as a

manager trainee, Airchem Northern Ohio as an outside salesman, Ohio Industrial Supply in the

purchasing department and finally Carter Industries as store manager of the Carter Plumbing Electric

Heating Company in Dover, Ohio in 1966. After serving as manager for thirty years, he left in 1996 to

work for Carter Lumber Company in Akron, Ohio, the parent company, in inside sales, until November

30, 2007. He was last employed by Home Depot in North Canton, Ohio as a part time salesman in the

plumbing department, retiring on December 31, 2010.

Active in community organizations, Duane served on the Tuscarawas County Republican Central

Committee, as a volunteer on the Wayne Township and Dover City fire departments, and as an adult

for the Boy Scouts of America. Mr. Burrell was a committee member for various Cub Packs and Scout

Troops in the county as well as Neighborhood Commissioner and Assistant District Commissioner. He

was awarded the Scouter's Training Award, the Scouter's Key Award, the Twenty Year Veteran Award

and was an Order of the Arrow member. A member of the Dover First Moravian Church, Duane served

on the Board of Trustees, the Board of Elders, the New Church Building Committee and was a

delegate to Eastern District and Provincial Synods. A past member of the Dover Jaycees, he also

received the Boss of the Year Award, and has been a member of the Dover Elks Lodge. Both he and

his father Willis were members of the Tuscarawas County Genealogical Society and First Families of

Tuscarawas County.

Duane enjoys hunting and fishing and toured extensively by motorcycle across the United States. He

loves photography, music and his wife Beckie's art work.

A wonderful and loving husband, father and grandfather, Duane will be sadly missed by his wife of28 years, Rebecca "Beckie" Kochman Burrell; children, Terry (Julie) Burrell of Dover, Wendy Jennings of Georgia, Mark (Amanda) Hines of Dover, Amy (Russ) Korns of Dover and Sherry (Michael) Ryan of Massillon; brothers, Dean (Carol) Burrell of Strasburg and Rick (Connie) Burrell of Rootstown; sisters, Gayle (Bill) Bradley of Wooster, Saundra Eskridge of Rootstown and Billie Jo (John) Sommers of Ravenna; 10 grandchildren, Andrew, Jordan, Brandon, Emily, Julianna, Elizabeth, Kayla, Dillon, Katlyn and Samantha.

Duane was preceded in death by his parents, Willis and Eva Wright Burrell; first wife, Julia Burrell on March 17, 1983 and an infant son, Thomas Burrell.

Funeral services will be held on Saturday, December 8 at 11:00 am in the Toland-Herzig Funeral Home and Crematory at Dover with Marie Couts officiating. Interment will be at the Dover Burial Park. Friends can call at the funeral home on Friday from 6-8 pm. Those wishing to express their fondest memories of Duane may do so by visiting the on line obituaries link on the funeral homes website.

Memorial contributions may be made to Community Hospice at 716 Commercial Ave SW, New Philadelphia, Ohio 44663.