Duane Gordon Carter, 90, passed away in his home Thursday morning, July 9, 2015. Duane grew up on a ranch in Park Valley, Utah. The oldest of Gordon Ray Carter and Mary Eldora HIrschi Carter's seven children. Duane graduated from Brigham City High School in 1943. He spent the next year taking care of the family ranch with his brother David while his father recuperated from appendix surgery. As soon as his father recovered he joined the Navy and was eventually sent to the Panama Canal as an electrician. After his discharge from the Navy he attended Idaho State College of Pharmacy, graduating in 1950. It was here in Pocatello , Idaho he met Betty Lou Price. They were married immediately after his graduation and moved to Mesa, Arizona where Duane had secured employment as a Pharmacist at Bunde Drug Store. The following year, 1951, Duane and Betty added to their family when daughter Teresa was born followed by Jennifer, 1954, Michelle, 1956, and Gordon, 1964. Duane left Bunde Drug and opened his own Pharmacy, Duane's Pharmacy which he owned until 1972. After the sale of his store he worked at Smitty's Pharmacy for 21 years. He retired in 1995 after 50 years as a Pharmacist. Duane enjoyed photography and became a member of the Mesa Camera Club. He eventually served as the President of the club and won awards at the Arizona State Fair for some of his Photographs. He was fascinated by computers and technology. He joined a computer group and spent many happy hours working on his computer and talking about computers to anyone who was interested. Duane was an active member of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter Day Saints. He served in many positions including Stake missionary, Bishopric counselor, and ward clerk. Duane was a great example of one who would go out of his way to serve others. He was friendly and outgoing and enjoyed talking to everyone he met. He was highly respected in his profession and was known to close friends and family as "Doc" because he was trusted for his medical knowledge. Even though in his last years he struggled with illness he was proud that he reached the age of 90. Duane was a loving husband, father, grandfather and great-grandfather and will be missed by his family. He is survived by his wife of 65 years, Betty Lou Price Carter, sister Gayla Patterson, brother David Carter, and four children, Teresa Reed John, Jennifer Nelson Jeffrey, Michelle Bodine, Gordon Carter Olga, eighteen grandchildren and 62 great-grandchildren. Visitation Thursday, July 16, 2015, 6:00 pm to 8:00pm, at Meldrum's Mortuary, 52 North Macdonald, Mesa, AZ. Funeral Services to be held Friday, July 17, 2015, 10:00 am at Riverview ward, 1718 N. Date, Mesa AZ. Visitation one hour prior to services.