Obituary

Duane Robert Carter, 85, of Columbus, Sunday, November 7, 2010. Duane was a WWII Marine veteran where he served in the South Pacific on the USS Astoria. He retired from Conrail after thirty-five years service. He then spent twenty years working at Sawmill Athletic Club where he greeted members each morning and became known as "Mr. C". He was a longtime parishioner at St. James the Less Catholic Church. He enjoyed volunteering as a basketball and baseball coach and assisting with scouting. He and his wife later became parishioners at St. Brendan and Sts. Simon and Jude Catholic Churches. Duane loved sports, gardening, the beach, and almost anything that has to do with being outdoors. He was a huge fan and supporter of activities at St. Francis DeSales High School and West Jefferson High School. His greatest joys in life were his family and friends. His survivors include his wife of sixty-two years, Elvira (Melaragno); daughters, Marie (Bill) Skinner, Antoinette (Phil) Haskins, Jeannette (Rich) Haskins; sons, Robert, Joseph, James (Lisa) Carter; grandchildren, Mary Beth (Mark) Espena, Joseph (Sarah) Skinner, Alexandra, Paul, and Rachel (fiancé Phil Geary) Carter, Christopher and Rebecca Carter, Allison and Sarah Haskins; great-grandchildren, Mitchell, Matthew, Maxwell, and Jonas; sisters, Twila Jean (Don) Shaffer, Dorothy (Dick) Eichner, Edith (Charlie) Osborne; brother, Bill Carter; sisters-in-law; Gilda (Bob) Ferrari, Stella Melaragno, Patricia Melaragno; brothers-in law, Felix (Cecelia) Melaragno, Victor Melaragno. Preceded in death by parents, Rachel and Earl Carter; brothers, Jim, Tom, Ed, Richard and sister, Sarah. Friends may call THURSDAY November 11, 2010 at the JOHN QUINT TREBONI FUNERAL HOME, 1177 W. 5th Avenue, from 4:00-8:00 PM. Funeral Mass will be held 10:00 AM on FRIDAY November 12 at Our Lady of Victory Catholic Church, 1559 Roxbury Road, Rev. Msgr. Romano Ciotola, Presider. FAMILY AND FRIENDS ARE ASKED TO MEET AT CHURCH. Interment will follow at the St. Joseph Cemetery. Friends who wish, may contribute in memory of Duane to the Odyessy Healthcare, 540 Officenter Place, Gahanna, Ohio 43230. Special thanks to roommate Dan Franklin and the staff at Mayfair Village. Condolences may be sent via www.johnquint.com.