Duane Suttles, 58,of Grayson, KY passed away Saturday, December 3, 2022, at King’s Daughters Medical Center in Ashland, KY.

He was born October 24, 1964, in Huntington, WV; the son of Henry and Mary Frances Kitchen Suttles of Grayson, KY.

He was preceded in death by his paternal grandparents, Joe and Gathel Suttles, and his maternal grandparents, Fred and Iona Kitchen.

Duane was very active in his community, who was a member of the Better Life Church in Grayson. Being the former SFRT District 9 Coordinator, the Fire Commission announced his death with great sorrow of his sudden passing. Duane Suttles was a man of many hats, in Kentucky’s fire service having served over 40 years in various ranks with the City of Grayson Fire Department, had been Treasurer of the Kentucky Firefighters Association for the past several years and dedicated 25 years of employment to the Fire Commission. He was also past vice president of the Eastern Kentucky Fire Fighters Association. Duane was currently employed by the City of Grayson as City Clerk.

Duane was a 1982 graduate of East Carter High School, attended Morehead State University, and received a degree in Fire Service from Ashland Community Technical College. He was also a member of the Grayson Rotary Club and the Grayson Kiwanis Club.

In addition to his parents, Duane is survived by his wife, Cynthia Steele Suttles; a daughter, Kelli (Tanner) Stidham of Iola, KS; a brother, Joe David Suttles of Grayson; a sister, Dawn Michelle Suttles (Honorio Hernades and children, Isabella and Caleb Young) of Grayson; brother-in-law, Curt (Diana) Steele of Grayson; two sisters-in-law, Ellen Sue Justice of Rush, and Missy (Scott) Wallace of Grayson; two granddaughters, Stella Lynn and Adaline Mae; a nephew, Brandon Clay Suttles, and a host of Uncles and Aunts.

Funeral services will be Friday, December 9, 2022, at 1:00 p.m. at the First Church of Christ in Grayson. Aaron Rayburn, Daniel Lucas, and Harold Horton, ministers. Burial will follow at the Cribbs Hill Cemetery with full firefighters honors.

Visitation will be Thursday, December 8, 2022, from 4:00 p.m.-8:00 p.m. and Friday 11:00 a.m. until service time at the First Church of Christ, 287 Pomeroy Street Grayson, KY 41143.

Arrangements by the Sparks Funeral Home of Grayson.