ALAN Rudolph’s excruciating “Trixie” was the disaster of the Sundance Film Festival and it’s no better on a second viewing.

The director of “Afterglow” and “Mrs. Parker and the Vicious Circle” apparently saw this as a bid to make a “mainstream” film, but his notion of the mainstream is both clueless and deeply patronizing.

The movie follows the fortunes of a doltish security guard, named Trixie (a disastrously miscast Emily Watson) given to relentless, decreasingly amusing malapropisms like “It’s my first case and I’m a little green behind the ears” and “It’s time to fish or get off the pot.”

Trixie chews gum all the time and speaks in an atrocious Chicago accent. Assigned to plainclothes work at a tacky casino in a small Northwestern resort town, she meets various heavily eccentric characters, like teenage barfly Ruby Pearli (Brittany Murphy from “Girl, Interrupted”) and nightclub impressionist Kirk Stans (Nathan Lane – who, with roles in “Titan A.E.” and “Love’s Labour’s Lost,” is becoming a staple presence in bad movies).

She also gets picked up by Dex Lang (Dermot Mulroney), a ladies man who keeps fumbling smooth moves like tossing a cigarette out of a pack and into his mouth.

For a date, Dex takes Trixie to the boat that belongs to his boss, corrupt developer Red Rafferty (Will Patton). But Red, his trashy, alcoholic girlfriend Dawn (Lesley Ann Warren), the thuggish DeFlore brothers and a corrupt state senator (Nick Nolte) turn up for an unexpected party.

Not long afterwards Dawn disappears, and Dex is beaten by the DeFlore brothers who are looking for a missing tape. Trixie goes into gumshoe mode, finds Dawn in a hotel, and herself in the middle of a lazily cliched but opaque blackmail plot. Getting to the end takes a very, very long time.

Photographed in a film student-pretentious style (with lots of self-conscious but meaningless shots of people in mirrors) “Trixie” doesn’t work as a noir-spoof, a comedy thriller or anything else.

It’s so painful to sit through you eventually stop feeling sorry for the floundering cast, who have only themselves and their agents to blame for their roles in this fiasco.

——

TRIXIE Half a star

An agonizingly incompetent, laughless screwball-noir comedy from Alan Rudolph. Running time: 117 minutes. Rated: R. At the Angelika and the First and 62nd Cinemas.