Gothic director Tim Burton’s Edward Scissorhands is a movie for the ages and is most notably remembered for Johnny Depp’s performance as Edward Scissorhands himself. Starring alongside Depp is Winona Ryder, who plays Kim Boggs in the movie, and the pairing of the two truly paved the way for the success of the cult classic.

Advertisement

Now that the dust has settled, and Depp’s performance as the titular character is embedded in everyone’s minds, did you know that he wasn’t supposed to even play the lead role at all? There was another very well-known actor lined up way before Depp got considered for the role, but the Pirates of the Caribbean actor simply snatched it from him.

A Must-Read: After Winning Defamation Trial, Johnny Depp Reportedly Star Attraction of Prestigious MTV Video Music Awards Next Weekend – May Be Invited as Chief Guest

Advertisement

Top Gun Star, Tom Cruise, Came First Before Johnny Depp

Johnny Depp‘s reputation as a talented actor who can play any role that is given to him spectacularly is unquestionable, as he has a track record in that field.

Related: ‘He Might. I’m a Big Fan of Johnny’: Mads Mikkelsen Hints Johnny Depp’s Return as Grindelwald to Fantastic Beasts Franchise, Claims Copying Him is ‘Creative Suicide’

From Willy Wonka & Edward Scissorhands to Jack Sparrow, he is an amazing actor. But the iconic actor hadn’t made too much of his portfolio back then and was just behind rising star Tom Cruise for a role in the Tim Burton classic.

Advertisement

Fortunately, for Depp, Cruise looked up the role he was offered and simply rejected it, deeming that Edward Scissorhands was an ‘ugly’ movie. Thus, Depp got the role, and from there on its simply history.

Also Read: Who is Julia Fox – Kanye West’s Ex-Girlfriend Who Will Do Anything To Support Amber Heard and Diss Johnny Depp

Here’s Johnny Depp In A Video Game Trailer

Mosasaur Studio’s new game, Sea of Dawn is an upcoming MMORPG adventure game that will release on Mobile and PC platforms. With good funding to back it up, it recently released a new trailer for the game, in which Depp stars in!

Advertisement

Related: “She’s Cut Off His Goddamn Finger”- Amber Heard’s Sister Reportedly Freaked Out After the Aquaman Actress Cut Johnny Depp’s Finger in a Fight, New Revelations

Depp’s appearance in the new game trailer for Sea of Dawn saw him get completely lost in the role, as he always has in the numerous cult classic movies he has starred in. Check it out below.

The 59-year-old actor also has a new movie in the works that he’ll be starring in. Maïwenn’s new upcoming drama, La Favorite, will see Depp’s portrayal of French King Louis XV, the king of France in the 18th century.

Filming for La Favorite will begin somewhere around this summer, and the movie is set to be distributed by Netflix, however, in France only as of now.

Source: The News International