A unique plethora of culture, adventure, nature, food, and festivals, Sarawak is the place where the journey of endless exploration starts

We are inviting you to join us at PATA Destination Experience Forum & Mart 2023 for an in-depth exploration of this sustainable destination, so we are cramming you these eight facts you must know about Sarawak!

There are a few widely accepted stories about where this name came from. The most popular version is that when British explorers first arrived in the 19th century, his guide thought he was pointing to a cat instead of the town, thus mistakenly replying 'kucing', Malay for cat. Two other claims are 1) the city was named after a tree that once grew throughout the area bearing a fruit named Mata Kuching, and 2) James Brooke, referred to the town as ‘Kuching’ in 1839, which might suggest the old word ‘Cochin’ or port as in India or Indo-China.

Whatever the story may be, eventually the city of Kuching settled on the moniker of Cat City, because who doesn’t like cats? Today when you visit the city, it is hard for you to miss the cue as cat statues and paintings can be seen everywhere.

Fun fact: The iconic White Cat is dressed up for different festivities throughout the year by the Kuching South Municipal Council.

2. Sarawak is the largest region in Malaysia.

4. Sarawak only became a part of Malaysia in 1963.

Sarawak has, in fact, been a part of Brunei for the longest time from the 15th century to 1841. After Brunei, the Brooke dynasty administered Sarawak for a century until in 1941 when Japan occupied the island during WWII. Between 1945-1963, Sarawak, together with Sabah, became Crown Colonies under the British Empire. was a part of the British colonial. This year, Sarawak celebrates the 60th anniversary of the formation of the Federation of Malaysia in 1963 with the rest of the country.

5. Sarawak is also known as “Land of the Hornbills” because the Rhinoceros hornbill is Sarawak’s state emblem.

6. 60% of Sarawak’s energy is reusable.

Having all these valuable resources makes conservation and responsible development even more critical for Sarawak. From 2010 to 2020, Sarawak was able to decarbonise its power system by more than 70%, and its clean hydrogen production capacity has more than doubled since January 2021.

7. Sarawak’s tourism is all about being responsible.

Having said that, it is for sure that Sarawak’s tourism is all about being responsible. The destination has been devoting huge efforts to promoting responsible tourism that steers its community towards SDG 4 (Quality Education), SDG 12 (Responsible Consumption and Production), and SDG 17 (Partnerships for the Goals).

Toward visitors, they are actively encouraging eco-friendly tourism products like nature-based activities, community-based tourism, as well as homestays, responsible food-consumption, local handicrafts and arts.

For their supplies, Sarawak Tourism Board provides training on waste management, reducing plastic & carbon footprints, and taking proactive measures to reduce impacts of their major festivals. You will be able to learn more in-depth and first hand insights of how Sarawak is putting sustainability into action at PATA Destination Experience Mart & Forum.

8. The best season to visit is April – September.

The best season to visit Sarawak is April to September for two reasons: 1) It is the period of time when there is the least rainfall, and 2) one of the most happening music festivals featuring world music happens around this time!