Above: Alan Lancaster

Forty years ago, it was Status Quo’s turn to record in Montserrat, where they recorded what bass player Alan Lancaster described as their worst ever album. It was Lancaster’s last album with the band, so he was saved from some of the band’s later efforts, but Back to Back, their 16th album, was barely recognisable as a Quo record.

Although relatively unknown in the USA, Status Quo were household names in Britain, where they were famed for their energy, catchy tunes, nasal-driven vocals, and three-chord rock ‘n’ roll boogie. But they were running out of steam after the mid-70s, and frontman Francis Rossi was looking for a new sound: One that Lancaster hated. Four singles were released from Back to Back, with the most successful being Margeurita Time, which the band members, other than Rossi, didn’t even want to record. It was a ditty rather than a rock song, but it got them onto the light entertainment shows.

Lancaster also suffered the ignominy of seeing the record company demand that the vocals on the song he wrote, Ol’ Rag Blues, be rerecorded by Rossi, who was the recognisable voice of Quo on the radio. The final single off the album, Going Down Town Tonight, was also rerecorded back in England without any band members playing on it at all. A risible early 80s keyboard backing track hinted at what was to come.

The Frantic Four, as the band’s most successful lineup became known, was falling apart. Drummer John Coghlan had left before the Montserrat session, complaining that he was fed up with the lifestyle, and Lancaster was eventually forced out too. He’d been complaining about the music. Lancaster said the break up of the Frantic Four was all down to cocaine, ego, and Rossi’s personal ambitions, but for many Quo fans, this lineup, the 1970-81 lineup, was the only real deal. Without the 70s rhythm section and Lancaster’s songwriting, the band became a couple of middle-of-the-road artists searching for a hit. They even sued the BBC at one point, for age discrimination, for not playing their latest single (a Beach Boys cover) on Radio One. They lost.

Back to Back probably needed a stronger musical direction, and nothing recorded at AIR studies was performed live until Rossi started sneaking Margeurita Time into the sets decades later. A brief reunion tour of the Frantic Four in 2013/14 stuck with the 1970s songs. Asked by Classic Rock Magazine what would happen if Rossi wanted to play Margeurita Time, guitarist Rick Parfitt said, “we’d split up again, have a punch up, and then reform straight away.” By then, there were two Status Quo lineups: The Frantic Four playing their three-chord power boogie and Rossi and Parfitt’s other Quo, turning out album after album of good-time rock ‘n’ roll of ever-diminishing quality. But the arrangement gave something to everyone for a period. Rick Parfitt died in 2016, and Alan Lancaster in 2021.

Between 1968 and 2010, Status Quo had 58 top 40 hits in the UK, more than any other artist. They continue to record and tour.

Margeurita Time became one of the best-selling singles recorded in Montserrat and was performed by Status Quo (without Alan Lancaster) on Saturday evening’s Canon and Ball variety show in the UK.

An early run-through of the song in the studio is at the link below. They appear to be under the influence of something. Margeuritas perhaps.