Post by quomanuk on

This is all thanks to gatesheadbanger. I found this link

quo.boards.net/thread/21443/story-quo-album-cover

A little while back we were wondering who drew the Quo album cover - seeing as for so many of us it is a favourite; so I dug around on the internet and found out it was Dave Field. I contacted him, told him our MB had voted his album cover most popular, and asked him if he could tell us the story behind it - and today I got an email from Dave - here it is (I had told him I'd post the story):-

" It was 1974 and I was designing various sleeves for Jack Wood, who was the Art Director for the Vertigo Record Label. I had just won a design award for The Sensational Alex Harvey Band's 'NEXT' album sleeve, with it's metal foil print technique, it was a bit of a innovation.

I designed and or Illustrated for Vertigo..... Nazareth.....Razamanaz, Loud N' Proud. - Thin Lizzie.....Nightlife. - Alex Harvey.....Next, Tommorow Belongs to Me, Live. - Uriah Heep.....Return to Fantasy. - Black Sabbath.....Live at Last, Paranoid (revised single sleeve). - Manfred Mann...Nightingales and Bombers; to name but a few.

Jack called me in to discuss a new album cover for Status Quo, with the working title of 'QUO'. I was pretty chuffed and it was agreed that it would be a good idea to spend a few days with the guys at The Windmill in Brixton to discuss the album concept, as it was where they were rehearsing for a week.

After getting our heads together, Rick and Rossi fancied getting a bit of a Roger Dean style background shapes into the design and then combining my monochrome portrait drawings approach, they thought it might be an interesting mix.

I studied and sketched the guys over a few days and came up with a draft of the album that finally evolved.

I must say that having met a great number of famous musicians, personalities and celebrities in my time, the guys in Quo stand out as belonging to the more considerate, accommodating and generous of them.

During my daily visits to The Windmill, I came dressed in my more outlandish of my fashion gear of the time and turned up in some jeans that I had modified from denim to multi coloured leather patchwork. Rick took a shine to them and on the last day I brought them along and gifted them to him on the proviso that he would wear them on stage. I never knew if he did this. I was however, amazed when I was paid for the album design and had a generous extra load of £'s given to me by Rick for the razzy jeans.

I look back with affection at my time with Quo.

Cheers,

Dave"

Read more: quo.boards.net/thread/21443/story-quo-album-cover#ixzz3kcf88Zoi