As any fool knows, Status Quo aren’t just one of the most enduring and successful rock bands of all time – having notched up a gobsmacking 66 hit singles, more than 100 appearances on Top Of The Pops, and spent 434 weeks (over eight years) in the British singles chart – they also have one of the most expansive catalogues.

Leaving aside the multitude of compilations and live records that flood the market, Status Quo have some 33 official studio albums to their name, the most recent being 2019's surprisingly well-received Backbone.

But if you’re looking to buy into the Quo back catalogue or expand your Quo collection, tread warily. Because while the band hit an enviable run of form with a succession of near-flawless albums they released between 1970 (Ma Kelly’s Greasy Spoon) and, for the sake of argument, 1981 (purists consider Never Too Late to be the last ‘real’ Quo album), some of the material they churned out after a post-Live Aid reunion is woeful.

After bassist Alan Lancaster and drummer John Coghlan had jumped ship in the mid-80s, guitarist/vocalist Francis Rossi had little opposition within the band when it came to dabbling with more middle-of-the-road-flavoured material like In The Army Now, The Anniversary Waltz and Burning Bridges (songs that Lancaster would rather have chewed off his own arm than perform).

Certainly guitarist/singer Rick Parfitt seemed content to go along for the ride. The version of Fun Fun Fun that Status Quo recorded with The Beach Boys in 1996 might have been little short of a travesty, but it sounded like a work of genius compared to the same year’s cover of Steeleye Span’s jaunty folk-shuffle hit All Around My Hat, recreated in the company of Span singer Maddy Prior.

Fortunately, the renewal of Rossi’s writing partnership with former road manager/ harmonica player Bob Young helped to refocus Quo’s creative energy, and Under The Influence (1999) was hailed as their best album in years. Heavy Traffic, in 2002, was better still, although with hopes of long-term Quo fans coming to the boil, the band bottled it with the aforementioned The Party Ain’t Over Yet, and the reformed "Frantic Four" (featuring the classic Rossi/Parfitt/Lancaster/Coghlan lineup), whose reunion tour in 2013 was such a huge success, never entered the studio. Sadly, with Parfitt and Lancaster now gone, they never will.

Here, then, are the Status Quo albums that many of us wore out tennis rackets to, throwing shapes in the privacy of our bedrooms; the ones that the band made before your gran became a fan as well.

...and one to avoid