Any rumours that Paora Winitana is returning to play for his hometown franchise are simply just that - fishermen's wives' tales.

However, the former 0800 Easy LPG Hawks basketball co-captain tells SportToday from Christchurch his international career is over.

The 33-year-old from Hawke's Bay was a notable omission from the Tall Blacks trials, which started this afternoon in Mairangi Bay, for the Fiba Basketball World Championship in Turkey late next month.

"I'm not one hundred per cent and the body is nowhere near it," the Christchurch Cougars shooting guard says.

The Hastings-born swingman gave assurances to head coach Nenad Vucinic, his assistant, Chris Tupu, and retired Tall Black Dillon Boucher before the National Basketball League (NBL) season ended late last month but it was to no avail.

An ankle injury in Christchurch on the eve of the Cougars NBL match against the Hawks in Napier is pretty much at the core of Wintana's inability to put his hand up for international duties. A damaged ligament that controls his toes also compounded his problems.

"I think I came back too early for the last two games [for the Cougars]," he confesses.

Last season's Adelaide 36ers player will not return to the Australian National Basketball League (ANBL) either.

"It was always going to be a family decision to stay put here and we had talked about that last year," says Winitana, who is ordained as a Mormon bishop.

The devout member of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-Day Saints, who opts not to play on Sundays, says he, wife Tia and their children will remain in Christchurch as he fulfills his contractual obligations to the Cougars franchise.

"As a family we'll evaluate things on a year-by-year basis at the end of each year," he says, not ruling out the possibility of donning the Hawks shirt again at the Pettigrew-Green Arena in Taradale again.

"Anything is possible but it's highly improbable right now because I'm contracted to the Cougars."

Nevertheless, Winitana, who was awarded the Rookie of the Year title in his debut year in the NBL in 1996, captained the Hawks to an NBL title in 2006, the first in the Bay's history.

That year the former New Zealand Breakers player won a silver medal as part of the Tall Blacks team at the 2006 Commonwealth Games.

The current national trials, which ends on Sunday, will see a 21-member squad culled to a 12-man team to travel to the world champs on Monday.

Current Hawks small forward Chris Daniel and guard Jarrod Kenny are among the hopefuls who will play in build-up matches and mini tournaments in Croatia, Slovenia and Turkey.

They will lock horns with Iran, Serbia, Turkey, Russia, Serbia and Slovenia in Maribor, Slovenia early next month. A mini tournament in Zadar, Croatia, will feature matches against Russia, Jordan and the hosts.

Vucinic has been based in Turkey where he has been coaching the Darussafaka team in Istanbul.

Teams in No 13-ranked New Zealand's group at the world champs are world No 3 Spain, No 6 Lithuania, No 15 France, No 19 Canada and No 24 Lebanon, who have former Tall Blacks coach Tab Baldwin at their helm.

The Tall Blacks first game is against Lithuania, August 28.

Winitana fondly recalls Baldwin impressing on his troops before the 2002 world champs the need to "play every second of every minute of every game with pride and passion" after a moving speech from the late Sir Edmund Hillary.

"I've definitely done that for my country and my family and I'm very proud of that."

Finishing fourth at the 2002 world champs are among the many highlights of his enviable international career.

"To be part of the 2002 Tall Blacks programme and then go on to represent my country was awesome eight years so I'm blessed to have made that journey," he reveals.

He is reluctant to put his accomplishments in any hierarchical order but adds playing against an American team in Florida, boasting the likes of LeBron James, Swayne Wade and Tim Duncan, en route to the Athens Olympics was equally memorable.

"Athens was another thrill because over there I met some of the world's best athletes, not just basketballers."

So was winning the silver medal at the 2006 Commonwealth Games in Melbourne despite losing to Australian Boomers in the final.

That he could take his wife and children to key events overseas in those years made it extra special for Winitana.

He will always savour his time with fellow retired Tall Black Paul Henare, who were bitter rivals at school before becoming co-skippers for the Hawks. They went on to play alongside each other for the Tall Blacks and for the Cougars before Henare returned home last season to roost with the Hawks.

While his NBL fires are still burning, he reflects on the significance of winning the NBL title under head coach Shawn Dennis who this month returned to Australia to be the assistant coach of the Perth Wildcats.

He echoes the sentiments of Hawks assistant coach Kirstin Daly on Bay-born Hawks guard Everard Bartlett, who missed out on the Tall Blacks trials.

"It's tough to make it but at least he should have got a trial, especially as I'm retiring."