Signs that a major transition was looming for Mobile-based Integrity Media were confirmed Monday, when the company announced that it was selling off divisions in a move that will cut its local work force in half.

The company’s co-founder and CEO, P. Michael Coleman, was somber as he described "a difficult series of decisions" for the Christian music and publishing enterprise.

"What we’ve done is sold the two divisions that were in the recorded music and song-publishing space," he said.

The deal that will have the greatest local impact is the sale of the Integrity Music division to David C Cook, a Colorado-based nonprofit ministry.

That organization was founded in 1875 in Chicago by its namesake, who taught Sunday school when not working in the sewing-machine parts business. Cook tapped a growing market in Sunday school materials, and has acquired a number of other makers of Christian products since the 1980s.

Ryan Dunham, who was installed as the president of Integrity Music by David C Cook, said his organization bought the song catalog, master recordings and contracts with artists, songwriters and commercial partners. Integrity produced and distributed albums and other materials by many award-winning artists.

By LAWRENCE SPECKER and JEFF AMY

Staff reporters

Cook already owns the Kingsway music label, based in the United Kingdom. Like Integrity, it focuses on worship music for evangelical Christians.

"They’re very similar, which is what led us to the purchase," Dunham said. However, he noted that Cook is a nonprofit organization focused on providing material directly to churches, while Integrity was a for-profit company that may have looked more like a commercial record label.

Dunham said Cook will keep the Integrity name and add it as its sixth major unit.

In a separate deal, Integrity has also sold INO Records, a Nashville-based record label, to another party. Coleman declined to identify the buyer, saying he wasn’t authorized to speak on their behalf.

According to a news release issued Monday morning by the company, Integrity also plans to sell international divisions located in the United Kingdom, Singapore and South Africa.

Coleman said proceeds from the sales have been used to pay down the company’s debts, and the company is still grappling with a decision about what form it will take in the future. But when the dust has settled, he said, Integrity Media will have dropped from about 60 employees in Mobile to "less than 30."

Coleman cited woes that have plagued the secular music industry as well as its Christian counterpart: New technology has made it easy to copy and hear music for free, causing revenues to crash worldwide, and a prolonged economic downturn hasn’t helped.

Integrity has enjoyed far better times: Founded in 1987 as a direct-to-consumer music club focusing on the Christian genre known as praise and worship music, the company enjoyed periods of explosive growth. It went public in 1994, experienced some ups and downs and was taken private again in 2004. According to Press-Register reports from the period, it then had more than $70 million in annual revenue, was expanding into new ventures and employed about 150 at its west Mobile headquarters.

That same campus was put up for sale this spring, signaling that major developments were in the works. Details had been scant until Monday.

For Integrity Music, a transition period lasting at least three months lies ahead, Coleman said. Some employees will have the option of moving west with the company.

"They’re conducting interviews of staff. They have hired some folks already, and I expect that process will continue over the next 60 to 90 days," Coleman said. "I don’t know how many will be offered positions or how many will choose to move."

Dunham said Cook wants to move Integrity to Colorado Springs in part because the organization has spare space in its headquarters building and wants to cut costs, but also to encourage cross-pollination between music, books, DVDs and other media.

"Our intent is the staff of Integrity Music, as many as possible, would be offered jobs, and as many as are able would move," Dunham said. "Not everyone is going to be able to be a part of it.

"I think it allows us to get much more creative in terms of product development," said Dunham, who was Cook’s senior vice president of sales and marketing before the Integrity purchase. "It’s just hard to do that from a separate location."

Dunham said Cook will offer Integrity’s artists an expanded platform.

Dunham said Kingsway will continue, as will contracts between Kingsway and EMI. Integrity, on the other hand, will maintain its contract with Sony’s Columbia Records. Cook has agreed to continue to use Integrity’s South Africa and Singapore operations for distribution, but won’t use Integrity’s British office.