What is the Population of the Seychelles?

The Seychelles has a population of approximately 108,000 people who mostly live on eight of the Seychelles' 115 islands. 90% of the population live on the main island of Mahé. The next-largest populations are on Praslin and La Digue respectively. In total, eight of the Seychelles' islands are permanently inhabited.

The Seychelles People: Multi-ethnic, Peaceful, Harmonious

90% of the population of the Seychelles are of Creole descent, usually from French colonial settlers and African slave labourers. Most of the remaining 10% of residents are of European origin.

Since their discovery, the Seychelles have attracted people from all over the world. The multi-ethnic roots of the Seychelles people stretch far and wide, including France, India, the UK, China, the Arab world, and other parts of Africa. Almost every imaginable ethnic and national group can be found in the cultural melting pot of the Seychelles, and each has left its own mark on the country's vibrant, peaceful society. Nowadays, all citizens enjoy equal footing, whether they are a descendent of slaves, adventurers, exiles, or pirates. Seychelles people therefore tend to have a wide range of skin colours.

21st-century Seychellois societal norms are similar to those in Europe. The modern-day Seychelles are also a rich country, especially compared to other African nations, and the GDP per capita is even higher than in some European countries.

The average age in the Seychelles is 33,1 years old, and the country enjoys a population growth rate of 0.8%. Those who travel to the Seychelles will often find that the locals are friendly towards foreigners, and generally helpful and courteous. The everyday pace of life is much slower in the Seychelles, however, so there is little of the familiar hustle and bustle of western cities on show.

What Languages do they speak in the Seychelles?

There are three official languages in the Seychelles: Creole, English, and French. The most common language spoken by the Seychellois population is their own Creole variant, Seychellois Creole, or Seselwa. This language is a mix of African languages such as Swahili and Malagasy, but with large French influences.

Religion in the Seychelles

The main religion in the Seychelles is Roman Catholicism, with 82% of the population belonging to this religion. Around 6.4% of the Seychellois are Anglican Christian, while the next-largest religions are Hinduism (2.4%) and Islam (1.6%). Around 2% also belong to a variety of smaller Christian churches such as the Adventists, or to the Bahai religion. (Figures from 2022).

Other Beliefs