Founded in 1964, Shoreline Community College is a public accredited college, renowned for providing high-quality education and helping students achieve their dreams. Shoreline is among the top 15 community colleges in the U.S. for international student enrollment (IIE Open Doors data) with a strong commitment to serving a global student body. Located in Seattle, Washington, Shoreline has a strikingly beautiful campus and is surrounded by some of the most spectacular natural scenery in America. Seattle is one of the fastest-growing port cities in the U.S. and is home to major world-class companies such as Amazon, Boeing, Microsoft, and Starbucks.

Find the right path for you

2+2 University Transfer

Early College/High School Completion

English as Second Language

Professional/Technical Programs

Fully Online Academic Classes and Degree Programs

2+2 University Transfer

The 2+2 University Transfer program is one of the most popular programs at Shoreline. We offer over 90 areas of study such as art, biochemistry, business, communication studies, computer science, economics, engineering, music, psychology, etc. Shoreline students earn an Associate's degree which is equivalent to the first two years at university and then transfer to a four-year university for two more years to complete a Bachelor's degree.

Our expert faculty academic advisors will help students develop individual plans and achieve their academic goals. There are many other ways for supporting our students with transfer success, including:

hold transfer fairs with over 100 universities twice a year

host transfer workshops, alumni panels, university rep visits every quarter

offer transfer admission guarantee (TAG) with our partner universities

Where do Shoreline students transfer?

Our students successfully transfer to top universities around the U.S. Here are just a few:

Early College/High School Completion

International students can begin college early and earn a high school diploma from Shoreline. Our college credits count toward both the college degree and high school diploma requirements, saving both time and money. To apply to this program, students need to:

be at least 16 years of age by the start of international student orientation

completed the equivalent of U.S. 9th grade

English as Second Language

Shoreline offers beginning to advanced levels of academic English to help you succeed in college. While taking higher levels of English, students can also enroll in college-level courses. The result? Shoreline students do better, get higher grades, and are more prepared when they enter a four-year university.

No TOEFL, IELTS or SAT required

We do not require a TOEFL, IELTS or SAT for admission. During our orientation program, students take an English placement test to determine the level of English proficiency. You can be exempt from our academic English program with the following scores:

TOEFL 61 overall/20 writing

IELTS 5.5 overall/6.0 writing

Duolingo 95

For guaranteed placement into advanced levels of English:

TOEFL 46 overall/14 writing

IELTS 5.0 overall/5.0 writing

Duolingo 85

Professional/Technical Programs

Shoreline offers more than 50 professional/technical programs leading to an Associate of Applied Arts and Science degree or a certificate. These programs are uniquely designed to prepare students for work in specific career fields.

Fully Online Academic Classes and Degree Programs

If you do not plan to physically study in the U.S., Shoreline also has a great option for you to take classes online overseas. The Overseas Online Learning application is very simple.

Cost

Tuition and fees at community colleges typically cost 50%-70% less than public and private universities.* The cost to attend Shoreline for one academic year (9 months) is approximately:

* Source: College Board

Housing

Students can choose to live on campus in our newly opened residence hall, with an American homestay family, or on their own in a local apartment or shared housing. Our beautiful, state-of-the-art residence hall has many other conveniences, including a full kitchen in each unit, activities in the hall that students participate in, and public transportation just steps from the building. Students love to call our campus "home"!

Why choose Shoreline Community College?

Over 90 areas of study

Excellent record of transferring to top U.S. universities

High academic standards

Small class sizes

Excellent student support services

Fun and engaging student activities

Beautiful campus and safe environment

Located in Seattle - a vibrant, cosmopolitan port city

Applying to Shoreline

Online application

Copies of transcripts

Bank statement or other financial documentation

$50 application fee

Contact us for more information