If you only listen to one song tonight, make it “February Truths” by A Shoreline Dream (2012, from the Three EP).

Tonight’s song is yet another from the trusty mailbag.

A Shoreline Dream is a shoegaze/”nightrock” band from Denver who have been active since 2005. They’ve changed the band lineup a couple of times, and since 2006, they’ve released three proper albums. This year, they’ve decided to do something a little different.

This year, the band has released a trilogy of EPs. They recorded them in a three-month period, and then released one EP each month during the spring. The series, which they call “333” is available as a limited edition boxed set or as downloads. Details about that in just a bit.

Three, which was released in the first week of May, is “a trip to the sand dunes”. 3, which was released in the first week of June, “takes place in their Barnum-based studio”. Barnum is a small, predominantly Hispanic section of Denver. III, which came out in the first week of July, is “based upon the many drives they take listening to their songs”. The last song on that third EP is called “103”, and it was written as a soundtrack for a drive up the Mount Evans Scenic Byway (Colorado State Highway 103), which is the highest paved road in North America.

They list Slowdive, Film School, Ride, and Sigur Rós as their main influences, and in tonight’s song, it’s pretty easy to understand all of that.

Tonight’s song is from the Three EP. The one about going to the Great Sand Dunes National Park in central Colorado.

“February Truths” by A Shoreline Dream

http://www.planetarygroup.com/pressassets/ashorelinedream/ashorelinedream-februarytruths.mp3

The guitar bit right there at the drop is reminiscent of “Dreams Burn Down” by Ride, and that’s pretty much aces in our book. The rest of the song is still very Ride-esque as well. With the delay and flange turned to 11, the result is sun-washed bliss, perfect for an early spring-time drive at sunset. Windows open, volume high. Since it’s not springtime right now in the northern hemisphere (which is where most of you readers are from), you’ll have to have a different listening experience. In your house. Lights off. Volume high. Choose your own listening experience, but I really do think that whatever it is, you should listen to this with the volume high.