Hamilton Branch Meeting WHEN: Wednesday 26 May 2021 at 7:30pm sharp (feel free to arrive from 7pm)

WHERE: Glenview Club, 211 Peacockes Road, Glenview, Hamilton

SUBJECT: DVD on Hawker Sea Fury and Book review of "Smithy"

SPEAKER: Hugh McCarroll (book review)

This month we are having a dvd on the Hawker Sea Fury at War. The Hawker Sea Fury started out as a land-based design called the Fury-the next generation of fighter after the Typhoon and tempest. The RAF were less than enthusiastic as they were increasingly committed to jets, but the Fury was “Navalised” and renamed Sea Fury, which quickly found a new home with the Fleet Air Arm who were looking for a replacement for their aging Seafires. The fastest piston engine aircraft of its time, highly manoeuvrable and packed with power, the Sea Fury proved a formidable combat aircraft in the skies over Korea, operating from British Carriers.

This film history of the Sea Fury is packed with rare and previously unavailable archive film from the Imperial War Museum and ITN, with footage of the trainer, fighter, fighter-bomber and later air racer variants, as well as exclusive “Hair Raising” interviews with veterans from the Fleet Air Arm who flew Sea Furies on gruelling combat missions over Korea, named “The Forgotten War”. Highlights include considerable breathtaking carrier ops footage, both catapult and rocket-assisted take offs, film of low level Sea Fury exercises off Gibraltar, original a/c recognition footage and much more.

Hugh will also present his book review on Charles Kingsford Smith and his legacy.

The name Kingsford-Smith is known around the world. Charles Kingsford Smith was a colourful Australian aviation pioneer who came to worldwide fame when he and his crew flew the Fokker FV11 Southern Cross from the USA to Australia in 1928, a feat then considered impossible. The Atlantic had been flown in 1919 by Alcock and Brown (west to East), and Charles Lindberg flew from New York to Paris in 1927.

Kingsford Smith went on to make many other pioneering flights, including the first Atlantic crossing East to West, and the first flight across the Tasman. He made several Tasman flights, and toured New Zealand giving joyrides for paying passengers. His radio operator and business associate for many years was a New Zealander John Stannage, who has a fascinating story of his own.

Copyright © RAeS New Zealand Division, All Rights Reserved