Then she was cast as a Bond girl in Quantum Of Solace and suddenly she was obscure no longer. Bounding into the mainstream she has starred in not one but two Hollywood blockbusters this year, Prince Of Persia and Clash Of The Titans, yet still she’s not happy.

The problem is she thinks she is more appreciated for her looks – ­specifically her rear aspect – than for her talent.

“I’ve nearly walked off very big films before and I would because I don’t want that in my life,” she says in an interview this week with GQ ­magazine (whose cover just happens to ­feature a half-clad Gemma in a remarkably suggestive pose).

EXPRESS OFFER: CLAIM £15 IN FREE BETS HERE!

“I want to enjoy the work I do. I’m looking at working with people I get on with, who respect me, who don’t just see me as a piece of ass, which I have experienced as well. I read so many scripts and they’re all the same. Either the character is just someone to be in the background or they’re there to help the man, to be the love interest, like I’ve done in Prince Of Persia or Clash Of The Titans.”

I’m looking at working with people who don’t just see me as a piece of ass,

Gemma Arterton

Young actresses – Gemma is still only 24 – have a notoriously difficult time in Hollywood. Last year model-turned-starlet Megan Fox, whom nobody would confuse with Meryl Streep or Dame Judi Dench, complained about the dictatorial behaviour of a particular director and found herself pilloried.

Her crime was to refuse to play by the rules of the game. Those rules insist that young women who have been hired as eye candy should smile, look pretty and not whinge – certainly not in public.

So three cheers for Gemma, who is currently to be seen in a microscopic pair of shorts in the British comedy Tamara Drewe, if she is really prepared to climb off the Tinseltown whirligig in pursuit of artistic ­integrity and respect. Whether she will find it is another matter.

There is a well-trodden path of duckling actresses who succeed on their merits and then become swans. Kate Winslet and Emma Thompson were never beauty queens but they all scrub up nicely for the red carpet.

The path in the opposite direction is harder to find. Helen Mirren had to wait till she was middle-aged to be treated as a serious actress rather than crumpet in a semi-permanent state of undress. Charlize Theron made herself monstrous in Monster and won an Oscar for it. And the equally delicious Rachel Weisz even married an art-house director as a sign of her seriousness.

But in general the mantle of beauty is hard to shrug off. One leading critic tells me: “Gemma Arterton is a good actress and by all accounts a nice ­person. She was excellent in British thriller The Disappearance Of Alice Creed, which was an opportunity for her to show her range. But let’s face it she’s not getting the Hollywood big bucks because of her acting skills. As far as the studios are concerned she is basically a cheap bit of British totty.

“It’s all very well her wanting to diversify but people don’t offer you serious roles when you’re young unless you want to go very low budget.”

Actresses whose looks mark them down as bimbos often dream of ­surprising everyone with their talent. Marilyn Monroe yearned to be taken seriously but it would have helped if she could ever remember her lines.

Sometimes it does happen, though. ­Farrah Fawcett looked like the toothpaste model she once was when she starred in Charlie’s Angels but gradually emerged as a far-from-dumb blonde in films such as Extremities and The Apostle. Jacqueline Bisset wasn’t cast for her brain when she played Miss Goodthighs in the James Bond spoof Casino Royale and a scene of her underwater in a thin white T-shirt in The Deep made its director rich. Somehow she pulled through and has been nominated for four Golden Globes, an Emmy and a César (the French Oscars).

B ut people blessed with beauty often seem not to comprehend how far it has got them. I can attest that Gemma Arterton was not the best actress in that gruelling production of Love’s Labour’s Lost. In my vivid recollection the star of the show was another young lady who richly deserves to go on to greater things, called Michelle Terry. Unfortunately her biggest screen triumph to date has been a British TV pilot that sadly sank ­without trace last month. That’s because she does not have the ­conventional beauty Hollywood craves.

So good luck and all that to Gemma. But you can’t blame some of her struggling colleagues if they think she doesn’t know she’s born.

While we’re at it you can’t blame some of her fans for wishing she would carry on just as she is.