Could Kate be her own worst enemy in Bafta battle?

Award hopeful: Kate Winslet

Kate Winslet's biggest threat to picking up an award at the Baftas this weekend may be. . . herself.

Bafta voters have split Kate's vote in the best actress category of the awards being revealed on Sunday night - which could result in her cancelling herself out of a trophy spot.

The British star has been nominated twice: nice, but not necessarily helpful when it comes to getting her hands on one of the gongs.

(It's worth pointing out, though, that Scarlett Johansson was once in a similar position - nominated for both Lost In Translation and Girl With A Pearl Earring - and did win the Bafta, for the former film, so maybe Kate will pull it off!)

Kate has been recognised in the leading actress category for her acclaimed performances in The Reader, directed by Stephen Daldry, and Revolutionary Road, made by her husband Sam Mendes.

This could see her ending up with more total votes - spread between her two films - than her competitors, but not enough to win outright against rivals Meryl Streep, Kristin Scott Thomas and Angelina Jolie.

At least it will bring some element of surprise to Sunday's show.

Will Kate prevail and win the big one? Or will scoring two nominations work against her? A lot of folk would like to see her win, despite the bafflingly spiteful backlash she's suffered recently.

Whatever happens, one sure thing is that the Orange Baftas will be a circus on Sunday.

Brad Pitt, Ms Jolie, Sean Penn, Mickey Rourke and their entourages (and Judy Craymer, producer of Mamma Mia!, in her stilettos) will all be in town and hitting the red carpet.

Then there are the studio chiefs behind Slumdog Millionaire, The Curious Case Of Benjamin Button, Frost/Nixon, Milk and The Reader.

So it's probably just as well the Grey Goose vodka people are sponsoring the Orange Bafta ball and the various private after-parties at the Grosvenor House Hotel on Park Lane.

Nick Jones, who runs the Soho House clubs in London and the U.S., and his team have set up a number of comfy rooms at Grosvenor House, so guests won't have to schlep all over town to the after-bashes.

Jones told me he's put in sofas and chaise longues for people to flop out on (and knock back a few Grey Goose cocktails at the same time).

He's modelled the late-night events on the Golden Globes awards, where all the fun happens under one enormous roof, but in a number of separate salons.

Just in case Nick is reading this: mine's a Grey Goose Le Citron on the rocks, with cranberry juice and a splash of orange juice. Please.

Without a doubt, Viola is a star. Just ask Meryl

Loyal: Viola Davis

Viola Davios almost steals the movie Doubt from double Oscar-winning actress Meryl Streep.

There's a 15-minute scene between Streep's dictatorial nun Sister Aloysius and Viola's Mrs Miller, the mother of a pupil who may or may not have been sexually abused by Philip Seymour Hoffman's character Father Flynn at the school, run by Sister Aloysius.

It's like watching two lionesses clawing each other: some of the most gripping moments to be seen on a movie screen.

It nearly didn't happen that way, though, because of Viola's own political, racial and sexual views.

'I had prepared for the scene for months before I'd even auditioned. It took a long time to figure this woman out,' Viola explained.

'I had a 50-page biography I created for her - pages all over the house.

'I did all the things I learnt at acting school, like trying to figure out what was driving her and what did she want? And what I slowly realised was that what gets in the way of a character is you.

'My 21st-century sensibility about what I think of myself as a black woman was taking me one way and I realised I had to rein myself in. This was 1964 and there was a certain etiquette.

'Sister Aloysius is in a habit, she is a white woman - and she has the power to destroy my son.

'Ultimately, I found something I should have discovered the first day,' she told me.

Which was? 'That she's just a woman who loves her son and who will do anything to protect him.'

Streep told me that working with Viola was like getting the best possible workout an actor could find. No wonder Streep screamed 'My God! Somebody give her a movie!'

during her acceptance speech for best actress at the Screen Actors Guild Awards.

I've raved about this movie many times, and no matter what is written elsewhere, it's a film that has sparked a fascinating debate. That's the point: we mull over our own doubt.

All four of the film's main players - Streep, Davis, Hoffman and Amy Adams - have been nominated for Oscars.

The main races will be between Streep and Kate Winslet in The Reader, and best supporting actress nominees Viola and Penelope Cruz in Vicky Cristina Barcelona.

Ms Davis is one of America's most distinguished thespians, but she told me: 'I make a living as an actress, but I don't have the career people think I have.' She will have, though. I'm certain of it, now she has Ms Streep and Doubt producer Scott Rudin in her corner.

Preparing for his role: Ramin Karimloo

One new Phantom, two new haunts...

Andrew Lloyd Webber and the team behind what's expected to be the biggest new musical of the year, Phantom: Love Never Dies, are meeting in New York over the weekend to thrash out how they're going to stage it in the West End and on Broadway simultaneously (and Shanghai, a few months later).

That means casting the show three times. So far, Ramin Karimloo, born in Iran and raised in Toronto, and actress Sierra Boggess have been cast. But, as yet, no one's certain whether they will open in New York or London first.

Karimloo has played the Phantom in London, while Ms Boggess, who created the part of Ariel in The Little Mermaid on Broadway, performed as Christine a couple of years ago in the Las Vegas abridged version of Phantom.

The pair have had a refresher course, so to speak, playing the Phantom and Christine during workshop rehearsals in London, and they have created the template for how the roles will be played on three continents.

The show's creative team, led by director Jack O'Brien and designer Bob Crowley, have drawn up a production schedule that would have a long period of previews for Love Never Dies at the Adelphi Theatre this autumn, and at whatever theatre the producers settle on in New York (a deal is imminent, I understand), with O'Brien and colleagues shuttling across the Atlantic. Shanghai will follow later.

Sierra Boggess will play Christine

'It's a hilariously complex operation, but Andrew and everyone else is fully committed to pulling it off,' an executive connected to the production in New York told me. 'But if Andrew,

Jack, Bob or the Really Useful's boss Andre Ptaszynski comes up against a reason for not going global, then we'll scale it back and open in one place - either New York or London - first.

'It's all down to how well we're organised,' he explained.

I'm told Andrew 'just wanted to have fun' and was 'tired' of opening shows the 'regular' way.

There's also talk of some of the Love Never Dies songs, by Lloyd Webber and Glenn Slater, being previewed by singers on U.S. TV talent show American Idol. (The songs are good, but work is still being done on the 'book'.)

In the show, Christine, who is now a famous singer, has found life with husband Raoul (the hunk who rescued her at the end of the first Phantom) tough going. He enjoys a drink, or two or three, and has squandered their money.

Christine, Raoul and their teenage son (who was born with half a mask on his face, so guess who the real daddy is?) travel to New York for Christine to perform there.

You can guess what happens next. New levels of creative tension will surely be reached on this show.

I can't wait.

Words can't describe

Theatre folk who attended the rehearsed reading on Wednesday for a stage musical version of the Audrey Hepburn-Gregory Peck movie Roman Holiday had no words I could print here (and keep my job) to describe the experience, particularly Lee Mead's contribution.

'Unprepared': Lee Mead in Roman Holiday

Mead took the Peck role, that of a reporter who falls for a princess, and the politest thing said about him was that he 'wasn't prepared'.

Songs by Cole Porter were used, but they were, I'm told, ill-chosen and didn't fit the storyline.

Sophie Bould in the Hepburn part was good, as was Lesli Margherita in a featured part.

Out from the shadows

Moonshadow features a raft of Yusuf Islam songs

Yusuf Islam - the artist formerly known as Cat Stevens - has written a musical called Moonshadow featuring a raft of his hit songs.

I wrote about this a few years ago and it has taken that long to sort out all the rights to numbers such as Morning Has Broken, Wild World and so on.

Moonshadow is expected to be 'tried out' in Northampton in July and if all works well it will head to the West End.

Siobhan McCarthy, original star of the musical Mamma Mia!, will be singing at a preview of parts of Moonshadow at the Prince of Wales Theatre on February 15, during the Whatsonstage.com Theatregoers Awards.

The ceremony is being hosted by James Corden and Sheridan Smith. Last year James (such a bad boy) gave Daniel Radcliffe a full kiss on the mouth.

Anyway, sounds as if it's going to be a right old knees-up.

Patina Miller, star of the London Palladium's Sister Act, also hopes to make an appearance, singing one of Alan Menken's rousing R&amp;B numbers.

Sister Act, opening on May 7, has sold close to £1.5 million worth of tickets.

Says Patina: 'People think nuns don't have lives. But nuns like iPods; they listen to rock music; they drive cars, although there are a few things they obviously don't do.

'I play a woman who's not really a nun, so I get to spice it up. I hope the nuns of England come and visit us.'

Patina, of course, plays the part of Deloris, the role Whoopi Goldberg made her own in the Sister Act movies.

Rehearsals begin in March, although director Peter Schneider and choreographer Anthony Van Laast are already hard at work shaping the show with Menken and Glenn Slater.

Watch out for ...

Ryan Molloy, star of Jersey Boys, and Matt Rawle, the eponymous Zorro, are the only musical leading men up for Olivier Awards who are still playing their roles.

(Molloy, sublime as Frankie Valli at the Prince Edward Theatre, has just extended his contract.) Their fellow nominees in the best actor in a musical category, Douglas Hodge and Denis Lawson - who were brilliant in La Cage Aux Folles - have left the show, which is still running at The Playhouse.

The envelopes are being opened for the Oliviers on March 8.

Who else should play the Master, Noel Coward, than debonaire John Standing? The actor, born with the bluest of blood in his veins (he's a baronet), will bring an inherent sense of style when he sings songs associated with Coward in cabaret at Bellamy's restaurant, just off Berkeley Square, for a season from Monday.

Call 020 7491 2727 or email: gavin@bellamysrestaurant.co.uk for details.

Amy Adams will star in Leap Year

Amy Adams (Doubt and Enchanted), who will star in the romantic comedy Leap Year, which starts shooting in Dublin soon. Anand Tucker has been casting around for a handsome leading man to sweep Ms Adams off her feet (in cinematic terms) and he's decided on Matthew Goode, who was in Brideshead Revisited and the forthcoming blockbuster Watchmen. The movie's written by Simon Beaufoy, who's in the running for an Orange Bafta Award and an Oscar for Slumdog Millionaire.

Kerry Ellis, who follows Maria Friedman into the Shaw Theatre for Neil Marcus's The Great British Songbook season. Ms Friedman, one of the best musical theatre artistes around, is in residence at the Shaw till tomorrow night. Ms Ellis, now playing Elphaba in the musical Wicked at the Apollo, Victoria, heads to the Shaw for two nights starting June 20. Her powerhouse voice will work its wonders on songs by Don Black, The Beatles, Andrew Lloyd Webber, Duffy and Queen.

Ken Stott, Hayley Atwell and Mary Elizabeth Mastrantonio, who are excellent in Lindsay Posner's riveting production of Arthur Miller's great play A View From The Bridge, which is running at The Duke of York's Theatre in St Martin's Lane. Stott, as Eddie Carbone, a longshoreman working the docks at Brooklyn Bridge, is superb. It's his unhealthy infatuation with his niece (beautifully captured by Ms Atwell) that drives the story that you know is going to end badly. And how fantastic it is to see Ms Mastrantonio on stage again and fully in command. Gerard Monaco and Harry Lloyd are just right as the brothers who shatter Eddie's fantasy. The only thing that spoilt my evening were the noisy and fidgety pupils sitting in front and behind me.

Other members of the audience complained to theatre management, and strict guidelines on how students should behave - um, like, you don't talk or make phone calls during the play, duh! - are to be introduced.