Cwmbran Shopping Centre

Cwmbran Shopping Centre is a shopping centre owned by Prudential in the town of Cwmbran, Torfaen. As a New Town the town centre was planned in a single Master Plan along with the surrounding residential neighbourhoods.

Children's Hospital for Wales

The Children's Hospital for Wales, also known as the Children's Hospital, Cardiff is a children's hospital in Cardiff, Wales. It is situated on the site of the University Hospital of Wales in the Heath area of the city.

Cathays Cemetery

The Cathays Cemetery is one of the main cemeteries of Cardiff, Wales. It is in the Cathays district of the city, about 1.5 miles (2.4 km) north of Cardiff city centre.

Caswell Bay

Caswell Bay is a beach on the south east of the Gower Peninsula, near Swansea, Wales.

Cardiff Roman Fort

Cardiff Roman Fort was a coastal fort in the Roman province of Britannia Superior, of which Roman Wales was a part. Its original Latin name is uncertain.

Cardiff North (Assembly constituency)

Cardiff North (Welsh: Gogledd Caerdydd) is a constituency of the National Assembly for Wales. It elects one Assembly Member by the first past the post method of election. Also, however, it is one of eight constituencies in the South Wales Central el…

Cardiff Crown Court

Cardiff Crown Court is a historic building situated in Cathays Park, Cardiff, Wales. The building is a Grade I listed building.

Cardiff Central (Assembly constituency)

Cardiff Central is a constituency of the National Assembly for Wales. It elects one Assembly Member by the first past the post method of election. Also, however, it is one of eight constituencies in the South Wales Central electoral region, which el…

BT Tower (Swansea)

The BT Tower is located near Swansea Castle and is the second tallest building in Swansea after The Tower, Meridian Quay. It has 13 floors and is 63m/206.64 ft high.

Bettws, Newport

Bettws (Welsh: Betws) is an electoral ward and coterminous community (parish) of the city of Newport, South Wales. It is one of the largest modern housing estates in Europe.

Beacons Way

The Beacons Way [1] is a waymarked long distance footpath in the Brecon Beacons National Park in south Wales, United Kingdom.

Bargoed railway station

Bargoed railway station serves the town of Bargoed in the county borough of Caerphilly, South Wales. It is a stop on the Rhymney branch of the Valley Lines network. The station, which is the northernmost on the double-track section of the branch, ha…

A48(M) motorway

The A48(M) is a motorway in Wales between Cardiff and Newport. It is a spur off the M4 into eastern Cardiff. It is 2 miles (3.2 km) long and is a 2-lane motorway throughout its length.

Xpress Radio

Xpress Radio is a national award-winning student radio station based at Cardiff University in Cardiff, Wales, focused on current, popular and new music.

Willows High School

Willows High School (Welsh: Ysgol Uwchradd Willows) is a secondary school located in the Tremorfa area of Cardiff, Wales. It caters for pupils aged 11 to 16 and is English-medium.. As of September 2011, the headteacher is Joy Ballard. She succeeded …