Cowbridge Grammar School

Cowbridge Grammar School was one of the best-known schools in Wales until its closure in 1974. It was replaced by a comprehensive school.

Children's Hospital for Wales

The Children's Hospital for Wales, also known as the Children's Hospital, Cardiff is a children's hospital in Cardiff, Wales. It is situated on the site of the University Hospital of Wales in the Heath area of the city.

Cathays Cemetery

The Cathays Cemetery is one of the main cemeteries of Cardiff, Wales. It is in the Cathays district of the city, about 1.5 miles (2.4 km) north of Cardiff city centre.

Cardiff Roman Fort

Cardiff Roman Fort was a coastal fort in the Roman province of Britannia Superior, of which Roman Wales was a part. Its original Latin name is uncertain.

Cardiff North (Assembly constituency)

Cardiff North (Welsh: Gogledd Caerdydd) is a constituency of the National Assembly for Wales. It elects one Assembly Member by the first past the post method of election. Also, however, it is one of eight constituencies in the South Wales Central el…

Cardiff Crown Court

Cardiff Crown Court is a historic building situated in Cathays Park, Cardiff, Wales. The building is a Grade I listed building.

Cardiff Central (Assembly constituency)

Cardiff Central is a constituency of the National Assembly for Wales. It elects one Assembly Member by the first past the post method of election. Also, however, it is one of eight constituencies in the South Wales Central electoral region, which el…

Bristol Manor Farm F.C.

Bristol Manor Farm F.C. is an English football team based in Bristol. They play in the Toolstation Western Football League Premier Division. They play their home games at The Creek.

Brislington West (ward)

Brislington West is a council ward of the city of Bristol, England. It covers the western part of Brislington, Arnos Vale, Kensington Park and St Annes.

Bettws, Newport

Bettws (Welsh: Betws) is an electoral ward and coterminous community (parish) of the city of Newport, South Wales. It is one of the largest modern housing estates in Europe.

Bargoed railway station

Bargoed railway station serves the town of Bargoed in the county borough of Caerphilly, South Wales. It is a stop on the Rhymney branch of the Valley Lines network. The station, which is the northernmost on the double-track section of the branch, ha…

Altolusso

Altolusso (meaning "high luxury" in Italian) is a residential skyscraper in Cardiff, Wales. The building is 72 metres (232 ft) high and has 23 floors.

Almondsbury Interchange

The Almondsbury Interchange in South Gloucestershire, is one of the United Kingdom's largest motorway stack interchanges. The interchange is one of only three four-level stacks in the UK, spanning a range (including slip roads) of 1 km by 1 km.

…

A48(M) motorway

The A48(M) is a motorway in Wales between Cardiff and Newport. It is a spur off the M4 into eastern Cardiff. It is 2 miles (3.2 km) long and is a 2-lane motorway throughout its length.