EXPERIENCED LAWYERS

PRACTICAL APPROACH

VALUE-DRIVEN

With a focus in tech, media, and entertainment contracts.

Featured Art: The Edge by Ursula Abresch

OUR LAWYERS ARE

CLIENT-CENTERED

We have been both lawyer and the client. We trained at big law firms before working in-house.

PREDICTABLY-PRICED

We offer reasonable hourly rates, fixed price subscriptions, and innovative pricing models to fit your budget.

COLLABORATIVE

We understand the diplomacy and speed required to work as part of a team.

EFFICIENCY DRIVEN

Our lawyers operate separately insured law firms but practice in association to minimize costs by sharing expenses and infrastructure.

OUR CLIENTS SAY

Darlene and the team at Inter Alia Law completely transcended our expectations of lawyers over our work together from start-up to acquisition of our business. Inter Alia got into the mindset of our business and grappled with how legal would intersect with our business strategy. They dug into the role that law could play to make us stronger and provide better service to our clients. Our approach to legal became a competitive advantage while also managing our risks.

Rob Leadley, CFO/COO, Pacific Content

Inter Alia Law has been a game-changer for us. We'd tried both small and large law firms and weren't getting the attention and focus we needed, and also paying a premium for it. We were then referred to Interalia and Darlene's team—it has been a breath of fresh air.

Ransom Hawley, Caddle Inc.

Darlene, Mike, Rowan and the rest of the team at Inter Alia truly understand the demands made of in-house legal teams and work alongside you to build tools, systems and processes that deliver for the organization as a whole. I always appreciate their ability to provide technical legal advice in a practical way and their desire to innovate, both of which resonate with our business teams. Their value proposition is outstanding: smart and collaborative lawyers who put their clients first, everytime.

Erin Eizenman, General Counsel & Corporate Secretary, MaRS Discovery District

Inter Alia Law played an integral role in helping me launch my business. Darlene and Mike were wonderful supporters in helping me determine how to protect my company and my IP. The team is incredibly responsive and kind. They were able to communicate with me in a way that was eye-level and approachable. So glad I went with this team!

Amanda Cupido, Lead Podcasting

I've been thrilled with the support that Darlene and Steven have provided for our software development agency. Incredibly responsive, always thoughtful and on-point with feedback and advice, and very genuine in their approach to helping us with contract negotiations. There's far less stress in our day-to-day knowing they're in our corner and ready to help.

Nick Wilkinson, Steamclock Software Ltd.

It has been a pleasure working with Inter Alia Law for our Flipturn Publishing business. They always put our needs first and recognize the challenges of our industry. Darlene and her team balance their personal touch with outstanding expertise. Their support has been instrumental as we grow, helping us to forge lasting relationships globally.

Kathryn Harrison, Flipturn Publishing

They are a group of smart, diverse, trustworthy, business-savvy and efficient lawyers. They have helped us scale and make smart business decisions — they provide a total perspective/point-of-view, not just a legal perspective. I've recommended them dozens of times and will continue to do so!

Ransom Hawley, Caddle Inc.

Rockstar legal team for a SaaS business... Highly recommend. Been working with Darlene and her team for years now on all the legal bits that surround an Enterprise SaaS GTM motion.

Ryan Susanna, LogiSense Corporation

Chris and the team at Inter Alia have been a huge help in supporting our growth. They are experienced, truly understand our business, can anticipate potential issues, and offer pragmatic solutions. We have worked with multiple members from the team and have always experienced consistency in the attention and level of service we have received. We are very fortunate to be working with Inter Alia – Highly recommended!

Chris Parkes, NuraLogix Corporation

Learn more about our service offerings, past successes and how we can help your business.