Aggregate Intellect is a smart and integrated knowledge management platform with a global community of AI…

Airtasks is a team productivity platform for architects, engineers and builders. Our product helps teams manage their…

Appanzee blurs the line between traditional spreadsheets and enterprise apps, allowing teams to install or custom-build…

Arista Technologies Limited is an OT/ICS Cybersecurity company based out of Richmond Hill,…

ASecureCloud removes all the heavy lifting from building and operating secure cloud environments. The platform enables…

Assetflo helps the supply chain industry increase visibility with the next generation of location technology that works…

AuditMap.ai is a Enterprise Risk Intelligence platform using deep learning technology to identify key risks and…

AutoMetrics is an industrial automation company focused on machine-learning-powered solution developments. The company’…

Every ecommerce site will become a marketplace. Our marketplace platform is used by retailers, wholesalers,…

Baneks is a fast and secure currency exchange platform that enables our customers to exchange money with peers. We made…

Bay Area Research Logistics is known for its superior management of all components of clinical trial logistics, from…

Energy companies, manufacturers, and smart city management are enrolling IoT, edge, and smart devices to…

Brickeye empowers industrial users with advanced decision-making tools and actionable insights anywhere and anytime to…

Bright Mega Capital is a small-mid market private equity firm that has a global investment horizon, specializing in…

Rooted in national security and critical infrastructure protection, C3SA has over 25 years experience preventing,…

Chevalier Thurling is a boutique creative agency focused on crafting compelling digital experiences that win hearts and…

Hello Future. Chillwall AI a global leader in human-like conversational AI based on propietary algorithms…

Crowdmark is a grading and assessment solution that enables educators to grade paper-based and digital exams and…

Cya Live is a real-time platform that creates communal experiences around content for a modern digitized world. Our…

A Global Leader in Cybersecurity, Awareness, Education and Certification Cyber Security Global Alliance’s mandate is…

CYDEF is a Canadian cybersecurity company offering managed endpoint protection, detection, and response. Our unique…

Dataraction's integrated community platform makes project-based learning, mentorship, and networking easy for educators…

DataRealm Inc. has 2 primary lines of business: a) Factory Automation controls systems design and programming and b)…

Founded in 2018, Denvr delivers industry-leading cloud based HPC and accelerated compute services to clients with any…

DevCycle is for modern development teams who are looking to graduate from their current feature flag tool. A simple…

Docsie has one simple mission: helping businesses everywhere to write better documentation using reader insights, and…

EECOMOBILITY specializes in AI and Machine Learning developing software products for automotive and…

eleven-x provides wireless Smart City solutions that incorporate innovative sensor networks that deliver secure data…

Emergconnect is changing the way patients think about same day care through a first of its kind patient-facing mobile…

Enersion is a clean energy company with an innovative cooling and Tri-Generation technologies. We are an…

Every retailer pays significantly daily for numerous traffic & sales driving opportunities through their leases;…

ETAS provides innovative solutions, engineering services, consulting, cybersecurity, training, and support for the…

DistillerSR automates every stage of the systematic reviews process for faster and more accurate evidence-based…

Expancio is the first retail and franchise SaaS platform for businesses to build eCommerce applications and sales…

FAHM brings it all together across the value chain helping our clients deliver one journey, one experience, one…

Forward Robotics Inc. based in Cambridge, ON, makes autonomous, large area crop spraying drones. We have a patented…

FundMore is focused on providing a simpler mortgage experience for Canadians by being the leader in mortgage process…

FutureFit AI partners with Fortune 500 companies, governments, and workforce development organizations to provide…

FYELABS is a startup-friendly product development firm. It de-risks the process of developing (or enhancing) a product…

Every year, Genesys® orchestrates more than 70 billion remarkable customer experiences for organizations in…

Nonprofit fundraising is bigger than ride-sharing and food-delivery combined but Baby Boomer fundraising does not…

Hitachi Vantara is a wholly owned subsidiary of Hitachi, Ltd. that offers a unique blend of Operational Technology…

A software solution service company in Toronto, Canada. Working on FinTech, Retail and Banking products and services…

InheritChain is a legal tech startup focussed on legal process automation software for lawyers (B2B). Our…

We’re the digital transformation partner of choice for leading enterprises and SMEs. We help businesses…

Built by wine lovers, informed by sommeliers, and backed by technology, InVintory is the leading platform for wine…

Inward Strong is a self-directed wellness system that delivers personalized mental fitness & health care with no…

iRadar Canada is an intelligent enterprise software solution specializing in public sector social data like immigration…

Founded by award-winning CEO David Mansilla, ISU Corp is a world class custom software solutions company.…

Reviews for products worth talking about. Junip helps brands gather more reviews and display them everywhere that…

Kama.AI is a Canadian Indigenous owned, conversational intelligence provider that is leading the industry in zero-code…

Kasi Insight is Africa’s leading decision intelligence company empowering business leaders and entrepreneurs to make…

Fully transparent, proprietary mobile programmatic solutions for brands and agencies: we deliver a precise view of your…

Knockri is an AI-powered behavioral interviewing solution, that reduces hiring bias and creates…

KnowMeQ is the leading AI enabled, web-based workforce diagnostic & up-skilling assessment tool that…

Lakes Environmental Software is internationally recognized for its technologically advanced environmental modeling…

Launchit Ventures is a venture studio interested in early-stage ventures. Its model combines funding with a strategic…

Layla’s mission is to empower people to take control of their mental health. We use patient-centric innovation to…

Lemay.ai provides specialized artificial intelligence services to companies. Our experts design and implement…

At Lightster, we believe the best products are made through co-creation with its users. Lightster is a mobile platform…

Liquid Avatar Technologies is a global blockchain and fintech solutions organization focused on digital identity at its…

LiveGauge partners with brands and agencies to help turn raw data from live events into actionable insights. LiveGauge…

LogiSense provides usage rating, data mediation and subscription billing solutions in a SaaS environment…

Loom Analytics provides Robotic Process Automation and Analytics products and services for enterprises that want to…

LoopX is founded by a group of dreamers that are thrilled about bettering the world with autonomous robots. We are re-…

Lorica Cybersecurity is a team of world-leading experts in cryptography and high-performance computing with offices…

At Make Stuff Move, we build kits and lessons encouraging confident hands-on skills while blending STEM…

MALLEUM is a cybersecurity consultancy headquartered in Ottawa, Canada. We specialize in providing highly technical,…

Maple Green Digital Technologies Ltd, a Canadian IT Solutions company providing Cloud Enabled Solutions.…

MedEssist enables pharmacies to become modern healthcare hubs for their communities. The platform modernizes how…

Mobii specializes in scalable live video delivery solutions at ultra-low latency speeds. Our media services solutions…

Work From Home Reimbursement & Tax Deduction For Connectivity Costs. Objectives Customers Channel…

MoviWearMED 5G wearables and web-platform Remotely Monitors peoples’ vitals, real-time, using our 5G wearables &…

A videogame live streaming platform that connects streamers to their fans through interactive 3D experiences in VR and…

myLaminin is a Blockchain-enabled document sharing and verification service that gives organizations and individual a…

Netmechanics is a boutique cyber security firm providing strategy, advisory, vCISO, and awareness program development…

Nexovate is an IT consulting firm based in Toronto. For more than 15 years, Nexovate has been working with…

NextUp Care is automating healthcare – one appointment at a time. We are committed to improving access to care in our…

Northern World Entertainment Software Inc. (NWES) is a company based in Alliston, Ontario, Canada. The…

Novacene helps analysts harvest insight from increasing volumes of unstructured data. The company’s flagship product,…

ODAIA combines multivariate data analytics, process mining and AI to deliver a Customer Data Platform (…

Okanii has built the web 3.0, the ability for ANYONE to move ANY value as easily as the Internet moves data. Okanii's…

Omnivex has been helping organizations for over 30 years to achieve real business goals: increase revenue, reduce cost…

One Red Maple is the retail Robin Hood app. Search for any product anywhere on the web and One Red Maple finds your…

One37 delivers the building blocks of Web3 providing the highest level of security and privacy for businesses and…

OPTT provides comprehensive hybrid digital care plans augmented by AI for proactive triage and monitoring…

Partho Technologies Inc. e-SaaS offerings including portals, mobile applications which fully digitize and automate…

Recognized as one of Canada’s Best Managed Companies for four years in a row, Payment Source is the established and…

PaySprint Inc. is a financial technology company headquartered in Brampton, ON. The company was incorporated in 2021 to…

PEER Group® is a leading supplier of innovative factory automation software products for the semiconductor…

Pitstop is a cloud-based Predictive Maintenance Platform, enabling fleets to leverage the wealth of data and…

PLC Group addresses key profitability and service delivery challenges for small and large mission critical data…

PledgX is on a mission to transform how contractors and subtrades are selected for construction jobs with driven…

Pontosense's vision is to fundamentally transform everyday technology by expanding the relationship between humans and…

PreOperative Performance is dedicated to making neuro procedures safer by providing the clinical community with tools…

Preteckt empowers vehicle maintenance teams by augmenting their diagnostic decision-making helping. This helps them…

Process Fusion is a software company and cloud solution innovator. We help organizations transform inefficient, paper…

Prolucid develops custom software applications for customers in the medical technology and nuclear power industries…

Getting personalization right for retailers is a $1 Trillion dollar (McKinsey) opportunity but retailers do not have…

RecruitForMe.com (RFM) is a community-building platform that helps people grow, secure and find work using…

Redwood's sole business focus is developing online learning programs and technology solutions tied to hosting and…

Reindeere is a company focused on improving the experience and efficiency of labour. Especially regarding the labour…

Renergy Technologies enables small and mid-sized commercial real estate (CRE) properties reduce the cost…

Riskfuel's mission is to bring transparency and understanding of the risks in derivatives portfolios by giving traders…

Rolplay is a cloud-based platform, powered by artificial intelligence, designed to provide a virtual space to train,…

Based in Toronto, SAVVYY is building digital infrastructure for the lending industry. We use data and design to…

ScriptString.AI is a cloud-based artificial intelligence platform designed to deliver usable data faster. Our AI-…

Signifi Solutions is a leader in delivering smart vending, self-serve kiosks and automated retail solutions on a global…

Skinopathy is a medical startup that builds high performance skin health technology through data and artificial…

SkyPrep provides a powerful and intuitive online training platform that helps businesses train their employees,…

SmartCocoon micro-zoning climate control system allows having separate temperature settings for different rooms of a…

Smart Nora is a sleep tech company focused on building products that promote wellbeing and enhance quality of life. Our…

SmartOne Solutions is an award-winning Canadian technology company that transforms buildings into smart community's.…

Softdrive is putting the business computer onto the cloud. We're solving the pain of computer performance, remote work…

SoulRooms is a B2B enterprise software tool that leverages data across the rental journeys and provides…

Soundpays is a mobile engagement solution enabling a real-time, ”actionable” and “shoppable” experience from online or…

Spectra Plasmonics enables lab grade testing in the palm of a person's hand. Our launched product, Amplifi ID, is a…

SPOT gives employers access to a new marketplace to recruit, up-skill and onboard an on-demand workforce for Frontline…

SR.ai is building the next generation of investment research tools, with a focus on ESG, utilizing…

Outsourced Startup Due Diligence for venture capital investors. We built a software that uses networks, big data,…

STEM Minds provides parents, schools and educators with cutting edge STEM content and learning experiences for children…

Symboticware innovates in the industrial Internet of Things (IIoT), delivering real-time, actionable, data…

Systematics works at the intersection of digital, systems and design to craft elegant solutions for complex problems…

Tali is a voice-enabled virtual assistant for physicians at the point of care. We take over physicians’ administrative…

Tap Report streamlines inspections and reports to provide workplaces 3X+ ROI. Objectives Connect with facility,…

OLT Footcare provides podiatrists, chiropractors and pedorthists with the most advanced and comprehensive in-clinic…

TechAlliance is the place for dreamers, innovators, and world-changing ideas. Supporting Ontario’s most promising start…

The TelosTouch client experience platform helps institutions share financial expertise at scale and in a meaningful way…

Third Eye Solutions is a software company specializing in systems for loans management, financing, billing, revenue…

ThoughtWire builds software for digital health, smart buildings, and smart cities. Our ThoughtWireOS and its underlying…

Tiny Mile provides first and last mile delivery services 10x cheaper. Objectives We want to find customers for our…

Translucent specializes in health information and clinical research technology. Our product, Emrchiver, is a cloud-…

TRIYO is an early-stage SaaS company and is the first to embed APIs in existing applications to…

Veyetals has been developed by LocateMotion in collaboration with Queen’s University, a leading University in Canada.…

Videolinq is changing how broadcasters create and distribute live video by offering an online workspace for teams to…

VL OMNI is an integration partner for real-time, agile, and scalable iPaaS data integration. We empower businesses to…

The objective of the DroneShip project introduced by Win Global is to develop an innovative autonomous zero-emission…

Worksimply is a hybrid workplace platform for SMBs that allows employees to book a desk at their company's central…

Wysdom offers a suite of Conversational AI solutions to help businesses increase customer satisfaction,…

Xiera has developed the first auto-tuner for fuzzy logic control. Fuzzy logic control has been shown to be up to 35%…

At XpertVR we believe that training and education should be engaging, inspiring and accessible. That’s why our VR…

Yariba Tech is providing technology venture building services. We offer help and assistance to startups, early-stage…