Atlas Institute for Veterans & Families

Making

veterans feel

seen and heard

Making veterans feel seen and heard

Atlas bridges the divide between research and practice to help veterans and their families get the best possible mental healthcare. The visual ethos of the brand ties to the mythic hero who carries the weight of the world, and to the reference volumes that help us find our way in the world.

Innovative Medicines Canada

Advocating

for an accessible

healthcare system

Advocating for an accessible healthcare system

IMC helps ensure Canadians get the most from leading medicines and treatments. Through storytelling and social content, Stiff boosted awareness of IMC’s role in advocating for an accessible healthcare.

Canadian Medical Association

Co-creating

a better future

of health

Co-creating a better future of health

CMA’s Impact 2040 strategy marked a major shift for the organization—from a focus on member service to leading major advocacy work nationwide. To build momentum, we created a narrative that captured healthcare in crisis and positioned CMA as an agent to lead change toward a sustainable, accessible healthcare system.

LogiSense

Punching

above your

billing class

Punching above your billing class

LogiSense is the leading usage-based billing platform in the market. Until recently, the Canadian-based billing software company was viewed as a scrappy underdog in an oversaturated market. We changed that—for the better.

OpenText

Capturing an interactive guide to the OpenVerse

Capturing an interactive guide to the OpenVerse

OpenText is one of the most dynamic yet unsung tech companies in Silicon Valley. We captured CEO Mark Barranchea’s vision of this evolving business and his technology philosophy—the OpenVerse—in a highly visual and interactive book inspired by images from the universe.

Canadian International Arctic Centre

Repositioning Canada’s

vibrant north

Repositioning Canada’s vibrant north

Global Affairs Canada’s International Arctic Centre (CIAC) is one of the agencies responsible for implementing our country’s International Arctic Policy. We saw an opportunity for CIAC to amplify its mandate by telling the stories taking place in the Arctic.

AbleTo

Closing the employment gap

Closing the employment gap

This campaign targets employers and busts their myths about workforce talent with visible and non-visible disabilities. The aim: stem the workforce shortage in Ottawa and help students and graduates living with disabilities find meaningful employment.

EU in Canada

Bringing

Canadians and

the EU closer

Bringing Canadians and the EU closer

The European Union in Canada aims to increase public knowledge and understanding of EU—Canada relations. We designed a social media strategy and brand to bolster these efforts.

SEED Winnipeg Recognition Counts

Recognizing

skilled

immigrants

Recognizing skilled immigrants

The SEED Recognition Counts (RC) program provides flexible, character-based loans to skilled immigrants to help with qualification recognition. To raise awareness and increase visibility of the loan program, the RC team required a tactical marketing plan that prioritized communication activities with the team’s limited internal capacity.

Ottawa Symphony Orchestra

Revitalizing

Ottawa’s oldest

orchestra

Revitalizing Ottawa’s oldest orchestra

Aging audiences. Decreasing attendance numbers. A bold move to a novel performance space. We combined these three factors to usher in a new era for the community orchestra.

Veterans Affairs Canada

Defining a

veteran-centric

voice

Defining a veteran-centric voice

Veterans Affairs Canada (VAC) had a disconnected brand and a fundamental inability to connect with over 80% of the veteran community, leading to failure in reputation. The department required a major shift in perception.

WAGE Canada

Giving voice to women and LGBTQ2+

Giving voice to women and LGBTQ2+

Equity, diversity and inclusion is more than giving people seats at the table. It is giving them the opportunity to speak. We collaborated with WAGE to help people across Canada tell their stories of equality in action.

Trellis

Rebranding in the COVID era of online retail

Rebranding in the COVID Era of Online Retail

Growth Vectors had the right product and team of experts to help new e-commerce sellers simplify selling and grow. But the start-up lacked the right narrative and visual identity to connect with audiences and stand out in a saturated market.