HEADQUARTERS: Westford, Massachusetts (USA)

EMPLOYEES: 1,000+

INDUSTRY: Technology and Telecommunications

TYPE: Public (NASDAQ:RBBN)

SERVICES: Secure real-time communications for service providers and enterprises

Ribbon provides carrier-class secure software solutions to the world’s leading communications service providers and enterprises to help them securely embrace the next generation of mobile and cloud-based communications technology.

Kandy Communications Platform as a Service (CPaaS) is Ribbon’s disruptive cloud communications platform that allows anyone to easily add voice, video, messaging, presence, and collaboration capabilities directly into their business, mobile and web applications. It is a real time software development platform built from Ribbon’s core communications technologies.

Kandy enables organizations to easily extend the value of their applications by making communications a seamless part of the user experience.

The concept of a CPaaS solution is that it makes it easy to acquire and deploy discrete real-time communication services. Rather than pay a monthly subscription fee, billing is typically usage-based, so users only pay for what they consume. Ribbon found that they needed a more sophisticated billing and rating system for CPaaS events for service providers, systems integrators, and channel partners.

They wanted to be able to easily create a multi-tiered billing model that reflected their multi-tier, channel-based, go-to-market model. Ribbon was seeking to enhance its existing billing solutions to seamlessly support the ability to add more tiers to the selling and billing process.

Focused on delivering a major new offer aimed at Tier 1 service providers, Ribbon turned to LogiSense to deliver a flexible product catalogue billing model with rates and pricing.

Ribbon selected LogiSense to deliver a tightly integrated, white label billing platform for its Kandy Communications Platform as a Service (CPaaS). The Ribbon and LogiSense teams partnered to deliver the solution in a mere six months. Unlike traditional telecom billing (processing minutes, data, SMS, and fax), LogiSense's solution can bill based on any type of triggered event.

In the case of Kandy CPaaS, the number of API calls (including tiering, bundles, and share-plans) are all billable. LogiSense also provided the ability to integrate the CPaaS platform with automated account provisioning and service delivery tools. The solution includes mediation to support a multi-tier channel, and integration with partner/customer billing platforms.

LogiSense's platform delivered a highly efficient multi-tiered billing model that easily adapts to sales of a new generation of communications services. The platform’s modern architecture and robust APIs dramatically reduce the expense and time required to deliver a complete billing solution.

LogiSense's billing solution enables Ribbon to scale their business faster, providing them with an agile billing platform to support enterprise pricing and contract configurations.