Pacific Gas and Electric Company (PG&E) is requesting a permit to construct the Monta Vista/Wolfe/Stelling Looping project. The proposed project is needed in order to meet the increase in electrical demand in the DeAnza electrical service area, which includes the cities of Cupertino, Mountain View, Los Altos, and Sunnyvale. The project would balance and distribute power more efficiently, ensure reliable service, and reduce the potential for circuit overloads and potential service disruptions by creating a new Circuit #3 between the Wolfe, Stelling and Monta Vista substations.

The Ames substation in Mountain View and the Monta Vista substation in Cupertino are connected by Circuits #1 and #2 of the Monta Vista-Ames 115 kV power line (see Figure 1). Circuit #1 supplies power to the Whisman and Mountain View substations, and Circuit #2 supplies power to the Wolfe and Stelling substations. Both Circuits #1 and #2 receive power from both the Ames and Monta Vista substations.

The cities of Mountain View and Cupertino have recently experienced dramatic economic growth along with an increased demand of approximately 8 megawatts (MW) per year and a predicted growth of an average of 10 MW per year for the next three years. The proposed project would balance the electrical transmission system between the Mountain View, Whisman, Wolfe and Stelling substations by reducing the number of substations served by existing Circuits #1 and #2.

According to PG&E, the proposed project will need to be on-line by the summer of 1999 in order to prevent thermal emergency overloads on Circuits #1 and #2 and to prevent potential service interruptions for PG&E customers in the service area (PG&E, 1998).

For construction at the SCVWD property and Monta Vista site, all construction equipment, vehicles, personnel, and staging areas would be accommodated within the site, or off-site storage would be made available at the PG&E Cupertino Service Area. Except for the underground line construction, all project components would be constructed concurrently.

Use of heavy equipment along the roadways for installation of new poles, for pulling wire or for trenching operations, may require the temporary closure of single lanes of traffic. PG&E would coordinate the dates and times for construction closures of traffic lanes with the City of Cupertino, and to the extent feasible, lane closures would occur during off-peak traffic periods.

Overhead Line Construction. The new overhead portion of Circuit #3 would be constructed in part at the upper portion of the Monta Vista substation on two separate circuits and take-off structures (see Figure 3). The two new lines would be 115kV each and would be located on four new self-supporting tubular steel poles approximately 40 to 75 feet in height (see Figure 4). They would then be connected to a new riser pole structure on the lower Monta Vista substation property (see Figure 5).

Boring the foundation holes for the new poles, which would range from four to six feet in diameter, to depths of eight to 15 feet would require the use of a heavy-duty, truck mounted auger. Before concrete is added to each hole, reinforcing bars and anchor bolts would be set in place. Each hole may take four to six weeks to cure before the poles are erected.

Each of the new poles would be assembled on the ground at the site then raised into position and set on their foundations. After installation of the tubular steel poles and conductors, all equipment would be tested and the line would be energized. This portion of the overhead line construction would require a crew of six to ten workers approximately six to eight weeks to complete.

Transition Structures. A 75-foot riser pole would be used to connect the two overhead 115kV lines from the upper Monta Vista substation to the new underground power line at the lower Monta Vista substation (see Figure 6).

The SCVWD property has two existing 55-foot dead-end lattice structures. Each of these lattice structures would be used to mount 29-foot platforms containing termination equipment. The new underground line would terminate at the SCVWD property below the lattice structures and connect to newly installed termination equipment (see Figure 7).

This portion of the overhead line construction would require a crew of 10 to 12 workers, and would take approximately two weeks to complete.

Underground Line Construction. This portion of the project would require 10 to 20 workers and six months to complete. Approximately one mile of underground line would be placed in trenches along:

The lower portion of Monta Vista substation on PG&E property;

East on Salem Avenue to Foothill Boulevard;

North on Foothill Boulevard to Starling Drive;

East on Starling Drive to Baxter Avenue;

North on Baxter Avenue to Creston Drive;

East on Creston Drive to Groveland Drive; and,

North on Groveland Drive to the SCVWD property.

Underground line construction is comprised of trenching and excavation, equipment installation, and backfilling and paving.

Trenching and excavation would take place in a 20 foot-wide work area along the routes described above. Trenching spoils would be trucked to an approved Class III disposal site. Trench construction includes digging to a depth of six to ten feet, 36-inches wide, and approximately 600 feet in length. Equipment used for this phase of underground construction would include a concrete saw, pavement breaker, jack hammer, a front end loader, a flatbed with a hoist, and a crane with outriggers.

When the excavation and trenching portion of the project is completed the nine 6-inch polyvinyl chloride (PVC) conduits, the conduit pipes, and concrete duct banks would then be installed. The concrete duct banks would be located at a minimum depth of 24 inches below grade and include number 5 rebar in six locations when under existing roadways.

After the equipment is installed, including duck banks, splice vaults, and riser structures, the cable will be installed. Cable would be pulled between the riser structures or the 12 splice vaults then rough cut, joined together mechanically with connectors, and sealed with a waterproof covering. Upon completion of the cable installation, the trench would be backfilled and the road surface would restored in compliance with locally issued permits.

Horizontal Dry Boring. There are two sites that require the use of horizontal dry boring: underneath I-280 and the Union Pacific Railroad tracks at the SCVWD property, and at Heney Creek. This segment of the project would require approximately four to six workers and six weeks to complete both sites. At the SCVWD property the horizontal dry boring would be located approximately six feet below the Union Pacific Railroad and 15 feet below I-280. A bore pit on the SCVWD property would be excavated, and an angle bore would be drilled to a receiving pit at Groveland Drive.

The horizontal dry boring at Heney Creek would be located approximately 10 feet below the surface of the creekbed and would originate 50 feet west of Heney Creek and extend 50 feet to the east side.

Reconductoring. Reconductoring would occur between the Wolfe and Stelling substations along the WLA/WLMV 115kV line. Temporary crossing structures would be installed over roads, railroads, and other power lines in order to avoid accidental contact with energized lines.