Location: Sunnyvale, CA

Are you a student or parent at Fremont High School? Want to understand how to get the most out of high school?

We've written the best guide to Fremont High available. Here we'll cover:

Breakdowns of student ethnicity, gender, and family income

How safe Fremont High is to attend

SAT/ACT/AP scores earned by Fremont High students

Which AP/IB classes you can take at Fremont High

Every sports team you can join at Fremont High

Let's get started!

Basic Information

Fremont High School is a public school, supporting grades 9 to 12 . It's located in Sunnyvale, CA in Santa Clara County.

Based on its location, Fremont High is classified as a school in a midsized city. Here's the location on a map:

Contact Information

Mailing address:

Fremont High School1279 Sunnyvale-saratoga Rd. Sunnyvale, CA 94087-2535

Phone number: 4085222400

Fremont High School homepage: http://www.fhs.fuhsd.org/

Principal: Bryan EmmertEmail the principal: [email protected]

Student Demographics

Student Enrollment

The total enrollment at Fremont High School is 2004 students, making it a large high school, in the top 25% of all California high schools by size.

Attending Fremont High will feel like attending a small college. You'll have a few hundred students in your class, enough to provide an interesting set of activities, sports, and classes to try. But compared to the largest high schools in California, the student body size won't be overwhelming.

Growth in Student Body Size

Is Fremont High School growing or shrinking? This will help you see trends in where the school is headed.

From our calculations, the enrollment at Fremont High has decreased over the past few years. We calculate this by comparing enrollment in grades 9 to 12.

Male Students Female Students All Students 9th grade 262 235 497 10th grade 250 208 458 11th grade 245 247 492 12th grade 292 258 550

As you can see in the table above, the senior class is 53 students larger than the freshman class. This suggests that Fremont High is shrinking in size and taking on fewer students.

There are a few reasons this can happen. The population of Sunnyvale could be decreasing, thus sending fewer students into Fremont High. Alternatively, other schools (like charter or private schools) might be appearing, drawing students away.

Gender Split

Are there more boys or girls at Fremont High School?

From our statistics, Fremont High has a 53:47 split between male and female students in the high school grades.

Fremont High has a balanced male-female ratio that's largely representative of the general population in Santa Clara County. Since the student body is roughly half and half, it should feel like there are equal numbers of boys and girls in your classes.

This usually means that Fremont High doesn't strongly select for either males or females, unlike other schools that have a large majority of males or females.

Ethnicity Breakdown

What's the racial diversity at Fremont High School? Does one ethnicity make up most of the student body, or is it fairly balanced?

From our statistics, Fremont High has a diverse student body. No single ethnicity composes more than 50% of all students, which means you'll be surrounded by a diverse set of students in class. Only a third of California schools show this much diversity.

The most common ethnicity at Fremont High is Hispanic. In California, 51.5% of all students are Hispanic, making it the most common ethnicity. Even though Fremont High is relatively diverse, students of Hispanic descent are the most common ethnicity here.

Percentage Number American Indian/Alaska Native 0.0% 0 Asian 27.3% 548 Hispanic 45.1% 905 Black 2.6% 53 White 19.2% 386 Hawaiian Native/Pacific Islander 1.4% 29 Two or more races 4.1% 83

High schools usually reflect the population in the surrounding area, so the ethnicities of students likely resembles those of Sunnyvale. If you'd like to see how other nearby schools look in diversity, just google "[name of school] prepscholar" to find our guide to that specific school.

Income Level of Fremont High Families

What are the family incomes of students at Fremont High School? To determine this, we look at the number of students who qualify for free or reduced lunches, a classification by the US federal government.

To qualify for a reduced price meal, family income needs to be below 185% of the federal poverty guidelines. For a family of 4, this means an income of around $45,000 or below.

To qualify for a free meal, family income needs to be below 130% of the federal poverty guidelines. For a family of 4, this means an income of around $32,000 or below.

The lower the percentage of students who qualify for free or reduced price meals, the higher the income levels are likely to be.

At Fremont High, 8.8% of students qualify for reduced-price lunches, and 34.0% qualify for free lunches.

This means Fremont High has a below average level of poverty. With most students not qualifying for free or reduced price lunches, Fremont High is below average among California schools in poverty level. The income level of families in Sunnyvale is thus likely to be relatively high.

Number Percent Reduced-price lunches 178 8.8% Free lunches 682 34.0% Do not qualify for reduced-price or free lunches 1144 57.0%

As with ethnicity, this likely reflects the surrounding community in Sunnyvale and doesn't speak much about the school itself.

Fremont High is in the middle 50% of schools by income level. Generally, higher income level schools are better-funded and have a higher quality range of classes and activities. Fremont High is likely in the middle of the pack in this regard and will give you a good set of options to try.

If you have any interests that Fremont High doesn't cover, look to your local community for activities, or to the Internet for self-study AP classes.

School Safety

How safe is Fremont High School to attend? Can you expect a lot of conflict as a student here?

To study this, we look at disciplinary data for two types of incidents at Fremont High: referrals to law enforcement (when incidents are reported to police), and arrests.

These are the most serious disciplinary actions available to school administration and are more severe than suspensions or expulsions. Suspensions are often discretionary and can be given just for being disruptive in class. In contrast, law enforcement referrals and arrests often indicate incidents that put the safety of other Fremont High students at risk.

With this record, is Fremont High School significantly different from other schools in the area? It could be that Fremont High has an especially bad record, or it could be that the local area shows a pattern.

Compare this school with other high schools in the same school district, using the following table:

Fremont Union High School District Safety

School Name Total Referred Total Arrests Enrollment Cupertino High 30 2 1909 Homestead High 47 0 2315 Lynbrook High 23 2 1788 Monta Vista High 24 8 2511 Community Day 0 0 14

Academic Performance

Now we get to a major aspect of assessing a high school: academic performance. How good of an education will you get at Fremont High School? Will you be competitive for college? Will you have access to advanced classes?

We've compiled everything we could find about Fremont High's academics here.

Graduation Rate

To start off, an important benchmark of academic achievement is graduation rate. For all students who start high school at Fremont High, the state of California wants as many students to graduate as possible, since a high school diploma can mean a big difference in getting a job.

Note: This data comes from a few years back, but the trends are likely to stay the same, since schools don't get significantly better or worse within a short period of time.

Standardized Testing

Next, we'll look at another major piece of high school academics: standardized testing performance for Fremont High School students. These are tests that are administered to large populations of students for comparison purposes.

Let’s start by taking a look at the data for nationally administered standardized tests.

SAT Scores

As you probably know, the SAT is a critical test used for college admissions. The higher the score you get, the better your academic performance compared to students nationwide, and the easier it is to get into top colleges.

We did in-depth research and found the average Fremont High School SAT scores.

Here's a breakdown of SAT scores by section:

Average SAT Scores (2013-2014)

Source Critical Reading Math Writing Composite Fremont High 515 561 528 1600 California 498 510 496 1504 United States 495 511 484 1490

Note that the SAT has since changed to a 1600 scale, but the trends above for your high school are likely to continue. Just use this guide to convert between the old 2400 scale and the new 1600 scale.

To learn more about SAT percentile rankings, read our guide on what SAT percentiles really mean.

How good is 1600 as an SAT score? Find out with our complete 1600 SAT score guide, including which colleges you can get into with a 1600 or any other SAT score!

ACT Scores

In California, the ACT is less popular than the SAT. Fewer students take the ACT, and typically these students are more motivated and academically prepared for college. Therefore, it's harder to compare Fremont High School ACT scores with the rest of the country.

Here are the average English, Math, Reading, and Science scores for Fremont High compared to California and the US:

Average ACT Scores

Source English Math Reading Science Fremont High 23 25 23 23 California 21.8 22.8 22.3 21.7 United States 20.3 20.9 21.3 20.8

Scores provided are for the 2013-14 school year.

Find out more about percentile rankings and the ACT in this article.

Every individual is different. What counts as a good ACT score for you? Learn more with this article!

Advanced Placement (AP)

Advanced Placement (AP) classes are college-level courses that are an additional academic challenge may give Fremont High School students credit for college.

Here's what we're looking for: high average AP test scores as well as high AP passing rates.

AP Scores

Every year, roughly 419 students in grades 9-12 at Fremont High take 783 AP exams. It's important to understand how students score on the AP - earning a 3, 4, or 5 on the AP test means passing the test and often earning college credit.

We have specific data on how many students got a 1, 2, 3, 4, or 5 (out of 5) on AP exams in the chart below:

AP Test-Taking Statistics

Another way to gauge the quality of a school's AP program is to see how many AP students actually took AP exams at Fremont High School. If a lot of students enroll in AP courses but don't actually take the AP tests, it can be a sign that students don't feel adequately prepared to take the test, or the school isn't encouraging students to take the exams enough.

Note: The most recent data we have available is from 2012, so the statistics may have changed since then. Most likely, however, the trends are likely to continue - above average schools are likely to stay above average, and below average schools are likely to stay below average.

AP Passing Rates

For AP students at Fremont High School who take the exam, it's important to know how they do. Here we have specific data on how many students got a passing grade (a 3 or above) on all, some, or none of the AP exams that they took.

To find out the passing rates for specific AP courses at Fremont High School, you'll have to talk to your guidance counselor (who can then help you find that information). For instance, one AP Calculus teacher may have an above-90% passing rate, while another might only have a 50% passing rate. If you can, you'll want to take the class with the teacher who has more students get a 3 or above on the AP exam.

Find out more about the average score for each AP subject here.

State Tests

As of 2014, eleventh graders attending Fremont High School must take standardized tests in English/Language Arts and Math as part of the California Assessment of Student Performance and Progress (CAASPP). These align with the new Common Core standards and are called the "Smarter Balanced" tests.

If Fremont High students meet or exceed state standards, they're academically prepared to graduate high school and go to college. Specifically, we care about the percentage of students who meet or exceed state standards. The larger this number, the higher the preparation of students at Fremont High.

English/Language Arts

English/Language Arts Test Results (2015)

Read more about what’s measured in each ELA area score here.

Math

The other major test taken for state assessments is Math. Across the state, Math performance is generally lower than English/Language Arts performance, so it's natural for this number to be lower.

Math Test Results (2015)

Read more about what’s measured in each Math area score, go here.

Academic Offerings

In addition to the standard high school curriculum, many high schools like Fremont High School offer advanced coursework as part of the Advanced Placement (AP) or International Baccalaureate (IB) programs.

Brief Intro to AP/IB

AP and IB courses are designed at the difficulty level of college introductory classes. There are several important benefits to taking advanced coursework at Fremont High. First, taking more advanced classes shows colleges that you're committed to challenging yourself academically, and that you're one of the more advanced students at Fremont High. Taking AP/IB classes also raises your weighted GPA and makes you a stronger college applicant.

Furthermore, many colleges will accept your Fremont High AP/IB coursework as college coursework. In some cases, you'll be able to skip introductory-level classes and move to more advanced classes. In other cases, you'll be able to avoid having to take required courses and might even be able to graduate earlier than the standard 4 years. Often this will require you to pass the AP test, getting a score of 3 or above.

So what advanced courses does Fremont High School offer?

AP Courses

Fremont High School offers AP courses in 17 subjects.

This is an impressive number of AP subjects, putting Fremont High School in the top 25% of California schools in AP offerings. You'll likely have all of the most popular AP courses available to you, as well as some broader interests.

The total number of AP subjects is 38, so Fremont High is missing a good number of subjects, but these are likely the least popular subjects, like less popular foreign languages. If there are any AP courses you want to take that aren't being offered at Fremont High, ask your counselor for other options.

Of course, keep in mind that quality matters even more than quantity - it's important that your AP courses are taught well by engaging teachers. But the strong AP program at Fremont High likely means you'll be in good hands.

The following AP courses were offered at Fremont High during 2015-2016:

Course Title Biology Calculus AB Calculus BC Chemistry Chinese Language and Culture Computer Science A English Language and Composition English Literature and Composition Environmental Science Japanese Language and Culture Microeconomics Physics C: Mechanics Spanish Language and Culture Statistics Studio Art: 2-D Design United States Government and Politics United States History

Sports Teams

Finally, we'll cover which sports teams are available at Fremont High School. Sports are an integral part of many students' high school experiences. The more sports that are available, and the more levels supported (Frosh, JV, Varsity), the more likely you'll be able to participate in a sport at Fremont High.

By the way, the Fremont High mascot is the Firebirds. Go Firebirds!

Fremont High School fields 13 teams for girls' sports. This is a sizable number that puts Fremont High in the top 50% of California schools that offer girls' sports. You won't get the full range of sports and levels, but you'll be able to try out for a few options. If you participate in a sport that Fremont High doesn't offer, consider looking for a local non-school team that you can join.

And now for the boys: Fremont High School fields 21 teams for boys' sports. This puts Fremont High in the top 25% of California schools that offer boys' sports. Boys will have a large pick of sports to try out for.

Boys Teams Girls Teams Basketball

Var JV Fr

Basketball

Var JV Fr

Tennis

Var JV Fr

Tennis

Var JV Fr

Football

Var JV Fr

Wrestling

Var JV Fr

Volleyball

Var JV Fr

Volleyball

Var JV Fr

Baseball

Var JV Fr

Softball

Var JV Fr

Waterpolo

Var JV Fr

Waterpolo

Var JV Fr

Crosscountry

Var JV Fr

Soccer

Var JV Fr

Soccer

Var JV Fr

What’s Next?

Want to get more useful information about high school classes and preparing for colleges? Our blog has a ton of articles and advice on topics ranging from coursework and GPA to letters of recommendation, extracurriculars, and much more!

Ready to bulk up your schedule and maximize your college preparedness? Read all about the Advanced Placement and International Baccalaureate programs.

Not quite in high school yet, but eager to get started? We've also got information for younger students interested in advanced learning opportunities, both in and out of school.

If You Liked Our Advice...

Visit our blog for free strategy guides on college admissions and test prep.

Our experts have written hundreds of useful articles on improving your SAT score and getting into college. You'll definitely find something useful here.

Visit our blog now.

Subscribe to our newsletter to get FREE strategies and guides sent to your email. Learn how to ace the SAT/ACT and get into college, with exclusive tips and insights that we share with our private newsletter subscribers.

Get Free SAT Tips to Boost Your Score

Get EXCLUSIVE insider tips on how to ACE THE SAT for FREE! 100% Privacy. No spam ever.

You should definitely follow us on social media. You'll get updates on our latest articles right on your feed. Follow us on all of our social networks:

Sources

The data on this page is drawn from a variety of sources, including (but not limited to):