Meet our team of eye doctors in Sunnyvale, California. We offer a full range of eye health services to clients of all ages - all with personalized attention and a smile.

In our eye care office, every patient is treated warmly. Individualized attention is the foundation of our care, to ensure that your eyes remain healthy. We're dedicated to optimizing your vision!

Home » Our Eye Doctors

Silicon Valley Eye Physicians

Silicon Valley Eye Physicians is a leading vision care provider that has been serving the community for over 40 years. Our doctors can help restore health and function to your eyes through customized and comprehensive eye care treatment and are members of prestigious organizations, including:

The American Academy of Ophthalmology

The Association for Research in Vision and Ophthalmology

The Cornea Society

The California Optometric Association

We are happy to conduct examinations and make diagnoses over the phone using our Telehealth service. To schedule in-person exams for your entire family, call or extent our Sunnyvale office at (408) 741-9363.

Meet Our Eye Doctors Near You

Area of Special Interest and Extensive Training: Cataract Surgery, LASIK, Corneal Disease, Glaucoma Dr. Mark attended Stanford University and completed degrees in biology and music. He received his medical degree from the Stanford University School of Medicine and completed his internship at Valley Medical Center in San Jose. Following...

Areas of Interest and Extensive Training: Orthokeratology, Keratoconus Dr. Mendelson, a board certified optometrist, received his doctorate at the University of California at Berkeley. He was trained at Oak Knoll Naval Hospital, Pacific Presbyterian Medical Center and at the Veterans Administration Hospital at Stanford. Dr. Mendelson has been a clinical...

Areas of Interest and Extensive Training: Binocular Vision Disorders A California native, Dr. Jesley Johnson grew up in San Jose and attended St. Francis High School. She graduated from the University of California San Diego in 2007 with a Bachelors of Science in Human Biology. During her time at...

Dr. Jackson Lau obtained his Doctor of Optometry and Bachelors degree in Molecular and Cell Biology from the University of California, Berkeley. He then completed a residency in Cornea and Contact lenses at the Illinois Eye Institute. There, he served as clinical faculty, conducted research on dry eyes and scleral...

Dr. Wu is a local man who grew up in Cupertino and attended Monta Vista High School. He graduated from UC Davis with a Bachelor’s of Science in Psychobiology. He then obtained his doctorate degree from University of California, Berkeley School of Optometry. Dr. Wu looks forward to providing full...

Dr. Tseng received her Doctorate in Optometry from the New England College of Optometry, Boston and was inducted into the Beta Sigma Kappa International Optometric Honor Society for her academic performance. She then completed the competitive Cornea and Contact Lens Residency at University of California, Berkeley where she received intensive...

charity

Contact Silicon Valley Eye Physicians Right Away!

Emergency Eye Care Information

Please call our office at: 408-739-6200 for further instructions. Use your best judgment on urgency, if you feel the need to find the nearest emergency room.

If you experience loss of vision, double vision, swelling, infection or any eye emergency, contact us immediately for guidance. We’ll help you with the best treatment to prevent complications and promote long-lasting clear eyesight.