The Imperial Avenue townhome complex is a 56-unit development in the Monta Vista district of Cupertino. Originally built to be relatively inexpensive, with square footage to fit a growing family, these townhomes are still some of the least expensive homes in high-end Monta Vista.

Strengths

1) The schools. People will go to great lengths and expense to secure entry into Cupertino's education trifecta of Lincoln Elementary, Kennedy Middle and Monta Vista High. With good reason given their international renown. (As always, check school availability before making a purchasing decision.)

2) The Imperial Ave. area is one of the least expensive neighborhoods in prestigious Monta Vista. For families who want to move up into the Monta Vista area and gain access to its schools, this is one of the easiest entry points.

3) The HOA has a low fee, particularly considering the value of these homes. They do pay for the maintenance of the white picket fences that give this complex a middle-American theme.

4) Access to 85 and 280 is trivially easy, with strong connecting access to 101. Arguably walking distance to De Anza College.

Weaknesses

1) The townhomes on Imperial Ave. on the same street as several auto body shops.

2) Aside from a courtyard, there is very little green space within or around the complex.

3) Many of the front-facing units overlook the nearby office complexes. Inner townhomes might face the garages of others in the complex. Many rear townhomes overlook a parking lot, which is separated from the complex by a wall.

4) Train tracks run close by but ironically there isn't access to public transportation by train or light rail in Cupertino.

5) Most townhomes here on Imperial are relatively thin, with 2.5 or 3 levels depending on how you look at it. Some units have oddly positioned fireplaces whose flues (and the walls enclosing them) block what would have been open space between levels.

Opportunities

1) Cupertino's reputation for schools builds demand for its homes. 10182 Imperial Ave. (1795 sqft.) went in 2004 for $790,000 and a unit with the same configuration, 10192 Imperial Ave. went in June 2007 for $990,000: a difference of $200,000 or 25.3%. See threat #1 below.

2) Being the lowest cost entry point into an internationally-desirable school district gives these homes instant and immediate marketability.

3) It seems strange that some developer hasn't purchased the land occupied by the auto body shops, or several of the smaller homes in the neighborhood, for re-development.

4) Nearby Blackberry Farm is planned to reopen in 2009.

Threats

1) The reputation Cupertino has sometimes overshadows other opportunities. For example, at the Expressions of Sunnyvale, 996 Alpine Terrace, Unit 5 (1895 sqft.) went in 2004 for $630,000 and in May 2007 for $802,000: a difference of $172,000 or 27.3%.

2) People from out of town wouldn't think this street had a one million dollar home, much less fifty-something.

3) If the trifecta of schools became less-desirable for some reason, this neighborhood's desirability also drop relative to others where there is less of a price premium. However, Cupertino voters consistently choose policies that will protect their schools. And if there were any erosion, it would take time.

Schools and School District Information for Montebello Cupertino

Since school boundaries and availability may change based on enrollment needs and population shifts, it is always a good idea to check with the local school district (Cupertino Union School District, Fremont Union High School District) for the latest information.

1) Abraham Lincoln Elementary (see ratings and parent opinions).

2) John F. Kennedy Middle (see ratings and parent opinions).

3) Monta Vista High (see ratings and parent opinions).

Map

The California Department of Education (CDE) has released the updated 2006 Academic Performance Index (API) scores for California schools, including data for San Mateo County and Santa Clara County. The API is a statewide benchmark based on standardized achievement tests which is primarily used to rank schools relative to one another and relative to schools with similar demographics. Here's an example of what the statistics look like.

We'll take a look at how school rankings and Silicon Valley real estate prices are related, but first let's look at how to read the information.

Number of Students. In the first column, you'll find the number of students whose results were included from that school. It's pretty close to the total number of students, less any excluded students. The rules for excluding students are listed in the API Base Documentation Information Guide found on the CDE API page. Surprisingly, the number of students has little to do with how well the school did in its API scores (almost, see epilogue).

Base API, Statewide Rank, Similar Schools Rank. The Base API score is like an SAT score except it's from 200 to 1000. Higher is better. To make comparing schools easier, the CDE provides a statewide rank from 1 to 10 (ten is best) and a similar schools rank that rates schools (again from 1 to 10, ten being best) that have similar demographics and characteristics. Apples-to-apples in a way.

Growth Target, API Target. The growth target is the number of points California wants the school to improve in the next year. That added with the current base API score equals the API target. The CDE doesn't set a target for schools above the current statewide performance target of 800.

Silicon Valley School District Scores

I've assembled information from the CDE site and the Palo Alto Daily News to provide a table of school district API averages for Silicon Valley and Bay Area elementary and middle schools.

Comparing School Districts and Housing Prices

Remember the chart of median Silicon Valley single-family home prices in February 2007 from my article Determining Your Must-Haves When Buying a House?

Combining the chart for Silicon Valley school district rankings with the one for Silicon Valley median single-family real estate prices brings up some surprises. (I used a simple ratio between how far the API score was above 700 and the median single-family home price. The resulting number isn't really that relevant, it's the visual comparison I was looking for.)

Regarding Schools and Value in Pricing

First, while Cupertino and Foster City housing prices are very similar, there is a vast difference between the performance index of their school districts. On school rankings, compared to Foster City, Cupertino represents a much better value based on the median sale price of single-family homes.

Second, while Los Altos has the highest API scores, it also had a much higher median price putting it on-par with other elite school districts like Palo Alto and Los Gatos, but well-below Saratoga which had both higher test scores and a lower median home price.

Third, it is possible to cherry-pick good schools in average school districts. For example, you can search around Sunnyvale's Cherry Chase Elementary, which has a base API score of 941, if you're looking for a good elementary school. Stay tuned.

[ed. This is the CYA: The data in the report is considered accurate but not guaranteed.]

Epilogue

There's a quirk in the ratings system where only test scores for "statistically significant" groups (read: ethnicities) are counted. Some schools, none that I can find documentation on, were accused of reclassifying lesser performing students into groups that weren't statistically significant to prop up their overall test scores.

There is a measure of transparency, though, because if you drill down on the individual schools, it will show which groups were counted, which weren't, and how many were in each.

There were network connections wired into every room, and this being Silicon Valley, we asked the owner if it was standard CAT-5 or CAT-5e. The gentleman, in his decidedly French accent, said with a bit of sheepishness, "You know, I'm not sure." (He was a little redfaced because we'd talked about his job at Cisco.)

So I asked whether he had a wireless network and his face lit up. He hopped over to the storage closet in the entryway and eagerly showed off the router, neatly and carefully wired into the connectivity panel. He didn't check for CAT-5e because he didn't need it.

The network drops were a "nice-to-have" for my client who does a lot with multimedia. They weren't a dealmaker (and as he discovered not a dealbreaker) but given that this was the first home he'd seen as a potential buyer, he was eager to get some experience looking at houses under his belt so that he could really experience firsthand what his requirements feel like.

In the back of people's minds, most people start off with a list of requirements that I rank order informally using the "MoSCoW" method:

Must: What they know they want

Should: What they think they want

Could: What they don't have strong feelings about

Won't: What they don't want

For any number of reasons, what people say they want doesn't always line up with what they really want in their minds and hearts.

A lot of times that's because of the difference between theory and application: being able to actually drive the commute or experience how many flights of stairs there are gives people a clearer picture of "could" vs. "won't".

The tricky part is separating the borderline "must-haves" from the "shoulds." And with my client in the early stages of his home search, we needed to setup a stable foundation so that we'd learn those differences from every property he would see on the rest of his search.

You Can Learn a Great Deal From a Rant

I sat in the office of another client, across from him and his dustless mahogany desk. I briefly peered out towards the Silicon Valley hills through the shades of the window behind him before he lifted his brow from thought. He muttered cautiously, "That's a good question..." and placed his chin on his hand in the universal position for "I don't have an answer for that yet."

He wanted to tell me something but the way his eyes focused into the distance, you could see a little fear, as if to say, "People will think less of me for saying what I'm really thinking."

I'm not judgmental and I don't remember saying anything at that point, just tilting my head to the side a little. But what I got back, I never would have expected from this formal and staid lawyer.

"I WANT A HOUSE!" he exclaimed. "I want a place where the neighbors respect where we live. If they see trash on the ground, they pick it up because they feel ownership. I want to live in a place where I don't have to be ashamed to say, 'I live here.' I want my neighbors and I to be peers and for them not to look at my car and go, 'Who does he think he is?' I want my wife and kids to feel important. I want to be able to carry on a meaningful educated conversation with the people living around me. I WANT A [ed. deleted] HOUSE!"

That joke one of my clients made about me being an iceman must be partially true because with a hint of a smile in my expression, I winked a little and asked in an ironic, almost dry manner, "So, what did you want again?"

Home Search Criteria People Don't Like to Say Out Loud

I wanted to share this conversation because it's critically important when buying a house. There are things people never say they're looking for during a house search, but actually really need. This gentleman was brave enough to share some with me:

1/ Prestige. This is a really sensitive subject. On the one hand many people want to be regarded and respected. On the other hand, people fear that by wanting to be regarded and respected, that people will actually think less of them. But the root cause is that sometimes people judge others based on a mental picture of where they live. What do you think of when I say New Jersey or Alabama? Or East Palo Alto? (I'm from Louisiana: insert stereotype here!) If prestige is important to you, then that should be included as a criteria in your home search without emotional prejudice.

2/ Owner's Mentality. I have a personal story here, all this over a simple piece of paper. I lived in a large apartment complex that was in a good location, was kept in decent condition, and had below market rents so I could save money and buy a house. I stepped out of the elevator next to the trash chute and noticed a crumpled piece of paper lying there on the ground. As a renter, my first instinct was, "Oh, the maintenance people will take care of it." I eventually did throw that paper away but it left me wondering whether I would have thought twice if it were in front of the home I lived in.

3/ Neighborhood Pride. Have you ever been to a sleepy old manufacturing town whose plant closed long ago? Where people can't wait to find a way out? Or a town that's languishing under the weight of its own lack of culture. The transient nature of people living there is much different than the sense of community an identity engenders.

4/ Belonging. Whether it's being close to the culture of your parents or your parent's parents, to feeling like you can relate to your neighbors, that sense of belonging can be very important to your enjoyment of your home. Sometimes it doesn't even boil down to culture. If you're single, living in a family community with lots of kids around may not be preferable to being closer to other singles whom you can relate to. And being a movie junkie with a huge home theater system (read: speakers) in the middle of a complex of semi-retirees might not make you any friends.

5/ Less competitive schools. Some parents, even though they care about their children's education, don't want to put that much competitive pressure on their kids. This is one I hear with increasing frequency.

Common Trade-Offs

After we left the top-floor townhouse owned by the gentleman at Cisco, I told my client that, yes, you can have your dream house, but only if you know what's really important to you. After all, since homes are so expensive, you don't want to have to pay for amenities and benefits that mean nothing to you. Why would you spend your hard-earned money on something you don't need or want?

Here in Silicon Valley, people make trade-offs every day when buying real estate but it takes a lot of self-reflection and some experience actually going through the home search process for those priorities to really become clear.

Single-Family vs. Multi-Family Properties

"Maintaining the lawn just sounds like work. If I'm going to be doing work, it may as well be for work!" he said. The land you get on a single-family house is valuable but if it hurts your lifestyle, then what are you paying for?

According to RE InfoLink, in February 2007, the difference between buying the median townhome or condominium and the median single-family is between $200,000 and $300,000 in both Santa Clara County and San Mateo County.

My client in this article chose to look for townhouses and condominiums because he can get more square footage inside the home for the same money and minimize the responsibility he has for maintaining the property. He doesn't have any kids or need room for a swing set, but if he can get a small yard or patio for entertaining, that would be perfect.

Schools

Ever hear the advice, "You should always buy a home where there are good schools?" There are advantages to this because these are neighborhoods which are (in general) the last ones to decline and the first ones to appreciate, but remember that if the neighborhood has a reputation for good schools, that reputation is already priced into the house.

My client used the words, "I'm single and this isn't my last house. Why would I want to pay for a good school district?"

If you have school-age children, you may save money by buying in a less expensive neighborhood and sending your kids to private schools. You will get more house for your money if you don't have to pay for the school district's reputation. And you may get more upside from an ascending school district which is building a great reputation than one that's maintaining its high scores. When the best kept secret in the area comes out, people will be looking for that good value.

Cupertino and Palo Alto, among other cities in the Bay Area, have prestigious school districts. How do the median prices for single-family homes compare with other cities around Silicon Valley? The chart of figures from February 2007 speaks for itself. What are the best kept secrets in Silicon Valley? That's a whole 'nother article.

Commute

I had a client say that he enjoyed a reasonable commute time to be able to "switch modes" and another wanted to catch up on reading while on the train. I'd argue that most people consider commuting a necessary evil based on where they live and work.

Time is money, right? Well, almost, because no matter where you were born, what your parents have, or what your opportunities are, everyone starts off with 24 hours in a day.

You can measure the value of your time in two ways. Economists measure the value of time in terms of opportunity cost, the amount of money you can make with your time at its highest and best use. Most people measure it in exactly the same way except with things they can be doing: activities like spending time with the family, and reading a book, to taking a second honeymoon.

You'll have to help me determine the value of your second honeymoon, but I can show you the cost of your commute. Let's say you've live in your home for five years and take the same commute each day. You earn a conveniently round number $100,000 and work 50 weeks out of the year for 5 days a week. Here's what your commute costs: