The Fremont Union High Schools Foundation has surpassed a major milestone during its 30th anniversary.

The nonprofit, which supports programs at all five district high schools, has surpassed the $1.5 million mark in fundraising. A ceremonial check of $200,000 was presented to the district’s board of trustees during the board’s Sept. 3 regular meeting.

“Since the foundation was established in 1983, it has led the way in the Cupertino-Sunnyvale community in support of our five outstanding high schools,” said Jeanne Bradford, foundation president. “Thanks to the generosity of our community, the foundation has donated more than $1.5 million toward programs that have become an important part of our students’ high school educational experience.”

The foundation is an independent nonprofit serving Cupertino, Fremont, Homestead, Lynbrook and Monta Vista high schools. The foundation acts as the main fundraising organization for the school district and fills in the gaps when it can when budget cuts hit the district.

Bradford told the board of trustees that much of the money raised to date has come in the past five or six years of the foundation’s run.

“Now 30 years later, we’re still going strong, arguably stronger than in the first few years,” she said.

This year, the foundation will fund programs in inquiry and research in science as well as independent study courses in science, technology, engineering and math, robotics, student art shows, journalism, business and entrepreneurship, athletics and student communications and study skills through School Loop.

The foundation also supports student use of Naviance, an online guidance tool that helps juniors and seniors master the college application process, from identifying career interests and helping with SAT preparation to choosing potential colleges and submitting applications.

A great deal of revenue for the foundation comes from the annual community crab feed and from direct donations.

Bradford added that fewer than 10 percent of parents donate or are even aware of the foundation.

Hung Wei, a district trustee, unveiled a plan during the meeting to work harder this school year and beyond to spread word about the foundation. Beginning this year, the foundation plans to make calls to all parents of freshman students over the course of four years.

“The foundation has a lot of potential, and we’re hoping we can raise $1 million a year,” Wei said. “We figure in four years we will reach all parents.”

Bradford also said that the approximately 20-member foundation board of directors is seeking new members, as some longtime members have stepped down. The board includes teachers, business professionals, community members and parents from each of the five high schools.