Curated by Rod Taylor

Arthur Lakes was a geologist, artist, minister and teacher who emigrated from England to the western United States in 1865. His interest in geology lead him out into the western landscape in search of fossils and in uncovering what at the time were some of the first dinosaur bones to be discovered. Along with the arduous work of excavating the fossils, Lakes spend hours recording his findings in his journals through his writing, drawing and painting. Lakes also shared his discoveries and interest in palaeontology through his teaching at the Colorado School of Mines. After retiring, Lakes moved from Colorado to Ymir, British Columbia in 1910 to be with his two sons who were involved in the mining business. Lakes continued to document his experiences and the regional mining activities through his paintings and articles for the Nelson Daily News until his death in 1917.

From the permanent collection of Touchstones Nelson comes an exhibit of watercolour paintings and sketches, done between 1912 and 1917. As historical documents, this material holds a place in the recording of settlement in the region and an era in mining history. In Lakes’ time some of his writing and art work was used by the industry to announce to the outside world some of the mineral resources yet undeveloped of the Kootenays, which contributed to the growth of mining in the region. Lakes’ art work and writing conveys more than an economic reality at the turn of the century they speak of his curiosity and love the natural world that was the thread of his life’s work – the discovery of nesting Kingfishers along the river, the alpine flowers, geological processes and the investigation of what lies below our feet and above our heads. Arthur Lakes’ life and work serve as an example of an inquiring mind that was able to share its discoveries with the world in a myriad of ways.

Arthur Lakes (1844 – 1917)

Arthur Lakes immigrated to the United States from England in 1865. His interest in geology and a teaching job at Jarvis College in Golden, Colorado soon lead him out into the western landscape where he began his passion for studying geology and collecting fossils. Teaching provided Lakes with little money but some extra time. In order to supplement his income he worked in remote mining camps as an itinerant minister, for which he had been ordained an Episcopal deacon in 1874.