ANDREW’S VIDEO VAULT at THE ROTUNDA

presents a FREE double feature screening of

Peter Godfrey’s THE TWO MRS. CARROLLS (1947 / 99 minutes)

&

Michael Curtiz’s THE STRANGE LOVE OF MOLLY LOUVAIN (1932 / 73 minutes)

* Continuous show from 8 PM

2012 SCHEDULE

JANUARY 12

The Two Mrs. Carrolls (1947 / 99 minutes) Moody psychological thriller starring Humphrey Bogart (cast against type) as an unstable painter caught in a murderous and bizarre love triangle with Barbara Stanwyck and Alexis Smith. Directed by Peter Godfrey.

The Strange Love of Molly Louvain (1932 / 73 minutes) Michael Curtiz directs Ann Dvorak as poor country girl adrift in the city and on the lam in this sordid pre-Code crime drama. Co-starring Lee Tracy and Leslie Fenton. Based on the play, Tinsel Girl by Chicago source author, Maurine Dallas Watkins.

FEBRUARY 9

Samson and Delilah (1949 / 131 minutes) Cecil B. DeMille’s lavish biblical spectacle presents Victor Mature and Hedy Lamarr as the titular characters, an Israelite and a Philistine who destroy each other. Co-staring George Sanders and Angela Lansbury.

Sodom and Gomorrah: The Last Seven Days (1975 / 99 minutes) A cosmic, witty and epic biblical pastiche from Artie & Jim Mitchell, the creators of Behind The Green Door.

MARCH 8

Girlfriends (1978 / 86 minutes) Claudi Weill’s comedic drama of two mismatched roommates, a photographer and a writer, in late-1970s New York City. A favorite of Stanley Kubrick, who remarked that it was one “of the very rare American films that I would compare with the serious, intelligent, sensitive writing and filmmaking that you find in the best directors in Europe… It seemed to make no compromise to the inner truth of the story.” Screenplay by Vicki Polon.

Windows (1980 / 96 minutes) Legendary cinematographer Gordon Willis’ only movie as a director is a dark and twisted thriller starring Talia Shire as a menaced woman and Elizabeth Ashley as her obsessed, voyeur neighbor.

APRIL 12

Rubber (2010 / 82 minutes) “Careful Where You Tread!” An abandoned tire with telekinetic powers seeks revenge. Stars Stephen Spinella, Wings Hauser and Roxane Mesquida. Written and directed by Quentin Dupieux.

Death Bed: The Bed That Eats (1977 / 77 minutes). An unusual horror film about a demonic bed that consumes anyone who lays on it. Written and directed by George Barry.

MAY 10

The Music of Chance (1993 / 98 minutes) James Spader and Mandy Patinkin are gamblers out of their league forced to pay off their gaming debts by building a wall made of stones. Co-stars M. Emmet Walsh, Charles Durning, Joel Grey, Samantha Mathis and Chris Penn. Directed by Philip Haas. Based on the novel by Paul Auster.

All I Desire (1953 / 79 minutes) Actress Barbara Stanwyck stops over in the smalltown she left behind ten years before to visit the family she deserted and weigh her choices. Directed by Douglas Sirk.

JUNE 14

The Red House (1947 / 100 minutes) Delmer Daves directs this rural, noir psychodrama with supernatural overtones starring Edward G. Robinson as a one-legged farmer trying to control the urges of his teenaged daughter.

Brother Orchid (1940 / 88 minutes) After an assassination attempt orchestrated by new mobster king-pin Humphrey Bogart, aging racketeer Edward G. Robinson reinvents himself as a monk. With Ann Sothern and Ralph Bellamy.

JULY 12

Vibrations (1967 / 75 minutes) A writer, moonlighting as a typist, moves into a New York apartment with her up-tight sister and is drawn to the secret cult next door. Directed by Joseph W. Sarno.

Fluctuations (1970 / 70 minutes) Grindhouse avant-garde stream of consciousness sexploitation directed by Joel Landwehr.

Submission (1969 / 73 minutes) A ménage a trois leads to a robbery plot, sexual confusion and unexpected double crosses in Allen Savage’s movie.

AUGUST 9

Carny (1980 / 107 minutes) Eighteen year old Jodie Foster runs away from home and takes up with two carnival hustlers played by Gary Busey and Robbie Robertson. With Meg Foster, Kenneth McMillan and Elisha Cook Jr. Music by Alex North.

Girl on the Run (1953) Offbeat noir murder mystery set at a burlesque show on the midway. Features Frank Albertson and, in his big screen debut, Steve McQueen.

SEPTEMBER 13

Dementia (1955 / 56 minutes) A nightmarish, dialogue-free film noir, with an amazing George Antheil score, follows a gamin though the shadowy streets of Venice Beach, California. The only film from director John Parker.

Freud (1962 / 120 minutes) Director John Huston biopic casts Montgomery Clift as the famous Viennese psychoanalyst and follows him from 1885-90 as he formulates his theories of the Oedipus complex. Based on a screenplay by Jean-Paul Sartre. Photographed by Douglas Slocombe.

OCTOBER 11

* * * * Two silent movies directed by Tod Browning with live musical accompaniment from Lincoln vs. The Moon (Jen Lightfoot and Ed Dymek) * * * *

The Unknown (1927 / 63 minutes) Wanted murderer Lon Chaney poses as “Alonzo the Armless Wonder.” Falling in love with unstable and phobic Joan Crawford, he becomes enraged when a strongman becomes romantic rival, setting the stage for an unforgettable Grand Guignol climax.

The Unholy Three (1925 / 86 minutes) A sideshow ventriloquist (Lon Chaney), a little person (Harry Earles), and strongman (Victor McLaglen) flee the carny life and form a perverse crime family operating out of a pet shop. Based on a novel by Tod Robbins, the author of “Spurs” the story that inspired Browning’s movie Freaks.

NOVEMBER 8

Pericles on 31st Street (1962 / 60 minutes) A young Sam Peckinpah directed this entry in “The Dick Powell Show,” based on the novel by Harry Mark Petrakis. Features Theodore Bikel, Carroll O’Connor and Arthur O’Connell.

The Man with Two Heads (1972 / 80 minutes) Writer/director Andy Milligan’s chaotic, angry and insane version of “The Strange Case of Dr. Jekyll and Mr. Hyde” shot on location in England.

DECEMBER 13

Rienzi – Der Letzte Der Tribunen [Rienzi, the Last of the Tribunes] (2010 / 156 minutes) Philipp Stolzl and Christian Baier’s revision of Richard Wagner’s infrequently performed third opera (1842) about civil war in Rome. From the Deutsche Oper Berlin.