View waymark gallery

H.P. Lovecraft Birthplace - Providence, Rhode Island USA

in Childhood Homes

Posted by: 401Photos

N 41° 49.798 W 071° 23.368

19T E 301577 N 4633658

A polished black granite post with an etched steel plaque marks the birthplace and childhood home of H.P. Lovecraft, father of Weird Fiction.

Waymark Code: WM10181

Location: Rhode Island, United States

Published By: kaschper69

Views: 4

Born on March 15, 1890 in Providence, Rhode Island, H.P. [Howard Phillips] Lovecraft, posthumously became known as the originator of Weird Fiction -- a unique blend of horror, science fiction, and fantasy. Today, H.P. Lovecraft is internationally celebrated and studied. This marker is the result of a Kickstarter campaign and was officially unveiled March 15, 2016, on the 78th anniversary of his death.

His childhood home at 454 Angell Street no longer exists, so this spot has only the marker to note the historical significance within the lively Wayland Square neighborhood. There is now an unremarkable, three-floor, red brick apartment building on the corner of Elmgrove Avenue by the marker.

From Guide to Lovecraftian Sites in Rhode Island:

"I was born on the 20th of August, 1890, at No. 454 (then numbered 194) Angell Street, in the city of Providence. This was the home of my mother’s family; my parents’ actual residence at the time being in Dorchester, Mass....In the mid-seventies, my grandfather transferred all his interests to Providence (where his offices had always been) & erected one of the handsomest residences in the city—to me, the handsomest—my own beloved birthplace! This spacious house, raised on a high green terrace, looks down upon grounds which are almost a park, with winding walks, arbours, trees, & a delightful fountain. (Letter to Reinhardt Kleiner, 16 November 1916)

The Lovecrafts lived here from 1893 through 1904, when Howard’s grandfather, Whipple Phillips, died. Lovecraft loved this building and hoped to someday have enough personal wealth to acquire it. It was, unfortunately, torn down in 1961."

Sources:

H.P. Lovecraft Birthplace Marker Kickstarter and The Big Reveal

The H.P. Lovecraft Archive

The Lovecraft Arts & Sciences Council

NecronomiCon Providence

Wikipedia: H.P. Lovecraft

Name of Famous Person: H.P. LovecraftPhysical Address: Next to 468 Angell Street, Providence, Rhode IslandWhat is this person famous for?:

Howard Phillips Lovecraft is most well-known as an author and, more specifically, the Father of Weird Fiction.Website verifying legitimacy of site: [Web Link]Additional Website verifying Site legitimacy: [Web Link]Personal Experience:

Because his childhood home no longer exists, this spot has only the marker to note the historical significance in the lively Wayland Square neighborhood. There is a three-floor, brick apartment building on the corner by the marker.Other information about area:

The nonprofit Lovecraft Arts & Sciences Council promotes on-going Lovecraft and Weird Providence-related educational events and tours of Providence. The organization's headquarters and store are in the historic Arcade in downtown Providence.

NecronomiCon Providence is a biennial convention that explores the work of H.P. Lovecraft and that of his myriad literary and artistic offspring, via speakers, panel discussions, book readings, and workshops. It occurs on odd-numbered years since 2013.

Visit Instructions:

New logs must include information regarding the waymark. This can include photos, information about tours or even the confirmation that the waymark is still in existence.

Search for...

Geocaching.com Google Map

Google Maps

MapQuest

Bing Maps

Nearest Waymarks

Nearest Childhood Homes

Nearest Geocaches

Create a scavenger hunt using this waymark as the center point

Recent Visits/Logs:

There are no logs for this waymark yet.