It seems that director Richard Lester’s thesis in A Hard Day’s Night (1964) is that everyone over 30 is completely out of touch. For most of the film’s sleek 87 minutes, the members of the Beatles rub up against stuffed shirts, airless television producers, soulless marketers, overbearing managers and clueless cops, all standing in the Fab Four’s path of having a laugh. These cranks don’t like loud music, don’t understand the latest style and no longer have the affinity for chasing after girls and dancing the night away. But what does it mean when the most rebellious person in the film isn’t even a young man, but Paul McCartney’s venerable grandfather (Wilfrid Brambell)?

Leave it to the inimitable Lester Bangs to sum it up best: “Fuck the Beatles… it’s BLATANTLY OBVIOUS that the most rock-and-roll human being in the whole movie is the fucking grandfather. That wily old slime of Paul’s! He had more energy than the four moptops put together! Plus the spirit! He was a true anarchist!”

So yes, while the Beatles are dancing, singing love songs and being chased by rabid fans, Paul’s dear grandfather is out gambling, forging signatures on promo stills to sell and even sending Ringo Starr into an emotional tailspin by carping about the drummer’s lack of interest in “parading” himself around and getting some tail. The old man is so wily the Beatles themselves end up chasing after him. The last we see of him, the codger is handcuffed inside the helicopter that is waiting to whisk the boys away from a television appearance and onto their next adventure.

So just who is the old man who steals the film that is supposed to star four of the 20th century’s most magnetic stars? Brambell (1912-1985) was an Irish actor best known as a star on British television. Born in Dublin, he began his acting career as a child, entertaining wounded World War I soldiers, and eventually became a professional theater and television actor.

Brambell’s big break came in 1962 where he earned the leading role in “Steptoe and Son,” a series so popular and long-running that McCartney himself handpicked the actor for A Hard Day’s Night. A recurring joke in the movie is that Brambell’s character is a “clean old man.” Out of context, the joke could seem like a play on the “dirty old man” stereotype that sometimes clings to wily elderly characters. But the recurring joke in “Steptoe and Son” was that Brambell’s son is constantly calling him a “dirty old man”. Since the popularity of “Steptoe” hasn’t managed to carry on, especially for American audiences, the “clean” joke now comes off more like a non-sequitur when viewing A Hard Day’s Night.

Although Brambell, weasel-faced and long in the tooth, looks old in the film, he was only in his early 50s at the time. In fact, he often played characters much older than his true age, including his role as Albert Steptoe. But while Brambell was cast against type in A Hard Day’s Night – he was never himself a coarse rebel – he did struggle as a closeted homosexual most of his life, struggles that included an arrest in a public lavatory in 1962. Brambell’s defining role would come in the early ‘80s when he starred as a dying man coming to terms with his sexuality in The Terence Davies Trilogy.

Until 1967, homosexual acts were illegal in Britain, making Brambell the true outlaw. Though the Beatles are portrayed as rebels in A Hard Day’s Night, it wouldn’t take the world long to catch up to their brand and style. That spirit is indubitably captured in the film through Brambell’s character, who totally upstages the Beatles.

Brambell died of cancer in 1985 at the age of 72, but his name resurfaced in 2012 when allegations that he molested two young boys backstage at a theater during the ‘70s came to light. It is an unfortunate legacy for the actor to leave behind, one that a former British minister is convinced is true. Maybe Brambell really was a dirty old man after all, but it’s the role where he played a clean one that still sparkles more than 50 years later.