Muhammad Baydoun was a moderate Lebanese politician and served as a member of the Lebanese parliament from 1992 until 2005. He also served as minister of power and energy as recently as 2005. He participated in many rallies organized by the 14 March coalition.

Muhammad Baydoun was born on February 5, 1952, in Beirut, Beyrouth, Lebanon. His birth geographical coordinates are 33° 53’ 36” North latitude and 35° 30’ 6” East longitude. Muhammad Baydoun passed away at the age of 70 in 2022.

Astrologically, Muhammad Baydoun falls under the Sun sign of Aquarius, with Gemini as his Ascendant, Gemini as his Moon sign, and Cancer as his Black Moon Lilith sign.

Planets

Planets represent different aspects of personality, life themes, and energies within a birth chart, influencing individual characteristics, motivations, and experiences.

Planets in Signs

Planets in a zodiac sign denote how the energies and qualities associated with those planets express themselves within the context of the themes and attributes of that particular zodiac sign.

Sun Aquarius Moon Gemini Mercury Aquarius Venus Capricorn Mars Scorpio Jupiter Aries Saturn Libra Uranus Cancer Neptune Libra Pluto Leo Ceres Pisces Chiron Capricorn Eros Taurus Hygiea Pisces Juno Capricorn Pallas Aquarius Vesta Virgo Ascendant Gemini Black Moon Lilith Cancer Midheaven Aquarius North Node Pisces South Node Virgo Part of Fortune Libra Vertex Scorpio

Sunin Aquarius15° 33’ 32”

The Aquarius Sun Sign in the Natal Chart makes you intellectual and clever. You are more intense than most people and can be fierce and […] Read more »

Moonin Gemini15° 19’ 37”

The Moon in Gemini in the Natal Chart makes you lighthearted and compassionate. You are playful and use your creativity to help inspire others. You […] Read more »

Mercuryin Aquarius3° 44’ 52”

Is Mercury in Aquarius good or bad? Mercury in Aquarius is an intense placement that enhances your intuition and intellect. The Aquarius Mercury placement brings […] Read more »

Venusin Capricorn10° 40’ 45”

Capricorn Venus in the Natal Chart makes you calm and stoic in relationships. You value stability and crave security in romance. You are helpful and […] Read more »

Marsin Scorpio7° 4’ 50”

Scorpio Mars in the Natal Chart makes you intense and mysterious. You have a probing nature and an insatiable appetite for knowledge. You seek hidden […] Read more »

Jupiterin Aries11° 10’ 41”

Aries Jupiter in the Natal Chart is a generational placement. You can find greater nuance by studying the Jupiter in Aries house placement. The Jupiter […] Read more »

Saturnin Libra14° 51’ 18”

Yet, when you face challenges, you can be a staunch advocate for others. You have a feisty side and can be passionate about your mission. […] Read more »

Uranusin Cancer10° 38’ 4”

Cancer Uranus in the Natal Chart indicates you are part of a generation that dramatically changes society. Your breakthroughs and epiphanies help redefine home and […] Read more »

Neptunein Libra21° 39’ 51”

Libra Neptune in the Natal Chart indicates you are part of a generation that craves connection. You want intellectual and emotional intimacy. You are artistic […] Read more »

Plutoin Leo20° 27’ 1”

The Pluto in Leo generation empowers celebrities, giving those with status the authority to lead. Society is materialistic during this transit, and you are part […] Read more »

Ceresin Pisces26° 15’ 47”

Ceres in Pisces in the Natal Chart indicates a loving and mystical generation. You are part of a cohort that follows your ideals and can […] Read more »

Chironin Capricorn8° 48’ 20”

Chiron in Capricorn in the Natal Chart is an ideal placement for healing from subconscious wounds related to work, money, and security. You are productive […] Read more »

Erosin Taurus8° 59’ 33”

Eros in Taurus in the Natal Chart indicates you are passionate about your desire for luxury and physical pleasure. You are compassionate and can be […] Read more »

Hygieain Pisces27° 28’ 17”

Hygiea in Pisces in the Natal Chart is an ideal placement for an intuitive healer. You can be a spiritual guide who encourages others to […] Read more »

Junoin Capricorn19° 22’ 9”

Juno in Capricorn in the Natal Chart makes you a supportive partner. You prioritize your family and work diligently to provide for your loved ones. […] Read more »

Pallasin Aquarius26° 18’ 52”

Pallas in Aquarius in the Natal Chart makes you explosive and creative. You can be eager to pursue your futuristic vision and motivated by your […] Read more »

Vestain Virgo12° 40’ 23”

Vesta in Virgo in the Natal Chart is an ideal placement for a devoted healer. You are on a clear spiritual mission and face restraints […] Read more »

Ascendantin Gemini7° 11’ 16”

Gemini Ascendant in the Natal Chart makes you passionate about your ideas. You are talkative and open up quickly about your ideas. You can be […] Read more »

Black Moon Lilithin Cancer24° 13’ 42”

Cancer Black Moon Lilith in the Natal Chart makes you dramatic and caring. You are sensitive and hurt easily. When offended, you lash out and […] Read more »

Midheavenin Aquarius17° 33’ 50”

Aquarius Midheaven in the Natal Chart makes you erratic and explosive. You have a unique and unconventional approach to your career path. You can be […] Read more »

North Nodein Pisces1° 35’ 3”

Pisces North Node in the Natal Chart makes you more open to your spiritual mission. You are influenced by your moods and can be prone […] Read more »

South Nodein Virgo1° 35’ 3”

Virgo South Node in the Natal Chart indicates you are a humble and comforting person. You have a grounded personality and can be gentle and […] Read more »

Part of Fortunein Libra6° 57’ 21”

Libra Part of Fortune in the Natal Chart makes you gentle and conscientious. You can be caring and romantic with an eye for beauty and […] Read more »

Vertexin Scorpio2° 57’ 13”

Scorpio Vertex in the Natal Chart indicates an ideal placement for being a change agent. You are daring and use your gifts to help others […] Read more »

Planets in Elements

Planets in elements denote how the fundamental energies and qualities associated with those planets interact with the elemental nature of the signs they inhabit, shaping an individual’s overall temperament and approach to life.

Air Element

The air element in astrology corresponds to three signs; Gemini, Libra, and Aquarius. This element is associated with new insights and perspectives. The air element […] Read more »

Water Element

Astrologers and other occultists study the water element to understand emotional healing. This element relates to love and compassion. Numerous planets in water signs in […] Read more »

Earth Element

The earth element in astrology is associated with practicality and grounding. This element is associated with career and wealth. Taurus, Virgo, and Capricorn are signs […] Read more »

Fire Element

The fire element in astrology is associated with passion and motivation. This element brings creativity and intensifies planets and natal houses. Your competitive nature comes […] Read more »

Planets in Qualities

Planets in qualities signify how the inherent attributes and tendencies of those planets align with the modalities of the signs they occupy, influencing an individual’s style of action, decision-making, and engagement with the world.

Cardinal Quality

The Cardinal quality in astrology is associated with new seasons and initiative. Cardinal signs mark the equinoxes and solstices. The Cardinal modality represents the extremes […] Read more »

Fixed Quality

The second Quality in astrology is the Fixed modality. Fixed Signs follow the Cardinal Signs, bringing strength and endurance. These signs build upon the foundation […] Read more »

Mutable Quality

The third Quality astrological signs are grouped into is mutable. Mutable Signs come at the end of a season. Mutable Signs are associated with flexibility […] Read more »

Planets in Houses

Planets in a zodiac house signify where in life’s areas and experiences the energies and influences of those planets are predominantly focused and expressed.

Sun Ninth House Moon First House Mercury Ninth House Venus Eighth House Mars Sixth House Jupiter Eleventh House Saturn Fifth House Uranus Second House Neptune Fifth House Pluto Fourth House Ceres Eleventh House Chiron Eighth House Eros Twelfth House Hygiea Eleventh House Juno Eighth House Pallas Tenth House Vesta Fourth House Black Moon Lilith Third House North Node Tenth House South Node Fourth House Part of Fortune Fifth House Vertex Sixth House

Aspects

Aspects reveal the dynamic relationships and interactions between planets within a birth chart, influencing the way their energies combine and manifest in an individual’s life experiences and personality traits.

Within this birth chart, there are 24 major aspects, alongside 8 minor aspects, as well as 5 extra aspects.

Major Aspects

Major aspects highlight significant connections between planets, providing insights into key dynamics, challenges, and potentials shaping an individual’s life journey and psychological makeup.

Sun Trine Moon Moon Trine Saturn Venus Square Jupiter Venus Opposite Uranus Sun Trine Saturn Jupiter Square Uranus Neptune Sextile Pluto Mercury Square Mars Sun Sextile Jupiter Moon Sextile Jupiter Venus Sextile Mars Venus Square Saturn Mars Quincunx Jupiter Mars Trine Uranus Jupiter Opposite Saturn Saturn Square Uranus Sun Quincunx Uranus Sun Opposite Pluto Moon Quincunx Venus Moon Sextile Pluto Sun Trine Neptune Moon Trine Neptune Saturn Sextile Pluto Saturn Conjunct Neptune

Explore detailed articles on the major aspects in this birth chart, gaining deeper insights into this cosmic identity. Dive into each aspect and uncover how it shapes Muhammad Baydoun’s life journey.

Sun Trine Moonorb: 0°

The Sun trine Moon in the Natal Chart helps you relate to your family without being stifled by your home life. You may have a […] Read more »

Moon Trine Saturnorb: 0°

The Moon trine Saturn in a chart typically indicates that a person is self-reliant, emotionally mature, and calm. They express their emotions instead of hiding […] Read more »

Venus Opposite Uranusorb: 0°

Venus opposite Uranus in a chart creates a zest for life and excitement in romance. Any person with this in their chart will need a […] Read more »

Sun Trine Saturnorb: 1°

The Sun trine Saturn in the Natal Chart makes you an old soul. You have a link to history and love learning about the past. […] Read more »

Mercury Square Marsorb: 3°

Mercury square Mars in a Natal Chart typically indicates that a person will struggle with decision-making, feelings of frustration, impulsivity, and arguments caused by their […] Read more »

Sun Sextile Jupiterorb: 4°

The Sun sextile Jupiter in the Natal Chart makes you idealistic and expansive. You are outgoing and love meeting new people and can be thoughtful […] Read more »

Moon Sextile Jupiterorb: 4°

When the Moon is sextile Jupiter in a Natal Chart, this typically makes a person more generous and optimistic. The way they express their feelings […] Read more »

Venus Sextile Marsorb: 4°

Venus sextile Mars in a chart typically indicates that a person is highly social and energetic. They love being around other people, gaining new experiences, […] Read more »

Mars Quincunx Jupiterorb: 4°

Mars quincunx Jupiter in a chart creates tension between serving your own needs and serving the needs of others. There is typically a desire to […] Read more »

Jupiter Opposite Saturnorb: 4°

Jupiter opposite Saturn in a chart typically creates tension within a person. One side of them might be enthusiastic and adventurous, while the other side […] Read more »

Sun Quincunx Uranusorb: 5°

The Sun quincunx Uranus in a Natal Chart makes you intense, yet sometimes awkward. You don’t feel secure and go to extremes to assert your […] Read more »

Sun Opposite Plutoorb: 5°

The Sun opposite Pluto in a Natal Chart is an intense placement. You come across as severe to others. You can be intense and have […] Read more »

Moon Quincunx Venusorb: 5°

Stable romantic relationships might be difficult if you have the Moon quincunx Venus in your Natal Chart. This does not mean you’ll never find one, […] Read more »

Moon Sextile Plutoorb: 5°

The Moon sextile Pluto in a Natal Chart usually makes a person highly emotional. Their feelings can be profound and intense. They aren’t just connected […] Read more »

Sun Trine Neptuneorb: 6°

The Sun trine Neptune in the Natal Chart makes you compassionate and spiritual. You are endearing and charming. You can be flirty and easily attract […] Read more »

Moon Trine Neptuneorb: 6°

The Moon trine Neptune in a chart typically indicates that a person is caring and compassionate. They are sensitive and friendly, and it is probably […] Read more »

Saturn Conjunct Neptuneorb: 7°

Saturn conjunct Neptune in a chart can create the potential for both stability and instability. Someone with this aspect in their chart may lean more […] Read more »

Minor Aspects

Minor aspects represent subtler connections between planets, offering additional nuances and layers of interpretation to understand more detailed influences on an individual’s personality and experiences.

Mars Quincunx Ascendant Mercury Square Vertex Pluto Quincunx Juno Venus Conjunct Chiron Venus Trine Eros Venus Trine Vesta Mars Opposite Eros Uranus Opposite Chiron

Discover additional layers of meaning with this collection of articles on the minor aspects found in Muhammad Baydoun’s birth chart. Delve deeper into these cosmic nuances to gain a richer understanding of this astrological profile.

Mars Quincunx Ascendantorb: 0°

Mars quincunx the Ascendant in a chart typically indicates that how someone portrays themselves, especially when it comes to their confidence and level of passion, […] Read more »

Extra Aspects

Extra aspects, though less emphasized than major or minor aspects, contribute subtle nuances and intricacies to the overall astrological interpretation, offering additional insights into an individual’s personality traits and life experiences.

Chiron Trine Eros Ascendant Trine Part of Fortune Ceres Conjunct Hygiea North Node Trine Vertex South Node Sextile Vertex

Explore how these extra aspects contribute to the intricate tapestry of Muhammad Baydoun’s life path through subtler influences. Dive into each extra aspect and uncover the hidden gems that shape a unique cosmic identity.

Ceres Conjunct Hygieaorb: 1°

Ceres conjunct Hygiea in a chart can add extra care to someone’s personality, particularly as those things relate to health, hygiene, habits, and wellness. People […] Read more »

North Node Trine Vertexorb: 1°

The North Node trine the Vertex in the Natal Chart makes you successful and charming. You attract new opportunities easily and embrace opportunities to thrive. […] Read more »

South Node Sextile Vertexorb: 1°

The South Node sextile of the Vertex in the Natal Chart makes you intuitive and open to unique opportunities. Your past life wisdom helps you […] Read more »

Houses

A house starting in a zodiac sign indicates the area of life where the qualities and themes of that sign are particularly emphasized and influential within an individual’s birth chart.