The “Queen of Disco” will be celebrated once more at the city of Boston’s 10th annual Donna Summer Disco Party on Thursday, June 27.

Summer, born LaDonna Gaines, was a singer-songwriter that gained popularity during the disco era in the 1970s. She was born in Dorchester and raised in Mission Hill before becoming a five-time Grammy winner, selling over 140 million records worldwide.

Summer was posthumously inducted into the Rock & Roll Hall of Fame. She died in 2012 at age 63, following a battle with lung cancer.

Known for hits like “Love to Love You Baby” and “Hot Stuff,” Summer started her impressive career singing in local churches in Mission Hill. The Greater Boston community fell in love with her then and has held her close ever since. Parker Hill Avenue, the street she grew up on, was even renamed after her.

Today, the annual Donna Summer Disco Party run by the city honors her legacy in a block party-style celebration of her life and music.

We know you work hard for the money, so it’s important to note that Thursday’s dance party is free. If you’re lookin’ for some hot stuff that evening, here’s what you need to know.

What is the event?

Mayor Michelle Wu and the city's Office of Tourism, Sports and Entertainment host the Donna Summer dance party, complete with glow sticks, colorful lights, bubbles and a disco ball.

Guests can glide around City Hall Plaza on roller skates like it’s their last dance. Summer’s sister Mary Gaines Bernard and nephew O'Mega Red will perform and DJ Vince1 will mix Summer’s music.

When and where is it? How can I get there?

The groovy party will be held on June 27 from 5-9 p.m. at 1 City Hall Square. Here’s how to get there:

For public transportation:

Green Line to Government Center

Blue Line to Government Center

Orange Line to State Street or Haymarket

Red Line to Park Street and transfer to the Green Line towards Lechmere or Government Center

92 and 93 buses to Congress Street outside City Hall

For parking:

Metered parking on Union Street and Cambridge Street

Parcel 7 Garage (entrance on New Sudbury Street) for $3 for three hours maximum with local merchant validation. (The city of Boston does not validate parking.)

For bikes:

Bike racks at 1st and 3rd floor entrances

How do I dress and what do I bring?

Lean into the disco vibes with sequins, feathers, bold prints and flare pants. Summer was known for extravagant, glittering outfits, so take inspiration from her and make it your own. Make sure to pack your roller skates to roll around City Hall Plaza. Speaking of...

Safety tips for roller skaters

While it may look like a blissful activity, roller skating can be dangerous if you’re not well prepared, so here are some safety tips to make sure you have fun all night:

Wear knee pads, elbow pads, wrist guards and a helmet to protect from potential injuries.

Make sure your skates aren’t too loose or too tight and have good ankle support.

Watch online tutorials or take skating lessons if you’re new to the skill.

Look out for any obstacles in your path.

Stretch beforehand.

Drink lots of water.

Any questions?

If you have further inquiries, the city of Boston website requests you email Tourism@Boston.gov.