LEGENDARY singer, Donna Summer was widely known for her disco hits in the 70s.

Summer died in May 2012 and here's everything we know about the musician.

Who was Donna Summer?

Donna Adrian Gaines, widely known as Donna Summer, was born on December 31, 1948, in Boston, Massachusetts.

In the 60s, Donna joined a rock band as their lead singer prompting the artist to move to New York City.

By the end of the decade, in 1968, Summer moved to Germany to act in the German adaptation of Hair.

It was in Europe where Summer ventured into disco music creating hits such as I Feel Love and Love to Love You Baby.

In 1976, the Boston native returned to the United States where she continues to make music including her popular disco hit, Last Dance.

Due to her success with the genre, Summer was named the Queen of Disco.

Throughout her music career, Donna won five Grammy Awards and six American Music Awards.

What was her cause of death?

On May 17, 2012, Summer died after a quiet battle with lung cancer.

Summer believed that her cancer developed after inhaling toxic dust from the 9/11 attacks.

Though she wasn't in the towers, her apartment was close enough to be exposed to the hazardous aftermath.

Following her death, her family released a statement saying: "Early this morning, we lost Donna Summer Sudano, a woman of many gifts, the greatest being her faith.

"While we grieve her passing, we are at peace celebrating her extraordinary life and her continued legacy. Words truly can’t express how much we appreciate your prayers and love for our family at this sensitive time."

Summer is survived by her longtime husband, Bruce Sudano, and her three children, Mimi Dohler, Brooklyn Sudano, and Amanda Sudano.

How can I watch Love to Love You, Donna Summer?

Celebrating the life and artistry of Donna Summer, HBO released a documentary on the artist on May 20, 2023.

The documentary was co-directed by her daughter, Amanda, alongside Roger Ross Williams.

The website described the documentary as: "A deeply personal portrait of Summer on and off stage, the film features a wealth of photographs and never-before-seen home video footage – often shot by Summer herself.

"Through a rich window into the surprising range of her artistry, from songwriting to painting, Love to Love You, Donna Summer explores the highs and lows of a life lived on the global stage."