Before she became known the world over as “The Queen of Disco,” Boston-born Donna Summer held court in several city neighborhoods.

So it is only appropriate that the North American tour of “Summer: The Donna Summer Musical,” the 2018 Broadway show about her life, will play her hometown when it comes to Boston’s Emerson Colonial Theatre, Feb. 22 through March 6.

From childhood, Summer – born LaDonna Adrian Gaines, the daughter of Andrew and Mary Gaines who grew up on Mission Hill, went to Grant AME Church on the South End/Lower Roxbury Line, and attended Jeremiah E. Burke High School in Dorchester – seemed destined to go places.

As a teenager with a powerhouse voice, Summer had her earliest recording sessions on Newbury Street. In 1967, she moved to New York City and, in 1968, she joined a German company of the musical “Hair.”

'A little bittersweet': Hingham's favorite aardvark 'Arthur' will wrap its 25-year run

'The Dynasty': 10-part documentary on the Patriots coming to Apple TV+

After that production closed, Summer remained in Munich, where she eventually began working with music producers and songwriters Giorgio Moroder, known as the founder of disco, and Pete Bellotte on songs including the epic “Love to Love You Baby” and the electronic dance music-fueled “I Feel Love,” which helped establish her as an international recording artist.

Summer’s success only grew from there. She charted 42 hit singles on the Billboard Hot 100 in her lifetime, 14 of which reached the top 10. Hits such as “Hot Stuff,” “Bad Girls,” “Dim All the Lights,” “On the Radio,” “Last Dance” and “She Works Hard for the Money” helped make the five-time Grammy Award winner one of the biggest female recording artists of all time, selling 100 million records.

A non-smoker, Summer died of lung cancer at her home in Naples, Florida, on May 17, 2012, at age 63.

The musical features songs by Summer, Moroder, Bellotte, Paul Jabara and others, and a book by Colman Domingo, Robert Cary and Des McAnuff. The role of Summer is played by three different performers, Brittny Smith as “Diva Donna,” Charis Gullage as “Disco Donna” and Amahri Edwards-Jones as “Duckling Donna.”

Smith, an Austin, Texas, native and veteran of touring productions of shows including “Dreamgirls” and “Step Afrika!”, was in Portland, Maine, recently when she spoke by telephone about the iconic singer, what it’s like to play her at the pinnacle of her career and more.

Q: Is Donna Summer the first real-life person you’ve played?

A: Yes, it’s interesting too because I thrive on jukebox musicals. I’ve been in quite a few, but Donna is the first real person I’ve portrayed. Donna was such a great singer. She had disco covered, of course, but also pop and rock, all of which made her so great. When it comes to doing a show like this, it’s all about bringing audiences to an earlier time. It’s all about nostalgia – doing covers of songs people love. That’s why jukebox musicals work, especially when you have so many amazing songs like these to work with.

Q: Will you and your castmates be taking a Donna Summer roots tour while you’re in Boston?

A: I really hope so. We have people in the cast who are like our resident historians, finding interesting places for us to visit wherever we play. It will be great if we can see where Donna spent her childhood, and the places connected with that time in her life.

Q: When did you first become familiar with Donna Summer?

A: I was a big Selena fan and saw her very last concert, in February 1995, at the Houston Astrodome, when I was maybe in the fifth grade. Selena did a disco set and that gave me my first introduction to Donna’s music. Later, my mom, who was a Donna fan, took me to see her in concert.

Music Scene: Tinsley Ellis might be 'a lawyer if not for The Beatles.' Now he's coming to Plymouth.

Q: Your mother introduced you to this music. What else did you learn from her?

A: My mom told me everything she knew about Donna Summer and her place in pop music. One Halloween, she even dressed up as Donna. My mom sings jazz and plays six instruments, so my brother and I were exposed to music from an early age. My mom is very funny and clever too. She had us listening to her albums as we cleaned the house. We’d be dusting and vacuuming while singing along with her. She wanted us to enjoy the music, but she also made sure we got work done.

Q: Is it a safe bet that your mother was one of the first people you told when you landed this tour?

A: She was the first. The casting process was interesting. I’ve done many tours – they’re what I like to do. For this one, auditions were held last summer. I was up for either Diva or Disco Donna. I made it to the finals in New York, and they offered me the part of Diva Donna on the spot, which is unusual. It was very flattering.

I called my mother from the rehearsal hall and she was so happy. She immediately started singing Donna’s songs on the other end of the phone.

Movie review: 'Death on the Nile' sets sail with Kenneth Branagh and Gal Gadot

Q: Is your mother your biggest fan?

A: We’re closer than close, but I’d have to say she’s my biggest critic. She’s always supportive, but she’s also very honest. She always tells me what she really thinks. I live in the Baltimore area, so she’s coming to stay with me and see the show there, just before Boston.

I can’t wait for my mom to see it. I hope she likes it, because any time I impress my mother it’s a big deal. It’s when I feel most accomplished.

Q: What kind of research did you do to prepare for this role?

A: I listened to her albums, of course, and I watched YouTube clips to learn her movement, and some of her inflections. I wanted to embody, not impersonate her. Diva Donna opens and closes the show. She’s the through-line, almost like a narrator, so I want to get her just right.

Q: What’s it like sharing the part with two other actresses?

A: It’s wonderful. It’s really cool, because with three Donnas you get to see her at different ages. The book provides an intimate look at Donna throughout the various stages of her life. With Duckling Donna, you get to see her young, in a period of self-discovery. With Disco Donna, you experience her at the height of her fame, and then you see her fully evolved as Diva Donna. The three of us who play her are like sisters, united in our love of Donna.

Q: It’s clear you’re having a great time in this production. What can audiences expect?

A: Donna Summer left an amazing legacy. Like everyone, she had her ups and downs and we deal with those. Her music is incredible, though, and we have brilliant choreography, which makes this show a joy for us, and a joyous experience for our audience. We perform 20 of her hits and when people hear their favorite, they immediately start clapping. By the time we get to “Last Dance,” everybody reacts and is on their feet dancing, and sending love and respect up to Donna.

See the 'Summer' musical

What: “Summer: The Donna Summer Musical”

When: Feb. 22–March 6

Where: Emerson Colonial Theatre, 106 Boylston St., Boston

Tickets: Starting at $44.75

Info: 1-888-616-0272 or BroadwayInBoston.com