The municipality Los Pintanos covers an area of 79.6 Km2.

This town is at a distance of 170 Km from Zaragoza city.

Located at an altitude of 674 m.

In 1999 he was a resident population of 96 inhabitants.

Belongs to the county (comarca) of Cinco Villas.

Ayuntamiento de Undues Pintano

Calle Mayor, 1.

50685 UNDUES PINTANO (ZARAGOZA)

Phone: +34 948439001

Information Turism: +34 948439040

Mayor: +34 948439008

Situation

Al NO. de la provincia de Zaragoza

Se accede desde la capital por la autopista A-68 y la carretera N-232, con desvío en Gallur a carretera C-127, y nuevo desvío en Sos del Rey Católico a carretera C-132, y último desvío, pasando Urriés a carretera local, en el valle de Onsella.

Este ayuntamiento comprende dos poblaciones La villa de Pintano y Undues Pintano.

Celabrations:

En Pintano las fiestas patronales se celebran el primer fin de semana de Agosto

En Undues Pintano las Fiestas patronales se celebran el último fin de semana de Agosto (San Ramón Nonato, 31 de agosto).

Ample your information on Aragon

If you want Ample your information on Aragon you can begin crossing some Monasteries, o 40 Castles another interesting route is the Mudejar, Patrimony of the Humanity, also you can extend your cultural knowledge on Aragón examining its municipal and institutional heraldy without forgetting, of course, some of its emblematicas figures as San George Pattern of Aragon or its personages I illustrate adding to these data a minimum crossed by its history o some books.

Also Aragon enjoys a diverse and varied Nature where passing by plants, animals, or landscapes we can arrive at a fantastic bestiario that lives in its monuments.

The information will not be complete without a stroll by its three provinces: Zaragoza, Teruel and Huesca and ours varied Regions, with shutdown in some of its spectacular landscapes like Ordesa or the Moncayo or by opposition in the valle of the Ebro.

If reasons of work or relatives have taken to you Far from Aragon you can Download images of bottom, sounds or animations

Also you can dedicate you to the intangible ones: from the legend compilation that also does to universal Aragon you can persecute the presence of Santo Grial in Aragon.

Other pages on Aragon in Internet

Other current also you can interest.

Huesca | Teruel | Zaragoza | Shires| Aragon

La Seo | The Pilar | Mudejar | Goya | Bestiary | Museum Provincial Zaragoza

Tourism | Geology | Nature | Alfabetic index | Maps

Los Pintanos municipality : basic information

Copyright 1996-2024 © All Rights Reserved Javier Mendivil Navarro, Aragon (Spain)

Explanations or to correct errors please press here

Legal Warning . This activity of the Asociacion Cultural Aragon Interactivo y Multimedia

All administration or public institution is made independently off.

As opposed to the threat of the hope of the water trasvase: CONGRATULATIONS.