Province of Spain

Province in Aragon, Spain

Zaragoza (Spanish pronunciation: [θaɾaˈɣoθa]), also called Saragossa in English,[1] is a province of northern Spain, in the central part of the autonomous community of Aragon. Its capital is the city of Zaragoza, which is also the capital of the autonomous community. Other towns in the province include La Almunia de Doña Godina, Borja, Calatayud, Caspe, Ejea de los Caballeros, Tarazona, and Utebo.

Its area is 17,274 km², which makes it the fourth-largest Spanish province by land area. Its population was 954,811 in 2018, accounting for slightly over 72% of the entire population of Aragon; nearly 75% of those lived in the capital. Its population density was 51/km². It contains 292 municipalities, of which more than half are villages with fewer than 300 people.

The main language throughout the province is Spanish (with official status), although Catalan is spoken in the easternmost part (Bajo Aragón-Caspe comarca and Mequinenza municipality).

The province of Zaragoza is bordered by the provinces of Lleida, Tarragona, Teruel, Guadalajara, Soria, La Rioja, Navarre, and Huesca. The southern and western side of the province is in the mountainous Sistema Ibérico area and includes its highest point, the Moncayo, while the northern end reaches the Pre-Pyrenees. The Ebro River crosses the province from west to east.

Comarcas in the Zaragoza province:

No. Name Capital 5 Cinco Villas Ejea de los Caballeros 12 Tarazona y el Moncayo Tarazona 13 Campo de Borja Borja 14 Aranda Illueca 15 Ribera Alta del Ebro Alagón 16 Valdejalón La Almunia de Doña Godina 17 Zaragoza Zaragoza 18 Ribera Baja del Ebro Quinto 19 Bajo Aragón-Caspe/Baix Aragó-Casp Caspe 20 Comunidad de Calatayud Calatayud 21 Campo de Cariñena Cariñena 22 Campo de Belchite Belchite 24 Campo de Daroca Daroca

The following comarcas having their capital in Huesca Province include municipal terms within Zaragoza Province:

Bajo Cinca: Mequinenza.

Hoya de Huesca: Murillo de Gállego and Santa Eulalia de Gállego.

Jacetania: Artieda, Mianos, Salvatierra de Esca and Sigüés.

Monegros: La Almolda, Bujaraloz, Farlete, Leciñena, Monegrillo and Perdiguera.

The historical population is given in the following chart:

List of municipalities in Zaragoza