The province of Zaragoza is divided by the Ebro valley. This enclave corresponds to the great sceneries for fishing cyprinids and large predators such as catfish, perch, black bass, carp and barbels. These are areas inhabited by predatory species in coexistence with cyprinids, which occupy the most turbid or calm waters and reservoirs. Among many of these places, the Ribarroja and Mequinenza Reservoirs stand out, as well as the Ebro River all along its course. This whole territory is dotted with large inland seas with numerous fishing possibilities and low stretches of the tributaries of the Ebro River.

In these increasingly better treated and clean waters, huge carps (Cyprinus Carpio) introduced by the Romans and of unaltered behaviour and customs, live. Enormous catfishes (Silurus Glanis) coexist with carps; and once fished, photographed, and returned to the water, they become virals astonishing the whole world. All this happens because here there are certain endemic and very favourable environmental conditions that benefit the fish and endow it with a high and progressive rate of growth already more than confirmed.

Every year the size of the catfish and Aragonese carp is bigger. But it turns out that with the other species of the Ebro River the same thing happens and their size and populations are prosperous. Other noteworthy species are:

And the list of minor fish species that can try to catch is even greater in more specific waters. You can also find pikes, barbels, etc.

Mar de Aragón y Ribarroja Reservoirs

The Sea of Aragon formed first by the Mequinenza Reservoir and as well as the Ribarroja Reservoir is a succession of five hundred kilometres of inland coast with spectacular landscapes of cliffs, forests and rocks that surprise the visitor. In them the fishermen find a unique paradise in Europe for fishing, which has become a world reference point for fishing enthusiasts.

Very close by, in Sástago, the Monastery of Rueda is worth a visit: a medieval Cistercian complex next to the Ebro River that is very well restored and that will allow us to get acquainted with the Medieval monastic life.

Tranquera Reservoir

It is the largest and most important wetland in the area. Of irregular coasts formed by the flooding of the Piedra River an abrupt terrain. When the level drops in summer, some reddish rocks emerge in the water. In addition to fishing, it is essential to visit the famous Piedra Monastery, where water and rock merge in an unforgettable way giving rise to a fairy-tale landscape of really suggestive waterfalls, caves and lakes.

Otros cotos deportivos en la provincia de Zaragoza

Calatayud and the Jalón River combine sporting activity in a natural landscape with a wealth of monumental Mudéjar art, which unrepeatably combines Christian architecture with the decoration of Muslim tradition. From the Maidevera Reservoir, on the Aranda River, among ravines and mountain ranges, as well as practising fishing, you can access the Moncayo Natural Park through its most unknown side, the natural border between Aragon and Castile.

Ebro River

The improvement in water quality has enriched the river’s wildlife as it passes through Zaragoza, a city that in itself is a well-known tourist attraction in which to enjoy several days of its lively and vibrant street culture. The Galachos de Juslibol, old meanders abandoned by the river and very close to the city, are also a desired destination for anglers and hikers who like to walk through this surprising ecosystem of wetlands and riverside forests.

Other points of attraction in the territory

In the Ebro valley, the variety of the landscape is a distinctive feature. Mountains furrowed by valleys, pre-Pyrenean buttresses towards Huesca, the beautiful views offered by the Sea of Aragon, originated by the construction of the Mequinenza Reservoir in the Ebro River (the largest reservoir in Aragón), the great promontory of Moncayo at whose foot lies the beautiful Cistercian Veruela Monastery, the splendid and rugged landscape of the Monegros… the cities Calatayud, Tarazona, Daroca, Sos del Rey Católico, Uncastillo… all of them declared Historic Sites.

Zaragoza, offers the attractions of a large city with the history of its more than 2000 years. The Roman Route, the Pilar Basilica and La Seo cathedral, are priority destinations for visitors when arriving in the city. Islamic art has its most representative example in the Aljafería Palace. And the Goya Route, that departing from his native town, Fuendetodos, and passing by several localities, takes us to see his paintings of the Pilar, Cartuja de Aula Dei and Museums in Zaragoza.