Undues Pintano locality of Los Pintanos municipality Saragossa. Aragonien. Spanien.

Locality Los Pintanos

Aragon > Zaragoza> Los Pintanos

Locality Undues Pintado belongs to the municipality of Los Pintanos.

This town is at a distance of 175 Km from Zaragoza city.

Located at an altitude of 809 m.

In 1999 he was a resident population of 39 inhabitants.

Belongs to the county (comarca) of Cinco Villas.

Ayuntamiento de Undues Pintano

Mayor, 1.

50685 UNDUES PINTANO (ZARAGOZA)

Phone: +34 948439001

Information Turistic: +34 948439040

Celebrations:

En Undues Pintano las Fiestas patronales se celebran el último fin de semana de Agosto (San Ramón Nonato, 31 de agosto).

Ample your information on Aragón

If you want Ample your information on Aragon you can begin crossing some Monasteries, our 40 Castles another interesting route is the Mudejar, Patrimony of the Humanity, also you can extend your cultural knowledge on Aragón examining its municipal and institutional heraldica without forgetting, of course, some of its emblematicas figures as San George Pattern of Aragon or its personages I illustrate adding to these data a minimum crossed by its history o some books.

Also Aragón enjoys a diverse and varied Nature where passing by plants, animals, or landscapes we can arrive at a fantastic bestiario that lives in its monuments.

The information will not be complete without a stroll by its three provinces: Zaragoza, Teruel y Huesca y sus varied Regions, with shutdown in some of its spectacular landscapes like Ordesa or the Moncayo or by opposition in the valle of the Ebro.

If reasons of work or relatives have taken to you Far from Aragon you can Download images of bottom, sounds or animations

Also you can dedicarte to the intangible ones: from the legend compilation that also does to universal Aragon you can persecute the presence of Santo Grial in Aragon.

Other pages on Aragon in Internet

Huesca | Teruel | Zaragoza | Shires| Aragon

La Seo | The Pilar | Mudejar | Goya | Bestiary | Museum Provincial Zaragoza

Tourism | Geology | Nature | Alfabetic index | Maps

Copyright 2000-2024 © All Rights Reserved Francisco Javier Mendivil Navarro, Aragon (Spanien)

Erläuterungen oder um Fehler zu korrigieren klicken Sie bitte hier