United Arab Emirates (UAE) City-States

The United Arab Emirates (UAE) consists of seven independent city-states: Abu Dhabi, Dubai, Sharjah, Umm Al Qaiwain, Fujairah, Ajman, and Ras Al Khaimah.

Abu Dhabi

Abu Dhabi is the largest Emirate in the United Arab Emirates, occupying 84% of the nation's land. It has 200 islands and a 700-km-long coastline. Its total area is 67,340 square kilometres, and Abu Dhabi City is the federal capital of the UAE.

Dubai

Dubai is the second largest Emirate with an area of 4,114 square kilometres, which is about 5% of the UAE excluding islands. The older districts of Dubai cover an area of 1,500 square metres. Dubai is known as the 'Pearl of the Gulf' and 'Jewel of the World' because of its heritage and history.

Sharjah

Sharjah is the third largest Emirate in the UAE, with an area of 2,590 square kilometres. It occupies 3.3% of the total area of the UAE, not counting the islands. It is known for its picturesque landscapes and water vistas.

The Emirate has many educational institutions, which ensure a continuous supply of fresh graduates who have learned the latest knowledge in engineering, science, technology, and other skills that support economic growth.

Ajman

Ajman is the smallest of the seven Emirates, covering 259 square kilometres, about 0.3% of the UAE's mainland. Ajman has a few sandy beaches but is mainly characterized by the rugged Hajjar mountain range. Although Ajman city is modern and provides up-to-date services and facilities, it reflects traditional charm.

Umm Al Quwain

Umm Al Quwain is the second smallest and the least populated Emirate in the UAE. It covers an area of approximately 720 square kilometres, equivalent to 1% of the UAE's landmass. Umm Al Quwain is located between Sharjah to the southwest and Ras Al Khaimah to the northeast. The city of Umm Al Quwain is built on a narrow peninsula called Khor Al Bidiyah.

Ras Al Khaimah

Ras Al Khaimah (RAK) has a rich history. It was known for its prosperous port and exquisite pearls, the whitest and roundest in the world. It is the fourth largest Emirate and covers an area of 1,684 square kilometres, 3.16% of the total area of the UAE. The Emirate is near the northern-most point of the United Arab Emirates and shares its boundaries with the Emirates of Umm Al Quwain, Fujairah, and Sharjah. It also has an international border with the Sultanate of Oman.

Fujairah

Fujairah is the only Emirate entirely located on the eastern coast of the UAE on the Gulf of Oman. The shores of Fujairah extend along the Gulf of Oman for about 70km, from the city of Fujairah in the south to the town of Dibba in the far north. The total landmass of Fujairah is 1,450 square kilometres.