BAY CITY -- Former legendary World Wrestling Entertainment (WWE) tag team Demolition reunited for a match in Bay City with Ultimate Championship Wrestling Saturday night.

Bill "Ax" Eadie and Barry "Smash" Darsow sent fans home on a high note with a win by disqualification over local tag team Legion in the main event.

It was the first Michigan in-ring appearance by the duo in years.

"We have had a lot of great memories wrestling here," Darsow said. "I remember competing at the Pontiac Silverdome, Joe Louis Arena, for Georgia Championship Wrestling in Saginaw and having matches in Grand Rapids."

MORE UCW WRESTLING COVERAGE:

One of their early appearances as team together came during WWE's Saturday Night Main Event in March of 1987 at Joe Louis when they were participants in a battle royal.

While Eadie and Darsow regularly do appearances at independent shows and wrestling conventions, there schedules are nothing like they were back then.

"We wrestled two to three matches at television tapings Monday and Thursday then did doubleheaders on the weekend," Darsow said. "At one point, we wrestled for 62 straight days, and were on the road for 52 weeks in a row.

As one of WWE's most popular tag teams during a stretch in the mid-to-late '80's, Darsow said they wrestled upwards of 400 times a year. Demolition still holds the record for the longest World Tag Team Championship reign (478 days).

The travel required both men to make a lot of personal sacrifices.

Darsow had to get married in the afternoon so he could wrestle at night. Eadie was on tour in Nova Scotia when his daughter was born, and he didn't get to see her until she was two weeks old.

When Darsow's wife went into labor with their son, WWE owner Vince McMahon tried to accommodate him as best he could.

"We were in Rockford (Illinois) and she was in Charlotte, so he said what I'll do for you is put you guys on first," Darsow said, laughing. "We wrestled then went to Chicago to catch a flight the next morning. We couldn't get a hotel, so I ended up sleeping in my car before taking off on a flight at 6 a.m."

His wife didn't give birth until 11:15 p.m. the next day, so Darsow's visit with his newborn was brief. He had to catch a flight at 6 a.m. to get back on the road.

"I didn't mind, it allowed me to have a day off," Eadie said, laughing.

Life has come full circle for Darsow as his son Dakota is now pursuing a wrestling career of his own.

"I tell him he has to get out there as much as he can," Darsow said. "He spent a year with the WWE in their developmental territory down in Florida, and recently did some stuff for TNA Wrestling. He is just kind of waiting for his big break."

Despite coming from a wrestling family, and the name recognition that may bring, Darsow said his son has an uphill battle like any aspiring wrestler.

"It's just my opinion, but I think being a second generation wrestler hurts him a little bit," Darsow said. "Companies can only have so many second or third generation wrestlers on the roster, you have to have different kind of characters. For every Randy Orton, there is a Von Erich, a Neidhart or a Rotunda looking to break out."

As Darrow's son approaches the prime of his career, Demolition acknowledges theirs is in its twilight.

"We aren't the same as we used to be in the ring, fans coming out to see us know that, but they are nostalgic," Eadie said. "They still want to see old guys like us. We love doing the legends conventions. It's nice because we get to talk to fans a little more than when we had to stay in character on the road."

Later this month, Demolition is doing a show in Halifax and they have an appearance scheduled later this year in Connecticut.

UCW Wrestling May 18 Results:

Justin Mane over N8 Mattson via pinfall with small package

Arella over Jasmin via pinfall with small package

PK Andrews over Kaleb Krosby via pinfall with a slam

Hukster over PK Andrews via pinfall with a legdrop

Xero over Kris Korvis and Sebastion Rose for the UCW Mid-Heavyweight Title in a ladder match after Xero hit a powerbomb on Korvis allowing him to climb the ladder and grab title

"Viper" Pete Christie/"The Mastermind" Dave Dupont over El Diablo/Akuma via pinfall with a spinebuster by Christie

Joseph Parks over Krimson via pinfall with a Black Hole Slam

Demolition over Legion via disqualification when Legion's manager interfered