WPOV-LP

WPOV-LP (107.7 FM, "The Vine") is a radio station broadcasting a religious format. Licensed to Vineland, New Jersey, USA, the station serves the Vineland-Millville-Bridgeton area.

Ventnor City School District

Ventnor City School District is a community public school district that serves students in pre-Kindergarten through eighth grade from Ventnor City, in Atlantic County, New Jersey, United States.

Sea Isle City School District

The Sea Isle City School District is a community public school district that served students in pre-Kindergarten through eighth grade from Sea Isle City, New Jersey, United States.

Ocean City School District

The Ocean City School District is a comprehensive community public school district that serves students in Kindergarten through twelfth grade from Ocean City, in Cape May County, New Jersey, United States.

Mullica Township Schools

The Mullica Township Schools is a community public school district that serves students in pre-Kindergarten through eighth grade from Mullica Township, in Atlantic County, New Jersey, United States.

Somers Point Public Schools

The Somers Point Public Schools are a community public school district that serves students in pre-Kindergarten through eighth grade from Somers Point, in Atlantic County, New Jersey, United States.

Engleside Hotel

Engleside Hotel was one of the most decorative and beautiful Victorian hotels that once stood on Engleside Avenue in Beach Haven (located on the southern end of Long Beach Island), New Jersey.

Egg Harbor City School District

The Egg Harbor City School District is a comprehensive community public school district responsible for the education of children in pre-Kindergarten through eighth grade from Egg Harbor City, in Atlantic County, New Jersey, United States.

Carey Stadium

Carey Stadium is an open-air stadium located in Ocean City, New Jersey. The stadium is primarily used by the Ocean City School District for Ocean City High School's football, soccer, and lacrosse teams. Carey Stadium is also known for the home field…

Brigantine Public Schools

The Brigantine Public Schools is a community public school district that serves students in pre-Kindergarten through eighth grade from Brigantine, in Atlantic County, New Jersey, United States. The district is governed by the Brigantine Board of Edu…

Brigantine Island

Brigantine Island (also known as Brigantine Beach Island) is a 6 mile long (9.7 km) island off the Atlantic Ocean coast of New Jersey, located northeast of Atlantic City.

Belleplain State Forest

Belleplain State Forest is a 21,320-acre (8,630 ha) New Jersey State Forest in northern Cape May County and eastern Cumberland County. It has many young pine, oak and Atlantic white cedar trees, having better soil than the northern Pine Barrens.

Beach Haven School District

The Beach Haven School District is a community public school district that serves students in pre-Kindergarten through sixth grade from Beach Haven, in Ocean County, New Jersey, United States.

Atlantic Christian School

Atlantic Christian School is a private coeducational Christian school in Egg Harbor Township, in Atlantic County, New Jersey, United States, serving students in grades K-12 and is co-educational. The school colors are green and white, and the symbol…

Woodbine School District

The Woodbine School District is a community public school district that serves students in Kindergarten through eighth grade from Woodbine, in Cape May County, New Jersey, United States.

WEHA

WEHA (88.7 FM) is a Stellar Award winning radio station broadcasting a Gospel music format. Licensed to the suburb of Port Republic, New Jersey, it serves the Atlantic City metropolitan area. It first began broadcasting in 2003 under the call sign W…