Prosecutors painted Dale Brown as a Faginesque character who enlisted younger men in his neighborhood to rob a Gretna convenience store for money to support his cocaine habit. The 32-year-old Algiers resident admitted he began abusing cocaine and marijuana when he was 15 years old.

But he described himself as a hapless victim of his neighbors, who, unknown to him, robbed the Circle K at 929 Lafayette St., on Jan. 5 and forced him at gunpoint to lead police on a car chase that culminated with his being shot in Algiers. He denied influencing the younger neighbors.

"These kids are old enough to think for themselves," he testified of Shawn Ward, 17, and Tramell LaFrance, 23, who last week implicated Brown in the crime when they each pleaded guilty to armed robbery.

"Apparently not," Assistant District Attorney Jerry Smith quipped in response, drawing an objection from Brown's attorney Alex Lambert.

On Wednesday, a Jefferson Parish jury deliberated an hour before siding with the prosecutors, finding Brown guilty of armed robbery and aggravated flight from an officer. He faces 15 to 99 years in prison for the robbery and up to two years for the flight charge. Judge John Molaison of the 24th Judicial District Court scheduled sentencing Tuesday.

Authorities say Brown drove LaFrance and Ward to rob the store, parked his car around the corner and sent his cohorts to commit the crime. Ward, armed with a semi-automatic pistol, and LaFrance wore hoodies and masks when they ordered the cashier to turn over the money. The crime was recorded by the business's video security system.

They also fled with cartons and packs of cigarettes and, on the way out, grabbed candy. "I know they're little kids, because they took candy," the cashier told a 911 operator.

Fifty-five seconds after the police dispatcher announced the robbery on the radio, Gretna police Lt. Don McCoy spotted Brown's car in the adjacent residential neighborhood, being driven without headlights, he testified. Sgt. David Heintz joined the pursuit, in which Brown ran red lights as he made his way onto the ground-level Westbank Expressway, Heintz testified.

As he followed Brown driving 110 mph toward Algiers, Heintz said, an off-duty police officer working a security job at a bar pulled his pickup truck onto the expressway lanes to block traffic. Brown swerved to avoid the blockade, striking the curb and causing one of his car's tires to begin to fray, Heintz testified.

Brown drove into Algiers and onto Behrman Highway, where the robbers began throwing cash out of the windows, Heintz testified. His car's tires now blown out, Brown leaped from the driver's seat. The driverless car continued up the street with Ward, LaFrance and a third teen, Darren Robin, still inside, the police said.

Brown slipped in the gravel as he got out of the car then started running toward the police officers, Heintz testified. "I saw him stand up, something black in his hand," Heintz testified. "I think I shot three times." A bullet struck Brown in a leg.

McCoy, standing behind Heintz, testified he feared for his fellow officer's safety as Brown ran toward them. McCoy said he was preparing to shoot, too, but Heintz stepped into his line of fire, so he did not pull the trigger.

Back at the car, LaFrance got out of the front passenger's seat and pointed a gun at the officers, "at which time I shot five more rounds," Heintz testified. LaFrance was struck in the torso, although the officer wasn't sure whether the front or back.

Brown gave a vastly different version. Describing his addiction to cocaine, he admitted to the jury that he used the Supplemental Security Income that he and his girlfriend got from the government to buy drugs. He testified he also made money by cutting hair and giving tattoos.

He told jurors that he drove LaFrance and the others to Gretna, where LaFrance was going to link him up with a cocaine dealer. He said he did not park at the dealer's home, because that man didn't want strangers seen at the house. He said he thought LaFrance and Ward were walking to the dealer's home but instead robbed the store.

After they returned and as he drove away, Brown said a police car appeared behind him. LaFrance "was like, 'Just go, man,' Brown testified. "Shawn (Ward) came out with a gun, told me, 'Keep going.'"

Brown admitted driving toward Algiers, but he said a police officer shot out his car tire. He said he feared for his life and wanted to get out of his car. He said he escaped from Ward and LaFrance once he reached Behrman.

"I ran toward the police with my hands up," Brown testified. "The police started shooting."

Despite the leg wound, Brown ran into the Algiers neighborhood and hid. McCoy, the ranking officer at the scene, ordered police to set up a perimeter to keep Brown contained while a police officer and police dog, Bluto, were sent in. Bluto bit Brown during the arrest, McCoy testified.

Ward and LaFrance each pleaded guilty Aug. 18 to armed robbery, on the condition that they'd be sentenced to no more than 25 years in prison. They were arrested within minutes of the robbery, their clothing matching that seen in the security video. As part of their pleas, they gave sworn testimony implicating Brown as being involved in planning the robbery and in carrying it out as the driver.

They also said Robin, who had turned 19 on the day of the robbery, was sleeping in the car and had nothing to do with the crime. That led prosecutors to dismiss Robin's armed robbery charge. He was released from jail.

Yet in court on Wednesday, Ward and LaFrance refused to say Brown was involved in the crime. LaFrance still admitted he was one of the robbers. But when asked about Brown's involvement, LaFrance repeatedly invoked his 5th Amendment right against self-incrimination, apparently hoping to avoid a perjury charge. "I plead the 5th on that question," he repeatedly told Smith, who prosecuted the case with Jody Fortunato.

"You don't want to be a rat, do you?" Smith asked him. LaFrance shook his head side to side, acknowledging he did not want to incriminate Brown.