A former Federal agent who worked undercover in a series of Federal operations investigating corruption in the awarding of NASA contracts at the Johnson Space Center near here concluded his testimony in the trial of the only person to plead not guilty in the cases.

The defendant, Dale Brown, is charged with one count of paying a $500 bribe to a Federal agent posing as an associate of an Army procurement officer. In all, the Government indicted 13 people on a variety of offenses in the operations.

If convicted in Federal District Court here, Mr. Brown, 38, a former partner in a small consulting firm, could receive 15 years in prison and a $250,000 fine.

The former F.B.I. agent, Hal Francis, tried to draw a picture of Mr. Brown and his former partner, Leonard Neal Jackson, as people likely to commit a crime and inclined to accept illegal payments or confidential information that could help their consulting company, Space Inc., win a Government contract.

"I offered them inside bid information, and they took it," Mr. Francis said.

Mr. Brown's lawyer, Dick DeGuerin, whose clients have included the religious sect leader David Koresh and Senator Kay Bailey Hutchison, the Texas Republican, said the defense would argue that Mr. Brown was the victim of overzealous Federal agents.

Mr. DeGuerin began cross-examining Mr. Francis, who posed as John Clifford, the director of a fake company called Southern Technologies Diversified. Mr. Francis told those he was investigating that he was a wealthy technology investor from Atlanta looking for an opportunity to set up a manufacturing plant in Houston.

Under cross-examination, Mr. Francis acknowledged that he had no prior information that Mr. Brown was prone to committing a crime. The recently retired agent of the Federal Bureau of Investigation testified that neither he nor Mr. Brown ever used the word "bribe" in connection with the money that he gave on March 4, 1993, to an undercover agent posing as an associate of a Government procurement officer.

Mr. DeGuerin said that rather than rooting out corruption, the 19-month Federal undercover operation, which ended in July 1993, was an excessive use of Government power and money that sought to coerce innocent people into breaking the law.

"There was no crime," Mr. DeGuerin said in an interview. "It was all manufactured by the F.B.I. They tried to corrupt people."