Dale Brown, CAE

President & CEO

Dale E. Brown, CAE, is the founding president and CEO of the Financial Services Institute (FSI). Established in 2004, FSI is the only organization advocating on behalf of independent financial services firms and their affiliated independent financial advisors. FSI’s mission is to create a healthier regulatory environment for their members through aggressive and effective advocacy, education and public awareness. FSI represents more than 100 independent financial services firm members and their 160,000+ affiliated financial advisors.

Dale brings more than 30 years of association management experience to FSI with broad leadership in government relations and constituent advocacy. He leads FSI’s advocacy strategy, interacting frequently with regulators and policymakers in Washington, D.C. Prior to joining FSI at its launch, Dale guided the government relations, corporate and broker-dealer programs for the Financial Planning Association (FPA) and the International Association for Financial Planning (IAFP). Dale led the successful fight in the mid-1990s against the IRS’s attempts to force broker-dealers to re-classify independent contractor representatives as statutory employees.

Dale was named a Certified Association Executive (CAE) in 1995. He is a past president of the Georgia Society of Association Executives (GSAE), and a recipient of GSAE’s President’s Award in 1995 and 2001. In May 2002, he received GSAE’s highest honor, the Clifford M. Clarke Award, given annually to an association executive who has demonstrated exemplary personal leadership and service to his or her own association, the association community and the general community.

Dale is an elder at Redeemer Church of Arlington, VA. He also serves on the board of Orphan Prevent Community, an Atlanta-based 501(c)3 ministry to at risk families in Guatemala.

Dale has been recognized by Registered Rep magazine as one of “Ten to Watch” in 2005; included in Boomer Market Advisor’s “Forward Thinking Five” in 2006; and was named for nine consecutive years as one of ThinkAdvisor’s 25 most influential individuals in and around the planning profession. He was named by InvestmentNews as one of the Power 20 for 2012.

Dale attended the University of Georgia and graduated from Georgia State University with a bachelor’s degree in political science.

David Bellaire, Esq., CAE

Executive Vice President & General Counsel

David Bellaire works to prevent unintended consequences. As the Financial Services Institute’s executive vice president & general counsel, David leads FSI’s team of lawyers and lobbyists in pursuit of a business environment that frees its member broker-dealers and financial advisors from the unintended consequences of federal and state legislation and regulation. David has more than 25 years of broker-dealer advocacy, compliance, legal, and operations experience. Prior to joining FSI, he served as vice president of operations and general counsel at Securities Service Network, Inc. He also previously served as special investigations attorney and regional compliance manager with InterSecurities, Inc. (now known as Transamerica Financial Advisors), assistant director of compliance at Commonwealth Financial Network, Inc., and assistant to the executive director at the Institute of Certified Financial Planners (ICFP). David earned a B.S. in business management from Providence College and a J.D. from the University of Denver, Sturm College of Law. He is admitted to practice law in the states of Massachusetts and Tennessee. In his free time, he enjoys listening to music, reading and spending time with his wife Sara and their two children.

Michelle Allgauer, CAE, CMM, CMP Fellow

Senior Vice President, Education & Engagement

With more than 30 years of experience in association management, Michelle has dedicated the majority of her career to working for various associations in specialized roles focused on events and education. In her role at FSI, she leads the strategic and the operational direction of its portfolio of meetings, educational content, sponsorship and marketing.

She is a strong advocate for professional development and lifelong learning, which is reflected in the certifications she has earned and maintained, including the Certified Meeting Professional Fellow (CMP Fellow); the Certificate in Meeting Management (CMM); ASAE’s Business of Meetings Certification and the Certified Association Executive (CAE) credential.

She is an active member of Meeting Professionals International, serving in numerous leadership roles at both the chapter and global level. She is the Past President of the Potomac Chapter and currently the Chair of MPI’s International Board of Directors.

Beyond her work at FSI, Michelle remains engaged in the meetings industry and has served on Events Industry Council’s CMP Governance Commission and other industry-related advisory boards. She earned her Bachelor of Science with a minor in Business from Ithaca College in New York.