Betty Ann "Margaret" Wiggins Buckner, age 91, of Munster, Indiana, formerly of Oak Hill and Elkview, WV, passed away on Thursday, September 15, 2016. Born December 11, 1924, in Logan, WV, she was the daughter of the late Lewis D. and Ora Mae Wells Wiggins. Betty was a homemaker and former member of the Oak Hill United Methodist Church. Her husband, James E. Buckner; brothers, Gilbert Wiggins and Frank Wiggins; and sisters, Helen Pritt and Lucille Tucker preceded her in death. Those left to mourn her passing are two sons, David Buckner and his wife, Linda of Griffith, IN and Paul Buckner and wife, Annie of Hammond, IN, and brother, Alvin Wiggins and his wife, Katie of Bridgeport. Also surviving are grandchildren, Melissa Domazet and husband, Trevor, Stacy Jones and husband, Joshua, Amanda Buckner, Jonathan Buckner and wife, Bethany and Valarie Blomquist and husband, Adam; nine great grandchildren; nieces, nephews and other extended family members. Funeral services will be held at 11 AM on Sunday, September 25, 2016 at the Tyree Funeral Home, Oak Hill with Pastor Roger Goodwin officiating. Burial will follow in High Lawn Memorial Park, Oak Hill. Friends may call one hour prior to service on Sunday at the funeral home. Online condolences may be sent to www.tyreefuneralhome.com. Arrangements by Tyree Funeral Home, Oak Hill, WV.

Published on September 22, 2016

Plant a Living Memorial

In Memory of BettyHow does it work?

Send Flowers: When Is the Ordering Deadline?

Next-Day Delivery

ANY DAY OF THE WEEK

Order any time up till the day before

Same-Day Delivery

MON-FRI Order by 2:00PM

SAT & SUN Order by noon

Morning Delivery

TUES-SAT Order by 3:00PM

The day before

SAT & SUN Order by Saturday

Note: These are general guidelines; some florists may not be able to operate within these timelines. During peak periods such as Valentine’s Day, Memorial Day and most holidays, florists are not always able to keep up to demand. Tribute will contact you if there are any issues.

Plant a tree: How does it work

When your purchase is complete, a post will be made on the tribute wall of the deceased signifying the planting of a memorial tree.

An official certificate recognizing your purchase will be included with your email receipt. You can then forward the email to the family or print it and give it to them personally.

After an order is placed, our forestry partners will plant the tree in the area of greatest need (nearest the funeral home), according to the planting schedule for the year.

Due to seasonal conditions, the tree planting takes place during the spring and summer.

Tree Planting Timeline

Orders placed in:

January - May

Planting will take place in Spring or Summer of the same year.

June - December

Planting will take place in Spring of the following year.

Hide Detail

In Memory of Betty

Plant a tree How it Works Plant a tree