Smitten by the sea! Steven Tyler's heavily tattooed daughter Mia cuddles up to her boyfriend as they frolic on Miami Beach

She's had a tumultuous love life, splitting with her former husband, ex-Papa Roach drummer Dave Buckner, in 2005, and later a broken engagement with guitarist Brian Harrah.

But it seems that Steven Tyler's daughter Mia has finally found love again.

The 34-year-old heavily-tattooed artist, plus-sized model and actress, appeared completely smitten as she cuddled up to her boyfriend Phelan Davis on the beach in Miami on Sunday.

Scroll down for video

The brunette beauty, who also is the half sister of Liv Tyler, could not stop giggling as the pair posed for some happy snaps together.

Mia, who turns 35 this month, showed off her lovely curves in jeans and a black tank top, while her man, a long-haired rocker type, wore a similar ensemble consisting of a black top with skull print and black jeans.

The couple were joined by the rest of the Tyler clan, including the Aerosmith rocker, the Stealing Beauty actress and Steven's other children, daughter Chelsea and son Taj.

Despite the complicated genealogy, it seems that the Tyler siblings are extremely close and very supportive of one another.

And it was for Mia that the family turned out on mass to support as she debuted her photography at Art Basel Miami Beach, in a show called Kink, which explores the world of erotica and fetish.

Liv and Mia's younger half sister Chelsea also performed with her band, badbad, at the photography exhibit's after-party.

Mia's mother, Cyrinda Foxe, who died in 2002, was an American actress, model, public speaker and publicist, best known for her role in Andy Warhol's Bad.

She was married to both David Johansen, of the New York Dolls, and Tyler.

Meanwhile, Liv's mother is Bebe Buell, 60, an American fashion model and singer known for dating rock musicians.

Filmmaker Cameron Crowe said in interviews about his 2000 movie Almost Famous that he based part of the film's Penny Lane character (played by Kate Hudson) on two women he met during the early 1970s — Bebe Buell and Geraldine Edwards.

The actress was born after her mother's brief relationship with the Aerosmith vocalist. Buell initially named the daughter Liv Rundgren and claimed that Todd Rundgren was the biological father to protect her from Tyler's drug addiction.

Liv was initially raised as the daughter of musician Todd Rundgren with whom Bebe shared an on-off relationship.

And just to round off the complicated Tyler family tree, Liv and Mia's half-brother Taj Tallarico, 22, and their half-sister Chelsea's mother is Steven's second wife Teresa Barrick.