Oma Buckner, Jr., 78, passed away on November 6, 2022, at home surrounded by family.

Oma was a huge Mountaineer fan, loved riding four-wheelers and spending time with family. His biggest enjoyment was spending time with his grandchildren, especially his great-grandson.

Oma leaves behind his beloved wife of 58 years Nancy Sue Buckner, two daughters: Sheila and husband, David Hart of Pulaski, Virginia, Charlotte Buckner and husband, David Eells of Welch, West Virginia; two sons: Chris and wife, Jami Buckner of Princeton, West Virginia, Bryan Buckner and girlfriend, Veronica Vaughn of Statesville, North Carolina; five grandchildren: Kennedi Hart and fiancé, Chase Martin, Nicholas Hart and girlfriend, Mariah White, Chelsea Buckner, C.J. Buckner and Tori Buckner; one great-grandchild, Lincoln Cash Martin and a sister, Reba and Harold Scott of Florida.

Oma was preceded in death by his father, Oma Buckner, Sr., mother, Emma Buckner, brother, Raymond Buckner, and sister, Gladys Richardson.

Services will be held Thursday, November 10, 2022, at 12:00 PM at the Fanning Funeral Home Chapel in Welch, West Virginia with Pastor Roger Lafferty officiating. Visitation will be held an hour prior at the Fanning Funeral Home Chapel in Welch from 11:00 AM to 12:00 PM. Entombment will follow at Woodlawn Memorial Park Mausoleum in Bluewell, West Virginia. Pallbearers will be comprised of Oma's family and friends.

Fanning Funeral Home of Welch is serving the family.

Online condolences may be sent to the family at www.fanningfuneralhomes.com.

Published on November 7, 2022

Plant a Living Memorial

In Memory of OmaHow does it work?

Send Flowers: When Is the Ordering Deadline?

Next-Day Delivery

ANY DAY OF THE WEEK

Order any time up till the day before

Same-Day Delivery

MON-FRI Order by 2:00PM

SAT & SUN Order by noon

Morning Delivery

TUES-SAT Order by 3:00PM

The day before

SAT & SUN Order by Saturday

Note: These are general guidelines; some florists may not be able to operate within these timelines. During peak periods such as Valentine’s Day, Memorial Day and most holidays, florists are not always able to keep up to demand. Tribute will contact you if there are any issues.

Plant a tree: How does it work

When your purchase is complete, a post will be made on the tribute wall of the deceased signifying the planting of a memorial tree.

An official certificate recognizing your purchase will be included with your email receipt. You can then forward the email to the family or print it and give it to them personally.

After an order is placed, our forestry partners will plant the tree in the area of greatest need (nearest the funeral home), according to the planting schedule for the year.

Due to seasonal conditions, the tree planting takes place during the spring and summer.

Tree Planting Timeline

Orders placed in:

January - May

Planting will take place in Spring or Summer of the same year.

June - December

Planting will take place in Spring of the following year.

Hide Detail

In Memory of Oma

Plant a tree How it Works Plant a tree