About the Founders

About Plumtree Software

Plumtree Software is the Enterprise Web leader. Plumtree’s mission is to create a comprehensive Web environment for employees, customers and partners across the enterprise to interact with a wide range of Web applications. Plumtree’s Enterprise Web solution consists of integration products for bringing resources from traditional systems together on the Web, shared services such as collaboration, content management and search for building new Web applications, and an application management framework for delivering these Web applications to broad audiences. Plumtree’s independence and its Web Services Architecture allow this solution to span rival application servers, helping maximize customers’ return on their existing technology investments. With offices in more than a dozen countries, Plumtree has licensed over 550 customers, including Boeing, Ford Motor Company, Procter & Gamble and the U.S. Navy. For more information, visit Plumtree on the Web at www.plumtree.com.

About Documentum

Documentum provides enterprise content management (ECM) solutions that enable organizations to unite teams, content and associated business processes. Documentum's integrated set of content, compliance and collaboration solutions support the way people work, from initial discussion and planning through design, production, marketing, sales, service and corporate administration. With a single platform, Documentum enables people to collaboratively create, manage, deliver and archive the content that drives business operations, from documents and discussions to e-mail, Web pages, records and rich media. The Documentum platform makes it possible for companies to distribute all of this content in multiple languages, across internal and external systems, applications and user communities. As a result, Documentum's customers, which include thousands of the world's most successful organizations, harness corporate knowledge, accelerate time to market, increase customer satisfaction, enhance supply chain efficiencies and reduce operating costs, improving their overall competitive advantage. For more information, visit Documentum on the Web at www.documentum.com.

About BEA

BEA Systems, Inc. (Nasdaq: BEAS) is the world's leading application infrastructure software company, providing the enterprise software foundation for more than 15,000 customers around the world, including the majority of the Fortune Global 500. BEA, Tuxedo, and its WebLogic® brand are among the most trusted names in business. Headquartered in San Jose, Calif., BEA has 77 offices in 31 countries and is on the Web at www.bea.com.