BEA Systems Inc. last week unveiled a new version of a tool it acquired last year that it said can be used to build and manage collaborative business processes.

The updated AquaLogic Interaction Process, previously called Plumtree Process Server, was added to the BEA product line following BEA’s purchase of Plumtree Software Inc. last October.

Version 1.5 of the tool set is tightly integrated with BEA’s AquaLogic Interaction Collaboration tool, allowing multiple people to use and manage documents and project information through portals, BEA said.

The software began shipping at the end of January.

Andrew Reid, vice president of software development at Red Bank, N.J.-based home builder K. Hovnanian Homes, said his company plans to use the updated BEA tool to automate the paper-based processes for granting user access to restricted applications and data.

Reid said he expects the AquaLogic tool set to ease the process of moving requests through supervisors and district managers. In addition, he said the updated version will let the company create the electronic records that are required by the Sarbanes-Oxley Act.

Reid said K. Hovnanian, a user of the earlier Plumtree software, also plans to test the new version to determine whether it can be used to queue data updates¿such as changes to the status of a home under construction. That capability would let users view data that is compiled when Internet connectivity fails or is unavailable, he said.

“We are finding ourselves using a lot more hosted solutions for different functionality, so we need a basis for managing those integration [points] in a partially connected scenario,” Reid said. “It is a question of being able to work in a connected and disconnected mode and queueing up [data] to be delivered later,” he said.

Extending Capabilities

The former Plumtree tool extends BEA’s business process management (BPM) capabilities beyond its traditional focus on the business processes of systems. The new tool models and manages the processes that workers follow, according to Christine Wan, BEA’s director of product marketing.

The AquaLogic Interaction Process software can attach collaboration documents to work items, map a business process to a collaboration project and allow users to participate in threaded discussions within a process. The software can be used to create and manage processes for expense approval, benefits administration, customer management, field service management, inventory management and sales cycle management, Wan said. “It is the first time that BEA is addressing the human workflow side,” she said.

AquaLogic Interaction Process also allows business analysts to model and design a business process and to designate the roles for participants in a process, Wan said.

The tool includes a process-execution engine that orchestrates the activities of users and their roles with the back-end system, and it notifies users when they have tasks that need to be performed.

Version 1.5 also integrates with BEA’s AquaLogic Interaction Collaboration product so users can share documents with others who need to work with a process by checking documents in and out.