How common is the last name Janik in the United States?

Based on the data from the Decennial U.S. Census, the popularity of the surname Janik saw a slight decrease in rank between 2000 to 2010, moving from 9872 to 9901 which signifies a change of -0.29%. However, the count of people with the Janik surname increased by 8.22% during the same period, rising from 3017 to 3265. The proportion of individuals carrying the Janik surname per 100k remained relatively stable, decreasing by only 0.89%.

Race and Ethnicity of people with the last name Janik

Reviewing the ethnic identity associated with the surname Janik, data from the Decennial U.S. Census indicates that the majority of individuals identifying with this surname are of White ethnicity (95.16% in 2010, down slightly from 96.55% in 2000). Other significant ethnicities associated with Janik include Hispanic (increasing from 1.72% in 2000 to 1.87% in 2010) and Asian/Pacific Islander (surging from 0.17% in 2000 to 1.59% in 2010). There were modest decreases in those identifying as Black and American Indian and Alaskan Native, while the percentage of individuals identifying with two or more races remained stable at 0.89%.

Janik ancestry composition

23andMe computes an ancestry breakdown for each customer. People may have ancestry from just one population or they may have ancestry from several populations. The most commonly-observed ancestry found in people with the surname Janik is Eastern European, which comprises 48.7% of all ancestry found in people with the surname. The next two most common ancestries are British & Irish (18.9%) and French & German (15.5%). Additional ancestries include Italian, Spanish & Portuguese, Scandinavian, Greek & Balkan, and Ashkenazi Jewish.

Ready to learn more about your ancestry? Get the most comprehensive ancestry breakdown on the market by taking our DNA test. Shop 23andMe

ANCESTRY BREAKDOWNCOMPOSITION Eastern European48.7 % British & Irish18.9 % French & German15.5 % Other16.9 %

What Janik haplogroups can tell you

Haplogroups are genetic population groups that share a common ancestor on either your paternal or maternal line. These paternal and maternal haplogroups shed light on your genetic ancestry and help tell the story of your family.

The top paternal haplogroup of people with the surname Janik is O-F2415, which is predominantly found among people with East Asian & Indigenous American ancestry. Haplogroup O-F2415 is descended from haplogroup O-M1359. Other common haplogroups include E-M183 and O-F2859, which are predominantly found among people with European and East Asian & Indigenous American ancestry.

The most common maternal haplogroups of people with Janik surname are: T2b, U2_3_4_7_8_9, H. These most commonly trace back to individuals of European ancestry.

Your paternal lineage may be linked to the Cham

One of the many populations harboring members of haplogroup O1b1a1a1a1 is the Cham ethnic group, a group of people who speak Austronesian languages in Mainland Southeast Asia. Austronesian languages make up a language family that is extremely large and widespread, comprising over 350 million people on islands such as Madagascar, Easter Island, and many others. However, Austronesian languages are less common on mainland Asia, with a notable exception being the Chamic language. Research suggests that ancestors of the Cham people migrated from Southeast Asian islands to the mainland around the year 500 BCE, and that early Cham populations quickly began mixing with indigenous southern Vietnamese populations. As a result, the Chamic language now has words that were borrowed from languages spoken by indigenous Vietnamese people. It is likely that an ancestral Kinh population was one of the populations that mixed with the Cham people shortly after their migration to mainland Asia.

Your maternal lineage may be linked to Marie Antoinette

Because it is so dominant in the general European population, haplogroup H also appears quite frequently in the continent's royal houses. Marie Antoinette, an Austrian Hapsburg who married into the French royal family, inherited the haplogroup from her maternal ancestors. So did Prince Philip, Duke of Edinburgh, whose recorded genealogy traces his female line to Bavaria. Scientists also discovered that famed 16th century astronomer Nicolaus Copernicus traced his maternal lineages to haplogroup H.