Janik (AKA Janik 55555, Janik Creations, Illuminy_pizza_world_official, Funtime_greendy_and_pon_pon) was born on January 29th, 2004 (18 y/o) and he is the creator of the point-and-click videogames on GameJolt of FNaI' Series, The Gorakan Series, and The Lands of Elements Saga.

Description[]

On GameJolt[]

Old[]

Hi my dears, I intend to create the video games on three of my creations, the first creation is the Illuminy saga which will be called Illuminy Project (IP) which will consist of multiple games (conceived in 2017), the second creation is called "The Tales of the Gorakan's Kingdom" which I will call the Gorakan Project (GP) which will consist of only one game for the moment (conceived in 2013/2014) and finally my third creation is called "Lands of Elements" which I will call the LoE Project (LoEP) , which is also consisting of only one game per hour (designed in 2018-2019)

Enjoy my games

(don't spam plz)

New[]

Hi everyone, it's-a-me, WALUI--- Janik five five five five five

I have a lot of free time, so since I have nothing better to do I dedicate myself to what I love: Create (in every sense)

I create drawings

I create characters

I create plots

I create videogames

I create videos

I create animations

I create basically everything I want

if you wonder what my icons above my oc symbolize, they are my three main series: Five Nights at Illuminy's, The Tales of the Gorakan's Kingdom and Lands of Elements.

Born: 29/01/2004 (18 y/o)

Nationality: Italian (and I'm so proud of that)

Gender: I have balls

Favorite color: just look the pfp

Irl Friends:

internet friends: basically

The_Betaglian_Testers

and other people

On YouTube[]

Questo è un canale bello dove si fanno cose belle

Appearance[]

On YouTube/GameJolt[]

What does he do?[]

He animates and creates Scott Cawthon's Five Nights at Freddy's Questions and Answers/SFM animations and videos, he posts FNAF fangames in a nutshell/in meme like MidaGames, He makes gameplay videos about every Scott Cawthon's Five Nights at Freddy's chapter and Five Nights at Coso series. He creates games using Clickteam Fusion 2.5 and public them on GameJolt, he creates images/drawings using Photoshop, witch are made from Microsoft Paint like Mida does on GameJolt.

History[]

Born[]

Janik is born in Thursday, January 29, 2004 in Taranto (A city in Europe).

Joined on YouTube[]

Janik created his own youtube channel on Dec 8, 2015.

The First Videogame series (Five Nights at Illuminy's)[]

In 2018: History is made, Janik decided to create a new indie point and click survival horror video game, and the first Janik 55555 saga titled "Five Nights at Illuminy's". Which is a beta version of FNaI 1, The beta version is unfinished and the game is remade as "The Remake". The game is released in 2019.

The Second Game of the FNaI Series[]

In 2019 after the release of FNaI 1, Five Nights at Illuminy's 2 is created. The game is followed by teasers on Instagram. The game is now released in October 2019.

The Creation of the Five Nights at Illuminy's Community[]

They got hundreds of others to start making fanart of the illuminies, posting memes/fnafshitpost and creating their Five Nights at Illuminy's fangame. The Five Nights at Illuminy's Community is created on GameJolt. The first Five Nights at Illuminy's fangame is created and titled: Five Luminos at Night 5.

The Third Game[]

In 2020 after the creation of the Five Nights at Illuminy's Community, The third installment is created. There are alot teasers with more illuminies here. On July 1, 2021: The progress is clear that all the nights are done! 7 to 8 minigames are finished. Extras are 40% finished. The total game progress is 75.83% to +16.67%. On July 13, 2021: The icon of the third installment is changed. On July 30, 2021: The final progress is shown. The third installment is finished. Janik decided to redub the illuminy voices in English and also Italian. 1 year ago: The third installment is released on August 10, 2021.

Non-Main Title (Three Nights with Starminy)[]

After the release of the third installment. Three Nights with Starminy's is created as: The Illumino joke game. On October 25, 2021: The first teaser is created for the second anniversary of FNaI 2 with Starminy in it. On November 7, 2021: The second teaser is made: The Ony-Glam teaser is made as: More as a Joke. On December 18, 2021: Eyan's teaser is made except all the characters from TNwS. It says: "I SEE you" and the bottom text "while you jerk off", The game name is changed to Three Nights with Starminy's, and the game is released on December 31, 2021 on the happy new year.

Five Nights at Illuminy's 4[]

On Janik's birthday on January 29, 2022: He became 18-Years-Old, and he decided to redraw the beta version to the remake version. 3 years have passed since the illuminy saga just existed: The Third Anniversary of Five Nights at Illuminy's is created, the banner of the Five Nights at Illuminy's Community is replaced by the illuminy saga banner. Hidden in the background the illuminy named Sessuminy is hiding between Twisted/Original Illuminy. For FNaI 4: Soon He will start the development of his next masterpiece... which for now he will call "FNaI 4", he wanted this game to be the real grand finale of the illuminy saga, so he want something 100 times higher than the third installment came out.

Creation of the Five Nights at Illuminy's 4 page[]

Janik posted a April fools prank of the fourth installment on April 1, 2022. And he said: GUYS FNAI 4 IS REAL!. and it says on the description of the fourth installment's page on GameJolt: Yes. This is official, NO THIS IS NOT A APRIL FOOL. Not much as known better.

Cancellation of FNaI 4[]

On July 2, 2022. Janik decided to cancel Five Nights at Illuminy's 4. He realized that the project was too long to do. In fact in recent months he have practically done almost nothing. But now he has clear ideas, he knows how the fourth installment will come, he didn't think it will take too long this time. (Will the game be that different from how he just originally designed it?) What would happen if the fourth installment is different: The plot and all the illuminies and other animatronics will be the same, the only thing that will drastically change will be the gameplay and its focal point. The game led to one of the cancelation of FNAF fangames between 2015 - 2022. And then it is designed as: Five Nights at Illuminy's: MR (A Five Nights at Illuminy's version of Ultimate Custom Night.).

The beginning of Five Nights at Illuminy's: MR[]

On July 3, 2022. The first teaser is shown up with computer keyboard characters around here. And it also features Chinese characters/things. On July 9, 2022: The minor teaser is shown: Janik said: Today is the day when something BIG is about to happen. and the teaser is being brightened it says above the text of "Today is the day where..." saying: "HE will pay for everything".

The first anniversary of the third installment[]

1 year ago: on August 10, 2022, Five Nights at Illuminy's 3 reached it's first anniversary since it has been released 1 year ago. Janik made a new update to the third installment.

FNaI: MR[]

On August 29, 2022, Five Nights at Illuminy's: MR is designed as: a illuminy version of Ultimate Custom Night, The first installment is going very slowly due to several things. There may be demos. Is it just a common ucn?: Uh: no. The illuminy saga's finale must be worthy of the name, Janik just said that the UCN part of the gameplay is just the tip of the iceberg of something bigger and deeper. The fourth installment's released planned for Summer 2023. in a few weeks. Janik will currently draw the cameras. The fourth installment is said that the animatronics and characters are returning from the previous installments. Except Three Nights with Starminy. Because it is not the main installment in the illuminy saga. Like the returning animatronics and characters. There will be new characters and animatronics in the fourth installment. On August 29, 2022, The fourth installment's design is changing: And there will be all old animatronics and characters from the previous installments in the illuminy saga, Janik posted the teaser of the first row of FNaI: MR, Showing: Illuminy, Toy Illuminy, Funtime Illuminy, Miny-miny, New Illuminy, Veggentminy, Illuminette, and Ballminy etc. On September 2, 2022, The second row has been shown, The fifth teaser of the game. Showing: Withered Illuminy, Nightmare Illuminy, Illumimangle, Ennilluminy, and also the illuminies from Five Nights at Illuminy's 3 such as: Twisted Illuminy, Sinister Illuminy and his Genkamines, Nightminy, and Headminy etc. On September 6, 2022, The third row has been shown. It is the sixth teaser of the game. Showing the rest of the animatronics from FNaI 3, Including: Serpminy, Phantom Illuminy, Belldora, The Illumireenas, Qubby, The Qubidybabs, Pastminy, and a discarded prototype illuminy: Futurminy etc. On October 4, 2022 the fourth row has been reveled but the last one is missing showing 1 enemy that can kill the player: Eyedoom, and the player's helpers named Jiuminy, The Shape Squad, and D.I.P.S., and 4 new animatronics that resemble from Three Nights with Starminy.

Entered Characters susceptible to specific moods [FNAI: MR][]