Carpathian Rus, more commonly known as Carpathian Ruthenia, is a single-city releasable of Ukraine. It was added on November 8, 2022 in the Europe rework update.

Background[]

'Carpathian Ruthenia (Rusyn: Карпатьска Русь, romanized: Karpat'ska Rus; Ukrainian: Закарпаття, romanized: Zakarpattia; Slovak: Podkarpatská Rus; Hungarian: Kárpátalja; Romanian: Transcarpatia; Polish: Zakarpacie) is a historical region on the border between Central and Eastern Europe, mostly located in western Ukraine's Zakarpattia Oblast, with smaller parts in eastern Slovakia (largely in Prešov Region and Košice Region) and the Lemko Region in Poland.

The following is taken from Wikipedia which is licensed under CC-BY-SA 3.0. You can view the article it was taken from here.

Base Statistics[]

Economy[]

Carpathian Rus starts off with a population of 150,832 and with an income of $111,889.

Resources[]

Uzhgorod produces 1 unit of Gold.

Resources of Carpathian Rus Gold +1.11

Military[]

It has a manpower cap of 60,000 similar to other city states, with an increase of ~250.

Base Manpower Capacity of Carpathian Rus per Conscription Law Disarmed

[1% RP] Volunteer

[2% RP] Limited

[5% RP] Extensive

[10% RP] Required

[25% RP] 60,000 60,000 60,000 60,000 60,000

Geography[]

It's fully Mountainous and in the normal biome, as it's almost entirely located within the Carpathian mountains.

It turns to Severe Winter in December-January and Mild Winter in February.

Cities[]

Carpathian Rus has a single city - Uzhgorod - serving as its capital.

Strategy[]

First, you can ally a strong nation around you, like Germany or Russia, but this is optional.

Build as many troops as possible, preferably at least 40,000. Once they are finished, build 1 Electronic Factory and 1 Motor Factory and the resources required for it. If you wish, you can build the factories before the troops, but it means taking longer to invade. Justify on Hungary and Slovakia. Once it is done, declare on one of the 2 nations (Hungary would be the better option). Use AI Luring to kill the troops of the enemy, then set to Auto Capture. If the nation is Hungary, make sure you capture all cities except Budapest, in order to force peace it. This will not work on Slovakia.

Once you have conquered your nation, continue into the rest of the Balkans or into Central Europe. If you took Hungary, start making tanks by buying steel. When you get enough money, start making Civilian Factories to sell to large AIs.

From here, invade either Czech Republic or Serbia depending on which country you took first. Use the same strategy for these countries. By now, you will want to choose an Ideology. It depends on your playstyle, but Communism is the best one as it gives extra manpower and factory output, as well as less War Exhaustion. Alternatively, you could pick Limited conscription, as it gives 2.5x more manpower.

Now you should be a fairly strong nation capable of taking down medium sized nations like Romania. The rest is now up to you. Good luck!

Threats[]

Ukraine re-integrating you.

Russia taking over to form the Soviet Union or the Russian Empire.

Germany expanding.

Poland or Lithuania needs you for the Polish-Lithuanian Commonwealth or the Grand Duchy of Lithuania.

Romania trying to form the Kingdom of Dacia.

Czechoslovakia or Slovakia taking you over for historical reasons.

Hungary invading you to form the Kingdom of Hungary.

Trivia[]

Carpathian Rus was a province of Czechoslovakia between 1920 and 1938.

Carpathian Rus hosts various dialects of Ukrainian, Slovak, Hungarian etc. and is quite diverse in culture.

Its in-game name comes from one of the unofficial names used for the area when it was under Czechoslovakia before WW2.

North America Alaska • Alberta • Aztlan • Baja California • Barbuda • California • Cascadia • Confederate States of America • Nevis • New England • Puerto Rico • Quebec • San Andres • Saskatchewan • Texas • Yucatan South America Amazonia • Espirito Santo • Mendoza • Nordeste • Patagonia • Rio de Janeiro • Santa Cruz • Sao Paulo • Sul • Wallmapu Europe Abkhazia • Aland • Alsace • Andalusia • Aragon • Astrakhan • Asturias • Avaria • Balearic Islands • Balkaria • Bashkortostan • Basque • Bavaria • Brittany • Budjak • Carpathian Rus • Catalonia • Chechnya • Chuvashia • Circassia • Cornwall • Corsica • Crimea • Don • Donetsk • Emilia • Erzya • Flanders • Frisia • Friuli • Galicia • Ingria • Ingushetia • Kaliningrad • Kalmykia • Karachay • Karelia • Komi • Kosovo • Kuban • Kumykia • Lezgistan • Liguria • Lombardy • Luhansk • Mari El • Mercia • Moksha • Naples • Northumbria • Occitania • Ossetia • Piedmont • Pomorje • Provence • Romagna • Romandie • Saint Petersburg • Sardinia • Savoy • Saxony • Scania • Scotland • Sicily • Tatarstan • Terek • Transnistria • Transylvania • Trieste • Tuscany • Udmurtia • Valdosta • Valencia • Venetia • Wales • Wallonia Asia Aceh • Al-Ahwaz • Anhui • Arakan • Artsakh • Arunachal Pradesh • Assam • Assyria • Balawaristan • Bali • Balochistan • Bangsamoro • Buryatia • Degar • Dravida Nadu • East Turkestan • Far Eastern Republic • Gorkhaland • Guangdong • Guangxi • Guizhou • Hai-nam • Hakkaland • Hazarajat • Hexi • Hok-giong • Hubei • Hui • Hunan • Jiangsu • Johor • Kachin • Kangleipak • Karakalpakstan • Kashmir • Kayah • Khalistan • Khyber Pakhtunkhwa • Kirat • Kongsi • Kurdistan • Madhesh • Manchuria • Meghalaya • Minahasa • Mizoram • Nagalim • Northern Cyprus • Pattani • Riau • Ryukyu • Sabah • Sarawak • Shan • Shandong • Shanghai • Shanxi • Siberia • Sichuan • Sindhudesh • South Azerbaijan • South Maluku • South Turkestan • South Yemen • Southern Mongolia • Talysh-Mughan • Tamil Eelam • Tibet • Tripura • Tuva • Ural Republic • Yakutia • Yogyakarta • Yugra • Yunnan • Zhejiang • Zhongzhou Africa Afar • Agadez • Ambazonia • Anjouan • Azawad • Barotseland • Bas-Congo • Biafra • Cabinda • Canary Islands • Cape Republic • Casamance • Darfur • Kabylia • Katanga • Kivu • Logone • Lunda-Tchokwe • Mombasa • Mthwakazi • Mwali • Oduduwa • Ogaden • Oromia • Rif • Somaliland • South Congo • Tigray • Volkstaat • Western Sahara • Western Togoland • Xhosaland • Zanzibar • Zululand Oceania Bougainville • Hawaii • New Munster • Tasmania • West Papua • Westralia