Event details

Date: Monday, April 9

Beijing

Type of Event: Training

Speaker: George Cao

Dragon Trail Interactive’s CEO and co-founder, George Cao will deliver a training session on marketing destinations to outbound Chinese travelers, as part of the World Tourism Cities Federation (WTCF) International Tourist Destinations Marketing and Training Program 2018.

Effective destination marketing requires a strategic approach and a solid understanding of the market and consumer behavior. This session will present a framework in destination marketing specifically designed for the Chinese market. Participants will be introduced to popular marketing channels, as well as an analysis of consumer behavior. Case studies from various NTOs and DMOs will be used to illustrate best practices in outbound travel marketing.

Attendees of the training will include tourism marketing and government representatives from Colombia, Costa Rica, Estonia, Germany, Indonesia, Kenya, Latvia, Morocco, Nigeria, Panama, Poland, Seychelles, Spain, Sri Lanka, Tanzania, UK and USA.

Established in Beijing in 2012, World Tourism Cities Federation (WTCF) is the world’s first international tourism organization focusing on cities. Its annual training program on International Tourist Destinations Promotion and Marketing aims to provide an introduction to the development and demand of Chinese tourist market for participants to better understand its development and rules of operation, the demands of Chinese tourists, and the cultural differences between East and West.

Please visit the WTCF website for more information on the event.

Marketing Permissions

Dragon Trail International will use the information you provide on this form to be in touch with you and to provide updates and marketing. Please select the option below to allow us to send monthly newsletters and information on upcoming events.

Email

You can change your mind at any time by clicking the unsubscribe link in the footer of any email you receive from us, or by contacting us at communications@dragontrail.com. We will treat your information with respect. For more information about our privacy practices please visit our website. By clicking below, you agree that we may process your information in accordance with these terms.