Two races down, three to go! Plus… a small race in Paris in between.

Abu Dhabi was set to kick the season off on 8-9 March 2024, but unfortunately the event had to be cancelled.

Yokohama instead started the racing in May, and saw first-time wins in both events – Morgan Pearson for the men and Léonie Periault for the women.

Next up was Cagliari at the end of June, where several federations made their final team selections for the Paris Olympic Games. Alex Yee set his stall out with a convincing win over Hayden Wilde, while home favourite Cassandre Beaugrand took her first Olympic-distance win when it mattered.

Keep on reading to find out what happened in the series in 2023, who’s racing in the next event in Hamburg over the weekend of 13-14 July, and what the rest of the short-course season looks like…

What happened in the 2023 WTCS?

The first round in Abu Dhabi on 3 March saw double GB gold, as Beth Potter notched up her first-ever WTCS win and Alex Yee put in a masterclass performance to take his fifth WTCS victory.

The second-round spoils in Yokohama went to Potter’s teammate Sophie Coldwell – her first WTCS victory – and NZ’s Hayden Wilde.

The third round in Cagliari, Sardinia, was yet another Brit double as Georgia Taylor Brown rediscovered that world-beating form to take her first win of the season and Yee once again got the better of the field to make it two wins from two race starts.

Montreal hosted the fourth round where Potter reigned supreme yet again. In a slightly depleted men’s field, Aussie Matt Hauser took his first-ever WTCS win.

Round five took place in a familiar venue but with an entirely new format for the German city of Hamburg – the eliminator, which has so far only been contested in Montreal. The race also acted as the first-ever World Super Sprint Champs.

Taking the top honours were Hayden Wilde and Cassandre Beaugrand, for their second and first wins of the season, respectively.

The penultimate race took place in Sunderland, UK, for what could be the last WTCS outing for some time on UK shores.

But back on the race course it was a French sweep as Pierre Le Corre beat teammate Leo Bergere in a sprint to take his first WTCS win; Cassandre Beaugrand made it two in a row; and Team France outshone the field to win the Mixed Team Relay.

Pontevedra, Spain, hosted the Grand Final, with Alex Yee leading the rankings and poised to become the first British world champion since Jonny Brownlee back in 2012. However, a terrible swim for the Brit saw him eventually finish in 29th place and fifth in the overall standings.

Taking the spoils was Dorian Coninx, a surprise victory for the Frenchmen who had been in fifth place heading into the Final.

For the women, Beth Potter started as No.1 and finished No.1, leading from almost start to finish to take her first world title.

When and where is WTCS Hamburg taking place?

The third round of the 2024 WTCS takes place in Hamburg, Germany, over the weekend of 13-14 July.

Which events are taking place in Hamburg?

Hamburg will be hosting elite men’s and women’s sprint-distance WTCS races, plus the Mixed Team Relay Championships on Sunday 14 July.

Which athletes are racing in Hamburg?

With Hamburg taking place just over two weeks before the Paris Olympic triathlon events (30 and 31 July for the individual races, 5 August for the mixed relay), athletes racing will be either those who haven’t qualified or will be Games hopefuls using it as a leg-stretcher.

In the latter camp is reigning world champ Beth Potter, plus medal hopeful Cassandre Beaugrand and her teammate Emma Lombardi. Potter’s Paris teammate Kate Waugh is also on the women’s start list for Hamburg.

There’s no Wilde or Yee on the men’s start list for Hamburg, nor are there two of the French qualified athletes, Dorian Coninx and Leo Bergere, however Pierre Le Corre’s name is down.

Other notable Paris contenders on the list include Vasco Vilaça, Matt Hauser, Jelle Geens and Morgan Pearson.

The 2024 WTCS Hamburg course

The elite races are sprint distance, and start with a one-lap 750m swim that includes a 40m swim through a dark tunnel. The average water temperature in the Alster in mid-July varies between 15°C and 22°C.

The 20km bike is made up of six x 3.3km laps around the city’s streets. It’s mostly flat without any noteworthy climbs, but it’s technically demanding due to several changes of direction and tight turns.

From T2 they start the 5km (2 x 2.5km laps) run course over a completely flat route.

For course maps of each discipline, head here.

The 2024 Hamburg Mixed Relay Champs course

The Mixed Relay Champs will run over the following format:

Swim: 1 x 300m lap

Bike: 2 x 3.5km laps = 7km

Run: 2 x 875m = 1.75km

For full details and course maps for each discipline head here.

How can I watch the 2024 WTCS Hamburg race?

You can watch all races live on TriathlonLive.tv, while UK audiences can also stream live coverage via BBC Sport, the BBC Sport app and the BBC Red Button.

When do the 2024 WTCS Hamburg events start*?

*All times are local, which is 1hr ahead of the UK.

Saturday 13 July

1:50pm – Elite men’s sprint-distance race (12:50pm British time)

3:55pm – Elite women’s sprint-distance race (2:55pm British time)

Saturday 14 July

3pm – Elite Mixed Relay Champs race (2pm British time)

2024 World Triathlon Championship Series

The 2024 series will have visited five different locations during the season, culminating at the Grand Final in Torremolinos-Andalucia, Spain, in October.

WTCS 2024 overview

8-9 March: WTCS Abu Dhabi, UAE (sprint and mixed relay) – CANCELLED

11 May: WTCS Yokohama Japan (Olympic)

25-26 May: WTCS Cagliari, Italy (Olympic)

13-14 July: WTCS Hamburg, Germany (sprint and mixed relay)

27 September: WTCS Weihei, China (TBC)

17-20 October: World Triathlon Grand Final Torremolinos-Andalucia, Spain (standard)

Paris 2024 Olympic Games

30, 31 July & 5 August: Paris, France (standard & mixed relay)

How to watch triathlon at the 2024 Paris Olympic Games

Paratriathlon

8 March: Para Cup Abu Dhabi, UAE

16-17 March: WTPS Devonport, Australia

13 May: WTPS Yokohama, Japan

18-19 May: Para Cup Samarkand, Uzbekistan

15-16 June: Para Cup Besançon, France

22-23 June: WTPS Swansea, Wales

29-30 June: WTPS Montreal, Canada

20-21 July: Para Cup Long Beach, USA

1-2 September: Paris 2024 Paralympic Games, France

17-20 October: World Triathlon Para Championships Malaga, Spain