WTCF-TV, virtual channel 8 (VHF digital channel 18), is a Telemundo owned-and-operated television station licensed to Wilmington, North Carolina, United States. The station is owned by the Telemundo Station Group subsidiary of NBCUniversal (itself a subsidiary of Comcast). WTCF's studios are located on Shipyard Boulevard in Wilmington (shared with NBC affiliate WECT (channel 6), owned by Gray Television, and FOX affiliate WSFX-TV (channel 26), owned by American Spirit Media and operated by Gray Television under a local marketing agreement), and its transmitter is located in Northwest, North Carolina.

History[]

The station signed-on for the first time on March 22, 1995 in Missoula, Montana as KTMM-TV, the second semi-satellite of Billings, Montana's Telemundo affiliate KTBM-TV (which first signed on 3 years prior in 1992) after Great Falls, Montana station KTCC-TV (now WHOL-TV in Parma, Ohio serving Cleveland), which signed-on the same year as KTMM-TV.

In 2011, NBCUniversal purchased the Telemundo Montana network from Gray Television. In 2012, NBCUniversal applied with the FCC to reallocate KTMM-TV to Wilmington, North Carolina, as part of a plan by NBC to "downsize" KTBM's reach and create two new Telemundo O&Os elsewhere (NBC was also looking to move sister station KTCC to Ohio as part of the plan). The FCC approved the request on August 11, 2013. On April 7, 2014, KTMM applied for a construction permit to move to Wilmington (though its transmitter is in nearby Northwest). KTMM signed-off from Missoula for the last time on June 1 in anticipation of the move. On June 10, KTMM signed on its upconverted 720p high-definition television signal from its new location at Northwest. KTMM continued to carry Telemundo as part of the move, and became the Telemundo station for the Cape Fear region.

On October 15, 2018, the call letters were changed to WTCF-TV.

News operation[]

On May 1, 2015, KTMM aired the first edition of Noticiero Telemundo Cape Fear, the first local Spanish-language newscast for the Cape Fear region. Marcelo Hafenreffer of Telemundo's San Diego affiliate XHAS-TDT was transferred to KTMM to serve as anchor. Wilmington native and Hispanic freelance journalist Melanie Bravo was chosen as Marcelo's co-anchor and the station's news director. Bravo left her co-anchor duties in May 2017 (but continues to be the station's news director), with Morena Borges Echenique hired as the new co-anchor.