For the UK parliament constituency of the same name, see South Ayrshire (UK Parliament constituency).

South Ayrshire (Scots: Sooth Ayrshire; Scottish Gaelic: Siorrachd Àir a Deas, pronounced [ˈʃirˠəxk aːɾʲ ə ˈtʲes̪]) is one of thirty-two council areas of Scotland, covering the southern part of Ayrshire. It borders onto Dumfries and Galloway, East Ayrshire and North Ayrshire. South Ayrshire had an estimated population in 2021 of 112,450, making it the 19th–largest subdivision in Scotland by population. With an area of 472 sq mi, South Ayrshire ranks as the 15th largest subdivision in Scotland.

South Ayrshire's administrative centre is located in its largest town, Ayr. The headquarters for its associated political body, South Ayrshire Council, is housed at the towns County Buildings located in Wellington Square. Ayr is the former county town of the historic Ayrshire county, with the political activity of the Ayrshire County Council being based at County Buildings.

History

South Ayrshire was created in 1996 under the Local Government etc. (Scotland) Act 1994, which replaced Scotland's previous local government structure of upper-tier regions and lower-tier districts with unitary council areas providing all local government services. South Ayrshire covered the same area as the abolished Kyle and Carrick district, and also took over the functions of the abolished Strathclyde Regional Council within the area. The area's name references its location within the historic county of Ayrshire, which had been abolished for local government purposes in 1975 when Kyle and Carrick district and Strathclyde region had been created.

In 2021, South Ayrshire submitted a bid for city status as part of the 2022 Platinum Jubilee Celebrations. The bid was based on the area's rich history and links to royalty, and received backing from organisations and businesses including Ayrshire College and Scottish Enterprise. The bid was ultimately unsuccessful, with eight other settlements across the UK, overseas territories and crown dependencies being awarded city status, including Scottish town Dunfermline.

Geography

Geographically, South Ayrshire is located on the western coast of Scotland, sharing borders with neighbouring local authorities East Ayrshire, Dumfries and Galloway and North Ayrshire. The climate in South Ayrshire, typical of that in western Scotland, is milder than that of eastern Scotland due to the stronger maritime influence, as the prevailing winds blow from the sea into South Ayrshire, which is located primarily on the western coast of Scotland. The warm Gulf Stream also has a strong influence on western Scotland. With winds mainly blowing from the sea the annual mean temperatures are in the range 9.5 to 9.9 °C (49.1 to 49.8 °F) in coastal areas of South Ayrshire such as Ayr and Troon.

The sea reaches its lowest temperature in February or early March so that on average February is the coldest month in some coastal parts of South Ayrshire along with the Rhins of Galloway, Kintyre and the Hebrides. In February the mean daily minimum temperature varies from about 2 °C in most of the islands, 1 to 2 °C along most of the Solway Firth and lowland inland areas, but less than −1 °C in parts of the Southern Uplands and central Highlands. Inland, where the influence of the sea is less, January is the coldest month with mean daily minimum temperatures generally between −3 and 0 °C.

The number of hours of natural sunshine in South Ayrshire is controlled by the length of day and by cloudiness. In general, December is the dullest month and May or June the sunniest. Sunshine duration decreases with increasing altitude, increasing latitude and distance from the coast. Local topography also exerts a strong influence and in the winter deep glens and north-facing slopes can be in shade for long periods. Industrial pollution and smoke haze can also reduce sunshine amounts, but the decline in heavy industry in the Ayrshire area, primarily in Ayr in South Ayrshire along with Kilmarnock in East Ayrshire, has resulted in an increase in sunshine duration particularly in the winter months.

Average annual rainfall totals range from less than 1,000 mm (39 in) in the upper Clyde valley and along the coasts of Ayrshire and Dumfries and Galloway to on average over 3,500 mm (140 in) over the higher parts of the west Highlands, approaching the maximum values found in the UK (over 4,000 millimetres or 160 inches further north).

Settlements

South Ayrshire's population is mostly concentrated around the adjoining coastal towns of Ayr, Prestwick and Troon located to the north-west of the council, which represents 68% of the council's total population according to data derived from the 2011 census, with a combined population of 76,846. Other areas of significance include the towns of Maybole and Girvan which are located to the south of the council area in the district of Carrick.

Largest settlements by population:

Settlement Population (2020) Ayr 46260 Troon 14950 Prestwick 14880 Girvan 6330 Maybole 4580 Dundonald 2570 Coylton 2160 Mossblown 2100 Tarbolton 1860 Symington 1510

A list of settlements in South Ayrshire may be found below:

Towns

Ayr is the administrative centre of the South Ayrshire Council, and the historic county town of Ayrshire. With a population of 46,982, Ayr is the 15th largest settlement in Scotland and second largest town in Ayrshire by population. The town is contiguous with the smaller town of Prestwick to the north. Ayr submitted unsuccessful bids for city status in 2000 and 2002, and as part of the wider South Ayrshire area in 2022. Ayr was established as a Royal Burgh in 1205 and is the county town of Ayrshire. It served as Ayrshire's central marketplace and harbour throughout the medieval period and was a port during the early modern period.

Troon is the second largest town in South Ayrshire and is about eight miles (thirteen kilometres) north of Ayr and three miles (five kilometres) northwest of Glasgow Prestwick Airport. Troon has a port with ferry and freight services, and a yacht marina and since March 2024, Caledonian MacBrayne have operated a ferry service to Brodick on the Isle of Arran. In the 2001 census the population of Troon, not including the nearby village of Loans but including the Barassie area, was estimated at 14,766, a 4.77% increase on the 1991 estimate of 14,094.. The population in 2024 is just over 15,000

South Ayrshire's five towns are as follows:

Ayr

Girvan

Prestwick

Troon

Maybole

Villages and hamlets

Economy

For more details, see Economy of Scotland

The economy of South Ayrshire, like many other areas, was badly affected during the worldwide financial crisis from 2009 to 2012. Despite this, total Gross Value Added for South Ayrshire has seen a steady increase over the last 20 years, reaching a peak in 2015 of £2.4 billion. South Ayrshire's GVA represents 1.9% of the total Scottish Gross Value Added income which is consistent with the previous 20 years. By 2022, South Ayrshire Gross Domestic Product (GDP) estimates stood at £2.710 million.

The largest employment industry in South Ayrshire and Scotland is the public administration, education and health sector. Compared with Scotland, proportionally there are more South Ayrshire residents employed in this sector than Scotland, while there are proportionally fewer employed in banking, finance and insurance sector than Scotland. Despite being a costal area, the smallest employment in South Ayrshire is in the agriculture and fishing sector.

Regional Economic Partnership

The council and its neighbours of East Ayrshire and North Ayrshire work together on economic growth as the Ayrshire Regional Economic Partnership, with support from the Scottish and UK governments and other private and public sector organisations.

Employment trends

Across South Ayrshire in 2023, 47,500 people were classed as being economically active, with 44,700 people categorised as being in employment (36,800 employed by a business or organisation and an additional 7,500 people classed as self employed). In the same period, a total of 1,700 people in South Ayrshire were unemployed, an unemployment rate of 3.7% which is higher than the Scottish average unemployment rate of 3.5%.

Professional Occupations make up the largest employment figures based on occupation in South Ayrshire, with an estimated 8,900 people (20.0%) of the population employed in the area. Other large sectors of employment across South Ayrshire include the associate professional occupations sector (13.1%), the care, leisure and social care sector (10.2%) and managerial and directors occupations (9.1%).

The average gross weekly salary for a full time employee in South Ayrshire in 2023 was £753.40, higher than the Scottish average gross weekly salary figure of £702.40.

Tourism

The tourism sector of South Ayrshire is a major contributor to the local economy, with the area having attractions including Burns Cottage, the Robert Burns Birthplace Museum, Turnberry Castle and Culzean Castle.

The Royal Troon Golf Club is featured on the rota of courses used for the Open Championship, with the most recent Open Championship being held at Royal Troon in 2024. Additionally, the Turnberry Golf Course has also hosted the Open Championship, the most recent being in 2009. However, since the course came under the ownership of Donald Trump, the 45th President of the United States, The R&A, the governing body for golf said following the 2021 storming of the United States Capitol, that it had "no plans to stage any of its competitions at Turnberry" and would not do so "until we are convinced that the focus will be on the championship, the players and the course itself".

Other notable places of interest within South Ayrshire include:

Ailsa Craig

Bachelor's Club, Tarbolton

Bargany Gardens

Blairquhan

Burns Cottage

Robert Burns Birthplace Museum (Robert Burns)

Carrick Forest

Crossraguel Abbey

Culzean Castle

Electric Brae

Penkill Castle

Souter Johnnie's Cottage

Royal Troon Golf Club

Turnberry Hotel and Golf Course

Education

For more details, see Education in Scotland

Educational provision in South Ayrshire is offered via eight secondary schools, forty-one primary schools, two special needs schools and five stand-alone Early Years Centres (although some primary schools have Early Years Centres attached). In terms of early years provision, there are also a number of private establishments which are operated in conjunction with South Ayrshire Council, rather than managed and operated entirely by the council.

Based on figures from 2023–2024, a total of 6,596 pupils attend secondary schools across South Ayrshire, with Belmont Academy in Ayr being the largest in terms of pupil numbers, with a total of 1,225 pupils attending Belmont Academy. In contrast, Carrick Academy has the smallest school roll, with a total of 391 pupils attending the school. A total of 7,441 children were enrolled in South Ayrshire's primary schools between 2023–2024, with Forehill Primary School having the largest pupil roll amongst the areas primary schools, with a total of 458 children attending the school. Straiton Primary School had the smallest pupil roll, with a total of 18 children attending the school in 2024.

South Ayrshire Council also owns and operates Dolphin House, an outdoor learning programme for upper primary school aged pupils across South Ayrshire which is located within the grounds of Culzean Country Park.

As of 2024, there are a total of eight secondary schools within South Ayrshire:

Ayr Academy (Non-denominational, Ayr)

Belmont Academy (Non-denominational, Ayr)

Carrick Academy (Non-denominational, Maybole)

Girvan Academy (Non-denominational, Girvan)

Kyle Academy (Non-denominational, Ayr)

Marr College (Non-denominational, Troon)

Queen Margaret Academy (Roman Catholic, Ayr)

Prestwick Academy (Non-denominational, Prestwick)

In addition to the eight secondary schools which are operated by South Ayrshire Council, Ayr is home to Wellington School, a private day school which educates children from 3–18.

Governance

Main article: South Ayrshire Council

South Ayrshire Council

South Ayrshire is governed by South Ayrshire Council which has been under no overall control since 2003, in which time various coalitions and minority administrations have operated. Since the last election in 2022, the council has been led by a Conservative minority administration which took office with support from two independent councillors and abstentions from Labour. The next election is due in 2027.

The council's civic head takes the title of provost. This is a largely ceremonial role, chairing council meetings and acting as the area's first citizen. Although an elected councillor, the provost is expected to be politically impartial. Political leadership is provided by the leader of the council.

Parliamentary representation

UK Parliament

South Ayrshire forms part of two UK Parliamentary constituencies, listed below:

Constituency Member Party Ayr, Carrick and Cumnock Elaine Stewart Scottish Labour Party Central Ayrshire Alan Gemmell Scottish Labour Party

Scottish Parliament

Constituency MSPs

South Ayrshire forms part of two Scottish Parliamentary constituency seats, listed below:

Constituency Member of Scottish Parliament Extent of constituency Ayr Siobhian Brown SNP Covering Ayr, Prestwick and Troon. Carrick, Cumnock and Doon Valley Elena Whitham SNP Covering Kyle and Carrick outside of Ayr, Prestwick and Troon, alongside Ballochmyle, Cumnock and Doon Valley in East Ayrshire.

Regional List MSPs

As part of the South Scotland electoral region, South Ayrshire is represented by 7 regional MSPs who are elected to represent the entire South Scotland region – all regional list MSPs elected for the South Scotland region are listed below:

Constituency Member Party South Scotland Sharon Dowey Conservative Emma Harper Scottish National Carol Mochan Labour Craig Hoy Conservative Brian Whittle Conservative Martin Whitfield Labour Colin Smyth Labour

See also