Collated by Elaine Brown

South Ayrshire came into existence as a unitary authority in 1996 and comprises the south western corner of the historical county of Ayrshire. It ranges from built-up in the north, where it is home to Glasgow International Airport at Prestwick, to rich agricultural land in the south.

Where to find local collections:

Scottish and Local History, Carnegie Library, Ayr (offsite link)

Ayrshire Archives (offsite link)

Books – non fiction

John Campbell Shairp Robert Burns (1879). “A work of both history and literary criticism that can be used as an entry point to a wider study of its subject.”

Forestry Commission Scotland, Native woodland survey of Scotland South Ayrshire (2010)

William Robertson, Ayrshire, its history and historic families, (1908) Volume 1 Volume 2

Book – fiction

F.E. Renwick, Craigielinn (Dunedin, NZ: 1884). Prize-winning Victorian novel written in Scots.

Films

The 1922 Launch of paddle steamer ‘Glen Gower’ at Troon.

1909-1959 Jubilee of 14th, 1st Prestwick, Ayrshire Boy Scouts

Manuscript collection

Robert Burns, A Poet’s Welcome to his Love-begotten Daughter from the Glenriddell Manuscripts.

For more from Burns, read the Kilmarnock edition of his poems in our Digital Gallery.

An e-resource

UK Parliamentary Papers. This resource is available remotely to Library card holders resident in Scotland via the eResources page on our website. Reports of the Commissioners, particularly their Minutes of Evidence, are a rich source for social history and in many cases, biographical information of interest to the family historian as well.

The Royal Commission on employment of children, young persons and women in agriculture. Fourth report, appendix, minutes of evidence, index, 1870, contains a wealth of information about farming practice, living conditions, wages and hiring policies down to the level of individual farms in the late 1860s.

A business

Andrew Kay and Co. Ltd. have been manufacturing curling stones from granite quarried from Ailsa Craig since 1851. The Manufacturing of curling stones at Andrew Kay and Company Ltd shows the stages in the process.

Person

Robert the Bruce, Robert I, King of Scots was born in Turnberry in 1274. Read Michael Penman’s biography, Robert the Bruce, King of the Scots (Yale University Press: 2014) (You must be logged in to view this resource).

At the nearer end of the historical scale, John Loudon Macadam, inventor of tarmac, was a native of Ayr. You can see details of his life and work in Chambers’ Biographical Dictionary of Eminent Scotsmen, in our Digital Gallery.

A ghost/mythical creature

Sawney Bean and his family, notorious cannibals, were reputed to live in Bennane cave, near Ballantrae, on the south Ayrshire coast. Was Sawney Bean a real person or was he not? And why does it matter? A research paper by Sandy Hobbs and David Cornwell, Sawney Bean, the Scottish Cannibal from Folkore, Vol 108 (1997), is available via JSTOR (you must be logged in to view this resource).

A castle or other historic building

Crossraguel Abbey, a Cluniac monastery founded by Duncan, Earl of Carrick, in the late 13th century and dissolved during the Reformation. It was ruinous by the time John Slezer published his view of the abbey in Theatrum Scotiae in 1693.

There are some drawings of its surviving architectural features in the collection compiled by George Henry Hutton, an amateur antiquary, in the 19th century

The Abbey has a history of connection with the Kennedy clan – several Kennedys were Abbots there – but its most notorious one is probably the roasting of the crown-appointed commendator, Alan Stewart, by Gilbert Kennedy, 4th Earl of Cassilis, to ‘persuade’ him to sign over the Abbey’s lands and revenues to the clan. This incident is described by Robert Pitcairn in Historical and genealogical account of the principal Families of the name of Kennedy published in 1830.

Food