At a recent council meeting, councillors approved the budget that will see The International Ayr Show – Festival of Flight come to Ayr’s Low Green from September 8-10 this year.

South Ayrshire Council also announced that Ashleigh (Scotland) Ltd. have signed up to become a major sponsor of the new air show, where they will join forces with the council, strategic partner, theSKYLAB and event charity partner The RAF Benevolent Fund to deliver the three-day festival.

More sponsorship is on the cards following a recent business engagement event that was held at Ayr Town Hall.

The event saw representatives from the local business community come together to discover more about proposals to deliver the air show, and the council's ambition to raise awareness of the importance of Science, Technology, Engineering and Mathematics (STEM) subjects with local young people.

South Ayrshire Council’s Portfolio Holder for Tourism, Culture and Rural Affairs, Councillor Alec Clark said: “It’s excellent to have the final go-ahead to bring the brand-new air show to Ayr this year.

"I’m absolutely delighted that Ashleigh (Scotland) Ltd. have offered major sponsorship, which shows their confidence in us to deliver such a prestigious event.

“The business engagement event was a fantastic opportunity for local retailers and businesses to get together in one place to learn about the many benefits the new air show will bring not only to Ayr, but South Ayrshire as a whole.

"It was also the perfect stage for the RAF Benevolent Fund to introduce themselves and highlight the important work they do to the local business people who joined us.

“The International Ayr Show – Festival of Flight gives us a platform to raise awareness of the importance of STEM subjects and how the young people who study in these areas will play a key part in shaping our future.”

South Ayrshire Council’s Portfolio Holder for Sport and Leisure, Councillor Brian Connolly, said: “A huge milestone was passed today, and it feels great to finally be able to go full steam ahead with planning for the event.

“Ashleigh (Scotland) Ltd.’s sponsorship comes as much-welcomed news to everyone involved in the festival.

Read More: Ayr woman wins £250 after picking up litter

"With the support of local businesses and that of our event partners, we’ll work collaboratively to make the brand-new air show a huge success.

“We’ll also be able to reach out to young people and promote the many positives around studying STEM subjects and the fantastic potential this can afford their future careers.

“Being able to help showcase the magnificent efforts of the RAF Benevolent fund is a privilege for the council and I was delighted to see them come along to join us at what was a very successful business engagement event.”

Leader of South Ayrshire Council, Councillor Martin Dowey, said: “It’s fantastic to have the budget agreed for the new air show and now be able to plough ahead with the arrangements for this much-anticipated festival.

“I’d like to extend my thanks to Ashleigh (Scotland) Ltd. for stepping up as a major sponsor for The International Ayr Show – Festival of Flight. Working together with local businesses will help everyone achieve great things through the new air show.

“It’s always brilliant to see opportunities for young people emerge from council initiatives and events, and our partnership with the SKYLAB is ideal to encourage local young people to embrace STEM subjects.

“We’re also extremely proud to have the RAF Benevolent fund as our event charity partner and help them to raise awareness of the wonderful work they carry out.”