John Olatchy Momoh was born on July 1st, 1957 in Lagos State, Nigeria, to Momoh Ikiebe, a cook from North Ibie in Estako East local government area of Edo State, Nigeria. John Momoh is an entrepreneur, ace broadcaster and the Chairman and CEO of Channels Media Group.

John Momoh Age

John Momoh is 67 years old.

John Momoh Early Life

Momoh spent his early life in Surulere, Lagos State, where his family comprising of parents and seven children lived in a single room. Born as the first child in a Muslim home, he became a Christian during his days at Thomas Aquinas Primary School, Surulere. He had his secondary education was at Baptist Academy, Lagos and his tertiary education at the University of Lagos where he obtained a bachelor's degree in Mass Communication. He thereafter, earned a Master’s degree in International Law & Diplomacy from the same institution.

John Momoh Career

John began his broadcasting career in Abeokuta with the Ogun State Radio. After two years with the station, he joined the Federal Radio Corporation of Nigeria, FRCN and later Nigerian Television Authority, NTA. From there, he decided to start his own station called Channels TV and applied for his TV license in 1993. The station became the first Nigerian broadcaster to be nominated at the International Emmy for the International Children’s Day of Broadcasting Award.

He has professional Diplomas from the UK’s Thomson Foundation and the University of Manchester. He is an alumnus of the prestigious Harvard Business School and a Fellow of the Nigerian Guild of Editors and the Nigerian Institute of Journalism. On July 28th, 2016, Momoh was elected Chairman of Broadcasting Organization Of Nigeria.

Momoh was a former General Secretary of Nigeria’s Independent Broadcasters Association and Chairman of the League of Nigerian Broadcasters. He is a member of the International Academy of Television Arts & Sciences based in New York and has served as a juror for the International Emmy Awards. He is also serving as a Juror for the AIB Awards – The Association for International Broadcasters. He is a Red Cross Ambassador and Patron of several charitable organizations in Nigeria.

John Momoh Personal Life

Momoh is married to Olusola Momoh, a broadcaster and currently the Vice Chairman of Channels TV. They are blessed with three children - 2 daughters and a son. Momoh was formerly a Roman Catholic but is now a member of the Anglican Church. Among his heroes are Steve Jobs, Richard Branson and Nelson Mandela.

John Momoh Awards

Momoh was honoured with the Nigerian merit award as Officer of the Order of the Niger in December 2005

He won the Lifetime Achievement Award in 2006

In 2008, he was nominated for Entrepreneur of the Year by the Fate Foundation

In June 2013, he received the Lagos Business School’s Distinguished Alumni Award

He was honoured with the Leadership Award at the 2014 Planet Africa Awards held at the Grand Victorian Convention Centre in Canada

John Momoh Net Worth

John Momoh is estimated to have a net worth of about $700 million

John Momoh on Social Media