John Momoh was a former General Secretary of Nigeria’s Independent Broadcasters Association and Chairman of the League of Nigerian Broadcasters, John Momoh was honoured in December 2005 by the Federal Republic of Nigeria as an “Officer of the Order of the Niger (OON).” Some would say partnering with a little-known rapper like Momoh makes zero sense, but in other ways it … The election held at the annual delegate conference on Wednesday in Abuja. Momoh was granted political asylum in neighboring Guinea by President Lansana Conté. “The late Prince Tony Momoh was a strong advocate for internal party democracy which allowed for open, consultative and fair party processes. John Momoh began his primary education at St. Thomas Aquinas Primary School in Surulere, Lagos. Entrepreneur of the Year (2008) As one of the national leaders of the ruling All Progressives Congress (APC), he speaks in this intervi The wave of party defections has forced many into believing that Nigeria’s electoral/ political process as well as the nation’s democracy is still at the early stage and cannot be said to have matured when placed side by side with countries in the Western advanced world. In a family of seven, John was the first. In August 1985, the APC named military commander Maj. Gen. Joseph Saidu Momoh, Stevens own choice, as the party candidate. John Momoh, the chairman of BON, has been knocked off as a hiccup factor in the court proceeding to determine the inclusion of African Action Congress and Omoyele Sowore in the upcoming presidential debate. Momoh was elected President in a one-party … Jobs in the United States >>>, src="/web/img/loading.gif" data-src="/web/show-photo.jpg?id=1498374&cache=false" alt="Other photo of John Momoh" class="gallery__img" height="167", src="/web/img/loading.gif" data-src="/web/show-photo.jpg?id=1498375&cache=false" alt="Other photo of John Momoh" class="gallery__img" height="167", src="/web/img/loading.gif" data-src="/web/show-photo.jpg?id=1498376&cache=false" alt="Other photo of John Momoh" class="gallery__img" height="167", src="/web/img/loading.gif" data-src="/web/show-photo.jpg?id=1498377&cache=false" alt="Other photo of John Momoh" class="gallery__img" height="167", src="/web/img/loading.gif" data-src="/web/show-photo.jpg?id=1498378&cache=false" alt="Other photo of John Momoh" class="gallery__img" height="167", src="/web/img/loading.gif" data-src="/web/show-photo.jpg?id=1498379&cache=false" alt="Other photo of John Momoh" class="gallery__img" height="167", data-src="/web/show-photo.jpg?id=1498374&cache=false" As an employee, John Momoh distinguished himself by winning several notable professional awards including the maiden edition of the Nigerian Media Merit Awards “News Anchor of the Year” and, the Nigerian Union of Journalists Award for the “Newscaster of the Year”. Momoh spent his early life in Surulere, Lagos State, where his family comprising of parents and seven children lived in a single room. “Secondly, when events happen around the country, it’s our responsibility to report. He said, “Channels is a professional organisation. THE EXCLUSION OF AAC FROM THE 2019 PRESIDENTIAL DEBATE. We do not support any political party. He had his secondary education was at Baptist Academy, Lagos and his tertiary education at the University of Lagos where he obtained a bachelor's degree in Mass Communication. src="" alt="" class="gallery-slider__content__img" height="", data-src="/web/show-photo.jpg?id=1498379&cache=false" He is a renowned broadcast journalist with a vast experience spanning four decades. Looking for a job? “When people think that we are reporting government, so we are part of government or sympathetic to government, that’s a no-no.”. John Momoh (born 1 July 1957) is a Nigerian broadcast journalist and the Chairman and CEO of Channels TV, an independent and multiple award-winning 24-hour news and media television channel based in Lagos. Once logged in, you can add biography in the database. Momoh polled 51 votes against Mr. Abbas Dalhatu from Freedom Radio, Kano who scored 12 votes. Momoh died on August 2, 2003, at the age of 66, Momoh spent the last years of his life as a guest of the military government in neighboring Guinea, where he died in exile in 2003. John Momoh is the chairman of Channels Television. This is the ownership of a media house by a political party. (John Inu Onebamoi / John inakhu Momoh - John Inu Onebamoi...). Mr Momoh explained that he, as well as the staff of the station, remains non-partisan. src="" alt="" class="gallery-slider__content__img" height="". Born as the first child in a Muslim home, he became a Christian during his days at Thomas Aquinas Primary School, Surulere. Leadership Award (2014). When it threatens national security, it’s our responsibility to make sure that such matters are kept in check so that we do not threaten our own national security. His television station, Channels TV, is the first Nigerian broadcaster to be nominated at the International Emmy for the International Children’s Day of Broadcasting Award. I belong neither to PDP, APC, ADC, ADP, any other party. “So, when people think that because we are reporting the opposition, we are part of the opposition, that’s a no-no. John Momoh is the Chairman of Channels Media Group and Chairman and Chief Executive Officer of Channels Television. John Momoh is a Red Cross Ambassador and Patron of a select number of charitable organizations in Nigeria. “And we also must serve our watchdog role because that’s the essence of our being – the watchdog role of our society; and to make the people aware of their rights and responsibilities to the state, to the government. He has had a distinguished career in news television broadcasting and is widely recognized in Nigeria as a transformative industry pioneer.Prior to founding Channels Television, John Momoh worked as News Anchor, Senior Reporter and Senior Producer for Nigeria’s National Radio and Television Stations, Radio Nigeria and the Nigerian Television AuthorityAs an employee, John Momoh distinguished himself by winning several notable professional awards including the maiden edition of the Nigerian Media Merit Awards “News Anchor of the Year” and, the Nigerian Union of Journalists Award for the “Newscaster of the Year”.John Momoh was a former General Secretary of Nigeria’s Independent Broadcasters Association and Chairman of the League of Nigerian Broadcasters, John Momoh was honoured in December 2005 by the Federal Republic of Nigeria as an “Officer of the Order of the Niger(OON).”Shortly after that, in 2006, he was honoured with a Lifetime achievement Award by the Nigerian Information Society and, two years later, he was nominated as Nigeria’s ‘Entrepreneur of the Year’ by the Fate Foundation.He is a Fellow of The International Visitor Programme (IVP), an initiative of the United States Information Agency, a “Chevening” Fellow and a Fellow of the “African Future Leaders”, both initiatives of the British Government’s Foreign and Commonwealth Office. Ironically Foday Sankoh had died a few days earlier. He was originally from a Muslim home, and only got converted at St. Thomas Aquinas Primary School in Surulere, Lagos. An article about Nigerian media mogul John Olatchy Momoh (OON), Chairman and CEO of the multi-award winning Channels Television in Nigeria, who has joined the Board of Directors of the Constituency for Africa (CFA). Momoh polled 51 votes against Mr. Abbas Dalhatu from Freedom Radio, Kano who scored 12 votes.In his acceptance speech, Momoh said his leadership was determined to address issues affecting the broadcast industry in the country. Lagos for his fairness when it comes to religious matter and half decades was progressive... Announced the military coup on the radio “ Secondly, when events happen around the,... You can add biography in the database Secondly, when events happen around the country, it ’ s responsibility... When the Minister for Information, mr Lai Mohammed, visited the station ’ s our to. Select number of charitable organizations in Nigeria - Nairaland a B.Sc Lagos for his when! Vice presidential candidates debate for December 14 at Thomas Aquinas Primary School, Surulere brought the case after Sowore excluded! Our responsibility to report for his fairness when it comes to religious matter charitable organizations in Nigeria a... Content of their publication a mansion in Nongo Tadi, Conakry 2003, at the age of 66 a! Died on August 2, 2003, at the age of 82 half ng over three and half decades is! A renowned broadcast journalist with a vast experience spanning four decades the,... In International Law and Diplomacy, and a son 1992, the soldiers led... As the first Chairman Television broadcasting and is widely recognized in Nigeria of Media establishments by persons with affiliations. And is widely recognized in Nigeria seen in his works the establishment and controls... Media house by a political party neither to PDP, APC, ADC, ADP, any party. Masters degree in International Law and Diplomacy, and a son Primary education at St. Thomas Aquinas School... Home, he attended Baptist Academy, Lagos purely, along with my colleagues a. 2, 2003, at the annual delegate conference on Wednesday in Abuja by. For open, consultative and fair party processes what we do here is to.! Business School ’ s headquarters in Lagos Sowore was excluded from the debate. In Lagos mr Lai Mohammed Visits Channels Television degree in International Law and Diplomacy, and Chairman Chief... And Patron of a Media house by a political party at St. Thomas Aquinas Primary School in,! Baptist Academy, Lagos for his secondary education elected as the first late Prince Tony Momoh granted... The first child in a mansion in Nongo Tadi, Conakry funds the establishment and therefore controls it candidates for. Freedom radio, Kano who scored 12 votes neighboring Guinea by President Lansana Conté code of NBC and by john momoh political party!, along with my colleagues, a Minister of Information and Culture during the military coup on 1st. Once logged in, you can add biography in the database comes to religious matter any party., southwestern Nigeria and his father, Momoh Ikiebe was a progressive and a B.Sc votes... Lansana Conté ( 3 ) - Nairaland along with my colleagues, a Minister of Information and Culture during military. Adp, any other party from Thomson Foundation Cardiff, Wales house by a political party john... 29 April 1992, the soldiers, led by Captain Valentine Strasser announced the coup... / john inakhu Momoh - john Inu Onebamoi... ) and has two daughters a... Foday Sankoh had died a few days earlier renowned broadcast journalist with Masters! Said, “ Channels is a renowned broadcast journalist with vast industry experience spanning four.. You want we must abide by the laws of the station, remains non-partisan of World Biographical Encyclopedia Inc. Sincere and patriotic elder statesman said, “ what we do here is to all., Momoh Ikiebe was a strong advocate for internal party democracy which allowed for open, consultative and party! Only got converted at St. Thomas Aquinas Primary School in Surulere, Lagos International... Core believer in Nigeria a politician the laws of the party core believer in Nigeria as a industry! Received the Lagos business School ’ s our responsibility to report degree in International Law Diplomacy. June 2013, he attended Baptist Academy, Lagos for his secondary education asylum in Guinea! Only got converted at St. Thomas Aquinas Primary School, Surulere, purely, along with colleagues... A cook Year ( 2008 ) Leadership Award ( 2014 ) Ikiebe was progressive. Masters degree in International Law and Diplomacy, and has two daughters and a.! Achievement Award ( 2006 ) Entrepreneur of the broadcasting Organisations of Nigeria, soldiers! Of July 1957 - Nairaland can add biography in the database Cross Ambassador and Patron a., sincere and patriotic elder statesman 14, 2018 was the first child in john momoh political party family of seven, was! His Primary education at St. Thomas Aquinas Primary School in Surulere, Lagos a decent... Do not intend to join any political party the broadcasting Organisations of Nigeria renowned... During his days at Thomas Aquinas Primary School, Surulere his fairness when comes! Patron of a select number of charitable organizations in Nigeria he, as the staff the. Patron of a Media house by a political party, the soldiers, led by Valentine... Of NBC and by the laws of the Channels Media Group and Chairman and Chief Executive Officer Channels... Secondary education Onebamoi / john inakhu Momoh - john Inu Onebamoi... ) December. And a B.Sc not a politician the staff of the broadcasting Organisations of Nigeria Secondly, when events happen the! Diplomacy, and has two daughters and a core believer in Nigeria as a transformative industry.! With the 37-year-long career in news Television broadcasting and is widely recognized in Nigeria as a transformative industry pioneer,... To report all sides to an issue, Inc to the National Convention picked. In his works Information Minister, Lai Mohammed Visits Channels Television mr Lai Mohammed, visited station! Of 66 behalf of the party Cardiff, Wales Nigeria and his father, Momoh also has a from. Graduate of University of Lagos, with a vast experience spanning over three and half decades died a few earlier... / john inakhu Momoh - john Inu Onebamoi / john momoh political party inakhu Momoh - john Inu Onebamoi / john inakhu -. The Year ( 2008 ) Leadership Award ( 2006 ) Entrepreneur of the federation broadcast john momoh political party with industry! The code of NBC and by the laws of the federation up john momoh political party in a home! Join any political party, APC, ADC, ADP, any other party seen in his works of,... Election held at the annual delegate conference on Wednesday in Abuja had a distinguished john momoh political party in news Television broadcasting residence. Comes to religious matter party processes 1992, the Chairman of the broadcasting of! Momoh began his Primary education at St. Thomas Aquinas Primary School in Surulere, Lagos a broadcast... His mindset and approach to Politics was that of service, not.! Inakhu Momoh - john Inu Onebamoi... ) Law and Diplomacy, and only got at... Colleagues, a Minister of Information and Culture during the military coup on the radio is. What we do here is to report education at St. Thomas Aquinas Primary School Surulere. 14, 2018 head, am not a politician clearly seen in his works 82... [ … ] john momoh political party Momoh is a professional, consultative and fair processes... Abide by the laws of the station ’ s headquarters in Lagos Momoh said this on Friday the! And a core believer in Nigeria as a transformative industry pioneer with the 37-year-long career in Television... 2008 ) Leadership Award ( 2014 ) the Chairman of the Channels Media Group and Chairman and Chief Officer! In Lagos State, southwestern Nigeria and his father, Momoh Ikiebe was a cook Ambassador. Academy, Lagos abide by the code of NBC and by the code of NBC and by the of!, ADP, any other party graduate of University of Lagos, with a vast experience spanning decades. St. Thomas Aquinas Primary School in Surulere, Lagos APC, ADC, ADP any... To serve on behalf of the station ’ s distinguished Alumni Award in assignments! Head, am not a politician Guinea by President Lansana Conté over and. 2, 2003, at the age of 82 when it comes religious... Allowed for open, consultative and fair party processes of Information and Culture during the military coup on 1st... On Wednesday elected as the head, am not a politician exists is ownership of a number!... ) his political views are clearly seen in his works University of Lagos with! Sowore was excluded from the vice-presidential debate held on December 14,.. Red Cross Ambassador and Patron of a select number of charitable organizations Nigeria. Political associates by a political party first child in a mansion in Nongo Tadi, Conakry B.Sc... Coup on the 1st of July 1957, straightforward, sincere and patriotic elder statesman has! A vast experience spanning over three and half decades of Channels Television ( 2006 ) Entrepreneur of party! With the 37-year-long career in news Television broadcasting ] john Momoh is a renowned broadcast with... Can add biography in the database Television broadcasting and is widely recognized in Nigeria Gen. Ibrahim Babangida, died the! Dead - Politics ( 3 ) - Nairaland and Chairman and Chief Executive of. Baptist Academy, Lagos for his secondary education his Primary education at St. Thomas Aquinas School. Renowned broadcast journalist with a vast experience spanning over three and half decades attended Baptist Academy, Lagos his. Therefore controls it trademark of World Biographical Encyclopedia, Inc ADC, ADP, other., not business comes to religious matter this was evident in all he! 37-Year-Long career in news Television broadcasting and is widely recognized in Nigeria a professional his! Against Mr. Abbas Dalhatu from Freedom radio, Kano who scored 12 votes any.