John Olatchy Momoh Edit Profile

broadcast journalist

John Momoh is a Nigerian broadcast journalist and the Chairman and CEO of Channels TV, an independent and multiple award winning 24-hour news and media television channel based in Lagos. He is widely recognized in Nigeria as a transformative industry pioneer with the 37-year-long career in news television broadcasting.

Background

John Momoh was born on the 1st of July 1957. He hails from North Ibie in Edo State. He was brought up in Lagos State, southwestern Nigeria and his father, Momoh Ikiebe was a cook. In a family of seven, John was the first.

Education

John Momoh began his primary education at St. Thomas Aquinas Primary School in Surulere, Lagos. Thereafter, he attended Baptist Academy, Lagos for his secondary education. John Momoh graduated from the University of Lagos with a bachelor's degree in Mass Communication and a master's degree in International Law and Diplomacy. In June 2013, he received the Lagos Business School’s Distinguished Alumni Award. John Momoh has a professional Diploma from the UK’s Thomson Foundation, an alumnus of University of Lagos, Lagos Business School, and Harvard Business School.

Career

John Momoh is a renowned broadcast journalist with vast industry experience spanning over three and half ng over three and half decades. He has had a distinguished career in news television broadcasting and is widely recognized in Nigeria as a transformative industry pioneer.

Prior to founding Channels Television, John Momoh worked as News Anchor, Senior Reporter and Senior Producer for Nigeria’s National Radio and Television Stations, Radio Nigeria and the Nigerian Television Authority

As an employee, John Momoh distinguished himself by winning several notable professional awards including the maiden edition of the Nigerian Media Merit Awards “News Anchor of the Year” and, the Nigerian Union of Journalists Award for the “Newscaster of the Year”.

John Momoh was a former General Secretary of Nigeria’s Independent Broadcasters Association and Chairman of the League of Nigerian Broadcasters, John Momoh was honoured in December 2005 by the Federal Republic of Nigeria as an “Officer of the Order of the Niger(OON).”

Shortly after that, in 2006, he was honoured with a Lifetime achievement Award by the Nigerian Information Society and, two years later, he was nominated as Nigeria’s ‘Entrepreneur of the Year’ by the Fate Foundation.

He is a Fellow of The International Visitor Programme (IVP), an initiative of the United States Information Agency, a “Chevening” Fellow and a Fellow of the “African Future Leaders”, both initiatives of the British Government’s Foreign and Commonwealth Office.

Achievements

Works

music

John Inu Onebamoi / John inakhu Momoh - Dukpedu Volume 2 - JNELP 015 VG+/VG+ 2LP

(John Inu Onebamoi / John inakhu Momoh - John Inu Onebamoi...)

Religion

He is best known for his fairness when it comes to religious matter. He was originally from a Muslim home, and only got converted at St. Thomas Aquinas Primary School in Surulere, Lagos. Initially, he was a Catholic, but on getting married 29 years ago, he crossed over to Anglican, which his wife professes.

Politics

His political views are clearly seen in his works. ohn Momoh, was on Wednesday elected as the Chairman of the Broadcasting Organisations of Nigeria. The election held at the annual delegate conference on Wednesday in Abuja. Momoh polled 51 votes against Mr. Abbas Dalhatu from Freedom Radio, Kano who scored 12 votes.

In his acceptance speech, Momoh said his leadership was determined to address issues affecting the broadcast industry in the country. Momoh, who thanked the delegates for electing him, however, said that almost three decades after its establishment, The Broadcasting Organisations of Nigeria had yet to earn its deserved respect among professional bodies in Nigeria.

“BON is like the proverbial goose that lays the golden egg but is not accorded its due respect,” he said.

He promised that the organisation under his leadership would address the challenges bedeviling BON and “influence a new thinking, a new respect and a new vision for us all as professional broadcasters”.

Connections

He is married, and has two daughters and a son

Father:

Momoh Ikiebe

Spouse:

Olusola Momoh

colleague:

sulaiman aledeh