Nessana: Excavations and Studies, Volume 1, edited by Dan Urman. Beer-Sheva, Volume 17. Beer-Sheva: Ben-Gurion University of the Negev Press, 2004. English section: xiv + 248 pp., 172 figures, 26 tables. Hebrew section: xiv + 306 pp., 142 figures, 14 tables, 52 black-and-white photos. Cloth. $65.00.

The papers published in this edited volume (about half of which are in English and the others in Hebrew) defy easy categorization. Several of them belong in a final excavation report: H. K. Mienis: "The Molluscs of Nessana"; J. D. Klenck: "A Preliminary Report on the Animal Fauna at Nessana"; A. Baginski and A. Sheffer: "Textiles from Nessana"; P. Figueras: "Greek Inscriptions from Nessana"; and N. Liphschitz, G. Biger, and D. Urman: "Wood from the Nessana Excavations: Problems in the Analysis of Archaeological Finds." Other papers are synthetic studies of the archaeology, geography, flora, and fauna of the Nessana region: S. A. Rosen: "The Prehistoric Archaeology of the Nessana Region"; A. Yair: "Slope Hydrology, the Collection of Run-Off Water, and the Spatial Distribution of Ancient Agricultural Systems in the Northern Negev"; N. Liphschitz: "The Flora of the Nessana Region: Past and Present"; and S. Gibson: "A Brief Note on a Visit Made to el-'Auja (Nessana) by E. H. Palmer and C. F. TyrwhittDrake in February 1870." Another group of papers documents the fierce battle that was fought at Nessana (modern 'Auja el-Hafir) during Israel's War of Independence in 1948: M. Pa'il: "The Occupation of Nessana during Operation 'Horev' (December 1948)"; A. Vered: "A Historical Perspective on the Battle of 'Auja el-Hafir After Forty Eight Years"; A. Vered: "Experiences of a Soldier in the Battle of 'Auja el-Hafir (Nessana)"; and K. I. al-Sharif: "The Battle of 'Auja el-Hafir through the Eyes of an Egyptian Soldier."

The lion's share of the volume is devoted to a long paper by the late D. Urman on "Nessana Excavations 19871995" (it is the only one published in Hebrew and English). This paper also defies easy categorization, lying somewhere between a final excavation report and a synthetic overview of Urman's nine years of excavations at Nessana. According to a foreword that Urman wrote shortly before his death in 2004, "I...