Did you know that Plymouth is the birthplace of a former Wimbledon champion?

Florence Angela Margaret Mortimer Barrett was born in Plymouth on 21 April 1932 and was raised in Kingkerswell near Newton Abbot, Devon. She didn’t start playing tennis until the age of 15. Despite being a ‘late bloomer’ and partially deaf, her talent was such that she was playing majors just four years later.

Between 1953 and 1962 she was ranked in the world top ten nine times. She reached a career high of World No 1 in 1961. She always played in shorts and refused to wear dresses on court despite many offers from people who were keen to design them for her!

Mortimer’s star was already on the rise in the early 1950s when she was a quarter finalist at the US Open (1952) and at Wimbledon (1953 and 1954).

Her first year of major success was 1955 during which she won the women’s singles title at the French Open and the women’s doubles (with Anne Shilcock) at Wimbledon. Her victory in France marked the first time a British woman had won one of the four major titles since 1937. Her victory in London with Shilcock was the first British win in the women’s doubles since 1937.

The following year, in 1956, she was the runner up in the women’s singles in France and a quarter finalist again at Wimbledon.

For a couple of years after this Mortimer was sidelined with a virus that she caught in Egypt. She returned to full form in 1958 with major success at the Australian Open as runner up in the women’s and mixed doubles and winner of the women’s singles title. In that same year, as an un-seeded player, she was also the runner up at Wimbledon. She beat the former Champion Margaret DuPont in the quarter final and the French Champion Zsuzsa Kormoczy in the Semi Final, before surrendering to inspirational American, Althea Gibson in the final.

In both 1959 and 1960 she made it to the Wimbledon quarter finals again.

1961 would prove to be the pinnacle of her tennis playing career. She had been a prominent player in covered court tournaments across Europe for many years. This peaked in 1961 when she won French, German, Scandinavian and British titles. She also made it to the semi final of the US Open.

Wimbledon then beckoned and she worked her way through the rounds, even beating top seed Sandra Reynolds in the semi final.

Her opponent in the women’s singles final was fellow Brit Christine Truman Janes. It was the 75th anniversary of the Wimbledon championships and the first all British women’s final since 1914. There hasn’t been another one since.

Mortimer, who was seeded 7th, went on to beat 6th seeded Janes in three sets – winning 4-6, 6-4, 7-5. Her winning prize was apparently a £20 voucher to spend on tennis-related items – a far cry from what today’s champions receive!

She retired from single’s tennis in 1962. That same year she published an autobiography called ‘My Waiting Game’ in which she discussed her style of play which was mainly from the baseline.

In the years that followed she worked for a flamboyant fashion designer called Teddy Tinling. In April 1967 she married BBC commentator, author and former Davis Cup player, John Barrett with whom she has a son and a daughter.

She was inducted into the International Tennis Hall of Fame in 1993. Her husband was also inducted in 2014 thus making them one of only two married couples in the Hall of Fame, the other of which is Andre Agassi and Steffi Graf.

By Alison Cooper, Curator of Decorative Art

One of the great things about the decant process is that we’re getting to know our collections much better. With over a million objects in our collections, it would take a long time for any curator to get to physically see every object. This is a rare chance to see a lot in a short space of time.

One of our never ending tasks is to track and audit our collection, making sure every item has a unique accession number and is on our database. The museum has been collecting for over 100 years but we’ve only had a computer database for about 20 years. As you can imagine, there’s still an awful lot of information to capture online!

This means that as we’re checking our collections, we can come across items that aren’t on the database and that we’re not necessarily familiar with. One of our most recent re-discoveries was a box of lace. It was donated to us in the 1950s and then loaned for display at Buckland Abbey. The collection was packed and carefully carefully when it was returned from Buckland in the 1980s but, as this was before the existence of our digital database, the information was only kept on paper.

Whilst re-packing this lace, it was clear to see that it was of extremely high quality. This prompted me to look in our historic exhibition files. I was able to find the associated information which revealed that the beautiful lace has a wonderful and important history.

The lace was made in Branscombe which was a renowned local centre for lace making. The tradition likely came to the area in the late 1500s with Flemish refugees. By the 1800s, Beer, Branscombe and Axmouth had a reputation for producing the finest workers. For much of this period in Branscombe, the Chick and Tucker families dominated the industry and it was from this family that the rediscovered lace came from. Abigail Chick moved to the area in 1804 and founded the firm, growing its reputation. Her son-in-law John Tucker, expanded the firm further and they became known as one of the finest producers of lace. They even exhibited at the Great Exhibition of 1851 and 1862.

Lace-making is an extremely difficult craft and requires a lot of patience. It can take an extremely long time to produce which makes these examples all the more impressive. Branscombe lace is a type of bobbin or pillow lace. This relates to the fact that the lace would be made on top of a pillow with the thread wound around bobbins, made in bone or wood. This example (below) of a lace pillow from our collection with a huge number of bobbins and partially finished piece of lace, shows just how complex the process is.

To the left of the image below you can see the Coat of Arms of HRH the Prince Consort made in the workrooms of John Tucker. A very similar but larger piece was made and exhibited at the Great Exhibition of 1851 and so this is probably of a similar date.

The image on the right shows part of a border designed as a cornucopia with rose, shamrock and thistle. The same design was used for the wedding lace of Princess (later Queen) Alexandra in 1863. Her dress had four flounces of lace which, along with the train, veil and handkerchief, were all supplied by John Tucker.

Thanks to the decant process, the collection is now recorded on our database with its associated historic information. In future, it will be much easier to search for and locate these items. In addition, most of our lace collection has now been re-packed in special acid free sleeves. As you can see in the image below, this will keep the lace flat and in good storage whilst allowing visitors to access it more easily for research.

England women’s cricketer Heather Clare Knight was born in Plymouth on 26 December 1990.

Much of her early cricket education was at Plymstock Cricket Club where she started playing for the colts in the under-9s. Marcus Trescothick and Michael Atherton were her inspiration.

Since 2001 she has progressed through the ranks at a local and regional level.

In May 2008 she became the first female to open the batting for a Devon League men’s side – playing for Plymstock in the Devon League B Division.

Later that year, in August 2008, she was one of five female cricketers from Devon invited to play at the ECB Junior Super 4 in Taunton – a competition where the 52 best under-19 girls play against each other.

In August 2009, after topping the Women’s County Championship, she was selected to represent the England Academy against a European select side.

In February 2010 she was drafted into the senior England women’s team for the first time in a one-day international against India. She hit 49 off 101 balls and opened the batting.

In January 2011 she scored her maiden half century in international cricket at Perth’s WACA ground during a one day international with Australia.

The plaudits and success kept coming on the international stage during 2012 and 2013.

In August 2014 she became England Vice Captain. Earlier this month she was named England Captain following the retirement of Charlotte Edwards. This step up was a natural progression for Knight who already has captaincy experience with Berkshire in county cricket and Hobart Hurricanes in the WBBL.

Next Monday the 25 year old former Plymstock School pupil will lead her country for the first time against Pakistan.

England play Pakistan in three one day internationals and three T20s between 20 June and 7 July before heading to the West Indies for a five-match one day international series in October.

In a recent interview the right-handed top-order batter said: “I’m hugely proud and honoured to be named England captain and can’t wait to face the challenges ahead. It’s a fresh, exciting time for the team and I’m looking forward to seeing how we can develop together.”

By Tabitha Cadbury, Curator of Social History and World Cultures

In preparation for the redevelopment of the Museum and Art Gallery for the History Centre, myself and my colleague Rachel Smith have started to pack and document our world cultures collections.

There are over 4,000 objects altogether. About 10% of these are currently on display in the ‘Bringing the World to Plymouth’ gallery on the Museum’s ground floor. We’re trying to keep as many things on public display as possible until the building closes, so we won’t start on packing these objects until September.

In the meantime, we have nearly 900 boxes to go through in the store! We also have larger items which are stored on shelves, 19 large rolled objects including textiles and barkcloths, and about 250 long objects such as spears and staffs which are stored on wall racks. The objects in our world cultures collections include everything from weapons, pots and baskets to costumes and model boats.

The very first box we looked at contains two items of clothing collected by Gertrude-Benham (1867-1937).

Benham was an intrepid female explorer and mountaineer who travelled the world nine times during the 1920s and 1930s. She climbed over 300 peaks including mountains in the Rockies and Himalayas. In 1909 she became the first recorded woman to ascend Mount Kilimanjaro in Tanzania, Africa.

Benham came ashore in Plymouth in January 1928 after one of her treks. She visited the Museum and was impressed with what she saw. Six years later, in 1934, she gave us a collection of over 800 objects gathered from nearly every country in what was then the British Empire.

The two items of clothing in box number one were a gloriously striped sash and fantastically colourful child’s cotton tunic from Guatemala – a republic in Central America which is bordered by Mexico, Belize, Honduras, El Salvador, the Pacific Ocean and the Caribbean. Fittingly, records show that Benham was there in 1927 on the trip she took that ended in Plymouth.

The use of vibrant colours is typical of traditional Guatemalan clothing which often features geometric patterns such as stripes.

The items in our box are great examples of this. The decant of the Museum is an excellent opportunity for us to get to know our collections even better than before.

Wayne Philip Colin Sleep OBE spent much of his childhood in Hartlepool in the north of England – but Plymouth will always be able to lay claim to the fact that it’s the place where this British dancer, director, choreographer, actor, panellist and world record holder was born on 17 July 1948.

Sleep started dancing lessons in 1955 when he was a young child. Six years later in 1961, at the age of just 13, he won a scholarship to the Royal Ballet School. Five years after this, in 1966, he joined the Royal Ballet Company. Before long he was one of their Senior Principal Dancers.

Sleep’s work in classical ballet spanned more than three decades, took him all over the world and saw numerous roles created for him by the top choreographers of the time. He also appeared as a Guest Artist with several other ballet companies.

At only 5’2″, he is famous for being the shortest male dancer ever admitted into the Royal Ballet School. His unique physique meant that he was often chosen for character roles.

In 1981 Sleep created the role of Mr. Mistoffelees in Andrew Lloyd Webber’s famous musical ‘Cats’ in London’s West End. The following year, Lloyd Webber adapted his ‘Variations’ album as the second half of the stage show ‘Song and Dance’ especially for Sleep.

Sleep became an OBE in 1998. As well as dancing, he has appeared in a number of television programmes, published books and has a wide variety of acting and choreography credits to his name. Now in his late 60s, he continues to pass on his knowledge and passion for dance through a programme of workshops which he runs all over the world. He also runs a Foundation which provides scholarships for talented youngsters to help them further their training.

Sleep has also been a world record holder since 1973. His record of completing six ‘entrechat douze’ – a jump with twelve beats of the feet where the legs are crossed in mid-air from a standing position – has held firm for more than 40 years. Prior to this the record was five and was held by Vaslav Nijinsky, a Russian often described as the greatest male dancer of the 20th century.