Royal Air Force Air GVR RAF Officer's Sword of AVM. Sir Geoffrey Rhodes Bromet KBE, CB, DSO, DL A very good example of the regulation pattern, George V period and complete with special pattern scabbard. The single edged straight blade with etched decoration of a Royal Arms and RAF crest. To the forte the retailer’s details of Gieves. The hilt with white shagreen grip enclosed by a gilt guard incorporating the RAF crest and Crowned GVR cypher The grip surmounted by an eagle head pommel. Contained in the special pattern Air Officer scabbard, the gilt mounts embossed with floral decoration. Complete with with bullion knot. Gilt remains bright and fresh near Parade condition, small amount of age wear. ... Accompanied by an Isle of Man presentation sword, made by Wilkinson the blade with presentation text "Presented by His Honour First Deemster and Clerk of the Rolls S J Kneale C.B.E. to Air Vice Marshall Sir Geoffrey Bromet for his outstanding service as Lieutenant Governor of the Isle of Man from 1945 to 1952". To the forte the three legs Arms of the Isle of Man. (2 items) Air Vice Marshal Sir Geoffrey Rhodes Bromet KBE, CB, DSO, DL was commissioned into the Royal Navy and during the Great War served as a Flight Commander with the Royal Naval Air Service, being commended for his service at Gallipoli in 1915 and later commanding No. 1 Squadron RNAS and then No. 8 Squadron RNAS. In 1919 he was commissioned permanently as a major in the Royal Air Force. After commanding the Marine Aircraft Experimental Establishment, he was appointed Senior Engineering Staff Officer at Headquarters Coastal Area in 1931, Senior Air Staff Officer at Headquarters RAF Middle East in 1933 and Senior Air Staff Officer at Headquarters RAF Coastal Command in 1936. He served in WW2 as Air Officer Commanding No. 19 Group and then as Air Officer Commanding No. 247 Group before retiring at his own request in 1945.

In 1945 he was appointed Lieutenant Governor of the Isle of Man and held this post until 1952. He died in 1983 at the age of 92.