George V Air Vice Marshal Sir Geoffrey Bromet's RAF Sword, Sold

In very good condition, a super rare George V RAF Senior Officer's Sword, that of Air Vice Marshal Sir Geoffrey Rhodes Bromet KBE, CB, DSO, DL.

How can you tell this is a senior RAF officer's sword? Just look at the scabbard fittings and compare them to a regular officer's scabbard. How do we know this is the sword of Air Vice Marshal Sir Geoffrey Bromet? Because we bought it along with two of his other swords (IoM Appreciation and Diplomatic Swords) and had email confirmation from the seller (through the auctioneer) that they were all his grandfather's. See: Geoffrey Bromet Career.

His Isle of Man state appreciation sword (for being Lieutenant Governor).

The 32 3/4 inch dress (picquet) weight blade is in very good condition, with only a few minor rust patches which are thankfully away from the etching. Etched to famous naval retailer Gieves (the RAF was really born from the RNAS (Royal Naval Air Service) and RFG (Royal Flying Corps), so the sword was actually made by Wilkinson Sword. Blade firm in the hilt. The hilt has most if not all of its fine gilt remaining and is in very good condition save for a very slightly bent section of the outer lip, almost certainly period (a specialist could correct it). The white fishskin grip in very good condition. The twisted grip wire bindings with some tarnish and a lesser wire a little astray, but overall good. The original sword knot in good condition. The gilt on leather scabbard is good but the middle fitting and chape / drag showing some tarnish around the fitting joints. The sword sheathes and draws well. The original leather all weather bag and roeskin liner aged but sound.

Look, it is such a rare sword that the chances are that you will never, ever get a chance to buy another. What is more, we have full provenance on the original and very important Air Vice Marshall that once owned it. Don't blink, or it will be gone. Price: £? (too late, now sold). Please quote item reference number AE96 (1036). Further / full sized pictures available upon request.