vs.

I made a thread about a month ago pitting two of my favorite games of all time against each other: RE4 and NGB - and many more than I expected were a bit vocal that I was a fool to put NGB over even DMC3. And so, with some time behind us, I make this poll.

NGB is the 2005 enhanced version of the Xbox-exclusive Ninja Gaiden, and DMC3 was released that same year exclusively for the PS2. The former is wonderfully supported by Xbox backwards compatibility, offering a 4K/60fps option; the latter has seen ports on Windows and just about every console since through re-releases and enhanced versions/collections.

Ninja Gaiden Black (Xbox) has a 94 Metacritic, and DMC3 (PS2) has an 84. IGN gave NGB a 9.4 and said this:

"Everything about Ninja Gaiden Black leaves me very impressed. Here is a game that can appeal to everyone from the most casual of players to those who haven't stopped booting up Ninja Gaiden every day. There is one caveat: Those with less than considerable ability won't get as much out of this game as others due to the incredible difficulty of most of the new content. There's something for every type of gamer here, but not every part is for everyone."

IGN gave DMC3 a 9.6. and said this:

"I wish I could convey in words just how good Devil May Cry 3 really is. I know that I've already gone on for three pages with reasons why I think you should care about it, but I'm not sure if I've done it enough justice. Just believe me when I say that Dante's Awakening has everything. It has the fun, the depth, and the look. It has the reason to skip school, the reason to call in sick to work, and the reason to reconsider that Friday night date. It has five difficulty settings (all challenging, most insane), plenty of secret missions, unlockable bonuses and costumes, an easy to use interface, and more brain-twisting puzzles than the first two games combined. In other words, it's the reason you bought a PlayStation 2, now go and enjoy it."

NGB is a re-release of an older game, with DMC3 being a brand new entry. That said, for the sake of this particular poll and the fact we're coming back to these games nearly two decades later - I'd say pit your "favorite" variant of NGB to your "favorite" variant/release of DMC3, and pick a winner.

I sincerely think they're both great games - and neither are anything less than "great." But I just, personally, feel NGB is on an entirely different level. Clearly based off the last thread, that's not a universal opinion - and hey, IGN gave DMC3 2/100ths of a better score ;p But to me? Even if both are great, NGB is one of the best games of all time and one I could go back to every couple years. I've played through DMC3 once and I think that was enough at release.