Devil May Cry HD Collection is an action-adventure game developed by Capcom. It was originally released in 2012. It was published by Capcom. On review aggregator Metacritic, Devil May Cry HD Collection has a score of 70. The game is rated as "Recommended" on RAWG. Devil May Cry HD Collection is available on Xbox One, Xbox 360, PlayStation 4 and PC. You can purchase the game on Xbox 360 Store, PlayStation Store, Xbox Store and Steam. It was produced by Hiroyuki Kobayashi. It was directed by Hideki Kamiya. It was scored by Masami Ueda, Masato Kohda and Misao Senbongi.

Devil May Cry 4: Special Edition is an action game developed by Capcom. It was originally released in 2015. It was published by Capcom. Most rawgers rated the game as "Recommended". Devil May Cry 4: Special Edition is available on Xbox One, PlayStation 4 and PC. You can purchase the game on Steam. It was produced by Hiroyuki Kobayashi. Hideaki Itsuno directed the game. It was scored by Akihiko Narita, Kento Hasegawa, Kota Suzuki and Shusaku Uchiyama.

Devil May Cry 3: Dante's Awakening is an action game developed by Capcom U.S.A. It was originally released in 2005. Capcom published the game. Devil May Cry 3: Dante's Awakening has a Metascore of 78, based on professional reviews. The game is rated as "Exceptional" on RAWG. You can play Devil May Cry 3: Dante's Awakening on PlayStation 2, Xbox 360, PC and PlayStation 3. The game is sold via PlayStation Store. Tsuyoshi Tanaka produced the game. Hideaki Itsuno directed the game. It was scored by Kento Hasegawa and Tetsuya Shibata.

Onimusha: Warlords is an action game developed by Capcom and Capcom U.S.A. It was originally released in 2001. It was published by Capcom. On review aggregator Metacritic, Onimusha: Warlords has a score of 86. The game is rated as "Recommended" on RAWG. Onimusha: Warlords is available on Xbox, PlayStation 4, Nintendo Switch and PC. You can purchase the game on Steam, PlayStation Store, Nintendo eShop and Xbox Store. Keiji Inafune and Shinji Mikami produced the game. It was directed by Jun Takeuchi and Shinji Mikami. It was scored by Takashi Niigaki.

Exoprimal is an action-shooter game developed by Capcom. It came out on 14-07-2023. Capcom published the game. Most rawgers rated the game as "Meh". You can play Exoprimal on PC, PlayStation 5, Xbox Series S/X and PlayStation 4. You can purchase the game on PlayStation Store and Steam.

Bayonetta 3 is an action game developed by Platinum Games. It came out on 28-10-2022. It was published by Nintendo. On review aggregator Metacritic, Bayonetta 3 has a score of 86. Most rawgers rated the game as "Exceptional". Bayonetta 3 is available on Nintendo Switch. You can purchase the game on Nintendo eShop. It was produced by Akiko Kuroda, Atsushi Kurooka, Hitoshi Yamagami and Yusuke Hashimoto. Hideki Kamiya directed the game. It was scored by Erina Niwa, Hiroshi Yamaguchi, Masami Ueda and Norihiko Hibino.

Exoprimal Open Beta Test is an action game developed by Capcom. It came out on 15-03-2023. It was published by Capcom. The game is rated as "Meh" on RAWG. You can play Exoprimal Open Beta Test on PC. The game is sold via Steam.

Bayonetta 2 is an action game developed by Platinum Games. It came out on 20-09-2014. It was published by Nintendo. Bayonetta 2 has a Metascore of 92, based on professional reviews. The game is rated as "Exceptional" on RAWG. Bayonetta 2 is available on Wii U and Nintendo Switch. You can purchase the game on Nintendo eShop. It was produced by Atsushi Inaba and Hitoshi Yamagami. It was directed by Yusuke Hashimoto. It was scored by Masami Ueda.

Mega Man X5 is an action-arcade game developed by Capcom and Sony Interactive Entertainment. It came out on 30-11-2000. Capcom published the game. Most rawgers rated the game as "Exceptional". Mega Man X5 is available on PlayStation and PC. The game is sold via PlayStation Store. It was produced by Tatsuya Minami. It was directed by Koji Okohara. It was scored by Naoto Tanaka, Naoya Kamisaka and Takuya Miyawaki.

BIOHAZARD VILLAGE Z Version is an action game developed by Capcom. It came out on 22-01-2021. It was published by Capcom. The game is rated as "Skip" on RAWG. You can play BIOHAZARD VILLAGE Z Version on PlayStation 5, Xbox One, PC and PlayStation 4. You can purchase the game on PlayStation Store and Steam.

Resident Evil: Village is an action-adventure game developed by Capcom. It was originally released in 2021. Capcom published the game. On review aggregator Metacritic, Resident Evil: Village has a score of 83. The game is rated as "Exceptional" on RAWG. Resident Evil: Village is available on Xbox Series S/X, PC, iOS and PlayStation 5. The game is sold via Steam, PlayStation Store and Xbox Store. It was produced by Tsuyoshi Kanda.