Bloodhound is an indie action game developed by Kruger & Flint Productions. It came out on 18-07-2023. Kruger & Flint Productions published the game. The game is rated as "Meh" on RAWG. You can play Bloodhound on PC. You can purchase the game on Steam.

Devil May Cry is an action game developed by Capcom. It came out on 23-08-2001. Capcom published the game. On review aggregator Metacritic, Devil May Cry has a score of 84. Most rawgers rated the game as "Recommended". You can play Devil May Cry on Xbox 360, PlayStation 3, Xbox One and Nintendo Switch. The game is sold via PlayStation Store and Nintendo eShop. It was produced by Hideaki Itsuno. It was directed by Hideki Kamiya. It was scored by Masahiro Aoki, Masami Ueda, Takanori Arima and Tetsuya Shibata.

God of War (2018) is an action game developed by Santa Monica Studio. It was originally released in 2018. It was published by PlayStation PC. God of War (2018) has a Metascore of 94, based on professional reviews. Most rawgers rated the game as "Exceptional". You can play God of War (2018) on PC and PlayStation 4. You can purchase the game on GOG, PlayStation Store, Steam and Epic Games Store. Chad Cox, Elizabeth Dahm Wang, Eric Fong and Sean Llewellyn produced the game. It was directed by Cory Barlog and Matt Sophos. It was scored by Bear McCreary.

The Saboteur is an action, shooter and adventure game developed by Electronic Arts and Pandemic Studios. It came out on 04-12-2009. Electronic Arts published the game. On review aggregator Metacritic, The Saboteur has a score of 66. The game is rated as "Recommended" on RAWG. The Saboteur is available on PC, PlayStation 3 and Xbox 360. You can purchase the game on Steam, PlayStation Store, GOG and Xbox 360 Store. It was produced by Phil Hong. Cameron Brown and Trey Watkins directed the game. Gabriel Mann and Rebecca Kneubuhl scored the game.

Sekiro: Shadows Die Twice is an action-RPG game developed by FromSoftware. It came out on 22-03-2019. It was published by FromSoftware. Sekiro: Shadows Die Twice has a Metascore of 90, based on professional reviews. The game is rated as "Exceptional" on RAWG. Sekiro: Shadows Die Twice is available on Xbox One, PC and PlayStation 4. The game is sold via Xbox Store, Steam and PlayStation Store. It was directed by Hidetaka Miyazaki. It was scored by Yuka Kitamura.

Blind Fate: Edo no Yami is an action-adventure game developed by Troglobytes Games. It came out on 15-09-2022. It was published by 101XP. Most rawgers rated the game as "Meh". Blind Fate: Edo no Yami is available on PC. The game is sold via Steam and GOG.

Aragami is an indie action-adventure game developed by Lince Works. It came out on 03-10-2016. It was published by Lince Works. On review aggregator Metacritic, Aragami has a score of 71. The game is rated as "Recommended" on RAWG. Aragami is available on Xbox One, PC, macOS and Linux. The game is sold via PlayStation Store, Steam, GOG and Nintendo eShop.

Onimusha: Warlords is an action game developed by Capcom and Capcom U.S.A. It was originally released in 2001. It was published by Capcom. On review aggregator Metacritic, Onimusha: Warlords has a score of 86. The game is rated as "Recommended" on RAWG. Onimusha: Warlords is available on Xbox, PlayStation 4, Nintendo Switch and PC. You can purchase the game on Steam, PlayStation Store, Nintendo eShop and Xbox Store. Keiji Inafune and Shinji Mikami produced the game. It was directed by Jun Takeuchi and Shinji Mikami. It was scored by Takashi Niigaki.

Halo Infinite is an action, shooter and adventure game developed by 343 Industries. It came out on 08-12-2021. It was published by Xbox Game Studios. Halo Infinite has a Metascore of 84, based on professional reviews. The game is rated as "Recommended" on RAWG. Halo Infinite is available on Xbox One, PC and Xbox Series S/X. The game is sold via Steam and Xbox Store.

Animal Rescuer is an indie, action, adventure and RPG game developed by Turquoise Revival Games. It came out on 22-12-2020. Turquoise Revival Games published the game. Animal Rescuer is available on PC. You can purchase the game on Steam.

Mortal Kombat 11 is an action, adventure and fighting game developed by NetherRealm Studios, QLOC and Shiver Games. It came out on 22-04-2019. Warner Bros. Interactive published the game. On review aggregator Metacritic, Mortal Kombat 11 has a score of 82. The game is rated as "Recommended" on RAWG. You can play Mortal Kombat 11 on Nintendo Switch, Xbox One, PC and PlayStation 4. You can purchase the game on PlayStation Store, Steam, Nintendo eShop and Xbox Store. It was directed by Ed Boon.