The big problem at Twitter? The number of people who really use the thing. Power users love to tweet, but n00bs just don’t get it.

This afternoon, the embattled company released its second quarter earnings report, and although Twitter beat the expectations of Wall Street analysts in terms of revenue, the company's monthly-active-user growth remains slow. And in the U.S., it's practically nonexistent.

During the company's earning call, chief financial officer Anthony Noto said that stats indicate that "We've only reached early adopters and tech enthusiasts. And we’ve not yet reached the next cohort of users known as the mass market."

That difference is significant. Whereas Facebook can tell advertisers that it serves more than 1.4 billion monthly users—and upwards of 900 million daily active users—Twitter has to settle for a userbase of a little more than 300 million. And about 250 million of those are overseas. "Nonusers can continue to ask: ‘Why should I use Twitter?’” Noto said, adding that for those who don’t regularly use Twitter it remains "too difficult to use."

That's quite an admission. And it shows that although Facebook has turned social networking into a serious money maker, others are still struggling to crack the code.

What is Twitter doing to change this predicament? On the earnings call, cofounder and interim CEO Jack Dorsey emphasized new products that would make it easier for new users to understand the service.

"You’ll see us continue to question the chronological timeline and all the work it takes to build one and finding accounts," Dorsey said, before nodding to new tools like "While You’re Away," a summary of tweets you missed while doing others things, and "Project Lightning," the upcoming Twitter tab that will include events-based curated feeds.

But Noto called for patience. "We expect that [it] will take a considerable period of time" to reach the mass market, he said. But will advertisers have that patience? Will Wall Street?

Former YouTube CEO Susan Wojcicki Dies at 56

Susan Wojcicki is one of this era's great unsung executives—and was crucial to Google's trajectory from its very beginnings in her garage.

The Olympics' Hostile Architecture Is a Preview of What's to Come

Under a bridge in Paris, a homeless encampment has been replaced with dozens of giant Lego-like bricks. Campaigners say things will likely get worse at the 2028 Games in LA.

OpenAI Warns Users Could Become Emotionally Hooked on Its Voice Mode

The company has revealed details of AI model safety testing—including concerns about its new anthropomorphic interface.

Google's Rise Was Inevitable. So Was Its Antitrust Ruling

This week, a US federal district court judge ruled that Google was a monopolist. It's been a long time coming.

CrowdStrike Faces a Potential Tsunami of Lawsuits. Only the Fine Print Can Save It, Experts Say

After crashing millions of computers and disrupting businesses across the globe, cybersecurity company CrowdStrike must protect itself against a flurry of legal activity that is already beginning. The devil will be in the details.

AI Is Heating the Olympic Pool

A data center in Paris has been hooked up to the energy system heating the Olympic pool. But critics say that projects recycling data centers’ excess heat are a distraction from the real environmental costs of AI.

Palmer Luckey’s Defense Startup, Anduril, Raises $1.5 Billion to Produce AI-Powered Weapons

The company plans to build a Tesla-style, software-optimized factory to manufacture autonomous drones and other battlefield tech.

Huge Microsoft Outage Caused by CrowdStrike Takes Down Computers Around the World

A software update from cybersecurity company CrowdStrike appears to have inadvertently disrupted IT systems globally.