Kissflow is known for being the first Unified Digital Workplace Platform that allows you to manage all of your work in a single place. The platform is designed to help all business users discover, create, modify, and use business applications, with each app guaranteed to be easy to use, accessible, and user-friendly. The focus is to offer something for non-technical people, ensuring that no coding or complex mapping is required.

Company OrangeScape Technologies Year founded 2004 Company size 201-500 employees Headquarters Chennai, Tamil Nadu, India Social Media

the best feature is the possibility to easily create and customize your own apps - with integrations, actions, datasets. all without having to write any code, just using some formulas here and there.

This adaptable program has significantly improved cloud-based productivity and quality. Truth be told, it has been crucial in counteracting acquired data. Its superior user interface is a key factor in improving administrative performance. For me, it is an excellent value. I look forward to reaping many benefits from this program in the near future. The management programs you have indicated and created have been invaluable in shaping the solution and solving the data storage problems. For each of us individually, it has been a really fantastic and cutting edge piece of software.

We have identified a crucial interaction within the company that will help reduce the strain on upcoming projects and free up valuable data storage space. We have eliminated a lot of wasted time and can now organize our data as we need it. Our company procedures have been successfully computerized. Kissflow offers a wide range of functions, such as case management, project management, client management and many others. Kissflow is a great choice for companies of any size that want to increase their production and efficiency.

Kiss flow is a very powerful system to manage work and document. It is very easy to use and also without knoledge, or very, poor knoledge, of programming it is possible to achieve very good results.

In some situation it would be useful to have more possibilities to intract with person that are ouside the platform. It would be a good idea to have a kind of external use tha can start process and/or see and creat reports.

We use Kiss flow to analyze, approuve and manage all the documents (thousands of documents) requested in a big construction site in the South of Italy and our management system it is emprouved a lot.

Kissflow has an interactive interface. For starters, it is user friendly. The report is also easy to customize and easy to use and with new developments aroudn the application, I will always recommend it.

To mention a few, claim management, policy endorsement and processing, all workflow approvals which helps with a full end to end integration. Kissflow has helped improve our TAT and it is wonderful.

It reduces the turnaround time of concerns with manual processes by automating the processes, and it also reduces the use of paper and helps with the safekeeping of documents.

I like Kissflow, but not all systems are perfect. It has limits. For example, the integrations, compared to before, have more integrations but still lack. Formulas for automating fields also have its limitations.

In our case, it was used as a ticketing system. It helps to remove the misrouting of tickets and helps the turnaround time to be reduced, from 2 weeks turnaround time into 3 days.

Kissflow is simply amazing! It's the primary document platform in our organisation, for Organized Documenrt Management and Approval Workflow. As the Business Systems Analyst, I manage the workflow design and implementation, and it's really easy to use, and flexible to suit different workflpw process needs. We use kissflow for all document approvals, eliminating paper shuffling across the entire organisation.. Highly recommended any day!

I wish it had a scripting engine where I can further extend the app to very custom needs. It has impressive nocode integrations built in, but with a scripting engine, I could take full control of how I want it to work.

136 / 5.000 Resultados de traducción Resultado de traducción Until now, everything has been in excellent condition, from the creation of processes to the administration and monitoring of flows with users.

We solved process problems since before they were by mail now we handle them from a single platform. And the best thing is that we can export the information and make reports

Having an Integration from Kissflow to NetSuite. I there was a NetSuite native connector so we will have to use the SOAP connector.

Our account support person made working with kissflow a breeze. We were new to the platform and they had so much patience and insight to teach us how it all works. Very appreciative.

We have a complicated workflow for regarding student classification. We were migrating from a paper process and this was much needed. The benefits are myriad, it helps us better track where we are in the process and gives us more assurances that the proper items are completed.

It is very intuitive, also it has many options for users, which makes it dynamic and easy to adopt.It is easy to create processes from scratch or generate a custom one from the templates

Understanding it from the beginning is somewhat complicated. I would like there to be more tutorials. They could have tutorials, or even courses to understand it and get the most out of it

We try to prototype some of our MVPs the fastest way possible, and Kissflow has allowed us that.

I like how the processes can be created. So far everything I needed to do fits in this app. The app is well designed.