OrangeScape is a platform-as-a-service (PaaS) company that was created to facilitate business application development. I first featured OrangeScape on my blog in 2009. The company was founded in India in 2003 and today has headquarters in Chennai and offices in Mountain View, California. OrangeScape gained early traction via a Chennai manufacturing firm for which it had built an HR application. Moving from one client to another, OrangeScape slowly established itself. Because PaaS was a new concept that posed unique challenges, the company grew slowly. To minimize risk, co-founders Suresh Sambandam (CEO) and Mani Doraisamy (CTO) focused solely on the Indian market. That move paid off, helping OrangeScape to survive its first year in business and remain cash-flow positive from 2006 to present day, serving such big name clients as Pfizer, AstraZeneca and Citibank.

In February 2011, OrangeScape became the first company to be backed by our 1M/1M-Persistent Systems partnership to bring technologies from startup companies to market. Headquartered in Pune, India, Persistent Systems is a leader in outsourced product development with more than 250 customers.

“Over time, we foresee OrangeScape becoming a leader in the A-PaaS (Application PaaS) space and also a cornerstone of the Google enterprise solution portfolio.” That was my prediction about OrangeScape back in February 2011. And it was correct. OrangeScape identified a gap in Google’s App Engine product, whereby, companies moving from Lotus Notes to Google Apps routinely ran into problems porting their long tail applications. Google App Engine did not have a visual development offering – an Application PaaS, if you will – and today, OrangeScape parachutes in to address that limitation. For more details on what is happening in the enterprise productivity apps marketplace, please read this article from our Thought Leaders in Cloud Computing series: Cutting Costs.

More recently, OrangeScape has come up with KiSSFLOW (Keep it Simple & Smart Workflow). KiSSFLOW is the first workflow product specifically built for Google Apps. KiSSFLOW offers customers a simple and efficient way to automate workflows around their existing email user bases. This includes travel claims and expense reports, leave requests, budget approvals, and other HR and business processes. KiSSFLOW runs on Google cloud, the same infrastructure that customers are comfortable with and already using.

Suresh and Mani figured out that their clients were following a pattern while creating applications. Customers who moved to the cloud, especially to Google Apps, were creating workflows that were very specific to Google Apps. Some of the workflows were quite complex and needed IT involvement. On the other side, some of the workflows were pretty simple and involved activities like sending documents or filling forms for approval. Most of the clients did not have the budget to automate the entire workflow; hence they ran on emails and spreadsheets and struggled a lot to keep track of the processes. Suresh and Mani saw this gap. All the available workflow solutions were made for complex workflows. Hence, they created KiSSFLOW. They designed KiSSFLOW in such a way that it can easily automate workflows, and it integrates deeply with Google Apps. KiSSFLOW was launched in June 2011 at Google I/O in the prime cloud session. Many technical analysts reviewed KiSSFLOW; 300 companies from 64 countries signed up for KiSSFLOW in the first week of launch. And KiSSFLOW was part of all keynote demos in g|day, India.

KiSSFLOW is available in the Google Apps Marketplace. It is free for up to 10 users, then costs $3 per user. Suresh and Mani want to make KiSSFLOW the de facto workflow product for Google Apps and make it the driving force for consumers to choose Google Apps over other cloud based PaaS solutions.

By making KiSSFLOW specific for Google Apps, Mani and Suresh have set the stage with Google at Google I/O and g|day. However, they still find it challenging to get better traction, PR in the U.S. and European markets, and connect to resellers and partners. The company has already raised $1 million and will consider raising additional capital as its business plan demands.

One of few Indian product companies attempting to break into the global market, OrangeScape has deftly navigated many years of challenging circumstances. Today, it has a relatively well-set, mature team that has developed strong core-competency in the Google Apps eco-system, as well as in PaaS. The next leg of their journey, we hope, will accelerate their growth, as well as diversify the revenue streams across multiple products that leverage one another.

One of my key observations about the Indian technology startup eco-system is that it still lacks in product marketing savvy. With KiSSFLOW, OrangeScape is demonstrating evidence of maturing product marketing talent capable of sniffing out opportunities based on customer pain-points.

This is rare, and welcome.