OrangeScape’s Kissflow Lets Businesses Create and Manage Traditionally Complex HR and Business Approval Processes with Simplicity, New Features Also Unveiled

OrangeScape today announced it has added Kissflow™ to the Google Apps Marketplace™, Google’s online storefront for Google Apps™ products and services. Kissflow is the first workflow creator tool to create and manage workflows specifically built for Google Apps. Kissflow offers customers a simple and efficient way to automate workflows around their existing email user base. This includes travel claims and expense reports; leave requests, budget approvals and other HR and business processes. In addition, Kissflow is unveiling new features, which includes sign-on, group assignment, and email integration.

“Approval processes in businesses with 100 or more employees are typically complex and lengthy,” said Mani Doraisamy, Co-Founder and CTO of OrangeScape. “There’s a mix of emails, spreadsheets and other documents related to processes like submitting an expense report. While required, these workflow processes decrease productivity and de-focus people from core business goals. Kissflow is purposely designed to create cloud-based Google workflows that remove complexity. This vastly accelerates and streamlines the daily procedures of HR and other business approval processes.”

Kissflow is designed with a familiar Gmail-styled interface to remove any learning curves. The app fully integrates with Google Apps Mail, Docs and Contacts. Users can browse their Docs within Kissflow and attach them to any workflow request. Workflow tracking is also possible. Kissflow provides a reporting capability to view, analyze and gather insights about workflow tasks.

Latest Features

Kissflow has also made available three new convenience features:

Single sign-on allows all users in a company to access Kissflow from the Google navigation bar. With a single click, users can switch between Mail, Docs, Kissflow and other apps. This removes additional login and logout steps.

User and group assignment processes have been updated. Typical workflow software requires assigning groups of users to a role and then assigning a role to a workflow step. This process requires learning and can be complicated. Kissflow now allows process owners to instead assign email groups to workflow steps. This is a more natural process for workflow owners traditionally used to emailing groups about a workflow task.

The third new feature is email integration. When a workflow task is assigned to someone they’ll receive an automatic email detailing the task they need to act on.

Pricing

Kissflow offers a simple approach to pricing. Every user is $9/month for unlimited creation of apps.

Update: As of May 2019, Kissflow switched to a different pricing plan. The workflow tool now has built-in capabilities for collaboration, project and case management.

The Google Apps Marketplace makes it easy for more than 5 million businesses using Google Apps to discover, purchase and deploy integrated business applications and related professional services. By integrating with user account and application data stored in Google Apps, these cloud applications provide a simpler user experience, increase business efficiency, and reduce administrative overhead. To learn more, visit google.com/appsmarketplace.

About OrangeScape

OrangeScape is a leading Platform as a Service (PaaS) company. Its PaaS solution enables the creation of cloud-based, SaaS or on-premise business applications. OrangeScape-based applications have been developed across nearly 100 application categories: time sheet; payroll; loan origination, and more. Customers include AstraZeneca™; Citi®; Ford®; Pfizer™ and dozens more. OrangeScape also offers Kissflow, the first workflow builder app specifically for Google Apps™. With Kissflow, businesses can easily create HR and business approval workflow processes in a few simple steps. OrangeScape has secured $1M in an angel bridge round of venture funding. The lead investor is former CEO of Yahoo® India, Sharad Sharma. Other investors include Pramod Bhasin (former chairman, NASSCOM® and CEO of Genpact®); Linda Bernardi (CEO StraTerra Partners); Venkat Raju; and Raman Roy (CEO of Quattro Global Services). The company maintains offices in Mountain View, Calif. and Chennai, India. More information about Kissflow Process is available at workflow process

Note: Whether noted or not, references to certain words may be trademarks or registered trademarks of their respective owners.