HOW GREEN WAS MY VALLEY

Screenplay by Philip Dunne

Based on a novel by Richard Llewellyn

Directed by John Ford

Produced by Darryl F. Zanuck

20th Century Fox

1941

__________

How Green Was My Valley won Academy Awards for Best Picture (Darryl F. Zanuck), Best Director (John Ford), Best Supporting Actor (Donald Crisp), Best Cinematography (Arthur Miller), Best Art Direction (Richard Day, Nathan Juran combined with set decorator Thomas Little). Additionally, the film was nominated for Academy Awards for Best Screenplay (Philip Dunne), Best Supporting Actress

(Sara Allgood), Best Editing (James B. Clark), Best Musical Score (Alfred Newman), Best Sound (Eugene Crossman and Roger Heman).

The New York Film Critics presented John Ford their Best Direction Award

of 1941.

__________

20TH CENTURY-FOX FILM CORPORATION

PRESENTS

HOW GREEN WAS MY VALLEY

Produced by DARRYL F. ZANUCK

Directed by JOHN FORD

Screenplay by PHILIP DUNNE

Based on the Novel by RICHARD LLEWELLYN

Cinematographer: ARTHUR MILLER

Music: ALFRED NEWMAN

Choral Effects by EISTEDDFOD SINGERS OF WALES

Editor: JAMES B. CLARK

Narrator: IRVING PICHEL

Narrator for United Kingdom Version: RHYS WILLIAMS

Art Direction: RICHARD DAY and NATHAN JURAN

Make-Up: GUY PIERCE

Set Decorator: THOMAS LITTLE

Costumes: GWEN WAKELING

Sound: EUGENE GROSSMAN and ROGER HEMAN

Filmed in Black & White

Running Time: 118 Minutes

__________

THE CAST

MR. GRUFFYDD WALTER PIDGEON

ANGHARAD MORGAN MAUREEN O'HARA

GWILYM MORGAN DONALD CRISP

MRS. BETH MORGAN SARA ALLGOOD

BRONWEN MORGAN ANNA LEE

HUW MORGAN RODDY McDOWALL

IANTO MORGAN JOHN LODER

IVOR MORGAN PATRICK KNOWLES

DAVY MORGAN RICHARD FRASER

OWEN MORGAN JAMES MONKS

YOUNG GWILYM MORGAN EVAN S. EVANS

DAI BANDO RHYS WILLIAMS

CYFARTHA BARRY FITZGERALD

THE WELSH SINGERS THEMSELVES

MR. JONAS MORTON LOWERY

MR. PARRY ARTHUR SHIELDS

CEINWEN ANN TODD

DR. RICHARDS FREDERIC WORLOCK

OLD EVANS LIONEL PAPE

MRS. NICHOLAS ETHEL GRIFFIES

IESTYN EVANS MARTEN LAMONT

MEILLYN LEWIS EVE MARCH

MINER'S WIFE MAE MARSH

MINER LOUIS JEAN HEYDT

ENSEMBLE SINGER TUDOR WILLIAMS

POSTMAN HERBERT EVANS

EVE MARY FIELD

BIT WOMAN MARY GORDON

SHOP KEEPER TINY JONES

MERVYN CLIFFORD SEVERN

Additionally FRANK BAKER

TAILOR (cut from final release) JOSEPH M. KERRIGAN

MOTSHILL (cut from final release) DENIS HOEY

__________

HOW GREEN WAS MY VALLEY

PART ONE

We hear a magnificent choir of men's voices singing one of the great Welsh songs. The voices continue through the opening scene, but more softly when the voice of the Narrator comes in.

We see Huw's HANDS, the hands of a man about sixty, carefully folding some shirts, ties and socks into an old blue cloth. As the hands knot the blue cloth round the clothes, the scene shifts to the window, so that we can see, beyond, a typical WELSH COAL VALLEY, ugly, dirty, dominated by its stacks, cranes and towering slag heap. Not far from the window the great slag heap rises in a broken sweep, high into the sky.

Huw's VOICE (simultaneous with the unfolding scenes). I am packing my belongings in the little blue cloth my mother used to tie around her hair when she did the house, and I am going from my Valley. And this time I shall never return.

I am leaving behind me my sixty years of memory- Memory.

There is strange that the mind will forget so much of what only this moment is passed, and yet hold so clear and bright the memory of what happened years ago -of men and women long since dead. For there is no fence nor hedge round Time that is gone. You can go back and have what you like of it-if you can remember.

The scene shifts, as if passing through the window, until we are looking up the steep STREET. In the background are the slag heap and the collieries. Moving up and down the street are poorly dressed men, walking bent because of the steepness of the street. The houses are built of quarry stone, grimy and huddled together-an atmosphere of poverty and decay. Finally the entire ugly coal VALLEY spreads before us. Smoke, blackness, poverty.

Then the picture dims slowly down as the Valley, as it once was, appears, fresh and green, each detail in the new scene fitting in with its counterpart in the old. The Chapel, almost hidden in the first scene, now stands bravely in view. Next we see the COLLIERY with only a small slag heap-a splotch of ugly black on the green; then, the CHAPEL dominating the street.

And now we see the COLLIERY with only a small slag heap-a splotch of ugly black on the green.

The Exterior of the CHAPEL is next seen, dominating the street.

Huw's VOICE. So I can close my eyes on my Valley as it is today-and it is gone and I see it as it was when I was a boy. Green it was, and possessed of the plenty of the earth. In all Wales, there was none so beautiful, for the colliery had only begun to poke its skinny black fingers through the green. The black slag the waste of the coalpits-made only a small pile then-and our little Chapel was master of the Valley from where it stood at the head of the street.

Far down below a man and boy appear, slowly climbing the hill. They are GWILYM MORGAN and his ten-year-old son, the same HUW who is the Narrator of our picture. Both wear the clothes of the period around 1890. They are of a family of coal miners and are attired accordingly. Morgan is smiling down at Huw as the boy struggles to keep up with his father's great strides.

HUW is seen drinking in what his father says. He looks round him as if expecting actually to see the men of whom his father is speaking. Then the two stop on the ridge of the hill, where they are silhouetted against the golden light that bathes the Valley. The wind blows through their hair.

Huw's voice. Everything I ever learnt as a small boy came from my father, and I never found anything he ever told me to be wrong or worthless. He used to tell me of my Valley and its people-the brave men of Wales who never bowed to Roman or Danish or Saxon conquerors until so many had died that the women could not bear enough children to fill the ranks. The Men of the Valley, long since gathered to their Fathers-became as real to me as if I had met them face to face. But the battles they had fought had been long forgotten and we of my Valley fought a new fight now-to wrest from beneath the green the black wealth of Nature: the coal-which first enriched us and then made us poorer than we had been before. Coal miners were my father and all my brothers-and proud of our trade as our ancestors had been of theirs.

The scene dissolves, first to the COLLIERY WHISTLE, which is blowing, -and then to a section of the colliery, a COLLIERY CUTTING, with IVOR, the eldest of the Morgan sons, punching at the coal face with his pick. He wears a miner's outfit and is blackened and grimy with the coal dust.

Huw's VOICE. We were a big family. After my father: Ivor, the eldest-solid and dependable as the mountainside.

In ANOTHER CUTTING, IANTO, second of the sons, up to his waist in water, is levering out a boulder with a crowbar. Ian to turns at the sound of the whistle.

Huw's VOICE. Ianto-who had the devil's own tongue and liked a fight better than the blood in his veins-

DAVY is seen, pick on shoulder, lantern in hand. He is coming down from one of the cuttings.

Huw's VOICE. Davy, the brain of the family-

OWEN AND GWILYM appear trundling a barrowful of coal.

Huw's VOICE. Owen, the dreamer, whom we seldom heard speak-Gwilym, who was named for my father, and yet as quick with his tongue as my father was slow-

The scene dissolves to the interior of the COLLIERY, where the miners, with Morgan and his sons prominent, are taking their places in the CAGE. It moves slowly up, revealing some adolescent boys.

At the MINE ENTRANCE. It is day, and the stalwart miners, grimy with coal dust, are coming from the cages and lining up to get their pay. The Morgans again are prominent.

IVOR is seen receiving his pay in gold from the paymaster in his little booth. There are gold coins on the paymaster's counter. Ivor drops one and it rings faintly.

Huw's VOICE. Saturday was the great day, for then the men would be paid off as they came off the morning shift.

In those early days of the colliery, money was easily earned, and plenty of it. And not in pieces of paper, either. Solid gold sovereigns, yellow as summer daffodils and they rang when you hit them on something solid.

We see the MORGAN HOUSE, where ANGHARAD, a pretty girl of seventeen, stands in the door looking up toward the colliery. She goes into the house and reappears with a stool which she sets outside the door. After a moment, MRS. MORGAN (BETH) comes out, wearing a snowy white apron, and sits on the stool, spreading the apron.

At the COLLIERY the miners start down the hill in a solid, compact mass. As they approach, one of them, in the foreground, opens his mouth and starts a song. Others immediately join in the rich Welsh harmony.

And now we can see the miners marching DOWN THE HILL, still singing. As they pass each house, a little group breaks off and goes to the house. Morgan and his five grown sons leave the procession and turn in at the little gate of the MORGAN HOUSE. Morgan throws his sovereigns in his wife's lap and passes into the house. IVOR passes next with a smile for his mother, the other brothers following. IANTO tweaks Huw's ear as he passes.

Huw's VOICE. My sister Angharad would warn my mother that the men were coming up the hill. On pay day, all the women would dress up specially in their second best, with starched stiff aprons. One of the men would strike up a song.

Singing is in my people as sight is in the eye.

As the men came up they threw their wages, sovereign by sovereign, into the shining laps, fathers first, sons and lodgers in a line behind. With my father and five brothers working we had forty every week for the box on our mantelpiece.

The scene dissolves to the INTERIOR OF THE MORGAN SHED. The boys have stripped to the waist and are having the grime scrubbed off their backs by their sister and Huw. Buckets of water and towels are in evidence. A pair of GRIMY HANDS is seen. Their owner scrubs at them without avail, leaving the black lines of coal dust.

The boys towel themselves vigorously, with Huw standing on tiptoe to reach Ivor's broad shoulders. How looks with distaste at his own lily-white hands.

Huw's VOICE. Then the scrubbing-out in the shed. My mother had drawn the buckets of hot water and cold and I used to help my sister scrub the coal dust from my brothers' backs. Most would come off them, but the hands were hopeless. Scrub and scrub, Mr. Coal would lie there and laugh at you. It is the honorable badge of the coal miner and I envied it on my grown-up brothers.

The scene dissolves to the INTERIOR OF THE MORGAN KITCHEN, where Morgan is seated at the head of his table. His head is raised as his lips move in the act of saying grace. All are standing. We see the bountifully laden table and the expectant family waiting. Huw squirms restlessly, and his father shoots him a look.

Morgan is carving and Beth is ladling out soup for the family. The plates are passed round and the family begins to eat.

Huw's VOICE. Then dinner, with my father saying the grace, looking up at the stain in the ceiling, and maybe giving me a look under his brows if I moved. There was always a baron of beef and a shoulder or leg of lamb at my father's elbow. And chickens or ducks or goose-and plenty of vegetables-and the soup. There was a smell with that soup-vital with herbs fresh from the untroubled ground. If happiness has a smell, I know it well-for in those days it was all over our house. There was never any talk while we were eating. I never met anybody whose talk was better than good food.

Beth moves to the stove to lift a lid off a pot. She looks back at her family, smiling.

Huw's VOICE. My mother was always on the run-always the last to start her dinner and the first to finish. For, if my father was the head of our house, my mother was its heart.

The scene dissolves to ANGHARAD washing dishes in the sink. Huw stands with a towel, wiping.

Huw's VOICE. After dinner, when dishes had been washed, the box was brought to the table, for the spending money to be handed out.

We see the INTERIOR OF THE PARLOR, the box on the mantelpiece. Beth lifts down the box, takes it over to the table, and sets it down in front of her husband, who is smoking his pipe. The sons are gathered round. As Morgan opens the box, Huw and Angharad hurry in from the kitchen. Morgan begins to hand out small amounts of money to his children as they step up in order of their age, but first he gives some to Beth, and with it an affectionate kiss.

Huw's VOICE. My father used to say that money was made to be spent just as men spend their strength and brains in earning it-and as willingly-but always with a purpose.

Huw, as the youngest, is last in line. He stands eagerly and expectantly. Morgan gives him a playful frown and then puts a penny in his hand. As soon as he gets the penny, Huw turns and runs from the room like one possessed. Morgan and Beth laugh after him.

Huw reaches the door. He starts out, then stops, hurries back and grabs his cap and runs out once more.

Huw darts out of the house. Then he runs up the street and around a corner.

Huw's VOICE. I had my Saturday penny every week.-Out of the house and round the corner-as I had run a hundred times before.

Huw appears, still running, at the LITTLE GREEN IN FRONT OF THE CHAPEL. He slows down to a respectful walk as he approaches the Chapel, and walks past it, touching his cap politely to a dignified elderly couple.

Huw's VOICE. Softly now, for respect for Chapel was the first thing my father taught us.

As soon as he passed, he breaks into a run once more, reaching A SMALL SIDE STREET, where he runs up to a small bakery and confectionery shop, embellished with a sign:

TOSSALL BAKERY AND CONFECTIONS

and darts in. A bell jingles from somewhere within the shop. Soon Huw is dancing impatiently from foot to foot before the counter. A benign, elderly woman hands him a package of toffee, which she has all ready for him, and accepts his penny. Huw gives her a polite little bow and turns to leave the shop. He goes out the door, the bell jingling once more. He is cramming the toffee into his mouth and is in heaven. He chews mightily and stuffs in some more. Some of it gets caught round a back tooth and he puts in an exploring finger to straighten it out.

Huw's VOICE. Then straight to Mrs. Tossall, the Shop for that toffee which you could chew for hours, it seems to me now, and even after it had gone down, you could swallow and still find the taste of it hiding behind your tongue. It is with me now-so many years later. It makes me think of so much that was good that is gone.

It was on this afternoon that I first saw Bron-Bronwen- She had come over from the next valley for her first call on my mother-

Huw comes back to his own house. He stops near the gate, looking off down the street. The chewing motion of his jaws slows.

Approaching the gate, walking up the steep hill, is a very pretty girl with a double basket held on her hip, her hat tied under her chin with a gay bit of ribbon.

As BRONWEN approaches the gate we begin to hear her footsteps, the Chapel bell tolling, the rumble of wagon wheels, all the dim murmuring sounds of a little village come to life. Bronwen looks inquiringly at the house, turns in at the gate, which creaks, and stops as she sees Huw. She smiles.

BRONWEN. Is this Gwilym Morgan's house?

Huw, staring at her, nods.

BRONWEN (smiling). You must be Huw.

Huw gulps, turns and darts into the house. Bronwen laughs as she moves towards it.

Beth is at the table under the window in the MORGAN KITCHEN, cutting a pie. Huw runs excitedly in.

BETH. What's the matter with you?

Huw cannot speak; he points, gaping, into the parlor.

BETH (looking up). Oh-

She puts down her knife, straightens her hair hurriedly, and seeing Bronwen standing outside the door of the PARLOR, goes to meet her.

BETH. Is that you, Bronwen?

BRONWEN (whispering). Yes.

BETH. Come in, my child.

She opens the door; Bronwen comes in. Beth kisses her in warm greeting, then stands back to look at her.

BETH. There is lovely you are. -I am so proud for Ivor.

BRONWEN (shyly). I'm the one to be proud.

BETH (laughing). You think well of our Ivor? It seems only a few months since he was scratching round like this one · here (indicating Huw, who is still gaping) with his mouth open.

She puts a finger under his chin to close his mouth, then takes Bronwen's basket and gives it to Huw.

BETH (to Huw). This is Bronwen, Huw, who is to be your sister.

BRONWEN (with a smile). We've already met.

She bends down to kiss Huw, who reacts to this with wonder and awe, touching his finger to his cheek.

BRONWEN (smiling). Be careful of the basket. There's shortcake in it.

It is less a warning than an invitation to help himself. But Huw's mind is not on shortcake. Then Morgan's voice is heard.

MORGAN'S VOICE (heartily). Well -

Morgan comes down the stairs, followed by his sons. He smiles at Bronwen, then crooks a finger over his shoulder.

MORGAN. Ivor-

Ivor comes down the stairs, looking at Bronwen. The brothers grin at him covertly. Morgan, grinning, pushes Ivor toward Bronwen. As Ivor is about to take Bronwen in his arms, Morgan, who has observed Huw gaping, takes him by the back of the neck and leads him toward the stairway. Huw would like to look back, but doesn't dare.

MORGAN (grinning). Those things are not for you, my son. You will have your turn to come.

He gives Huw a friendly push up the stairs and goes back into the room.

HUW is seen reluctantly climbing the stairs, stopping occasionally to look wistfully back. He can hear the happy, excited voices of the people below: Ivor's brothers meeting Bronwen, congratulating Ivor.

Huw's VOICE. I think I fell in love with Bronwen then. Perhaps it is silly to think a child could fall in love. But I am the child that was, and nobody knows how I felt, except only me. And I think I fell in love with Bronwen that Saturday on the hill.

The scene dissolves to the EXTERIOR OF THE CHAPEL. It is day. Crowds of people, all dressed in their best, are entering. This dissolves to the INTERIOR, which is packed, men sitting on one side, women on the other.

IVOR is waiting nervously with Ianto beside him and his other brothers behind him. Bronwen, in her wedding dress, is seen coming up the aisle on her father's arm.

Beth and Bronwen's mother are crying happily into their handkerchiefs. Morgan and Bronwen's father, as the latter steps back from Bronwen to stand beside Morgan, are both perspiring and uncomfortable. The Morgan brothers, with Huw, are standing solemnly.

MERDDYN GRUFFYDD, the minister, is standing at the head of the aisle as Ivor and Bronwen take their places before him. He looks at them with his head on one side, smiling a little, and with something of appraisal in his eyes. They shift a little uneasily.

Huw's VOICE. All our Valley came to the wedding, and Bron's valley, too--and Chapel packed so full you could not raise your elbows.

Ivor had my father's white waistcoat and there is a swell he was with the pinks in his buttonhole. And Bron in her great grandmother's wedding dress.

My mother and Bron's were crying down in front, and her father and mine looking unhappy in their high collars and top hats. And all my brothers as solemn as a funeral. But the new preacher-Mr. Gruffydd-was not solemn. It was my first sight of him. I remember how he smiled--and looked at Ivor and Bronwen --and waited--and waited--almost as if he would refuse to marry them -unless he could learn right there from looking at them that they would be happy together.

The congregation is waiting for the minister to begin the services, some of the elders in the front pews rather startled by Gruffydd' s easy informality. GRUFFYDD is still smiling down at Ivor and Bronwen. Then his eyes grow serious and he begins the ceremony.

The scene dissolves to the CHAPEL GREEN, Long tables, loaded with food, have been set up before the Chapel. The happy wedding guests are thronged round the tables, laughing and chatting. Prominent is an enormous wedding cake.

The scene dissolves to the EXTERIOR OF THE MORGAN HOUSE, at night. Celebrants are waiting round with tankards as Morgan swings a bung-starter on a barrel of beer. The beer gushes forth. Morgan begins to fill the tankards, straightening to take an enormous gulp himself. Beth, inside the house, is dispensing tea to the women.

Huw's VOICE. I will never forget the party after the wedding--and the wedding cake it took two men to lift.

It was one of the few times I ever saw my father drink too much beer-but if a man cannot get drunk on the night his eldest son marries and gives him a chance for grandchildren, let us all go into the earth and be quick about it. Everyone was drunk that night, and if tea had been beer, the women would have been on the floor, too.

Next we see the GUESTS assembled, singing. Ivor, now in his ordinary Sunday best, is leading them. The MORGAN FAMILY is sitting with others on the porch, Huw sitting with Mr. Gruffydd and his father and mother, all singing. A short distance away, Angharad sits with Ianto, Davy, Owen, and Gwilym. They, too, are singing. Huw looks up at Gruffydd, who is singing with vigor and enthusiasm and GRUFFYDD continuing to sing, gives Huw a little smile. Angharad, seen among her brothers, looks over toward Gruffydd and stops singing as she watches him.

HUW notices that Angharad is not singing. He follows her glance to Gruffydd, looks back at her, then back at Gruffydd, as if he understands the reason for her silence. Gruffydd 1s oblivious of Angharad's adoring gaze.

Huw's VOICE. We made a noise to lift the mountain from its base, indeed, and we learned Mr. Gruffydd could sing as well as he could preach. And Angharad could not sing at all for watching him.

We see ANGHARAD, IANTO and DAVY-Angharad still looking at Gruffydd. Ianto notices that she is silent and gives her a hearty nudge in the ribs. Angharad hastily begins to sing once more.

The crowd is singing under the stars, with lighted windows of the houses round them.

Huw's VOICE. And round about us the Valley echoed with the happy voices happy, then-all of us-but soon there was to be trouble.

The scene dissolves to the MINE ENTRANCE by day. A mine employee is tacking up a card, headed:

WAGE SCHEDULE

EFFECTIVE AUGUST 3RD

The men gather round. An angry buzz goes up from them. A bitter voice rises.

MINER. Up to our waists in water all week--and paid short today.

Morgan and his sons, along with several other miners, shoulder their way into the forefront of the scene, and read the notice, frowning. Morgan looks up thoughtfully at the mine office.

OUTSIDE THE MINE OFFICE, Christmas Evans, the owner, stands with his manager. They go back into the office. Morgan turns to Ivor, who is beside him.

MORGAN. Ivor-find Dai Griffiths and Idris John and bring them to the office.

Ivor leaves. Morgan turns to go but Ianto detains him.

IANTO. Will we come with you?

MORGAN. No. This is a matter for the older men. Home to your mother and ask her to keep my supper hot.

Davy frowns as Morgan leaves.

DAVY. But-

Ianto puts his hand on Davy's arm, restraining him.

IANTO. Leave it now, Davy.

Both look off after their father with worried frowns.

The scene dissolves to the MORGAN PARLOR. The Morgan boys are sitting tensely, waiting. Beth can be seen in her kitchen in the background, Huw and Angharad helping her. Morgan comes quietly in, and crosses to hang up his jacket. His back is to the boys, but we can see his face. He looks angry and bitter. He pauses without turning as he hangs his coat.

MORGAN (quietly). Why aren't you washed?

IANTO. We were waiting for you.

Morgan turns as Beth comes in. Morgan speaks to her kindly.

MORGAN. The cut is only a few shillings. There will still be plenty for all of us. (Patting her arm) A bit of supper now, is it, girl?

Beth goes back into the kitchen. Morgan turns to the boys; who are still eyeing him steadily. He is taking his time over satisfying their curiosity. Finally, he speaks:

MORGAN. It is because they are not getting the old price for coal. Come and wash, now.

He starts to go, but Ianto stops him.

IANTO. May we speak, first?

MORGAN. Yes.

IANTO. They have not given you the real reason for this cut.

Morgan's eyebrows go up.

DAVY (nodding). We have been expecting it for weeks-ever since the iron works at Dowlais closed down.

MORGAN. What have the iron works to do with us?

IANTO. The men from Dowlais have come to the colliery, willing to work for any wage-so all our wages must come down.

Davy, standing near the box on the mantelpiece, nods gloomily.

DAVY. And this is only a beginning. Watch, now. They will cut us again and still again, until they have this-(tapping the box )-as empty as their promises.

MORGAN. Nonsense. A good worker is worth good wages, and he will get them.

IANTO. Not while there are three men for every job.

DAVY (pressing the point). Why should the owners pay more-if men are willing to work for less?

MORGAN. Because they are not savages! They are men, too. Like us.

IANTO (quietly). Men, yes. But not like us. Would they deal with you just now when you went to them?

MORGAN (honestly). No.

IANTO. That's because they have power and we have none.

MORGAN ( with irony). How will we get power, then? From the air?

The boys exchange another look, then Davy speaks with deliberation.

DAVY. No-from a union of all the men.

Morgan's lips compress.

MORGAN. Union, is it? ( With studied distaste) I had no thought I would ever hear my own sons talking socialist nonsense.

DAVY (hotly). But it's sense. Good sense. Unless we stand together-

MORGAN (cutting in). I have had enough of this talk.

DAVY (protesting). But, Father-

Morgan turns his gaze full on him, looking him in the eyes. Davy stares for a moment, then subsides. Morgan, having established his mastery over his sons, returns to his normal tone.

MORGAN. Come and wash, now. Your good mother will be waiting.

Morgan leads the way out, Huw watching with wide eyes, sensing the bad feeling that exists between father and sons.

The scene dissolves to the EXTERIOR OF THE COLLIERY. A rainy day. Huw is going home from school, carrying books. He stops short as he comes to the colliery entrance, looking up to where the checkers are checking the trams loaded with coal that the men push past them. Two of the checkers stand under little sheds. Morgan, the third, is standing in the pouring rain without a shed. Huw stares at his father.

Morgan is grim-faced as he does his job in the pouring rain. Ianto and Davy approach with their trams. They are looking accusingly at their father, who averts his eyes from them. He looks over the coal in their trams, makes a check mark and waves them past. They hesitate a moment, then they go on past. Morgan turns to check a tram pushed by another miner as the scene dissolves to:

The INTERIOR OF THE MORGAN HOUSE. The family is at dinner. They are silent and tense, the boys looking at their father out of the corners of their eyes. He is eating quietly. Davy suddenly jumps to his feet, shaking his fist.

DAVY (with sudden anger) . Do you think I will let them make my father stand like a dog in the rain and not raise my hands to stop it?

BETH (scandalized). Hisht, Davy-

All turn to look at Morgan, who finishes chewing what is in his mouth and then turns to look at Davy.

MORGAN (quietly). Who gave you permission to speak?

DAVY (stubbornly). This matter is too important for silence. They're trying to punish you-

MORGAN (cutting in). It is not more important than good manners.

DAVY (heatedly). But what are we going to do about it? You will die of the cold when it comes to snow.

IANTO (nodding grimly). Let us all stand together and see how they will act, then.

DAVY. Right. The men will come out if we say the word. All the pits are ready.

At this, Morgan's eyes harden. He speaks with quiet deliberation and emphasis.

MORGAN. You will not make me a plank for your politics. I will not be the excuse for any strike.

IANTO. But if they learn they can do things like that to the spokesman, what will they try and do to the men?

MORGAN. We will see. Be silent, now, and finish your supper.

DAVY (desperately) . But-Father-

MORGAN

(sharply). Enough, now.

His manner says plainly that he will tolerate no more of this talk. He begins to eat his dinner. Davy sits down, but Owen slams down his fork.

OWEN. It is not enough!

MORGAN (sternly). Owen-

OWEN (doggedly). I am sorry, sir-

But-

MORGAN (quietly). Hold your tongue at

table until you have permission to speak.

OWEN. I will speak against injustice anywhere- with permission or without it.

MORGAN. Not in this house.

OWEN. In this house and outside.

MORGAN (quietly). Leave the table.

OWEN ( also quietly). I will leave the house.

He pushes back his chair and rises. Beth puts out her hand to her husband.

BETH. Gwil- (To Owen.) Tell your father you're sorry.

OWEN (stubbornly) . I'm not sorry.

Gwilym suddenly springs to his feet.

GWILYM. I'm with you! We can find lodgings in the village.

BETH (shocked). Gwilym!

Morgan sits like a rock, his eyes traveling slowly to his other sons. It is a challenge to them to choose sides and state their intentions. Davy meets his look defiantly, then slowly rises to his feet. Morgan's look passes over to Ianto. Reluctantly, Ianto joins the others.

MORGAN. All of you, then?

They nod silently, in unison.

MORGAN (quietly). You have one more chance. Sit down-finish your dinner and I will say no more.

IANTO ( also quietly) . We are not questioning your authority, sir, but if manners prevent our speaking the truth-we will be without manners.

There is a moment's pause, then Morgan picks up his knife and fork.

MORGAN. Get your clothes and go.

The four boys turn and go slowly toward the stairs, Huw watching breathlessly. Morgan resumes his dinner, outwardly calm, but his hand trembles slightly as it carries his fork to his mouth.

BETH. Oh, Gwilym- (She begins to sob quietly.)

Angharad rises and begins to stack the plates. She looks at her father, and then her mother, then puts down the plates.

ANGHARAD (mutinously). I'm going with them-to look after them.

Beth whirls on her, her tears forgotten. In her emotion, she slaps Angharad lightly.

BETH. Close your mouth, girl. Get on with your dishes.

She means what she says. Angharad wilts, picks up the plates and goes to the sink. Beth looks up toward the stairs.

In the UPSTAIRS BEDROOM, used by all the boys, with five beds in it, Ianto, Davy, Owen, and Gwilym are packing their clothes in bundles, rolling up their mattresses.

In the KITCHEN Beth turns and goes slowly to the sink after Angharad, her shoulders sagging.

MORGAN and HUW are still at the table. Huw is pretending to eat. Morgan lays down his knife and fork and stares stonily straight in front of him. Huw scrapes his plate with his fork. After a moment, Morgan smiles a little, without looking at Huw.

MORGAN. Yes, my son. I know you are there. He looks at Huw kindly and fumbles for his pipe. He begins to fill it as the scene fades out.

PART TWO

The UPSTAIRS BACK BEDROOM of the Morgan House fades in. Beth is making Huw's bed in the foreground. Beyond are the bare springs of the four beds of her other sons. She looks at them sadly as she gives Huw's pillow a final pat. We hear a door slam and running feet on the stairs. Beth turns as Angharad comes bursting into the room. Her face is white, her eyes wide with excitement.

BETH. Goodness gracious, girl!

ANGHARAD (breathlessly). Mother-the men are coming up the hill!

BETH. What?

She hurries toward the stairs, followed by Angharad. Beth and Angharad emerge and go to the gate of the house, while all the way down the hill on the street toward the colliery, the women are appearing at their gates, looking anxiously off toward the colliery. In the background the men appear, walking slowly and quietly up the hill. There is no singing.

BETH at the gate is looking toward the men with her hand to her mouth. Then her eyes move to the towering slag heap. The conveyor belt in the distance is moving up the slag heap, dumping the slag on the growing pile. As Beth watches, it slows and comes to a creaking stop.

Beth and Angharad are in the foreground, while the other women are waiting at their gates. Some boys are running excitedly ahead of the men.-We begin to hear their cries, unintelligible at first, but then coming more clearly.

SHOUTS. Struck work-the men have struck work! It's a strike!

We get flashes of several of the women reacting: careworn faces contract, a tear or two; a stringy woman gathers her two little children protectively under her arms.

The vanguard of the men comes up the hill. Their faces are grim, but determined. Morgan and Ivor are seen approaching Bronwen's cottage. Bronwen is waiting for Ivor. Ivor and Morgan exchange a look, then Ivor goes to join Bronwen, entering the gate without a word. Morgan moves on toward his own house.

GRUFFYDD'S LODGINGS, a small, dingy house in a street down the hill below the Chapel. Gruffydd and Huw come out from the house, climb the few steps to the street level, and stand staring at the men passing up the street. Gruffydd is coatless and carries a book in his hand with his thumb marking the place, as if he had been interrupted during a lesson. Huw is excited and curious, Gruffydd troubled and sad. The men pass Huw and Gruffydd. The Morgan brothers are prominent in the scene. Inasmuch as they are the strike leaders, they are surrounded by a group of eager, gesticulating men.

HUW (in a whisper). What does it mean, Mr. Gruffydd?

GRUFFYDD (soberly). It means that something has gone out of this Valley that may never be replaced.

Huw is deeply impressed. He looks off again toward the men. Gruffydd puts his hand kindly on Huw's shoulder.

GRUFFYDD. Home to your father and mother, now. They will need you today.

Huw looks up at Gruffydd for a moment, then nods and runs toward his own house.

At the gate of the MORGAN HOUSE Beth, Morgan and Angharad stand watching silently. Huw comes running, crossing in front of his brothers who are approaching up the hill. The brothers pass by the house without stopping or looking over while the depleted Morgan family watches them pass.

The scene dissolves to the EXTERIOR OF THE MINE WORKS. It is day, but there is no smoke coming from the chimneys, and a big crowd of men is gathered silently outside.

In a VLLAGE STREET the men are standing idly about in knots, some leaning up against the walls. Down the street women are sitting dejectedly on their doorsteps. Children play aimlessly about in the streets, with shrill noise and laughter, unconscious of the tragedy that has befallen the village. The sound of the children's laughter begins to fade as Huw's VOICE comes in.

Huw's VOICE. There is strange it was w go out into the street and find the men there in the daytime. It had a feeling of fright in it.

HUW comes out of his house and looks off down the street. Against a SECTION OF WALL some men are leaning, arguing quietly. They leave, strolling off down the street, leaving a black mark, shoulder high, on the wall.

Again at the SECTION OF WALL, determined looking women are scrubbing off the black marks with buckets of soapy water.

Huw's VOICE. All down the hill, along the walls, a long black mark could be seen where men's shoulders had leaned to rub grease. The women would scrub, but soon it was back, for the men had now here else to go.

The scene dissolves to the EXTERIOR OF THE COLLIERY. It is day, and again the men are standing silently before the colliery. They are now wearing overcoats and scarfs. The wind is howling. Music begins to build in the background.

Huw's VOICE. Twenty-two weeks the men were out, as the strike moved into winter. Always the mood of the men grew uglier-as empty bellies and desperation began to conquer reason. Any man who was not their friend became their enemy.

The scene changes to the EXTERIOR OF THE MORGAN HOUSE. A crowd of depressed, ugly shivering men stands outside. A stone is thrown and it crashes through Morgan's window. Simultaneously, the music reaches a climax and stops.

In the MORGAN PARLOR, Morgan is smoking quietly. He does not move as the stone crashes in, spraying glass at his feet. Beth and Huw, in the background, gasp in dismay.

The scene dissolves to the HILLSIDE. It is night, and Huw and Beth, warmly dressed. are moving up the hill. There is a grim. implacable light in Beth's eyes.

BETH (gasping). This way?

Huw nods and points. As they come closer to us, a few drops of rain fall on them. Huw turns up his collar against the rain and stumbles on after his mother, who appears not to notice the rain as she moves purposefully up the hill.

The scene dissolves to ANOTHER LOCATION ON THE HILLSIDE, where Beth and Huw are moving steadily on. A flicker of distant firelight begins to play on their faces. The rain is now coming down harder, and the wind is beginning to blow.

Further along the HILLSIDE, while the rain is still pouring, a union meeting is in progress. The men are crowded round a circle of Druid stones. They have lit several fires and are all warmly dressed against the cold. Now the meeting is breaking up in the increasing rain. The men are headed toward the path that leads back to the village. At the edge of the crowd, some of the men stop as Beth and Huw appear. She moves determinedly past them in the now driving rain, up to some rocks which form an impromptu speaker's stand. Davy, Ianto, Owen and Gwilym are standing there with other men. They look over in surprise as their mother appears and turns to face the moving men.

BETH (in a loud, strong voice). Wait! Wait till you have heard me.

The men, surprised, turn to face her.

BETH looks over the crowd. Her eyes are like Joan of Arc's. Davy and Ianto step toward her, but she ignores them. When she speaks, her voice is low and resolute, like a man's.

BETH. I am Beth Morgan. I have come up here to tell you what I think of you all, because you are talking against my husband.

We see the faces of the men. Some look ashamed, some angry and defiant.

BETH. You are a lot of cowards to go against him. He has done nothing against you and he never would and you know it well. For you to think he is with the owners is not only nonsense but downright wickedness. How some of you can sit in the same Chapel with him I cannot tell. (Fierce-eyed, she looks over the crowd.) There is one thing more I will say and that is this. If harm comes to my Gwilym I will find out the men and I will kill them with my hands. And that I will swear by God Almighty.

THE MORGAN BROTHERS staring at her, BETH takes Huw by the arm and leads him away. The men part for her as before, looking after her in the pelting rain. The brothers are seen still staring.

The scene dissolves to BETH and HUW making their way down the HILLSIDE in the dark and rain. The wind is beginning to howl fiercely.

Beth and Huw appear on a STEEP :BANK ABOVE THE BROOK. They slip on the bank and fall to the rocks on the edge of the brook where some half-melted snow is banked.

BETH and Huw are in the snow. He lies quiet as she struggles to her knees. The rain has plastered her hair across her face. She is white-faced and panting.

BETH. Huw-

He stirs, pulls himself upright. smiles at her, but dazedly.

HUW. Yes-

BETH. Are you hurt?

Huw. No. I'm all right. (Bravely) Up a dando now, Mama.

She laughs in her relief.

BETH. Up a dando, is it? And who was up a dando just now and frightening his mother sick?

She looks around, brushing off the snow.

BETH. Where's the bridge?

HUW (pointing). Over by there ...

They start wearily m the direction Huw has pointed.

Huw's VOICE. I was wrong then, for in the blackness I thought we were below the bridge and in truth we were above it. Again Beth and Huw stumble forward, pausing to get their bearings. Huw points first in one direction, then another. They start off again in the teeth of the gale.

The scene dissolves to a MOUNTAINSIDE. It is still night. Huw and Beth, almost totally exhausted, are stumbling down a steep place. It is raining fiercely and the wind shrieks through the trees above them. Beth is failing visibly. Huw puts his arm around her, struggling to support her.

Huw's VOICE. Hours it seemed, and no feeling or sense was in me-but I was crying to God to help me save my mother and I was helped sure or I could not tell where I found the strength-

The scene dissolves to a BRIDGE, as Beth and Huw stagger toward it. They reach the bridge. Beth clutches at the rail for support. The wood is rotten and breaks under her weight. She pitches forward into the icy water a few feet below the bridge. Huw gives a frightened gasp and throws himself in after her.

IN THE WATER Beth, inert, is slung around by the swift current. Huw struggles closer to her, as the current brings her up against a rocky point. Gasping .with the cold Huw brings her head and shoulders clear of the water. He cannot leave the water himself, but must push against her with all his might to hold her clear of the racing stream.

Huw's VOICE. So strong was the cold that for minutes I couldn't breathe-

HUW, his face contorted, is struggling to hold his mother up as he stands shoulder deep in the icy black water. A faint light appears upon Huw and the inert figure of Beth.

Huw's VOICE. How long it was I cannot tell, but there was a weariness of time before I saw a light-

Huw is desperately holding on as the light grows stronger and dark figures appear in the rain. It is a group of men from the meeting, headed by Davy and Ianto. They have a lantern.

Huw turns, his eyes glistening in the light, and opens his mouth to shout.

How's VOICE. I tried to shout but my voice was gone from my throat.

Davy, Ianto and the men, not seeing Huw and his mother, start to cross the bridge. Huw's mouth is open. He is trying to shout against the wind, but he cannot make himself heard. He begins to fail, to slip. Beth's head rolls and she almost goes under the water.

Ianto and Davy with the other men are on the bridge. They are about to leave the bridge and pass on when Ianto almost casually notices that the rail is broken. He stops for a second look, holding the lantern high. Huw is straining mightily to hold Beth above the water. Ian to starts to move away, then raises the lantern once more. As he looks down the stream, his eyes widen in horror. He turns and shouts into the storm.

IANTO (shouting). Davy- He puts down his lantern and plunges forward into the water where Huw is giving his last ounce of strength to hold up his mother until Ianto reaches them. As Ianto pulls them to the bank, Davy and the other men are there to help them to safety. The scene fades out.

The MORGAN PARLOR fades in. It is day, and Bronwen is sitting with some sewing, singing softly. The shades behind her are drawn, so that the light in the room is dim. She raises her head and looks toward the wall bed. We see Huw, unconscious and swathed in bandages, lying in the wall bed. As she looks, his eyes open. He turns his head slowly to look at Bronwen. She puts down her sewing and crosses swiftly over to him.

BRONWEN. Oh-Huw- (there are tears in her voice.) There is proud I am to have your name. (She kisses him softly, straightens and smiles down at him.)

HUW ( with difficulty). Mother?

BRONWEN (cheerfully). Upstairs-and doing well. The doctor is with her now.

He closes his eyes with a little smile. She stands looking down at him with pity and affection. Morgan, Angharad and Dr. Richards come down the stairs and move over to look down at Huw.

BRONWEN (whispering). He was awake just now.

DR. RICHARDS ( in a low voice). He'll do then. But it's beyond me to say why. You are breeding horses in this family, Mr. Morgan. This boy should be in his coffin, for my part. ·

MORGAN (smiling). Then he's a Morgan,

is it?

His hands stray gently to Huw's bandaged shoulder. He touches it proudly and lovingly. In the meantime the Doctor is getting into his overcoat, which Angharad holds for him.

DR. RICHARDS. He should be fed now, Mrs. Ivor-a little soup and some warm smile.

Bronwen nods and goes into the kitchen. Morgan, Angharad and the Doctor go out through the front door.

The Doctor, Angharad and Morgan come out of the MORGAN HOUSE. Morgan closes the door, but not completely. It is left open a crack. Gruffydd comes up the steps, carrying a book.

MORGAN (to Gruffydd). Huw was awake just now, and spoke to Bron.

GRUFFYDD (to Richards). How long, then, for the little one?

DR. RICHARDS (pursing his lips). It's hard to say. His legs were frozen to the bone. A year-two years-quiet like that. But I can't promise he will ever walk again-

As Huw's eyes open once more, it is evident that he can hear what is being said outside the door. Dr. Richards' voice comes over:

Nature must take her course-Mr. Gruffydd-

Huw s6rs as he hears this. His lips quiver a little; then he looks up. BRONWEN is now in the room with his soup. She looks at Huw anxiously, then hurries to the door.

Bronwen comes out at the FRONT DOOR, closing the door behind her. She addresses herself to the Doctor, with compressed fury.

BRONWEN (fiercely). Mind your tongue! I think he heard you.

Disturbed, Morgan, Gruffydd, Angharad and the Doctor look toward the door; then Morgan, Gruffydd, Angharad and Bronwen reenter the house, leaving the Doctor to move down the path.

In the MORGAN PARLOR, Huw is lying in the foreground with eyes bright with tears. Gruffydd comes over, followed by the others, and sits down beside him.

GRUFFYDD (smiling). Hello, Huw.

Huw's lips form a soundless "Hello," but his face shows his unhappiness and fear. His eyes turn away from Gruffydd.

GRUFFYDD (sternly). Where is the light I thought to see in your eyes? Are you afraid, boy?

Huw turns his mute, appealing eyes back to Gruffydd. Bronwen is shocked by Gruffydd 's sternness. She puts her hand on his arm in protest, but Gruffydd shakes it impatiently off.

GRUFFYDD (relentlessly). You heard what the doctor said?

A spasm crosses Huw's face and he nods.

GRUFFYDD. And you believed it?

Huw nods again.

GRUFFYDD (fiercely). You want to walk again, don't you? (Huw nods.) Then you must have faith. And if you have, you will walk, no matter what all the doctors say.

Huw looks at him piteously.

HUW (feebly). He said Nature must take her course.

GRUFFYDD (swiftly). Nature is the handmaiden of the Lord. (Smiling) I remember on one or two occasions she was given orders to change her course. You know your Scripture, boy?

Huw nods, wide-eyed. Angharad is watching breathlessly, her eyes wide with admiration for Gruffydd.

GRUFFYDD. Then you know that what's been done before can be done again for you. (Bending over Huw) Do you believe me, Huw?

Huw nods again, with shining eyes.

GRUFFYDD (cheerfully). Good. You shall see the first daffodil out on the mountain. Will you?

HUW ( weakly, but with a smile). Indeed I will, sir.

GRUFFYDD. Then you will.

He grins down at Huw, who grins back. Morgan, with tears in his eyes, squeezes Gruffydd's shoulder with emotion and gratitude. Angharad is smiling with starry eyes. Gruffydd shows Huw the book he has brought him.

HUW (feebly). "Treasure Island"- Gruffydd smiles a little as he touches the book.

GRUFFYDD. I could almost wish that I were lying there in your place-if it meant reading this book again for the first time.

Huw looks at the book close to his head with wondering eyes. Gruffydd rises from beside him and goes out of the room. Angharad hesitates a moment, then follows him.

As Gruffydd comes out of the MORGAN HOUSE, Angharad follows.

ANGHARAD ( calling after him). Mr. Gruffydd-

Gruffydd turns. ANGHARAD. I couldn't let you go without

thanking you.

GRUFFYDD. It was only my duty, girl.

ANGHARAD (looking at him). No. It was more than duty.

GRUFFYDD (his eyes sober). Yes. He is a fine boy-

He hesitates a moment, looking at her, as if he would like to compliment her personally, but he compromises:

GRUFFYDD. -and you are a fine family.

The look in his eyes is not lost on Angharad. She is still staring up at him with shining eyes. Gruffydd tries to cover his embarrassment.

GRUFFYDD (gently). You'd better be going back. You'll catch your death.

ANGHARAD. Yes. (But she doesn't move.) Will you be coming to supper soon?

GRUFFYDD. Later-when you are finished with doctors and such.

ANGHARAD (with a smile). I will hurry them away then.

GRUFFYDD (smiling at her). Good.

He touches his hat and goes, stopping at the gate to look back at her. She looks after him as if unconscious of her surroundings; then she gives a sudden little shudder of cold, drawing her shoulders together. She turns and goes back into the house.

Angharad comes into the MORGAN PARLOR, closing the door. She stands quietly at the door, thinking of Gruffydd. Bronwen, sitting beside Huw, has picked up the book.

She looks up at Angharad with sympathy and comprehension, then turns back to Huw and begins to read.

BRONWEN (reading). "Squire Trelawney, Dr. Livesey and the rest of these gentlemen, having asked me to write down the whole particulars about Treasure Island from the beginning to the end, keeping nothing back but the bearings of the island, and that only because there is still treasure not yet lifted, I take up my pen-"

Huw's eyes begin to light up. Bronwen reads on. The scene slowly dissolves to an illustration in "Treasure Island": Jim Hawkins in the crosstrees with Israel Hands, dirk in teeth, climbing the shrouds toward him. Huw's hand leafs the page over.

The scene dissolves back into the MORGAN PARLOR. It is day. Huw, now without bandages, and propped up in bed, is reading, studying, while the normal activity of the house goes on around him.

Huw is seen reading avidly in the MORGAN PARLOR, and superimposed on this picture is a view of the shelf beside the bed. His hands appear, putting the books, one by one, on the shelf:

TREASURE ISLAND

IVANHOE

PICKWICK PAPERS

BOSWELL'S LIFE OF JOHNSON

As the shelf dissolves, Huw sets down his book and listens, looking up. As a sharp tapping is heard, Huw smiles and taps three times on the wall.

Huw's VOICE. For months I lay in the wall bed. I learned. I read. All the. noble books which have lived in my mind ever since-and always I hoped and kept my faith.

For the first months my mother was still upstairs and we could talk to each other with tappings ln quick succession we see Morgan painting the doorjambs, Angharad hanging fresh curtains, while Huw, in his wall bed, is watching.

The scene dissolves into the MORGAN PARLOR, at night, as Ianto, Davy, Owen and Gwilym are standing before their father in the parlor. Huw is in the wall bed in the background, watching. All involved are very serious. The boys look thin and rather ragged.

Huw's VOICE. Then my father began to make preparations-/ or the doctor told him that soon she would be leaving her bed. New tile for the kitchen-whitewash on our doorstep-new curtains and fresh paint-and, for the occasion-another surprise for my mother. ·

MORGAN (quietly). My sons, I would like to have you back here to live-

The boys stare as Morgan goes on.

MORGAN. -but on one condition. We shall all be lodgers here.

The. boys are silent a moment before answering.

IANTO (quietly). How can you be a lodger in your own house?

MORGAN. Because I have no authority. No man shall say he is head of a house unless his word is obeyed. You are grown and entitled to your own opinions. So, we will all be lodgers and your mother will care for all of us.

The boys are silent, looking at the floor.

MORGAN. Will you come?

The boys exchange a look and nod.

MORGAN. Good. It will make your mother very happy. Tomorrow, then.

The boys turn and go out.

Again in the MORGAN PARLOR, in the day, Huw, in his wall bed, is looking toward the stairs with shining eyes. We see THE STAIRCASE, which in Welsh houses is covered, and hear Beth's footsteps dimly on the stairs. Then Beth appears at the bottom of the stairs, assisted by Morgan. She is weak and shaky, and whiter than before, but her eyes are shining. She stands at the foot of the stairs, leaning on Morgan's arm, looking at Huw. Then she slowly crosses over to him, leaving Morgan in the background.

Huw's VOICE. Then the great day when at last she came down again into her own house. First her footsteps. Strike and hardship and illness all were forgotten. Four months. Only a ceiling between us, yet for four months we hadn't laid eyes on each other. Then she was there, watching me with diamonds in her eyes and her hand to her mouth. Whether to laugh or cry, now ...

Beth's eyes are full of tears, and she is too moved to speak. She sits beside Huw on the bed, devouring him with her eyes. As he looks at her almost white hair, his hand goes up to it and touches it wonderingly.

BETH. The old snow got into it-

She chokes on the words, kisses him fiercely, and then moves back a little from him as if the better to see him. Morgan tiptoes over to the door, opens it a crack and signals with his hand.

Into the PARLOR, as Beth and Huw look up, comes the sound of Ivor's choir singing. Morgan, smiling proudly, comes back to them. Beth looks toward the door with wonder. Morgan gently helps her to her feet and leads her out, Huw looking after them proudly.

In front of the MORGAN HOUSE the singers, led by Ivor, are massed in the foreground, while Beth and Morgan are on the porch in the background. The Morgan boys are seen watching their mother as they sing in the front row. They have bundles of their belongings with them.

BETH is tremendously affected by the singing, and above all, by the sight of her sons and their bundles. The tears stream down her cheeks, then she buries her face in her husband's shoulder.

BETH (brokenly). Oh, Gwil-there is a wife you've got-resting in her bed and letting strangers care for her family.

Morgan smiles and twines a strand of her silver hair round his forefinger.

MORGAN. There is a wife I have got, then.

BETH (rallying). Go on with you, boy.

The men finish their song and burst into a shout for Beth. Cries of "Speech!" Morgan pushes her gently forward.

MORGAN. Go on-say something.

BETH (frightened). What will I say?

MORGAN. You found something to say last time you spoke. It should be easier now, with friends.

Beth tries to find words, chokes a little, smiles, holds out her hands to the crowd, hesitates, then blurts:

BETH. Come and eat--everyone-

The people cheer again and begin to troop into the house, paying their respects to Beth as they pass. But her eyes are on her sons and the bundles in their hands. Ianto and Davy, followed by Owen and Gwilym, come up and embrace her silently. She looks at Ianto's bundle with bright eyes, smiling through her tears, then assumes a mask of sternness.

BETH. There is disgraceful the condition your clothes are in from the lodgings( lifting Davy's trouser leg )--one more step and we would be seeing the back of your leg.

GWILYM. You should see Owen's. One more step and we'd be seeing the back of his neck, indeed.

OWEN (pushing him). Shut up, man.

All go into the house.

In the MORGAN PARLOR, the family and guests are trooping in. Some are already making for the food-laden table. Ianto intercepts Morgan in the foreground, and shows his father a newspaper.

IANTO. Have you seen this?

Morgan takes the paper from Ianto and puts on his glasses to read it. Then, with a twinkle in his eye, he looks over at Huw.

MORGAN. Well- (Turning to the guests) Listen, everyone-listen to this!

The guests gather round. Morgan clears his throat importantly.

MORGAN. It seems someone has been getting his name in the paper.

He reads proudly from the paper.

"Handwriting competition. Boys under twelve years of age. First prize of Two Guineas is awarded to Huw Morgan, for an entry of great merit."

A cheer goes up. All eyes turn to Huw in the wall bed. Huw is embarrassed, tries to duck beneath his pillow, but Ianto and Bronwen pull him into the open.

MORGAN. And that boy has been lying there going on four months and no sound from him but laughing and no words but cheerful. (Taking off his glasses and wiping them) I will stay over here to tell you what a good son you are, Huw. If I went to you now, I would be acting very silly, I am afraid.

Bronwen kisses Huw gently.

BRONWEN. There is a clever old man you are-

HUW reacts to Bronwen's kiss, embarrassed but happy. His eyes are bright, and he touches his cheek where she kissed him.

This scene dissolves to two men with fiddles and Miss Jenkins, a prim spinster who plays the harp. We see the celebration in full swing. These people are hungry and in want, but they are making the most of the occasion and the Morgan's hospitality. A wide-eyed miner receives a cup of tea and some cake from Angharad.

MINER. Real tea you have.

ANGHARAD. A little weak.

MINER. Weak? Hot water at our house.

Standing near each other are Ianto and Mr. Parry, a bespectacled, ascetic elder who has just finished piling his plate. He takes a mouthful and addresses himself to Ianto.

PARRY. Ianto--I haven't seen you in Chapel lately.

IANTO. I have been too busy.

PARRY. What business, may I ask?

IANTO (looking at him). Mine.

At this a hush falls on the people round

them.

PARRY (injured). Only asking a civil question, I was.

IANTO. And having a civil answer. (Looking_ at Parry.) I have been busy with the union.

PARRY (shaking his head darkly). Unions are the work of the devil. You will come to no good end.

IANTO (like ice). At least I am not sitting on it, talking a lot of rubbish in Chapel.

PARRY. Look here-

IANTO (with an impatient gesture). Leave it now, or I will say something to be sorry.

He turns away from Parry and finds himself face to face with Gruffydd, who is regarding him steadily. Morgan, Beth and the other Morgan brothers also move into scene, listening intently.

GRUFFYDD. No. This matter requires airing. Ianto-why do you think we of the Chapel talk rubbish?

IANTO. My remark was not aimed at you.

GRUFFYDD (smiling, but serious). Then

aim it.

IANTO (deliberately). Very well. Because you make yourselves out to be shepherds of the flock and yet allow your sheep to live in filth and poverty, and if they try to raise their voices against it, you calm them by saying their suffering is the Will of God. (With burning scorn) Sheep indeed! Are we sheep to be herded and sheared by a handful of owners? I was taught that man was made in the image of God! Not a sheep!

MORGAN. Ianto -Mr. Gruffydd healed Huw.

GRUFFYDD (still looking at Ianto ). Mr. Morgan-Huw healed himself. (Then to Ianto .) I have not expressed my views here because I have had no wish to interfere in a family disagreement.

He looks at Morgan challengingly.

MORGAN (quietly). You have my permission to speak.

GRUFFYDD. Well, then, here is what I think. First, have your union. You need it.

We see MORGAN listening intently as Gruffydd's voice is heard.

GRUFFYDD's VOICE. Alone you are weak. Together you are strong.

We get a glimpse of the faces of Ianto, Davy, Owen and Gwilym, listening.

GRUFFYDD's VOICE. But remember that with strength goes responsibility-to others and to yourselves. (He is now visible.) For you cannot conquer injustice with more injustice-only with justice and with the help of God.

ANGHARAD is seen, listening at the tea urn, lips parted and eyes bright. Silence falls on the little group as Gruffydd finishes. He has obviously made a deep impression both on Morgan and on his sons. Then Parry's lips tighten.

PARRY Are you coming outside your position in life, Mr. Gruffydd? Your business

is spiritual.

GRUFFYDD (quietly). My business is anything that comes between man and the spirit of God.

PARRY (glowering). The deacons shall hear that you have been preaching socialism-

Ianto, always ready for a fight, steps up to Parry.

IANTO. Mr. Parry Gwilym moves forward.

GWILYM (hotly). Loose the old devil's teeth for him!

Morgan quickly steps between them, pushing Ianto and Gwilym back.

MORGAN (to Ianto ). He is our guest.

He takes Parry's arm and signals to Beth.

MORGAN (with a grin). Beth, give Mr. Parry a pint of home brewed, and put his pipe back in his mouth.

BETH (militantly). I will give him a good clout with the frying pan.

Parry, abashed, shuts up. Gruffydd smiles and leaves the little group. Morgan and his sons are looking at each other steadily.

IANTO (to his father). Can you and your lodgers agree on what we have just

heard.

MORGAN (simply). I have no lodgers only sons.

He puts one arm round Ianto 's shoulders, the other round Davy's, and signals to Miss Jenkins.

MORGAN. Now, then, Miss Jenkins-a tune. "Comrades in Arms," is it?

The music starts up gaily. All begin to sing, except Parry, who walks off, shaking his head. Angharad, smiling happily, goes into the kitchen with a stack of used plates and sets them on the sink. Gruffydd moves into the foreground, looking at her through the door. Seeing Angharad inspect her fire, then lift the heavy coal scuttle to refill the range, Gruffydd goes into the kitchen.

In the KITCHEN, Angharad is struggling with the heavy scuttle. The singing is heard as Gruffydd comes up to her. She looks at him with a smile.

ANGHARAD. Oh, Mr. Gruffydd-will we always be in your debt? Now you have made us a family again.

GRUFFYDD (smilingly). Here-let me

He takes the scuttle from her and pours some coal into the stove. She is still looking at him. Gruffydd sets down the scuttle and straightens to face Angharad. She sees that his hands are covered with coal.

ANGHARAD. Oh-your hands-there's a pity-

GRUFFYDD (grinning). No matter.

He turns his hands to show her the palms. GRUFFYDD's PALMS, seen in full view, reveal the telltale black lines of one who has worked as a miner. Angharad takes his hands gently, looking at the palms, then up into his eyes.

ANGHARAD. Have you been down the collieries?

GRUFFYDD. Ten years-while I was studying.

ANGHARAD (moved). Ten years-

Then she breaks the mood, becoming very businesslike. She moves over toward the sink.

ANGHARAD. A bit of soap, now.

GRUFFYDD. Please don't bother.

He takes a handkerchief from his pocket and begins to scrub at his hands. Angharad turns back to him.

ANGHARAD. There is a man for you spoiling your good handkerchief.

Gruffydd grins at her. Angharad gets some soap and a piece of rag.

ANGHARAD. Wait, you. You are king in the Chapel, but I will be queen in my own kitchen.

She returns to him and begins to scrub the coal off his hands. Gruffydd's expression has changed. There is no flippancy in his look now. He waits until she has finished, then suddenly speaks, almost as if against his will.

GRUFFYDD. You will be queen wherever you walk.

Angharad looks swiftly up at him, her heart in her eyes. There is a tense pause.

ANGHARAD (whispering). What does that mean?

GRUFFYDD (looking at her). I should not have said it.

ANGHARAD. Why not?

GRUFFYDD. I have no right to speak to you so.

Angharad continues to look at him, then smiles a little.

ANGHARAD (softly). If the right IS mine to give-you have it.

They stand looking at each other, deeply moved. Then Bronwen comes into the kitchen with some more plates. She stops short when she sees them, sensing that she has interrupted something, then proceeds to the sink. Gruffydd smiles at Angharad and goes out, Angharad looking after him. Bronwen stands watching her with sympathy and understanding, whereupon Angharad turns to her a little irritably.

ANGHARAD. Well-what are you staring at?

BRONWEN (smiling). Let me have my look, girl. (Then putting her hand on Angharad's arm) If I were single again -I think I should try to marry Mr. Gruffydd, shame to me or not.

The scene fades out.

PART THREE

An early morning scene fades in. The moon is still shining, lights are lit in all the houses, and the men, singing, appear to march up to work. "Men of Harlech" is their song.

In flashes, we see: Beth preparing lunch boxes. Huw waving goodbye to his father and brothers from his wall bed. The rusty colliery gates opening. The men lined up at. the gates, being checked through. Singing men entering the colliery. The winding house wheel, creaking from disuse, as it begins to turn. A puff of steam from a long disused chimney. The conveyor-belt starting. Men waving their lamps to the beat of the music as they march.

Huw's VOICE. Then the strike was settled- with the help of Mr. Gruffydd and my father-with a minimum wage and at least a promise of no more cuts. No victory, but it was good to see my mother's face as she made ready the lunch boxes again. The men went back on the early morning shift. Cold it was, and still dark, but in all the village I think I was the only one to stay in bed. Wheels that had grown rusty turned again, spinning wages for the box on out· mantel, which had grown so light-work to wipe out the memory of idleness and hardship. The men were happy going up the hill that morning. -But not all of them-for there were too many now for the jobs open, and some learned that never again would there be work for them in their own . Valley-

AT THE COLLIERY GATE, the mine manager, with a piece of paper in his hand, is approaching the guards at the gate. As the miners file in, he checks something against his tally. The guard begins to close the gate in the faces of the men who are still waiting to go in. The gates close, leaving outside the men who have been shut out. Prominent among them are Owen and Gwilym, who are standing grim-faced with the other men, silent, hard-eyed.

The scene dissolves to the MORGAN PARLOR. Morgan, Ivor, Ianto, Davy, Owen and Gwilym are assembled-a council of war. Huw, in his wall bed, is in the background.

OWEN. It is the same all over South Wales. In Cardiff, the men are standing in line to have bread from the government. (Shaking his head) Not for us. We will have our share of the box and go.

MORGAN. Where?

OWEN (quietly). America.

Morgan's shoulders sag. He turns slowly to the mantelpiece, takes the box, and sets it down on the table. He opens the cover and stands looking down into it. The others gather round. Morgan slowly takes out two small stacks of sovereigns, setting one before Owen and one before Gwilym. Then Ianto speaks:

IANTO (quietly). My share, too, Owen.

DAVY (quickly). And mine.

OWEN. No. Our own. We will take no

charity.

IANTO (roughly). Not charity, man.

Sense.

GWILYM (stubbornly) . No. Only our

own.

Owen also shakes his head with finality. Morgan closes the box with a snap, then turns to Owen and Gwilym.

MORGAN. Say nothing to your mother. Let this day be over, first.

Suddenly they hear Beth's voice.

BETH'S VOICE. Never mind saying nothing.

They all turn. The little group stands round the table, taking in Beth as she moves slowly toward them from the kitchen door, where she has been standing.

BETH. I heard.

Beth reaches Owen and Gwilym. The tears spring to her eyes as she embraces them.

BETH (brokenly). America-America-my babies-

After a moment Morgan gently withdraws Beth from her two sons, holding her in his arms for a moment. He looks at the boys.

MORGAN. Shall we read a chapter, my sons?

OWEN. What shall we have?

MORGAN. Isaiah, fifty-five. "Ho every one that thirsteth, come ye to the waters, and he that hath no money, come ye, buy and eat."

Owen crosses to get the Bible from the shelf on the mantel. Beth, unable to stand any more, moves over toward Huw and sits down on the bed beside him. She is crying. Huw tries awkwardly to comfort her.

BETH (tragically). This is only the beginning. Owen and Gwil first-then all of you will go-one after the other-all of you!

How (stoutly). I will never leave you,

Mama-

Beth takes him by the shoulders, and stares into his eyes.

BETH. Yes, Huw. If you should ever leave me, I will be sorry I ever had babies.

HUW (wondering). Why did you have them?

BETH (with a twist of her lips). Goodness gracious, boy! Why, indeed? To keep my hands in water and my face to the fire, perhaps.

Morgan is seen marking his place in the Bible. His sons are grouped round him. Before Morgan can begin to read, though, they hear a commotion out in the street. They all look up, as they hear loud, excited voices shouting something we cannot distinguish. One . of the boys opens the door and all go out in the street.

Morgan and his sons are standing outside the house, as Beth comes curiously out to join them. Approaching the house is about half the village following the figure of Dai Ellis, the postman, who carries a letter high in his hand. The villagers are shouting and chattering to each other.

IANTO. What is it?

MORGAN. They're coming here.

They exchange a look, almost as if this might be a lynching party come to get them. The villagers approach behind the postman. Dai Ellis, his hand trembling with excitement, holds up the letter. He tries to speak but his vocal chords are paralyzed with excitement. He stutters impotently.

IANTO (impatiently). What's with you, man?

Ellis finally produces words:

DAI ELLIS ( his voice breaking into a falsetto squeak). From Windsor Castle it IS-

He hands the letter to Ivor. The Morgans, seen as a group, are tremendously excited. Ivor takes the letter. The villagers gather close round as Ivor rips it open with impatient fingers. He begins to read from the letter.

IVOR (in a trembling voice). Mr. Ivor Morgan is commanded to appear before her Majesty at Windsor Castle with chosen members of his choir.

A great shout goes up from the assembled villagers. Morgan, powerfully affected, grabs Ivor's shoulder.

MORGAN. To sing before the Queen. (With quiet pride.) My son, I never thought to see the beautiful day. (Then with animation.) Ianto, Davy-(to the assembled villagers )-all of you. Fetch everyone from all the Valleys round. (To the postman.) Dai Ellis, get your trap and to town to spread the news. Davy-over to the other collieries-invite everybody-it's a celebration, tell them. Ianto-down to the Three Bells for beer. Open house tonight-for all who will come.

Then his eye catches sight of Owen and Gwilym standing together. There is a break in his voice as he addresses them.

MORGAN. My sons. You shall have a send-off worthy of Morgans.

IN THE STREET, the people are running excitedly off in different directions. Dai Ellis jumps into his trap, which stands in front of the post office, and whips his horse off into a gallop.

The scene dissolves to an exterior view of the VILLAGE at night. The windows are all lit and people lean in them, looking out. The party is assembled. The street is filled with celebrating people. Beer is flowing freely. All are singing the last bars of a gay Welsh song. As the song finishes, Morgan climbs up on the wall in front of the CHAPEL with Ivor. (The choir is assembled in the street.) He holds up his hand for silence. When he gets it he begins to pray, simply and sincerely.

MORGAN. O Heavenly Father, I give thanks from the heart to live this day. I give thanks for all I have, and I do give thanks for this new blessing. For you are Our Father, but we look to our Queen as our mother. Comfort her in her troubles, 0 God, and let her mighty worries trouble not more than she shall bear in her age. And let sweetness and power and spirit be given to these voices that will sing at her command. And may Ivor have strength to acquit himself with honour. Amen.

A deep, reverent, "Amen" goes up m the street.

Morgan climbs down from the wall and joins Beth. Then Ivor raises his hand and brings it down sharply. The tenors sing the first line of "God Save the Queen." Sopranos join the tenors with the second line.

HUW is seen in his wall bed, eyes shining. Bron and Angharad are with him. The window is open. Baritones, bass and alto come in with tenor and soprano. The whole CHOIR is seen singing. All the voices are now in.

Morgan is singing along with the choir, but Beth is silent. She is looking steadily, with tears in her eyes, out of the scene. We follow the direction of her glance. THE MORGAN BROTHERS are in the front line of the choir, singing with the rest. We see Owen and Gwilym closely as the anthem goes into its final chords.

The whole VILLAGE is seen as the anthem comes to its close.

The scene fades out.

PART FOUR

The INTERIOR OF THE CHAPEL fades in. Gruffydd is leading the congregation in the closing hymn of the service. The hymn stops and the men begin to pick up their hats.

GRUFFYDD (soberly). Will you please remain in your places? There is a meeting of the deacons.

A little buzz of conversation goes up as the people resume their seats. The deacons, mostly elderly men, stalk stiffly up to the front of the Chapel. Morgan is among the deacons. Gruffydd relinquishes his place at the lectern to Mr. Parry and then walks slowly down the aisle, his head bent. He passes Angharad, who is sitting on the aisle, and moves to the back of the Chapel. Mr. Parry, spokesman for the deacons, stands forward.

PARRY (sternly). Meillyn Lewis-step forward.

A girl, whom we have not seen before, stumbles past Angharad. She is sobbing violently into her handkerchief, which covers her face. She steps before the assembled deacons.

PARRY (looking down at her). Your sins have found you out, and now you must pay the price of all women like you. You have brought a child into the world against the commandment.

ANGHARAD is seen staring, white-faced, shocked and pitying. GRUFFYDD, at the back, is expressionless but manifestly uncomfortable. The faces of the deacons look stern. Morgan alone among them looks disturbed and unhappy.

PARRRY (continuing). Prayer is wasted on your sort. You shall be cast forth into the outer darkness till you have learned your lesson. Meillyn Lewis, do you admit your sin?

MEILLYN LEWIS sobs out something like

"Yes."

ANGHARAD rises slowly to her feet.

PARRY looks sternly down at Meillyn Lewis.

PARRY. Then prepare to suffer your punishment-

Angharad's voice rings out.

ANGHARAD. Stop it! Stop it! Let her alone -you hypocrites!

It is as if the meeting had been struck by lightning. Meillyn Lewis, mouth open, tears dripping from her eyes, is staring at Angharad. The deacons are also staring, still too amazed to be angry. Then Morgan moves. His face is white with fury. He strides over to Angharad.

MORGAN (furiously). Angharad-you-

Gruffydd steps quickly between them. He puts his hand on Morgan's arm.

GRUFFYDD (looking at Angharad). Leave it now, Mr. Morgan.

He urges Angharad gently away, Morgan staring after them. Gruffydd and Angharad exit from the Chapel, with all the congregation staring.

Angharad and Gruffydd come out of the Chapel. She is still white and shaken. He looks at her soberly. At a little distance from them an old, poorly dressed woman, Meillyn Lewis's mother, is waiting nervously, holding a baby. Angharad with an angry gesture raises her eyes to Gruffydd's.

ANGHARAD (passionately). How could you stand there and watch them? Cruel old men-groaning and nodding to hurt her more. That isn't the Word of God! "Go thou, and sin no more," Jesus said.

GRUFFYDD (sadly). You know your Bible too well-and life too little.

ANGHARAD (stormily). I know enough of life to know that Meillyn Lewis is no worse than I am!

GRUFFYDD. Angharad!

ANGHARAD. What do the deacons know about it? ( Clenching her fists) What do you know about what could happen to a poor girl when she loves a man so much that even to lose sight of him for a moment is torture!

Her eyes try to hold him, for she is now referring to her own love for him. But Gruffydd will not meet the issue.

GRUFFYDD. It was cruel, but you must realize that the men of the Valleys here have made their homes, lived and died with no help from any government of men-no authority but the Bible. If it has produced hypocrites and Pharisees the fault is with the human race. Men are not angels.

ANGHARAD. They were like devils today! My father, too. (Accusingly) And you stood by and let them.

Gruffydd frowns. He is as deeply moved as Angharad, but finds his predicament difficult to explain to her.

GRUFFYDD. It's their Chapel. I am only its servant. If I spoke out now-they could put me out to preach in the hedges with only the sparrows to listen.

ANGHARAD. But you will speak out against it?

GRUFFYDD (nodding gravely). When the time is ripe. When the ground is prepared. Believe me.

She softens. Their eyes meet and hold. Then both turn as the door of the Chapel opens in the background and Meillyn Lewis stumbles out. She runs to her mother, crying. Other people begin to appear from the Chapel. Meillyn takes the baby and kisses it. She and her mother cling to each other forlornly and start to walk slowly away. ANGHARAD AND GRUFFYDD are looking after them with compassion. With one accord they start to move after Meillyn and her mother. Angharad calls gently:

ANGHARAD. Meillyn-

The scene fades out.

PART FIVE

The MORGAN PARLOR fades in. Huw is reading in his wall bed. Beth is straightening up the room. Huw looks up as sunlight falls across him from the opening front door and his face lights up as he sees Gruffydd standing, framed in the sunlight. There is something portentous in his manner. His face is very grave. Beth moves into the scene. She is surprised to see Gruffydd.

BETH. Good morning, dear Mr. Gruffydd. There is good to see you. Angharad is down to market.

Gruffydd does not move. His eyes remain searchingly on Huw.

GRUFFYDD (looking at Huw). I have come for Huw.

BETH (surprised). For Huw?

She looks over at Huw, who is smiling. He has sensed why Gruffydd is here. He is smiling-but frightened and a little in awe.

Huw. The daffodils are out, Mama.

BETH (with her heart in her eyes). Oh, Huw-

She crosses over to him, clutching her hands in her apron. Then Gruffydd, still with his eyes on Huw, advances.

GRUFFYDD. Where are your clothes, Huw?

Huw. Under my pillow, sir.

BETH. Your pillow?

HUW. For these months-ready for today.

GRUFFYDD (smiling). Come you, then you

shall bring back a posy fit for a queen for your brave mother-

HUW (eyes shining). Indeed, I will-

Beth is too stunned to move. Gruffydd starts to help Huw out from under the covers, and to retrieve his clothes from under the pillow.

The scene dissolves to the HILLSIDE. It is a bright, windy morning. A patch of daffodils is nodding in the wind. In the background Gruffydd is carrying Huw on his shoulders. Silhouetted against the skyline, they come close to the daffodils. Gruffydd gently lowers Huw to his feet and supports him there, while both look at the flowers. They smile at each other. Gruffydd carefully releases Huw and moves a few steps away from him, then turns and holds out his hands to Huw.

GRUFFYDD. Now, then--over to me-

Slowly, painfully, Huw moves one leg forward, and brings the other up . to join it. Then he sways as if about to fall. Gruffydd steps quickly forward to support him, but Huw waves him away with a grin.

Huw (a little breathless). I'm all right-

He takes two more steps, which bring him to Gruffydd. They grin at each other, and Gruffydd takes hold or him.

GRUFFYDD. Enough, now. (Looking at Huw searchingly, and speaking gravely.) You have been lucky, Huw. Lucky to suffer and lucky to spend these weary months in your bed. For so God has given you the chance to make spirit within yourself. And as your father cleans his lamp to have good light, so keep clean your spirit.

HUW. How, Mr. Gruffydd?

GRUFFYDD. By prayer, my son. And I don't mean mumbling, or shouting, or wallowing like a hog in religious sentiments. Prayer is only another name for good, clean, direct thinking. When you pray, think well what you are saying, and make your thoughts into things that are solid. In that manner, your prayer will have strength, and that strength shall become part of you, mind, body and spirit.

Huw looks up at him, deeply impressed. Then Gruffydd smiles.

GRUFFYDD. And the first duty of your new legs shall be to carry you to Chapel next Sunday.

The scene dissolves to the CHAPEL with the Morgan family approaching it in the daylight. Morgan and Beth are not in evidence. In the group are Angharad, Ianto , Davy and Huw, who is now limping painfully, with the aid of Davy.

NEAR THE CHAPEL ENTRANCE, IESTYN EVANS, a rather supercilious young man, and dressed-even overdressed-in the height of fashion, is lounging on the Chapel green. He looks over and sees Angharad. He steps forward and raises his hat.

IESTYN. Hello, Angharad.

lanto and Davy step in front of their sister.

IANTO (with dangerous quiet). Who are you talking to?

IESTYN (casually). Angharad. Your sister, perhaps.

lanto knocks him down with one punch. IESTYN, out cold, crashes against the Chapel entrance and winds up sitting on the ground. His fall dislodges the sign announcing the subject of the sermon. It falls across him, bearing the legend:

"LOVE YE ONE ANOTHER"

lanto, his brothers and Angharad are all looking down at Iestyn. Angharad then goes for Ianto with clawed fingers.

ANGHARAD. YOU devil.

Davy catches Angharad and pulls her back from Ianto , who looks at his knuckles, then at the fallen Iestyn.

IANTO (quietly). I will not have my sister treated like a pit-woman. His father may own the colliery, but if he wants to speak to you, let him ask permission. We have a home and he knows well where it is.

The Chapel-goers are now crowded round Iestyn, who is being helped to his feet by Morgan and Iestyn's father, Christmas Evans. They approach Ianto and the others.

EVANS. Did you hit my son?

IANTO. I did.

MORGAN. Here at Chapel?

IANTO (looking at Iestyn). That's where he was. Buttonhole and all.

EVANS. I will have you m court, young man!

IESTYN (to Ianto, groggy but defiant). Doubtless you had a reason.

IANTO. Doubtless. And doubtless I will break your neck if I have another reason.

MORGAN. Why did you hit him?

IANTO. Let him tell you.

Morgan looks at Iestyn, who speaks after a moment's hesitation.

IESTYN. I spoke to your daughter, sir.

EVANS (his eyebrows go up). You spoke

to her?

IESTYN (somewhat chastened). Yes, sir.

Evans turns to Ianto and holds out his hand.

EVANS. Ianto , I am sorry for what I said. ( Glaring at Iestyn) If a man spoke to Iestyn's sister, murder would be done.

He pushes Iestyn toward Ianto .

EVANS. Now, then-shake hands-no malice anywhere, is it?

They shake hands, but gingerly, like a couple of prize fighters. Then Iestyn bows to Morgan.

IESTYN. I will call to ask your permission tomorrow evening, Mr. Morgan.

MORGAN. Good, I will wait for you.

The sound of organ music, the processional, conies from the Chapel. All adjust themselves and start into the Chapel. Moving toward the entrance, Ianto and Iestyn enter together, walking side by side, but still stiff toward each other. Christmas Evans follows and after him Davy and Huw. Then Beth and Morgan. As Beth and Morgan come close, we see that there are tears in her eyes. Her husband notices them.

MORGAN (in a whisper). What ails you, girl?

BETH (sniffing). Too young-even to be

thinking of marriage-

MORGAN (cocking a humorous eye at her). How old were you?

BETH (wiping her eyes). Much older, boy.

MORGAN. Go on with you, girl. You were younger still than Angharad.

Angharad follows them. She comes face to face with Gruffydd, hesitates a moment, then goes into the Chapel.

The scene dissolves into the MORGAN KITCHEN, at night. ANGHARAD is looking through the open door toward a group in the parlor. Her expression is bewildered and unhappy as we hear Gruffydd's voice.

GRUFFYDD's VOICE. The bath holds one hundred gallons. "A" fills the bath at the rate of twenty gallons a minute. "B" at the rate of ten gallons a minute.

We see Gruffydd, Morgan and Bronwen coaching Huw, who sits at a table piled with books and papers. Beth sits nearby, busy with her sewing. Gruffydd is giving Huw a problem. Huw takes notes as Gruffydd talks;

GRUFFYDD. "C" is a hole which empties the bath at five gallons a minute. Got it? (Huw nods.) How long to fill the bath?

Beth clicks her tongue disapprovingly so that they all turn to look at her.

BETH. There is silly. Trying to fill a bath with holes in it, indeed.

MORGAN. A sum it is, my girl. A sum. A problem for the mind. For his examination into school next month.

BETH (doggedly). That old National School. There is silly their sums are with them. Who would pour water in an old bath with holes? Who would think of it, but a madman?

MORGAN ( his eyes seeking heaven). It is to see if the boy can calculate, girl. Figures, nothing else. How many gallons and how long.

BETH. In a bath full of holes.

She throws her sewing at her workbasket, misses it and throws it again twice as hard. Morgan regards her with an exasperated grin, then turns to Gruffydd, who is smiling covertly.

MORGAN. Now I know why I have such a tribe of sons. It is you. Beth Morgan is the cause. Look you, Mr. Gruffydd. Have you got something else?

GRUFFYDD. The decimal point, Mr. Morgan.

MORGAN. The decimal point, then( with a look at Beth )-and peace in my house.

BETH (calmly). Go and scratch.

She rises, putting her work away. Gruffydd also gets up.

GRUFFYDD (with a smile). It is late, now. I will be going. (Putting his hand on Huw's shoulder) We will follow the decimal point tomorrow night. (Bowing to Morgan and Beth) Good night.

They bid him goodnight and Morgan puts out the lamp on the table, which leaves only the little lamp near Huw's wall bed. He and Beth go up the stairs as Gruffydd goes to the door, signaling to Huw to follow him. Huw hobbles after Gruffydd.

Gruffydd and Huw come out of the MORGAN HOUSE. From his pocket Gruffydd takes a beautiful pencil box which he presents to Huw.

GRUFFYDD. It was mine and my father's.

Huw ( deeply appreciative). There is beautiful, Mr. Gruffydd.

We see the PENCIL BOX IN GRUFFYDD's HANDS. The hands slide the lid back and forth.

GRUFFYDD's VOICE. See how he joined it and the pattern of grained woods on the lid and round the sides. Labor and love -therefore beauty.

He gives the box to Huw.

GRUFFYDD. It's yours-for when you go to school.

HUW (in an awed whisper). Mr. Gruffydd-

GRUFFYDD. Take care of it, then-

Huw (overwhelmed). Oh, I will, sir thank you-

GRUFFYDD. You're having an opportunity none of your brothers had-to get yourself a good education in a good school. Be worthy of it, Huw.

HUW. I'll try, sir.

GRUFFYDD. Good. You will come tomorrow? I promised your father we would make him a frame for the picture Queen Victoria gave to Ivor.

HUW. Yes, sir.

GRUFFYDD (smiles). Good night then and God bless you.

Huw. Good night, sir.

Gruffydd goes down the path. Huw goes back into the house and closes the door.

In the MORGAN PARLOR, Huw is hobbling back over toward his -bed, looking at the pencil box with wide eyes. He sets it down beside the bed and begins to undress.

In BETH AND MORGAN'S BEDROOM, at night, Beth, in her old-fashioned nightgown, is just climbing into the double bed and pulling up the covers. Morgan, in an equally old fashioned nightshirt, is approaching the bed with a lighted candle, which he sets beside the bed.

BETH (frowning a little). Gwil-who is in charge of this decimal point?

MORGAN (pleading). Look, Beth, my little one, leave it now, or else it will be morning and us fit for bedlam, both.

BETH. But who thought of it?

MORGAN. I don't know. The French, I think.

BETH. Well, no wonder! Those old Frenchies, is it?

MORGAN (climbing into bed). There is an old beauty you are. Go to sleep now before I will push you on the floor.

Beth turns over on her side.

BETH (muttering, as she turns). With Frenchies and old baths full of holes, what will come to the boy? What will come to the country, indeed?

MORGAN. Let the Old Queen in Windsor Castle worry over that.

Beth, apparently mollified, settles herself in the bed and closes her eyes. Morgan reaches over to pinch out the candle, but before he can do so, Beth's eyes open and she speaks once more.

BETH. Gwil-

MORGAN (impatiently). Yes, girl?

BETH (dreamily). I wonder does the Queen know about this decimal point?

MORGAN. Well, devil throw smoke!

He pinches out the light.

The scene dissolves to GRUFFYDD's LODGINGS, at night. It is a combination study, bedroom and carpentry shop. (For woodworking is Gruffydd's hobby.) Now, of course, we can see nothing, for the room is dark. Gruffydd enters, crosses to his desk and lights the lamp upon it. Then he stops short. The light reveals Angharad standing there. Her mood is strange, unnaturally calm. For a moment they are silent.

GRUFFYDD (quietly). You shouldn't be here.

ANGHARAD. I couldn't spend another night without knowing. (Looking up at him with tortured eyes) What has happened? Is something wrong?

GRUFFYDD. Wrong?

ANGHARAD. You know what I mean. Why have you changed towards me? Why am I a stranger now? Have I done anything?

GRUFFYDD. No-the blame is mine. Your mother spoke to me after Chapel. She is happy to think you will be having plenty all your days.

ANGHARAD ( with a note of scorn). Iestyn

Evans.

GRUFFYDD (looking at her). You could

do no better.

ANGHARAD (quietly). I don't want him. I want you.

GRUFFYDD (quietly). Angharad-I have spent nights too-trying to think this out. When I took up this work, I knew what it meant. It meant devotion-and sacrifice. It meant making it my whole life-to the exclusion of everything else. That I was perfectly willing to do. But to share it with another- (With sudden emotion) Do you think I will have you going threadbare all your life? Depending on the charity of others for your good meals? Our children growing up in castoff clothing-and ourselves thanking God for parenthood in a house full of bits? (Shaking his head with determination) No-I can bear with such a life for the sake of my work. ( Suddenly savage) But I think I would start to kill if I saw the white come into your hair twenty years before its time.

Angharad comes close, looking up at him with misty eyes. She understands the significance of his last remark.

ANGHARAD (softly). Why?

He doesn't answer.

ANGHARAD (more insistently). Why would you start to kill?

Gruffydd averts his eyes. She moves even closer to him.

ANGHARAD. Are you a man-or a saint?

GRUFFYDD (in a low voice). I am no saint -but I have a duty towards you. Let me do it.

Angharad realizes that she has made no impression on him.

ANGHARAD (brokenly-tearfully). Did I come here to hear sermons about your duty?

He does not move. She stares at him for another moment, then turns on her heel and goes out. Gruffydd stands looking after her.

Angharad comes swiftly out of GRUFFYDD's LODGINGS. We watch her as she rounds the corner. Then she bursts into sobs as she hurries along. The scene fades out.

The interior of GRUFFYDD's LODGINGS fades in. It is day. We see Gruffydd's work bench, at which Huw and Gruffydd are busy making the picture frame. Huw shows Gruffydd the piece he has been working on.

GRUFFYDD. Good. Now a piece for the molding-about two feet.

HUW. Yes, sir.

He hunts around on the bench for a piece of wood and then looks up at Gruffydd.

HUW. Will I ever be rich, Mr. Gruffydd?

GRUFFYDD (gravely). You are rich, Huw.

Huw. Me? Oh, no, Mr. Gruffydd.

GRUFFYDD. What do you want, then?

Huw is silent, trying to think what he wants.

GRUFFYDD (smiling). If you cannot think what you want, think how you would feel if you lost what you have. Your father and mother. Your brothers and sisters. Your home. Would you feel poor if you lost them? (Huw nods.) Then you are rich in possessing them. And that is the real wealth, Huw-because it was earned by love.

Huw is deeply impressed by what Gruffydd has said, but he is still struggling with his thoughts about Gruffydd and Angharad. He hesitates a moment, then blurts out:

HUW. But you will never have either kind of wealth! You can't marry Angharad because you have no money.

Gruffydd is startled by Huw's outburst. But as Huw looks up at him challengingly, Gruffydd speaks quietly:

GRUFFYDD (kindly). Who has been talking

to you, Huw?

HUW. Bron-and-I have heard other talk.

Gruffydd's face goes stern for a moment, then he smiles a little wistfully and lays his hand affectionately on Huw's shoulder. After a moment he turns and goes slowly to the window.

GRUFFYDD is at the window, and Huw in the background is watching him. Gruffydd is silent for a moment, then speaks as much to himself as to Huw.

GRUFFYDD ( quietly, hut with bitterness). Perhaps there is still a third kind of wealth. Perhaps a man is wrong to ask more for himself than the opportunity to serve his God-

The scene dissolves to the EXTERIOR OF THE CHAPEL on a bright spring day. The Chapel door is seen. The whole Valley is out, in much the same spirit as for Bronwen and Ivor's wedding earlier. The villagers are cheering and throwing rice at a bride and groom emerging from the Chapel. In the close foreground stands a smart, open carriage, driven by a coachman, who is not in too resplendent uniform. Until the bride and groom come close, we do not see who they are. They are ducking, shielding their faces from the rice. The coachman jumps down to help them into their carriage and we see that they are Iestyn and Angharad. Iestyn is smiling proudly. Angharad's face is blank. Iestyn helps her into the carriage and climbs in beside her. He takes her hand possessively.

IESTYN. My darling-you shall have everything in the world.

He kisses her while the celebrants round the carriage laugh and cheer. She responds, but automatically, without any real warmth. Her eyes go past him back to the Chapel, then the coachman cracks his whip and, with a jerk, the carriage . moves out of sight. The celebrants crowd into the foreground waving after the carriage. The people gathered at the Chapel begin to leave, moving down into the street. Near the Chapel door are the last of them, Morgan, Beth and Huw. They start to move slowly away from the Chapel. Beth is crying, Morgan has his arm around her. Huw looks at his mother, then back toward the open Chapel door. His face is very grave. They go out of scene as the door comes into view.

From the door, GRUFFYDD is seen moving methodically about at the front of the Chapel, putting away his book, extinguishing a candle, straightening the cloth on the lectern. He finishes his work and walks ~lowly forward. As he comes close, we see that his face is grave and self-contained. Gruffydd comes out through the door, gently closing it, turns and goes out of our vision, as the scene fades out.

PART SIX

The INTERIOR OF THE SCHOOL CLASSROOM fades in. It is day. Children, boys and girls, are filing into the classroom as if from recess. A group of them come into the foreground. One of them, Mervyn Phillips, is a rather bullying, heavy type. They stop by a desk and look down. On the desk are Huw's books and the pencil-box given him by Mr. Gruffydd. The boys exchange mischievous looks. Mervyn Phillips takes up the pencil-box and cracks it against the desk. Others begin to tear Huw's books and to pour ink on them. One of the boys looks back over his shoulder.

BOY. Look out, here he comes.

They scatter to their own desks. Huw comes up to his desk. As HUW looks down, his eyes widen, then his fists clench and tears start in his eyes. He looks up and faces them.

Huw. I'll fight you all.

Soma of the boys laugh, some sneer at him.

MERVYN PHILLIPS. Dirty coal miner!

HUW. YOU first.

Then Huw begins to sob, though he tries to fight the sobs back. He tries to mop the pencil-box with his clean handkerchief, then puts the handkerchief to his eyes, leaving a black smudge on his face. His fists clenched, he starts toward Mervyn Phillips. One of the boys calls out warningly.

BOY. Look out!

All take their seats hastily as the sound of the door opening is heard. JONAS, the master has entered the room. He is an unpleasant man, young, but heavy, and pedantic, with a sneering manner and an affected English drawl. He looks at the class and notices Huw's rumpled, tearful condition. He walks slowly over to him and stands looking down at him. Huw looks defiantly up at him, rising slowly.

JONAS. You are the new boy? ( With an unpleasant smile) What a dirty little sweep it is.

He pulls Huw's handkerchief from his pocket and inspects it disapprovingly, holding it daintily between two fingers.

HUW (rebelliously) . It was clean when I left home-

The smile, as if by magic, leaves Jonas' face.

JONAS. You will address me as "sir" or I will put a stick about you. Now sit down. If you expect to stay with us you will have to be more civilized.

Mutiny wells up in Huw. He glares fiercely at Jonas. Jonas turns away and moves up to the head of the class.

The scene dissolves to the SCHOOLYARD. The children are pouring out for midday recess, a jostling crowd. Huw and Mervyn Phillips approach each other.

MERVYN. Fight me, will you?

He swings wildly at Huw. Huw swings back, but is no match for Phillips. He goes down under a rain of blows, comes up with his nose and mouth bleeding and goes down again. This time Mervyn jumps on him and pummels him on the ground. The boys who have gathered round the fight are all for Mervyn. They cheer him on as he pounds Huw.

The scene dissolves to the EXTERIOR OF THE MORGAN HOUSE. It is early evening. Huw, battered and bedraggled, slowly approaches the house. He carries his broken pencil-box and ink-stained books. · His clothes are smudged and torn. His face is a battered mass with a black eye and bloody nose and several cuts. He looks at the front door, then turns and goes past the house to sneak in the back way. He stops at the sound of Davy's voice.

DAVY's VOICE. Here he is.

Ianto and the other brothers are coming out of the shed, where they have been washing. They come up to Huw. Ianto sees Huw's face and whistles. He lifts Huw's chin. Huw tries frantically to think of a plausible lie.

HUW. I-I fell on the mountain.

IANTO (grimly). Did you win?

HUW (honestly). No.

Ianto looks at Davy.

IANTO. Where will we find Dai Bando?

DAVY. At the Three Bells, likely.

IANTO. Come.

They leave. Huw turns to the HOUSE. Beth is coming out with a pail of slops. She sees Huw and stares. She puts down the pail and runs to him, taking him in her arms, tears in her eyes.

BETH. Oh, Huw-what have they done to you?

Morgan comes out of the house and crosses to Huw. He looks gravely at his son, then takes him by the arm.

MORGAN. Come with me.

He leads him into the house. Beth, fearful that Morgan is going to give Huw a licking, hurries after him.

BETH. Gwilym-Gwilym-

the MORGAN PARLOR, Morgan and Huw come in, followed by Beth, protesting. Morgan says nothing. He stops before the mantelpiece, takes down the box and sets it on the table. He takes a few coins from it and looks at Huw.

MORGAN. Are you willing to go back to school tomorrow?

HUW. Yes, sir.

MORGAN. Good. From tonight you shall have a penny for every mark on your face, sixpence for a bloody nose, a shilling for a black eye, and two shillings for a broken nose.

He gives some coins to Huw, Beth already listening with growing disapproval.

BETH. Gwilym-stop it. (To Huw) Fight again and when you come home not a word shall you have from me. Not a look. (Fiercely) Break your old nose, then! Break your mother's heart every time you go from the house!

MORGAN. A boy must fight, Beth.

BETH. Fight, is it? Another beating like that one and he will be dead.

MORGAN (smiling). He has had no beating. A hid