We mark today the 144th birth anniversary of the late President Sergio Osmeña who was born #OnThisDay in 1878.

Hailing from the province of Cebu, Osmeña was a journalist and lawyer before being elected as provincial governor. He then went on to win a seat in the election of the Philippine Assembly in 1907, where he was elected as its first Speaker. During this time, he founded the Nacionalista Party, together with Manuel Quezon, the oldest political party in the Philippines and in Southeast Asia.

Osmeña was then elected senator, serving for 13 years. He spearheaded a crucial independence mission in 1933, joining fellow Senator Manuel Roxas in Washington, D.C. to lobby for the passage of the Hare-Hawes-Cutting Act. It aimed to provide a transitional commonwealth government for the Philippines under the United States before the recognition of our independence.

This government was eventually established and in 1935, Osmeña ran for vice-president alongside presidential candidate Manuel L. Quezon. The Commonwealth of the Philippines was inaugurated and they both took their oaths of office at the steps of the Legislative Building, now the National Museum of Fine Arts.

When war broke out and the Japanese forces occupied the country, he joined President Quezon and a few government officials as the Commonwealth went into exile to the United States. He remained as Vice President during these turbulent times until Quezon passed away in 1944 and Osmeña succeeded him as President. He served Quezon’s unfinished term and joined the American forces when they returned to help liberate the Philippines in 1945.

Osmeña ran for a fresh presidential term in 1946 but lost to Roxas. He passed away on October 19, 1961, in Manila at the age of 83.

We make a timely remembrance of Osmeña’s accomplishments and contributions as a public servant especially now that we are celebrating Civil Service Month this September.

Pictured below is the monument to the late president Osmeña located at the façade of the National Museum of Fine Arts along Padre Burgos Avenue. National Artist for Sculpture Guillermo Tolentino created this work of art, which was then cast in bronze by the Fonderia Berdicando Marinelle in Italy. It was unveiled in 1966 and remains a testament to Osmeña’s service to the Filipino people. In 2019, the #NationalMusuemPH declared this sculpture as an Important Cultural Property (ICP).

The National Fine Arts Collection also holds several works of art featuring Pres. Sergio Osmeña: “Portrait of President Sergio Osmeña” (1951, oil on canvas, Executive Floor) by Martino Abellana, “Caricature of President Osmeña “(undated, watercolor on Strathmore paper) by Liborio Gatbonton, and “President Sergio Osmeña” (1952, wood, Philippine General Hospital Hall, Gallery XVI) by Fidel Araneta.

See all these and more when you visit the National Museum of Fine Arts! We are open Tuesday-Sunday, from 9:00 AM to 6:00 PM. Admission is FREE!

Text and photo by NMP Fine Arts Division. With contributions from Museum Volunteer Mikaela Anja Reyes.