Former New England Patriots coach Bill Belichick looks completely smitten with his 24-year-old girlfriend as the pair flashed matching rings on a Fourth of July bike ride in Nantucket.

Jordon Hudson and the NFL legend, 72, doubled down on their relationship by stepping out together at the exclusive Massachusetts island's holiday celebrations.

The May-December couple have been brushing off media attention and critics surrounding their controversial romance and only had eyes for each other on the outing.

But exclusive DailyMail.com photos show that the couple – who have a 48-year age gap – have taken a big step in their romance by wearing matching rings on their left index fingers.

Hudson had a smaller silver band while father-of-three Belichick sported a dark grey ring.

While there appear to be no immediate plans for wedding bells, the jewelry has confirmed how serious the couple are about their romance – with Belichick moving the former cheerleader into his multi-million-dollar properties after dating for just a few months.

The couple celebrated the Fourth of July on the exclusive island, enjoying the local bike parade with friends and Belichick’s family.

They were all smiles as they sat on a lawn to watch the cyclists go by, with Belichick handing his younger lover a drink as he chatted to fans and petted a dog.

The unlikely couple were first spotted on the Massachusetts summer destination early in June. They have reportedly been living together since January.

They then hunkered down in Belichick's lavish Boston home.

Both have since returned to Nantucket, which Belichick has called home since 1979, and spent time with his family at the parade before splitting off on their own.

Hudson got in the holiday spirit, pairing a red off-the-shoulder top with white jeans and trainers which she paired with a stylish set of sunglasses.

The couple cycled to nearby Sconset Market, buying an iced coffee which they shared, before heading two miles on the bikes to nearby Sankaty Head Lighthouse.

Hudson got her much-older beau to pose for a selfie, with both pouting at the camera, before taking a picture of the NFL legend leaning against a fence close to the historic structure.

He dressed down in a blue t-shirt with white shorts, donning a blue cap and sunglasses to enjoy the sunshine with his younger lover.

The six-time Super Bowl-winning coach made sure to point out all of the top spots on their walk among the sand dunes, with Hudson happily smiling and nodding along as they strolled together.

The couple put on a loved-up show. Hudson cuddled up to her lover before they rode back to his property for more celebrations with the family.

They have been staying in one of the many lavish properties that Belichick owns on the exclusive island. The home has an estimated value of $3 million.

He currently owns at least seven properties on the island, with six of them close to each other making up a complex in Siasconet, worth in total $15.7million.

Belichick originally bought a home on the island in 1979 and has spoken of his love for the area.

Speaking to N Magazine in 2017 he said: 'The island is spectacular. The people are great, fishing, bike paths, the lighthouses, the beach, the history — I mean it's got it all.

'The baked goods there are pretty hard to resist, especially their muffins or cookies.'

Hudson's relationship with Belichick has divided opinion this summer due to the significant age gap between the two – he could easily be her grandfather.

Pictures from Nantucket in June show the couple clutching on to each other after dining at a swanky private members club together.

The former collegiate cheerleader and pageant queen wasn't too shy about showing some PDA with her older beau, with Hudson keeping a tight grip on his arm as they left the restaurant.

Belichick first met Hudson on a flight to Florida back in 2021, where they bonded over the former student athlete's philosophy project

During the flight, Belichick even signed his now-girlfriend's notebook, writing: 'Jordon, Thanks for giving me a course on logic! Safe travels!'

The couple promised to stay in touch, with their relationship eventually turning romantic when Belichick split from longtime girlfriend Linda Holliday last September, with the coachand his new flame now reportedly living together less than a year later.

Amid the controversy surrounding her love life, Hudson was spotted driving a stylish white Porsche Macan S last week.

It is thought that the $75,000 car was a gift from her new lover, which she used to get to a cheerleading practice in Boston.

The couple were pictured for the first time since their relationship became public in exclusive DailyMail.com images, with Belichick taking Hudson out on his $225,000 powerboat – named VIII Rings for his eight Super Bowl titles (six as head coach in New England and two as the New York Giants' defensive coordinator).

Before news of the romance broke, they had also been seen together in Croatia and at Tom Brady's Patriots Hall of Fame induction ceremony on June 12.

Belichick and Hudson are currently described as being 'inseparable' after shacking up together at the start of 2024.

It's claimed she moved into his home in Hingham, Massachusetts, early this year, just a few months after the NFL legend confirmed his split from TV presenter Holliday.

Hudson's 64-year-old ex-boyfriend Joshua Zuckerman recently praised her for being 'wise beyond her years' in a conversation with TMZ.

Zuckerman revealed that they initially bonded over psychology, philosophy, and nature a number of years ago before eventually making the relationship romantic.

It comes after DailyMail.com revealed footage of Belichick sneaking out of his girlfriend's home in 2023 – months before their relationship was revealed.

Belichick's long-time Patriot quarterback Tom Brady mocked the Ring footage of the football coach doing a bare-chested walk of shame in April.

Brady, who joked about his beloved coach on his Netflix roast, seemingly had no clue the home belonged to Belichick's new girlfriend.

However, the former Bridgewater State University cheerleader has since met the NFL legend, accompanying Belichick to his Hall of Fame induction in May.

They initially kept things low key and were only briefly spotted on rare occasions, but TMZ claims Hudson secretly visited Gillette Stadium to support her man during the 2022 and 2023 seasons with the Patriots.

Hudson is even understood to have been helping Belichick with his business endeavors of late.