1375243520

Order this image under fair dealing

All Rights Reserved except for Fair Dealing exceptions otherwise permitted under the Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988, as amended and revised.

Accepted Non-commercial Use

Permitted use for these purposes:

Personal use for non-commercial research and private study and other uses under the UK’s exceptions to copyright and those exceptions to copyright in place where the user is located.

Use on websites that are primarily information-led, research-oriented and not behind a paywall.

Use on personal social media accounts, provided the individuals are not promoting themselves commercially.

Non-Commercial educational use for the purpose of teaching and instruction, including internal training.

Downloading audio-visual for non-commercial offline listening or viewing.

Free exhibitions held in venues, which do not charge an entry fee.

If you would like to use IWM collections materials in a way that is not covered above, require a commercial licence, high-resolution copies, or have manipulation requests, please contact the Image and Film Licensing Team. Digital files of films and sound recordings are available at cost depending on intended use.

If you are interested in the full range of licenses available for this material, please contact the Image and Film Licensing Team.

Description

Object description

whole: the image is positioned in the upper three-quarters. The title is separate and placed in the lower quarter, in black outlined red, and in black. The text is separate and located in the upper third, in red, and in the lower half, in black. All set against a white background. image: a shoulder-length depiction of the cartoon character Old Bill, wearing a cap and muffler and smoking a pipe. text: THE OXFORD TWICE DAILY AT 2.30 AND 8 'Ullo! DAVID ALLEN AND SONS LTD 17. LEICESTER St. LONDON. W . BELFAST . HARROW . LIVERPOOL . GLASGOW AND DUBLIN. (Copyright Resd.) Bruce Bairnsfather CHARLES B. COCHRAN'S PRODUCTION The Better 'Ole OR THE ROMANCE OF 'OLD BILL' BY BRUCE BAIRNSFATHER AND ARTHUR ELIOT.

Label

A production announcement in 'The Times' for 31st July 1917 stated. 'On the eve of the Bank Holiday Mr Charles B Cochran will produce at the Oxford Music Hall Captain Bruce Bairnsfather's play entitled 'The Better 'Ole'. It is in two acts and eight scenes all designed by Captain Bairnsfather, with musical interludes'. The review of 6th August describes the work as 'a cheery example of what the British Army calls 'swinging the lead'. Written in a trench magazine the story would excite derision, though in billets, as in the theatre, it would win laughter'. 'The Better 'Ole' played at the Oxford Theatre twice daily for over a year. After its London stay, five touring companies travelled playing it around Britain. A film of the same name was eventually produced. 'Old Bill', the cockney character illustrated here, was Bairnsfather's most famous cartoon invention. The title of the play, which Bairnsfather co-wrote, is based on Old Bill's well known quip 'If you know of a better 'ole go to it'.

Inscription

3158

Inscription

NEG NO: Q 80155

Object Details

Category

Posters

Related period

First World War (production), First World War (content)

Creator

Bairnsfather, Bruce (Undefined)

David Allen and Sons Ltd, 17 Leicester Street, London, W Belfast, Harrow, Liverpool, Glasgow, Dublin (printer)

Oxford Theatre (publisher/sponsor)

Production date

1917

Place made

Great Britain, United Kingdom

Materials

Support: paper

medium: lithograph and letterpress

Dimensions

Support: Height 760 mm, Width 504 mm

Mount: Height 763 mm, Width 509 mm

Catalogue number

Art.IWM PST 2733

Our collections information

We have over a million object records online, and we are adding to this all the time. Our records are never finished. Sometimes we discover new information that changes what we know about an object, such as who made it or used it. Sometimes we change how an object is interpreted. We sometimes make mistakes in our spelling, transcription or categorisation, or miss information out of our records.

Read more about our collections and the information we hold. Developing our collections information

If you have concerns about the language in this record, or you have information to improve it, please share your feedback.

Our collections information

Please use this form to give us feedback on an object. The form will be sent to our Collections Management Team who will use it to improve our object records. We receive a lot of comments and can't respond to each one, but we do read them all and will respond where we can.

Read more about our collections and the information we hold.

Object

Your feedback

Name

Email address

(we will only ever use it to respond to you about your feedback)

Related content

IWM Q 31065

First World War

10 Surprising Laws Passed During The First World War

The outbreak of war in 1914 brought many new rules and regulations to Britain. The most important of these was the Defence of the Realm Act (DORA), passed on 8 August 1914 ‘for securing public safety’.

First World War

8 Celebrity Air Aces Of The First World War

Aviation was one of the most romanticised elements of the First World War. 'Air aces' in particular achieved celebrity status both during and after the war and their photographs regularly appeared in newspapers. Of the eight aces listed here, seven were killed in action between 1916 and 1918 or died in flying accidents during or after the war.

First World War

Whizz Bangs And Wind-Ups: 10 Tommy Slang Terms

During the First World War, British soldiers used language in inventive and often humorous ways. The words and phrases they used reflected everything from the dull routines of service to the traumas of front line action, often tinged with characteristic black humour and irony.

Share this