The Bold and the Beautiful's Romy Park teased Bill and Poppy's impending fate, revealing things are about to go from "awkward to horrifying" for the budding couple.

In this week's drama-filled soap, Bill and Poppy are about to be met with a very unexpected surprise as they try to take their romance to an intimate level. The pair, who were previously connected many years ago, have found their way back to each other again and are ready to reignite their old flame - but not without a few obstacles getting in their way first.

Speaking on Poppy and Bill's blossoming romance Romy said: "Poppy and Bill had an immediate attraction and connection years ago. That has stayed with her all these years. But it turned out they were ships passing in the night. She accepted that, moved on, became a mother. And being a mother became her top priority, as opposed to searching for romantic love."

Join the Mirror's SMS news service to get the biggest breaking stories delivered straight to your phone. Click here to subscribe.

READ MORE: Inside the life of latest Bold and the Beautiful Thomas star, Matthew Atkinson

Speaking to Soaps She Knows, she said her character was initially "guarded" when Bill re-entered her life. However, they "picked right back up where they were" when she let her guard down. Romy said it's "exciting" and admitted Poppy is willing to see where things go with Bill.

As the pair reconnect on a date they end up finding themselves back at Poppy's beach house in Malibu. And as the heat begins to turn up between them in the bedroom, Poppy suddenly realizes they're not in the house alone. Filled with horror, she turns to Bill to tell him that her daughter and boyfriend R.J. are doing the same thing as them in the other room. Park says that "things go from awkward to horrified, especially for Luna" after the unexpected turn of events.

But Bill on the other hand has the opposite reaction to the incident finding the whole situation hilarious. Diving into Poppy's less light-hearted reaction, Poppy explains that although she can be a "free spirit" she draws the line when it comes to parenthood as she strives to be a "good role model" for her daughter and doesn't want her to follow "in those particular footsteps."

Despite Poppy being unamused by the scene, Romy says that she had the best time filming the unfortunate mishap and couldn't stop cracking up during the takes. She said that they were so filled with laughter that it took them a while to wrap up the scene and looks forward to the episode airing.

Click here to follow the Mirror US on Google News to stay up to date with all the latest news, sport and entertainment stories.

Follow the Mirror US News page on Facebook

All the latest news, showbiz, lifestyle and sports updates, brought to you by our dedicated American team.

Follow the Mirror US News page on Facebook to make sure you're not missing out.