Former New England Patriots coach Bill Belichick, 72, and his 23-year-old girlfriend, Jordon Hudson, aren’t letting the chatter about their age-gap sack their romance.

The newly unveiled couple showed off some PDA following a dinner date at the exclusive club, The Boarding House, with pals in Nantucket, Mass. on Wednesday night.

In photos obtained by the Daily Mail, Hudson could be seen firmly holding onto her beau’s arm as they strolled down the cobblestone streets of the picturesque island.

Meanwhile, the NFL icon looked proud as he led her to his parked vehicle. In footage obtained by the Mail, he showed he is a true gentleman by opening the car door for his lady. Although, after some consideration, the former collegiate cheerleader decided not to get in.

Belichick wore jeans and a light blue button-down shirt paired with brown loafers. Hudson looked youthful in flared, floral-print pants, a curve-hugging white tank and matching wedges.

They reportedly spent two hours at the private club before grabbing some ice cream. Belichick stayed in the car as Hudson grabbed their dessert — potentially wanting to avoid causing commotion.

Their swanky dinner followed a romantic ride on Belichick’s boat, which is named VIII Rings after how many Super Bowl championships he’s clinched. They were seen on the $225,000 vessel earlier in the day Wednesday but were not photographed displaying any affection.

The pro football coach and Hudson’s relationship was uncovered last week when the latter’s former teammate told TMZ they began dating after meeting on a plane in 2021. They allegedly hit it off over a discussion about logic — after which he signed her homework and they exchanged numbers.

Their friendship is reported to have turned romantic following Belichick’s “drawn-out, back-and-forth breakup” with Linda Holliday.

They’ve become more comfortable making their relationship public, as Hudson attended Tom Brady’s Patriots Hall of Fame induction ceremony this month with Belichick.

There have been a handful of clues about their relationship over the last year as well. The eight-time Super Bowl champion was seen at the 2024 Coastal At The Capitol Cheer and Dance event in March, where Hudson is believed to have competed.

Plus, he made headlines last November after a Ring camera caught him leaving a Massachusetts home without a shirt. The Daily Mail has since reported he was leaving Hudson’s house.

Both parties have yet to speak publicly about their romance.