Money can't buy you love, but it does help you mix in some fascinating social circles.

I hear that Bill Gates's daughter is enjoying a passionate romance with Sir Paul McCartney's grandson.

Phoebe Gates, 21, whose Microsoft founder father has a fortune of £88billion, is going out with Arthur Donald, 24, the elder son of photographer Mary McCartney and her first husband, TV producer Alistair Donald. By comparison, Macca is worth a measly £950million. Phoebe has shared this photograph online of her with Arthur, a New York-based climate investor, taken on a balcony in Paris.

The two families already enjoy close connections with one another as Arthur's aunt, the fashion designer Stella McCartney is good friends with Phoebe's mother, Melissa Gates. 'Even when I was little, she would send me stuff and little notes and I'd be so excited,' Phoebe says of Stella. 'We are really deeply connected.

Before dating the grandson of The Beatles singer - Phoebe was in a relationship with fellow Stanford student Robert Ross. Phoebe shared pictures of her cozying up with her then-boyfriend on Instagram and trolls were quick to leave racist comments about her interracial relationship with Robert Ross, who is black.

She responded to the backlash during an interview with The Information, and she said she was 'done' with people making fun of her relationship.

Despite the innocent nature of the photos of Phoebe and her then-boyfriend, Twitter was quick to react to the notion that Phoebe might be dating a black man, with many choosing to make crude jokes suggesting that her rumored beau was simply using her for her father's money.

One wrote: 'Her net worth projected $130 Billion. I don't think he is her equal or they are doing 50/50. Just my guess [though].'

Another chimed in: 'Phoebe Gates has a black boyfriend, young brotha do not pull out … BE GREAT.'

'When Phoebe Gates' boyfriend get added to the joint checking account,' one person added, while sharing a video of a black man doing a celebratory dance.

The 20-year-old, who has gained more than 64,000 followers on TikTok and 195,000 on Instagram opened up about the highs and lows that come with getting so much attention online, and when she was asked about the worst part of being a social media sensation, the college student admitted: 'The misconceptions and conspiracy theories about my family and my relationship with my boyfriend.

'It’s 2023. I’m done being memed for being in an interracial relationship.'

Phoebe's TikTok feed contains things like 'day in the life' type videos, as well as clips of her working out, showing off her favorite outfits and beauty products, reviewing different items, and trying out various makeup trends.

It also features videos of her discussing political topics like women's rights and abortion, alongside her mother, Melinda Gates.

At age 21, the college student and aspiring designer has already achieved a lot: she has made waves in the world of fashion - receiving invites to coveted New York and Paris Fashion Week shows, elite parties, and star-studded events - as well as racking up some celebrity friends along the way, becoming a viral social media star, and even landing an internship at British Vogue.

And while some may argue that she has gotten to where she is thanks to her wealthy background, both Bill and Melinda have continuously insisted that they are working hard to ensure that their kids 'create their own path.'

In fact, Bill - who has a whopping net worth of $107 billion - has voiced his fears over his kids becoming 'distorted' over 'wealth' on numerous occasions, and he once vowed to use his immense fortune to 'help the poor' rather than his own children.

While raising their children, the former couple - who split in May 2021 after 27 years of marriage - did their best to give their three kids - Jennifer, Rory, and Phoebe - a normal childhood.

They made them do chores and split the household work as evenly as possible, while tech mogul Bill has even admitted that he was a stickler about screen time - and didn't allow his kids to have phones until they were age 14.

She often jets off on extravagant trips around the globe - and makes sure to document her endeavors on her Instagram account, where she has gained more than 314,000 followers.

Phoebe has been adamant about wanting to find success on her own, and not because of her parents. But the 21-year-old has followed in their footsteps in one department - becoming a fierce women's rights advocate just like her mother.

Last summer, she interned with British Vogue, who sent her to Copenhagen to cover Fashion Week.

And the trip further cemented her passion. She explained: 'It was super interesting, and it was where I was like, "OK, I want to do a bunch more stuff."'

'There is some toxicity in the industry and I have a huge interest in women's health as well, so I wanted to work somewhere where it didn't feel like those were confounding with each other,' she added of her internship.

Phoebe - who said she wants to 'be her own person' and 'branch away' from her parents - may have met her new beau through the close ties between the McCartney family and the Gates family.

She grew close to Paul McCartney's daughter, designer Stella McCartney, after the two were introduced by her mother - who has also inspired her to want to go on her own path, rather than following in her parents' footsteps.

'When I was little she would send me stuff and little notes and I'd be so excited. I've been asking my mom forever and ever if I could meet with her,' Phoebe said.

'I felt very connected to her, I feel like because she's been able to use the platform she had, because of who her dad is, and then she took that and instead of being like, "Oh, people define me by this," she took it and she was like, "OK, I have this immense privilege, now I'm going to use it to leverage something."

'What she chose to leverage is to launch a brand that is completely sustainable. So I think we are really deeply connected because that's a lot of what I think about.

Stella invited Phoebe to attend her show at Paris Fashion Week last fall, where she wowed in a black bra, leather jacket, and white trousers - which contained an intricate painting of a bird on them.