The couple share three children together: Jennifer, Phoebe and Rory. In an interview with BBC post-split, Bill was asked if he would like to find love again. His response was simple: “Sure, I’m not a robot.”

Now, not only has he managed to find love, there are even rumours that he may be engaged!

Did Bill Gates give Paula Hurd a ring?

The internet went wild when images of Hurd wearing a ring on her engagement finger while out with Gates went viral. The pair was snapped together in New York City in July and her bling immediately sparked speculation.

But a representative of Hurd confirmed to People magazine that she has had the ring for “decades” and it does not “symbolise an engagement”. The denial has, however, not stopped rumours that Gates and Hurd’s relationship is serious and wedding bells may be on the cards.

So, how did their romance start?

Back in October 2021, Hurd and Gates attended the BNP Paribas Open in California. According to People, they were not dating at the time and were not even seated together, but it’s the first time a public connection between them could be traced.

Both lovers of tennis, in September 2022, they were photographed seated next to each other at the Laver Cup at the O2 Arena in London. A few months later, in January 2023, they reunited at the Australian Open.

In February, it was widely reported that the couple were dating and that their relationship was “known” to those close to them and business associates. But, according to People, Hurd had not yet met Gates’ children.

Paula Hurd is a widow

She may be in headlines now because of her relationship with the Microsoft founder, but Hurd was formerly in a high-profile marriage with the CEO of software company Oracle. She was married to Mark Hurd for nearly 30 years. CNBC reported that Mark died in 2019, with Business Insider adding that he took a leave of absence a month before he passed away, reportedly of cancer.

Paula and her husband share two daughters together, Kathryn and Kelly. Mark, a respected businessman who has been credited with turning embattled companies around, was also the former CEO of Hewlett-Packard. His estimated net worth was US$70 million at the time of his death, according to Ncesc.

She’s a career woman

Per a biography on Baylor University’s website, Hurd has a bachelor’s degree in business administration from the University of Texas, which she obtained in 1984. Baylor is her late husband Mark’s alma mater, too, so the couple were heavily invested in sponsoring the academic institution.

Hurd held various positions in sales and management at software company NCR. The organisation provides software and services for banks and retailers. She eventually became vice-president of services, leading a global team to manage strategic partnerships.

Together, the couple built the Mark and Paula Hurd Welcome Centre in 2018 and also donated US$7 million to a basketball pavilion. These acts extended her philanthropic role at the university and extended her reach to support many other organisations.