Duane Allen "Bear" Carter, of Saginaw, Mich., formerly of Danville, passed this life at 6:20 a.m. Sunday, July 15, 2012, at Mercy Hospital in Muskegon, Mich.. Duane was born Nov. 17, 1959, in Danville to Jessie C. (Dudley) Pierce and Sam Carter.. Duane was a 1977 graduate of Danville High School and former member of Greater Shiloh Missionary Baptist Church under the leadership of the Rev. H. L. Reed.. While in Danville, Duane worked at Hyster, Lauhoff Grain Co. and General Motors. Duane attended Danville Area Community College and became a pipe fitter, millwright, locksmith and received a truck driving certificate. After leaving Danville, Duane relocated to Saginaw, Mich., continued to work for General Motors and became a union representative.. Duane had a loving spirit; he loved everyone, and everyone loved him. He was a member of the Soul Survivors Motorcycle Club.. Duane loved his family, fishing, barbequing, car racing, motorcycle riding and simply enjoyed life.. Duane loved his daughter, Dyshena, granddaughter, Kymberly, and was always concerned for them and others.. Duane leaves to cherish his memory: his daughter, Dyshena (Vince August) Heard; granddaughter, Kymberly August; his fiancé, Marilyn Moore, of Muskegon, Mich.; sisters, Jannette Kay (Victor) Jackson, of Detroit, Mich.; Ethel Jones, Ann (James) Farr and Dorothy Carter, all of Danville; two brothers, Leroy (Janice) Carter, of Danville, and Bishop Samuel (Jeanette) Carter, of Springfield; an uncle, Charles Dudley, of Danville; an aunt Elizabeth (Fred) Williams, of Plymouth, Minn.; best friend, Steve (Ann) Carruth; and a host of nieces, nephews, cousins and friends.. Duane was preceded in death by his son, Dymon Lee Heard; his grandparents, Vanderbilt and Delinia Dudley; his uncles, Maud, James and Mack Dudley; and his aunt, Ann Pettus.. A celebration of life will commence at noon Saturday, July 21, at New Life Church of Faith, 1419 N. Bowman Ave., Danville. Visitation will begin at 11 a.m. until the time of the service. A public viewing will commence from 1-5 p.m. Friday, July 20, at Leek & Sons Funeral Home, 304 E. Williams St., Danville. Officiating: Bishop Samuel Carter. Interment: Spring Hill Cemetery.. Condolences may be sent by accessing: www.leekandsonsfuneralhome.com.