Shraddha Nigam is Karan Singh Grover's first wife. The couple parted ways allegedly due to the latter's extramarital affairs.

The lovebirds of B-town Bipasha Basu and Karan Singh Grover are a happily married couple now. The duo tied the knot yesterday (April 30) in the traditional Bengali style. The wedding ceremony was a private affair but later in the evening, a grand reception was hosted for Bollywood celebs, telly stars, and other people close to the couple. This is the third marriage for Karan Singh Grover. When the news broke out that Bipasha and Karan are getting hitched, media and fans wanted to know the reaction of his ex-wives. Here is what Karan’s first wife Shraddha Nigam had to say.

Karan Singh Grover and Shraddha Nigam’s marriage lasted only for 10 months. The duo had tied the knot in the year December 2008. The reason for the couple’s separation is allegedly Karan’s extramarital affairs. On hearing her former husband’s third wedding, Shraddha Nigam in an interview with Telly Bytes wished Karan all the luck for his wedding and life ahead. (ALSO SEE: Shah Rukh Khan, Aishwarya Rai, Sushmita Sen, Salman Khan: Bollywood celebs attend Bipasha Basu-Karan Singh Grover’s wedding reception!)

Even Karan’s second wife Jennifer Winget who also happens to be the popular face of telly world had said, “It was an experience, and an amazing roller-coaster ride. There were some happy and sad moments. But I know that I gave my 500% (to my marriage), and no one can point a finger at me. I don’t regret a single day of my life. But, s**t happens. I don’t feel bitter or hold any grudges. I am in a happy space. People might think otherwise, but that’s not the case.” (ALSO READ: OMG! Did Salman Khan & Aishwarya Rai Bachchan come across at Bipasha Basu-Karan Singh Grover’s wedding reception? (Watch Video))

Karan Singh Grover’s earlier wives have moved on in their lives. His first wife is happily married to Mayank Anand. Speaking of the newlyweds, we wish them all the luck and a colourful life ahead!

For breaking news and live news updates, like us on Facebook or follow us on Twitter and Instagram. Read more on Latest Entertainment News on India.com.