A childhood memory inspired one man to pursue a passion in the industry of glass blowing and now, he’s giving back to people in the community interested in the art. Parker Stafford, 57, runs his own hot glass studio and gallery at 8685 Virginia Avenue in Newport.

A nationally known Bluegrass band is schedule to perform in Giles County this May to help local youth sports teams. The Lonesome River Band is scheduled to perform in Giles County as part of a benefit concert for Newport baseball and softball teams.

NEWPORT, R.I. – Billie Jean King and the other members of the Original 9 who laid the groundwork for the women’s professional tennis tour are the first group nominated together for the International Tennis Hall of Fame. They join Jonas Bjorkman, Sergi Brugera, Juan Carlos Ferrero, Lleyton Hewitt, Lisa Raymond and the late Dennis Van der Meer on the ballot announced Monday for the Hall’s Class of 2021. That group and Van der Meer, who advocated for a universal teaching method in tennis, were nominated in the Contributor Category. Van der Meer died last year. The full ballot now goes to the official voting group — which includes tennis journalists, historians and Hall of Fame members — and fans can vote online in the Player Category from Oct. 1-25.

New West Records publicist Brady Brock confirmed his death, but did not immediately provide details. Earle was the son of country star Steve Earle. (AP Photo/Joe Giblin, file)NASHVILLE, Tenn. Nashville police said a preliminary investigation into the death of singer-songwriter Justin Townes Earle shows his death was a probable drug overdose. Police spokesman Don Aaron said officers did a welfare check at Earle's home on Sunday where he was found dead. He was the son of country star Steve Earle, although the younger Earle was mostly raised by his single mother, Carol-Ann.

39-year-old Joshua Langfitt of Newport is the countys only professional blacksmith, and one of the few in the region. That skill set transitions into a lot of life I think.Thats why hes working to teach the next generation the trade. In order to teach the next generation, I think it's vitally important because it does keep that craft alive, Langfitt said. While Langfitt admits in todays modern era, there may not be as much of a pressing demand for blacksmithing, he says its an important skill to pass on. Langfitt works full time now as a blacksmith and has his own business, JJL Forge.

The Newport Agricultural Fair, Virginia’s oldest agricultural fair, has been canceled for 2020. Usually held in August, the fair features the best of the community’s agricultural heritage and the beloved Miss Newport pageant. Newport Agricultural Fair Board of Director President Kevin Law made the announcement the 2020 fair would be canceled, only the second time to happen in it’s history. According to an article written by Bill Vincel, during the war years the Newport Fair was cancelled from 1942 to 1946 as all energies were being directed to the war effort. The Fair Board of Directors plans to continue the fair in 2021.

(CNN) - Jennifer Lawrence and Cooke Maroney have officially tied the knot. The Oscar-winning actress' publicist confirmed the marriage to CNN on Sunday. The wedding was held a day before at Belcourt of Newport, a luxurious mansion in Newport, Rhode Island, according to Christy Welder, a representative for the estate. Lawrence and her Manhattan art dealer hubby said their vows in front of 150 guests, including Amy Schumer, Emma Stone, Adele and Kris Jenner, according to People. The bride wore a Dior gown for the celebration, Elle reported.