Lleyton Hewitt used a dazzling array of angles on his serves and groundstrokes to defeat Vince Spadea 6-3, 6-4 on Saturday and move on to the final of the SAP Open in San Jose, Calif.

Hewitt, the No. 3 seed and 11th-ranked player in the world, had the answer for everything Spadea could dish out, especially from the backcourt where the Australian’s foot speed gave him a huge advantage on the indoor court.

Hewitt was set to face the winner of the evening semifinal between defending champion Andy Roddick and Britain’s Andy Murray.

A final against the big-serving Roddick would be a formidable task for Hewitt. Roddick earns plenty of quick points off his booming serve, and if he gets past Murray he’ll need that against the steely Hewitt.

Open 13: Arnaud Clement rallied to beat top-seeded Rafael Nadal 2-6, 6-3, 7-5 to make the Marseilles, France, final.

The 67th-ranked Clement will play sixth-seeded Croatian Mario Ancic, who hit 10 aces to defeat France’s Sebastien Grosjean 6-3, 3-6, 6-3.

diamond games: Top-ranked Kim Clijsters defeated Elena Dementieva 5-7, 6-1, 6-2 to reach the final in Antwerp, Netherlands.

Listen now and subscribe: Apple Podcasts | Google Podcasts | Spotify | RSS Feed | SoundStack | All Of Our Podcasts

Clijsters will face rival and No. 2-ranked Amelie Mauresmo today to try and stave off the Frenchwoman’s quest for the top spot.

Clijsters was happy with her comeback from a right ankle injury despite not being 100 percent recovered.

“It’s a miracle, I am so happy with my game,” Clijsters said.

copa telmex: Two-time champion Carlos Moya outlasted Spanish compatriot Juan Carlos Ferrero, prevailing 3-6, 7-6 (3), 6-4 over two hours and 40 minutes to reach the final in Buenos Aires, Argentina.

Moya, who won his first pro title in Buenos Aires in 1995 and repeated in 2003, will face Filippo Volandri of Italy in today’s title match. The sixth-seeded Volandri defeated Agustin Calleri 6-3, 6-4 in the other semifinal.

boxing

former boxer indicted: Former heavyweight boxer Dale Crowe has been indicted in the death of a man whose body was found in a trash bin.

The 29-year-old Crowe was arrested Thursday outside the Hamilton County, Ohio, courthouse after he had made an appearance there on an unrelated misdemeanor.

Prosecutors accuse him of killing Frank Branam, 23, of Cincinnati. Crowe faces charges of aggravated murder, murder and aggravated robbery.

Be the first to know

Get local news delivered to your inbox!

* I understand and agree that registration on or use of this site constitutes agreement to its user agreement and privacy policy.