After stints in the Bahamas, Melbourne and Sydney’s eastern suburbs, Bec and Lleyton Hewitt have headed back to the NSW’s capital’s Hills District after dropping a cool $10.3 million on a mortgage-free resort-style, six-bedroom estate in the semi-rural suburb of Glenhaven.

“I’m a Sydney girl, I love Sydney,” says Bec, who, along with her family, has swapped the busy inner city for a secluded suburban street.

Six years after they sold their $5 million compound in the neighbouring suburb of Kenthurst, the Hewitts and their three kids, Mia, 17, Cruz, 14, and Ava, 12, are savouring being back in their old community and close to Bec’s family.

The 40-year-old’s former Home And Away co-star Lynne McGranger is also a neighbour.

Now that they’ve returned to the area, the family of five are no doubt making the most of their new designer digs.

“The house is tucked away on a quiet, dead-end road in a sleepy suburb, which will give them a bit more privacy,” says a local insider.

Sitting on just over two hectares and located behind commanding gates, the luxury home features an out-of-this-world outdoor living area that comes complete with a spacious open-living areas, stunning pool and, of course, a tennis court.

There’s also a guest cottage, office, cabana and storage barn on the sprawling property.

Inside, there are soaring ceilings, an adult retreat for Bec and Lleyton, a gym, a “boy’s club” room – where Lleyton, 42, and son Cruz can hang out – and even a secret room hidden in the loft, should a family member want some peace and quiet.

After selling their Melbourne mansion in the ritzy suburb of Toorak for $16 million in 2021, there was no mortgage required for the Hewitts’ impressive new pad.

Bec and Lleyton – who’s now busy as Davis Cup captain after retiring from the international tennis circuit – bought the luxury home from former rugby league champion Nathan Hindmarsh and his interior designer wife Bonnie Hindmarsh, the co-founder of Three Birds Renovations, which overhauled the property in 2018.

Three Birds Renovations declined to comment on the news of the sale.

“We won’t be giving any quotes or information about the sale of the home,” a spokesperson told Woman’s Day.

Their new home may be more than 30 kilometres from the ocean, but the Hewitts – who are celebrating 18 years of marriage this year – already bought themselves a beach house in 2021.

The couple are also the proud owners of a Palm Springs-inspired new-build, dubbed The Palms, in Burleigh Heads.