24 Hour Party People (2002) is a British biographical satirical-drama flick. The narrative takes viewers inside the world of a young man who created the iconic Factory Records but also lost the record label following a string of unavoidable situations. The film acquired stellar reviews from both critics and audiences.

Here’s how you can watch and stream 24 Hour Party People (2002) via streaming services such as Amazon Prime Video.

Is 24 Hour Party People (2002) available to watch via streaming?

Yes, 24 Hour Party People (2002) is available to watch via streaming on Amazon Prime Video.

Tony Wilson’s musical record label Factory Records became a globally known company with hit bands delivering sold-out stages and records. However, sometime later, Tony’s happy days turn into a grim phase after the record label gets into losses. What happens next is a set of unexpected circumstances that lead to the closure of the record label forever.

The film stars Steve Coogan as Tony Wilson, John Thomson as Charles (Granada TV producer), Shirley Henderson as Lindsay Wilson (Tony’s first wife), Paddy Considine as Rob Gretton, and Lennie James as Alan Erasmus, among others.

Watch 24 Hour Party People (2002) streaming via Amazon Prime Video

24 Hour Party People (2002) is available to watch on Amazon Prime Video.

Amazon Prime Video boasts a vast catalog of films in multiple genres and languages for avid cinema lovers to stream easily from any part of the world.

You can watch via Amazon Prime Video by following these steps:

Go to Amazon Prime Video

Select ‘Sign in’ and ‘Create your Amazon account’

Sign up for a Prime Video membership:

$14.99 per month or $139 per year with an Amazon Prime membership

$8.99 per month for a standalone Prime Video membership

Amazon Prime is the online retailer’s paid service that provides fast shipping and exclusive sales on products, so the membership that includes both this service and Prime Video is the company’s most popular offering. However, you can also opt to subscribe to Prime Video separately.

The official synopsis is as follows:

“Manchester, 1976. Tony Wilson is an ambitious but frustrated local TV news reporter looking for a way to make his mark. After witnessing a life-changing concert by a band known as the Sex Pistols, he persuades his station to televise one of their performances, and soon Manchester’s punk groups are clamoring for him to manage them. Riding the wave of a musical revolution, Wilson and his friends create the legendary Factory Records label and The Hacienda Club.”

NOTE: The streaming services listed above are subject to change. The information provided was correct at the time of writing.

MaXXXine UK Release Date Gets Brought Forward

It’s good news for UK cinemagoers who want to see Ti West’s latest horror movie at the same time as… Movies Neil Bolt 1 hour ago

The Fall Guy’s Box Office Falls Short of Expectations With $28.5 Million Opening

The Fall Guy‘s box office did not climb as high as its early estimates suggested. Its move from March to… Movies Vansh Mehra 1 hour ago

Unfrosted Interview: Writer Spike Feresten on Making a Funny ‘Biopic’

ComingSoon Editor-in-Chief Tyler Treese spoke with Unfrosted writer Spike Feresten about the comedy movie. He discussed working with Jerry Seinfeld over the years… Movies Spencer Legacy 16 hours ago

Turtles All the Way Down Brought Former Nickelodeon Stars Isabela Merced & Cree Closer

Former Nickelodeon stars Isabela Merced and Cree are closer than ever before after starring in the Max movie Turtles All… Movies Tyler Treese 18 hours ago