Emii (right) was photographed holding hands with married Kobe City Councilor Ken Hashimoto in the middle of last month

33-year-old Member of the Japanese girl group "SPEED" Riko Imai was accused of having an affair with 37-year-old married Kobe City Councilor Ken Hashimoto, the storm continued to fever, "Weekly New Wave" not only released a photo of 2 people holding hands with a shinkansen in the middle of last month, puncturing their previous statement that they did not cross the moral standards, Hashimoto Ken's wife was even more kicked when interviewed, he did not say that he had long planned to divorce, but the day before the weekly release (last Wednesday), he found a lawyer to submit a divorce agreement. It doesn't matter if she lives or dies with her children for the sake of extramarital affairs. Imai Eriko entered politics last year, and the senator of the Frozen Garlic Liberal Democratic Party did not expect to develop an extramarital affair with the married Kobe City Councilor Ken Hashimoto, which caused controversy. Two people were photographed by Weekly Shincho in the middle of last month to spend the night at her villa with a hotel in Osaka City and sleep on the same blanket on the Shinkansen, hashimoto held a press conference last Thursday to explain that in the past 4 or 5 years, his relationship with his wife has been rifted, and he has filed for divorce a year ago and has separated. Imai also explained on the same day that the 2 people are not in a bad relationship, because they know that the other party has not yet divorced, so there is no sloppy behavior, but after the photo of the 2 people sleeping hand in hand on the Shinkansen is exposed, it is equivalent to punching the two sides of the face.

According to KUGOU. TV reported that Hashimoto's explanation was also denied by his wife, who said: "Last August he suddenly proposed a divorce, and after September, he left me and my children without returning home, and the living expenses given were also greatly reduced." It means that the husband is obviously lying in order to wash away the image of bulun, and the outside world also questions his second child who has just started kindergarten, if the couple's feelings in the past 4 or 5 years have deteriorated, how can they have children again. When Ken Hashimoto walked out of the hospital where he was the president the night before, he did not say a word in the face of the media waiting for the interview, and then took a taxi and left. As an extramarital affair plummeted his image, the Kobe City Council has received more than 100 complaints in recent days asking Ken Hashimoto to resign as a councilor. Eriko Imai's former semi-cohabitant okonomiro first love boyfriend is also very dissatisfied with her nanny who is regarded by Imai as a nanny who takes care of her hearing-impaired son, and it is said that she often used work as an excuse to not return home for 2 or 3 weeks many times, suspecting that she had stepped on two boats at that time, and after this storm, Imai's political career was sung in jeopardy.

Eriko Imai (right) sleeps on Ken Hashimoto's shoulder on the Shinkansen.

Ken Hashimoto did not say a word to the interview media the day before yesterday.