Some tried to steer Nazr Mohammed into coaching, but Mohammed knew he wanted an NBA front-office job before his playing career even began.

He just had to wait a while.

Mohammed played for eight teams in 18 seasons, including with the Thunder from 2011-12, and then again in 2016 before retiring for good.

Mohammed has worked as a Thunder scout since December 2017, the culmination of a relationship with general manager Sam Presti that dates back to their San Antonio days.

The Oklahoman recently caught up with Mohammed, who helped organize the Thunder Legacy Network, which was set to launch the weekend of March 20. Eighteen former Thunder players were expected to return to Oklahoma City for a reunion.

Q: You played a big role in contacting former teammates for the legacy network. What was your first impression of the program, and what did you hear from other guys?

A: I was excited about it. Playing for the Thunder and now working for them, I have a great deal of respect for everything we do. I'm always amazed by how the organization is always thinking to the forefront and doing things like this for the players. The reception of the guys was great, too… When I reached out, certain guys were just like, 'Yeah, I'm in.' And that's something that's hard to do, getting commitments on the spot. Those guys haven't been contacted by some other organizations, so they probably just felt that it was extra special to be part of that first group of guys coming back.

You won a championship in San Antonio and played for several other teams. Why did you want to finish your career in Oklahoma City and what made you identify with the Thunder?

I went to Kentucky, I won there. Had a chance to win in San Antonio. And then got a chance to make it back to the finals in OKC. There's similarities in organizations that win. It just kind of speaks to me. Just my experience with Sam and Rob (Hennigan), and everybody who was also in San Antonio, the Thunder just embodies everything I believe an organization should be about. The connection is just there. It's a winning organization that does things the right way and cares about its players, the community, the people who work there... When players leave, they still have the respect and connection to the organization.

Tell me about your job now. “Pro evaluation scout, identification and intelligence” is a long title, but what does it mean?

The title in my job, I feel a little bit like I have many jobs. The reason why I say that is because a lot of my job is to learn. Sam and everyone there created an environment to teach me about the business of basketball. He created a curriculum in the sense that taught me about the CBA, the salary cap. The people in the organization were my teachers, and still are. My days as a player give me the opportunity to talk to different departments in our basketball offices. Sometimes they want to see if there's things that I would've liked or done differently as a player, and I appreciate that the knowledge I have as a player can kind of be used in a front office.

What does a normal day, pre-coronavirus, look like for you?

A big part of basketball ops is definitely scouting, whether it's amateur or professional. I've done mostly professional scouting. That's G League, Europe and of course NBA players. That's in preparation for free agency, trades and things like that. The part that I'm very fortunate about is that my relationship with Sam gives me the opportunity to learn other parts of the business and not just the scouting part of it.

As a former player, how do you balance the eye test versus analytics when you're evaluating a player?

I mean, scouting is something most players do naturally. If you have played long enough, you are evaluating the guys you're playing against. You're trying to learn their tendencies and their strengths and weaknesses. So that part of it, you can just use your instincts. The next step of it is to see if the analytics support your instincts. You don't want to shy away from things that come natural to you, but you want to be able to support it with the analytics of the game.