Furnished house for rent in Smørum

Fully furnished house for rent in Smørum for minimum 11 months. The house is(…) and(…) garden with a small beautiful vegetable garden, that has been featured in magazines and books. Besides furniture there is everything you need for a normal household, including kitchen utensils. Rent: 10.000 plus heating/water/electricity. 1 month prepaid rent. 2 months deposit. The rent is excluding water, electricity and heating. The house: Ground floor: A big living room with dining space, kitchen with dish washing machine and all other white goods, and finally bathroom with shower, washing machine and dryer. 1st floor: One big bedroom with 4 meter wardrobe, an open floor room, a toilet and a storage room. The garden is small and does not require much work. There is a small shed for garden tools and lawn mover. All gardens tool are included. In the front garden, there is a big apple tree and a mirabella tree and a small glass house to grow tomatoes and cucumbers. In the vegetable garden you have the possibility to grow veggies. The perfect tenants are a non-smoking couple with 1 child working in Copenhagen for a shorter period, who need a fully furnished house with all equipment. There is free parking close to the house for(…). The house is placed in Smørum 12 minutes walk or 5 minutes on a biclycle from Måløv S-train station and in a car you are just 5 minutes away from the highway, and you can be in Kastrup airport in 25 minutes. The train ride from Måløv station to Copenhagen Central station is 35 minutes. In both Måløv and Smørum, just 5 minutes away on a bicycle, you will find several grocery stores, post office, bank, fitness centers, cafés, restaurants, pharmacy, DIY stores and much more. Also you are in a big green area with lots of parks and small lakes and you are just 15 minutes away from the big forest Hareskoven and the lake Søndersø, which offers amazing nature experiences. The house is for rent from Oct 5th or soon thereafter. Latest Oct. 15th. I can do the first showing of the house over Skype or Facetime.

Room in Art filled lux apartment

LOOKING FOR A MATURE ROOMATE - SHARE 89m2 4 værelse/ Kbh S. MAKE SURE TO READ FULLY BEFORE APPLYING Location: Zone 1 -Amagerbrogade 😍 Bedroom approx 20m2 - Available December 1st (…) (…) or shorter. 4 værelse/ Kbh S. kr.5,900 – excluding utilities . bills(…) PPM CPR ALLOWED: Our stunning apartment now has a room for the right person who must be clean, working or studying and not messy. Its located in Zone 1, close to the beach and metro. The size of the whole apartment is 89 m2 - its classically renovated and a very light attractive apartment with courtyard for barbecues, on Amagerbrogade in the center of Amager with great atmosphere and plenty of shopping/cafes/beach/metro and just 15 min to City Center. see images here : (…) We have a small but cozy kitchen where you can be creative. The bathroom is spacious & bright with room for your things. The ceilings are high and the walls are lined with an inspiring exhibition of art from world reknown artists courtesy of our local art gallery Black Pop Contemporary. The rooms are light, stunning and large (approx. 20m2 ) and has: - one Double Bed (but if you have one already we can easily store our one) - an antique rack for your clothes. - a bay window which allows you to sit and enjoy the views. - There is a choice either a room facing the main road of Amager or the more quiet room at the back facing courtyard. Therefore there might be noice, especially if the windows are openBut when the windows are closed, it is alright. Bare in mind that we are situated in a capital, so noise will be expected. -Furnished Financials: Rent: plus utility bills 5,(…) 6,300 DK Per month. Standard 3 mths Deposit= 3X 6,300 plus 1 months rent in advance 6.300 DKK Total: 25,200 DKK . Please write something about yourself and when your looking to move. PM Solomon E Lyttle for more info

1/2 pers. room in Sydhaven's Kulvej in shared flat

We are renting out a room in Sydhaven's Kulvej from 30/04 on (4 months with option to be prolonged). The room has got a queen size bed, a closet and two bookshelves. In front of the room you have got a terrace and close from there you can find the rain-protected bike-garage. You share the flat with a sympathetic young couple from Peru: Carla and Gonzalo. The flat is arranged as the two sleeping rooms being on opposite sites of the flat with the living room and kitchen in between. Plenty of families live in the area and still the flat and neighbors are mostly quiet. The flat is close to a Netto supermarket and in walking distance to both Sydhavens station (~(…) and Fisketorvet shopping center / Dybbelsbro station (~15 min). By bike it is quick to both stations as well as to the city center. Directly in front of the flat you can find the waterfront which is great for jogging or a swim in the summer. Aside of the train at Sydhaven's and buses close by the flat you can also take the harbor bus which takes one all the way along the Copenhagen water channel to the Opera and further to Revshaleoen. We are looking for someone being ideally clean and taking care on things. Also being a non-smoker is important to us. Unfortunately, pets are not allowed. And of course most important is that we get along well with you, so please come by for a coffee to visit the flat and room so we can get to know you. Relevant properties of the flat: - Rental period: 30/(…) or ? (option to be prolonged) - Monthly rent: (…) - Deposit: 1 monthly rent - Internet, garbage, water and electricity included For visiting the flat please give us a message.

Attractive apartment/Room located zone 1-

An attractive lux- apartment located zone 1- close to shops, cafe bars, beach and metro. Amagerbrogade Available Feb 1st (…) (…) 3værelse/ 1x large room. kr.5,800 – which including all utilities bills.. Our stunning apartment now has a room for the right person who must be very clean and tidy weekly. Its located in Zone 1, close to the beach and metro. 85 m2 classic renovated attractive apartment with courtyard for barbecues, on Amagerbrogade in the center of Amager with great atmosphere and plenty of shopping/cafes/beach/metro, bus stop on our door step and just 15 min to City Center. We have a small but cozy kitchen where you can be creative. The bathroom is spacious & bright with room for your things. The ceilings are high and the walls are lined with an inspiring exhibition of art from world reknown artists courtesy of our local art gallery Black Pop Contemporary. The room is light, stunning and large(…) meters) and has: - one Bed and Desk - Washing machine incl. -Towels - There is a choice either a room facing the main road of Amager or the more quiet room at the back facing courtyard. Therefore there might be noice, especially if the windows are openBut when the windows are closed, it is alright. Bare in mind that we are situated in a capital, so noise will be expected. -Furnished Rent: 5,800 Per month. 3 mths Deposit: plus 1 months rent in advance. Please write something about yourself and when your looking to move. Solomon E Lyttle email: (…) see pictures on my facebook (…)

Apartment in Teglholmen close to Cph Center

As we are moving our two bedroom apartment is available for rent through Nordea Ejendomme. It's on Kulvej between HC Ørstedsværket and SuperMarco on Frederiks Brygge - a whole new area being developed on Teglholmen by Nordea Ejendomme with more than 1,300 apartments. It's situated in the southernmost part of Havneringen and is centered around a basin at the end of a branch of Copenhagen harbor. The recently constructed wooden wharf gives access to swimming, sailing and just hanging out. There are stands for kayaks and in time it will offer other recreational opportunities (ball courts etc). The yard has a play area and outside business hours there is access to the local kindergarten's playground. The apartment is 5 minutes from Copenhagen Mall (Fisketorvet) and 10 minutes from Copenhagen Town Hall Square (Rådhuspladsen) by bicycle. Situated on the fifth floor it has a view of central Copenhagen, Tivoli and Vesterbro. The nearby Skolen i Sydhavnen is a brand new school with a maritime focus that has won several awards for its architecture. Acroos the canal is Teglværket ((…)) that will be the new street food/music/beach bar venue to go to when Paper Island (Papirøen) closes. The apartment has two bedrooms and a large open kitchen cum lounge (3V). There is a balcony at one end and a French door at the other which gives lots of light from morning to evening. Rent: DKK 13,857.66 per month Water/Heat (a conto/estimate):(…) month Rebate while construction is ongoing in the area: DKK -1,483 TOTAL: DKK 13,174.66 per month You can find the apartment on (…) - it's in Alléhuset on Kulvej 2, 5 TV There's a waiting list - but it's very short at the moment and you can contact Pernille Hansen at Nordea ejendomme for more info:(…)

In Desperate Need of a Place to Live

Hello everybody! This is my inaugural InterNations post, and as such it marks the start of my international adventures in Denmark, therefore it is only fitting that I ask about housing. I'm a student, and I'm beginning my master's at KU in September, but I am moving to Denmark on 16/08. I am in need of a room, preferably in Nørrebro, but anywhere north of Sydhavn is great. I've been struggling a lot to find somewhere, I've tried all the university channels, and either the waiting lists are too long, the rooms are too expensive, or they rent to someone else. I'm getting quite nervous, but I'm forever optimistic that my knight in shining apartment will send me a rental agreement, and we can live happily ever after (or at least for the next two years). My needs are small, but my need is great. I am looking for anything in the region of (…) to (…). I have to be able to get a CPR, and it would ideally be a room of at least 12 m^2. I have an international background, I spent the first 5 years of my life in Switzerland, then moved to England, and I have worked for some time in Germany, visiting every country I can in between. I'm a pretty nerdy guy, I'm into music and films. Denmark is a great place for both, as there are some brilliant films and tv coming out of there, and the music is also very good. I love science (even the really ugly, boring bits) and I spend a large amount of my time studying, because I want to do a PhD. I don't smoke, have no pets, and I don't party that often. I cook very well, and I like to share my food - I won't force it upon anybody though. If anybody knows of anywhere/anyone that I could contact, that would be brilliant. Help me InterNation, You're my only hope. - Max.