Det Ny Emdrupborg Kollegium is located a bit further out of central Copenhagen in the northwest of the city, but that is not a bad thing: Several lakes and green spaces are nearby, making it easy to go for a quick run or stroll during a study break, and swimmers and sun worshippers can reach Svanemøllen beach in about 15 minutes by bike. In the evenings a short cycle gets you to Nørrebro, a trendy area popular for going out, due to its many bars and lively music scene.

The local lakes and beach make it fun and easy to stretch your legs and get out for some exercise or hanging with friends. For some nightlife, the close Nørrebro area is perhaps the most popular quarter for going out in Copenhagen. There are lots of places to eat, drink, dance and experience live music. But there is also much to see, for example the famous graveyard Assistenskirkegården, where celebrities and musicians are traditionally buried and the locals go for walks. Or the Red Square (Røde Plads), a hub for multicultural encounters and political rallies, where also many sports and music events take place.

All the rooms are furnished but you need to bring your own bedding, towels, cutlery and cooking utensils. Please bring or buy what you require. However you might find that previous tenants have left kitchen items for you to use. Therefore it is often worth moving in first and checking this before buying kitchen items.

For building related issues(fixtures in the apartment such as windows, floors), please contact the building inspector Kim Marsfeldt at:

[email protected]

or call the building administration at:

+4543420222

For issues taken care of by The Housing Foundation’s inspector (furniture, inspections) please contact Attila during office hours:

Tuesdays & Thursdays

between 8am and 10am

+45 50525096

or email:

[email protected].

Please add a picture indicating the issue, in case you send an email.

Daytime:

If you have locked yourself out or permanently lost your key, contact the Housing Foundation office during office hours.

Night-time / Out of hours:

For emergency lock out please read here.