It’s personal for Chuck Cecil.

Some of the most explosive plays opponents have made against Arizona have been the result of missed tackles by safeties, the position Cecil coaches. It pains Cecil — a former All-American safety — to see that happen. He and his group continue to work on eliminating those mistakes and improving their technique, a task that’s easier said than done in an era in which tackling opportunities are limited in practice.

“Having been in the NFL for so long, tackling is kind of generally accepted: You’re gonna tackle,” Cecil said Tuesday. “It’s not that the guys don’t want to tackle. Sometimes it’s how to go about it. It really is something that’s practiced, just practicing tackling techniques and approach angles. It’s all about geometry.

“It’s just something that you have to work on and be aware of. Hopefully it gets better moving forward. That’s the plan.”

The latest example came on the third play from scrimmage against No. 3 Oregon this past Saturday. Quarterback Anthony Brown connected with receiver Jaylon Redd on a post pattern at the UA 47-yard line. Gunner Maldonado hit Redd in the midsection but couldn’t bring him down. Redd spun out of the tackle, forcing the other safety, Jaydin Young, to miss him as well. Redd raced into the end zone for a 63-yard touchdown.

“The biggest thing there is just to go and wrap-tackle the legs,” Cecil said. “It’s a very simple technique, and it’s virtually undefeated.

“There’s times to take the big hit. And then there’s times to just tackle them and get them on the ground. That part of the tackling decision-making is just a big part of the process. When do you go for the big hit, and when do you go for the sure tackle?

“JY and Gunner are both explosive guys that want to do the big thing. They come hard; they play hard. Sometimes the best thing to do is to slow down, actually, and to make a sure tackle.”

Part of the challenge in teaching those techniques is that NCAA rules put a cap on the number of fully padded practices teams are allowed to hold. UA coach Jedd Fisch said the team will don full pads for some of its practices during this week’s bye, but it isn’t like the old days — or even the fairly recent days.

“Therein lies the rub,” Cecil said. “You might get five minutes here or 10 minutes there in practice of individual time to actually work on something like tackling. There’s clearly other things that you need to work on as well. So trying to manage your time and making sure that that you get important things like tackling in are obviously always very important. We have done that.”

Improvement is possible. Safety Jaxen Turner had five missed tackles in the first two games, including four vs. San Diego State, according to Pro Football Focus. He hasn’t had one since.

Targeting talk

The game has changed in other ways. No one understands that better than Cecil.

Cecil played at Arizona in the 1980s and in the NFL through 1995. The types of hits he delivered were praised back then. They’re illegal now.

“I got to play in the NFL because I was good at targeting,” Cecil said. “I get it. I know what targeting is.”

Cecil estimated that he suffered “50 to 60” concussions during his playing days, an alarming revelation. At all levels of the sport, efforts have been made in recent years to minimize head-to-head contact. Any questionable play is reviewed in college football. Two Wildcats, Turner and defensive end Mo Diallo, have been disqualified for targeting.

“The bottom line is that you’re trying to protect the kids from themselves as much as anything else,” Cecil said. “What they’re trying to eliminate is targeting where the defender makes a conscious effort to hit the offensive player in the head.”

Cecil said targeting violations are easy to recognize about 90% of the time. It’s the other 10% that rankle coaches, players and fans.

Diallo’s ejection against NAU fell into the latter category. He didn’t make an overt move to initiate head-to-head contact with Lumberjacks quarterback RJ Martinez. But just enough contact was made for Diallo to be flagged and booted from the game.

“You got guys out there trying their hardest, giving their best effort,” UA defensive line coach Ricky Hunley said. “It could have gone either way, easily. It’s just a matter of how somebody felt that day or for that moment.

“I tell the guys ... if you’re within one step, go ahead and make the tackle. Two steps, try to hold him up, so at least you’re making the effort to try not to hurt him.”