Cecil Turner was just about to leave for Florida to start seminary when he was asked to perform preaching duties one Sunday at Calvary Assembly of God in Mobile as they searched for a full-time pastor. He agreed, took his position at the pulpit, and that's where he stayed for the next 45 years.

"Dad used to joke, 'I guess they're still looking for a pastor,'" said Turner's son, Tom. "He ended up cancelling his seminary plans, but was able to earn his credentials remotely. He was one of the first to do long-distance coursework, all while pastoring at Calvary, and it ended up being the only church he ever served."

On April 7, Rev. Cecil L. Turner passed away, leaving a legacy of quiet leadership and a strong belief in the true goodness of people. At the time of his death, the retired Air Force veteran and pipe fitter had served as pastor of Calvary Assembly of God for 45 years.

"Grew up working hard"

Turner was born and raised in Melvin, Alabama, on the family farm where his parents raised cattle and poultry. His father worked at the dry docks in Mobile during the day, while his mother tended to the chickens on the farm. "His father actually drove the crane during the construction of the Bankhead Tunnel," said Turner's son, Rev. Tom Turner, who pastors at Praise Family Church. "Dad grew up working hard. He was expected to."

Turner played football at Choctaw County High School and would often fill in driving duties for his uncle, who drove the school bus. His high school sweetheart, Winifred, graduated a class ahead of Turner, and the couple eloped to Quitman, Mississippi, during his senior year. "They got married in secret because her mother didn't want them to marry so young," Tom said. "But when he installed a bathroom in my mother's family home, he won my grandmother over."

After graduation, Turner served in the United States Air Force and spent time in Flagstaff, Arizona, and Fairbanks, Alaska. When the first of his three sons was born in 1956, Turner moved his family to Mobile where he secured a job as a pipe fitter with Scott Paper. "Calvary was still a new church and he and Mom began working there and he served on the Board," Tom said. "They had been involved with their school youth group, where Mom served as president and Dad was vice president. The funny thing is, he was so shy back then, if Mom couldn't go to a meeting, Dad wouldn't show up either."

"Quiet leader"

Shyness aside, while still working at Scott Paper, Turner felt a calling to lead the congregation and made plans to enroll in seminary. It was quite a step for a man known for his reserved ways.

"He was so unassuming, but I think that's why he was effective as a pastor," Tom said. "He was sometimes referred to as a 'fireball preacher," but he was a quiet leader."

One of Turner's most unique characteristics, his son said, was his consistency in treating everyone, and every audience, the same. "He was never different, whether in front of the congregation or in a small group or individually, and this surprised a lot of people. No matter where you were or what the situation was, he always put the same face forward. He also never thought bad of anybody, even if he hadn't been treated right. He never let hurt dictate his life."

"Loved doing things for people"

When Tom and his brothers were growing up, they accompanied their father every weekend to tend to the homes and yards of neighbors and members of the congregation. "There was always someone's grass to be cut," Tom laughed. "In fact, I remember one Saturday morning waking up and seeing that it was raining outside, I was content to go back to bed. A few minutes later Dad came knocking on my door and said, 'I don't care that it's raining, it's past seven o'clock and there's work to be done.' He would end up working on people's houses or fixing their pipes. My brothers and I, we got our work ethic because of that. He loved doing things for people."

It wasn't all work for the Turner family, though, and every summer there was a vacation to be had. "Even when we didn't have much, my brothers and I didn't know we were poor because Dad always made sacrifices for us," Tom said. "We might be eating mayo sandwiches, but there never was a summer we didn't take a vacation. He would save up all that he could, maybe $200 cash, and he'd gas up the car, we'd take the Coleman stove and an ice chest for sandwiches, and for two weeks we'd be on the road. Sometimes we might borrow someone's camper or drive out to a state park. We went to the Grand Canyon and saw the Painted Desert, and we always took at least one grandmother, or sometimes both, so they could share the experience, too. We'd visited 44 states before I left home."

"Always willing to take a step back"

When Tom enrolled at University of Alabama, he said he had no plans to follow in his father's footsteps. "In fact, I kind of ran from it, because I didn't want my family to be poor. My major was computer programming and I was considering dentistry or medical school, but something called me back to ministry," he said. "Dad always wanted us to pursue what was in front of us, but he was so excited when I ultimately chose the path I did."

In the 45 years Turner led the Calvary congregation, the church grew in membership 10 times over, and Tom said he couldn't begin to guess how many weddings and funerals his father performed. "But he was also always willing to take a step back and let others preach. They may be younger or newer to pastoring, and Dad would encourage them and push them to the front."

Likewise, Turner sought advice and counsel from his peers, whom he so admired. "There were several local pastors he looked up to, because they were doing the same thing he did, day in and day out," Tom said, adding that his father was never afraid to emulate and learn from them. "He never felt threatened by other churches growing down the road. He was one of the most open-minded pastors for his generation."

"Always thought the best of people"

Tom said his father loved Westerns, and Roy Rogers and Gene Autrey were his heroes. "It was that mentality of the good guy always winning in the end. For us boys and for all of his grandsons, we all grew up with that, too."

Turner also loved to hunt, and took his sons out to hunt quail on many a Saturday. "He loved being outside," Tom said. "As he got older, he just wanted to get on the tractor and go out to our family property. He loved to get on that bush hog; even if there wasn't a project to work on, he'd find something to do."

Tom said that when he and his brothers were grown and had moved out of the house, "Every time we'd show up for a family meal, there would be these people there we didn't know. Dad loved family and wanted everyone to be together - especially people who didn't have anyone else to go home to.

"We never heard him gossip, and if someone was gossiping in front of him he'd tell them to stop. He never thought people had bad motives. Sometimes it would drive us nuts, but we knew he was right. He always thought the best of people first."