Robert G. "Bob" Franklin, 69, of 48 Cannon Lane died Friday evening, August 4, 2006, at his home surrounded by loved ones after a long battle with colon cancer.

He was born in Gardner, Massachusetts, September 20, 1936, the son of George and Lena (Pelletier) Franklin. He grew up in Gardner, attending schools there where he lived for many years, later moving to Westminster and Barre, and for the past 15 years has resided in the Tully section of Orange.

He was a veteran in the U.S. Navy, serving during the Korean War. He was a police officer for the town of Westminster for several years until his retirement, previously served as a police officer for the town of Gardner. He was also on the Gardner Fire Department for several years. He owned and operated Bob’s Sanitary Service in Gardner for several years and had worked at the former Gardner State Hospital. Following his retirement he worked for Petersham Oil Company, Ron’s Fuel in Athol and delivered Meals on Wheels. He was a member of the Franco-American Naturalization Club in Athol and the Petersham Gun Club. Bob enjoyed his family and collecting fire engine Replicas.

He leaves his son, Michael Franklin of Templeton; two daughters, Catherine Amidio and her husband Michael of Oakham; and Christine Franklin of Templeton; a sister, Jean Rogers of Brandenton, FL; a granddaughter, Marissa Amidio of Oakham; and also his dear friend, Kris Ricker and her daughters, Jennifer and Katelyn Ricker who Robert thought of as his grandchildren, and several nieces and nephews. He was predeceased by a brother James Franklin.

Funeral services will be held Wednesday, August 9, 2006, at 11:00 A.M., at Higgins-O’Connor Funeral Home, 146 Main Street, Athol with the Rev. Mark D. Bariloni, pastor of the Athol-Orange Baptist Chruch, officiating. Burial will follow in Tully Cemetery and calling hours will be Tuesday, August 8, 2006 from 6:00-8:00 p.m. In lieu of flowers the family suggests contributions be made to the Gardner Visiting Nursing Association, Hospice Program, 34 Pearly Lane, Gardner, MA 01440. For further information or to send family condolences go to

www.higginsoconnorfuneralhome.com