Robert “Bob” Franklin Silvers, 90, went home to be with the Lord Tuesday, June 6, 2023. He was born February 17, 1933 to the late Talmadge and Lottie Silvers. Bob was a lifelong resident of Ringgold and a member and usher at New Liberty Baptist Church. He retired from Little Debbie as supervisor of the truck garage and had formerly worked with the Catoosa County school system as a diesel mechanic supervisor and at Benny Jackson Ford.

Bob was preceded in death by his loving wife of nearly 60 years, Barbara “Bobbie” Silvers, Brothers Eugene Silvers, Richard Silvers, Jackie Silvers. Sisters, Billie Petty, Martha Denton, and Nina Mattox.

Survivors include son Robert “Tyson” (Amy) Silvers, daughter Mary Alice (Mike) Denton, sister Jane (Chuck) Frye, sister-in-law Imogene Phillips, grandchildren Janice Hollis and Suzanna Mansi, great-grandchildren Jennifer Warnack, Zackery Hollis, and Samuel Mansi, great-great-grandchild Micah Hollis Painter, and several very special nieces and nephews.

Bob was a family man above all else. Not only was he a loving dad, granddaddy, brother, uncle and friend to everyone he met, he was strong, caring, loving, patient, kind, always happy and always helping someone do something. He had a huge heart and passion for service. His hands could fix about anything and worked on and fixed many vehicles. He mowed enough yards over the years to cover all of Ringgold. He loved the outdoors, hunting, camping, going to the cabin and being around people. He was the first person in Ringgold to ever receive a shot of penicillin. He loved being with all children, not just his own. He shared a special bond with and loved his companion dog, Dixie, like a member of the family. His two children and his beloved Bobbie were the lights of his life. He will be fondly remembered and deeply missed by all who were blessed enough to know him and be loved by him.

A special thanks to caregivers Drema Walls and Linda Thompson for the loving care provided.

Funeral services will be held 2 PM Saturday in the funeral home chapel with Rev. Danny Henson officiating. Interment will be in Anderson Memorial Gardens.

The family will receive friends 4-7 PM Friday and 12-2 PM Saturday at Heritage Funeral Home and Crematory, Battlefield Parkway.