Anne Inez McCaffrey was born April 1, 1926 in Cambridge, Massachusetts to George Herbert McCaffrey and Anne Dorothy McElroy McCaffrey. She studied Slavonic Languages and Literature at Radcliffe College. She married in 1950 and has three children: Alec Anthony, born in 1952, Todd, born in 1956, and Georgeanne, born in 1959. She was divorced in 1970, after which she emigrated to Ireland. Anne McCaffrey's first novel, Restoree , was written as a protest against the absurd and unrealistic portrayals of women in science-fiction novels in the 50s and early 60s. It is, however, in the handling of broader themes and the worlds of her imagination, particularly the two series, The Ship Who Sang and the fourteen novels about the Dragonriders of Pern, that Ms. McCaffrey's talents as a storyteller are best displayed. McCaffrey's short story "Weyr Search", the initial story in the Dragonriders of Pern series, won a Hugo for Best Novella. It was published in October 1967 in Analog. It was the first time a woman had won a Hugo for fiction. This story (after some rewriting) now forms the first quarter of Dragonflight. She currently lives in County Wicklow, Ireland. She lives in a house of her own design, Dragonhold-Underhill (because she had to dig out a hill on her farm to build it) in Wicklow County, Ireland.

Dragonholder by Todd McCaffrey

Anne McCaffrey's biography by her son. November 1999, Del Rey Books, Hardcover, ISBN 0-345-42217-1

Dragonriders of Pern and/or

Chronicles of Pern

The Dragonriders of Pern books are written by Anne McCaffrey. The books written earlier have a fantasy slant to them (low levels of technology, fire breathing telepathic dragons, and a feudal society), however McCaffrey prefers to describe them as science fiction and stresses the scientific rationales behind the world she has created. In later written volumes the series moves towards more overt science fiction as the colonists rediscover their links to the past and develop much higher levels of technology. Pern is a fictional planet in the universe created by science fiction writer Anne McCaffrey for her Dragonriders of Pern series of novels. Pern was colonised by settlers from Earth who wanted to return to an agrarian society with a low level of technology.

All the Weyrs of Pern [Dragonriders of Pern 8] by Anne McCaffrey

For generations, the dragonriders had dedicated their lives to fighting Thread, the dreaded spores that periodically rained from the sky to ravage the land. On the backs of their magnificent telepathic dragons they flew to flame the deadly stuff out of the air before it could reach the planet's surface. But the greatest dream of the dragonriders was to find a way to eradicate Thread completely, so that never again would their beloved Pern be threatened with destruction. Now, for the first time, they take steps to get rid of thread. December 1991

UK Edition, 0-552-13729-4

Del Rey Paperback, ISBN:0-345-36893-2

0-345-41935-9 (Trade P-back)

0-345-45405-7 (eBook)

Eleventh of the Pern series

Dragonseye [Dragonriders of Pern 11] by Anne McCaffrey

It's been two hundred years since the deadly Thread fell like rain upon Pern, devouring everything in its path. No one alive remembers that first horrific onslaught and no one believes in its return--except for the dragonriders. For two centuries they have been practicing and training, passing down from generation to generation the formidable Threadfighting techniques. Now the ominous signs are appearing: the violent winter storms and volcanic eruptions that are said to herald the approach of thread.

Feb 1997

0-345-41879-4

0-345-45400-6 (eBook)

Red Star Rising (The Second Chronicles of Pern)

These are the same book under different titles. The UK edition was released first; Del Rey delayed their edition for supposedly editorial reasons. The change in title was allegedly due to concerns that the American audience wouldn't recognize a Pern book without a "Dragon" title.

Aug 1996

0-552-142727-7

A Diversity of Dragons by Anne McCaffrey ,Richard Woods, and John Howe

Anne McCaffrey is as renowned for her knowledge of dragons as she is for her New York Times bestselling novels. In this beautifully designed hardcover, McCaffrey focuses her attention on the fantastical creature's existence throughout history. Her words are complemented by the stunning color portraits by John Howe, noted for his success with several J.R.R. Tolkien calendars and maps. Engagingly conceived, McCaffrey's story is a modern day dragon fantasy, colored with excerpts of some of the most thrilling scenes taken from classic dragon tales and accompanied by John Howe's magnificent art. Dragons from the time of the Bible and the Babylonians, the Arthurian Era and the Chinese Dynasties, to the current dragons invented by Robin McKinley, Gordon R. Dickson, Melanie Rown, and McCaffrey herself--are all fully explored and rendered in glorious detail.

1997

The Dragonlover's Guide to Pern by Anne McCaffrey and Jody Lynn Nye

A much-needed update to the classic companion to Anne McCaffrey 's canonical novels and numerous short stories about Pern, this book includes a few recipes, information about knitting patterns, Craft and Hold badges, and more. As a reference, it is marred by the lack of cross-referencing within the book, although there is an index, and by the lack of scales with the drawings of various animals and places. It will be invaluable to readers like me who can't recall just where they read that name before, or what Weyr a rider is from, or where that small Hold is, and it provides a useful overview of the high points of Pernese history. Considered by many to be the reference work on Pern...aside from the books themselves. Others have noted internal contradictions as well as conflicts with other published material and therefore do not consider it particularly authoritative. The 2nd edition adds material from books published since the 1st edition.

1st edition: Nov 1989, Del Rey Books

0-345-35424-9 (Hardcover)

0-345-37946-2 (Softcover)

2nd edition: Mar 1997, Del Rey Books

0-345-41274-5 (Softcover)