Tudástár

Wikipedia (angol)

>

Michael Swanwick (born 18 November 1950) is an American fantasy and science fiction author who began publishing in the early 1980s.

Writing career

Michael Swanwick: Vacuum Flowers

Michael Swanwick: Stations of the Tide · Michael Swanwick: The Iron Dragon's Daughter · Michael Swanwick: Jack Faust

Michael Swanwick: The Periodic Table of Science Fiction

Michael Swanwick: Bones of the Earth · Michael Swanwick: The Dragons of Babel · Michael Swanwick: The Iron Dragon's Daughter · Michael Swanwick: Dancing with Bears

Gardner Dozois · William Gibson

His many works of short fiction have been collected in Gravity's Angels (1991), Moon Dogs (2000), Tales of Old Earth (2000), and others. A novella, Griffin's Egg, was published in book form in 1991 and is also collected in Moon Dogs. He has collaborated with other authors on several short works, including Gardner Dozois ("Ancestral Voices", "City of God", "Snow Job") and William Gibson ("Dogfight").

Michael Swanwick: Stations of the Tide

Nonfiction writing

Hope Mirrlees

Swanwick has written about the field as well. He published two long essays on the state of the science fiction ("The User's Guide to the Postmoderns", 1986) and fantasy ("In the Tradition...", 1994), the former of which was controversial for its categorization of new SF writers into "cyberpunk" and "literary humanist" camps. Both essays were collected together in The Postmodern Archipelago 1997. A book-length interview with Gardner Dozois, Being Gardner Dozois, was published in 2001. He is a prolific contributor to the New York Review of Science Fiction. Swanwick wrote a monograph on James Branch Cabell, What Can Be Saved From the Wreckage?, which was published in 2007 with a preface by Barry Humphries, and a short literary biography of Hope Mirrlees, Hope-in-the-Mist, which was published in 2009.

Television and film

Swanwick's short stories "Ice Age" and "The Very Pulse of the Machine" from Tales of Old Earth were adapted for the Netflix series Love, Death + Robots (2019) for its first and third seasons respectively.

Personal life

Swanwick thanks his wife, Marianne C. Porter, in all his books, referring to her as "the M. C. Porter Endowment for the Arts".

Gardner Dozois

He was a friend of Gardner Dozois and Susan Caspar for many years. From this friendship grew Being Gardner Dozois and several collaborations, including the novel City Under the Stars.

Awards

Michael Swanwick: Stations of the Tide · Michael Swanwick: The Iron Dragon's Daughter · Michael Swanwick: Jack Faust

Bibliography

Novels

Gardner Dozois

Michael Swanwick: Vacuum Flowers · Michael Swanwick: Stations of the Tide · Michael Swanwick: The Iron Dragon's Daughter · Michael Swanwick: Jack Faust · Michael Swanwick: Bones of the Earth · Michael Swanwick: The Dragons of Babel

Darger and Surplus series

Michael Swanwick: Dancing with Bears · Michael Swanwick: Chasing the Phoenix

Short fiction

Collections

Michael Swanwick: The Periodic Table of Science Fiction · Michael Swanwick: The Dog Said Bow-Wow · Michael Swanwick: Not So Much, Said the Cat

Stories

Gregory Frost

Gardner Dozois · Jack Dann · William Gibson

Essays

Critical studies and reviews of Swanwick's work

Michael Swanwick: Chasing the Phoenix

———————

Notes

External links