Maxime Edgard Chaya (born December 16, 1961) is a sportsman, mountaineer and explorer from Lebanon. On May 15, 2006, he was the first Lebanese to climb Mount Everest, completing the Seven Summits challenge.[1][2][3] On December 28, 2007, he also became the first from the Middle East to reach the South Pole on foot from the Antarctic coast,[2] after an unsupported and unassisted journey that lasted 47 days. Then, on April 25, 2009, he was again the first from the region to reach the North Pole on foot, all the way from Canada.[4] In doing so, he became the 16th person in history to complete the Three Poles Challenge.[5] Last, Maxime is the 6th person in history to complete the Explorers Grand Slam.

Contents

1 Bio

2 Major sporting achievements

2.1 National

2.2 International

3 Expeditions

3.1 Climbed peaks and reached landmarks

3.2 Climbed, and raised the Lebanese flag on all Seven Summits

4 Public recognition

4.1 Awards and distinctions

4.2 Stamps

4.3 Calling cards

5 Inspirational speaking

5.1 Schools, Universities and Clubs

5.2 Companies

6 Philanthropy

6.1 Charities

6.2 NGOs

6.3 Board memberships

7 Publications

7.1 Book: Steep Dreams: My journey to the Top of the World

8 References

9 External links

Bio

Maxime Edgard Chaya was born and raised in Beirut until the year 1975 when the civil war saw him and his family take refuge abroad. He pursued his education overseas in Greece, France, Canada and the United Kingdom where outstanding academics led him to graduate with a Bachelor of Science Honors degree from the London School of Economics (LSE).

Maxime then spent a year as a trainee at Republic National Bank of New York’s head office on Fifth Avenue before foregoing post-graduate studies and returning home to take over the family’s Foreign Exchange business. In 1999, he founded his own company VO2max, and through it, organized races and competitions for Lebanese youth of all ages. Cycling, both road and Mountain Bike, triathlon, road running, trail-running, rock climbing, ski touring and freeride were all part of the VO2MAX challenge series of events from 1999 to 2003. [6]

Besides organizing events for others, and the youth in particular, Maxime showed great interest in competing personally, and seemed to excel in every discipline he would adopt. Despite the lack of professional training and advice (his country was at war), his rigorous training, coupled with unfailing determination, perseverance and willpower won him several awards and trophies in a host of disciplines both at international level.

Maxime now resides in Lebanon with his two children: Edgard and Kelly. Despite work and family life, he has kept his fitness level at the very top but has gradually put down his rackets, skates, and various balls to take up more open air sports such as trail running, biking, backcountry skiing, and climbing.

Since his partnership with Bank Audi on the “Seven Summits Project” in January 2003,[7] it has been one successful expedition after another for Maxime, acquiring experience, knowledge and wisdom, while discovering new limits within him, and 'Growing Beyond His Potential' summit after summit.

Major sporting achievements

National

National champion is several disciplines including squash, cross-country skiing and cycling

4 times winner of the Redbull Sno-to-Sea (Lebanon – 2003 to 2006)

International

Numerous national representations at international events.

2nd overall: “Trophée du Nil” (Egypt – 1998)

3rd overall: “Raid Thai” (Thailand – 1999)

1st place: “Kenya Sports Safari” (Kenya – 2001)

23rd: UCI World Masters Championships (Canada - 2001)

Among the first Lebanese to complete an “Ironman” triathlon (Holland – 2002)

Expeditions

In the year 2000, while on a visit to Kenya for an international mountain-bike stage race that he won, Maxime went on to climb Mount Kilimanjaro in nearby Tanzania. Little did he know that this was to be the first of his 'Seven Summits', and as he watched the sunrise from the roof of Africa, he pondered over his desire to challenge himself yet further on these new sports grounds in the great outdoors: the high mountain.

Over a three-year climbing odyssey, Maxime took on each of the 'Seven Summits' (the highest peak on each continent), raising the Lebanese flag -and national pride- on every occasion. Still intent on thriving, Maxime subsequently went on to achieve the 'Three Poles'.

In 2006, Discovery Channel launched a reality television series entitled Everest: Beyond the Limit. It is a multi-episode documentary that portrays the two-month expedition and the struggles, highs, lows, triumphs and despairs of 11 climbers aspiring to stand on the summit of the world's highest peak. Maxime was one of those climbers. The series turned-out to be a tremendous success to the point that it was repeated in subsequent years, with different climbers in what was known as Series II and Series III. As Maxime said in many interviews about his Everest expedition,[8] reaching the summit -and more importantly, coming back- should never be taken for granted. This is a serious endeavor that could put even the finest climbers' lives at risk. Everest may not be as technical as some other 8,000 meter peaks, yet its sheer height greatly magnifies any problem that is not dealt with immediately. This -the altitude- is what makes Chomolungma (the Tibetan name for Everest) unique and worthy of all the respect it deserves.

On May 15, 2006, Maxime, exhausted after his successful summit bid, sees his triumph turn to tragedy as he encounters a dying climber on his way back from the summit of Everest. The name of the distressed climber was David Sharp. Maxime and his Tibetan Sherpa Dorjee , tried their best to help. They spent more than an hour next to the stricken climber, whom they did not know, desperately trying to revive him. Unfortunately, Sharp was unconscious and frozen from the knees down. He did not respond to the oxygen administered. Maxime later reported that although very sad of the man's fate, he was confident that nothing more could have been done for him at that stage. "He was much closer to death than he was to life."

Climbed peaks and reached landmarks

Mont Blanc (France)

Cho Oyu (Tibet / Nepal)

Mount Aspiring (New Zealand)

The Geographical North Pole (the Arctic Circle)

The South Pole (Antarctica)

Mount Ama Dablam (Nepal)

The Matterhorn (Switzerland / Italy)

Climbed, and raised the Lebanese flag on all Seven Summits

Mount Kilimanjaro - 5,963m (Tanzania - September 2001)

Mount McKinley/Denali - 6,195m (Alaska - June 2003)

Aconcagua - 6,962m (Argentina - January 2004)

Vinson Massif - 4,897m (Antarctica - December 2004)

Mount Elbrus - 5,633m (Russia - July 2005)

Carstensz Pyramid - 4,884m (Indonesia - November 2005)

Mount Everest - 8,850m (Tibet / Nepal - May 2006)

Public recognition

Awards and distinctions

December 2003: Knighted by the President of the Republic. “National Order of the Cedar” - Rank: Knight.

May 2006: Decorated by the President of the Republic. “National Order of the Cedar” - Rank: Officer.

May 2008: Awarded the “Paul Harris Fellowship” by the Rotary Foundation of Rotary International.

Stamps

July 2007: Postal Stamp Issued by the Ministry of Finance commemoration Maxime's ascent of Mount Everest[9]

April 2008: Fiscal Stamp Issued by the Ministry of Finance commemorating Maxime’s South Pole Success.

Calling cards

March 2008: Kalam Cards (calling cards) issued by the Ministry of Telecommunications commemorating Maxime’s successes. Two cards: One commemorating the Everest success on May 15, 2006; and another card commemorating the South Pole success on Dec. 28, 2007.

Inspirational speaking

Schools, Universities and Clubs

As part of his own CSR, Maxime regularly visits school, universities and clubs across the region delivering his presentation entitled: “There is an Everest for Everyone”.

List of some Schools and Universities visited by Maxime Chaya to address and motivate the students:[10]

Repton School - Dubai

Notre Dame de la Paix des filles de la Charite - Kobayat

Modern Community Shool

BMS

Wellspring Community School Exhibition - Max Museum

International College Ain Aar

NDU

Graduation Sagesse Technique

City International School

ACS

American School of Dubai

Ecole des Soeurs des Saints Coeurs - Zahle

Collège des Soeurs des St Coeurs -Kfar Hbaab Ghazir

Lycée Franco - Libanais / Remise des Diplômes

Collège Saint Joseph – Antoura - Zouk

Collège des Soeurs des Saints Coeurs - Bouchrieh

Saydet Al Ataya - Dekwaneh

St. Hripsimiantz College

Grand Lycée Franco-Libanais

Alba - Lebanese Academy of Fine Arts

Dubai Women's College

Armenian Mesrobian School

Collège Notre Dame de Jamhour on the independence day celebration November 2010

Companies

Maxime also speaks to companies at annual events. He delivers a more elaborate, corporate presentation also entitled “There is an Everest to Everyone” where he draws the parallel between mountain climbing and the challenge of business and life.[11]

Royal Dutch Shell- Qatar (July 2009)

Pepsico- Lebanon (June 2009)

Johnson & Johnson- Sharm l Sheikh (May 2008)

United Motors Agency- KSA (April 2008)

Honeywell- Abu Dhabi (April 2008)

Abbott Pharmaceuticals- Sri Lanka (March 2008)

General Motors - UAE (March 2008)

RasGas - Qatar (February 2008)

L'Oréal - USA (January 2008)

OBEGI Consumer Products - Lebanon (June 2007)

Hewlett Packard - Nepal (May 2007)

Schneider Electric - Lebanon (March 2007)

Leo Burnett - Dubai, UAE (February 2007)

Medco - Lebanon (January 2007)

Boston Scientific - Lebanon (July 2006)

Procter & Gamble - Lebanon (January 2006)

Philanthropy

Charities

Maxime is increasingly solicited to endorse and speak on behalf of charities and NGOs across the region and beyond:

Oum El Nour[12]

Tobacco Free Initiative - Lebanon

Arc-En-Ciel[13]

SEAL[14] [15]- Lebanon

Toufoula - Lebanon[16]

Chance - Lebanon[17][18]

Heartbeat - Lebanon

NGOs

ThinkGreen[19]

Board memberships

BMA Beirut Marathon Association[20]

WL : WORLD LINKS[21]

Publications

Book: Steep Dreams: My journey to the Top of the World

Lebanon's foremost sportsman and climber, Maxime Chaya was the first person from his country to hoist its flag atop Everest, and he did so en route to ascending the highest mountain on every continent - the Seven Summits - while also skiing to the North and South Poles. Written in conjunction with New York Times bestselling author Richard Buskin, and illustrated with more than 700 stunning, high-quality, comprehensively captioned photos, 'Steep Dreams: My Journey to the Top of the World' tells the story of Max’s adventure-based achievements; of his brushes with death in a wide variety of settings, along with the physical pain, mental anguish, soul-searching, emotional highs and ultimate satisfaction of not only surviving, but also learning to contend with the forces and marvels of nature. It is, in short, the gripping, sometimes harrowing, always rewarding tale of one man’s incredible trans-global journey and the realization of his most heartfelt lifelong ambition.

References

Maxime's Live Blog

Maxime's Seven Summits Website

Maxime's Personal Website