Maxime Chaya is a Lebanese mountaineer and explorer. On May 15, 2006, he was the first Lebanese to climb Mount Everest and the Seven Summits. On December 28, 2007, Max also became the first from the Middle East to reach the South Pole on foot from the Antarctic coast, after an unsupported and unassisted journey that lasted 47 days. Then, on April 25, 2009, he reached the North Pole also on foot, all the way from Canada.

Maxime Chaya was born on December 16, 1968, in Beirut, Beyrouth, Lebanon. His birth geographical coordinates are 33° 53’ 36” North latitude and 35° 30’ 6” East longitude. Maxime Chaya is currently 55 years old.

Astrologically, Maxime Chaya falls under the Sun sign of Sagittarius, with Aries as his Ascendant, Scorpio as his Moon sign, and Gemini as his Black Moon Lilith sign.

Planets

Planets represent different aspects of personality, life themes, and energies within a birth chart, influencing individual characteristics, motivations, and experiences.

Planets in Signs

Planets in a zodiac sign denote how the energies and qualities associated with those planets express themselves within the context of the themes and attributes of that particular zodiac sign.

Sun Sagittarius Moon Scorpio Mercury Sagittarius Venus Aquarius Mars Libra Jupiter Libra Saturn Aries Uranus Libra Neptune Scorpio Pluto Virgo Ceres Sagittarius Chiron Pisces Eros Capricorn Hygiea Pisces Juno Sagittarius Pallas Sagittarius Vesta Aries Ascendant Aries Black Moon Lilith Gemini Midheaven Capricorn North Node Aries South Node Libra Part of Fortune Aquarius Vertex Libra

Sunin Sagittarius24° 31’ 50”

The Sun in Sagittarius in the Natal Chart is an ideal placement for a natural leader. You are attracted to spiritual and philosophical subjects and […] Read more »

Moonin Scorpio7° 2’ 12”

The Scorpio Moon in a Natal Chart makes you intense and passionate. You have a gift for revealing hidden wisdom and are obsessed with discovering […] Read more »

Mercuryin Sagittarius29° 44’ 12”

Mercury in Sagittarius in the Natal Chart indicates a gregarious and loving personality. You are idealistic and have a strong sense of conviction. You are […] Read more »

Venusin Aquarius7° 38’ 12”

Aquarius Venus in the Natal Chart makes you unusual and brilliant. You value people who inspire breakthroughs. You love epiphanies that help you understand the […] Read more »

Marsin Libra22° 12’ 17”

Libra Mars in the Natal Chart makes you long for balance. You are motivated to express your unique fantasies and find the passion and motivation […] Read more »

Jupiterin Libra4° 10’ 30”

Libra Jupiter in the Natal Chart makes you diplomatic and influential. You have a broad reach and bring charm and beauty to others. You are […] Read more »

Saturnin Aries18° 43’ 9”

Aries Saturn in the Natal Chart indicates you are born into a generation that values tradition and order. Your generation creates hierarchies based on creativity […] Read more »

Uranusin Libra3° 45’ 50”

Libra Uranus in the Natal Chart indicates a generation that aspires to live up to their higher ideals. You are born at a time when […] Read more »

Neptunein Scorpio27° 16’ 60”

Scorpio Neptune in the Natal Chart is an ideal placement for emotional healing and transformation. Your generation brings out the best in others and can […] Read more »

Plutoin Virgo25° 4’ 29”

Pluto in Virgo in the Natal Chart indicates a generation dedicated to exposing secrets related to misuse of power in agriculture, healthcare, and service industries. […] Read more »

Ceresin Sagittarius22° 24’ 43”

Ceres in Sagittarius in the Natal Chart brings an abundance of hope and faith. Your generation is committed to fulfilling your ideals. You are energizing […] Read more »

Chironin Pisces28° 52’ 17”

Chiron in Pisces is an ideal placement for a generation committed to healing. You are passionate about showing others you care. You can be self-sacrificing […] Read more »

Erosin Capricorn24° 2’ 5”

What does Eros in Capricorn mean for your personality? You are comforting and sensual. You are affectionate and can be gentle and romantic. You have […] Read more »

Hygieain Pisces29° 5’ 53”

Hygiea in Pisces in the Natal Chart is an ideal placement for an intuitive healer. You can be a spiritual guide who encourages others to […] Read more »

Junoin Sagittarius12° 24’ 46”

Juno in Sagittarius in the Natal Chart indicates an ideal placement for affection and desire. You bring abundance and love to your relationships and can […] Read more »

Pallasin Sagittarius3° 50’ 1”

Pallas in Sagittarius in the Natal Chart makes you determined and focused. You are generous and can be a natural leader who inspires others to […] Read more »

Vestain Aries20° 23’ 3”

Vesta in Aries in the Natal Chart makes you zealous and caring. You are passionate and can be energetic. You are determined, and nothing stands […] Read more »

Ascendantin Aries0° 56’ 16”

Aries Ascendant in the Natal Chart indicates a dramatic personality. You have a passionate appearance and often go to extremes to show your individuality. You […] Read more »

Black Moon Lilithin Gemini20° 11’ 26”

Gemini Black Moon Lilith makes you dramatic and eager to push boundaries. You can fall for extreme ideas and are attracted to taboo and unconventional […] Read more »

Midheavenin Capricorn0° 33’ 34”

The Capricorn Midheaven in the Natal Chart makes you stoic and observant. You are patient and down to earth. You have a practical and determined […] Read more »

North Nodein Aries5° 26’ 18”

Aries North Node in the Natal Chart indicates you are passionate about your purpose and break habits by developing confidence in yourself. You are driven […] Read more »

South Nodein Libra5° 26’ 18”

Libra South Node in the Natal Chart makes you affectionate and loving. You are attuned to other people’s needs and can learn to open up […] Read more »

Part of Fortunein Aquarius13° 26’ 38”

Aquarius Part of Fortune in the Natal Chart makes you bright and charming. You are expressive and inspired by unconventional ideas. You use your individualistic […] Read more »

Planets in Elements

Planets in elements denote how the fundamental energies and qualities associated with those planets interact with the elemental nature of the signs they inhabit, shaping an individual’s overall temperament and approach to life.

Fire Element

The fire element in astrology is associated with passion and motivation. This element brings creativity and intensifies planets and natal houses. Your competitive nature comes […] Read more »

Air Element

The air element in astrology corresponds to three signs; Gemini, Libra, and Aquarius. This element is associated with new insights and perspectives. The air element […] Read more »

Water Element

Astrologers and other occultists study the water element to understand emotional healing. This element relates to love and compassion. Numerous planets in water signs in […] Read more »

Earth Element

The earth element in astrology is associated with practicality and grounding. This element is associated with career and wealth. Taurus, Virgo, and Capricorn are signs […] Read more »

Planets in Qualities

Planets in qualities signify how the inherent attributes and tendencies of those planets align with the modalities of the signs they occupy, influencing an individual’s style of action, decision-making, and engagement with the world.

Cardinal Quality

The Cardinal quality in astrology is associated with new seasons and initiative. Cardinal signs mark the equinoxes and solstices. The Cardinal modality represents the extremes […] Read more »

Mutable Quality

The third Quality astrological signs are grouped into is mutable. Mutable Signs come at the end of a season. Mutable Signs are associated with flexibility […] Read more »

Fixed Quality

The second Quality in astrology is the Fixed modality. Fixed Signs follow the Cardinal Signs, bringing strength and endurance. These signs build upon the foundation […] Read more »

Planets in Houses

Planets in a zodiac house signify where in life’s areas and experiences the energies and influences of those planets are predominantly focused and expressed.

Sun Ninth House Moon Seventh House Mercury Ninth House Venus Eleventh House Mars Seventh House Jupiter Seventh House Saturn First House Uranus Seventh House Neptune Eighth House Pluto Sixth House Ceres Ninth House Chiron Twelfth House Eros Eleventh House Hygiea Twelfth House Juno Ninth House Pallas Eighth House Vesta First House Black Moon Lilith Third House North Node First House South Node Seventh House Part of Fortune Eleventh House Vertex Sixth House

Aspects

Aspects reveal the dynamic relationships and interactions between planets within a birth chart, influencing the way their energies combine and manifest in an individual’s life experiences and personality traits.

Within this birth chart, there are 13 major aspects, alongside 18 minor aspects, as well as 12 extra aspects.

Major Aspects

Major aspects highlight significant connections between planets, providing insights into key dynamics, challenges, and potentials shaping an individual’s life journey and psychological makeup.

Jupiter Conjunct Uranus Sun Square Pluto Moon Square Venus Sun Sextile Mars Neptune Sextile Pluto Venus Trine Jupiter Mars Opposite Saturn Mercury Square Jupiter Mercury Square Uranus Venus Trine Uranus Sun Conjunct Mercury Mercury Square Pluto Sun Trine Saturn

Explore detailed articles on the major aspects in this birth chart, gaining deeper insights into this cosmic identity. Dive into each aspect and uncover how it shapes Maxime Chaya’s life journey.

Jupiter Conjunct Uranusorb: 0°

Jupiter conjunct Uranus in a chart typically indicates that someone craves freedom and needs to try new things constantly. There are both positive and negative […] Read more »

Sun Square Plutoorb: 1°

The Sun square Pluto in a Natal Chart makes you fearful of change and loss. Until you accept core fears and weaknesses, you may overcompensate […] Read more »

Moon Square Venusorb: 1°

The Moon square Venus in a Natal Chart typically indicates a person is relationship-focused, even if they aren’t always lucky in love. Someone with this […] Read more »

Sun Sextile Marsorb: 2°

The Sun sextile Mars in a Natal Chart blends passion and focus. You are adventurous and bold. Your ego and ambitions are aligned. You enjoy […] Read more »

Mars Opposite Saturnorb: 3°

Mars opposite Saturn in a chart can be incredibly difficult to deal with. There is a lot of aggression and anger in this aspect. There […] Read more »

Mercury Square Jupiterorb: 4°

Mercury square Jupiter in a Natal Chart can create the desire to succeed but an inability to follow through and do the necessary work. Someone […] Read more »

Sun Conjunct Mercuryorb: 5°

Sun conjunct Mercury in the Natal Chart can make you bright, playful, and talkative. Your intellectual gifts are among your best characteristics. You can be […] Read more »

Sun Trine Saturnorb: 6°

The Sun trine Saturn in the Natal Chart makes you an old soul. You have a link to history and love learning about the past. […] Read more »

Minor Aspects

Minor aspects represent subtler connections between planets, offering additional nuances and layers of interpretation to understand more detailed influences on an individual’s personality and experiences.

Mars Sextile Ceres Jupiter Sextile Pallas Uranus Sextile Pallas Mercury Square Chiron Mercury Square Hygiea Mercury Square Ascendant Mercury Conjunct Midheaven Mercury Square Vertex Jupiter Opposite North Node Jupiter Conjunct South Node Saturn Sextile Black Moon Lilith Pluto Trine Eros Mars Opposite Vesta Saturn Conjunct Vesta Uranus Opposite North Node Uranus Conjunct South Node Neptune Trine Chiron Neptune Trine Hygiea

Discover additional layers of meaning with this collection of articles on the minor aspects found in Maxime Chaya’s birth chart. Delve deeper into these cosmic nuances to gain a richer understanding of this astrological profile.

Mercury Conjunct Midheavenorb: 1°

Mercury conjunct Midheaven in the Natal Chart makes you intellectual and outgoing. Your career brings opportunities to express your creativity and intelligence. You are thoughtful […] Read more »

Jupiter Conjunct South Nodeorb: 1°

Jupiter conjunct the South Node in a chart signifies a need to rise above harmful belief systems. Someone dealing with this conjunction may have some […] Read more »

Saturn Conjunct Vestaorb: 2°

Saturn conjunct Vesta in a chart creates a profound sense of responsibility related to someone’s spiritual calling. Sometimes, the restrictive nature of Saturn can stifle […] Read more »

Uranus Conjunct South Nodeorb: 2°

Uranus conjunct the South Node in a chart can be challenging to deal with because of the unpredictable nature of this conjunction. Someone may be […] Read more »

Extra Aspects

Extra aspects, though less emphasized than major or minor aspects, contribute subtle nuances and intricacies to the overall astrological interpretation, offering additional insights into an individual’s personality traits and life experiences.

Chiron Conjunct Hygiea Vesta Sextile Black Moon Lilith Ascendant Square Midheaven Midheaven Square Vertex Hygiea Square Midheaven Hygiea Opposite Vertex Juno Sextile Part of Fortune Ascendant Opposite Vertex Chiron Square Midheaven Chiron Opposite Vertex Hygiea Conjunct Ascendant Pallas Trine North Node

Explore how these extra aspects contribute to the intricate tapestry of Maxime Chaya’s life path through subtler influences. Dive into each extra aspect and uncover the hidden gems that shape a unique cosmic identity.

Chiron Conjunct Hygieaorb: 0°

Chiron conjunct Hygiea in a chart creates an intense healing energy. Someone can take advantage of the masculine healing energy of Chiron and the feminine […] Read more »

Houses

A house starting in a zodiac sign indicates the area of life where the qualities and themes of that sign are particularly emphasized and influential within an individual’s birth chart.