chauncey-billups-no-1-7-16-13.jpg

Chauncey Billups (left) is No. 1 again for the Detroit Pistons, after some wrangling between Joe Dumars (right) and the NBA league office, and some kindness by teammate Andre Drummond.

(The Associated Press)

AUBURN HILLS -- Chauncey Billups thought for a time he might have to settle for being No. 1 in

fans' hearts.

That was before the NBA relented on a rule requiring jersey number changes to be submitted in March of the previous season and allowed Andre Drummond to give up his number to a player who wore it for a 2004 Pistons championship team.

Billups' reintroduction press conference was delayed 25 minutes while the team awaited the NBA ruling, followed by a jubilant reunion.

"I wanted to have the same opportunity as a lot of the other Pistons greats -- Isiah (Thomas), Joe (Dumars), Ben (Wallace) and those guys -- had, and and that was to retire a Piston," Billups said Tuesday. "That's something that was very significant to me. So yeah, there were some other offers out there but this meant something to me."

Billups, who was traded to Denver in the 2008 Allen Iverson trade, two games into his sixth season with the Pistons, has seen the franchise go downhill ever since.

He said he relishes the chance to help restore lost luster.

"I hate to see the Palace look the way it looks now during games, with nobody watching the games," Billups said. "But I also know that this city loves a winner. We've got die-hard Pistons fans here and if you put out the effort and the pride that I want to try to instill back in this team -- the Piston pride that we played with -- I feel like people will come out and watch."

Dumars, the Pistons' president of basketball operations,

just three days after doing the same with another veteran point guard, Will Bynum.

With Brandon Knight and Rodney Stuckey also under contract, and the Pistons still uncertain what to do with second-round draft pick Peyton Siva, who could be stashed overseas for a year, the team suddenly has a plethora of point guards.

The question comes down to who starts.

Billups, who will turn 37 just before training camp begins, certainly is one candidate.

Dumars said he and Pistons coach Maurice Cheeks already have had that conversation.

"You know, what we did is Chauncey and Mo Cheeks and I talked about this and said let's not predetermine everything, whether he will or won't be," the starter, Dumars said. "Let's see how he looks in training camp and if he is, he is.

"We're going to leave the competition wide open. If it's Brandon, it's Brandon. Whoever it is, Mo said, 'Look, I'm going to go into training camp, and whoever the best guy is for us to start, that's what I'm going to do.'"

Billups also played with the New York Knicks and most recently the Los Angeles Clippers after he was traded away from the Pistons.

In the nearly five years since that deal was consummated, Billups, who was an NBA journeyman before becoming a three-time All-Star with the Pistons, had to overcome some searing emotions.

"To be honest with you, at the start, when it first happened, I was hurt," he said. "I was hurt by what happened. It wasn't what happened, per se, but it's just kind of how it went down, because Joe and I had built a great relationship before that. Obviously, that kind of bruised the relationship temporarily.

"A couple years, maybe, after that -- or a year, I don't know when it was -- Joe and I had a long talk. We had a long talk, we talked about everything that happened during that time. You know, I'm a forgiving person. Things happen. I'm over it now. We talked about it, I'm over it now, life is short, man. We had a great relationship at one time and I think our relationship is building back to where it was again."

Dumars said Billups for Iverson was the one trade he would "like to have back" during 13 seasons as the Pistons' top personnel executive.

Billups said the upside of the trade was that it sent him to his hometown, Denver, where his children had a chance to spend extensive time with family.

That doesn't mean he wouldn't have nixed the trade if given the chance.

"I wanted to end my career here from way back then," Billups said. "Hopefully, I will get the opportunity to do that now."

Billups used the word "respectability" several times in describing his goal during his second tenure with the Pistons.

"I don't know that in two years that we can get it back to what it was when I left," he said. "But I think just making the playoffs is a goal that we have to have from day one. You never know what can happen in the playoffs. That's a goal that I think is feasible for this team."

-- Download the Detroit Pistons on MLive app for iPhone and Android