Tigers are quick to anger and indecisive, but they can be flexible and accommodate their personalities to suit circumstances. The tiger is the king of the jungle and, nocturnal evokes images of darkness and stormy weather. The period from 3 to 5 A.M. is the Hour of the Tiger when the tiger returns to his lair after prowling at night. A woman born in a Tiger Year will be unhappy in marriage, but a man will often be talented and suited for a high position.

Tiger is the third animal that appears in the Vietnamese zodiac signs. Orderly, the 12 zodiac animals are Rat, Buffalo, Tiger, Rabbit, Dragon, Snake, Horse, Goat, Monkey, Rooster, Dog, and Pig. A Tiger year happens every 12 years. People in Tiger year are born in 1914, 1926, 1938, 1950, 1962, 1974, 1986, 1998, 2010, and 2022.

Characteristics of a Tiger Zodiac Sign

Being considered as an active and vigor, the tiger is one of the most powerful animals in wildlife. The people who are born in Tiger year also possess these kinds of characteristics. They are not only active but also cautious; thus, they never have to regret what they say or do. They always stick to the plan and never give up halfway before reaching their target. They do not believe in fate and try to overcome any difficulties in their life by themselves. However, in friendship, they act as stubborn and arbitrary people, besides, they are not sophisticated enough, which causes some problems when establishing the relationship.

People in the tiger sign like to be straightforward instead of beating around the bush. They rarely use diplomatic means, which sometimes make others unhappy. Talented ones are ambitious and never satisfied with the boring working environment. Thus, job-hopping happens regularly. In career life, they want to work for big companies where they can demonstrate their capabilities to the fullest and are likely to be promoted. The disadvantage of this is that they may act independently without taking notice of their colleagues.

According to the astrology, different periods of a day by the time the Tiger people born could greatly affect their personalities: if a person is born in the morning, they are believed to be so ambitious. Therefore, they could achieve great success in life. However, great ambition and an exaggerated notion of their importance, their fortune will be unstable. Furthermore, friends and colleagues may keep away from them due to their ambition. So, they should attempt to change these weak points or they cannot get helped by others.

Tiger born at noon are the luckiest. They are not the backbone of the organization, most of them are truthful staffs. This is not really a bad thing because they could enjoy a peaceful life. The female tigers are reliable and good-tempered. Their great talents are also developed so that they could achieve great accomplishments in their career life. They can balance work and life as well. At the same time, they demonstrate to be great mothers.

People born in the evening are full of sufferings during their childhood; however, they will succeed in their middle age. They are attracted by power and like to control others.

The Health Condition of the Tiger Zodiac Sign

In general, the Tigers are healthy. They like to participate in many kinds of sports. They rarely experienced small illness such as fever, coughs or colds. However, they should avoid dangerous activities because they may cause physical harm. Warm-up exercises, jogging, aerobic are advised to keep fit and healthy. When they are exhausted by the overload work, enough relaxation is really important for them to refresh themselves.

Which Careers are best-suited for the Tiger Zodiac Sign?

As the king of the animals, tigers are born to be the leader and respected by other people. Pilot, flight attendant, actor, writer, musician, travel agent office manager, or advertising agents are suitable for tigers.

How to Build Relationships with the Tiger Zodiac Sign

In society, Tigers always take the leadership role. They do not like to interact with other people due to their cover confidence and mistrust. Thus, it is hard for them to build up a deep relationship. Being patient, clever, tactful, and understanding is extremely important when dealing with tigers.

In love relationships, tigers are not romantic and sweet so their partners should be active to understand and catch up with their sense of adventure.

Five Types of Tiger Zodiac Sign

There are five sacred elements in the universe which are Metal, Wood, Water, Fire, and Earth. Each zodiac sign has a close relationship with those elements and a combination of one element and one animal occurs every 60 years. For example, a Water Tiger year comes every 60 years.

Type of TigerYear of BirthCharacteristicsWood Tiger1914, 1974Sympathetic, comprehensive, and out-goingFire Tiger1926, 1986Confident and self-reliant, with poor self-controlEarth Tiger1938, 1998Risk-taking, rational and strong faithGold Tiger1950, 2010Females are very sympathetic; males are hesitant, persistentWater Tiger1902, 1962Bright, self-assured

Famous People Born in the Years of Tiger

Ludwig van Beethoven, Marco Polo, Marilyn Monroe, Karl Marx, Leonardo DiCaprio, Tom Cruise, Emmy Rossum, Jodie Foster, Alyson Hannigan, Ryan Phillippe, Dwight D. Eisenhower, Ashley Olson, Joaquin Phoenix, Jim Carrey, Rosie O’Donnell, Whoopi Goldberg, Mary Kate Olson, Garth Brooks, Robert Pattinson