Ben Stein, born on November 25, 1944, in Washington D.C., is a man of many talents with a multifaceted career. He began his professional life in the field of law and politics before delving into the entertainment industry. Graduating as valedictorian from Yale Law School in 1970, Stein served as a poverty lawyer in New Haven and Washington D.C., and a trial lawyer at the Federal Trade Commission. His career took a political turn when he became a speechwriter for U.S. Presidents Richard Nixon and Gerald Ford. Stein's entrance into the entertainment industry was marked by his role as the monotonous high school teacher in the popular 1986 film Ferris Bueller's Day Off. This iconic role catapulted him into the limelight, leading to a successful acting career with appearances in numerous films and television shows. Not limiting himself to acting, Stein also made his mark as a game show host, notably for the Emmy Award-winning show Win Ben Stein's Money, which aired from 1997 to 2003. In addition to his legal, political, and entertainment endeavors, Stein is a prolific writer. He has authored and co-authored several books spanning different genres, including novels, biographies, and books about finance. His expertise in economics, derived from his early years as a poverty lawyer and a speechwriter, has been showcased in his financial writings. Stein's diverse career, combined with his intellectual prowess and distinct charisma, has solidified his status as a unique figure in both the world of entertainment and beyond.

Bernard Lawrence Madoff (April 29, 1938 – April 14, 2021) was an American market maker, investment advisor, financier, and convicted fraudster who served a federal prison sentence for offenses related to a massive Ponzi scheme. He was at one time non-executive chairman of the NASDAQ stock market, before being revealed as and later confessing to having been the operator of the largest Ponzi scheme in world history, and the largest financial fraud in U.S. history. Prosecutors estimated the fraud to be worth $64.8 billion based on the amounts in the accounts of Madoff's 4,800 clients as of November 30, 2008.

Susan Lynn "Suze" Orman ( SOO-zee; born June 5, 1951) is an American author, financial advisor, motivational speaker, television host, and podcast host. In 1987, she founded the Suze Orman Financial Group. The Suze Orman Show began airing on CNBC in 2002, running for 13 years in the U.S. and internationally. Orman has written nine New York Times bestsellers about personal finance. She was named twice to the Time 100 list of influential people, has won two Emmy Awards, and eight Gracie Awards. Orman has written, co-produced and hosted 8 PBS specials, and has appeared on multiple additional television shows. She has been a guest on The Oprah Winfrey Show approximately 29 times and Larry King Live over 30 times. Orman is currently the podcast host of the "Suze Orman Women & Money Podcast."

Ivan Julian Massow (born 11 September 1967) is a British financial services entrepreneur, gay rights campaigner, and media personality. He is also a former Chairman of the Institute of Contemporary Arts in London. He has been active in UK politics, formerly as a member of the Conservative Party and since 2016 in the Liberal Democrats.He is a trustee of the Prince’s School of Traditional Arts and Master of the Southdown and Eridge Trail Hunt.