Toting a baton, dreams

Notre Dame's boys 3,200 relay team has quietly become one of the fastest distance relay teams in the state this season. With a pair of strong 800 runners along with a pair of top-notch distance runners, the Bulldogs have an almost unbeatable quartet in Austin Critchlow, Jason Delgado, Sam Montgomery and Ryan Roggow...

Out of the past 5/28/04

10 years ago: May 28, 1994 Official with Gordonville-Dutchtown Public Water District Number Four says district's second water well should be in operation by late summer; Jerry Lorberg, president of district's board of directors, says drilling of new well began about two weeks ago on tract of land near Highway 25...

Births 5/28/04

Oswald Daughter to Loren and Christina Oswald of Jackson, St. John's Mercy Hospital in St. Louis, 8:49 a.m. Monday, May 10, 2004. Name, Maggie Loraine. Weight, 7 pounds 7 ounces. Third child, second daughter. Mrs. Oswald is the former Christina Berry, daughter of Paul and Linda Berry of Cape Girardeau. Oswald is the son of Charles and Gail Oswald of Cape Girardeau. He is employed at Procter & Gamble...

Cape police report 5/28/04

Cape Girardeau The following items were released by the Cape Girardeau Police Department. Arrests do not imply guilt. Arrests William L. Bridges, 18, 715 Second St., Tamms, Ill., was arrested Wednesday on suspicion of first-degree robbery and armed criminal action...

Expert - Credible intelligence hard to pin down

WASHINGTON -- In recent years, the government has told Americans it has credible evidence of impending terror attacks, of weapons of mass destruction in Iraq and of collaboration between al-Qaida and Saddam Hussein. But "credible" doesn't mean the same thing to every government official, and even credible information can be wrong...

Sports briefs 5/28/04

College The University of Colorado reinstated suspended football coach Gary Barnett on Thursday and said no one would lose their jobs because of the school's recruiting scandal. University President Betsy Hoffman said the embattled athletics department will be restructured as part of "sweeping" changes to reduce its autonomy and install greater accountability. ...

Cape airport boardings drop 17 percent for first quarter

The Cape Girardeau Regional Airport terminal seems a little lonelier these days as passenger boardings have plummeted this year. Boardings through the first three months of this year dropped by 17 percent. That amounted to 414 fewer passengers taking American Connection commuter airline flights to the St. Louis airport. In all, 1,997 passengers flew out of the Cape Girardeau airport through the first four months of 2004 compared with 2,411 during the same period last year, city records show...

Cheney visits Kansas City to support Patriot Act

KANSAS CITY, Mo. -- Vice President Dick Cheney is scheduled to visit Kansas City on Tuesday to talk about the USA Patriot Act at an event for President Bush's re-election campaign. Cheney is scheduled to arrive late Tuesday morning to speak at the KCI Expo Center at 11:15 a.m., near the Kansas City International Airport...

Audit - Parks' drinking water not regularly tested

JEFFERSON CITY, Mo. -- Just ahead of the summer's first holiday weekend, a state audit released Thursday found that drinking water at some Missouri state parks was not tested for bacteria as often as required. On a positive note, auditors found state parks clean and well-maintained. Parks division spokeswoman Sue Holst said parks have never had problems or illnesses because of their drinking water...

Father of Carnahan aide settles lawsuit

KANSAS CITY, Mo. -- An aircraft parts manufacturer has settled a wrongful death lawsuit filed by a man whose son died in a plane crash that also killed then-Gov. Mel Carnahan. Dale Sifford will get $905,000 in a settlement reached May 12 with Parker Hannifin Corp. of Cleveland. Sifford's son, Chris Sifford, was Carnahan's aide...

World briefs 5/28/04

Soldiers, demonstrators clash in Lebanon BEIRUT, Lebanon -- Demonstrators set fire to the Labor Ministry on Thursday after Lebanese soldiers shot and killed five people and wounded 12 others during protests against the government's economic policies, security and hospital officials said. A civil defense firefighter also died in the hospital after being hit by gunfire in what was Lebanon's worst violence involving civilians in a decade...

CVB looks for best return on spending

By John Mehner In Sunday's Southeast Missourian, local businessman Steve Robertson criticized the mission and efforts of the Cape Girardeau Convention and Visitors Bureau. Several points he makes are based on false assumptions. Robertson's claim is that the CVB spends far too much time and money on river-related activities and conventions and not nearly enough on interstate travelers. ...

Hong Kong hopes Buddha's finger brings peace

HONG KONG -- Tens of thousands of people lined up Thursday to see one of Buddha's fingers -- on loan from China for 10 days -- and although they were herded past in a hurry, many said the relic offered Hong Kong fresh hopes for peace and calm. Margaret Luk's eyes welled with tears after the 70-year-old retiree spent a few moments gazing at the bone fragment, encased in a statue enclosed in bulletproof glass...

Coalition suspends operations in Najaf

NAJAF, Iraq -- The U.S.-led coalition agreed Thursday to suspend offensive military operations in Najaf after Shiite leaders struck a deal with a radical cleric to end fighting that killed more than 350 Iraqis and 21 coalition troops. For the first time in weeks, the day passed in this southern Iraqi city without the thud of explosions or the crash of automatic weapons fire. U.S. forces remained in their positions but were not seen in Najaf's center...

Developments in Iraq

Gunmen ambushed a convoy carrying a member of the Iraqi Governing Council, Salama al-Khafaji. One of her guards was killed and her 18-year-old son was missing. A car carrying two Japanese journalists was attacked by gunmen just south of Baghdad, who set the vehicle on fire...

Freshman sprints to the front for Tigers

On a team without a senior, Central's youth has been paying off all year for the girls track and field team. No one epitomizes the Tigers' youth movement more than freshman Nicole Jackson, a sectional winner in the 200 and runner-up in the 100. Jackson has finished at or near the top in the 100 and 200 all year, and her performances of late have shown no let-up...

Mascot issues crop up all over

To the editor: Being the insensitive lout that I am, I hadn't given the brouhaha surrounding the Southeast Missouri State University mascot much thought until it was made all too real to me the other night, when I was at Arena Park watching my 10-year old son's baseball game...

Sales tax vital for future needs

To the editor: As the director of Cape Girardeau County Public Health Center, it is my responsibility to protect the health and welfare of the county's residents. The purpose of this letter is to urge Cape Girardeau residents to vote yes for the fire sales tax June 8...

Collaborators now enjoy heaven

To the editor: I was 9 years old when I noticed this distinguished-looking lady walk up the sidewalk leading to our home. I later learned her name was Thomza Zimmerman and that she and Mom were meeting to discuss collaborating on a column. They took it upon themselves to drive to area newspapers, asking editors to take a look-see and hoping to sell the column themselves. No agents for them. They were quite successful...

Charles Morrill

Charles Edgar Morrill, 73, of Scott City died Thursday, May 27, 2004, at St. Francis Hospital in Memphis, Tenn. He was born July 8, 1930, at Illmo, son of Gilbert Hillemann and Clara Mae Hosea Morrill. He and Myrime Louise Petitt were married June 2, 1951, at Illmo...

Marjorie DeLay

BELL CITY, Mo. -- Marjorie Louise Smith DeLay departed this life for her heavenly home Wednesday, May 26, 2004. Marjorie was born Oct. 3, 1917, in Jackson, daughter of John W. and Hattie A. Smith. She is survived by her beloved spouse and caretaker, James W. ...

Willie Miles

BENTON, Mo. -- Willie Dean Miles, 64, of Benton died Tuesday, May 25, 2004, at St. Francis Medical Center in Cape Girardeau. She was born May 7, 1940, in Trenton, Tenn., daughter of Elmer and Beatrice Buchanan Goodrich. She and Booker Miles were married in May 1954, at Caruthersville, Mo...

Robert Troup

SIKESTON, Mo. -- Robert Troup, 93, of Memphis, Tenn., died Wednesday, May 26, 2004, at St. Francis Hospital in Memphis. He was born March 8, 1911, in Aberdine, Miss. Troup worked more than 30 years at Sikeston Compress, and attended West End Baptist Church. He later attended New Hickory Hill Baptist Church in Memphis...

Nation briefs 5/28/04

Three children found decapitated in Baltimore BALTIMORE -- Three young children were found decapitated Thursday in an apartment in northwest Baltimore, police said. The children's mother found their bodies when she arrived home late Thursday afternoon, police spokeswoman Nicole Monroe said. The children were all under the age of 10, she said. The mother, who neighbors said was Hispanic and speaks little English, notified a neighbor, who called 911...

Caribbean floods trap thousands

PORT-AU-PRINCE, Haiti -- U.S. and Canadian troops rushed medical supplies, drinking water and chlorine tablets Thursday to flood-battered towns, where bodies were seen floating near the tops of palm trees. Haitians and Dominicans braced for a death toll that could reach well over 1,500...

Weather has farmers watching the skies, their calendars

This time of the year, a calendar and the Weather Channel seldom get far from soybean grower Neal Bredehoeft's view. The west-central Missouri farmer has learned over the decades that crop-planting can be a race against the clock. Getting seeds in the soil by the first week of June tends to produce better yields, conventional wisdom goes...

Car pulled from Cape park lake

Cape Girardeau Fire Department first responders and ambulance personnel attended to the driver of an automobile that came to rest in the lake at Cape Girardeau County Park South around 8 p.m. Thursday. Battalion chief Tom Hinkebein confirmed that the driver of the older-model Mercury was from Tennessee and was alone in the vehicle. ...

Notre Dame girls seek return to Class 1 championship game

When defending Class 1 girls soccer state champion John Burroughs lost Tuesday in the state quarterfinals, the pressure of expectations fell squarely on the shoulders of Notre Dame. But the Bulldogs either don't see it that way, or they don't mind the pressure. After finishing second in the state last season, Notre Dame's intention since last May was to come home with a state championship this spring. The Bulldogs get their chance this weekend at the Anheuser-Busch Center in Fenton, Mo...

Ride off road in Wrangler

Jeep Wrangler Unlimited has timeless qualities Rubber bands, balloons, inner tubes and Jeep Wranglers all have things in common: All are immediately recognizable. All can be stretched to make them more versatile. And, with a little creative thinking, all can be put to nearly unlimited, multipurpose uses. Maybe that's why Jeep's newest Wrangler has been dubbed "Unlimited."...

St. Louis-bound flights diverted to Cape

Severe weather in the St. Louis area diverted at least eight airplanes to the Cape Girardeau Regional Airport to wait out the storm Thursday night. The day before, two or three planes spent an hour or so until the storms blew over. Cape Girardeau firefighters were called to stand by while the airplanes landed as required by the Federal Aviation Administration. The aircraft ranged in size from 20-passenger planes to as large as 60-passenger planes, some of them jet-props...

Indians oust Govs to stay in hunt

PADUCAH, Ky. -- Southeast Missouri State University still faces a major uphill battle in its bid to win the Ohio Valley Conference tournament. But at least the fifth-seeded Indians are alive and kicking, thanks to Thursday's 6-1 victory over top-seeded Austin Peay, which became the first squad eliminated from the six-team event despite winning the OVC's regular-season title...

Rolen's RBI lead grows in 6-3 win

ST. LOUIS -- Scott Rolen did everything right, except remember that it was getaway day. Rolen homered and drove in four runs, giving him a major league-leading 49 RBIs, in the St. Louis Cardinals' 6-3 victory over the Pittsburgh Pirates on Thursday. He left Busch Stadium without speaking to reporters because he had to hurriedly pack for the team's seven-game trip that begins today in Houston, so his teammates spoke for him...

County offers to settle lawsuit with Jackson

The Cape Girardeau County Commission has softened its firm stance on the road and bridge tax debate, a year-and-a-half-long legal dispute with the city of Jackson. At stake are annual payments of more than $80,000 and back payments to Jackson that could approach $500,000...

Candidate Kerry slated to speak in Independence

INDEPENDENCE, Mo. -- Democratic presidential candidate John Kerry is coming to Missouri to lay out his plans for revamping the military to confront terrorists. Kerry's campaign said he will deliver the policy address June 3 at the Truman Presidential Museum and Library in Independence. The public likely will need tickets to attend the 11 a.m. speech, as well as a rally planned the evening before at Kansas City's downtown airport...

Everybody's a critic - 'Shrek 2'

Three stars (out of four) I was delighted with this week's movie, "Shrek 2." Although it was not as good as the first movie, it's worth seeing. It began right where the first film left off. Shrek and Fiona are on their honeymoon, and the moment they return home they are greeted by Donkey and a message from her parents to come and visit them in the land of Far Far Away...

Oran seeks a third straight trip to the Class 1 final four

Oran's baseball team has finished third and second the last two seasons in the Class 1 state tournament, respectively. Seniors Matt Seyer and Garrett Roslen played on those two teams, and they would like to make that trip again. The Eagles will travel to Thayer today for a 4 p.m. Class 1 quarterfinal game...

Two movie studios sue online seller of DVD-copying software

AP Business WriterST. LOUIS (AP) -- Two Hollywood movie studios have sued an online retailer, accusing Technology One of defiantly selling DVD-copying software previously barred by two federal courts. The lawsuit, filed in New York by Twentieth Century Fox Film Corp. and Paramount Pictures Corp., marks the first time a movie company has sued a retailer of the forbidden software by 321 Studios Inc...

Plan major downtown makeover for Maryville

MARYVILLE, Mo. (AP) -- The financing still needs to be worked out, but a task force has come up with a $2.4 million plan for revitalizing Maryville's downtown. The work began last August with visits to Jefferson City, Macon and Savannah to see what had been done there, and the final plans and cost estimates approved recently by the task force were presented to the City Council this week...

Peonies for our fallen heroes

I'll bet there are quite a few of us who remember when Memorial Day was called Decoration Day. And I'll bet I'm not the only one who grew up thinking Decoration Day got its name because that's when we went to the cemetery and "decorated" the graves...

'Love patent' lets computers decide

SAN JOSE, Calif. -- Chemistry? Forget it. Psychology and statistics best determine whether two people will have a happy marriage. At least so claims an online dating service that's patented its matchmaking formula. EHarmony.com Inc. this month received U.S. Patent No. 6,735,568, which describes a "method and system for identifying people who are likely to have a successful relationship."...

Louisiana shuttering juvenile prison

TALLULAH, La. -- The allegations began soon after the prison opened for business: teenage inmates beaten by guards, beating each other, running loose on the rooftops of the barracks. Ten years later, Louisiana is shutting down its toughest juvenile prison, a move that child welfare advocates see as an admission of failure...

Dogs confiscated from Jackson man await adoption

Three beagles and a Labrador mix confiscated from a Jackson man convicted of animal abuse soon will be available for adoption from the Humane Society of Southeast Missouri. Associate Circuit Judge Scott Thomsen found Gregory Cain, 39, of 156 Ora Lee Drive in Jackson guilty of animal abuse Tuesday. Thomsen placed Cain on two years supervised probation and ordered him to pay restitution to the Humane Society for the costs of caring for the animals...

Cleric arrested in London on U.S. charges

NEW YORK -- Abu Hamza al-Masri, the fiery Muslim cleric whose shuttered London mosque was linked to Zacarias Moussaoui and shoe bomber Richard Reid, was arrested Thursday in Britain, accused in a U.S. indictment of trying to establish a terrorist training camp in Oregon and providing aid to al-Qaida, officials said...

Former Lilbourn woman pleads guilty in embezzlement scheme

ST. LOUIS (AP) -- A woman has pleaded guilty to embezzling $1.8 million from her southeast Missouri employer. Andrea Buchanan, 46, of Kansas City and formerly of the southeast Missouri town Lilbourn, pleaded guilty Thursday to federal felony counts of passing forged securities and making false statements on tax returns. Sentencing will be Aug. 26...

Selleck's protrayal of Ike beyond physical

LOS ANGELES -- A film paying tribute to Dwight D. Eisenhower and his World War II D-Day achievement required precise casting, said writer-producer Lionel Chetwynd. So how did Tom Selleck, definitely not an Eisenhower lookalike, end up with the title role in A&E's "Ike: Countdown to D-Day"? It was all about character, Chetwynd said...

State releases report on racial profiling

Grades have come out for local law enforcement agencies, and the results indicate a problem with racial profiling in the state of Missouri. That includes some area police and sheriff's departments. On Thursday, state Attorney General Jay Nixon's office released the 2003 report on traffic stops in Missouri. The report contains data on 1,360,814 traffic stops made by over 600 city and county law enforcement agencies statewide. The report provides information on racial profiling for each agency...

Court allows abortion law requiring 24-hour wait to take effect

JEFFERSON CITY, Mo. -- A federal appeals court panel on Thursday allowed a challenged Missouri law to take effect requiring a 24-hour wait for women seeking abortions. The order by a three-judge panel of the 8th U.S. Circuit Court of Appeals in St. Louis dissolved a temporary retraining order that had been in place against the law since Oct. 10 -- the day before it was originally scheduled to take effect...

Felony charges filed against former Stoddard Co. employee

Dexter Daily Statesman BLOOMFIELD, Mo. -- This week, Stoddard County Prosecuting Attorney Briney Welborn filed felony charges of stealing against Natalie Metcalf. A former employee of the county collector's office, Metcalf allegedly had been taking money in various amounts from the office from 2001 to 2003. According to the complaint filed by Welborn in Circuit Court Division II on Wednesday, Welborn believes Metcalf stole a total of $48,647.93 over a three-year period...

Speak Out 5/28/04

Incredible talent WOW, I went to the wonderful production "Noye's Fludde" by the SEMO Music Academy. Thank you for the best hour of entertainment of the year. What incredible talent we have in this area and a delight to see. Speak English I'M GLAD our newspaper had the guts to run the article on speaking English. My grandparents came here from Germany, and we're not speaking German. I think everyone coming into this country should either learn to speak English or leave...

Coming to theaters 5/28

'The Day After Tomorrow' Starring Dennis Quaid, Jake Gyllenhaal, Emmy Rossum, Sela Ward and Ian Holm. A climatological disaster ravages the world beyond recognition. As millions of terrified survivors try to find shelter, Professor Jack Hall, a brilliant paleoclimatologist, heads to New York City -- now a frozen wasteland -- in search of his son Sam, who may still be alive. Rated PG-13 for intense situations of peril, running time 124 minutes. (Cape West Cine)...

Living her dream

It won't be hard to catch Saxy Jazz in the coming weeks. The jazz duo composed of Pat Schwent and Pete Parysek have shows lined up at Saffron, Mollie's Cafe and Bar, River Ridge Winery and Cape Girardeau's Tunes at Twilight. For saxophonist Schwent, who put the duo together, Saxy Jazz' success has been especially rewarding...

Artifacts 5/28

Chicago musician at house concert F.M. Smith will be playing an Underberg House Concert at 6:30 p.m. next Thursday. Smith plays acoustic guitar music, which has been described as a mixture of blues, jazz, folk and soul that tends to deal with social issues. He will play music from his latest CD, "Red Guitar," and music that will be featured on his upcoming release. To make reservations, call Jean or Larry Underberg at 334-7692...

Local singer philosophical about making the big time

Unlike many 20-year-olds, Brooke Burrows knows what she wants to do with the rest of her life. In fact, she has known since she was a child. "I've always sung, that's all I ever wanted to do," said the Jackson native, who now resides in Scott City...

Taylor fires 66 for lead at St. Jude

MEMPHIS, Tenn. -- Vaughn Taylor needed only 24 putts Thursday for a 5-under 66 that gave him a one-stroke lead over defending champion David Toms and Paul Stankowski after the first round of the St. Jude Classic. The former Nationwide Tour golfer grabbed the lead of a tournament that has none of the PGA Tour's top 10 money leaders with seven birdies and two bogeys. That put him in the lead after 18 holes for the first time in 14 PGA events...

Graham crusade rescheduled for October kickoff

KANSAS CITY, Mo. -- Evangelist Billy Graham has rescheduled his 2004 Kansas City Crusade for Oct. 7 to Oct 10, according to the committee planning the event. The event at Arrowhead Stadium had been scheduled to begin June 17 and run through June 20, but was postponed after Graham, 85, broke his pelvis May 14 in a fall at his home. At the time, the famed evangelist was recovering from a partial hip replacement performed in January...

Economy grows at 4.4 percent rate

WASHINGTON -- The economy grew slightly faster than previously thought in the first quarter of this year, fresh evidence of momentum heading into the summer. Higher energy prices, though, could weigh a bit on future growth, some analysts said. The Commerce Department reported Thursday that gross domestic product from January through March increased at a 4.4 percent annual rate. ...