Dec. 9, 2009

filmsgraded.com:

A Little Princess (1995)

Grade: 82/100

Director: Alfonso Cuarón

Stars: Liesel Matthews, Eleanor Bron, Liam Cunningham

What it's about. Based on the classic childrens' novel by Frances Hodgson Burnett. Set in a fancy New York City girls' boarding school, headed by wicked headmistress Eleanor Bron. Young Sara (Lisel Matthews) is dropped off at the school by her adored father (Liam Cunningham), who is off to fight World War I on behalf of England.

Soon, Sara is the most popular girl in school, in the process making an enemy of bratty Lavinia (Taylor Fry). She regales her fellow pupils with fabulous tales of India. Alas for Sara, her father goes missing, his checks bounce, and Sara's status changes. She is forced to dress in rags and move to the attic with fellow servant Becky (Vanessa Lee Chester).

Luckily, mystic Indian servant Ram Dass (Errol Sitahal) moves in next door with his invalid master, Arthur Malet. Dass' magic is so strong that it soon restores Sara's father to health, just in time to avoid policemen and the evil wrath of Eleanor Bron.

How others will see it. Although it was not a huge box office success, this movie picked up two Academy Award nominations. It is a favorite among women under 30, per the imdb.com user ratings, who grade it more than a point higher than do men from that age group. Men, and perhaps older women, find the "magic" portion of the story too much to believe. Indian men, no matter how nice or outlandishly dressed, cannot whip up a buffet by thought alone. And after all, no child can break a fall from a height by grasping a wet brick with one hand. And would Eleanor Bron, the heroine from The Beatles' Help!, really end up as a chimney sweep's assistant?

But the young of all ages (and perhaps even of both genders) care little about such matters. For them, the story is charming, especially the happy ending.

How I felt about it. A Little Princess was directed by Alfonso Cuarón. At the time, he was an obscure Mexican, and now, he is one of the top Hollywood directors, with a Harry Potter film and another blockbuster, Children of Men, on his resume. He was also director of the notorious Y tu mamá también, about the farthest film imaginable from our present subject.

Cuarón made this terrific movie on a shoestring budget. But he had something to work from: the 1939 Shirley Temple movie, which is perhaps even better than this remake. It is too much to expect for Liesel Matthews to match Temple's performance, and it is true that young Liesel has a few too many blank faced, mouth open stares. But she is cast after type, since Matthews is from one of the wealthiest families in America. They have so much money that they can actually afford to spend it on lawyers to battle other family members in court.