Maverick is one most favourite Mel Gibson idol, and is truly an American icon. In the western/comedy genre movies of all time cinema history, Maverick comes anyhow in the top-5 list. After the several failures of Red Kit(Lucky Luke)'s cinema adaptation between 1991-1993; Roy Huggins's "Maverick TV-series" of 1950s' had been enriched with the Hanna&Barbera vision of Lucky Luke(1984 TV-cartoon series) to integrate the whole concept of writing a new modern day Maverick by the writer William Goldman. There are a bunch of similarities between these two Western legends, but still Maverick's story was unique and impressive. Here in my review I would much rather talk about this movie itself, instead of its production values. Anyway, if you would like to share your opinions with me and everybody else, visit my message board topic with the title "40 factors that Lucky Luke and Maverick have in common".

Director Donner has preferred a left-in-the-middle Adventure type opening right away in the first scene, as if it's a continuation to Maverick's adventures. His antagonist, performed by British actor Alfred Molina, has left him in a trapped dilemma; that appears to our eyes as Maverick is just about to die. As the widely known old saying says: "A person recalls his life just before he dies" , Maverick starts to tell his story to sum up the reason how he ended up being in that deadly dilemma. Under his narration, we're welcomed to a heart-warmingly told weirdo story. He's been collecting money to enroll in a Poker tournament and travelling the country through several adventures.

What makes Maverick memorable and unique in style is first of all, the mood. There is a political film-noir view that we get every time we meet a new character. Every single character, even the cameos in this movie is so selfish, rebel and against the law. Robbery, racketeering, murder, gambling, bribery, deception is a must-have character profile for all. The sheriff of a town is in debt with fugitives. A credible police chief steals a $500,000 poker tournament prize from his son. A son of a police chief is a bandit. Well, his father known as the most credible police chief in Western America; and he even steals money from his own single child son. Even the most likable Jodie Foster's Annabelle character tries to steal money from everywhere, she fools every man to steal their wallet; even from a dead old poor wagon rider It's very absurd and reasonable at the same time that this is the greatest dreamy Western adventureland ever that the audience is witnessed.

After this great accomplishment, who cares if there are gaps in the plot? Indians might be so friendly(especially after Dances With Wolves, all the American Indians in Western movies somehow has become very friendly). All the bandits might be sappy. Set Designs might be cheap and distracting. Audio and sound effects might be the lowest quality. But still with craggy zigzagged narrated style of editing works perfect, and thus the film always rises unexpected incidents and surprises. The zigzags of the storytelling keeps the viewers' attention on trying to find the reasons why each character chooses to do what they do. Cinematography and directing of photography are also admirable. The sceneries are taken in rivers of Arizona, uplands of Oregon, canyons of Utah, prairies of Washington, Yosemite National Park of California. It feels like a falsely guided visit to Western states; Maverick says that he's going to the poker tournament in New York, while in the actual Earth geography he's in Yosemite. This film was nominated only in Costume Design category at the Academy Awards, but instead Hugo Weaving & Guy Pearce's Australian desert comedy won it.

Maverick can be seen entirely by everyone. Mostly with humour and film-noir comedy of Old West, it's also worth your time for Poker/Road Trip Sceneries/Adventure/Cowboy Gunfights/Living with the Indians segments.