Devil May Cry 3: Dante's Awakening Special Edition

By Sterling McGarvey |

The revamped version of Capcom's hit is one of the PS2's best action games ever.

Outstanding!

Pros:

New playable character, balanced difficulty, a variety of unlockables and a highly improved continue system makes for one of the best redone PS2 action games ever.

Cons:

Vergil can get a bit redundant to play, as he only has one style; there's plenty new, but it's still the same game at the end of the day.

When it released last March, Devil May Cry 3: Dante's Awakening was a highly polarizing title. There were those who immersed themselves in its intense gameplay and loved the challenge that it provided. Then there were others who weren't as fond of its steep difficulty and who loathed its "trial by death" nature and limited continue points. Either way, Capcom has found a way to appease all parties. With Devil May Cry 3 Special Edition, all of the issues that gamers had with the original release have been fine-tuned and quelled. Reminiscent of Virtua Fighter 4: Evolution, this Greatest Hits re-release builds on the original, and is, in fact, good enough to not only render the original release obsolete, but goes on to become one of the best action titles on the PlayStation 2.

For those who missed DMC 3 the first time, Dante's Awakening is a prequel to the first Devil May Cry. Dante is younger and cockier, but with the same gunslinging, swordfighting badass skills that make him the badass demon hunter that we all know and love. The story lays out his past and his battles with his twin brother, Vergil. Of course, along the way, Dante battles a variety of hellish monsters with his impressive arsenal. To find out more, check out GameSpy's original review of the game. DMC 3: SE seems to be one of the titles that is tapping into the surge in "director's cut" versions of games.

Relievingly for many gamers, DMC 3: SE has undergone a major overhaul in regard to its difficulty levels. There was a discrepancy between the Japanese and US releases. While the Japanese version featured an easy, normal, and hard mode, the bar was set a bit lower than in the US games. The American Easy mode was considered a Japanese Normal, while the Japanese Hard was the American Normal. Dante Must Die was the same for both versions. However, with the Special Edition, everything is balanced out, and the US Hard is now known as Very Hard, which is a mid-point between Hard and Dante Must Die. With such a varying range of difficulties, all of the complaints that plagued the original release are now fairly null and void.

Another complaint regarding the first DMC 3 was the way that Capcom implemented continues. In order to continue, players had to collect yellow orbs, which would allow Dante to pick up from the last checkpoint. Once he ran out of yellow orbs, the game would end. It was a flaw that rendered a challenging game a near-chore for many gamers.

The developers' solution has been to implement the Gold Orb system. Instead of the less-forgiving Yellow Orbs, if Dante has a gold one in his possession, he can pick up right where he leaves off should he not survive a battle. If he doesn't have one, he can resume from the last checkpoint (as though he had unlimited Yellow Orbs on that system). Also, there's a safety net and solace in the fact that there are unlimited continues, so gamers can rage through the adventure to their heart's content. For the more hardcore (and the occasional masochist), the Yellow Orb continue system is still intact.

Next: Page 2 >>

Page: 1 2