Myanmar led by Than Shwe is a custom civilisation mod by EmeraldRange, with contributions from Leugi and Tophat among others.

This mod requires Brave New World.

Overview[]

Located in the northwest of Southeast Asia, bordered by Bangladesh, China, India, Laos and Siam, Myanmar - also called Burma - has a long and complex history - a land where magnificent and ancient Buddhist temples gaze out serenely over a nation that has seen centuries of both prosperity and turmoil.

Than Shwe[]

Than Shwe was the leader of Myanmar during its junta years, officially ascending as head of state in 1992 after a coordinated palace coup. He dominates Burmese politics as a strongman, commander-in-chief and president. His rule is best known for its ruthless autarky and autocracy cementing a stratocratic military state while carrying over dozens of wars against ethnic minorities. After decades of tightly gripped hardline control of the country, Than Shwe retired and handed off power in 2011 but remains involved behind the curtains of the state.

Than Shwe was born in the small village of Minzu in either 1933 or 1935 during British Burma. After finishing high school in the nearby town of Kyaukse, Than Shwe worked as a postal clerk in 1949. Just a year after independence, the Karen Revolution started threatening to take control of large swaths of Lower Burma. Than Shwe enlisted into the military in its 9th intake. Being promoted within the 1st Infantry Battalion, he was heavily involved in the various battles of the early Karen war in eastern Burma.</Text>

By 1958, the Karen war had grown contained mostly within Karen state. Than Shwe was transferred to the newly established Directorate of Education and Psychological Warfare and trained under KGB courses for the year. He then assumed control of the No. 1 Psychological Warfare Battalion in the Northern Regional Command. By the time of the 1962 coup, he was a Psychological Warfare Officer and would briefly become an instructor of Psychological Warfare himself in 1963 before being assigned to the 101st Light Infantry Battalion

In 1969, Major Than Shwe took command of the 77th Light Infantry Division (LID). In 1972, Lieutenant Colonel Than Shwe, as commander of the 1st Infantry Battalion, commanded the 88th LID against various insurgents, like the KIA, while based out of Bhamo. Although the details of military operations are significantly redacted, we can assume that the operations of the newly formed LIDs and their penchant for strategic strikes to demoralize were informed in large part by Than Shwe's expert psychological warfare.

8888[]

In 1981, Than Shwe was elected to the Burma Socialist Programme Party's Central Executive Committee. After he was posted to the Southwest Regional Command as a commanding officer, he became the chairman of the Irrawaddy Division Party Committee in 1985. Leading up to 1988, Than Shwe was promoted every year up to Lieutenant General and, critically, Deputy Minister of Defence in July 1988 just 9 days before the main Uprising.

Discontent with the totalitarian autarky of Ne Win's Socialist Burma had grown over the late 1980s with protests growing starting in March of 1988. In 1987, Ne Win's astrological decision to demonetize bank notes indivisible by 9, his lucky number, sparked the beginning of the 8888 uprising. After an altercation against a protest resulting in mass rape by the soldiers sent to kill, universities were shut down. But this only increased the massive demonstrations. By mid-1988, the protests had gotten so widespread and severe that Ne Win was forced to retire, especially as open dissent spread within the military.

Ne Win appointed the Butcher of Yangon, Sein Lwin into power but as the country rallied behind the auspicious date of August 8, 1988, massive human shields kept escalating the situation. The entire country, it seems, started to march around Yangon for the entire month of August. Between 95 and 10,000 people were killed in the middle weeks of August. On August 10, the military stormed Yangon General Hospital to shoot down every doctor tending the wounded.

On September 18, the military stepped in, with General Saw Maung declaring that it had taken the interest of the people and decided to stabilize the situation. He ousted the remnants of the BSPP and mowed down between 1200 and 3000 protestors in one week, bringing a quick and bloody end to the coup. Unconcerned about international implication, his mass killing of 500 protestors outside the US embassy started the newly formed State Law and Order Restoration Council on the side of evil.

Saw Maung purged the sympathetic members of the military and promised a democratic election in 1990, of which Aung San Suu Kyi and her NLD party won in a landslide. Although Saw Maung was considering a handover, Than Shwe and other hard-line military leaders who survived the purges of the SLORC staged a Ne Win approved palace coup in 1992 citing "poor health" and putting Than Shwe truly in power of the junta and the country.

Stratocracy[]

Despite hopes that Than Shwe, being younger, would finally see democracy forward but he instead refused to discuss any handover and put Aung San Suu Kyi under house arrest. Than Shwe turned the SLORC into the State Peace and Development Council (SPDC) in 1997. The SPDC gave up the overt mission of SLORC and sought to bring peace to the union rather than to bring democracy. By 1997, the foundations for Than Shwe's machinations had been laid through the reorganization, purge, and stratification of the military into an impenetrable society loyal and united under his command. Squabbling officers were strategically assigned into distinct commands who would interact less. Soldiers and generals were placated by the wanton looting overlooked by the central government.

Most significantly, Than Shwe orchestrated ceasefires with a majority of the insurgents around the country since the 50s and 60s. In many cases he waged strategic psychological war to divide and weaken, using ethnicity, race, and foreign allegiances to split unified armies into squabbling squadrons. He encouraged shared informal agreements between commands and ethnic armies on illicit trade to trap ethnic armies into reliance on the state for their funds. Most significantly, he quelled popular dissent through directed fear tactics. Insurgents acting up would be punished by a quick ethnic cleansing campaign or unhappy students would see their classmates tortured in the infamous Insein Prison. Particularly notorious are the Four Cuts- cut food, cut funding, cut intelligence, cut recruits - that is to say, kill anyone who might be related to the rebel group or might become related to the rebel group.

As the long reign of a junta stretch further and further past the average life expectancy of 8 years, Than Shwe and the SPDC became entrenched in Burmese society as a new generation grew up entirely under their boot. Than Shwe renamed the country, changing Burma to Myanmar and Rangoon to Yangon. With the controversy of the SPDC's legitimacy, the change was politicized by the West and Than Shwe took it to politicize Myanmar as somehow inclusive of the Eight National Races through which he remodeled citizenship and the federal union into one "Myanmar" rather than Burma alongside others. In 2003, as part of efforts to join ASEAN, Than Shwe laid out a plan for democratization which would ultimately end with a free and fair election where the people would willingly vote a military party into power.

As had been planned, Than Shwe took note of Ne Win's sadder late years and continued his democratization plans alongside his own plans to retire. He oversought the 2008 constitution and entrenched a parliamentary system where the military strata could forever hold at least 25% of the seats and veto any constitutional amendments. Elections were finally held in 2010 of which NLD boycotted due to a clause in the new constitution barring people with foreign spouses from holding the office of president. Despite foreign cries of an unfair election, the election itself was conducted freely just without the pre-existing exclusion of the main opposition. The Union State Development Party won almost 80% of the vote in the election, cementing Than Shwe's handpicked successor Thein Sein into the role of head of government and his other successor Min Aung Hlaing as head of the military.

Although the enormous growth and boom of Thein Sein's presidency presented the best possible result for Than Shwe's disciplined democracy machination, the results of the 2015 and 2020 election and subsequent civil war at the incompetence of Min Aung Hlaing have failed in the long-term success of Than Shwe's constitution. In either case, the general is now a retired civilians quietly enjoying retirement in the midst of a civil war reaping the personal rewards of decades of plunder and genocide.

Dawn of Man[]

How more glorious you are to grace us, your Excellency, Senior General Than Shwe. The State Peace and Development Council you lead will truly bring democracy back into a troubled union and the State Law and Order Restoration Council will wield your will to make it so. From platoon leader to psychological warfare graduate, your ascendancy to take charge of the Union would see you rule the longest standing military junta the world would ever see. The light of hope for its people would stand at the end of your long and dark tunnel.

Mighty, Glorious, Just and Wise Commander in Chief of the Eight Races, Babagyi Than Shwe your iron grip of the Union had kept it stable for long. Can you descend upon the people once again to unite them? Can you defend the existence of the Union from rabblerousers? Can you build a Myanmar that will stand the test of time?

Introduction: "It is truly a great asupiciousness that someone as great as you has been united with someone as great as me. Please, enjoy this parade; I do hope it is a fitting welcome to the Golden Land, Myanmar!"

Defeat: "Quite the feat. You must be proud. I see you believe that you won. Heh... Let's leave it at that. Good day!"

Attacked: "Perfect! Please do. There's nothing we could use more than a big fat ugly enemy to collectively shoot at to save this union."

Unique Attributes[]

Myanmar (Than Shwe)

Four Cuts and Eight Races

Cities assign Commands to units trained based on their highest yield and gain +2 Local Happiness per promotion level of a garrisoned unit with a matching command.

RMCHQ (Armory)

Does not require Barracks.

+15 XP for all Units.

Provides +10% combat bonus for units within city limits with matching commands at the start of their turn.

+15% Production towards all combat units if the city's unit garrison has the same command.

LID (Paratrooper)

+1 Movement.

Pillaging provides an additional boost of their command's yield to the nearest city you control.

Gain +50% XP when starting a turn in the tiles of a city with the same Command.

City List

Naypyidaw

Yangon

Mandalay

Pathein

Lashio

Mawlamyine

Monywa

Taunggyi

Taungoo

Myeik

Myitkyina

Kengtung

Ann

Maymyo

Bago

Magwe

Sittwe

Hpa An

Pyay

Dawei

Loikaw

Hakha

Pakokku

Kale

Henzada

Sandoway

Yenangyaung

Thaton

Mong Mit

Botahtaung

Mingyan

Chauk

Hpakant

Pyinmana

Minzu

Spy List

Khin Nyunt

Saw Maung

Soe Win

Thein Sein

Nay Shwe

Kyaing Kyaing

Aye Aye

Dewa

Khin Pyone

Kyi Kyi

Thandar

Strategy[]

Music[]

Peace Theme War Theme "မြန်မာတို့ရဲ့တပ်မ​တော် (Myanmar's Tatmadaw)"; "Great Soldiers by Myawaddy Channel"

Mod Support[]

Mod Support Yes Yes

Community Balance Patch

Unknown Yes Unknown

Ethnic Units

Yes No Yes Yes

Map Labels

Yes Yes Yes Unknown

Unique Cultural Influence

Yes

Wish for the World

No

YnAEMP

Yes

Full Credits List[]

Direct Download Steam Workshop Latest Version: v 1 Last Updated: 12 February 2022

EmeraldRange: Lua, Art, Code, Leaderscene, Texts, Design, UU retexture

Leugi: Leaderscene

Tophat: Lua Help

Sukritact: Texts

DuskJockey: Texts

Zharques: Texts

Firaxis: UU model

DarthKyofu: Icon Help,

EmeraldRange's Civilizations and Collabs†

Burma

Taungoo • Konbaung • Thayae Khittaya • Burma (Aung San) • Burma (U Nu) • Myanmar (Than Shwe)

Mainland

Shan States • Pegu • Lanna • Karen • Kokang† • Wa

Island

Sunda • Singapore • Medang • Dayak

South Asia

Bengal† • Gupta

One a Continent

Africa: Mogadishu • Australia: Yolngu • Europe: Kalmyks • North America: Cayuga • South America: Guyana