Chiang Mai (Mizzima) – Burma’s Commander in Chief of Defense Services, Senior General Than Shwe, has appointed 388 parliamentary representatives from the military as per constitutional quota, according to an announcement by the Union Election Commission (UEC).

A brigadier general, colonels, lieutenant colonels, majors and captains account for the parliamentary seats. In total, 110 military representatives were appointed to the People’s Parliament, 56 to the National Parliament and 222 to the State/Region Parliament. Of the delegates, 353 are from the army, 19 from the navy and 16 from the air force.

Karen State Peace and Development Council chairman Brigadier General Zaw Min, a graduate from the 56th batch of Officer Training School (OTS) and having served as Deputy Commander of South-East Command, was selected as an MP for the Karen State Parliament.

Similarly, high-ranking officers Colonel Than Aung, from the 64th batch of OTS, Colonel Htay Myint Aung, from the 12th batch of Office Training Course (OTC) and Colonel Aung Thu of the 24th Defense Service Academy batch have also been appointed as MPs of the Kachin, Mon and Shan State Parliaments, respectively.

Further, Colonel Ant Zaw, from the 10th batch of OTC, Colonel Tint San, from the 26th DSA batch and Rangoon Division Tactical Operation Commander Colonel Maung Maung Htoo, from the 11th batch of OTC, have been named as MPs of the Magway Division Parliament, People’s Parliament and National Parliament, respectively.

“The authorities held the elections. And the junta-backed Union Solidarity and Development Party (USDP) won the elections and appointed the military personnel to serve in parliament. They have also privatised many businesses to close associates. So, nothing is left,” assessed Htay Aung, a Burmese military observer in Australia.

The list was announced 11 days ahead of the first parliamentary session, to be held on the final day of January. The primary duty of appointed armed forces representatives is to be military affairs, though during parliamentary sessions they will also be expected to attend meetings and carry out tasks in accordance with orders handed down by the Commander in Chief, who maintains authority to dismiss and replace appointed military representatives.

Burma’s Commander-in-Chief of Defense Services Senior General Than Shwe made an address at the Passing out of Parade of No. 12 Intake of the Defence Services Medical Academy on 24 December.

According to his speech, in Burma, there are over 100 ethnic groups who have lived in friendship and harmony since prehistoric time. He said that all the nationalities in the country have established unity in diversity, having been born and living on the same land. Than Shwe also spotlighted the geographical features of Burma, which include high mountain ranges and main rivers that flow from the north to the south, make transportation difficult and delayed communications among the ethnic nationalities.

At one point, Than Shew said, “Moreover, under colonialism, they were subject to many years of systematic divide-and-rule practices. The national peoples become suspicious of one another, prompting our leaders to make strenuous efforts during the struggle for independence so that the central Myanmar (Burma) and the mountainous regions could gain independence together.”

He explained further more that doubts toward one another deepened in the post-independence era, giving swell up to multi-coloured insurgencies across the country.

So, during the period when the Tatmadaw or Burma Army has taken the responsibilities of the State, east-west and north-south networks of motor roads, railroads and airports have been built. According to his speech, the junta has made improvement of transportation and communication, friendship and harmony among the nationalities. By doing such advancement, the nation has been achieved in the economic, health and education sectors of the States, he said. Continue reading “Junta’s Chief Than Shwe turns down Suu Kyi’s Second Panglong Approach by Zin Linn” →