The British Comedy Society Presents: Laurence Marks & Maurice Gran, London

When you’ve been writing TV comedy for as long as these two troopers, you’re bound to have a decent fund of stories and a reasonably bulging contacts book. So this charity gala in honour of Laurence Marks and Maurice Gran should be a celebratory and gag-laden affair. They’re perhaps best known for creating the enduringly popular odd-trio sitcom Birds Of A Feather and the scabrous, Thatcher-era satire The New Statesman. They’re also responsible for that curiously zen hymn to apathy, Goodnight Sweetheart, in which Nicholas Lyndhurst’s Gary finds himself able to travel through time and uses this ability to simply go down the pub in a different era. Marks & Gran have never really stopped churning out the funnies since they first collaborated on scripts for Frankie Howerd’s radio show in the late 1970s. In fact, their relationship has even deeper roots than that: they’ve been friends since childhood, so presumably they finish each other’s sentences like any other old married couple. Expect glowing testimonies, and probably a measure of gratitude, from the likes of Matthew Kelly, Linda Robson and Nigel Planer.

Leicester Square Theatre, WC2, Sun

PH

Darcymania, Bath

For 200 years, Jane Austen’s indecorous creation Mr Fitzwilliam Darcy has been winning the hearts of women everywhere. And following Michael Gove’s GCSE reading list reform last year (to include Pride And Prejudice among other 19th-century Brit lit), a succession of young girls will undoubtedly be swooning after him, too. But why? We all know that while Austen describes him as a “fine, tall person [with] handsome features”, he is a proud, pompous arse: yet his heart-throb status was hammered home by Colin Firth’s portrayal in the BBC’s 1995 TV adaptation (a part so iconic, it subsequently shepherded Firth into a lifetime of posh-gent roles). Pitching up to question the relentless fan culture surrounding the ill-mannered fellow as part of this week’s Jane Austen festival is Gabrielle Malcolm, the author of Fan Phenomena: Jane Austen, who will also be discussing the various modern adaptations of the character and how they’ve affected our view of the man.

Theatre Royal, Fri

DG

Girls Rule The World: Visual Pleasure, Sexual Politics And Pop Imagery, London

Does Beyoncé’s carefully hewn image make her a control freak? Is Nicki Minaj turning into a living sex doll or subverting porn’s cliches? Is Miley Cyrus a cut-and-paste rebel or true pop revolutionary? There’s no end to the hot-button questions around women’s identity that keep the Twittersphere firing, and this week the Photographers’ Gallery in collaboration with the Guardian have assembled a well-placed panel of experts to further stoke the debate. Chaired by Ekow Eshun, they include cultural commentator Miranda Sawyer, Juliette Larthe, who has produced videos for MIA and Rihanna, and Little Boots, whose recent Working Girl-inspired video saw her rethink perniciously sexist stereotypes of the 1980s. Discussion is set to bounce off We Want More, the gallery’s exhibition exploring a new wave of music photography, including recent alternatives to gender cliches of purring, submissive chanteuses.

The Photographers’ Gallery, WC1, Mon

SS