Lionel Andres Messi is an Argentinian soccer player who plays for Paris Saint-Germain and the Argentina national team.

At the age of 13, Messi moved from Argentina to Spain after FC Barcelona agreed to pay for his medical treatments. There he was renowned as one of the best players in history. He has helped his club win more than two dozen league titles and tournaments.

In 2012, he sets a record for "most goals in a calendar year" and in 2022, he was Europe's Ballon d'Or winner for the seventh time.

Early Life

Mesii was born on June 24, 1987, in Rosario, Argentina. As a young boy, Messi tagged along with his two older brothers and played soccer with their friends unintimidated by the bigger boys.

At age 8, he was recruited to join the youth system of Newell's Old Boys, a Rosario based team. Recognizably smaller than most of the kids in his age group, Messi was eventually diagnosed by doctors as suffering from a hormone deficiency that restricted his growth. Messi's parents, Jorge and Ceclia, decided on a regimen of nightly-growth hormone injections for their son, though it soon proved impossible to pay several hundred dollars per month for the medication.

So, at the age of 13, when Messi was offered the chance to train at soccer powerhouse FC Barcelona youth academy, La Masia and have his medical bills covered by the team, his family and him moved to Spain making it their new home.

Ultimately, Messi short stature( 5 feet and 7 inches), combined with his speed and relentless attacking style has drawn comparisons to another famous Argentinian footballer, Diego Maradona.

Soccer Career and Teams

FC Barcelona and Argentina

Messi has currently played for two clubs Paris Saint-Germain and FC Barcelona where he first signed at age 13. He also plays for the Argentina national team.

By age of 16, Messi made his first appearance for the senior team of FC Barcelona, putting himself on the record books on May 1, 2005, has the youngest player to ever score a goal for the franchise. That same year, he led Argentina to the title in the under-20 World Cup, scoring a pair of penalty kicks to propel the team over Nigeria.

Messi steered Barcelona to a wealth of success, most notably in 2009, when the left footer's team captured the Champions League, Laliga and Spanish Cup titles. That same year, after two consecutive runner-ups, he took home his first FIFA "World Player of the Year" honor/Ballon d'Or award.

Messi embarked on an all-out assault on the record books in 2012. He became the first player to score five goals in a Champions League match in early March, and a few weeks later he surpassed Cesar Rodriguez's club record of 232 goals to become Barcelona all-time leading scorer.

Throughout the years, Messi continued with outstanding performances in which he won six Ballon d'Or awards and trophies for football club Barcelona.

On August 10, 2021, Messi joined French club Paris Saint-Germain. After a long run of 16yrs with Barcelona, the little magician decided to leave due to various Laliga rules and conducts. The Legend of Barcelona had no choice but to leave the club. He made his debut for the club on August 29.

Stats

As of August 2019, Messi all-time highlights for FC Barcelona:

• Appearances: 687

• Goals: 603

• Assists: 251

• Chances created: 348

Messi has won FIFA's Player of the Year seven times. He's also won the European Golden Shoe for top scorer six times, two more than his nearest rival, Cristiano Ronaldo.