A team of experts from the German organization for international cooperation GIZ SLS and its partners have launched a web portal Green Media Serbia (www.greenmediaserbia.rs) dedicated to information about environmental issues. The website is also highly useful for journalists who report on ecology and environment. The launch of the website was preceded by five seminars on environmental issues held between October 2010 and June 2011. The seminars were attended by more than 70 journalists from all regions of Serbia. The initiators behind these seminars were GIZ SLS and the Journalists' Association of Serbia (UNS) in cooperation with the Ministry of Environment, Mining and Spatial Planning, the Standing Conference of Towns and Municipalities and the Bells Movement.

(UNS, 29.12.2011)

In 2012, the citizens of Pozarevac and Kostolac gained access to a third local TV station – TV 0:12. The new station, based on the foundation of the previous TV Club IN, now airs only experimental programme via the cable provider SBB and will officially begin its operations on 9 January. The station's producer, Zoran Gavrilovic, says that TV 0:12 began its work after nine months of acquisition of equipment and struggle to get a TV broadcasting license. "We will cover only local issues because our citizens are mostly interested in such information. We will also offer reports that will not be similar to anything seen so far on our local TV stations, and intend to include political programmes and face-offs between politicians. Ordinary people will also have a chance to appear on our programme and voice their opinion", said the station's editor.

(Vecernje novosti, UNS, 04.01.2012)

Digitalization

Dr Jovan Radulovic, the president of the Managing Board of the Republic Agency for Electronic Communication (RATEL), said to the newspaper Danas: "Aside from the network and digitalization equipment, all citizens that have old TV sets have to invest 20-30 euros in devices that are necessary for reception of the high-quality picture. Croatia gave all its citizens vouchers worth 20 euros. Croatia has completed the country's digitalization, while in my opinion we will not achieve it until 2015. Elections are approaching and no one wants to change anything. The project is controlled by the same ministry that has formed the company "Broadcasting Equipment and Links" ("Emisiona tehnika i veze").

(Danas, NUNS, 22.12.2011)

The state secretary for the digital agenda, Jasna Matic, said that in the next year maximal attention would be dedicated to digitalization of television and introduction of electronic management in other state institutions with the aim to make administrative procedures more accessible to citizens. The process of digitalization is progressing relatively well and transmitters – which are in a bad condition – are now being upgraded; the next year will be crucial for transition from analog to digital broadcasting, said Matic. She considers that the transition from the analog to the digital signal only a few days or weeks before the elections would not be a good solution.

(Blic, 25.12.2011, Pregled, NUNS, 26.12.2011)

Other news