The sayings and pick-up lines that'll keep those scientists coming back for

more:

"I'm really digging your phenotype."

"I'll translate you... all the way from 5' to 3'"

"Wanna see where my meiosis takes place?'

"If I could be any enzyme, I would be DNA helicase so I could unzip your

genes."

"You just made me cross the action potential threshold... "

"Gosh, you really build my turgor pressure"

"My heart lub-dubs for you."

"I'd bind to your active site."

"You must be in the middle of cytokinesis cause you have some great

cleavage."

"I wish I was RNA, so I could have U"

"I think we should use an re-uptake inhibitor... "

"We can do it in the alpha or beta configuration, whichever you prefer."

"I see the evolutionary biologists never saw you before they claimed the Y

chromosome was shrinking... "

"How 'bout we go back to my place and get all Mendelian?"

"You wanna make an F1 with me?"

"Bet we can get a good hybrid vigor between the two of us."

"Are u auxin?, cuz u are making my cells elongate."

"My ribosome will read you mRNA any day."

"Why don't we go back to my place so I can elucidate the big bang theory for

you."

"Is it true that biologists prefer to do it in their genes?"

"Can I wet mount you to my slide to take a closer look? I want to make

observations on all your parts!"

"You're so hot you denature my proteins."

The Physicist, upon seeing all the waves, gets very excited and runs into the water, disappearing.

The Marine Biologist, aware of tremendous variety of marine life in the ocean, also gets very excited, and runs into the water, disappearing.

The Chemist pulls out her notebook, and writes "The Physicist and the Marine Biologist are soluble in water"

Q: While walking into a lab, how does one know which lab is it?...

A: -If it's green and wabbles - it's a biology lab.

- If it's stink - it's a chemistry lab

- And if it doesn't work - it's a physics lab...

Q: What happened to the molecular biologist who swallowed a beaker full of restriction endonucleases?

A:He came to a sticky end...

Chemistry is killing me: anytime I do a Diels-Alder reaction, I think I'm diene.

Did you hear about the biologist who had twins? She baptized one and kept the other as a control!

Q: Why don't catholics pray for forgiveness when sitting down?

A: Because there's no syn elimination in the chair conformation!

Q: What did the receiver say to the radio wave?

A: Ow! That megahertz.

Q: What does a sperm do when he meets the egg of his dreams ?

A: He looses his head !

Q: What is the difference between a Quantum Theorist and a Beauty

Therapist?

A: The Quantum Theorist uses Planck's Constant as a foundation,

whereas the Beauty Therapist uses Max Factor.

The highest educational degree is actually quite basic. I mean, come on. It's pH D.

The Name's Bond, Ionic Bond... taken, not shared

A small furry animal walks into a bar, orders a drink. Bartender looks at him, says "Sorry, the occupancy is 6.03x10^23. We cannot serve a mole."

Around the holidays a favorite carol around the lab is, "Oh chemis-tree, oh chemis-tree"

Q:Why does e^x hate going to parties?

A:Because no matter how hard he tries, he always fails to integrate