Born in Trnava, Emília Rigová has her own exhibition in Trnava for the first time. Yesterday, she opened the Untitled exhibition in the Synagogue – a space for contemporary art, in which she deals with the theme of the Roma Holocaust. She has been working on it for a long time. “Only now has she reached the place where she really belongs, and that adds a new semantic level to the work,” she told Trnavské rádio.

Nová výstava Emílie Rigovej v Trnave upozorňuje na rómsky holokaust. Na vernisáž prišiel aj Igor Kmeťo starší. In: Trnavske Radio. 30.06.2023. https://trnavske.radio/2023/06/30/nova-vystava-emilie-rigovej-v-trnave-upozornuje-na-romsky-holokaust-na-vernisaz-prisiel-aj-igor-kmeto-starsi/

Another article, this time in the Polish press about Małgorzata Mirga-Tas’ exhibition in Berlin. The host of the exhibition is the famous Brücke Museum, presenting only Expressionist painters associated in the early 20th century in the group “Die Brücke”. Małgorzata Mirgi-Tas’s exhibition “Sivdem Amenge. I sewed for us” is an artistic dialogue with selected artists of this group. But not only.

The article states that Małgorzata Mirga-Tas is currently the most famous contemporary Polish visual artist in the world.

Małgorzata Mirga-Tas i godność setek tysięcy Romów zamordowanych przez nazistów. In: RP. 30.06.2023. https://www.rp.pl/kultura/art38679371-malgorzata-mirga-tas-i-godnosc-setek-tysiecy-romow-zamordowanych-przez-nazistow

The Berlin police wanted to deport a Roma family from Moldova early in the morning. The parents weren’t there, just two children. The officers took the 18-year-old daughter away and “handed over” the 11-year-old son to the neighbours. The boy then disappeared the management of the refugee home called the police and the youth welfare office, but even after the entire home was searched, he remained missing.

His siter was deported.

Abschieben um jeden Preis? In: TaZ. 29.06.2023. https://taz.de/Polizei-verliert-Kind/!5940367/

Many Roma in the Ukraine do not have any official documents. This prevents them from receiving social help, complicates their situation as IDPs, and often prevents them from finding official work. An action was started in Lviv, to help Roma obtain their papers.

Better late than never …

11 місць компактного проживання: на Львівщині хочуть паспортизувати ромів. In: Daily Lviv. 30.06.2023. https://dailylviv.com/news/sytuatsiyi-i-pryhody/11-mists-kompaktnoho-prozhyvannya-na-lvivshchyni-khochut-pasportyzuvaty-romiv-112390

У Львівській ОВА думають, як паспортизувати ромів. In: Espreso 29.06.2023. https://zahid.espreso.tv/u-lvivskiy-ova-dumayut-yak-pasportizuvati-romiv

There are not enough camping sites for travellers in Switzerland. This is definitively not new. The Council of Europe is now telling Switzerland it must act.

Let’s see, as the country is very good at doing nothing on this topic.

Switzerland considers more transit sites for itinerate communities. In Swissinfo. 29.06.2023. https://www.swissinfo.ch/eng/politics/switzerland-considers-more-transit-sites-for-itinerate-communities/48629380

An interview with the theatre actress Dominika Badžová, a Romni from the Košice region. She comes from a poor family with a single mother, and while she studied acting, she could not find a job, being a Romni. She was fortunately discovered and her talent rewarded.

DivadelníčkaDominika Badžová: Deti nám písali texty, na základe ktorých vznikali inscenácie. In: SME. 28.06.2023. https://video.sme.sk/c/23187813/divadelnicka-dominika-badzova-deti-nam-pisali-texty-na-zaklade-ktorych-vznikali-inscenacie.html

Another of those articles in the Slovene press … Speaking of the Roma “Problem”, the fact that they are all unemployed, criminals, that they have many more children than the rest of the population, and that most of their children do not even finish primary school.

What they are talking about is not a Roma “problem”, it is a case of poverty and exclusion. And that is a Slovene issue.

Romska socialna bomba na Dolenjskem. In: Reporter. 29.06.2023. https://reporter.si/clanek/slovenija/romska-socialna-bomba-na-dolenjskem-1069639

The beauty contest, organised by the association Romia CZ recently took place. Seventeen-year-old Lucie Tulejová from Česká Lípa became Czech-Slovak Miss Roma 2023 on Saturday in Hodonín. Eighteen-year-old Vanesa Hrabalová from Ústí nad Labem took home the title of first runner-up, and Stanislava Kroščenová from Spišské Štvrtek finished in third place. The competition, organized by the association Romia cz, aims to show the beauty, talent and personality of young Roma girls from the Czech Republic and Slovakia.

Romská krása zazářila v Hodoníně: Známe vítězku Česko-slovenské Miss Roma 2023! První místo patří Lucii Tulejové. In: Romea. 27.06.2023. https://romea.cz/cz/domaci/romska-krasa-zazarila-v-hodonine-zname-vitezku-cesko-slovenske-miss-roma-2023-prvni-misto-patri-lucii-tulejove

In his play “Tschandala”, the Swedish Roma actor Lindy Larsson talks about decades of discrimination against Roma in Sweden – and about his own depressing and touching family history.

It’s hard to bear what the man, standing at the edge of the stage in a pale cone of light, is saying. His father was taken from the family as a child and placed in a government home. There he was beaten, raped, tied up for days, imprisoned. Again and again. He almost succeeded in attempting suicide when he was eleven. Later, as a teenager, he was almost sterilized. And he almost spent his whole life in prison and never met his future wife.

Schauspieler, Rom, schwul: „Es gibt uns. Wir erzählen von uns“. In: Focus. 27.03.2023. https://www.focus.de/politik/ausland/schauspieler-rom-schwul-es-gibt-uns-wir-erzaehlen-von-uns_id_197543256.html

An exhibition on the on the Genocide of the Sinti and Roma, designed by the Mittelbau-Dora Memorial will be shown in the Flohburg in Nordhausen, Germany, opening on July 7th.

Verfolgt, deportiert und ermordet: Wanderausstellung in Nordhäuser Museum widmet sich den Sinti und Roma. In: Türinger Allgemeine. 27.06.2023. https://www.thueringer-allgemeine.de/regionen/nordhausen/verfolgt-deportiert-und-ermordet-wanderausstellung-in-nordhaeuser-museum-widmet-sich-den-sinti-und-roma-id238801395.html

The Polish filmmaker Krzysztof Skonieczny is directing a new movie set in Wrocław, a city he knows well, featuring a young skateboarder who falls in love with a Romni and is confronted with the prejudice against Roma. Both key actors are new to filming, and are supported by a cast of well know actors.

To może być wielki hit! Krzysztof Skonieczny wrócił do Wrocławia i kręci tu swój nowy film. In: Wrocław. 26.06.2023. https://www.wroclaw.pl/kultura/wrooklyn-zoo-krzysztof-skonieczny-film-krecony-we-wroclawiu

Out of the many refugees out of the Ukraine, ca. 100’000 are Roma. One of the issues they face is that many of them are stateless, they have no official papers, often lacking even a birth certificate that would prove their citizenship.

The fate of refugees in Western Europe is much better than in Eastern European countries bordering the Ukraine. There, they are definitively discriminated against.

Romi u ukrajinskom ratu: izbeglice druge klase​. In: Krstarica. 25.06.2023. https://forum.krstarica.com/threads/romi-u-ukrajinskom-ratu-izbeglice-druge-klase.977151/

Another sad story. An apartment block had to be destroyed in the Roma settlement in Sabinov, in Eastern Slovakia, as the building was apparently unstable. The tenants had to be evicted and relodged in temporary housing.

Years of neglect do not help …

V rómskej osade pri Sabinove začali búrať bytovku. Demoláciu však sťažuje doslova nalepený kostolík. In: TV Noviny. 25.06.2023. https://tvnoviny.sk/domace/clanok/846178-v-romskej-osade-pri-sabinove-zacali-burat-bytovku?campaignsrc=tn_clipboard

Dana Ema Hrušková (55) never thought that she would one day work in social services. Together with her husband, she successfully ran a hardware business. The turning point came when she started cooperating with the non-profit organization Romodrom, which was just starting field work in socially excluded locations. That’s when she discovered that helping others fulfils her more than her own thriving business. Today, she works as a field worker in the Prague 14 Černý Most district and has more than 80 clients.

„Musím být psychoterapeut, právník a někdy i člen rodiny,“ říká terénní pracovnice Dana Ema Hrušková se 14letou praxí. In: Hate Free. 25.06.2023. https://www.hatefree.cz/clanky/musim-byt-psychoterapeut-pravnik-a-nekdy-i-clen-rodiny-rika-terenni-pracovnice-dana-ema-hruskova-se-14letou-praxi

An estimated 400,000 lived in Ukraine before the Russian invasion. A quarter fled the war-torn country. Many went to Poland. Władysław Kwiatkowski, president of the Roma Association in Poland, stated in an interview that “Not everyone in Poland realizes that many Roma fight in the ranks of the Ukrainian army. They defend their country. They are citizens of Ukraine, just like the rest”.

Dr. Małgorzata Kołaczek from the Foundation for Dialogue – one of the authors of the report “Human rights, and discrimination – the situation of Roma refugees from Ukraine in Poland. Report on research and intervention activities” Said:

“The Roma, like other Ukrainians, lose their life possessions, husbands and fathers at the front, and yet they are treated differently – as if their pain and suffering were less. As it happens in a situation of uncertainty and danger, the lowest human instincts are activated, which are directed towards those whom one “always” dislikes “.

Co dzieje się z uchodźcami z Ukrainy romskiego pochodzenia? “Rozwiązania systemowe nie istnieją”. In: WP Kobieta. 26.06.2023.https://kobieta.wp.pl/co-dzieje-sie-z-uchodzcami-z-ukrainy-romskiego-pochodzenia-rozwiazania-systemowe-nie-istnieja-6912030140574368a

A round table “Roma cultural and artistic influences in Europe” was organized in Murska Sobota, Slovenia.

The keynote speaker of the round table was the advisor for culture of the Republic of Slovenia. In his speech, Marko Sraka Stated: “The topic of today’s round table, Roma cultural and artistic influences in Europe, is extremely important. In the public and the media, the Roma community is not often associated with a rich and vibrant culture, because social issues and problems arising from the relationship between the majority population and the Roma are always in the foreground. Every day, the Roma face hatred and rights violations, and have problems with decent and affordable housing, and are often denied employment and rights, and find it harder to integrate into the education system. The Romani language, culture and art have always been those parts of the Romani heritage, which others also recognize as a special value, especially here in Prekmurje,” he concluded in his speech.

FOTO: V Murski Soboti organizirali okroglo mizo »Romski kulturni in umetniški vplivi po Evropi«. In: Pomurec. 25.06.2023. https://www.pomurec.com/vsebina/73808/FOTO__V_Murski_Soboti_organizirali_okroglo_mizo_»Romski_kulturni_in_umetniski_vplivi_po_Evropi«#11

Less than a hundred people took part in an anti-Ukrainian xenophobic demonstration in Brno on June 24th, which was organized by pro-Russian disinformation Jakub Netík. Together with David Mezei, they tried to use the death of young Roma Nicolas to stir up anti-Ukrainian sentiments. Classic pro-Russian propaganda was heard at the demonstration, as well as calls for the resignation of the government.

Protiukrajinská xenofobní demonstrace v Brně: Proruský dezinformátor Netík, hysterický David Mezei a novopečený ochránce Romů Volný. In: Romea. 24.06.2023. https://romea.cz/cz/domaci/protiukrajinska-xenofobni-demonstrace-v-brne-prorusky-dezinformator-netik-hystericky-david-mezei-a-novopeceny-ochrance-romu-volny

A Photographic Pilgrimage will be presented this summer at the chapel of the Museon Arlaten, the “Rencontres d’Arles” invited the film director Tony Gatlif (Latcho Drom, Gadjo dilo, Exils, Liberté, Tom Medina, etc.) to tell us the story of the Gypsies, Manouches , Roma and Travelers from France and Europe.

LES PRINCES DE LA PETITE ÉGYPTE DE BOHÈME PAR TONY GATLIF. In: Rencontres d’Arles.https://www.rencontres-arles.com/fr/actualites/view/722/les-princesde-la-petite-egypte-de-boheme-partony-gatlif?fbclid=IwAR3Kh89yCN8kGj2-h6NBMfCIi0ZUZ5plB9V4UhLabwYiy6QZj8qzaWfQnw8