Putinova poseta Indiji je istorijska.

Indija se okrece prema Rusiji i Kini i stvara osovinu protiv Amerike.

Indija kupuje preko 100 Mig-ova 35 -jaca veze sa Rusijom.

Putin je bio gost Indiji za Dan Republike i primeceno je da je dobio bolji tretman od Busha..

Indija jaca saradnju sa Rusijom i Kinom -slabi saradnju sa Izreaelom i USA.

Bez Indije-USA i Izrael nece poceti novi veliki rat-jer nemaju ljudski potencijal..

To je dobro za svet i za USA..

Interesantan clanak..

The just concluded trip of the Russian President Vladimir Putin to India is an extremely important event not only for those two countries but also for the whole world. This is because this trip has laid the foundation of a trilateral axis consisting of China, Russia and India. Prime Minister Dr. Manmohan Singh went to the Airport to receive President Putin. He wanted to convey the message that India gave the same importance to his visit, which it gave to President Bush’s visit. By making President Putin a special guest at the Republic day celebrations in Delhi, the Indian government showed a good approach.

Russia has proved to be a time-tested friend of India who stood up for India in different times. Large portions of Indian Army weapons come from Russia. After the collapse of the Soviet Union, India jumped to the American bandwagon. This looked like an opportunist stand. Now, India is trying to correct that policy and is adopting a more balanced approach. India’s relations with Russia are not only important for both countries, but are also very important to maintain a balance of power and place in the World. This relationship is also very important for changing the unipolar world order into a multipolar world.

After the collapse of the Soviet Union, the bipolar world changed into a unipolar World. America became the only superpower. There was no one country or group of countries, which could balance the American power. This lead to an arrogant attitude and America stopped listening to the World Community. The other civilizations started feeling that America is trying to impose its consumerist culture on them. America also became a champion of a globalization that completely lacked any ethical aspect. These factors contributed to the clash of civilizations leading to more tension and contributed to the unrest and rise of terrorism.

America seems to have encouraged Hindu fundamentalism in India, so that an anti-Islamic and anti-Chinese alliance can be made consisting of America, Israel and India. Such an alliance is against the fundamental interests of not only the Indian people but also people of the world, including the American people; because it increases the chances of a third world war and also increases the likelihood of worsening of the problem of terrorism and a major terrorist attack, including a nuclear attack on India, America and Israel.

It should be clear that when Russia has formed an alliance with China, then an alliance of America, India and Israel will not be able to defeat them because the balance of power has already shifted in their direction. Therefore, it can only lead to more confrontation, instability and destruction in the World rather than a decisive victory, which happened in the first two world wars.

If India does not form an alliance with America and Israel, then they are unlikely to start a world war because they will be unable to provide the man force needed for such a war. Only India has the manpower to start a third world war. If a trilateral axis of China, Russia and India emerges, then unbalanced American power can be balanced. America is then very likely to change its policies and work with the world community to seriously address the challenges faced by mankind. This will be a very good development not only for the people of the world, but also for the American people.

President Putin made it clear to India that he is in favor of developing a trilateral axis of China, Russia and India and change the present unipolar World order into a multipolar world. The ease and rapidity with which the two countries were able to sign nine agreements and come up with a joint statement shows that they are eager to restore and advance the traditional friendship between the two countries.

President Putin also wants to rapidly increase trade with India. At present, the annual trade is only three billion dollars between the two countries. President Putin wants to quickly raise the trade between the two countries to eighty billion dollars annually. The big Indian companies such as Reliance group are also very eager to invest in Russia. Russia has become the second largest producer of oil after Saudi Arabia and has large reserves of foreign currency.

Dr. Sawraj Singh is Chairman of Washington State Network For Human Rights, and Chairman of Central Washington Coalition For Social Justice.

Bler ce se sutra obratiti Parlamentu i najaviti teske dane za Britaniju u narednom desetljecu..

Britain's bleak vision of the next decade

A disturbing vision of the dangers threatening the UK is to be revealed by the Prime Minister tomorrow when he unveils a landmark foreign policy review. Tony Blair will lay bare the challenges facing Britain, which include:

Threats to security the danger from both foreign extremists and 'home-grown' terrorists has risen since the September 2001 al-Qaeda attacks.

Weapons of mass destruction - a 'serious challenge' with the immediate focus on North Korea and Iran, but one which could well get worse as other countries turn to nuclear technology as part of the fight against climate change. So far, the paper says, there is 'no clear solution'.

Energy - with Britain set to become a net importer of oil and gas, Russia and Iran control 40 per cent of world gas reserves. By 2020, it says, 'half of the world's oil production will occur in potentially unstable regions'.

Climate change - in addition to the environmental perils, the paper predicts possible major political and security upheavals as a result of its specific effects inside China, India, Russia, Iraq, Iran and Afghanistan.

Disease - Downing Street fears major economic and social effects from HIV-Aids epidemics, particularly in Africa where the scale of victims is already interfering with the functioning of some states, but also in parts of eastern Europe and Asia. It also foresees a 'high risk of an influenza pandemic' in which poor countries will suffer worst.

The policy review paper, called 'Britain in the World', also predicts a major shift in the world's balance of power - with China, India, Brazil and Russia all likely to emerge as more assertive and influential, alongside Germany and Japan.

It was drawn up by the cabinet office in the wake of discussions including Blair and Chancellor Gordon Brown, as well as Foreign Secretary Margaret Beckett, International Development Secretary Hilary Benn, and two of the Chancellor's leading political allies, Defence Secretary Des Browne and Trade and Industry Secretary Alastair Darling.

The study highlights opinion poll results since 2004 which have charted growing alarm over a number of the potential threats to be singled out by the Prime Minister - and shows that climate change has overtaken terrorism as the chief concern over the past two years.

'All these challenges are inter-related,' the policy paper argues, while adding that 'an integrated response is essential - military, diplomatic and development interventions.'

Commenting on the review, a Downing Street policy adviser told The Observer: 'The strong message is that in a complex and potentially dangerous world, we need to remain committed to an active, values-based foreign policy - engaged with both the so-called hard issues like terror, and soft ones like African development or climate change.'

He said the policy review paper underscored Blair's twin beliefs in the need to be willing to commit troops overseas when necessary, but also to offer an 'alternative narrative' to terrorism and extremist ideologies by diplomatically addressing issues such as the Israeli-Palestinian conflict.

'The Prime Minister feels strongly there is a progressive case for military intervention, whether in places like the Balkans and Sierra Leone, Iraq and Afghanistan, dating back to the Spanish Civil War,' the official said.

'He also feels - as this policy paper makes clear - that in the 21st-century world, foreign policy must be about a range of different tools, and that it will also be essential for us to find a way to make international institutions work far better.'

The policy review concludes that the EU is seriously lagging behind economically and, for at least the next decade, the United States will remain the dominant world power - a strong argument, it suggests, for Britain to ensure that it safeguards its 'strategic alliance with the US.'

Downing Street said last night that Blair's publication of the policy review paper was likely to coincide with a new push for progress this week on the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, which remained at the top of his agenda.

They revealed that Beckett and German Chancellor Angela Merkel were set to visit the Middle East in the coming days in the latest bid to restart Israeli-Palestinian negotiations. Crucially, a senior policy aide added, 'Condi [US Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice] really has got her teeth into this issue.' He added that Blair had been in contact with both Rice and President George Bush on the issue in recent weeks.

'We see this as essential to solving the problems in places like Iraq and Afghanistan,' the official said.