The Kinks were an English rock band formed in Muswell Hill, North London, by brothers Dave Davies and Ray Davies in 1963. Their music was influenced by a wide range of genres, including rhythm and blues, British music hall, folk and country. Ray Davies (lead vocals, rhythm guitar) and Dave Davies (lead guitar, vocals) remained members throughout the group’s 32-year run. Longest serving member Mick Avory (drums and percussion) was replaced by Bob Henrit formerly of Argent in 1984.

The Kinks first came to prominence in 1964 with their third single, You Really Got Me written by Ray Davies. Between the mid-1960s and early 1970s, the group released a string of singles and LPs most of which were critically successful but commercial failures, and gained a reputation for songs and concept albums reflecting English culture and lifestyle, fueled by Ray Davies’ observational writing style. Albums like Face to Face, Something Else, The Kinks Are the Village Green Preservation Society, Arthur, Lola Versus Powerman and the Moneygoround and Muswell Hillbillies, along with their accompanying singles, are considered among the most influential recordings of the period.

The Kinks subsequent theatrical concept albums met with less success, but the band experienced a revival during the late 1970s and early 1980s with albums Sleepwalker, Misfits, Low Budget, Give the People What They Want and State of Confusion. In addition, groups such as Van Halen, the Jam, the Knack and the Pretenders covered their songs, helping to boost the Kinks’ record sales.

The Davies brothers were born in suburban North London the youngest and only boys among their family’s eight children. At home they were immersed in a world of varied musical styles, from the music hall of their parents’ generation to the jazz and early rock and roll that their older sisters enjoyed. These musical experiences centered around nightlong parties held in the front room of their house, which made a great impression on the Davies brothers. Thomas Kitts writes, “The influence of these parties on The Kinks … is remarkable. Whether consciously or unconsciously, [onstage] it seemed as if Ray was trying to recreate the Saturday night parties of his family’s home—complete with chaos, beer and singalongs.”

They formed a band, the Ray Davies Quartet, with Ray’s friend and classmate Pete Quaife and Quaife’s friend John Start. Their debut at a school dance was well received, which encouraged the group to play at local pubs and bars. The band went through a series of lead vocalists; the most notable was Rod Stewart. He soon formed his own group, Rod Stewart and the Moonrakers, which became a local rival to the Ray Davies Quartet.

In late 1962, the band decided on a new, permanent name: the Kinks. Numerous explanations of the name’s genesis have been offered. In Jon Savage’s analysis, “[They] needed a gimmick, some edge to get them attention. Here it was: ‘Kinkiness’—something newsy, naughty but just on the borderline of acceptability. In adopting the ‘Kinks’ as their name at that time, they were participating in a time-honoured pop ritual—fame through outrage.” Manager Robert Wace related his side of the story: “I had a friend. … He thought the group was rather fun. If my memory is correct, he came up with the name just as an idea, as a good way of getting publicity. … When we went to [the band members] with the name, they were … absolutely horrified. They said, ‘We’re not going to be called kinky!’ Ray Davies’ account conflicts with Wace’s—he recalled that the name was coined by Larry Page, and referenced their “kinky” fashion sense. Davies quoted him as saying, “The way you look, and the clothes you wear, you ought to be called the Kinks.” “I’ve never really liked the name,” Ray stated.

You Really Got Me was released in August 1964, and, boosted by a performance on the television show Ready Steady Go!, quickly reached number one in the United Kingdom. Hastily imported by Reprise Records, it also made the Top 10 in the United States. The loud, distorted guitar riff—achieved by a slice Dave Davies made in the speaker cone of his Elpico amplifier (referred to by the band as the “little green amp”)—gave the song its signature, gritty guitar sound. Extremely influential on the American garage rock scene, You Really Got Me has been described as “a blueprint song in the hard rock and heavy metal arsenal”.

The Kinks made their first tour beginning in January 1965 as part of a package bill that included Manfred Mann and The Honeycombs. An intensive performing schedule saw them headline other package tours throughout the year with acts such as The Yardbirds and Mickey Finn. Tensions began to emerge within the band, expressed in incidents such as the on-stage fight between Avory and Dave Davies at The Capitol Theatre, Wales. After finishing the first song, Davies insulted Avory and kicked over his drum set. Avory responded by hitting Davies with his hi-hat stand, rendering him unconscious, before fleeing from the scene, fearing that he had killed his bandmate. Davies was taken to Cardiff Royal Infirmary, where he received 16 stitches to his head. To placate the police, Avory later claimed that it was part of a new act in which the band members would hurl their instruments at each other.

Following a mid- year tour of the United States, the American Federation of Musicians refused permits for the group to appear in concerts there for the next four years, effectively cutting off The Kinks from the main market for rock music at the height of the British Invasion. Although neither The Kinks nor the union gave a specific reason for the ban, at the time it was widely attributed to their destructive and rowdy on-stage behavior.

The satirical single Sunny Afternoon was the biggest hit of summer 1966, topping the charts and displacing the Beatles’ Paperback Writer. Before their next tour Ray Davies suffered a nervous and physical breakdown, caused by the pressures of touring, writing and ongoing legal squabbles. During his months of recuperation, he wrote several new songs and pondered the band’s direction. Sunny Afternoon was a dry run for the band’s next album Face to Face, which displayed Davies’ growing ability to craft gentle yet cutting narrative songs about everyday life and people. Face to Face was released in October 1966, where it was well received and peaked at number eight.

The next single was Waterloo Sunset…. Ray Davies said, “It was a fantasy about my sister going off with her boyfriend to a new world and they were going to emigrate and go to another country.” Despite its complex arrangement, the sessions for Waterloo Sunset lasted a mere ten hours; Dave Davies later commented on the recording: “We spent a lot of time trying to get a different guitar sound, to get a more unique feel for the record. In the end we used a tape-delay echo, but it sounded new because nobody had done it since the 1950s. I remember Steve Marriott of the Small Faces came up and asked me how we’d got that sound. We were almost trendy for a while”. The single was one of The Kinks’ biggest successes (hitting number two on Melody Maker’s chart), and went on to become one of their most popular and best-known songs. Pop music journalist Robert Christgau called it “the most beautiful song in the English language”, senior editor Stephen Thomas Erlewine cited it as “possibly the most beautiful song of the rock and roll era.”

Ray Davies travelled to Los Angeles, in April 1969 to help negotiate an end to the American Federation of Musicians’ ban on the group, opening up an opportunity for them to return to touring in America.The group’s management quickly made plans for a North American tour, to help restore their standing in the US pop music scene.

In May 1970 The Kinks recorded Lola, an account of a confused romantic encounter with a transvestite, that became a Top 10 hit, helping return The Kinks to the public eye. The lyrics originally contained the word Coca-Cola , and as a result the BBC refused to broadcast the song, considering it to be in violation of their policy against product placement. Part of the song was hastily re-recorded by Ray Davies, with the offending line changed to the generic “cherry cola”, although in concert, the Kinks still used “Coca-Cola”. Recordings of both versions of Lola” exist.

Before the end of 1971, the Kinks signed a five-album deal with RCA Records and received a million-dollar advance, which helped fund the construction of their own recording studio, Konk. Their debut for RCA, Muswell Hillbillies, was replete with the influence of music hall and traditional American musical styles, including country and bluegrass. It is often hailed as their last great record, though it was not as successful as its predecessors It was named after Muswell Hill, where the Davies brothers were brought up, and contained songs focusing on working-class life and, again, the Davies’ childhood.

In 1973, Ray Davies dove headlong into the theatrical style, beginning with the rock opera Preservation, a sprawling chronicle of social revolution, and a more ambitious outgrowth of the earlier Village Green Preservation Society ethos. Ray’s marital problems during this period began to affect the band adversely, particularly after his wife, Rasa, took their children and left him in June 1973. Davies went into a state of depression, culminating in a public outburst during a July gig. According to a Melody Maker review of the concert, “Davies swore on stage. He stood and swore that he was ‘Fucking sick of the whole thing’. … He was ‘Sick up to here with it’ … and those that heard shook their heads.” At the show’s conclusion, as pretaped music played on the sound system, he declared that he was quitting. Sounds magazine reported that Ray looked ” haggard and ill” before he kissed Dave Davies “gently on the cheek, and then delivered the bombshell”. Ray subsequently collapsed after a drug overdose and was rushed to hospital. Dave later commented in an interview about the incident:

“God, that was horrible. That was when Ray tried to top himself. I thought he looked a bit weird after the show—I didn’t know that he’d taken a whole bloody bottle of weird-looking psychiatric pills. It was a bad time. Ray suddenly announced that he was going to end it all—it was around that time that his first wife left him. … She’d left him and taken the kids on his birthday, just to twist the blade in a little more. … I think he took the pills before the show. I said to him towards the end that he was getting a bit crazy. I didn’t know what happened—I suddenly got a phone call saying he was in the hospital. I remember going to the hospital after they’d pumped his stomach and it was bad.”

The Kinks broke up in 1996, a result of the commercial failures of their last few albums and creative tension.

Here the Kinks for you to enjoy (or not). Waterloo Sunset from 1968. https://youtu.be/N_MqfF0WBsU

Rick