Only Emilio Fernández's third feature and his first collaboration with legendary cinematographer Gabriel Figueroa, Wild Flower began an incredible run for the pair, followed by, among others, Maria Candelaria, Bugambilia — both with Wild Flower stars Dolores del Río and Pedro Armendáriz — and Enamorada (starring Armendáriz and María Félix) over just the next few years.

The film tells a story proudly without nuance, of true love between a wealthy, landed man (Armendáriz and his amazing eyelashes as José Luis) and a poor woman (del Río as Esperanza), their shared commitment to revolution, and both the costs and rewards of that love. It is a story about both those people and their nation, overtly engaging in the creation of legend…

Made at the height of the Golden Age of Mexican Cinema, Flor Silvestre, a period melodrama set during the 1910 Revolution, was the first Spanish-language movie of Dolores del Río after her career in Hollywood films. It's the first of many she made with ace director Emilio Fernández.

The story is simple: a poor young peasant (del Río) marries the son of a wealthy landowner but is rejected by his parents. Soon, the revolution starts and the patriarch by murdered by bandits pretending to be revolutionaries, causing the son to follow code and take revenge.

The film also marked the first time Gabriel Figueroa, a cinematographer trained by Gregg Toland, worked with Fernández. Flor Silvestre is truly a visual delight. The filmmakers truly make a point to highlight the beauty of Mexican culture and landscape. They also focus on and critique the constricting traditional customs and values.

I couldn't find english subtitles but it's quite easy to follow.

The start of something great in Mexican cinema. Hollywood star Dolores del Rio returns home to team with soon-to-be celebrated director/actor Emilio Fernández for what would become a fruitful working relationship. Flor silvestre [Wild Flower] (1943) is a story of love, death and revenge. At times superbly atmospheric with it's dose of melodrama. Struggle a little to keep ones full attention in especially the early portions of the film, but you can definitely see the qualities this does possess even if it's not a perfect movie. Dolores del Rio shows an aura she wasn't allowed to showcase in the US and the result is mesmerizing.