MANSFIELD

On Richmond Road, Lexington, Fayette County, Kentucky

Built 1845

Henry Clay had the well-known architect, Major Thomas Lewinski, build this home for his son, Thomas, in 1845, on the "Mansfield" tract, which adjoined Mr. Clay's "Ashland" on the Richmond Road about two miles from Lexington.

Major Lewinski in his diary tells of several visits to "Ashland" to discuss with Mr. Clay, over the breakfast table, the plans for the "Mansfield" mansion.

The name "Mansfield" for the tract between the "Ashland" estate and "the waters of Hickman" (now the beautiful lakes of the Lexington Water Company) is first of record in 1776.

During that year, in May and June, John Todd. Jr., addressed letters to Col. William Preston, Fincastle County, Virginia, and each of the letters is headed "Mansfield."

Further reference is made to the name in the grant by the land court at Harrodsburg November 5, 1779 to Capt. Levi Todd, reading:

"John Todd, Jr., by Levi Todd, this day claimed a settlement and pre-emption to a tract of land lying on the head of the west branch of Hickman's Creek by the name of Mansfield by improving the same and raising a crop of corn in the year 1776. (Satisfactory proof of same, granted 400 acres and improvements and a pre-emption of 1,000 acres adjoining)."

Col. John Todd fell at the Battle of Blue Licks August 19, 1782, but the name which he bestowed upon the estate remains today. It is said that it was chosen as a compliment to Lord Mansfield.

Henry Clay bought the Mansfield tract of 255 acres before he purchased Ashland—the deed to the latter stating that Ashland extended "on the side of Boone's Road to a stake on the line of Mansfield Tract, a corner to the land formerly the property of George Nicholas, dec'd. (now said Clay's), thence with the line thereof South-west 192 poles," etc.

Mr. Clay purchased Mansfield from Wilson C. Nicholas. It had been conveyed in 1800 to Samuel Smith, of Baltimore, Md., and Wilson Carey Nicholas, of Albemarle County, Va.," by Col. George Nicholas' executors, James Morrison and Joseph H. Davis.

The deed described it as "a farm near the town of Lexington purchased by George Nicholas of Charles Wilkins, containing 255 acres, beginning at a corner to Elisha Winter's land," etc.

Charles Wilkins bought the farm August 11, 1795, from Thomas Irwin and Jane, his wife, "late Jane Todd," and John Hawkins, of Scott Co., Ky. The deed said it extended to "corner to heirs of John Todd, dec'd., settlement and pre-emption land" and in the other direction to "corner to Elisha Winter—which tract is part of a tract of 400 acres granted to said Jane Todd by patent Oct. 2, 1786," and sold by her "but not conveyed" to John Hawkins.

The above accounts for the 400 acres "by the name of Mansfield" cited in the John Todd, Jr., by Levi Todd, grant by the land court at Harrodsburg, which was "adjoining a pre-emption of 1,000 acres."

The spring nearby, for years known as the "Henry Clay Spring," marks the site of Col. John Todd's cabin, the rendezvous of the pioneers on their expeditions against the Indians.

In a deposition (Collins' History) made by John Pleakenstalver in 1804, he stated that in the last of April or first of May, 1779, he and others started from Boonesborough to go to Shawneetown. "We went to Col. John Todd's cabin, on the waters of Hickman" (Ralph Morgan deposes that they "encamped at Todd's Spring, which is yet—1804—called by that name, about two miles from Lexington") lay there all night, started next morning to find some men at Elkton—I think the cabin was called Maj. John Morrison's, now called Lexington." Major John Morrison deposed "he became a resident of Lexington in April, 1779."

The entire pre-emption on both sides of the Richmond Road was originally called "Mansfield." In articles of agreement entered into September 30, 1806, "between Thomas Irwin of the one part, Jane Irwin of second part and Robert Todd, of the third part," in a division of the estate of the said Thomas and Jane," Thomas Irwin was allotted "all of that part of the Mansfield tract of land which lies on the north-east side of Boone's Road." In the same agreement, Irwin deeded to Robert Todd and Mary O. Russell his interest in "all that part of the Mansfield track of land lying on the south-west side of Boon's Road." To each deed was appended a "post script" agreement that "if any money comes from Virginia from the estate of John Hawkins, dec'd., to Thomas Irwin as a legatee, it shall be equally divided between Thomas and Jane Irwin." This explains Jane Irwin's deed to Charles Wilkins of the tract now known as "Mansfield" wherein she stated that it had been sold to her "but not conveyed" to John Hawkins.

The original grant to the entire tract, as follows, was published in the "Register," Kentucky State Historical Society, January, 1923, copied from the "Certificate Book" in Fayette County Court office:

"At a Court continued & held for adjusting Titles to the Kentucky Lands at St. Asaph's or Logans fort on Monday 10th of Oct. 1779—Present, Wm. Fleming, Edmund Lyne, & James Barbour, Esqrs. (Certificate issued for 1400 Acres fees &c pd D.D.)

"Robert Todd this day Appeared & claimed a right to a settlement pre-emption to a Tract of Land lying on Hickmans Creek adjoining the lands claimed by Col. John Todd which lies up above the said Land, on the said Creek, & the Lands of Lieut. Collins on the West & North West, and the lands claimed by Walter Overton, on the East & North East by improving the said Land, in the year 1776 and resided in the Country twelve months After making the said improvement on satisfactory proof being made to the Court, they are of Opinion that the said Todd has a right to a settlement of 400 acres to include the said improvement & a pre-emption of 1,000 acres adjoining & that a Certificate issue for the same & then the Court adjourned untill Tomorrow morning 10 o'clock. WILLIAM FLEMING."

Source: Old Houses of Lexington, C. Frank Dunn, typescript, n.d., copy located in the Kentucky Room, Lexington (Kentucky) Public Library.