'Route 66: Radiance, Rust, and Revival on the Mother Road'

Their newly blazed roads included the east-west route of the Santa Fe and Old Spanish Trails, and the north-south route of the Camino Real. Later called the Chihuahua Trail, this route overlaid the ancestral trails and eventually became the National Old Trails Road and Highway 66. Their efforts resulted in improved stream crossings and bridges between Fort Smith and Albuquerque, and road construction west of Albuquerque. Beale's men called the sandhills west of town "the worst part of the road to California."

Irate citizens tried to delay the project by "sugaring" the construction equipment gas tanks and "sanding" the engines, and the crews had to cut through 27 miles of piñon forest near Moriarty, but "Hannett's Joke" (east of Albuquerque) and the "Laguna Cutoff" (west of Albuquerque) became part of the new Route 66 by 1937. The shortcuts reduced road-weary drivers' highway travel by more than 100 miles, and diverted tourist dollars straight into our city.

In his memoirs, Governor Arthur Hannett recalled that he conceived of the shorter, east-west alignment by placing a ruler on the map between Santa Rosa and Gallup. However, Highway Maintenance Supervisor Clyde Tingley may have first proposed the idea in a letter to Hannett dated June 9, 1925. He provided a hand drawn map and suggested that the route would eliminate 30 miles, five railroad crossings, and two bridges.

New Mexico, especially the northeastern quadrant, was just as hard hit by the Dust Bowl. Farmers and their families — handkerchiefs over their noses and mouths — began evacuating to other states looking for clear skies and clean crops. Migrant travelers perceived the end of the rainbow to be California's central valley, where oranges fell like rain from the trees, and a poor man could achieve the American dream.

The automobile industry also influenced the lives of women and youth. For the first time, young people felt free from the protective 'meddling' of their families, and saw in their "wheels" a mechanism for becoming more independent. Even 1950s slang was rooted in American car culture: hot rodders could "burn rubber," "drag," or go "cruisin' for a bruisin.'"

Hairpin curves of La Bajada Hill, c. 1920

Gift of James and Betty Rutledge

PA1993.19. 15

(l-R) Red Ryder (Dave Saunders), Little Beaver (Arnold Vigil) and Monte Montana with horse at the entrance to the Fred Harman Cartoon Studio, Little Beavertown, c. 1961.

Gift of Vicky Dean Mayhew

PA1998.10.17

Albuquerque's railroad-era Mission style Alvarado Hotel, with its north façade located directly on Central Avenue, served both train and automobile travelers. The Franciscan, built in 1923 at Central Avenue and Second Street, was Albuquerque's first hotel designed to specifically attract automobile travelers. Its Pueblo Deco architecture and furnishings were major tourist attractions.

C.G. Wallace's De Anza Motor Lodge, built in 1938 in the Spanish-Pueblo Revival Style, sported a sign shaped like a Spanish conquistador's helmet in tribute to Spanish governor Juan Bautista De Anza, who secured peace for the Pueblos in the 1770s. The "tourist court" craze spawned entrepreneurs like Myron Robart, who founded the Franciscan Furniture Company to meet the needs of a burgeoning motel industry.

The Route 66 experience is driven not only by nostalgia for the road and its architecture and material culture, but also by the interaction with people encountered along the way.

For many who trace the route an important part of the trip is the introduction to Native American culture, but too often the visitor experience extends only to the souvenir shops.

The people whose villages intersected the highway often felt disadvantaged by the tourist economy. Today, the Indian Arts and Crafts Act (amended 1990) protects the artistic traditions of Native people and prevents businesses from misrepresenting inventory as Native made.

Road Rebels case with Route 66 record albums and travel game

Courtesy Autry Museum of the American West, Paul Hutton, and Joseph Traugott