ABOUT US

News

May 2024

April 2024

March 2024

February 2024

January 2024

December 2023

November 2023

October 2023

September 2023

By Austin Curtis / Journal Staff Writer The Albuquerque Academy girls and boys golf teams, as well as the Volcano Vista boys and individual golfers from Piedra Vista and La Cueva recently teed off in the PGA High School Golf National Invitational, a prestigious tournament. In order to qualify for the invite-only event, teams and […]

Academy Chargers are winners of the NMAA 4A Director’s Cup for the sixth consecutive year and for the 16th time since the award was introduced in 2005! The Director’s Cup is awarded to the top NMAA schools based on success in activities, athletics, and sportsmanship. The top three finishers in 4A are Albuquerque Academy with […]

Three Academy students are 2024 Scholastic Art & Writing Awards national medal winners. Lex Kelly ’24 received a silver medal for “Ungirlhood” in the personal essay category. Camilla Lujan ’26 received a silver medal in ceramics and glass for her work titled “Eat Me.” Jaelyn Yu ’25 received a silver medal in painting for her […]

BOYS TENNIS: Connor Dils, sr., Albuquerque Academy The future UNM Lobo was sheer perfection, literally, in his senior season with the Chargers. He had an undefeated singles record, capped by a dominating performance at the Class 4A state tournament last month. He also won metros, with a victory over longtime friend Leo Rocca of Albuquerque […]

Kevin Hendricks/Rio Rancho Observer Assistant Editor The New Mexico Chamber of Commerce hosted the second annual National Civics Bee state finals on June 1 at the University of New Mexico’s main campus in Albuquerque, and two Rio Rancho students were the stars of the show. Seventh grader, Keith Lee, a Rio Rancho resident who attends […]

The Albuquerque Academy Class of 2024 will matriculate to 89 different college campuses in 24 states, the District of Columbia, England, and Scotland. American University Arizona State University (Downtown Phoenix) Arizona State University (Tempe) Barnard College Baylor University Boston College Brown University Bryn Mawr College Cal Poly Humboldt California Polytechnic State University (San Luis Obispo) […]

By James Yodice / Journal Staff Writer Albuquerque Academy senior catcher Satish Raichur capped a terrific career with the Chargers with an excellent final season. Raichur batted .564 with 13 doubles, five triples, 26 RBIs and 20 runners caught stealing. He’s behind the plate on the All-Metro first team. First Team Catcher: Satish Raichur, sr., […]

By Megan Gleason / Journal Staff Writer Seventeen-year-old Ada Ovitt has lived in New Mexico her whole life and feels a connection to the beautiful mountains and desert. She doesn’t want to see climate change take that away. She’s trying to put together a Youth Climate Leadership Council to do more to address the warming […]

By James Yodice / Journal Staff Writer Here are the metro-area team/individual state champions for the 2023-2024 school year. [List reduced to only Albuquerque Academy teams/athletes] GIRLS CROSS COUNTRY Albuquerque Academy (4A) Anna Hastings, Albuquerque Academy (4A) GIRLS SWIMMING/DIVING Albuquerque Academy (4A-5A) Maya Van Atta, Albuquerque Academy (50 free) BOYS SWIMMING/DIVING Albuquerque Academy, 200 free […]

The John F. Kennedy Library Foundation announced that Aarush Tutiki ’26 was named a finalist in the national John F. Kennedy Profile in Courage Essay Contest for High School Students. In his essay, Aarush profiled Leonidas Dyer, former U.S. Representative of Missouri. For this year’s contest, 2,313 essays were submitted from students in 50 states and […]

By James Yodice / Journal Staff Writer Josh Skarsgard is a former standout player at Albuquerque Academy; he was a teammate of James Borrego, who is one of the men who has interviewed for the current Los Angeles Lakers coaching vacancy. Skarsgard on Tuesday was named the new head coach of the Academy girls basketball […]

Albuquerque Academy celebrated the 16 graduates from the Class of 2024 who will participate in athletics at the college level. The Academy has a rich history of student-athletes who compete at the college level. Click here to learn more. Baseball Mark McNaney, United States Air Force Academy Satish Raichur, Pomona-Pitzer Colleges Basketball Joe Jack, Chapman […]