The James Beard Foundation® announced today its 2022 Restaurant and Chef Awards semifinalists in advance of the returning James Beard Awards® presented by Capital One. Quite a few New Mexico chefs and restaurants made the cut! Winners will be celebrated at the James Beard Restaurant and Chef Awards ceremony on Monday, June 13, 2022, at the Lyric Opera of Chicago.

The James Beard Awards, considered to be among the nation’s most prestigious honors, recognize exceptional talent in the culinary and food media industries, as well as a demonstrated commitment to racial and gender equity, community, sustainability, and a culture where all can thrive.

2022 Restaurant and Chef Award Semifinalists:

Best New Restaurant

Zacatlán Restaurant, Santa Fe

Outstanding Baker

Nobutoshi “Nobu” Mizushima and Yuko Kawashiwo, Ihatov Bread and Coffee, Albuquerque, NM

Best Chefs Presented by Capital One (by region):

Best Chef: Southwest (AZ, NM, NV, OK)

Ahmed Obo, Jambo Cafe, Santa Fe

Fernando Olea, Sazón, Santa Fe

Martín Rios, Restaurant Martín, Santa Fe

Salazar Brothers, La Guelaguetza, Albuquerque, NM

Marie Yniguez, Bocadillos, Albuquerque, NM

The James Beard Foundation’s Restaurant and Chef Awards were established in 1991 and is one of five separate recognition programs of the Awards. The full list of 2022 Restaurant and Chef Awards semifinalists can be found below and on the James Beard Foundation website.

Restaurant and Chef Awards nominees, in addition to honorees for Leadership, Lifetime Achievement Award, and Humanitarian of the Year Awards will be revealed on Wednesday, March 16, 2022, in Scottsdale, AZ. Nominees for the James Beard Foundation Media Awards will be released on Wednesday, April 27, 2022, in New York City.

The 2022 James Beard Awards will be the first in two years, after a hiatus during which the Awards underwent a full audit of its policies and procedures, continuing the work to remove bias, increase transparency and accessibility, and making the program more aligned with the Foundation’s mission and values.

The 2022 James Beard Awards are presented by Capital One, the official credit card and banking partner of the James Beard Foundation. The James Beard Awards are proudly hosted by Choose Chicago and the Illinois Restaurant Association as well as with the following partners: Premier Sponsors: American Airlines, the official airline of the James Beard Foundation, S.Pellegrino® Sparkling Natural Mineral Water; Supporting Sponsors: Skuna Bay Salmon, Valrhona; Reception Sponsors: Ecolab, Kendall College at St. Louis University, and Windstar Cruises, the official cruise line of the James Beard Foundation. Intersport is the Official Broadcast Partner of the 2022 James Beard Awards.

For more information about the James Beard Foundation Awards, visit jamesbeard.org/awards. For up-to-the-minute news about the Awards follow @beardfoundation on Twitter and Instagram and keep an eye out for posts using #jbfa.