iWin.com offers over 4,200+ fun and free PC games to download and enjoy playing on your Windows PC, with new download games added regularly. If you're new to iWin.com, try some of our best PC games such as Jewel Quest, Jewel Quest Mysteries, Cubis Gold, Delicious: Emily's Hopes and Fears, Bubble Town, COLLAPSE!, Big City Adventure Super Pack, Mahjongg Dimensions and Tri-Peaks Solitaire To Go. You can even play top PC games based on popular TV shows and films, such as Les Miserables and others. You'll never run out of great games to play!

Read More About PC Games and Online Games at iWin.com

More About PC Games and Online Games at iWin.com

Is iWin.com completely free to play?

You can play iWin games for free or subscribe to our premium ad-free experience and play.

Can I play iWin games off-line?

Yes! Our PC download games can be downloaded to play on your computer at any time without the need of an internet connection. Please note: iWin download games are only for PC's and will not work if downloaded to a Mac computer.

Can I play iWin games without downloading them?

Yes! Our online games can be played on any device at any time as long as you have an internet connection. You can start playing immediately with no need for a download or even signing in.

Does iWin offer exclusive games?

Yes! Games such as Jewel Quest, Deal or No Deal, or Cubis and many more are exclusive to iWin. We also offer classic games and games directly from game studios so you'll always be able to find something you'll like.

Do I have to login to play?

No, you can play many games online as a "guest." So if you feel like playing a quick round of Deal or No Deal, you can play right away with no hoops to jump through or information to enter. However, if you'd like to save your game's progress or track your scores over time, you can sign up for an account at iWin.

What are the most popular categories of games?

We offer a wide variety of games to choose from, here are some of the most popular types:

New games - We add games on a weekly basis so you can always check here for the most recent and exciting releases

Most popular games - These games are a hit with players for a reason: they are super fun to play!

Free download games - These games can be downloaded to your PC to play whenever and wherever you are

Popular categories:

Hidden Object Games - The classic mystery-solving-story-telling-hidden-object-games you know and love

Match 3 Games - JewelQuest and many other Match 3 Games that are as fun as they are challenging

Time Management Games - Test your wits and management abilities with these time management games

Premium Games - Special Editions, expanded content and exclusive content that you can only get through these enhanced games

Adventure Games - Perfect games to get immersed in the action and fun while completing puzzles and challenges along the way

Puzzle Games - Games for the true puzzle-lover at heart with a variety of puzzle types and ways to play

Arcade & Strategy Games - Save your quarters and play these free games instead as you play classic arcade and strategy style games

Card & Board Games - All the card and board games you love in many different formats from which choose

Word & Gameshow Games - For a true or aspiring wordsmith and gameshow contestant, get your practice with these before you audition

Poker & Casino Games - Games of risk and chance where you can win big points if you play your cards or chips right

Thank you for signing up for Time to Play!

You will soon receive an email in your inbox to confirm your subscription.