We have been creating computer game trailers for iWin.com for more than two years now and they keep coming back for more. Our primary service to iWin is a video of around 30 second clips of actual game play. We provide a quick turn around service for this client to optimize cost verses quality with a quick turnaround. We capture the game play with our talented team of entertainment specialists and then we edit the video that we collect with a non-linier video editing system. The client provides us with a few marketing blurbs that we also place into the trailers with special transitions to optimize the feel of the type of project that we are working on to help sell the games to their clients. They also require a few graphic buttons for when the video is placed on the web. In addition we provide a few other services to iWin on a regular basis. They require longer segments of video and some video graphical editing as well.

We also provide full 3D modeling and animation services to enhance any game trailer that we create. Our 3D artists are some of the best in the world and have worked on many projects including film VFX.

What is iWin.com:

iWin, Inc is a leading online developer, publisher and distributor of casual games for the mass market. iWin.com is one of the leading casual game portals, reaching millions of visitors every month from all over the world who love to play games together as part of the iWin community. Through our downloadable games, rich multiplayer games as well as our vast catalog of 100% free, full version downloadable games, iWin provides a multitude of exciting ways to relax and have fun, whether you have a couple minutes or hours.

iWin has produced more than 90 games that are available through PCs, Macs, mobile devices, handheld devices, consoles and retail locations. iWin is the creator of the massively successful Jewel Quest and Mah Jong Quest franchises, some of the industry’s top-selling, award-winning games. Whether playing on your Nintendo DS, Xbox 360 or home PC, iWin has a long history of creating family-friendly games that consumers love to play and share with friends and family.