Arthur Douglas Wagner (13 June 1824 – 14 January 1902) was a Church of England clergyman in Brighton, East Sussex, England. He served for more than 50 years at St Paul's Church in the town—first as a curate, then from 1873 as its vicar. As the only son of the Rev. Henry Michell Wagner (Vicar of Brighton for 46 years) and his wife Elizabeth Harriott, who died when he was a child, Arthur Wagner inherited considerable wealth. Following the pattern set by his father—who founded several churches in Brighton—he was able to pay for the construction and endowment of four churches in the town, three of which survive, and another in rural East Sussex where he owned a country estate. Like his father, he became embroiled in disputes and controversy: he held strongly Tractarian views and was often criticised for the advanced ritualism of the services he held at St Paul's, while his involvement in the Constance Kent affair caused national debate about priest–penitent privilege. Wagner's influence in Victorian Brighton was considerable. "Not just a very rich clergyman of advanced religious beliefs", he was also greatly interested in church architecture and decoration. His wealth and his successful ministry at St Paul's allowed Wagner to found new churches in growing suburbs such as Hanover, Montpelier and the London Road/Lewes Road areas, which were notable both for their richly designed interiors and for their determinedly Tractarian tradition. The vast St Bartholomew's Church continues to serve a densely populated inner-city area; St Martin's Church, built shortly afterwards, is even larger and served a district partly developed by Wagner himself; the Church of the Annunciation combines a modest exterior with striking internal fittings; and he was involved with the design and fitting out of St Paul's Church, although his father paid for it. Arthur Wagner's influence was also seen in the "grandeur and artistry" of St Michael and All Angels Church, built for the ministry of one of his curates at St Paul's. Although his official status was never more than vicar of a single church, his influence was such that "he was acknowledged as virtual Bishop-coadjutant of Brighton".

DbPedia