Edward Arthur Wagner, 88, of Mifflinburg, entered into eternal rest unexpectedly at 1:36 a.m. on June 26, 2020, surrounded by family.

He was born on August 30, 1931, a son of the late James and Margaret (Young) Wagner. Growing up, he spent most of his childhood in the Cowan area on Shinbone.

There he and his brothers spent many a day hunting for small game as well as fishing, swimming, and playing ice hockey on Buffalo Creek. The red-headed Wagner boys had quite a reputation in the area. The siblings played many sports which led to Ed's participation in high school football, basketball, and baseball. He graduated from Mifflinburg High School in 1949. His interest in sports continued throughout his life following his favorite teams and watching his grandchildren excel in their many respective sports.

He worked a year at Philco before enlisting in the Air Force. He served 4 years stateside during the Korean conflict. On October 24, 1952, at the First Evangelical Lutheran Church, Mifflinburg, he married Leona E. Gast. They built a home on the Gast property, raised their family, and lived there until 1976. At that time, they moved down the hill to the 1850 farmhouse that Ed and Leona lovingly restored. They shared many years of happiness there with family and friends.

Ed worked hard all his life in many types of construction jobs. He was employed as a carpenter for Shipton Brothers, in maintenance at the Laurelton State Center, as a maintenance carpenter at Faylor Middlecreek, and finally retired in 1996 from the Danville State School where he worked as a boiler tech. He also worked various part-time jobs including pumping gas at Napp's Sinclair, custodian at First Lutheran Church and United Church of Christ, as well as many moonlighting jobs.

He was a faithful member of First Evangelical Lutheran Church, Mifflinburg, where he served several terms on the church council.

Ed was an expert craftsman, creating beautiful pieces of woodwork that are cherished by his family, such as jewelry boxes, baby doll cradles, medicine cabinets, beautiful picture frames, and play tables and chairs. He was also a "master fixer". No matter how it was broken, or how many pieces it was in, Ed could fix it.

Ed was an avid cyclist, logging thousands of miles on the rail trail between Mifflinburg and Lewisburg. He was a local legend known by many on both ends of the trail. It is amazing to know that he rode the entire trail the day before his death. Regulars were inspired by him and will miss his smile and his friendly hello.

Ed was a loving, caring, adoring husband, father, father-in-law, grandpa, great-grandpa, brother, brother-in-law and uncle. Family was everything to him. He was an extraordinary man whose strong set of values guides us all each and every day.

Surviving are two sons and three daughters and their spouses: Scot E. and Mary Wagner of Mifflinburg, Stacey L. and Dale Moyer of Mattituck, NY, Susan E. and Steve Boyer of Pearland, TX, Peggy L. and Tim Inch of McAlisterville, Timothy P. Wagner and long-time girlfriend, Kelly Bowersox of Mifflinburg, 8 grandchildren, 3 step-grandchildren, and 6 great-grandchildren. He is also survived by three brothers, Kenneth, David, and Thomas, and a sister, Ginny Libby.

He was predeceased by his wife, Leona E. Wagner, two brothers, Robert Wagner and Frederick Wagner, and one sister, Janet Milroy.

Family and friends are invited to the viewing from 6 to 8 pm on Monday, June 29, 2020 at Adamo's Funeral Home, 16 Walnut Street, Mifflinburg. The family will gather and greet outside near the rail trail as a tribute to Ed's love of cycling. The family asks that visitors wear masks and follow social distancing guidelines. To honor Ed, we would love to see riders passing on the trail or stopping by during the visitation.

A private funeral for family and extended family will be conducted on Tuesday, June 30, 2020, at First Evangelical Lutheran Church, 404 Market St,. Mifflinburg, with Pastor John Yost, officiating.

Interment will be conducted at a later date in Mifflinburg Cemetery.

In lieu of flowers, memorial contributions in Ed's memory may be sent to First Evangelical Lutheran Church, 404 Market St. Mifflinburg, PA 17844 or to the Union County Trail Authority (UCTA) 155 N. 15th St. Lewisburg, PA 17837 (please specify in memory of Edward Wagner).

To share in Edward's online memorial, please visit www.adamofh.com

Funeral arrangements are by Dominick T. Adamo Funerals • Cremations • Monuments, 16 Walnut Street, Mifflinburg.