Arthur David Wagner, 81, of Clarendon, died Sunday, December 25, 2016, surrounded by his family. Arthur was born January 16, 1935, in Warren. He is the son of the late Clarence and Florence (Goodrich) Wagner.

Arthur served in the US Army during the Korean War. He was an electrician with the IBEW Union, from which he retired. He attended First United Methodist Church in Warren for several years, and was a member of the Clarendon Vets Club. In the past, Arthur enjoyed race cars on dirt tracks. He was also an avid football fan and enjoyed dancing. He will be remembered for his love of the outdoors—canoeing, going to the beach to collect sea shells and shark teeth near his home in North Carolina, logging, and especially mowing. For a few years, Arthur worked for Mead Township, tending to the mowing and lawn care of the community.

He is survived by two sons, Doug Wagner, and wife, Zina, of Clarendon, and Duane Wagner, of Warren; one daughter, Debbie Haley, of Hamburg, NY; five siblings, Kenneth Wagner, and wife, Mary, of Alaska, Barbara Jones, of Tionesta, Butch Wagner, and wife, Barb, of Warren, Donna Ducket, and husband, Dick, of Alabama, and Marie Smead, of North Carolina; eight grandchildren, Melinda McLaughlin, Duane Wagner, Jr., Kara Wagner, Steven Wagner, Nicole Watson, Natalie Miller, Meagan Crumpler, and Douglas Wagner, Jr.; eight great-grandchildren, Ryleigh, Duane Charles, Evelyn, Phoenix, Thomas, Noah, Jaxon, and Bentley; and several nieces and nephews.

In addition to his parents, Arthur was preceded in death by his son, Danny Wagner; great-granddaughter, Kaylea Littlefield; and two siblings, John Wagner and Sherry Haines.

Friends will be received at the Peterson - Blick Funeral Home, Inc, 1003 Penn Ave., E., Warren, on Wednesday, December 28, from 2 to 4 p.m., at which time a funeral service will be held there, with Rev. Dr. Mark E. Hecht, pastor, First United Methodist Church, officiating. Private burial will be at Warren County Memorial Park.

In lieu of flowers, those wishing to make a memorial contribution should consider the Erie VA Medical Center, ATTN: Voluntary Office (135), 135 East 38th Street, Erie, PA 16504.