We are saddened to announce Rev. Thomas A. Wagner, a beloved Catholic priest, passed away on Friday, December 1, 2023, at the age of 66. Fr. Wagner passed away surrounded by loved ones. He was born on September 5, 1957, of Allison Park, son of the late Arthur G. and Lois “Dolly” (Hertweck) Wagner. He is survived by his sister, Diane (Steve) Burke; brothers, William (Kathy) Wagner, Gary (Kim) Wagner, Kurt (Elaine) Wagner; and many loving nieces and nephews. He attended St. Mary’s Glenshaw where he was first called by God to priesthood. He graduated from Hampton High School in 1975, Duquesne University in 1979, and completed his seminary at St. Vincent. On June 25, 1983, he was ordained a Catholic Priest at St. Paul Cathedral. Fr. Wagner was a faithful servant of God and a beloved member of the Catholic community. He served various assignments throughout his priesthood, most recently as pastor to St. Michael’s, Queen of the Rosary, St. Eugene ministering to the people of God until his illness. He will be missed by many. Fr. Wagner's family, friends and fellow Clergy will gather to pay their respects at Saint Joachim and Anne Parish, Saint Michael’s Church, 101 McLay Drive, Elizabeth, PA 15037 on Wednesday, December 6th from 2 PM until the time of Mass of Translation at 7 PM with Bishop Mark Eckman presiding. A second viewing will take place on Thursday, December 7th, at Our Lady of Perpetual Help Parish, Saint Mary of the Assumption Church, 2510 Middle Road, Glenshaw, PA 15116 from 12 PM until Mass of Christian Burial at 2 PM with Bishop David Zubik presiding. Burial will follow in Assumption Cemetery of Saint Mary in Glenshaw. In lieu of flowers, please contribute to your home parish for their needs or to The Mary of Nazareth Catholic School. Arrangements by the Paul E. Bekavac Funeral Home, Elizabeth.

Eternal rest grant unto him, O Lord. May Your perpetual light shine upon him. May his soul and the souls of all the faithful departed rest in peace.

To plant a beautiful memorial tree in memory of Rev. Thomas A. Wagner, please visit our Tree Store.