The Nobel prize is probably the most prestigious and generous prize awarded to an individual or organization in the world today. Set up by the Swedish chemist and inventor of dynamite, Alfred Nobel (1833-1896) in his will, the prizes have been awarded since 1901 in five subjects: physics, chemistry, medicine, literature and peace. Since 1968, a prize has also been awarded for economics.

The Nobel Prize in Literature

According to Alfred Nobel, the literature prize was to be awarded "to the person who shall have produced in the field of literature the most outstanding work in an ideal direction". On Five Books, we have (so far) interviews dedicated to William Faulkner, who won the Nobel Prize in Literature in 1949, Albert Camus (1957), Winston Churchill (1953), Samuel Beckett (1969) and Aleksandr Solzhenitsyn (1970).

Beyond that many of our interviews recommend the work of laureates or discuss their significance. Here's a list of all the times a book written by a winner of the Nobel Prize in Literature has been recommended on Five Books.

The Nobel Peace Prize

The Nobel Peace Prize is for "the person who shall have done the most or the best work for fraternity between nations, the abolition or reduction of standing armies and for the holding and promotion of peace congresses", wrote Alfred Nobel in his 1895 will. We have interviews dedicated to two winners of the peace prize: the European Union and the United Nations, as well as an interview with Muhammad Yunus, 'banker to the poor'. Yunus won the Nobel peace prize in 2006 along with the Grameen Bank he set up in Bangladesh "for their efforts to create economic and social development from below."

In addition, we have many book recommendations that assess the contribution of other Nobel Peace Prize laureates, such as Woodrow Wilson (1919) and Nelson Mandela (1993).

The Sveriges Riksbank Prize in Economic Sciences in Memory of Alfred Nobel

Five Books has interviewed three Nobel economics laureates – Robert Shiller, Eric Maskin and Paul Krugman. We also have an interview with Muhammad Yunus, the economist who won the Nobel Peace Prize in 2006.

Nobel prizes in the sciences (physics, chemistry and physiology/medicine)

Few subjects are harder to understand than the frontiers of physics. Fortunately, many physicists, including several winners of the Nobel Prize, have tried to communicate the subject by writing books accessible to the general reader. We've made a list of all the books by or about winners of the Nobel Prize in Physics recommended on Five Books.

In her interview on the best chemistry books Michelle Francl discusses the contribution of George Smith, Greg Winter and Frances Arnold (Chemistry 2018) and Donna Strickland (Physics 2018).