The Messengers is a 2007 American supernatural horror film directed by the Pang Brothers which was released on February 2, 2007 by Columbia Pictures and Screen Gems.

Plot[]

The film follows the Solomon family who move from Chicago to a small town in North Dakota where they start a sunflower farm; however, their children, Jess and Ben begin noticing omnious events caused by a supernatural source.

Cast[]

Kristen Stewart as Jess Solomon

Dylan McDermott as Roy Solomon

Penelope Ann Miller as Denise Solomon

Evan and Theodore Turner as Ben Solomon

John Corbett as John Burwell\John Rollins

Production[]

"The Messengers" first started off as an original script called "The Scarecrow" by Todd Farmer and was originally written as a psychological thriller as opposed to a more supernatural horror film.

The script was sold to Revolution Studios where director Patrick Lussier signed on to the film and put a supernatural flair into the story. Revolution Studios later sold the script to Ghost House Pictures who took it and hired Mark Wheaton to re-write the script.

Impressed with his work on the film, "High Tension", producer Sam Raimi offered the film to Alexandre Aja, who passed on the film to direct "The Hills Have Eyes."

Principal photography for "The Messengers" took place on June 27, 2005 in Saskatechwan, Canada (in Regina and Indian Head).

Scout Taylor-Compton auditioned for the role of Jess, but it was ultimately given to Kristen Stewart.

Box Office[]

"The Messengers" grossed $14,713,321 during its opening weekend. Overall, it grossed $55,060,312 on an estimated budget of $16,000,000.

Critical Reception[]

On Rotten Tomatoes, "The Messengers" has an approval rating of 12% based on 84 reviews and an average rating of 3.7/10. The site's critical consensus reads: "The Messengers is an atmospheric but derivative rip-off of countless other horror movies."

On Metacritic, the film has a score of 34 out of 100 based on 16 critics, indicating "generally unfavorable reviews." Audiences polled by CinemaScore gave it an average grade of "C–" on an A+ to F scale.

Maitland McDonagh from TV Guide Magazine called it both "formulaic and derivative."

The New York Times wrote: "Like too many horror pictures, The Messengers becomes more boringly prosaic as it goes along, and there's an 11th-hour plot twist so dumb and poorly articulated that it destroys the movie."

Ronnie Scheib of Variety said: "Though the Pangs prove culturally adaptive on a visual level, they seem completely clueless as to the tonal modalities of Mark Wheaton's admittedly undercooked, all-American script."

The Los Angeles Times said the film is "at once ruthlessly efficient and shamelessly distended" while the New York Post called it "nicely photographed but slow-moving, dull and utterly predictable."

James Berardinelli of ReelViews wrote: "It's a little sad that The Messengers is ultimately a good candidate for burial in a toxic waste dump because there are some good elements contained herein."