WARNING: POSSIBLE SPOILERS INSIDE!

Auntie Mame is a 1958 film directed by Morton DaCosta and based on the play by Betty Comden and Adolph Green, which in turn was based on the novel by Patrick Dennis. The film stars Rosalind Russell (in a reprisal of her Broadway role) as Mame Dennis, Forrest Tucker as Beauregard Jackson Pickett Burnside, Coral Browne as Vera Charles, Fred Clark as Dwight Babcock, Jan Handzlik and Roger Smith as younger and older Patrick Dennis, respectively; Patric Knowles as Lindsay Woolsey, Peggy Cass as Agnes Gooch, Joanna Barnes as Gloria Upson, Pippa Scott as Pegeen Ryan, Lee Patrick as Doris Upson, Willard Waterman as Claude Upson, Robin Hughes as Brian O'Bannion, Connie Gilchrist as Norah Muldoon, Yuki Shimoda as Ito, Brook Byron as Sally Cato MacDougall, Carol Veazie as Mrs. Burnside, and Henry Brandon as Acacius Page.

Plot Summary:

The film tells the story of young Patrick Dennis, who goes, along with nanny Norah Muldoon, to live with his eccentric madcap aunt, Mame Dennis, when his more conservative father passes away. However, when his trustee, Dwight Babcock, discovers that Mame has gone against his father's (and his own personal) wishes to bring Patrick up to be conservative as opposed to Mame's more liberal outlook on life, he's taken away. Wiped out by the Stock Market Crash of 1929, Mame takes on several odd jobs, with comic results each time. These include selling shoes at Macy's and acting in a play in a job given to her by her friend, infamously bad actress and even more infamously great lush Vera Charles. It is at Macy's, however, that Mame meets Beauregard Jackson Pickett Burnside. Mame wins Beau's heart when she accidentally wins a fox hunt in his hometown of Peckerwood, Georgia. Mame, Beau, and, on occasion, Patrick set out for several years worth of traveling around the world. Mame's happiness comes to an end when Beau, trying to take a picture of Mame, falls off an Alp.

Mame returns to Beekman Place and decides to write her autobiography, titled Live, Live, Live. It is through this adventure that she meets editor Brian O'Bannion and secretary Agnes Gooch. While writing the book, Brian seems to fall for Mame, and when Patrick announces that he's in love with a more conservative girl named Gloria Upson and demands that Mame get rid of Brian, she calls him a snob. Immediately regretting it, she agrees to have Brian out of the house while Gloria visits. She decides that instead of going to a party with Brian, she'll make over Agnes and send her with him. Begrudingly, Agnes gives in. Patrick arrives with Gloria, and Mame realizes almost immediately that she doesn't care much for this boring, snobby conservative Patrick's in love with. However, because of Patrick's importance to her, she agrees to meet her family.

She finds that she also doesn't like the Upsons or their overly conservative, snobby, dull, bigoted views on everything. (An example includes the fact that they want Mame to go 50/50 on their next door property - partially as a wedding present for Patrick and Gloria, but mostly to prevent "the wrong kind of people" from getting the property.) So she plans to have them come over to Beekman Place for an intimate gathering. However, Mame has a few tricks up her sleeve, including bring out Agnes Gooch, who got pregnant out of wedlock (Or so she thinks.) by Brian after she got drunk, (She later finds out that in her inebriation, she also married Brian.) inviting friends Lindsay Woolsley, who's brought her a copy of her book, and Vera Charles, who confuses decorator Pegeen Ryan with Gloria after Gloria confuses Vera with Helen Hayes. Thanks to all of the "spontaneous" things happening, the Upsons' true colors show, and Patrick realizes that Gloria is the wrong girl for him. Just as Mame had planned.

Fast forward several years. Patrick is now married to Pegeen, whom he met the day of his breakup with Gloria. They now have a son, Michael, who, along with Mame, try to convince Pegeen and Patrick to allow him to go to India with Mame. After he quotes Mame's famous line "Life is a banquet, and most poor suckers are starving to death," Michael is finally given permission. After Mame makes the same promise to open doors for Michael that she made with Patrick when he first came to live with Mame, Pegeen makes the observation that Mame is "the Pied Piper."

My first exposure to this eccentric woman, Mame Dennis, was with a download of the soundtrack to the 1974 musical version starring Lucille Ball, simply titled Mame. I know that this is pretty much widely considered a mistake, but that's beside my point. I found Mame quite enjoyable, despite Lucy's lack of singing and dancing prowess. The film is helped considerably by original Broadway stars Jane Connell and Golden Girl Bea Arthur, reprising their respective roles as Agnes Gooch and Vera Charles.

Time and time again, when I've mentioned I enjoyed Mame, I've been told - in some cases VERY condescendingly - that I needed to see the original non-musical Auntie Mame with the ever-delightful Roz Russell as Mame. I found it a few days ago in the store for $10 and HAD to pick it up. It was on TV a couple of weeks ago, but I missed it. As always.

I guess I'm just weird. I can separate Auntie Mame and the Broadway and film versions Mame in my head and enjoy both films for what they are, instead of having to compare Roz and Lucy, or Lucy and Angela in the case of the film and Broadway versions of the musical. I'm a fan of all three actresses, and all three gave their own unique flavor, color, texture, and depth to the character of Mame Dennis. Roz is just naturally over-the-top, which really helps to show off Mame's eccentric side and makes for an unforgettable performance. Angela, of course, had the vocal and acting chops to sing those songs and play that character. Not to mention Angela is baudy enough to do it well. And Lucy's performance was often far more subtle than Roz's, but she still gave great flair to Mame. Frankly, I enjoy living in a world where I can watch my DVDs of Auntie Mame with Roz and Mame with Lucy and listen to the Broadway cast recording with Angela and enjoy all three, as each lady brought something unique to the table.

In addition to Roz, Auntie Mame is enjoyable period. Fine actors all around, playing these characters for all they've got. I will have to say, Coral Browne makes a good Vera Charles, but I think Bea Arthur made a far better Vera - but I'm totally biased when it comes to Bea Arthur, so take that as you will. Peggy Cass gave a very memorable performance as Agnes Gooch. I think Jane Connell did an equally good job as Agnes in Mame. I do like that Agnes has more of a role in Mame, essentially taking the place of Auntie Mame's Norah Muldoon, as well as absorbing the makeover and pregnancy aspects of her original character, but without the secretarial work on Mame's book, which doesn't exist in the film version of Mame.

I say Auntie Mame ranks 9/10. My only real beef with it, and it's a very minor one, is that it's a little overlong. Frankly, nothing can remedy that because I can't think of anything that dragged on and needed to be shortened or deleted entirely. Oh, and my bias prevents me from totally loving Vera Charles in this film, as I think Bea Arthur slammed that one out of the park. But Coral Browne is still fine in her own right as Vera. Good film which demands repeat viewings thanks to the performance of Ms. Rosalind Russell.