How far are you willing to go to stand up for your deepest beliefs? For Randy Kehler and Betsy Corner of Colrain, Massachusetts, their life-long commitment to pacifism led them to risk losing their home. For fourteen years, they publicly refused to pay federal taxes as a protest against war and military spending. As a consequence, their home was seized by U.S. marshals and IRS agents. Narrated by actor Martin Sheen, this feature-length documentary chronicles the couple’s five-year struggle to nonviolently resist the seizure of their home, in which they are joined by hundreds of supporters from across the country, including noted author and activist priest Fr. Daniel Berrigan and long-time folksinger Pete Seeger.

When a young couple buys the contested home at auction from the U.S. government for $5,400, they become involved in a political and moral battle much larger than what they originally bargained for. An Act of Conscience provides a compelling and thought-provoking glimpse of the conflict between these two families: one couple reaching for the American dream, the other challenging the very foundation of that dream. Digitally Remastered HD Version.

For 20 years, I was invited each year to screen and speak about An Act Of Conscience to high school students from Hyde Park, New York.

They were in an advanced English class that studied Henry David Thoreau, in which they read his essay on civil disobedience, after which, they were assigned to watch An Act Of Conscience as a modern-day example of Thoreau’s principles in action.

Following the screening, the students would write questions, and then I would engage with them in an hour-long question-and-answer session.

It was an elegant event, as the students were bussed on a school field trip to Upstate Films, an independent cinema in the next-door town of Rhinebeck, New York, to watch the film on the big screen.

I greatly enjoyed this opportunity to engage with the students about An Act Of Conscience, as it always stimulated a vigorous discussion about our role as citizens in a democracy.

I always would ask the students, “What social or political issues do you feel most passionate about? What would you consider ‘an act of conscience’ for yourself?”

Having made this film over 25 years ago, in association with HBO/Cinemax, and re-releasing it now in a digitally remastered high definition version through New Day Films, it strikes me how deep this story is and what a long shelf life it has, as a very unique story about citizens standing up for their deepest beliefs and principles.

Randy Kehler, one of the main characters of An Act Of Conscience, has a close connection with another film in the New Day collection.

The Most Dangerous Man in America: Daniel Ellsberg and the Pentagon Papers, directed by Rick Goldsmith and Judith Ehrlich, chronicles the story of Daniel Ellsberg, America’s most famous whistleblower who released the Pentagon papers and helped to change the course of the Vietnam War.

In The Most Dangerous Man in America: Daniel Ellsberg and the Pentagon Papers, Daniel Ellsberg recounts the story of how he was inspired to commit his act of civil disobedience by releasing the Pentagon Papers after he heard Randy Kehler, a young Vietnam War draft resister speak at a conference in 1969, and state his intention to risk going to jail by refusing to be drafted in the Vietnam War.

Please check out my other social issue documentaries that chronicle grassroots activism in the New Day Collection, The Peace Patriots and Power Struggle, as well as additional films at my website www.TurningTide.com.