The University of Bristol Law Club

The UBLC is the largest & official society of the University of Bristol Law School. After being founded in 1937, this year we are celebrating our 87th anniversary. At present, we have grown to over 1000 members and we aim to keep expanding our membership so that our opportunities can be enjoyed by as many University of Bristol students as possible.

The UBLC operates with the aim of providing our members with the skills and opportunities to help make their career aspirations become a reality.

Open to students of all academic disciplines, the UBLC provides invaluable exposure to the legal sector through our strong and long-maintained relationships with leading global firms. Their sponsored events enable our members to engage with employers through career presentations, employability workshops, annual competitions and social networking events.

In today's rapidly evolving legal landscape, staying informed and adaptable is more critical than ever. As such, my primary goal as President is to make the UBLC a hub of legal insights and discussions. We are keen to facilitate active discourse on current legal issues, tapping into the wealth of knowledge from our members, alumni, and our wider network. Our aim is to go beyond the academic curriculum, thus nurturing an understanding of legal practice in its real-world context.

To our esteemed partners in law firms and the wider legal profession, we look forward to strengthening our ties and expanding our collaboration. Your insights are invaluable for our members and contribute significantly to the rich tapestry of knowledge we aim to provide.

However, the UBLC experience is not solely about academic and professional enrichment. We value the sense of camaraderie and enjoyment that comes from our social events. To our members, and those considering joining us, you can expect an enhanced social calendar that will bring us together in various fun and engaging ways.

Further, we plan to emphasise our wide array of competitions and opportunities. These will not only challenge and hone your legal skills, but will also provide a platform to demonstrate your abilities to our wide audience, including potential employers and mentors.

While we are excited about the upcoming year, we recognise that our plans and actions are best shaped with input from you. Whether you are a member, a potential member, a law firm representative, or one of our alumni, your feedback and ideas are most welcome.

If you have any questions, or would like to discuss anything related to the UBLC, please send me an email.

Yours faithfully,

Ben de Sousa

UBLC President

ben.de.sousa.2022@bristol.ac.uk