The University of Bristol offers a world-class undergraduate education. Teaching is delivered by leading academics and informed by our influential research.

We offer a range of undergraduate degrees in Arts; Engineering; Health Sciences; Life Sciences; Science; and Social Sciences and Law.

Many courses include optional units to help students tailor their degree to suit their interests. Some incorporate study abroad, innovation, industrial experience or quantitative research methods.

Students can apply for undergraduate courses through UCAS.

Postgraduates at Bristol study alongside leading academics engaged in ground-breaking research. The University has strong research links, expert staff and a reputation for innovation.

Students can choose from a range of postgraduate degrees at Bristol.

Our wide range of taught programmes includes MA, MSc and LLM degrees. We offer research programmes such as PhDs and master’s degrees by research. Some programmes provide part-time study options or distance learning.

Postgraduate students can apply online through the University of Bristol website.

Student life

The University’s world-class education attracts the brightest minds from across the world. Around 28% of our students are from outside the UK, with more than 150 countries represented.

Bristol is one of the UK’s best cities. It's just 90 minutes from London but also close to beautiful English countryside. It’s a friendly, historic and multicultural hub with world-class culture and plenty of green space.

University accommodation is divided into three Student Residential Villages. There is a wide range of residences available for different preferences and budgets. Some rooms are in modern flats in the city centre, and others are on the edge of town with acres of grounds.

Bristol Students’ Union supports more than 350 student-led societies, sports clubs and volunteering projects for a huge range of interests. This includes around 50 country-based and religious societies.

Our outstanding sports and fitness facilities cater to everyone from beginners to top athletes, helping you to lead a healthy, active lifestyle.