Citation preview

Sentence to Hope

This page intentionally left blank

Sentence to Hope: A Saʿdallah Wannous Reader TRANSLATED FROM THE ARABIC AND WITH AN INTRODUCTION BY ROBERT MYERS AND NADA SAAB

YALE UNIVERSITY PRESS

NEW HAVEN & LONDON

The Margellos World Republic of Letters is dedicated to making literary works from around the globe available in English through translation. It brings to the English-­speaking world the work of leading poets, novelists, essayists, philosophers, and playwrights from Europe, Latin America, Africa, Asia, and the Middle East to stimulate international discourse and creative exchange. English translation and introduction copyright © 2019 by Yale University. All rights reserved. This book may not be reproduced, in whole or in part, including illustrations, in any form (beyond that copying permitted by Sections 107 and 108 of the U.S. Copyright Law and except by reviewers for the public press), without written permission from the publishers. The selections in Sentence to Hope are translated from Saʿdallah Wannous, al-­Aʿmal al-­Kamila (Complete works), published in three volumes by Dar al-­Adab in 2004. Rituals of Signs and Transformations, An Evening’s Entertainment for the Fifth of June, and The Adventure of the Head of Mamlouk Jabir first appeared in English translation in Four Plays from Syria: Saʿdallah Wannous, published by Martin E. Segal Theatre Center Publications, New York, in 2014. Yale University Press books may be purchased in quantity for educational, business, or promotional use. For information, please e-­mail [email protected] (U.S. office) or [email protected] (U.K. office). Set in Electra and Nobel types by Tseng Information Systems, Inc., Durham, North Carolina. Printed in the United States of America. Library of Congress Control Number: 2018955858 ISBN 978-­0 -­300-­22134-­3 (hardcover : alk. paper) A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library. This paper meets the requirements of ANSI/NISO Z39.48-­1992 (Permanence of Paper). 10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1

CONTENTS

A Note on Transcription vii Acknowledgments ix Introduction xiii PLAYS

An Evening’s Entertainment for the Fifth of June 3 The Adventure of the Head of Mamlouk Jabir 120 Wretched Dreams 208 Rituals of Signs and Transformations 266 SPEECHES, ESSAYS, AND INTERVIEWS

Thirst for Dialogue 387 The Dream Falls Apart 391 On the Performance of The Adventure of the Head of Mamlouk Jabir in Moscow 395 Theater as Mirror 403 It All Begins with the Audience 405 For the First Time Writing Is a Form of Freedom, for the First Time Writing Is a Pleasure 415

This page intentionally left blank

A NOTE ON TRANSCRIPTION

In general, words that are already Anglicized and familiar to English speakers or found in English dictionaries are not transcribed. To simplify reading, diacritical marks that indicate emphatic consonants or the lengthening of the vowels “a” and “i” have been omitted. The exception to this principle is the long vowel “u,” which is rendered as “ou” so as to reproduce the Arabic sound as closely as possible in English. For example, we use “Wannous” instead of Wannus and “Mamlouk” instead of Mamluk. A hamza, or glottal stop, is rendered as ʾ. The letter ʿayn, which, for those unfamiliar with the Arabic alphabet, sounds like a vocalized “h,” is rendered as ʿ. The ʿayn is used, for example, in the spelling of the name of the author, Saʿdallah Wannous.

vii

This page intentionally left blank

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

A volume such as this cannot come into being without the support of an enormous number of people. Since this volume contains four theater plays, it was especially helpful for us to see a full production and several readings of our translation of one of them and to stage translations of several other modern and contemporary works from the Arab world, including another play by Saʿdallah Wannous. The administrations of the American University of Beirut, where Robert Myers teaches, and the Lebanese American University of Beirut, where Nada Saab teaches, were both instrumental in supporting our work as translators. Our colleague and friend, the Lebanese director and actor Sahar Assaf, worked with us to transform our translations into beautiful theatrical productions, which was a great gift for any translator. Silk Road Rising Theater in Chicago, and its directors Jamil Khoury and Malik Gilani, in conjunction with a grant from the MacArthur Foundation, supported the translation and production in Beirut and reading in Chicago of our translation of Rituals of Signs and Transformations. Marvin Carlson and Frank Hentschker, of the Segal Center at CUNY in New York, not only invited us to pre­sent a reading of this same play there, Marvin also included it in his groundbreaking volume Four Plays from Syria. Frank and Marvin also very graciously allowed us to offer our own translations of An Evening’s Entertainment for the Fifth of June and The Adventure of the Head of Mamlouk Jabir. Marvin and Safi Mahfouz first offered versions of these works in Four Plays from Syria, published by the Segal Center, which is the most important venue for world theater in North America. Thanassis Cambanis wrote a wonderful piece about Wanix

x Acknowledgments

nous and our Beirut production of Rituals in the Boston Globe, and our friend the renowned journalist Rami Khoury wrote an extraordinary tribute to the New York reading of the play that was published in his syndicated column. We are especially grateful to the poet Marilyn Hacker, who first suggested we contact John Donatich at Yale University Press about publishing translations of Wannous’s work for the Margellos World Republic of Letters. Both John and his staff, including Danielle D’Orlando and Kristy Leonard, were exceedingly helpful and patient as we suggested alterations in the content so as to offer the best possible introduction to Wannous’s work to an English-­speaking audience. Yasmina Jraissati, of the Raya Agency, who represents the Wannous estate, went out of her way to help facilitate our work in every way, as did Saʿdallah Wannous’s daughter, the writer Dima Wannous, and his widow, Fayza Wannous. Another important supporter of our work and of scholarship about and translations of plays from the Arab world more generally has been Margaret Litvin of Boston University. Miriam Ayres, whom we both met when we were all graduate students in New Haven, was an impeccable copyeditor and proofreader, and Rawan Nasser, an MA student in the literature program of the English Department at AUB, meticulously examined our translations alongside the original Arabic versions and assisted with innumerable editorial corrections. Sonja Mejcher-­Atassi, chair of the English Department at AUB, and David Wrisley, the former chair, both supported our work as translators, and Elise Salem, a celebrated scholar of Arabic literature and a Vice President of LAU, offered us support and guidance at every turn. The Theater Department of LAU and Dean Nashat Mansour also coproduced one of our Wannous productions. President Fadlo Khuri and Dean Nadia El Cheikh of FAS have been ardent supporters of AUB’s Theater Initiative and the production of plays at AUB. The former Provost of AUB, Ahmad Dallal, and the former Dean of the Faculty of Arts and Sciences at AUB, Patrick McGreevy, helped us fund productions and generate inter-

Acknowledgments xi

est in the theater of Wannous. We would also like to thank the actors who performed our translations of Wannous’s dialogue and the audience members from AUB, LAU, Beirut, New York, and Chicago. The beautiful cover of this volume, a reproduction of a painting by the Iraqi artist Jamil Hammoudi, was selected as a result of the efforts of Kaoukab Chebaro, Associate University Librarian for Archives and Special Collections and Assistant Professor at AUB. Ms. Ishtar Jamil, the daughter of Jamil Hammoudi, kindly granted us permission to use the painting for the cover of the book. We are, of course, especially grateful to Saʿdallah Wannous. Although, because he passed away two decades ago, neither of us knew him, we have had the enormous pleasure of becoming acquainted with him through his literary and theatrical legacy. We are indebted to Yale University Press and the Margellos World Republic of Letters for providing us with this medium for sharing that legacy with other lovers of theater and literature.

This page intentionally left blank

INTRODUCTION

To characterize Saʿdallah Wannous as an Arab writer is, at the same time, to say something essential about his identity and his oeuvre and assert something potentially misleading for many English-­language readers, who probably know few writers from the Arab world except perhaps the Palestinian poet Mahmoud Darwish, the Syrian-­Lebanese poet Adonis, or Naguib Mahfouz, the Egyptian novelist who won the Nobel Prize in 1988. The confusion evoked by characterizing Wannous as an Arab writer is likely to be compounded by the fact that he is Syrian, and the little that well-­read English speakers probably know about Syria’s history and culture has been filtered through the narrow lens of the Western media’s coverage of the brutal civil war that began there in 2011. Moreover, Wannous is known principally as a playwright even in the Arab world, and few literate people, with the exception of specialists and theater artists, read plays—as opposed to seeing them performed—with the possible exception of those of Shakespeare. The current volume, which is the first widely distributed English-­language anthology devoted to Wannous’s plays and writings about theater, is, however, likely to change more than a few minds about the pleasures of reading plays, especially since Wannous clearly intended that his works should be read simultaneously as cultural critiques, political and philosophical treatises, and innovative rewritings of traditional storytelling and performance modes, as well as serious dramas to be staged. Wannous was born in 1941 into a peasant family in a small village above the Syrian port of Tartous, which, it is worth noting, has housed a Soviet, and later Russian, naval facility since the early 1970s. xiii

xiv Introduction

Although Wannous became an atheist, a Marxist, and a committed secularist, his family and he were nominally ʿAlawites, a small heterodox Islamic sect to which President Bashar al-­Assad also belongs, as did his father, President Hafez al-­Assad, who preceded him. In 1959, after completing his baccalaureate degree, Wannous moved to Cairo, which was then the cultural and political center of the Arab world. This was the so-­called golden age of Egyptian cinema, the era of the celebrated diva Umm Kulthoum and of Egypt’s charismatic leader and former military officer Gamal Abdel Nasser, who led a coup in July 1952 to overthrow the spectacularly corrupt King Farouq. In 1956, Nasser became the most revered leader in the Arab world when he was given credit for facing down the British, the French, and the Israelis, who had tried to seize control of the Suez Canal. This victory—which, along with the 1958–1961 union of Syria and Egypt into a single political entity, the United Arab Republic, constituted the apex of Arab nationalism—was the Arabs’ only success before a string of devastating military and diplomatic defeats during the remainder of the century. While in Egypt, Wannous, who at this time was an ardent Arab nationalist and admirer of Nasser, studied journalism at Cairo University and, according to ʿAli al-­Anezi, “became a regular reader of al-­Adab (Belles Lettres), the most influential Arab literary journal, which translated and published works by Camus and Sartre.”1 Wannous also wrote an essay, which has subsequently been lost, about the renowned Egyptian absurdist playwright Tawfiq al-­Hakim, perhaps the most celebrated dramatist from the Arab world in the first half of the twentieth century.2 In 1963, after Wannous returned to Syria, which was now ruled by the nominally socialist Baʿth Party, he became the theater editor for the state-­controlled cultural publication al-­Maʿrifa (Knowledge) and wrote a series of philosophical plays—dramatic treatises composed more for the page than the stage, largely based on al-­Hakim’s model. At the age of twenty-­five, in 1966, Wannous moved to Paris to study theater at the Sorbonne, where he

Introduction xv

continued his career as a cultural journalist, interviewing over the years artists such as his own professor, the theater director Jean-­Marie Serreau, Jean Genet, and the renowned theater actor and director Jean-­Louis Barrault, best known to English-­speaking audiences for his role in the film Les Enfants du Paradis (Children of Paradise). He also continued his apprenticeship as an aspiring playwright, attending performances at the Comédie-­Française and by foreign troupes such as Judith Molina and Julian Beck’s Living Theater and artists such as Peter Brook and Peter Weiss. Brook, one of the premier theater directors of the twentieth century, had just created the innovative theatrical “happening” entitled US, an improvised performance opposing U.S. military intervention in Vietnam, produced in London in 1966. One can see clear formal echoes of US in Wannous’s first theatrical success, the equally innovative and revolutionary An Evening’s Entertainment for the Fifth of June, the play that opens this volume, which is a scathing critique of the deceit and betrayal of peasants, soldiers, and the Palestinians by Nasser and the Arab regimes during the June 1967 War. During this same period, when Wannous was first living in France, the Living Theater performed their adaptation of Brecht’s version of Antigone and their own Paradise Now, a work replete with nudity and audience participation, which at the urging of company members spilled into streets during the 1968 Avignon Theater Festival. Like US and An Evening’s Entertainment, both of these works obliterated what Bertolt Brecht has referred to as the fourth wall between audience and performers and attempted to destroy the distinction between theatrical performance and revolutionary political action. Peter Weiss, best known for his groundbreaking 1963 play Marat/Sade—a work strongly influenced by Brecht and Antonin Artaud that lays bare the failure of the French Revolution—and his 1965 documentary play The Investigation, about the Frankfurt-­Auschwitz war crime trials, also became a theatrical model and mentor for the budding Syrian playwright and theater theoretician. Wannous met Weiss in Paris in 1968, the same year he wrote An

xvi Introduction

Evening’s Entertainment and attended a conference in East Berlin devoted to Brecht. Wannous developed a close relationship with his teacher Jean-­ Marie Serreau, a comedian turned theater director who also became a mentor for the revolutionary Algerian playwright Kateb Yacine and the renowned Caribbean writer and political theorist Aimé Césaire. It is clear in Wannous’s plays from the late 1960s and the 1970s, however, that the principal theatrical influence during this period was Bertolt Brecht, as playwright, theatrical theoretician, and political thinker. During this period, Brecht’s vision of drama as an instrument of social critique and revolutionary change offered an aesthetic and political model for a number of other theater artists from the so-­ called developing world, among them Augusto Boal, Wole Soyinka, and Athol Fugard. On June 5, 1967, when Israel attacked Egypt, Wannous was living and studying in Paris. In less than a week the decimated armies of Egypt, Jordan, and Syria had capitulated, with the political landscape in the Middle East having radically changed and Israel having occupied the Gaza Strip, the Sinai, the West Bank, and the Golan Heights in Syria. As Wannous recounts, Nasser’s acknowledgment of the truth and scale of the Arabs’ defeat left the young Syrian playwright feeling as if he were “suffocating.”3 He returned briefly to Damascus and then went back to Paris where he dropped the project he was working on and began writing the bitterly ironic An Evening’s Entertainment. Thus much of the play, which is itself a clarion call for revolution, was composed in Paris during the period leading up to and including the mass demonstrations at the Sorbonne and elsewhere in France in May 1968. The play, unlike anything that had ever been staged in the Arab world, is a highly original metatheatrical hybrid that draws on both Brecht’s teaching plays and his technique of breaking the fourth wall, although in Wannous’s case he shatters even the semblance of a demarcation between performers and audience by placing throughout

Introduction xvii

the playing arena actors who comment upon the action, offer choral counterpoints to stage dialogue, and enter the main action by walking up onto the stage. The “play” itself is little more than the sketch of a second-­rate, socialist-­realist, peasant drama dreamed up by the apparatchik director of the theater who has had no personal experience of the recent defeat and who has hired a playwright to expand upon the facile piece of propaganda that he, the director, has cooked up. However, the playwright, who has decided that the words in his text smell like a “prostitute’s vagina,” has refused to allow the play to go forward, and when the theater director attempts to dramatize the scene of his refusal with an actor, the “actual” playwright comes up out of the audience to join the fray and play himself. This dramatic ruse, which in the hands of a less adroit playwright might fall completely flat, is but one of a seemingly endless series of sly theatrical tricks that Wannous employs as he simultaneously enacts the gruesome truth of the recent war, questions the ability of any theatrical rendering to dramatize war’s actual horrors, and repeatedly skewers the terrifying regime of the Baʿth Party and its cultural toadies for the Orwellian lies they have perpetrated. Wannous brilliantly frames all of these theatrical proceedings about a catastrophic defeat under the saccharine title of a haflat samar (literally, “an evening of entertainment”), a soirée or traditional evening of song and dance and other light entertainment in the Arab world. Wannous says he hoped that the play, which ends with a literal call to arms, would spill into the streets and spark an insurrection. He was bitterly disappointed when it was first produced in Damascus in 1969 and met with tepid approbation and mixed reviews. He should not have been surprised, since many of those in the audience were themselves very similar to the compromised Eastern bloc cultural bureaucrats he so successfully satirizes in the play, and the regime—though it did not punish him and would itself be overthrown by Hafez al-­Assad two years later— was notorious for vicious retribution against its perceived political opponents.

xviii Introduction

Assad seized power in 1971 shortly before Wannous’s next play, The Adventure of the Head of Mamlouk Jabir, the second in this volume, was set to be staged. Like a number of Wannous’s plays, Mamlouk Jabir draws on a significant historical event in the Arab world, in this case the sack of Baghdad by Hulagu Khan in the thirteenth century with the connivance of the chief Arab minister, who betrays his caliph. Assad’s censors, who no doubt perceived the allegory of betrayal as too reminiscent of the treacherous political atmosphere of contemporary Syria, refused to allow the play to be performed. Ironically, Assad’s government, as it frequently did, promoted the play as an example of Syrian culture elsewhere in the Eastern bloc, where it was unlikely to be read as a denunciation of Assad for betraying his superiors. The play was first staged in East Berlin and later in Moscow and elsewhere in the Soviet Union. In one of the two interviews included in this volume, Wannous talks about the reception of his play in the Soviet Union, and his discussion, among other things, reminds the reader that not only did Brecht spend the final years of his career working for the state theater in the German Democratic Republic, but also that theater in Syria, which was effectively an Eastern bloc country, was inevitably deeply influenced by Russian theater. In fact, when one comes to understand how profound the influence of the Moscow Art Theatre, Meyerhold, Stanislavsky, and Chekhov was in places like Damascus, the notion of Wannous as an “Arab” writer—in the sense that contemporary parlance about Islamism, the Middle East, and the Syrian civil war in the Western media might suggest—is particularly fatuous. Not only was Wannous, like almost all of the artists of his generation in the Arab world at this time, a committed Marxist, he was a cosmopolitan, postcolonial writer who read and studied a wide range of literary, theatrical, and philosophical traditions and repeatedly compared his country’s predicament and struggle—and that of the Palestinians against the United States’s only ally in the region, Israel—to that of the Vietcong in Vietnam, who were fighting the American military directly.

Introduction xix

Although Mamlouk Jabir may be read as a Brechtian allegory, it, like An Evening’s Entertainment, is another extraordinarily innovative hybrid. Wannous’s work is another play-­within-­a-­play, but in this case he frames the drama by setting it in the most traditional of settings in the Arab world, a coffeehouse, and by utilizing the most traditional of Arab performative figures, the hakawati, or storyteller. Wannous continues his preoccupation with the audience—one that is central to the aesthetic of his earlier works and elaborated in his essay “It All Begins with the Audience,” also included here—but in this case instead of bringing audience members onto the stage to join the drama, they are central to its dynamic from the play’s inception. As Muʾnis, the storyteller, tells the tale of the Mamlouk Jabir, a slave who works for the vizier, the minister who is conniving to betray the caliph to the general of the army encircling Baghdad, the figures whom Muʾnis is describing appear onstage in front of the patrons. Throughout the action the coffeehouse patrons serve as an unruly audience onstage, alternately commenting on the characters’ actions, requesting that another story be told, ordering additional cups of coffee from the waiter, and expressing their dismay at how different this tale is from the lighthearted fare to which they are accustomed. In another striking departure from traditional modern plays from the Arab world and elsewhere during this period and earlier, Mamlouk Jabir, like Brecht’s Mother Courage, offers the story of a significant historical event from below, from the point of view of servants and slaves. Not only do these characters offer novel interpretations of political events and the behavior of their better-­known superiors, their perspectives inevitably foreground concerns that had heretofore been largely excluded from respectable bourgeois drama such as heightened consciousness of class and a necessary preoccupation with the basic necessities of life such as bread. Arguably Wannous’s most significant innovation in Mamlouk Jabir is his creation of the title character, a charming slave who, out of necessity, has learned to live by his wits and charm. It is he who, in a moment of acute politi-

xx Introduction

cal crisis, seizes an opportunity, contriving a brilliant solution for how to smuggle a message through the heavily guarded checkpoints surrounding the city to the general of the besieging army. Taking what he sees as his one chance to rise in social status and win the hand of the servant girl who has caught his eye, he offers up his own body as a textual medium. In an interview included here that was conducted after the performances of the play in what was then the USSR, Wannous discusses his pleasure at the production’s emphasis on the work’s comic aspects. Nevertheless, the text as written, as is so often the case in Wannous’s work, begins as a seemingly lighthearted and humorous tale but abruptly takes a darkly ironic turn that is reminiscent of the story of Rosencrantz and Guildenstern in Hamlet. Critics generally divide Wannous’s work into plays written before and after 1977. Not only are the works from the two periods starkly different, the year 1977, for a number of reasons, constitutes much more than an arbitrary demarcation in Wannous’s oeuvre. For many in the West, Anwar Sadat’s visit to Jerusalem and the ensuing thaw in Egyptian-­Israeli relations that led to the Camp David Accords constitute two of the few bright spots in a seemingly interminable and intractable conflict between Israel, the Palestinians, and the larger Arab world. For Wannous and many Arab intellectuals of his generation, however, Sadat’s gesture represented not a realistic accommodation to an implacable and determined foe that had humiliated Arab armies twice in the space of seven years, but a complete capitulation to a colonial oppressor and U.S. proxy. Whereas many African states had recently succeeded in shedding their colonial masters, and just two years prior the United States had abandoned Saigon to the Vietcong, who had soundly defeated two imperial powers in two decades, Arab nationalism had, in the same span of twenty years, been obliterated and, in the eyes of Wannous and others, its leaders reduced to pathetic figures groveling before their tormentors. Moreover, as the architect of the accord, former President Jimmy Carter, has subsequently admitted, the agreement left unresolved the thorniest and

Introduction xxi

the most emotional issue between Israel and the Arabs, the continuing occupation of Palestinian territory. For supporters of Palestine like Wannous, Sadat’s failure to insist on a resolution on the status of the Palestinians in the accord and his willingness to make a separate peace with Israel must have seemed a rank betrayal. In an interview for There Are So Many Things Still to Say, a documentary about Wannous by Syrian filmmaker Omar Amiralay made shortly before the playwright’s death in 1997, Wannous says that, although Sadat’s visit to Jerusalem did not take him completely by surprise, it left him emotionally and artistically shattered. The event became the catalyst for a complete nervous breakdown and an unsuccessful suicide attempt that left him unable or unwilling to write plays for a dozen years. During this period Wannous did not completely abandon Brecht as an aesthetic and political model, nor did he immediately repudiate his previous engagé approach to playwriting that viewed theater as a tool for civic and political transformation. In fact, when he did finally compose another play, The Rape, published in 1989, it was an adaptation of The Double Life of Dr. Valmy, a work about torture in Franco’s Spain by the Spanish playwright Antonio Buero Vallejo, transplanted to the West Bank and set during the first Intifada in 1987. The play contains a ferocious condemnation of the use of rape by Israel’s internal security service, Shin Bet, as a tool of interrogation and humiliation for the purpose of suppressing the uprising, and several Israeli Zionist characters are portrayed as unremittingly repugnant. However, the work also contains a Palestinian who collaborates with the Israelis so he can be reunited with his family, and it offers nuanced and sympathetic portraits of both a conflicted and repentant Shin Bet interrogator and his Israeli psychiatrist, who abhors Zionism. A character named Saʿdallah Wannous appears at the end of the play to engage in dialogue with the psychiatrist and to denounce Arab demagogues and what he describes as “Arab Zionism.” Not surprisingly, the play’s multifaceted rendering of Israeli characters garnered him few plaudits in the Arab world, and accord-

xxii Introduction

ing to an interview Wannous granted to the New York Times, not only was the production of the play banned by Syrian censors, the appearance of Wannous’s name in party-­controlled newspapers in Syria was also forbidden.4 The play was first produced in Beirut in 1991 by the Iraqi director Jawad al-­Assadi, who removed the storyline related to the Palestinians. Wannous condemned the changes when an integral version was later published in his collected works. Nonetheless, al-­Assadi’s production received awards and excellent reviews when it was staged in Cairo and in other Arab countries.5 As is clear in Elizabeth Suzanne Kassab’s study Contemporary Arab Thought, Wannous was as much a social and political theorist as playwright. Like most Arab intellectuals of his generation, he was—at least in his early career—a Marxist, Arab nationalist, and anticolonialist who had in substantial measure been shaped by the creation of Israel in 1948, the wars between Israel and the Arab states, and the Israeli-­Palestinian conflict. Both politically and artistically he had absorbed a wide range of influences from France, elsewhere in Europe, and the Eastern bloc. As he engaged in the process of interrogating his own programmatic Marxist and anti-­Zionist worldview that presupposed an eventual socialist revolution of which committed art was an essential component, he increasingly turned his attention to a group of nineteenth- and twentieth-­century Arab intellectuals associated with the Nahda, or “enlightenment,” whose project was to critique and modernize the Arab world. Although he never abandoned Marxism, even after the collapse of the Soviet Union in 1989, and he frequently expressed repulsion at what he saw as the devastation to culture, especially Arab folk culture, wrought by globalization and the rampant spread of consumerism, he became increasingly preoccupied with the internal reasons for the failures in Arab and Islamic societies. Two especially illuminating examples of Wannous’s social, political, and philosophical reconsiderations in the late 1980s and 1990s can be found in his writings during that period about Sayyid Qutb

Introduction xxiii

and Taha Hussein. Qutb, who was hanged in 1965 after supposedly plotting along with his cohorts in the Muslim Brotherhood to assassinate Nasser, was one of the principal intellectual architects of the modern Muslim Brotherhood, which briefly came to power in Egypt in 2012 via elections after Hosni Mubarak was deposed, and one of the most significant spiritual and political influences on Ayman al-­ Zawahri, the spiritual and operational leader of al Qaeda. As Kassab outlines, Wannous unequivocally rejected Qutb’s resort in his thinking to the idea of turath (heritage or civilizational culture) as an ahistorical talismanic concept suggesting that all Arabs are united through the glorious Islamic past. Conversely, Wannous pointed to Taha Hussein, a twentieth-­century Egyptian literary scholar, translator, and educator, who, like Wannous, studied at the Sorbonne, as a model of the modern Arab thinker. Hussein had written historically about literature, including Islamic literature, rejected religious education and rote learning, acknowledged the extent of Greek and Roman influence on Arab literature, and, like Wannous, viewed civil society in a secular, democratic state with guaranteed freedoms as a prerequisite for political and intellectual advancement.6 In addition to admiring various political and philosophical thinkers of the Nahda, Wannous continued to view two nineteenth-­century theater artists from the Levant, the Syrian playwright Abou Khalil al-­Qabbani and the Lebanese playwright Maroun al-­Naqqash, as precursors and political models. Al-­Naqqash was the first writer to introduce European-­ style drama to the region with his adaptation of Molière’s The Miser, staged in Beirut in 1848. Al-­Qabbani, whose life and theater were subjects of a 1972 play by Wannous in which he interrogates the concepts of heritage and cultural authenticity, ran afoul of the religious authorities in Damascus in the 1880s, who shut down his theater for subverting public morals by, among other things, using female actors. As Wannous told Mary Ilyas in a 1994 interview included here entitled “For the First Time Writing Is a Form of Freedom,” he particularly admired the experimentation these playwrights undertook. “The

xxiv Introduction

solutions they came up with to cultivate a particular kind of theater provoke awe,” he said. “These pioneers constitute the tradition that influenced me more than any other.” Another key factor in Wannous’s reassessment of his artistic and intellectual projects was the fact that in 1992 he was diagnosed with cancer of the pharynx. After an initial remission, the disease spread to his liver, and his doctor told him he had only six months to live. As he said in his speech “Thirst for Dialogue,” also included in this volume, which he gave in 1996, the year before his death, after being selected by UNESCO to give an address on “World Theater Day” that was circulated to theaters worldwide, he was determined after the diagnosis to go on writing as long as possible to engender dialogue and defend theater, which he saw as besieged by commercialism. “Writing,” he said, “and specifically writing for the theater, has been one of the most important means I have had to fight [cancer].” As a result of his reflections on the Arab Nahda, his intensive reconsideration of programmatic Marxism, his own attempts to transform an underdeveloped and authoritarian society through theater, and a medical diagnosis that amounted to a death sentence, Wannous’s writing underwent a profound transformation. As Wannous acknowledged in the 1994 interview with Mary Ilyas, he had previously believed that “individual strife or personal idiosyncrasies were unessential shallow bourgeois matters that should be set aside. My concern was all focused on the comprehension of history so I mistakenly thought that my consideration of the process of history must transcend individualities and the traps of bourgeois writing.” By his own admission, after his cancer diagnosis his works no longer portrayed individuals as forces and products of history and social conditions but as complex, contradictory, feeling beings whose weaknesses and tenacity in the face of the intractable forces arrayed against them often made them seem heroic. He suddenly expressed open admiration for the work of Chekhov, a political liberal whose tragicomedies about human foibles eschew programmatic solutions, and

Introduction xxv

of Shakespeare, whose depictions of human psychology at every level of society defy reductive ideological interpretations. In the 1990s, in chameleonlike fashion, Wannous rapidly produced plays in a variety of styles such as Historical Miniatures, a series of dramatizations of key episodes in Arab history that draws on the visual arts in a manner similar to that later used by Orhan Pamuk in his novel My Name Is Red; and Drunken Days, based on the life of the mother of his friend Omar Amiralay, which is the story of a Lebanese Christian woman in the 1930s who receives visitations from a jinn, or spirit, that clearly seems to be a manifestation of her suppressed erotic desires and who eventually abandons her husband and children for a Muslim man with whom she has fallen in love. In the 1990s, female characters began to figure much more prominently in Wannous’s work, in part because, like Shaw at the end of the nineteenth century in Europe, he recognized that the predicament of women—in this case in the Arab world at the end of the twentieth century—was the ideal subject for the stage. He also wished to use the stage as an arena for explicating the dilemmas of women and for imagining radically different futures for Arab women as his legacy to his own daughter, Dima, who herself ultimately became a writer. Wretched Dreams, which is also included in this volume, appears on the surface to draw on some of the themes from Wannous’s earliest works for the stage. The play takes place in the 1960s immediately after the Baʿthists have come to power and are attempting to tighten their grip on Syria through a network of low-­level spies. The principal character, Mary, lives in a home in rural Syria with her feckless husband, Faris, whom we soon discover gave her a venereal disease years earlier, shortly after they were married, which left her sterile. They share the house, which Mary owns and which has an adjoining coffeehouse, with another couple, Kazim, who is a low-­level intelligence officer and abusive husband, and his wife and cousin Ghada, who is Mary’s friend. All but one of the scenes take place in the claustrophobic rooms in the house, which also contains a sophis-

xxvi Introduction

ticated and mysterious lodger who, to Faris’s profound distress, Mary claims is her long-­lost son. The appearance of this ghost child, now decades older, at first brings the two women much closer but eventually wreaks havoc in the lives of both couples. In the play’s most extraordinary and inventive scene, which may or may not be one or more characters’ dreams, we see the lodger for the first and only time as he engages in a series of grotesque and deeply disturbing interactions with Mary and Faris. Although the solidarity that Mary and Ghada achieve as they admire the cultured lodger and conspire against their male tormentors is tragically thwarted, the theme of women directly challenging the authority of powerful men is central to Wannous’s most accomplished later work, Rituals of Signs and Transformations, which is the final play in this volume. Written in 1994, the play is loosely based on a historical incident in Damascus in the 1880s when the two most powerful religious leaders in the city, the Mufti and the Naqib al-­Ashraf, were involved in a feud and the Mufti arranged his rival’s arrest for lovemaking in a private park with his female consort. From this thread, Wannous weaves a fictional story of female empowerment in which the Naqib’s wife, Muʾmina, agrees to the Mufti’s request to save her husband from complete humiliation by substituting herself for the consort who is sharing his jail cell in exchange for a divorce. Once free of the Naqib, she changes her name to Almasa, “the diamond,” and embarks on a journey of self-­discovery, sexual liberation, and spiritual transformation that upends the entire social and political order of the city. However, Almasa is but one of a number of characters who undergo radical metamorphoses in a play that deals overtly with male homosexuality, religious and legal corruption, prostitution, and pedophilia. Drawing on the ritual theatricality and promise of self-­ enlightenment inherent in Sufism and plot elements drawn from Shakespeare’s Measure for Measure and Twelfth Night, Wannous has created another stunningly original theatrical hybrid that presaged many of the latent desires in Arab societies that began to emerge

Introduction xxvii

during the so-­called Arab Spring, which began more than a dozen years after Wannous’s death in 1997. In fact, a production of the play in 2011 at the American University of Cairo was explicitly linked to the uprising in Syria. Rituals of Signs and Transformations was also translated into French and produced at the Comédie-­Française in 2013, and the translation in this collection was the basis of the first English-­language version, which was also produced in 2013 at Babel Theater in Beirut. Although Wannous wrote two more plays after Rituals, since his death it has become a sort of epic valedictory that has ensured his position as the most important playwright from the Arab world in the second half of the twentieth century and one of its most important writers and thinkers. Although shortly before he died Wannous spoke for himself in the often quoted line from his 1997 address on World Theater Day that gives this volume its title, one cannot help but also hear his voice in the words of Almasa, who near the end of Rituals tries to explain her desire for a new self and society to the Mufti. Almasa tells the clergyman, who has by now fallen hopelessly in love with her: “My approach to love is impossible in a place where everyone’s either a slave or a prisoner . . . I don’t want to own or be owned by anyone . . . I want to be free, to live without a brand. Around me I see nothing but trivialities. I’ve lost. It’s possible I was unable to differentiate among my desires, but I won’t retreat.” As if he himself were a product of the magically contradictory logic of Sufism he employs in the play, Wannous was an Arab writer who embraced cosmopolitanism, an Arab nationalist who relentlessly explored defeat instead of celebrating victory, and a political playwright whose most powerful ideological statement was the creation of a female protagonist doomed by an almost erotic desire for a new kind of society. Nonetheless, within the dark vision of his own society that his plays dramatize, he offers his readers glints of the hope he claims we cannot live without. Robert Myers and Nada Saab

xxviii Introduction

Notes 1. Ali Naji al-­Anezi, An Analytical Study of the Theatre of the Syrian Playwright Saadallah Wannous, With Particular Emphasis on the Plays Written After the 1967 War (University of Sheffield, UK, unpublished dissertation, 2006), 3. 2. Ibid., 4. 3. Ibid., 5. 4. Ibid., 215. 5. Edward Ziter, Political Performance in Syria: From the Six-­Day War to the Syrian Uprising (New York: Palgrave Macmillan, 2015), 142. 6. Elizabeth Suzanne Kassab, Contemporary Arab Thought (New York: Columbia University Press, 2010).

AN EVENING’S ENTERTAINMENT FOR THE FIFTH OF JUNE

Characters

D i rect o r A udien ce/Spec tators (#1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7) Fem a le Spectato rs (#1, 2) C ho ru s Act o r s (#1, 2) ʿ Abda lghani al -­S ha ʿ ir W o rker s A nno u n cer M e n (#1, 2) Sm all C hi l d S ol diers (#1, 2, 3, 4) V i lla gers P easan t ʿ Al i Ma gis tr a te ʿ A bda lla h No tab les (#1, 2, 3) Yo un g M en (#1, 2) Shei kh

First published in Arabic as “Haflat Samar min Ajl 5 Huzayran,” Saʿdallah Wannous, in the journal Mawaqif, no. 3 (1969). First performed in Arabic in Lebanon and Sudan in 1970.

3

4 Plays

F a ther M e n in ʿ A bda l lah ’s Gr oup (#1, 2, 3) Yo un g W o m an ʿ A bda lra hm an ʿ Izza t A bou F a r aj Co m panion T ro upe M usi cians (#1, 2, 3) D an cer s Ol d Man Man in Sui t Arm e d Me n (#1, 2) The audience, history, government officials, and professional actors participate in this play.

■

Soon after the 1967 June War, most directors and heads of cultural institutions, more specifically governmental institutions, were, with their customary zeal, eager to confirm the significance of the institutions they headed. Governmental institutions are, after all, required to validate their existence through political events. The June War was for them but another of those political events, nothing more. A state theater invites the public to watch a play, The Whistling of Spirits, by ʿAbdalghani al-­Shaʿir. For the opening night, which is the night on which the events of our play take place, routine invitations are sent out to officials and pillars of government, in addition to refugees and third-­class citizens. In the case of these latter invitations, the status quo is best camouflaged so as to disguise its intrinsic reality. As is the case in our country, the director of the play is also the theater manager. I should add that he is an actor and an official whose presence extends well beyond the stage on which he stands and the building housing the theater. This play has no characters in the conventional sense, and the director and playwright, ʿAbdalrahman, Abou Faraj, and ʿIzzat are no exceptions. Like the other characters they are voices or manifestations of specific historical conditions. The characters have no special, individual characteristics but instead obtain these features as they sketch in the details of the general historical picture that constitutes both the form and content of the play. The auditorium is lit and so is the stage, which instead of a curtain has, hanging in front, a blackboard. On it is written “At eight forty-­five on the morning of June Fifth of 1967, Israel, a country that represents the most dangerous and harsh form of international imperialism, launched a thunderous attack upon the Arab countries, defeated their armies and occupied yet more of their land. If the attack clearly exposed the ferocity of imperialism and its lurking dangers, it

5

6 Plays

more clearly exposed the need to look at ourselves, to look into our mirrors and ask ourselves, ‘Who are we and why?’” The entertainment [referred to in the title of the play] is supposed to begin at eight-­thirty, but the time can be changed depending on the program of the theater that pre­sents it. Time passes, but no actor appears onstage and there is no indication that the performance will begin. The audience begins to complain. The sound of whispers gradually fills the auditorium, whistles come from the back seats, there are giggles, and heads turn. Another whistle, more noise and heads turn, displaying impatience. Sentences are heard. —What is this? We’re not slaves of their fathers. —What a farce! Is this a theater or a hotel? A loud whistle followed by another. —We didn’t come here to fall asleep. Whistles from different parts of the auditorium are heard. People in the audience shift restlessly in their seats. Chaos and complaints grow, but the stage remains empty and well-­lit as if it were an apathetic and wide-­open eye. This lighting may in fact be the factor increasing the discontent on the part of the spectators. —A technical error. —Like a typographical error. The perfect excuse for all kinds of nonsense. Whistle. —It could be a crisis backstage. —Or maybe the actors forgot their lines. —Whatever it is, it shows a lack of respect for the audience. —It could be an imperialist conspiracy. Laughs. —What they’re doing’s unacceptable. —You’re right. It’s unacceptable.

An Evening’s Entertainment for the Fifth of June 7

—They’re mocking us. —It’s almost nine. Voices and confusion. Complaints and expressions of discontent increase. The auditorium becomes tense as the Director enters trying to walk steadily. He is a confident and obese man. His tanned, full face reveals an almost indiscernible idiocy. He walks forward until he is directly facing the audience. He looks at the audience for several moments, appearing worried. The noise begins to subside. When there is total silence he begins to speak. D I RECT O R . (Confused) How difficult this is. Honestly, don’t misjudge us, please. If you want to call it a conspiracy, we were victims of it before you. AU DI E NCE . (From the auditorium) —What happened? —What sort of story is this? —So the play’s not going to begin? Noise gradually increases. DI RECT OR . (Loudly) Quiet, please. Quiet. I’ll explain everything, in detail . . . and faithfully. I was prepared for anything to happen this evening except what’s happening right now. We artists are generally prepared for all kinds of surprises, but this particular surprise is worse than anything I could have imagined. Suppose . . . we were suddenly deprived of our roles and had fallen into a sticky trap. No . . . I don’t want to get ahead of myself. I’m going to have to rely on your patience so that I can explain our crisis in detail. You have no idea how much we’re relying on your patience today so that we can find a way out of this crisis. S PECTA T O RS. (From the audience) —Enough with the preludes. —Get to the point. —What’s wrong?

8 Plays

—Is there going to be a play or not? Noise from the audience. DI RECT OR . Gentlemen . . . please help me perform this difficult task. I had considerable hesitation about doing it . . . but what else was I supposed to do? Dignitaries had received their invitations and most of the tickets had already been sold. S PECTA T O RS. (From the audience) —Well . . . so what? —So what? DI RECT OR . Quiet . . . quiet. (He wipes his forehead looking embarrassed and annoyed) Besides, you have the right to know the whole truth. Otherwise trust between us would be impossible. (Pause. He wipes his forehead again) You’re obviously aware of the difficult historical situation that we’re trying to navigate. It’s as if the earth had shaken under all our feet and we’d all experienced a bitter taste that I’d describe as dramatic. Of course I don’t want to re-­open our wounds. Our goal this evening was nobler and more elevated than to simply stir up gloomy memories. To be absolutely candid, memory is not the province of theater. It may be the province of history, but here our only province is art. Art that is at every single moment a demonstration. Ever since the “events” began, I’ve believed that our theater should not remain in the shadows. Haven’t we demonstrated at every moment, haven’t we celebrated every change? Our demonstration needs to be even more vivid and boisterous. The events that transpired around us were neither normal nor easy to endure. (Pause) At the beginning, while our daily lives and the thoughts illuminating our minds were framed by exploding shells, I dreamed of preparing an evening of readings at which we would dramatically recite poems that had emerged from the current circumstances or were related to them. (Acting begins) The lights would be dim, as if the sound of bullets were throbbing in their veins. (Lights dim, bullets are heard) The actor would move downstage like a mythic figure

An Evening’s Entertainment for the Fifth of June 9

bathed in a multicolored halo. (He is bathed in multicolored light) He would stand before you here . . . scrutinizing you. There would be music moving in waves across every inch of the stage with the sound of bullets throbbing in it too. (Music and the sound of bullets up. The spectacle onstage is awe-­inspiring) The actor would recite as if what he was saying were an explosion: “Fear is the weeping of a country we don’t even recognize.” (As he speaks, a Chorus, a group of men in dust-­colored clothes walking in unison, gather around the Director) A chorus of men with glassy eyes in dust-­colored clothes that touch the ground would ­repeat CH ORU S. (Solemnly, emotionless, with their eyes opened wide) “Fear is the weeping of a country we don’t even recognize.” DI RECT OR . Then the actor, accompanied by the sound of the chorus, would continue Time would be pregnant with grief and catastrophe Days would give birth to days That overflow with lifeless blood Menses and the offspring of insects Cadavers would putrefy Forests of grief bloom The thirsty land would drink them in CH ORU S. But fear is the weeping of a country we don’t even recognize. DI RECT OR . (Still demonstrating what the actor would do) Invaders appear Hunger emerges Plague arrives Rot and more rot erupts But fear is the weeping of a country we don’t even recognize CH ORU S. But fear is the weeping of a country we don’t even recognize. (Pause) Time would be pregnant with grief and catastrophe

10 Plays

Days would give birth to days That overflow with lifeless blood Menses and the offspring of insects The Director claps, the Chorus stops and exits. The light that was shining on the Director fades. His role as the “actor” ends. DI RECT OR . (Returns to the front of the stage) I just wanted to offer you an example of what I had in mind. However, I’ve recently realized . . . and I hope it’s just temporary . . . that you have come to despise poetry and to reject it. So I gave up on my concept, and I began to develop a project that was theatrical. You shouldn’t assume that it was an easy task. Choosing a text is always one of the most difficult and complex problems that face those who work in the theater in our part of the world. We wanted a text that would respond to the sentiments of the moment. How miserly are our libraries, or rather, I would say, how impoverished they are. Of course, before anything, I glanced at Tawfiq al-­Hakim, but, unfortunately, Hakim despises politics and couldn’t care less about war. I skimmed the pages of other writers and, for one reason or another, found them all wanting. S PECTA T O RS. (From the audience) —You’re disparaging our entire literary tradition. —Tawfiq al-­Hakim is a great writer. —You’re belittling our talent and our heritage. DI RECT OR . No. I didn’t mean to belittle or insult our writers. Like you, I have due respect and appreciation for all of them. I’m talking about a specific situation. I was looking for a text that would respond appropriately to our current condition, but among those I read I couldn’t find one that was suitable. So I thought the best plan would be to cooperate with a writer to compose a text whose content would be inspired by recent events. I’ve done that before. I’ve collaborated several times with ʿAbdalghani al-­Shaʿir, but this time it was a mistake. Betrayal is such an unbearable blow from a friend. No, I

An Evening’s Entertainment for the Fifth of June 11

don’t want to go off on a tangent. Let me return to the beginning. The story starts in my office. I invited Mr. ʿAbdalghani to come for a visit one night, and he did. Our city was a gloomy blue and still sobbing. He moves to the left, near a wall. Blue light shines on the stage. Actor #1 enters carrying two chairs. Actor #2 follows him, carrying two framed pictures, one of Molière and the other of Samuel Beckett. Actor #2 hangs the two pictures on the wall behind the Director and exits. Actor #1 places the chairs facing one another, leaving a space between them, representing a desk. The Director sits, and Actor #1, who is here playing the role of the author, ʿAbdalghani, sits. DI RECT OR . (Trying to remember the original encounter) Welcome, it’s been quite a while since we last saw one another. ACTOR #1. (Playing the role here of ʿAbdalghani) Really. It hasn’t been that long. DI RECT OR . I was afraid you’d left town. The “real” ʿAbdalghani rises from among the spectators and walks toward the stage, shouting. ʿ ABDA LGH ANI. You don’t need an actor to play me. I’m here in person. ʿAbdalghani is tall with delicate features, distinguished by a sharp, indecipherable smile that seems to cover his entire face. DIRECTOR. (Surprised) You? You’ve come in spite of everything you’ve done. ʿ ABDA LGH ANI. As far as I know I’m not barred from the theater. (He goes up onto the stage) DI RECT OR . So tell me, did you get what you wanted? Look at this difficult situation you’ve put me in. ʿ ABDA LGH ANI. (He smiles his indecipherable smile from ear to ear. Actor #1 rises and stands aside) I thought you wanted to tell the audience about our meeting.

12 Plays

D I RECT O R . (Angrily) Exactly. That’s what I want. Sit down. (Actor #1 exits, to ʿAbdalghani) Let’s be civil to one another and tell them everything that happened. My goal was clear, wasn’t it? ʿ ABDA LGH ANI. I wouldn’t say that . . . DI RECT OR . Then have a seat. Let’s recall for this distinguished audience what took place between us. (ʿAbdalghani sits. The Director begins to play the words and actions he remembers. Smiling) I was afraid you’d left town. ʿ ABDA LGH ANI. Are we repeating that? DI RECT OR . Yes. From the very first sentence. ʿ ABDA LGH ANI. Whatever you’d like. DI RECT OR . (He repeats) I say . . . “I was afraid you’d left town.” ʿ A B D A LGH A N I . (Begins to play what he remembers) Leave town, where to? D I RECT O R . (With a suggestive smile) You know, most of our friends are scattered about in far-­flung towns or up north. ʿ ABDA LGH ANI. I’ve never considered leaving, and I wasn’t particularly scared. DI RECT OR . You’re like me. My wife nagged me nonstop to go to her parents’ village, but I refused to give up and run away. (Moves his brows and shakes his head) What times we live in. We can’t sleep. We have no idea what’s going on, and things simply happen one after another. What times we live in. I was beginning to think that our whole way of life was falling apart, that the future was incomprehensible. But here we are as always, still on our feet. S PECTA T O RS. (From the audience) —On our feet or flat on our faces. —Our feet are being ripped apart like corn husks. —Or torn to pieces from so much running. —Let’s listen to them.

An Evening’s Entertainment for the Fifth of June 13

—These comments are disgraceful. —But they’re true. —No, no one believes that. The commotion in the audience grows louder. D I RECT O R . (To ʿAbdalghani as he angrily points toward the audience) Do you like this? (ʿAbdalghani smiles, the Director rises, appearing upset, and walks toward the audience, attempting to calm its members down with his hands. To audience) You’re making our job this evening more difficult. Haven’t we suffered enough? (The commotion and whispers continue. He raises his voice) At this rate, we’ll never finish. (He claps his hands and looks toward backstage. One of the Workers in the theater enters) Set the scene. W O RKER . Right away. (Goes backstage) DI RECT OR . (Talking to people in the front row of the audience) I’m very sorry, gentlemen, but you’ll see soon enough whether I’m the one to blame. He returns to his seat. The curtain falls. Three knocks are heard, indicating that the performance is about to begin. Lights down in the auditorium. Commotion ends. Curtain rises. The stage is bathed in pale blue light except for the corner in which the Director and the playwright, ʿAbdalghani, sit. The corner is lit white. They are seated as they were before. DI RECT OR . (Returning to the previous conversation) And you? How has the time passed for you during this strange period? ʿ ABDA LGH ANI. (With a grave expression) Like a cloud of sweat, commotion, and verbosity. (Smiling) I’m now able to distinguish the voices of all the announcers on the radio. DI RECT OR . In that respect we’re all the same. I still feel as if several stations are running together in my head. I meant something else by my question. I was wondering how these recent events spoke to you.

14 Plays

ʿ ABDA LGH ANI. (After a pause, but still smiling) They told me to cry, but I had no tears. They told me to sleep, so I went to sleep. DI RECT OR . Who among us has not felt his heart split apart like a piece of rotten fruit? Who has not seen his tears dry up? S PECTA T ORS. —How easily they find the right words. —And how presumptuous they are. —(Sternly) Shame on you, people. Let them continue. DI RECT OR . I, however, was speaking from an artistic point of view. Events as violent as these don’t happen often. Experiencing them must have enriched your art and writing. That’s the case with every artist. ʿ A B D A LGH A N I . (Sarcastically) You’re giving me a big head. Maybe things happened as they did so my writing would be richer. Which reminds me of the story of the thirteen lines. DI RECT OR . The thirteen lines? ʿ ABDA LGH ANI. Haven’t you heard it? DI RECT OR . I don’t believe I have. ʿ ABDA LGH ANI. Listen then. There was once a revolution that began in one of our brother countries. Many young people here were enthusiastic about it, and some even decided to travel there and take part in it. Among those who went was a young man who dreamed of becoming a writer, a political leader, or a movie star. It didn’t matter which. And eventually one of those dreams came true. When he and his friends arrived in this country’s capital, they checked in to a hotel and he went straight to his room. He removed his clothes, put on his pajamas and sat at his desk for several hours and wrote thirteen lines about the revolution. Then he left his room, amazed by his accomplishment, and read what he had written to his friends, wondering all the while whether the revolution had actually erupted so that he

An Evening’s Entertainment for the Fifth of June 15

might write those lines. And many times afterward, he read those lines, and each time he did he’d wonder the same thing. DI RECT OR . (Laughing) Your wit’s so easily accessible. Even if the earth began to tremble, you’d still be ready with a joke. This friend of yours will continue until Judgment Day to ask “What does any of this have to do with us?” The important thing is to not simply fold our arms and waste our time asking pointless questions. ʿ ABDA LGH ANI. Are you planning a counterattack? D I RECT O R . (Smiling) This is hardly an appropriate moment for jokes. ʿ ABDA LGH ANI. (Absently) Ah, so you’re planning a new play. D IRECT OR . Of course. The attack that took place provides us with a perfect opportunity to create an extraordinary piece of work. ʿ ABDA LGH ANI. (Appearing despondent) Do you really believe people at this moment care about seeing a new play? DI RECT OR . Do you believe it’s appropriate to ask this kind of question? Our theater is a public arena that shouldn’t just shut down and disconnect itself from current events. Theater’s vital, or at least it’s supposed to be. ʿ ABDA LGH ANI. Excuse me, but I think you left a sentence out: “We shouldn’t concern ourselves with what people care about. Theater is always vital, or at least it’s supposed to be.” DI RECT OR . Really? Okay. But memory’s not a tape recorder or a perfect print. ʿ ABDA LGH ANI. Of course, but you seemed so keen to recall our conversation precisely, that’s all. We can continue now. (Recalling) Theater . . . oh yes, theater, but its space now stretches beyond the little stage in our theater building. DI RECT OR . (Happy) See, you know how much I love working

16 Plays

with you. I admire your imagination, your ability to paint a picture filled with symbolism and passion. The work we created together in 1956 brought us all the success we could have hoped for. ʿ ABDA LGH ANI. It was so easy for us to recite poetry and sing patriotic songs. D I RECT O R . Lyrics, characters, and political positions came easily. ʿ ABDA LGH ANI. It was simple to let our imaginations soar. DI RECT OR . Your imagination lacks neither wings nor color. You were inspired by less significant events and still you produced quality work. I think whatever we do now . . . (Excited) we’ll need to make history vivid onstage. ʿ ABDA LGH ANI. Hasn’t history become weak in the knees from being so vivid? DI RECT OR . That’s why I think it’s a good opportunity. There are millions of possibilities. ʿ A B D A LGH A N I . Again, we should be grateful that current events have made our job so easy. DI RECT OR . Look, you have no right to waver. ʿ A B D A LGH A N I . (Sarcastically, bitterly) You’re not telling me what to do, are you? DI RECT OR . As a matter of fact I am. We all need to connect the links of time together, to fill in the gaps that have suddenly emerged in history. Refusing to do so, which is our responsibility, is unacceptable. It’s incumbent upon everyone to do something. ʿ ABDA LGH ANI. (Very bitterly) I assure you, I read every official newspaper this morning, listened to three news broadcasts and all of the commentaries. I refused to talk to any of my compatriots and proudly refused to spread rumors. I walked along the streets, looking

An Evening’s Entertainment for the Fifth of June 17

neither side to side nor straight ahead. My eyes were firmly planted on the ground. I can even describe all the paving stones on which I walked. I behaved like a good citizen, and you’re telling me what I’m supposed to do? Do you think I’m the kind of person who would neglect his duties? S PECTA T O RS. (From the audience) —What a farce! —Exactly! What’s a good citizen anyway? —We’re all good citizens. —Do I cease to be a citizen if I don’t read newspapers? —This is depraved mockery of us and of everything. —(Loudly getting up from his seat) If you can’t respect this place, at least respect those who are here by invitation. The noise subsides. D I RECT O R . (About the audience, shaking his head) Are you happy now? It doesn’t matter. (He pauses then resumes playing the conversation that he is recalling) We didn’t meet to waste our time telling jokes. We’ll have time for that later. What we need to do now is work as quickly as possible and produce something within a couple of weeks. I want you to roll up your sleeves and get to work because you don’t have much time. Do you understand? A few weeks, that’s it. I have no doubt your imagination won’t fail you. ʿ ABDA LGH ANI. (Hesitating) But don’t forget that defeat diminishes the imagination. DI RECT OR . Defeat? ʿ ABDALGH ANI. Yes, defeat. Does the word shock you? Or perhaps it has a strange ring to it? D IRECT OR . To hell with defeat. Who’s talking about that? ʿ ABDA LGH ANI. So what do you mean? DI RECT OR . What I have in mind is something about heroism,

18 Plays

not defeat. See, I’m thinking of one thing and you’re thinking of something else. Heroism, as you know, is a perpetual source of inspiration. ʿ ABDA LGH ANI. Especially when heroism’s a fantasy. DI RECT OR . Don’t exaggerate. I think one can always find heroism. (Pause) Even if you can’t, what difference does it make to an artist? That’s a trivial detail. ʿ ABDA LGH ANI. Perhaps. I’d forgotten how much you hate anything realistic. D I RECT O R . Where does one find the realistic, ʿAbdalghani? We’ve had this discussion before. We’re not here to make history or to keep regurgitating it over and over. We’re here to create, to keep art alive. ʿ A B D A LGH A N I . (Tired, sarcastically) Art! Oh yes . . . art. Excuse me. It’s only natural that things are a little confused in my head. DIRECTOR. (Smiling and pretending to be friendly) Your malice stings, but I’m used to it. I’m not going to be deterred by your jokes. Let’s put our heads together and get to work. Of course, I have a vision and some general ideas. ʿ ABDA LGH ANI. I’m sure you’ve prepared almost everything. DIRECT OR . No, just a general outline. I can envision a few of the scenes, of course. The end, for example, is very clear in my mind. I could put it together right this second. It’s going to be a moving majestic scene. I imagine . . . ʿ ABDA LGH ANI. (Interrupting) It’s tragic to begin at the end. DI RECT OR . (Smiling) I find the image stimulating, but you’re right. Let’s put the end aside for now. I’ll explain to you what I have in mind. I think it provides an excellent foundation for a fine piece of work. For example, I imagine the beginning without any introduction. I make the spectator part of the event. (Loudly) They’re in a war.

An Evening’s Entertainment for the Fifth of June 19

S PECTA T ORS. (From the audience) —But the war has ended. —The war hasn’t ended. —It’ll be quite a while before you see the next part. —Silence! DI RECT OR . (Ignoring the comments from the audience) Here we can rely on several effects to manifest the ambience. A terrible explosion is heard offstage. (An explosion is heard offstage) Followed by the continuous sound of static on the radio. (Static from a radio is heard) ʿ ABDALGHANI. (No longer enacting the recollection. Appearing upset, with a sarcastic smile) I thought you might do that. DI RECT OR . (Violently) I have the right to suggest scenes I’ve conceived. ʿ ABDA LGH ANI. That’s a clever way of going about it. DI RECT OR . (Angrily) I’m not being clever. These are my ideas. It’s only natural that I pre­sent them in my own theatrical way. Unless you propose to deprive us of all possible strategies. If this were your play we were going to stage you could object, but I assure you it’s not. I’m just trying to undo the damage you’ve done as a result of your whim. ʿ ABDALGHANI. Oh, don’t be angry. I simply wanted to acknowledge how smart you are. (He shakes his head) It’s better to continue. This has gone on longer than I expected. D I RECT O R . Don’t worry about that. I want them to know exactly what I had planned for tonight. Then we’ll find out if I’m clever or not. (Pause) Where were we? Yes, I was saying (As he returns to recollecting) I was saying that static is heard from a radio offstage. And then there is a terrible explosion. (An explosion is heard) Air-­raid sirens are heard. (The sound of sirens) We hear the roar of planes overhead. (Airplanes are heard) The radio announcer says

20 Plays

ANNO U N CER . (Offstage) War has broken out as a result of the treacherous attack committed by the enemy in the south of our country. At eight-­forty . . . DI RECT OR . At this point the sound of sirens becomes so loud that it drowns out the voice of the announcer. A number of people enter the stage. They are disturbed and agitated, moving in various directions. (Several people enter. They are different ages and sizes. Some of them steal glances at the newspapers they are carrying. Others listen to their transistor radios. They appear confused. They move about as if they don’t know where to go) I think silence here would be the most revealing. All meaning would be concentrated in these people’s eyes. Nevertheless, some people here and there speak, saying M AN #1. (Frightened) It’s war. M AN #2. God help us. Yes, it’s war. D I RECT O R . (Continues) More people enter who appear lost, occupying all areas of the stage. Their movements become quicker and more agitated. (More people enter and their movements are quicker) Then I picture a small child entering. (A Small Child enters and does precisely what the Director describes) He doesn’t know where to go. He walks among people trying to avoid being trampled by them. When other explosions are heard in the distance and the sound of planes shakes everything around him, he looks up to the sky and bursts into tears. (The Small Child cries) Amid the chaos no one acknowledges him. Each time he hears an explosion, he places his hand on his head and takes off screaming, not knowing where to run. You see, this child could be a symbol. He could have profound significance during a peculiar period such as the one that will be represented when the curtain opens. All the disturbed people who are walking about exit the stage. As the far-­off sirens that sound like weeping rise, the child becomes more and more frightened and confused. The stage becomes completely empty except for the child, who does not understand what is happening. We have no idea how the child be-

An Evening’s Entertainment for the Fifth of June 21

came separated from his family. After long moments of confusion, he exits, extremely frightened. The stage is transformed into a profound opening from which confused and rumbling sounds emerge. Rumbling, weeping sirens, explosions. (The sounds he describes briefly occur onstage and then end. He continues) You see, I think this is a reasonable introduction that would immediately place the spectator within the action. After that . . . I’m not claiming that all the other scenes are as clear in my mind. However, we can . . . A loud, sharp voice is heard in the middle of the auditorium. SPECTATOR IN THE MIDD LE OF THE AUDI ENCE . (Sharply) What sort of fairy tales are you telling? You’re preposterous, you and your confused, silent characters. As for your child, he’s nothing more than a doll made of rags. S PECTA T O RS. —That’s no way to talk. —Good God, what kind of evening is this? DI RECT OR . (He looks toward the audience) Watch your mouth, sir, if you please. You’re not in a café. S PECTA T O R IN THE MIDD LE OF THE AU DI E N CE. What I said needs to be said, and a lot more too. What are these stories you’re trying to tell us? Have you ever seen any of these silly, spineless people? The war didn’t take place a hundred years ago. It started a couple of months ago. We all remember that morning very well. Our war, unlike other wars, was the fulfillment of an ancient and righteous desire. We all remember that morning. The streets were full of people, embracing one another, weeping in ecstasy. We didn’t walk around scared, with gloomy expressions on our faces like those sick shadows you described. S PECTA T O RS. (From the audience) —Amen. —In our neighborhood, women ululated so much they were hoarse.

22 Plays

—What you showed us is like the way wars start in American movies. —Wait a second, sir, you’re going too far. D I RECT O R . (Agitated, whereas ʿAbdalghani’s smile widens) Actually I don’t understand why we’re having these outbursts. No one’s saying anything different from what you are. I was one of those people who wept with joy. What I’m trying to do is create a theatrical picture of the start of the war, nothing more. SPECTATOR IN THE MIDDLE OF THE AUDIENCE. We lived the real picture. DI RECT OR . We all lived the real picture. I’m not claiming to be presenting a documentary of what happened. What we’re doing here is a theatrical process. You must’ve misunderstood. If you think I meant to portray people as horrified and cowardly, you’re absolutely wrong. Had you waited a minute you would’ve seen that what you were talking about was precisely what I had in mind. This is principally a symbolic picture that sets the stage for a moving ambience. What will happen later will clarify my intentions with no confusion whatsoever. Please follow what we’re doing quietly and stop interrupting us. (He looks at ʿAbdalghani and sees him smiling. He grinds his teeth angrily) What was I saying . . . (He tries to recall ) Yes . . . After that I see four soldiers in combat uniforms. The stage becomes a battlefield . . . The light on the stage turns green and opulent, filled with dust and smoke and flashes of gunfire. The Stagehands enter carrying two boards covered with mud and dirt. They set them up Right and make what looks like a trench. After that, four Soldiers in combat uniforms rush in. They are camouflaged with mud, leaves, and branches. They are carrying their automatic weapons and looking intensely about. They jump into the trench, prepare their weapons, and aim them at the audience. DI RECT OR . What I see when I imagine this scene is the soldiers becoming one with the dirt and stone and everything related to the

An Evening’s Entertainment for the Fifth of June 23

earth. They are part of it, an extension of it, its raison d’être. Do you understand what I’m getting at? ʿ ABDA LGH ANI. (Sarcastically) I’m trying. D IRECT OR . I have no doubt you’re more capable than anyone else of imagining it, assuming you were following what I was saying. ʿ ABDA LGH ANI. (Very calmly) I was following you. DIRECT OR. (Sensing ʿAbdalghani’s sarcasm, becomes annoyed) Fine, let’s set that aside. I’m saying . . . (Acts out what he is saying) . . . the soldiers are rooted in the earth, lying in wait. The scene is heavy with silence, their solemn gazes spreading in its veins. The message in their eyes is “the enemy will not pass here.” Their features shout, “We have become death.” When the noise of the battle starts to subside, scattered words are emitted from their dry mouths, resembling the sound of choking. SOL DI ER #1. The bombing has stopped. SOL DI ER #3. I think they’re planning another assault. SOL DI ER #1. Obviously. DI RECT OR . The silence is leaden, absolute. The air of expectation is heavy with destiny, catastrophe. ʿ A B D A LGH A N I . (Disgusted) This is where I’m supposed to interject, right? DI RECT OR . Exactly. ʿ ABDALGH ANI. Ahem, I remember very well that at the beginning I was being sarcastic. I remember very well I was sarcastic. But, who knows how . . . Even now, I don’t know how . . . little by little, I began to be drawn in. DI RECT OR . As I remember it, that day you interjected to say other words. ʿ ABDA LGH ANI. Yes, other meaningless words.

24 Plays

DI RECT O R . The time has not arrived for you to start defending an indefensible work. (Expressing schadenfreude) We are here to talk about something else. ʿ ABDA LGH ANI. (Shaking his head) Fine. I admit it, you’re intelligent. Let’s let it go. (Pause. He returns to recollecting) The third soldier looks at his comrades. SOL DI ER #3. Only four of us left. SOL DI ER #2. Our fate will be the same as the others. DI RECT OR . And the fourth soldier says SOL DI ER #4. We have the bad luck of being alive after everyone else is dead. DI RECT OR . Then gunshots are heard in the distance. They become utterly silent. ʿ ABDA LGH ANI. The second soldier says S O L D I ER #2. Ahmad was hoping his wife would receive this letter. ʿ ABDA LGH ANI. The third soldier answers SOL DI ER #3. What about our own letters? I wonder if there’ll be anyone left to send them to our loved ones. ʿ ABDA LGH ANI. And the first one says SO L DI ER #1. Since they say one’s heart knows, the beating of their own will no doubt tell them. In such moments, the lights will flicker, their hearts will add a beat, quaking like the earth, and then voices will erupt in lamentation and the ceaseless waiting will come to an end. DI RECT OR . That’s a touching line, but what I was thinking . . . (Hesitates) Is it a good thing to mix the day-­to-­day with a heroic situation such as this?

An Evening’s Entertainment for the Fifth of June 25

ʿ ABDA LGH ANI. What are you trying to say? I don’t understand what you mean by day-­to-­day. DI RECT OR . I mean . . . (Hesitates) I want to say, a soldier is, as you know, primarily a symbol. ʿ ABDA LGH ANI. That means he’s above regular people? DI RECT OR . And above our insignificant affairs. ʿ A B D A LGH A N I . Above sentimental relations and trivial emotions that cross our hearts. Above love, fear, worry, remorse. DI RECT OR . Don’t push this too far. I wonder . . . doesn’t the symbol become diluted if we muddle it with trivial matters? ʿ ABDA LGH ANI. What I know personally is that soldiers marry and they have children, families, and relatives. They enjoy the pleasures of life just as we do and actually have more of them. DI RECT OR . (After considering) I know, but . . . (Pauses) It’s not important. You’ll discover the best way to create the characters and weave their lives together. What I wanted to do was to give you a general idea of what I had in mind, nothing more. The rest is your area of expertise. Let’s continue. (He returns to the game of remembering the scene) The dialogue between them goes off on tangents. It’s choppy, lugubrious. S O L D I ER #1. I heard Sheikh ʿAbdalghaffar once say that one who becomes a martyr is hailed by beautiful voices in heaven. SOL DI ER #2. The white wings of doves will flutter for him. SOL DI ER #1. He will be welcomed by a lovely song. His wounds will be salved by fingers of light like healing balm. S O L D I ER #3. (He looks up, sighing) Our comrades await us. And perhaps they’re smiling. ʿ ABDA LGH ANI. I think Soldier #4 will then interject and say SOLDIER #4. A plague upon all of you. If you don’t leave heaven

26 Plays

and its voices out of this, when the enemy confronts us they’ll think they’re facing butterflies instead of soldiers. DI RECT OR . I find what he said harsh in such an ethereal moment. ʿ ABDA LGH ANI. Are they in a battlefield or in a Sufi circle? DI RECT OR . Even so . . . I think the scene should have a spiritual dimension. Soldier #2 will answer SOL DI ER #2. Don’t blaspheme the heavens. What will we do if we’re deprived of support from above? SOL DI ER #3. In days of old, heaven rained stones of clay upon its enemies. SO L DI ER #1. Thrown by birds. SO L DI ER #4. And today stones and birds fall upon our heads. (Angrily) But I can’t understand why it’s suddenly quiet. I wonder what the bastards are up to now. SOL DI ER #1. Have you seen their tanks? They’re the devils incarnate. SOL DI ER #3. And their other weapons. It’s as if they were created by sorcery. SOL DI ER #1. (After a moment) If you add it up, our side’s laughable. SOL DI ER #2. However, we’re the wall of defense against them and their devils. Each one of us is a steadfast barricade. We’ll make them curse their ancient forebears. D I RECT O R . (Enthusiastically) That’s the way I imagine the scene more or less. A period of silence, then one of them looks cautiously about . . . (Soldier #3 looks about) . . . and sees the expanse of the earth, the stones, the trenches, the bomb craters. This place allows him to understand the meaning of loneliness.

An Evening’s Entertainment for the Fifth of June 27

SO L DI ER #3. It’s as if the land were suddenly barren. SOL DIER #2. The land isn’t barren as long as we’re alive. SOL DIER #4. I wish we had some idea what was happening with the other troops. S O L D I ER #1. We’re cut off, lost. We have no orders and no means of communication. SOL DI ER #2. (Moments later) But we’re in our trenches, in our land, doing exactly what we should be doing. D I RECT O R . Another bubble of apprehensive silence hovers above them. Their eyes turn in their sockets, feverish, as if they were flames on the battlefield. ʿ ABDA LGH ANI. Then one of them sadly mutters SOL DI ER #3. It’s been almost a whole month since I received a letter from my family. I’d promised to go visit them for a week when I was on leave. Then things happened and all leaves were canceled. My little brother’s expecting me to bring him a toy car. SOL DI ER #1. The last time I was on leave, I got into a fight with my family, which makes me incredibly sad. SOL DI ER #2. Why did you fight with your family? SOL DI ER #1. (Sighing) It’s a long story that has to do with love and marriage. DI RECT OR . (Impatiently) Then the roar of planes is heard in the distance. SOL DI ER #4. The attack’s started again. SOL DI ER #3. The cowards. They wouldn’t dare take a single step if they weren’t protected by their planes. D I RECT O R . (Quickly and enthusiastically) I don’t know how you’ll create the dialogue between them. We’re only discussing gen-

28 Plays

eral themes now. (He performs what he then describes) Planes approach, explosions take place in quick succession, the sound of military vehicles fills the wide horizon. Tanks and armored vehicles crawl toward them like embodiments of horror. And the battle begins again. (All the sounds he describes are heard by the Spectators. The ambience of the battle fills the stage) I imagine the enormity of the attack compared to the tiny number of defenders will make a profound impression upon the audience. (The Soldiers are confused and react in an exaggerated manner. They are frantically consumed by the battle) SOL DI ER #2. (Stunned) To the right. SOL DI ER #1. Those are armored vehicles. SOL DI ER #3. The bastards. SOL DI ER #4. One bullet, one man. Aim well and let death sing its song. The Soldiers aim their weapons toward the audience. The sound of rapid firing is heard. DI RECT OR . A hellish battle begins. SOL DI ER #3. Take that. SO L DI ER #2. And that. The sound of gunfire amid the sounds of battle is almost melodic. SOL DI ER #2. Don’t forget what you swore you’d do if I died. DI RECT OR . Shrapnel rains perilously down on them. Soldier #3 collapses onto his weapon. SOL DI ER #1. (Quickly checking the bleeding body of his comrade) He’s dead. SOL DI ER #2. (To the enemy) This one’s for you. SOL DI ER #4. They’ll advance on a sea of corpses. Nothing but corpses.

An Evening’s Entertainment for the Fifth of June 29

DI RECT O R . And more shrapnel rains perilously down. S O L D I ER #1. (Screaming) A-­h-­h. (He collapses at the edge of the trench) SOL DI ER #2. He’s dead. S OL DI ER #4. Oh, despicable war. Let them get a taste of how we die. Fire! D I RECT O R . Shrapnel again rains perilously down. (The other two Soldiers are killed. The firing stops. The noise subsides) I imagine them at the edge of their trench lying motionless like dried-­up screams issuing forth from an angry land that’s been defiled. You see, with light and music I’ll be able to create various meanings in a scene so vivid it’s as if it were history made manifest. The scene ends. (The Soldiers rise from their trench and exit. After a moment, the Director continues) The way I envision it, the sound of battle continues even during intermission, if there is one. I don’t want the effect on the spectators to be interrupted. I want the atmosphere to remain tense until the more comprehensive scene begins. ʿ ABDA LGH ANI. (Not immediately clear whether he is being sarcastic or not) So, are you completely done with the soldiers? DI RECT OR . (Surprised) Weren’t they just killed in the trench, or are you not following me? ʿ ABDA LGH ANI. Of course I was following and I know they were all killed, but that doesn’t necessarily mean they’re not coming back. DI RECT OR . I don’t know what you’re talking about. ʿ ABDA LGH ANI. I’m trying to say that even though they were killed, why not let them go on being in the play? That enriches their complexity as characters and gives the work a moving, symbolic dimension. D I RECT O R . (Slowly considering) Go on being in the play? (Continues considering)

30 Plays

S PECTA T ORS. (Overlapping, from the audience) —They resurrect the dead and kill the living. —An amusing game. —What about the ones who really were killed? Who’s going to resurrect them? —They’re alive with their Lord. DI RECT OR . (Having finished considering and now looking content, pats ʿAbdalghani on the shoulder with admiration) You see why I like working with you? They go on being in the play. A wonderful insight that no one else would even think of. It’ll be marvelous, it’ll connect the scenes and give the final image an extra punch. More importantly, it’ll provide a rationale for the internal logic and the plot progression of the play. I imagine the soldiers appearing as an astonishing and novel element in the middle of a fierce debate that, in spite of its good intentions, goes nowhere. ʿ ABDA LGH ANI. (His smile widens) What debate? D I RECT O R . I’ll tell you. It’s another scene. (The Stagehands carry various props onto the stage, and they set up a new scene as the Director speaks) I’m positive now that we’ll create a work that’s worth the effort. I told you at the beginning that what I had in mind is a collection of disconnected images. But with one brilliant stroke you’ve linked them all together. Next I imagine one of the villages right by the border that has awakened to the booming sounds of war and exploding bombs. A normal village, like any village in our countryside. (As the Director describes his village, the Stagehands set up a village similar to the one he is describing) Scattered houses made of mud in no particular pattern, but they are, as in all villages, gathered around a spacious square with a fountain in the middle. To the right of the square is a stone mosque with a minaret shooting up toward the sky. In this village there are peasants like those in any village, tough men whose pride and honor are as unsullied as the white kaffiyehs on their heads. As the curtain rises, the last sounds of the “call to prayer” are

An Evening’s Entertainment for the Fifth of June 31

heard, and the scene opens on men running in various directions. In the contours of their faces are the determination and concern one sees in peasants in rural areas. Among the men are little children running around who don’t understand what’s going on, and eventually everyone meets in front of the mosque. (The Stagehands finish putting together a village similar to that which is described. The “call to prayer” is heard in the distance. Silent men with expressions of worry and surprise begin to gather in front of the entrance to the mosque. Running about in their midst are Children) You see, the scene here is more general and comprehensive. Of course I don’t want to constrain you with too many of my own images and details. You know what I’m talking about. A village during a war. This part is where I imagine the plot unfolding. I don’t know how you’ll construct it, but what I care about is the specific tone and attitude. It’s a noble kind of struggle upon which a grueling future will depend. People here are presented with two options. In their small world, based on simplicity and age-­old virtues, this choice is as difficult and brutal as the war itself. I see them gathered in the square, their ears flush with the sound of the call to prayer, the mosque buttressing their backs and embracing their communion. (From the gathering comes commotion, unclear voices) Many of the children have anxious faces and questioning eyes. Their presence, which is the cause of this dilemma, lends the moment its significance, intensifying the choice these people face. As in the previous scene, it’s important that they should be cut off from the wider world. Do you agree? (The clamor in the group increases) This village is separated from the body of the homeland, but although it’s detached, it nonetheless is a symbol of it. These people, and these people alone, by the power of their own free will, must choose their own fate. Do you get what I’m driving at? ʿ ABDA LGH ANI. Of course. You don’t want any cowards in your village. D I RECT O R . It’ll become clear. Cowardice has nothing to do

32 Plays

with this awe-­inspiring situation in which they find themselves. What I envision is much more profound than that. There are two options and each is completely justified. And this is the moment where the dilemma achieves its full significance. You have to understand, the war has taken them by surprise. The Villagers become animated. A series of statements by them are now comprehensible. VI LLA GER S. —God is great. —God help us. —It’s war. —It’s as if the earth were quaking. —We’re right beside the border. —We’re in the line of fire. —May God preserve us from his wrath. —May curses rain down upon them until doomsday. —The blasphemous infidels. —I was expecting their treachery would appear on a morning like this. —The roofs of our houses will be destroyed right above our heads. —Our children will be killed. —Have we started weeping like women now? —No one here’s crying. —How would you describe these words of dread? —None of us is afraid. —In our village, nobody’s afraid. —The coward will be cursed until Judgment Day. —Who said anything about cowardice? —Our dignity precedes everything. —Not one contemptible person’s ever been born in our village. —What kind of talk is this, people? —It’s better to decide things than simply give up.

An Evening’s Entertainment for the Fifth of June 33

—Yes, but what should our decision be? —That’s what we’re discussing. Bullets are heard. An explosion can be heard in the distance. —Help us, Almighty God. —God is great. —God is great. (They speak in unison) God is great . . . God is great. The repeated phrase takes on a particular rhythm betraying fear, awe, and confusion. PE ASAN T . (From a distance, offstage, shouting) God in Heaven, fire, fire! (He enters and approaches the Villagers. He appears out of breath and very disturbed) God knows what’s going on. (Still out of breath) Fire, fire! May God Almighty have mercy on us. I saw the fire fill the horizon, blocking the sky with its smoke. VI LLA GER S. —Fire! —Fire! Fire! —Where? —Where did you see it? PE ASAN T . At ʿAli Naʿous’s orchard. It’s that close. ʿ A LI. You’re saying my orchard’s being devoured by flames? (He starts to run, but the other Villagers grab and stop him) Let go of me. My orchard’s on fire, my orchard’s on fire. VI LLA GER S. (Overlapping) —God preserve us. —It’s no use. There’s nothing you can do about it. —Anoint yourself with God’s mercy and calm down. —It’s in the orchard! It’s even closer than we thought! PE ASAN T . (Also overlapping) I went to my land early this morning to till it.

34 Plays

ʿ A LI. (Voice breaking, as if about to cry) Oh, my orchard! What’s left of it? PE ASAN T . (Without taking a breath) I heard an explosion and gunfire. I didn’t realize how serious it was. I thought I should finish my work quickly and then go back home, but the planes . . . oh, God give us strength . . . I looked up at them. It was as if they were angry black birds snatching the sky. My feet trembled and so did the earth under them. God have mercy on us. Who’d dare stay here after something like this? The fire. I saw it devour everything with my own eyes. ʿ A LI. It’s devouring my orchard . . . my orchard! PE A S A N T . And it’s coming this way. God have mercy on us. What are we going to do now? VI LLA GER S. (Overlapping) —Yes, what are we supposed to do? —What are we going to do? —Let’s decide quickly. —Decide what? A powerful explosion is heard nearby. Everyone is shaken by it. The knot tying the group together is broken. VI LLA GER S. —The mountains themselves are shaking. —Glory to God. —What are we waiting for? —The fire’s approaching. —Bombs are going off. —We need to hurry. —What do you suggest? —Suggestion. We need a suggestion. —Let the magistrate speak. —Yes. Let the magistrate speak.

An Evening’s Entertainment for the Fifth of June 35

Several Villagers voice their support for this suggestion. The Magistrate starts to speak, but the Villagers cut him off. —Let the sheikh speak. —Yes. Let the sheikh speak. Several Villagers voice their support for this suggestion. The Sheikh appears out of the group of Villagers. —Or let the village notables speak. —Yes. Let the village notables speak. The Notables appear out of the group of Villagers. Their distinctive dress differentiates them from the other Villagers. Several people speak at the same time, and say —Let whoever has an opinion speak. —What should we do? —What is to be done? ʿAbdallah appears out of the group of Villagers. His features are rough and severe, and he is wearing a white kaffiyeh. ʿ ABDA LLA H . Do we have a thousand options? VI LLA GER S. —What do you have in mind? —The fire is approaching. —We have wives and children. —Whoever has something to say, let him say it quickly. M A G I S TR A TE . (Angrily) People, let’s discuss this quietly. If everyone speaks whenever he wants, we’ll never decide anything. VI LLA GER S. —Yes, let’s discuss this calmly. —Silence. —There’s no time to hesitate. ʿ A LI. But my orchard is on fire.

36 Plays

VI LLAGER . Soon everything will be on fire. Only God knows what’s going to happen. M A G ISTR A TE . Everyone talking at once is not going to resolve anything. We need to go about this calmly. VILLAGER . Silence. M A G I S TR A TE . (To ʿAbdallah) What do you want to say, ʿAbdallah? ʿ ABDA LLA H . It’s clear what I want, magistrate. Aggressors are invading our lands, our homes. What do you want us to do? VI LLA GER S. —We’re going to fight them. —Don’t forget, they’re more powerful than we are. —We’ll slaughter them like sheep. —Our land is dear, but our children dearer still. ʿ A B D A LLA H . (Loudly) I can smell the stench of servility and cowardice. Children run between the legs of their parents, playing games of war. One Child imitates the sound of explosions, another acts like a soldier carrying a rifle. They run after one another, and whenever they hear an explosion they laugh loudly together. VI LLA GER S. —It’s one thing to act courageously, it’s another to be annihilated. —These are all meaningless words. —Now I’m really beginning to smell the stench of cowardice. —You have no right to make accusations like that. —What’s the decision? —Valuable time’s slipping away. M A G I S TR A TE . If everyone speaks whenever he wants, we’ll never get anywhere.

An Evening’s Entertainment for the Fifth of June 37

N O TA B LE #1. God help us. Can everyone please control his temper and his tongue? M A G I S TR A TE . So your opinion, ʿAbdallah, is that we should stay? ʿ ABDA LLA H . Of course, is there any other choice? VI LLA GER S. —God preserve you, ʿAbdallah. —Yes, we should stay. —We’ll make them taste death before we allow them to enter the square of our village. NO TAB LE #1. Let’s not make a hasty decision. N OTAB LE #2. What are you going to use to make them taste death? VI LLA GER . Anything I can fight with, an axe, a stick, my hand. We’ll show them how to fight like men. NO TAB LE #3. Courage is one thing, foolhardiness another. Do you want to fight a cannon with a stick? ʿ ABDA LLAH . And do you want me to give away the land I inherited from my ancestors to the first son of a bitch who attacks it? V ILLA GER S. —It would be better to die. —The only way they’ll take our land is if it’s sewn with corpses. —What are we supposed to do with our children? —And our wives? —It’s shameful for us to even think about running away. —They’re a huge army and how many are we? V I LLA GER . (In a loud voice that drowns out the commotion) “How often by the grace of God has a small group vanquished one that is mighty.”

38 Plays

VI LLAGER S. (With dread) —This is the truth God has spoken. —But why doesn’t the sheikh speak? —Yes, let the sheikh speak. S HEI KH. God, may he be exalted, tests the heart and wisdom of believers on a day like this. I cannot abandon the house of God. I will make my stand in it and await whatever he decrees for me. As for you, the magistrate and the notables of the village will lead you onto the right path. VI LLAGER S. —Why shouldn’t we stand with the sheikh? —We can’t let them desecrate the House of God. The sound of planes is heard in the distance. Deafening explosions are heard, Children scream. VI LLAGER S. —Did you hear that? —Most gracious God, have mercy on us. —What do you think we should do, magistrate? NO TABLE #1. Tell us what to do, magistrate. VI LLAGER . Yes, tell us what to do. ʿ A B D A LLA H . Be careful what you say, magistrate. Your words will become a guide for people to follow. The scene comes to a halt. Everyone in the scene becomes silent. DI RECT OR . It’s a difficult dilemma. Do you see the way I imagine things? The magistrate is not a coward. Neither are those who believe that leaving is better than staying. This situation is difficult, which means people don’t have the luxury of carefully considering the precise meaning of their words, so they quickly become divided. ʿ A B D A LGH A N I . (Smiling) A conflict between wisdom and courage.

An Evening’s Entertainment for the Fifth of June 39

D I RECT O R . (Ignoring the sarcasm) If that’s how you want to describe it. Each of the positions is extreme. But they’re in a violent situation, so they don’t have time to consider things. I can imagine the magistrate hesitating and the village becoming divided into two groups, with the children running among them, shouting. ʿ ABDA LGH ANI. What about the dead soldiers? DI RECT OR . What about them? Their time will come. The scene becomes animated. The Children are still playing. One Child acts as if he’s shooting a rifle. A Second Child attacks him as if he has a knife in his hand. He strikes the First Child on the shoulder. The Two Children fight. M A G IS TR ATE . (To Peasant) Did you see anything besides fire? A Man pulls the Two Children apart and scolds them. PE ASAN T . With God as my witness, I saw nothing but planes shooting through the sky like arrows. ʿ A B D A LLA H . Why the hesitation, magistrate? Our decision is as obvious as a minaret on a mosque. The enemy wants to desecrate our land and homes. Should we turn our backs on them and take off running? The division between the two groups of Villagers starts to become more apparent. VI LLA GER . May God strike us dead if we do. M A G IS TR ATE . How long can we resist? We have no weapons and there are only a few of us, as you can see. ʿ ABDA LLA H . We’ll resist until we die. That’s long enough. The Villagers divide into two groups. Some gather around ʿAbdallah. Others gather around the Magistrate. VI LLA GER S. (Group with ʿAbdallah) —We’re with you.

40 Plays

—This is how men are supposed to act. —May God preserve you. VI LLA GER S. (Group with Magistrate) —What you people are doing’s the definition of foolhardy. —We’re not going to commit suicide. —We have our future to think about. M A G IS TR ATE . We were all taken by surprise by this. We weren’t prepared for it. N O TA B LE #1. Before any of us decides, we need to carefully consider the situation we’re in. M A G IS TR ATE . In my opinion, we have to . . . ʿ A B D A LLA H . (To Mag