iSteve: Perhaps on the Wrong Side of History, but on the right side of reality.

The iSteve Blogroll

Unz Review

Taki’s Magazine

VDARE

Chronicles

The American Conservative

HBD Bibliography

Arts-Arts & Letters Daily

Arts-Dennis Dale Untethered

Arts-Galley Slaves-Last

Arts-Golf Club Atlas

Arts-Uncouth Reflections

Blog--28 Sherman

Blog-American Conservative

Blog-American Scene

Blog-Anti-Gnostic

Blog-Assistant Village Idiot

Blog-Boundless Sea

Blog-Bruce Charlton

Blog-Cail Corishev

Blog--Captain Capitalism

Blog-Carcinisation

Blog-Chariot of Reaction

Blog-Mansizedtarget

Blog-Countenance

Blog-Deconstruct Leftism

Blog-Delusion Damage

Blog-Ed West

Blog-Education Realist

Blog-Ex-Army

Blog-Glaivester

Blog-Handle’s Haus

Blog-Jason Bayz

Blog-Just Not Said

Blog-Jerry Pournelle

Blog-Jewamongyou

Blog-Larison’s Eunomia

Blog-Lead & Gold

Blog-Less Wrong

Blog-Lion of Blogosphere

Blog-Lloydsauvante

Blog-Luke Ford

Blog-Mangan

Blog-Mencius’ UR

Blog-Michelle Malkin

Blog-Mickey Kaus

Blog-Military Analysis

Blog-Motl

Blog-Noah Millman

Blog-Once Upon a Time

Blog-Overcoming Bias

Blog-Pumpkin Person

Blog-Parker ParaPundit

Blog-Refugee Watch

Blog-Reihan Salam

Blog-Heartiste

Blog-Richard Bradley

Blog-Rod Dreher

Blog-Ross Douthat

Blog-R.S. McCain

Blog-Scott “Dilbert” Adams

Blog-Shouting Thomas

Blog-Slate Star Codex

Blog-Spotted Toad

Blog-Spandrell

Blog-Stuart Schneiderman

Blog-Stupid Girl (Charlotte Allen)

Blog-Szabo Unenumerated

Blog-TGGP

Blog-Those Who Can See

Blog-Uncouth Reflections

Blog-VDARE’s blog

Blog-Voxday

Blog-W/Both Hands

Blog-XX Committee

Book Reviews-Graham Seibert

Canadian-Colby Cosh

Canadian-Kathy Shaidle

Diversity-Discriminations

Diversity-Is Chaos

Diversity-Kevin MacDonald

Diversity-John Ray

Diversity-MondoWeiss

Diversity-Nat’l Assoc Scholars

Diversity-Occidentalist

Diversity-Unamusement Park

Econ-Arnold Kling

Econ-Evolving Economics

Econ-Business Insider

Econ-Dr. Housing Bubble

Econ-EconLog

Econ-Exurban Nation

Econ-Marginal Revolution

Econ-Steve Keen

For. Policy-Antiwar

For. Policy-Leon Hadar

Funny-Across Difficult Country

Funny-Tyler Durden WWTDD

Funny-American Fez

Funny-Norm Macdonald

Funny-Bill Burr

Funny-Patton Oswalt

IQ – Chris Brand

Left-Kevin Drum

Left-Slate

News-LA Times

News-NYT

News-Wash. Post

Quant-Andrew Gelman

Quant-Audacious Epigone

Quant-Dusk in Autumn

Quant-FiveThirtyEight

Quant-Hail to You

Quant-Human Varieties

Quant-RandomCritical Analysis

Quant-Unsilenced Science

Right-American Renaissance

Right-American Spectator

Right-Ann Coulter

Right-Chronicles

Right-FrontPageMag

Right-Lew Rockwell

Right-Mark Steyn

Right-NRO

Right-WSJ Editorial Page

Sci-Dienekes

Sci-Emil Kirkegaard

Sci-Frost’s Evo and Proud

Sci-FuturePundit

Sci-GNXP Discover

Sci-hbd* chick

Sci-James Thompson

Sci-John Hawks

Blog-Jayman’s

Sci-Race/History/Evolution

Sci-Staffan’s Personality

Sci-Steve Hsu

Sci-West Hunter Cochran-Harp.

Steve Sailer: iSteve.com

Taki’s Mag

Trad--Jim Kalb’s Turnabout

Trad-What’s Wrong w/World

UK-Martin Kelly

Old: 2Blowhards

Old: GNXP (Gene Ex.)

Old: GNXP Discover

Old: Auster View from Right

Old: Stuff White People Like

Hiatus: Inductivist

Hiatus: Foseti

Hiatus: Elusive Wapiti

Hiatus: Joy of Curmudgeonry

Hiatus: Malcolm Gladwell

Hiatus: Your Lying Eyes

Contact Steve Sailer

Email me at SteveSlr *at* aol*dot*com (make the obvious substitutions between the asterisks; you don’t have to capitalize an email address, I just included the capitals to make clear the logic — it’s my name without a space and without the vowels in “Sailer” that give so many people, especially irate commenters, trouble.)

iSteve Panhandling

I always appreciate my readers’ help, especially monetary. Here’s how you can help:

First: You can use PayPal (non-tax deductible) by going to the page on my old blog here. PayPal accepts most credit cards. Contributions can be either one-time only, monthly, or annual.

Second: You can mail a non-tax deductible donation to:Steve Sailer

P.O Box 4142

Valley Village, CA 91617-0142

Third: You can make a tax deductible contribution via VDARE by clicking here. (Paypal and credit cards accepted, including recurring “subscription” donations.) Please make sure to click the box for:

Make contribution to author

Note: the VDARE site goes up and down on its own schedule, so if this link stops working, please let me know.

Fourth: You can use Bitcoin:

I’m using Coinbase as a sort of PayPal for Bitcoins.

The IRS has issued instructions regarding Bitcoins. I’m having Coinbase immediately turn all Bitcoins I receive into U.S. dollars and deposit them in my bank account. At the end of the year, Coinbase will presumably send me a 1099 form for filing my taxes.

Payments are not tax deductible.

Below are links to two Coinbase pages of mine. This first is if you want to enter a U.S. dollar-denominated amount to pay me.

Pay With Bitcoin (denominated in U.S. Dollars)

This second is if you want to enter a Bitcoin-denominated amount. (Remember one Bitcoin is currently worth many U.S. dollars.)

Pay With Bitcoin (denominated in Bitcoins)

Fifth: if you have a Wells Fargo bank account, you can transfer money to me (with no fees) via Wells Fargo SurePay. Just tell WF SurePay to send the money to my ancient AOL email address steveslrAT aol.com — replace the AT with the usual @). (Non-tax deductible.) There is no 2.9% fee like with PayPal or Google Wallet, so this is good for large contributions.

Sixth: if you have a Chase bank account (or even other bank accounts), you can transfer money to me (with no fees) via Chase QuickPay (FAQ). Just tell Chase QuickPay to send the money to my ancient AOL email address (steveslrATaol.com — replace the AT with the usual @). If Chase asks for the name on my account, it’s StevenSailer with an n at the end of Steven. (Non-tax deductible.) There is no 2.9% fee like with PayPal or Google Wallet, so this is good for large contributions.

Seventh: send money via the Paypal-like Google Wallet to my Gmail address(that’s isteveslrATgmail .com — replace the AT with a @). (Non-tax deductible.)

Here’s the Google Wallet FAQ. From it: “You will need to have (or sign up for) Google Wallet to send or receive money. If you have ever purchased anything on Google Play, then you most likely already have a Google Wallet. If you do not yet have a Google Wallet, don’t worry, the process is simple: go to wallet.google.com and follow the steps.” You probably already have a Google ID and password, which Google Wallet uses, so signing up Wallet is pretty painless.

You can put money into your Google Wallet Balance from your bank account and send it with no service fee.

Or you can send money via credit card (Visa, MasterCard, AmEx, Discover) with the industry-standard 2.9% fee. (You don’t need to put money into your Google Wallet Balance to do this.)

Google Wallet works from both a website and a smartphone

app (Android and iPhone — the Google Wallet app is currently available only in the U.S., but the Google Wallet website can be used in 160 countries).

Or, once you sign up with Google Wallet, you can simply send money via credit card, bank transfer, or Wallet Balance as an attachment from Google’s free Gmail email service. Here’s how to do it.