News Facts

Oracle today announced plans to enhance its Oracle Fusion Middleware offerings through the acquisition of Sunopsis, a leading provider of heterogeneous data integration products. This acquisition further strengthens Oracle's hot- pluggable commitment to support IT environments by providing broad support for both Oracle and non-Oracle data sources and targets. Sunopsis offers best-of-breed products for data integration through its high performance "Extract Load Transform" (ELT) architecture and its support for a broad range of data sources and target systems.

"Real-time information access, next-generation architectures and more mixed IT environments are driving increased requirements for sophisticated, fast, heterogeneous data integration solutions," said Thomas Kurian, senior vice president, Oracle Server Technologies. "Oracle and Sunopsis have complementary products with a shared focused on delivering the very best data integration products to our customers. We plan to incorporate Sunopsis' high-performance data integration technology into the Oracle Fusion Middleware product family and make the technology an integrated part of Service-Oriented Architecture (SOA), Business Intelligence (BI), and Master Data Management (MDM) solutions from Oracle."

Financial details were not disclosed.

Contact Info

Letty Ledbetter

Oracle

+1.650.506.8071

letty.ledbetter@oracle.com

About Oracle

Oracle (NASDAQ: ORCL) is the world's largest enterprise software company. For more information about Oracle, please visit our Web site at http://www.oracle.com.

Trademarks

Oracle, JD Edwards, PeopleSoft, and Siebel are registered trademarks of Oracle Corporation and/or its affiliates. Other names may be trademarks of their respective owners.

The above is intended to outline our general product direction. It is intended for information purposes only, and may not be incorporated into any contract. It is not a commitment to deliver any material, code, or functionality, and should not be relied upon in making purchasing decisions. The development, release, and timing of any features or functionality described for Oracle's products remains at the sole discretion of Oracle.