Julia Cameron is an American teacher, author, artist, poet, playwright, novelist, filmmaker, and much more. She is best known for her book, “The Artist’s Way.“

In this episode, in addition to discussing her book, “The Artist’s Way,” Eric and Julia talk about finding your creativity and her famous practice known as “Morning Pages.”

But wait – there’s more! The episode is not quite over!! We continue the conversation and you can access this exclusive content right in your podcast player feed. Head over to our Patreon page and pledge to donate just $10 a month. It’s that simple and we’ll give you good stuff as a thank you!

In This Interview, Julia Cameron and I Discuss Finding Your Creativity and…

Her book, “The Artist’s Way“

Her many strategies for feeding her good wolf

Creative recovery is the process of tracking back to our original selves

Creativity as a spiritual practice

“Morning Pages” is her daily practice of writing 3 pages longhand about anything that is on your mind first thing in the morning

The importance of writing no more or no less than the 3 pages.

Morning pages are aimed at moving out of inertia into action.

Learning to write past our inner critic is how we train ourselves to move past fear

Cloud thoughts are the thoughts that drift into your consciousness that are not connected to anything

Morning pages are your tough love friend and are not meant to be reread

Creativity can come from happiness as well as pain

The reward for paying attention is a sense of well being that counters loneliness

“Artist Dates” are expeditions out of your house that you find delightful or brings you joy

The myth that artists are born and not made

How perfectionism stands between you and your creativity

The process of creativity is more important than the end product

Moving past perfectionism with your morning pages

Walking is another important creative tool

The secret doubt is our skeptical sense that a higher power isn’t interested in us.

The voice of guidance is kind, intuitive, truthful, and supportive

Julia Cameron Links:

juliacameronlive.com

Twitter

Instagram

Facebook

Transparent Labs offer a variety of supplements and protein powders that include science-based ingredients and have no sugar, fat, lactose, artificial colors or sweeteners. Check out Eric’s favorite, 100% Grass Fed Whey Isolate that comes in many delicious flavors. Visit transparentlabs.com and use Promo code WOLF to receive 10% off your order.

Plushcare: Provides excellent primary and urgent healthcare through virtual appointments. It’s easy to book online and you can even get same-day appointments. They accept most major insurance carriers, are available in all 50 states and you get prescriptions sent to your local pharmacy. Go to www.plushcare.com/wolf to start your free 30-day trial.

Calm App: The app designed to help you ease stress and get the best sleep of your life through meditations and sleep stories. Join the 85 million people around the world who use Calm to get better sleep. Get 40% off a Calm Premium Subscription (a limited time offer!) by going to www.calm.com/wol

If you enjoyed this conversation with Julia Cameron on the Finding Your Creativity, you might also enjoy these other episodes:

Albert Flynn DeSilver