(reddit) “In 1738, Charles III of Spain married Princess Maria Amalia of Saxony, daughter of Polish king Augustus III and an educated, cultured woman who gave birth to 13 children, eight of whom reached adulthood. This is the letter that Charles III wrote to his parents in July 1738, telling them about his wedding night:

My very dear Father and my very dear Mother, I was happy to know that your Majesties are still doing fine, me and my wife are perfectly well, thank God. I received a letter from your Majesties on the 15th of last month, in which I saw how, thanks be to God, your Majesties had received two of my letters.

You assumed that by the time I received this letter my heart would be glad and I would have consummated the marriage. You told me that sometimes young girls are not so easy and that, with this hot weather, I should try to save my energy, not doing it as much as I wanted because it could ruin my health, that I should be content with once or twice times between night and day, that otherwise I would end up exhausted and that is better to serve the ladies little and continuously than a lot once.

Should be content with once or twice times between night and day? Guy, I know this is your first time with the opposite sex and you’re busting at the seams with cum but don’t get greedy. A lot of married men out there are content with having sex once or twice a month. Then again, if the royal family isn’t getting a few more nuts than the common folk then what’s even the point of a monarchy? Now ladies, according to the King and Queen of Spain you prefer sex “little and continuously” more than “a lot at once”? Any female stoolies care to verify this for me? I was under the impression that some ladies out there could go without D for weeks after a solid marathon bone sesh (I’ve coined this the “camel theory”) but I could be mistaken.

About what you asked regarding her height, I will tell your Majesties that according to the portrait I have of my sister, they are nothing alike. With all due respect to my sister, my wife is much prettier and much whiter. She shoots very well and takes a lot of pleasure from hunting.

People think it’s tough these days using dating Apps where we chose dates solely based on just a few pics of that person. My friend once went on a Tinder date, when the girl got out of the cab and saw that he didn’t look enough like his profile pictures, she got right back in the cab and left. Talk about an ego-killer. Now imagine having to chose your wife based on just one painting? WAIT HOLD UP. I just re-read that paragraph, based on one painting of his sister??? Did his parents really show him a portrait of his sister and be like “she looks kinda like this.” Maybe he meant “portrait that my sister painted” but who knows. Either way, what a relief that she was way more attractive than the painting(of his own sister?). I mean I’m getting a chub just looking at this portrait of her so can only imagine how pumped I would be when it turned out she was even hotter in person.

Chuck the Third was one lucky dude. Not to mention she ended up being a real guy’s gal who loved killing animals for sport just as much as he did. #blessed #relationshipgoals

Your Majesties wrote me as parents and as married people, and asked me to tell you if everything went well and if I find her to my liking, both her body and her spirit, so I’ll tell you how it all went down.

YIKES. Imagine you’re parents sitting you down and being like “Look son, you’re reaching an age where you may someday soon put your D in some V, just make sure that when that day comes you tell us all about her body and “how it all went down.” Ok pops will do. The scary thing is that Charles got off easy as in many cultures there used to be a “bedding ceremony” where the entire family would have to watch you have sex on your wedding night to ensure the marriage was consummated. Just as recently as 2016 there was a Chinese couple forced to have sex in front of everyone at their wedding. You couldn’t pay me enough to have sex in front of my parents, not to mention I don’t think it would be physically possible as there is zero chance I’m getting a boner under those circumstances.

The day I met her in Portella, we spoke lovingly, until we arrived at Fondi. There we had dinner and then continued our journey having the same conversation until we arrived in Gaeta a little late. Between the time she needed to get undressed and to undo her hair, it was dinnertime and I couldn’t do anything, even though I really wanted to.

We went to bed at nine o’clock and both of us were shaking but we started to kiss and I was soon ready, so I started and after 15 minutes I broke her (her hymen). This time none of us could spill (ejaculate).

You can’t bullshit a bullshitter Chuckie! I mean it’s not exactly a shocker you didn’t give Maria an orgasm on your first try but trying to claim you lasted 15 minutes and couldn’t cum??? GTFOH. You’ve been beating off to paintings for the last five years buddy. Zero chance your dick didn’t start spilling jizz all over the place the first time you touched a naked woman. 15 minute marathon bone sessions just don’t happen your first time having sex although I’m sure some tough guys in the comment section beg to differ. I don’t always last 15 minutes and not to brag but I’ve been having sex for years now. I do have to give you props for referring to cumming as “spilling” tho. That is some first tier slang right there.

About what you told me about her being young and delicate, warning me that she would make me sweat, I will say that the first time I was sweating like a fountain but I have not sweat since then.

Ahh the old rookie sweats. Very true Chuck. Shoulda seen me my first time having sex. I was sweating so much the chick was pretty much being waterboarded. But since then? Not a drop. Sweating during sex is for virgins.

Later, at three o’clock in the morning, I started again and we both “spilled”, both at the same time, and since then we have continued like this, doing it two times a night except for the night when we had to come here since we had to wake up at four o’clock in the morning and we could only do it once. I assure you that I could have done it many more times but I’m controlling myself as you advised. I will also say that we always “spill” at the same time because we always wait for each other.

HAAAAAAARRRRRRRDOOOOOOOOOO! If you stroked your own cock a little more in this paragraph you’d end up spilling all over the pages Chuck. Hey Mom and Dad, I have sex two times EVERY night! Maybe they should start calling me Charles II lmao. But nah lets keep my name Charles III as everyone knows I could have sex 3 times every night if I wanted. Oh and did I mention I make my wife orgasm EVERY time we have sex?? If I didn’t have to write this letter I’d be literally making her spill right now. I make her RAIN in SPAIN if ya catch my drift.

When you and bae “spill” at “the same time”

She is the most beautiful girl in the world, she has the spirit of an angel and the best disposition. I am the happiest man in the world having this woman who will be my companion for the rest of my life.

Okay here is where this blog takes a dark turn. Maria died suddenly a year later and ya boi Charles III never remarried. Oh well, many people would take one year in a loving relationship filled with incredible sex over 40 years of mediocre sex with someone they can’t stand.

Your Majesties told me that you were eagerly waiting to find out if you were going to have grandchildren. I’ll tell your Majesties that she doesn’t have her period yet, but, by all appearances, she will soon because four days ago she started leaving some stains of this material they say precedes the period.

Too much information Chuck. Just let us know when she’s knocked up and make it snappy. Don’t even think about Coitus interruptus (scientific term for the “pull out method” and the only form of contraception back in the day). You need a heir to the throne and they sure don’t grow on trees, they grow in your wife so keep dumping loads in her until your parents have some grandkids.

My wife begs me to place her with the utmost submission at the feet of your Majesties.

Name a creepier way to end this letter, you can’t.

P.S.

Does Tommy Smokes have some royal lineage in his blood line?