Michael Chang Net Worth, Biography, Age, Wife, Height, Weight, and many more details can be checked through this page. Michael Chang is an American tennis player who has a net worth of around $35 Million. He was born on Feb 20 to 1972 in New Jersey America. He became a professional tennis player in 1988, at the age of 15 years. He was the youngest player to win the main draw US Open match.

Throughout his career, he has been in many Grand Slam finals, but in number never achieved the Number one tennis ranking, the best singles tennis ranking Michael has achieved is around number two ranks. Michael Chang has won over 30 singles titles. Also, check Owen Van Natta Net Worth.

He was one of those players who couldn’t wait to finish their education to start a tennis career. That’s why he left the school in the middle to get his tennis journey started. He was also the youngest player to reach any Grand Slam final at the age of just 16 years old.

Table of Contents

Michael Chang Net Worth

The famous American tennis player “Michael Chang” has a net worth of $35 Million. According to various online resources (Wikipedia, Forbes, IMDB), the most popular American tennis player Michael Chang estimated net worth of around $35 Million.

Advertisement

As we have already discussed that his net worth is around $35 million. Most of the money that he has got comes from his tennis career. He started his coaching school, once he left his tennis career. After retiring from tennis, he moved to California from New Jersey. He still lives in California and firmly migrated from Asia to America in the early days.

That is the reason he takes his family every year to visit one of the South Asian countries. He tried his hand at tennis commentary, but unfortunately, he did not succeed there. His California house has a price tag of $3 million. He is not very fond. Of course, he prefers to be driven than drive himself.

Michael Chang Net Worth Growth

Tennis experts say that Michael showed tremendous talent at an early age, but during the second half of his career, he couldn’t capitalize on his talent. Did you know that when he won the French Open, he was the first American to win the French Open in 34 Years?

American players are known not to be good on clay courts. The French Open is the only Grand Slam title that Michael won during his tennis career Michael. Michael also reached the Australian Open and U. S Open finals but unfortunately, he had to be satisfied with the runner-up position.

Michael Chang Biography

Michael Chang Relationship & More

Some Unknown Facts about Michael Chang

Does Michael Chang Smoke? No

Does Michael Chang Drink Alcohol? Yes

Michael Chang takes great care of his health. Michael Chang eats food before 9 at the night.

Michael Chang is very fond of playing tennis.

Michael Chang loves watching TV and movies.

Michael Chang himself has said that his crush is Michael Chang whom he has loved since childhood.

Frequently Asked Questions

Recommended

Michael Chang Net Worth Growth

Frequently Asked Questions

What is the net worth of Michael Chang?

Michael Chang's total net worth is around $35 Million.

How old is Michael Chang?

Currently, Michael Chang is 51 years old (22 February 1972).

How much does Michael Chang make annually?

Michael Chang earns an estimated salary of $3 Million per Year.

What is the height of Michael Chang?

The height of Michael Chang is 1.75 m. (5’ 9”).

What is the name of Michael Chang’s wife?

Michael Chang was married to Amber Liu (m. 2008).

ncG1vNJzZmibkaC7sMPLnpugnV6YvK57zKKaoZmVoXqktMCnnmamlal6uLvRrZ9o