The image of the 12th FICM, which celebrates the Golden Age of Mexican film, now comes alive in a spot with the iconic song “Mexico lindo y querido” by Chucho Monge, the Michoacán composer who will be honored at FICM 2014.

“México lindo y querido” is a sentimental anthem of our country, appearing in such films as Canta y no llores (1949) by Alfonso Patiño Gómez, Siempre tuya (1952) by Emilio “el Indio” Fernández and México lindo y querido (1958) by Julio Bracho, among many others. But Chucho Monge’s contribution to cinema is not limited to this tune. According to Eduardo de la Vega Alfaro, his name is on the credits of some 135 Mexican and foreign films.

Rodrigo Toledo, FICM designer and producer of the spot, shared the following about the experience of working with the music of Chucho Monge. “When we knew that Chucho Monge would be the Michoacáno who would be honored this year, we decided to take one of his most well know songs and we chose ‘México lindo y querido.’ This represented a number of complications – that later, like a good challenge, got a better result. After hearing more than 50 interpretations of this song, I decided what I definitely liked most was the end of the arrangement made by Chucho Zarzosa for the film México lindo y querido (Julio Bracho, 1961) with the soprano Ernestina Garfias. But we did not want the lyrics of the song to be heard, only the melody, so we had to reinterpret this arrangement. Based on this, the musicians Emiliano Motta and Emilianto González de León did a wonderful job.”

As for the graphics, Toledo said, “In the beginning, the nature of the image of the 12th propose something simple, a single movement over it with a few simple gestures.” On the creative process, he added, “The proposal of a moving image changed a lot and... what first was a dark, torrential rain turned into a shower of white flowers. And why a shower of flowers? Well, it’s just what I want for the beloved state of Michoacán.”

Below you can see the spot of the 12th FICM: