McAfee announced its intention to acquire privately-owned Sentrigo, a leading provider of database security and compliance, assessment, monitoring and intrusion prevention solutions. Sentrigo offers a complete suite of database security technologies including vulnerability management, database activity monitoring, database audit, and virtual patching – ensuring databases are protected without impacting performance or availability.

McAfee has had a successful partnership with Sentrigo through its Security Innovation Alliance (SIA) program and in 2010 entered into an OEM relationship with Sentrigo to offer McAfee Vulnerability Manager for Databases, McAfee Database Activity Monitoring, and McAfee Integrity Monitoring for Databases. Through the acquisition, McAfee will be able to deliver best-of-breed solutions for vulnerability management of databases, protection of databases, and activity monitoring of databases.

The proposed transaction will bring together best-in-class technologies to:

Stop database attacks, including the number-one web-born attack against databases: SQL Injection; ensure compliance audit and reporting, minimize the risk of a data breach of Personally Identifiable Information or other sensitive information, and reduce the costs associated with breach notification.

Diagnose and assess the database environment so that customers detect threats before they are exploited and receive the optimum security solution for their unique database infrastructure.

Build on the McAfee Risk and Compliance solutions and expand current vulnerability management solutions to include operating systems, networks, web applications and databases.

Provide complete visibility into all transactions leveraging McAfee and Sentrigo's Database Audit and Database Activity Monitoring (DAM) solutions.

Leverage Sentrigo's unique offering of Virtual Patching, a capability that provides a strong level of protection for database systems that cannot be patched in a timely manner.

?The integration of Sentrigo with McAfee will provide customers with the highest level of security across their database environments and allow companies to rapidly deploy a database security strategy in a cost effective manner,? said Dave DeWalt, president of McAfee. ?McAfee is continuing to broaden its security portfolio to now-secure databases, as well as endpoints, networks, email and web. In addition to the acquisition announcement, McAfee is also announcing a complete database security platform which includes products across the McAfee portfolio.?

?Every organization stores their most sensitive information in databases, either directly or through their key business applications,? stated Nathan Shuchami, CEO of Sentrigo. ?The regular stream of public breach announcements is evidence that we must all do much more to protect mission-critical database environments, and Sentrigo has been working for more than four years to develop a suite of products to best secure these assets. As part of McAfee, Sentrigo will be in a position to deliver these best-of-breed solutions to address a much broader range of customer's database security and compliance challenges.?

Following the closing of the proposed acquisition, the Sentrigo team will report to the McAfee Risk & Compliance business unit, headed by Stuart McClure, senior vice president and general manager.

The acquisition is expected to close in April 2011, contingent upon customary closing conditions. For additional information, please reference the acquisition landing page at www.mcafee.com/sentrigo and McAfee Blog Central at http://blogs.mcafee.com/.

About McAfee

McAfee, a wholly owned subsidiary of Intel Corporation (NASDAQ:INTC), is the world's largest dedicated security technology company. McAfee delivers proactive and proven solutions and services that help secure systems, networks, and mobile devices around the world, allowing users to safely connect to the Internet, browse and shop the Web more securely. Backed by its unrivaled Global Threat Intelligence, McAfee creates innovative products that empower home users, businesses, the public sector and service providers by enabling them to prove compliance with regulations, protect data, prevent disruptions, identify vulnerabilities, and continuously monitor and improve their security. McAfee is relentlessly focused on constantly finding new ways to keep our customers safe. http://www.mcafee.com

NOTE: McAfee is a registered trademark or trademark of McAfee or its subsidiaries in the United States and other countries. Other marks may be claimed as the property of others.