Advertisement

Advertisement

Advertisement

Where is Suri Cruise in 2024 as she turns 18 – and what’s her relationship with dad Tom Cruise now? She lives with mum Katie Holmes in NYC, and might go into fashion rather than acting

STORYFaye Bradley

Apr 17 , 2024

Remember Suri Cruise, once the most famous baby in the world?

Well, she’s no longer a baby – in fact, far from it. The daughter of Hollywood actors Tom Cruise and Katie Holmes turns 18 tomorrow, on April 18, and she’s looking more like her mother as she grows up.

Despite living a life away from the spotlight, the paparazzi have continued to follow her every move as she hangs out with friends and enjoys mother-daughter time with Holmes.

Here’s what Suri Cruise has been up to in 2024.

Where is Suri Cruise now?

These days Suri is based in New York City with her mum, according to She Knows. She was most recently spotted on March 4 taking a solo stroll through the Big Apple while looking at her phone and holding onto a bag of Trader Joe’s milk chocolate covered peanut butter pretzels.

What is she studying?

According to US media, Suri is set to graduate from high school in June and is expected to start university this autumn.

She’s kept her life very private so far, though it was revealed in December that she’d showcased her acting talent as Morticia Addams in her school’s adaptation of The Addams Family: A New Musical.

Sources told British media that it was more likely she would go on to study fashion rather than acting.

Why did they name her Suri?

The former couple, Tom and Holmes, explained the origins of her unusual name at the time of her birth. “Some friends of ours sent us two [baby-naming] books. When we came to the name Suri, we both loved it,” Tom said at the time, per Yahoo! It’s also the Hebrew name for “princess” and in Persian, it means “red rose”, which Tom said was an added “bonus”.

Does Tom Cruise have a relationship with Suri?

It’s no secret that the Top Gun: Maverick actor has had a complicated relationship with his daughter. According to Marca, he hasn’t been in Suri’s life since 2012, when he split up from Holmes.

ABC news reported in 2013 that one of the main reasons for their estrangement was due to Tom’s controversial links with Scientology, which was revealed in court documents at the time. Per Marca, he pays around US$33,000 per month in child support, amounting to US$400,000 a year.

Despite living a life away from the spotlight, the famous offspring of Katie Holmes and the Mission Impossible actor is often spotted hanging with friends and going about her daily life in NYC

Suri turns 18 on April 18 and looks more like her mother as she grows up – so what has she been up to recently, and does she have any relationship with dad Tom Cruise?