Katie Holmes and Tom Cruise were married from 2006 to 2012.

They weren't intimate with each other, according to a former member of Cruise's security team within the Church of Scientology.

After Nicole Kidman divorced Cruise in 2001, the Church reportedly tried to find him another wife.

During his relationship with Holmes, Cruise spent little time with her or his three children, according to the former security official.

Katie Holmes and Tom Cruise had a famous and much talked about romance. From the unforgettable moment when Cruise jumped on Oprah's couch to profess his love to all the shocking claims that have been reported about their marriage since, the former couple continue to fascinate.

But according to Brendan Tighe, a former member of Tom Cruise's security unit within the Church of Scientology, the pair did not seem close to one another throughout their marriage from 2006 to 2012.

"I never saw any level of intimacy," Tighe told the Australian magazine New Idea. "Only when they were going to the gym and the Fourth of July fireworks display in 2007 — which was also his birthday — and she presented him with a motorbike."

During his relationship with Holmes, Tighe says Cruise hardly paid attention to her or their children — Suri, his biological child with Holmes, and Isabella and Connor, who he adopted with Kidman.

"Most of the time, Katie looked like a deer in the headlights, like she was being dragged around and having a hard time keeping up with him. Cruise is on the go all the time," Tighe told The Daily Mail. "I never saw him with his kids, apart from one time in 2007 when it was his birthday."

Tighe was a Scientologist for 30 years, but left the church in 2011 after conflicts with higher command, he told The Daily Mail.

In response to questions from INSIDER, Karin Pouw, the head of public relations at the Church of Scientology, dismissed Tighe as a disgruntled ex-Scientologist but didn't deny any of his specific claims.

"False tabloid stories like the ones you are asking about can always be sourced to the same discredited ex-Scientologists — a small group of expelled members with sordid pasts looking to make money by spreading lies," she said. "And that of course includes Brendan Tighe."

According to Tighe, the relationship between Cruise and Holmes was strange from the start. The Church of Scientology, where Cruise is one of the most powerful figures, reportedly struggled to find a partner with the right image for him after he divorced Nicole Kidman in 2001. The search was a priority for David Miscavige, the longtime head of the church, according to Tighe.

"They were looking at Hollywood stars, Tommy was getting grilled on them: Who didn't have a porn past? Who hadn't done nude scene in movies? Who hadn't a major drug history?" Tighe told The Daily Mail. "So many prospects had done something wrong, like sex movies that had been leaked; it was impossible to find someone qualified."

Tighe said the church considered Scarlett Johansson, as the friend of Scientology member Erika Christensen. According to Tighe, the church judged her on Scientology's "tone scale," which supposedly measures emotion.

"Scarlett was 1.1 on the tone scale, which meant covert hostility, it's considered the worst on the backstabbing scale," Tighe said.

The reported meetings between Johansson and Cruise were also around the time they considered working together. But Johansson's longtime publicist told INSIDER the story about her interviewing to be his partner is false.

"The story is complete BS. She never 'interviewed' to date Cruise," Johansson's representative told INSIDER. "The story was fake then and always has been."

A representative for Holmes declined to comment. A representative Cruise didn't immediately respond to INSIDER's requests for comment.