Tom Cruise and Katie Holmes were one of the most iconic couples in the mid-2000s. The Mission: Impossible star dated for one year and then tied the knot with the Batman Begins actress on November 18, 2006. But the world of pop culture was shaken when the duo popularly known as TomKat among fans announced their divorce in 2012. Surprisingly, the divorce case went relatively smoothly as compared to many other Hollywood legal battles and ended very soon. But reportedly, it was Katie Holmes who signed a harsh bond to put a quick end to the relationship.

Advertisement

Tom Cruise was first spotted on The Oprah Winfrey Show in 2005 jumping on his couch and showing his affection for the Phone Booth actress. This led to many fans thinking that this couple might suffer a different fate than Cruise’s first two relationships but things turned quite opposite.

Also Read: Russian Movie “The Challenge” Steals from Tom Cruise’s Playbook &#8211; Becomes First Movie Shot in Space

Advertisement

Tom Cruise and Katie Holmes’ divorce holds a dark secret

The 60-year-old actor was head over heels for the actress but reportedly his association with the Church of Scientology led the couple to break up the long marital life of five and a half years. They also share a daughter Suri who was born on April 2006, months before their marriage.

While Tom Cruise reportedly agreed to pay $400,000 annually in alimony, a report also claimed that Holmes had to agree to a set of rules for the procedure. If the report by RadarOnline is to be believed, then Katie Holmes had to nod her head to one of the meanest clauses that prevented the actress from dating publicly for five years.

“Katie signed a clause in her quickie divorce settlement that prevents her from embarrassing Tom in various ways, like talking about him or Scientology, or publicly dating another man for five years after the divorce. She’s allowed to date, but she cannot do so in a public fashion, and she’s not supposed to let any boyfriend near their daughter, Suri.”

Further, it is added that she was done with the Top Gun alum and wanted to leave him as soon as possible which led her to agree to the statement and also got her a huge sum for it.

Advertisement

“Katie wanted out of the marriage so badly, she agreed to the terms — and got $4.8 million in child support, plus another $5 million for herself.”

Interestingly, this report never got confirmation from either side which still raises a question mark on the whole incident. But a report which came out during the rumored relationship phase between Jamie Foxx and Katie Holmes seemingly confirmed that Tom Cruise’s team might have presented the actress with such a harsh agreement.

Also Read: Every Woman Tom Cruise Has Dated & Where Are They Now

What was the aftermath of the TomKat divorce?

After Tom Cruise and the Miss Meadows star got separated, Holmes was granted the primary custody of Suri while the actor was allowed to visit her. But more interestingly, a relationship rumor between Holmes and The Amazing Spider-Man 2 actor, Jamie Foxx attracted wide media attention.

Advertisement

Also Read: Who Is Katie Holmes Dating Now After Divorcing Tom Cruise?

Similar to the weird agreement, this relationship rumor also never got any confirmation but several hints pointed at the news being right. Many pictures of the duo holding hands were leaked. On the other hand, a report by W Magazine claimed that Foxx and Holmes kept their relationship silent for the first five years which raised suspicion among the fans. But seemingly it also came to an end in 2019 and the 44-year-old actress dated chef Emilio Vitolo Jr from 2020 to 2021.

Source: RadarOnline