Saiyuki manga volume 1 features story and art by Kazuya Minekura and is presented in this collector’s hardcover edition. The boys are back, in 400-page hardcovers that are as pretty and badass as they are! This hit adventure—which blends mythology from around the world into a classic adventure story—has been out of print for years, and this collector’s edition is a fitting celebration of its return!

Genjo is a Buddhist priest in the city of Shangri-La, which is being ravaged by yokai spirits that have fallen out of balance with the natural order. His superiors send him on a journey far to the west to discover why this is happening and how to stop it. His companions are three yokai with human souls. But this is no day trip—the four will encounter many discoveries and horrors on the way, and on the road, Genjo will wonder…can he really trust his supernatural companions?

So, this is different from many of the other book reviews, given that it’s a Japanese comic(manga) but, it is a hard back so it’s slightly different? And a classic one at that, which is still being printed over in Japan – not because there is a lot of it being released, it’s not like One Piece – due to the creator having a lot of different commitments going on, as well as their own health issues.

However, Saiyuki is a classic adventure story that takes the fabled Journey into the West – it’s been done a lot over in Japan, Dragonball Z is another big hit – but tweaks it, changes it into something a bit different and new. Of course given that it came out in the late 90’s, it does have that feel to it, there are certain words that are thrown around that wouldn’t be said today, but regardless of certain words being used, the story itself still works and it’s an enjoyable read. The main four are interesting, even though you don’t know too much about them, in fact in this edition the only characters that we learn about – regarding their backgrounds – are Sha Gojyo and Genjo Sanzo, although Son Goku and Cho Hakkai do have little moments within the book (grant Goku’s is right at the start of the book), and even then it’s not really that much to give the reader too much information about why they are as they are. Yet the characters are they stand in this moment are interesting, funny, questionable and just work.

The art work is also stunning, the translations are pretty well done too.

Of course there are moments within the book when the translation can’t be done, due to a game that they play that isn’t played over in the West, for example, but they let people know what the characters are saying and what it means at the back of the book, though given that they put down page numbers… and the manga doesn’t have page numbers, so it will possibly involve either flipping through the book or just waiting until the end to get the full translations. I flipped through the book, so I didn’t forget what was going on. There is also a moment in the book when the speech bubble doesn’t cover up the original text of Japanese, although I do think that happens a lot and I do remember that was in the original version of the manga too – why did I get this version when I had the original? I can’t find the original manga and I have heard word that many people are hoping that if this gets a good number of sales, the company will release the rest of the manga into English.

If you are interested in a manga that stars 4 pretty handsome men, an interesting plot along with a lot of humour, this could be something to look into.