Staff writer | San Jose, Ca., USA – Cypress Semiconductor Corp. announced that it has appointed J.D. Sherman to the board of directors.[break]

Mr. Sherman is the chief financial officer at Akamai Technologies, a leading web networking infrastructure company. Prior to Akamai, he served as the chief financial executive of IBM's $21 billion Systems and Technology Group.

During his 15 | May 18, 2010

May 18, 2010, San Jose, Ca., USA – Cypress Semiconductor Corp. announced that it has appointed J.D. Sherman to the board of directors.

Mr. Sherman is the chief financial officer at Akamai Technologies, a leading web networking infrastructure company. Prior to Akamai, he served as the chief financial executive of IBM's $21 billion Systems and Technology Group.

During his 15-year career at IBM, he held a number of senior executive positions in finance, including vice president of finance and planning for the company’s zSeries Server Division. Before IBM, Sherman served as CFO for CommQuest, a wholly owned IBM subsidiary in the wireless semiconductor design industry.

Mr. Sherman holds a master’s degree in business administration from the University of Chicago and a bachelor’s degree in Economics from Emory University. ■

LATEST MOVES FROM California

Automation Anywhere appoints Tim McDonough as CMO

Farmers Insurance appoints John Griek as CFO

Cromer Material Handling appoints Brent Poulton as president

Apple nominates Wanda Austin to board

Jack in the Box appoints Brian Scott as CFO

CAREERS

Africa Finance Corporation appoints executive director, financial services Africa Finance Corporation, an infrastructure solutions provider in Africa, has appointed Banji Fehintola as its new executive director of financial services, effective August 1, 2024.

Lindemann Metal Recycling: Markus Tandel named head of procurement and aftermarket Lindemann Metal Recycling, a manufacturer and pioneer in the circular reuse of metals, has announced the appointment of Markus Tandel as its new head of procurement and aftermarket.

Travis Leonard joins Lockton as CFO Lockton, an insurance brokerage firm, announces that Travis Leonard has joined the firm as chief financial officer.