CommQuest Services Inc Deliverance House - Substance Abuse Treatment in Canton, OH

Commquest Services Inc Deliverance House is an addiction treatment center located at 1711 Spring Avenue Ne in the 44714 zip code in Canton, OH. Commquest Services Inc Deliverance House provides the following rehab services: drug rehab for pregnant women, rehab for people with trauma and drug rehab for seniors and older adults. Some of the additional services that Commquest Services Inc Deliverance House offers consist of recovery training, social skills development and self-help groups. Ancillary services provided by Commquest Services Inc Deliverance House include counseling for families, substance use education and employment counseling and training.

Call (866) 770-0811 for 24/7 help with treatment.

WHO ANSWERS?

Located at: 1711 Spring Avenue NE, Canton, OH 44714

Types of Care

Service Settings

External Opioid Medications Source

Type of Alcohol Use Disorder Treatment

External Source of Medications Used for Alcohol Use Disorder Treatment

Treatment Approaches

Facility Ownership

License/Certification/Accreditation

Payment/Insurance/Funding Accepted

Payment Assistance Available

Special Programs/ Population Groups Supported

Assessment/Pre-treatment

Screening & Testing

Transitional Services

Ancillary Services

Other Addictions Treatment

Counseling Services and Education

Tobacco/Screening Services

Facility Smoking Policy

Age Groups Accepted

Gender Accepted

Below you can find detailed information about CommQuest Services Inc Deliverance House in Canton, OH and its addiction treatment programs:

Types of Care:

halfway house

residential drug use treatment

inpatient dual diagnosis treatment

Service Settings:

residential drug rehab

60 and 90 day inpatient drug rehab

External Opioid Medications Source:

In-network prescribing entity

Personal physician/health care provider

Type of Alcohol Use Disorder Treatment:

Accepts clients using medication assisted treatment for alcohol use disorder but prescribed elsewhere

External Source of Medications Used for Alcohol Use Disorder Treatment:

In-network prescribing entity

Other contracted prescribing entity

Personal physician/health care provider

Treatment Approaches:

anger management

CBT

motivational incentives

community reinforcement

DBT

motivational interviewing

rational emotive behavioral therapy

relapse prevention

substance use counseling approach

counseling for trauma victims

12-step rehab

Facility Ownership:

a private non-profit organization

License/Certification/Accreditation:

State substance abuse agency

State department of health

State mental health department

Certified by the Council on Accreditation

Payment/Insurance/Funding Accepted:

Accepts Federal funding

Accepts Medicare

Accepts Medicaid

Accepts Military insurance

Accepts private health insurance

Accepts self payment and cash

Payment Assistance Available:

Sliding fee scale

Special Programs/ Population Groups Supported:

drug rehab for transitional-age young adults

residential drug rehab for adult women

drug rehab for pregnant and postpartum women

drug rehab for older adults

LGBT drug rehab

drug rehab for vets

military families rehab

judicial clients treatment

dual diagnosis treatment

rehab for people with HIV or AIDS

sexual abuse victims rehab

rehab for domestic violence victims

rehab for people with trauma

Assessment/Pre-treatment:

Comprehensive substance use assessment

Interim services for clients

Outreach to persons in the community

Screening & Testing:

Breathalyzer or blood alcohol testing

Drug or alcohol urine screening

Screening for mental disorders

Screening for substance use

TB screening

Drug and alcohol oral fluid testing

Transitional Services:

Aftercare/continuing care

Discharge Planning

Naloxone and overdose education

Outcome follow-up after discharge

Ancillary Services:

case management

domestic violence services

HIV early intervention

sober housing services

mental health services

recovery coaches

self help meetings

social skills training

help with transportation

professional interventionist

mentoring

Other Addictions Treatment:

general addiction disorder treatment

treatment for gambling disorder

Counseling Services and Education:

counseling for individuals

counseling for groups

family counseling

counseling for couples

substance use education

hepatitis education, counseling and support

HIV/AIDS counseling

health education services

employment counseling services

vocational training

Tobacco/Screening Services:

Screening for tobacco use

Smoking/tobacco cessation counseling

Facility Smoking Policy:

Smoking permitted in designated area

Age Groups Accepted:

adult rehab

accepts young adults over 18

Gender Accepted:

inpatient drug rehab for women

Phone #: 330-454-6800

Call (866) 770-0811 for 24/7 help with treatment.

WHO ANSWERS?

When considering a drug rehab center like CommQuest Services Inc Deliverance House, it's essential to gather detailed information to ensure it meets your specific needs or the needs of your loved one. Here are 15 important questions to ask:

Accreditation and Licensing:

Is CommQuest Services Inc Deliverance House accredited by any reputable accrediting bodies?

Are all staff members licensed and certified in their respective fields?

Treatment Approaches:

What treatment approaches and modalities does CommQuest Services Inc Deliverance House use?

Is the treatment plan individualized based on the specific needs of each patient

Staff Credentials:

What are the qualifications and credentials of the treatment staff at CommQuest Services Inc Deliverance House, including counselors, therapists, and medical professionals?

Medical Supervision:

Is there 24/7 medical supervision at CommQuest Services Inc Deliverance House, especially during detoxification?

How is medical care integrated into the overall treatment plan?

Detoxification Process:

What is the detoxification process like in CommQuest Services Inc Deliverance House, and how is it managed?

Are medications used to assist in the detox process, and if so, how are they administered?

Length and Structure of Program:

How long is the recommended treatment program at CommQuest Services Inc Deliverance House?

What is the structure of the daily schedule and the overall treatment timeline?

Aftercare and Continuing Support:

What aftercare programs or support does CommQuest Services Inc Deliverance House provide to help individuals transition back into daily life?

Family Involvement:

How does CommQuest Services Inc Deliverance House involve and support the families of individuals undergoing treatment?

Are there family therapy sessions or educational programs?

Dual Diagnosis Treatment:

Does CommQuest Services Inc Deliverance House provide treatment for co-occurring mental health disorders along with substance abuse?

Success Rates and Outcomes:

Can CommQuest Services Inc Deliverance House provide data on its success rates and outcomes?

How does the center define and measure success in treatment?

Cost and Insurance Coverage:

What is the cost of the treatment program at CommQuest Services Inc Deliverance House, and what does it include?

Does CommQuest Services Inc Deliverance House accept insurance, and what is the coverage?

Privacy and Confidentiality:

How does CommQuest Services Inc Deliverance House ensure the privacy and confidentiality of its clients?

What information is shared with external entities?

Facility Amenities and Environment:

What amenities and recreational activities are available to patients?

How is the overall environment conducive to the healing process?

Therapeutic Modalities:

What types of individual and group therapy are offered at CommQuest Services Inc Deliverance House?

Are there alternative or complementary therapies available, such as art therapy or yoga?

Relapse Prevention:

What strategies and programs does the center have in place for relapse prevention?

How does CommQuest Services Inc Deliverance House support individuals in maintaining long-term recovery?

Asking these questions can provide you with a comprehensive understanding of CommQuest Services Inc Deliverance House and help you make an informed decision about pursuing treatment there.

This is a detailed listing page for CommQuest Services Inc Deliverance House, a rehab center in Canton, OH

© Copyright Inpatient-DrugRehab.org. All Rights Reserved.

When you call any number that is not associated with a specific treatment facility listing where a "treatment specialist" is mentioned, or any number or advertisement that is marked with "i", "Ad", "Sponsored Ad" or "Who answers?", you will be calling Legacy Healing, a network of treatment centers that advertises on this site, with locations in Florida, California, New Jersey and Ohio. Treatment may not be offered in your location. Treatment for your specific addiction or mental health condition may not be offered. If you are experiencing severe emotional distress and/or suicidal thoughts, please seek all available help immediately, including contacting the Suicide & Crisis Lifeline by dialing 988 and/or visiting their website at: https://988lifeline.org/. For additional treatment options or to speak to a specific treatment center, you can visit SAMHSA at: https://www.samhsa.gov/. The Florida Department of Children and Families can provide additional treatment options and can be reached at: https://www.myflfamilies.com/SAMH-Get-Help. Inpatient-DrugRehab.org provides informational services only. Inpatient-DrugRehab.org is not a mental health, psychiatric and/or substance abuse treatment services organization. Inpatient-DrugRehab.org is not affiliated with any of the addiction or mental health facilities listed on our website or located near you. Calling one of the sponsored telephone ads listed on our site will route your call to one of our third-party treatment center partners. Inpatient-DrugRehab.org does not recommend or endorse specific facilities or any other medical or addiction-related information that may be made available by and through the Site Offerings. The Site Offerings do not constitute mental health, psychiatric and/or addiction-related treatment and/or diagnosis. The Site Offerings are not a substitute for consultation with your healthcare provider or substance abuse professional. Reliance on any information made available to you by and through the Site Offerings is solely at your own risk.