As everyone knows Mabel Normand made her last film in 1922. At least, that’s what Dickie Attenborough stated in his (very) flawed film Chaplin. Silly boy, he didn’t do his homework. If he had, he’d have realised that Mabel’s last film was released in 1927. Furthermore, if he’d bothered to read Chaplin’s autobiography, he’d have known that, when Charlie and Mabel had a minor argument about some silly gags, Mabel said nothing, except order everyone back to the studio. Oh, and by the way there wasn’t a railway station outside Keystone, and you can’t run a car race in an orange grove, especially when there are tree stumps everywhere. Take 500 lines, young Attenborough, and stand at the back of the class. Anyhow, getting back to Mabel’s last films, these were made at the Hal Roach Studios, beginning in 1926, with Raggedy Rose. The Roach studio had represented the enemy for her old employer, Mack Sennett, and it’s likely that the chauvinistic bully, Hal Roach, did not really like Mabel. She was too cock-sure of herself, and too disrespectful to movie producers. Many producers, however, took Mabel as she was: Adolph Zukor, Louis B. Mayer, Mack Sennett, Sam Goldwyn, and even D.W. Griffith had accepted Mabel for herself. Sennett, Goldwyn and Griffith employed Mabel, but it seems, due to contractual problems, Zukor was never able to have her at his Paramount Studio. Mayer is a different kettle of fish, and we’ll discuss this further on.

What Lead up to the Roach Films?

The W.D. Taylor murder, which caused Mabel so much trouble in 1922, was a complicated mess, involving Mabel, Sennett Studios and Paramount. Both studios worked in tandem to remove evidence from the scene, and, perhaps, plant other evidence. Paramount had been involved with the Sennett Studio in the 1910s, and the bottom line was that Mabel was considered the professional property of Mack Sennett. Without going into the complexities of the case, it seems that Taylor had been trying (or at least Mabel thought he was trying) to get Mabel into Paramount Studios, via the backdoor. However, the long-term links between Zukor and Sennett dictated that Mabel would never step over the threshold of Paramount. When the Taylor business finally blew over, Mabel found herself making the film Extra Girl, for Sennett, but no sooner was the film in the can than Mabel was involved in another shooting, when her driver, Horace Greer, commonly known as ‘the shooting chauffeur’, shot her latest lover, Courtland Dines.

All hell broke out, when, just after the Dines case, a certain Mrs Church named Mabel in a divorce case. However, Mabel was not named as co-respondent, but as someone that “had alienated Mr Church’s affections for Mrs Church.” In essence Mabel and Mr Church had shared a bottle of gin, while they had been hospitalised together. Following this, Mabel departed on a stage tour for a play called the Little Mouse. The play had been on the road under different names in the past and failed, but impresario Al Woods, thought it could succeed, with Mabel being the little mouse. In other words, she would not be billed as the tough, wayward girl that the press had painted her, but as someone demure and ‘quiet as a mouse’. Mabel’s name would draw the crowds, and the nature of the play would, hopefully, rehabilitate her with the public. The play itself was bad, and the press lampooned it, and also thought Mabel’s voice to be weak. The public, however, loved it, or rather they loved Mabel. In the end Mabel pulled out halfway through the play’s run, as she thought her impact would lessen over time. This was a good move, and Mabel settled on a million dollars for the work she’d done, rather than the two million for the complete run. Her share of the profits of Extra Girl also amounted to a million, so Mabel retired back to L.A., bought a Beverly Hills mansion, and put her feet up.

Very soon, though, she realized she was not suited to life at the fireside, and Mack Sennett moved in with the offer of a role in a new feature film. When she went to the studio for negotiations, the whole lot went crazy. Old friends surrounded her car cheering, but were roughly pushed aside by the young actresses eager to meet the great Keystone Mabel. Unfortunately, their hope of having a figure-head in their studio was dashed. For reasons unknown, the Sennett film never happened. Mabel married Lew Cody, and cruised into Roach Studios.

Living with Hal Roach.

Mabel did not exactly cruise sedately into the Roach studio out at Culver City. A whole lot happened in the lead up to the Roach berth. Mack Sennett still maintained an interest in Mabel, and the big producers knew and respected that. Consequently, although she was on good terms with all the top producers, she had to look for a rebel-type film-maker, especially one that wanted to give Sennett ‘the finger’. That person was Hal Roach, but there was a problem with Roach, for Mabel had ridiculed the ‘thick-necked Mick’ as she called him, down the years. It was her friends, Mary Pickford, Blanche Sweet, Norma Talmadge that wrote to Roach requesting that he take Mabel on board. Mabel’s old director, and now studio supervisor at Roach, F. Richard Jones, also made representations to his new employer, who had publicly stated he’d employ any of the old ‘falling stars’ that were in trouble.

He clearly had not expected the star of stars, Mabel Normand to come a-calling, and when he made his statement, he had the idea of paying $50 a week. Mabel was the biggest comedy star there was, and would surely demand payment in the thousands a week, and he knew that Mabel would never provide her own costumes, unless she was in a mind to. However, the chance of poking Sennett in the eye again, was too good to miss. Unfortunately, he soon realised he’d, perhaps, made a mistake when Mabel arrived for negotiations, not just with an attorney, but with an entourage, comprising a chauffeur, her private nurse, her physician, and a liveried butler carrying her fur coat. She also had her hand maidens along – her friends that Hal recognised as current movie stars. After the butler had swooshed the chair with a silk handkerchief, Mabel sat at Hal’s desk. She then asked for a glass of water, into which the butler placed half a dozen red roses. If Hal was in any doubt, he was now in the presence of a Queen. Mabel then ordered that F. Richard Jones be present. Hal had no choice, and he had an orderly tell Dick Jones to come up. Hal then asked what figure Mabel had in mind. The attorney wrote something on a piece of paper and then handed it to the Irishman. Hal nearly fell over backwards, “Good god Mabel, five thousand a week!” The attorney said that Mabel did not expect the five thousand to be in the contract. There would be $1,000 on the contract, and the rest would be paid ‘under the table’. Mr Roach swallowed hard, when he realised the $5,000 only applied to the first film. The second film would be paid at ten thousand a week, and all ensuing films at thirteen thousand a week.

“Mabel, that’s more than I make!” said Roach.

“Yes, but it’s not you up on the screen” replied Mabel.

Mabel’s friends sniggered. Check-mate, Hal was screwed. If he wanted Mabel, he’d have to pay. Then, Mabel demanded four feature films, or the deal was off. Hal swallowed hard again, and quickly worked out that a series of features would cost him a king’s ransom.

“Take it, or leave it, Hal” said Mabel.

“O.K., O.K., but my insurers insist that every employee have a medical examination.”

With that, the physician stepped forward, and presented Hal with a thick medical report. The report suggested that Mabel had a little breathing difficulty, at the moment, due to a cold, but was otherwise sound in health. The physician reminded Hal that he was licensed by the insurance companies to produce reports. The report was a lie – Mabel was dying, and would be gone in a little over three years. After Dick Jones had discussed with Mabel what the studio could provide, the contract was signed and sealed.

That night Hal Roach tossed and turned in his bed, he’d been had, and he knew it. If it weren’t for his cauliflower ears, he might have heard the tinkling of glasses down at Mabel’s Beverly Hills mansion, where, unknown to him, Dick Jones, his screenwriter Stan Laurel, and a fat guy called ‘Babe’ Hardy, had joined a large number of Mabel’s friends for a celebratory party. Even Hal’s newest starlet, Anita Garvin, had come along. The studio was about to liven up, and steel helmets would be obligatory.

Tweaking the Irishman’s Nose.

If Hal ever imagined he was going to have an easy life, then he was wrong. Mabel soon had screenwriter, Stan Laurel, and first director, Richard Wallace, doting on her, but she also demanded supervisor Dick Jones into her presence. She just about monopolised Dick, who was meant to be spread thinly across the whole studio. Mabel cared not. Lew Cody came in often to help her, along with her nurse Julia Benson, but the biggest problem were the girlfriends and starlets that Mabel brought to the studio, against Hal’s express wishes. Like Mabel, they used the most profane language imaginable, and, as Hal later said “They followed me around the studio screaming the most unladylike language at me — Mabel herself was the dirtiest-talking girl you ever heard.” As at Biograph, Vitagraph, Sennett and Goldwyn, there was nothing anyone could do.

The Films.

Raggedy Rose: This was the first of Mabel’s Roach films, and the absence of Dick Jones as director, was palpable. The film goes for cheap laughs above all, which is not surprising, considering that Stan Laurel (screenwriter/co-director) was a committed gagsman, who never dealt with stories. Mabel had kicked against gagsville very early in her career, something Stan’s old mate, Charlie Chaplin, had failed to understand twelve years before. The photography was not terribly good, even allowing for the lapse of 90 plus years. Sennett’s films had been sharp and ultra-clear in their day, although Mack had the advantage of having D.W. Griffith, and his cameraman, Billy Bitzer, as his mentors. Mabel did the best she could with what she was given, and she even asked for some re-takes supervised by Dick Jones. However, this was a four-reel film, and therefore a short feature. There are some amusing scenes in this film, the most amusing being where Anita Garvin and Laura La Varnie (Mabel’s old protagonist from Mickey) fall from a window and end up embedded in a car’s roof with their legs sticking up in the air, waving.

Anita Garvin was a childhood fan of Mabel, and she was delighted to play alongside her heroine. She thought Mabel was just great, but notes that she seemed unable to find her mark on the set. Anita thought she was losing her mind, and she was. However, Mabel had always been a bit wild on the set, and often got herself on the edge of the shot, and very few people knew she just about as blind as a bat (hence the soulful, hypnotic eyes). Mabel plays a ‘5 – 5’ girl, working for James Finlayson, playing a latter-day Fagin-style junk dealer Mabel was a girl so poor “that even the sunshine she gets is second hand.” This is classic Mabel, and soul food for a tragedienne, and the film, and Mabel, are more sorrowful than, say, the girl in Mabel’s Dramatic Career (Keystone 1913), but very similar to the one in What Happened to Rosa (Goldwyn 1921).

However, we would be unkind to say that Stan Laurel, so much the filcher, based his film on Goldwyn’s offering. Mabel spends far too long involved with gags, and one gag, involving finding a dime in an old pair of trousers, takes several minutes to play out, which probably sent the audience shuffling in their seats (if thousand-mile-an-hour Sennett had been dead, he’d have turned in his grave). The old grandfather clock gag that appeared in Mickey is here resurrected, but this time the old thing shatters into a thousand pieces, as does the incredible self-collapsing car, a staple of some Sennett films. Sennett’s classic, the horse’s neck joke, also comes into play. Sennett had a whole repertoire of dumb-witted Mabel jokes, one being that Mabel thought that the’ Horse’s Neck’ cocktail was a dobbin steak. Mabel, falling from a moving ambulance on a stretcher, is time-enduring comedy to be found in films from 1908 to the present day. This picture may be described as a semi-Cinderella story, for Mabel (it appears) gets her man, albeit accidentally. There is no doubt that Dick Jones saved this picture from certain death, by inserting ‘life-saver’ scenes. We might suggest that the early scenes were retaken by Jones, to include some of the Mabel facial expressions seen in Extra Girl. The old Sennett trick of getting Mabel into a nightdress or pajamas is used here, but, as previously, said nightdress trailed the floor. Numerous times, in this film, Mabel does the head or hair scratch, something she’d developed over twenty years, and best seen when she’s wearing a hat. If we think we’ve seen this somewhere else, then we have. Watching closely on the set was our old friend Arthur Stanley Jefferson aka Stan Laurel, who was looking for a few tricks to get himself back in front of the camera.

The Nickel-Hopper: it would be interesting to know what discussions took place between sourpuss Hal and Mabel prior to this, her second film. The first film was successful, but Mabel had not been seen on the screen for three years, and everyone welcomed the ‘Madcap’s’ return. Furthermore, national newspapers had carried Raggedy Rose photo-comic strips, and sheet music was on sale, which was avidly purchased by the public. The next film would have to be a ‘humdinger’, and, besides, Mabel wanted to return to her dramatic roots i.e. she wanted a film in the vein of Mickey and Extra Girl. In terms of Mabel’s ability to carry on at her former pace, it must have been considered that she was no longer physically up to performing in a feature, for the second film would be shorter.

However, it is clear Mabel was looking for quality, not quantity, and she must have bargained long and hard for the services of Dick Jones, who eventually directed the picture. In fact, the film is a blend of Roach/Laurel and Sennett/Jones. In the majority of early Keystone films, Mabel is the Queen Bee, around which everything happens – it is her reactions – facial gestures, subtle body movements that are important. Possibly, this resulted from the fact that, early on in California, she was a lone female, surrounded, on screen and in real life, by he-man gorillas trying to kill each other with clubs, bricks and Colt .45s. In the New York Biograph comedies, Mabel often initiates the action, as she occasionally does in the Roach offerings. The film brings back the well-photographed melancholy scenes, so notable in Extra Girl, but Jones has here allowed them to become a bit over the top. The scene, where Mabel breaks down in floods of tears, while talking to her father, would have been disallowed by Sennett, but Mabel never freed herself from the belief that tragedy could be combined in equal measure with comedy.

Chaplin took on board Mabel’s idea, but his success came from using a mere background of melancholy. Nonetheless, the tears shed by Mabel have nothing to do with publicising sorrow over her medical condition, as few outside Hollywood were aware of this. Mabel is merely putting herself forward, as a misunderstood, pathetic, naive ingenue, to counter the brickbats that were thrown at her by the press. She was, in fact, as hard as nails inside, and allowed herself no self-pity, but would sob like a baby, if she heard of a crippled orphan, or some child dying for want of medical funds. It should be noted that ‘Babe’ Hardy was taken out of the Roach cupboard for this picture, and acquitted himself well in the few seconds he’s on screen. This film, although a short, was highly successful.

The script is an acceptable one for a short film. The main character is called Paddy, and she is, appropriately, as Irish as the banshees. Paddy is a nickel-hopper by night, a girl who dancers with a partner (punter) for money (Mabel, ’tis said, was an extraordinarily good dancer). Also for money, she takes in and cares for babies, which, as in His Trysting Place, gives her a chance to show her affection for youngsters. Children, it is said, always went straight to her in real life, but it is not known if she wanted children of her own. We can assume that Mabel had no time for domestic life, and, in any event, her tuberculosis would have made her infertile. Paddy’s family are as poor as potato famine migrants, and while mother and daughter slave to pay the rent, pa stays in bed virtually all day. He only comes to life, to drive off the occasional boyfriend that Paddy brings home. Eventually, a punter drives her home in a Rolls Royce, but Paddy, seeing ‘pops’ at the window, tells the rich guy to drive to another address. This address is a high-class residence, but Paddy has to pretend she lives there, and even has to enter the premises. The house is the residence of a certain James Finlayson, who is soon chasing Mabel and lover with an elephant gun. However, after all the machinations, as you’ve probably guessed, Mabel marries her Rolls Royce guy. All is not plain sailing, though, as while escaping the wedding rice thrown by guests, the pair run off a precipice, and are only saved when Mabel’s dress billows out into a parachute. To avoid any impropriety, Mabel is wearing her all-covering pantalettes from Extra Girl, and after so many quick peeps down the years, the film johnnies finally get to see Mabel’s pants. Interesting note: Boris Karloff appears in this film (scary!). The self-collapsing car has been reassembled for this film, and Mabel is supple enough to get bent up in the wreckage.

Anything Once: In this film Mabel gets with it, and dons a flapper skirt, high heels and a cloche hat, atop her bobbed hair. Mabel has lost about 20 pounds since her Keystone days, and her spindly legs protruding from her short skirt, give her the gawky look that Sennett wanted for Louise Fazenda. Now we know that the madcap has finally abandoned the Edwardian era, and entered the 1920s.

Mabel, as usual, is a slavey, working for taskmaster James Finlayson. Our heroine does her best in her dressmaking job, but manages to set Finlayson’s toupee on fire, after drinking gasoline by mistake!? Why there is a bottle of gasoline on Mabel’s ironing board, while she is ironing, is not explained. However, as we know from His Trysting Place, ironing boards can be a source of great amusement, especially when cracked over a certain Charles Spencer Chaplin’s head!

Mabel makes a hash of delivering a dress to snooty Mrs Du Puyster. Mrs Du Puyster has had a face-lift, in order to capture the heart of a prince. Although there are a few comical themes in this film, there are also numerous silly inter-titles. This is the Cinderella story to end all Cinderella stories, and Mabel appears to get the man, or prince, although when he proposes, she simply says “I must be wooed and won, chase me!” then runs away. We are left wondering whether the prince got the girl, but the line Mabel said might have been better directed at Mack Sennett. James Finlayson, as in the other films, adds his own particular brand of humour, as does Mabel when Mrs Snooty gets riled with her, and Mabel points at her face saying “Slippy — Slippy” indicating her face-lift has failed. We also get another glimpse of Mabel’s bloomers, but then this is the type of repeated corn expected of Roach.

Should Men Walk Home.

Mabel as a bandit, surely not. This is a new deal, for the sweet, wholesome Keystone Girl would never be a gun-toting crook, but in this film she is. You have to go back 12 years to find a villainous Mabel, in Tillies Punctured Romance. However, the Tillies Mabel was a somewhat nasty Mabel, a gangster’s moll, in fact. Circumstances were different back then, and by 1923, we only find a mildly intimidating gun-toting Mabel in Extra Girl. At that time, and later, Mabel was, we might say, rehabilitating herself with the public, after the two shooting scandals. The gun-girl in Roach’s film is cute and unbelievable in her role. Mabel hijacks a crook in his car at gunpoint, but Mabel soon shows us she has not lost her previous girl appeal, when the car is stopped by police for speeding. Mabel pulls every charm possible out the bag, including her fluttering 2-inch eyelashes, to get them off the hook. Afterwards, the crook pretends to be sorry for her, and writes her a thousand dollar cheque. Mabel immediately snatches the cheque and jumps from the car, and walks off giving the cute Mabel wave. However, the real Mabel comes to the fore, and she realizes that the man means more to her than the money, and she re-enters the car, saying:

“We should work together….you furnish the ideas and plans…..and I’ll furnish the brains.”

Unfortunately, it turns out that Mabel was not as brainy, as she’d thought, and belatedly realises the cheque is signed ‘Santa Claus’. The two do get together, though, and attend a high-class party, at which they attempt to steal valuables, while being closely watched by detective Eugene Pallette. Creighton Hale ends up swimming in a fountain pool, as Mabel becomes a true spindly legged flapper, of the Colleen Moore type, trying to distract Pallette. In fact, it is enlightening to see the 34-year old Edwardian, seemingly very fit, giving the flapper generation a run for their money.

The supporting cast was Creighton Hale, Eugene Pallette, and Oliver Hardy. Creighton Hale, by the way, was the hero in the Pearl White ‘Pauline” and ‘Elaine’ films.

One Hour Married. This film tells the story of a girl who has her husband snatched from her arms during her wedding. The snatchers were the Great War press-gang, and he was straight off to the mud-filled trenches of Flanders Field. The Great War was a particular bee in Mabel’s bonnet, and she’d led the anti-war ‘Dig for Peace’ movement in 1917. Indeed, her brother, Claude, was snatched by Uncle Sam, and sent to sample the mud on the Somme. Unfortunately, this is a ‘lost film’ and so we only have stills, and reviews to tell us the story, and of the quality of the picture. These reviews hint at the power of the short film, and suggest that Mabel could have won the war all on her lonesome, by traipsing all over the battlefield, looking for her husband, and fighting it out with the dreaded Hun on the way. It’s a shame the film is lost, for the critics suggest this was the best of the Roach bunch. Mabel, of course, was never on the Somme, but, curiously a certain Lillian Gish and D.W. Griffith did film on the front line. Mabel, we know, rarely filmed outside the studio fence, let alone outside the country.

Why Work for Roach?

Going to Roach did not, and does not, seem a good career move for Mabel, although she was the star of those film. When Sennett offered her a part in his 1926 super-feature, she was wise to reject the part, which was just one star role, among many others. In fact, every other star, including Gloria Swanson, turned Sennett down as well. So, what was in Mabel’s mind and those that sought to help their Goddess? Hal Roach was the King of Corn, and we might say that ‘Laurel and Hardy’, with their gag-based stories, was the best that the Irishman could do. For Mabel there was little of artistic merit in the pictures, and her attempts to introduce tragedy, look grossly out of place. Surely, then, she was out to show that she could still cut it on screen, and the Roach films are just one great advert for Mabel, who in every film seems to be screaming “Help, get me out of here!” A hopeless cause? Patently not, for big producers were listening, even if their ears weren’t as big as Roach’s cauliflowers.

Mabel left Roach after the contracted series of films, but she had not contemplated oblivion. Instead, it seems, many producers were waiting for her medical treatment, to prevent recurring bouts of pneumonia, to finish. In 1928, Louis B. Mayer brought her to a screen test at MGM, where she was filmed on the set of Our Dancing Daughters, ostensibly as a private film. Using a current set, however, would enable the MGM board to evaluate her performance with that of the actual performers in the movie. Furthermore, there was recorded sound to go with the film, as a further test. The press got wind of this, and were told that it was merely a private film for Lew Cody’s Christmas present. Some private film, wasn’t it? Mabel looks fit and well in the film’s stills, as she did in the photo with Charlie Chaplin, taken in that same year. Mabel’s debut, though, with MGM was put on hold, while Mabel undertook further medical treatment. Nonetheless, by early 1930, there was nothing for Mayer to do, but join the band of Hollywood’s big-shot pall-bearers, and carry The Keystone Girl to her final resting place.

The Winners and Losers

Strangely enough, Mabel was a winner from the Roach association. If she had not died, she would have run on through the thirties, and, perhaps, into the 1940s. This would have enabled her to fend off the brick bats hurled at her by the supporters of McCarthyism, and Billy Wilder, with his film Sunset Boulevard, that eventually damned her reputation. Big winners were the middle-aged, washed up actors, Stan Laurel and Oliver Hardy, who re-ignited their careers off of their association with Mabel. Ollie had the opportunity of performing in the films of one of the greatest of Hollywood stars, while Stan was close enough to Mabel to borrow her gestures and facial expressions that formed the core of his new character (principally the head scratch and the dumb face). Stan had no particular mannerisms of his own, he had previously been just a blank face. In one way, Roach had lost his self-esteem and reputation by employing the contemptuous, dirty-talking Mabel, but he scored with the success of Laurel and Hardy, even though he had to eat humble pie and return Stan to acting. It seems likely, though, that Hal was forever haunted by Mabel’s ghost, right down through his long years on this earth.

Relevant Links.

MABEL AND THE DINES AFFAIR.

W.D. TAYLOR AND MABEL NORMAND. PART 1.

MABEL’S FRIENDS: F. Richard Jones