Scott Brady

unread,

to

Comedian Hal Roach has died at age 84 in Florida. The Waterford-born

entertainer was a fixture in Irish American circles and spent 26 years

as comedian in residence at Jurys Cabaret in Dublin where millions of

Irish Americans laughed at his jokes.

His catch phrase was ‘write it down’ and Roach published several books

aimed at the Irish American market which were very popular.

Roach was over 60 years in show business and first came to attention

as a boy soprano.

Upon hearing the news, fellow comedian and good friend Brendan Grace

stated: "Roach was a prime influence throughout my career and has

inspired me and many others to walk in the shadow of his greatness."

The Irish Times printed five of Hal’s funniest jokes;

The teacher said, “Seán, what is a cannibal?” He said, “I don’t know.”

The teacher said, “Well, if you were to eat your mother and father,

what would you be?” He said, “An orphan”.

Murphy found himself very late one night in London in the underground

subway station, at four o’clock in the morning. He walked along to the

escalator. And on the escalator it is written, “Dogs must be carried

on the escalator.”

And he thought, “God, where am I going to find a dog at this hour of

the night?”

A man buys a jigsaw puzzle with eight pieces. Nine months later he has

managed to put it all together and is delighted with himself. He

thinks he has done well because on the box it says “four to six

years”.

The teacher said to this boy, “What’s Gandhi’s first name?” He said,

“Goosey Goosey”.

http://www.irishcentral.com/news/King-of-Blarney-comedian-Hal-Roach-dies-at-84-140847703.html

Diner

unread,

to

On Wednesday, February 29, 2012 1:41:16 PM UTC-5, Scott Brady wrote:

> Comedian Hal Roach has died at age 84 in Florida. The Waterford-born

> entertainer was a fixture in Irish American circles and spent 26 years

> as comedian in residence at Jurys Cabaret in Dublin where millions of

> Irish Americans laughed at his jokes.

Not to be confused with the American comedy film producer of the same name, who died in 1992 at age 100.

I hadn't thought of Hal Roach (the comedian) in years. I actually saw him once, when I was a kid, circa 1977. My dad took the whole family to see The Clancy Brothers, and Roach was the opening act. The venue was the Villanova University fieldhouse (then the home of the school's basketball team), which was packed.

I'm sure the Clancys were great, but I was too young to appreciate them at the time. As for Roach, he told one-liners for half an hour or so, each one sillier than the next. I only remember one joke he told: He was sitting on a subway, and a man walked up to him and asked "Are you reading that newspaper you're sitting on?" Even at age 12 or so, I immediately thought "He stole that joke from David Brenner!" Brenner told the joke better (as a story, saying he had been repeatedly asked the question on subway rides), and gave it a punch line (he said "Yes," got up, turned the page, and sat down again). Roach did it quicker - he just said the one line, then plowed on to the next joke. He kept it simple, for an audience that wanted it simple. That was his style, and it made him popular with a dedicated, if limited, audience for decades.

> The teacher said to this boy, “What’s Gandhi’s first name?” He said,

> “Goosey Goosey”.

I had to read this joke a couple times before it made sense. I think it only works if you pronounce "Gandhi" with an Irish accent (rhyming it with "candy"). And even then...

-Tim