The history of Slovakia and the Slovaks has for many years been perceived in Polish historiography as a component of larger wholes: the history of Hungary or the history of Czechoslovakia. For this reason, Polish historians usually paid little attention to the phenomenon of the national development of the Slovaks in the 19th century. This situation began to change only from the 1990s, when numerous studies finally appeared seeking to see the history of Slovakia and the Slovaks as a separate historical issue from the histories of the Hungarians and especially the Czechs. This text is aimed at presenting the achievements of Polish scholars over the last three decades with regard to the history of Slovakia and the Slovaks in the 19th century. The article describes the most important Polish synthetic studies, collective studies, and finally monographic works on the history of Slovakia and Slovak culture. Attention was also paid to the most important scientific centres in Poland, which initiate research in the field of Slovak culture and history. Despite the growing interest in Poland’s southern neighbour in recent years, significant shortcomings in Polish historiography are still visible. The article also attempts to draw attention to the desirable perspectives for further research in Poland.

In the first half of the twentieth century, Ostrava (Moravian Ostrava, Greater Ostrava), as the center of the Ostravian industrial area (with a high concentration of plants that use coal, iron, and steel and were involved in the chemical industry in the nineteenth century), was not only an important center of Austria–Hungary and then Czechoslovakia, but also served as an important center of modern religious life in the Czech lands. Between the two world wars, the Ostravian area was the center of the Czechoslovak atheistic movement, the National Czechoslovak Hussite Church, and the Middle-European spiritualistic movement. In this essay, which is based on records and statistic materials from Ostrava City Archive and other Czech archives, will map religious life of Moravian Ostrava in relation to two social groups, the working class and the middle class of both the Czech and the German speaking populations, including German speaking people of Jewish origin. The second observed phenomenon, proselytism, will be described based on Books of religious conversions of the Roman Catholic Parish Of ce from 1854 to 1920. I consider the frequency of conversions between individual confessions, the most frequent reasons given for conversion, mixed marriages within working class and middle class environments, and Jewish converts to Roman Catholicism. Keywords: religious life, industrial town, atheistic movement, national church, spiritualistic movement, proselytism, Ostrava, 1850–1950.

The Counts of Krbava (Corbaviai), a family of Croatian magnates, have been documented in the sources from the thirteenth century up to 1531. They originated from the county of Krbava, today a rather undeveloped and poorly inhabited part of the Croatian region of Lika. In contrast to this, during the Middle Ages Krbava was one of the important Croatian political and ecclesiastical centres. We do not know much about the counts due to the fact that their family archive probably perished during the Ottoman invasions at the turn of the fifteenth and the sixteenth centuries. However, analysis has shown that Krbavski had seven generations with three branches and altogether some 60 individuals. They mainly marked medieval Croatia, Dalmatia, Slavonia, Istria and Bosnia with their presence. Nevertheless, some of them temporarily or permanently resided in today’s Hungary and Slovakia. Of all the Croatian magnates, they were the ones who were often most present in Slovakia. This was practically unknown in Croatia until the pioneering work of Pál Engel from 1998. The first among the Krbavski in Slovakia was the kindred’s leading figure, Grgur (Gregory) I, in 1358. He came to Levoča? / Levice? (in castro Levia) as a prisoner of King Louis I. The counts ascended significantly on the social scale during the rule of King Sigismund (1387– 1437), because they were the king’s most consistent and loyal supporters in medieval Croatia. Therefore, they were rewarded with many high-ranking titles and offices, as well as with numerous landed estates. For example, Count Karlo II (Charles) of Krbava obtained from the king, in 1393, as a permanent donation the royal castle and town of Čeklís (Latin Cheklyz, Slovak Bernolákovo ; Hungarian Cseklész). Čeklís or Bernolákovo remained Karlo’s seat and residence right up to his death (after 1422). He was consequently even titled Duke of Čeklís. He spent his lifetime between his native region and his estates in Slovakia. He also possessed a big house in Bratislava. His direct descendents (three sons, three grandsons, and one great-grandson) remained permanently in Slovakia and with time extended their possessions even in the region of Nitra. This branch of the Krbavski kindred could be, therefore, called with full justification Slovak nobility of Croatian origin. This paper presents data about the Slovak branch of the Krbavski from the perspective of Croatian history.

Until recently in Croatian archaeology, research of medieval rural settlements was very rarely a subject of scientific interest. Over the past 15 years, extensive protective excavations have been carried out intensively on the routes of future motorways. Large areas have now been explored, which has led to new and more-accurate insights into medieval rural settlements, but there is still a need for the systematic publication of research. The settlements are dated from the Early Middle Ages to the Early Modern Age. Dispersed and nucleated settlements prevailed among the several types of rural settlements during the reigns of the Árpád and Angevin dynasties. This paper discusses the transformation of rural settlements in Slavonia with reference to numerous examples. An earlier group of dispersed settlements, dated from the 10th to 13th centuries, was characterized by occasional dispersed structures, a small number of pits, and hearths. The buildings are characterized as dwellings and/or working buildings. They were built in the form of huts with steep roofs. Settlements dated from the 13th and 14th centuries to the first half of the 16th century show different features. They consist of larger dwellings with the remains of posts combined with postholes and hearths. Different types of settlements are represented among these buildings; from single-spaced structures that are reminiscent of earlier periods, to the multi-spaced buildings with house plots. This period is characterized by the development of a fixed plot system. Organized compact settlements replaced the former dispersed and isolated ones, and are connected to the reorganization of the field system. Settlements established during the 15th century have been recorded and their existence has been established, even after the Ottoman conquest of Slavonia. By the shape of the structures and their organization they indicate continuity from the Middle Ages.

The purpose of the research is to highlight, on the basis of documents from the archives of the Society of Jesus and periodicals of the time, the missionary activity of the order in Stanyslaviv from 1883 until the beginning of the First World War. In addition, to analyze the social work of the Society of Jesus, particularly the latter’s establishment of religious societies and Marian sodalities. Th e research methodology. Th e article uses general scientifi c methods, particularly the analysis, and synthesis of various sources, induction, and deduction. Th e principles of historicism, objectivity, comprehensiveness, integrity, and systematicity are applied. Th e text uses the approp- riate terminological apparatus, which substantiates the author’s vision of the essence and historical assessment of the missionary initiatives of the Society of Jesus in Stanyslaviv. Th e scientifi c novelty lies in a comprehensive review of the pastoral activities of the Society of Jesus in Stanyslaviv...