Horoscope and chart of Poppy Montgomery

Astrological portrait of Poppy Montgomery (excerpt)

Disclaimer: these short excerpts of astrological charts are computer processed. They are, by no means, of a personal nature. This principle is valid for the 68,179 celebrities included in our database. These texts provide the meanings of planets, or combination of planets, in signs and in houses, as well as the interpretations of planetary dominants in line with modern Western astrology rules. Moreover, since Astrotheme is not a polemic website, no negative aspect which may damage the good reputation of a celebrity is posted here, unlike in the comprehensive astrological portrait.

Introduction

Here are some character traits from Poppy Montgomery's birth chart. This description is far from being comprehensive but it can shed light on his/her personality, which is still interesting for professional astrologers or astrology lovers.

In a matter of minutes, you can get at your email address your astrological portrait (approximately 32 pages), a much more comprehensive report than this portrait of Poppy Montgomery.

N.B.: as this celebrity's birth time is unknown, the chart is arbitrarily calculated for 12:00 PM - the legal time for his/her place of birth; since astrological houses are not taken into account, this astrological profile excerpt is less detailed than those for which the birth time is known.

The dominant planets of Poppy Montgomery

When interpreting a natal chart, the best method is to start gradually from general features to specific ones. Thus, there is usually a plan to be followed, from the overall analysis of the chart and its structure, to the description of its different character traits.

In the first part, an overall analysis of the chart enables us to figure out the personality's main features and to emphasize several points that are confirmed or not in the detailed analysis: in any case, those general traits are taken into account. Human personality is an infinitely intricate entity and describing it is a complex task. Claiming to rapidly summarize it is illusory, although it does not mean that it is an impossible challenge. It is essential to read a natal chart several times in order to absorb all its different meanings and to grasp all this complexity. But the exercise is worthwhile.

In brief, a natal chart is composed of ten planets: two luminaries, the Sun and the Moon, three fast-moving or individual planets, Mercury, Venus and Mars, two slow-moving planets, Jupiter and Saturn, and three very slow-moving planets, Uranus, Neptune and Pluto. Additional secondary elements are: the Lunar Nodes, the Dark Moon or Lilith, Chiron and other minor objects. They are all posited on the Zodiac wheel consisting of twelve signs, from Aries to Pisces, and divided into twelve astrological houses.

The first step is to evaluate the importance of each planet. This is what we call identifying the dominant planets. This process obeys rules that depend on the astrologer's sensitivity and experience but it also has precise and steady bases: thus, we can take into account the parameters of a planet's activity (the number of active aspects a planet forms, the importance of each aspect according to its nature and its exactness), angularity parameters; (proximity to the four angles, Ascendant, Midheaven, Descendant and Imum Coeli or Nadir, all of them being evaluated numerically, according to the kind of angle and the planet-angle distance) and quality parameters (rulership, exaltation, exile and fall). Finally, other criteria such as the rulership of the Ascendant and the Midheaven etc. are important.

These different criteria allow a planet to be highlighted and lead to useful conclusions when interpreting the chart.

The overall chart analysis begins with the observation of three sorts of planetary distributions in the chart: Eastern or Western hemisphere, Northern or Southern hemisphere, and quadrants (North-eastern, North-western, South-eastern and South-western). These three distributions give a general tone in terms of introversion and extraversion, willpower, sociability, and behavioural predispositions.

Then, there are three additional distributions: elements (called triplicity since there are three groups of signs for each one) - Fire, Air, Earth and Water - corresponding to a character typology, modality (or quadruplicity with four groups of signs for each one) - Cardinal, Fixed and Mutable - and polarity (Yin and Yang).

There are three types of dominants: dominant planets, dominant signs and dominant houses. The novice thinks astrology means only "to be Aries" or sometimes, for example, "to be Aries Ascendant Virgo". It is actually far more complex. Although the Sun and the Ascendant alone may reveal a large part of the character - approximately a third or a half of your psychological signature, a person is neither "just the Sun" (called the sign) nor just "the first house" (the Ascendant). Thus, a particular planet's influence may be significantly increased; a particular sign or house may contain a group of planets that will bring nuances and sometimes weaken the role of the Ascendant, of the Sun sign etc.

Lastly, there are two other criteria: accentuations (angular, succedent and cadent) which are a classification of astrological houses and types of decanates that are occupied (each sign is divided into three decanates of ten degrees each). They provide some additional informations.

These general character traits must not be taken literally; they are, somehow, preparing for the chart reading. They allow to understand the second part of the analysis, which is more detailed and precise. It focuses on every area of the personality and provides a synthesis of all the above-mentioned parameters according to sound hierarchical rules.

Warning: when the birth time is unknown, which is the case for Poppy Montgomery, a few paragraphs become irrelevant; distributions in hemispheres and quadrants are meaningless, so are dominant houses and houses' accentuations. Therefore, some chapters are removed from this part.

For all paragraphs, the criteria for valuation are calculated without taking into account angles and rulerships of the Ascendant and of the Midheaven. The methodology retains its validity, but it is less precise without a time of birth.

Elements and Modes for Poppy Montgomery

Cheers for communication and mobility, Poppy Montgomery! The predominance of Air signs in your chart favours and amplifies your taste for relations and for all kinds of short trips, whether real (travels) or symbolic (new ideas, mind speculations). You gain in flexibility and adaptability what you lose in self-assertion or in pragmatism.

Poppy Montgomery, Fire is dominant in your natal chart and endows you with intuition, energy, courage, self-confidence, and enthusiasm! You are inclined to be passionate, you assert your willpower, you move forward, and come hell or high water, you achieve your dreams and your goals. The relative weakness of this element is the difficulty to step back or a kind of boldness that may prompt you to do foolish things.

The twelve zodiacal signs are split up into three groups or modes, called quadruplicities, a learned word meaning only that these three groups include four signs. The Cardinal, Fixed and Mutable modes are more or less represented in your natal chart, depending on planets' positions and importance, and on angles in the twelve signs.

The Mutable mode is the most emphasized one in your natal chart, Poppy Montgomery, which indicates a mobile character that is curious and thirsty for new experiences and evolution. You are lively and flexible, and you like to react quickly to solicitations, but don't confuse mobility with agitation, since this is the danger with this configuration - and with you, stagnation is out of the question. Security doesn't matter as long as you are not bored. You optimize, you change things, you change yourself... all this in a speedy way.

Dominants: Planets, Signs and Houses for Poppy Montgomery

The issue of dominant planets has existed since the mists of time in astrology: how nice it would be if a person could be described with a few words and one or several planets that would represent their character, without having to analyse such elements as rulerships, angularities, houses, etc!

The ten planets - the Sun throughout Pluto - are a bit like ten characters in a role-play, each one has its own personality, its own way of acting, its own strengths and weaknesses. They actually represent a classification into ten distinct personalities, and astrologers have always tried to associate one or several dominant planets to a natal chart as well as dominant signs and houses.

Indeed, it is quite the same situation with signs and houses. If planets symbolize characters, signs represent hues - the mental, emotional and physical structures of an individual. The sign in which a planet is posited is like a character whose features are modified according to the place where he lives. In a chart, there are usually one, two or three highlighted signs that allow to rapidly describe its owner.

Regarding astrological houses, the principle is even simpler: the twelve houses correspond to twelve fields of life, and planets tenanting any given house increase that house's importance and highlight all relevant life departments: it may be marriage, work, friendship etc.

In your natal chart, Poppy Montgomery, the ten main planets are distributed as follows:

The three most important planets in your chart are Neptune, Mercury and Venus.

With Neptune as one of your three dominant planets, you are a secretive and ambiguous person, often confused or unclear about your own motivations! Indeed, you are endowed with unlimited imagination and inspiration, as well as with an extreme sensibility that may turn you into a psychic or a clairvoyant. On the other hand, your impressionability is such that you may have difficulties in separating what is concrete and solid from illusions or dreams.

A mystic, a visionary or a poetess, you daydream, like any Neptunian, and you see what few people only can see, all of this being shrouded in aesthetic mists when you are fired with enthusiasm.

A boundless, infinity-loving woman like you is inevitably likely to be more vulnerable and easily hurt because of your acute perception of events. In such cases, you are hit full in the face, and you may sink into gloomy daydreamings and dark melancholy.

That said, this mysterious aura definitely gives you an indefinable charm in the eyes of your close friends who are often fascinated by your unique ability to feel and to see what ordinary people can never see!

With Mercury among your dominant planets, you are certainly cerebral, nervous, swift, curious, quick-witted, and you love to communicate. Your psychological pattern is intellectual, all the more so since Mercury is important, with its whole set of assets but also of weaknesses, obviously.

Your sensitivity, emotions, and heart's impulses give precedence to thinking, which can lead people to believe that you are a playful and witty but heartless person, intellectualizing situations and juggling with words and numbers whilst ignoring human aspects of things. Of course, it is said that cats always land on their feet - this is your Mercurian strength and your trump card!

Your weakness lies in your nervousness, and you may miss your goal because of your "over-intellectualization" that may be detrimental to other kind of energies such as instinct, spontaneity, heart, sensitivity, etc.

With Venus among your dominant planets, one of your first reflexes is... to please! Your look, your charm, and your seduction are omnipresent elements in your behaviour.

Your approach to things is connected to your heart, and for you, no real communication can flow if your interlocutors exude no sympathy or warmth. Cold and logical reasoning, clear thoughts and good sense are not important to you: if there is no affective bond with your environment, no connection can be established with the Venusian that you are, and nothing happens.

You have a strong artistic side, and you never neglect subjective but clear concepts such as pleasure, beauty, and also sensuality. However, sometimes to the detriment of efficiency, durability, logic, and... detachment.

In your natal chart, the three most important signs - according to criteria mentioned above - are in decreasing order of strength Gemini, Cancer and Leo. In general, these signs are important because your Ascendant or your Sun is located there. But this is not always the case: there may be a cluster of planets, or a planet may be near an angle other than the Midheaven or Ascendant. It may also be because two or three planets are considered to be very active because they form numerous aspects from these signs.

Thus, you display some of the three signs' characteristics, a bit like a superposition of features on the rest of your chart, and it is all the more so if the sign is emphasized.

With Gemini as a dominant sign, your qualities include being lively, curious, mobile, clever, and flexible: you often make others dizzy, and you may come across as a dilettante - a bit inquisitive, shallow, and insensitive because you may be too intellectualizing. However, your natural curiosity, a nice quality, and your quick humour, allow you to demonstrate to everyone how much they may gain from your company, and that your apparent flightiness hides an appetite (particularly mental) for life, which itself conceals a terrific charm!

Cancer is one of your dominant signs and endows you with imagination and exceptionally shrewd sensitivity. Although suspicious at first sight - and even at second...- as soon as you get familiar with people and let them win your confidence, your golden heart eventually shows up, despite your discretion and your desire for security that makes you return into your shell at the slightest alert! Actually, you are a poetess and if you are sometimes blamed for your nostalgia and your laziness, it is because your intense inner life is at full throttle...

With Leo as a dominant sign, you naturally shine brightly. Your dignity, your sense of honour, and your generosity can almost turn you into a solar mythological hero, a knight or a lord from the ancient times. People may blame you for your selfishness, your pride or your somewhat loud authority, but if you are self-confident, kind-hearted and strong-willed, it surely makes up for your little flaws, as long as they remain moderate...

After this paragraph about dominant planets, of Poppy Montgomery, here are the character traits that you must read more carefully than the previous texts since they are very specific: the texts about dominant planets only give background information about the personality and remain quite general: they emphasize or, on the contrary, mitigate different particularities or facets of a personality. A human being is a complex whole and only bodies of texts can attempt to successfully figure out all the finer points.

The Moon in Leo: her sensitivity

You seek other people's attention and approval, Poppy Montgomery, you need to exteriorize your emotions, to interpret them, and even to dramatically enact them because it is essential for you to shine at the front of the stage. You always try to achieve more and better than anyone else and, whatever the situation may be, you strive to remain warm, generous, loyal, honest, straightforward and courageous. You are always available when your assistance or your advice is needed and you are glad and proud to help. However, you must be wary not to overdo, as you may be domineering! You are not indispensable and people might think that you are self-centered and authoritarian when you handle things with no regard for your entourage's views. It would be regrettable that you project such an image because it may only reveal a lack of self-confidence and you are only trying to reassure yourself...

Mercury in Cancer: her intellect and social life

Your intelligence is sensitive and delicate, with good comprehension abilities, Poppy Montgomery, which endows you with a strong intuition and receptivity. To you, impressions and feelings prevail over facts and your excellent selective memory is not cluttered with useless elements. Although you are not aware, your fertile imagination may lead you to change your daily reality so that it matches your dreams better. If you are creative, you may make use of your imagination in literary pursuits where you can freely invent beautiful stories taking place in the past. Your passion for History is such that you may immerse yourself into it with too much nostalgia and therefore, you may miss opportunities the present offers to design projects and to think of the future.

Venus in Gemini and the Sun in Gemini: her affectivity and seductiveness

In your chart, the Sun and Venus are both in Gemini. On two accounts, you belong to the category of people who are praised for their open-mindedness and criticized for their superficiality. But what does superficiality exactly mean? It is a quality: the opposite of anything heavy, fatty, thick. Actually, better than anyone, you know how to make use of the mood of the moment and the trends of the times. Your healthy curiosity precludes unbearable routines, the daily grind that gets the couple bogged down in old habits and obsessions. You need to discover, to experiment and to broaden the scope of your concepts and your interests. The danger may be that you are content with relationships that are superficial, easily established and too “light”. When not well integrated, this planetary duet describes an “artichoke heart” with so many crazes that love is never considered a serious matter. Your affective search becomes a finality in itself, as your heart cannot find a permanent home base. Therefore, it is important that you let go, that you cling to your certainties, as frail as they may be. Under this condition, the qualities of your sign can fully be expressed: love becomes an easy and inexhaustible source of varied emotions. So that what you dread most never settles in: the boredom of a dull life.

What is it, that really appeals to you, Poppy Montgomery, to love or to please? You have so much charm and so much volubility that you easily manage to be what is known as a femme fatale. Feelings and intellect are so tightly mingled that you may not know any more whether you are really in love or whether you are acting. You have a taste for flirt and variety, and you appreciate very much complicated situations where no one knows where the truth lies any more. You shift from one game to another. To you, everything can be an agent for seduction, be it your attitudes, your words or the way you dress. You do not separate your actions from your desire to please. People who do not understand this are in trouble because, if they take your sweet and well-phrased speeches too literally, they are likely to undergo cruel disappointments: for you, it is only a matter of living in the moment and you never commit yourself because, above all, you loathe confinement, even just its thought.

The Sun in Gemini: her will and inner motivations

Your mobility is such that you are in every place where you are not expected. You spend lots of time asking questions and answering them. Your curiosity and your quick-wittedness are insatiable. Your mind is in constant turmoil, hopping from one topic to another, solving problems, accumulating anecdotes and knowledge within a short range of time. Your mobility is mostly mental, it takes you afar and turns your daily life into a mosaic of intense and pleasant moments that are not necessarily related to one another

As you are born under this sign, you are nervous, expressive, lively and adaptable, with a quick mind and a good sense of humour. You are bubbling, playful, sociable, clever, curious, whimsical, independent, intellectual, flexible, ingenious, fanciful, imaginative, charming, cerebral, and you are into everything. You may also be whimsical, unfocused, quirky, superficial, indiscreet, opportunist, unmindful, selfish, sarcastic or mercurial.

In love, Madam, you are full of intelligence and liveliness. You are so subtle, so whimsical, that you could be seen as a “teaser” because you can seduce in any situation. The more complex they are, the more numerous the contacts, the better.

Among all the Zodiacal signs, you are the outstanding one who can “manage” several simultaneous love affairs. It is not a matter of vice, but only of voluptuous pleasure of the instant. If they do not take place at the same time, your amorous encounters may be short-lived. But their number is very considerable because you constantly want to keep boredom and monotony at bay and you frantically run away from any source of peace and calm.

You will probably marry more than once. For you, the Sun symbolizes first the father then the husband: Gemini being a double sign, and your father being unique, it is likely that you will have two or more husbands. However, this is not a fatality and the rest of your chart can easily tell you more.

Mars in Cancer: her ability to take action

It is difficult to find a more sensitive person than you, Poppy Montgomery. You are able to contain your aggressiveness and it may be hard for you to exteriorize your feelings. You are usually passive and you draw your strength from inertia and resistance more than from the will to take action. Your mood is changing, you show little of yourself and you may surprise with your inopportune reactions that come late, when people have forgotten what it was all about. The only area where you express yourself with zeal and where your actions are successful is the area of home or, more symbolically, in the fields where you can achieve security. In other words, you need to feel comfortable before you can move, in concrete matters as well as in sexuality.

Conclusion

This text is only an excerpt from of Poppy Montgomery's portrait. If you want to get your own astrological portrait, much more comprehensive that this present excerpt, you can order it at this page. Do you belong to the Jupiterian type, benevolent and generous? The Martian type, active and a go-getter? The Venusian type, charming and seductive? The Lunar type, imaginative and sensitive? The Solar type, noble and charismatic? The Uranian type, original, uncompromising and a freedom-lover? The Plutonian type, domineering and secretive? The Mercurian type, cerebral, inquiring and quick? The Neptunian type, visionary, capable of empathy and impressionable? The Saturnian type, profound, persevering and responsible? Are you more of the Fire type, energetic and intuitive? The Water type, sentimental and receptive? The Earth type, realistic and efficient? Or the Air type, gifted in communication and highly intellectual? 11 planetary dominants and 57 characteristics are reviewed, quantified, and interpreted; then, your psychological portrait is described in detail, in a comprehensive document of approximately 32-36 pages, full of engrossing and original pieces of information about yourself.

Astrological reports describe many of the character traits and they sometimes go deeper into the understanding of a personality. Please, always keep in mind that human beings are continuously evolving and that many parts of our psychological structures are likely to be expressed later, after having undergone significant life's experiences. It is advised to read a portrait with hindsight in order to appreciate its astrological content. Under this condition, you will be able to take full advantage of this type of study.

The analysis of an astrological portrait consists in understanding four types of elements which interact with one another: ten planets, twelve zodiacal signs, twelve houses, and what are called aspects between planets (the 11 aspects most commonly used are: conjunction, opposition, square, trine, sextile, quincunx, semi-sextile, sesqui-quadrate, quintile and bi-quintile. The first 5 aspects enumerated are called major aspects).

Planets represent typologies of our human psychology: sensitivity, affectivity, ability to undertake, will-power, mental process, aptitude, and taste for communication etc., all independent character facets are divided here for practical reasons. The twelve signs forming the space where planets move will "colour", so to speak, these typologies with each planet being located in its particular sign. They will then enrich the quality of these typologies, as expressed by the planets. The Zodiac is also divided into twelve astrological houses. This makes sense only if the birth time is known because within a few minutes, the twelve houses (including the 1st one, the Ascendant) change significantly. They correspond to twelve specific spheres of life: external behaviour, material, social and family life, relationship, home, love life, daily work, partnership, etc. Each planet located in any given house will then act according to the meaning of its house, and a second colouration again enriches those active forces that the planets symbolize. Finally, relations will settle among planets, creating a third structure, which completes the planets' basic meanings. A set of ancient rules, which has stood the test of experience over hundreds of years (although astrology is in evolution, only reliable elements are integrated into classical studies), are applied to organize the whole chart into a hierarchy and to allow your personality to be interpreted by texts. The planets usually analysed are the Sun, the Moon, Mercury, Venus, Jupiter, Saturn, Uranus, Neptune and Pluto, which means two luminaries (the Sun and the Moon) and 8 planets, a total of 10 planets. Additional secondary elements may be taken into account, such as asteroids Chiron, Vesta, Pallas, Ceres (especially Chiron, more well-known), the Lunar nodes, the Dark Moon or Lilith, and even other bodies: astrology is a discipline on the move. Astrological studies, including astrological portrait, compatibility of couples, predictive work, and horoscopes evolve and become more accurate or deeper, as time goes by.

Precision: concerning the horoscopes with a known time of birth, according to the Tradition, we consider that a planet near the beginning (called cuspide) of the next house (less than 2 degrees for the Ascendant and the Midheaven, and less than 1 degree for all other houses) belongs to this house: our texts and dominants take this rule into account. You can also choose not to take this shift into account in the form, and also tick the option Koch or Equal houses system instead of Placidus, the default houses system.

Warning: In order to avoid any confusion and any possible controversy, we want to draw your attention upon the fact that this sample of celebrities is very complete and therefore, it also includes undesirable people, since every category is represented: beside artists, musicians, politicians, lawyers, professional soldiers, poets, writers, singers, explorers, scientists, academics, religious figures, saints, philosophers, sages, astrologers, mediums, sportsmen, chess champions, famous victims, historical characters, members of royal families, models, painters, sculptors, and comics authors or other actual celebrities, there are also famous murderers, tyrants and dictators, serial-killers, or other characters whose image is very negative, often rightly so.

Regarding the latter, it must be remembered that even a monster or at least a person who perpetrated odious crimes, has some human qualities, often noticed by his/her close entourage: these excerpts come from computer programmes devoid of polemical intentions and may seem too soft or lenient. The positive side of each personality is deliberately stressed. Negative sides have been erased here - it is not the same in our comprehensive reports on sale - because it could hurt the families of such people. We are hoping that it will not rebound on the victims' side.

Numerology: Birth Path of Poppy Montgomery

Testimonies to numerology are found in the most ancient civilizations and show that numerology pre-dates astrology. This discipline considers the name, the surname, and the date of birth, and ascribes a meaning to alphabetic letters according to the numbers which symbolise them.

The path of life, based on the date of birth, provides indications on the kind of destiny which one is meant to experience. It is one of the elements that must reckoned with, along with the expression number, the active number, the intimacy number, the achievement number, the hereditary number, the dominant numbers or the lacking numbers, or also the area of expression, etc.

Your Life Path is influenced by the number 4, Poppy, and your destiny implies sustained efforts, long-drawn-out works, and concrete achievements. The path may seem a bit tedious, but it is very promising, provided that you demonstrate some tenacity, loyalty, and patience. You are often invited to display orderly and methodical qualities, and step-by-step, you go through all the stages which may lead you to success, if you do not let hurdles dishearten you throughout your life. Persistence is among your major qualities. You see life as a challenge, and, far from falling into the trap of picking the easy way out, you face problems with calm and lucidity, and you choose the work and steady effort which open the door to success, although evolution requires quite a long time. Your personal path is based on continuous efforts and on maintaining the same immutable direction.

Poppy Montgomery was born under the sign of the Rat, element Water

Chinese astrology is brought to us as a legacy of age-old wisdom and invites us to develop an awareness of our inner potential. It is believed that the wise man is not subjected to stellar influences. However, we must gain the lucidity and the distance without which we remain locked up in an implacable destiny. According to the legend of the Circle of Animals, Buddha summoned all the animals to bid them farewell before he left our world. Only twelve species answered Buddha's call. They form the Chinese Zodiac and symbolize the twelve paths of wisdom that are still valid nowadays.

The Asian wise man considers that a path is neither good nor bad. One can and must develop one's potentialities. The first step is to thoroughly know oneself.

Your personality is secretive and mysterious and you prefer to take action behind the scenes rather than to reveal your plans and ambitions. You are sensitive to the slightest interpersonal flaw and you display a great deal of caution in your affairs.

Besides, you do not like the crowd and the hustle and bustle. You prefer a more intimist atmosphere where your qualities can be fully expressed. Better than anyone, you know how to face adversity, subtly getting round obstacles and manipulating your entourage, if necessary. You are awesome in situations of crisis: thanks to your perspicacity, you avoid tricks with disconcerting ease and you also happen to be Machiavellian and scheming.

You never totally open up because you believe that it would give other people the means to act against you! On the other hand, you have mastered the art of making your interlocutors reveal what they wanted to conceal. Actually, you only need a word to guess the underlying stakes of any situation.

On the chapter of your flaws, a weak moral sense is to be mentioned: you do not hesitate to show perfidy. However, your advices prove very judicious most of the time. This is the reason why your influence is considered beneficial.

Chinese astrology has five elements, which are referred to as agents: Wood, Fire, Earth, Metal and Water.

You have a deep affinity with the agent Water. In China, this element corresponds to the planet Mercury, the black colour and the number 6.

You are particularly sensitive to your surroundings, the atmosphere of a place and the climate of a meeting. Your high receptivity allows you to perceive naturally the stakes underlying people and situations.

You are reserved by nature, you favour emotions and inner life, leaving challenges and audacity to other people. You frequently maintain a certain distance and you share your true feelings with few intimate friends only. It is probably because you know that genuine communication is a difficult exercise.

Everything in your realm is sheer subtlety and nuance. The danger is that you may escape realities and indulge in indolence without fulfilling your responsibilities. This is the other side of the coin of your extraordinary sensitivity and your exceptional clear-sightedness.

You feel in tune with few people. However, this selectivity forges relationships that are long-lasting because they are natural and genuine.

N. B.: when the birth time is unknown, (12:00 PM (unknown)), these portrait excerpts do not take into account the parameters derived from the time, which means, the domification (Ascendant, astrological houses, etc.). Nonetheless, these analyses remain accurate in any case. Regarding the sources of the birth data in our possession, kindly note that the pages we publish constitute a starting point for more detailed research, even though they seem useful to us. When the sources are contradictory, which occurs rarely, after having analysed them, we choose the most reliable one. Sometimes, we publish a birth date just because it is made available, but we do not claim that is it the best one, by no means.