The Eastern Shore Centre in Spanish Fort has new owners that want to fill the empty store fronts and upgrade the site. Other shop owners we spoke with say they're hoping new ownership will give their business a boost as well. Shelley Bottiaux co-owns Poppy Blowout Bar with her daughter and has been located at the Eastern Shore Centre for nearly two years. She's seen businesses come and go around their store and would prefer to see more foot traffic from shoppers.

"My daughter and I will be jumping for joy to see this place thriving again," said Bottiaux. "I'm looking forward to seeing what they're going to do that is going to be fresh and new."

Wicker Park Capital Management purchased the property. Its subsidiary, Birmingham-based Crawford Square Real Estate Advisors is now managing the site. Suzanna Edwards, who oversees their marketing, says they have plans to add events and use the green space more often. She says that's been a successful approach at The Shoppes at East Chase, another shopping center they manage in Montgomery. This week at that location, there's an outdoor Yoga class, a farmer's market and community concert all on the calendar.

"We always believe that our shopping centers are the center of the community," said Edwards.

Events are just one way to get people on site. And right now, they're working now to bring in new businesses. The Eastern Shore Centre has 70% of its store fronts filled. That's about the same occupancy rate the Montgomery site had when they took over in 2018, according to Edwards.

"And now we're almost at 95% lease. So we brought in Lululemon, Sephora some major name brands that helped kind of revitalize that shopping center," said Edwards.

Edwards says there are immediate plans to pave the parking lot, update the landscaping and improve the exterior of the buildings.

"Right out of the gate. There are a lot of improvements that we're going to be doing to the facades of the shopping center," said Edwards. Those are some of the big things that we'll do right away."