"Excellent!"

―Burns' catchphrase

"Release the hounds!"

―Burns' order to release his hounds

"Smithers!"

―Burns calling for Smithers

"Smithers, who is this [put down]?"

―Burns when he does not remember Homer's name

"Simpson, eh?"

―Burns re-learning Homer's name

"You're fired!"

―Burns telling someone they are fired

"Oh, Fiddlesticks!"

―When something bad happens to Burns

Charles Montgomery Plantagenet Schicklgruber Burns[2], also known as Monty Burns, Montgomery Burns, C.M. Burns, and Mr. Burns, is the owner of the Springfield Nuclear Power Plant in The Simpsons franchise. He is Springfield's richest, oldest (supposedly), most powerful, and undoubtedly greediest and meanest citizen. His net worth has been stated to be in the billions and in one instance was pegged at exactly $1,800,037,022.[3]

He had, on four occasions, lost his entire fortune,[4][5][6][7] and on another occasion sold his Power Plant.[8] At another time his fortune slipped to "only" $996 million ($996,036,000), leading to his expulsion from Billionaire Camp.[3] Despite his proficiency with firearms, Burns is very elderly and physically frail but employs relentless and ruthless tactics to get whatever he wants.

Biography[]

Charles Montgomery Burns's birthday is September 15.[9] His age and time of birth varied depending on which account was given. In 1909 he appeared as a small child.[10] He once mentioned surviving the Titanic by making a raft out of steerage passengers.[11] In one episode he graduated from college in 1914 and attended the 25-year reunion in 1939.[12] However, in another episode, he was a child in 1913,[13] and in a different episode he was a child in 1935.[14] In another episode, he was a wealthy tycoon in the 1920s who used his wealth to hold excessive parties in his Middle Hampton mansion and described by Homer Simpson's narration as "the last tycoon of the Jazz Age".[7] In another episode's flashback, Burns was a young man in Paris "between the wars".[15] He mentioned last checking his stocks in September 1929,[4] living through five years of "McKinley-omics",[16] and meeting Calvin Coolidge.[17] He appeared as an old man terrorizing children in a 19th-century woodcut.[18] In the 1990s, he gave his age to Homer as 81,[19] although other people in the 1990s and 2000s including Homer understood his age to have been 104.[17][20][21] In the 2000s, his age was large enough to be a four-digit personal identification number,[22] and he gave his place of birth as Pangaea.[5] When the 108-year-old Cornelius Chapman died in 2000, Burns officially became Springfield's oldest living resident.[23] In the 2010s, Burns told Homer his age has four digits.[24] Burns implied he was rounding down his actual age, whichever it was, to 89, when after mistaking a eulogy for the millennia-old Geezer Rock for himself, Burns said, "I have been 89 for a while now."[25] During the musical number "Thanks for the Currency" in Burns' dream, Burns told George Washington that he was present at the Revolutionary War.[26] Homer once narrated that Burns was a man who dated Betsy Ross.[7]

As a child, Burns lived happily with his natural parents, Clifford and Daphne Burns, and his teddy bear Bobo. He was described as either the older brother of George Burns,[9] or the youngest of eleven siblings, all of whom aside from Montgomery Burns himself died young.[27] As a child, Burns was so jubilant and amiable that his parents called him "Happy",[9] though accounts disagreed on whether his own parents were happy as well[9] or cold and distant.[14] How he left his parents varied depending on the account. According to some early episodes, at a young age, he left his parents, and Bobo, to live with a twisted and heartless billionaire,[9] who was his grandfather, Wainwright Montgomery Burns, the owner of the Springfield Power Works, where laborers split atoms by hitting anvils with sledgehammers.[10] In another episode, his parents were rich and sent him to boarding school on Christmas Day, which left him heartbroken as he had previously asked a mall Santa Claus for a hug from his mother and a smile from his father. According to Sideshow Bob, disguised as Santa, this was to toughen him up and make him a ruthless tycoon as a better expression of love than with hugs and kisses. When Burns returned home, his parents had died, and it was too late for him to hug them,[14] although yet another episode described his mother as living to be at least 122 years old in the 1990s (after Burns failed to murder her five decades prior to that for her extramarital affair with President William Howard Taft).[21] He also listed the cause of his parents' deaths during a medical check up as "got in my way",[23] and in another episode claimed that the lack of indoor plumbing killed his mother, again suggesting she had died well before the 1990s.[25] Accounts varied as to whether Burns inherited his fortune,[14][28] or if he gained it from the nuclear power business[3][29] or by hanging onto the song "White Christmas".[30] According to one episode, Burns first came to Springfield when Marge Simpson and Moe Szyslak were children,[24] while other episodes show him living in Springfield in the 1900s,[10] 1910s,[13] and 1920s.[7]

Burns attended Yale University, where he studied science and business, played on the varsity football team, and was inducted into the Skull and Bones secret society.

After becoming a CEO with a power tie and a bonsai tree, Burns got a book contract to write the business advice guide called The Rungs of Ruthlessness.[7]

Burns' social security number is 000-00-0002. Once, while filling it in, he muttered to himself, "Damn Roosevelt."[23]

At Burns' Yale University reunion, he had an affair with the daughter of an old flame named Lily Bancroft. She would later bear his long-lost child, Larry Burns, who was given up for adoption and would later enter Burns' life briefly.[12]

After Germany invaded Poland in 1939, Burns joined the SS.[31] However, Burns defected and fled Germany. Because of his American heritage, he returned to the United States in 1941, just days after the US declared war on Germany, and enlisted in the U.S. Army.[citation needed|date=]

Burns served in the Flying Hellfish during World War II, holding the rank of private after being demoted for his involvement in a romantic scandal and attempting to block a probe from J. Edgar Hoover. Burns is proud of having manufactured shells for the Nazis, seeing himself as being superior to Oskar Schindler because his shells "worked, dammit!".[32]

A member of Springfield's Flying Hellfish battalion, he saw action in the Ardennes during the Battle of the Bulge, serving under Sergeant Abraham Simpson II. He was later transferred to the South Pacific with part of his squad. During the closing years of the war, when his platoon was clearing out a German-occupied castle, Burns came across several valuable portraits. Since they could not choose on who they should go to, they planned to enter into a tontine, from which Burns was removed after the war through being dishonorably discharged when he tried to kill Abe. The paintings were later handed back to a German whose relatives owned them.[33]

At the end of World War II, he was personally hired by President Harry Truman to transport a specially-printed trillion-dollar bill to Europe as the United States' contribution to the reconstruction of the continent. As the United States' richest citizen, Burns was thought to be also the most trustworthy, which turned out to be just a false rumor. Subsequently, Europe had never managed to reconstruct and Burns absconded with the bill and kept it in his possession for many years until it was lost to Fidel Castro.[34]

Burns, along with the Flying Hellfish, served in the Korean War.[citation needed|date=]

A mural was painted of Burns being driven out of Cuba in 1959,[35] although on another occasion he was unaware President Fulgencio Batista was gone.[34]

By the time Homer Simpson was about six[36][37] or nine,[38] Burns was the chairman of the Germ Warfare Laboratory at Springfield University. By that point, peace activists, including Homer's mother Mona, destroyed all of the germs in the laboratory with antibiotics.[39] He still had a chair on the university's board many years after Homer left high school.[40]

When Homer Simpson was either 12[41] or in his senior year of high school,[42] Burns opened the Springfield Nuclear Power Plant with his assistant, Waylon Smithers Sr. Soon after, the plant suffered a meltdown, and almost exploded. Smithers Sr. chose to sacrifice himself to save the plant, along with his son and town.[41] Burns currently owns the plant, although he has parted with it several times, including when he sold it to German investors (Hans, Fritz, and Horst),[8] when the bank foreclosed on it and put Lenny Leonard in charge,[4] when Burns lost his possessions to Rich Texan in a scavenger hunt game,[5] and when Jay G tricked Burns into bankrupting himself by overspending on a credit card.[7] He was also close to selling the plant when Elon Musk's changes to the plant caused Burns to lose his fortune,[6][43] but this was averted after Burns struck uranium deal with a Nigerian King.[6] The plant was also legally owned at one point by a canary bird named Canary M. Burns to protect Mr. Burns from responsibility for any wrongdoing by the power plant.[44] At some point during his ownership of the plant, Mr. Burns apparently recruited a Brazilian soccer team to work at the nuclear power plant's reactor core after their plane had crashed in front of his property (an act that was against the laws of the Department of Labor), as well as hiring a duck named Stewart.[45]

Criminal Record[]

This record will include crimes committed by Waylon Smithers, but planned by Burns.

Threat of violence - After Bart was going to maul Burns (mainly for injuring his dog and destroying Bart's Treehouse), he showed his holster, indicating that he would actually fire at Bart if he tried to attack him.[20] This could be argued as self-defense, yet they both have had history with each other, as previously mentioned. Burns may have bribed the authorities, as this is a serious felony.

Hit & Run: In "Bart Gets Hit by a Car", Mr. Burns hit Bart, yet drove off after Smithers suggested to take him to the hospital.

Attempted Murder: In the same previously mentioned episode, Mr. Burns hit Bart, killing him, yet being revived. In "Raging Abe Simpson and His Grumbling Grandson in "The Curse of the Flying Hellfish"", he tried to kill Abe to cheat on a tontine, and later attempted to drown Bart.

Attempted Treason: It is revealed in the comic "Big House Homer" that he sold plutonium to third-world countries for vacation money. Further more, in the episode "The Computer Wore Menace Shoes", Homer spied on Burns selling deadly uranium to Middle-Eastern terrorists and ratted him out to the FBI.

Framing: Burns had Smithers edit footage of his Attempted Treason (above) by putting Homer in his place; this resulted in Homer being arrested and sent to prison.

Child Labor: He has been known to force children to work for him under terrible conditions, a great example of this is from the episode "Undercover Burns".

Employee Abuse: He has been know to abuse his own employees, occasionally even randomly firing some just to throw the fear of God into them[46].

Kidnapping: In "Marge Gets a Job", Burns tried to woo Marge by making Smithers kidnap Tom Jones, hold him at gunpoint, and chain him while he was singing.

Pollution: Burns and Smithers have been seen dumping nuclear waste all over Springfield. The Simpsons Movie proved that a hazardous waste treatment plant exists, but Burns and Smithers hardly visit. Burns and Smithers have been seen hiding barrels of nuclear waste in trees[47], dumping waste in the lake[48] and once on St. Patrick's Day, Lisa Simpson pointed out that even the lake water was green, but Burns pointed out that it was green due to the nuclear waste[49].

Sexual Harassment: In "Marge Gets a Job", Mr. Burns sexually harasses Marge Simpson, causing her to feel uncomfortable. Burns later fires Marge when Burns finds out that she is married.

Poaching: in Two Dozen And One Greyhound it is revealed that Mr. Burns hunts endangered animals for clothes

Character[]

Burns is a tall, slightly hunchbacked man with a prominent overbite and a long beak-like nose. He is thin to the point of being skeletal, since his spine and ribcage are visible. Despite this, he has outlived many of Springfield’s residents.

Personality[]

Mr. Burn's personality classification is that he is a sadistic, cold, life-hating ecological terrorist with a sadistic passion for autarchy. He has an incurable process addiction of devising destructive, disruptive, life-hating plots for his own gain. Mr Burns personally enjoys the dehumanization of new, creative, bright employees because he ignores how that dehumanization relates to his profits. Mr. Burns' main conflict with himself is his musculoskeletal condition is so bad, that he is constantly achy and he is generally of poor and low character. Mr. Burns never took his billions of dollars to buy any class for himself. Mr. Burns embodies a number of sometimes accurate stereotypes about Corporate America, as he has an unquenchable desire to increase his own wealth and power. Burns also embodies the stereotype of a manager by forgetting his employees' names (especially Homer's, despite Homer appearing that he interacts more than Burns does with most of his employees), though this can be attributed to his senility. Burns is also unconcerned for their safety and well-being (the plant, for example, is filled with obvious safety violations).

Because Burns has become like an authoritarian bloated tick operator in his local economy, he is incredibly greedy as well as incredibly short-tempered, the latter trait being best demonstrated by his often releasing his attack dogs, the hounds, on those requesting charity. He uses his wealth on absurdly extravagant things, such as a life-size chess set (with humans as pieces),[50] using the town's snow plows to play a soccer-type game,[51] and having "money fights" with Smithers.[52] Also due to his riches, Mr. Burns is very stingy and averse to rewarding good deeds with money. His exact status on his stinginess has varied, however, especially when made to pay fines. When undergoing a state-level nuclear inspection, Mr. Burns when learning the cost to pay off the 342 safety violations to get rid of them as being $56 million got so incensed and depressed at having to pay the fines (with his exact reaction implying the possibility that he didn't have that amount of cash on him) that he proceeded to drink himself to a stupor until Homer suggested he run for governor.[53] On the other hand, when he was made to pay a $3 million fine for illegally dumping nuclear waste in a public park, Mr. Burns largely took the whole thing in stride, casually telling Smithers to get his wallet out of his restraints' pocket, and then offered to take the Justice statue in exchange (with Roy Snyder agreeing to these terms).[54] It is heavily implied that the reason why Mr. Burns was vicious towards his own employees and presumably most of Springfield if not all of humanity is because his employees and possibly everyone else have frequently abused his trust to goof off earlier.[55]

Burns appears to be completely removed from modern conventions and, sometimes, reality. Although he is evil, he sometimes loses his train of thought completely, becoming a helpless old man and sometimes actually a nice, caring person. He continually fails to remember who Homer is, despite the two having interacted extensively throughout the series. Not even Homer spray-painting "I AM HOMER SIMPSON" on Burns' office wall was sufficient to get Burns to remember Homer's name, this incident only resulting in an altercation. In addition, Mr. Burns, when planning his Sun Blocker plan shortly after firing Smithers, and while literally stomping down on potential rivals at his model of Springfield, proceeded to stamp down on one of the cooling towers of the plant and yell "Take that, Springfield Nuclear Power Pl..." before realizing that the plant was actually already under his control and then sheepishly muttered, "Oh, fiddlesticks!"[20]

Burns is also, for the most part, unaware of the townspeople's general hatred of him. He also tends to be extremely selfish and does not even seem to realize or even care about his selfish actions. However, he also had redeemable traits despite his status as a villain; He was good friends with Simon Woosterfield, and gave Bart advice on what was going on in his family (although at that time, he had mistaken Bart for Simon due to the two switching places),[28] and he also once supplied his workers, as part of Employee Appreciation Day, a trip to the drag racing track, although this largely backfired when Lenny Leonard, while drunk, inadvertently terrorized Mr. Burns when trying to thank him for the great evening.[21] He also willingly allowed Smithers to take a week off from the Power Plant and presumably his duties as Mr. Burns' primary caregiver to perform in a Malibu Stacy musical he wrote and directed at the Alburquerque Theater in New Mexico, despite his personally thinking that the play would fail due to its subject matter,[56] and earlier also prevented Smithers from drowning himself in a mental breakdown from perceived failure in defending him or doing basic duties and even suggested he take a vacation.[21] Once, he even aided Marge in an attempt to protect Springfield's children from Lindsey Naegle's anti-child group (although it's implied that he had more selfish motives for backing the group, as he needed the children's' "supple young organs" to stave off death).

He is also shown to hate the lawyers he hires in large part because of the latter party's unethical practices, and only has them available under necessity. At one point, in an uncharacteristic act of charity, he also managed to pay for a then-dangerously overweight Homer Simpson's liposuction to make him comparatively thin again to repay the latter for reducing a potentially catastrophic Chernobyl-style nuclear meltdown at the plant to "a mere Three-Mile Island" (although it should be noted that he did this task after Homer failed to do one sit-up).[57] In addition, during Frank Grimes' last moments when he, having entered a psychotic break, ended up grabbing extremely high voltage cables under the delusion that he was Homer Simpson, Burns was seen grimacing at the result alongside Homer Simpson, Smithers, and at least two other workers.[58] In addition, Mr. Burns when watching a play Skinner organized to get him to provide funds for the then-recently closed Springfield Elementary School, reacted with horror after the Chef, out of incompetence caused by the school being closed, placed rat poison into broth instead of salt, before Skinner pointed out that Mr. Burns could have ingested it.[59] Similarly, when Homer had a manatee pose as himself, Mr. Burns was shown to befriend him, and when learning he was about to die from dehydration, he immediately requested they give the manatee a sponge bath.[60]

Burns also proceeded to make sure Homer went to college for a Nuclear 101 course so that he can be allowed to keep his job, even going as far as to use his holding a chair at Springfield University to pull several strings to make sure he was enrolled (though it should be noted that he mostly did it for somewhat selfish reasons, as he implied that if Homer did not go to college, then the nuclear power plant would be shut down as a result of Homer's incompetence).[40] He also organized a team-building exercise upon witnessing first hand his employees failing to clear the power plant during a fire drill within at least fifteen minutes (especially when the optimal clearance time was forty-five seconds), and was genuinely disgusted with his employees' actions beforehand (in particular, Homer blocking the fire escape with a bench).[61] In addition, when Homer was revealed to have had mental trauma caused by his accidental discovery of Waylon Smithers, Sr.'s half-decayed corpse in a local watering hole that he was swimming at that got re-exposed during a hypnotist session, Mr. Burns also supplied a videotape explaining how Waylon Smithers, Sr. died to help Homer recover from the trauma (although he also largely did it because they assumed that Mr. Burns had him murdered due to the place where Smithers' body was discovered being connected directly to Mr. Burns' office, with the alternative being facing jail time, and thus wanted to clear his own name as well.).

Mr. Burns uses archaic phrases and antiquated expressions that have either changed meanings or fallen out of common usage in American English, including score (meaning 20), post-haste (quickly),[62] petroleum distillate (gasoline),[63] gay (jolly, which also caused Smithers quite a scare due to the latter initially thinking he asked if he was going to do a homosexual activity during the weekend),[64] dean (principal), velocitator and deceleratrix (a car's accelerator and brake),[21] jumping box and picto-tube (television), Automated Telemachineomeratron (Automated Teller Machine/ATM), Suffragette (Feminist), [25] auto-gyro (helicopter),[39] and the New York Nine (New York Yankees).[65] His use of "ahoy-hoy" when answering the telephone follows the suggestion of its inventor, Alexander Graham Bell, who felt "ahoy" should be the initial greeting instead of "Hello". He also calls Smithers and says "Smithers, come here, I want you", a take on what are reputedly the first words spoken by Alexander Graham Bell on his telephone ("Mr. Watson, come here, I want to see you.").[8] On a similar note, he also sometimes uses more eloquent expressions, which is best evident during his passive-aggressive treatment of Homer Simpson (who at the time was undergoing the gradual symptoms of a quadruple heart attack) upon calling him to his office, where he berated Homer by saying "Your indolence is inefficacious!", which confused Homer enough for his heart to calm down slightly, only for Mr. Burns to angrily translate that as meaning that Homer's terrible at his job, which ultimately had Homer's stress level rise to catastrophic levels.[66]

He is out-of-touch with modern technology and behavior: he practices phrenology,[39] writes with a quill pen, drives a 1936 Stutz Bearcat while wearing an Edwardian motorist outfit which includes a hat, trench coat, driving gloves and goggles,[34] carries antiquated weapons for self-defense, such as a mace or a blunderbuss,[21] and, when not chauffeured, drives without regard to traffic laws in the manner of early 20th century motorists.[21] His driver's license expired in 1909 (he even is still in the possession of several useless items from the same era, such as a Ticket Stub from the silent film "Tillie's Punctured Romance" and his SS ID Card from his time as a Gestapo Officer). It is also implied that part of the reason he once managed to go bankrupt was because he failed to realize that most if not all of the blue chip companies (pertaining to transoceanic Zeppelins, spats, inflammable powders, and hay), as well as the Baltimore Opera Hat Company, either had long been defunct or otherwise never even gained traction by the present era.

It has been shown throughout the series that Burns is, despite his somewhat dilapidated mindset, an incredibly intelligent businessman. In the list shown above, Burns can manage a number of commercial operations successfully, and is able to create big profits, which is a likely reason for Burns being so wealthy to begin with. He was able to convert Springfield's church into a successful advertising business,[67] as well as incorporate an oil drilling company in a very short amount of time[20] He is also a skilled business acquirer.[25] His financial skills have come in handy for certain occasions where he loses his fortune, as when he lost his money due to bad investments (which was because of his outdated input), he was able to rebuild his wealth and empire by recycling, thanks to Lisa Simpson's help (he even offered her ten percent of his profits, but she declined).[4] On a similar note, he was implied to have had a hand in the expansion of Ticketmaster via purchasing the company as a way to "widen the gap between the rich and the poor."[68]

Burns appears to be unaware of 20th century political and private developments, such as Fidel Castro becoming President of Cuba,[34] Siam becoming Thailand,[39] India gaining its independence from the British Empire, New Mexico becoming a state, women being granted independence rights,[56] the Wall Street Crash of 1929 (with him also blaming Smithers for not warning him about the crash despite the fact that, as Smithers pointed out, the event in question occurred 25 years before he was even born and thus was in absolutely no position to warn him of the event),[4] Idlewild Airport becoming JFK Airport,[16] the extinction of the dodo,[21] confusing The Ramones with The Rolling Stones,[9] and the occurrence of the 1939 World's Fair.[69] Despite serving in World War II, he was unaware (or had forgotten) that Archduke Franz Ferdinand was assassinated, prompting World War I. He also was shown to be unaware of more contemporary developments, such as the musicals "Cats" and "The King and I" (where he sarcastically suggested that Smithers try making musicals relating to the common housecat and the King of Siam regarding his learning that Smithers did a musical based on Malibu Stacy).[56] Humorously, he has also asked a vending machine for taffy, thinking its like a candy shop.

Mr. Burns' investment portfolio includes long-defunct shares in "Confederated Slave Holdings, Trans-Atlantic Zeppelin, Amalgamated Spats, Congreve's Inflammable Powders, U.S. Hay", and an "up-and-coming Baltimore Opera Hat Company".[4]

Burns commonly refers to deceased persons as if they were alive, including Al Jolson,[70] Tallulah Bankhead, Louise Brooks,[71] Honus Wagner, Cap Anson, and Mordecai "Three Finger" Brown.[72]

Burns used to pay his employees a salary less than a worker in the United States can normally earn (which is illegal), but the only employee Burns pays a normal salary is Smithers. This attitude entitles Burns to deduct his employees' wages as much as he likes, with Smithers being the only exception.

He also believes that some social institutions and inventions are novel or nonexistent, such as the Packard automobile,[34] the Fire Department,[23] ice cream (or, as he calls it, "iced cream"),[73] vending machines, recycling,[4] strip clubs, the Dumont,[19] the word "into", silent films like the 1929 film Lulu(although he has seen other films in the past),[74] and the synonymy of ketchup and catsup.[4] While trying to chat up Gloria Jailbird, Burns offers to play the clavichord and show stereopticon images of the Crimean War.[17]

Health[]

Due to his vast wealth, Mr. Burns has access to the best health care anyone in Springfield could ever receive. He employs elaborate medical methods, such as frequently replacing his shins and pickling his brain in vinegar, all forcing his body to continue functioning long after its natural expiration date. Due to his unnaturally long life, Burns has numerous physical ailments and health problems, or more accurately, he has every physical ailment and health problem, including several discovered in him. He is often to the point where he seems to straddle the line between life and death. The Mayo Clinic diagnosed Burns with "Three Stooges Syndrome", where a delicate state of homeostasis is created by the presence in his body of every disease known to man cancel each other out. Mr. Burns took this as being invincible, although the doctor who told him this implied that the slightest breeze could kill him.[23]

Physically weak, he often has great difficulty performing the most basic physical tasks, such as giving a thumbs up, receiving a hug, crushing a paper cup,[75] or stepping on an insect.[25] He is weak enough to be pushed over by an ant[25] or a high-five, or pushed down by a sponge scrub on his head (although he was able to eventually get up in the latter case).[76] In addition, he was frail enough that even an ant was able to overpower him and knock him on his feet when he tried to stamp it. Oddly enough, he does not seem to be affected by the recoil caused by firing a gun, as seen when he fired a blunderbuss at one of his employees(although the latter did humorously survive). He has a hunched back and his vertebral column is visible when he is viewed from the side. His exposure to radiation during his lifetime of working at the plant has given his skin a healthy green glow and left him infertile and as impotent as a Nevada boxing commissioner.[77] A 1,000 dollar bill dispensed from an ATM bruised him, leaving a reverse imprint of the bill on his chest.[22] When Burns was incarcerated at the Springfield Penitentiary, when he was getting a mugshot, the camera flash was able to slam him against a wall and knock him out.[78]

His organs have grown immensely weak over the years: his heart is black and desiccated, it barely beats or does not beat at all, and is shrunken to the size of a cherry. Burns' blood type is double-O negative.[79] When his finger is pricked, he bleeds dust, and when his arm is poked with a needle, it passes through his arm like meringue.[23] A chunk of Burns' brain once fell out through his ear. One time, his lungs came out through his mouth and acted as an airbag.[80] On another occasion, he indicated in an off-hand manner that he only has a single lung.[81] If he is not careful, fluid can build up in his hands, causing them to swell to enormous proportions, and his fingers have been shown to flap in the breeze released from a bowling ball dispenser.[82] It has been revealed that if Burns sweats even one drop, he could die of dehydration unless he takes a bath immediately.[83] Burns had also lost body parts due to leprosy (one example is when he lost an entire fingernail in a cup).[84] Both his legs have a crease in them, down the entire length.[85] Even the mere act of forceful spitting in shock was enough to drain him of his body liquids to such an extent that he appeared severely wrinkled, thus requiring Smithers to spray him with moisturizer to instantly rejuvenate his face.[25] Burns was once persuaded into giving Ralph Wiggum a piece of candy, but after he does, his skull collapses and he nearly dies. He then weakly steals the candy back and regains his health.[29] Apparently, the only reason that he could survive was due to hate, and he could not give out his kindness without getting killed as a result.

Although very much frail, he is not immune to the effects of weight gain from increased appetites, as after obviously being inspired by Homer's positive (at the time) food reviews for various food chains when he took up a side job of being a food critic, Mr. Burns became immensely overweight and while congratulating Homer on having gotten him to gain weight, he admits he never felt jollier before then. However, his weight gain still did not alleviate all of his health problems, as Mr. Burns when attempting to "toe-hop" as a gesture had his shin bones snap off, forcing him to waddle off, with his ruefully implying that this was not the first time such a thing happened (and presumably proceeded to incense him enough that he became part of the angry mob that tried to beat Homer up as retribution later on).[86]

Medical treatment[]

Mr. Burns' medical treatment includes a weekly procedure that he goes through every Friday evening after work. First, his chiropractors perform a slight spinal adjustment. Then, a team of doctors administers eye drops in his eyes (which causes his pupils to dilate very huge), painkillers, and a painful vocal chord scraping (that is done by Dr. Nick); its purpose is to postpone his death for one week. This makes him become temporarily "nice". He also glows green, a result of working in a sub-standard nuclear plant for ages causing his body to accumulate tons of radiation. Burns' appearance once caused Homer to mistake him for an alien.[87] He also had his brain flushed out with vinegar and his eyes "re-balled".[88] Though Burns needs double O-negative blood, he stated (in the song) that he took blood from sheep.[89] Burns' knees were also sent out to be repaired at a "shop".[90] His dentures replace themselves.

He once broke all his bones after falling from his office window and being crushed by his stuffed polar bear during a fight between Smithers and Homer.[21] On rare occasions, he has displayed great strength and skill, such as when he managed to single-handily capture the Loch Ness Monster (though it was never explained how he did so or seen on-screen)[91] and when he rescued his girlfriend, Gloria Jailbird, from a burning building (although she wound up carrying him out of the blaze).[17]

Career[]

Burns is almost entirely work-oriented. At the nuclear plant, Burns spends most of time in his office, monitoring his employees via closed-circuit security cameras. In his office, he keeps a team of ten high-priced lawyers, a scale model of Springfield,[20] a special microbe-resistant chamber,[92] a two-seat escape pod, and the "League of Evil" - a sinister cabal whose members are long deceased, but whose skeletons remain.[25] The booby traps in Burns' office include cricket poison, a secret trapdoor (though he sometimes forgets where it is and was once under renovation[93]), a catapult that fires 100-gram weights, and a ceiling-mounted suction tube, which he can use to transport dissident workers to Morocco.[94] He is also a loan officer at the Springfield Nuclear Power Plant Employees’ Credit Union.[95][19]

Kent Brockman also credits Burns with having stolen Christmas from 1981 to 1985.[4] He also claims to have participated in the Boston Tea Party.

As evidenced by his role in the series, Burns has owned or co-owned a number of business ventures and companies in Springfield, including the Monty Burns Casino (later demolished),[16] the Little Lisa Recycling Plant,[4] the Burns Slant Drilling Co.,[96] Burns Media,[25] the electric company, the water works and even a hotel on Baltic Avenue.[20] He also operated the Burns Germ Warfare Laboratory (which was destroyed by Mona Simpson and a group of protesters).

He owns the rights to the song, White Christmas, after blowing the chance to buy Picasso's painting Guernica, but the song ended up earning him billions; one of many possible results of his riches.[30] Burns has used his power and wealth to blackmail and bribe various members of Springfield, including Mayor Quimby, as well as safety inspectors.[40] He once attempted to block out the sun to force Springfield residents to increase their use of electricity produced by the nuclear plant and was subsequently shot by Maggie. The town is routinely subject to Burns' abuse, and there is a general dislike of him throughout the town.[20] In The Simpsons: Hit & Run, during mission 4 in Level 7, it is implied that he had a business partner that he killed. When Homer goes to his office, Mr. Burns mistakes him for the ghost of his former partner.

Properties Owned[]

Springfield Nuclear Power Plant (current owner)

Isotope Stadium

Springfield Estadio de Toros (initially the Duff Beer Krusty Burger Buzz Cola Costington's Department Store Kwik-E-Mart Stupid Flanders Park)

Springfield Monorail

Montgomery Burns State Prison

Springfield Concert Hall

Mr. Burns Basketball Stadium

S.N.P.P. Cafeteria

Montgomery Burns Institute For Soul Extraction (non-canon)

Mr. Burns' Casino

Springfield Opera House

Springfield Elementary School and Prison

Springfield Sports Arena

Springfield Atoms Stadium

Naming Rights Available

Spellympic Village (Part-owner)

Little Lisa Recycling Plant (formerly)

Burns Slant Drilling Co.

Germ Warfare Laboratory (formerly)

Baltic Avenue Hotel

Burns Recycling Inc.

Water Works

Electricity Company

Ticketmaster[97]

Burns University

New owner of[]

SpringFace (joint ownership with Bart and Lisa)

MyTube

BetterThanTV.com

Nuclear-secrets.com (joint ownership with the Springfield Nuclear Power Plant)

Earthland Realms

EBooze

Springsonian Museum (Owner/Manager/Boss)

Springfield Museum of Natural History (Half ownership)

35 Industry Way (joint ownership with Bart Simpson)

Springfield Bus Station (new owner)

Springfield Excitement (won a poker game)

Residence[]

Main article: Burns Manor

Burns resides in a vast, ornate mansion on an immense estate known as Burns Manor, located at 1000 Mammon Lane, on the corner of Croesus and Mammon streets in the Springfield Heights district. It is protected by a high wall, an electrified fence and a pack of vicious attack dogs known as The Hounds, one of them is named Winston.

He usually releases a whole lot of hounds towards guests (implied only to drive out the guests from the house and without the actual intention of hurting the guests[98]). He has at least one 30+-year-old dog named Crippler, who specialized in attacking hippies, but is now so old he has trouble walking. If a guest put him in a particularly good mood, he will return the favor by significantly reducing the number of hounds released to one.[99] At times, he has employed for protecting a force of Wizard of Oz - style monkey guards, a personal paramilitary force, a riot police squad, and a robotic Richard Simmons.[100]

The interior of the mansion includes a room containing a thousand monkeys at a thousand typewriters,[101] a bottomless pit, a hedge maze, a moat, bleached hardwood floors,[102] a human chessboard,[103] the largest television in the free world, a "Hall of Patriots" that commemorates his ancestors,[34] a laboratory, a botanical garden of vultures bearing his likeness, a safe containing a Beefeater guard,[23] a theater that is showing round-the-clock movies and shows which plays regardless whether there is an audience or not, a TV studio and a CCTV room. His residence also contains a closet full of clothes made from many different types of animals, such as a vest made from a gorilla's chest and loafers made from gophers.[104]

The mansion is also home to many rare historical artifacts including the only existing nude photo of Mark Twain,[9] the suit that Charlie Chaplin was buried in,[34] King Arthur's mythical sword Excalibur, and a rare first draft of the Constitution with the word "suckers" in it.[9]

Aside from his main residence, he also has a summer retreat, which ended up being squatted in by the Simpson family as part of a movie.[105] He also owns a mansion on Lengthy Island.

Relationships[]

Burns has been engaged at least three times: A woman named Gertrude who died of loneliness and rabies,[106] to Jacqueline Bouvier,[107] and to a policewoman named Gloria Jailbird.[17] Though when he tells Homer about Gertrude, he says that he was her fiancé, but he implies that they were married, as he says he missed their wedding, their honeymoon, and their divorce due to working so hard. He was once involved with a fellow student during his time at Yale University named Mimsy Bancroft, and then later had an affair with her daughter, Lily.[12] He once had an affair with Countess von Zeppelin, as he slept with her one time.[108] He also once in love with Marge, and pursued a relationship with her, but stopped once he discovered that Marge was married. Agnes Skinner revealed that she once had an affair with Mr. Burns during the Great Depression ("let him feel me up").[109] Burns once caught the attention of Selma when she discovers that Burns is single.[110]

Family[]

Charles Montgomery Burns was born to Clifford Burns and Daphne Burns (before the marriage, her maiden name was Daphne Charles (hence Mr. Burns' first name Charles)).

Clifford Burns was born to Wainwright Montgomery Burns and Evelyn Graycomb.

Evelyn Graycomb was born to Otto Graycomb and Lolly DuBois.

Lolly DuBois was born to Lance DuBois and Clarice Stemple.

Clarice Stemple is the sister of Gaylord Stemple.

Gaylord Stemple married Trixie Simpson.

Trixie Simpson is the sister of Garwood Simpson.

Garwood Simpson married Clowta Stillman and had a son named Howland Simpson, who married Gabby Crouse and had a son named "Old Tut" Simpson.

"Old Tut" Simpson married "Happy" Dinsdale and had a son named Orville Simpson, who married Yuma Hickman and had a son named Abraham Simpson II.

Abraham Simpson II married Mona Simpson (before the marriage, her maiden name was Mona Olsen) and had a son named Homer Simpson.

Mr. Burns' great-great-grandmother's sister-in-law's brother's fourth great-grandson is Homer Simpson.

Another line to Trixie Simpson goes like this:

Charles Montgomery Burns is the son of Clifford Burns and Daphne Burns.

Clifford Burns was the son of Wainwright Montgomery Burns and Evelyn Graycomb.

Evelyn Graycomb was the sister of Amos Graycomb.

Amos Graycomb was married to Moselle Graycomb (before the marriage, her maiden name was Moselle Stemple).

Moselle Graycomb was the daughter of Paco Stemple and Riva Herrin.

Paco Stemple was the son of Gaylord Stemple and Trixie Simpson.

If we carry on, we find out that Homer is also Burns' grandmother's sister-in-law (who is also her second cousin)'s grandmother's brother's fourth great-grandson.

Also, Mr. Burns and Homer are actually related by marriage (which makes Bart being Burns' heir extremely ironic, because Bart would be related to him).

Mr. Burns had a strained relationship with his own mother, whom he apparently tried to kill at least once, for having had an affair with President Taft.[21] When he was asked the cause of his parents' deaths, he replied: "Got in my way".[23]

Organizations[]

Mr. Burns is a member of various organizations. In his early years, while he was a college student at Yale University, he was a member of the Skull and Bones society. During World War II, Burns became a member of the Flying Hellfish squad, a group of soldiers who entered into a tontine regarding the ownership of German artwork. Burns was a member of the Stonecutters until it disbanded, at which time he joined the secret society that succeeded it: The Ancient Mystic Society of No Homers (One source of dislike of Burns for the "Stonecutters" is that despite his wealth and greed, he is outranked by Lenny). He is currently the head of the Springfield Republican Party and once headed a short-lived religion. He is also a member of the "Excludes Club", the Springfield Golf and Country Club, and the National Rifle Association. He holds a chair (a demonic throne with snarling dogs chained to it) at Springfield University and controls an anti-democratic paramilitary force in Latin America.

Burns attended the annual Billionaire's Retreat, where he won the Austin Celtics basketball team from The Rich Texan in a poker game. After severely mismanaging the team, he lost nearly half his net worth. At the following year's retreat, it was discovered he was no longer a billionaire. He was ejected from the camp, and thrown over a wall into the slack-jawed millionaire's camp.[3]

Burns tried to run for Governor until Marge ruined his chances by serving a three-eyed fish (an example of the adverse effects of the nuclear plant) for dinner in front of the media. In the end, he echoes Charles Foster Kane by crying out his name in rage and vows for the rest of his life to make Homer Simpson's life miserable.[111]

Burns was a Freemason "before it was trendy".[112]

Non-Canon[]

The contents of this article or section are considered to be non-canon and therefore may not have actually happened/existed.

Comics[]

In the Simpsons Comics 69 story, "In Burn$ We Tru$t", he takes over the First Church of Springfield, which he uses in order to help spread his influence, with him stating that it is a sin for all environmental organizations, including the Environmental Protection Agency, Green Peace, and "Lisa Simpson's Tree Hugging Society". It is later revealed that he plans to ascend to the position of Pope, so that he can have tax-free access to all of the Vatican gold. However, when he learns that the church is not Catholic, he promptly quits (much to everyone's glee), but only on the condition that Reverend Lovejoy will grant him permission to Heaven when he dies. Eventually, he agrees, but it is comically revealed that Mr. Burns can only go to Dog Heaven when he dies. Later, it is shown in Dog Heaven (a.k.a. Cat Hell) that Mr. Burns is running around, pretending to be a dog, hoping to "rise up the alpha dog ladder!"

"A Serious Flanders: Part One"[]

He is shot and killed by Kostas Becker alongside Disco Stu, Fat Tony, Legs, Louie, and Johnny Tightlips.

Future[]

In one possible future, eight years from the present, he was a shut-in who sponsored a Yale scholarship as punishment for stealing Christmas. He kept diamonds to have them changed into Earth's most precious mineral of the age: coal. His home was also guarded by a large group of flying unicorn-clam creatures (uni-clams).[113]

In one possible future, 15 years from the present,[114] Mr. Burns was cryogenically frozen. Scientists worked to find a cure for 17 stab wounds to the back so that he could be thawed out and cured. He was cured in time to attend Lisa Simpson's wedding. However, he was not completely thawed, as when he tried to sit down, he snapped in half, which was also cured.[115]

In one possible future, in 1,000,000 AD, Burns was alive as a cyborg. He once again found Bobo after leaving him behind roughly every century.[9]

Similar characters[]

Monty the Miser[]

Mr. Burns appears in The Simpsons: Bart & the Beanstalk as two characters. He first appears as "Monty the Miser", who provides Bart with both magic beans and a slingshot in exchange for the cow (the latter mostly because Bart refused the magic beans), thus having him set the plot forward. He later appears as the boss of the second level, as a cloud in Mr. Burns' likeness.

Count Burns[]

Main article: Count Burns

Count Burns is a vampire. Lisa says that she is suspicious about him, but no one believes her. She and Bart find Mr. Burns' secret lair, which can be accessed by a staircase that has a lever which doubles as a fun slide, and Bart (while fleeing from a horde of vampires) says, "I know I really shouldn't, but when am I gonna be here again?" before pulling the lever. Unfortunately for him, the horde of vampires are waiting at the bottom of the slide, and Count Burns bites Bart's neck, causing him to turn into a vampire. The Simpsons are then worried that Bart could get worse and they have to kill the head vampire, who is Count Burns. Homer kills Count Burns (who, after getting stabbed in a heart and freaking out, comes back to life to fire Homer, then dies again) but it is revealed that Marge is the head vampire. Just as the vampire versions of Homer, Marge, Bart, Maggie and Grampa are about to bite Lisa, they all say, "Happy Halloween, everyone!" before they all parody the ending scene to A Charlie Brown Christmas.

Lord Montymort[]

Main article: Lord Montymort

Mr. Burns is also Lord Montymort, who is based on Lord Voldemort from the Harry Potter book and film series. He captures young wizards and witches to takes their powers away.

Video games[]

The Simpsons: Bart vs. the World[]

Mr. Burns acts as the main antagonist of this game. He rigs the election results of an art competition on The Krusty the Clown Show to have Bart win, as part of his diabolical plan to have his relatives kill off the Simpsons (though he admits he wasn't happy with going through with rigging it due to how Bart's artwork was exceptionally poor). His motive for doing so is implied to be the result of the family being a significant drain on his finances, as when discussing the plot with Smithers, a stock chart titled "profits" with a decreasing line can be seen in the background. However, the Simpsons proceed to outsmart every single one of his relatives Fu Manchu Burns, Abominable Snow Burns, Ramses Burns, and Eric Von Burns in China, the North Pole, Egypt, and Hollywood with Mr. Burns, after cutting off ties to his relatives as a punishment for their failure, ultimately being forced to swallow his pride and appear on The Krusty the Clown Show to personally congratulate Bart, with Bart proceeding to throw a pie in his face.

The Simpsons Arcade Game[]

Mr. Burns appears as the final boss of this game, operating a giant mechanical robot from within that changes form depending on the damage it receives from the Simpson family. He also was the one who orchestrated Smithers' theft of a diamond, which also indirectly made him responsible for Maggie's kidnapping as well, as Smithers ended up kidnapping Maggie due to the diamond that he stole was knocked towards Maggie after Smithers bumped into Homer and she started using it as a pacifier. After being defeated, Mr. Burns is knocked out unconscious and Maggie then places her pacifier into Mr. Burns' mouth.

The Simpsons Bowling[]

Mr. Burns appears as a playable character in the game. If the player wins a full game with him, the ending shows him trying to move the trophy, although due to his obvious lack of physical strength, he could barely move it an inch before falling down in exhaustion. Maggie then emerges from the trophy and offers Mr. Burns a lollipop, causing Mr. Burns to beg for mercy before Maggie throws it at his head, knocking him out. His reaction to Maggie's offer references the events of "Who Shot Mr. Burns?". He also appears in Apu's ending, where he forces Apu to give him the latter's trophy at gunpoint and makes his escape.

The Simpsons Road Rage[]

Mr. Burns buys out the Springfield Transit System and turns them into nuclear buses. Springfield, in order to buy it back from him, then proceeds to create a for-hire taxi service to raise up enough money to do so, namely $1,000,000. In one of the missions, it is also said that he buys out the Springfield Shopper. Also, if the player drives in the Springfield Mountains, it can drive into Burns Manor. In the last mission, the player has to battle Mr. Burns as Homer, where Homer has to smash the statues in Burns' garden. Also, in the second mission, the player needs to dodge him.

In every single road rage or Sunday drive, he tries to hit the player with his car. However, if the player uses a cheat code, the player can drive his car, a nuclear bus, and even Mr. Burns driving a brick. In the downtown location, his bus depot can be seen. One of the other locations is his nuclear power plant.

Upon collecting $1,000,000, what happens depends on the version of the game. In the GameCube/Xbox/PS2 versions, Mr. Burns, while making clear that he is fed up with the people of Springfield complaining about his nuclear-powered buses and saying that it outranked even the 1967 Summer of Love in terms of the most contemptible effort of civil disobedience, caves and lets them have their public transport system back, but then ominously warns the player that they have not seen the last of him before sending the player down his trap door. In the GBA version, he simply expresses shock alongside Smithers when Homer arrives with a crane to drop the $1,000,000 to pay back the transit system.

The Simpsons Wrestling[]

Mr. Burns appears as a boss, but cannot be fought directly. He accompanies Smithers while he is on the ring, throwing explosive test tubes at the player. Unlike most enemy characters, Smithers and Mr. Burns are not unlockable.

The Simpsons: Minutes to Meltdown[]

Mr. Burns is seen telling Homer where Plopper went.

The Simpsons: Hit and Run[]

The player can drive to the nuclear power plant at the first level, and Mr. Burns tells everyone bluntly to leave the plant. In addition, Homer investigates Mr. Burns due to suspecting the latter to be potentially being responsible for mysterious black vans popping up over town and spying on people (Homer in particular), with Mr. Burns citing innocence (although he does admit to having arranged to have Amelia Airhart's plane shot down due to being "too big for her jumpers"), and then proceeding to release the hounds on Homer and also requesting that Smithers fire Homer if he did work at the plant.

In the last level, the player can climb up to Mr. Burns' office. The player also sees him in Level 7, where he provides the player with a map containing all of the nuclear waste barrels he buried all over Springfield (although due to Homer saying "aliens", Mr. Burns initially thought he was going to use them to kill off illegal immigrants until Homer clarified that he meant "tentacle aliens") and can eventually drive his car if the player completes the bonus mission in Level 7. He also implies in this level that he had murdered Merriweather, his old business partner and had been haunted by him, since he's initially mistaken Homer for his ghost and lets slip his murder of him and causing him to express awkwardness when learning Homer is not his ghost.

The Simpsons Game[]

In Lisa the Tree Hugger, the player stops Mr. Burns from destroying the ecosystem. Burns plans to cut down every tree in Springfield and turn each one into a single luxury toothpick. When the logging facility is destroyed, Mr. Burns has Smithers' phone in some goons to rough up Al Gore to make himself feel better. Later, in Medal of Homer, a younger Mr. Burns steals paintings from Ville de St. Capitulons and protects them on board his personal naval carrier with a squad of sailors that resemble Smithers. The younger Mr. Burns reappears in the Game Over level, when he tells Orc-Moe to hold on, but leaves him behind when he steals the paintings again.

The Simpsons: Tapped Out[]

Mr. Burns is one of the characters of the game, and can be unlocked when the player's Springfield is at Level 11 and upon completion of the power plant cooling towers.

Behind the Laughter[]

Creation[]

Burns' character, appearance, and mannerisms are based on several different people. The show's creator, Matt Groening, principally based Burns on Fredrik Olsen, a reclusive Norwegian shipping magnate and the owner of Timex. Drawing further inspiration from oil tycoon John D. Rockefeller, David Rockefeller, and fictional character Henry Potter from It's a Wonderful Life, Groening made Burns the "embodiment of corporate greed". Animator David Silverman based Burns' appearance on Fox founder Barry Diller, and modeled his body on a praying mantis. The idea of Burns reading employee names off of cards in "There's No Disgrace Like Home" came from an article about Ronald Reagan that writer Al Jean had read. In some episodes, parallels have been drawn between Burns and moguls such as Howard Hughes and, more frequently, fictional character Charles Foster Kane from Citizen Kane. Writer George Meyer lifted Burns' "Excellent!" hand gesture from his former Saturday Night Live partner Jim Downey.

Matt Groening got Burns' middle name from a Montgomery Ward department store in Portland, Oregon's Northwest Industrial district, and his surname from Burnside Street, the main thoroughfare in Portland. Burns' first name being Charles is a reference to Charles Foster Kane. In the script for "There's No Disgrace Like Home", Al Jean and Mike Reiss refer to him as "Mr. Meanie".

In Season 2, the writers started to enjoy writing about Smithers and Burns' relationship, and they often pitched episodes with them as the focus, but many never came to fruition.

Voice[]

Mr. Burns was originally voiced by actor Christopher Collins in the episodes "Simpsons Roasting on an Open Fire," "Homer's Odyssey," "There's No Disgrace Like Home," and "The Telltale Head".[116] He was soon replaced by Harry Shearer because Sam Simon found Collins "difficult to work with." Additionally, Christopher Collins died on June 12, 1994. Shearer has voiced the character ever since. He modeled the voice on Lionel Barrymore and Ronald Reagan. Shearer is also the voice of Smithers and is able to perform dialogue between the two characters in one take. Shearer said that Mr. Burns is the most difficult character for him to voice because it is rough on his vocal cords and he often needs to drink tea and honey to soothe his voice.[117] He describes Mr. Burns as his favorite character, saying he "like[s] Mr. Burns because he is pure evil. A lot of evil people make the mistake of diluting it. Never adulterate your evil."

In 2014, Shearer won a Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Voice-Over Performance for his performance on "Four Regrettings and a Funeral" for voicing Mr. Burns.[118]

Trivia[]

One of his middle names is Schicklgruber. This was the maiden name of Adolf Hitler's paternal grandmother, who later married a man named Hitler who legitimized her son (Hitler's father).

His other middle name, Plantagenet, was the family name of a branch of the British Royal family in the 1300s. Supposedly, the last Plantagenet was King Richard III who was killed in battle by Henry Tudor. This implies that Mr. Burns is a secret descendant of King Richard.

Like the inspirations for his voice, Lionel Barrymore and Ronald Reagan, Mr. Burns is a Republican. However, Barry Diller, the inspiration for Mr. Burns' physical appearance, has long been a Democrat and is even regarded as a close friend of the Clinton family. https://www.realclearpolicy.com/2020/01/09/chelsea_made_millions_on_boards_run_by_clinton_mega-donor_43846.htmlhttps://www.foxbusiness.com/money/chelsea-clinton-iac-board-of-directorshttp://www.realclearpolicy.com/2020/01/09/chelsea_made_millions_on_boards_run_by_clinton_mega-donor_43846.html

One major connection between Mr. Burns' vocal inspirations Lionel Barrymore and Ronald Reagan was their appearance in the 1941 MGM remake of The Bad Man, which saw Reagan play the hero against a Pancho Villa-like Mexican bandit. https://worldhistoryproject.org/1941/3/28/ronald-reagan-appears-as-gilbert-gil-jones-in-the-bad-man This was released eight years before Barrymore's death and years before Reagan, who was once a staunch New Deal Democrat, shifted towards the right wing in the 1950s. Despite Reagan's more liberal political views at the time, the film appealed to conservatives who embraced the Mexican bandit stereotype.

On the Simpson family tree, Mr. Burns is a distant relative of the Simpsons by marriage.

In his cabinet, he has a secret safe that is hidden underneath a painting that looks almost alike A Bar at the Folies-Bergère by Manet, except the waitress has Burns' head. Inside of the safe, Burns hides his Last Will and a human heart in a jar.

Mr. Crocker from The Fairly OddParents is based on Mr. Burns (in terms of both personality and voice), because Butch Hartman is a fan of The Simpsons.

In the episode "The Burns and the Bees", Mr. Burns' net worth is arguably $1,800,037,022. However, he lost money, and by the time of the ending of the episode, decreased to $996,036,000.

Despite being the secondary antagonist of The Simpsons Movie, Mr. Burns was never seen interacting with Russ Cargill.

In "When Flanders Failed", it is revealed that Mr. Burns is left-handed. However, he can sometimes be seen writing with his right hand. He could possibly be ambidextrous (can use both hands for tasks).

In more recent seasons, Burns is completely helpless without Smithers.

A running gag in the show is Mr. Burns always asking to Smithers who Homer is (even though he is a long-time worker in his company) when he is seen by him, and after the latter's answer, he replies by saying "Simpson, eh?".

There are many possible occurrences that helped Burns gain his wealth. One is that he was raised by a billionaire and inherited his wealth. Another is that he amassed his fortune through his business ownership, from a germ warfare laboratory to a nuclear power plant providing a whole city with energy. It is also possible that the song, White Christmas, was the true reason for Burns's wealth.

Most fans consider Burns as the main antagonist of the show.

He is little more than a skeleton with skin, a circulatory system, lungs, and a brain. His weight comes in at a mere 60 lbs (27 kg), only a quarter of Homer Simpson's. However in "Fraudcast News", Kent Brockman states that his weight is 36 lbs (16.3 kg), and in "The Fool Monty", Kent states his weight is 37 lbs (16.8 kg).

In "The Burns and the Bees", it is suggested that Burns is Austro-Hungarian and a Monarchist since he sings the Austria-Hungary Anthem.

It is implied in the episode "Million_Dollar_Maybe", that Burns may used to be a German soldier in World War 2, when he says "Wait, I'm shooting AT nazis? That's not the way I remember it."

Mr. Burns makes a cameo in the Harvest Moon manga as one of the crowd to rebuild Claire's grandfather's farm.

In "Puffless", it is mentioned he suffers from Dementia.

It is implied that Burns was part of the Schutzstaffel during Adolf Hitler’s rule over Germany. When Burns is imprisoned, among his personal effects is an SS identification card and even has the Schutstaffel logo on it. The officer confiscating Burns’ belongings identifies it as a social security card, to which Burns remarks “That’s an SS card, you dummkopf!”.

Gallery[]

Appearances[]

The Simpsons: Season One "Simpsons Roasting on an Open Fire": "Bart the Genius": "Homer's Odyssey": "There's No Disgrace Like Home": "Bart the General": Minor Absent Minor Minor Absent "Moaning Lisa": "The Call of the Simpsons": "The Telltale Head": "Life on the Fast Lane": "Homer's Night Out": Absent Absent Minor Cameo Minor "The Crepes of Wrath": "Krusty Gets Busted": "Some Enchanted Evening": Absent Absent Absent

The Simpsons: Season Two "Bart Gets an "F"": "Simpson and Delilah": "Treehouse of Horror": "Two Cars in Every Garage and Three Eyes on Every Fish": "Dancin' Homer": Minor Major Absent Major Minor "Dead Putting Society": "Bart vs. Thanksgiving": "Bart the Daredevil": "Itchy & Scratchy & Marge": "Bart Gets Hit by a Car": Absent Minor Absent Absent Major "One Fish, Two Fish, Blowfish, Blue Fish": "The Way We Was": "Homer vs. Lisa and the 8th Commandment": "Principal Charming": "Oh Brother, Where Art Thou?": Minor Absent Minor Absent Absent "Bart's Dog Gets an F": "Old Money": "Brush with Greatness": "Lisa's Substitute": "The War of the Simpsons": Absent Minor Major Absent Absent "Three Men and a Comic Book": "Blood Feud": Absent Major

The Simpsons: Season Three "Stark Raving Dad": "Mr. Lisa Goes to Washington": "When Flanders Failed": "Bart the Murderer": "Homer Defined": Minor Minor Minor Minor Major "Like Father, Like Clown": "Treehouse of Horror II": "Lisa's Pony": "Saturdays of Thunder": "Flaming Moe's": Absent Major Minor Absent Absent "Burns Verkaufen der Kraftwerk": "I Married Marge": "Radio Bart": "Lisa the Greek": "Homer Alone": Major Minor Absent Absent Absent "Bart the Lover": "Homer at the Bat": "Separate Vocations": "Dog of Death": "Colonel Homer": Absent Major Absent Minor Absent "Black Widower": "The Otto Show": "Bart's Friend Falls in Love": "Brother, Can You Spare Two Dimes?": Absent Absent Absent Minor

The Simpsons: Season Four "Kamp Krusty": "A Streetcar Named Marge": "Homer the Heretic": "Lisa the Beauty Queen": "Treehouse of Horror III": Absent Absent Absent Absent Major "Itchy & Scratchy: The Movie": "Marge Gets a Job": "New Kid on the Block": "Mr. Plow": "Lisa's First Word": Absent Major Absent Absent Absent "Homer's Triple Bypass": "Marge vs. the Monorail": "Selma's Choice": "Brother from the Same Planet": "I Love Lisa": Minor Minor Absent Absent Absent "Duffless": "Last Exit to Springfield": "So It's Come to This: A Simpsons Clip Show": "The Front": "Whacking Day": Absent Major Minor Absent Cameo "Marge in Chains": "Krusty Gets Kancelled": Minor Minor

The Simpsons: Season Five "Homer's Barbershop Quartet": "Cape Feare": "Homer Goes to College": "Rosebud": "Treehouse of Horror IV": Absent Absent Major Major Major "Marge on the Lam": "Bart's Inner Child": "Boy-Scoutz 'n the Hood": "The Last Temptation of Homer": "$pringfield (Or, How I Learned to Stop Worrying and Love Legalized Gambling)": Minor Minor Absent Minor Major "Homer the Vigilante": "Bart Gets Famous": "Homer and Apu": "Lisa vs. Malibu Stacy": "Deep Space Homer": Absent Minor Absent Minor Minor "Homer Loves Flanders": "Bart Gets an Elephant": "Burns' Heir": "Sweet Seymour Skinner's Baadasssss Song": "The Boy Who Knew Too Much": Minor Minor Major Absent Absent "Lady Bouvier's Lover": "Secrets of a Successful Marriage": Major Minor

The Simpsons: Season Six "Bart of Darkness": "Lisa's Rival": "Another Simpsons Clip Show": "Itchy & Scratchy Land": "Sideshow Bob Roberts": Absent Absent Absent Absent Minor "Treehouse of Horror V": "Bart's Girlfriend": "Lisa on Ice": "Homer Badman": "Grampa vs. Sexual Inadequacy": Minor Absent Absent Absent Absent "Fear of Flying": "Homer the Great": "And Maggie Makes Three": "Bart's Comet": "Homie the Clown": Absent Minor Minor Absent Absent "Bart vs. Australia": "Homer vs. Patty and Selma": "A Star is Burns": "Lisa's Wedding": "Two Dozen and One Greyhounds": Absent Absent Major Minor Major "The PTA Disbands": "'Round Springfield": "The Springfield Connection": "Lemon of Troy": "Who Shot Mr. Burns? (Part One)": Absent Minor Cameo Absent Major

The Simpsons: Season Seven "Who Shot Mr. Burns? (Part Two)": "Radioactive Man": "Home Sweet Homediddly-Dum-Doodily": "Bart Sells His Soul": "Lisa the Vegetarian": Major Absent Absent Absent Minor "Treehouse of Horror VI": "King-Size Homer": "Mother Simpson": "Sideshow Bob's Last Gleaming": "The Simpsons 138th Episode Spectacular": Absent Minor Major Absent Absent "Marge Be Not Proud": "Team Homer": "Two Bad Neighbors": "Scenes from the Class Struggle in Springfield": "Bart the Fink": Absent Major Absent Minor Absent "Lisa The Iconoclast": "Homer The Smithers": "The Day The Violence Died": "A Fish Called Selma": "Bart on the Road": Cameo Major Absent Absent Absent "22 Short Films About Springfield": "Raging Abe Simpson and His Grumbling Grandson in "The Curse of the Flying Hellfish"": "Much Apu About Nothing": "Homerpalooza": "Summer of 4 Ft. 2": Minor Major Cameo Minor Absent

The Simpsons: Season Eight "Treehouse of Horror VII": "You Only Move Twice": "The Homer They Fall": "Burns, Baby Burns": "Bart After Dark": Absent Minor Cameo Major Minor "A Milhouse Divided": "Lisa's Date with Density": "Hurricane Neddy": "El Viaje Misterioso de Nuestro Jomer (The Mysterious Voyage of Homer)": "The Springfield Files": Absent Minor Absent Cameo Major "The Twisted World of Marge Simpson": "Mountain of Madness": "Simpsoncalifragilisticexpiala(Annoyed Grunt)cious": "The Itchy & Scratchy & Poochie Show": "Homer's Phobia": Minor Major Minor Absent Absent "Brother from Another Series": "My Sister, My Sitter": "Homer vs. the Eighteenth Amendment": "Grade School Confidential": "The Canine Mutiny": Absent Absent Cameo Cameo Minor "The Old Man and the Lisa": "In Marge We Trust": "Homer's Enemy": "The Simpsons Spin-Off Showcase": "The Secret War of Lisa Simpson": Major Absent Minor Absent Absent

The Simpsons: Season Nine "The City of New York vs. Homer Simpson": "The Principal and the Pauper": "Lisa's Sax": "Treehouse of Horror VIII": "The Cartridge Family": Absent Absent Absent Minor Cameo "Bart Star": "The Two Mrs. Nahasapeemapetilons": "Lisa the Skeptic": "Realty Bites": "Miracle on Evergreen Terrace": Minor Cameo Minor Absent Minor "All Singing, All Dancing": "Bart Carny": "The Joy of Sect": "Das Bus": "The Last Temptation of Krust": Absent Absent Minor Absent Absent "Dumbbell Indemnity": "Lisa the Simpson": "This Little Wiggy": "Simpson Tide": "The Trouble with Trillions": Absent Absent Minor Minor Major "Girly Edition": "Trash of the Titans": "King of the Hill": "Lost Our Lisa": "Natural Born Kissers": Minor Absent Minor Minor Cameo

The Simpsons: Season Ten "Lard of the Dance": "The Wizard of Evergreen Terrace": "Bart the Mother": "Treehouse of Horror IX": "When You Dish Upon a Star": Absent Absent Minor Absent Cameo "D'oh-in' in the Wind": "Lisa Gets an "A"": "Homer Simpson in: "Kidney Trouble"": "Mayored to the Mob": "Viva Ned Flanders": Minor Absent Absent Cameo Minor "Wild Barts Can't Be Broken": "Sunday, Cruddy Sunday": "Homer to the Max": "I'm with Cupid": "Marge Simpson in: "Screaming Yellow Honkers"": Cameo Absent Minor Absent Absent "Make Room for Lisa": "Maximum Homerdrive": "Simpsons Bible Stories": "Mom and Pop Art": "The Old Man and the "C" Student": Absent Minor Absent Minor Minor "Monty Can't Buy Me Love": "They Saved Lisa's Brain": "Thirty Minutes Over Tokyo": Major Cameo Minor

See also[]

Springfield Nuclear Power Plant: more info on Mr. Burns' power plant.

Waylon Smithers, Jr.: more info on Mr. Burns' assistant.

Burns Manor: more info on Mr. Burns' mansion.

Citations[]

The Simpsons Characters The Simpsons and relatives Homer Simpson • Marge Simpson • Bart Simpson • Lisa Simpson • Maggie Simpson

Santa's Little Helper • Snowball II • Abraham Simpson • Patty Bouvier • Selma Bouvier • Mona Simpson • Jacqueline Bouvier • Ling Bouvier • Herb Powell Around Springfield Jasper Beardly • Comic Book Guy • Barney Gumble • Maude Flanders • Ned Flanders • Professor Frink • Gil Gunderson • Julius Hibbert • Lionel Hutz • Helen Lovejoy • Reverend Timothy Lovejoy • Captain Horatio McCallister • Akira • Hans Moleman • Marvin Monroe • Bleeding Gums Murphy • Apu Nahasapeemapetilon • Mayor Joe Quimby • Dr. Nick Riviera • Agnes Skinner • Cletus Spuckler • Disco Stu • Squeaky-Voiced Teen • Moe Szyslak • Sam and Larry • Kirk Van Houten • Luann Van Houten • Clancy Wiggum • Eddie • Lou • Crazy Cat Lady • Lindsey Naegle • Cookie Kwan • Wiseguy • Brandine Spuckler • The Yes Guy • Sanjay Nahasapeemapetilon • Blue-haired Lawyer • Judge Roy Snyder • Rich Texan • Luigi Risotto • Old Jewish Man • Mrs. Glick Media Personalities Itchy & Scratchy • Kent Brockman • Krusty the Clown • Troy McClure • Sideshow Mel • Rainier Wolfcastle | Arnie Pye • Radioactive Man • Duffman • Bumblebee Man • Bill and Marty • Drederick Tatum • Mr. Teeny • Scott Christian • Booberella • Gabbo • Lurleen Lumpkin • Celebrities Springfield Elementary School faculty and students Superintendant Chalmers • Seymour Skinner • Edna Krabappel • Elizabeth Hoover • Groundskeeper Willie • Otto Mann • Lunchlady Doris • Dewey Largo • Dr. J. Loren Pyror • Milhouse Van Houten • Ralph Wiggum • Nelson Muntz • Martin Prince • Rod Flanders • Todd Flanders • Sherri and Terri • Wendell Borton • Database • Jimbo Jones • Kearney Zzyzwicz • Dolph Starbeam • Üter Zörker • Janey Powell • Lewis • Richard • Bashir bin Laden Springfield Nuclear Power Plant Charles Montgomery Burns • Waylon Smithers • Carl Carlson • Lenny Leonard • Charlie • Blinky Villains Snake Jailbird • Kang & Kodos • Herman • Sideshow Bob • Fat Tony • Frankie the Squealer • Johnny Tightlips • Legs and Louie Families The Simpsons • The Bouviers • The Flanders • The Van Houtens • The Wiggums Miscellaneous Fictional characters • One-Time Characters • LGBT characters • Parodied celebrities • Animals

Springfield Nuclear Power Plant Employees Management Charles Montgomery Burns ● Waylon Smithers, Jr. ● Canary M. Burns ● Al Simmons ● Executive 1 ● Executive 2 ● Executive 3 ● Burns' Dog Employees Homer Simpson ● Lenny Leonard ● Carl Carlson ● Blinky ● Inanimate carbon rod ● Charlie ● Karl ● Tibor ● Gummy Joe ● Joey Crusher ● Lowblow ● Eugene Fisk ● Stewart ● Pops Freshenmeyer ● Dr. Olberman ● Power Plant Employee (Simpson and Delilah) ● Power Plant Employee (Life on the Fast Lane) ● Springfield Nuclear Power Plant Employee ● Half-Bald Worker ● Bathroom Employee ● Mr. Mackleberry ● Giant Handed Man ● Ms. Finch ● Bernie ● Employee of the Month Model ● Employee of the Month Presenter ● Mr. Gammel ● Great Dad ● Late shift worker 1 ● Late shift worker 2 ● Late shift worker 3 ● Springfield Nuclear Power Plant employee ● Hazmat Employee ● Crane Operator ● Guy Who Watched Homer's Speech 1 ● Guy Who Watched Homer's Speech 2 ● Helburn ● Red Headed Employee ● Nuclear Inspector ● Male Nuclear Inspector ● Female Nuclear Inspector ● Dog (SNPP) ● Ex-employees Marge Simpson ● Frank Grimes † ● Jack Marley ● Waylon Smithers, Sr. † ● Zutroy ● Mindy Simmons ● Ted ● Wayne Slater ● Larry Burns ● Chip Davis † ● Elon Musk ● Don Bookner ● Roz Davis ● Larry ● Opening sequence co worker ● Robert Marlow ● Queenie Miscellaneous Radioactive waste ● Springfield Nuclear Power Plant softball team ● Smilin' Joe Fission ● Plant Operations Center ● S.N.P.P. Cafeteria