Coverage and streaming rights begin with inaugural PFL Challenger Series l

eading into 2022 Regular Season

Partnership to focus on original programming, archived content, coverage of new

PFL competitions and content exclusive to Australia

PFL MMA Regular Season kicks off in April

NEW YORK (February 16, 2022) - The Professional Fighters League (PFL), the fastest growing and most innovative sports league, and Stan Sport today announced an exclusive multi-year broadcast partnership. Under the deal, Stan Sport will become the exclusive PFL broadcast partner in Australia, carrying the inaugural PFL Challenger Series, beginning February 18, along with the 2022 PFL Regular Season, Playoffs, and PFL World Championship. The deal was spearheaded in conjunction with Athletic Sports Group and its subsidiary Fight Globe, the world's largest combat sports distributor.

Through the partnership, Stan Sport will bring MMA fans exclusive PFL content including archival season footage from 2019-2021 and original content from PFL Studios.

PFL Featherweight fighter Aaron Blackie, an Australian native, will make his PFL debut at the inaugural PFL Challenger Series on March 11 as he looks to earn a 2022 PFL Regular Season contract. Additionally, Light Heavyweight Robert Wilkinson and Heavyweight Sam Kei will both make their PFL debuts during the 2022 Regular Season. Wilkinson, a native of Tasmania, is known for his finishing abilities with 12 of his 13 wins coming by way of stoppage, and will look to continue his dominance in pursuit of the $1 million championship purse. Kei, a tantalizing prospect, enters the PFL Regular Season riding a two-fight win streak. All three fighters will carry their nation's pride into the PFL SmartCage while taking aim at the $1 million dollar champions prize on a global stage.

“The Professional Fighters League is proud to announce our multi-year broadcast partnership with Stan Sport in Australia beginning with the inaugural PFL Challenger Series this February,” said PFL CEO Peter Murray. “Australia is one of the fastest-growing MMA markets in the world and Stan Sport is the perfect partner to deliver our innovative products and live year-round programming schedule to the fans.”

“Our exclusive new partnership with the PFL will bring Australian MMA fans a world-class competition on Stan Sport,” said Stan Acting Chief Executive Officer Martin Kugeler. “The PFL features some of the biggest names in MMA, with some trailblazing Aussie fighters joining the League in 2022. MMA is one of the fastest growing sports in Australia. The pedigree of the PFL’s roster combined with the League’s extraordinary production quality, will make it a key pillar in our combat sports offering.”

Following a breakthrough year that saw 100 percent audience growth, PFL has accelerated its momentum in the early part of 2022 with a multi-year renewal with ESPN, generating widespread buzz around the upcoming Challenger Series on Fubo Sports Network, and adding several leading brands to its blue-chip sponsorship portfolio.

Professional Fighters League is the No. 2 MMA company globally and features an elite talent roster with 25 percent of its fighters independently ranked in the top-25 of the world, including 2021 PFL champions Ray Cooper III and Movlid Khaybulaev. PFL has live event coverage in 160 countries on leading distribution platforms and delivers a unique, innovative product to the more than 600 million MMA fans globally.

About Professional Fighters League

Professional Fighters League (PFL) is the fastest growing and most innovative sports league. PFL is the #2 MMA company worldwide and the only with the sports-season format where individual fighters compete in Regular Season, Playoffs, and Championship.

PFL is primetime in the U.S on ESPN and ESPN+ and was broadcast and streamed live worldwide last year to 160 countries with partners including RMC Sport, FPT, Sky Sport, and more. The PFL roster is world-class, with 25% of PFL fighters independently ranked in the top 25 in the world. The PFL proprietary SmartCage data and analytics platform powers real-time betting and provides next-gen viewing experience.

PFL has over two-dozen blue-chip brand sponsors such as Anheuser-Busch, IBM, GEICO, DraftKings, Bose, Socios.com, Air Force Reserve, US Marine Corps, and more. PFL is backed by major investors including Ares Capital, Luxor Capital, Elysian Park Ventures, Swan Ventures, Knighthead, Legends, and several NBA, MLB, and NHL team owners.

MMA is the growth sport of this decade, with 600 million fans worldwide, the youngest audience demo of any sport, and true global revenue streams.

PFLmma.com; Instagram (@PFLmma); Twitter (@PFLMMA); Facebook (/PFLmma)

About Stan Sport Australia

Stan is Australia’s leading local streaming service and unrivalled home of original productions.

Stan’s recent original production slate includes the hit series WOLF LIKE ME, starring Isla Fisher and Josh Gad; THE TOURIST, a six-part drama series starring Jamie Dornan and Danielle Macdonald; GOLD, a taut thriller film starring Zac Efron in his first Australian production; CHRISTMAS ON THE FARM, the crowd-pleasing romcom starring Poppy Montgomery; multiple AACTA Award-winner NITRAM, directed by Justin Kurzel; BUMP series 1 & 2, a modern parenthood drama starring Claudia Karvan; RUPAUL’S DRAG RACE DOWN UNDER, hosted by RuPaul, Michelle Visage and Rhys Nicholson; and countless other acclaimed original series and films.

Stan’s studio partnerships include NBCUniversal, Starz, Lionsgate, Showtime, Paramount, CBSViacom,Sony, Warner Bros, Disney, all3media, BBC and more. Through these partnerships, Stan offers Australians unlimited access to thousands of hours of premium entertainment – with an outstanding lineup of blockbuster movies and exclusive premieres.

For more information, visit stan.com.au.