The Truce At Bakura

by Kathy Tyers

Published by Bantam Publishing

Scott's Rating: 2.5 out of 4

As soon as the credits begin rolling in RETURN OF THE JEDI, this book begins.

The newly victorious Rebels recieve a distress call from a remote Imperial outpost on Bakura. The Bakurans are a powerful people, but they are being invaded by an evil reptilian race, called the Ssi-ruuk , who capture their enemies and use their minds to power battle droids and ships. The Ssi-ruuk don't plan on stopping with Bakura, they plan on taking over the newely overthrown Empire! Luke and the gang rush in to stop them, but can they overcome their differences with the Imperials to stop those leapin' lizards?

Also, Princess Leia is visited by the ghost of Anakin Skywalker who begs for her forgiveness. Can she ever come to terms with the fact that the man who tortured her, froze her man in carbonite, and generally was a big meanie was her father? Read the book!

Scott:

I really liked seeing Leia deal with the fact that Darth Vader was her father, and her father coming back to visit her. I feel that it was a major turning point in the life of the character. More novels need to have the characters grow and face life changing decisions. I feel that this internal battle of Leia's is what Star Wars is about. I also liked seeing the Rebels and Imperials having to work side by side to defeat a common enemy. You knew, after Return of the Jedi, that they would eventually have to get along or beat the crud out of each other.

Scott:

I did not really like the Ssi-ruuk. They were kind of boring and not really very original. I also felt that the whole 'transferring the life force to the robot' deal was a little too Star Trekish. Plus, they weren't even that good of a fighter when they were transplanted. The action was a bit slow for my taste, as well. I also did not like seeing Luke fall in love just to lose her again. Kind of disappointing to me. All of thing combined seemed to outweigh the good to me, so I had to give this book a lower rating.

Scott:

Definitely those big Horny Toads, the Ssi-ruuk, and their Frankenstein routine. Yuk.