Kathy Tyers has written two Star Wars novels - 'The Truce at Bakura', and the second New Jedi Order hardback novel 'Vector Prime'. Kathy has contributed to the Star Wars RPG with the 'Truce at Bakura Sourcebook' from West End Games, and has written many Star Wars short stories. She is also well known for her Firebird series of original novels.

Website:

Jedi Council Forums Username: Shmi52

Discuss Kathy's novels and aspects of his writing in this thread. You never know, Kathy might drop by from time to time!

Well, I guess I'll be the first to post in here. The Truce at Bakura is my favorite so far (I'm just about to begin the Jedi Academy trilogy) very good characterization of Luke. I also like Dev Sibwarra (especially) and Gaeriel Captison a lot.

I loved Kathy's Balance Point as well.

She has a natural panache for Star Wars which consistently excites and engages readers.

Even though many dislike Jacen's characterization in Balance Point, I loved it. I disagreed with this actions yet understood his motivations behind those actions. I found myself screaming at Jacen's apparent cowardice and reservations but also loving every minute of it. Why? Because I was thoroughly engaged with his character.

Actually, I really enjoyed "Truce at Bakura." None books focused around Luke in that paticular manner.

I was also very pleased with, "Balance Point." The romance between Leia and Han was a little bit gritty, but it was a great book all and all. (And might I note, she did a better job with Jaina than did Cunningham)

I love Kathy Tyers, so for those of you who would like to read her stuff:

SW Novels:

The Truce at Bakura

Balance Point

SW short stories:

so many I can't think of them all...

Other novels:

Firebird

Fusion Fire

Crown of Fire

(a wonderful trilogy about a woman, Firebird Angelo- I throroughly enjoyed it)

Shivering World

(yes, RB-wan...Kathy DOES need to write a sequel to that one )

Crystal Witness

One Mind's Eye

and currently, Kathy is working on a new novel, Sun Dust. Can't wait until it comes out!

*Also, Kathy Tyers has a yahoogroup dedicated to her and all her books. It is lady_firebird, and to join just go to yahoogroups and type that in (I'll try to find a link for it). Kathy always talks to the people on it (when she's not super busy on Sun Dust) and would love your comments.

more Kathy updates:

Kathy's website is: www.kathytyers.com

Short stories:

"Rock Gig"

"Rebel Bass"

"Tinian on Trial"

"We Don?t Do Weddings: The Band?s Tale"

"To Fight Another Day"

"A Time to Dance, A Time to Mourn: Oola?s Tale"

"Only Droids Serve the Maker"

"The Prize Pelt: Bossk?s Tale"

Gatherer: summary of first Firebird book:

Born an expendable child of the royal family of Netaia, honorable suicide is the highest thing she could ever hope to attain. Sent to lead an assault on the planet of Veroh, part of the hated Federacy, her death was hoped for, expected, but not to be. Fate places her in the hands of the enemy, and with her own people seeking her demise, Firebird must choose between two worlds before she can carve her new destiny.

The Firebird trilogy is great! I highly recommend it to all who liked Kathy's Star Wars book. If you join her Yahoo email list she'll talk to you and you can buy some of her out of print books and have her sign them. I bought Crystal Witness and One Mind's Eye and she autographed them for me with a special message. Very cool!

Hoya

Kathy rocks!

I was fortunate enough to speak with her in the aforementioned thread, and she is a very kind person! I thoroughly enjoyed Balance Point and looking back, I thought Truce at Bakura was decent as well! (Don't forget it was early on in the creation of new SW novels).

I admire Kathy's ability and hope she makes an appearance in her new thread here! excal

Kathy Tyers rocks!!!!!

The Truce At Bakura was one of the really good SW books. It deals with Leia's heritage really well and there is a different type of villian not some super weapon or super genius, just a warlike race which brings some plausibility to the novel which makes it a good read

"Balance Point" would sit better with me if it had actually been about Han and Leia's reunion instead of being saturated with syrupy Luke/Mara love scenes and hadn't contained a truly revolting scene where Mara, still improbably drop-dead gorgeous at 46, makes her nephew Anakin drool.

I also think the scene where Mara finds out her baby is a boy and she and Luke get all mushy could've been devoted to Han going back to check on his bleeding, tortured wife and perhaps them bonding and working through their problems.

Of course, being a Han/Leia fan and NOT being a Mara fan, I'm tired of my couple suffering and getting no time together while Mara is fawned over and gets gobs of mushy love scenes.

Good. It's nice to see someone other than that stupid cow Mara get fawned over for her beauty. And I imagine that only happened because Leia fans finally got fed up with how she was tortured, literally, while Mara's beauty was extolled and she got constant love scenes with her lapdog...er, husband.