Interview: Kathy Tyers Talks ‘Balance Point’, ‘The Truce At Bakura’, & ‘Star Wars Legends’

December 8, 2014 at 12:01 am | Posted in Books, eBooks, George Lucas, Interview, Lucasfilm, Sci-Fi, Star Wars, Star Wars Books, Star Wars Rebels, Television | 5 Comments

Tags: balance point, firebird, kathy tyers, tales from the bounty hunters, tales from the mos eisley cantina, the truce at bakura

Today we have a very special interview conducted by Doug McCausland. A couple weeks ago Doug did an outstanding interview with author Kevin J. Anderson covering the 20th anniversary of the Jedi Academy Trilogy. This week Doug continues his series of Star Wars author interviews with Kathy Tyers.

In the early to mid 90’s, Kathy Tyers was one of the most prominent authors of the Bantam-era Star Wars Expanded Universe alongside Timothy Zahn & Kevin J. Anderson. Her first contribution to Star Wars lore was 1994’s The Truce at Bakura, taking place immediately after the events of Return of the Jedi. She would later go on to contribute several short stories to Kevin J. Anderson’s Tales From The… series, including “Prize Pelt: The Tale of Bossk” and “We Don’t Do Weddings: The Band’s Tale”, as well as the New Jedi Order installment Balance Point. Continue Reading Interview: Kathy Tyers Talks ‘Balance Point’, ‘The Truce At Bakura’, & ‘Star Wars Legends’…

The Early Bantam Era: Drew Struzan

November 14, 2011 at 11:09 am | Posted in Art, Regular Feature, Star Wars Books | Leave a comment

Tags: drew struzan, the courtship of princess leia, the crystal star, the truce at bakura

Continuing the Star Wars Cover Art series, we last left off with Timothy Zahn’s Thrawn trilogy. The Thrawn Trilogy kicked off a long series of books for Bantam publishing. Setting aside the young reader series The Jedi Prince, we have the first few novels of the early Bantam period. The year 1994 ushered in six Star Wars books, three new authors, and two new cover artists: Drew Struzan and John Alvin. John knocked out all three covers for the Jedi Academy Trilogy, which I’ll tackle in my next installment. For now, let’s take a look at Struzan’s work. Continue Reading The Early Bantam Era: Drew Struzan…