The confrontations shown in ''Junoon: The Rock Star and the Mullahs'' are mild ones: conversations between Salman Ahmad, the leader and guitarist of the Pakistani rock band Junoon, and militant Islamic mullahs and students who believe music should be banned. But this documentary, which is being broadcast tonight on PBS stations as part of the ''Wide Angle'' series of international news reports, sees portents of greater repression.

In Pakistan Mr. Ahmad has become a figure like Bono of U2: a positive-thinking, hugely popular rock musician whose songs address both spiritual and social questions. He spent most of his teens in the United States, where he learned rock guitar, before returning to Pakistan to study medicine. But rock prevailed. After winning a nationwide patriotic songwriting contest, he started Junoon in 1990.

Although the documentary doesn't mention it, Junoon was banned from Pakistani television and radio from 1996 to 1999 after recording a song called ''Accountability,'' which criticized government corruption. The band's music, heard only briefly in the documentary, can sound like blues-rock, Santana, U2 or an electrified version of the vigorous devotional songs of Sufism, a mystical branch of Islam. His faith, Mr. Ahmad says in the documentary, gives him ''the confidence to try and form a modern Pakistani identity.''

But the more restrictive Islam associated with the Taliban in Afghanistan has spread to parts of Pakistan. Anti-Americanism stirred up by the war in Afghanistan helped a coalition of militant Islamic parties win elections last year in the Peshawar region of northern Pakistan, where Osama bin Laden is rumored to be hiding in the mountains. In June legislators voted to impose Taliban-like rules, requiring all women over 12 to wear veils and banning music on public transportation.

A Peshawar musician, Gulzar Alam, who carries on a long tradition of historical songs, tells the most ominous story. While singing at a wedding, he said, police officers arrived and stopped him, saying, ''Don't you know that the government has banned music?'' They insulted him, then arrested him when he slapped one in response. Police officers later searched his home and arrested his children. Mr. Alam, who is shown performing despite government pressure, says a 150-year-old bazaar in Peshawar, where musicians have long shared songs, has been shut down. Mr. Ahmad also visits a Peshawar record store with empty shelves and owners who have been told to find other work.

In Karachi Mr. Ahmad goes to one of the Islamic schools called madrasas. A student offers chilling justification for suicide bombings: ''The more body parts of infidels that explode, the calmer the martyr's soul will be,'' he says calmly.

Thank you for your patience while we verify access. If you are in Reader mode please exit and log into your Times account, or subscribe for all of The Times.

Thank you for your patience while we verify access.

Already a subscriber? Log in.

Want all of The Times? Subscribe.