1. UNIVERSITY OF MAKATI CENTER OF HUMAN KINESTHETICS Group 5 – I – C BPW – Archival, Allyssa Nicole - Dequito, Abegail C. * – Bugna, Desiree Gail J. * - Florentino, Jason – Cabral, Teodore - Ittangon, Rosita * – Catangay, Rafael * - Mateo, Engelbert * - Mendoza, Nenita * Prof. Tessie Tapiador-Sagadraca Social Science Department

2. Religion during American Occupation and the Great Schism in the Catholic Church

3. What Religion did Americans brought to the Philippines?

4. • PROTESTANTISM – is a form of Christian faith and practice which originated with the Protestant Reformation, a movement against what its followers considered to be errors in the Roman Catholic Church.

5. 3 Fundamental Principles 1. Scripture Alone • The belief in the Bible as the supreme source of authority for the church 2. Justification by Faith Alone • The belief that believers are justified, or pardoned for sin 3. Universal Priesthood of Believers • the right and duty of the Christian laity.

6. Trinity • Protestants who adhere to the Nicene Creed believe in three Persons (God the Father, God the Son, and God the Holy Spirit) as one God.

7. Five Solae 1. Sola Scriptura ( By Scripture Alone) 2. Sola Fide (By Faith Alone) 3. Solus Christus (Christ Alone) 4. Sola Gratia (Grace Alone) 5. Soli Deo Gloria (Glory to God Alone)

8. Population • Philippines has the World’s 13th – Largest Protestant with almost 6 million adherents and about 5 % of the national population.

9. Early History –Arrived in the Philippines during the late 19th Century and Early 20th Century. –Developed in the Philippines after the Spanish – American War when the Americans acquired the Philippines from the Spanish with the 1898 Treaty of Paris.

10. Early History (cont.) –The dominance of the Catholic Church in all aspects of life in Spanish Philippines and Protestant anti-Catholic animosity were prominent reasons for the start of Protestant missionary activity.

11. First Worship Service –Sunday, August 28, 1898 –Held in an old Spanish dungeon facing Manila Bay.

12. First Worship Service – Lead by George Stull He commented on this service: “That the power of God will use this day to make a good Catholic better, any weak American stronger, any backslider ashamed, and the gloomy old dungeon the beginning of wonderful things in these Islands, is my prayer."

13. American Colonial and Comity Agreement –After the defeat of the Spanish in the Battle of Manila Bay by the U.S. Asiatic Squadron, Presbyterian, Baptist and Methodist leaders met in New York to discuss how to bring Protestants to the Philippines in 1898.

14. Comity Agreement –Result is to comity agreement of the missionary enterprises, dividing up places of ministry to avoid future conflicts among themselves and their converts. Only one Protestant church would be started in each area.

15. American Colonial and Comity Agreement • Three Specific Major Agenda: – “to organize the Evangelical Union,” – “choose a common name for Protestant churches,” and – “delineate the geographical work allotments for each church.

16. Protestant Mission Agencies joining the Comity Agreement (1898 -1930) • Methodists (1898, most of lowland Luzon and north of Manila) • Presbyterians (1899, Bicol, Southern Tagalog area and some parts of Central and Western Visayas) • Baptists (1900, Western Visayas) • United Brethren (1901, Mountain Province and La Union) • Disciples of Christ (1901, Ilocos, Abra, and Tagalog towns)

17. Protestant Mission Agencies joining the Comity Agreement (1898 -1930) • Congregationalists (1902, Mindanao except for the western end) • Christian and Missionary Alliance (1902, Western Mindanao and Sulu Archipelago). • Brethren (Kapatirang Kristiano) linked to Plymouth Brethren, was established in the 1930s in San Juan, Metro Manila by a missionary named Cyril H. Brooks. They planted numerous chapels in the Philippines with majority in Bulacan, Pampanga and Rizal Province.

18. Iglesia Evangelica Metodista en las Islas Filipinas • Started with the Methodist when Nicolas Zamora broke from the Methodist and founded IEMELIF. • Shattered the Comity Agreement 1909 • Divisions came with growth and expansion, and personality clashes, racial tensions, the dynamics of nationalism, cultural differences, power struggles and other non-theological factors contributed to the schisms.

19. Iglesia Evangelica Unida de Cristo • In 1929, the United Brethren, Presbyterian and Congregational Churches formed the United Evangelical Church in the Philippines. • In 1932, six of the smaller indigenous denominations of Presbyterian and Methodist backgrounds formed the Iglesia Evangelica Unida de Cristo, or now more commonly known as the Unida Christian Church.

20. Growth – A major factor in the development of Philippine Protestantism is the explicit expression of religious freedom found in Section 5, Article III ("Bill of Rights) of the 1987 Constitution, separating church and state. The concept and its English phrasing has been present in essentially every national charter since the 1935 Constitution promulgated by the Commonwealth government. The Philippine Youth Movement founded in 1926 boosted the move to develop the indigenous Protestant church nationwide

21. Seventh Day Adventist Church of Christ United Church of Christ in the Philippines

22. The Great Schism in the Catholic Church

23. What is Schism? • The formal separation of a church into two churches or the withdrawal of one group over doctrinal differences

24. The Great Schism • Christianity split into two churches in 1054: – Roman Catholic Church (Universal) – Eastern Orthodox Church (Correct Belief)

26. The Problem The Catholic (west) and Orthodox (east) argued over the following issues 1. Icons 2. Who was in charge? – Pope (west) vs. Emperor (east)

27. What is an Icon? • Religious images that can be prayed to. –Statue of the Virgin Mary –Jesus Christ on the cross • They appear in several forms; in mural painting, mosaic and most typically painted on small wooded panels.

28. The Fight Between Icons Catholic (West) –Thought that icons brought you closer to the idea person –Praying to a statue of Jesus brought you closer to him Orthodox (East) – Thought it was wrong to worship something that was man- made. Worship should only be made to God.

29. How did the icon fight begin? • In 730, Byzantine Emperor Leo III banned the use of icons, This Byzantine emperor viewed the use of icons as idol worship.

30. How did the West react? • One pope ordered the excommunication of a Byzantine emperor – that is, he said the emperor was not a Christian.

31. The West – Roman Catholic Church • Mass was in Latin • Pope was the Supreme head of Church in the West – above any political ruler • Priest could NOT marry • Religious icons of martyrs and saints to be respected • Only Pope and Bishops could interpret the scriptures.

32. The POPE is the leader of the WESTERN Roman Catholic Church.

33. The East – Orthodox Church • “Mass” was in Greek - so everyone could understand. • Monks who did missionary work often converted it into the language of the people they were trying to convert • The Byzantine Emperor was superior to religious leader(patriarch) of Constantinople. • Priests could marry • Icons not allowed