Xintai is a county-level city in the central part of Shandong province, People’s Republic of China. It is the easternmost county-level division of the prefecture-level city of Tai’an and is located about 50 kilometres to the southeast of downtown Tai’an. Xintai is a city found in Shandong, China. It is located 35.90 latitudes and 117.75 longitudes and it is situated at elevation 197 meters above sea level. Xintai has a population of 222,459 making it the 15th biggest city in Shandong.

Historical, Cultural facts & Religion

Xingtai is the oldest city in North China. The history of Xingtai can be traced back 3500 years ago. During the Shang Dynasty, Xingtai functioned as a capital city. During the Zhou Dynasty, the State of Xing – from which the present name derives – was founded in the city. The state recognizes five religions: Buddhism, Catholicism, Daoism, Islam, and Protestantism. The practice of any other faith is formally prohibited, although often tolerated, especially in the case of traditional Chinese beliefs.

Brief City History

Xingtai, Wade-Giles romanization Hsing-t’ai, city, southwestern Hebei sheng (province), China. It is situated in a fertile plain at the foot of the Taihang Mountains, on the upper course of the Ziya River. It became a settlement at an early date. There were several settlements of the Shang dynasty (c. 1600–1046 BCE) in the area, and the name of Xing (the source of the city’s name) appears on oracle bones found there. Since 1954 some two dozen such Shang sites have been found in the district, indicating both lengthy occupation and a relatively advanced urban complex. In the early years of the Zhou dynasty (1046–256 BCE), the site was the capital of the feudal state of Xing. After Xing transferred its capital farther east and was subsequently destroyed (mid-7th century BCE), Xingtai became a part of the state of Jin and later of Zhao, and it was incorporated into the Qin empire on the fall of Zhao in 228 BCE. In the civil war following the defeat of the Qin dynasty (206 BCE), Xiangyu, one of the chief contenders for the empire, made one of his supporters the king of Changshan, with his seat at Xingtai, which at the time was named Xiangguo. During the ensuing Han dynasty (206 BCE–220 CE), the area was divided among the surrounding commanderies and feudal kingdoms. In 319 it became the capital of the Hou (Later) Zhao dynasty, founded by Shi Le (reigned 319–333), but under his successor, Shi Hu, the capital was moved from Xingtai to Ye in 335. After the Sui dynasty (581–618) conquered China, the area was given the name of Xingzhou, which it retained until 1119, when it became Xinde prefecture. Under the Ming (1368–1644) and Qing (1644–1911/12) dynasties, it became Shunde prefecture. The actual prefectural town has been called Xingtai since Song times (960–1126).

Xingtai is now largely a local market and commercial centre on the main railway line and expressway from Beijing to Zhengzhou and farther south, and it collects produce from the agricultural area in the plain to the east. Metallurgical, machine-making, and textile industries form its main economic base. West of the railway is a newly established industrial zone. Pop. (2002 est.) 489,715.

Language (s) Written & Spoken

Jilu or Ji–Lu Mandarin, formerly known as Beifang Mandarin “Northern Mandarin”, is a dialect of Mandarin Chinese spoken in the Chinese provinces of Hebei (Jì) and the western part of Shandong (Lǔ).

Important Types of Commerce in Xintai

Xintai is an important area of production of foods, vegetables and petroleum. There are about 1,600 million tons of coal deposits, other mineral deposits include quartz, limestone and clay. The industrial structure of Xintai is cantered on energy, building materials, machines and chemical engineering.

Language Services US and others will provide working with Xintai

Northern Mandarin is the official language of Xintai. For any industry to penetrate into Xintai, it’s exceptionally important to use a professional translator when you want to translate Northern Mandarin. Many business sectors, including Automobile, Legal, Medical, Agriculture, Tech, Science, Government and so on utilize professional Northern Mandarin translation services to flawlessly translate their important documents. A professional Northern Mandarin translator with an expert understanding of the use of vocabulary and grammar is best equipped to handle the specific nuances of this unique language.