Nationalities: Han

Administrative: Xingtai City has 2 municipal districts (Qiaoxi District, Qiaodong District), 15 counties (Xingtai County, Neiqiu County, Lincheng County, Longyao County, Ren County, Baixiang County, Nanhe County, Ningjin County). , Julu County, Pingxiang County, Xinhe County, Guangzong County, Wei County, Linxi County, Qinghe County), two county-level cities (Shahe City, Nangong City), and one economic development zone (Hebei Xingtai Economic Development Zone).

History of Xingtai

Historically, Xingtai has borne many names. As a fiefdom of Zhao Kingdom in early Warring States Period (476BC-221BC), it was called Xiangguo. During Sui (581-618) and Tang (618-907) dynasties, it was named Longgang, and then got the name of Xingtai in the year of 112 in Song Dynasty (960-1279). In addition, it is the site where one of the seven famous kilns in Tang Dynasty, Xing Kiln, is seated having a brilliant history of white porcelain making.

What to see in Xingtai?

Located at the convergence of Taihang Mountains and North China Plain, Xingtai city slopes from the west to the east. Its main topography is plain occupying more than half of the city area. It has reserves of black metal and other minerals. Here lists top atrractions in Xingtai.

Xingtai Grand Canyon Tianhe Mountain Bian Que Temple

When to visit Xingtai?

Enjoying a warm-temperate monsoon climate, Xingtai is dry and usually windy in spring. In summer, it is rainy and damp and the weather is cool and stable in autumn. Like in all the cities in northern China, people will spend a dry and cold winter with less rain and snow. And there is probably slight pollution. The hottest and coldest months are respectively July and January with average temperature of 26째C (78.8째F) and -3째C (26.6째F).

Visitors often choose to visit there in autumn not only for the favorable weather but also for the local well known chestnuts.

How to reach Xingtai?

Visitors can have a five and a half hours ride from Beijing to Xingtai. There are also buses running every 30 minutes from Shijiazhuang and Jinan.

Tourists can also take a train to Xingtai Railway Station or Xingtai East Railway Station from Beijing, Tianjin, Shijiazhuang, Guangzhou, Shanghai and other cities.