Veteran Star-Ledger reporter Guy Sterling tapped his lifelong passion for music to write three stories that have earned him a Deems Taylor Award, a national honor presented by the American Society of Composers, Authors and Publishers.

Sterling's articles about Judy Garland, John Coltrane and county music in New Jersey won him this year's Pop Articles award for American authors and journalists for excellence in books, articles and liner notes on the subject of music. Sterling and the other winners will be honored tomorrow night at the 40th annual awards ceremony in Frederick P. Rose Hall, home of Jazz at Lincoln Center in Manhattan.

"I really got into them. I just felt there was a real need for these stories," says Sterling, a general assignment reporter for The Star-Ledger since 1980. "Two are about some of the greatest performers America's ever produced and their strong connections to New Jersey."

A New Jersey native, Sterling was educated at the University of Virginia, where he graduated with a bachelor's degree in 1970. Two years later, he earned a master's degree from the Columbia School of Journalism.

"I loved music since I saw Elvis Presley on TV when I was a kid. I sat there on the living room floor saying, 'What is this?,'" says Sterling. He later wrote a book about Presley, "Elvis in Roanoke," published in 1977.

Sterling said his love of music was nurtured in the 1960s at New York City's legendary Fillmore East, where promoter Bill Graham presented a wide range of acts.

"He was eclectic in the shows he put together," says Sterling, 59. "You would see a jazz act with a rock act with a folk act with a blues act. Looking back, that's what opened my eyes to all different types of music. And it never really stopped."

A resident of Newark, Sterling runs the Newark Jazz Elders, a jazz ensemble featuring musicians who lived in or played in Newark during the city's jazz heydays in the 1950s through 1970s.

"Several times a year we bring them together for a big jam session, showcasing these terrific musicians, some of them were sidemen with some of the biggest names of jazz," says Sterling about this labor of love. "These are all active, thriving musicians who are every bit as good today as they were in their 30s and 40s."

Several other New Jerseyans are among tomorrow night's 30 winners. Vin Scelsa of Roseland will be honored for his long-running radio program "Idiot's Delight" (heard on WFUV, 90.7 FM), and Lorraine Gordon, a native of Newark, will receive an award for her book, "Alive at the Village Vanguard: My Life In and Out of Jazz Time." Producer Joe Boyd, a Princeton native, will be honored for his book, "White Bicycles: Making Music in the 1960s" and Dan Morgenstern, director of the Rutgers-Newark Institute for Jazz Studies, will be cited for his liner notes for the Fats Waller boxed set "If You Got To Ask, You Ain't Got It."

Peggy McGlone may be reached at (973) 392-5982 or pmcglone@starledger.com.