Upcoming events this season include the film premiere of Domum Dolce Domum, monthly dance classes and concerts

NEWARK, N.J. (June 3, 2022) – Newark Symphony Hall (NSH), the largest Black-led arts and entertainment venue in the state, announced its summer 2022 lineup of events and performances, including monthly soul line dancing with WBLS 107.5’s Superhero DJ Jon Quick and legendary instructor Kenny J, which begins on Friday, June 10, and is free for the first month.

“Newark Symphony Hall has been called the ‘Grand Dame’ of Newark’s cultural offerings, and some of the world’s greatest artists, including Judy Garland, Richard Pryor, Count Basie, Gladys Knight, and The Rolling Stones have performed there,” said Newark Mayor Ras J. Baraka. “This series of summer appearances, highlighted by Monthly Soul Line Dancing with DJ Jon Quick, will bring more visitors to our city, enable more young and future stars to showcase their talents on a great stage, and continue to expand Newark’s luster as a center for the performing arts.”

In-person performances and events taking place at Newark Symphony Hall through the season include:

RyArMo Productions: ‘Domum Dolce Domum’ Film Premiere – Tonight, June 3 at 7 p.m.

Monthly Soul Line Dancing – FREE kick-off night on June 10 at 7 p.m., featuring WBLS 107.5’s DJ Jon Quick and Master Line Dance Instructor Kenny J., taking place every second Friday of the month.

Salsa Night with Smiling David – June 17 at 7 p.m., taking place every third Friday of the month.

A Night of Excellence − June 18 at 6 p.m., the Alpha Community Center is hosting a benefit concert honoring ten New Jersey Living Legends in order to raise funds to help fund its programs geared towards educating the public at large on issues pertaining to public education, health and wellness, affordable housing, community economic empowerment, and youth development; to increase public awareness of such issues; and to support efforts to improve the opportunities afforded people of color in all spheres of life.

Iconic: Sharon Cuneta and Regine Velasquez – July 16

“We are excited to unveil our summer performance lineup, filled with both new events and returning programs, designed to highlight the performing arts and get the whole city involved,” said Newark Symphony Hall President & CEO Taneshia Nash Laird. “Our determination to include and bring together local residents and business owners is imperative to our work at NSH – offering fun and interactive events for our citizens is just one way we are fulfilling our mission of community enrichment through the arts.”

Returning to Newark Symphony Hall on June 10 is the audience-favorite monthly soul line dancing, taught by line dance instructor extraordinaire Kenny J and featuring WBLS 107.5’s DJ Jon Quick, whose AfroFlava show made NYC radio history on 107.5 WBLS in June 2019 as the first to feature all African music.

“Newark Symphony Hall and the City of Newark have been hard at work curating a lineup of impressive performances and events for the whole community to enjoy,” said Andrea Mason, Senior Manager of Newark People’s Assembly for the City of Newark. “Engaging community members is our number one goal”.

Newark Symphony Hall recently celebrated the start of its monthly Salsa Night series on May 27 with a performance from special guest Tito Puente Jr.

Tickets to events are available on Newark Symphony Hall’s website, along with the full list of upcoming programs: https://newarksymphonyhall.org/events/.

ABOUT NEWARK SYMPHONY HALL