Thelma Judy Garland, 78, of Toms River, NJ passed away in Community Medical Center, Toms River on December 8, 2019. Judy was born in Kenbridge, VA on December 29, 1940.

She was the fourth child of Fred and Eva (Crowder) Garland. Judy’s early childhood was spent in Kenbridge, VA. She attended Kenbridge Elementary School and Lunenburg High School in Virginia. While Judy was in the eighth grade, she played point guard on the Lunenburg High School girls’ varsity basketball team. Upon moving to New Jersey, Judy attended Toms River High School. While at Toms River High School she played Field Hockey and participated in archery.

Judy lived in South Toms River, NJ for a while, then she moved to Newark, NJ with her mother. In Newark, Judy worked at St. Barnabas Hospital. While working at the hospital Judy also attended a business school on Broad & Market Streets in downtown Newark. In April of 1962 Judy married George Womack, Jr.

Sometime later Judy returned to live in South Toms River, NJ. There she and her sister, Agnes G. Willis, were employed by the First National Bank of Toms River as data processors. She was also employed by O.C.E.A.N., Inc. with the maintenance department.

Judy joined Wells Chapel A.M.E. Church. She later moved her membership to St. Thomas AME church, where her nephew was the pastor. Judy is also a member of the local chapter of the NAACP.

Judy was always a very active fan of her children and grandchildren. You could always hear her in the stands cheering them on. She was affectionately known as “Judy Babe” by the children. Judy also was a caretaker of many of the neighborhood children. Her apartment was always open to them.

She was predeceased by her parents, two sisters and two brothers. She is survived by her two sisters, Eva Strickland, and Margaretta Gerrell (Gene), three children, Gregory, Danita (Hopeton), and Michael (Stacey); four grandchildren, Erick (Faith), Duey, Malik, Bilal; one great grandchild, Amyah; and a host of nephews and nieces.