Liza Minnelli Shows Her Love To The Boys Of New Jersey (via Out In Jersey)

Liza Minnelli has been a gay icon for as long as many of us can remember. How could she not be with lineage like hers? (Liza is the daughter of legendary actress Judy Garland and director Vincent Minnelli). From "Cabaret" to "Arthur" to "Arrested Development" (with an amazing songbook in between), Liza can simply do no wrong with us. Here, Entertainment Editor Cookie got the honor of sitting down with Liza to talk about her new album "Confessions", how she loves New Jersey, and her love for her gays and Lady Gaga!

Liza performs this Saturday night at 8pm at NJPAC in Newark. For tickets visit http://www.njpac.org/

Ms. Minnelli, this is such a pleasure, thanks so much for speaking with me. You're in rehearsals right now, are you even a little bit tired?

No! I will be tonight though (LOL).

Your latest album "Confessions" features some amazing Ira Gershwin songs you grew up listening to, such as "At Last" & "All The Way". Was it hard to choose from such an amazing songbook?

Well, those are the only two Gershwin's on the album. Ira Gershwin was my godfather and I definitely wanted to sing two songs that I had never sang before.

I was blessed enough to be one of the people to see your spectacular performance Of "Liza At The Palace", where the show was a tribute to your godmother Kay Thompson. Many consider that to be one of the most iconic performances on Broadway in recent history. What are some of your best memories of that magical show?

I think some of the best memories of the show is actually putting it together. It started as an idea for an album really, and then it kind of grew. I thought, well, we could perform it and record it at the same time, and then it kept going from there. I called Ron Lewis, who is my favorite choreographer, and asked if he would help me. See, the guys in the show with me were singers, they were not dancers. Ron had them moving exactly like dancers and they sang great! We did it on the road as we were traveling, I think it took about a year to completely get it together.

You're February 4th show is eagerly anticipated by your New Jersey fans, and your show in Asbury Park last year was sold out! Is there anything about fans in New Jersey that bring a different energy to a show you do here?

Those are great places, and the audiences in Jersey, they're just so vocal and so enthusiastic; that's what makes it so much fun.

A large part of your audiences are always gay men, especially in your New York/New Jersey performances (with a large amount of them being able to sing along with every word of "Liza With A Z"). Do you know why so many gay men feel such an affinity for you?

I love that! Well, I usually give a real flip answer like "they have good taste" (LOL). I think that the part of me that's the rebel, that went up against all odds, I think we relate to each other that way. My fight was to win my own status, and I think that's their fight also.

Tony Bennett just made his second album of standards, featuring such amazing artists as Lady Gaga. Do you think you would ever embark on a project of "Duets"? If so, who would you love to team up with?

Well, to tell you the truth, I'm thinking about it, so I can't discuss it! (LOL). There are so many people I would team up with though. Lady Gaga's a friend. She knows exactly what she's doing, she's great.

Liza Minnelli Brings Home New Show to NJPAC in Newark (via NJ.com)

Liza Minnelli performing in Germany in 2009.

She won’t be dancing her way onto the stage at NJPAC on Saturday night.

A broken leg, suffered during a fall she took in November, has limited her mobility somewhat.

But all fans of Liza Minnelli know: Catch the star in performance, and no matter what, you’re guaranteed to be entertained.

“Every other country has singers or actors or performers,” says Minnelli, 65. “We’re the only country that really has entertainers. Entertainment really started out as an American art form, and I think it continues to be.”

The formidably talented Minnelli, who has been in show business since early childhood, is proud to stand in the American tradition of multifaceted performers. She’s excelled at singing, dancing and acting — especially when combining all three into a single expression of her artistic will.

And while it is possible to bathe in the full wattage of Minnelli’s star power at a theater or even in front of the small screen, to truly understand why she’s so beloved, you’ve got to see her in concert.

“I’ve calmed down a bit,” says Minnelli, whose NJPAC appearance was scheduled for Dec. 16 before the fall sidelined her. “But I try to make every night onstage exciting, no matter what. I’ve got to love it, otherwise why would I even be doing it at this point?”

Minnelli is famous for the warmth, generosity and respect for showbiz history that she regularly brings to the stage. But even longtime fans were unprepared for the command she demonstrated in her show, “Liza’s at the Palace !”

“Liza’s,” which ran at the Palace Theatre on Broadway in December 2008 and January 2009, was, in part, a tribute to the two women who exerted the greatest influence over Minnelli’s early development as a performer: her famous mother, Judy Garland, and her lesser-known godmother, Kay Thompson.

Minnelli resurrected Thompson’s nightclub act of the ’40s, and performed a modified version of Garland’s “Palace Medley,” which her mother performed at the same theater decades ago. It was simultaneously an act of great imagination and one of considerable fidelity to source material that held great personal significance to her. The show won Minnelli a Tony Award for best special theatrical event.

The show that Minnelli brings to Newark doesn’t include many elements from “Liza’s at the Palace !” Yet Minnelli suggests that the energy and invention of that concert has carried over into her new project.

“It’s a brand-new show,” says the performer, who is thrilled to return to NJPAC, a theater she lauds for its intimacy. “It came from me wanting to do something smaller, but one that had the same kind of power.”

Minnelli attributes that power to her ability to coax the narrative out of every song she sings. She credits French singer Charles Aznavour for helping her locate that character and make the elaboration of that character’s motivation the core of her performance.

“I always have the story line in my head. I always know who the person is, and why she’s saying what she’s saying. What I’m singing is what the character is thinking, or doing.”

It’s a rewarding approach that can be applied to singing far beyond Broadway, and Minnelli has never confined herself to standards. In 1989, she cut the “Results” album with Pet Shop Boys Chris Lowe and Neil Tennant, and showed a fresh generation of listeners that she could apply her voice, her warmth and her technique to synthpop as easily as she could to Sondheim.

When ferocious (albeit theatrical) Belleville pop-rockers My Chemical Romance needed an expressive vocalist to sing the part of the Mother on the 2006 concept album “The Black Parade,” Minnelli got the call. She cut her part on “Mama” enthusiastically — she didn’t even charge the band.

“They just called up and said, ‘Do you want to do this?’ and I was happy to,” says Minnelli. “I am just a very curious person, and I enjoy exploring everything from rock ’n’ roll stuff to the classics.”

Minnelli hasn’t let the accident slow her down much and intends to keep on conceptualizing shows as long as they keep coming to her. The entertainer insists she’s always got a project cooking and is always looking around, taking inspiration for the characters she plays from the interactions of ordinary people.

“I always think from the audience’s point of view. What would they want to pay to see? I know if I was there, I’d want to get my money’s worth.”

Liza Minnelli

Where and when: Prudential Hall at New Jersey Performing Arts Center, 1 Center St., Newark, Saturday; Event Center at Borgata Hotel Casino and Spa, Atlantic City, March 24. Both shows at 8 p.m.

How much: $39 to $125 for Newark; call (888) 466-5722 or visit njpac.org. $75 to $95 for Atlantic City; call (609) 317-1000 or visit theborgata.com.

Liza Minnelli Reveals Intimate Details on NJPAC Performance, 'Hot In Cleveland' Role and Judy Garland (via Huffington Post)

She's captivated standing-room-only audiences across the globe, nabbed an Oscar for her role in a celebrated Hollywood musical and held court amongst New York's famed glitterati at Studio 54.

However, one week before she is set to take the stage at the New Jersey Performing Arts Center (NJPAC) on Feb. 4, Liza Minnelli has something considerably less glamorous on her agenda: a visit to the dentist.

Calling just minutes following her appointment, Minnelli apologizes in advance if she is difficult to understand over the telephone. Of course, something as minor as dental anesthetics would never be able to numb this ever-shining star; after all, it's Minnelli's well-established survival skills -- not to mention her unique brand of wide-eyed, precocious spunk -- that helped make her a gay icon for multiple generations, with a legacy rivaling only her legendary (and similarly tenacious) mother, Judy Garland.

Busy as ever, the 65-year-old singer-actress who Joy Behar once jokingly introduced as having "entertained more gay men than Larry Craig" will be whisked off to rehearsal shortly after the phone call. Still, she speaks enthusiastically and at length about her highly-anticipated NJPAC performance as well as her forthcoming guest-starring turn opposite Betty White on the hit series "Hot In Cleveland," while sharing memories of working with famed Broadway and film choreographer Bob Fosse and, of course, the beloved Judy.

Huffpost Gay Voices: Congratulations on your upcoming NJPAC performance. What sorts of surprises do you have in store for us?

Liza Minnelli: Liza Minnelli: My show is called "Confessions," and it's really a collection of various songs about how I feel about different things, what I believe in, people I've known -- some of whom nobody would ever know. "Confessions" is really all these different points of view; it's something I learned from [Armenian-French singer-songwriter] Charles Aznavour when I was 19. I saw him perform in Paris, and his show just killed me because each one of his songs was like a movie.

I knew I could dance and I knew I could act, but I never thought I could sing, so I went to Aznavour in Paris and I asked if I could be his student, and he said, "Sure." And he really taught me everything I know about singing -- how each song is a different movie.

Huffpost Gay Voices: You've also signed on for an episode of "Hot In Cleveland," set to air later this season. What's your character going to be like?

Liza Minnelli: They haven't told me a thing! I'll be out there Feb. 12, so I'll just see what they tell me and I'll do it, kind of like what I did with "Arrested Development" -- everybody was just so excellent on that show; I just respected everybody on that set so much. Of course having the chance to do anything with Betty White is great.

Huffpost Gay Voices: Two living legends, united on the small screen...

Liza Minnelli: What the hell is a "living legend"? (laughs)

Huffpost Gay Voices: Well, in my opinion, a living legend is someone whose work and career are immensely respected across multiple generations and in various industries.

Liza Minnelli: Well, thank you -- I guess as long as it's a living one, it's OK! (laughs) But I always think of myself as a gypsy, a Broadway performer who travels from show to show.

Huffpost Gay Voices: You're one of the few entertainers who has won an Oscar, an Emmy and a Grammy, not to mention four Tony Awards. Is there anything you're dying to do, either personally or professionally, that you haven't already?

Liza Minnelli: I won't know until it happens -- that's it. I love it because things just come up! I rarely plan anything unless it's a tour or a show I'm working on, and in the meantime, all of these mad, wonderful things have happened, like My Chemical Romance calling me up and asking me to sing with them.

Huffpost Gay Voices: 2012 marks 40 years since the release of "Cabaret," for which you won the Academy Award. What comes to mind when you look back on that film?

Liza Minnelli: Bob Fosse. And just how extraordinary it all was. Bob took immense risks in terms of how he depicted sensuality in the choreography, the photography. It was so fun. We were away in Germany and we were doing this kind of outrageous, wonderful film. We wanted to make a musical about Nazis, so we could really kind of do anything we wanted. And our cinematographer, Geoffrey Unsworth, was just so great. At one point they sent him a letter that said there was too much smoke in the cabaret...Bob took the letter from him and tore it up.

What Bob did was just extraordinary. I came on before Bob, as you know...[his work] really reminded me so much of a film called "The Damned," which was just so dark and wonderful and bizarre. I remember seeing that film with my dad [director Vincente Minnelli], who was always there for me. He helped me so much all of the time.

Huffpost Gay Voices: Your mother, Judy Garland, remains one of most fascinating stars in Hollywood history. Even though there's been a tremendous amount of research into her work and analysis of her life, what do you think is the biggest misconception audiences still have about her?

Liza Minnelli: The biggest misconception people have about my mother is that she was so unhappy. I think people enjoy thinking that -- some of them, anyway. They see the tragedy as opposed to the fact that she understood how to play tragedy.

I remember somebody at school once said something really mean about her: "Oh, Judy does too much of this or that, she drinks too much." And I came home from school crying; my mother asked me what was wrong and I told her. And then she said, "You know what? You let everybody say what they're gonna say, and we'll go get a hamburger."

Liza Minnelli performs at the New Jersey Performing Arts Center in Newark on Feb. 4. For more information click here.

Check out some of Liza's best moments over the years below:

Liza Minnelli & Judy Garland, 'Together (Wherever We Go)' (1963) - This stellar performance -- among others seen on 'The Judy Garland Show' -- made it clear that Liza was poised to follow in her legendary mother's footsteps.

Joining Judy Onstage for 'Over the Rainbow' (1965) - Liza has generally (and some say wisely) steered clear of Judy's musical repertoire throughout her career, but she seemed happy to join in on this 1965 performance of her mother's signature song at the London Palladium.

'Cabaret' (1972) - Liza took home an Oscar for her portrayal of Weimar-era nightclub singer Sally Bowles in Bob Fosse's adaptation of the Broadway musical "Cabaret." Watch her perform a medley of songs from that show here.

'Liza With A Z' (1972) - Produced, directed and choreographed by Bob Fosse, Liza's 1972 television concert film took home four Emmy Awards. Watch her perform the title song here.

'My Own Best Friend' (1975) - In 1975, Liza briefly replaced Gwen Verdon as Roxie Hart in the original Broadway run of the musical "Chicago." Watch her perform one of the hit show's numbers here.

'New York, New York' (1977) - Although the song became Frank Sinatra's signature tune, 'New York, New York' was originally written by John Kander and Fred Ebb for Liza to perform in the 1977 Martin Scorsese film of the same name.

'The Muppet Show' (1979) - The star appeared on 'The Muppet Show' in 1979, opening with this stellar rendition of Barry Manilow's hit 'Copacabana.'

'Baryshnikov on Broadway' (1980) - Watch Liza share the stage with Mikhail Baryshnikov in this incredible 1980 TV special.

'Frank, Liza & Sammy: The Ultimate Event' (1989) - Liza performed alongside fellow legends Frank Sinatra and Sammy Davis Jr. in this 1989 televised concert.

Performing With Queen (1992) - One year after frontman Freddie Mercury's death, Liza took the stage with members of Queen in London in 1992 for this rendition of an arena rock classic.

'Arrested Development' (2004) - In 2004 and 2005, Liza appeared on the Emmy Award-winning show "Arrested Development" as Lucille Austero. Check out one of her deleted scenes here.

GLAAD Vanguard Award (2005) - After winning the GLAAD Vanguard Award in 2005 for her support of LGBT equality, Liza entertained the crowd with "What Makes A Man A Man," a song written about an impersonator.

My Chemical Romance's 'Mama' (2006) - Liza contributed guest vocals on My Chemical Romance's song "Mama" -- portraying "Mother War," a dark conception of the main character's mother.

'Liza's at the Palace' (2008) - Liza paid homage to her late mother in 2008 with this vaudeville-inspired tribute, "Palace Medley."

'Sex And The City 2' (2010) - Liza stole the show from Sarah Jessica Parker and company with her cover of Beyonce's hit "Single Ladies."

With Charles Busch On Her Gay Fans (2011) - Liza looked back on her career highlights, and her status as gay icon, with author Charles Busch.

January 31, 2012: