Tapulous carved out a rhythm niche for itself with the release of Tap Tap Revenge, a Guitar Hero/Rock Band-esque game for the iPhone with the greatest price tag of all: free. But now Tapulous is moving into the premium content arena. First, the company released a Nine Inch Nails edition of the game. Now, Tapulous has two new premium Tap Tap games, including Tap Tap Dance, which debuts today on the App Store, and the soon to be released Christmas with Weezer which will feature six Christmas classics newly recorded specifically for the game.

Tap Tap Dance is, as the title suggests, a dance-themed edition of Tap Tap Revenge. The game includes ten licensed songs from artists like Daft Punk, Basement Jaxx, and Moby. Soul Magic Orchestra contributed an exclusive track, "Compressor," especially for Tap Tap Dance.

"Technologic" by Daft Punk

"Zdarlight" by Digitalism

"Disco Lies (Remix)" by Moby

"Phantom Pt II (Soulwax Remix)" by Justice

"Where's Your Head At" by Basement Jaxx

"Stratosphere" by Junkie XL

"Midnight Madness" by The Chemical Brothers

"Goldrush" by Tiesto

"Compressor" by Soul Magic Orchestra

"Daylight (Exclusive Morgan Page Remix) " by Sunny Levine

Tap Tap Dance features improves on the Tap Tap Revenge formula, although the game does not steer too far from its casual roots. Now, players can tap multiple notes at the same time as well as tap and hold notes, like you see in Guitar Hero when you play an extended note or chord. The game supports new visualizations, too, such as special skins for individual tracks. Tapulous calls this new software 2.0 and it will be used in the upcoming Christmas with Weezer.

Christmas with Weezer not only includes the previously mentioned Christmas tracks (which includes treasured classics like "Come All Ye Faithful" and "Silent Night"), but also two bonus tracks from the band's recent album. While the bonus tracks are available for purchase outside the Tapulous game, the Christmas songs are exclusive.

Tapulous is eager to grow its brand by getting more and more artists to use the game as a launch pad for new music, just how Guns 'n Roses debuted "Shackler's Revenge" from Chinese Democracy on Rock Band 2. Tap Tap Revenge, the original, continues to be a free download on the App Store and features new tracks every week. Previous artists contributing to Tap Tap Revenge include Katy Perry and Q-Tip. According to recently released Apple figures, Tap Tap Revenge was the top downloaded free game app of 2008.

Look for a full review of Tap Tap Dance, which now sells for $4.99 in the App Store, on IGN Wireless very soon.