In 2001, Natalie appeared in Llanview with an agenda. She befriended Jessica Buchanan and always seemed to be there when Jessica was caught in a bind. One night while Jessica's car was broke down on the side of the road, Natalie showed up out of nowhere and changed her tire, leaving Jessica impressed with Natalie's ability to take care of herself. It wasn't until she gained the trust of Jessica and her family that Natalie did a complete turnaround and announced that she was Viki's biological daughter! Although Jessica and Natalie were twins, the two had different fathers. After Allison Perkins switched the babies at birth, she returned Jessica (Viki and Mitch's child) instead of Natalie (Viki and Clint's child) in turn causing Natalie to be raised in Atlantic City by Roxy Balsom.

Having endured a very deprived childhood with a mother who was either always drunk or never there, Natalie raised her adoptive brother Rex until he was shipped off to live with his aunt. Jessica having taken her spot and growing up in a wealthy loving home made Natalie a very bitter girl. After months of causing Viki and Jessica constant problems, Viki was able to finally break Natalie's walls down and welcome her with loving, open arms. However, Natalie's life continued to be filled with heartache...

After months of denying their attraction, Natalie and Cristian Vega gave into their passion and fell deeply in love. When Cris's ex-girlfriend Jen Rappaport claimed she was pregnant with his child, wanting to do the right thing, Cris left Natalie to marry Jen. Feeling thrown away once more, Natalie took comfort in a stranger, Michael Lazarus. On the day of Cris's wedding, Natalie did the only thing to help her deal with the loss. She married Michael. However, it would turn out that Jen miscarried before the wedding and Cris couldn't go through with it. It wasn't until Natalie tried to annul her marriage that she found out that Michael was really Mitch Laurence, the same man who had her and Jessica switched at birth! Although Mitch refused to let Natalie out of their marriage, Cris saved Natalie just as Mitch was about to rape her and Bo took him into custody, giving Natalie the means to annual it on her own.

Just as Natalie and Cris got their lives back, John McBain, an undercover FBI agent came into town posing as a pool scout for a man wanted in all 50 states! John's plan was to use Natalie as a way to get information on Flynn Laurence. When Natalie refused to play by John's rules, the plan went bad and Flynn kidnapped Natalie. Tragedy would strike when Cris traded places with Natalie and was believed to have been killed.

Although she blamed John for Cris's death, Natalie became drawn to him and eventually found love again. To complicate her life more, Cris came back from the dead! Having lost his memory, Cris had been programmed to kill mob boss Tico Santi, then claimed to be an impostor so Natalie wouldn't waste her life away while he did time in prison. By the time Natalie found out that not only did Cris keep his identity a secret, John did too, and it was too late to repair her relationship with Cris.

Throughout the years, Natalie and John have had a tension filled relationship. Just when John was about to admit his love for her, he was involved in a massive car accident and presumed dead. Once again, Natalie thought her life was over. In December 2006, she found out that the man in the burn unit, believed to have been Hugh Hughes, was really John McBain! John finally opened up and admitted his love for Natalie! A vulnerable and loving woman, Natalie is relentless when her happiness is threatened!

Natalie later met, fell in love with and married Jared Banks. Their happiness was short lived when Jared died after a gunshot wound during a plot to trap Mitch Laurence. Natalie's grieving led her back into the arms of John who was involved with Marty Saybrooke. However, after Marty and John lost their baby Natalie professed her love to him through a letter but thought he'd rejected her when John didn't show up at Rodi's. Upset, she planned to leave town for London and stopped by Brody's to say goodbye. Brody, thinking he lost Jessica, got drunk with Natalie and ended up sleeping with her.

John made it clear that he wanted to give his and Natalie's relationship another shot and prevented her from leaving town. Natalie struggled with the guilt of sleeping with her sister's boyfriend and was devastated to find out she was pregnant - and that Brody was the father.

Marty vowed to tell John the truth. Natalie kidnapped Marty and brought her the Buchanan Lodge, where Natalie went into labor. Marty helped her deliver the baby then ended up in St. Ann's after thinking the baby was Marty and John's.

Natalie thought her secret was safe but was forced to admit that she and Brody had a one night stand at her double wedding with John, Jessica and Brody. She also devastated John, Brody and Jessica with proof that Liam was Brody's son.

It was later revealed that Marty had switched the results, and that John was really Liam's father. Natalie stole Marty's session tape where she admitted the truth to her doctor. The women struggled over the tape until Marty pushed Natalie off the Angels Square Hotel roof and kidnapped Liam.