David Fumero (Cristian Vega, One Life to Live) and his wife, Melissa, are expecting a baby boy. Fumero took over the role of Cristian Vega from actor Yorlin Madera, quickly making it his own and playing it for 13 years.

The couple hadn’t been planning to get pregnant, so this development came as a welcome but still jaw-dropping surprise, Melissa told People magazine. “[David] and I have been together a long time, so it’s very special and exciting for us, and we’re just really happy and excited.” David met Melissa on the set of One Life to Live (OLTL) when she played Adriana Cramer.

Related: Fans Fighting To Get OLTL back – 5 Years After Cancellation & 4 Years After Last Episode Aired

Melissa says that the many changes to her body have been the biggest adjustment for her in life as a mother-to-be. She also told People that she and David, being the “active” people they are, look forward to playing sports and engaging in outdoor activities most with their son.

David’s model good looks (he actually was a model for a time, doing an unforgettable campaign in nothing but his skivvies for Calvin Klein) drew many Llanview ladies to him. And though he fell for many of them in return over the years, notable ones including Natalie Buchanan and Rama Patel, no pairing of his sparked as much viewer passion and loyalty as his first, with Jessica Buchanan, particularly as Erin Torpey played her.

Related: Remembering Soap Actors and Actresses We Lost in 2015

The two were teenagers when they met, and though their coupling seemed charmed at first, it was star-crossed—this is daytime, we’re talking about after all! When the show aired its last episode, fans still hadn’t gotten the Cristian-Jessica happily ever after so many wanted. But if the Save Our Soaps movement has its way, OLTL will be back on TV. Then perhaps Crissica will reunite.

Soap Opera Spy would like to congratulate David and Melissa on the upcoming birth of their baby boy – and wish them luck in their parenting endeavors!