Courtown papers

Repository: Trinity College Dublin

Identity Statement

Context

Creator(s): Stopford, family, Earls of Courtown

Administrative History ↴

Earl of Courtown, in the County of Wexford, is a title in the Peerage of Ireland. It was created in 1762 for James Stopford, 1st Baron Courtown. He had previously represented County Wexford and Fethard in the Irish House of Commons. Stopford had already been created Baron Courtown, of Courtown in the County of Wexford, in 1758, and was made Viscount Stopford at the same time he was given the earldom. These titles are also in the Peerage of Ireland. He was succeeded by his eldest son, the second Earl. He was a Tory politician and served under William Pitt the Younger as Treasurer of the Household from 1784 to 1793. In 1796 he was created Baron Saltersford, of Saltersford in the County of Chester, in the Peerage of Great Britain. This title gave him and his descendants an automatic seat in the House of Lords. His eldest son, the third Earl, was also a Tory politician. He succeeded his father as Treasurer of the Household and was also Captain of the Honourable Band of Gentlemen Pensioners for many years. He was succeeded by his third but eldest surviving son, the fourth Earl. He represented County Wexford in the House of Commons as a Tory. His only son from his first marriage, the fifth Earl, served as a Deputy Lieutenant of County Wexford. He was succeeded by his eldest son, the sixth Earl. He was Lord Lieutenant of County Wexford. His eldest son, the seventh Earl, was a Major-General in the Army and served as Deputy Assistant Adjutant-General at the War Office from 1941 to 1947. As of 2010 the titles are held by the latter's grandson, the ninth Earl, who succeeded his father in 1975. Lord Courtown is one of the ninety elected hereditary peers that remain in the House of Lords after the passing of the House of Lords Act 1999, and sits as a Conservative.

Archival History ↴

The collection was deposited in 1976-8 and was purchased in 2001-2002.

Immediate Source Acquisition ↴

Purchase

Content & Structure

Scope & Content: Stopford, family, Earls of Courtown ↴

The Courtown papers contain records of the Stopford family. They cover a period from the 18th to the 20th century and relate to the management of the lands in the counties of Wexford, Carlow and Kilkenny.

A small section of personal papers (letters between the 4th Earl and his wife Charlotte nee Montagu-Scott) have been transcribed.

Appraisal Destruction ↴

Permanent Retention

Arrangement ↴

The collection is arranged as follows:

Courtown volumes: 11183/V/1-251

Courtown papers: 11183/P1/ – P60/

Courtown maps & genealogy: 11183/MG/1-111

Conditions of Access & Use

Allied Materials

Descriptive Control Area