Droits de l'Homme / Human Rights Stop au bain de sang commis par le pouvoir militaro-islamiste en Turquie!

C'en est assez.

Assez des manipulations et des machinations du pouvoir militaro-islamiste qui, tout en donnant des leçons de démocratie aux pays arabes, continue sans cesse de massacrer les enfants des civilisations plus anciennes de la Mésopotamie !

Après les Arméniens et les Assyriens il y a un siècle, Ankara continue aujourd'hui la persécution des Kurdes.

Trente-cinq villageois kurdes ont été tués mercredi soir à la frontière turco-irakienne par l’armée turque lors de raids aériens à Uludere.

"Ils nous ont délibérément massacrés. Pourquoi tout ce sang a été versé? Ils doivent nous répondre": les larmes aux yeux, Kitan Encu, qui a perdu onze parents durant les bombardements près de son village kurde orchestré par l’armée aérienne turque, ne cache pas sa révolte.

Selahattin Demirtas, co-président du BDP, principale formation pro-kurde de Turquie, a dénoncé un “carnage”, assurant que l’ensemble des victimes étaient des civils.

C'en est assez.

Il ne s'agit pas d'une simple bavure. C’est un nouvel épisode des opérations meurtrières déclenchées par le chef islamiste Tayyip Erdogan et par ses généraux qui siègent au Conseil de la sûreté nationale.

Sous ce nouveau régime militaro-islamiste, des milliers de dirigeants kurdes, des centaines de journalistes et juristes vont célébrer le nouvel an derrière les barreaux simplement pour avoir revendiqué les droits et les libertés du peuple kurde ainsi que des minorités nationales et religieuses d'Anatolie à l'instar des pays européens dont la Belgique.

Les intellectuels, écrivains, éditeurs brillants du pays croupissent actuellement dans les prisons turques.

En guise de contrecarrer un projet de loi relatif à la pénalisation du négationnisme en France, tous les partis politiques turcs confirment leur opposition honteuse à la reconnaissance du génocide des Arméniens perpétué en 1915.

La plupart des médias écrits et audio-visuels turcs, sous le contrôle du régime, continuent d’accuser les opposants de haute trahison à la patrie et à la suprématie turco-islamique tout en ignorant les violations des droits de l'Homme.

C'en est assez.

Ses crimes de longue date n'empêchent pas le pouvoir militaro-islamiste de donner des leçons de démocratie à la Syrie en la sommant d’engager des réformes démocratiques et à mettre fin à la répression.

Assez de l'hypocrisie des dirigeants des puissances occidentales qui se taisent devant les crimes odieux commis sans cesse par l'armée, la police et la justice de leur allié stratégique et géopolitique qu'ils imposent comme un modèle sur mesure aux millions d’opprimés ???? du Moyen-Orient de l'Afrique du nord.

Quant aux médias occidentaux, ils passent sous silence les crimes perpétuels de ce pouvoir assoiffé de sang ou en parlent dans quelques lignes comme de simples faits divers.

C'en est assez.

Il faut mettre fin à cette mascarade et réagir tout de suite face aux crimes commis par le pouvoir militaro-islamiste.

En tant qu'organisations issues de l'émigration politique et en provenance de Turquie, nous appelons les dirigeants et médias belges et européens à ne plus rester complices d'Ankara et à prendre des positions fermes dans toutes les instances gouvernementales et parlementaires contre les atrocités et violations des droits de l'Homme commis dans ce pays candidat à l'Union européenne.

Bruxelles, le 30 décembre 2011

L'Association des Arméniens Démocrates de Belgique

L'Institut Assyrien de Belgique

L'Institut Kurde de Bruxelles

La Fondation Info-Türk

E-mail: collectif1971@scarlet.be

Les Kurdes, en colère, enterrent les victimes d'un raid aérien

Des milliers de Kurdes courroucés ont enterré vendredi dans le Sud-Est anatolien 35 civils tués mercredi soir par erreur au cours d'un raid aérien turc et ont conspué le Premier ministre Recep Tayyip Erdogan, le qualifiant de meurtrier.

La foule endeuillée a accompagné dans un long convoi de voitures et d'ambulances les cercueils des victimes du bombardement depuis la bourgade d'Uludere, où les corps ont été autopsiés et où un service funèbre a été célébré à la mosquée, jusqu'au cimetière du village de Gülyazi, près de la frontière irakienne.

Après le défilé des véhicules, au son des avertisseurs, les chauffeurs faisant le V de la victoire, l'assemblée funèbre a scandé "Erdogan est un assassin".

"C'était une jeune pousse, nous n'avons pas pu la cultiver", se lamente la mère de Vedat Encu, âgé de 13 ans.

"Je veux dire au chef d'état-major que mon fils est un martyr et qu'il ne portait aucune arme", hurle le père de l'adolescent, alors que le corps est porté en terre.

M. Erdogan a présenté vendredi ses condoléances aux familles des victimes, évoquant un incident "malheureux et affligeant".

"Selon les images (de drones) un groupe de 40 personnes se trouvait dans la zone. Impossible de dire de qui il s'agissait (...) Après, il a été déterminé qu'il s'agissait de contrebandiers transportant des cigarettes, et du carburant à dos de mules", a-t-il expliqué, assurant qu'"aucun Etat ne bombarde son peuple délibérément".

M. Erdogan a également tenté de justifier le raid mené par des F-16 par le fait que dans le passé des rebelles du Parti des travailleurs du Kurdistan (PKK), visés par le raid, empruntaient le même chemin avec des mules pour le transport de leurs armes afin d'attaquer des postes militaires à la frontière irakienne.

A Gülyazi, ces explications ne convainquent pas.

"Il est impossible qu'il aient été tués par erreur. Les soldats étaient à 150 mètres de là et à portée de vue", a déclaré Mehmet, 20 ans, du village d'Ortasu, d'où étaient originaires avec celui de Gülyazi la plupart des victimes.

"J'aurais pu être une des (victimes)", ajoute le jeune homme, qui admet vivre de la contrebande avec l'Irak.

Une jeune femme est en pleurs après la mort d'un de ses cousins.

"Ce n'était pas une erreur. Ils ont tué volontairement des gens qui s'efforçaient de gagner leur croûte", accuse-t-elle.

L'armée turque, qui bombarde régulièrement les repaires du PKK dans le Kurdistan irakien, fait face depuis l'été à une flambée de violence des rebelles qui utilisent leur bases arrières en Irak pour lancer des attaques contre des objectifs dans le Sud-Est anatolien, peuplé en majorité de Kurdes. (AFP, 30 déc 2011)

35 Kurds slaughtered by Turkish army's warplanes

Following the MGK (National Security Council) meeting on 28 December, the Turkish army has made a slaughter with warplanes. At least 35 burnt bodies have been reached so far. The number of casualties is feared to increase. Around 50 civilians, some of them believed to be borders smugglers, were targeted by F-16 warplanes on Wednesday night at around 21.20 local time. Among the dead are young boys.

According to the information received, wounded survivor Servet Encü came to the village and informed villagers after the assault. Encü said the followings; “We were bombed on our way back to the village. A bitter smell spread during the bombardment, people all at once died burning. Around five people escaped from the bombing and hid themselves amidst rocks but the warplanes dropped bombs on them as well.

Among the dead are border smugglers, youngsters between 15 and 20 years of age as well as village guards and their kids.

Here are the names of the 36 people so far identified:

Seyit Enç, Özcan Uysal, M. Ali Tosun, Yüksel Ürek, Salih Ürek, Nadir Alma, Mehmet Encü, Nevzat Encü, Hamza Encü, Şervan Enmcü, Cemal Encü, Osman Encü, Şıvan Encü, Bilal Encü, Mahsum Encü, Salih Encü, Haki Encü, Serhat Encü, Adem And, Savaş Encü, Çetin Encü, Selahattin Encü, Bedran Encü, Hüseyin Encü, Aslan Encü, Cevat Encü, Erkan Encü, Selman Encü, Zeydin Encü, Orhan Encü, Fadıl Encü, Vedat Encü, Cihan Encü, Fikret Encü, Hüsnü Encü, Erkan Encü.

Soon after being informed about the event, BDP Şırnak Provincial Chair Baki Sondak and BDP administrators went to the scene.

Şırnak City Council Deputy Chair Erşet Ediş said the followings from the scene; “The bodies were burnt to a crisp. Vehicles cannot go into the area due to severe snow. People are trying to reach the area by their own means.”

Remarking that soldiers acted as if nothing had happened and didn’t interfere in the event, BDP Şırnak Provincial Chair Baki Sondak said the followings; “Villagers were bombarded after passing the border with the supplies they bought from the border. It is possible that napalm bombs were used in the assault. There are still some bodies between rocks. We can’t reach the bodies and casualties.”

Mothers cry out: they killed my sons

Mercan Encü is the mother of Şervan and Nevzat Encü. The two kids lost their life in the bombing by the Turkish army on Wednesday night. Mercan Encü is devastated by pain and sorrow. She cries and says "My children went to the border to buy fuel but the Turkish government mercilessly killed them. For which of my sons should I mourn now? They burnt my children."

Zahide Encü, mother of 12-year old victim Aslan Encü also lost her son: “My elder son lost his foot seven years ago when he stepped on a mine while doing this work. - she says - My 12-year old son was smuggling also to get the money for a prosthesis leg for his elder brother. He went there to buy two bins of fuel. However, the state confronted them and sent warplanes against them. The children who died in the bombing - she adds - were all aged 12, some were 14. We have to smuggle because we don’t have any other opportunity". The devastated mother cries out to the killers, the culprits of this massacre. She said they "are not God believers, not Muslims because Islam wouldn’t allow people to kill people with warplanes. All victims were burnt and their bodies torn apart beyond recognition. I wasn’t able to recognize the bodies of my children."

Halit Encü, a relative of a victim of the bombardment, underlined that the state also knew that these people were smuggling. Smuggling – he added - is the only source of living of the people living in the area. Encü remarked that the state purposely prevented and killed them with bombs.

Relative of another victim, Ayaz Encü reported that they faced with a slaughter at the scene and showed the piece of a bomb in his hand. Encü said : “Our relatives were slaughtered savagely and mercilessly. The whole world needs to see that this is the real face of Turkey and the AKP. I call on the world public opinion to show awareness and the Turkish public opinion to be here.”

Responding to the request for the bodies to be transferred to Malatya Forensic Medicine Institute, villagers ask to bury their relatives in their village following an autopsy at Gülyazı village clinic.

BDP: a horrifying massacre

Peace and Democracy Party (BDP) Chairman Selahattin Demirtaş said that what took place in Uludere was "a horrifying massacre" and added that all of the victims were villagers, including children and high school students. He also pointed out that the villagers were living on smuggling and that the officials in the region also knew that.

Demirtaş recalled the remarks of Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdoğan, who said a government which kills its own people loses its legitimacy in reference to embattled Syrian leader Bashar al-Assad. "I am using these exact words with respect to Erdoğan," the BDP leader said.

The BDP had declared a three-day period of mourning for the victims.

In the meantime the Turkish General Staff has been trying to "justify" the horrifying massacre in Uludere by claiming that it would have been impossible to know whether the civilians killed by warplanes were actually villagers or PKK guerrillas, as the PKK often used this area to cross the border. Somehow it is an appalling justification, made even worse by the assumption that the victims were "border smugglers" so to a certain degree lesser people.

"As a result of intelligence received from various sources and technical analyses carried out, - reads the General Staff statement - we understood that terrorist groups, which also included senior leaders, gathered in the region and that they were readying to stage attacks on our outposts and bases along the border; the relevant troops were warned."

The General Staff statement adds that an unmanned aerial vehicle (UAV) detected a group heading towards the Turkish border with northern Iraq at 6:39 p.m. on Wednesday. "Considering that the area where the group was spotted was a region frequently used by terrorists - reads the statement - and that there was overnight activity towards our borders, we decided the group should be fired upon and the target was hit between 9:37 and 10:24 p.m."

Gross Rights Violations Continue in F-Type Prisons

Maltreatment, torture and rights violations are still widespread in the so-called high-security F-type prisons, after 11 years of their bloody introduction, Ankara branch of Turkey's Progressive Lawyers' Association (ÇHD) says.

20 lawyers have visited and interviewed inmates at Sincan F-type prisons no 1 and 2, as well as the women's ward. Here are some examples of rights violations from the report:

*Circular 45/1 of the Ministry of Justice, circulated on 22 January 2007 accepts "social contact" as a fundamental right and secures its implementation in prisons. Yet, it has not been implemented in Ankara prisons until November 2011.

* Isolating some prisoners in single cell units that has ventilation area for only one person, and limiting daily ventilation time to 1-4 hours, is a gross rights violation.

* Detainees are forcefully stripped naked upon their arrival at the prison facility. Those who oppose this treatment are condemned to solitary confinement on grounds of "insulting and resisting officials".

* Number of suicides at F-type prisons reveals isolation's detrimental effects as well as that the psychological care is not sufficient. Ill patients can wait for months to get checked by doctors. A doctor is present only for 1,5 days a week at Sincan F-type prison no 1. Journalist Erol Zavar, who has cancer and is kept here, has not been released despite numerous applications.

* Besna Özer, 60, had been denied medical care twice, on grounds that she doesn't speak Turkish. Her demand for diet food has been rejected.

* Although the phone conversions of inmates are recorded at Sincan no 1, they are also required to announce name and phone number of the person they are speaking to at the beginning of the call. Those who oppose the practice are denied the rights to phone calls since January 4th, 2011.

* During cell searches, even photographs and art work are confiscated. ,

* Legally published books and publications can be restricted. Among them are the "Communist Manifesto", Server Tanilli's "History of Civilization" and columnist and writer Ece Temelkuran's books. (BIA, Ayça SÖYLEMEZ, 21 December 2011)

International call for lawyers’ release

Six international organizations have sent a letter to President Abdullah Gül and Justice Minister Sadullah Ergin to protest the arrest of lawyers in Turkey.

The Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a joint program of the International Federation for Human Rights (FIDH) and the World Organization Against Torture (OMCT), the Union Internationale des Avocats (UIA-International Association of Lawyers), the Conférence internationale des barreaux (CIB), Lawyers’ Rights Watch Canada (LRWC) and the International Foundation for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders (Front Line) expressed their “deepest concern about the frequent use of arbitrary detention and judicial harassment against a significant number of lawyers for merely defending their clients’ rights in politically sensitive cases,” in a letter addressed to Gül and Engin.

The appeal referred to the recent arrests of 39 lawyers and one legal worker in the scope of an operation against the Kurdish Communities Union (KCK), the alleged urban branch of the outlawed Kurdistan Workers’ Party (PKK).

Since 2009, about 700 people have been arrested over their alleged links to the KCK, according to government figures, although the BDP puts the figure at more than 3,500.

Five parliamentarians and two prominent intellectuals, publisher Ragıp Zarakolu and academic Büşra Ersanlı, are in custody on similar charges.

All the suspects mentioned in the letter are either current or former lawyers of Abdullah Öcalan, the imprisoned PKK leader serving a life sentence on İmralı Island.

“Our organizations deplore that cases of judicial harassment against lawyers for exercising their mission to provide a defense are not new and that, worse, they are becoming frequent,” read the letter. “These arrests are contrary to human rights standards which bind Turkey. Furthermore, these arrests contravene the “Basic Principles on the Role of Lawyers” [Havana Rules] as adopted at the United Nations in Havana, Cuba in 1990.”

The organizations voiced their concern that lawyers in Turkey were being prosecuted under the terrorism law.

The letter called on Gül and Ergin “to ensure that lawyers in the Republic of Turkey do not face any act of harassment.” (Hürriyet Daily News, Dec 20, 2011)

The longest trial ever: Dev-Yol (Revolutionary Way)

The trial of 29 year old "Dev-Yol" case, whose first accusation was prepared in 1982, has resumed yesterday at the Penal Department No. 9 of the Supreme Court of Ankara.

The trial on 14 December was attended by nine defendants and lawyers Mehdi Bektaş, Şenal Sarıhan and Ömer Kavili.

The trial was adjourned to 18 January 2012 upon the demand of lawyers for extension of time for defense. Lawyers remarked that some documents of the case file are missing since the decision of Supreme Court’s General Board of Criminal Department hasn’t been conveyed to some lawyers and defendants yet.

Speaking to bianet after the trial, defense lawyer Mehdi Bektaş reminded that Dev-Yol main case had been concluded in 1995. Remarking that some of the defendants had been convicted in that process, Bektaş noted that the current trial was held for other defendants who weren’t convicted then due to prescription and those in whose favor the Court made a decision at that time.

The Penal Department No. 11 of the Supreme Court reversed the judgment of military commission which in 1995 demanded 15 years imprisonment for each of 21 defendants. The Penal Department considered the sentences insufficient and defended that the accused needed to be judged in accordance with the 146/1 Article of the Turkish Penal Code.

In the defense during the trial, Bektaş stated that the case should be dropped because of prescription.

Defendant Cahit Akçam noted that the Supreme Court’s General Board of Criminal Department grounded on the dates of defendants’ detentions while considering the demands for prescription. (ANF, 15 December 2011)

Avocat, profession à hauts risques, en Turquie

par Amitiés kurdes de Bretagne

Selon nos informations, venant confirmer celles qui circulent en Turquie mais que la presse française omet de diffuser, le nombre des arrestations et incarcérations ne cessent d’augmenter en Turquie, notamment dans les régions kurdes du sud-est anatolien : les avocats sont particulièrement visés. Après la rafle de ces dernières semaines qui a concerné 37 des leurs, "tous mes amis avocats sont tous sur les nerfs et me disent que bientôt leur tour arrivera" me confie une source sûre.

Le barreau de Diyarbakir a apprécié la résolution du Conseil de l’Ordre des avocats de Paris. Il appréciera l’envoi d’une mission, dans les semaines à venir, à l’initiative des barreaux de Genève, de Bruxelles, de Paris et de barreaux américains, suite à la lettre ouverte signée par la Fédération internationale des Droits de l’Homme (FIDH), l’Organisation Mondiale contre la torture(OMCT), l’Union Internationale des Avocats (UIA), la Conférence internationale des barreaux (CIB), Lawyers’ Rights Watch Canada (LRWC), la Fondation Internationale pour la Protection des Défenseurs des Doits de l’Homme (Front Line), et adressée au président turc, Abdullah Gül, et à son ministre de la Justice.

Les Amitiés kurdes de Bretagne, pour leur part, lancent un appel à tous les avocats de France, et notamment à ceux de Bretagne, pour qu’ils élèvent eux aussi une puissante protestation. Tous les candidats à la présidence de la République doivent être interpellés pour leur demander de se démarquer nettement de la politique liberticide du gouvernement turc.

Ajournement du procès des "151" jusqu’au 26 décembre

Le procès de Diyarbakir, dit des "151", qui concerne principalement 151 élus politiques et associatifs, dont le maire de Diyarbakir, a bien repris le 6 décembre, avec la présentation, par l’accusation, des prétendues preuves de culpabilité des prévenus. Interdits de s’exprimer dans leur langue maternelle, les accusés ne furent pas autorisés à prendre la parole pour assurer leur défense.

Le tribunal, aux ordres d’un gouvernement autoritaire, jouant une fois de plus "la montre" a ajourné les débats. Les audiences devraient reprendre le 26 décembre pour une session dont la durée prévue ne devrait pas excédée un mois, si toutefois, de nouveaux ajournements ne viennent pas perdurer cette scandaleuse situation. Le prolongement excessif d’une détention provisoire est en soi une atteinte aux libertés individuelles et une torture physique, psychique et morale. C’est aussi une atteinte à la démocratie quant il s’agit de mettre des élus dans l’impossibilité d’exercer leur mandat. Le ministère de la justice commence à anticiper les décisions du tribunal en procédant à des destitutions et à la mise en place d’administrateurs nommés par le pouvoir. C’est déjà le cas pour Etem Şahin, Maire de Suruç (région de Urfa).

Dernière minute : coup de force contre la mairie de Kurtulan (région de Siirt) : locaux perquisitionnés, 18 personnes, dont le maire, en garde à vue.

Ce matin, 16 décembre 2011, les locaux de la mairie de Kurtulan et le domicile du maire ont été perquisitionnés. Le Maire, Necat Yilmaz, a été interpellé et placé en garde à vue, ainsi que cinq conseillers municipaux, 10 militants du BDP dont l’ancien président de la section locale, un conseiller régional de Siirt et un journaliste, correspondant de l’agence de presse DIHA. (André Métayer, 17 déc 2011)

"Revolting" Students Rely on Legal Rights

The second hearing against students who participated in the "We are revolting" ('Başkaldırıyoruz') protest action at the renowned Middle East Technical University (ODTÜ) on 5 January was held on Wednesday (14 December). A total of 117 students are being tried by reason of attending the protest action and alleged resistance to the police. The trial will be continued on 16 March.

The students had protested the Higher Education Council (YÖK) and the government during a meeting of Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdoğan with the rectors. The police intervened with tear gas and water cannons against the students.

117 students are facing prison terms of between one year and nine months and ten years. They are charged with "opposing Law No.2911 on Meetings and Demonstrations", "resistance to the police" and "harming public property".

"I was sitting an exam - what basis was I arrested on?"

Only 34 of the indicted students attended the hearing at the Ankara 24th Criminal Court of First Instance. Defendant Akın Can stated that he was sitting an exam on 5 January during the time of the protest action. Can presented an according document to the judge and added, "I do not know on what basis I was arrested on".

Defendant Kazım Laço claimed that he went to the place of the press release because he had been directed accordingly by the police. "Why was I directed to go there when they were going to attack us like that?" he questioned.

Several students claimed to their defence that it was their democratic right to attend the press release. Thus, they rejected all charges pressed against them.

The judge decided to have an expert examine the CD submitted to court by the Ankara Governorship in order to determine the persons on the video and to decide whether the footage constituted a legal basis or not. The trial was postponed to 16 March 2012 to hear the defendants who did not attend the hearing. (BIA, Serhat KORKMAZ, 15 December 2011)

Thousands of Arrests, Dozens of Deaths in Prisons

The Human Rights Foundation of Turkey (TİHV) and the Human Rights Association (İHD) issued a joint press statement on the occasion of the Human Rights Week from 10 to 17 December. Both human rights organizations drew attention to mass arrests in Turkey in 2011.

The statement marked the 63rd anniversary of the adoption of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights by the United Nations. It was said that significant violations occurred against people who wanted to make use of their rights to freedom of thought, expression and association in Turkey in 2011. "We do not want to give a statement but express ourselves", the organizations claimed.

"In Turkey, continuous judicial pressure is being applied to political parties carrying out legal political activities and to organizations of social opposition. They are treated as armed organizations".

Right to association violated

The joint statement referred to examples such as trials opened against political parties and institutions like the Peace and Democracy Party (BDP), the Socialist Democracy Party (SDP), the Social Freedom Platform (TÖP), the Socialist Party of the Oppressed (ESP), the Community Centres organization and executives and members of the Confederation of Trade Unions of Public Employees (KESK).

"25 members of KESK, including the organization's president, were sentenced on the grounds of arbitrary and unjust charges of membership of an illegal organization. Members and executives of the Community Centres organization and the Freedom and Solidarity Party (ÖDP) are facing trial by reason of the incidents related to Hopa. These are examples of heavy violations of the right to association", it was announced.

The statement also comprised sections on other human rights violations, i.e. mass arrests related to the KCK trial (Union of Kurdish Communities; the outlawed armed Kurdistan Workers' Party (PKK) is affiliated with the KCK); purported zero tolerance to torture; impunity for torturers and casualties as the result of tear gas.

2,057 arrests in KCK investigation in 7 months

* Crucial obstructions before the right to freedom of expression and opinion and a fair trial are caused by the facilitation of arrests by provisions of the Criminal Procedure Law, regulations on secret witnesses and applications of telephone interception and technical surveillance.

* The number of custodies and arrests with regard to investigations into Ergenekon, the KCK or the Hopa incidents has reached massive dimensions. In the context of the "KCK Investigation" for instance, a total of 4,815 people were taken into custody, most of them BDP members and executives, during the past seven months from March to November 2011. 2,057 of these people were arrested. The rush of custodies and arrests is still going on, the statement underlined.

Zero tolerance to torture remained an empty promise

* Deaths caused by violence of police forces continued in 2011. 19 people lost their lives till 28 November due to extrajudicial killings, ignoring a stop warning and as the result of random gun fire. At the same time, 9 unsolved murders were committed. 35 people died in prisons, four persons at detention centres, the rights organizations revealed.

Impunity for torturers

* Also the term "zero tolerance to torture" remained mere rhetoric in 2011. 473 people applied to the TİHV until the end of November due to experienced torture or ill-treatment.

* The frequency of torture and ill-treatment applied in locations outside officially registered places (streets, vehicles, meetings and demonstrations) has increased. Impunity encourages the torturers. Trials against people who applied torture are not opened ex officio. Prosecution periods are very long and result in acquittals or the minimum penalty.

6 People killed with tear gas

* 2011 saw serious interventions against the right to meetings and demonstrations. Six people died in the course of police interventions and 271 were injured. All events of death were caused by the effect of tear gas or hits by gas bomb capsules.

* The number of violations in the field of press freedom increased as well in 2011. 71 journalists are still being imprisoned. According to the data compiled by TİHV and İHD, a total of seven newspapers and magazines were suspended from publication. The number access bans to websites amounted to 15,506. (BIA, Ayça SÖYLEMEZ, 13 December 2011)

Policeman convicted to 4 years in death of refugee

Turkish court yesterday sentenced a police to 50 months imprisonment for “involuntary manslaughter” in the 2007 fatal shooting of Nigerian refugee Festus Okey.

Okey was detained in 2007 for not carrying identification and died from a wound that was caused by a police officer’s bullet. Okey’s case could not proceed until yesterday because the court could not certify his identity.

“I am here because I did what my duty requires,” police officer Cengiz Yıldız told the court.

Yıldız’s lawyer, Vehbi Kahveci, said the deficiencies in the police institution, particularly the lack of closets for storing guns, caused the incident; Yıldız kept his gun in his pocket and a sudden move between him and Okey might have caused the shooting, he added.

“We were expecting an acquittal,” Kahveci said.

Yıldız was sentenced to four years and two months imprisonment, although chief judge

İshak Eren opposed the court’s decision and demanded that Yıldız be fined. The court initially handed down a higher sentence before making a reduction.

Meanwhile, the court rejected the demands from Okey’s brother’s lawyers, Alptekin Ocak and Can Atalay, to intervene in the case on the grounds that the relationship between Totuchugvu Gameliah Ogvu and Okey was “unverified.”

“We wanted to get involved in the case to find all the responsible parties,” Ocak said, adding that if the court had accepted their investigation demands at the police station, they could have found more culpable people.

In addition to journalists watching the trial, there were representatives from several nongovernmental organizations, such as the Migration Solidarity Network (GDA), Amnesty International and the Contemporary Lawyers Association (ÇHD).

“The suspect would be punished with almost 12 years imprisonment if the … lawyers could have proved that the case was voluntary manslaughter,” said Taylan Tanay, the ÇHD Istanbul branch head, adding that the T-shirt Okey was wearing at time of the incident was never recovered.

Meanwhile, Istanbul Bar Association’s Human Rights Center head Erdem İlker Mutlu said the social outcomes of the punishment would be heavier for the former police officer.

“Although the court reduced Yıldız’s imprisonment, he can’t work as a civil servant anymore,” Mutlu said, adding that civil servant employment rules prevented this. (Hürriyet Daily News, Dec 14, 2011)

Turkey top of list on rights violations in EU

Turkey led all of Europe in terms of the number of cases at the European Court of Human Rights that were related to violations of rights between 1959 and 2010, according to recent numbers released by the court.

The most violated right in Turkey is the right to be judged fairly, according to the statistics.

In the 1990s, 90 percent of the cases against Turkey were opened because of the country’s alleged violations of the right to life and the prohibition against torture; now, however, the country is most often charged due to long periods of imprisonment without conviction and violations of the right to a fair trial.

Turkey has been ordered to pay compensation in 2,245 out of 2,753 cases related to the infringement.

The European court currently has 153,850 pending cases on its books; Russia tops the list, while Turkey is second at 16,800.

The court had 15,200 cases pending against Ankara in 2010, but the number has increased this year.

Meanwhile, the European court recently ordered Turkey to pay compensation of 18,000 euros to the family of Ekrem Kurt, who committed suicide during his military service in 2007, according to reports.

Although Kurt was diagnosed with a neurotic disorder, he was still drafted into the military, according to reports. On March 6, 2007, Kurt was found at his guard post with a bullet wound to the head. (Anatolia News Agency, December 13, 2011)

22 Releases in Hopa Trial

28 people stand trial in Ankara in the context of their protest actions in Turkey's capital against the massive police intervention in the course of anti-government demonstrations in Hopa (eastern Black Sea coast) on 31 May 2011.

At the Friday (9 December) hearing of the case, the court decided to release all 22 detained defendants pending trial.

The defendants are charged with "membership of the illegal armed terrorist organizations THKP-C (Turkey's People's Liberation Party-Front), Revolutionary Path, Revolutionary Youth".

Defence lawyer Ayhan Erdoğan said in the first part of the Friday session that a terrorist organization did not have to be a left-wing organization but could also occur within the state. The students were alleged to be members of organizations of the People's Liberation Front of Turkey, Revolutionary Path and Revolutionary Youth that did not exist, the lawyer claimed. Therefore, Erdoğan found it wrong to have the case handled by a special authority court, he concluded.

The lawyer continued that since there was no illegal organization there was no need for a special authority court. He requested the court decide for lack of jurisdiction and the release of the defendants. Public Prosecutor Hakan Yüksel on the other hand put forward that the defendants were active on behalf of the illegal organization without being a member of it and demanded to reject the request for their release.

When the court decided for a ten-minute intermission in order to evaluate the request for lack of jurisdiction, the prosecutor tried to leave the court room as well. The defence lawyers and people in the audience protested his move since it evoked the impression as if he might try to influence the decision of the court board. Thereupon, the prosecutor stayed in the court room.

The court board dismissed the request for jurisdiction according to Articles 250 and 252 of the Criminal Procedure Law and Article 1 of the Anti-Terror Law (TMK).

Prosecutor Yüksel demanded to summon the law enforcement officers who were involved in the incident to court to be heard as witnesses. Yüksel also requested to release defendants Ozan Sürer, Eda Dişkaya, Cüneyt Çakır, Göksel Ilgın and Ferhat Konukçu since the nature of crime had changed and to keep the other defendants in detention.

The court board decided for the release of all 22 detained defendants and postponed the hearing. The families of the detained defendants were delighted by the decision and some of their mothers started crying with relief.

Supporters of the defendants who came to Ankara from different places expressed their contentment with the decision for release in a meeting at the Abdi İpekçi Park. About 2000 people came together and shouted slogans. The crowd carried banners of political parties and organizations such as the Youth Opposition, Community Centres, Socialist Democracy Party (SDP) or Communist Party of Turkey (TKP). (BIA, Atakan FOÇA - Gökhan KESKİN, 12 December 2011)

Scary picture of human rights violations in Turkey

Data about the increasing number of violations of human rights in Turkey presents a scary picture of human rights violation in Turkey.

Human Rights Association (İHD) launched a silent action to draw attention on this depressing picture and presented a list which contents the demands for promoting human rights and freedom of speech in Turkey.

İHD İstanbul Branch Chair Abdülbaki Boğa made a statement about Turkey’s human rights records in 2011. He underlined that human rights defenders do not want to be defendants in courts but to explain freely what they want for the sake of peoples in Turkey in the squares.

“Judiciary’s poor credibility because of Turkish Prime Minister’s manipulation is getting decrease, particularly after huge wave of arrest of Kurdish politicians. Thousands of them were jailed while same judges’ punishing the rapists with tragicomic imprisonments, heavy punishments for conscientious objectors, police’s unproportional force against demonstrators, etc. are the most important parts of this black sides of Turkish human rights picture,” said Boğa and summarized the main points of the violations in 2011 until end of November as follows;

- 330 people died during clashes. 19 people died because of extrajudicial execution and by unknown perpetrators. 6 died 6,800 detained, 3,800 were jailed during meetings and demonstrations.

- 812 applications were made for torture and maltreatment.

- The total number of prisoners is 122,404. 251 of them wait for being released due to terminal diseases.

- The total number of imprisoned journalists is 71.

- Violation against women, unemployment and poor social rights of workers become worse

- No demands of Alevites accepted.

According to the latest data gathered by Human Rights Foundation of Turkey (TIHV); while 330 people lost their lives in clashes and over 450 torture applications were made in 2011, 12 human rights defenders are currently held under arrest, six people were killed and 271 wounded by security forces, 71 journalists were put in prison and the number of banned websites exceeded 15 thousand within this process, the number of arrested Kurdish politicians and human right defenders has reached 5,000 towards the end of the year.

However, the European Court of Human Rights’ (ECHR) 2010 data showed that Turkey is on the first place in the list of countries with highest rate of human rights violations. The number of applications made from Turkey was 2,488 in 2005; 2,328 in 2006; 2,830 in 2007; 3,706 in 2008; 4,474 in 2009 and 5,821 in 2010 while the number of ongoing cases from Turkey was 15,200 last year.

According to the Human Rights Association (İHD) Diyarbakir Branch 2011 mid-term report on the situation of human rights in the Kurdish region registered 16,482 cases of human rights violation in the first six months of 2011, against 13,219 cases over the same period of 2010. The report recorded 1010 cases of torture and ill-treatment in the first six months of the year in the Kurdish region alone, against 433 in 2010. The association denounced an increase of 200% in the cases of torture, arrests and violent police interventions against demonstrators.

In addition, Peace and Democracy Party (BDP) Batman Deputy Ayla Akat Ata had a press release during the session of Turkey’s Grand National Assembly (TBMM). Criticizing the ruling party, Ata underlined that according to European Unions’ figures, Turkey placed in the first line among all countries of the world, regarding the total number of political arrests in September when more than 12,000 people were taken into custody. (DIHA, December 12, 2011)

UN Rapporteur: "Judicial Practice is Problematic in Turkey"

The UN Special Rapporteur on the Independence of Judges and Lawyers, Gabriela Knaul, visited Turkey from 10 to 14 October 2011 at the invitation of the Government and included Ankara, Istanbul and Diyarbakir. Her preliminary report was now also published in Turkish.

The main purpose of the visit was to assess a series of judicial reforms recently undertaken by the Government. Other issues assessed were access to justice, the availability and effectiveness of legal defence and the legal profession, as well as fair trial guarantees.

The independence of the Judiciary

"The 2009 Judicial Reform Strategy and the Constitutional amendments adopted in 2010 have represented, as a whole, positive steps to strengthen the structural independence of the judiciary. Nonetheless, challenges remain in some areas to guarantee, in practice, the effective independence and impartiality of judges, prosecutors and lawyers. In addition, the implementation of these reforms should be accelerated", the Special Rapporteur said.

It was stressed "that it is the duty of all governmental and other institutions to respect and observe the independence of the judiciary so as to avoid any kind of political, institutional or social control or influence which could affect their capacity to decide on matters independently and impartially, on the basis of facts and in accordance with the law".

"Women are increasingly entering into the judicial career, though I have not seen many appointed at higher levels, which is an element to be addressed".

Access to justice

"Almost unanimously judges and prosecutors have called my attention to the issue of workload and a backlog of cases, which is of course among the main causes of delays in the proceedings. This structural problem also affects the citizens' effective access to justice, as justice delayed is justice denied" according to Knaul.

Procedural guarantees in anti-terrorism legislation

"The investigation, prosecution and trial of cases related to terrorism and organized crime is within the competence of the so-called Heavy Penal Special Court or Heavy Penal Court with 'special authority' (...). I am particularly concerned at the lack of respect for fundamental procedural guarantees in these cases, and notably at the restrictions to the right to defence".

"Furthermore, there is also a limitation of the number of lawyers that can assist an individual charged under the anti-terrorism legislation and access to documents pertaining to the case can be equally restricted".

"Furthermore, there is also a limitation of the number of lawyers that can assist an individual charged under the anti-terrorism legislation and access to documents pertaining to the case can be equally restricted".

Lawyers

"Another concern that I heard quite regularly is that, in the daily performance of their duties, lawyers are not treated at the same level as judges and prosecutors".

"Another example of the difficulties that lawyers face to properly carry out their work are the obstacles posed to the effective performance of their professional functions by the restrictions mentioned above, such as limitations to access case-files, non-disclosure of evidence, delays in the contact with their clients, and undue identification of the lawyer with his/her clients or the clients' causes as a result of discharging their functions. (...)" (BIA, 9 December 2011)

Gov’t under fire for bill on financing terrorism

The three opposition parties in Turkey’s Parliament have united in their objection to a bill to prevent terrorism financing amid worries that the government may misuse it.

The Nationalist Movement Party (MHP) joined the Republican People’s Party (CHP) and the Peace and Democracy Party (BDP) in opposing the bill yesterday as a debate on the draft continued. “We certainly support measures to prevent the financing of terrorism. But even some journalists have been counted as terrorists for attempting to write books. That’s why we have concerns on this bill,” a MHP deputy said.

The draft bill includes strict regulations such as freezing the accounts of those funding terrorist organizations, as well as heavy penalties and fines. It envisages jail sentences of up to 10 years for those convicted of funding terrorist organizations or terrorists, even if the money is not directly used for a terrorist crime.

A provision that would open the door for the freezing of assets without a court ruling has come under particular criticism.

Raising misgivings about the scope of the bill, CHP deputy Mahmut Tanal said the bill included no concrete definition of terrorism and might be used by the government to oppress the opposition. The CHP’s Mehmet Siyam Kesimoğlu, meanwhile, said the bill would become a “bullying instrument” in government hands.

“If you give a dinner to a nongovernmental organization and one of its members is on trial under the Anti-Terror Law, you will be considered as a financier of terrorism. It’s unacceptable,” BDP deputy Altan Tan said.

Another lawmaker from the BDP, Sırrı Süreyya Önder, said the United States demanded the bill in order to cut off the financial channels of Islamic organizations but added that the ruling Justice and Development Party (AKP) intended to use it to suppress “the Kurdish opposition.”

If passed, the bill will also serve as a legal basis for police raids on BDP-held municipalities, Önder said.

Following the completion of the debate at the Interior Affairs Commission, the bill will go to the Justice Commission before being voted upon in Parliament. (Hürriyet Daily News, 7 December 2011)

Blame on former police chief Ağar for extrajudicial killings

Former National Intelligence Organization (MİT) Counterterrorism Unit head Mehmet Eymür, who was questioned by a special prosecutor last week, claimed in his testimony that a team that included former Police Chief Mehmet Ağar, special ops units and military men was responsible for carrying out extrajudicial killings, racketeering and kidnapping.

According to Eymür's testimony obtained by the Taraf daily, he claimed that Ağar and his team were heading that “formation.” Ağar, who has been sentenced to five years in prison on charges of establishing a criminal organization, had claimed in his testimony that there were “secrets” inside the state and “if a brick is pulled out, the whole wall would come down.”

Ağar, who said following his conviction that he is confident the Supreme Court of Appeals will overturn his sentence, is also accused of having been involved in crimes disclosed after the Susurluk affair of 1996, which exposed links between state officials, politicians and organized crime.

Taraf's headline asserted that it was Eymür who “pulled out a brick.”

Eymür, who started his career at MİT in 1966 in İstanbul, provides in his testimony a web of relations among many people whose names have been related to extrajudicial killings. Eymür said that he had a long-time and close relationship with Ağar, who sometimes stayed at his home when Eymür was still a bachelor. Eymür said that Ağar had many connections and that among his “friends” were mafia related people, whose names are included in MİT's reports.

“Since I was responsible for contraband trade at the time, I found out in reports coming from Interpol that some foreign contraband traders would call the İstanbul police, and when I found out whose number they were calling, I learned that they were calling Ağar's extension. I warned Ağar and then tried to stay away from him,” Eymür said.

Eymür went on to say that when he became the head of the special intelligence unit at MİT in May 1994 he was aware of the murders of Macit Baskın, head of the Altındağ Registry Office, Namık Erdoğan, ex-head of the supervisory board of the Ministry of Health, and Faik Candan, a lawyer.

“I don't remember those events fully but I have knowledge about the murder of lawyer Yusuf Ekinci,” Eymür said, and added that “Yeşil,” an alias used by Mahmut Yıldırım, a hitman who is believed to have carried out most of the “dirty work” of the illegal formations inside the state, was related to the murder.

Yeşil managed to remain elusive for much of his life and has been presumed dead for many years. Eymür said that Yeşil initially worked for MİT in Elazığ, but was not allowed to do so later as he was “out of control.” Eymür also said that Yeşil started to work at JİTEM, an illegal intelligence unit secretly founded in the '90s to fight Kurdistan Workers' Party (PKK) terrorism “more effectively.” JİTEM's existence was officially acknowledged only this year, despite overwhelming evidence of its existence surfacing long before the official acknowledgement by the Interior Ministry, which said in a response to a query filed by a court hearing a JİTEM-related trial that the organization “had existed,” although observers suspect it might still be in operation.

“Yeşil was given identification cards. Some of his cards even included the title of the ‘Prime Ministry Intelligence.' He worked with JİTEM up until 1995, and then, since he was out of control, he was moved to Ankara. In Ankara, Yeşil was introduced to me as he was going to be useful for the capture of Abdullah Öcalan. I asked him if he would work for us and he accepted. I told him that he would not have a duty inside the country. At the time he was not a sought after person by the police. I later learned that he was involved in many extrajudicial killings. He was involved in many events with gendarmerie officer Aytekin Özel,” Eymür said.

Yeşil was detained by an order from then Ankara Police Chief Orhan Taşanlar in relation to the murder of two Iranians.

“I questioned Yeşil about this. He said he was not involved in this event. … We found out that those Iranians were killed by Abdullah Çatlı and his team,” Eymür said, referring to Çatlı, an internationally wanted criminal who died in the Susurluk accident which revealed connections of the illegal structures within intelligence units and the police force.

Eymür also claimed that MİT has detailed logs and reports on the acts of Tarık Ümit, a MİT informant. Eymür said he went to Ümit's home in İstanbul upon his request.

“He told me that he has a 40-member list for people to be killed. Some names were crossed out, like Behçet Cantürk, who was already murdered. He told me that the list was given to him by the 'formation' that I mentioned before. So I reported this to the MİT Undersecretariat. We started to be interested in how those extra-judicial killings occurred and started to use Tarık Ümit,” Eymür said adding that both Yeşil and Ümit were used within the procedures of the MİT, not on Eymür's personal initiative.

Eymür also stated that murders of Şahin Arslan, Fevzi Arslan and Medet Serhat were committed by the “formation” he mentioned.

“I know Serhat since I was the one who questioned him. He was pro-Kurdish and Cantürk's lawyer. He is respected in the Kurdish community. Since he was not involved in violence, his advice was taken by the MİT in regards to the solution of the Kurdish problem. However, the formation headed by Ağar, Korkut Eken and İbrahim Şahin had him killed under the banner of ‘fighting with terrorism'.”

Eymür also accused Hanefi Avcı, İstanbul intelligence chief of the police at the time, for having responsibility in Serhat's murder.

“He never touched Çatlı even though he had Çatlı's house searched. He never worked toward finding those responsible for extra-judicial killings,” Eymür stated.

According to Eymür, former Prime Minister Tansu Çiller was used by Ağar.

“I know that Çiller was supporting the anti-terrorism policies with good will, and I don't think she would ever gave orders like ‘kill this person, take that person's money. But since she had less experience in the state affairs, Ağar and his team might have pushed Çiller and [her husband] Özer Çiller into making some mistakes.”

Eymür was questioned in relation to the July testimony of Ayhan Çarkın, a former member of the National Police Department's Special Operations Unit, who had said that he had information about the killing of some men who were Erdoğan, Ekinci and Candan. Çarkın said he and some other colleagues took part in the killings. Çarkın was arrested and an investigation was launched after his confession.

The recent detention of Eymür and his release after being banned from travelling abroad came as part of the investigation into Çarkın's confessions. Şahin was earlier arrested as part of the same probe. (TODAY'S ZAMAN, 7 December 2011)

Journalist Mater talked of murders by unknown people

Unidentified people wearing a coat approached their victims from behind. A bullet shot in the neck and on to the next killing.

In a presentation about murders by unknown people, journalist Nadire Mater gave voice to the journalist killed in Kurdistan. Mater, co-founder of Bianet and author of best seller "Mehmet's book", made the presentation to the “Commission for Investigating Terror Events and Violation of Right to Life” affiliated to Human Rights Investigation Commission of Parliament.

Mater described the environment of Cizre during Newroz celebrations in 1992 as follows; “We were afraid. We even had our photos taken to have a memory as we were almost sure that one of us was going to die. Still, the white clothes waved that day didn’t help to prevent the death of Sabah reporter İzzet Kezer.” Arguing that the year 1992 was the darkest year for journalists, Mater noted that among 76 journalists, who were killed between 1905 and 2011, 14 were murdered in 1992.

Mater added that the years of 1993 and 1994 were the years of closed papers, murdered journalists and unidentified murders. Mater recalled those years in these terms: “10.00-10.30 in the morning and 16.00-16.30 in the evening were the hours murders by unknown people took place in Diyarbakır. Unidentified people wearing a coat approached their victims from behind. A bullet shot in the neck and on to the next killing.”

According to the Human Rights Foundation of Turkey’s database on the victims of lost in custody between the years of 1980-2000, Mater remarked that 757 people disappeared in the last 20 years. Most of these events were witnessed in Diyarbakır, Lice, Istanbul and Cizre, added Mater.

Nadire Mater is a founder and advisor of BIA, the Independent Communication Network, a ten-year-old project that brings together more than 130 newspapers and TV and radio stations to offer honest, locally based reporting on Turkey. Much of the content is available online at Bianet.org. Mater is also known for Mehmet’s Book, a collection of testimonies from Turkish soldiers who served in the southeast, which she published in 1999. (ANF, 9 December 2011)

Students released by court as protests simmer

Twenty-two of the defendants who were under arrest were released by an Ankara court late yesterday.

A crowd of at least 3,000 people, including lawmakers of the Republican People’s Party (CHP) and the Peace and Democracy Party (BDP), academics, prominent actors and activists who came from all over Turkey, demonstrated outside Ankara’s main courthouse as the trial began Dec. 9.

The defendants, most of whom have been behind bars for 6six months, have been accused of being members of leftist terrorist groups solely on the basis of leftist publications discovered in their homes, the indictment has revealed.

Aged between 20 and 31, the youths were arrested after they took part in violent street protests in Ankara May 31, erupting in reaction to a heavy-handed crackdown on a demonstration earlier that day in the Black Sea town of Hopa. Retired teacher Metin Lokumcu died of a heart attack after police used tear gas against the demonstrators who had taken to the streets during Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdoğan’s visit to Hopa.

At the first hearing of the case, the defendants rejected the accusations and demanded they be released pending trial.

“Even demonstrations in solidarity with Palestine and our protests against the occupation of Iraq were considered illegal,” one of the defendants Kadir Aydoğan told the judge. “One of the police officers who took me into custody said, ‘Fifteen of you will be arrested. You will learn a lesson when you stay in jail several months.’ Then, we, 15 people, were arrested that day,” he said.

The case hit headlines after it emerged the indictment described leftist associations Halkevleri (People’s Houses) and Öğrenci Kolektifleri (Students’ Collectives), which were at the forefront of the May 31 protest, as extensions of the outlawed Turkish People’s Liberation Party-Front (THKP-C), the now-defunct radical group that led Turkey’s leftist movement in the 1970s. No weapons have been discovered in the probe, and the defendants face no charges of armed action.

Among the objects, vthe prosecutor lists as incriminating evidence are banners, sticks, an umbrella, a checkered scarf, books by Marx and Lenin, posters of Mahir Çayan and Deniz Gezmiş, the iconic leaders of Turkey’s leftist movement, and leaflets calling for cheaper transport and food at university campuses.

The indictment said the protesters held an unauthorized gathering, carried a banner calling the ruling Justice and Development Party (AKP) “murderer,” dismantled sidewalks and pelted the police with sticks and stones, leaving 65 riot police injured.

The defendants have been charged with membership in a terrorist organization, spreading propaganda for a terrorist organization, deliberately injuring a public employee, damaging public property and resisting security forces. (hurriyetdailynews.com, Dec 10, 2011)

Country-Wide Protests of Workers, Architects, Engineers, Doctors...

Protest actions against lengthy detention periods and mass custodies were organized in 40 provinces all over Turkey on Saturday (3 December).

The Confederation of Progressive Trade Unions (DİSK), the Turkey Union of Chambers of Architects and Engineers (TMMOB), the Turkish Medical Association (TBB) and the Confederation of Trade Unions of Public Employees (KESK) had called for the country-wide protest.

In Istanbul, a large number of people joined the demonstration that went from Takism Square along Istiklal Avenue to the Galatasaray Square. The decision for the mass protest was taken after 25 KESK members were sentenced to imprisonment of six years and three months each on charges of "membership of a terrorist organization". The group of convicts also includes the President of KESK, Lami Özgen.

CHP and BDP voiced the same requests

The demonstration was supported by many organizations such as the Peace and Democracy Party (BDP), The Freedom and Solidarity Party (ÖDP), the Labour Party (EMEP), the Democratic Congress of the People (HDK), the Turkey Communist Party (TKP), the Socialist Democracy Party (SDP) or the Initiative 'Who is Next'. The Republican Peoples' Party (CHP) Provincial Administration and CHP Deputy Chair Erdoğan Toprak joined the protest as well.

Four main demands were voiced during the demonstration.

* Special Authority Courts should be abolished.

* The Anti-Terror Law (TMK) should be lifted.

* Mass custodies and arrests should stop.

* Detainees should be released.

"Turkey turned into an open prison"

In a brief sit-down protest on the way, the 2,000 demonstrators drew attention to arrested academic Büşra Ersanlı, publisher Ragıp Zarakolu, journalists Ahmet Şık, Nedim Şener, Mustafa Balbay, unionist Mustafa Avcı, detained KESK members and Kurdish detainees. Their names were read out one by one and the crowd shouted "Here!" for each one of them.

KESK President Özgen read out a press release on Galatasaray Square at the end of the demonstration.

Özgen claimed that Turkey had turned into an open prison. He held the ruling Justice and Development Party (AKP) responsible for long periods of detention, arbitrary custodies and emanating fear in society.

The joint press release touched upon the following main points:

* Everyone has become a target of the AKP including elected persons, dissident journalists like Nedim Şener and Ahmet Şık, university lecturers, students, representatives of political parties and of democratic mass organizations and municipalities who are not members of the AKP.

* Detention has turned into punishment. The AKP both arrests people and deprives them from their right to defence.

* The Union of Kurdish Communities (KCK) became the latest bogyman to legitimize the operations of the AKP. Everybody who wants a democratic and peaceful solution of the Kurdish question is in danger of being arrested as an alleged KCK member. The latest examples for this are Prof Büşra Ersanlı, publisher Ragıp Zarakolu, Deniz Zarakolu and former KESK Secretary General Mustafa Avcı.

* Special authority judges and prosecutors break the law on behalf of their special status. Special Authority Courts should be removed. Mass arrests have to stop. (BIA, Işıl CİNMEN, 5 December 2011)

Towards unveiling notorious rulings of Courts of Independence

Parliament is currently working on the archives of the early Republican era and the controversial rulings of the notorious Courts of Independence in a move that all parties in Parliament say will contribute to the transparency of the Turkish state and make the country confront dark incidents in its history. The latest debate on the Dersim massacre, which took place in the early years of the republic when the state violently suppressed a rebellion in today's Tunceli, killing thousands of innocent people, has raised calls for Turkey to face up to similar tragedies in its history.

In a historic move, Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdoğan last month apologized for the Dersim massacre on behalf of the state, which was a first in the history of Turkey. He also released a number of state documents about the incident and read excerpts from archive documents related to the massacre.

There is growing pressure on the state to confront the notorious rulings of the Courts of Independence, which were founded during the War of Independence to prosecute those who stood against the new system of government. These courts were located in Ankara, Eskişehir, Konya, Isparta, Sivas, Kastamonu, Pozantı and Diyarbakır. All of them were closed in 1921. A total of 1,352 people were executed by these courts, according to reports. Parliament is currently working on the archives of this court -- 914,695 pages of documents and 158 old notebooks.

Toward the end of the 23rd term Parliament when Speaker of the Parliament was Justice and Development Party’s (AK Party) Mehmet Ali Şahin, an eight-member team began translating these documents into modern Turkish and expect to finish within two to two-and-a-half years, at which time the speaker’s office will decide whether the archives will be open to the public.

Deputies from political parties represented in Parliament told Today’s Zaman they strongly support the opening of state archives, particularly those pertaining to the Court of Independence, adding that such a move is necessary if Turkey is to become a transparent state. AK Party Adıyaman deputy Mehmet Metiner said the opening of state archives to the public is an obligation, while he said the rulings of the courts were just an example of “judicial tyranny.” “Opening the state archives is an obligation that cannot be deferred so that we can correctly read and understand our history. The rulings of the Courts of Independence are examples of judicial tyranny. Several generations were kept away from facts on this issue through the lies of history. The young generations will at least not grow up with the same lies. We need to know what really took place in our history,” said Metiner.

“The documents, which will be translated meticulously, should be open to all not only to historians or researchers who want to study them,” suggested Metiner.

Republican People’s Party (CHP) İstanbul deputy Sezgin Tanrıkulu said his party supports the opening of the archives pertaining to Courts of Independence to attain a transparent society.

“After a certain amount of time passed, such archives should be open to historians, researchers, hence to the public. Opening state archives will be a positive move to understand the background of the trials in the first years of the republic,” said Tanrıkulu.

The CHP deputy added that opening archival documents about these courts to the public will not be sufficient alone; he called for the opening of other archives in the Prime Ministry and the General Staff. The archives of the General Staff are closed tight in Turkey, and the confidentiality of these archives cannot be broken -- even for major coup cases. Pro-Kurdish Peace and Democracy Party (BDP) Şırnak deputy Hasip Kaplan voiced his party’s approval of the opening of state archives without any delay, saying that historical facts based on documents should be presented to young people. The Nationalist Movement Party (MHP) is also in favor of the opening of state archives, including those pertaining to the Dersim massacre and Courts of Independence, to the public. MHP Kayseri deputy Yusuf Halaçoğlu, who is also a historian, told Today’s Zaman that the archival documents of the Courts of Independence should be opened immediately without waiting for the completion of their translation. “They should be opened to the public without waiting for their translation into modern Turkish. If I were to work on these archives, I would prefer to look at the original texts, not the translations,” said Halaçoğlu.

Courts reopened after Sheikh Said Rebellion

The Sheikh Said Rebellion took place in 1924-25, after which the courts were reopened and the rebels tried. The courts remained open for some time thereafter, with pending charges against the dissidents being cited as a reason for their need.

Light to be shed on Muslim cleric İskilipli Atıf Hoca’s case

State archives concerning the Courts of Independence could shed light on the tragic killing of İskilipli Atıf Hoca, a Muslim cleric who was executed in February 1926 following the ruling of a Court of Independence in the early republican period for authoring a book that included his position against a hat law. According to a report in the Star daily on Tuesday, Atıf Hoca’s trial and execution is nothing but a judicial scandal. Although he wrote the book against the law, which made wearing Western-style hats mandatory 1.5 years before the law took affect, Atıf Hoca was tried retrospectively, which is a violation of the law. Secondly, although a prosecutor demanded a sentence of three to 15 years, one day before the final court ruling on Atıf Hoca, the presiding judge of the Court of Independence ruled for his execution, diverting greatly from the demand of the prosecutor. (todayszaman.com, ALİ ASLAN KILIÇ, 6 December 2011)

Mass arrests of trade unionists in Turkey

Peace in Kurdistan has received this urgent message from Mehmat Bozgeyik, the General Secretary of EGITIM SEN (Teachers Union) who has been forced to cancel his visit in December organised by UNISON South Lanarkshire and Peace in Kurdistan Campaign.

The message describes the unprecedented pressures facing trade unionists in Turkey at the present time. While many union leaders have been arrested and charged, we are informed that 25 have been sentenced in the latest development that took place on 28 November. As a result of the urgency of the situation, our visitor Mehmat Bozgeyik has been forced to postpone his visit to the UK.

During his visit Mr Bozgeyik was due to meet with leaders of the teaching unions in the UK, including the National Union of Teachers (NUT) and Educational Institute of Scotland (EIS), as well as trade unionists and parliamentarians.

"We are very disappointed that Mr. Bozgeyik has had to postpone his planned visit. We hoped to learn a great deal about the situation in Turkey concerning trade unionists and the campaign for Kurdish language education for children which the Turkish authorities still do not permit. Mr Bozgeyik had recently visited Van where earthquakes have killed hundreds of people and we hoped to learn more about the situation facing the survivors. However, we have perhaps already learned a great deal about the situation due to the repression of Mr. Bozgeyik’s union comrades which has caused him to postpone his visit," says Stephen Smellie from UNISON South Lanarkshire.

We would like to appeal to trade unionists in Britain to demonstrate their solidarity with Kurdish trade unionists, now coming under intolerable attack from the political establishment in Turkey. The arrests and detentions of union activists and leaders are part of a plan by the ruling AKP whose aim is to silence the opposition and make their organisations ineffective. Already journalists, lawyers, politicians, academics and youth leaders have all been targeted and are being subjected to police action and prosecution. They need our support and we appeal to you to show solidarity by doing whatever you can in the union movement and by raising the issue with British politicians.

“Dear Colleagues and Friends

One of the most severe attacks on our confederation (KESK and our union EĞİTİM SEN) is the operation of mass detention and arrests against our leaders and members. As a result of this operation our General President, Former General President, our former Women’s Secretary, our union EGITIM SEN's former and present Women’s Secretaries, three members of our General Board and 31 of our associates most of whom worked in the administration of our unions' Izmir branch, are being detained and arrested. Our activities as a union and our democratic activities have been subjected to investigation and court cases are pending. Our colleagues were held in prison for six months and were subsequently released in the first hearing. Although our friends were released by the court pending a trial and as far as the case against them is concerned, everyone, especially those who work in the legal profession, expected our friends be acquitted. However, it was as if "a mysterious hand" interfered with the judicial process and a short time before the final hearing two judges concerned with the trial were replaced. As a result 25 of our administrators and members were each sentenced to six years and three months in prison on 28 November 2011 at the final hearing in Izmir. Campaigns have already been held in opposition to these sentences by trade unions and civil rights organizations in Turkey.

Any opposition which does not share the AKP's viewpoint or acts in line with their political programme are considered enemies and are targeted by the AKP. Elected officials, university lecturers, journalists, political party representatives, NGO representatives, lawyers, youth, non-AKP municipalities, in short all opposition forces, are now falling within the AKP's target.

A quick look at the daily detention numbers is sufficient to demonstrate the accuracy of this assertion. In recent days people from the opposition are being taken into custody, tried, and arrested within a few hours' time and this is happening almost every day.

They want us to submit under fear of "when is it going to be my turn?" Our houses, telephones, organisations, publishing and political party offices, unions, and even our private lives, are now under the surveillance of the cemaat-controlled police.

We want to state clearly and issue a strong warning that this is the way to fascism. The aim is to create a society silent and dumbed into subservience. The organised democratic forces including members of the union movement are facing an unprecedented wave of attacks and pressure. The fascist tendencies at work in the country are now being institutionalised. These tendencies are led from the centre and according to a specific programme.

Our administrators and members who had been sentenced are:

KESK General President Lami ÖZGEN, KESK former Central Management Board member Songül MORSÜMBÜL, EĞİTİM SEN Central Management Board member Sakine Esen YILMAZ, EĞİTİM SEN former Central Management Board member Gülçin İSBERT, EĞİTİM SEN former Central Management Board member Elif Akgül ATEŞ, EĞİTİM SEN former Central Supervisory Board member Haydar DENİZ, EĞİTİM SEN Central Office Educational Branch member Mehmet Hanifi KURUŞ, BTS former Secretary General Hasan SOYSAL, EĞİTİM SEN Branch Management Board Member Nihat KENİ, EĞİTİM SEN Branch Director Mustafa BEYAZBAL, SES İzmir Branch Management Board Member Yüksel ÖZMEN, BES member Meryem ÇAĞ, EĞİTİM SEN members and former branch administrators, workplace representatives Mine ÇETİNKAYA, Aziz AKİKOL, Hasan UMAR, Harun GÜNDEŞ, Aydın GÜNGÖRMEZ, Süeda DEMİR, Şermin GÜNDEŞ, Şeyhmus BELEK, Erkan DENİZ, İsmail DEMİR, Mahir Engin ÇELİK, retired worker and former union activist Abdulcelil DEMİR, EĞİTİM SEN former member, retired teacher Ahmet DEMİROĞLU.

I would like to appeal for your support and I urge you to do whatever you can to campaign to raise these issues in your country and to create awareness internationally about the injustices taking place inside Turkey today.”

It is therefore with sadness that I have to inform you that I been compelled to cancel my long-planned visit.

Mehmat Bozgeyik, the General Secretary of EGITIM SEN

We urge you to take immediate action to defend trade unionists in Turkey! Thanks!

PLEASE SEND SUPPORT MESSAGES TO EGITIM SEN !!!

Estella Schmid, Peace in Kurdistan Campaign

Estella24@tiscali.co.uk

Newspaper for Detained Students

The "Gelecek Hapsedilmez" newspaper was published on 26 November in order to support more than 500 students who are currently being detained in Turkish prisons. "The future cannot be jailed" is the meaning of the title of the newspaper prepared by students who are members of the Turkish Communist Party (TKP). It aims to be the voice of all students in detention on behalf of Cüneyt Çakır, TKP member and student of the Middle East Technical University (ODTÜ) Department of Philosophy, who is being detained at the Sincan F Type Prison.

The "Gelecek Hapsedilmez" contains numerous messages of support from many institutions and student communities. The senders include Nurettin Abacıoğlu, head of the steering board of the University Councils Association; Himmet Şahin, head of the steering board of the ODTÜ Alumni Association; Prof Ahmet İnam from the Çakır University who is a member of staff at the ODTÜ Department of Philosophy and various student communities from ODTÜ.

The World Federation of Democratic Youth (WFDY) issued a statement in the paper and condemned the arrest of students in Turkey and the oppression of the left. The Contemporary Lawyers Association (ÇHD) contributed with a compilation of their report on detained students.

The last page of the newspaper was reserved for a call to support the 23 people, among them14 students, at their hearing on 9 December in the context of the protests at Hopa (eastern Black Sea coast) on 31 May. Tragic-comic details of the Hopa indictment are published as well.

What can be the mission of the "Gelecek Hapsedilemez" at a time when custodies and arrests related to certain sections of society are going on in Turkey?

Bosporus University student Engin Karaman who helped in the publication of this paper said that the detained students were isolated and that they aimed at depicting their troubles in the newspaper. In Karaman's opinion, all detained students have in common that they are opposition.

Karaman explained, "These students are struggling for Turkey to advance into another direction. They have projects for a different Turkey and missions for Turkey's future. With the "Gelecek Hapsedilmez" newspaper we tried to say that these detained students are Turkey's future. We thought the paper would function to become partners with our troubles and to talk about our worries. We prepared the newspaper in solidarity with Cüneyt Çakır and to clarify his matter in particular". (BIA, Emel GÜLCAN, 30 November 2011)

Pression sur les médias / Pressure on the Media Zarakolu to be reunited with son behind bars

Authorities have accepted prominent publisher Ragıp Zarakolu’s longstanding request to be placed in the same prison ward as his son, Deniz Zarakolu, who was also arrested as part of the Kurdistan Communities Union (KCK) case like his father.

“If conscience now serves as a justification for unfair arrests in this country, the gravity of the point we have reached makes itself felt once more. If lies pass as the truth, and denials have replaced apologies, then everything is rotten,” Ragıp Zarakolu told the Hürriyet Daily News in a recent letter.

Deniz Zarakolu, a 36-year-old Ph.D. student at Istanbul’s Bilgi University, was transferred Dec. 28 from a prison in the Thracian province of Edirne to another prison in the northwestern province of Kocaeli, where his father, Ragıp Zarakolu, is currently being kept under arrest.

“We are living in a country that has turned into a field of death. I could not have born the weight of remaining outside [of prison] any longer. Greetings to you all; I am delighted to be inside. As you know, they like the dead and the underdog in this country and turn life into hell for those still alive,” said Ragıp Zarakolu.

Human rights activist, writer, publisher and journalist Ragıp Zarakolu is also a member of the Turkish PEN Center, as well as a recipient of numerous prestigious international awards. He was arrested on Nov. 1, 2011, alongside prominent academic Büşra Ersanlı and dozens of other suspects upon the order of an Istanbul court over his alleged links with the KCK, the alleged urban wing of the outlawed Kurdistan Workers’ Party (PKK).

“As 2011 is drawing to a close, or being expended away with ignorance, boorishness and gauche to be more precise, Turkey has also made it among the [the world’s] worst countries in terms of the freedom of thought and expression,” Tarık Günersel, a member of PEN International Board and the president of the Turkish PEN Center, told the Daily News.

Six PEN members, including Zarakolu, are currently serving time behind bars, according to Günersel.

“Over 100 of our journalists are in prison. More than 500 students are still under arrest merely for unfurling banners. Statues are getting torn down into pieces, while writers, translators and publishers are being shoved into prisons,” he said. “Anxiety and self-censorship is growing more widespread, while critical thinkers censor themselves even when speaking on the phone.”

Ahmet Abakay, the head of the Ankara-based Contemporary Journalists’ Association (ÇGD), also condemned Ragıp Zarakolu’s continued arrest.

“Turkey is flunking on the year 2011. The government is at ease over all these developments. Even the rulings of the European Court of Human Rights are no longer relevant. Over 100 journalists are being tried, while the files of journalists released pending trial are nearing 10,000,” Abakay told the Daily News, Vercihan Ziflioğlu, December31, 2011

Info-Türk Foundation's 2012 Freedom Award Granted to Ragip Zarakolu

Brussels, December 28, 2011

As a non-government organization contributing for over 38 years to the struggle for human rights and freedoms in Turkey, Info-Türk Foundation has decided to grant its 2012 Freedom Award to author, journalist, publisher and human rights activist Ragip Zarakolu* who is currently under arrest at the high security prison type-F in Kocaeli.

Starting to write and to contribute to intellectual life in 1968, Zarakolu is carrying on these activities for 43 years without giving any concession to political powers. Today's power which gives lessons of democracy to Arab countries attempts to make Zarakolu pay the price of this determination by throwing him at 63 years old and despite his serious health problems to a high security prison under ridiculous pretexts.

Ragip Zarakolu had already been imprisoned after the 1971 Coup. When released, together with his wife Ayse Nur Zarakolu, he opened a new horizon in the books world by founding Belge International Publishing House.

Ragip and Ayse did not only demolished the taboo of Armenian Genocide, but also made an undeniable contribution to the struggle for the democratization in Turkey by publishing hundreds of books about the injustice and discrimination of which the Kurdish people and Anatolia's all national and religious minorities have suffered for centuries.

Ragip Zarakolu also took part among the founders of the Human Rights Association of Turkey (IHD). He is currently the chairman of the Committee to Publish of the Publishers' Union of Turkey (TYB) and the representative in Turkey of the Committee to Publish of the International Publishers' Association (IPA).

Since 2005 Zarakolu has been granted "Freedom of Expression Award" by the Norwegian Writers' Union together with the Norwegian Ministry of Culture, "Thought and Freedom of Expression Award" by the Publishers' Union of Turkey, "Press Freedom" award by the Journalists' Association of Turkey and recently "Hagop Megapart Medal of Honor" by the Armenian National Library for his contribution to the recognition of Armenian history, culture and literature in Turkey.

For years Zarakolu has been invited by many countries to meetings on human rights and he participated as speaker to two conferences on freedom of thought and militarism in Turkey, organized in Brussels by Info-Türk Foundation, Assyrian Associations of Belgium, Association of Democrat Armenians in Belgium and the Kurdish Institute of Brussels.

Info-Türk Foundation's 2012 Freedom Award will be forwarded to Ragip Zarakolu by his relatives at the type-F prison in Kocaeli. The award certificate will be given to him personally at a ceremony in Brussels after his release from prison.

President of İnfo-Türk Foundation

Doğan Özgüden

*) All informations on Ragıp Zarakolu's arrest and his biography:

http://www.info-turk.be/400.htm#Ragip

http://www.info-turk.be/399.htm#Info

Le prix 2012 "Pour la liberté" de la Fondation Info-Türk à Ragip Zarakolu

Bruxelles, 28 décembre 2011

En tant qu'organisation non-gouvernementale qui, depuis plus de 38 ans, contribue à la lutte pour les droits de l'Homme et les libertés en Turquie, la Fondation Info-Türk a décidé d'attribuer le prix Info-Türk 2012 "Pour la liberté" à Ragip Zarakolu*, auteur, journaliste, éditeur et défenseur des droits de l'Homme, actuellement dans la prison de haute sécurité de type-F de Kocaeli.

Zarakolu mène ses activités de pensée et d'édition depuis 43 ans sans avoir donné aucune concession aux pouvoirs politiques. Aujourd'hui, le pouvoir actuel qui donne des leçons de démocratie aux pays arabes, tente de faire payer à Zarakolu le prix de sa détermination en l'incarcérant, à 63 ans et malgré des graves problèmes de santé, dans une prison de haute sécurité sous des prétextes ridicules.

Ragip Zarakolu avait déjà été emprisonné après le coup d'état de 1971. Après sa mise en liberté, avec son épouse Ayse Nur Zarakolu, il a ouvert un nouvel horizon dans le monde des livres par la fondation de la maison d'éditions internationale Belge.

Ragip et Ayse n'ont pas seulement démoli le tabou du génocide arménien, mais ils ont aussi apporté une contribution indéniable à la lutte pour la démocratisation en Turquie, en publiant des centaines de livres sur l'injustice et la discrimination dont le peuple kurde et toutes les minorités nationales et religieuses de l'Anatolie ont souffert pendant des siècles.

Ragip Zarakolu a également pris part à la fondation de l'Association des droits de l'Homme de Turquie (IHD). Il est actuellement le président du Comité pour la liberté de publication de l'Union des éditeurs de la Turquie (TYB) et le représentant en Turquie du Comité pour la liberté de publication de l'Union internationale des éditeurs (IPA).

En 2005, le prix "la liberté d'expression" a été conjointement attribué à Zarakolu par l'Union des écrivains norvégiens et le Ministère norvégien de la Culture. Il a également reçu le prix "la liberté de pensée et d'expression" décerné par l'Union des éditeurs de Turquie, le prix "la liberté de la presse" donné par l'Association des journalistes de Turquie et récemment il a reçu de la bibliothèque nationale arménienne la médaille d'honneur "Hagop Megapart" pour sa contribution à la reconnaissance de l'histoire, la culture et la littérature arménienne en Turquie.

Pendant des années, Zarakolu a été invité par de nombreux pays à participer à des réunions sur les droits humains. Il a participé comme conférencier à deux conférences sur la liberté de pensée et le militarisme en Turquie, organisées à Bruxelles par la Fondation Info-Türk, les Associations assyriennes de Belgique, l'Association des Arméniens démocrates en Belgique et l'Institut kurde de Bruxelles.

Le prix Info-Türk 2012 "Pour la liberté" sera remis à Ragip Zarakolu par ses proches à la prison de type-F à Kocaeli. Le certificat de prix lui sera remis personnellement lors d'une cérémonie à Bruxelles après sa libération.

* Toutes les informations sur l'arrestation de Ragip Zarakolu et sa biographie:

Dogan Özgüden

Président de la Fondation Info-Türk

* Toutes les informations sur l'arrestation de Ragip Zarakolu et sa biographie:

http://www.info-turk.be/400.htm#Ragip

http://www.info-turk.be/399.htm#Info Shame on AKP: 96 journalists in Turkish Prisons

Following the detentions within the scope of the Union of Kurdistan Communities (KCK) operations on December 20, 36 journalists have been remanded in custody for allegedly being "member of an illegal organization" by the 9th High Criminal Court in Istanbul. According to the Platfofrm for Solidarity with Journalists in Prison (TGDP), the number of the journalists in Turkish prisons has climbed to 96 with these recent arrests.

After bearing testimony to the prosecutor at Istanbul Court for over 15 hours, 42 journalists were on December 23 evening referred to the vacation court with a demand of arrest. While six of them were released on December 24 morning on conditions of trial without arrest, 36 journalists were sent to prison once again despite the lack of any confirmed criminal evidence.

Following the judgment where journalists were interrogated because of the news they made, Eylem Sürmeli (former staffer of Özgür Gündem daily), Güneş Ünsal (editor of DİHA English section), Enis Yalçın, Şeref Sümeli (Former employee of Fırat Distribution Company), Sevinç Tuncelli (former staffer of Özgür Gündem daily) and Arzu Demir (reporter of Etkin News Agency) were released on conditions of trial without arrest.

Hatice Bozkurt was released earlier while Celal Kaya (Fırat Distribution Company), Evrim Kepenek (DİHA reporter), Üfliye Özcan (Fırat Distribution Company), Hamza Sümeli (Employee of Gün Publishing House), Mustafa Özer (Associated France Press (AFP) photographer and Murat Eroğlu (former staffer of Özgür Gündem daily) were being released by the prosecutor before the trail.

The court defended the decision of arrest for 36 journalists by the reason of “strong evidence suspect” and “probability of obfuscating the evidences.”

Here the list of the detained journalists as follows;

Ramazan Pekgöz (Editor of DIHA -Diyarbakır)

Mazlum Özdemir (DIHA reporter-Diyarbakır)

Fatma Koçak (Editor in Chief, DIHA -İstanbul)

Kenan Kırkaya (DIHA Ankara Correspondent-Ankara)

Sadık Topaloğlu (DİHA reporter-Urfa)

Semiha Alankuş (Editor of DIHA -Diyarbakır)

Çağdaş Kaplan (DIHA reporter-İstanbul)

Ömer Çelik (DIHA reporter-İstanbul)

Zuhal Tekiner (DIHA Accountant-İstanbul)

Zeynep Kuray (reporter for Birgün Daily Newspaper and ANF)

Nahide Ermiş (Member of Editorial Board of monthly Özgür Halk and Demokratik Modernite )

Berxwedan Yaruk (Staffer of Demokratik Modernite)

Davut Uçar (Manager of Etik Agency)

Ömer Çiftçi (Licencee of Demokratik Modernite Monthly Magazine)

Hüseyin Deniz (Reporter for Evrensel daily)

İsmail Yıldız (former reporter of DİHA)

Dilek Demirel (İzmir)

Sibel Güler (Former employee of the daily Özgür Gündem)

Cihan Albay

Ertuş Bozkurt (Former employee of Fırat Distribution)

Çağdaş Ulus (Reporter of Vatan daily)

Nevin Erdemir (Employee of the daily Özgür Gündem)

Nurettin Fırat (Commentator of the daily Özgür Gündem)

Ayşe Oyman (Özgür Gündem)

Yüksel Genç (Özgür Gündem)

Çiğdem Aslan

Oktay Candemir (Former employee of DIHA)

Ziya Çiçekçi (Publisher and Managing Editor and Licensee of Özgür Gündem)

Haydar Tekin (Former employee of Fırat Distribution)

Safiye Torman (Demokratik Modernite Dergisi Van çalışanı)

Selahattin Aslan (Demokratik Modernite çalışanı)

İrfan Bilgiç (Former staffer of Fırat Distribution)

Şeyhmus Fidan (Fırat Distribution Staffer Istanbul)

M. Emin Yıldırım (Chief Editor Azadiya Welat daily Kurdish Newspaper)

Cihan Albay

Saffet Orman

(DIHA, 24 December 2011)

CPJ condemns journalist arrests in Turkey

Committee to Protect Journalist (CPJ) condemned journalist arrests in Turkey and sent on December 22, 2011, a letter to Turkish Prime Minister Erdoğan and Sadullah Ergin, Turkish Minister of Justice. Emphasizing bad reputation of Turkey regarding press freedom, the CPJ said there was no response received from government referring its previous letters about this case.

The letter sent to Erdoğan is as follows:

Dear Prime Minister Erdoğan,

The Committee to Protect Journalists is writing to condemn the arrests of as many as 29 journalists in raids on Tuesday as well as the ongoing media repression that has earned Turkey a reputation as one of the world’s worst press freedom violators and done grave damage to the consolidation of Turkish democracy.

In coordinated raids that stretched from Istanbul to Diyarbakir, and from Ankara to Izmir, police detained 40 individuals, according to state-run media. News reports said many are journalists, although the precise number is not clear. So far, CPJ has been able to identify 29 journalists by name and affiliation, and it continues to examine 11 others. Your government claims that the operation targets “the press and propaganda” arm of the Union of Kurdistan Communities (KCK), but it provides no evidence supporting this assertion. Authorities maintain that the KCK is the “urban wing” of the banned Kurdistan Workers Party, a claim that has been widely disputed.

We are even more deeply troubled by this course of action because some in the Turkish media have alleged that a recent CPJ report confirming that eight Turkish journalist have been jailed for their work may have emboldened your government to take action. Indeed, your justice minister cited CPJ’s finding in remarks before Parliament on December 8, the newspaper Dünya reported.

Mr. Prime Minister, it would be perverse for your government to take any solace whatsoever from CPJ’s conclusion that eight journalists are in jail because of their work. This number–just behind Burma and ahead of Ethiopia–places Turkey firmly in the company of some of the world’s most repressive countries and deeply compromises your government’s commitments to democracy and the rule of the law. Our list of eight journalists jailed should be seen as a black mark on your record and a source of shame.

Moreover, it is a minimum. CPJ’s researchers systematically investigated every one of the estimated 64 journalists in jail in your country on December 1 to determine the reason for their incarceration. While we were able to confirm in eight cases that the charges were related to journalism, we condemn the jailing of every single journalist in Turkey because of pervasive due process violations. In many instances investigated by CPJ, the judicial process itself has been opaque and the charges unsubstantiated.

Our research is ongoing, and we intend to send a delegation to Turkey in 2012 to further review the outstanding cases. We hope that your government will demonstrate its commitment to the transparent application of the law by cooperating with the CPJ delegation. We note with grave concern that we never received a response to our July 25 letter sent to your justice minister and requesting information about the spate of arrests.

Mr. Prime Minister, we urge you to ensure that as a member of the Council of Europe and a signatory to the European Convention on Human Rights, Turkey respect its international obligations, in particular by curbing the use of secret evidence against journalists. Your government’s record of what amounts to mass incarceration of journalists and media professionals without due process is doing grave damage to your country’s reputation as an emerging democratic power. The threat is compounded by the fact that thousands of criminal cases have been opened against journalists across Turkey.

We urge you to amend this record, to commit your government to a transparent and open legal process, and to ensure that no journalists in Turkey are ever jailed for the expression of dissenting ideas.

Sincerely,

Joel Simon

Executive Director

Also sent to:

Catherine Ashton, High Representative of the European Union for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy

Stefan Füle, European Union Commissioner for Enlargement and Neighborhood Policy

Hélène Flautre, Chair of the European Parliament EU-Turkey delegation

Thomas Hammarberg, Commissioner for Human Rights of the Council of Europe

Saga of reporter trial resumes on 299th day

The indictment accusing a group journalists of being members of and helping an outlawed organization began to be read yesterday on the 299th day of their arrest.

An anchorwoman from the state-run TRT read the 134-page Oda TV case indictment at a courthouse in Istanbul, in which 14 suspects, including arrested journalists Nedim Şener, Ahmet Şık and Soner Yalçın, are accused of having ties to the Ergenekon group.

The court adjourned at 6:00 p.m. yesterday without any rulings and the indictment’s reading will continue today.

Prosecutors allege in the indictment that Şık and Şener were aiding and abetting the outlawed Ergenekon organization. The other suspects are accused of being members of the gang.

Colleagues, friends and supporters of imprisoned journalists gathered yesterday in front of the Istanbul courthouse where the Oda TV trial was held.

Members of Freedom to Journalists Platform said in a statement read in front of the courthouse that journalists in Turkey were under oppression.

“This is the second big oppression against journalists in Turkey after the coup d’etat in 1980,” a representative said while holding Şık’s book “The Imam’s Army” (İmam’ın Ordusu), which was “a book draft prepared with other suspects as instructions and guidelines for the Ergenekon Armed Terrorist Organization” according to the prosecutors.

Despite efforts to eliminate copies of “The Imam’s Army,” the book recently went to print and was released on the market at Istanbul’s Tüyap Book Fair Nov. 16 under the title “000Book” (000Kitap).

Republican People’s Party (CHP) Deputies Umut Oran, Sezgin Tanrıkulu, Binnaz Toprak, Oktay Ekşi, İlhan Cihaner and Peace and Democracy Party (BDP) Deputy Ertuğrul Kürkçü also followed the case in the courtroom.

Chief Judge Mehmet Ekinci said before the hearing that their duty was to decide by distinguishing facts and imputations.

Way-out statements

At the beginning of the case during the statements of identification Professor Yalçın Küçük represented himself as being “trial mannequin” which caused laughs in the courtroom.

“They arrest me for the important cases as a wall flower. I am also a retired professor who is imprisoned quite a bit…” said Küçük.

One of the other suspects Müyesser Uğur introduced herself by stating “I have been working as a journalist for last 30 years but the indictment says I am a terrorist.”

The Chief Judge replied, “Not at all!”

Şık said he is the father of a daughter who will be a bandit someday.

BDP deputy Kürkçü, who was also in the courtroom, told the Daily News he is hopeful due to the judge’s words on distinguishing facts and imputations but he was still afraid the case would run long.

“Only a prosecutor can gather a socialist journalist, a nationalist professor and an ultra-nationalist journalist for building a gang to target violence against the government,” Kürkçü said.

CHP deputy Oktay Ekşi said that the government and the judiciary should take lesson from the history that no idea can be put behind the bars.

Meanwhile the chief judge sent an officer to stop those using Twitter from spreading news from the courtroom during the case.

The hearing was still in process when the Daily News went to print yesterday. (Hürriyet Daily News, Dec 26, 2011)

TRT Director Insulted Kurdish Singer Rojin

A women's rights group on Monday called for the resignation of Turkish Radio and Television Corporation (TRT) President İbrahim Şahin, the latest condemnation of a figure which the group has called an “enemy of women.”

The group, known as the Association for Education and Supporting Women Candidates (KADER), called for the resignation of Şahin after his terse and widely condemned slandering of the popular Kurdish singer Rojin during a dinner in Ankara four days ago.

Şahin, who called Rojin an “aşifte” (a woman with loose morals) during his speech before academics and journalists during the dinner, was denounced by KADER for what the group described as an “intentional” and “deliberate” show of disrespect towards Rojin. The group pointed to Şahin's inquiring if “any women were present” before making the statements as evidence of the “willing and planned” nature of the remarks.

The group rejected the TRT head's weekend apology and now says he must step down immediately to make amends for words which “legitimize verbal abuse” of women. (TODAY'S ZAMAN, 26 December 2011)

Strong Reaction to Journalists' Arrest

Thousands of people took to the streets in Istanbul and Ankara, protesting the arrest of journalists on allegations related to the so-called KCK operation. Police operations, investigations and massive trials into The Union of Kurdish Communities (KCK), the umbrella organization that includes the militant Kurdistan Workers' Party (PKK) have seen thousands of pro-Kurdish politicians and rights activists arrested in the last two years.

Prominent journalists and journalism organizations strongly condemned yesterday's police operations which took place in Istanbul, Ankara, İzmir, Diyarbakır, Van and Adana.

While the motives behind the arrests are not clear yet, the news media reported that the suspects are alleged members of the press arm of the KCK. Mostly local correspondents, the journalists detained are working for Özgür Gündem, Vatan and BirGün dailies, Dicle and Fırat news agencies as well as AFP.

More than five thousand people walked through Istiklal Street in downtown Istanbul Tuesday evening, protesting the arrests. Protesters demanded the removal of the Anti-Terror Law which serves the basis for the operations.

"There are more than 70 journalists in prisons and we're expected to accept that more will be joining them. We're here today not just to defend the journalists but our right to information and our freedom of speech" said Alper Turgut, Turkish Union of Journalists (TGS).

A demonstration was also held in Ankara. Peace and Democracy Party (BDP) MPs Sebahat Tuncel, Ertuğrul Kürkçü, İdris Baluken, İbrahim Binici and Republican People's Party (CHP) MP Musa Çam, union leaders, journalists and rights activists attended.

Popular columnists speaking to bianet, also condemned the operation.

"State TV and news agency report that the operations are against the 'media and propaganda leg of the KCK'. Even during the darkest days of 1990s such reporting was not present. We have to stand against normalizing these developments" said Ahmet Hakan, daily Hurriyet columnist.

"A new term, authoritarian democracy is in currency for a while. Now the democracy is gone and we're stuck with authoritarian. Whatever the issue may be, it's the press' duty to scrutinize it. All governments must realize this: It's our duty" added Tuğrul Eryılmaz, senior editor of Radikal daily. (BIA, 21 December 2011)

EU strongly reacts to Turkey about detained journalists

Speaking to ANF about 42 detained journalists, Peter Stano, the spokesman for the European Commissioner for Enlargement Stefan Fuele warned Turkey sternly and said that; “We are greatly concerned about the developments. The freedom of press is the most important and unbending condition of membership to the