Silicon Graphics Inc and Cray Research Inc shared a platform for the first time since the Mountain View graphics workstation king acquired the supercomputer market leader – and kicked off by saying that it would take four years to harmonize the two product lines fully, and move the Cray machines over to the MIPS RISC where they currently use another commodity microprocessor. The two plan over the period to unify products on the software side, progressing from enhanced interoperability to source code compatibility, to eventual binary compatibility. The Silicon Graphics Power Challenge 10000 and the Cray J90 and T90 were both enhanced, and Cray is stressing that there is no question of its top end vector processors being abandoned. The enhancements to the top-end Cray T90 Series include a faster memory system for three and a half times the bandwidth of current Cray T90 system memory to improve total system speed by up to 40%. There is also a new processor option for IEEE floating point compliance, and users can mix and match Cray and IEEE floating-point processors in one system. And both the T90 and J90 now support Cray’s GigaRing scalable input-output and networking system first launched with the T3E scalable parallel system last November. The GigaRing stores and move data into and out of systems such as the Cray T90 supercomputer at up to 38.4G-bytes per second, and supports Petabytes of disk capacity. A new J90se processor for the J90 series doubles the scalar speed of the J90 and improve overall system performance on vector-scalar codes up to 40%. The new processor modules can be combined with current J90 modules. And Cray has a deal with Costa Mesa, California- based Irvine Sensors Corp under which it will market products that exploit a new form of Irvine Sensors’ proprietary chip-stacking technology. The new Memory Mini-Cube was developed by Irvine to Cray’s specifications for use in very high performance memory systems; the device stacks up to eight memory chips in a module using edge mounting, where the chip interconnects are butted onto the connector, thus eliminating the leads that normally radiate from the chip.