NEW YORK -- Silicon Graphics Inc., whose computers have created the visual effects in fantasy movies such as "Jurassic Park," is buying a majority stake in Cray Research Inc., the supercomputer maker.

The $730 million deal ends the independence of the company that pioneered the supercomputer industry and had become the last survivor of its shakeout. Smaller rival Convex Computer Corp. was swallowed by Hewlett-Packard Co. in September.

The consolidation of the supercomputer industry was brought on by the end of the Cold War and the increasing power of microprocessors, most common in personal computers.

Since 1972, government agencies worldwide have bought Cray computers, with price tags up to $30 million, for high-tech simulations of wars and weather, among other applications.

As its market dwindled, Cray lost $226 million last year on sales of $676 million, 26 percent below its 1994 sales. But it has a backlog of orders worth a record $437 million at the end of 1995.

Cray Chairman J. Phillip Samper said the company had been challenged by the industry changes and approached Silicon Graphics about a deal.

Though it has been in trouble recently, Cray is a "national asset," Silicon Graphics chairman Ed McCracken said. "We've come to associate the Cray name with America's leadership in computing."

Investors were less certain about the deal, however. Silicon Graphics stock was down $2.87? to $24.62?, a 10 percent drop, by early afternoon on the New York Stock Exchange. Cray stock rose $3 to $28.25, a 12 percent jump, also on NYSE.

Silicon Graphics will pay $30 cash for 19.2 million shares, or 75 percent, of Cray's outstanding shares, a total of $576 million. It will acquire the rest over time on a one-to-one ratio to its stock price. Based on today's prices, Silicon Graphics would pay $155.1 for the remaining Cray shares, making the overall transaction worth $730 million.

Mountain View, Calif.-based Silicon Graphics' biggest customers are aerospace and automotive companies that use visual imaging to design products. Annual sales amount to about $2 billion.