DAYTON, Ohio (WKEF) -- The Carillon Historical Park Rail Festival was this Saturday, June 22, from 9:30 a.m. - 5 p.m. and Sunday, June 23, from 11 a.m. - 4 p.m. The family-friendly festival featured miniature train rides, model train and historical displays, indoor carousel rides, performances from the Carillon Park Concert Band and $5 rides on the full-sized Carillon Park Railroad.

Admission Cost:

$14 for adults

$12 for seniors

$10 for children

Free for Dayton History members, children 2 and under

Free parking is available at Carillon Historical Park

Carillon Park Railroad Cost:

A single ride is $5 or an unlimited day pass is $12

The Carousel of Dayton Innovation is $1

The miniature train rides are free.

“We’re excited to have the 17th annual Carillon Park Rail Festival, this event began in 2006 and it’s happened every year except for the pandemic closures. Of course, it’s all types of railroading. We have a variety of model train layouts, everywhere throughout the indoor and outdoor parts of campus. We have small model trains which are about the size of your thumb all the way up to ones where each car is about the size of a loaf of bread and everything in between. The real draw is that we have two different train rides available here. We have the large-scale Carillon Park Railroad which has about a mile-long loop that takes people on a ten to fifteen-minute long journey. Then we have a small-scale train here as well where people actually ride on top of the train cars and take a seven to eight-minute trip. All of that is on top of what we already have here at Carillon Park, a really beautiful museum campus,” said Alex Heckman, the Vice President of Dayton History.

“We are always happy to have Rail Festival because at our core we are an educational organization. We do this for several reasons, one is to educate people about the rich history of railroading in the Maimi Valley and the greater Dayton region. We have some really great history here. We also do this event to try and inspire young people to join the railroad hobby, to become model railroad builders, railroad photographers, or maybe people who want to work on a railroad someday,” said Heckman.

Carillon Park is home to America’s oldest-existing locomotive the Baltimore & Ohio Railroad's “#1 John Quincy Adams”, built in 1835. The park's 65-acre campus also houses a 1903 Barney & Smith wooden parlor car, a 1923 caboose and much more. It is home to 35 historic structures and over three million artifacts.