Carillon Historical Park is a 65-acre open-air history museum that serves as the main campus for Dayton History. It shares the amazing stories of how Dayton changed the world! The museum properties of Dayton History - Carillon Historical Park, along with Hawthorn Hill and the Patterson Homestead - are ready to take you on a spectacular journey through Dayton's innovative history.

Please Note: The Carillon Park Railroad is temporarily out of service. Visit Carillon Park's website for more information and updates.

Behind the Scenes at Carillon Historical Park

Carillon Historical Park has compiled multiple videos to give you a glimpse behind the scenes!

Touring Brethen Tower

Exploring the Pest House

Plan Your Visit

Carillon Historical Park is a 65-acre open-air history museum that serves as the main campus for Dayton History. You will learn about the countless ways Dayton changed the world!

Can't Go A Day Without Dayton - Videos

Carillon Historical Park celebrates how Dayton, Ohio, changed the world. The Gem City is home to the airplane, the automobile self-starter, the cash register, the first internationally acclaimed African American poet, the National Football League’s inaugural game, and so much more. By the turn of the 20th century, Dayton had more patents, per capita, than any U.S. city, and one-sixth of the nation’s corporate executives had spent a portion of their career at legendary Dayton company National Cash Register (NCR).

Dayton’s extraordinary history has undoubtedly impacted billions of lives. With a hand-carved carousel, 4-D theatre, trains, slides, living history experiences, thousands of artifacts, extensive educational programming, and so much more, Carillon Historical Park brings Dayton’s past to life in a way that is fun for the whole family!

Mon - Sat: 9:30am - 5:00pm

Sun: 12:00pm - 5:00pm

937-293-2841

Carillon Historical Park

1000 Carillon Boulevard

Dayton, Ohio 45409

Website

Take a Daycation for More Family Fun

After exploring Carillon Historical Park, you'll be hungry for more learning, and exploring and Dayton does not disappoint! We've put together multiple "Daycation" ideas for you and your family and friends!