Jo Van Fleet, the Academy Award-winning actor who made a career playing mothers on stage and in such films as East of Eden and Cool Hand Luke, has died.

She died Monday at Jamaica Hospital. While she was said to be 81 at the time of her death, some reference books gave her age as 76.

Honored for her portrayal of proud, stoical women, she was a highly skilled professional who worked with equal ease on stage, in films and on television.

In her first screen appearance, Ms. Van Fleet won the 1955 Oscar for best supporting actress as the mother of James Dean's character in East of Eden. Two years later, she won a Tony Award as best supporting actress for her role as the irritable Jessie Mae Watts in Horton Foote's Trip to Bountiful.

She also played the mothers of Susan Hayward's character in the film I'll Cry Tomorrow (1955), Paul Newman's character in the film Cool Hand Luke (1967) and Anthony Perkins' character in Look Homeward, Angel on Broadway.

In 1965, she played the wicked stepmother in a TV revival of Rodgers and Hammerstein's Cinderella.

Some of her best performances were portrayals of women much older than herself: In Wild River (1960) she portrayed an 80-year-old matriarch who refuses to leave a home about to be flooded by the Tennessee Valley Authority.

She made her New York stage debut in The Winter's Tale in 1946. In 1950, she played Regan to Louis Calhern's King Lear.

Her other films included The Rose Tattoo, Gunfight at the O.

K. Corral, This Angry Age and The Gang That Couldn't Shoot Straight.

She was married to William Bales, a dancer and choreographer, who died in 1990. She is survived by a son, Michael, and a granddaughter.

_ Information in this obituary came from stories from the New York Times and the Associated Press.

WALTER RAYMOND STOKES, 98, an environmentalist whose work with Margaret Sanger resulted in the formation of Planned Parenthood, died Sunday at Port St. Lucie. He was co-founder with Sanger of the Sex Information and Education Council and served on the organization's board of trustees. He was a founder of the Jensen Beach Environmental Studies Center. In 1982, the Florida Association for Preservation of Beaches and Shores named him citizen of the year for his contributions to the preservation of barrier islands. A street in Jensen Beach and a public park on Hutchinson Island, near Jensen Beach, bear his name.

+ + +

DR. DAVID ALLAN HUBBARD, 68, a renowned Old Testament scholar who presided over Fuller Theological Seminary for 30 years, died Friday in Santa Barbara, Calif., of a heart attack. He wrote 36 books, including Psalms for All Seasons and The Practice of Prayer. Radio evangelist Charles E. Fuller founded the seminary with 39 students studying in a church in 1947. During the tenure of Dr. Hubbard, one of the seminary's early graduates, enrollment at the institution grew from 300 to 3,500.

+ + +

COURTNEY JOHNSON, 56, a banjo player who played with the groups New Grass Revival and Bluegrass Alliance, died Friday in Glasgow, Ky., of lung cancer. He collaborated with mandolin player Sam Bush in three bands, Poor Richard's Almanac, Bluegrass Alliance and New Grass Revival. During his tenure, New Grass Revival recorded several albums and backed Leon Russell on a tour.

_ Area obituaries and the Suncoast Deaths list appear in local sections.