Fifth Avenue, the glittering central spine of Manhattan, is the undisputed divider of the city’s famous street grid: east of Fifth is East, and west of Fifth is West. Been that way since 1838.

So when Scott M. Stringer, the borough president of Manhattan, was walking along Fifth Avenue by Central Park this week, he noticed something peculiar: every bus stop sign on the sidewalk seemed to be wrong.

A stop across the avenue from East 84th Street was identified as “5 Avenue & West 84 St.” Same for the stop at Fifth Avenue and “West” 72nd Street. The peculiar signage continued all along the length of the park.

Mr. Stringer, who deemed the signs misleading, sent a stern note on Tuesday to the city’s Transportation Department, demanding that the apparent errors be fixed.

It is unclear, however, whether the signs are in error at all.

Since these signs sit on the west side of Fifth Avenue, they are technically in the western zone of the street grid. So can West 84th Street exist on the west side of Fifth Avenue, even if the street itself begins on the other side of Central Park?

The answer, steeped in the arcane history of New York’s streetscape, is hazy, even among historians. But the dispute points to the prevailing mysteries of Manhattan’s street grid, which, despite celebrating its 200th birthday on Tuesday, can continue to flummox.

Samuel I. Schwartz, a former transportation commissioner and a longtime authority on New York’s streetscape, said he believed the city’s bus stop signs were, in fact, correct.

On that side of the street, “you are on the West Side of Manhattan,” Mr. Schwartz said.

“Let’s be pure about it,” he continued, “and keep Fifth Avenue as the dividing line.”

Mr. Stringer, however, insisted that the signs were confusing at best and a danger at worst.

“These are nonexistent streets, which do not actually appear until you’re standing on the other side of Central Park,” he said.

The idea that the west side of Fifth Avenue is, technically, the West Side of Manhattan, calls into question some of the basic spatial assumptions of the city’s geography. Central Park, for instance, could be entirely claimed for the Upper West Side, something that Upper East Side residents are unlikely to accept without a fight.

A number of New York historians called on Tuesday afternoon said they had never really considered the vagaries of where West begins and East ends.

“I never thought of Central Park as being on the West Side,” said Kenneth T. Jackson, the Columbia historian and editor of The Encyclopedia of New York City, adding, “I guess technically it is.”

Manhattan’s official borough historian, Michael Miscione, laughed at the question. “It might lead to some confusion or ambiguity, but technically, the signs are probably right,” he said. “In all these years, I never even thought about it, or was ever asked about it.”

A spokesman for the Transportation Department, Seth Solomonow, noted that the signs in question had been installed (and in full public view) since 1997. In that time, not a single person filed a complaint.

Still, Mr. Solomonow added, the agency would inspect the signs and “make any changes with a sticker overlay.”

Al Sussman, a retired television producer, was waiting for a bus on Tuesday at Fifth Avenue and what he believed to be East 90th Street. He inspected a bus sign that read “W 90 St” and shook his head: “We are on the East Side and nobody is going to tell me we are not.”

But Juan Leyton, a retired chauffeur, who was also at the bus stop, said he believed the signs to be correct. “Ninety percent of people don’t know the truth, but I know it,” Mr. Leyton, a former livery-cab driver, said. “On this side of Fifth Avenue, we are on the West Side.”

Mr. Stringer, however, pointed out one corner where a bus sign reads “West 84 St” and a green street sign a few feet away reads “E 84 St.”

“You can’t have two signs on the same block that say two different things,” Mr. Stringer said. “It’s time to finally decide what is west and what is east.”