Fifth Avenue: From Washington Square to Marcus Garvey Park presents an in-depth exploration of architecture along one of the world’s most iconic streets: New York City’s fabled Fifth Avenue. Through six fact-filled walking tours, this accessible illustrated guide takes readers along the entire length of Fifth Avenue, studying its architecture block by block, building by building, offering the chance to discover exceptional and unusual structures across Greenwich Village, Midtown, the Upper East Side, and Harlem.

Heavily illustrated with more than 300 images and practical graphic maps that mark the stops along each route, Fifth Avenue spotlights hundreds of buildings, from familiar tourist destinations to lesser-known gems. Featured are, of course, major monuments including the art treasures of Museum Mile on view at the Metropolitan Museum of Art, the Guggenheim, the Jewish Museum, and the Museum of the City of New York. The book offers a fascinating glimpse into the evolution of architectural styles, from the Beaux-Arts mansions of the turn of the twentieth century to the striking contemporary structures Highlights also include works by distinguished architects such as Richard Morris Hunt, Stanford White, and Frank Lloyd Wright and contemporary leaders like Rem Koolhaas and Bjarke Ingels.

We invite you to join FRIENDS and author Bill Henessey for an awe-inspiring walking tour of Fifth Avenue between the East 70s and East 90s on Saturday, November 12. Included with your ticket is a copy of the book, that will be delivered on the day of the tour.

William J. Hennessey is an architectural historian who has taught at Vassar College, the University of Kansas, the University of Kentucky, and the University of Michigan and directed the art museums at each of those institutions. From 1997 to 2014 he was director of the Chrysler Museum of Art in Norfolk, Virginia. Hennessey is the author of catalogs and articles on a wide range of art and design topics, including nineteenth-century architecture and twentieth-century industrial design as well as the monograph Russel Wright: American Designer and Walking Broadway: Thirteen Miles of Architecture and History (Monacelli, 2020), a tour of Manhattan from the Battery to the Harlem River.