VH1 has named the judges, mentors and special guests for Wednesday’s livestreamed, 24-hour event, “Make a Band Famous.”

TheWrap can exclusively reveal that the judges, who will provide critiques and commentary for each challenge during the 24-hour competition, will be pop star and Grammy Award-nominee Natasha Bedingfield; Adam Blackstone, musical director to Justin Timberlake, Pharrell and Maroon 5; Kurt Hugo Schneider, a YouTube singer and producer with over 4.2 million subscribers; and Rooney lead singer Robert Schwartzman.

The “Make a Band Famous” mentors, who will act as guides and coaches to the competing bands, will be Gym Class Heroes lead singer and rapper Travie McCoy, Grammy-nominated Daughtry frontman Chris Daughtry and prolific songwriter-singer Bonnie McKee, who co-wrote Katy Perry‘s “California Gurls,” “Teenage Dream,” and “Roar.”

Also read: VH1 Names 24 Bands to Battle in ‘Make a Band Famous’ Competition

Additionally, Benji and Joel Madden, Ed Sheeran, Fall Out Boy’s Patrick Stump and Pete Wentz, and Colbie Caillat will make special appearances.

Hosted by All-American Rejects frontman Tyson Ritter, “Make a Band Famous” will stream continuously and uncensored starting June 11 at 8 p.m. ET from Brooklyn, N.Y.

Over the 24 hours, 24 unsigned bands will compete in several challenges, including learning a cover song in an hour, re-imagining a classic hit with toy instruments and busking for money and fans in Williamsburg. The winning band will get a recording deal with Republic Records.

Also read: VH1 Save the Music Foundation and Sara Bareilles Name Winners of ‘Keys + Kids’ Piano Grants (Exclusive)

Viewers will be able to watch the competition live and uncensored at MakeABandFamous.VH1.com and in the VH1 app. New York-area fans can watch the finals in Red Hook, Brooklyn on Thursday, July 12 by visiting 1iota.com.

Aside from footage that will be aired on VH1 in support of the program, “Make a Band Famous” is VH1’s first original digital program that isn’t attached to a program on the channel.