VH1'S "LOVE & HIP HOP: MIAMI" HEATS UP THE SUMMER WITH A BRAND-NEW SEASON PREMIERING MONDAY, AUGUST 14 AT 8 PM ET/PT AND AN EXCLUSIVE THREE-PART LEAD-UP SPECIAL

FOR A FIRST LOOK AT SEASON FIVE SUPER TRAILER CLICK HERE

#LHHMIA

NEW YORK, NY - JULY 27, 2023- VH1 today announced the return of its hit series"Love & Hip Hop: Miami,"premiering onMonday, August 14 at 8 PM ET/ PT on VH1.The groundbreaking reality franchise returns hotter than ever with its fifth season documenting all the grit and glitz of life in the Magic City's music fast lane.

It's a new era on"Love & Hip Hop: Miami,"and reinvention is the name of the game. After a year of life-altering upheavals, the series' cast of iconic industry legends and hard-hustling up-and-comers are back outside, mixing it up, and turning the page - with spicy relationship reveals, game-changing career moves, and jaw-dropping personal evolutions.

Bouncing back after the end of her engagement,Amara La Negrasets the blogs on fire with the hard launch of her new boo - friend-turned-loverSafaree, who's starting fresh in Miami after finalizing his divorce. But the relationship is immediately tested as emotional baggage, industry pressure, duplicitous haters, and a social media uproar weigh on the high-profile couple.

Miami's undisputed rap queenTrinaembarks on a new, prestigious era of her career while navigating grief after a family tragedy and heartbreak after calling off an engagement to long-time beauRaymond.However, he's not done fighting for their love. As he celebrates 25 years in the music business,Trick Daddyhas a new lease on life. He's getting in shape,removing his gold grills, and putting on a new generation of artists.

Ray J and Princessmay have called off their divorce - but have they fixed their marriage? The new season finds the Norwood's living in Las Vegas, where they vowed to work on their relationship. But the tables have turned as Princess neglects Ray J. for her new passion - high-stakes poker - leading him to make a dramatic ultimatum.

After endless viral controversies, a newly singleSukihanahits the road to promote a dramatic rebrand that taps into an elevated style and a sophisticated, Afro-Fusion sound. WhileBobby Lytesreturns on a whole new level,using his elevated profile to launch a personal and professional rebirth.

Florence El Lucheis making big moves in music - and diving into a secretive new romance.Zoey Brinxxhas been one to watch for years, but label politics and industry skepticism about her plus-size figure have delayed her big break - until now.Shay Johnsonis finally going public with her longtime on-again-off-again boyfriend and the father of her baby daughter,Fabo. Meanwhile,Gunplayis back in action - this time with an infant daughter and a wife who dreams of a career in law enforcement. AndEliza Reignis coming back outside after a highly public battle with the father of her daughter.

The hit series will also feature more talent than ever, includingMiami Tip, Joy Young & Vonshae, Supa Cindy& theHollywood Twinswho will make a splash in the new season!

The hot Miami fun kicks offMonday, July 24 at 9 PM ETwith three"Love & Hip Hop: Miami"clip-shows, where cast members of the reality show and celebs rewatch moments from the previous season and share behind-the-scenes stories. The three-part special leads up to the can't miss season five premiere! Special guests revisit the outrageous moments that turned Love & Hip Hop Miami into a cultural phenomenon andrelive the iconic scenes and shocking revelations that shaped Love & Hip Hop Miami's legendary history. Watch an exclusive preview of the clip special HERE.

Join the conversation using #LHHMIA and follow the official Love & Hip Hop accounts on Instagram, Facebook, X, Threads, YouTube, and TikTok.

VH1's Love & Hip Hop: Miami is executive produced by Mona Scott-Young for Monami Productions, Lashan Browning, Donna Edge-Rachell, Alissa Horowitz, Paris Bauldwin, Daniel Wiener, Brian Schornak, and Eric Cyphers for Antoinette Media. Sitarah Pendelton-Eaglin, Daniel Blau Rogge, and Paula Aranda serve as executive producers for MTV Entertainment Studios and Tiffany Lea Williams for BET Media Group.

Love & Hip Hop Miami: Top 10 Most Outrageous Moments, Love & Hip Hop Miami: Top 10 Most Legendary Moments and Love & Hip Hop Miami: The Rewind are executive produced by Mona Scott-Young, Michael Lang, Stephanie R. Gayle, James Knox and Marta Ravin for Monami Productions.

About BET Media Group

The BET Media Group, a unit of Paramount (NASDAQ: PARAA; PARA; PARAP), is the world's largest media company dedicated to entertaining, engaging, and empowering the Black community and championing Black culture. Connecting Black audiences through a portfolio of brands including BET, BET+, BET Gospel, BET HER, BET International, BET Jams, BET Soul, BET Studios, and VH1, the BET Media Group is a thriving media ecosystem of leading interconnected platforms across cable TV, streaming, digital, studios, live events and international. For more information about BET, visitwww.bet.comand follow @BET on social platforms. For more BET news announcements, follow us on social @BET_PR.

About Antoinette Media

Founded by industry veteran Lashan Browning as a joint venture with Paramount Global, Antoinette Media is a full-service production company specializing in authentic, mass-appeal television and film content. It is actively developing a deep slate of projects - ranging from documentaries to scripted features to star-driven digital formats - all exemplifying the company's commercial and quality-driven approach. Antoinette Media is currently producing seven series for MTV Entertainment Studios includingLove & Hip Hop Atlanta,Love & Hip Hop Miami,Love & Hip Hop Family Reunion,Couples Retreat,Caught in the Act: Unfaithful,Shaunie & Keion: Destination I Do, andRun it Back -and has both scripted and unscripted projects currently in development across the partnership with Paramount's MTV Entertainment Studios.

About Monami Productions

Monami Productions is a leading independent production company that boasts a diverse slate of scripted and unscripted projects representing a wide array of concepts, stories and experiences. The company is committed to conceptualizing, showcasing and amplifying the full spectrum of BIPOC voices and, along with its executives, approaches all content with an eye towards global perspective and expansion. Founded by CEO Mona Scott-Young, Monami Productions is a division of Monami Entertainment, a lifestyle and entertainment company specializing in talent management, cross-platform brand development and experiential marketing. Both companies were created on the premise of tapping into and expanding upon Scott-Young's remarkable track record for success in all areas of the entertainment business; music, television, publishing and consumer products.