Samuel Dalembert

On 10-5-1981 Samuel Dalembert (nickname: Samuel) was born in Port-au-Prince, Haiti. He made his 2 million dollar fortune with New York Knicks, Dallas Mavericks. The basketball player is currently single, his starsign is Taurus and he is now 43 years of age.

Samuel Dalembert Facts & Wiki

Where does Samuel Dalembert live? And how much money does Samuel Dalembert earn?

Birth Date 10-5-1981 Heritage/origin Haitian Ethnicity Afro-American Religion - believes in God? Agnosticisme Residence He owns an apartment in New York, United States.

Samuel Dalembert Net Worth, Salary, Cars & Houses

Estimated Net Worth 2 million Dollar Celebrity Net Worth Revealed: The 55 Richest Actors Alive in 2024 Yearly Salary N/A These Are The 10 Best-Paid Television Stars In The World

Houses

Cars

RELATED:These 10 Whopping Homes & Cars Of Celebrities Look Amazing!

Samuel Dalembert: Single, Dating, Family & Friends

Who is Samuel Dalembert dating in 2024?

Relationship status Married Sexuality Straight Partner Currently in no confirmed relationship Ex-girlfriends or ex-wives Has any kids? No

Shall the Haitian basketball player Samuel Dalembert find love in 2024?

These Are The 15 Hottest Wives And Girlfriends Of Hollywood!

Height, Weight, Body Measurements, Tattoos, Skin, Hair & Eye Color

This cool friendly talented basketball player originating from Port-au-Prince, Haiti has a athletic body & round face type.

Hair color Black Hair type Straight Hair Length near-shaved Hair Hairstyle alternative Distinct feature hair color Skin Tone/Complexion Type VI: Black brown skin Skin Type Normal Beard or Mustache Beardless Eye Color Dark Brown Height 211 cm Weight 113 kilo Feet size N/A Does Samuel Dalembert smoke? No, never Caught Smoking: These Are The 60 Most Shocking Celebrity Smokers Does Samuel Dalembert have a tattoo? No

These 50 Celebrity Tattoos Went Horribly Wrong

Samuel Dalembert - 2024 Black hair & alternative hair style. Does Samuel Dalembert have official Social Media profiles?

Follow this page to stay up to date about the latest gossip and rumors (plastic surgery, scandals, new photos or videos and so on) of Samuel Dalembert!

Trending

Lo and behold, this is our Top 60 of celebrities that have been caught smoking or

Celebrities don’t always wear makeup anymore. In fact, many of them lately like to show off

40/ 40Cardi B’s dream mansion in Atlanta rap-up.com After two years of house hunting Cardi B

55/ 55Sean Penn – $70,000,000 via bz-berlin.de Sean is a dinosaur in Hollywood, but he manages

A lot of celebrities do not know what to do with their money anymore in 2022.