Former NBA center Samuel Dalembert was arrested Sunday on battery charges after allegedly hitting his girlfriend and her cousin.

[Follow Dunks Don’t Lie on Tumblr: The best slams from all of basketball]

From The Associated Press:

A Boca Raton police report says police responded to Dalembert’s home Sunday evening after a 911 hang-up. The woman and her cousin initially told officers nothing was wrong but eventually said the 7-foot, 270-pound Dalembert became upset after finding out that his girlfriend was leaving for Orlando with their two children.

The cousin told police Dalembert pushed the girlfriend down and then choked the cousin when he tried to intervene. Dalembert was arrested on two counts of battery and released from jail.

The Palm Beach Post has more detail from the arrest report in the incident:

When police arrived they met with the 7-foot, 270-pound Dalembert, whose demeanor officers described as “aggressive.”

The girlfriend, who has 8- and 1-year-old children with Dalembert, and her cousin initially told police nothing was wrong but later admitted “they did not want Dalembert to know they called 911 because they were scared what he might do to them,” the report said. […]

The woman had an abrasion on her chin, a swollen lip, a small bruise on her forehead and an abrasion to her left shoulder, the report said. She told police that Dalembert has been “drinking excessively” and “not acting like his normal self” recently.

The woman’s cousin said he had to intervene to keep Dalembert from striking her, the report said. Dalembert then allegedly attacked the 26-year-old man, grabbing him by the neck and putting him in a choke hold, throwing him to the ground and head-butting him, the report said.

A first-round draft pick of the Philadelphia 76ers in the 2001 NBA draft, Dalembert, 35, averaged 7.7 points, 7.8 rebounds and 1.7 blocks in 24.4 minutes per game over 13 NBA seasons. After spending the first eight years of his pro career in Philadelphia, the Haitian-born rim-protector out of Seton Hall joined the Sacramento Kings in 2010 in a trade that sent Spencer Hawes and Andres Nocioni to the Sixers, kicking off a nomadic stretch that would see Dalembert play for five teams over the next five campaigns.

The former 76ers, Kings, Houston Rockets, Milwaukee Bucks and Dallas Mavericks center last played for the New York Knicks during the 2014-15 season, but was waived before the All-Star break as the team set about rebuilding. He briefly rejoined the Mavericks in the summer of 2015, but was released before the start of the season, and spent last year playing for Shanxi Zhongyu of the Chinese Basketball Association, averaging 12.7 points, 11.5 rebounds and 2.2 blocks in 27.9 minutes per game in 20 appearances.

More basketball coverage from Yahoo Sports:

– – – – – – –

Dan Devine is an editor for Ball Don’t Lie on Yahoo Sports. Have a tip? Email him at devine@yahoo-inc.com or follow him on Twitter!