For five seasons, the Sacramento Kings have searched for the right mix of players to surround All-Star big man DeMarcus Cousins. The Kentucky product brings a wide array of skills to the floor, but finding the perfect fit to line up next to him has been a very tall task.

The Kings have spent lottery picks trying to fill the void and thrown plenty of cash around in free agency, but no one seemed to find a rhythm with the talented 25-year-old.

Coming into this offseason, Vlade Divac made finding Cousins a partner in the post a priority. With the sixth pick in the 2015 NBA Draft, Divac selected an athletic wonder in Willie Cauley-Stein. The Kings haven’t had a rim protector like Cauley-Stein since Samuel Dalembert or maybe even Keon Clark. But Divac wasn’t done.

Like Cauley-Stein, Sacramento has never had a big man with the skill set of 7-footer Kosta Koufos. He’s a banger, a brute, a player you have no choice but to put a body on. His work ethic and blue color attitude have quickly earned the respect of his teammates.

“He brings a winning mentality,” Rudy Gay said. “He goes out there and does his job. He comes from winning.”

[HAM: Breaking down barriers: Hammon, Lieberman setting new NBA norm]

Koufos shined early in camp. He has worked his way into the conversation for the starting lineup and even opened the preseason schedule at the center spot with the starters.

NBA

“For sure, without a doubt,” Koufos told CSN about whether he can play next to Cousins. “DeMarcus is a special talent, he’s an All-Star. I’m just here to make his job a lot easier -- running the floor, setting screens, rolling, ducking in, rebounding. Just doing the little things to help the team win."

The cause and effect of starting Koufos alongside Cousins is an interesting one to say the least. Yes, Cousins and Koufos can play together, but at what cost?

Koufos is a natural five and that means that Cousins will have to slide to the four for extended minutes. Cousins can dominate most power forwards on the offensive end, but can he stay in front of stretch fours or effectively guard the 3-point line? More importantly, can he avoid foul trouble long enough to impact the outcome of a game?

That is a risk Karl may be willing to take. While the Kings’ coach is leaning towards starting Cauley-Stein and using Koufos as his anchor on the second unit, he feels confident in what he has.

“He doesn’t make many mistakes,” Karl said of Koufos. “Defensively he’s a very good big guy defending. And he knows how to stay on the court. I think right now, he’s not a flashy player, but he’s a guy that you like having on the floor.”

The addition of Koufos has opened options for Karl and his staff, which is why Divac handed the 26-year-old big man a four year, $32 million contract this summer. While Willie Cauley-Stein figures out the pro game, the Kings now have a reliable starter or reserve. If he comes off the bench, the Kings have a one of the top reserves in the league in the post and that will pay dividends during an 82-game stretch.

Whether this group can play together is still a mystery. On paper, they should be a good fit, but no one has ever won a game on paper. What we know is that the Kings have quality talent and depth on the frontline. It's up to the players to put it all together on the court.