The Neighbourhood is a band that’s relatively new to the music scene, yet they’re already reshaping the indie-rock genre by storm. Their debut album I Love You (2013) was released to critical acclaim, and their electronic, moody rock sound has helped distinguish them from most other indie bands of today. They are best known for their insistence on everything being black and white. All pictures of them, videos, even live performances are shot in black and white, and the band members always dress in shades of black and white. They have a very cool, west coast vibe (which makes sense since all the band members grew up in the same California town together) and they already have a very fervent cult following, deemed “Hoodlums”. I Love You had a very specific sound, moody yet with enough pop influence to make it more mainstream, but with their new mixtape #00000 & #FFFFF , their sound is very different. The sound of their new, free mixtape is heavily influenced by rap and hip hop, and has a heavily “west coast rap” feel. They collaborated with different up and coming rappers, experimented with different background music, and even included a saxophone in one song.

Their lead singer Jesse Rutherford has openly discussed how much they are influenced by rap and hip hop, and he used to be a rapper before starting the Neighbourhood. In fact their first song “West Coast” is borderline rap, so it shouldn’t come as a surprise that this is the direction they are heading in. Yet, for some reason, people are freaking out over their change in sound. In the comments section of their new mixtape, it seems that every third comment is someone begging them to go back to their “old sound”, and I can’t figure out why people want that. Obviously their old sound is fantastic, but the whole point of a band is to keep evolving and changing their sound until they are happy with what they are making. While the Neighbourhood was happy with I Love You, that wasn’t the exact sound they were looking for. “Everybody’s so safe right now, even us. I think we could be doing a better job” says Jesse Rutherford in an interview with Billboard about their new mixtape. He goes on to talk about how rock and roll is dead because no one is willing to try new things. He also points out that they are the first band in forever to release a free mixtape, and can’t figure out why other bands aren’t doing the same. He says they want to give music back to the people, because if they can make music, why wouldn’t they share it with everyone? Well put, Jesse.