The Neighbourhood is an American band formed in California, in 2011. It has 5 members, vocalist Jesse Rutherford, guitarists Jeremy Freedman and Zach Abels, bassist Mikey Margott, and drummer Brandon Fried. Their musical style has been described as alternative rock, indie rock, indie pop, pop rock, with elements of electronic, hip hop, pop, and R&B. I really love how they mix so many different styles and sound so good. In this post, I want to show you my favorite albums and two favorite songs of each, based in the lyrics and instrumental.

I love you – 2013

This was the first album I heard of them. I was really surprised with their sound because I’ve never listened to something like it. I fell in love with them with “sweater weather”. When I listen to it, I feel like I’m 15 years old again, it gives me so many teenage vibes.

Favorite instrumental: Alleyways

Favorite lyrics: Afraid “Keep on dreaming, don’t stop giving, fight those demons”

Wiped Out! – 2015

Wiped Out! is, in all aspects, an album of evolution. They evoluted to an atmospheric, moody style which blends alternative rock with radio-friendly pop, R&B and hip-hop, but still had their characteristic sound. I was really impressed when I listened to this album and remembered why I love them. When I listen to it, it makes me feel like I’m a teenager living my best life in Los Angeles.

Favorite instrumental: Prey

Favorite lyrics: Cry baby “I think I worry a lot, I need to take it easy; I got this anxious feeling, but it goes away for a minute when I’m with you breathing”

The Neighbourhood – 2018

This album of dramatic rap-tinged alternative rock also impressed me, and I absolutely loved it. It’s like they’re different people in every album, they grow and also does their music. I’ve seen them live two times and I would go again without any second thoughts.

Favorite instrumental: Stuck with me

Favorite lyrics: Scary love “Your love is scaring me, no one has ever cared for me as much as you do”

Hope you liked my post!

Constanza Manríquez Villar