The Neighbourhood, an indie rock band from California and the artists behind the popular hit “Sweater Weather,” recently released their sophomore album. The album, titled Wiped Out!, features a dark pop sound, reminiscent of a modern R&B feel much like the music of The Weeknd.

At first listen, the album sounds like something an angsty teen would play at the beach. It has alternative undertones and somber progressions, but also throws in some guitar twangs and ocean ambience that gives it that unexpected beach-y feel that’s hard to explain. It’s the type of beach that won’t conform to your social norms. After all, the first track is titled “A Moment of Silence,” and is literally just 30 seconds of complete silence. The album definitely isn’t devoid of character.

When it comes to the specifics of the sound, Wipe Out! doesn’t have much variety between songs. Sure, there are tempo changes, but for the most part, the same moody, melancholy R&B vibe permeates throughout the entire work. This consistent style isn’t a bad thing, however. The Neighbourhood has found the sound that works for them as a band and has completely capitalized on it. Sure, the songs can be hard to tell apart at first listen, but as you dive into the album more, the songs set themselves apart from each other, each finding its own niche within the track list.

One of the most distinct parts of Wiped Out! is the lyrical element . If at any point you denied the angst of the album, a look at the lyrics will most certainly change your mind. In the track “Wiped Out!” the band croons about being “Lost and afraid/young and innocent but getting older.” In the track “Single,” a dramatized love story is told through the lyrics, with lines such as, “I don’t ever mind sharing oxygen/I just wanna get lost in your lungs.”

Overall, I think Wiped Out! is a success for The Neighbourhood. It showcases their strongest style of making music: dark, angsty R&B. It probably won’t be everyone’s favorite style of music, but I think they nail the vibe they set out to emulate.