Lebesgue was a French mathematician, born in Beauvais, Oise, (Northern) France, on June 28, 1875, who died in Paris, France, on July 26, 1941, aged 66.

His doctorate was supervised by Émile Borel at the Sorbonne (University of Paris).

He had three students: Paul Montel; Zygmunt Janiszewski; and Georges de Rham.

He completed his undergraduate degree at the École Normale Supérieure from 1894 — 1897.

He made major contributions to analysis, the foundations of measure theory, integration theory, Fourier analysis, and potential theory.

Awards given to him include: Fellow of the Royal Society (FRS); Poncelet Prize (1914); member of the Académie des Sciences.

Lebesgue married Louise-Marguerite Vallet in 1903 (she was the sister of one of his fellow students), and they divorced in 1916. They had two children together.

Life

Henri Lebesgue was born in France, 1875. Unfortunately, his father died of tuberculosis when Lebesgue was very young, and so his mother supported him by herself. Lebesgue suffered from complications with tuberculosis himself during his later life, which ultimately was a factor in his death.

Lebesgue was admitted to École Normale Supérieure in 1894, one of the most selective and prestigious universities in France (see here). After graduating in 1897, he remained at the university for two more years, studying in the library. It was during this period he discovered work by René-Louis Baire on discontinuity of functions (at the time, most people hadn’t seriously considered functions which weren’t continuous, so it wasn’t fully appreciated how useful discontinuous or at least non-differentiable functions might be for incorporation within theories).

(It is worth pointing out that at this time, analysis and topology were also relatively young disciplines in the mathematical world, with the epsilon-delta definition of limits only being rigorously defined around 1820 (by Karl Weierstrass, Bernard Bolzano, and Augustin-Louis Cauchy) and the formulation of compactness in a topological space we know today only being developed in the 1920’s.)

It was around this time that Lebesgue began his graduate studies at the Sorbonne (see here for information on the Sorbonne). He learned of Émile Borel’s work developing measure theory and of Camille Jordan’s work on the Jordan measure (which in how we define measures nowadays, is in fact not actually a measure). During his graduate studies under Borel, he established the groundwork for the generalisation of the Riemann integral; his finished work made up the contents of his dissertation, and has been described as one of the best mathematics dissertations ever written.

To shed some light on this, Riemann’s integral had several deficiencies which severely limited its applications. One of the main problems was the question: for which functions was the Riemann integral defined? When we first come across the Riemann integral, one of the main results is that the Riemann integral is defined for any continuous function on a closed, bounded interval in \R. However this poses a problem: certain limits (e.g. pointwise ones) of continuous functions need not be continuous themselves, even if the sequence is uniformly bounded. To see why this might be any issue, there are several instances (in particular Fourier series) where we want to be able to integrate an infinite series term-by-term to find the integral of the whole infinite series. However, in the same way as above, it is possible to have a sequence of (uniformly bounded) partial sums, all of which are Riemann integrable, but the limiting function represented by the infinite series is not Riemann integrable. In general, in analysis we essentially want to be able to take limits of certain functions and we want to be able to integrate the limit: the Lebesgue integral allows us to do this. One of the great aspects of Lebesgue’s work on integration was that for his integral, the candidate functions to be integrated where so-called measurable functions, and limits of measurable functions turn out to be measurable functions as well (under these notions of convergence which we care about).

After publishing his thesis, Lebesgue lectured at the University of Rennes (France) from 1902 — 1906, and then moved to the Faculty of Sciences at the University of Poitiers (France). He continued strengthening the work of his thesis, establishing the dominated convergence theorem (see here), arguably the most practical result for his integration theory. He also continued working on Fourier analysis, which we shall discuss later. In 1910 he moved back to the Sorbonne, where he was made a professor in 1919. In 1921 he moved to the Collège de France (see here), where he remained for the rest of his life. Here, Lebesgue started working primarily on other areas, and made contributions to historical work and elementary geometry. It is not exactly known why he moved away from the field he founded, but there are two potential candidates. One is that at the time there was a lot of debate over who actually discovered the generalisation of the Riemann integral, with others (such as Borel, although it is said they both admired each other in their debates) claiming they had more general theories or had discovered it earlier and so should have the credit (or at least some of it) instead of Lebesgue, all of made Lebesgue feel distanced. For example, Paul Montel wrote (see [1]) that originally Émile Picard alone fully defended the work of his thesis. The second reason is that Lebesgue was not an advocate for big generalisations, like his integral was. Lebesgue once wrote:

Réduites à des théories générales, les mathématiques seraient une belle forme sans contenu

Henri Lebesgue

(which roughly translates as: reduced to general theories, mathematics would be a beautiful form without content).

Related to all of this is the fact that throughout his life Lebesgue had a rivalry with Baire. This began in 1904, when they argued over who should give the Cours Peccot (see here) at the Collège de France, which is a semester-long mathematics course given by a young distinguished mathematician. Lebesgue gave the course in 1902 and 1904, whilst Baire gave it in 1903. This rivalry worsened during World War I when both were working for the defence of France.

Students

Lebesgue supervised three students during his life, each of whom was remarkable in their own way. These were:

Paul Montel (completed his PhD at the Sorbonne in 1907). Montel was born in Nice, France. One of his main contributions to mathematics was the introduction of a normal family, a notion which was a predecessor of the notion of a compact set which is commonplace in analysis today. Montel also helped write part of the text Henri Lebesgue: l’savant, l’professeur, l’homme, which is one of the main historical accounts of Lebesgue. See here for more information about Paul Montel.

Zygmunt Janiszewski (completed his PhD in 1911). Janiszewski was born in Warsaw in 1888, which is now in modern day Poland but at the time was part of the Russian Empire. Mathematically he made contributions to the early development of topology. Shortly after finishing his graduate studies, he became a soldier in the Polish Legions during World War I. He left the Legions and went into hiding under an assumed identity after he and other officers refused to swear an oath of allegiance to the Austrian government. He then established a shelter for homeless children and initiated the Polish School of Mathematics. He also founded the Fundamental Mathematicae, a research journal intended to foster mathematical research in Poland. However sadly, after saving many lives, he died in early 1920 due to the influenza pandemic of 1918 — 1919, and never saw the first issue of his journal published. He devoted his family property and prize money from mathematical awards to charity and to the education and development of young Polish students. See here for more information about Zygmunt Janiszewski.

Georges de Rham (completed his PhD at the University of Paris in 1931). De Rham was born in Roche, Switzerland. His main contribution to mathematics was the introduction of de Rham cohomology and in particular what is now known as de Rham’s theorem, which states that the de Rham cohomology groups are isomorphic to the singular cohomology groups, thus enabling topological information about a smooth manifold to be attained from the study of smooth maps on the manifold. As topology was still a new field at the time, these results were incredibly important in its success and development. See here for more information about Georges de Rham.

Work of Lebesgue

To give a taster of some of the work Lebesgue did, we briefly summarise some of his key ideas.

The Lebesgue integral. We have already mentioned that the Riemann integral, defined around 1850 by Bernhard Riemann, was insufficient for numerous purposes in analysis. One of the main issues was a lack of ‘closure’ for functions which were Riemann integrable. This problem was solved by the Lebesgue integral when the monotone convergence theorem (see the section here which discusses Lebesgue’s integral) was established by Lebesgue.

The Riemann integral was originally defined for a function on a closed interval of \R: the idea was to partition the interval (i.e. the domain of the function) and form ‘rectangles’ under the graph of the function so to approximate the area under the graph. By taking a suitable limit, we get the Riemann integral, whenever this limit exists. Lebesgue’s approach was to do the reverse: partition instead the codomain of the function, looking at regions in the domain where the function value lies between two values determined by the subdivision of the codomain. Using the notion of measure to determine the ‘size’ of these sets in the domain, it is then possible to define a notion of integral, which exactly is the Lebesgue integral.

This definition has all the properties of the integral which one would want (e.g. linearity, positive functions integrate to positive numbers, etc) but it also has the crucial property that the Riemann integral was missing, namely that it could be defined for a larger class of functions, the so-called measurable functions, which are closed under taking pointwise limits. After the establishment of the monotone convergence theorem and the dominated convergence theorem, analysis was able to develop rapidly.

See here for more information about the Lebesgue integral.

Fourier analysis/series. Lebesgue was able to answer satisfactorily the question of when a function could be expressed as its Fourier series. Joesph Fourier himself had made a faulty assumption in his own work, essentially due to the issues with Riemann integration we have discussed already about when term-by-term integration of an infinite series was possible, which left this question open. Lebesgue overcame this with his integral. He was then able to also establish the order of magnitude of the remainder term in a Fourier series of a Lipschitz function (establishing a decay rate for the Fourier series convergence to the original Lipschitz function) and moreover was able to show that for a general continuous function, the best general decay result for the Fourier coefficients which is possible is just that they must tend to zero: this result is now known as the Riemann–Lebesgue lemma (see here).

See here for more information on Fourier series.

Potential theory. Lebesgue introduced a domain, called the Lebesgue spine (see here), to illustrate that on some domains the Dirichlet problem (in general) does not always have a solution. This ultimately comes down to his domain having a ‘sharp edge’ at which there is a point where the domain is thin (see here). The key point is that this demonstrates how the geometry can impact the analytical properties.

Approximation theory. One question you can ask yourself is, if you have an arbitrary continuous function on, say, [0,1], what is the best possible polynomial approximation we can find over all polynomials of some bounded degree? One way you can tackle this problem is by sampling n points of the function, and taking a polynomial of degree n which passes through all of those points. Then you can ask two questions: (1) how well does such a polynomial approximate the function elsewhere, and (2) which points should I choose to get the best approximation, in general? How well such a polynomial approximates the function when compared to the ‘optimal’ polynomial can be bounded by a constant now known as the Lebesgue constant, due to its connection to a more general result established by Lebesgue. It turns out, when we take points which are uniformly separated along the interval, the Lebesgue constant grows exponentially. However when points known as Chebyshev nodes are used, the constant only grows logarithmically, which is a big improvement. However even these are not optimal, and the search for an optimal set of nodes is still an open question today.

See here for more information on Lebesgue constants.

The Lebesgue integral has since been generalised to more general measure-theoretic frameworks in the form of the Lebesgue–Stieltjes integral (see here), which is used in probability theory and stochastic calculus to define integration with respect to more exotic measures, including certain random variables such as Brownian motion.

Lebesgue’s view on Teaching

One of Lebesgue’s most inspiring and admirable qualities I find to be his attitude towards the teaching of mathematics, his dedication to his students, and his value of duty; I hope this section will illustrate what I mean.

All of the following quotes related to Lebesgue’s style of teaching are taking from Henri Lebesgue: l’savant, l’professeur, l’homme [1]. Rough translations are given below each quote (any mistakes are my own and I am happy for them to be pointed out to me!).

Tout problème est alors susceptible de multiples solutions suivant l’aspect où on l’étudié. Parfois l’un d’eux semble le meilleur: nous croyons entendre encore le maître dire “en réalité il s’agit de…”, mais ce n’est qu’une prééminence d’un instant, relative à l’éclairage actuel de la question:

“II m’est arrivé comme à tout le monde d’avoir l’impression que je venais de comprendre comme il fallait comprendre, qu’autrement on ne comprenait pas complètement. On sent tout le relatif de cet absolu dès qu’on a l’occasion de réfléchir plusieurs fois à une même question difficile à quelque temps d’intervalle. Chaque fois on finit par comprendre et chaque fois d’une façon différente. Puisqu’il n’y a pas une meilleure manière de comprendre, il ne saurait y avoir une meilleure manière d’enseigner.“

Rough translation: Any problem is susceptible to multiple solutions depending on the view where it is studied. Sometimes one of them looks best: we think we hear the teacher say “in reality, it is about…”, but this is only a distinction of a moment, relative to the current light of the question.

“Then to me, like everyone else, I have the impression that I have just understood how we must understand this [concept], and that otherwise we did not understand it completely. We all feel the relative nature of this absolute as soon as we have the opportunity to reflect several times on the same difficult question after some time. Each time we come to understand it and in each time a different way. Since there isn’t a better way to understand, there couldn’t be a better way to teach.”

Le but est donc atteint si, en ce jour, en cet instant, l’accord des auditeurs est obtenu, s’ils sont, non seulement convaincus par voie logique, mais encore éclairés par une sensation que nous connaissons bien: celle de comprendre.

Rough translation: The goal [of teaching] is thus reached if, on this day, in this moment, the listeners all agree; if they are not only convinced by the logical way, but also enlightened by a feeling which we know well: that of understanding.

“Si les rouages d’une démonstration sont démontés pièce à pièce (…) les élèves n’auront rien à objecter mais ils ne seront pas pour cela parvenus à cette conviction intime qui exigerait que l’on ait compris assez pour que les vérités nouvelles se raccordent, s’enchaînent, et de plu sieurs façons, avec celles qui sont déjà familières.”

Rough translation: “If the cogs [of a machine] in a demonstration are dismantled piece by piece, the students will have nothing to object to, but they will also not have achieved this intimate conviction for that which would require that we have understood enough for the new truths to come together and connect in many ways with those that are already familiar.”

“En somme, qu’est-ce que comprendre? Une notion n’a toute son utilité qu’au moment où on l’a assez bien comprise pour croire qu’on l’a toujours possédée et pour être devenu incapable d’y voir autre chose qu’une remarque banale et immédiate. Si l’effort de recherche n’a pas été dissimulé, on ne sera pas dupe de cette illusion de simplicité et nul ne s’étonnera que le simple soit ce que l’on aperçoit en dernier.”

Rough translation: “In short, what does it mean to understand? A notion is only useful when we have understood it well enough to believe that we have always possessed it and to have become incapable of seeing in it anything other than a banal and immediate remark. If the research effort has not been concealed, we will not be fooled by this illusion of simplicity and no one will be surprised that the simple is what we see last.”

Sa méthode d’exposition, de recherche devant les élèves, est la conséquence de sa conception de savant:

“Le mathéma ticien doit explorer le domaine où il travaille, observer le rôle des êtres mathématiques qu’il y rencontre, les regarder vivre, pourrait-on dire, afin d’en discerner les qualités et de recon naître les apports de chacune de ces qualités.”

Rough translation: His [Lebesgue] method of exhibition, of research in front of his pupils, is the consequence of his concept of a scholar:

“The mathematician must explore the field in which he works, observe the role of the mathematical beings he meets there, watch them live, one could say, in order to discern their qualities and to recognise the contributions of each of these qualities.”

Il avait horreur de l’hypocrisie par laquelle on sauve la valeur d’un raisonnement au moyen d’un mot, d’une restriction, d’une incidente que l’on sait être hors de la portée de l’élève et que l’on prononce pour soi seul. Si le professeur est à la hauteur de sa tâche, il possède une lumière qu’il doit trans mettre.

Rough translation: He [Lebesgue] hated the hypocrisy by which one saves the value of a reasoning by means of a word, a restriction, an incident which one knows to be beyond the reach of the pupil and that the person says for themselves alone. If the teacher is up to their task, they have a light which they must transmit.

Surtout pour les jeunes élèves, la perfection de la forme doit être l’aboutissement d’un effort collectif et la préparation doit avant tout porter sur le fond. C’est à cette tâche que notre maître, dans les deux Ecoles normales, essayait de préparer les futurs professeurs:

“Je voudrais que les théorèmes ne soient pour aucun d’eux des arbres plantés à la queue leu leu le long de la route du programme, une route qui ne traverserait rien. Je voudrais qu’ils voient en eux les cimes dominantes d’une forêt touffue et variée, qu’ils sachent cette forêt sillonnée de mille sentiers permettant tout aussi bien de l’explorer, qu’ils se soient aventurés dans quelques-uns d’entre eux, admirant les plus beaux arbres sous tous leurs aspects. Pour être guide dans la forêt, ne faut-il pas bien la connaître et en sentir pleinement la beauté?”

Pour être ce guide, nul n’était plus qualifié que Lebesgue.

Rough translation: Especially for young pupils, the perfection of the form must be presented as the result of a collective effort, and the preparation must be above all focus on the substance. It is for this task that our teacher [Lebesgue], in the two École Normale’s, tried to prepare future teachers:

“I would like theorems not to be trees planted in single file along the road of the program, a road that would cross nothing. I would like them to see in them the dominant summits of a dense and varied forest, to know this forest crisscrossed with a thousand paths allowing it to be explored just as well, that they have ventured into them, admiring the most beautiful trees in all their aspects. To be a guide in this forest, don’t you have to know it well and fully feel its beauty?”

To be this guide, no one was more qualified than Lebesgue.

Lebesgue a exprimé nettement son point de vue:

“Le seul enseignement que peut, à mon avis, donner un professeur, c’est de penser devant ses élèves.”

Et, pour que cette pensée reste vivante et spontanée malgré la suite des années d’enseignement sur des programmes immuables ou presque, deux conditions: enrichir toujours sa propre culture et oublier la mise au point de l’année précédente que l’on pourrait réciter, oublier ce qui a été rodé par les pédagogues pendant des siècles et copié dans tous les manuels, oublier les phrases toutes faites qui rem placent la pensée: c’est en ce sens que Lebesgue prétendait s’être toujours refusé à “savoir” les mathématiques.

L’idéal n’est donc pas de si bien choisir les méthodes, de si bien doser les difficultés, qu’un enchaînement de lemmes, de théorèmes, de corollaires se déroule comme les marches d’un escalier avec une rampe de chaque côté : “Faisons ceci et encore ceci, remarquons cela et encore cela; et après tout ce disparate, Q.E.D.” Tout le monde est capable de suivre ce chemin avec un peu de persévérance, même les yeux fermés.

“C’est mettre les mathématiques en pilules !” disait Lebesgue.

Rough translation: Lebesgue expressed his point of view clearly:

“The only lesson that a teacher can, in my opinion, give is to think in front of their pupils.”

And, so that this thought remains alive despite the following years of teaching development on immutable or almost immutable programs, two conditions should be held: to always be enriching one’s own culture, and forgetting the focus of the previous year that one could recite, forgetting what has been honed by pedagogues for centuries and copied in all the textbooks, forget the ready-made sentences that replace thought: it is in this sense that Lebesgue claimed to have always refused to “know” the mathematics that he taught.

The idea is therefore not to choose methods so well, to measure the difficulties so well, that a sequence of lemmas, theorems, and corollaries unfolds like the steps of a staircase with a ramp on each side: “Let us do this and this again, notice this and this again; and after all this disparity, Q.E.D.” Everyone is able to follow this path with a little perseverance, even with closed eyes.

“It’s putting maths into pills!” said Lebesgue.

From these snippets we can get a flavour of what kind of teacher Lebesgue was, and how much he despised mathematics being taught as routine theories were the same results were proved year on year and with all the ‘real’ mathematics being hidden behind slick arguments; all of the work and discovery being removed.

As a supervisor and person, we can read some of what his first student Paul Montel writes about him:

Sa bonté était inépuisable. Si l’un de ses élèves avait besoin d’une aide matérielle, intellectuelle ou morale, il s’empressait de venir efficacement à son secours. Nous avions coutume de nous raccompagner mutuellement à nos domiciles et nos séparations étaient précédées d’allées et venues fertiles en bavardages.

Rough translation: His goodness was inexhaustible. If one of his students needed material, intellectual or moral help, he hastened to come to his aid effectively. We used to accompany each other back to our homes and our separations were preceded by frequent comings and goings in chatter.

Lebesgue apportait autant d’énergie à défendre le juste qu’il en dépensait à soutenir le vrai. L’injustice le mettait hors de lui. Une élection en mathématiques à l’Académie des sciences lui parut constituer un déni de justice; il cessa pendant plusieurs années d’assister aux séances et ne reprit sa place que lorsque l’injustice lui parut réparée. Au-dessus de tout, il plaçait le sentiment du devoir.

Rough translation: Lebesgue brought as much energy to defending the just as he expended in supporting the true. The injustice pissed him off. An election in mathematics at the Académie des Sciences seemed to him to constitute a denial of justice; so for several years he ceased to attend the sessions and did not resume his place until the injustice appeared to him to be repaired. Above all else, he placed the feeling of duty.

To conclude, Lebesgue possessed a penetrative insight into both academic and personal matters. His legacy is much more than the creation of the Lebesgue integral, and all I can hope is for this post to do him justice.

References

[1] Henri Lebesgue: l’savant, l’professeur, l’homme — Arnaud Denjoy, Lucienne Felix, Paul Montel. Can be found here: https://www.e-periodica.ch/digbib/view?rid=ens-001:1957:3::102

[2] Measure and the Integral — English translation of Lebesgue’s thesis work with an autobiographical sketch of Lebesgue, written by Kenneth O. May. Can be found here: https://www.scribd.com/doc/274680861/Measure-and-the-Integral

[3] ‘Integrale, longueur, aire’ the centenary of the Lebesgue integral — G. T. Q. Hoare & N. J. Lord. Can be found here: https://www.jstor.org/stable/pdf/3621569.pdf

[4] https://mathshistory.st-andrews.ac.uk/Biographies/Lebesgue/

[5] https://www.genealogy.math.ndsu.nodak.edu/id.php?id=86693

[6] Integrale, longueur, aire — dissertation of Henri Lebesgue

[7] Lettres d’Henri Lebesgue à Émile Borel — letters between Lebesgue and Borel, can be found here: http://www.numdam.org/article/CSHM_1991__12__1_0.pdf