James Buchanan, the only American president to hail from Pennsylvania, died on June 1, 1868. This Friday will mark the 150th anniversary of his death.

"Buchanan essentially died of old age at the age of 77," said Stephanie Townrow, museum educator with LancasterHistory.org.

Buchanan retired to his estate at Wheatland, outside of Lancaster, after his tenure as president ended in 1861. There he remained until his death from "a series of symptoms" according to Townrow -- symptoms that his election to the office of the presidency may have indirectly caused.

"In the months leading up to his presidency, he visited Washington D.C.," Townrow said. "He stayed at a hotel, and actually contracted a disease there. Everybody in the hotel got it."

National Hotel disease, which some have speculated to be similar to Legionnaire's disease, killed several people, including three members of Congress.

"Buchanan recovered, but never fully recovered," Townrow said. "Some of those symptoms probably helped to cause his eventual death."

The people of Lancaster came out in droves regardless to honor the former president as the funeral procession carried him to Woodward Hill Cemetery. A newspaper of the time cited "not less than 20,000 onlookers" for the event, according to Townrow.

"Buchanan, when he died, expressly requested in his words 'no pomp or parade.'" she added. "It was probably partly because he didn't know if anyone would come."

As Townrow explained, this may have been partly due to his advanced age for his time -- few of Buchanan's contemporaries would have survived to see 77 years. But it also may have been due to the fact that "Buchanan was not well received as president, even during his own time."

"He was certainly aware of his shaky legacy," she continued. "It's very difficult to be president right before the Civil War. In many ways, he was set up as a Republican scapegoat, because this war was inevitable, and he was in the hotseat."

As a Democrat, Buchanan was at odds with Republican voters and politicians, including Lancaster's Thaddeus Stevens, an influential leader among the Radical Republican faction in Congress. The Radical Republicans were devoted to abolition and staunchly opposed to secession: to many critics of his era, Buchanan failed to address either matter in any meaningful way, helping to set the stage for the Civil War.

The benefit of hindsight has done little to help Buchanan's reputation, either. Historians regularly point to his lack of leadership as one of the escalating factions that led to the Civil War, or at least failed to prevent it.

"But in Lancaster, we really loved him," Townrow said. "They really considered him a hero. I think it was a little bit unexpected. It doesn't seem his reputation really affected his status as a revered hero of Lancaster."

And regardless of politics, Buchanan did still have friends among the Freemasons.

"His friends in Lancaster weren't so much aligned with him politically, they were part of a Masonic lodge," Townrow said. "I think the Masons were part of the reason there was such a large parade also. I think that's where his supporters and friends stem from."

Buchanan was a lifelong bachelor, but he was survived by a niece and nephew, Harriet Lane and James Buchanan Henry, whom he had adopted and raised.