Metal Blade Records founder Brian Slagel did a book signing for his second book, SWING OF THE BLADE, at the Antique Mall of America on Saturday, June 24, 2023.

Metal Blade Records rocked the world following their formation by Brian Slagel in the mid-1980s. Slagel also released the METAL MASSACRE compilations of artists, which introduced the world to bands like Metallica. The label’s odyssey has been a long and interesting one, told masterfully by Mr. Slagel himself in his first book which was released a few years back, FOR THE SAKE OF HEAVINESS.

But can you ever truly get enough Metal Blade?

In recent years, Slagel opened a booth/store at the Antique Mall of America, which while small, has a ton of cool memorabilia, including records, CDs, shirts, and even other rare collectibles. There’s even a Metal Blade museum in town which will soon be open to the public on Saturdays. Did I mention the label has their own vodka and rum?

Fans wanted more stories, so guess what? We now have a second book from Slagel, SWING OF THE BLADE, featuring further stories from Metal Blade and the various artists to have an association with Slagel and the label over the years.

And Slagel, who now resides in Las Vegas, announced he’d be doing a book signing at the Antique Mall of America, where his booth/store is located. Being a local rock and metal fan, I knew I’d have to be there.

Of course, I did immediately have some doubts as to the choice of location for the signing, though these were quickly laid to rest. Given the small size and narrow hallways of the Antique Mall of America, I did question if it was the right place to host a signing, but fortunately, the event itself wasn’t done at Slagel’s store/booth. Some space was cleared away in the Western side of the building with a table added, giving more space to accommodate fans. As a long-time follower of Metal Blade and its founder, this fan hoped for a large turnout. I’d previously attended a vodka signing for the label here in the Vegas Valley at a Lee’s Discount Liquor back in December.

The event was slated to run from 1:00 PM to 4:00 PM; I stayed on the premises for the first two hours of the three. And I was certainly pleased to see a steady flow of headbangers coming and going from start to finish, including many familiar Vegas metal fans and several people I met for the first time. Simply seeing the shirts these fans were wearing was particularly worthwhile, be it Mercyful Fate, Slayer, Judas Priest, or one of countless other groups. I myself, as is the norm for any concert or music-related event, wore one of my battle jackets, which proved to be quite popular with the fellow metalheads, and quite surprisingly, one of the older ladies working at the mall itself!