Excel Curriculum

Excel courses are specialized sessions designed to provide essential academic career and personal success. Every student is exposed to the course's full curriculum however, students in the Excel program at Georgia Tech are responsible for learning a modified portion of the curriculum based on their individual functional level.

Excel courses include content in:

Reading and Writing Comprehension

Math

Science/Technology

Financial Literacy and Money Management

Interpersonal Communication/Social Skills

Community Engagement

Project-Based Learning

Career Exploration and Preparation

Preparing for After-College Transitions

Excel Mentorship Program

Mentors provide a foundation of support as Excel students integrate into the Georgia Tech community. Social inclusion enhances lives by creating an environment where students can meaningfully participate in activities with their same-aged peers. Mentors empower students to navigate campus resources and explore Georgia Tech’s social environment, whether it is joining a campus organization, attending an event, or developing meaningful friendships with other students. Mentors also serve as resources for navigating the greater Atlanta area. Off-campus activities promote the development of social awareness that is transferrable to non-university scenarios vital for independent life after graduation.

Categories of support include:

Academic Mentor – support with developing and enhancing academic skills and providing in-class support as needed.

Social Mentor – facilitate progression toward building social skills and developing a social network on campus.

Fitness Mentor – assist students to develop healthy habits and active lifestyles.

Cooking Mentor – work with students to expand their familiarity in the kitchen and their independent cooking skills.

Independent Living

Excel provides instruction in independent living skills through a classroom-based curriculum and provides additional reinforcement of lessons learned through its peer support program. Students learn to manage a busy schedule with class, work, fitness, cooking instruction, and more.