MTC Training Programs – also known as Corporate and Continuing Education (CCE) – can be completed in a matter of weeks or months. They result in nationally recognized career certifications that can lead to salaries from $40,000 - $80,000. The Training Programs provide education for in-demand careers and for adding new skills in current careers. They are not for academic credit, and you don’t need to apply to the college to attend; however, successful completion of some training courses may provide advanced standing in certain academic programs.

Programs of Study

Small Classes, Experienced Instructors

Classes are small in Corporate and Continuing Education, and individuals get maximum attention. Faculty are chosen for their subject-matter expertise and for their real-life experiences – bringing relevance to the classroom along with valuable information and skills. Instructors also understand the adult learner and apply principles that encourage interactive learning.

Flexible Class Options

Midlands Technical College Corporate and Continuing Education offers many classes that can be completed in shorter time frames than academic classes. Many students attend academic classes and Corporate and Continuing Education at the same time. In addition to day and evening classes, many online and virtual class options are available.

QuickJobs

QuickJobs programs can prepare you for lucrative jobs, quickly.

QuickJobs are career training programs developed for jobs where workers will be in high demand over the next decade. QuickJobs are designed to provide intensive and complete job training; prior experience in a field is not required. Most programs only take a few months to complete, and some can be finished in a matter of weeks.

Career opportunities exist in exciting fields such as Advanced Manufacturing and Skilled Trades, Business, Computer and Information Technology, Health Care, and other Creative Careers. QuickJobs programs offer a wide variety of courses with skill- specific and job-preparatory training. Students can quickly build their skill sets and compete in a growing economy to improve their overall quality of life.

QuickJobs

Tuition Assistance

Tuition assistance, including scholarships, loans, veterans education benefits, and WIOA benefits may be available for many Corporate and Continuing Education programs.

Financial Aid for Training

Refund Policy

If you find it necessary to withdraw from a class, you may be eligible to receive a refund depending on when you withdraw. You must officially withdraw from a class to receive a refund. Contact the Continuing Education Registration Office at 803.732.0432.

You may also request a transfer into another class, or you can send someone else in your place if the substitute student has completed any required prerequisites. If you do not withdraw and do not attend, you are still responsible for payment. Refunds are not available after classes begin. Tuition will be refunded 100% for any classes canceled by the College.