Quickskills

In direct consultation with employers in our region, PTC has designed several programs that will prepare you directly for entry-level employment in two semesters or less. These credentials are stackable—they’ll allow you to get to work quickly, then continue your studies when you’re ready to advance.

After completing one of these certificates, you’ll be qualified to start work in jobs that employers are ready to fill today. And when you are ready to make the move to extend your training, you can apply these credits to other programs at PTC.

Learn More

Computer Skills

Successful businesses are innovative, forward-looking and well-prepared for changes in technology. Be sure that your employees have the latest computer skills to perform their jobs effectively.

Piedmont Technical College offers a wide range of Computer Training courses designed to keep your employees up to date, and to train them in new skills for all of your organization's needs.

Contact us today at (864) 941-8400 to discuss your organization's needs with a business solutions provider.

Learn more

Common Course Offerings

Adobe Photoshop

Basic Computing

Computer Skills 101

Computer Skills 201

Creating Web Pages

Exploring the Internet

Microsoft Access

Microsoft Excel

Microsoft Office

Microsoft Outlook

Microsoft Project

Microsoft Publisher

Microsoft Word

QuickBooks

Visual Basic

Health and Safety

Ensure the safety and well-being of your employees while on the job.

Our safety and health care training courses like CPR, AED, HAZWOPER, and First Aid are a must for most places of business.

Contact us today at (864) 941-8400 to discuss your organization's needs with a business solutions provider.

Learn more

Common Course Offerings

American Heart Association Adult, Child and Infant CPR

American Heart Association AED

American Heart Association First Aid

American Heart Association Instructor's Training

American Red Cross Adult, Child and Infant CPR

American Red Cross AED

American Red Cross First Aid

Basic EMT

Bloodborne Pathogens

Electronic Medical Records

First Responder

Health Unit Coordinator

Medical Coding for Medical Workers

Medical Computer Applications Specialist

Medical Keyboarding and Terminology

Medical Receptionist with Medical Terminology and HIPAA

Medical Scheduler/MISYS Computerized Billing

MISYS Advanced Computerized Medical Billing

NCLEX Review for LPNs and RNs

Nursing Assistant

Pharmacology Made Easy

Leadership & Communication

See the difference that a Piedmont Technical College customized leadership program can make in your organization.

We offer training in customer service, employee development, and leadership development in areas that can be completely tailored to meet your needs.

Contact us today at (864) 941-8400 to discuss your organization's needs with a business solutions provider.

Learn More

Common Course Offerings

Behavioral Style/Building Relationship Versatility

Change Management

Communicating Effectively with Others

Conflict Resolution

Customer Service

Effective Interviewing and Hiring

Employee Relations

Microsoft Access

Eureka! Winning Ways

Personal Coaching for Supervision and Management

Profit 101: From the Eureka! Ranch

Social Networking

Supervisory Certification

Team Building

Time Management

Train-the-Trainer

Quality Improvement

Remain a step ahead of your competition by improving the quality of your product and processes.

We offer management training courses that cover the topics that are most important to you. Example courses include American Society for Quality Certification Review, Mistake Proofing Skills and more.

Contact us today at (864) 941-8400 to discuss your organization's needs with a business solutions provider.

Learn More

Common Course Offerings

A3 Problem Solving

ASQ Certified Quality Auditor (CQA) Exam Prep Course

ASQ Certified Quality Engineer (CQE) Exam Prep Course

ASQ Certified Quality Improvement Associate (CQIA) Exam Prep Course

ASQ Certified Quality Technician (CQT) Exam Prep Course

ASQ-CMQ/OE

Design of Experiments

Error/Mistake Proofing

GD&T - Geometric Dimensioning and Tolerancing

Statistical Process Control

ISO 9001:2015 - Internal Auditor, Lead Auditor

ISO 14001: 2015 - Internal Auditor, Lead Auditor

IATF 16949 - Internal Auditor, Lead Auditor

ISO 45001:2018 - Internal Auditor

Quality Overview

Total Quality Management / Team Problem Solving

Six Sigma Black Belt

Six Sigma Green Belt

Six Sigma Overview

Professional Development

PTC offers a wide variety of relationship building, management enhancing, and professional skill development courses that can increase your organization's success.

Contact us today at (864) 941-8400 to discuss your organization's needs with a business solutions provider.

Learn more

Common Course Offerings

Administrative Professionals

APICS CPIM Exam Review Course

Constable Inservice

Conversational Spanish

Customized Spanish Program

Customer Service

Defensive Driving

Event Planning

Floral Design Certification

Pool and Spa Operator

Project Management

Real Estate

ServSafe

SHRM Exam Review

Supervisory Development

LEAN Manufacturing

LEAN Training can help reduce the total amount of time and resources utilized in your processes while increasing overall value to your business.

Take advantage of one of the most practical training opportunities available. LEAN can increase productivity, impact results, save time and improve processes.

These courses cover topics like Supply Chain Management, Visual Management, and Value Stream Mapping to help provide the groundwork for more productive and less wasteful processes.

Contact us today at (864) 941-8400 to discuss your organization's needs with a business solutions provider.

Learn more

Common Course Offerings

5S

Cellular Flow / Plant Layout

Constraint Management / Theory of Constraints (TOC)

Kaizen Training and Facilitation

Kanban / Pull

LEAN 101: High Variability / Low Volume

LEAN 101: Principles of LEAN Manufacturing

Office LEAN

SMED / Quick Changeover

Supply Chain Management

Total Productive Maintenance (TPM)

Training Within Industry (TWI) - Job Instruction, Job Relations, Job Methods

Value Stream Mapping

Visual Management

Industrial Maintenance

Invest in your organization's bottom line.

Piedmont Technical College's innovative, industry-specific Industrial Maintenance programs can help you establish a highly skilled workforce and increase the safety of your employees on the job.

Contact us today at (864) 941-8400 to discuss your organization's needs with a business solutions provider.

Learn More

Common Course Offerings

Arc Flash Safety Training

Blueprint Reading - GD&T Print Reading

CNC - Computer Numerical Control

Cranes & Hoists

Customized Industrial Testing

Forklift Safety Training & Driving School

HAZMAT

HAZWOPER

HVAC

Industrial Electronics

Industrial Hygiene

Mechanical Maintenance

OSHA 10-hr Safety

OSHA 30-hr Safety

PLC Training

Precision Measurement

PRIMEed

RCRA

Skills Assessments

Small Engine Repair

Wastewater

Weatherization: BPI Certifications

Welding Skills