IT is about more than providing great support, it is about having the best solutions in place for your business.

Accurately scoped and executed technology projects provide many benefits for your organization:

Install powerful solutions to best accomplish your goals

Transform technology to gain advantages over competitors

Simplify technology and reduce overhead

Centralize and standardize systems

Upgrade solutions to access new capabilities

Improve security and compliance

Optimize workflows and recapture lost employee productivity

Reduce the total-cost-of-ownership (TCO) of your solutions

Why does DAG Tech excel at executing technology projects?

Understanding. We listen and understand your strategic business objectives and design the best technology solutions for your business.

Clear Planning. We are clear on what we’re doing, what results we want, and how to get there.

Experience. DAG Tech’s CxO strategic technical consultants are highly experienced in a wide range of systems and technologies.

Team. Our project team consists of skilled system engineers and architects, security and compliance experts, and watchful project managers.

Results. We’ve designed, managed, and executed thousands of projects across a wide diversity of industries, and have a track record of excellent technology improvement results.

IT projects on-time, within budget, and with great results.

Damian Richard

Trustindex verifies that the original source of the review is Google.

I have worked exclusively with DAG Tech and it’s skilled professionals for all of my IT solutions. As a professional myself, my clients and their satisfaction are the most important aspects of my business. DAG’s cutting-edge IT infrastructure ensures that I have the seamless, secure, and uninterrupted communications and delivery of services. When new technology emerges, DAG is the first to implement and deploy, providing cost savings and improving quality. At a time when businesses, small and large, are under the threat of malicious actors, DAG’s network security applications give you the peace of mind that continuity in operations will not be affected.

Bachis Balfe

Trustindex verifies that the original source of the review is Google.

DAG Tech is a very supportive company. Daniel is always very helpful and very knowledgeable. It is a growing company and always delighted to work with.

Rodney Omanoff

Trustindex verifies that the original source of the review is Google.

DAG Tech is the best, most IT service company out there. The CEO Daniel and his staff take a personal interest in making sure your computer needs are met. If you have been looking for a great IT company, this is it.

Bob Powers

Trustindex verifies that the original source of the review is Google.

What an amazing experience I've had working alongside DAG Tech. I say "alongside" as they truly made me feel a part of the team. The quick and decisive actions that they were able to take helped keep my business operational during some dire times. Hats off to that group!

Anil Melwani

Trustindex verifies that the original source of the review is Google.

DAG has been the exclusive IT and VOIP provider for my CPA/tax firm for several years now. Switching to them was one of the best decisions we ever made and we are constantly recommending and referring them to clients & friends. They definitely know what they are doing when it comes to dealing with computers, e-mail, phones and all other aspects of technology.

Kadeem Francis

Trustindex verifies that the original source of the review is Google.

Amazing IT Firm the best in NYC!!!

I I

Trustindex verifies that the original source of the review is Google.

The guys are fast and professional, we're pleased working with them. Everything from the initial assessment to the procurement and deployment was done lightning fast and with the quality that can't be beat. Did I mention the prices? They are worth mentioning :)