Level I: This course provides the basic concepts and skills needed to start working with Microsoft Access databases. Students will learn how to navigate the Access interface, and how to create and modify tables, queries, forms and reports. The course assumes you know how to use a computer, and that you're familiar with Microsoft Windows. It does not assume that you've used a different version of Access or another database system before.

Level II: This course covers concepts and skills for more advanced database users. Students will learn how to create advanced queries, forms, and reports, how to create macros and how to manage databases. It assumes you have completed Access 2016/2013 Level 1 or have equivalent database skills.

Level I: This course provides the basic concepts and skills students need to start being productive with Microsoft Excel 2016: how to create, save, share and print worksheets that contain various kinds of calculations and formatting. This course, and the two that come after, map to the objectives of the Microsoft Office Specialist and Expert exams for Excel 2016. Students will benefit most from this course if they want to accomplish basic workplace tasks in Excel 2016, or if they want to have a solid foundation for continuing on to become an Excel Expert. If they intend to take a Microsoft Office Specialist or Expert exam for Excel, this coursework is a good place to start their preparation, but they will need to continue on to other courses in the series to be fully prepared for either exam.

Level II: This course builds on the basic concepts and skills of our Level 1 course to provide more advanced tools for analysis and presentation of complex, realistic data in Microsoft Excel 2016: how to manage complex workbooks, build more complex functions, use data analysis tools, make an impact with powerful chart and presentation features, and collaborate with other users. The three levels of our Excel 2016 courses map to the objectives of the Microsoft Office Specialist and Expert exams for Excel 2016. Students will benefit most from this course if they want to use Excel 2016 to perform real-world tasks such as rearranging and presenting complex data. If they intend to take a Microsoft Office Specialist or Expert exam for Excel, this course will continue their preparation, but they will need to continue on to the Level 3 course, particularly to prepare for the Expert exam.

Level III: This course builds on the concepts and skills of our Level 1 and Level 2 courses to provide advanced tools for solving real-world problems in Microsoft Excel 2016: lookup and decision-making functions, auditing and error-handling, array functions, date and text functions, importing and exporting, what-if-analysis and macros. The three levels of our Excel 2016 courses map to the objectives of the Microsoft Office Specialist and Expert exams for Excel 2016. Students will benefit most from this course if they want to use Excel 2016 to perform real-world tasks such as handling and getting information from large amounts of data from sources inside out and outside of Excel, creating output that varies according to conditions, manipulating dates and text, and automating repetitive tasks. If they intend to take a Microsoft Office Specialist or Expert exam for Excel, this course will complete their coverage of all the objectives for both exams.

Level I: This class provides the basic concepts and skills to start being productive with Microsoft Excel 2013: how to create, save, share, and print worksheets that contain various kinds of calculations and formatting. This course, and the two that come after, map to the objectives of the Microsoft Office Specialist and Expert exams for Excel 2013.

Students will benefit most from this course if they want to accomplish basic workplace tasks in Excel 2013, or if they want to have a solid foundation for continuing on to become an Excel expert. If they intend to take a Microsoft Office Specialist or Expert exam for Excel, this course is a good place to start their preparation, but they will need to continue on to other courses in the series to be fully prepared for either exam.

The course assumes students know how to use a computer, and that they're familiar with Microsoft Windows. It does not assume that they've used a different version of Excel or another spreadsheet program before.

Level II: In this course you will use advanced formulas and work with various tools to analyze data in spreadsheets. You also will organize table data, present data as charts and enhance the look and appeal of workbooks by adding graphical objects. Upon successful completion of this course, you will be able to: use advanced formulas; organize worksheet and table data using various techniques; create and modify charts; analyze data using PivotTables, Slicers, and Pivot Charts; insert and modify graphic objects in a worksheet; and customize and enhance workbooks and the Microsoft Office Excel environment.

Level III: This course will automate some common Excel tasks, apply advanced analysis techniques to more complex data sets, troubleshoot errors, collaborate on worksheets, and share Excel data with other applications. Upon successful completion of this course, you will be able to: enhance productivity and efficiency by streamlining the workflow; collaborate with other workbook users; audit worksheets; analyze data; work with multiple workbooks; import and export data; integrate Excel data with the web; and structure workbooks with XML.

Level I: This course will automate some common Excel tasks, apply advanced analysis techniques to more complex data sets, troubleshoot errors, collaborate on worksheets, and share Excel data with other applications. Upon successful completion of this course, you will be able to: enhance productivity and efficiency by streamlining the workflow; collaborate with other workbook users; audit worksheets; analyze data; work with multiple workbooks; import and export data; integrate Excel data with the web; and structure workbooks with XML.

Level II: This course provides more advanced concepts and skills for Microsoft Outlook 2016 productivity: how to organize Outlook items, use advanced message properties and collaborate with others. This course and the previous one map to the objectives of the Microsoft Office Specialist exam for Outlook 2016. You will benefit most from this course if you have a basic knowledge of Outlook 2016 and plan to continue on to become an Outlook expert. If you intend to take a Microsoft Office Specialist exam for Outlook, this course is a good place to complete your preparation, but you will need to complete both courses in the series to be fully prepared for the exam.

Level I: This course provides the basic concepts and skills that you need to start being productive with Microsoft PowerPoint 2016: How to create, navigate, format and customize PowerPoint presentations. This course and the Level 2 course map to the objectives of the Microsoft Office exams for PowerPoint 2016. You will benefit most from this course if you want to accomplish basic workplace tasks in PowerPoint 2016, or if you want to have a solid foundation for continuing on to master PowerPoint. If you intend to take a Microsoft Office exam for PowerPoint, this course is a good place to start your preparation, but you will also need to complete the Level 2 course to be fully prepared for either exam.

Level II: This course provides advanced concepts and skills for PowerPoint 2016 power users: how to use advanced formatting features along with animation and transition techniques, add and format media, track corrections and work with multiple presentations, create custom slide shows and work with security and sharing options. This course, along with the preceding one, maps to the objectives of the Microsoft Office Specialist exam for PowerPoint 2016. Objective coverage is marked throughout the course. You will benefit most from this course if you want to build on fundamental PowerPoint skills to become a power user, or if you want to have a solid foundation in PowerPoint's advanced features. This course assumes that you have completed PowerPoint 2016 Level 1 or have equivalent knowledge in the core skills of using Microsoft PowerPoint 2016.

Level I: This class is an instructor-led course manual that covers the basic concepts and skills to begin using Microsoft PowerPoint 2013: navigate the PowerPoint environment; create presentations; format slides; create and modify shapes, images, charts, and tables; and customize presentations. This course, and the following one, maps to the Microsoft Office Specialist exam for PowerPoint 2013.

Students will benefit most from this course if they want to accomplish create basic business presentation using PowerPoint 2013, or if they want to have a solid foundation for continuing on to become a PowerPoint expert. If they intend to take a Microsoft Office Specialist exam for PowerPoint, this course is a good place to start their preparation, but they will need to continue both courses in the series to be fully prepared for the exam.

The course assumes students know how to use a computer, and that they're familiar with Microsoft Windows. It does not assume that they've used a different version of PowerPoint or a similar desktop application before.

Level II: This course enhances your presentation by using features that will transform it into a powerful means of communication. Customization of the PowerPoint interface to suit your requirements and use features to create dynamic and visually appealing presentations will be discussed. Upon successful completion of this course, you will be able to: customize the PowerPoint environment; customize a design template; add SmartArt graphics to a presentation; add special effects to a presentation; customize a slide show; collaborate on a presentation; and secure and distribute a presentation.

Level I: This course provides the basic concepts and skills to start being productive with Microsoft Word 2016: how to create, format, and set up a document, and how to add graphics and tables. This course, and the two that come after, map to the objectives of the Microsoft Office Specialist and Expert exams for Word 2016. Students will benefit most from this course if they want to accomplish basic workplace tasks in Word 2016, or if they want to have a solid foundation for continuing on to become Word Expert. If students intend to take a Microsoft Office Specialist or Expert exam for Word, this course is a good place to start preparation, but they will need to complete the other courses in the series to be fully prepared for either exam.

Level II: This course will provide the concepts and skills to use some more advanced features of Microsoft Word 2016, including enhanced formatting, references, editing, and sharing and saving to various formats. This course, and the two others in this series, map to the objectives of the Microsoft Office Specialist and Expert exams for Word 2016. Students will benefit most from this course if they want to accomplish advanced workplace tasks in Word 2016, or if they want to have a solid foundation for continuing on to become a Word Expert. If they intend to take a Microsoft Office Specialist or Expert exam for Word, this course provides and important part of their preparation, but they should also complete the other courses in the series to be fully prepared for either exam.

Level III: This level includes an instructor-led course manual that covers advanced skills for Microsoft Word 2016 power users: advanced formatting features, document management, references, data fields and sources, macros and forms. This course, and the two that precede it, maps to the Microsoft Office Specialist and Expert exams for Word 2016. Students will benefit most from this course if they want to build on fundamental Word skills to become a power user, or if they want to have a solid foundation in Word's advanced features before continuing on to more complex document management or VBA programming topics. If they intend to take a MOS Expert exam for Word 2016, this course will teach them the necessary skills, but they will need to complete the first two courses in this series to successfully complete the Microsoft Office Specialist exam.

Level I: Word 2013 Level 1 provides the basic concepts and skills to start being productive with Microsoft Word 2013: how to create, format, and set up a document, and how to add graphics and tables. This course, and the two that come after, map to the objectives of the Microsoft Office Specialist and Expert exams for Word 2013.

Students will benefit most from this course if they want to accomplish basic workplace tasks in Word 2013, or if they want to have a solid foundation for continuing on to become Word Expert. If students intend to take a Microsoft Office Specialist or Expert exam for Word, this course is a good place to start preparation, but they will need to complete the other courses in the series to be fully prepared for either exam.

The course assumes that students know how to use a computer, and that they are familiar with Microsoft Windows. It does not assume that they’ve used a different version of Word or another word processing program.

Level II: This course will provide the concepts and skills to use some more advanced features of Microsoft Word 2013, including enhanced formatting, references, editing, and sharing, and saving to various formats. This course, and the two others in this series, map to the objectives of the Microsoft Office Specialist and Expert exams for Word 2013.

Students will benefit most from this course if they want to accomplish advanced workplace tasks in Word 2013, or if they want to have a solid foundation for continuing on to become a Word Expert. If they intend to take a Microsoft Office Specialist or Expert exam for Word, this course provides and important part of their preparation, but they should also complete the other courses in the series to be fully prepared for either exam.

The course assumes that students know how to use a computer, and that they are familiar with Microsoft Windows and the basics of Microsoft Word.

Level III: This session will address how to create, manage, revise and distribute documents. Upon successful completion of this course, you will be able to: use Word with other programs; collaborate on documents; manage document versions; add reference marks and notes; simplify the use of long documents; secure a document and create forms.