Sensenich Propeller, USA

Without a method of converting the power produced by the engine into useful thrust an aircraft would just be sitting still and creating a lot of noise and not get anywhere. In the past, all kinds of different propeller designs were tried: sometimes flat wooden blades, from one bladed counter weighted to multiple blade models rotating at various speeds.

Variable pitch propellers have a distinct advantage compared to fixed pitch models. This translates into a more fuel efficient, higher performing aircraft with much improved rate of climb and shorter takeoffs for those tight places!

Sensenich Propeller was established in 1932 to manufacture fixed pitch wood aircraft propellers for the growing aviation market. In 1999 they started their highly succesful line of ground adjustable composite propellers for Airboat, Aircraft and UAV’s. The company has two manufacturing locations: Lancaster, Pennsylvania. and Plant City Florida. USA.

Right on the Nose

Sensenich provides a complete line of aviation propellers. These include fixed pitch wood propellers for antique, light sport and experimental aircraft. Aluminum propellers for general aviation aircraft such as Cessna and Piper along with experimental aircraft such as Vans RV and Glassairs. They also carry composite ground adjustable propellers for light sport aircraft using Rotax, Jabiru, Continental and Lycoming engines.

Built-in stops

Sensenich’s composite props are pitch adjustable with built-in stops to prevent the selection of any inefficient pitch. The carbon construction minimizes their susceptibility to the cumulative effects of harmonic vibration damage. By design, these blades are stronger than similar propellers. Their stronger materials allow the weight of the propeller to aerodynamically optimize the flight.

EZ Hub System

Sensenich’s new composite propellers work with one of three, all-new hub systems. Featuring patent-pending technology, they are much simpler to use, allowing users to accurately set a pitch without the use of a protractor, special tools or gauges. This makes sure there is no difference in blade angle between the blades on the same propeller.

Pitch Cylinder

Sensenichs new Pitch Cylinder Hub System allows its users to set a broad range of pitches, using the system’s index mark as a reference point when making adjustments. They adjust 16 degrees in pitch, affording maximum performance within an efficient aerodynamic envelope. The blade pins lock into the blade pin slot of the pitch cartridge, allowing the blades to move back and forth in tandem for ease of setting pitch.

Pitch Change

With the new Pitch Cartridge System the pilot can choose from a wide range of pitch settings. The blade pins lock into the spring-loaded pitch cartridge, and the pitch is set. To change the pitch, you simply loosen the clamp bolts, replace the pitch cartridge, lock the blade pins in the pitch cartridge and torque the clamp bolts.

More detailed information in the next pdf file from Sensenich: Sensenich Composite Propellers.

Company information

Sensenich Propeller can be contacted at the following addresses:

Sensenich Wood Propeller Co.2008 Wood CourtPlant City, FL 33563 USA +1 813 752-3711Sensenich Propeller Manufacturing Co., Inc.14 Citation LaneLititz, Pa. 17543 USA +1 717 569-0435 [email protected] or [email protected] www.sensenich.com www.facebook.com/Sensenich-Propeller-Manufacturing-105127676220595/

Text and images used with permission (pending) of Sensenich Propellers.

Written by EAI.