Grand Duke Dmitri Pavlovich and Grand Duchess Maria Pavlvona, The Younger, 1903

Grand Duke Dimitri and Grand Duchess Maria were the children of Grand Duke Paul Alexandrovich of Russia and his first wife Grand Duchess Alexandra Georgievna of Russia, née Princess Alexandra of Greece.

Grand Duke Paul was the eighth child of Tsar Alexander II of Russia by his first wife Empress Maria Alexandrovna, and Princess Alexandra's mother was a granddaughter of Tsar Nicholas I and Princess Charlotte of Prussia, and therefore Paul Alexandrovich's first cousin.

Alexandra died just hours after Dmitri's premature birth. Dimitri survived with the help of his uncle Grand Duke Sergei Alexandrovich of Russia, who gave Dmitri the baths prescribed by the doctors, wrapped him in cotton wool and kept him in a cradle filled with hot water bottles to keep his temperature regulated.

Dmitri and his sister Maria lived in St Petersburg with their father until 1902 when Grand Duke Paul married a divorced commoner, Olga Pistolkors, and was banished from Russia by the Emperor. He was not allowed to take his children with him into exile, so they were sent to live with their uncle, Grand Duke Sergei and aunt, Grand Duchess Elizabeth Feodorovna, née Princess Elisabeth of Hesse and by Rhine (Empress Alexandra's sister).

In 1908 Grand Duchess Maria married her first husband, Prince Wilhelm, Duke of Södermanland. The couple had one son, Prince Lennart, Duke of Småland and later Count Bernadotte af Wisborg. The marriage wasn't a success and they divorced in 1914.

Dimitri was a conspirator in the murder of Grigori Rasputin in 1916, and as a consequence was exiled to the Persian front where he served briefly under General Nikolai Baratov at his headquarters in the Persian city of Kazvin. After the February revolution of 1917 he lived in Tehran for a while before moving to London, and then Paris. He married an American heiress, Audrey Emery, in 1926 morganatically, and she was granted the title Her Serene Highness, Princess Romanovskaya-Ilyinskaya by his cousin Cyril. They divorced in 1937. Their only child, Prince Paul Romanovsky-Ilyinsky, grew up in France, England and the United States, and served as a US Marine in the Korean War. In 1989 he was elected Mayor of Palm Beach, Florida, and thus became the only Romanov descendant known to have held elected public office.

Grand Duke Dimitri died in 1942, however the cause of his death is unknown since it is not listed on his death certificate.

Grand Duchess Maria died at the age of sixty-eight in 1958 in the border town of Konstanz in West Germany, and was buried beside her brother Dmitri in the vault of the church in Mainau, a possession of her son Lennart.