Galaxies consist of stars, dust, and gas bound together by gravity, and we see them from afar as stars. People have appreciated galaxies with an other-worldly fascination since we first looked up at the night sky. Our place in the galaxy continues to fascinate us today, as our compilation of galaxy quotes shows.

Here, you’ll find quotes about life beyond Earth, our significance within the universe, in literature, and many more. These quotes will undoubtedly get you thinking about what it means to be human on our own planet and beyond.

Best Galaxy Quotes

The universe consists of billions of galaxies with billions of stars. Humans tend to focus on our lives in our perceived big world. Carl Sagan said, “We’re made of star stuff.”

This statement is not just a saying but a truth. The Milky Way is mind-blowing. One of the most fascinating things about galaxies is their various shapes. For instance, the Milky Way has a spiral shape with lots of energy at the center, while many other galaxies have different forms.

The image of the Milky Way is one of the most beautiful sights. As seen from the Earth, it appears as a hazy band of light. As we contemplate the beauty of our galaxy and universe, let’s kick off this first section with some of our favorite galaxy quotes.

Galaxy Quotes About Looking Up At The Stars

Related: You might also like our star quotes for more twinkly brightness in the night sky.

Galaxy Quotes About Science And Understanding The Universe

When we think of “nature,” many people immediately associate it with greenery and animals. Although a part of it, nature represents something even more extensive. In its broadest sense, we consider the universe when we look up in contemplation. That is everything that the human being didn’t and can’t make or produce.

The galaxy, however, remains an area that we have barely scratched the surface of understanding due to its vast and ever-expanding nature. Here, we feature some quotes about galaxies that’ll get you thinking about our understanding of the universe.

For more reading, check out our moon quotes & night quotes, appreciating all that is up and above us.

Quotes About Life and Living Referencing Galaxies And Our Place

Many people see themselves as intrinsically connected to the universe. People like Carl Sagan, an American astronomer, popularized astronomy and the study of the galaxy. Many galaxy quotes and sayings reflect on our lives. This section explores fascinating quotes about life and living related to our place and significance in the galaxy.

The universe appears to be expanding, much like cooked pasta, as illustrated by observed light from distant galaxies shifting toward the Marinara Spectrum. Some scientists cite this as support for His preference for red sauce, but they are most likely idiots.

~ Bobby Henderson

Quotes About Galaxies And Our Significance

“Who am I?” and “What are we doing here?” remain the greatest questions that man continues to explore. First, we get to know our planet, earth. Then, we explore other planets and, after that, our galaxy and others.

Pondering on these subjects can leave us feeling utterly insignificant in the grand scheme. It’s important to remember that there’s so much more to the galaxy we call home and the ones beyond it despite our mighty civilizations. From our place on our little blue-green planet, we can ponder on the nature of existence. If you enjoy reflecting on this subject, here are some galaxy quotes about human significance.

The Big Bang theory is based on the fact that the universe is expanding right now. And if you rewind the tape, the universe appears to be shrinking. If you rewind the tape far enough, eventually the universe must be just one singular point.

~ Oliver Gaspirtz

Quotes About Life On Earth And Our Galaxy

Following our earlier quotes about life beyond Earth, we also examine quotes about life on Earth. After all, this is where we’re all living and existing. Below, we’ve compiled some interesting quotes exploring the galaxy and life on our planet.

Quotes From The Arts And Literature Referencing Galaxies

Many writers draw inspiration from the universe when creating their work. Apart from fiction pieces, countless non-fiction literature books explore the topic of galaxies from science fiction through dreamy narratives of imaginary worlds. Here, we feature some quotes from the arts and literature that somehow reference the galaxy.

Quotes About Life Beyond Earth

The subject of life beyond earth is often up for debate. However, reflecting on the unexplored planets and billions of galaxies makes it easy to become curious. You're not alone if you’ve ever questioned whether there’s much more beyond the human race and other life on our planet.

We may not know the specifics of everything; however, that doesn’t stop us from thinking about the chances of unknown worlds. This section features quotes that explore reflections on life beyond Earth.

Hitchhikers Guide to the Galaxy Quotes

The Hitchhiker’s Guide to the Galaxy is a comedy science-fiction franchise. Science fiction and sci-fi lovers will appreciate the universe that the creator, Douglas Adam, created with this work. The Hitchhiker’s Guide to the Galaxy started as a comedy radio drama series. Afterward, novels, comics, and stage shows followed. Below, we highlight some quotes from Hitchhiker’s Guide to the Galaxy.