➤ Hotel on the Cay | U.S. Virgin Islands

You're eligible for a Genius discount at Hotel on the Cay! To save at this property, all you have to do is sign in.

Located on lush Protestant Cay and accessible only by boat, this Christiansted landmark hotel features a private beach. Free WiFi is available in all areas.

A private balcony, a kitchenette and cable TV are found in each bright, decorative room at Hotel on the Cay. Coffee-making facilities and a DVD player are also included.

Guests of the Cay Hotel can go snorkelling or enjoy tours by wave runner or kayak. Windsurfing, sailing and paddle boat rentals are also available.

An on-site bar and a restaurant are open to all guests of the cay.

Central Christiansted is a 2-minute ferry ride from the hotel. The Buccaneer Golf Club is less than 5 km away.

In the fully equipped kitchenette, guests will find a refrigerator, kitchenware, a microwave and a tea and coffee maker. This air-conditioned double room is comprised of a flat-screen TV with satellite channels, a private bathroom as well as a terrace. The unit has 2 beds.

Guests can make meals in the kitchenette that features a refrigerator, kitchenware, a microwave and a tea and coffee maker. This air-conditioned single room is comprised of a flat-screen TV with satellite channels, a private bathroom as well as a terrace. The unit has 1 bed.

This spacious suite comes with 1 living room, 1 separate bedroom and 1 bathroom with a shower and free toiletries. In the fully equipped kitchenette, guests will find a refrigerator, kitchenware, a microwave and a toaster. Boasting a terrace, this suite also features air conditioning, a tea and coffee maker and a flat-screen TV with satellite channels. The unit has 2 beds.

This spacious apartment comes with 1 living room, 2 separate bedrooms and 1 bathroom with a shower and free toiletries. Guests can make meals in the kitchenette that features a refrigerator, kitchenware, a microwave and a toaster. This apartment has air conditioning, a tea and coffee maker, a flat-screen TV with satellite channels and a terrace. The unit has 3 beds.