The Technical State University of Quevedo started its activities on January 22, 1976, as an Extension of the "Luis Vargas Torres" University of Esmeraldas, opening its doors to science and knowledge with the courses of Forestry Engineering and Zootechnical Engineering.

After multiple efforts by the Quevedo community, the National Congress finally created the Technical State University of Quevedo – UTEQ, through the Republic Law of January 26, 1984, published in Official Registry No. 674 on February 1, 1984.

This higher education institution started its activities as UTEQ with the Faculty of Agricultural Sciences, later renamed the Faculty of Agricultural Sciences (FCA). Subsequently, the Faculties of Animal Sciences (FCP), Business Sciences (FCE), Environmental Sciences (FCAMB), Engineering Sciences (FCI), and the Distance Studies Unit (UED) were created, offering programs in line with the demands of the environment and student demand.

The university also has the Postgraduate Unit, where recognized and approved Master programs are carried out by the Higher Education Council (CES), contributing to the strengthening of a postgraduate culture that meets the needs for advanced education of the institutional, local, regional, and national professional population.

Currently, UTEQ is a pioneering university in the training of professionals, ready to serve our country, leaders, competitive, with critical thinking, and with human values, committed to the development of a just, equitable, and solidarity society, to contribute to improving the quality of life and promoting sustainable development in Ecuador.

The Technical State University of Quevedo is a university accredited by the Council for Evaluation, Accreditation, and Assurance of the Quality of Higher Education (CACES).

Message from the Rector

The State Technical University of Quevedo is a pioneering institution in the agricultural field in Ecuador, innovative and with a consolidated leadership in the region. At UTEQ our premise is the culture of excellence. Our university community is committed to continuous improvement, thus demonstrating that the Ecuadorian public university is also an example of development and progress.

Our research is vigorous and oriented towards solving Ecuador's problems. The social use of knowledge is vital for society and at UTEQ it is part of our perspective.

We understand the social responsibility and commitment to the present and future of our country and that is why the professional training of our students is of paramount importance.

UTEQ's imprint is an imprint on higher education.

Dr. Eduardo Díaz Ocampo, PhD.