Founded in 1984, the Universidad Técnica Estatal de Quevedo (Technical State University of Quevedo) is a non-profit public higher education institution located in the suburban setting of the small city of Quevedo (population range of 50,000-249,999 inhabitants), Los Rios. This institution also has branch campuses in Mocache, La Represa and Murocumba. Officially recognized by the Consejo de Aseguramiento de la Calidad de la Educación Superior del Ecuador (Council for Quality Assurance of Higher Education of Ecuador), Universidad Técnica Estatal de Quevedo (UTEQ) is a medium-sized (uniRank enrollment range: 9,000-9,999 students) coeducational Ecuadorian higher education institution. Universidad Técnica Estatal de Quevedo (UTEQ) offers courses and programs leading to officially recognized higher education degrees such as pre-bachelor's degrees (i.e. certificates, diplomas, associate or foundation), bachelor's degrees and master's degrees in several areas of study. See the uniRank degree levels and areas of study table below for further details. This 40-year-old Ecuadorian higher-education institution has a selective admission policy based on entrance examinations and students' past academic records and grades. The acceptance rate range is 50-59% making this Ecuadorian higher education organization an averagely selective institution. International students are welcome to apply for enrollment. UTEQ also provides several academic and non-academic facilities and services to students including a library, sports facilities, financial aids and/or scholarships, study abroad and exchange programs, online courses and distance learning opportunities, as well as administrative services.

Gender Admission

This institution admits Men and Women (coed).

Admission Selection

Has Technical State University of Quevedo a selective admission policy? Yes, based on entrance examinations and students' past academic records and grades.

Admission Rate

Technical State University of Quevedo's acceptance rate range is 50-59% making this institution an averagely selective higher education institution.

Student Enrollment

Technical State University of Quevedo has an enrollment range of 9,000-9,999 students making it a medium-sized institution.

Academic Staff

This institution has a range of 500-599 academic employees (Faculty).

Control Type

Technical State University of Quevedo is a public higher education institution.

Entity Type

Technical State University of Quevedo is a non-profit higher education institution.

Financial Aid

This institution offers one or more of the following financial aid for eligible students: scholarships, grants, loans, tuition waivers, emergency financial aid etc.

Study Abroad

This institution offers study abroad and exchange program opportunities for its students.

Distance Learning

This institution provides a distance learning mode for certain programs or courses.