Welcome to The Dutch Football Club. We’re here to bring the Dutch Football Culture to North Texas to cultivate A PASSION for the game, DEVELOP players the right way to reach their maximum potential so they can COMPETE at the highest possible level.

The club’s Low-Cost, High-Value model approach is based on the Dutch philosophy, methodologies, and principles implemented in clubs across the Netherlands. Holland is known for the most successful youth development systems in the world and renowned for producing 100s of top players like Virgil van Dijk, Johan Cruijff, and so many more. Our highly qualified coaching staff follows the famous Dutch soccer curriculum that guides players from 6 years of age through to 18. We implement an economic and guided discovery training process where we accelerate the development of the players’ technical skill sets—enabling us to rapidly level up our focus to the game’s tactical, strategic, and thinking sides.

Skills at an accelerated level

✅ Come have FUN and improve your Dribbling, Passing, Shooting.

✅ Learn the game by playing in 1v1, 2v2 and 4v4 SMALL SIDED GAMES.

✅ Open for Beginning, intermediate and advanced players.

✅ Led by Coerver Licensed Coaches who’ve played & coached at the highest level.

AGES: Boys & Girls Born 2007 to 2017

WHEN: Friday Evenings

5:00-6:00pm - Developmental Level

6:00-7:15pm - Intermediate/Advanced Level

WHERE: Stonebriar Community Church Fields of Faith Soccer Facility (4801 Legendary Dr, Frisco, TX 75034)

COST: $240 Fall Curriculum (12+ Sessions)

IMPORTANT:

Bring a Ball & Water

Wear Cleats

If you haven’t enrolled yet, SIGNUP & DETAILS.

Our Dutch Lion and Lioness teams are organized by the year the players were born. Teams have a dedicated professional coach and usually train multiple times per week with a game or tournament on the weekend. You can learn more here.

Our soccer camps are a week-long curriculum themed daily to a different skill set such as dribbling, passing, receiving and shooting.

Each day we progress through the fundamentals and advance to the game’s thinking side by applying the training in game-like situations.

You can enroll and get more info here.