On the tide of an average demand for foreign currency, the Moldovan leu rate started to slowly decrease, again approaching the psychologically important rate - MDL20:US$1. The visible pressure of major banks on the Moldovan leu rate, forecasted by dealers last week, did not last long due to a high supply of dolars and euros, on one hand, and due to the growing desire to buy currency, on the other hand.

Currency market participants target for October 21 a very close approaching of the Moldovan leu rate to the boundary rate, when the cashless dollar will be bought at the rate of MDL19.98:US$1, in order to get psychologically prepared for crossing this border already at the end of this week.

Foreign exchange offices are keeping the foreign currency position they kept even in those several days, when the leu has been slightly strengthening. The work of offices in such days is conducted on the principle: they sold what they bought, in order to close the day in currency position, said one of currency dealers.

Due to such situation in exchange offices, banks started to satisfy client’s demand for cashless dollar and euro.

“Despite the buying of currency, we cannot say about an agitation on the currency market. It is impossible in the situation, when on the market there is a category of clients, who need lei which are quite few”, said representative of a bank.

On the question whether the National Bank of Moldova (NBM) imposes or not restrictions on volumes of buying both convertible and non-convertible currency, the dealer said that the regulator is reliable in this regard.

“There were times when banks were coming to the rescue to each other, sharing foreign currencies on the interbank market. But now, the market clearly feels lack of national currency, which is necessary to be bought from the regulator, paying for Moldovan lei a commission of 0.5% of the purchased sum”, the interlocutor said, adding that for example for importing or exporting convertible currency, the bank is applying a 0.1% commission, which is an absolutely unfair regime.

At the request to characterize financial market’s reaction on scandals, which are shocking the society in connection to suspicion of abuse of power and corruption, Infotag interviewees said that in fact, everyone knew about the committed disgraces.

“The entire society perceives such information like a challenge, which shocks people. If usually the water boils at 100 degrees, now it can boil even at 50 degrees”, one of bankers said.

Other market participants pointed at an obvious misbalance in the dose and contents of the information the society has to digest.

“Those, who were boldly taking money, are presented as black and dirty, while those who were bringing this money from banks – as warm and fuzzy. It is about 250 million euros, but where are the rest three-fourths of the billion, to whom they went?”, the dealer wondered.

Market participants fear that due to the scandal, members of the Parliament will fall out with each other, after which a political crisis may occur, as there will not be a parliamentary majority.

“We cannot exclude that early elections will be avoided this time due to forming of a new majority with participation of MPs, who currently are representing opposition, but this will not last long. A reasonable question appears: who will come to replace current authorities? As de facto leaders of the Party of Socialists and the Partidul Nostru [Our Party] are birds of a feather: Dodon is purely a Plahotniuc, Usatii – is purely a Filat”, concluded the dealer, saying that this problems should raise serious concerns at today’s society.

Infotag’s dossier: The NBM established the official exchange rate of currencies: MDL19.7586:US$1 and MDL22.4882:1 euro. Following the market exchange rate, the figures of the official rate started to stably move up, showing slight depreciation of the Moldovan leu against the US dollar and euro.