The Moldovan leu will strengthen within the next few days due to a too high required reserve ratio, established for commercial banks by the National Bank of Moldova (NBM).

Currency market participants, interviewed by the Infotag, confirm the calm on the market, which increasingly sharper reveals the problem of lack of Moldovan lei both cash and cashless.

“At satisfying the demand on cash national currency, banks are helping each other without resorting to NBM services, which applies 0.5% commission. There is neither large inflow of cash lei currency exchange offices, which are working on counter flows: what they buy, that they sell”, said one of currency dealers.

Problems with reserve ratio worth 35% from funds attracted in the national currency has worsened the situation of Finance Ministry, which for already several consecutive auctions fails to place on the market the announced volume of state securities, despite their high yield – on average 24-26%.

“By means of such a tough policy the NBM is playing against the economy, chasing the lowering of inflation, while indirectly – lowering the volume of state securities’ pyramid”, the dealer said, not excluding that the market regulator is helping external partners, in particular, the IMF to make the Government more amenable in the coming discussion of the new program.

Talking about the perspective of the currency market situation development, its participants do not see any objective reasons for Moldovan leu strengthening in the long term.

“The Moldovan leu currency will be able to achieve stability only when the Government and the NBM put their signatures under Memorandum with the IMF. The availability of this document for Moldova does not exclude that foreign customers, in particular investment and pension funds, may show interest to state securities, as they need to share currency risks with such a reliable partner like the IMF”, the currency dealer said.

At the Infotag’s demand to forecast the time period when such situation may happen, he supposed that it can occur in late 2015, but it is more likely to happen in 1Q2016, but only if no early parliamentary elections occur.

Infotag’s dossier: For Thursday, the NBM established the following official exchange rate: MDL20.0609 :US$1 and MDL22.5797 :US$1 euro. The trend of the Moldovan leu official rate stopped moving up, showing a slight strengthening of the leu to the US dollar.