1995

Erica and Dimitri married for a second time in a glorious candle-lit ceremony in the Wildwind chapel on New Year's Eve. Then, Miss Kane became the star of her own TV talk show, "The Cutting Edge." Sadly, her reign as a TV queen came to an abrupt end when, during a modeling session, she took a terrible fall from a platform and hurt her back. To combat the pain, Erica began to over medicate herself with prescription painkillers.

Kendall discovered Dimitri and Corvina's deep dark secret that Anton was their son -- and she married the young man. Kendall's scheme ultimately failed. Humiliated, she was forced to agree to a divorce. Anton warmly accepted Dimitri as his father.

Later, Kendall got her hooks into Del Henry before leaving town to return to Florida. Before departing Pine Valley, Kendall apologized to Erica, and the two sworn enemies came to a mutual understanding.

Edmund had lost the 1994 congressional race against Matt Callaway. Knowing that Callaway was a shady politician, Edmund was still trying to dig up dirt on him. Someone put a bomb underneath Edmund's car, which exploded outside Pine Valley Hospital. They held the funeral for Edmund at the chapel on the Wildwind estate.

Having not been told that he was dead, Edmund strolled in, and asked, "Who died?" Everyone was shocked and then thrilled to see him standing there alive and well. Edmund explained that he had been to the Cayman Islands looking for information about Callaway. They quickly realized that it was Callaway who had died in the explosion. Joyfully, they all went back to the Wildwind mansion to celebrate Edmund's resurrection, and Dimitri's birthday.

When Erica's addiction to painkillers worsened, she found a savior in Dr. Jonathan Kinder. Dr. Kinder had a murky past, and an unorthodox method of treatment. He proceeded to prescribe more addictive drugs for Erica. Under the influence of the drugs, Erica allowed herself to be seduced by Jonathan. Afterwards, she was distressed by what she had done. Still drowsy, Erica raced for her car. Kinder, trying to stop her, jumped in the passenger seat as Erica recklessly sped off. Erica's wild ride came to an abrupt end when she crashed into a car driven by Dr. Maria Santos Grey and her passenger, Kelsey Jefferson. Soon, Dimitri demanded a divorce.

Through it all, Dimitri and Bianca remained close to each other.

1996

Erica was stunned and disheartened to receive divorce papers from her two-time husband, Dimitri Marick. Throughout this ordeal, Erica continued to deny that she was addicted to drugs. However, it was readily apparent to her loved ones that Erica had a problem. When Erica was chosen "Media Woman of the Year," she took center stage and made a complete fool of herself. The audience was aghast as Erica, high on drugs, publicly criticized nearly everyone in the banquet room.

Finally realizing she was an addict, Erica accepted Myrtle's help and checked into the Betty Ford Center for treatment. Erica was still hopeful for a reconciliation with Dimitri, though Dr. Kinder was still a powerful presence in her life.

Returning to Pine Valley, Erica's dreams were realized when she reconciled with Dimitri. However, their reunion was only temporary, thanks to Jonathan Kinder. One night, Jonathan drugged Erica and climbed into bed with her -- knowing that Dimitri would find them together. Seeing Erica in bed with Kinder, Dimitri broke off with Erica. Erica came to realize that Jonathan had drugged her, and she pledged to win back Dimitri.

Maria was devastated when her husband, Edmund stopped her from trying to run away with baby Sam, a child they were trying to adopt. Sam was being reclaimed by his birth mother, Kelsey. In her grief, Maria turned to her brother-in-law, Dimitri Marick, who was devastated also after his breakup with Erica. They shared one night of passion -- witnessed by Skye Chandler.

Later, Kelsey, who showed few maternal instincts, agreed to return the baby to the grateful Greys. And to make the scene at Wildwind even more joyous, Maria learned she was pregnant. After years of being unable to conceive, Maria was finally going to have Edmund's baby -- or so she believed. Skye, who had witnessed her encounter with Dimitri, was now obsessed with Edmund. She began to use her information as part of a plot to break up Maria and Edmund.

Erica teamed up with Skye Chandler and Janet Green, all victims of Jonathan Kinder, to expose the dirty doctor. After a dangerous confrontation in a church attic (where Skye and Janet had been held captive by Jonathan), Dimitri rescued Erica and Skye from Kinder.

Dimitri and Erica reconciled, while Kinder eluded capture thanks to his unwitting lover Marian Colby. Kinder enacted his revenge on Erica by kidnaping her daughter, Bianca. However, Kinder's evil plan ended when, after a struggle, he took a seemingly fatal plunge down a flight of stairs. Erica and Janet buried Kinder in Erica's garden and went on with their lives. Finally, the truth came out. When the police tried to exhume Jonathan's body, they found the grave empty. The body was gone! Kinder was alive! Erica, Janet and Skye tracked Jonathan to Caribbean, and managed to get him aboard their private jet. Then, the "three witches" tied him up and delivered their prey to the Pine Valley police. Kinder was locked up -- finally.

1997

1997 began with a bit of glorious news for Erica Kane. She was pregnant with Dimitri's baby. In a quiet dinner at the hunting lodge, she broke the news to Dimitri, who informed Erica of a medical condition that his child could possibly inherit. Erica and Dimitri planned for a third, and hopefully final wedding.

At the same time, Skye, who was more obsessed than ever with Edmund Grey, schemed to get her hands on the paternity test results for Maria's unborn baby. After seducing Andy, a nerdy lab technician, Skye saw the tests - which revealed that Edmund, not Dimitri, was the father of the baby. Intent on wooing Edmund away from Maria, Skye surreptitiously changed the test results. A guilt-ridden Maria finally broke the stunning news to Edmund that she slept with his brother. Edmund stormed out, but eventually accepted the betrayal and returned to Maria.

On Erica's wedding day, the bride to be collapsed and was rushed to Pine Valley Hospital. The news was not good. Erica lost her unborn baby. The news crushed both Erica and Dimitri who began to plan to fill the void by adopting a baby.

Soon, Erica grew more suspicious of Dimitri and Maria. Fearing that Maria was carrying Dimitri's baby, Erica resolved to get the truth. The old, scheming Erica resurfaced as she lured Maria to a remote cabin in the woods. Locked together in the cabin, Erica demanded that Maria confess the truth. Finally, Maria snapped, admitting that she slept with Dimitri. An unforgiving Erica then watched as Maria went into labor! Erica had no choice but to deliver the baby! Maria only had a chance to see the baby's telltale birthmark before Erica whisked the child away.

Braving a storm, Erica attempted to drive the baby to the hospital, but her car skidded and plunged off a bridge into the icy waters below. Erica survived, and dived into the murky waters to find the child - to no avail. Unbeknownst to anyone, a reclusive woman named Esther rescued the baby girl. Erica located Esther, and convinced her to give up the child. Erica had a plan - she would convince the world that she had adopted the baby (whom she named Sonya) in Russia. Maria, Edmund and Dimitri were led to believe that the baby (whom they thought was a boy) had perished.

After months of passing off the child as her own, a guilt-ridden Erica finally confessed what she had done, and baby Sonya was joyously returned to her rightful parents, Edmund and Maria, who named her Maddie. Erica was sent to prison for her crime of kidnapping Edmund and Maria's baby.

Tad Martin found love again with Gloria Marsh. She accepted his proposal of marriage, though Tad was troubled by the unbreakable bond that Gloria shared with Dimitri Marick, who was estranged from Erica. When Dimitri kissed Gloria, it was clear that he had strong feelings for his longtime "friend."

Wrongly believing that Tad was the father of Liza's baby, Gloria broke their engagement and married Dimitri.

Princess Gillian Andrassy, Dimitri's cousin, arrived in Pine Valley and began causing havoc for everyone that stepped in her path.

Dimitri informed Gillian that her father had gambled away the family fortune. Gillian then began her search for a rich husband and zeroed in on Edmund as prime husband material. Gillian gave up her pursuit of Edmund when she learned that Scott Chandler was getting access to his trust fund on January 1.

Dimitri thought that he was the father of Maddie, so he went to court, and was given sole custody of her. He later learned that Maddie's blood type was O negative and realized that Maddie could not be his biological daughter. Dimitri learned that Skye had changed the paternity test results. Dimitri confronted Skye and she admitted what she had done.

Dimitri warned Skye that if she told Edmund, he would kill her. Erica enlisted Gillian to help her get Maddie back to Edmund and Erica learned that Edmund was really Maddie's biological father.

At Wildwind, Jack and Erica explained that Edmund was Maddie's biological father. Jack told Edmund that Maddie needed to return to Dimitri until a new blood test was taken. Alone, Skye confessed to Edmund that she had changed the paternity test results. Skye informed Dimitri that Edmund knew that Maddie was his.

Dimitri then fled to Vadzel (his estate in Hungary) along with Gloria and Maddie, where Corvina welcomed them there.

He deceived Gloria into believing it was their long awaited honeymoon.

When Edmund and Tad learned that they had gone to Hungary, they decided to follow them. In order to get past the Budapest custom officials, Tad and Edmund cross-dressed.

Tad challenged Dimitri on Hungarian TV and demanded that Dimitri tell the Hungarian press the truth about Maddie. Meanwhile, Edmund made Gloria read the court papers requesting another blood test. Gloria then agreed to take Maddie to a Budapest hospital for a blood test. Gloria learned that Maddie could not be Dimitri's biological child. Dimitri and Gloria then said their goodbye to Maddie, who was reunited with Edmund. Gloria declared her love for Dimitri and convinced him to return to Pine Valley.

Edmund and Tad vowed to find tangible evidence against Dimitri to prove his deceit to Gloria. Edmund wanted to make amends with Dimitri and invited him to the Crystal Ball honoring Maria. Dimitri realized that Tad and Edmund had teamed up against him and he packed a gun and was armed and ready for the Crystal Ball.

Edmund and Tad's plan was to make Dimitri so angry at the Wildwind crypt, that he would admit to everything, which he did. What he did not know was that Tad brought Gloria down to the crypt to listen to what Dimitri had to say. Upon hearing what she had hoped was not true, she entered the room and slapped Dimitri, leaving him, and filed for divorce.

Dimitri was so upset and enraged, he pulled a gun on Edmund and shot him. Little did Dimitri know that the bullets in the gun had been replaced with blanks, by a magician after Tad found out that Dimitri had the gun. Thinking that he shot Edmund, a very terrified Dimitri confessed that he was very sorry for everything. When Edmund opened his eyes and let Dimitri in on the sly trick, Dimitri got even angrier.

Dimitri walked outside of the crypt, got angry with God (yikes!), and was hit by a falling tree (naturally). Stuck, he fell helpless. Edmund came to his rescue and rushed him to the hospital. Gloria of all people had to restart Dimitri's heart, but she still ended their marriage. Gloria finally left town to get her life straightened out. Dimitri tried to make peace with everyone - knowing now that life is too precious to be vengeful towards anyone.

1998

Dimitri's attempt to piece his life back together worked quite handily. It took some time, but eventually he and Edmund became close again---and it was this closeness that allowed Dimitri to repay his brother. After it was learned that the evil Jim Thomasen was responsible for the plane crash that claimed Maria's life, Jim lashed out at anyone who could prove that he had a hand in the disaster. Jim chained Edmund to a metal grating inside an aqueduct.

Dimitri came to the rescue but rather than immobilizing Jim, Dimitri raced inside the aqueduct to rescue his brother. It almost proved to be a fatal mistake. Jim recovered from the blows that Dimitri had inflicted upon him and locked Dimitri inside with Edmund. In a few hours, the tide would roll in and both Edmund and Dimitri would be goners. Edmund begged Dimitri to leave for the sake of Maddie and Sam, but Dimitri refused to leave his brother's side.

Just as the water was rushing in, and about to drown them, Dimitri finally managed to free Edmund from his shackles, and the two men lifted themselves into a drainpipe.

Luckily, Tad arrived in time to open the grate, saving both men, and rush Edmund to the hospital --- but Jim Thomasen was not done haunting them. Thinking that Jim had killed Edmund and Dimitri, and knowing that he had victimized her daughter Laura, Brooke lured Jim to Stuart Chandler's art gallery and shot him to death.

Dimitri arrived on the scene and told the police that he had been the one to kill Jim. Brooke silenced him and confessed that she had been the one to do the dirty deed. Dimitri stood by Brooke's side throughout the subsequent murder trial. After Brooke was acquitted, she and Dimitri saw an awful lot of each other. Brooke, though, was not ready to get involved with another man, and broke it off with him. However, a few weeks later, Brooke decided she had been a little hasty, and tried to rekindle a romance. You snooze, you lose, Brookie. She asked Dimitri if he was still carrying a torch for Erica, and he admitted that, yes, he stilled cared about her. He then gave Brooke the ol' "let's just be friends" speech.

At this year's Crystal Ball, Erica was Dimitri's date:

Dimitri: Erica, I have no illusions of why you've agreed to be my date tonight.

Erica: I agreed to be your date because you're still the most fascinating man I know.

Dimitri: And as a sideline, you don't mind sticking it to Brooke once again.

Erica: Dimitri Marick, how could you possibly stand there and accuse me of anything?

Dimitri: Because I know exactly what your are up to, and I am enjoying every minute of it. Brooke looks so radiant tonight, doesn't she?

Brooke: Erica, do you mind very much if I have this dance with Dimitri?

Erica: Oh, now you're pathetic, Brooke. You really are. Sure. Be my guest.

Brooke: Why, thank you.

[1991-1994][1995-1998] [1999-2000] [2001-]