Metta World Peace - whose original name was Ron Artest before he changed it - is famous for being involved in arguably the biggest brawl in NBA history 20 years ago.

The infamous 'Malice at the Palace' brawl occurred during an NBA game between the Detroit Pistons and Indiana Pacers in 2004, which resulted in severe consequences for those involved, particularly Metta World Peace.

The altercation, sparked by a fan throwing a drink at Metta, escalated into a massive fight involving players and fans. This led to the suspension of nine players and fines totaling $11.2 million from the league.

Metta, who was deemed to be the instigator of the melee, was banned for 86 games in the regular season and playoffs.

Reflecting on the event, Metta emphasized the importance of maintaining composure while on the court and admitted he made a mistake. Speaking to Keyshawn Johnson, the retired NBA player admitted that he shouldn't have reacted after being hit.

"I learn there's a lot of lessons from that event. One, if somebody hits you first, you can't react. That was the biggest," Metta World Peace said, via All Facts No Brakes.

"The other thing I learned was we were thugs [to the world]. It's amazing how they work that out because when you look at the situations of urban community, they are set up for failure... not everybody, but it's set up to fail."

However, MWP insisted that the type of brawl triggered by a fan shouldn't be enough to ruin or tarnish a player's legacy in the game. Sure enough, he went on to enjoy a stellar career.

Who was Metta World Peace?

During an NBA career spanning across 19 seasons, Metta World Peace played for the Indiana Pacers, where he won the NBA Defensive Player of the Year Award and was also named an NBA All-Star in 2004.

Weeks after the start of the 2005-06 season, he was traded to the Sacramento Kings before moving onto the Houston Rockets in 2008-09 season. In 2009, he signed with the Los Angeles Lakers, and helped the team win the NBA championship in 2010.