David Cameron's coalition is committed to staying together until 2015

David Cameron is putting the finishing touches to his coalition government in its third full day in power.

Lynne Featherstone and David Heath are the latest Lib Dems to get jobs, on top of eleven MPs from the party already appointed to ministerial positions.

Mr Cameron met First Minister Alex Salmond in Scotland, with both parties saying the talks had been productive.

But the administration also faces a backlash over procedures to dissolve Parliament and trigger an election.

The Lib Dem-Tory plan will mean that 55% of MPs must approve any moves to dissolve Parliament - a policy which has been attacked by senior Labour figures and a number of Tory backbenchers.

But Mr Cameron defended the plan, saying he was the first prime minister to give up control over naming the election date, a change which he said was "big and important".

Among further appointments made on Friday, Lynne Featherstone becomes a junior home office minister with responsibility for equalities while David Heath becomes deputy leader of the House of Commons.

Fellow Lib Dem MP Alistair Carmichael becomes a senior whip while Conservatives Jonathan Djanogly and Nick Hurd have been given jobs in the Ministry of Justice.

This came after a swathe of appointments on Thursday, with Nick Herbert made policing minister, Damian Green becoming immigration minister and Grant Shapps appointed housing minister.

'Great opportunity'

Alan Duncan becomes an international development minister, while Hugo Swire goes to the Northern Ireland Office.

Among the Lib Dems, Sarah Teather was named as an education minister, Nick Harvey as armed forces minister, Jeremy Browne as a Foreign Office minister and Steve Webb as a work and pensions minister.

There are expected to be 20 of the party's 57 MPs appointed at all levels across Whitehall departments.

WHO'S WHO: KEY CABINET POSTS

PM: David Cameron

Deputy PM: Nick Clegg

Foreign Sec: William Hague

Chancellor: George Osborne

Business/banking: Vince Cable

Defence: Liam Fox

Health: Andrew Lansley

Energy/Climate: Chris Huhne

Justice Sec: Ken Clarke

Chief Sec to Treasury: David Laws

Scottish Sec: Danny Alexander

Communities Sec: Eric Pickles

Culture/Olympics: Jeremy Hunt

Work and Pensions: Iain Duncan Smith

At the new cabinet's first meeting on Thursday, Mr Cameron said the coalition had a "great opportunity to think for the long term" - the Conservatives and Lib Dems have pledged to keep it in power until 2015.

Speaking on BBC One's Question Time, former Tory deputy Prime Minister Lord Heseltine said there would be "in-built tensions" between Mr Cameron and his Lib Dem deputy Nick Clegg but these would not deter the work of the government.

Lib Dem MP Simon Hughes said the coalition would last a full five years, but the two parties' candidates would battle hard in local and European elections and continue to do so into the next general election campaign.

Mr Cameron was accompanied on his trip to Scotland by the Scottish Secretary, Liberal Democrat Danny Alexander.

He stressed his commitment to the union and his desire for closer collaboration between the UK and Scottish governments.

Mr Salmond said the talks, in which he pushed for further powers to support the Scottish economy, were productive.

Mr Cameron's Conservatives polled less than 17% of the votes in Scotland in the election, winning just one of 59 Westminster seats but their alliance with the Lib Dems have given the government a stronger presence in Scotland.

In his first overseas trip since coming to power, Foreign Secretary William Hague visited Washington, where he and US Secretary of State Hillary Clinton stressed their desire to maintain a strong relationship between the two countries.

Following Gordon Brown's resignation on Tuesday, the Labour Party has started the process of choosing a new leader.

Former Foreign Secretary David Miliband became the first person to announce plans to stand.

Former Home Secretary Alan Johnson has ruled himself out, offering his backing for Mr Miliband.

Acting Labour leader Harriet Harman and former Justice Secretary Jack Straw also said they would not stand.

Backbench Labour MP Jon Cruddas, who came third in Labour's 2007 deputy leadership contest, has said he is thinking about entering the new leadership race.