As MP Lynne Featherstone saw disorder spread across the streets of London in the summer of 2011 something occurred to her.

Absent from the television reports of the developing chaos was an official response.

“Why is there no minister out there giving the government line?” she thought.

READ MORE: ‘I threw bottles at police to make a point about Mark Duggan and the response broke me’

It was all the more striking because, unusually for a Liberal Democrat of that era, she was part of the department responsible.

But entering only her second term as a member of parliament, with less than a year’s ministerial experience under her belt, the representative for Hornsey and Wood Green hardly thought she would be taking the lead.

Yes, she was working with Secretary of State Theresa May in the Home Office, but this was way above her remit.

“I was the ‘duty minister’ that weekend for the Home Office. But this was such a big story, I expected to see the Prime Minister or the Home Secretary,” she told My London.

Just to be sure, Featherstone called Theresa May’s long-time special advisor Nick Timothy.

“I said, ‘someone should be out there,’ and he said, ‘Well, you're the only person in town so you better come in,'" she explained.

“That's how I ended up in front of the cameras [as the face of the government] for the first couple of days.”

‘I assumed they’d be a grown-up in the room’

Given Featherstone’s lack of experience, it struck her as odd that she had been handed a leading role in such a major moment of public crisis, apparently off the back of her own call.

“I assumed that they’d be a ‘grown-up’ in the room,” she continued.

“The machine of government is there to support making sure everything is in place all of the time and clearly it wasn't, or there hadn't been any coordination.

“[Between] William Hague, Theresa May [and] David Cameron, none of the senior people were around.”

The riots broke out with Parliament closed for summer recess, so most of the country’s leaders were quite literally away.

Coalition figureheads Prime Minister David Cameron and his Lib Dem-deputy Nick Clegg were both in continental Europe, as was Foreign Secretary William Hague.

As for then Mayor of London Boris Johnson, who was taking a break in the US, he initially refused to return because he had “complete confidence in the police".

“I do think politicians deserve holidays,” added Featherstone.

“But I was surprised there weren't arrangements for people to come back or to be in touch.”

‘I never really done media before’

The situation was beginning to escalate when Featherstone was sent out to face the press and she was acutely aware of the need to communicate the right message.

“It was incredibly important to get the tone right, and not to set any hares running that would scare people, but also to give a frank description of what the government was doing and what was happening,” explained Featherstone.

For an experienced minister that would be a tricky line to tread, but after a phone call with Theresa May, who’d already agreed the government lines with her special advisors, she was put in front of the cameras.

“I’d never really done any media before, [well] none to speak of,” Featherstone added.

“To be really honest, I was quite terrified at that point.

“I've grown up a lot since, having been a minister for five years and being in all sorts of situations. But that was a heavyweight of responsibility because it was really serious.

“[I] needed to calm things down, but be honest.”

The clips went worldwide

Global attention on the London riots was significant and, as a result, Featherstone’s media appearances were beamed around the world.

“The riots were so huge that rocketed around the world," she added.

“I had friends in different countries saying, ‘Oh, I saw you on the news, from San Francisco to wherever’.”

Closer to home, the Liberal Democrat Life Peer saw first-hand how her constituency was effected.

Featherstone felt the wrath of its residents directly on an afternoon trip after the rioting, much to the dismay of the civil servant she was with:

“I went to Wood Green Shopping Centre and all the shops had been smashed up by looters,” she added.

“The shopkeepers were raging, they were angry.”

“I remember my private secretary saying, ‘minister, you've got to leave, you've got to leave.’ because [they didn’t like the situation]. But I didn't, I went and talked to them, because that's what you do.”

Looking back, she views these challenging moments with a sense of pride.

“It's where you find it if you made the right stuff, isn't it? And I was okay, I came out all right.”