Lynne Featherstone, the Liberal Democrat, has been appointed a junior Home Office minister with responsibility for equality.

Ms Featherstone, who was equality spokeswoman for two years, said it was a "huge opportunity to change things for the better".

The MP for Hornsey and Wood Green will work under Conservative Home Secretary Theresa May, who is also Minister for Women and Equality.

He told his Twitter followers: "I am delighted to have been appointed as a Parliamentary Under Secretary of State at the Ministry of Justice."

Mr Djanogly previously served as shadow business minister and shadow solicitor general.

The announcements on Friday came after Downing Street published a list of 30 appointments across Whitehall departments on Thursday, mainly at Minister of State level.

Nick Clegg's Liberal Democrats were given five cabinet posts.

The latest appointments included five women - two of them peers - amid ongoing criticism of the male-dominated make-up of the power-sharing administration.

Among them was Liberal Democrat Sarah Teather who becomes an Education Minister.

There are also several former members of Mr Cameron's shadow cabinet who may have been expecting higher-profile jobs but have been bumped down the pecking order because of the need to shuffle jobs to accommodate Lib Dems.

Conservative Chris Grayling, who was shadow home secretary until the general election, will serve under Iain Duncan Smith at Work and Pensions.

Dame Pauline Neville-Jones keeps the security brief she enjoyed in the shadow cabinet but no longer has a place at the top table.

The other female politicians to be given jobs are Tories Justine Greening, who is Economic Secretary to the Treasury, and Baroness Anelay of St Johns, the Lords Chief Whip.

Key posts for Liberal Democrats - on top of the five places they have in the Cabinet itself - are Nick Harvey at Defence, Steve Webb at Work and Pensions, Paul Burstow at Health, Jeremy Browne at the Foreign Office and Lord McNally at Justice.

The government is also facing a growing backlash over its plans to make it harder to dissolve Parliament.

Under the plan 55 per cent of MPs would have to approve any moves to dissolve Parliament.

William Hague, the Foreign Secretary, who is heading to Washington for talks with US counterpart Hilary Clinton, defended the plan, saying it was a "constitutional innovation".