Let’s start today with something that most of you probably know already: The Yankees have some serious inconsistencies in their famed interlocking “NY” logo. As you can see above, there are three distinct versions of it — one each for the home jersey, the cap, and the batting helmet. The easiest way to see the differences is to look at the upper prongs of the Y, and also at the negative space outside of those prongs. (I wrote about this, and about several other MLB teams’ logo inconsistencies — some of which have since been standardized — in this 2014 ESPN column.)

During last night’s American League Wild Card Game between the Yankees and Red Sox, Yanks starter Gerrit Cole was wearing one of those undershirts with the team logo on the mock-turtleneck collar. I’ve probably seen Yankees players wearing those a few jillion times during cold-weather games over the years, but last night for some reason it really jumped out at me that the “NY” on the collar was the jersey logo, and therefore it didn’t match Cole’s cap logo (for this and all subsequent photos in this section, you can click to enlarge):

Shortly after that, I noticed that Yanks manager Aaron Boone was wearing the team’s postseason hoodie, and it had the helmet version of the “NY”:

That got me thinking: Boone, like many MLB managers, tends to wear a lot of hoodies, windbreakers, and other non-jersey tops. Which logo is used on those items?

Some quick photo research reveals that Boone had two primary tops this season. The first was a “New York Yankees Baseball” hoodie with the helmet logo:

The other was a short-sleeved pullover with the jersey logo:

Boone appears to have worn those two items for the majority of this season’s games. But I also found a shot of him wearing a jacket with the jersey logo:

Now, you might be thinking (as I initially was), “The pullover and the jacket use the jersey logo because they both have the logo on the left chest area — just like on the team’s home jersey.” But no! Here’s a shot of Boone with pitching coach Matt Blake, who’s wearing a a different pullover with the helmet logo on the left chest area:

The best/worst anomaly is that they didn’t use the jersey logo on this year’s All-Star Game jersey! They used the helmet logo:

If you look at Yankees merchandise, it’s a mishmash. Most items appear to have the helmet logo, although some have the jersey logo.

Personally, I find all of this really fun and interesting — a few random glitches in the matrix. But it might bug the fuck out of me if I were a Yankees fan. For those of you who are Yankees fans, what do you think of all this?

Finally, just to make things more confusing, Yanks right fielder Aaron Judge wore the team’s “Field of Dreams” cap, which has yet another version of the “NY” logo, during pregame activities last night (along with a pullover featuring the helmet logo):

So the Yankees wore at least four different versions of their logo last night: cap, helmet, jersey (on Cole’s undershirt collar), and Field of Dreams. Crazy!

(Thanks to everyone who spotted Judge’s pregame cap.)

• • • • • • • • • •

Click to enlarge

Oh. My. God. Twitter-er @Mister_Trey_, who’s a Yankees fan, tweeted the photo shown above last night, along with the following note: “Just finished my annual playoff superstition I’ve been doing since 2017: writing each player’s name on the roster as many times as their jersey number is.”

Now that’s a superstition — especially given that Aaron Judge wears No. 99! This is so great that I almost feel bad about the Yankees losing last night. (But not quite.)

(My thanks to Uni Watch webmaster John Ekdahl for this one.)

• • • • • • • • • •

Click to enlarge

Home improvement: Reader Kenton Bontrager’s father was packing up some old housewares recently and came across this partial roll of vintage late-1970s MLB wallpaper. “It must be from between 1977 and ’79, because the Mariners’ logo is included and we moved into the house in July 1979,” says Kenton. “Twenty-five team logos are shown, but for some reason the Blue Jays aren’t included. It can’t be a Canadian licensing issue, because the Expos’ logo is there. I’ve never been able to figure out the absence of the Jays’ logo.”

The wallpaper is 20.5″ wide and 14′ long — not enough to paper a room, but still a cool conversation piece. “Amazingly it’s in very good condition after more than four decades in storage,” says Keton. Here’s a closer look:

Kenton, who grew up with this wallpaper in his bedroom (“Believe me, I spent hours lying in bed staring at the logos!”), initially thought about selling the wallpaper on eBay, but then he thought that he’d prefer to see it go to someone in the Uni Watch comm-uni-ty. So he’s asked me to facilitate a blind auction: If you’re interested in the wallpaper, send an email with your bid to Kenton by next Tuesday, Oct. 12. Highest bid wins! (You can also use that email link to ask Kenton any questions you might have about the wallpaper.)

Just to clarify: I have no financial stake in any of this. Kenton isn’t paying me to run this promo, I’m not getting a percentage of the final sale price, nothing like that. I’m just doing this because (a) the wallpaper looks really awesome and (b) I love that Kenton wants it to end up with a Uni Watch reader. Can’t wait to see what the eventual winner does with it!

• • • • • • • • • •

<

Click to enlarge

And then there were six: As of this morning, we were down to the last six pins for our October design. Get yours here while they last. Now sold out. Thanks!

• • • • • • • • • •

The Ticker

By Lloyd Alaban

NFL/CFL News: Black jerseys for the Panthers this week. … Black over white this week for the Bengals (from our own Phil Hecken). … Also from Phil: Neon Color Rash for the Seahawks this Thursday. … Here’s the Titans’ record in every uniform they’ve ever worn (from Adam Fuqua). … The Edmonton Elks are the latest CFL team to wear orange shirts to raise awareness of atrocities committed in the Canadian Indian residential school system (from Phil again).

College Football News: Utah’s new alternate uniforms will debut this Saturday (from our own Phil Hecken). … Also from Phil: Lafayette will wear rear-helmet “95” decals to honor late DL Chris LaPietra. … Notre Dame and Oklahoma are battling over who owns the slogan “Play like a champion today.” … The Ohio State Uniform Database has a feature on the Buckeyes’ record in alternate uniforms over the years (from Kary Klismet).

Basketball News: A photo showing Warriors PF Draymond Green wearing a T-shirt with a brash pro-vaccine message was actually a digitally altered fake (from our own Phil Hecken). … Also from Phil: With Pau Gasol announcing his retirement, the Lakers plan to retire his No. 16 at some point this season, although they haven’t yet announced a date. … New advertiser for the Lakers’ practice jerseys. … The Knicks wore shirts with the team’s throwback logo last night (from @babyyodawaffles). … The Bulls released some photos of players’ lockers, and Nikola Vucevic’s jersey did not have a gold championship tab on the back (from Etienne Catalan).

Soccer News: New crest for the Italian national soccer team (from Trent Lowe). … Arsenal wore their yellow alternates this week. The kit was practically see-through, especially for D Kieran Tierney, whose black underwear showed through his shorts (from our own Phil Hecken). … Also from Phil: New pro-organ donation shirt for USL Championship side Lights FC.