How to Find What You Are Looking for on This Page

We use Optical Character Recognition (OCR) technology to make the text on a newspaper image searchable. Below is the OCR data for 2 May 1972 Lemars Daily Sentinel in Lemars, Iowa. Because of the nature of the OCR technology, sometimes the language can appear to be nonsensical. The best way to see what’s on the page is to view the newspaper page.

Show OCR

LeMars Daily Sentinel (Newspaper) - May 2, 1972, Lemars, Iowa Teen sewers get the vote on april 21 at 1 30 mrs. Jepson miss Nicholason and the Home dec girls put on a fashion show entitled teen sewing gets the mothers grandmothers aunts and friends were invited. The fashion show was held in the music room which was filled to capacity with guests. Concluding the afternoon a Tea of punch and Coffee cookies cupcakes and mints was served. . Officers the Hinton Community education association recently elected new officers for the coming year. They Are president mrs. Barb Bielenberg vice president. Steve Warnstadt Secretary mrs. Beth Burow treasurer mrs. Alice Thurow High school rep. Mrs. Fern Jepson or. High rep. Mrs. Marj. Meseck elementary rep. Mrs. Frances Juelfs. Honor Roll \ these students made the Honor Roll for the third nine weeks period. They Are seniors Debbie Anderson Linda Dale sue Frerichs Carol Grasz Tish Hall Ray Hawk Linda Johns Barry Kramer Judy Krou Julie Lang Deb Pinkerton Keith Plendl Connie Richards Curt Richards a Kristy Richards Brenda Schindel Diane a Schoenherr and Jan spies. Juniors Jan Attrill Lynne Binneboese Brad Early Joe Flannery Judy har Ndersen Heidi held Kevin held Terri Nikalas Mary Kallsen Jerry Kroeger Ileann Leuch Laura Mcnery Annie Mcmanigal Bob Rohmiller Starla Rook isue Saienga Marcella Smith Jeanne Stabe Kenny Tiesler Kathy Tondreau Julie Vondrak Nina Vondrak Lori Wagner Randy Weiner. Sophomores Dennis Anderson Lucinda Becker. Marsha Bock Marilyn Eickholt Luann Hageman Kayleen Havener Julie i Jones Roger less Patty Muecke Nancy Raymond Cheryl Richards Shirley Timmer Donna Van Evera Mary Weiner and Shari Wingert. Freshmen Brenda Becker Mark Binneboese Paul Branum Jim Dirks Tammi Early Marjorie Eickholt Darwin Gamm Bruce held Renee held Steve Hodges Roy Musselman Hank Roehrich a Sara Jan Sparr. Iiene readers for 72 football season on april 26, 1972, tryouts were held for football cheerleaders for the 1972 season. Seventy percent was based on How they did on the individual cheer group cheer and extra credit thirty percent was based on classroom attitude. The judges were Ali brie Van Patton Laura Dominquez okie Jones cheerleaders from West mar faculty members were miss Betty Chambers coach Dennis Gravis coach Garie Rusk coach Larry Yoeger. The new cheerleaders Are Judy Hardersen Annette Mcmanigal Jan Attrill Lynne Binneboese Donna Van Evera Cheryl Richards. The alternates Are Cynthia Milbrodt Mary Weiner and Mary Pavlik. Staff sue Frerichs editor Linda Schindler co editor staff Lori Muecke Willard Albers Mike Schenzel Starla Rook adviser mrs. Bielenberg . To Ames on tuesday april 11, . Attended the state convention in Ames. The theme of the convention this year was new directions. We discussed changing the name of . To . United student action but it was voted Down As most of the students wanted the name to emphasize education More. After lunch we enjoyed entertainment by a Young american Type singing group from Linn mar a. T. & company. There were panel discussions and skits and election of slate officers. Those who attended were Jan Attrill Connie Rose Jeanne Stabe Tish Hall Starla Rook Denise Wilsbacher Terri Kalas Mike Schenzel Lori Wagner Lynn Binneboese Kathy Tondreau Nancy Kallsen Leanne Leuch and Julie Vondrak. We All enjoyed the trip. Vol. 2 no. 15 Hinton Hawk Eye be Mars Iowa daily Sentinel tuesday May 2, 1972 8 track Hinton High school May 2, 1972 the guests a 0 no the refreshments at the Tea. Carol Grasz serves punch to the guests at the fashion show Tea. Linda Schindler and Dixie Vondrak Model their hot pants outfits. Debbie Andersen models her Spring outfit As miss Nicholason at left commen tates during the fashion show. Marjorie Eickholt models the attractive dress she made. Laura Mceniry models the dress she made. In the first meet of the season at Willow despite wind and very cold temperatures Hinton took first in a close meet with 61 Points while Willow followed with 60. Judy Hardersen took first place in the Long jump Judy Kroll placed 2nd in shot put and 3rd in discus. Our hurdle relay team Jan s., Amy s., Kathy t., Judy a placed 1st, Julie Jones placed 3rd in the 100 Yard dash and 3rd in the 60 Yard dash. The mile relay team gave us the needed Points to win the meet As they placed third Colette v., Luann s., Jan s., Deb w. Judy h. Placed 1st in the 100 meter hurdles Kathy 3rd. On monday april 24, the girls met at Kingsley to take 5th place. Judy Kroll took first in the discus with. 105 2". Jeanne Stoltze tied for second in the High jump at 4 8%", Judy Hardersen placed first in the Long jump with be Liz Judy was 4th in the hurdles. The first meet was a dual at be Mars Gehlen with Hinton taking first in the 100 Yard dash Willard albers2nd in the pole vault Mark held2nd in the High jump Joe flannery1st and 2nd in the shot put Rop Heimgartner and Scott hodges1st and 2nd in the discus Curt Richards & Ron heimgartner3rd in the 880 Mike muecke2nd in the 440 Paul ingalls2nd in the 880 relay 2nd in the Medley relay 1st in the mile relay 1st in the 2-mile relay. The boys also participated in the Holstein relays on Friday april 7, to help get in shape but did not place in any events. On april 15 some of our boys attended the Tomahawk relays at Cherokee with Willard Albers placing 2nd in the 440 and 4th in the 880. On tuesday april 18, the Hawks met at be Mars for an invitational taking 3rd place honors in the meet for class b. We placed 2nd in the 100 cd. Dash Willard albers2nd in the High jump Joe flannery1st in the 440 Willard albers3rd & 4th in the shot put Ron Heimgartner and Scott hodges4th & 5th in the discus Curt Richards and Ron heimgartner3rd in the 2-mile relay 4th in the 440 relay 3rd in the mile relay and 4th in the 880 relay. Tuesday april 25, the boys participated in a meet at Unity Christian in Orange City. Ron Heimgartner took first in the shot put and Scott Hodges placed 5th, Ron Heimgartner took 2nd and Curt Richards took 3rd in the discus Joe Flannery took 2nd in the High jump at 5 7", Mark held took 4th in the 120yd. High hurdles will Ald Albers took first in the 100 cd. Dash for a new school record 10.4our 2-mile relay team took 5th Ray Hawk Mike Muecke Mike Arndt Kevin Vondra Dave Riediger took 3rd in the 220 cd. Dash we plan id 4th in the 880 cd. Relay Barry Kramer Terry Young Dave Riediger hot pants formal modelled by sue Willard Alber Dennis Moughan took 5th Frerichs. In the 440 cd. Dash Willard Albers took 1st in the 880 cd. Run and we took 3rd in the Medley relay Kevin Jorgensen Ray Hawk Mike Muecke Mike Arndt. C of play n Niay coach Rusk and Starla Rook watch events at the track meet at Kingsley. Linda formal. Johns models her prom crime does t pay tuesday april 25, Hinton was the setting of a unique Assembly. Four convicts from the South Dakota state Penitentiary talked to the students. Their first names and prison numbers were All that was Given for identification. They each gave a synopsis of How they d come to be in prison. Each Man had a different Story to Tell Liat they stated was not told in a lecture manner but in More of a Friendly advice giving manner. They wanted us to see the Pitfalls in crime and How one feels after he has made criminal mistakes. They wanted us to Stop and think do i want to end up like them All of the men had been in and out of prisons several times. Two men were in for manslaughter one for drugs and another for armed robbery. They knew what they were talking about. A guard accompanied them he kept the prison atmosphere Ever present. The program they Are involved in is called operation it subsists on donations made through student and civic minded groups hopefully this program will continue. It has tremendous potential for helping would be criminals. Prom saturday saturday evening. May 6 will be the Junior senior prom which will be held at the Oasis in Sioux City this year. Judy Kroll takes 1st in discus throw at the Kingsley track meet. The mouse that roared thursday and Friday May 4 and 5, the Junior and senior classes will present the class play entitled the mouse that roared it will be in the High school auditorium at 8 . On both nights. The play is about a Small country in Europe that declares War on the United states for various reasons. All in All everything ends up in a mess which makes a delightful comedy. The cast and Crews Are As follows Gloriana sue Frerichs Mary Mary Kallsen Jane Judy Hardersen fran a Heidi held Annie Mcmanigal Ann Jan Attrill Norma Joni Roe Helen Luann Epling Page Kathy Tondreau miss Johnson Julie Vondrak miss Wilkins Nina Vondrak mrs. Reiner a Becky held Jill Marcella Smith Debbie Karen Vanderkooi mrs. Bascom Lynn Binneboese professor Smith Jeanne Stoltze sightseer Leann Leuch Tully Curt Richards Mountjoy Steve Binneboese Benter Byron Jauer Boston Dennis Moughan Kok Intz Randy Riediger assistant Mark held president Dave Riediger Gen snippet Robert Rohmiller will Randy Winter announcer us Julie Lang announcer by Brad Early sightseer Larry Bates soldiers 1 Ray Hawk 2 Gary Fischer 3 Brad Early 4 Randy Weiner 5 Joni Roe promoters Tish Hall and Lori Muecke assistant director sue Saienga makeup head Connie Richards stage head Julie Lang make up committee Brenda Schindel Linda Dale Deb Bohlke programs Linda Schindler Dixie Vondrak Roxanne Vondrak posters Judy Kroll Linda Johns Joni Roe Toni Wilde props Kevin Johnson Ken Tiesler director or Burow coach Yoerger and assistant coach Warnstadt during track City. Meet at Orange Byron Bock wears placard to support his candidate in the mock elections. Relay team consisting of Kevin Jorgensen Barry Kramer both standi Nei Terry Young and Ray Hayte of Evite ing. Wait their turn at Orange City

Search the Lemars Daily Sentinel Today with a Free Trial

We want people to find what they are looking for at NewspaperArchive. We are confident that we have the newspapers that will increase the value of your family history or other historical research. With our 7-day free trial, you can view the documents you find for free.