The Democratic debate’s somber opening focus on how to deal with terrorism in the aftermath of the atrocities in Paris devolved into heated back-and-forth attacks, as rivals Bernie Sanders and Martin O'Malley directed their fire at front-runner Hillary Clinton on Saturday night in Iowa.

But Clinton, who leaned heavily on her international credibility as the nation’s former top foreign affairs official to prove she can do the top job, emerged mostly unscathed, despite one stumble in which she justified big campaign donations from Wall Street by saying she had helped that area of Manhattan recover from the Sept. 11, 2001, terror attacks, politics watchers said.

“Clinton effectively won by withstanding attacks,” undecided voter Steve Warnstadt, a former state senator from Sioux City, told The Des Moines Register after the nearly two-hour showdown at Drake University’s campus in Des Moines.

Sanders, a Vermont U.S. senator, ignited his base with several passionate applause lines, but may have also reinforced doubt about him, Iowa Democrats said. He refused to say it was a mistake to vote to give gun manufacturers immunity from lawsuits. And he noticeably rejected the premise of a question about working with Republicans by saying his political revolution would push aside anyone in its path.

More: Ultimate Guide to the Des Moines Democratic Debate

“It was an unrealistic answer that made him seem unrealistic,” said Iowa City Democratic activist John Deeth, who writes a blog on Iowa politics. “However, when he was in his comfort zone of economic issues, he was in perfect pitch tune with the Democratic base.”

The strategic winner of the night was O'Malley, who delivered quips and catchy lines, including slamming GOP presidential front-runner Donald Trump as an “immigrant-bashing carnival barker.”

And one of the most powerful lines of the debate, Iowa Democrats said, was when O'Malley said a mother of a service member he met in Burlington, Iowa, asked him not to use the term “boots on the ground” when referring to soldiers overseas.

“My son is not a pair of boots on the ground. These are American soldiers,” O’Malley said the woman told him.

“For the first time, he really established himself as a plausible alternative to Sanders for near-left Democrats not comfortable with Clinton,” Deeth said. “Still very much an uphill fight, but he looked credible.”

After a deadly spate of mass terrorist attacks ripped through Paris on Friday, killing 129 people and injuring more than 350, the organizers of the CBS News/KCCI/Des Moines Register debate scrapped their original script and focused the entire first segment on national security and terrorism.

Before the TV cameras rolled at Drake's Sheslow Auditorium, the 700 audience members stood and held hands as state Rep. Ako Abdul-Samad led a prayer.

“Now is the time for us to be family,” prayed the Des Moines lawmaker, who is Muslim.

When the candidates were introduced, all three drew strong applause, with many audience members clapping and cheering for each of them instead of for just one favorite.

Clinton, when asked to share her thoughts on the Paris attacks, said she doesn't believe the United States carries the bulk of the responsibility in dealing with the leading threat of an international terror network: the Islamic State.

“It cannot be an American fight,” she said.

Clinton said she thinks “we can bring people together” if the U.S. summons its resources, using diplomacy, intelligence sharing and development aid.

O'Malley disagreed, launching the first clear attack of the night.

“This actually is America's fight. It cannot be solely America's fight,” he said.

Sanders had forceful words about the Paris attacks: “Together, leading the world, this country will rid our planet of this barbarous organization called ISIS.”

But he didn’t offer much detail on what he’d do about it, politics watchers said. Sanders argued that climate change is actually the greatest threat to the world — and that it contributes to the rise of terrorism because it leads to fights over water and land.

When the focus of the debate returned to domestic issues after the first half an hour, Sanders got the first laugh — and the first applause — of the evening.

Asked how he’d pay for some of his most expensive proposals, such as free college tuition, Sanders said he hasn’t come up with an exact effective tax rate.

“But it will not be as high as the number under Dwight D. Eisenhower, which was 90 percent. ... I’m not that much of a socialist compared to Eisenhower,” he said, drawing hoots from the audience.

Clinton later scored points with the Iowa Democrats with a riff defending the Affordable Care Act, saying Sanders wants to start over and put everything in a big system that he then sends off to states to administer.

“I would not, if I lived in Iowa, want Terry Branstad administering my health care,” she said of the Iowa governor, who has stirred controversy with his plan to privatize management of the state's Medicaid system.

One of the biggest showdowns of the evening was about Wall Street.

After Clinton talked about needing to rein in risk on Wall Street, Sanders was asked what he thought about her answer.

“Not good enough,” Sanders answered.

Clinton blasted back that he was “trying to impugn my integrity, let’s be frank here. You know, not only do I have hundreds of thousands of donors, most of them small. I am very proud that for the first time a majority of my donors are women, 60 percent."

“And I represented New York on 9/11 when we were attacked. Where were we attacked? We were attacked in downtown Manhattan where Wall Street is. I did spend a whole lot of time and effort helping them rebuild. That was good for New York. It was good for the economy.”

Clinton’s decision to invoke Sept. 11 to defend her ties to Wall Street raised eyebrows on Twitter with a hail of criticism.

For most of the two hours, Clinton’s rivals took turns ganging up on her, trying to make a dent in her double-digit lead in state and national polls.

Sanders, who has seen his heady summertime momentum blunted, needled Clinton on her vote for the Iraq War when she was a New York U.S. senator.

“I would argue that the disastrous invasion of Iraq, something that I strongly opposed, has unraveled the region completely. And led to the rise of Al Qaida and to ISIS,” Sanders said. “These invasions, these toppling of governments, regime changes, have unintended consequences. I would say that on this issue I'm a little bit more conservative than the secretary.”

O’Malley, a former Maryland governor, who is trailing in a very distant third place, took swings at Clinton on ISIS, on “the after-effects of the invasion of Iraq,” and other matters.

On gun control, O’Malley told Clinton, “when you ran in 2000, you said that we needed federal robust regulations. Then in 2008 you were portraying yourself as Annie Oakley and saying that we don't need those regulations on the federal level.”

Democratic pollster Celinda Lake flagged that comment.

“Annie Oakley is kind of a sexist statement,” Lake told the Register.

Clinton pushed back at Sanders, saying she disagreed with him on how to provide health care to everyone, and free college for everyone, saying she doesn’t want to send Trump’s children to college for free.

Christopher Larimer, a political scientist at the University of Northern Iowa, concluded that Clinton's campaign “is going to be tough to slow down.”

“Sanders and O'Malley didn't land any serious blows,” he said.

Tony Leys, Kevin Hardy and Maggie Loughran contributed to this report.