Title: HMS THESEUS ON PATROL OFF THE WEST COAST OF KOREA [Allocated Title]

Film Number: ADM 1367

Other titles: POST-WAR NAVAL OPERATIONS - KOREA [Allocated Series Title]

Summary: Air operations onboard HMS Theseus, part of the activity for which the 17th Carrier Air Group won the Boyd Trophy in 1950.

Description: I. Reel Two. Sea Furies land on. Armourers load underwing rack on a Firefly with 60-pound rockets - the pilot is in the cockpit, aircraft engine running - it is windy and the deck crew wear duffel coats - in the background, other Fireflies are being launched. Firefly is directed forward to catapult. HA sequence as Sea Furies and a Firefly are launched. LA from catwalk as Sea Furies and Fireflies are launched - one of the deck crew dances from foot to foot to keep warm. Armourers load belts of 20mm ammunition into port wing of a Sea Fury - it is now snowing. LS pan across the flight deck - Sea Furies and Fireflies of 807 and 810 Squadron are ranged on deck. Sea Fury has port drop tank fuelled up. Armourers work on a Sea Fury as snow-fall increases - one of the crew notices the camera and crouches down to give an unobstructed view of a colleague, loading ammunition into the wing. Cut to fine weather conditions - a Sea Fury and a Firefly land on. II. Reel Three. HA down portside to stern scuttles and ship's nameplate. Range of Sea Furies begins to run up. Sea Otter lands on. Sea Furies and Firefly land on, the camera shooting forward from catwalk as the aircraft take the wire. LA.CU to pilot in cockpit of a Firefly - his aircraft is scored for 42 bombing missions and five rocket attacks - bearded observer in the rear cockpit smiles broadly and waves to camera. Range of Fireflies runs up. Landing Signals Officer at work, and pan as the Sea Fury he was directing takes the wire. Running range of Sea Furies - aircraft 121 taxies forward past camera to catapult. LS along the deck from aft of the catapult as Sea Furies are launched. LA.CU as Firefly taxies forward - ONE FOR JIMMY HAGAN is chalked on the 1,000-pound bomb suspended beneath port wing. Rocket-armed Sea Fury taxies past camera. LA to Sea Fury armed with 1,000-pound bombs. A mixed range of Furies and Fireflies is launched. LS aft from the starboard side, just forward of the crash barrier as Firefly and Sea Furies land on - after each landing the nets are lowered to allow the aircraft to taxi forward.

Alternative Title: POST-WAR NAVAL OPERATIONS - KOREA [Allocated Series Title]

Colour: B&W

Digitised:

Object_Number: ADM 1367

Sound: Silent

Access Conditions: IWM Attribution: © IWM

Production Country: GB

Production Details: Admiralty (Production sponsor)

Personalities, Units and Organisations: Royal Navy, Theseus (regiment/service) Royal Navy, Fleet Air Arm, Carrier Air Gp, 17 (regiment/service) Royal Navy, Fleet Air Arm, Sqdn 807 (regiment/service) Royal Navy, Fleet Air Arm, Sqdn 810 (regiment/service)

Keywords: ships, British naval - aircraft carrier, light: Theseus (object name) aircraft, British naval - combat: Hawker Sea Fury FB.11 (object name) aircraft, British naval - combat: Fairey Firefly AS.5 (object name) aircraft, British naval - seaplane: Supermarine Sea Otter (object name) weapons, British naval air - bomb: 1000-pound (object name) weapons, British naval air - rocket: 60-pound unguided (object name) operations, British naval air - preparation (object name) Korea (geography)

Physical Characteristics: Colour format: B&W Sound format: Silent Soundtrack language: None Title language: None Subtitle language: None

Technical Details: Format: 35mm Number of items/reels/tapes: 3 Footage: 1300 ft; Running time: 14 mins

HD Media:

Link to IWM Collections page:

ADM 1367

Related IWM Collections Objects: