This essay confronts Ray Brassier's vindication of nihilism with other two important but frequently underexamined philosophical attempts to overcome nihilism: Hans Jonas' and Keiji Nishitani's. By putting these different takes on nihilism into dialogue, it explores some blind spots in Brassier's position, as well as some of the practical consequences, for our current planetary situation, of undertaking a radical divorce between the normative and the natural that results from his radical nihilism. The article opts for a more moderate acceptance and eventual self-overcoming of nihilism, according to which, even if natural entities are indifferent to human reasons and meanings, this does not entail that nature is bereft of a human-independent normative dimension. In other words, the essay argues that care must be taken not to confuse criticisms of an anthropocentric conception of reasons and meanings with the belief that meaning is completely absent from the natural world. Thus, the central contention of the article is that, given our current climate and ecological catastrophe, one of the most pressing tasks of contemporary philosophy is to understand normativity in non-anthropocentric ways, so that humans are no longer considered as the only entities that respond to normativity. Such an attitude conceives humans as estranged normative creatures amidst a meaningless, indifferent natural world, toward which they would have no ethical responsibilities. The essay finishes by suggesting ways in which to develop an account that does not fall into this ethical vacuum.

This book is a collection of all the papers and essays published in the Special Issue “Nihilism and the Meaning of Life: A Philosophical Dialogue with James Tartaglia,” Journal of Philosophy of Life, Vol.7, No.1, 2017, pp.1-315. Two years ago, in 2015, we published the book Reconsidering Meaning in Life: A Philosophical Dialogue with Thaddeus Metz, and after the publication, one of the contributors to the above book, James Tartaglia, published his own intriguing philosophical book on the meaning of life and its connection with nihilism, entitled Philosophy in a Meaningless Life: A System of Nihilism, Consciousness and Reality (Bloomsbury 2016). I thought it would be a good idea to have a symposium on his book in the Journal of Philosophy of Life. I invited ten philosophers who have a strong interest in this topic, and edited a special volume dedicated to Tartaglia’s book. After receiving their papers, I asked James to write a reply to each of them, and in July this year we published a special issue in the Journal. You can read all of them, along with the replies by Tartaglia, in this single book.

In The Gay Science (1882), Nietzsche heralded the problem of nihilism with his famous declaration " God is dead, " which signalled the collapse of a transcendent basis for the underpinning morality of European civilization. He associated this collapse with the rise of the natural sciences whose methods and pervasive outlook he was concerned would progressively shape " an essentially mechanistic [and hence meaningless] world. " The Russian novelist Turgenev had also associated a scientific outlook with nihilism through the scientism of Yevgeny Bazarov, a character in Fathers and Sons. A century or so later, can we correlate relevant scientific results and the nihilistic consequences that worried these and other nineteenth-century authors? The aversion of empirical disciplines to such non-empirical concepts as personhood and agency, and their methodological exclusion of the very idea of value would make this a difficult task. Recent neuroscientific (MRI) investigations into free will might provide a useful starting point for anyone interested in this sociological question, as might the research results of experimental or evolutionary psychologists studying what they take human beings to be. In this paper, I turn instead to a more basic issue of science. I will question the universality of a principle of identity assumed by a scientific understanding of what it means for anything to exist. I will argue that the essential features of human existence present an exception to this principle of identity and thereby fall outside the grasp of scientific inquiry. The basis of this argument will be an explanation of why it is nonetheless rational for us to affirm personhood, agency, moral values, and many more concepts that disappear under the scrutiny of the sciences. 1 – Options for a meaningless world We are members of a social species, but also individuals whose agency implies a capacity for self-reflective, rational choice. This capacity is essential to our identity, and suggests why it is unjust to treat people merely as members of a species who can be herded into social arrangements without their consent. Such basic features of our civic life as individual rights and the rule of law assume the interrelated concepts of agency and personhood. Yet these concepts are fleeing our conceptual stage before the research results of neuroscientists, experimental psychologists, theorists of information technology, and philosophers who have eliminated concepts integral to the self – e.g., in addition to agency, belief, meaning, value, even consciousness. Daniel Dennett has presented a softer option to those of us who are reluctant to eliminate these concepts outright. He encourages us to view the self and its associated intentional-mental entities as things without real ontological status, as part of a pre-scientific inheritance which we maintain for practical purpose while the sciences gradually reveal the inventory of our actual ontology. It seems that if we are to keep faith with the sciences, we must, immediately or through a gradual process of mediating diplomacy, accede to the dramatic conclusion that the concepts underlying our most basic view

This article suggests that James Tartaglia’s otherwise interesting and insightful handling of the relationship between nihilism and philosophical questions concerning the meaning of life may have underestimated the former. Invoking a mini-tradition based on a Heideggarian reading of Nietzsche’s ‘European Nihilism’ as mainly expressed in The Will to Power, it outlines four possible perspectives from which Tartaglia’s conception of nihilism is liable to seem too complacent regarding its power to undermine the meaning we are inclined to attach to social life. In Philosophy in a Meaningless Life, 1 James Tartaglia cuts through misconceptions about the nature and consequences of nihilism that have dogged philosophical discussions over the years. And, he does this in a crisp, insightful, and often entertaining, way – one that should help refresh interest in issues concerning the meaning of life, while helping overcome the long prevailing tendency of analytic philosophers in particular to ...

Ø Call for Papers The term “nihilism” has received conflicting definitions throughout the history of modern European thought. Its first appearance is in Jacobi’s pessimism, where it is considered to be the inevitable consequence of German idealism and is defined as a horrific loss of meaning and reality. In contrast, Russian revolutionaries, feminists and anarchists found the meaning of nihilism not only in the recognition of the meaninglessness of the established powers, but above all in acts conducive to revolution. Later, many continental philosophers — following Nietzsche — understood nihilism as the establishment of values superior to and hostile to life, and hence the overcoming of nihilism became a basis for a radical critique of metaphysics and power. Today, however, while currents such as new materialism, speculative realism, afro-pessimism, non-philosophy, and neo-rationalism have retained these objectives, nihilism has either been cast to the wayside or provocatively embraced with inspiration from neurobiology, pragmatism, and analytic philosophy. Nihilism can thus be conceived of as one of the inflexion points from which the continental and its beyond are to be articulated as distinct discourses. This conference will be a space to discuss, learn and unlearn how numerous manifestations of nihilism have been addressed throughout the history of philosophy. With that being said, nihilism has always been a theme that has taken on not only conceptual but also artistic and cultural forms, a theme underlying the theory and practice of the sciences and a theme present in political, spiritual, and theological thought. Hence, by bringing together various metaphysical, aesthetical, epistemological and western and non-western theoretical perspectives, this conference is also an attempt to think about conflicting narratives of the renunciation and embrace of nihilism as a problem across disciplines. We invite proposals for 20-minute paper presentations from researchers, scholars and practitioners working in different fields, using different interpretations of nihilism. Contributions can respond to the following themes, but also to many others: • Historical and comparative studies in nihilism (ancient and medieval philosophy, German idealism, Nietzsche, existentialism, hermeneutics, deconstruction) • Lived experience and nihilism (phenomenology of the body, spiritual techniques, Eros and Thanatos, psychoanalysis) • Nihilism in sociology, human geography, anthropology and other social sciences •Political philosophy and nihilism (anarchism, feminism, post-Marxist thought, capitalist realism, real abstraction, foundations of community, value of life, bio-politics, resistance and revolution, queer theory) • Nihilism, theology, and Eastern philosophy (Christian, Islamic, Buddhist, Hindu, yogic and other perspectives on creation, being and nothingness) • Post-continental thought and nihilism (new materialism, speculative realism, object-oriented ontology, accelerationism, afro-pessimism, non-philosophy, neo-rationalism) • Scientific theory, epistemology and nihilism (scepticism, scientific realism, information theory, cognitive sciences) • Aesthetics and nihilism (existentialist and Russian literature, decadence and the arts) • Analytic approaches (defining nihilism, nihilistic consequences of the pluralisation of logic)

For centuries now, science has been revolutionizing traditional domains of knowledge. The world has been thoroughly ‘disenchanted,’ and now, at long last, science has begun revolutionizing the domains of the human. Every essay in this collection is betting that this revolution will somehow bypass or redeem some traditional conception of the human, presuming some prescientific notion of meaning will either be confirmed by the science, or left largely unscathed. The present article interrogates the basis of this optimism, and the possibility that these discourses offer no proof against disenchantment. Rather than presuming the best, it considers the worst case scenario, the possibility traditional accounts of meaning turn on various, covert forms of supernaturalism. It argues that massive, systematic deception regarding the nature of meaning is every bit as inevitable as massive, systematic deception regarding nature of the world more generally. It demonstrates how the standard critiques of meaning skepticism beg the question, how the apparent contradiction of ‘using meaning to eliminate meaning’ turns on obvious sophistry. It then outlines a genuinely naturalistic account of semantic phenomena, one that allows us to parse traditional theories of meaning from actual applications of meaning talk—theoretical meaning from practical meaning. Using this distinction, it offers an account of why all our received forms of meaning, theoretical and practical, are very likely doomed.