This essay confronts Ray Brassier's vindication of nihilism with other two important but frequently underexamined philosophical attempts to overcome nihilism: Hans Jonas' and Keiji Nishitani's. By putting these different takes on nihilism into dialogue, it explores some blind spots in Brassier's position, as well as some of the practical consequences, for our current planetary situation, of undertaking a radical divorce between the normative and the natural that results from his radical nihilism. The article opts for a more moderate acceptance and eventual self-overcoming of nihilism, according to which, even if natural entities are indifferent to human reasons and meanings, this does not entail that nature is bereft of a human-independent normative dimension. In other words, the essay argues that care must be taken not to confuse criticisms of an anthropocentric conception of reasons and meanings with the belief that meaning is completely absent from the natural world. Thus, the central contention of the article is that, given our current climate and ecological catastrophe, one of the most pressing tasks of contemporary philosophy is to understand normativity in non-anthropocentric ways, so that humans are no longer considered as the only entities that respond to normativity. Such an attitude conceives humans as estranged normative creatures amidst a meaningless, indifferent natural world, toward which they would have no ethical responsibilities. The essay finishes by suggesting ways in which to develop an account that does not fall into this ethical vacuum.

Ø Call for Papers The term “nihilism” has received conflicting definitions throughout the history of modern European thought. Its first appearance is in Jacobi’s pessimism, where it is considered to be the inevitable consequence of German idealism and is defined as a horrific loss of meaning and reality. In contrast, Russian revolutionaries, feminists and anarchists found the meaning of nihilism not only in the recognition of the meaninglessness of the established powers, but above all in acts conducive to revolution. Later, many continental philosophers — following Nietzsche — understood nihilism as the establishment of values superior to and hostile to life, and hence the overcoming of nihilism became a basis for a radical critique of metaphysics and power. Today, however, while currents such as new materialism, speculative realism, afro-pessimism, non-philosophy, and neo-rationalism have retained these objectives, nihilism has either been cast to the wayside or provocatively embraced with inspiration from neurobiology, pragmatism, and analytic philosophy. Nihilism can thus be conceived of as one of the inflexion points from which the continental and its beyond are to be articulated as distinct discourses. This conference will be a space to discuss, learn and unlearn how numerous manifestations of nihilism have been addressed throughout the history of philosophy. With that being said, nihilism has always been a theme that has taken on not only conceptual but also artistic and cultural forms, a theme underlying the theory and practice of the sciences and a theme present in political, spiritual, and theological thought. Hence, by bringing together various metaphysical, aesthetical, epistemological and western and non-western theoretical perspectives, this conference is also an attempt to think about conflicting narratives of the renunciation and embrace of nihilism as a problem across disciplines. We invite proposals for 20-minute paper presentations from researchers, scholars and practitioners working in different fields, using different interpretations of nihilism. Contributions can respond to the following themes, but also to many others: • Historical and comparative studies in nihilism (ancient and medieval philosophy, German idealism, Nietzsche, existentialism, hermeneutics, deconstruction) • Lived experience and nihilism (phenomenology of the body, spiritual techniques, Eros and Thanatos, psychoanalysis) • Nihilism in sociology, human geography, anthropology and other social sciences •Political philosophy and nihilism (anarchism, feminism, post-Marxist thought, capitalist realism, real abstraction, foundations of community, value of life, bio-politics, resistance and revolution, queer theory) • Nihilism, theology, and Eastern philosophy (Christian, Islamic, Buddhist, Hindu, yogic and other perspectives on creation, being and nothingness) • Post-continental thought and nihilism (new materialism, speculative realism, object-oriented ontology, accelerationism, afro-pessimism, non-philosophy, neo-rationalism) • Scientific theory, epistemology and nihilism (scepticism, scientific realism, information theory, cognitive sciences) • Aesthetics and nihilism (existentialist and Russian literature, decadence and the arts) • Analytic approaches (defining nihilism, nihilistic consequences of the pluralisation of logic)

My purpose is to discuss dramaturgy in Jonas's work. This dramaturgy seems to be an important point, one which covers several dimensions. Indeed, it occupies the central place in the context of the Gnostic studies that Jonas undertook. These studies, as we know, led Jonas to identify a particular Gnostic syndrome, which is manifested in a form of nihilism, determined by an acosmic relation to the world. The world – or, more precisely, the creation of the world – is interpreted in a negative perspective in ancient Gnosticism, so that we witness simultaneously a profound devalorisation of the world and of man within it. In fact, man is at the centre of a conflict which sets him against a world created by inferior, hostile powers. The history of creation in Gnosticism is a history of degeneration, an irreducible situation of crisis. To put it briefly, in creating the world, God lost some of his power, and left the world to inferior, demiurgical powers. I shall come back to the context of this appraisal, but what matters here is this central idea of metaphysical drama. It is present in Gnosticism, admittedly, but it is interesting to understand the extent to which this drama is an illustration of another drama taking place in secular philosophy. This is the other dimension of Jonas's dramaturgy. It is possible to see a resurgence of Gnostic thinking in the nihilism of Heidegger's thought. I shall return in detail to Jonas's criticism of his teacher. But what exactly are we talking about here? What is the link with philosophy? To understand this we have to grasp the thread which runs throughout Jonas's thinking. In his collection Philosophical Essays: from ancient creed to technological man, Jonas himself felt obliged to make this link explicit, as in fact his own philosophy takes several different paths. Consequently we have to make the link between the critique of Gnostic nihilism, the critique of Heidegger's nihilism, and then the emergence of a philosophy of life and of human responsibility for destructive technological power. This philosophy attempts a re-foundation of ontology in order to unite the being with the ought-to-be. And that presupposes one thing: this link or union between being and ought-to-be is hindered by a particular conception of the world. And what is that conception? In what type of conception of the world do we find the idea of a separation? Dualism. This is the guiding thread of Jonas's thought: resolving the problem of dualism, inasmuch as it enables a separation between man and the world, or man and nature, or man and the cosmos he belongs to. True, dualism had a primordial interest: developing a sharp awareness of human subjectivity. But what interests Jonas is that the separation is not morally neutral. This disunion can lead to the idea of rejecting the world, or at least a feeling that the cosmos is something foreign. Man loses a feeling of belonging to the world; and either he is unable to grasp the meaning and justification of his existence here, or (what is worse) his existence itself loses some of its value. If we are no longer able to give an account of the value of existence, all moral imperatives become vain. Philosophy itself, for Jonas, is the rational possibility of carrying out axiological research that would make it possible to distinguish Good from Evil; in fact, the postulate is this: man is