NAPLES, Italy—H.R.H. Princess Béatrice Marie Caroline Louise Françoise of Bourbon-Two Sicilies understands the importance of history and legacy. As Grand Chancellor of the Sacred Military Constantinian Order of Saint George and part of the Napoleon Imperial House of France by marriage, Princess Béatrice has a special place in her heart for history and tradition.

As such, when she heard Shen Yun Performing Arts would be gracing the stage of the Teatro di San Carlo in Naples, Italy, she was thrilled to see it again after having already been acquainted with the New York-based classical Chinese dance company in Paris.

Seeing Shen Yun was an uplifting experience, she explained.

“Wonderful! The colors, the ease of dancing, a wonderful thing,” she said.

“There is a fantastic energy!” she added. “You can see that they want to pass on a message and this message is very important.”

“This show is graceful, beautiful because it makes you really feel like you’re flying and looking into the sky,” de Goyzueta said, describing the way the Shen Yun dancers used their flowing costumes as props, sending brilliant fabrics flying and fluttering into the air.

“It really is of an extraordinary beauty; very, very beautiful,” de Goyzueta said.

Angioletta de Goyzueta found in Shen Yun a sense of elevation that resonated deeply.

“I have to say I [relate] a lot, because what it wants to transmit is this elevation towards Heaven and towards the Cosmos, and therefore I share [this idea] a lot because I am one who love very much this discourse of the beyond, and it seems to me that this show speaks about what is not only the here and there, but the Heavens and therefore it is very much, through all these movements, brings up very close to this cosmic dimension,” de Goyzueta said.

This sense of harmony moved de Goyzueta’s keen sense of aesthetics and spirit.

“It is an extraordinary harmony, because beauty is basically harmony, and they convey this beautiful harmony, so thank you very much for bringing us this show because it was really a joy to see it and participate,” de Goyzueta said, adding gratitude for the artists.

With reporting by NTD Television.