Cleveland disc jockey Alan Freed, who introduced the phrase “rock ’n’ roll” on mainstream radio in the early 1950s was born on Dec. 15, 1921.

In 1951, Freed began his Moondog Show on WJW Radio in Cleveland, playing a wide range of R&B singles. The controversy about this was Freed would play the original singles by the black artists instead of waiting for a white singer to cover them.

“Rock ’n roll is really swing with a modern name,” Freed once said. “It began on the levees and plantations, took in folk songs, and features blues and rhythm. It’s the rhythm that gets to the kids – they’re starved of music they can dance to, after all those years of crooners.”

Freed moved to WINS in New York in 1954 where his late night radio show became known as Alan Freed's Rock ’n’ Roll Party. His popularity was immediate and so was the criticism.

The New York Daily News described rock ’n’ roll as “an inciter of juvenile delinquency” and blamed Freed for its popularity.

Freed also began hosting live concert dance shows around New York that were an immediate hit with the teenagers. Freed would promote black performers asrock ’n roll artists, which didn't sit well with many in the industry. But the teenagers loved it. His show sold out back-to-back nights on Jan. 14 and 15, 1955 at theSt Nicholas Ballroom in Manhattan with a host of acts including Fats Domino.

In July 1957, Freed was given his own nationally televisedrock ’n roll dance show billed as “The Big Beat" on ABC-TV. The show featured a mix of pop and R&B acts. Early reviews for the national show were good, but it was cancelled abruptly after Frankie Lymom, one of the show's black performers, was shown on air dancing with a white girl.The biracial dance scene enraged ABC’s Southern affiliates and the network cancelled the show despite its growing popularity.

The show did continue locally in New York on WNEW-TV.

Freed was featured in five of the earliest rock ’n’ roll movies – Rock Around the Clock and Rock, Rock, Rock in 1956; Mister Rock And Roll and Don’t Knock the Rock in 1957; Go Johnny Go!

Trouble continued to follow Freed as the authorities began investigating the practice of payola.

Freed was not the only disc jockey to be paid to play songs, but he was the most high profile celebrity in the business that the federal government could focus on. Despite the fact that payola was not illegal at the time, he was convicted of twotwo misdemeanor commercial bribery charges, and fined $300.

The charge and the fine were not huge in themselves, but he was soon fired by ABC-TV and then by radio station WNEW.

The court cases surrounding the payola scandal took its toll on Freed, who was also investigated for tax evasion. He died on Jan. 1, 1965. He was 43 years old.

The 1978 movie "American Hot Wax" based on Freed's life in New York brought him and his impact to a whole new generation of rock 'n roll fans. Freed was among the inaugural class inducted into the Rock & Roll Hall of Fame in 1986.