David Cameron

Former Prime Minister United Kingdom (2010-2016)

As the UK’s youngest Prime Minister in two centuries, David Cameron has become one of the most prominent global influencers of the early 21st Century. David Cameron served as Prime Minister of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland from 2010 to 2016, leading Britain’s first Coalition Government in nearly 70 years and, at the 2015 General Election, forming the first majority Conservative Government in the UK for over two decades.

David Cameron came to power at a moment of economic crisis. Under his leadership, the UK’s economy was transformed. The deficit was reduced by over two-thirds; one million businesses set-up; a record number of jobs were created; and Britain became the fastest-growing major advanced economy in the world. That created the stability David Cameron needed to cut taxes, introduce a National Living Wage, transform education, reform welfare, protect the National Health Service, and increase pensions.

Internationally, David Cameron developed a foreign policy in the post-Iraq era that addressed the new challenges of the Arab Spring, as well as a more aggressive Russia, while ensuring Britain played a full role in the global fight against ISIS. Following hosting the successful London 2012 Olympic and Paralympic Games, David Cameron chaired the 2013 G8 Summit at Lough Erne in Northern Ireland, where he highlighted the global need for fair taxes, increased transparency and open trade. He later helped re-write the global goals on aid and sustainable development.

Elected Leader of the Conservative Party in 2005 to reform and modernize a party that had lost three elections in a row, David Cameron successfully remodeled the Conservative Party with a new and distinct modern, compassionate agenda – and that is how he governed. He led the way internationally by passing the UK’s Same Sex Marriage Act; and offered constitutional referenda on Scotland’s place within the United Kingdom, and on the United Kingdom’s place within the European Union.

And continuing the instrumental role he took while Prime Minister advocating UN Sustainable Development Goal 16, he is working with the London School of Economics and Blavatnik School of Government at Oxford University, chairing the LSE-Oxford Commission on State Fragility, Growth and Development, under the auspices of the International Growth Centre. The Commission will support the development and implementation of effective growth policies in fragile and conflict-affected states around the world. He also sits on the Global Board of Advisors at the Council on Foreign Relations.

He offers lessons in leadership at an extraordinary and turbulent time in global affairs – not least on building economic strength; creating inward investment across the UK and Europe against the backdrop of an emergent Russia and China; and navigating complex international security challenges. David Cameron will provide an unrivalled perspective on the future of the European Union and Britain’s place in the world following Brexit; and a unique insight on the rise of populist politicians and parties at a time of profound global change.