Lindsay Northover, a Lib Dem frontbench spokeswoman, is reported to have lived with her family in a terraced house in north London for almost two decades, giving the home as her “usual address” to Companies House this year.

But she insisted she was entitled to claim the overnight allowance, designed to reimburse peers outside London for accommodation costs incurred while attending the House of Lords, because she had to manage her late father’s farm in Worthing, West Sussex.

Baroness Northover said she continued to spend a lot of time in Worthing to be with her mother, who is ill.

The peer, a former academic who owns a third property in Devon, said: “For several years, because of the responsibilities that fell to me, given that my brother and sister live abroad, I have had to divide my time between Sussex and London. My personal arrangements dictated that I arrange my life differently because of these responsibilities.

“Like other peers who are based in London in the week and out of London at the weekend, I therefore claimed the overnight allowance, according to the rules of the House of Lords. My claims were assessed by my party leadership and fully approved.”

Yesterday, her party bosses rallied to her defence.

Lord McNally, Leader of the Liberal Democrats in the House of Lords, described the peer as “outstanding” and dismissed claims of impropriety as a “hotch potch of hearsay and innuendo”.

He said: “I have been aware of Baroness Northover’s domestic and family circumstances since becoming Leader of the Liberal Democrats in the Lords in 2004 and they are as she states.

“The truth is that she has shown admirable devotion to her family commitments whilst continuing to be a very hard-working front-bench spokesperson in the Lords.”

The claims about Baroness Northover’s allowances follow a series of damaging revelations about MPs of all major political parties abusing their Parliamentary expenses. The stories have led to several MPs paying back cash or announcing their retirement at the next election.

The Government is expected shortly to announce details of its plans for an independent body to set the rules on MPs’ pay and expenses as part of the Constitutional Renewal Bill.