The Rt.Hon Baroness Northover has been appointed by Prime Minister David Cameron to act on behalf of the British Government to increase trade and economic co-operation between the United Kingdom and Angola.

Speaking in Luanda, the British Ambassador to Angola, John Dennis welcomed the appointment;

“I am delighted that Baroness Northover has been appointed to this key role. There are major opportunities for the UK to help Angola diversify its economy, in the process increasing trade and investment to the benefit of both countries and peoples. Baroness Northover will bring to bear on this task her wealth of experience and skills. I and my team are greatly looking forward to working closely with her.”

Speaking in London, Baroness Northover said:

“I am delighted to have been appointed as the Prime Minister’s Trade Envoy from the UK to Angola. I look forward very much to building on the work of my predecessor, David Heath, and seeking out opportunities for the UK to build its trade with Angola, in a way which will benefit both the UK and the Angolan people.”

Further Information:

Rt Hon Baroness (Lindsay) Northover was Parliamentary Under Secretary of State at the Department of International Development (DFID), and Minister for Africa, 2014-15, in the Coalition Government. Prior to that she served in a number of other Government departments, including the Ministry of Justice, the Department of Health, the Department for Education, the Department for Energy and Climate Change, the Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs, the Department for Culture, Media and Sport and the Government Equalities Office, as well as serving as Lead Government Spokesperson for DFID from 2010-14.

She is an Honorary Associate Professor at the Institute of Global Health Innovation at Imperial College London, and is a former Member of Council of the Overseas Development Institute, Trustee of the Tropical Health and Education Trust, and Trustee of UNICEF UK. She is a Liberal Democrat member of the House of Lords, serving as Spokesperson for her Party first on Health and then on International Development. She has served on a number of House of Lords Select Committees. Her first degree is from Oxford University, and her Master’s and PhD are from Bryn Mawr College and the University of Pennsylvania in the USA. Lindsay Northover was formerly a Lecturer at the Wellcome Institute and University College London.