Scandinavia is a term used for the area shared by Norway, Sweden and the part of Northern Finland. This shifts the focus solely on Norway and Sweden whenever one refers to Scandinavian countries.

'Scandinavian' relation with Norsemen of early middle ages

The use of the word 'Skandinavien' is common in Swedish, Norwegian and Danish languages because that word refers to the ancient territories of the Norsemen: Norway, Sweden, and Denmark. Faroe Island and Iceland were the part of the Norsemen territory as well.

advertisement

Territories of the Norsemen is the most accepted way of recognising the Scandinavian countries.

When Iceland belonged to Norway and Denmark, Finland was a part of the kingdom of Sweden.

Not only did they share the same history, but the political and economic platforms were the same for these five countries as well. These countries also share a similar model known as the Nordic welfare state since the 20th century.

Clearing the confusion between Scandinavian and Nordic countries

At the time of these overlying linguistic and geographical confusions in identifying what Scandinavian countries are, the French came to the rescue. They invented the term 'Pays Nordiques' or 'Nordic Countries'.

This has become a common term to bring together Scandinavia, Iceland, and Finland under the same umbrella to be flagged as Nordic countries.

Other beliefs behind 'Nordic'

'Nordic' is a term derived from the local Scandinavian-language word 'Norden' which in literal terms means, the northern islands. However, the residents are called as 'Norbdo' which in literal term means, "northern dwellers".

Nordic countries include Finland, Iceland, Norway, Denmark, Sweden, and the Faroe Islands (an archipelago of islands as an autonomous country within the kingdom of Denmark).

These countries share similar flags, languages, and many cultural traits.

They are also the least corrupt in the world and have a low crime rate.

They have the world's most high-rated gender equality ratio and world's highest proportion of women in senior leadership position.

In the current scenario, while the term 'Scandinavia' is commonly used for Denmark, Norway and Sweden, the term "Nordic countries" is vaguely used for Denmark, Norway, Sweden, Finland and Iceland, including their associated territories of Greenland, the Faroe Islands and the land Islands.

However, both Svalbard and Greenland are classified as separate from both Scandinavia and the Nordics.

History of the

The Nordic countries were among the last parts of Eurasia to be settled by humans.

The 8th to the 11th centuries are known as the Viking Age.

Viking is not the name of a tribe or nation, but the Old Norse word for 'sailor'. Most people from the territory of Norse were farmers who remained in Scandinavia and were by definition not Vikings, but some Norsemen.

These Norsemen sailed through the stretch of Atlantic and the European rivers. They are also known to have taken part in the foundation of the nations like England, Russia and France.

With due time, the Norsemen held a bad reputation across Europe. They were known for their barbarism as their expedition from peaceful trade turned into pirate raids.

The Norse nations were unified by 1000 AD.

Sweden annexed Finland in the 13th century. Sweden proving rebellious fought eleven wars against Denmark over a period of 300 years. The idea of Scandanavian unity was revived in the 19th century.

Scandinavian history is properly known after the introduction of Christianity. In 829 AD, Denmark was the first of those countries to embrace Christianity.

Erik, the heir of Denmark, Norway and Sweden, implemented a political unity of a period of 123 years that acknowledged Denmark as the political capital of Scandinavia.

This union was broken with the establishment of independent Swedish monarch in a revolt led by Gustavus Vasa.

advertisement

Norway remained affiliated with Denmark and remained so until 1814 after the Swedish revolt. In this manner, the historical monarchies of Denmark and Norway were established on one side, and Sweden and Finland on the other.

Finland was a colony of Russia since 1845 and got independence in 1918 due to weakened condition of Russia after World War 1.

Norway's independence in 1905 was set off from Denmark after 400 years of domination.

Interested in General Knowledge and Current Affairs? Click here to stay informed and know what is happening around the world with our G.K. and Current Affairs section.