The Blue Plaque is a scheme for remembering the links between famous people and buildings by placing commemorative plaques on the walls. The scheme was started by the Royal Society of Arts in London, and the very first plaques was, in fact, of red terracotta placed on the outside of a former home of Lord Byron (since demolished).

The Society erected 36 plaques between 1866 - 1901, responsibility for them was transferred to the London County Council (1901-65) (which changed the colour of the plaques to the current blue) and later the Greater London Council (1965-86) and most recently English Heritage. Similar schemes are now operated in all the member countries of the United Kingdom.

Outside London

English Heritage looks after the Blue plaque scheme in the London Boroughs. Similar schemes exist outside London, run by each local authority. The system has been adopted outside the United Kingdom too, for example, in June 2010 a Blue Plaque was put on the home of Guernsey artist Peter Le Lievre.

Images for kids

English Heritage blue plaque at 22 Gladstone Avenue, Feltham, London, commemorating Freddie Mercury (erected 2016)

English Heritage plaque at 40 Falkner Square, Liverpool, commemorating Peter Ellis, architect (erected 2001)

Society of Arts plaque on Samuel Johnson's house in Gough Square, London (erected 1876). Many of the early Society of Arts and LCC plaques were brown in colour.

London County Council plaque at 48 Doughty Street, Holborn, commemorating Charles Dickens (erected 1903)

One of seven LCC Royal Doulton plaques with coloured laurel relief border erected in 1925; 41 Beak Street, Soho

London County Council plaque at 100 Lambeth Road, Lambeth, commemorating William Bligh (erected 1952)

Greater London Council plaque at 29 Fitzroy Square, Fitzrovia, commemorating Virginia Woolf (erected 1974)

English Heritage plaque, at 22b Ebury Street, Belgravia, London, commemorating Ian Fleming (erected 1996)

Corporation of London plaque on the site of Lloyd's Coffee House in Lombard Street

City of Westminster green plaque at 18 Cavendish Square, Marylebone, commemorating Josef Dallos, contact lens pioneer (erected 2010)

A Gateshead blue plaque commemorating William Clarke, co-founder of the engineering firm Clarke Chapman.

Plaque in Oldham marking the origin of the fish and chip shop and the fast food industry.

The first Swindon Heritage blue plaque, commemorating suffragette Edith New, who was one of the first two suffragettes to use vandalism as a tactic.

Oxfordshire blue plaque commemorating the first sub-4-minute mile run by Roger Bannister on 6 May 1954 at the University of Oxford's Iffley Road track.

Wolverhampton Civic Society plaque to Ernest Cox, an engineer noted for his marine salvage proficiency.

York blue plaque commemorating Anne Lister, described as the 'first modern lesbian'.

Transport Trust plaque at Hythe Pier and Railway, Hythe, Hampshire, the oldest working pier railway in the world

Royal Society of Chemistry plaque on the Chemistry Department of University College London, recording the work carried out there by Sir Christopher Ingold (erected 2008)

Institute of Physics plaque on the Parkinson Building, University of Leeds, recording the work carried out there by Sir William Henry Bragg

See also