One of the happiest and greenest cities in the world, Denmark’s capital, Copenhagen, is a trendy and vibrant waterside city. Though it’s situated across multiple islands on the country’s eastern coast, this compact, mega bike-friendly city is easy to traverse and packed with exceptional food, drink, and sightseeing.

Fact file

Population: 1,346,485

Currency: Danish krone

Timezone: Central European time (UTC +1)

Cost of living: The estimated monthly living cost for a single person is 20,700 DKK.

Find a detailed breakdown of the cost of visiting Denmark here.

Things to do in Copenhagen

Explore the city by bike

Biking is a key part of life in the Danish capital. Rent a bike or go on a guided bike tour to get to know the city like a local. This guide will help you confidently navigate the city on wheels.

Try New Nordic cuisine

Noma, one of the best restaurants in the world, helped propel Nordic fare and the Danish restaurant scene into the top tier. Focused on local staples and seasonal produce, New Nordic cuisine offers a fresh take on traditional Scandinavian dishes.

For an in-depth experience of Danish food and culture, try this Culinary Experience Tour.

Check out the quintessential tourist attractions

Can you truly say you visited Denmark’s capital without taking in the city’s most renowned attractions, like the Little Mermaid statue, Tivoli Gardens, Nyhavn, and the Amalienborg and Christianborg palaces?

Hit a bunch of the major sights and get a history lesson along the way with this Inner City Day Trip.

Explore some offbeat sights

Christiania, a partially self-governed hippie community, is a local gem where you can find cozy vegetarian cafés and weekly live jazz performances.

The city’s flea markets guarantee a unique experience with plenty of locations to browse for antiques and quirky treasures. Explore more of the city’s unconventional side with this Alternative Tour.

Keep it budget friendly

Denmark’s capital is notoriously expensive, but that doesn’t mean your visit needs to break the bank. There are several free museums as well as cheap places to eat, drink, and sightsee. You can even find delicious and affordable New Nordic cuisine if Noma is outside your budget.

For additional savings, consider purchasing the city’s discount card which offers free admission to 73 attractions and activities, including some transportation and restaurant discounts.

Where to stay

Hostels

Travellers on a budget should explore the city’s stylish hostels rather than shell out for a pricey hotel. Denmark is known for its great selection of trendy hostels, and they often include perks like bike rentals, quirky settings, social events, or live music.

Airbnb