Copenhagen Guide

Located on the eastern coast of Zealand, Copenhagen is Denmark's capital city and lies around 40 km to the north west of Malmo in Sweden and 165 km to the north east of Odense. Founded in the 10th century as a Viking fishing village, Copenhagen became Denmark's capital city in the 15th century. As Denmark's cultural hub, Copenhagen has many museums, galleries and music venues for visitors to enjoy. The National Museum, Nationalmuseet, is Denmark's largest museum of archaeology and cultural history and can be found in Copenhagen. It contains the histories of Danish and foreign cultures. Denmark's National Gallery (Statens Museum for Kunst) is the national art museum with collections dating from the 12th century to the present. Along with Danish painters, artists represented in the collections include Rubens, Rembrandt, Picasso, Braque, Léger, Matisse, Emil Nolde, Olafur Eliasson, Elmgreen and Dragset, Superflex and Jens Haaning.

Copenhagen's port is the main port for the Oresund region and serves as the gateway to the Baltic Sea. The harbour is jointly operated by the Swedish city of Malmo and accommodates ferries departing to Sweden, Norway and Poland with many services scheduled each week.

Oslo Guide

The city of Oslo is the capital of Norway and is a bit different from many other European cities. Although there are a number of impressive buildings in the city's historical districts of St. Hanshaugen and Frogner, Oslo does not have the architectural gems that other cities have. However, Oslo is a popular place to visit especially amongst those who love the outdoors as it lies next to the Skagerrak Strait and is directly to the south of the green belt area. Known as the North Woods (Nordmarka), hiking and even seasonal skiing are extremely popular here. Visitors should make the most of the Norwegian summer by visiting one of the city's many beaches on the peninsula of Bygdoy area, or take a stroll around the acclaimed Vigeland Sculpture Park. However, if you arrive in the winter, visitors may wish to try their hand at cross-country skiing around the Nordmarka woodlands, or head down to the Holmenkollen Ski Jump and watch one of the regular championships. A recent addition to Oslo is the Nobel Peace Centre, added since this is the city where the Nobel Peace Prize is presented each December.