To listen to an audio only version of our conversation, please click on the “>” symbol that is below the video image of this post.

Paul Nguyen is a filmmaker, journalist and social activist best known for creating Jane-Finch.com.

Nguyen’s impact is recognized by political and community leaders across Canada. He is a public speaker and media commentator on race, crime and youth issues.

Nguyen sits on the York University Alumni Board, York University Senate, and the National Ethnic Press and Media Council of Canada. He is featured on a list of noteworthy historical figures for Asian Heritage Month by the Government of Canada.

You can find more about Paul via:

Jane-Finch.com

Twitter

Email

Dwayne Wright (Mr. Fresh) is an Canadian Award Winning Entrepreneur and C.E.O from Toronto. In Toronto, there is a notoriously known neighborhood called Jane and Finch, or Jane and Fresh which Mr. Fresh likes to call it. He was raised in the midst of guns, drugs, violence and poverty it molded him from seeing violence, drugs and guns first hand, to the successful businessman he is today becoming Fresh and Famous.

You find out about Dwayne via:

Website

Instagram

Linkedin

Twitter

YouTube

Email

Recently, Paul and Dwayne were our on show talking about the article Jane-Finch voices speak truth to power on gun violence.

During the conversation, Paul and Dwayne talked about:

– Some of their experiences and challenges growing up in the Jane-Finch area

– Why did Paul decide to write this article

– Their experiences during the first “Summer Of The Gun” in Toronto (2005)

– What has been happening in Jane-Finch since 2005

– “The best social program is a job.” Paul

– The background behind the article

– The practice of carding by the police

– Their reactions when they see people leaving Jane and Finch

– The threat of gentrification and the effect that the current political climate is having

– Their thoughts on councilman’s Giorgio Mammoliti comments calling some of the residents of the area as “cockroaches”

– Some of the misconceptions and some great things about Jane and Finch

– Solutions to help make positive change

Please feel free to email us at dr.vibe@thedrvibeshow.com

Please feel free to “Like” the “The Dr. Vibe Show” Facebook fan page here

God bless, peace, be well and keep the faith,

Dr. Vibe

dr.vibe@thedrvibeshow.com

Producer of Google+ Hangouts – The Good Men Project

The Dr. Vibe Show™ At “The Good Men Project”

One of the first Brand Ambassador’s – Cuisine Noir Magazine

The Dr. Vibe Show™ Channel

Dr. Vibe – Producer And Co-host of Black Men Talking On WJMS Radio

Dr. Vibe on HuffPost Live – August 2, 2013

2013 Black Weblog Awards Finalist (Best Podcast)

2012 Black Weblog Awards Winner (Best International Blog)

2012 Black Weblog Awards Finalist (Best Podcast)

2011 Black Weblog Awards Finalist (Best International Blog and Best Podcast Series)

Black Blog Of The Day – Black Bloggers Network – June 23, 2011

Twitter

Twitter hashtag: #DrVibe

The Dr. Vibe Show™ – iTunes

Dr. Vibe Media – You Tube

Google+

The Dr. Vibe Show™ – Stitcher Radio

The Dr. Vibe Show™ – TuneIn Radio

The Dr. Vibe Show™ – Google Play Music

The Dr. Vibe Show™ – iHeartRadio

Linkedin – The Dr. Vibe Show™

Instagram

The Dr. Vibe Show Facebook Fan Page

Most Viewed Posts Over The Last 24 Hours: