Esperar is a common Spanish verb that can mean "to hope for," "to wait," and "to expect." You can figure out which meaning is intended by looking at the context, sentence structure, and whether esperar is followed by a verb in the subjunctive mood.

This article explains some of the different uses of esperar in Spanish, as well as esperar conjugations in the present, past, conditional, and future indicative, the present and past subjunctive, the imperative, and other verb forms.

Four Ways of Using the Verb Esperar

'Esperar Que' Followed by a Verb

The phrase esperar que is typically followed by a verb. If that verb is in the subjunctive mood, esperar can often be understood to mean "hope," while if that verb is in the indicative mood, it usually can be understood to mean "expect."

The use of the indicative mood suggests some degree of certainty, while the subjunctive mood indicates desire. The use of the subjunctive following esperar que is far more common. Also, the following phrases are common:

¡Espero que sí! (I hope so!)

¡Espero que no! (I hope not!)

'To Wait' or 'To Wait For'

This is one of the most common meanings of esperar, as seen in the following examples:

Por favor espera aquí por un momento. (Please wait here for a moment.)

Bajaron al andén y esperaron el tren. (They stepped down to the platform and waited for the train.)

Esperamos la llegada de la policía federal. (We are waiting for the arrival of the federal police.)

'To Expect'

This is another common meaning that is determined by the context:

El amor llega cuando uno menos lo espera. (Love comes when you least expect it.)

Para el 2028 esperamos la llegada de unos 406 mil turistas. (For 2028 we are expecting the arrival of some 406,000 tourists. Note how in some contexts "hope for" could be a suitable translation.)

The phrase estar esperando can be used in the same way as the English "to be expecting" when referring to pregnancy: Carme Chacón confirma que el bebé que está esperando es un niño. (Carme Chacon confirms that the baby she is expecting is a boy.)

Using Esperar Like Gustar

Esperar is sometimes used in a sentence with inverted word order, like gustar and some other verbs. A better translation in such cases is "await":

Al dólar le esperan tiempos peores. (Worse times await the dollar.)

Me espera una vida nueva en algún lugar del mundo. (A new life awaits me somewhere in the world.)

¿Qué avances tecnológicos nos esperan en el futuro? (What technological advancements await in the future?

Present Indicative

Esperar is conjugated in the same way as other regular -ar verbs.