Julie Andrews has revealed she felt she was protected from the casting couch because she was married to Blake Edwards and had children.

The actress, 84, admitted she was 'certainly aware of the tales', which saw actors and actresses being pressured into having sex with sleazy casting agents to get sought-after parts, in an interview with The Guardian.

Julie got her big break in Hollywood in 1963, when she was cast as Mary Poppins. Pregnant at the time she turned down the role but Disney told her 'We'll wait for you'.

Julie told the publication: 'I was certainly aware of tales about the casting couch.

'But I was so busy working and raising my kids and being married to Blake Edwards eventually, it was an extremely busy life, and to a certain extent that put a protective fence around me, I think.'

Andrews married Edwards in 1969. In the 1970s, the couple adopted two daughters; Amy in 1974 and Joanna in 1975.

When asked if her desire to adopt children was linked to her turbulent childhood, Julie said: 'Once I got to Broadway and Hollywood, the films drew me into that particular work, and I found that it was what I wanted to embrace, because it was giving me so much pleasure.'

She added Mary Poppins and The Sound Of Music led her into a 'concern for kids', and 'subliminally I was trying to give them as good a feeling as I could'.

Julie was born in 1935 in Walton-on-Thames, Surrey, England. Her mother, Barbara Ward Wells, was married to teacher Ted Wells, but conceived Julie in an affair with a family friend — something Julie didn't know until she was 14, when she met the man at a party.

'My mother was terribly important to me, and I know how much I yearned for her in my youth…but I don't think I truly trusted her,' she previously told the New York Times.

Barbara divorced Ted Wells and remarried Ted Andrews in 1943, giving Julie the last name she'd find fame with.

Theirs was a musical household, and Barbara, a pianist, and Ted Andrews, a vaudevillian performer, contributed to the war efforts by entertaining the troops through the Entertainments National Service Association.

In addition to the tumult of having divorced parents in the 1940s, she has said that her new stepfather, Ted Andrews, was an alcoholic, and tried twice to climb into bed with her.

In her 2008 autobiography Home, she recalled putting a lock on her door to keep him out.

In 1948, when she was just 13, she became the youngest solo performer ever in a Royal Command Variety Performance, where she performed at the London Palladium in front of King George VI and Queen Elizabeth.

She appeared on the BBC and in shows on the West End, and in 1952 — shortly after these snaps were taken — she voiced a character in the Italian animated movie The Singing Princess.

Then, just before turning 19 in 1954, she starred as Eliza Doolittle in My Fair Lady on Broadway.

Later, she achieved superstar status thanks to starring roles in 1964's Mary Poppins, 1965's The Sound of Music, and 1967's Thoroughly Modern Millie.

Other top credits over the years have included 1982's Victor Victoria and 2001's The Princess Diaries, and she's won an Academy Awards for Best Actress, five Golden Globe awards, three Grammys, two Emmys, and a BAFTA.