Dame Julie Andrews lost her husband of 41 years Blake Edwards in 2010, but she has admitted that she's 'still dealing' with the loss.

Speaking openly about her four decades-long marriage to the iconic director during an appearance on Good Morning Britain, the 79-year-old also revealed how they made it work for such a long time.

The legendary star told presenter Kate Garraway: 'He sadly passed away about three years ago, but we were married 41 years and it was a love story, it was.'

Scroll down for video

'Success in our marriage was to take it one day at a time and so, lo and behold, 41 years later there we still were,' she said.

But she also sadly admitted that, even four years on, his loss is something she is still coming to terms with.

'I'm still dealing with it, Kate,' she said.

'There are days when it's perfectly wonderful and I am myself and then it's suddenly - sock you in the middle of your gut and you think "ah God I wish he were here". But he is in a way, I think one carries that love always.'

The poignant interview with the actress and musical star was held in honour of The Sound Of Music's 50th anniversary.

Julie also discussed the novel way in which she met her husband, who passed away due to complications from pneumonia after battling with chronic fatigue syndrome and depression for 15 years.

The musical actress opened up about undergoing therapy back in the 1960s, to rid herself of some 'garbage' in her life.

But she is particularly pleased she did as she met Blake while travelling to one of her sessions to see the same therapist he used to visit.

Speaking about how they had met some time before they tied the knot in 1969, she said: 'We met about 10 years before, literally ships that passed in the night at some event but we actually… our cars, I was going one way and he was going the other, he rolled down the window after smiling a couple of times and he said, "Are you going where I just came from?"'

'I was going to a therapist he was coming from. Very corny, sorry about that.'

She also added that their marriage was 'a love story'.

The Sound Of Music has been celebrating 50 years since it was made, and it was just four years later that Julie married the man she spent the next 41 years with.

Edwards was regarded as a modern master of contemporary film comedy through films such as the Pink Panther series.

In a career that stretched back to the mid-50s, Edwards directed more than 30 films, including Operation Petticoat, starring Cary Grant and Tony Curtis and the classic Breakfast At Tiffany’s, which starred Audrey Hepburn and George Peppard.

The pair married in 1969 and went on to work together on seven films, most famously Darling Lili, 10 and Victor/Victoria, all of which were directed by Edwards and starred Andrews.