With his magnetically subtle presence, no-nonsense demeanor, and gravelly voice, Michael Madsen has become a go-to actor for various tough-guy roles. Best known for his work with acclaimed filmmaker Quentin Tarantino in films like "Reservoir Dogs" and "Kill Bill," Madsen has played everything from a quietly menacing mobster to killer cowboys across his extensive career. A working man's actor, Madsen brings a surprising amount of depth to each of his roles, elevating otherwise routine material while remaining consistently magnetic on screen.

With a career spanning over 40 years, Madsen has been cast as a reliable antagonist, delivering subtle sadism to many twisted characters. However, Madsen has demonstrated overlooked range throughout his career, playing everything from understanding fathers to sensitive love interests opposite Hollywood's biggest names. Here are the 15 best films starring Michael Madsen, including film roles that capitalize on his tough-guy reputation and those effectively casting him against type.

The 1994 remake of "The Getaway" is a thoroughly strange movie, from its gratuitous sex scenes to the awkward chemistry between Alec Baldwin and Kim Basinger — despite the couple being married in real life at the time. Madsen plays Rudy Travis, the violent partner of bank robber Doc McCoy (Baldwin), who double-crosses him and pursues him and his wife Carol (Basinger) for stashed loot. With all the unpredictable fury of a raw nerve, Madsen is riveting and injects life into an otherwise stale retread.

Madsen's best heel turns are when he plays antagonists who unabashedly embrace their dark side, and "The Getaway" provides us with a solid example. Far from a lone wolf, Madsen acts alongside Fran Carvey (Jennifer Tilly), a kidnapee-turned-love-interest — making their pairing a modern meditation on Bonnie and Clyde. Unlike Baldwin and Basinger's relatively joyless performances, Madsen and Tilly steal the show as the couple we find ourselves rooting for throughout its runtime.

Madsen played mob-associated tough guys in crime movies long before he began working with Tarantino, including one of his earliest roles in 1989's "Kill Me Again." The film stars Val Kilmer as private investigator Jack Andrews who becomes embroiled in a quarrel between murderous lovers Vince (Madsen) and Fay (Joanne Whalley-Kilmer). After Fay fakes her death and steals money from the mob, Jack becomes framed and goes on the run as Vince (Madsen) hunts them both.

A solid — if routine — pulp neo-noir thriller, "Kill Me Again" quietly sets the template for Madsen's tough guy persona, which has defined much of his career. Vince is an understatedly unrelenting menace, bringing terrifying thoroughness to inflicting violence and death as he pursues Jack and Fay. One scene, in particular, where Vince tortures one of Jack's friends for information foreshadows Madsen's "Reservoir Dogs" role without Tarantino's stylistic sheen. With twists and turns that leave Jack and the audience questioning where Fay's loyalties lie, "Kill Me Again" cements Madsen as a memorable bad guy.

Originally released in North America under the title "Renegade," the 2004 French western "Blueberry" brings a more psychedelic edge to the Wild West. U.S. Marshal Mike Donovan (Vincent Cassel) maintains the tenuous peace between settlers and the Indigenous population along the 19th-century frontier. Madsen stars as the villainous Wallace Sebastian Blount. Described in the film as a "white sorcerer," Blount gives Madsen one of his more unique antagonistic roles, opposing Donovan like the all-knowing specter at the end of a bad acid trip.

With its overlit cinematography and larger-than-life perspective on the West, Madsen gives "Blueberry" a grounding presence amidst all the outsized surrealism. "Blueberry" starts and stops in fits with uneven narrative pacing. But whenever Madsen is onscreen, it's all eyes on him. "Blueberry" practically feels like an arthouse western at times, but without the solid foundation that Madsen brings as Blount, the entire movie would feel aimless.

Madsen makes the leap to romantic lead opposite Patricia Arquette in the on-the-road crime comedy "Trouble Bound." In the film, he stars as the rough-and-tumble couple Harry Talbot alongside Arquette's Kit Califano. After Harry's prison sentence ends, he is given a Lincoln Cadillac by the mob, unaware that he is transporting a corpse hidden in its trunk. However, Harry's life on the outside grows significantly more complicated when he goes on the run with Kit, as the fiery young woman escalates their troubles with the mob.

"Trouble Bound" has the awkward distinction of coming out the same year as "True Romance." Both movies cover similar subject matter and star Arquette as a gun-toting rapscallion. Though "True Romance" is the much better of the two films, "Trouble Bound" stands as a competently made and entertaining popcorn flick. Madsen is gamely along for the ride, offering a more reactive performance opposite Arquette. However, he's not quite as strong a romantic foil for her as Christian Slater in "True Romance" is. Still, he's wryly entertaining. Ultimately, Madsen knows when to bring the action across chases and gunplay sequences in this odd romantic comedy, hitting all the perfunctory notes.

Reflecting on his career, Madsen revealed that he used to be neighbors with Pierce Brosnan during the latter's tenure as James Bond. Brosnan helped Madsen get cast in "Die Another Day." In the Bond film, Madsen plays Damian Falco, a no-nonsense official in the NSA who oversees his operative Jinx (Halle Berry) as she works with Bond to dismantle a North Korean plot to invade South Korea. While it's only a small supporting role in what would become Brosnan's swan song as 007, Madsen elevates what material he has — including squaring up with M (Judi Dench) over Bond temporarily going rogue.

"Die Another Day" is the Bond franchise at its most ludicrous, from an overreliance on offputting CGI effects, hilariously intrusive use of slow-motion, and the decision to have Bond infiltrate North Korea by surfing. Still, as outlandish as the proceedings get, Madsen plays Falco completely straight. He embodies American hubris in contrast to his more reserved counterparts in British intelligence. Plus, any movie with a Tarantino alum sharing scenes with Academy Award winner Dame Judi Dench must make any actor's highlight reel.

"Species" is a solid guilty pleasure, a movie that straddles the line between basic cable erotic schlock and a '90s sci-fi thriller. After a gene-splicing experiment with extraterrestrial DNA produces the lethal Sil (Natasha Henstridge), the scientists responsible for her must find her before she can mate. They project that her offspring will wipe out the human race. Joining this group is mercenary Preston Lennox, played by Madsen, with much of the film playing out like a lower budget "Alien" or "Predator" – but sexy.

Madsen thrusts himself into the shotgun-wielding hero role, an unassuming role many action stars could have filled. He works well with the given material, delivering plenty of requisite one-liners as he's paired with an ensemble of bookish scientists. Madsen's wisecracks provide a knowing wink to the audience, reminding them not to take the movie too seriously, and bringing plenty of dry humor to the proceedings.

Looking at Madsen's wider body of work, a family-friendly coming-of-age story might imagine him playing a tamer version of the roles he typically plays in mature crime fare. However, 1993's "Free Willy" has Madsen portray a caring foster father, Glen Greenwood, who adopts his adolescent nephew Jesse (Jason James Richter). He raises Jesse with his wife, Annie (Jayne Atkinson). Glen and Annie support Jesse and his dreams — participating in releasing the captive Orca Willy, Jesse's friend, into the wild.

For many millennials (including myself), "Free Willy" was an introduction to Madsen's work, albeit one of the few family-friendly projects in his filmography. Glen could have easily been a generic '80s/'90s coming-of-age suburban dad, along for the ride with some insightful lines to advise the protagonist. Fortunately, Madsen digs into his against-type role, with an argument between Annie and Glen as a standout moment for Madsen's performance. The scene and its subsequent resolution are among Madsen's most subtly emotional in his career, underscoring Glen's commitment to his family. For those hoping Madsen hasn't lost his edge entirely, he does manage to get in a punch during the movie's climactic showdown.

Not to be confused with the similarly titled but vastly different "Mulholland Drive," 1996's "Mulholland Falls" marks the first time Madsen worked with "Die Another Day" director Lee Tamahori. Set in '50s Los Angeles, police detective Max Hoover (Nick Nolte) heads a group of officers specially tasked with fighting the mob by any means necessary. Among this squad is Eddie Hall (Madsen), with the team facing scrutiny from the FBI. Soon they're targeted by the mob for their flagrant use of excessive force.

"Mulholland Falls" stands as a standard neo-noir procedural. Madsen brings a steadiness to his role as Hall, matching well against Nolte's lumbering swagger. The movie almost has a level of self-awareness, with its main characters leaning hard into their hardboiled archetypes. But Madsen plays his performance relatively straight amidst all the macho posturing. This isn't to say Madsen doesn't bring a sense of understated cool to his role; he does, sporting a slick pair of sunglasses and sharp suits — minus Nolte's fire and fury or slimy swagger. Treading on style over substance, "Mulholland Falls" crafts a reliably solid murder mystery, making Madsen a standout performer amidst a stellar ensemble cast.

As a musical biopic, "The Doors" is a mixed bag. Additionally, the surviving members of the real-life band were unhappy with Oliver Stone's handling of their story (via For What It's Worth). But for all the creative liberties taken with the rise and fall of Jim Morrison (Val Kilmer), there is a stylishly surreal look at the California band and their impact on pop culture. Madsen plays Morrison's actor friend Tom Baker, who joins him through his hedonistic binges as he contends with growing fame.

Tom Baker doesn't play a particularly huge role in "The Doors," serving as (a sort of) an enabler for Morrison's worst impulses while the star skyrockets into the spotlight. Compared to Kilmer's larger-than-life performance as Morrison, Madsen brings a more grounded edge, leaning into his acting strengths. He brings a refreshingly down-to-earth contrast to the mobster roles that make up his career. "The Doors" is not without its glaring flaws, but thankfully, Madsen is not one of them in a strong pre-"Reservoir Dogs" supporting role.

If you or anyone you know needs help with addiction issues, help is available. Visit the Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration website or contact SAMHSA's National Helpline at 1-800-662-HELP (4357).

Six months after the release of "Tombstone," Kevin Costner released his own film chronicling the Gunfight at the O.K. Corral between the Earps and the Clanton Gang in 1881. In "Wyatt Earp," Madsen stars as Wyatt's older brother Virgil: He joins his brother as a Marshal keeping the peace throughout Arizona, putting them on a collision course with the outlaw gang. Despite expressing his doubts about pursuing a career in law enforcement and the move to Tombstone, Virgil sticks with his family — even as it puts them directly in harm's way.

In the years since the debut of "Wyatt Earp," Madsen expressed regret in turning down the opportunity to star in "Pulp Fiction" as Vic Vega to appear in Lawrence Kasdan's film (via The Guardian). To Madsen's credit, he seems a much better fit for Virgil than Vic. He follows Costner's lead while bringing his presence to the role. Virgil is a tragic figure, and Madsen quietly highlights that capacity. He serves as an effective counterpoint to Costner's more ham-fisted performance as Wyatt. In a movie that revolves around the legacy of outsized Wild West legends, Madsen's subtle performance is something "Wyatt Earp" sorely needs.

Madsen reunited with Tarantino for 2015's "The Hateful Eight," playing the ornery cowboy Joe Gage among eight travelers snowed in at a stagecoach station. Bounty hunters Marquise Warren (Samuel L. Jackson) and John Ruth (Kurt Russell) pass through with wanted woman Daisy Domergue (Jennifer Jason Leigh). Those at the station are suspected to be in Domergue's gang. With the blizzard intensifying overnight, "The Hateful Eight" plays out like a slow-burn horror movie, dialing up the suspense before its inevitably blood-soaked finale.

"The Hateful Eight" deliberately positions Gage as the culprit in its Wild West whodunit early on, with Madsen and Russell sharing a particularly solid scene together as Ruth voices his suspicions. Once the cat is out of the bag that virtually everyone is in league with Domergue, Madsen seamlessly shifts into outlaw mode, relishing the chance to finally indulge in Gage's murderous impulses when his true colors are shone.This is apparent during a flashback of the gang wiping out the owners of the station ahead of Warren and Ruth's arrival, with Gage methodically killing a helpless stagecoach driver in one of Madsen's most chillingly understated scenes.

Madsen's best against-type casting is in "Thelma & Louise," playing laidback traveling musician Jimmy Lennox, the romantic interest of Louise Sawyer (Susan Sarandon). Understanding and empathetic, Madsen plays Jimmy as a sensitive old soul and the least toxic male character in the movie. Jimmy understands that he can't stay with Louise forever after Thelma Dickinson (Geena Davis) comes into her life, but he still gives it a heartbreaking try.

"Thelma & Louise" showcases how much dramatic range Madsen truly has, and it's a darn shame that more projects didn't notice and come his way after. Madsen's Jimmy offers a more mature romantic alternative to the male eye candy presented by Brad Pitt's J.D., Thelma's love interest. Madsen showcases on-screen vulnerability that he hasn't shared at the same level since this 1991 film. Madsen's Jimmy is an open, bleeding heart. The audience feels for him as he watches the woman he loves getting into trouble that separates the two of them for good. Jimmy's attempt to propose to Louise is the most bittersweet performance Madsen has brought to the screen and a criminally overlooked scene from his career.

With all due credit to filmmaker Mike Newell, "Donnie Brasco" is the greatest Martin Scorsese movie not directed by him. His film seamlessly fits into crime stories Scorsese has crafted. Johnny Depp stars as Brasco, an undercover FBI agent who infiltrates the mob and befriends its veteran and unappreciated enforcer, Lefty Ruggiero (Al Pacino). Madsen stars as Sonny Black, a rising mob figure, whose ascent drives Lefty into unwittingly helping Brasco obtain more vital information about the organization's criminal activities.

Madsen's character delivers the intimidating counterpoint to the father-son dynamic struck up by Depp and Pacino, which makes up the narrative's emotional core. As the audience, we know Brasco is using Lefty and betraying his trust to complete his assignment. Still, the two form a genuinely tight bond across the film. Contrasting that is Black's rise to power: Madsen brings unwavering intensity as Black. His character has any threat to his control over the mob eliminated. Depp and Pacino's performances elevate "Donnie Brasco," but Madsen's Black personifies the film's looming sense of danger and consequences.

After years of portraying aggressive characters, Madsen brought a more sensitive approach to Budd, the vicious younger brother of the murderous mastermind Bill (David Carradine) in the "Kill Bill" films. Reuniting with Tarantino a decade after their first collaboration, Madsen briefly appears as Budd in "Kill Bill Vol. 1." However, he delivers his standout performance as the character in "Kill Bill Vol. 2." A departure from the slick assassins in both films, Budd is a sad sack in the second movie. Madsen expertly mines pathos for the contract killer whose glory days are long gone.

Tarantino (wisely) introduces Budd by chronicling a day in his life: He reports to a job with a toxic boss and wastes away in his trailer. Coupled with Budd's remorse at betraying The Bride (Uma Thurman) years ago, this depiction makes him the most sympathetic character in the ensemble cast. Still, he's more dangerous than he initially appears. It's a fitting coda to a career of playing various tough guys, as Budd offers Madsen a chance to remind audiences of his dramatic capacity. His role here is the richest character he's played in a Tarantino movie.

While "Reservoir Dogs" doesn't feature Madsen's most complex or nuanced performance, it's rightfully the one that has and will continue to define his career. Starring as the sadistically homicidal Mr. Blonde, Madsen's professional association with Tarantino began with this 1992 crime movie. In Tarantino's feature directorial debut, Blonde and his crew assemble to rob an L.A. jewelry store, unaware that an undercover cop has infiltrated their group, setting them up to fail.

For all the paranoia that drives "Reservoir Dogs," Blonde is a character that never visibly loses his cool. He's unfazed by being accused as the traitor or of the group's dire circumstances. Left to watch over a captured police officer, Madsen channels Blonde's calmness into a twisted torture scene that stands among the most infamous sequences in a Tarantino movie — thanks to how Madsen cruelly sells it. Tarantino has since turned to Madsen whenever he needs an understated heavyweight. Madsen has evoked variations on Blonde into many of his subsequent roles.

There was Michael Madsen before starring in "Reservoir Dogs" and Michael Madsen afterward. Over 30 years later, the film looms large over his filmography, a testament to his chilling work.