Seattle, WA, March 12, 2019 - It's Official now, Kill Bill Actor Michael Madsen is joining Anushka Shetty & R Madhavan for the International film "Silence". Silence will be shot in Telugu, Tamil and English simultaneously.

Seattle based People Media Factory is Producing an International Film " Silence” with stars from Hollywood, Bollywood and Tollywood in association with Kona Film Corporation. It's stellar cast includes Hollywood star Micheal Madsen who played key roles in Quentin Tarantino's movies kill Bill, Hate full Eight and Reservoir Dogs. Micheal Madsen appeared in more than 100 Hollywood movies and for the first time he is doing an Indian International film.Bahubali Fame, South Indian Female super star Anushka Shetty, Pan India star R Madhavan, Subbaraju, Anjali, Shalini Pandey, Avasarala Srinivas and others.

Speaking on the occasion People Media Factory, CEO Vishwa Prasad said “This is a kind of film that will entertain, engage and cheer the audience across continents. Every screening of the film to a global audience will end up in a standing ovation and we expect the film to perform well all over.”

The Film which will be directed by Hemanth Madhukar will be shot in and around Seattle, USA during April - June 2019, at Global standards with International crew. The makers, People Media Factory will host " Silence” grand teaser release event in May 2019 in USA.

DOP: Shaneil Kumar Deo, Production Designer: Nathan Bakes, Music: Gopi Sundar. Executive Producers: Micheal Madsen, Dev Pinn. Line Producers: Pasta Nagaraj, Dujatha Prabhu. Casting Director: Renee Garcia, Entertainment Attorney: Brandon Blake. Location Services: Nicole Milstead. SAG Consultant: Paula Ray. Co-Producer: Vivek Kuchibhotla.

About People Media Factory:

People Media Factory is a Seattle based Production Company specialized in pre-production, post production, co-production, and events. People Media Factory has a global presence with a world class team which has mix and match of top-notch professionals across the world. People Media Factory is producing continuous films in Tollywood, Sandalwood, Kollywood, Bollywood and Hollywood.