Michael Madsen is a writer, producer and actor. He portrayed Bob.

Biography[]

Michael Madsen's long career spans 25 years and more than 170 films in which he has played memorable characters in myriad box office hits, including: Kill Bill, Sin City, Hell Ride, Die Another Day, Donnie Brasco, Species, The Getaway, The Doors, Thelma & Louise, and Free Willy. Michael Madsen is notably recognized for his role as Mr. Blonde, in Quentin Tarantino's Reservoir Dogs.

In recent years Madsen has received Best Actor awards for his role in the Irish boxing film Strength and Honour, from the New York International Film Festival, the Boston Film Festival and the Downtown Los Angeles Film Festival. Madsen received the Golden Dolphin Award at the 25th Festroia Festival in Portugal, an award also given to veterans Kirk Douglas and Robert Mitchum. In 2012, Madsen was named President of the first annual Champs Elysees Film Festival in France which honored producer Harvey Weinstein. Recent television appearances include guest starring roles on "The Mob Doctor", "Golden Boy" and "Blue Bloods" and most recently on Hawaii Five-0's episode titled "The Sins of the Fathers".

In 2014, Madsen is on location in Las Vegas starring in the feature film "Silver City" in the role of famed Casino owner Ted Binion with Josh Evans directing, Robert Evans producing. He is also at work on a documentary film about "The Western" with Robert Redford. Quentin Tarantino has tapped him for a role in his next feature titled "The Hateful Eight " which begins production later this year.

Madsen is well recognized as an accomplished poet. His first book "Burning In Paradise" with a Foreword by Dennis Hopper, won the Independent Firecracker Award and was later translated into Norwegian. He has a world-wide following with his work, honored at International Poetry Festivals in Genoa, Italy and Mexico. He was recently the Guest of Honor at the Crossing Border Festival in The Netherlands. His "The Complete Poetic Works" is an international bestseller. This was followed by his "Signs of Life" dedicated to Chris Penn. This unique work combined his new poetry with his own original photography. His next book of poetry "American Badass" was dedicated to the memory of the late David Carradine, his friend and Kill Bill co-star. His newest book "Expecting Rain" has a Foreword by Jerry Hopkins.

Trivia[]

His maternal grandparents are Lance and Lavinia.

"Burning in Paradise" won the Independent Firecracker Award for Poetry in 1998.

In 2002 he was presented an award for his work with the Shriners Hospital For Children.

He is a frequent collaborator of Quentin Tarantino, having starred in five Tarantino films.

Madsen's more recent Tarantino film was 2019 comedy-drama film, Once Upon a Time in Hollywood in which he played the role of a sheriff in the fictional Western TV series, Bounty Law. Madsen even leased his personal cream coloured 1966 Cadillac Coupe DeVille for the protagonists Rick Dalton, portrayed Leonardo DiCaprio and Cliff Booth, portrayed by Madsen's Thelma & Louise co-star, Brad Pitt.

Sources[]

Michael Madsen at the IMDb