Sremski Karlovci

If you are a wine lover then the perfect wine tasting tour from Novi Sad or from Belgrade is to visit the charming wine town of Sremski Karlovci in Vojvodina province. It is located on the banks of Danube just a 15-minute drive from Novi Sad. The town of Sremski is unquestionably one of the most stunning towns in Serbia with adorned baroque and well-preserved neo-classicist buildings. It is also one of the most prominent spots of Serbia’s Wine Route. Sremski Karlovci is a small town that makes everything accessible on foot but if you don’t like walking the local bus lines have few stops in the town.

History

The town was first mentioned in the historic documents in 1308 by the name Koram. After the fall of Serbian Despotate in 1459, a large number of Serbs moved to the north. It was under the control of Hungarian noble families before being subjugated by Ottomans in 1521. The Slavic name Karlovci was recorded in 1532-33. It remained a part of the Ottoman Empire for the next 170 years. The major part of town was populated by Serbs, with the small Muslim population. It was the biggest city with a Serb majority in the entire Ottoman Empire with three orthodox churches and a monastery. The town was the cultural and political capital of Serbian Vojvodina. From 1980 to 1989, Sremski was one of the seven municipalities of Novi Sad and today it operates as a separate administrative unit of South Backa District.

Wine Tasting

Sremski Karlovci is knowns for its viticulture. In 273 A.D, Roman Emperor Marcus Aurelius came here and planted the first wines. The town is famous for a long history of winemaking. There are several wineries and rakia producers here mostly owned and operated by families.

The town has 17 wineries which makes it a heaven for wine lovers as you can spend the entire day tasting delicious wines. All the meals are paired with wines and rakia. You can reserve a wine tasting at any of the wineries in advance. There are two famous local varieties of wines produced in Karlovci: Probus and Bermet. You can start your wine tasting journey from Benisek-Veselinovic wine cellar and matchbox Museum to sample some delicious nut and fruit-flavored rakias.

If you are interested in tasting wonderful wines and organic honey you can visit famous Beekeeping Museum and Wine House Zivanovic in Sermski. You can take a pick from Red Probus, Red Bermet varieties, and White Tamjanuka.

The Probus is a hybrid grape only produced in Sremski. It is a very strong wine with 14.4% alcohol. Another wine that is only produced in Serbia is Bermet. it is stronger than Probus with 17% alcohol. You can taste the aroma of spices, herbs, and fruits.

Famous Wine Cellars in Sremski Karlovci

· Jovan Živanović Apiculture Museum and Winery

It is one of the biggest wineries in Karlovci. Their well-known varieties include Rhein Riesling, Italian Riesling, Merlot, Cabernet Sauvignon. The local wines such as Probus, White, and Red Bermet are also available. You can also enjoy a variety of grape, honey, and apricot brandies.

· Kiš Winery

It is one of the famous wine cellars founded in 1830. Their famous wines include Rhein Riesling, Merlot, Italian Riesling, White, and Red Bermet.

· Kosović Winery

It is a relatively new winery with three generations of winemakers. Their famous wines include Italian Riesling, Župljanka, Cabernet Sauvignon, Vranac, Red and white Bermet, and grape brandy.

· Došen Winery

This small winery is situated in the center of town. There you can taste Merlot, Bermet, Chardonnay and other local varieties.

· Dulka Winery

With 90 years of winemaking tradition, Dulka winery offers Župljanka, Red, White, and Rose Bermet as well as assorted fruit brandies extracted from plum, grapes, apples, and peaches.

PRIVATE DAY-TRIP TO SREMSKI KARLOVCI FROM BELGRADE

If you are interested to visit Sremski Karlovci in a day-trip from Belgrade you can also visit those places nearby:

Novi Sad

Petrovaradin Fortress

Kovilj Monastery

FOLLOW US: