I can’t get past these Geoff Love records whenever I see them. They’re always coming with me. We had Geoff Love’s STAR WARS AND OTHER SPACE THEMES LP in our house when I was growing up, and so his slightly funky, slightly easy-listening versions of famous movie themes feel very familiar to me.

This collection from 1976 puts John Williams’ recently released JAWS theme next to selections from THE POSEIDON ADVENTURE, THE EXORCIST, ROLLERBALL, PSYCHO, THE EIGER SANCTION, EARTHQUAKE, AIRPORT ’75, THE TOWERING INFERNO, THREE DAYS OF THE CONDOR, THE EXECUTIONER and DEATH WISH.

This release seems to be timed to capitalise on the December 1975 release of JAWS in the UK, as the liner notes by Nigel Hunter point out:

JAWS is the latest and seemingly greatest in cinematic terror, although not relying on the supernatural. It has already sold more tickets at the box office in the USA than any other film in history, even outstripping its notorious predecessor THE EXORCIST in attracting the populace in fascinated, horror-stricken hordes. The jaws belong to a large, ravenous shark which lurks in the sea off an East Coast holiday resort in the States, chomping up a naked girl, a small child and sundry limbs belonging to other hapless human beings. The film should be showing in Britain by the time you’ve bought this record, and we guarantee you’ll be very careful about your next seaside bathe!

Hit: Tubular Bells (from The Exorcist)

Hidden Gem: Death Wish

This takes me back. We used to have this Music For Pleasure LP in our house when I was growing up. I’m not sure what happened to it. All of the remaining records in the house were absorbed into my collection in the late 1990s, and this one didn’t survive that long. I’ve always had my eye out for it ever since. A quick dig in the sale bins last Saturday – the September Drop of Record Store Day 2020 – proved successful.

Geoff Love probably doesn’t get the love he deserves. I have a few of his records, and they’re always worth a listen. Growing up, I always assumed Love was a white guy – but it’s not surprising to find out he’s black. He definitely injects a heap of disco funk into some of these sometimes staid themes. His version of the Theme From Star Trek is dangerously groovy; to boldy go where no man has jived before. Hearing this at such an impressionable age might explain my love of funk ever since.

This collection, as the title suggests, is a run through of all the main science-fiction film themes from the ‘60s and ‘70s. The one thing I love about this record is its wonderful artwork – influenced by the poster of the prior year’s Star Wars – but featuring the Tardis from Dr. Who alongside Star Trek’s Starship Enterprise and 2001’s circular space station. Less accurate is the depiction of Luke Skywalker, pictured here as a middle-aged man; more divorced farm-owner than adopted farm-boy.

Hit: Main Title From Star Wars

Hidden Gem: U.F.O.

There’s a reason that Geoff Love isn’t remembered as a great conductor. He and his orchestra had a tidy little earner recording easy listening versions of film themes, commonly released on the Music For Pleasure label. Anything that was cool about the original source material was stripped away, and all that remains is a schmaltzy version of something that sounds weirdly familiar. It’s the same result as you would expect if James Last recorded the collected works of Kraftwerk, or if Nana Mouskouri covered Joni Mitchell’s Blue.

Of course, the Bond films were full of the odd bit of lounge music, so some of it doesn’t sound too far from the truth. John Barry’s scores are full of tiny snippets of easy listening, usually to soundtrack the moment when Bond is about to bed an exotic looking broad. As a result, Geoff Love’s version of the Thunderball theme sounds like it could have been lifted right off the soundtrack to Barry’s Diamonds Are Forever score, particularly the sections set in the Las Vegas casinos. And a theme as eternally cool as On Her Majesty’s Secret Service could be covered by anybody and it’d still be a thousand times cooler than most other pieces of recorded music.

Still, record collecting gives you the opportunity to pick up little curios in charity shops like this for next to nothing. We always had a copy of Geoff Love’s collection of sci-fi themes next to our record player when I was growing up; it’s now long-gone but I’m sure I’ll find a copy of it one day for next to nothing.

Whilst trying to find a photo cover of Love’s Bond compilation to accompany this blog, I found that there are two covers. The original cover features the likenesses of Roger Moore, Sean Connery and Ursula Andress, while the second pressing – the version I have in my collection – has all of these faces either completely obscured (poor Roger) or completely altered. I’m guessing that Music For Pleasure didn’t do their due diligence when it came to securing the rights for what was essentially an unofficial cash-in on EON’s intellectual property.

Hit: The James Bond Theme

Hidden Gem: On Her Majesty’s Secret Service