Previously, I talked about the K-POP group “BTS” and now, I will talk about my favorite song of theirs which is entitled “Jamais Vu”.

Summary

I will discuss their song entitled “Jamais Vu”

Meaning of the phrase “Jamais Vu”

Discussion on the song

Why I like the song & personal opinions

The meaning of “Jamais Vu“

Jamais Vu is French which literally means “never seen”. The phrase itself actually means “the experience of being unfamiliar with a person or situation that is actually very familiar”. In other words, the phrase “Jamais Vu” means seeing very familiar things, places, persons, events, or anything as something very unfamiliar as though seeing them for the first time. Whereas Jamais Vu, in medical terms, is “a disorder of memory characterized by the illusion that the familiar is being encountered for the first time”.

I have also read some posts that said “Jamais Vu” is the opposite of “Deja Vu”. While “Deja Vu” is seeing something unfamiliar but feeling as though it’s familiar, “Jamais Vu” is the opposite as it means seeing something familiar as something never heard of before.

The lyrics of “Jamais Vu”

As I have previously mentioned, “Jamais Vu” is a song of BTS. Said song is part of the album they released in “Map of the Soul: Persona” back in April 12, 2019.

“The song talks about how there might be unintentional mistakes and setbacks but we will keep getting up and keep on running.”

Kim Namjoon (RM) during their global press conference

The entire song, in general, is all about them having the tendency to repeat the same things, the same mistakes, the same blunders, over and over again. In the chorus, it is mentioned that they’re asking for a remedy, a remedy to make their hearts beat again (perhaps a reason to keep on going forward?).

However, I also found a post by someone in ARMY Amino who discussed the song in connection to their webtoon, also known as the Bangtan Universe (an alternate universe wherein official music videos, clips, “The Notes” book, “The Notes” that come with an album, and those released by BigHit are all connected to form one storyline). User Angel Disha took lines from the song and connected them wonderfully to the group’s webtoon.

Here’s a link to her post in ARMY Amino: https://aminoapps.com/c/btsarmy/page/blog/parallels-between-jamais-vu-and-save-me/bNwj_MNrUouB8m63a6jKJZakGoxrPngRKR1

At first, I had a difficult time understanding just what the song was supposed to be about, but as I started looking into the meaning of Jamais Vu and the lyrics, it started to make more sense. The song repeatedly relates the feeling to a game except that they’re facing real life and there’s no quit button when things get too tough that they can’t comprehend it anymore, but they also say that they will keep on running even if the pain or hardships will constantly be there.

Lyrics to Jamais Vu (English translation) below:

[Verse 1: Jin]

I think I lost again

You look like you’re mad

In a blur, game over over over

[Verse 2: Jungkook]

If this was a game

I could just load it again

I guess I gotta deal with this, deal with this

Real world

[Verse 3: J-Hope]

It’d be better if it was a game

Because it hurts so much

I need to heal my medic

But I’m another star

Blame myself since I was imperfect

Brake in my head, brake in my step, always

All I wanted was to do well

I wanted to make you smile, damn

[Chorus: Jungkook, Jin]

Please give me a remedy

A remedy to make my heart beat again

(Remedy)

What should I do now

Please save me, give me another chance

Please give me

[Post-Chorus: Jungkook]

A remedy, a melody

A memory that will be left just for me

If I stop right now

If I just turn it off, will all will be more comfortable?

[Verse 4: Jin]

I’m fine but I’m not fine

I told myself I was used to it

It always hurts like it’s the first time

[Verse 5: J-Hope]

Not a good gamer, that’s right, you can’t control me

It keeps hurting ’cause of trial and error and 50,000-something else

My song lyrics, each gesture

I become afraid of every word, my jamais vu

Again, I try to escape as always

But still, you grab me

Even as my shadow grows

My life and yours are an equal sign

So my remedy is your remedy

[Chorus: Jungkook, Jin]

Please give me a remedy

A remedy that will make my heart beat again

(Remedy)

What should I do now

Please save me, give me another chance

Please give me a

[Bridge: Jin, Jungkook]

(Remedy)

Run and run again, stumble again

(Honestly)

Even if it repeats forever

I’ll keep running

[Chorus: Jungkook, Jin]

So give me a remedy

A remedy that will make my heart beat again

(Remedy)

What should I do now

Please save me, give me another chance

[Outro: Jungkook, Jin, J-Hope]

Please give me a remedy

(So is this success, I came back)

A remedy that will make my heart beat again

(I’ll concentrate on reaching you no matter what, falling, stumbling)

What should I do now?

(This familiar pain seizes on me again)

Save me

(It’s not easy this time either)

Please give me another chance

(Am I giving up? No, no never)

I won’t give up

There are many interpretations on what the song really means and I’ve stated above mine and some other interpretations too, but I’m not saying that you (or whoever is reading this blog post, for that matter) should think that the interpretations given actually do correspond to the real meaning of the song.

My personal opinion on the song

There are times when some of my favorite songs had to be a song I wasn’t completely fond of or liked at first listen and “Jamais Vu” is one of those songs. At first, I didn’t quite like the song maybe because of how the song sounded so new to me, or maybe because I just really didn’t see the song’s beauty at first listen.

I don’t consider myself picky with the songs or genres I listen to since I usually listen to any king of genre, any song, but sometimes, my first impression can completely chance how I view a song, and honestly, I wouldn’t have grown fond of the said song unless I read the lyrics, and I’m glad that I did give the song another chance because the beauty the song holds is something I haven’t heard or experienced in a long time.

After I’ve given the lyrics a look and giving the entire song another chance, I saw the beauty that the song held. The origin of the song’s title from French and just how wonderfully they captured the meaning of “Jamais Vu” in this one song especially since most artists wouldn’t go so far as to make a song for unusual or unknown expressions such as this.

On a final note, feel free to comment what you, as the reader of this blog post, think of the song and what else the song can possibly mean or stand for.

References:

Canva (Background on picture containing the text “Jamais Vu”)

https://www.vocabulary.com/dictionary/jamais%20vu (Definition of “Jamais Vu”)

https://www.merriam-webster.com/medical/jamais%20vu (Medical definition of “Jamais Vu”)

https://www.songfacts.com/facts/bts/jamais-vu (Small explanation on “Jamais Vu”)

https://genius.com/Genius-english-translations-bts-jamais-vu-english-translation-lyrics (English lyrics of “Jamais Vu”)