FORT LAUDERDALE, Fla. – Dalvin Cook and the Florida State Seminoles have a nickname for Hard Rock Stadium.

"We call it 'Doak South,'" Cook told reporters Wednesday during an Orange Bowl news conference.

The junior running back from Miami is, of course, referring to the stadium that will play host to Friday night's game between the 10th-ranked Seminoles and No. 6 Michigan.

It's a venue that, like Bobby Bowden Field at Doak S. Campbell Stadium, has been all too kind for the Seminoles in recent years, including Florida State's 20-19 victory against then-undefeated Miami in October.

Florida State is a perfect 6-0 there since the Hurricanes moved to Hard Rock Stadium in 2008. That includes a 31-10 victory against Northern Illinois in its last Orange Bowl appearance on New Year's Day 2013.

"You know, being in that stadium in front of my family, I always get that extra boost to go play, being in front of my family, being in front of my friends, being in my hometown," Cook said. "There's no better feeling than that."

Cook has been exceptional in South Florida, rushing for a cumulative total of 242 yards and two touchdowns, as well as 77 receiving yards and a touchdown catch, in two appearances.

Co-offensive coordinator Randy Sanders praised Cook for being "phenomenally consistent."

"He's been very tough, very durable," Sanders said. "I've always said that a running back has to be genetically superior to hold up because it's the only position on the field that you can clip him, you can chop block him, you can basically do anything but grab his facemask or hit him when he's on the ground. But he's shown up week after week, he has the ability to hit home runs from anywhere, which is really nice."

Despite being overlooked for the Heisman Trophy and Doak Walker Award recognizing the top running back in college football, Cook's name has been mentioned among the nation's best players this season. Cook has rushed for 1,620 yards (eighth nationally, though that includes bowl statistics for all but two players ahead of him) and 18 touchdowns. He surpassed Warrick Dunn last month to become the school's all-time rushing leader.

He'll be tested by the Wolverines and their second-ranked defense, led by linebacker Jabrill Peppers, defensive tackle Ryan Glasgow and defensive end Taco Charlton.

Glasgow called Cook the best running back he's watched on film in college.

"Just kind of everything about his game, the way he sets up his blocks, the way he can make a man miss in space, his breakaway speed," Glasgow said. "It's pretty amazing to see."

The Seminoles have faced three other top-10 defenses this season -- narrowly losing to Clemson (eighth nationally) 37-34 and trouncing Florida (sixth) and Boston College (ninth) by a combined score of 76-20.

Cook amassed a combined 430 rushing yards and six touchdowns against those teams.

A victory for the Seminoles might be a fitting finale for Cook if he decides to leave school early. Cook said he wouldn't decide his NFL future until after the game.

The Orange Bowl is also a homecoming for cornerback Tarvarus McFadden, who grew up in nearby Fort Lauderdale. He's tied for first nationally with eight interceptions.

McFadden, who won't be draft eligible until after next season, said playing at home "makes it even better."