Dalvin Cook thought Clemson and Florida were the right schools for him before becoming a Florida State football player.

James Cook believes FSU is already the right school for him.

It will be until 2019 until James Cook can make it official, but he decided he could not wait any longer.

Cook — a promising Miami Central running back just like his older brother was — committed to the Seminoles’ 2019 recruiting class on Friday.

“I feel like it was the right move,” he said when confirming the commitment to the Tallahassee Democrat.

Cook becomes FSU’s second pledge for the Class of 2019. And just like his brother did during an ESPN announcement, Cook tweeted he committed to the "University of Florida State" but corrected himself in another post from his Twitter account.

Cook became one of the top high school freshmen in the country and gained much attention after a helping Miami Central win a state title in December with an impressive performance, carrying the ball 15 times for 178 yards and three touchdowns.

He has received scholarship offers from at least 10 other schools — including Miami, Florida, Alabama, LSU, and Ohio State — but decided he could not wait any longer to pledge to a school and his brother’s school was his top choice.

He was one of several freshmen to visit FSU for the team's junior day recruiting event on Feb. 20, and named FSU his top school after the visit.

“It’s like family,” Cook said. “They bring you close together like I’m a player at Florida State already.”

Dalvin Cook, receivers Da’Vante Phillips and Travis Rudolph, and safeties Calvin Brewton and Derwin James were all in Miami this week for spring break, likely giving the younger Cook an impression of what being a Seminoles football player could be like when his time comes.

James will have nearly three years to decide if FSU is the right school for him. And he will surely be recruited by other teams until he signs a national letter of intent binding him to a school.

But in the meantime, Cook has aspirations to follow in his older brother’s footsteps. He also welcomes the comparisons, too.

“It’s just makes me hungrier, makes me stronger and makes me want to keep working hard,” he said.