It’s nearly impossible to ignore Dalvin Cook’s mark on Florida State’s football team.

The junior running back’s name is nationally recognized. There’s an enormous, wall-sized photo of Cook in the players' lounge.

And, despite a few early-season struggles – and really, they were struggles when compared to his stellar sophomore campaign – coaches know stopping the Seminoles means finding a way to at least contain Cook.

The No. 12 Seminoles take on No. 3 Clemson Saturday at Doak Campbell Stadium and Clemson head coach Dabo Swinney said Cook, who is No. 9 in the nation with 900 rushing yards, is a player that must be watched on every play.

“Sometimes you play teams and there’s a guy and you hold your breath when he touches it,” Swinney said during his weekly press conference.

“That’s kind of how he is. (FSU) does a great job. They use him kind of like how we used to use (2009 unanimous All-American C.J.) Spiller. They’re not going to come out of the ball game without No. 4 touching it a bunch.”

And to think, Cook could have ended up at Clemson instead of Florida State. Per 247Sports, Clemson was one of nine schools that offered a scholarship to Cook, and Cook had originally committed to the Tigers before committing to Florida – he decommitted from Florida before landing at Florida State.

“I went through the process,” Cook said about demomitting. “But this is a game I look forward to playing in every year. This game has become a rivalry that’s big at Florida State.”

Now, Cook said he’s happy to be a part of a rivalry between two teams that have been in the national title conversation over the last few years.

“The talent level in this game is one of the best in the country,” Cook said. “I think that’s what makes this game at the level it’s being played at right now. This game is being played as one of the rivalries at Florida State. It’s going to be played in a high level. It’s a game I want to be in right now.”

To start the season, FSU head coach Jimbo Fisher took multiple questions about Cook – the running back’s weight, if he was still recovering from offseason surgery, if there were any new injuries slowing him down.

Fisher maintained Cook was just fine.

Cook leads the Seminoles in rushing and is the team’s No. 3 receiver with 356 yards. He has eight of the team’s 29 touchdowns.

Swinney said the Tigers are ready to see multiple looks from Cook.

“They’re going to hand it to him,” he said. “They’re going to screen it to him. They’re going to flare it to him. They’re going to angle it to him. They’re going to play action it to him. They’re going to a lot of different things to get it back to him.

“He’s a guy that when he touches it, he can make a big play at any time.”

The Seminoles came into the season with national title hopes – a win over Clemson could at least keep the team’s slim chances of an ACC title alive. The Seminoles would need plenty of help. Clemson would have to lose again in conference play and No. 5 Louisville would have to lose two more ACC games.

Still, Cook said the 5-2 Seminoles, coming off a bye week, are right where they want to be.

“We’re in the best position we want to be in,” Cook said.

“We’re right here. Like we said, we’re 5-2, No. 12 in the nation and we’re right where we want to be at. Right in the mix. We ain’t looking at what happened. You have games like that, the North Carolina game and the Louisville game, but we can’t look back.

“We’ve got to take the next step in the second half of the season and go play some good football. I think guys have realized that. Our minds have shifted to the second half of the season. We got off to a great start.”

FSU vs. Clemson