A 100-year milestone is epic in any industry but in the world of precision optics it’s even more remarkable.

For Fulbourn-based Prior Scientific Instruments the achievement has been marked in its offices around the world, including Jena in Germany; Tokyo, Japan and Suzhou, China.

“This is a proud time for the company and illustrates our resiliency and adaptability,” said Thomas Freda, CEO of Prior Scientific. “We look forward to the next 100 years and the developments that we can bring to our markets.

“Prior is a very different company from what it was 100, 50, or even 10 years ago. We have evolved from an educational microscope manufacturer to a trusted producer and supplier of precision positioning equipment, opto-mechanical devices, and custom designed OEM products.”

WR Prior Co Ltd was founded in London in 1919 by Walter Robert Prior and Andrew Physicks, as a manufacturer of microscopes. By 1941 the factory building had been destroyed by German bombs and the company moved to a new facility in Bishop Stortford in 1942.

In 1981 Prior merged with James Swift & Sons, a leading polarizing microscope manufacturer. Prior relocated to its present home in Fulbourn, Cambridge in 1988. The company expanded its presence in the US in 1991 with a facility in Rockland, Massachusetts which is now also a key manufacturing facility for the company. More recently, Prior acquired Queensgate Instruments, a leading nanotechnology equipment company based in Torquay.

The company opened offices in Germany, Tokyo and Suzhou, China.It has well over 100 employees globally.

Celebrations will be held at exhibitions including MMC, in Manchester, Laser World of Photonics, in Shanghai and Munich, JASIS, in Tokyo, and Neuroscience in Chicago. A celebratory cocktail event, at Swynford Manor, will be the highlight of a busy year, and several internal events will cap off what is sure to be a great year for Prior.

CTO Stuart Jarvis said: “Prior has a great history, both locally and around the world, and I feel very privileged to be part of the Prior team that will be marking 100 years in business.

“I very much look forward to celebrating this milestone with colleagues, both past and present, who have all made such an important contribution to the success of Prior Scientific.”