A cloistered, haunted, suffocating love affair that can never work. Astruc puts his theories into action employing shadows, expressive camera angles, a fleeting camera that roams faces (young Aimée especially), objects (burning light of a lamp, curtains), hallways, corridors, seemingly overcrowded rooms, staircases spiraling, a flowing, bold white dress and all of these images folding in in themselves, telling the story of desire, of secrets and their destruction. Astruc, as well as d’Aurevilly, knows that this bourgeois home can in the end be nothing more than a sarcophagus for young love, love or something like it that can never be recaptured.

When she first grabs his hand under the dinner table I gasped along with him. Astruc blocks the scene…

It feels a relief to have finally found and watched Le Rideau Cramoisi, a title I've been on the lookout for these last 20 plus years. I remember sitting on the floor of my cell pouring over a Cannes booklet from the 70's which listed all the winners of each year since its inception. Many were not available at that time with English subtitles and even today there are many I have never seen. Here's to tenacity.

Jules-Amédée Barbey d'Aurevilly's 19th century story, The Crimson Curtain, could almost be a story from Stendhal. Comparisons or allusions to The Red and the Black can be found in the character of the young cavalry officer, rather lost in his egoistic notions, taking…

Completed four years after the publication of "la caméra-stylo", but what is striking here is the reliance still upon the text, the Barbey d'Aurevilly story reconstituted in reams of voiceover narration that makes the film feel sometimes closer to Sacha Guitry's Le Roman d'un tricheur than Astruc's nouvelle vague successors. It's hard to over-criticise: the spirit and feel of a certain form of 19th-century literature is ably captured, but the film is most alive- most beautiful- in its silences, when the team of Astruc-Schufftan's loping camera movements and chilly chamber-stillness become the luminous physicalization of passions and desires running through and beneath the asphyxiating petit-bourgeois mausoleum (perversion of a morally-grandstanding age). So it's half a literary cinema and half not,…