Biography

Panshikar was born into a family of Karhade Brahmin in Phanaswadi, Mumbai. His forefathers had been Sanskrit scholars with his Grandfather translating into Marathi Nighantu Ratnakar, the authoritative manual of Ayurvedic treatment. He had three brothers who were all masters of Sanskrit language. The Panshikar are originally from Goa, with their roots in the Panshi village in Pernem Taluka.

Initially, Panshikar worked and acted under the guidance of veteran Marathi drama director M.G. Rangnekar. Rangnekar gave him his break in the play To Mi Navhech by offering him the main role in 1962. The show became so popular that it was subsequently translated into other Indian languages like Gujarati and Kannada.He has to his credit the distinction of performing as an actor & producer on screen, stage and television. He formed an organization named Natyasampada and he developed local artists and launched them in cities like Pune, Mumbai, Kolhapur etc. He has spent 53 years on stage with over 8000 performances to his credit.

Personal life

Panshikar was married to Vijaya (née Kulkarni), with whom he had three children and seven grand children. His elder daughter, Janhavi Panshikar-Singh, is also an actress. She is married to TV actor Shakti Singh. Panshikar's son, Raghunandan Panshikar, is Hindustani classical singer and is a disciple of noted singer Kishori Amonkar. Raghunandan is married to Aparna Deshpande and the couple have two children. Panshikar's younger daughter, Tarangini, is a gold medallist in Sanskrit. She is married to marine engineer Narendra Khot. They have two children.

Death

Panshikar died in Pune on 13 January 2011 from cardiac arrest.

Selected plays

Bhatala Dili Osari

To Mee Navhech

Ithe Oshalla Mrutyu

Ashroonchi Zhali Phule

Thank You Mr.Glad

Jithe Gavtala Bhale Phuttat

Jwalamukhi

Selected plays as producer

Sangeet Madanachi Manjiri

Sangeet Suvarna Tula

Katyar Kaljat Ghusali

Andhar Maza Sobati

Kimayagar

Putrakameshti

"Sangeet Awagha Rang Ekachi Zaala"

"Many Happy Returns (Marathi Play)"

"Vichcha Majhi Puri Karaa"

"Varyavarchi Varaat"

"Lekure Udand Jaali"

"Lagnachi Bedi"

Honours and awards

Vishnudas Bhave Suvarnapadak

Rajarshee Shahu Suvarnapadak

Natyagaurav Puraskar

Sanget Natak Akademi Puraskar

Natasamrat Bal Gandharva Smriti Puraskar

Natashreshtha keshavrao Date Puraskar

Dr.Kashinath Ghanekar Smriti Puraskar

Natvarya Dattaram Puraskar

Acharya Atre Puraskar

Kalashri Puraskar

Uttung Puraskar

Maharashtra Gaurav Puraskar

Jagatik Marathi Parishad Puraskar

Dinanath Mangeshkar Smriti Puraskar

NatyaDarpan -'Man Of The Year'

Natasamrat Nanasaheb Phatak Smriti Puraskar

Navratna Puraskar

Ratnappa Kumbhar Puraskar

Maharashtra Bhushan Puraskar

First Jeevan Gaurav Puraskar of State Govt., Maharashtra, later this award was named Prabhakar Panshikar award.