What does a girl do when she finds herself the only child of two extraordinary people? One lives a prominent political life, while the other soars to the heights of artistic expression.

Susanna Short was born on August 31, 1944, three years after her father, Laurie Short, and mother, Nancy Borlase, married in a Melbourne registry office. As she grew up, Laurie was preoccupied by meetings and politicking. Nancy was painting pictures of terraces in Balmain, where the family lived in the early years.

When they moved to Gladesville in 1949 Laurie continued his tempestuous career battling communists in the dockyards and Nancy became preoccupied with innovators and revolutionaries of the art world.

The associations of both came together in sometimes jarring and peculiar ways. "I remember the parties my mother put on," Susanna Short says. "They brought together ironworkers, lawyers like John Kerr and Jim McClelland, artists like Bob Dickerson and Elwyn Lynn, the labour and cultural attaches from the United States embassy."

Susanna Short followed her mother's creative path and entered journalism with The Daily Telegraph, went to London and enrolled at the Slade School of Fine Arts. But she decided against being an artist and returned to journalism, accepting a job from Blanche D'Alpuget on the London newspaper Reveille.

Laurie, 93 and frail, was the subject of his daughter's 1992 biography. Susanna Short believes it is the turn of Nancy, who died in 2006 aged 92, to be recognised. For the retrospective exhibition From Balmain To Mosman at the Mosman Art Gallery, Susanna has offered her collection of about 100 of Nancy's works, covering the figurative painting of her early life and the late 1980s and a watercolour she painted as a 15-year-old in Napier, New Zealand.

Nancy migrated from New Zealand to Australia in 1937, worked as a waitress, was knocked back as a cartoonist by Eric Baume, the editor of the Sydney Sun, on the grounds of being "too intellectual for our readers" and endured lean times. She fell in love with one Bob Dodd, who betrayed her by shacking up with the girl next door when she was away.

She moved to Melbourne, found herself leading a strike by artists' models for better pay and conditions, bumped into Laurie Short on a street corner and married him on May 31, 1941.

When she accompanied Laurie to America in the mid-1950s Nancy was enraptured by the abstract art movement. Her first major award was the Mosman Art Prize in 1961, the year she and Laurie shifted to Mosman. There Nancy explored a wide range of styles, including realism, post-impressionism, cubism, futurism, expressionism and abstraction, always drawing inspiration from her immediate environment, including her view of Mosman Bay. She was also an art critic for the Bulletin, then the Herald.

She kept painting, declaring in 1994, at 80, that it was too early for a major retrospective of her work because she was still at it, though there was a retrospective at the Newcastle Regional Art Gallery.