In 1967 the exhibition Two Decades of American Painting, organised by the Museum of Modern Art, New York, travelled to Sydney and Melbourne. While the exhibition has often been framed as introducing Australian artists to new forms of abstract painting, this paper argues that the paintings exhibited were just one manifestation of the transnational proliferation of abstraction globally, and that the exhibition precipitated a series of resonances, contacts and missed contacts between New York and Australia.

When the narratives of the NLA’s A Nation Imagined and my work on Fullwood are combined with those attached to the legend, paradigm and brand of Australian impressionism, the result will be a richer and much-enlarged story about this fabled era in Australia’s art history. For a start, we can begin to see that Australian impressionism was part of a much wider settler-colonial art movement that embraced both Melbourne’s painters and Sydney’s artist-illustrators. Whatever the medium, their work reflected dominant views of Australia’s history, achievements and identity, their pictures defined by their celebration of whiteness, masculinity and settlers’ claims to indigeneity by virtue of their possession of Australia’s sunburnt country. What remained outside their frames were the dispossession of First Nations’ peoples and the lives and labour of settler women. In addition to sharing a common iconography, Sydney’s and Melbourne’s artists fed off a similar set of artistic influences, largely emanating from London and reinforced by the English-born and -trained artists who dominated these colonial outposts of Britain’s imperial art world. These would include such French-inflected British art practices as plein air painting and tonal realism. In other words, we might start talking about British-Australian impressionism and its distinctive contribution to British art history. From this perspective, Roberts, Streeton and Fullwood’s move to London can be seen as not the ending but the completion of Australia’s settler-colonial art movement; its homecoming to the heartland of British art. The art they created in England was integral to both their cultural and imperial identities and their artistic development.

The Field, in 1968, was the first exhibition held at the new National Gallery of Victoria. The exhibition made a bold modernist statement: seventy-four abstract paintings and sculptures by forty young Australian contemporary artists. The Field was a controversial undertaking because it was clearly derived from contemporary New York avant-garde styles. This paper considers The Field's impact and legacy based on the numerous exhibitions it has subsequently inspired. It focuses on The Field's efforts to align Australian art with the international modernist tradition and argues that the exhibition established a new role and identity for the art institution in Australia. The modernist values introduced by The Field had a considerable impact on the Australian art world, far greater than the avant-garde style for which the exhibition is known.

The subject of this article is the absence of Aboriginal art during the period that established the idea of a distinctively Australian modern art. It is intended as a contribution to the historiography of modern and contemporary Australian art history. The period discussed is the two decades between 1962, when Bernard Smith published Australian Painting, 1788–1960, and 1988, the year of the Australian Bicentenary. The article explores what changed in these years when art historians, critics, and curators, albeit belatedly and reluctantly, finally began to acknowledge the great contemporary Aboriginal painting that had long been in many artists’ sights as inspiration and model, and in plain view on display in the so-called primitive cultures’ sections of state museums. It argues that this was because it did not seem part of the national story of art.