Grene History, Family Crest & Coats of Arms

Origins Available:

England

Scotland

Ireland

The rugged west coast of Scotland in the kingdom of Dalriada is the setting from which came the Grene name. The name derives from someone having lived on the island of Jura in the Inner Hebrides. The name is derived from Gaelic Mac Crain. 1

Loading...

Early Origins of the Grene family

The surname Grene was first found in the islands of Jura and Islay, where they held a family seat from very ancient times, some say well before the Norman Conquest and the arrival of Duke William at Hastings in 1066 A.D.

Loading...

Early History of the Grene family

This web page shows only a small excerpt of our Grene research. Another 111 words (8 lines of text) covering the years 1625, 1649, 1856 and 1890 are included under the topic Early Grene History in all our PDF Extended History products and printed products wherever possible.

Loading...

Grene Spelling Variations

In various documents Grene has been spelled Since medieval scribes still spelled according to sound, records from that era contain an enormous number of spelling variations. MacCraney, Craney, Crainey, MacCrain, McCranie, MacCranny, MacCranne, MacCranney, MacCrayne and many more.

Loading...

Early Notables of the Grene family

More information is included under the topic Early Grene Notables in all our PDF Extended History products and printed products wherever possible.

Migration of the Grene family to Ireland

Some of the Grene family moved to Ireland, but this topic is not covered in this excerpt.

Another 69 words (5 lines of text) about their life in Ireland is included in all our PDF Extended History products and printed products wherever possible.

Loading...

Migration of the Grene family

Numerous Scottish settlers settled along the east coast of the colonies that would become the United States and Canada. Others traveled to the open country of the west. At the time of the American War of Independence, some remained in the United States, while those who remained loyal to the crown went north to Canada as United Empire Loyalists. The highland games and Clan societies that sprang up across North America in the 20th century have helped many Scots to recover parts of their lost traditions. Research into passenger and immigration lists has revealed some of the very first Grenes to arrive in North America: Peter Dow Maccraing, who was banished to America in 1766; Owen McCraney, who came to New York, NY in 1803; Mathew and Patrick Craney who settled in Philadelphia in 1846.

Contemporary Notables of the name Grene (post 1700) +

Sir Charles Grene Ellicombe (1783-1871), British general, Royal Engineers, son of the Rev. William Ellicombe, rector of Alphington, Devonshire 2

Related Stories +

The Grene Motto +

The motto was originally a war cry or slogan. Mottoes first began to be shown with arms in the 14th and 15th centuries, but were not in general use until the 17th century. Thus the oldest coats of arms generally do not include a motto. Mottoes seldom form part of the grant of arms: Under most heraldic authorities, a motto is an optional component of the coat of arms, and can be added to or changed at will; many families have chosen not to display a motto.

Motto: Amor proximi

Motto Translation: The love of our neighbor.

Citations +

Black, George F., The Surnames of Scotland Their Origin, Meaning and History. New York: New York Public Library, 1946. Print. (ISBN 0-87104-172-3)

Wikisource contributors. "Dictionary of National Biography, 1885-1900." Wikisource . Wikisource , 4 Jun. 2018. Web. 30 June 2020