Not picking on (murderface) but I keep seeing people say that the DX3C will do dual esc's on post after post.

I have read information over and over on the radio and I have not seen it state anywhere where it will do dual esc's. It is a Sport radio.

It talks about mixing which the DX3R and some other radios I believe have but that is not dual ecs's and does nothing for the 3rd channel. The radio is still only 3 channel so how do you plug in the other esc. Also the expo is only available on throttle and steering settings.

I find it hard to believe they would put out a $130 radio with features that their $300+ radios do not have.

It also has an sd slot for reflashing it.

It's called progress. Get out from under the rock and crawl over it. :ror:

http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=lrIJHgacwJ0&sns=em

Not picking on (murderface) but I keep seeing people say that the DX3C will do dual esc's on post after post.

I have read information over and over on the radio and I have not seen it state anywhere where it will do dual esc's. It is a Sport radio.

It talks about mixing which the DX3R and some other radios I believe have but that is not dual ecs's and does nothing for the 3rd channel. The radio is still only 3 channel so how do you plug in the other esc. Also the expo is only available on throttle and steering settings.

I find it hard to believe they would put out a $130 radio with features that their $300+ radios do not have.

Anyone who has owned both spektrum and futaba can also tell you there is a difference in quality.

I ran Airtronics M8, then M11, then converted to spektrum modules. Then switched every receiver in my race vehicles to DSM2 when DX3R was released. I was very happy with the lightweight feel of the spektrum versus the heavy azz m11. It felt better because it was lighter, and the dsm2 technology was noticably faster response wise. But my buddy Rich was running futaba for a while and had been racing with his 3pk since it was released. He runs his crawlers with it too. He would always tell me to ditch the toy and "Upgrade" to a real radio. I would tell him to F-Off.

Well, I went with the 4pks for my first MOA rig because I wanted to run a dual ESC setup. After running it for over 100hours, All I can say is that the difference between companies quality is night and day. When I pick up my DX3R, which is now my kids radio, it really does feel like a toy and I can't believe how fooled I was believing that Spektrum quality was as good or better than Futabas

This is just my opinion based on my own experiences with both systems

Hope this helps others who are on the fence

There is just no reason to go the archaic route of an punk dig, switch or servo electro dig, or that new version of a wantasummit. And I don't care what anyone running single esc in a moa rig says, a single esc with a dig can never compare to dual esc setup. Never. Never ever? Never Ever.

The wAs wantamix (new version of wantasummit) uses two esc's Its so people without a futaba can run dual esc's. It gives all the mixing ability of the 4pl/4pk. Just a smidge extra amount of space in the chassis. Perfect so everyone with a 3r, 3pmx, etc can run dual esc's so they don't have to upgrade to a 4pl/4pk

I agree though, dual esc's are 100x better than singe esc w/ dig

:mrgreen: