GMade R1 chassis cage

Bully 2 MOA Axles

Axial Links

Hobbywing dual ESC’s

Still very much work in progress....front links are too short, the motor hits the front of the cage......which of course means the front shock will then be too short! But thats half the fun, making it all work...this is not intended as a pro crawler, just a fun project, to run trails rocks, whatever.....

ESC’s will go back to back on the rear battery tray, battery will go onto the skid, rx probably under the yet to be made bonnet panel....might even get to put basic interior and driver in it!...

Anyone want a Bully 2 chassis assembled but unused?!.....

Edited February 12, 2021 by Paulnb57

A little more progress, the front motor was fouling on the bottom corners of the chassis on compression, I briefly considered chopping the chassis, but instead sourced longer links, same as the rear, 107mm at the bottom and 80mm at the top, (I have been donated a pair of 107mm higher clearance links, for the rear but have yet to go and pick them up.....) along with a combination of long and short ends got the motors pretty level.....one of the body side panels cracked at the crease, so Ill have to remake them, probably a bit thicker, Im considering extending them right up to the front of the chassis too, just to be a bit different.....Im also considering putting a proper body on it too, who knows?!

The skid has captive nuts and when I was faffing with link lengths one of the screws had locked solid into a nut, no idea why, I had to dremel through the screw head, and ended up having to cut the skid to get the nut out, deep joy! So now there is a Delrin skid plate in the mail....

ESC’s are in, front double taped under the “bonnet” (hood) the rear double under the rear battery tray .....keeps the wiring tidy.....not decided where the rx will go yet, but Im hoping to keep the “cab” clear so I can put a basic interior and driver in there....its a bit long!...

Ive messed with rod ends since the photos were taken and the front motor is now pretty level...

Stay tuned for more Rock n Roll!

Edited February 20, 2021 by Paulnb57

A bit more progress, I bought another chassis cage ( they are dirt cheap) and painted it, then swapped everything over, stripped the axles, replaced and greased all the bearings, rebuilt with loctite.

Its all wired now, the wiring needs a bit of tidying, plugged a battery in and each ESC bleeped, but I still have to calibrate them....Im not happy with the body panels I made, so Ill faff around some more, or possibly pop a Kamtec Beetle body on it.....need to source suitable sized Lipo to fit and its pretty much done.

With the widest wheel hubs fitted the tyres dont rub on the links

Less waffle...photos!