Budget Ant DESC

Rated 5.00 out of 5 based on 8 customer ratings

(8 customer reviews)

$15.00

The Budget Ant DESC has been developed to provide an affordable and robust drive ESC option for Repeat Drive Brushed or any other antweight size drive motor. To address the lack of high-quality budget ESC options available for antweight robots, I searched for and evaluated multiple potential ESC sources. The result? Repeat Robotics Budget Ant DESC. This is a customized Payne dual brushed ESC configured for an optimal driving experience, including onboard mixing, center braking, and pre-soldered connectors for signal and power. It’s the perfect option for your next brushed drive antweight robot!

In stock

Budget Ant DESC quantity

Description

Additional information

Reviews (8)

Description

WARNING: Repeat Drive Brushed motors operated at 4S CANNOT be stalled for an extended period! The motor will overheat and let out smoke, sustaining permanent damage. These ESCs do not have active current limiting, so if the motor is stalled until failure, the FET driving that motor will also fail, permanently damaging the ESC. If this occurs, you will have to replace both the brushed motor and the ESC.

Testing showed that the ESC and motor can be damaged when stalling for as little as 7 seconds on 4S and 25 seconds on 3S. In every test case, the motor smoked first and stopped working before the ESC failed.

Features:

NEW! Reduced size: 24x18x5mm

Weight: 7g with wires

Voltage

Recommended: 2-4S

Max: 6S (not recommended)

Current: 2A continuous

Center braking for better motor control

Built in mixing (disabled by default)

Enable mixing by cutting the jumper near the i on the back of the board (shown in the last photo)

Auto adjusts to PWM values between 800-1100μs for reverse and 1900-2200μs for forward

Failsafe behavior will stop motors when signal is lost

Integrated 5V 1.5A BEC output

BEC can power servos on 2-3S

BEC can power receivers on 2-4S

BEC should not be used for servos on 4S

BEC should not be used above 4S (cut red wires from CH1 servo connector)

Pre-soldered connectors

Power: XT30U connecter to connect to a battery or power distribution board

Signal: 1 servo connector for Ch2 + 5v(BEC) + GND and a 1 pin CH1 signal connector

Package includes 1x Budget Ant Dual Brushed ESC

Additional information

Weight 0.02 kg

Only logged in customers who have purchased this product may leave a review.

Related products

Antweight, Drive Motors

Repeat Mini – Mk3 (1pcs)

$20.00 – $40.00

Rated 5.00 out of 5

Select options This product has multiple variants. The options may be chosen on the product page