Not sure what's going on. It's been a while since I ran a Dual ESC set up.

My set is Dual Mamba Micro Pro's, Futaba R614FF, 4PKS, Castle BEC.. I linked the MMP's and set them up for Brushed Motors.. My BEC is the one I used last year with no problems. But I can't get it to link up to Castle Software. When I plug in the bettery the BEC lights up Green. So I know power is getting to the BEC.

Been trying to Bind my RX to TX. All I'm getting is Red Lights on everything....:x

1-What does the BEC plug into, the RX?

2-Are you trying to program the BEC, if so, try connecting it to the CClink 1st, then power it up.

3-Is your TX throttle trim set to "0", if not, do so as this can mess up the ESC programming.

4-Are you sure the battery is good?

When in doubt, disconnect everything but battery & RX, bind them and start plugging in other bits.

I have the same setup except for a 4PL instead of a 4PK. That being said, and me not wanting to ask too simple of a question, but did you make sure to pull both ESC red wires? I believe that not pulling both reds and still plugging in the BEC would cause some interference (and posible magic smoke) that would stop a bind. Like Charlie stated....disconnect everything....start with the BEC and try the BIND.

When my bec is wired into the rig the castle link will not hook to it....I always have to disconnect the neg power lead on the bec where it ties into the lipo deans.

Tried that. Didn't work...

Anyway.. Started going through it all again. Plugged the battery is and the BEC into the Link. Light came on Green and linked up. Changed from 6.2 to 7.2v....

Still can't get my RX to link up...:x

Hey is this the first time you are binding that rx? On my 4pk there are two different modes in the RXSYS menu. One is C2 and the other is something else. I dont recall which way is correct w/o reading the manual but I think the FF series and the FS series have different modes. I think it will be worth a look anyway. I know you can confirm it by removing the rx and just putting 6v to the rx and try to bind it OUT of the car with nothing hooked up. I dont think any of your electronics or setup really have much to do with just binding the RX to the TX.