4. Corporate governance

Members and functioning of the Board of Directors

Bruno CREMEL, 54 years old Position held within the Company Director appointed by the Shareholders’ Meeting Date of appointment to the Board 16 May 2019 Expiry of current term of office Shareholders’ Meeting called to approve the financial statements for the fiscal year closing 31 December 2022 Other position(s) Member of the Audit Committee Shares held 0 Nationality French

A graduate from the École Centrale de Paris, the Paris Institute of Political Studies (IEP), and the French National School of Administration (ENA – General Finance Inspection), Bruno Crémel started his career as a Finance Inspector, before joining the French Ministry for the Economy, Finance, and Industry as head of the Public Banks and Insurance Office, State Participations Department, where he notably coordinated the privatisation of several public banks and insurance companies. From 1998 to 2000, he was Strategic Plan Director at the Kering group as a member of the Executive Committee, then Chairman of the Management Board of PPR Interactive. From 2000 to 2002, he was Chief of Staff of Laurent Fabius, Minister for the Economy, Finance and Industry. From 2002 to 2006, Bruno Crémel was Chief Executive Officer of FNAC. From 2006 to 2012, he was General Partner and member of the Executive Committee of the LBO France investment fund, where he notably oversaw the acquisitions of Maisons du Monde and Promovacances. He was appointed Chairman & Chief Executive Officer of Darty France in 2012. He joined the Partech investment fund in May 2014 as a General Partner and Deputy Chief Executive Officer.

Offices and positions held during 2019 Principal position held outside the Company General Partner and Deputy Chief Executive Officer of Partech ■

Office/Position

Title

Country

Deputy Chief Executive Officer

Partech

France

Director Director Director Director

Made.com

United Kingdom

Evaneos M-Files

France Finland

Exporo

Germany

Chairman of the Board of Directors

Ataris

France

Expired offices held outside the Company over the past five years France

Director of EcoVadis ■ Director of NA-KD ■

François DELATTRE, 56 years old Position held within the Company Director appointed by the Shareholders’ Meeting on recommendation from the French State Date of appointment to the Board 28 June 2019 Expiry of current term of office Shareholders’ Meeting called to approve the financial statements for the fiscal year closing 31 December 2020 Other position(s) Member of the Strategy Committee Shares held 0 Nationality French

A graduate from the Paris Institute of Political Studies (IEP) and the National School of Administration (ENA), François Delattre started his career in 1989 as Second Secretary at the French Embassy in Germany. After spending two years at the Strategic Affairs & Disarmament Department of the French Ministry for Foreign Affairs from 1991 to 1993, he became a Special Advisor in Defence and European & Transatlantic Security in the office of the Minister of Foreign Affairs, Alain Juppé in 1993, before being in charge of these issues within the diplomatic team of the President of the French Republic Jacques Chirac from 1995 to 1998. He was appointed head of the Press and Communication Service at the French Embassy in Washington in 1998, Deputy Chief of Staff to the Minister of Foreign Affairs Dominique de Villepin in 2002 and then Consul General in New York in 2004. France’s Ambassador to Canada from 2008 to 2011, and to the United States from 2011 to 2014, he was appointed Permanent Representative of France to the United Nations in September 2014. He has been General Secretary of the French Ministry of Europe & Foreign Affairs since 1 July 2019.

Offices and positions held during 2019 Principal position held outside the Company Secretary General of the French Ministry for Europe & Foreign Affairs ■

Office/Position

Title

Country France France

Director Director

Orano

Agence nationale des titres sécurisés ( i.e. French national agency of secure shares) Commission de récolement des dépôts d’œuvres d’art ( i.e. French commission for the verification of the registration of works of art)

Director

France

Director Director Director Director

National School of Administration (ENA)

France France France France

France Médias Monde

Institut Français

Office français de protection des réfugiés et apatrides ( i.e. French office for the protection of refugees and stateless persons)

Director Director

Sorbonne Abou Dhabi

France France

Institut des hautes études de défense nationale ( i.e. French high national defence study institute)

Expired offices held outside the Company over the past five years France None. ■

G: EDF group company - L: listed company.

215

EDF | Universal registration document 2019