Diyarbakır's ancient city of Eğil stands out with its history, culture and spiritual values. Diyarbakır, one of the favorite tourism centers of the Southeast, preserves the legacies of the civilizations it has hosted throughout history and brings them together with travelers. Diyarbakır's Eğil district stands out in terms of faith tourism.

Eğil, one of Turkey's most important ancient cities with its Assyrian castle, caves and king tombs, offers precious moments to its visitors with its spiritual atmosphere in the region where the prophets Zülkifl and Elyesa, whose names are mentioned in the Holy Quran, and 9 prophets are believed to be buried.

In the Ottoman salnamas, Diyarbakır's status as a "city of prophets" was mentioned with the following statement: "This is a chart of the places where the tombs and mausoleums of the great prophets, honorable Companions and revered elders, who were buried in the fragrant soil of our city and benefited the people of our city with their great power and spiritual favors, and the foundations connected to the aforementioned."

Eğil, which has magnificent natural beauties as well as its historical importance, was conquered by Muslims during the reign of Caliph Hz. Ömer. Before the dam was built in the region where the Tigris Dam Lake offers exquisite views, the tombs of the prophets Elyesa and Zülkifl were located on the banks of the Tigris River. Since they would be flooded when the dam was built, the tombs were moved to Nebi Harun Hill in 1995 and placed in the tomb.

It is rumored that there are also the tombs of Prophet Harun-i Asefi, Prophet Hallak, Prophet Harut, Prophet Zunnun, Prophet Hormuz, Prophet Omar in Eğil, which is the most important cultural and belief center of Diyarbakır, known as the "City of Prophets".

Prophet Elyesa

Prophet Elyesa was the prophet sent to the Children of Israel after Elijah. A very small part of the community believed in Hz. Elyesa, who tried to reform the Israelites, and the majority did not believe.

Prophet Zulkifl

Hz. Zulqifl, the son of the uncle of Elyesa, was another prophet sent to the Children of Israel. Prophet Zulqifl conveyed the orders and requirements of the religion of Moses (peace be upon him) to the people. Prophet Zulqifl died in one of the cities of Damascus.