Akif says he recorded song back in 1976

Rahul Aijaz February 02, 2017

KARACHI: Dilruba Na Raazi was undoubtedly, one of the biggest hits of Coke Studio season nine. Faakhir and Zeb Bangash more than did justice to the raspy Pashto number, with the former taking much of the credit for having composed the entire song himself.

Coke Studio's Afreen Afreen tops Youtube Pakistan's most viewed video list

In a rather strange turn of events, though, it turns out that Dilruba Na Raazi is actually a rendition of a 1970s original by Pashto singer Fazal Malik Akif. His daughter Namsi Khan told The Express Tribune that she had contacted Coke Studio for infringing on intellectual property. “I got in touch with them and was told even they didn’t know Dilruba Na Raazi was my father’s composition. They haven’t been disrespectful and added his name in the credits,” she stated.

However, Khan clarified that her motive is not to make Coke Studio look bad. “My father made his career in the 70s and to see a contemporary artist make a name off of his composition is quite underhanded. The public should know about this,” she said. “The point is the theft of intellectual property. Fakhir and Zeb are getting the credit so I’d like Faakhir to publicly come out and acknowledge the original composer.”

Akif narrated the story of how and when he first composed the song. “I came to Karachi back in 1976. We were in Manghopir, where I recorded Dilruba Na Raazi for the first time with EMI Pakistan. I was there to record some Sindhi songs and I wrote the asthai (the starting words) of this one then,” recalled the singer. “The cover of the disc is still with me somewhere. Later on, the song was recorded in Peshawar TV Centre around 1980 and became one of my hits.” According to Akif, he tweaked the beat of the song after it became a hit. “Coke Studio has copied that and made its own rendition of that version.”

Akif also spoke of how, when he used to perform Dilruba Na Raazi in UAE, the audience would love it. He only came to know about the Coke Studio version through fans. “I was disappointed. All my fans are witnesses to the fact it’s my song. Just ask the people of Khyber-Pakhtunkhwa (K-P) and the Pakistani music industry about me and my past,” he said. “My concern is how the singer recorded one of the hits written, composed and sung by me without my permission. Faakhir should apologise publicly.”

He continued, “It’s very unfortunate. I have studied law but I didn’t practice because I can’t accept this corrupt system. Who cares about the intellectual property? And who takes care of matters such as this intellectual property theft?”

Five musicians who deserve a spot on Coke Studio 10

Ironically, Akif does not intend to pursue legal action against any party. “I spoke with Faisal Kapadia. He said Faakhir told him it was his own composition. He apologised and sent a very small amount in royalties,” he revealed. “They have also updated my name in the credits and if we pursue legal action, it would be pointless trouble for them.”

When contacted on the matter, Faakhir had another story to tell. “This song actually goes way back. It’s a folk song part of Pashto culture and heritage and therefore, it’s in public domain. Nobody can claim it,” he said.

However, the Tauba Hai hit-maker did admit to borrowing parts of the song from Akif’s rendition. “Yes, I borrowed a few things from Fazal Akif’s version but the rest of the song is my own composition. Mr Akif did a version of this song in the 70s and this is my version. There is nothing to publicly acknowledge for me.”

Listen to Akif's original version here:

Have something to add to the story? Share it in the comments below.