2. 6LoWPAN

3. 6LoWPAN IPV6 over Low Power Wireless Personal Area Network  6LoWPAN is a simple low cost communication network  It allows wireless connectivity in applications with limited power and relaxed throughput requirements  It provides IPv6 networking over IEEE 802.15.4 networks  It is formed by devices that are compatible with the IEEE 802.15.4 standard and characterized by  short range,  low bit rate  low power,  low memory usage a  low cost

4. Fig. 6LoWPAN

5. Working  When a lower processing capability sensor node in a 6LoWPAN or so-called reduced function device (RFD)  RFD wants to send its data packet to an IP-enabled device outside the 6LoWPAN  It first sends the packet to the higher processing capability sensor node or so-called full function device (FFD) in the same PAN.  The FFDs forward the data packet hop by hop to the 6LoWPAN gateway.  6LoWPAN gateway then forward the packet to the destination IP-enabled device by using the IP  address. Applications:  Automation  Industrial monitoring  Smart Home

6.  It adopts IEEE 802.15.4 standard PHY and MAC layers as its bottom layers while chooses IPv6 in its network layer.  There are total of 27 channels defined in the PHY layer.  These channels are allocated into different frequency bands with varying data rates as showed in Table below.

7.  Adding an adaptation layer between MAC layer and the network layer to achieve the header compression, fragmentation and layer-two forwarding.  LOAD protocol is a simplified on-demand routing protocol based on AODV.  It is defined to be operating on top of the adaptation layer instead of the transport layer Fig.6LoWPAN Protocol Stack

8.  The basic tasks provided by the MAC layer are beacon generation and synchronization  It supporting PAN association and disassociation, managing channel access via Carriers Sense Multiple Access with Collision Avoidance (CSMA/CA) mechanism  IEEE 802.15.4 standard defined 4 frame structures for MAC layer:  Beacon frame  Data frame  Acknowledgement frame  MAC command frame  A beacon frame is used by a PAN coordinator to transmit beacons  Data frame is used for data transfers.  The acknowledgement frame and the MAC command frame, are used for confirming successful frame reception and handling all MAC peer entity control transfers respectively.

9. Wireless HART

10. WirelessHART  WirelessHART is a wireless sensor networking technology based on the Highway Addressable Remote Transducer Protocol (HART).  It is a subset of the HART industrial instrument communication standard as of version 7, communicating process data over 2.4 GHz radio waves.  WirelessHART is a wireless mesh network communications protocol for process automation applications. Fig. WirelessHART Architecture

11. Working  Each individual instrument in the HART wireless connection is connected through a mesh network.  Each individual instrument is connected to a common input and adjustment instruments.  If an instrument is far from the gateway or the route is blocked, it can not connect to the gateway. Although you can communicate with the gateway through other instruments.  Therefore, each device in the mesh network can serve as a router for messages from other devices.  The purpose of a mesh network is to provide redundant data pathways in case of device failure or changes in the environment interrupting radio communication between devices  A network administrator responsible for configuring the network, scheduling communications between devices, managing message routes, and monitoring the state of the network.  Network Manager can be integrated into the gateway

12. Physical Layer:  2.4 GHz to 2.5 GHz (“ISM” – Industrial, Scientific, Medical) signal band  O-QPSK modulation (offset quadrature phase-shift keying)  250 kbps data rate  DSSS with frequency-hopping between 15 channels within that band for security and interference reduction  TDMA bus arbitration, with 10-millisecond timeslots allocated for device transmission Data Link Layer: Network ID number uniquely identifies each WirelessHART network, allowing multiple networks to overlap the same physical area Network Layer:  Mesh networking  Signal repeating – devices may act as “repeaters” for other devices too far away from the master unit  A Network Manager device determines communication routes between field devices.

13. Wireless USB

14. Wireless USB  Wireless USB is a wireless technology which enables the high- speed computer peripheral interface, USB, wireless.  It is a wire replacement of existing USB technology using a Multi Band Orthogonal Frequency Division Multiplexing radio technique.  The physical layer is standardized under IEEE 802.15.3 PHY.  The major WUSB promoters are HP, Intel, Microsoft, NEC Philips, & Samsung  USB system can be described by three definitional areas:  USB interconnect  USB devices  USB host

15. (A) USB interconnect : The USB interconnect is the manner in which USB devices are connected toand communicate with the host. (B) USB Device : Wireless USB devices which provide capabilities to the system, such as a printer,a digital camera, or speakers (C) USB Host :  There is only one host in any USB system.  The USB interface to the host computer system is referred to as the Host Controller.  Host controllers are typically connected to PCs through an internal bus such as PCI.  The Host Controller may be implemented in a combination of hardware or software.

16. Fig. Hub and Spoke topology