Siri is now a product of Apple Corp. Siri is a virtual personal assistant incorporated as a feature of [Apple](/organization/apple) iPhones beginning with the 4S generation. Siri was originally developed by [SRI International](/organization/sri-international). SRI spun off Siri, Inc., in 2007, and this company launched a personal assistant app in February 2010. Siri, Inc., was acquired by Apple in 2010, and in October 2011 Apple announced that the iPhone 4S would be using this technology.

Abundant Robotics mission: Deliver robotic systems for the hardest jobs in agriculture. As robotics researchers, we’ve broken new ground in a variety of domains. For the past two years we’ve focused on hard problems in agriculture and are spinning-out of SRI International to build products based on their successful research. They are global experts in their field, love solving important problems, like working together, and are passionate about building great products and working with like-minded folks. Customers are grappling with urgent problems and are incredibly enthusiastic about the solution we’ve demonstrated.

Hello Curry is a pioneer and leader in the QSR market in India. Conceived by Founders Raju Bhupati and Sandeep Penmatsa; as the world's first Internet First Asset Light Fast Indian Food chain, Hello Curry started operations early in 2014 with a seed capital of 6 crores; rising to the Top 5 startups in India in the first 6 months of operations. Hello Curry's innovative packaging makes an Indian meal a simple, easily manageable experience. Operating out of 4 cities with 29 outlets, Hello Curry has a vision of 10 outlets per city worldwide over the next 5 years. The key enabler to achieve this vision is a radical, game changer business model KICK [ Kitchen in Commercial Kitchen ] which allows for Hello Curry to set-up in any kitchen in India as a partner and offer its product line with a collaborative supply chain, Asset Light infrastructure and a lean delivery model. KICK spawns into a metric of multiple fully operational outlets in a matter of two weeks, affording tremendous productivity margins and lowering TCO. Hello Curry has recently been awarded the Best QSR Restaurant in South India; as also the best packaging award. In line with its expansion plans, Hello Curry has made strategic acquisitions - Paratha Post to improve its product line, Fire 42 a specialized technology provider to strengthen its operations, and has entered into a partnership with EatSome, a leading Pune based fast food chain. Hello Curry cognitively incorporates inorganic growth with major cities in India - leading ones being Delhi, Chennai, Hyderabad, Bangalore, Mumbai and Kolkatta

Tout is the TV network for the Internet. A spin-out from the Stanford Research Institute (SRI International), Tout's Personalized TV Technology is the first patented AI technology that delivers targeted video programming based on who you are and where you are across the web. Tout works with more than 300 leading content producers and over 3,500 publishers to significantly grow online video revenue and drive deeper engagement with consumers. Delivering over 400MM video streams to 85MM unique viewers every month, Tout provides unprecedented scale and brand-safety to hundreds of Fortune 1000 advertisers who want to align their brands with the highest quality and contextual relevant video content. Headquartered in San Francisco, Tout works with top media brands like CNN, Fox Sports and Time Inc. to deliver personalized TV across the Web.

Desti is changing the way people search and plan their travel. Instead of sifting thru hundreds of search results and reading countless travel reviews, Desti can find precisely the right places to stay and things to do based on your needs. They harken back to the days of travel agents, where consumers could ask tough travel questions like ” What are the best hotels near the beach that are kid-friendly?”. A recent spinout from SRI International, They are working on game changing technology that leverages natural language search technology and artificial intelligence to let users find precisely what they are looking for based on multiple criteria, not just price or travel dates. Their mission is to make travel planning as fun and painless as possible.

Scotty Labs is a spin-out of SRI International. They are a driving company. They believe that the true opportunities for the future of autonomy lie in unlocking the ability for human and machine to work together to solve the most difficult problems driverless vehicles face. The path of progress for the autonomous vehicle is blocked by the idea that complete vehicle autonomy is the goal. They believe safe tele-operation subsumes level 5 autonomy, so instead of removing humans from the driving experience entirely, we’re keeping the humans in, virtually.