The movie will be produced jointly by Udhayanidhi Stalin’s Red Giant Movies, Kamal Haasan’s Raaj Kamal Film International, Mani Ratnam’s Madras Talkies, R Mahendran and Siva Ananth.

Sequel to Thevar Magan

Meanwhile, sources close to Kamal and Mani Ratnam told South First that the actor will himself write the script for KG234. The film will reportedly be a rural drama, on the lines of Bharathan’s directorial Thevar Magan (1992).

It will start from where it ended: Sakthi (Kamal) going to jail for killing the caste-frenzied Mayan (Nassar). In KH234, Sakthi returns to his village after 14 years only to find that it has not changed for the better.

A little birdie, who was part of Thevar Magan, revealed that Bharatan and Kamal Haasan had a run-in over some portions of the story during the shoot. Bharatan asked the actor to write a better script or go by what he wrote. This spurred the actor to come up with a storyline in just about a week.

Mani Ratnam’s hunt for screenwriter

Meanwhile, a source close to Mani Ratnam told South First that the director was eagerly looking for a story with a rural backdrop, for a long time. He was hunting for a screenplay writer who would do the job, as he’s juggling other departments.

Some time ago, on Suhasini’s recommendation, he approached Malayalam film writer Dennis Joseph but the latter left the project halfway through. As Mani Ratnam got busier with his projects, he did not assign the job to any other screenwriter.

But, in the case of the KH234, since Kamal Haasan is donning the roles of a scriptwriter, hero and co-producer, there is no room for creative differences with Mani Ratnam. This is why the director readily okayed the project.

In fact, during Vikram’s shoot, right from director Lokesh to actors like Fahadh Faasil were stumped that Kamal Haasan — known for his all-pervading interference — did not poke his nose or give a suggestion where not required.

As for Rahman, he scored countryside music in Bharatiraja’s Kizhakku Cheemayile (1993) starring Vijaykumar and Raadhika. Since it was a musical hit, expectations are running high for KH234.

Interestingly, the makers did not want to name KH234 Thevar Magan 2 as both Kamal Haasan and Mani Ratnam felt that there isn’t a need to keep the caste tag in Thevar Magan.

Instead, they are planning to start KH234 with the visuals of Thevar Magan’s climax scene. The movie will have nothing more to it!