Regina Hall is a film and television actress. She has appeared in numerous television series, most prominently in a regular role on the comedy series Ally McBeal and Black Monday. She is known for her lead role of Brenda Meeks in four of the five Scary Movie films, The Best Man and its sequel The Best Man Holiday, Girls Trip and The Hate U Give.

Hall graduated from New York University in 1997 with a Master's degree in journalism, and shortly thereafter began a career in the entertainment industry, starting off with a guest appearance on Sadat X's 1996 album Wild Cowboys on the track, "The Interview." Around 2004, Hall’s mother was diagnosed with scleroderma, a rare autoimmune disease. Therefore, when not working in Hollywood, Hall can be found volunteering for the care of senior citizens at a Sherman Oaks, CA, convalescent home twice a week as well as raising public awareness for the disease.

Her television career initially began with a recurring role on the soap opera Loving, and guest appearances on the FOX's police drama New York Undercover. Her first film role came in 1999 with a small part in the film The Best Man. Hall gained more recognition with her role in the comedy-horror-spoof Scary Movie (and the sequels Scary Movie 2, Scary Movie 3 and Scary Movie 4) portraying Brenda Meeks, and the TV movie Disappearing Acts. In 2001, Hall landed the role of Coretta Lipp on the prime-time drama Ally McBeal, which was originally a recurring role over several episodes but was made a main character in the 5th season of the show. A year later, she starred in the action-drama Paid in Full, a film directed by Charles Stone III.

Since then, she has appeared in leading roles in films such as Malibu's Most Wanted, King's Ransom and The Honeymooners. In 2014, she appeared alongside Kevin Hart in About Last Night.

In 2017, Hall co-starred in the comedy film Girls Trip alongside Queen Latifah, Jada Pinkett Smith and Tiffany Haddish. The film was both a critical and commercial hit, earning praise from critics and surpassing the $100 million mark at the box office. She played the lead role in the 2018 film Support the Girls, an independent comedy film which was written and directed by Andrew Bujalski. For her work, she earned nominations at the Independent Spirit Awards and Gotham Independent Film Awards. She won the New York Film Critics Circle Award for Best Actress, becoming the first African-American to win the award.

In 2019, Hall hosted the 2019 BET Awards. Currently, she stars in the Showtime comedy series Black Monday as Dawn Darcy.