Background

Regina Hall was born in Washington, D.C., on December 12, 1970. She was raised in an African-American family. Odie Hall, her father, was a contractor and electrician, and Ruby Hall, her mother, was a teacher. She wanted to be a writer since she was a child. She was an incredibly emotional child who was readily impacted by negative events in the outside world, which eventually led to depression. To cope, she began writing comedy and began attending church during her senior year of high school. She had dreamt of becoming a nun and living a peaceful life in service to others for a long time.

Hall had no intention of making acting a full-time career. In 1992, she graduated from Fordham University in the Bronx with a bachelor’s degree in English literature. To cope with the grief of her father’s death, she concentrated on her career. In 1997, she auditioned and got picked for a T.V. commercial while getting her master’s degree in journalism at New York University. Following that, she had a brief part in the comedy film “The Best Man.” Many filmmakers employed African-American actors in crucial roles during this period to show support for the anti-racism movement in Hollywood. Her biggest break came in 2000 when she starred in the satirical comedy film “Scary Movie.” She played Brenda Meeks, a high school girl in the film. Her performance received accolades, and industry experts said her comedy timing was excellent. She was cast for a major role in the film “Paid in Full” in 2002. Her fame grew to the point where directors started approaching her for more prominent roles. She starred in several blockbuster films, including “Superhero Movie,” a comic satire on Hollywood’s burgeoning trend of superhero films, in which she played Mrs. Xavier, one of the X-Men. She also made an appearance on “Law & Order: Los Angeles.” Hall announced that she was working as a writer for “ABILITY” magazine around this time. She first appeared in “Think Like a Man” in 2012, and she went on to reprise her role in the series’ two sequels, “The Best Man Holiday” and “Think Like a Man Too.” For the film “About Last Night,” Hall paired up with Kevin Hart, a prominent comic actor. She also maintained her writing career by contributing to a variety of publications.

Hall keeps her personal life a secret. Her prior relationships include rapper Common and actor Damon Wayans, and she is rumored to be bisexual. She began volunteering for many N.G.O.s that spread awareness about scleroderma after her mother was diagnosed with the rare auto-immune disease.