(1992-)

Who Is Demi Lovato?

Demi Lovato started out as a child actor on Barney & Friends, before moving on to roles in shows like Sonny with a Chance and the film Camp Rock. Meanwhile, they launched a successful recording career with the release of their debut album, Don't Forget, in 2008. Lovato has followed with the albums Unbroken, Confident and Tell Me You Love Me, scoring hits with singles like "Skyscraper" and "Sorry Not Sorry." They have also continued to appear on television, serving as a judge on the singing competition show The X Factor from 2012 to 2013.

Early Life and Career

Demetria Devonne Lovato was born on August 20, 1992, in Albuquerque, New Mexico. Lovato's mother, Dianna, is a former country music recording artist and Dallas Cowboys Cheerleader. Lovato is the middle child of three sisters. Their older sister, Dallas, is also a singer and actress, and younger sister, Madison, was born in 2002.

Growing up, Lovato won several talent contests and performed in famous venues, including the Eismann Center and the Dallas Cowboys' Thanksgiving Day halftime show with LeAnn Rimes. They started their show business career in earnest at the age of 10 when they became a series regular on the children's television show Barney & Friends. After a stint on Barney & Friends, Lovato guest-starred on the television dramas Just Jordan and Prison Break.

Disney Star: 'Camp Rock' to 'Sonny with a Chance'

In 2007, Lovato began working with the Disney Channel. First, they got a part on a short television show called As The Bell Rings. Their role on that ended, however, when Lovato was cast as Mitchie Torres in the starring role of the Disney Channel movies Camp Rock and Camp Rock 2: The Final Jam.

In 2008, Lovato covered the Academy Award-nominated song, "That's How You Know" from Enchanted on the DisneyMania 6 album. Later on, in 2008, they began filming the Disney Channel Original Movie, Princess Protection Program. The film was made in Puerto Rico and Lovato co-starred with their then-good friend Selena Gomez.

Lovato was the star of their own Disney Channel television show called Sonny with a Chance. The series debuted in 2009, becoming one of the channel's most popular programs and making Lovato one of its brightest stars. Sonny with a Chance ran until 2011.

Albums and Hit Songs

'Don't Forget' and 'Here We Go Again'

On September 23, 2008, Lovato released their first album, Don't Forget, which debuted at No. 2 on the Billboard 200. In promotion of this album, Lovato went on tour with the Jonas Brothers on their Burnin' Up Tour as the opening act. On July 21, 2009, the artist released their second album, Here We Go Again. The title track reached No. 15 on the Billboard Hot 100, making it their first single to reach the Top 20. They went on tour again with the Jonas Brothers the following year and was romantically linked to Joe Jonas around this time.

'Unbroken,' 'Demi,' 'Confident,' 'Tell Me You Love Me'

Lovato released the 2011 album Unbroken, which featured the platinum top 10 hit "Skyscraper." They put out their next record, Demi, two years later, which had the best debut week of their music career. In 2015, Lovato unveiled a new single entitled "Cool for the Summer" from their album Confident. The single hit No. 11 on the Hot 100, while the album reached No. 2 on the Billboard 200. The artist enjoyed more success with their follow-up album, Tell Me You Love Me (2017), which spawned the hit single "Sorry Not Sorry."

More TV: 'The X Factor,' 'Glee'

In 2012, Lovato took on a new role. They joined The X Factor in its second season as a judge. Lovato, Simon Cowell, music industry titan L.A. Reid and pop star Britney Spears worked together to review the contestants and helped determine who would win the $5 million recording contract. The show was canceled after its third season.

Lovato made a return to acting in 2013 with a recurring role on the hit musical series Glee. They appeared on then-boyfriend Wilmer Valderrama's show From Dusk Till Dawn: The Series in 2015 and continued to contribute to reality TV competitions, serving as a guest judge on RuPaul's Drag Race in 2015, and Project Runway and The Voice of Germany in 2017.

Shortly after making their debut as a guest star on Will & Grace in January 2020, Lovato was tapped to perform at the Grammy Awards and sing the national anthem at Super Bowl LIV.

History With Substance Abuse

While on tour with the Jonas Brothers in 2010, Lovato got into an altercation with a dancer. The fight made headlines, and they sought treatment after the incident. According to People magazine, the singer sought help for "emotional and physical issues." Some of these issues were later revealed to be an eating disorder, self-harm through cutting and bipolar disorder.

Lovato drew attention for the June 2018 release of the single "Sober," in which they candidly admits to relapsing after six years of sobriety. On July 24, 2018, the singer was rushed to the hospital for an apparent overdose. TMZ reported that they were found unconscious and was revived with Narcan, a medication to reverse the effects of a narcotic overdose. They were later said to be in stable condition at the hospital, with ex-boyfriend Valderrama frequently dropping by to check on their condition.

Addressing the issue for the first time via an Instagram post on August 5, Lovato acknowledged the ongoing difficulties of dealing with addiction and thanked fans for their support. "The love you have all shown me will never be forgotten and I look forward to the day where I can say I came out on the other side," they wrote. "I will keep fighting."

Lovato revealed in their 2021 documentary Demi Lovato: Dancing with the Devil, that they had a heart attack and three strokes after their overdose.

Mental Health and Personal Life

Lovato has gone public with their diagnosis for bipolar disorder. According to Cosmopolitan for Latinas, they use medication to help manage their condition. The artist opened up about their disorder and other difficulties in the 2017 documentary Demi Lovato: Simply Complicated, released shortly after their album Tell Me You Love Me.

In May 2019, Lovato announced that they had signed with manager Scooter Braun, who also oversees the careers of pop stars Justin Bieber and Ariana Grande.

The following year, they went public with their relationship with actor and singer Max Ehrich. The pair got engaged in July 2020 but ended their relationship in September 2020.

In May 2021, Lovato announced on their podcast, 4D with Demi Lovato, that they will begin using the pronouns they/them.

QUICK FACTS

Name: Demi Lovato

Birth Year: 1992

Birth date: August 20, 1992

Birth State: New Mexico

Birth City: Albuquerque

Birth Country: United States

Gender: Female

Best Known For: Demi Lovato is a successful actress and recording artist with hits like 'Skyscraper,' 'Cool for the Summer,' 'Heart Attack' and 'Sorry Not Sorry.'

Industries

Pop

Television

Comedy

Astrological Sign: Leo