Demi Lovato "used to hold her freak back" but now she's "letting go," and who better to call when you want let that freak flag fly than Robert Rodriguez? Hollywood’s top desperado directs Lovato in this video for her banging new anthem, "Confident," which is the title track from her forthcoming album, and is also awesome. Even if you weren't a "Skyscraper" or "Heart Attack" fan, give this new video a chance. It’s got Rodriguez stalwart Jeff Fahey as a big shot in some sort of government organization, and in the role of his top agent you get the one, the only, Michelle Rodriguez. MRod has carved out one of the best careers in show business, because if you cast her in a role, there’s no one you can cast but her. Michelle Rodriguez movies are basically their own genre at this point, and we will accept no substitutes. Lovato plays an escaped fugitive and Rodriguez is the one responsible for bringing her in to the boss man, and if you start getting nervous that this video will jump the shark and have Demi actually beating Michelle in hand-to-hand combat then rest easy. RobRod knows that no one beats his top enforcer in a fight. Not even mixed martial arts champions Gina Carano or Rhonda Rousey.

The Acolyte and the Long-Awaited Death of Review-Bombing

Leslye Headland’s new Star Wars show is getting positive reviews from critics and being trashed by audiences. Some are calling it review-bombing—but it’s more complicated than that.

The 39 Best Shows on Max (aka HBO Max) Right Now

House of the Dragon, The Sopranos, and Fantasmas are just a few of the shows you need to be watching on Max this month.

The 51 Best Shows on Disney+ Right Now

The Acolyte, X-Men ’97, and World Eats Bread are just a few of the shows you should be watching on Disney+ this month.

The 61 Best Movies on Disney+ Right Now

Jim Henson: Idea Man, Taylor Swift: The Era’s Tour (Taylor’s Version), and Let It Be are just a few of the movies you should be watching on Disney+ this month.

The 28 Best Movies on Max (aka HBO Max) Right Now

Mad Max, Stop Making Sense, and Dune are just a few of the movies you should be watching on Max this month.

The 21 Best Movies on Apple TV+ Right Now

Fancy Dance, Argylle, Mad Max: Fury Road, and Blade Runner 2049 are just a few of the movies you should be watching on Apple TV+ this month.

The 19 Best Movies on Amazon Prime Right Now

The Idea of You, Road House, and American Fiction are just a few of the movies you should be watching on Amazon Prime Video this week.

For the Director of Wicked, There’s No Place Like Silicon Valley

Six years after Crazy Rich Asians, Jon M. Chu prepares to release his adaptation of one of Broadway’s biggest musicals. From a table at his family’s famous Chinese restaurant, he opens up about his childhood among the titans of tech—and why filmmakers shouldn’t be afraid of AI.