Demi Lovato

Back to Biographies

Demi Lovato is a young actress and singer. She has recorded CDs and starred on both TV shows and in movies. She is best known for her lead role on the TV show Sonny With A Chance as well as starring in the Disney Camp Rock movie series.

Where did Demi grow up?

Demi was born on August 20, 1992 in Dallas, Texas. She started playing the piano at age 7 and fell in love with music. She soon learned guitar and was writing her own songs. She asked her mom to home school her after being bullied at school. She went the rest of the way through school at home and even got her high school diploma this way.

What was Demi Lovato's first acting job?

Demi's first acting job was on Barney & Friends at the young age of 7. Later she would have a small role on a few shows and then got a bit bigger role on the Disney Channel show As the Bell Rings. Her first big break came with the starring role in the Disney Channel movie Camp Rock. The movie was a huge success and Demi soon became famous for both her acting in the movie as well as her singing. Since then Lovato has starred in more movies including Camp Rock 2: The Final Jam and Princess Protection Program as well as starring in her own Disney Channel comedy sitcom Sonny with a Chance.

Demi has also had a successful music career. She has been busy! She was featured on both the Camp Rock soundtracks and came out with her own CD's as well. Her first Album, Don't Forget, made it to number 2 on the billboard charts.

List of Demi Lovato movie and TV Roles Movies

2008 Camp Rock

2009 Jonas Brothers: The 3D Experience

2009 Pricess Protection Program

2010 Camp Rock 2: The Final Jam

TV

2002 Barney and Friends

2006 Prison Break

2006 Split Ends

2007 As the Bell Rings

2008 Just Jordan

2009 Sonny with a Chance

2010 Grey's Anatomy

List of Demi Lovato Albums

2008 Don't Forget

2008 Camp Rock

2009 Here We Go Again

2010 Camp Rock 2

2010 Sunny With A Chance

2011 A Rose to the Fallen

Fun Facts about Demi Lovato

One of Demi's best friends is Selena Gomez who is an actress on Wizards of Waverly Place.

She once dated Joe Jonas from the Jonas Brothers.

Her mother was a Dallas Cowboy Cheerleader.

She is a vegetarian.

She has won many awards including several Teen Choice Awards and a Peoples Choice Award.

Her real name is Demetria Devonne Lovato.

In 2009 she toured with David Archuleta.

Back to Biographies

Other Actors and Musicians biographies:

Justin Bieber

Abigail Breslin

Jonas Brothers

Miranda Cosgrove

Miley Cyrus

Selena Gomez

David Henrie

Michael Jackson

Demi Lovato

Bridgit Mendler

Elvis Presley

Jaden Smith

Brenda Song

Dylan and Cole Sprouse

Taylor Swift

Bella Thorne

Oprah Winfrey

Zendaya