DEMI Lovato opened up about her battle with drug addiction in her docuseries Dancing With The Devil.

Prior to her many musical career accolades, Lovato, 28, was known for her work as a teenage actress on the Disney channel.

What Disney Channel show did Demi Lovato star in?

Prior to her pop rock debut album Don't Forget, Lovato was known for appearing on the PBS children's series Barney & Friends.

After brief stint on the PBS show, Lovato played Charlotte Adams in the Disney short series As The Bell Rings from 2007 to 2008.

She rose to stardom as Mitchie Torres in the Disney Channel musical film Camp Rock, its sequel Camp Rock 2: The Final Jam and the series Sonny With A Chance.

Lovato sang four songs on Camp Rock's soundtrack, which debuted at number three on the US Billboard 200, selling 188,000 copies in its first week.

In Sonny With A Chance, Lovato played Sonny Munroe, the newest cast member of the show-within-a-show So Random!.

In June 2009, she starred alongside Selena Gomez in the Disney film Princess Protection Program, where she played Rosie Gonzalez/Princess Rosalina.

The film, the fourth highest-rated Disney Channel original movie, premiered to 8.5 million viewers.

What did she say happened to her during her Disney days?

During her docuseries, Lovato opens up how she was sexually assaulted as a teenage actress at Disney.

"I lost my virginity in a rape," Lovato said in the doc.

"We were hooking up but I said, 'Hey, this is not going any farther, I'm a virgin and I don't want to lose it this way.'

"And that didn't matter to them, they did it anyways. And I internalized it and I told myself it was my fault because I still went in the room with him, I still hooked up with him.

"I was a part of that Disney crowd that publicly said they were waiting till marriage," she added.

"I didn't have the romantic first time with anybody, that was not it for me and that sucked.

"And then I had to see this person all the time, and so I stopped eating and coped in other ways: cutting, throwing up, whatever. And my bulimia got so bad that I started throwing up blood for the first time."

Lovato says she never went public with her experience, partly because of how Rihanna was blamed after Chris Brown assaulted her in 2009.

She says she tried telling someone about what happened to her, but her rapist was never held accountable.

"Women are typically more oppressed than men, especially at 15 years old and especially as a little child-star role model," Lovato said.

"My MeToo story is me telling somebody that someone did this to me, and they never got in trouble for it. They never got taken out of the movie they were in."

What did Demi Lovato say about her drug relapse in 2018?

In Dancing With The Devil, Lovato details the night she relapsed in 2018.

One month after celebrating her sixth anniversary of sobriety, Lovato said she came to a breaking point.

"I picked up a bottle of red wine that night, and it wasn't even 30 minutes before I called someone that I knew had drugs on them," she said.

"I'm surprised I didn't OD that night.

"I ended up at a party. I just so happened to run into my old drug dealer from six years before - and the odds of that happening was crazy - and he had a duffel bag, and I just went to town. I went on a shopping spree," she added.

Lovato said her "cocktail" as a teenager was cocaine and Xanax, an anti-anxiety benzodiazepine. But the night she relapsed, she "did drugs that [she'd] never done before," including methamphetamine.

"I tried meth. I mixed it with molly, with coke, weed, alcohol, Oxycontin. And that alone should've killed me," she said.

"It was only two weeks before I was introduced to heroin and crack cocaine. I started using recreationally, and obviously, you can't do that with heroin before you become addicted to it."

Three months after relapsing, Lovato was found unconscious in her home after an accidental overdose.

She said she suffered a heart attack, three strokes and woke up in the hospital legally blind.

How can I watch Demi Lovato's docuseries Dancing With The Devil?

Demi Lovato: Dancing With The Devil will be released as a four-part series on YouTube starting March 23.

There will be two episodes available on March 23 and then others will air weekly.