Demi Lovato is set to star in a comedy project in the works at NBC, it was announced on Jan. 25. Hungry will follow a group of friends who belong to a food issues group and help each other as they look for love, success and more.

Lovato, who has been open about having an eating disorder, is also an executive producer, alongside Suzanne Martin, Sean Hayes and Todd Milliner of Hazy Mills and Scooter Braun, James Shin and Scott Manson of SB Projects.

And while fans love Lovato for her one-of-a-kind vocal talent and hit songs like “Sorry Not Sorry” and “Confident,” the news has us at Billboard reminiscing on the multi-hyphenate’s longtime acting career.

See all her onscreen moments below.

Trending on Billboard

Barney & Friends (2002 – 2004)

A then-10-year-old Lovato made her acting debut as Angela on seasons seven and eight of the popular kids’ television series. She met fellow star Selena Gomez on set, and the two would act in a number of scenes together.

As the Bell Rings (2007-2008)

Demi first dipped her toes in the Disney Channel world when she starred as Charlotte in the first season of As the Bell Rings, a short-lived comedy series. She was the main female character, and fans at the time were captivated by her growing crush on Danny, played by MKTO‘s Tony Oller.

Camp Rock (2008)

Demi’s breakout moment that skyrocketed her into superstardom was her role as Mitchie in Camp Rock. Not only did she star alongside the Jonas Brothers, but also delivered a now-iconic performance of “This Is Me” at the end, showing off her impressive vocal skills.

Sonny With a Chance (2009 – 2011)

Off to the races, she’s going places! Following the success of Camp Rock, Lovato became the star of her own Disney Channel series. Sonny With a Chance, which also featured Tiffany Thornton and Sterling Knight, followed the experiences of teen Sonny Munroe, who becomes the newest cast member of her favorite sketch comedy show, So Random!

Princess Protection Program (2009)

The Disney Channel Original Movie starred Lovato and her then-best pal Selena Gomez. In the film, Lovato plays a princess whose country has been invaded. She goes into hiding in Louisiana and stays with Gomez’s character’s family, and eventually has to learn to act like an ordinary teenager.

Grey’s Anatomy (2010)

Lovato appeared in season 6, episode 22 of the popular medical drama, in which she plays a schizophrenia patient treated by Dr. Alex Karev, played by Justin Chambers.

Camp Rock 2: The Final Jam

Lovato returned as Mitchie for the sequel of the movie that launched her career.

Glee (2013 – 2014)

Lovato appeared in the fifth season of Glee, in which she played a struggling New York artist named Dani, who later befriended Lea Michele’s Rachel Berry and Naya Rivera’s Santana Lopez. She then became Santana’s love interest.

Matador (2014)

Lovato briefly appeared in the TV series as a party guest alongside her boyfriend at the time, Wilmer Valderrama.

From Dusk Till Dawn (2015)

Lovato played Maia in the series based on the 1996 film of the same name that went on to be a cult favorite. El Rey Network creator and executive producer Robert Rodriguez previously shared that he wrote the role specifically for her.

Aside from her personal connection to the series, which is her then-relationship with cast member Wilmer Valderrama, Rodriguez said, “I’ve always been a big fan of hers and she’s on tour a lot, so when she’d come to set to visit I threw out that we’d love to put her in somewhere.”

Smurfs: The Lost Village (2017)

In the animated film, Lovato voiced Smurfette, the first girl smurf.

Charming (2018)

The star-studded musical animation also starred Sia, Ashley Tisdale, G.E.M. and Avril Lavigne. Lovato served as the film’s score executive producer, and voiced Lenore, who seeks payment by the king if she can help the prince (played by Valderrama) find love.

Will & Grace (2020)

Lovato guest stars in the iconic series as Jenny, Will’s surrogate with stellar reviews, but when he met her, her lifestyle as a cam girl surprised him.

Eurovision Song Contest: The Story of Fire Saga (2020)

In the comedy starring Will Ferrell and Rachel McAdams, Lovato played the talented, ill-fated Katiana Lindsdottir, the best Eurovision contestant to ever hail from Iceland.