Dresden/Zahna-Elster/Jessen, 4 May 2023 – The official groundbreaking ceremony for the Elster Repowering wind farm took place today. Project developer VSB, also represented in Finland by its subsidiary VSB Uusiutuva Energia Suomi Oy, has thus realised one of the largest repowering projects in Europe: 50 outdated wind turbines will be replaced by 16 modern, more efficient ones.

Using less than two-thirds of the original area, the energy yield will increase sixfold. The Elster Repowering wind farm will have a capacity of 105.6 MW and generate around 235 GWh per year – enough to supply 67,000 three-person households with renewable energy.

“With the Elster Repowering project, we are proud to help shape the transformation process towards a sustainable European energy landscape. This landmark project demonstrates our commitment to innovation, sustainability, and creating value in the region. By using the latest technology and adhering to the highest environmental standards, we are not only increasing the efficiency and performance of the wind farm, but also creating a better future for our planet,” says Frédéric Lanoë, CEO of the VSB Group.

After several years of planning and approval, as well as the dismantling of the 50 old turbines, the construction work will now begin with the excavation of the building pits, followed by the construction of the foundations by the hybrid tower constructor Max Bögl, probably in the third quarter of 2023. The first concrete tower segments will be erected in autumn 2023, followed by steel tower segments manufactured by Siemens Gamesa. The first turbines are planned to be installed in the first quarter of 2024 and the repowered wind farm is expected to be operational by the end of that year.

“The Elster project demonstrates the immense value of repowering as a means of not only increasing renewable energy capacity, but also revitalizing existing infrastructure to build a greener future. The project implemented by VSB Group reflects Partners Group’s broader focus and commitment to invest in next-generation sustainable infrastructure solutions and deliver positive stakeholder impact over the long term," said David Daum, Managing Director Private Infrastructure Europe, of Partners Group; Board Member at VSB Group. Partners Group, a leading global private markets firm, is the majority shareholder of VSB Group. The firm acquired VSB Group in 2020 on behalf of its clients.

The repowering of the Elster wind farm comes at a crucial time for the European wind industry. With a significant proportion of wind turbines reaching the end of their useful life by 2030, repowering initiatives such as the Elster wind farm project will play a vital role in achieving regional and global climate change targets.

Further information on the Elster Repowering wind farm

www.windfarm-elster.com

Press contact

Sandy Richter

Press officer

+49 351 21183 653

sandy.richter@vsb.energy

About Partners Group

Partners Group is a leading global private markets firm. Since 1996, the firm has invested over USD 195 billion in private equity, private real estate, private debt and private infrastructure on behalf of its clients globally. Partners Group seeks to generate superior returns through capitalizing on thematic growth trends and transforming attractive businesses and assets into market leaders. The firm is a committed, responsible investor and aims to create sustainable returns with lasting, positive impact for all its stakeholders. With over USD 135 billion in assets under management as of 31 December 2022, Partners Group provides an innovative range of bespoke client solutions to institutional investors, sovereign wealth funds, family offices and private individuals globally. The firm employs more than 1,800 diverse professionals across 20 offices worldwide and has regional headquarters in Baar-Zug, Switzerland; Denver, USA; and Singapore. It has been listed on the SIX Swiss Exchange since 2006 (symbol: PGHN). For more information, please visit www.partnersgroup.com or follow on LinkedIn or Twitter.

About VSB Group