Associated Student Body

Stockdale High School's official student governing body is the Associated Student Body (ASB). The ASB Executive Board is made up of two representatives from each class as well as a panel of board members elected by the students. The Executive Board oversees all dances, clubs, student groups, activities, community service, and various other school events.

The Stockdale High School Silver Mustang Band and Colorguard

The 185 member ensemble, under the direction of John Biller and Scott Dirkse, is one of the largest and finest marching bands in the state. In addition to performing the halftime show at all their home football games and as well as local Veteran's Day and Christmas parades, the participate in many marching band competitions throughout Kern County and California, winning many first places and sweepstakes awards. The Silver Mustang Band and Colorguard have performed at Disneyland, Magic Mountain, the Bulldog Stadium in Fresno, and the Rose Bowl in Pasadena. Every mid-November, they host their marching band competition, the "Stockdale Band Spectacular", which features 20–25 middle school and high school marching bands competing for top honors. In addition to the marching band, the instrumental program offers winterguard, winter percussion, string orchestra, symphony orchestra, wind symphony, symphonic band, and jazz band. The orchestras are also two of the largest and finest orchestras in the state. The orchestra regularly performs in different places, ranging from local elementary schools to Disneyland.

Field Shows

1991-1997 - Unknown

1998 - Rhapsody in Blue

1999 - Russian Easter Overture and Russian Christmas Music

2000 - Hook

2001 - The Mask of Zorro

2002 - The Hunchback of Notre Dame

2003 - The Mummy

2004 - Pirates of the Caribbean

2005 - The Age of Jazz

2006 - Batman

2007 - The Lion King

2008 - The Incredibles

2009 - West Side Story

2010 - Star Trek

2011 - The Rocketeer

2012 - The Phantom of the Opera

2013 - The Legend of Zelda

2014 - Les Misérables

2015 - Skyrim

2016 - The Polar Express

National Honor Society

The NHS at Stockdale is the primary community service organization on campus and includes over 590 students as members. The NHS is responsible for organizing events with many local organizations as well a sponsoring recurring events such as Welcome Home - a downtown homeless outreach project - and the Stockdale Christmas Miracle. The club was awarded national recognition in 2015 as one of five chapters in the country chosen for the Outstanding Service Project award for Welcome Home. They have also won Beautiful Bakersfield awards and PEAAK awards.

Medical Academy and HOSA

The Medical Academy of Stockdale High (MASH) has its own Health Occupation Students of America club (HOSA). Students enter the academy their freshman year and take special medical classes until completion in the senior year.

Math Club

The Math Club meets once every week to do many different math related activities. It hosts the CAML, a math competition, as well as the AMC.

Forensics (Speech and Debate)

Forensics is a school elective that many students participate in. They regularly go to tournaments, and do very well. They won the Valley title in Speech 2002, 2014, 2015, 2016, and the valley title in Debate 2016. They also have many individual valley title winners in both speech and debate. The unprepared events champion in IX, NX and Impromptu for speech as well as Parliamentary Debate regularly comes from Stockdale.

Notable graduates

David Carr, former quarterback for the Houston Texans, and first overall pick. Now retired.

Grant Desme, centerfielder at Cal Poly San Luis Obispo (Big West Conference Player of the Year); drafted in 2007 by the Oakland Athletics; retired in 2010 after being named Arizona Fall League MVP, to enter a Catholic seminary to study for the priesthood.

Casey Mears, NASCAR driver

Cory Hall, former NFL free safety for the Cincinnati Bengals attended Stockdale High School his freshman through junior year before transferring to South High School.

Sam Betty, European basketball star and stand-out two-sport Division III-A athlete at Occidental College

District

Stockdale High School is a part of the Kern High School District, one of the largest high school districts in the state of California. Stockdale High's boundaries cover much of the southwest corner of Bakersfield, California.