The National Library of Poland Selects Ex Libris Alma and Primo as Basis for Establishing a Nationwide Library Network

Ex Libris, a ProQuest company, is pleased to announce the National Library of Poland has selected the Alma library services platform and Primo discovery and delivery solution.

LONDON, UK, July 10, 2018 – Ex Libris®, a ProQuest company, is pleased to announce that the National Library of Poland has selected the Ex Libris Alma® library services platform and Primo® discovery and delivery solution as key components in the library’s OMNIS e-Service project. Alma and Primo will provide the basis for the library to adopt a unified national approach to library resource management, discovery, and delivery.

The OMNIS e-Service project, financed by the Digital Poland Projects Centre, represents a major investment in the creation of a nationwide library network and the future of Polish librarianship. The main objective of the project is to enable users to access a wide variety of resources via a single gateway.

After the Alma and Primo solutions are implemented at the National Library, they will be rolled out to early adopters consisting of academic, regional, and county libraries. These institutions will transfer their data to a common cataloging service and begin working collaboratively with Alma and Primo. The experience they gain will benefit all the libraries in Poland as the OMNIS e-service project is rolled out across the country.

Director General of the National Library of Poland Mr Tomasz Makowski said, “Alma and Primo will help us continue to carry out the National Library’s longstanding policy of providing innovative, high-quality library e‑services that meet modern standards and needs. Alma and Primo will assist us in building a foundation for long-term national cooperation and unified library and information services.”

Ofer Mosseri, corporate vice president and general manager of Ex Libris EMEA, said, “The National Library of Poland joins an illustrious list of state and national institutions that use Alma and Primo solutions as the platform to deliver library services. We are looking forward to working closely with the National Library as it brings this exciting national project to Polish libraries of all types and sizes.”

About the National Library of Poland

The National Library of Poland is the central Polish library, under the direction of the Ministry of Culture and National Heritage of the Republic of Poland. A legal deposit library, it also collects books, journals, and electronic and audiovisual publications published in the territory of Poland, as well as Polish-language materials published abroad. As an important humanities research library, the National Library contains the main archive of Polish writing and serves as the state center of bibliographic information about books. In addition, the library plays a significant role as a research facility and exerts influence on the practice of librarianship across Poland.

For more information, visit https://www.bn.org.pl/en/.

About Ex Libris

Ex Libris, a ProQuest company, is a leading global provider of cloud-based solutions for higher education. Offering SaaS solutions for the management and discovery of the full spectrum of library and scholarly materials, as well as mobile campus solutions driving student engagement and success, Ex Libris serves thousands of customers in 90 countries. For more information about Ex Libris, see our website, and join us on Facebook, YouTube, LinkedIn, and Twitter.

About ProQuest (https://www.proquest.com)

ProQuest is committed to supporting the important work happening in the world’s research and learning communities. The company curates content that matters to the advancement of knowledge, assembling an archive of billions of vetted, indexed documents. It simplifies workflows so that people and institutions use time effectively. And because ProQuest connects information communities, complex networks of systems and processes work together efficiently. With ProQuest, finding answers and deriving insights is straightforward and leads to extraordinary outcomes.

ProQuest and its companies and affiliates – Ex Libris, Alexander Street, Bowker – stand for better research, better learning, better insights. ProQuest enables people to change their world.