The formal establishment of the National Library took place over 95 years ago, based on the regulation of President Ignacy Mościcki of February 24, 1928. However, the traditions of the Library date back to the 18th century. In 1747, Andrzej Stanisław Załuski and Józef Andrzej Załuski established the first public and national library in Poland. Currently, Newspoint media monitoring provides the National Library with information on the institution itself, as well as on librarianship, bibliology, information science, programs and initiatives promoting reading in the press and online media.

The Library gathers and stores collections of printed literature, but also monuments of Polish literature and Polish culture, publications by Polish authors translated into foreign languages and published abroad. In 2021, the number of collections exceeded 10 million. At the end of 2022, the National Library had almost 3.6 million volumes of books and almost 1.3 volumes of journals. The Library’s collections are stored in warehouses that occupy an area of approximately 13,000 m².

Newspoint media monitoring supports the activities of supplementing the collections and databases

of the National Library. In addition, the service also includes monitoring of selected library activities,

collection policy, and copyright law.

Among the important aspects, the scope of the service provided and its appropriate adjustment to

the “unusual” client should be mentioned here.

The first challenge was the selection of appropriate keywords, tailored to the area of the Library’s activity. The conducted monitoring covers over 150 issues within which keywords have been selected.

It was necessary to introduce numerous restrictions to select only the most important publications, because with such a large number of entries, the number of new publications generated, especially online entries, exceeds the daily analysis of publications several times.

Automatic selection is supported by the work of our analysts to provide a service that is maximally tailored to the client. Ongoing cooperation with the client and continuity of contact are essential. For this reason, at Newspoint, dedicated guardians are assigned to customers who ensure their satisfaction with the service.

Currently, the main priority of the National Library’s activity is the digitization of its collections. With the use of modern technologies, collections can be made available without exposing the originals to damage. However, there is a unit whose activities are aimed at collecting articles from the printed press. We are talking about the Polish Writers’ Donation Library at the House of Literature in Warsaw, which since 2006 has been operating within the structure of the National Library. The Polish Writers’ Donation Library makes its collections available to readers: books, magazines and press materials.

The Polish Writers’ Donation Library is an invaluable collection of literary archives, typescripts and manuscripts, iconographic materials, magazines and books, often with authors’ autographs. Its seat is located in the House of Literature, a place where other organizations and literary institutions are based, and where meetings with Polish writers and outstanding artists are held. Library collections were made available to readers in 1951.

One of the basic tasks of the Polish Writers’ Donation Library is to acquire, secure and share the achievements of Polish writers. Among the collected press materials, we can also find those from before the formal establishment of the institution. Articles devoted to writers and their literary lives constitute an unprecedented collection, which is now available to anyone interested.

The main goals of the National Library when using Newspoint media monitoring: