The Biocon Bristol Myers Squibb Research & Development Center (BBRC) is a collaboration between Bristol Myers Squibb and Syngene International, a Biocon- group company, and is based in Bangalore, India. Fully operational since 2009, the site is involved in Target Identification, Lead Discovery and Lead Optimization all the way through to early stage Pharmaceutical Development and Clinical Biomarkers R&D.

Bristol Myers Squibb’s state-of-the-art research and development site at Cambridge Crossing encompasses over 480,000 square feet in a 43-acre life science development. Research here expands the boundaries of science, bringing together pillars of discovery, development and data across cancer, cardiovascular, immunology and neuroscience.

The passion of hundreds of scientists in Cambridge, coupled with Bristol Myers Squibb’s broad scope of research and development capabilities around the world, has contributed to one of the most promising pipelines in the industry.

Purchased in 1905 when E.R. Squibb & Sons relocated operations from Brooklyn, New York, this campus has 40 buildings that total 1.9 million square feet on 96 acres. The site has evolved from a manufacturing site to become Bristol Myers Squibb's center for excellence for our therapeutic compounds.

Bristol Myers Squibb’s R&D campus in Redwood City, California focuses on the complexities of the tumor microenvironment. Here, teams examine various aspects of the microenvironment, collaborating closely with discovery and translational scientists across the country to research how we can harness the body’s own immune system to better target tumors.

Bristol Myers Squibb’s San Diego R&D site, located in the heart of the local life sciences ecosystem just a few miles away from picturesque La Jolla, houses several unique and industry-leading capabilities. The site focuses on the exploration of novel biology and target concepts – such as protein degradation – and complex biologics, aiming to better understand and modulate the biological processes that lead to cancer, multiple sclerosis and other diseases with significant unmet needs.

Bristol Myers Squibb’s R&D site in the South Lake Union neighborhood of Seattle, Washington is at the center of the Company’s discovery, pipeline development and translational research efforts focused on cell therapy and immuno-oncology. Within this Thematic Research Center, scientists examine immune effector cell-based therapies such as CAR T cells, T-cell engagers, monoclonal antibodies and small molecules in both blood cancers and solid tumors. In addition, researchers in Seattle conduct extensive exploratory translational studies to support clinical studies and inform asset development strategies.

The BMS R&D site in Seattle is part of BMS’s larger Seattle-area presence, which also includes employees working to develop, manufacture and commercialize cell therapies at a BMS cell therapy manufacturing plant in nearby Bothell, WA.

Bristol Myers Squibb's Center for Innovation and Translational Research Europe (CITRE) R&D site in Seville, Spain is a capability center that brings together teams from our global Informatics and Predictive Sciences, early clinical development and Thematic Research Center organizations to contribute to Bristol Myers Squibb research efforts worldwide.

The site houses computational, clinical and biology research teams as well as dedicated computational research infrastructure and laboratory facilities. Alongside onsite research, the center serves to expand our innovation, collaboration and talent development footprint in Europe.

Bristol Myers Squibb’s R&D site in Summit, New Jersey focuses on nonclinical research and development, clinical pharmacology and early development and translational medicine for immunology, cardiovascular and fibrosis and hematology. Additionally, the Early Development Program Leadership organization, based here and in Princeton, New Jersey, collaborates across the organization in leading the development and implementation of compelling asset strategies across the portfolio.