+ Eligibility Requirements

The Foundation welcomes applications from agencies that meet the following requirements:

The applicant must be tax exempt under section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code. A copy of the final determination letter from the IRS must be submitted with the application. Note: Under limited circumstances, the Foundation may consider an application from an organization that does not have 501(c)(3) status, but that has found an organization with a 501(c)(3) willing to serve as a fiscal sponsor. A group submitting such a request must contact the Foundation to receive specific requirements and instructions.

The proposed project must directly benefit the people of Santa Barbara and/or Ventura and/or San Luis Obispo Counties.

The applicant must demonstrate that it has all of the following: a) local leadership in the form of Board representation or an advisory board b) broad-based local support c) local program management and accountability.

Applicants located outside Santa Barbara, Ventura and/or San Luis Obispo Counties must demonstrate knowledge of the Tri-County needs and local organizations providing similar services, as well as having explored opportunities for collaboration.

The Foundation supports organizations that do not discriminate in their employment practices, volunteer opportunities, or delivery of programs and services on the basis of race, color, religion, gender, national origin, ancestry, age, medical condition, disability, veteran status, marital status, sexual orientation, or any other characteristic protected by law. Any funding request that would support any project of an organization whose own policies run counter to the Foundation’s nondiscrimination policy may be denied even if the requesting organization meets all of the other criteria for funding.

+ Fields of Interest Categories

Through its capital and program grants, the Foundation awards funds through a competitive process to qualified organizations in the following five field of interest areas:

Community Enhancement and Environment

The Foundation is keenly aware and supportive of the need for the preservation and restoration of the natural environment, and the development and enhancement of the economic and civic well being of the community. Included in this field of interest are land acquisition and protection organizations, animal welfare agencies, and groups that enhance neighborhoods and citizen participation. Specifically, the Foundation supports agencies that:

encourage citizen participation in the strengthening of local communities and neighborhoods

promote projects and practices that preserve and restore the quality of our natural environment

Culture and Recreation

The Foundation is mindful of the importance of enhancing programs, extending accessibility and broadening the scope and reach of cultural and recreational institutions. In addition to traditional recreational, cultural and art institutions, this field of interest also includes community centers and park friends groups. We support organizations that:

promote the creation and appreciation of and accessibility to a diverse mixture of arts and culture

provide opportunities for leisure or sporting activities

Education and Personal Development

The Foundation supports the expectation that all members of the community will be afforded an equal opportunity to rise to their potential. Included in this field of interest are library friends groups; education foundations; youth groups that emphasize educational, age-appropriate activities and leadership; and skill development organizations. Specifically, we support agencies that:

provide or improve access to learning opportunities

reach out to our diverse population with a wide variety of educational activities aimed at improving the whole person

teach specific skills to a particular population

Health and Human Services

The Foundation recognizes a responsibility to help ensure that health care, prevention/wellness, shelter, sustenance and social services are provided throughout the community. This encompasses programs that address the basic needs required by all and the special needs required by a few. Counseling, day care and senior centers, transportation providers, and those agencies that ease entering and leaving this life are included in this field of interest. The Foundation supports organizations that:

address basic needs such as food and shelter

strengthen preventive care and improve access to services

develop the skills and independence of people with special needs, including those with drug and alcohol addictions, physical disabilities and mental illness

educate the public and provide support services for those affected by a specific disease or ailment

Native American

The Foundation is committed to preserving Native American Culture and continuing the traditions established by our Native American ancestors. We encourage organizations that focus on raising the awareness level and appreciation for the history and culture of Native American people. Specifically, we support organizations that:

educate and share Native American culture and tradition with the general public

preserve customs and traditions handed down to Native people through the ages

teach Native youth about Native traditions

celebrate the rich cultural heritage of our nation’s first people

+ Elements of a Successful Submission

The Business Council favors applications that have the following elements:

The application can clearly articulate and demonstrate the results its activities achieve for those it serves.

The request builds on an agency’s institutional strengths and encourages innovative solutions to community/agency problems and/or needs.

All relevant people are involved in the planning of the proposed project or activities.

The Foundation’s dollars are leveraged with other funding sources. It is unlikely that a request will be fully funded. Therefore, priority will be given to applicants who have a clear plan for securing additional support.

A multi-agency/collaborative approach is utilized whenever possible.

The Foundation assumes that there is an organizational commitment to the project for which funds are being requested. With that in mind, a member of the governing board must sign the application.

+ GRANT GUIDELINES

Funds granted are limited in use to the purpose for which they are awarded.

A request cannot exceed $75,000 per year. The grant period is one year in duration from the date of Business Council approval. If funds are not used within the 12-month period, the balance will be rescinded. The Foundation is not obligated to remind a grantee of unused funds.

An organization is eligible for only one capital or program grant per year. However, an agency that has recently merged with or acquired another nonprofit, and an agency serving as the fiscal sponsor on behalf of a community collaborative may be eligible to submit two applications within the appropriate grant cycle.

Applicants may submit a capital or a program request.

An organization must submit a year-end follow up on the grant and provide an outlined narrative of how the funds were used and whether program goals were reached.

Capital Grants

Grants are available for the acquisition of a capital item or improvement of facilities. Items that do not constitute a capital request include videos, books, and websites, and “consumables” such as brochures, posters, T-shirts, uniforms, individual sports equipment, etc.

Three competitive, comparable bids for each item must be submitted with the application.

The Foundation will not contribute more than once to a specific capital project.

Funds cannot be used to reimburse an agency for items purchased prior to the grant award date.

Program Grants

Grants are available for a new program or the expansion of an existing program.

The Foundation defines a program as a coherently packaged group of activities designed to result in a change for its participants. The change could be in behavior, attitude, skills, knowledge or condition.

Santa Ynez Band of Chumash Indians Foundation grants are not intended to support programs in perpetuity. An applicant may choose to seek funding for the same program for a subsequent year, but if awarded, an agency cannot expect funding for the same project beyond the third year.

Funds are to be used to support direct program costs, not indirect operating expenses.

Successful applicants must agree to report program progress to the Foundation.

+ FUNDING LEVELS

The Foundation considers three different funding levels in two different funding cycles throughout the year; January through March and May through July:

Active grant funding cycles

January 1 through March 31

May 1 through July 31

The smallest funding level is for application requests in an amount of $1,000 or less. The second level considers application requests in amounts greater than $1,000 and less than $10,000. The third level considers application requests in amounts greater than $10,000. Applications of any level will only be considered during the months of January through March or May through July. The Foundation will only consider one application per applicant per year.

Applications are accepted throughout the year but cannot exceed two per year.

Funds are limited in use to the purpose for which they are awarded.

Applications must be complete and include a sponsorship proposal at time of application submission.

Event Sponsorship requests must be received at least 90 days in advance to the event date.

An event re-cap must be provided within 90 days of the event by providing a 1-page narrative on the outcome of the event.

The event must take place within Santa Barbara, Ventura, or San Luis Obispo Counties to be considered.

In-Kind Donation requests must be received at least 60 days in advance to the event date

The Santa Ynez Band of Chumash Indians Foundation will supply all logo, ads, and written material that is to appear on our behalf.

+ In-kind donation Guidelines

Applications are accepted throughout the year but cannot exceed two per year.

Applications must be complete and include an in-kind donation request letter at time of application submission.

In-Kind Donation requests must be received at least 60 days in advance to the event date.

The event must take place within Santa Barbara, Ventura, or San Luis Obispo Counties to be considered.

The Santa Ynez Band of Chumash Indians Foundation will supply all logo, ads, and written material that is to appear on our behalf.

+ Submit an Application

Submit In-Kind Donation application

Submit Event Sponsorship application

Submit Grant application

+ Access saved applications

Review and access saved applications

+ Additional Documents for Grant Applications

Grant Requests for $1,000 or Less

Grant Requests for $1,000 - $10,000