Quiz Answer Key and Fun Facts

1. In what state was Cheney born?

Answer: Nebraska

Cheney was born on January 30, 1941 in Lincoln, Nebraska to Richard and Marjorie Cheney, the oldest of three children.

2. In what year did Cheney marry Lynne Vincent?

Answer: 1964

They were married in August 1964 in Wyoming.

3. What university's graduate school did Cheney attend to attempt to earn his Ph.D.?

Answer: Wisconsin

While Cheney attended the University of Wyoming to earn his bachelor's degree and master's degree in political science, he (along with his wife Lynne) attended the University of Wisconsin to earn his Ph.D. While he did complete all the course work, he left before completing his final thesis, on roll call balloting, to enter politics.

4. Who did Cheney replace as White House Chief of Staff in President Ford's administration in 1975?

Answer: Donald Rumsfeld

Rumsfeld was President Ford's first chief of staff. He served in the position until he left to become Secretary of Defense.

5. How many times was Cheney elected to the U.S. House of Representatives?

Answer: 5

Cheney was elected at a representative from Wyoming for the first time in 1978, replacing Teno Roncalio, who didn't run for re-election. He served in the House until 1989 when he resigned to become Secretary of Defense in President George H.W. Bush's administration.

6. In 1989, Cheney was nominated by President Bush to be Secretary of Defense. He was Bush's second choice, as Bush's first choice was rejected by the Senate. Who was Bush's first choice?

Answer: John Tower

Tower served in the U.S. Senate from 1961 to 1985. His nomination to be Secretary of Defense was rejected by the Senate because of the belief that Tower had too many ties to defense contractors, plus rumors of alcohol use. Tower died in a plane crash in 1991.

7. While Cheney was Secretary of Defense, the U.S. staged a successful invasion of Panama. What was the code name for that military operation?

Answer: Operation Just Cause

The operation, which took place in December 1989, resulted in the capture of Panamanian President Manuel Noriega.

8. In what Wyoming city is the Dick Cheney Federal Building located?

Answer: Casper

The formal dedication took place on June 1, 1999. The federal building is located at 100 East B Street in Casper.

9. When Cheney realized that George W. Bush was considering him for the vice-presidency, Cheney had to change his state of residency because the U.S. Constitution bars the electors of a certain state from voting for a president and a vice-president, if both are from the same said state. What amendment of the Constitution makes that requirement law?

Answer: 12th

The first paragraph of the 12th Amendment of the U.S. Constitution says "The Electors shall meet in their respective states, and vote by ballot for President and Vice-President, one of whom, at least, shall not be an inhabitant of the same state with themselves; they shall name in their ballots the person voted for as President, and in distinct ballots the person voted for as Vice-President, and they shall make distinct lists of all persons voted for as President, and of all persons voted for as Vice-President and of the number of votes for each, which lists they shall sign and certify, and transmit sealed to the seat of the government of the United States, directed to the President of the Senate"

10. Where was Cheney on September 11, 2001 when the terrorist attacks were made on the World Trade Center and the Pentagon?

Answer: Washington D.C.

Cheney was in his office in the West Wing at the time of the attacks.

Source: Author AdmiralShark

This quiz was reviewed by FunTrivia editor Bruyere before going online.

Any errors found in FunTrivia content are routinely corrected through our feedback system.