The summer movie season, traditionally described as beginning on the first Friday in May and ending after Labor Day weekend, is over.

The season’s 2014 box office take is reported as having dropped 15 percent from last summer, but this summer’s tentpoles, reboots, sequels and hoped-for blockbusters certainly have had their share of both highs (scores) and lows (fouls). Let’s review, shall we?

FOUL: Biggest attempted cash-grab disguised as a superhero movie: “The Amazing Spider-Man 2.” Despite the fact that 2012’s “The Amazing Spider-Man” basically just retold Spidey’s origin story with a hipster cast and a different villain, it did feel like a genuine freshening of the franchise just five short years after the third and final Sam Raimi “Spider-Man” film.

Sadly, this latest installment made all of the mistakes of Raimi’s last outing, (too many villains) and also managed to portray one of its central evildoers (Electro) as stupidly as a bad guy from a Joel Schumacher “Batman” film. The lowest-grossing Spidey film, unsurprisingly.

SCORE: Best violent sight gag: Watching family man Seth Rogen repeatedly blasted into ceilings and thrown across rooms by frat boy Zac Efron’s jerry-rigged airbag ejector seats in “Neighbors.” In attempting to determine exactly why I found this so amusing, I have concluded that I just can’t get enough of watching Seth Rogen sustain what in real life would be serious, if not fatal, injuries.

FOUL: Epic promotional fail. Beautifully rendered and critically well-received remake of a classic monster movie (“Godzilla”) grosses less money (when adjusted for inflation) than its almost universally loathed predecessor, 1998’s Roland Emmerich-helmed “Godzilla.” Arguments continue as to whether the ’98 film was too stupid, or this year’s outing was too serious. Neither is as wonderful as the original 1954 Japanese production.

SCORE: Best use of time-travel to reconstruct a franchise universe since J.J. Abram’s “Star Trek”: Despite some pretty shady theoretical comic book “science,” a ridiculously underwhelming villain (Peter Dinklage), a mind-numbingly overblown climax and scarily bad digital facelifts for two of its, ahem, elderly characters (Patrick Stewart as “old” Professor X and Ian McKellen as “old” Magneto), “X-Men: Days of Future Past” reinvigorated the brand.

Guided by the hand of superhero-movie guru Brian Singer and liberally dosed with standout performances from Hugh Jackman, Jennifer Lawrence, James McAvoy and the increasingly creepy Michael Fassbender, this latest installment went a long way toward restoring luster to the series.

FOUL: Least-funny movie billed as a comedic send-up of westerns, EVER: “A Million Ways to Die in the West.” I would also enjoy seeing Seth McFarlane sustain what in real life would be a serious, if not fatal, injury. In fact, the name “Seth” itself now carries negative connotations whenever I hear it, thanks to both Rogen and MacFarlane.

SCORE: Best retelling of a classic fairy-tale: Gotta hand it to Angelina Jolie. Both she and her “flying-wedge” prosthetic cheekbones come up big in this one. Kudos also to Sharlto Copley for another fine performance as a seriously twisted villain. And to anyone who criticized Stefan’s removal of Maleficent’s wings as a metaphor for an even more ghastly sort of violation, I can only ask, “What’s wrong with you, anyway?”

FOUL: Least compelling title change, EVER: Studio geniuses decided brilliantly to call an absorbing and disturbingly funny Tom Cruise sci-fi actioner “Edge of Tomorrow” instead of its original name, "All You Need is Kill." Featuring a tremendous cast that includes Emily Blunt and Bill Paxton, first-rate special effects and relentless action along with a crackerjack plot, the highlight of this film is surely Cruise’s performance as cowardly P.R. officer who must become a hero.

Apparently, even Warner Brothers has recognized the title choice as a lame one –- supposedly, DVD and Blu-ray packaging will feature the film’s promotional tagline: “Live. Die. Repeat.” in much larger type than the title itself.

SCORE: Best comedic sequel strategy, EVER: How do you overcome the uber-disappointment that often accompanies sequels to smash-hit comedies, where it apparently becomes nearly impossible for filmmakers to resist the urge to try and trump the same basic gags from the original film rather than create fresh material? (See “Hangover 2.”) If you’re the creators of “22 Jump Street,” the answer is simple. MAKE A RUNNING GAG OUT OF THE FACT THAT YOUR LATEST FILM IS A SEQUEL TO A SMASH-HIT COMEDY!!! Genius! Although I am often surprised that Jonah Hill’s real name isn’t Seth, both he and Channing Tatum return to their characters with renewed gusto and do an admirable job of sending-up the “bromance” between the bumbling undercover cops they play on-screen.

FOUL: Most critically maligned film of the summer: Sure, little about the notion of Clint Eastwood directing a musical biopic based on a hit Broadway play about Frankie Valli and the Four Seasons makes a lot of sense on the surface, but, “Paint Your Wagon” notwithstanding, someone apparently forgot to tell Eastwood. The Hollywood legend managed to craft an engaging throwback to classic films of this genre, complete with scenes clearly but lovingly filmed on studio back lots. Propelled by a magnetic and musically masterful performance from the play’s leading man, John Lloyd Young as Valli, “Jersey Boys” was a wryly joyful reintroduction to the music of the Four Seasons.

FOUL: Most critically overrated film of the summer: Critics have hailed “Snowpiercer” as “visionary” and “original,” among numerous other superlatives. South Korean writer-director Joon-ho Bong has been praised both for his depictions of bone-crunching violence and for his masterfully layered plotting. Don’t get me wrong. This film is a ball to watch and includes several wonderful performances amid its ever-escalating action sequences, all of which take place in a wonderfully atmospheric environment. But the ridiculous basic premise -- a few hundred human survivors of a climactic catastrophe circle the frozen earth for decades aboard a huge train powered by a “perpetual motion engine” -- fails to inspire the necessary suspension of disbelief, and the whole thing eventually comes crashing (literally) to a halt under the weight of its own silliness.

SCORE: Best franchise installment that delivers exactly what it promises: Unlike “Snowpiercer,” which definitely aspires to be seen as profound and to be considered thought-provoking, “Transformers 4: Age of Extinction” gives audiences who flock to see a movie about warring factions of giant robots from space exactly what they are seeking: a more visually mind-boggling and eardrum-assaulting episode than the previous one. Critical whipping boy Michael Bay continues to laugh all the way to the bank, having grossed over a billion dollars worldwide yet again.

SCORE/FOUL: Best CG animals outperforming their human counterparts in a live-action film: The human characters in “Dawn of the Planet of the Apes,” are, without exception, little more than cardboard foils for the much more engaging and richly depicted super-intelligent simian characters. Even Gary Oldman turns in a curiously ineffectual and uninspired performance. In the end, though, the apes prove no more worthy of dominion over the Earth than the humans they have replaced. Who was I supposed to be rooting for, again?

FOUL: Most cheesy sequel to a cheaply made, but highly profitable horror movie: Wearing its un-subtly snarky socio-political commentary way out on its sleeve, 2013’s “The Purge,” was, in fact, a big hit. Considering that it cost a mere $3 million to make and raked in $89 million worldwide. An investment of $9 million for “The Purge: Anarchy” this year paid off big time: over $105 million worldwide so far. Frank Grillo ("Captain America: The Winter Soldier”) attempts to lead a no-star cast to safety through the mean city streets on Purge Night. If you have to ask, you probably don’t want to know.

SCORE: Most ironically self-aware casting: Largely reviled by critics, “Sex Tape” is a relatively innocuous, if mildly raunchy, film that apparently can only be enjoyed by “low-brow” parents. (Yeah, I laughed quite a bit, actually.) But the choice of one of the earliest pioneers of the “celebrity sex tape” industry, Rob Lowe, to star as an ostensibly squeaky-clean corporate CEO with some strange private proclivities in a film titled thus is almost too weird to be true. Lowe, however, definitely seemed to be enjoying himself on screen.

SCORE: Best female superhero named Scarlett: Having portrayed the Black Widow in three films for box-office powerhouse Marvel Studios, including this year’s “Captain America: The Winter Soldier,” Scarlett Johansson demonstrated her own superpower as a box-office draw in Luc Besson’s sci-fi action-fest, “Lucy.” Johansson plays an involuntary drug-mule who is transformed by the chemicals surgically stashed in her abdomen into a person of frightening and extraordinary mental capabilities. Havoc ensues. The movie has grossed over $300 million worldwide so far, against a $40 million budget, making “Lucy” one of the highest-grossing action films fronted by a female star, right behind “Wanted,” and “Lara Croft: Tomb Raider.”

SCORE: Best film with a talking, machine-gun-toting raccoon and fighting tree: Marvel Studios steps out of its “Avengers"-oriented comfort zone and the gamble pays off, big-time. “Guardians of the Galaxy” features a group of unlikely interstellar heroes including the aforementioned Rocket Raccoon and his “muscle,” Groot, a tough-guy tree with a three-word vocabulary. It also includes new “big star” Chris Pratt, striving mightily to out-Han Solo Harrison Ford. “Star-Lord” Pratt and company, including Zoe Saldana as the assassin Gamora and Dave Bautista as Drax the Destroyer spend the bulk of this effects-laden action-comedy romp clashing with each other as well as assorted galactic threats, all the while trying to figure-out which side they’re actually on.

“Guardians” apparently translated into “big fun for all,” in spite of its cast of characters no one outside of the comics world has ever heard of. The film stands as the highest domestic grosser of the summer, closing in on $300 million. Worldwide, its total is nearly double that. Clearly, we haven’t seen the last of the tree, the raccoon and the more humanoid Guardians.

FOUL: Worst critical response to a solid disaster movie: Critics ravaged “Into the Storm” for what has been called a “clumsy script” and for being populated with “forgettable characters.” Meanwhile, most grudgingly complimented the “admittedly thrilling special effects.” I would submit that in a film about a series of massive, incredibly destructive tornadoes, the special effects are the stars. Unlike “Twister,” a film that featured a better-known cast playing equally forgettable characters in a movie that also “revolved” around special effects, at least “Into the Storm” didn’t feature “good guy” storm chasers vs. “bad guy” tornado hunters.

FOUL: Worst franchise-stretching film: Aside from an overly long sequence during which Sylvester Stallone and Kelsey Grammar roam the world recruiting new, younger members for the team that somehow served as a sort of weird fashion show for Sly, “Expendables 3” was just about as good as the previous two installments. The problem for Stallone and company is that in order for this chapter to have been really successful, it would have needed to be much better than the earlier films. No such luck.

FOUL: Second worse franchise-stretching film: “If it weren’t for “Expendables 3,” “Sin City: A Dame to Kill For” would have won the crown. As things stand, it’s in the running for Most Pointless Sequel. What was bold, innovative and daring filmmaking nine years ago seems oddly antiquated and run-of-the-mill today. And from a story standpoint, this latest installment had nothing new to say.

SCORE: Best James Bond movie that’s not a James Bond movie: “The November Man” certainly couldn’t buy a break from critics or moviegoers, but I really enjoyed Pierce Brosnan’s caustic and somewhat brutal turn as a retired spy drawn back into the game. One of the most enjoyable aspects of this film was the way several overused spy movie clichés (is your boss really a bad guy? Is the female spy you love a traitor, is your former protégé your worst enemy?) were to some extent turned on their ear by the end of the movie. Certainly far less boring than the recent crop of Daniel Craig Bond films.

FOUL: Worst found-footage horror movie EVER: “As Above, So Below” is a sad example of what happens when filmmakers employ an already done-to-death horror cinema technique in the mistaken belief that said technique will somehow carry their idiotic premise and a cast of characters that is either too insane or too stupid to care about to fright-film glory. There are numerous moments during this thing where it is impossible to tell what is happening on screen. And when you can understand what’s going-on, it doesn’t make any sense whatsoever.

SCORE: Best summer blockbuster released in the spring: Chris Evans comes into his own as the star-spangled Avenger in the present day in “Captain America: The Winter Soldier.”

Lovingly crafted along the lines of '70s-era political conspiracy thriller, this film shows audiences why Cap is a relevant hero in the 21st century, despite his lack of godlike powers or high-tech weaponry. His stalwart moral compass forged in an earlier time, coupled with a relentless, self-sacrificing courage, make him the perfect foil for the cynical, “ends-justify-the-means” modern approach of both enemies (Robert Redford) and even some of his allies (Samuel L. Jackson, Scarlett Johansson).

Cap’s steadfast, “old-fashioned” ideals stand in stark contrast to the convoluted “ethics” of our current age, but Evans’ unwaveringly straightforward portrayal never allows the hero to slip into the realm of caricature as some kind of flag-waving super-patriot. With loads of truly exciting action and layers upon layers of suspense and intrigue, not to mention several amusing exchanges between its principle characters, “Winter Soldier” is easily the finest individual hero film produced by Marvel Studios so far.