New movies bring on Spider-Man, Godzilla and more

He’s mean, green and back on the scene.

In a May of early season blockbusters, the reboot of “Godzilla” (Friday, May 16), should leave a considerable, three-toed, footprint on the movie landscape.

“We’re going to try to give the audiences goose bumps when they watch this stuff,” said director Gareth Edwards in a “Godzilla’ featurette.

Bryan Cranston, Elizabeth Olsen and Aaron Johnson star and this version of “Godzilla” is based on the 1954 original by the Toho Company of Japan. The big guy, who last appeared in the 1998 Hollywood remake “Godzilla” starring Matthew Broderick, takes on two other monsters – or is that teams up with two other monsters? – in this one.

Details — and images of the new Godzilla — have been scarce.

“Basically, we wanted to make a version of Godzilla where we took it seriously,” Edwards said. “The 1954 version is a very serious film. People may think that it’s, perhaps, a B-movie but when you watch it again, it’s really ... a metaphor for things like Hiroshima and Nagasaki.”

That is, Godzilla was the living embodiment of post-nuclear world anxiety – something the Japanese knew first hand.

“I love to take science fiction very seriously,” Edwards said.

On the topic of monsters, the comedy “Neighbors” (Friday, May 9) depicts a case of out of control neighbors — in this case, a frat house — living next door to a young couple (Seth Rogen and Rose Byrne) and their baby. Zac Efron leads the monsters next door and a feud escalates between the two camps.

With Rogen on board, we’re hopeful a peace pipe can settle the dispute.

There’s no settling the dispute between Spider-Man and Electro in “The Amazing Spider-Man 2,” which swings into theaters Friday, May 3. This is the second installment of the Spidey series with Andrew Garfield as Spider-Man, instead of Tobey Maguire, who starred as the web-head in “Spider-Man” (2002), “Spider-Man 2” (2004), and “Spider-Man 3” (2007).

In “The Amazing Spider-Man 2,” Peter Parker gives up being Spider-Man to enjoy life in New York City with Gwen Stacy (Emma Stone), but the emergence of Electro (Jamie Foxx) and the Rhino (Paul Giamatti) put a stop to that.

Need even more superheroes? In “X-Men: Days of Future Past” (May 23), it’s an alternate future where the merry mutants have been sent to concentration camps and giant, anti-mutant robots called Sentinels patrol America – these kinds of things tend to happen in the comic books. The X-Men of the present have to fight to keep that dark future from happening.

Jennifer Lawrence, James McAvoy, Michael Fassbender, Nicholas Hoult, Patrick Stewart, Ian McKellen, Hugh Jackman, Anna Paquin, Ellen Page, and Morristown native Peter Dinklage star in the film directed by West Windsor native Bryan Singer.

Sure, there are lots of monsters and superheroes at the movies in May, but how abut a good super villain? “Maleficent” (Friday, May 30) fits the bill as Angelina Jolie stars in this Disney live action retelling of the 1959 classic “Sleeping Beauty.” This time, it's told from the perspecitve of baddie Maleficnet.

“We’ve respected the classic, we've tried to bring you what you love about the story,” said Jolie in a “Maleficent” featurette. “We also hope to hope to bring a world that you've never seen before. It's a very beautiful story, and I think it is very different from what people are going to expect.”

Elle Fanning is Sleeping Beauty and the film is in 3D and 2D. Spinning wheels not included.

See schedule at left for what else is coming to the movies in May.

Chris Jordan: 732-643-4060; cjordan@ njpressmedia.com

Friday, May 2

“THE AMAZING SPIDER-MAN 2” 3D/2D (PG-13)

Electro (Jamie Foxx) and the Rhino (Paul Giamatti) take on Spidey (Andrew Garfield) in this second installment of the Spider-Man reboot. Who has time for Gwen Stacy, high school graduations and revelations about old friend Harry Osborn? Not Spider-Man. Marc Webb directs.

“WALK OF SHAME” (R)

Elizabeth Banks’ dream job called. The gig is hers if she can make the “Walk of Shame” across Los Angeles by 5 p.m. in this adult comedy. Meghan Miles,

Ethan Suplee and James Marsden co-star.

Friday, May 9

“LEGENDS OF OZ: DOROTHY’S RETURN” (PG)

We’re off to see Kansas in this animated sequel to “The Wizard of Oz.” Dorothy winds up back in Oz and finds a new adventure with new friends. Lea Michele is the voice of Dorothy

“NEIGHBORS” (R)

Seth Rogen, Zac Efron and Rose Byrne star in this madcapped comedy about unneighborly behavior.

MOM’S NIGHT OUT (PG)

Sarah Drew leads the moms who want to night out. Unfortunately, that means they have to leave

the kids with the dads. What could go wrong? Everything. Patricia Heaton, the executive producer,

Robert Amaya, Sean Astin, Trace Adkins, David Hunt and Abbie Cobb co-star.

“CHEF”

Chef Jon Favreau loses his job and opens up a food truck. The business starts rolling in and he tries

to reconnect with his estranged family. Favreau directs and Robert Downey Jr., Sofia Vergara,

Scarlett Johansson, Amy Sedaris and Oliver Platt co-star in this comedy.

Friday, May 16

“GODZILLA” 2D/3D (PG-13)

Godzilla’s back and Bryan Cranston, Elizabeth Olsen and Aaron Johnson’s got him. This one is based

on the 1954 darkly-hued original by the Toho Company of Japan, so don’t look for any baby Godzillas

or miniature singing twins in this one.

“MILLION DOLLAR ARM” (PG)

Jon Hamm plays a sports agent who’s looking for the first major league baseball player from India – he figures what’s the difference between a bowler and a pitcher, after all? This Disney film is based on the real-life experiences of Rinku Singh and Dinesh Patel. The film scores is by A. R. Rahman.

Friday, May 23

“X-MEN: DAYS OF FUTURE PAST”

It’s mutant mayhem, past, present and future. The X-Men have to travel into the past to save

the future. They’re all here: Jennifer Lawrence, James McAvoy, Michael Fassbender, Nicholas Hoult,

Patrick Stewart, Ian McKellen, Hugh Jackman, Anna Paquin, Ellen Page, and Morristown native

Peter Dinklage.

“BLENDED” (PG-13)

The latest Adam Sandler comedy finds the funnyman in Africa with Drew Barrymore and their

respective families.

Friday, May 30

“A MILLION WAYS TO DIE IN THE WEST” (R)

Seth MacFarlane, who also directs, plays a cowboy who can’t shoot straight in this raunchy comedy.

“MALEFICENT” 3D/2D (PG)

Angelina Jolie is Maleficent, Disney’s most beloved villain from the 1959 animated classic “Sleeping Beauty.” It’s her backstory with the promise of a happy ever-after for the baddie.