Directed by Michael Dowse (Canada)

Reviewed by Manohla Dargis

Back in the days of raves long gone, the English radio DJ Pete Tong, a dance-music guru and the occasional subject of media profiles and gossip, was bequeathed an unusual claim on immortality when his name became part of Cockney rhyming slang. The phrase "It's all gone Pete Tong" is patois for "It's all gone wrong," and is now the title of a faux documentary about a DJ (not Pete Tong) who goes stone deaf.

In "It's All Gone Pete Tong," everything that can go wrong generally does, mostly to surprisingly sweet effect.

The faux documentary has become such an established cliché that it even has a reigning auteur in the form of Christopher Guest. The Canadian filmmaker Michael Dowse, who wrote and directed "Pete Tong," is not a purist like Guest, who faithfully mimics the conventions of fly-on-the-wall-style documentary, thereby making a mockery of the form and its claim on the truth. Dowse takes a less rigorous approach, easing into faux documentary form principally during intermittent talking-head testimonials and some phony television bits. The rest of the time, the story assumes a more familiar fictive mode as it tracks the sideways adventures of Frankie Wilde, an Ibiza-based club DJ played with genuine heart and talent by Paul Kaye.

Taking a cue from "Citizen Kane," a touchstone to which this film pays fleeting, cheeky homage, Dowse tells his story mostly in flashback. At the height of his fame and before his hearing went, Frankie lived in a mansion on the Spanish island, where he swatted away bikinied beauties and ruled the island's cavernous clubs.Frankie is royalty among these sun-drenched mortals, as well as catnip for groupies like his wife, Sonya (Kate Macgowan), and parasites like his manager, Max (a fine Mike Wilmot).

When we first meet the DJ, he is in the grip of a coke habit. Coke builds Frankie up, giving him the energy to spin for thousands of flailing, cheering clubgoers, but it also brings him down.But "It's All Gone Pete Tong" is primarily a comedy, so it gives nothing away to say that Frankie's addiction is not really the point but the means to an unexpected end. That said, the fanged, stuffed monster that rides shotgun with Frankie during his binges is genius.

Dowse wrings soft humor from the usual sources, including a phony music video and different talking-head experts whose blathering turns out to be as clueless as it is essentially self-serving.Mostly, though, he gives Kaye room to push at extremes as Frankie loses his hearing and then his grip. The British comic turned actor appears in almost every scene and he carries that weight admirably, managing the very neat trick of keeping you interested in a character who does not merit our affection but earns it nonetheless.