John McCampbell began his teaching career at The Los Posas Country Club in Camarillo, California. He held the head tennis professional position until 1981 when he opened the Oxnard Tennis facility. The next year it was named the "Public Facility of the Year" by the USTA. John was then fortunate to move to the Cabrillo Racket Club in Camarillo, California and work with Wayne Bryan, father of the Bryan twins, and considered one of the best coaches in the nation. John also worked with Mike and Bob, who are now the world's number 1 doubles team, on a daily basis and even traveled with them their first three years on the US hard court series. The last few years John's band has backed up the Bryan brothers at tour events including the U.S. open. John then came to the Malibu Racquet Club in 1989. From 1995-2004 he coached the Malibu High School boys and girls teams. He is a 20 year member of the USPTA and has spent 23 years as a Prince Advisory Staff Professional.

Dina McBride has been a top teaching professional for over 20 years. She started her playing career in Southern California ranked among the top 10 juniors in So Cal. During her junior career she competed nationally and was ranked #6 in the nation in Girls 18s in doubles. She attended the University of San Diego on a full scholarship finishing as the #1 singles player and top 40 nationally in Division I. She played and traveled internationally on the WTA circuit earning world rankings in singles and doubles. With over 50 open wins and 12 national championships she remains one of the top women in her age division.

As an instructor her passion for playing has never wavered. She is certified by the USPTA as an Elite Professional. With over 20 years experience she has helped many junior players earn college scholarships. She also loves working with adult players to help them to continue to improve and reach their highest potential. She is known for being a high level singles and doubles strategist and a highly regarded technical coach.

She is married to Desi McBride and they have three children who share their love of tennis. All three are highly ranked SoCal juniors, and one of Dina's favorite memories is winning the Mother Son Nationals with her son on the same day her husband and daughter won the Father Daughter Nationals!

Desi McBride, the District 2 President for the USPTA, has been involved in the tennis business for over 30 years. He has been a tennis professional, junior program director, tennis director, general manager, and a managing partner in Top Seed Tennis Academy. Before coaching, Desi played collegiately at Pierce CC for Paul Xanthos. After his sophomore season he earned a scholarship to Temple University where he completed his education in Sports Administration and led his team to its first conference championship in tennis and being awarded MVP. He played in open and pro tournaments for a few years after college, and was ranked as high as #3 in So Cal in Men's Open Singles. He has three Gold Balls, and numerous Silver and Bronze Balls from his results in national competitions.

He has been married to Dina McBride for almost 20 years and they have three children who are all avid tennis players and competing in tournaments throughout southern California. Desi is so proud that they all have a great time playing this great sport and love competing!

As a coach he has helped over 100 juniors earn scholarships and play at universities. He loves teaching any level of student who wants to improve, and his specialty lies in the development of technique as well as patterns of play. Tennis has always been a very important part of his life and his goal is to pass on this love of the game to everyone around him!