A seat at the world’s greatest Italian opera stages streaming on medici.tv

A selection of our live streaming Italian operas and Italian opera documentaries are available for free to all registered users, and the rest can be unlocked with a subscription. Live video events stream right to your living room from the most famous Italian opera houses, and you can watch our performances streaming on your biggest screens with AirPlay, Chromecast, and our new Roku app. No matter where you are in the world, you’ll be guaranteed virtual tickets at venues like the San Carlo Theater, the Arena Verona, the Santa Monaca Church in Italy and many more. Watch the greatest operas of Italian composers performed by sensational singers all across Italy with your subscription—in Rome, Florence, and beyond! The operatic tradition of Bel Paese and Italian operas grant an amazing insight into the history of Italy, its local tradition, as well as its modern costumes. Besides, music and history are often interlinked in the Italian tradition: just think of the most famous works and Italian operas, such as Verdi's Nabucco, whose Giuseppe Verdi’s Nabucco, whose aria "Va, pensiero" became a symbol of freedom during the insurrectionary uprisings of the Risorgimento. The same applies to the Baroque period and its bombastic style, whose explosion was supported by the Catholic Church and its commissioned works: magnificent stages, celebrated singers, and renowned composers were subsidized over the years to celebrate the power of Rome through art and musical shows. In other words, opera is not only a sensational artistic masterpiece produced by Italy, but Italian operas are inextricably connected with their own essence, combining taste, quality, passion, erudition and, last but not least, Italianness. What are you waiting for? Take a seat at some of the most historically important concert halls of the Italian peninsula: witness dramatic works by Gioachino Rossini, Bellini, Donizetti, and many other composers, performed on the same sets that made the history of lyrical music! medici.tv is the best way to relive the magic of the Italian repertory, when you want and where you want!

The greatest artists and composers of Italian opera on your #1 classical music streaming channel