Societa Italiana Transporti Maritimi SpA (Italian Maritime Transport Company), or Sitmar, got its start in 1937, when Russian immigrant Alexander Vlasov purchased two small, old freighters and began carrying coal around the Mediterranean from his base in Genoa. Sitmar lost both ships during the war, but Vlasov regrouped afterward, buying a few surplus Victory ships to restart a freight service, and also working out a lucrative contract with the United Nations International Refugee Organisation to transport displaced persons to new homelands. This evolved into a highly profitable ocean liner service, carrying European immigrants to Australia and South America, with Sitmar emerging as one of the world's largest shipping companies by the end of the 1950s.

However, competition from airlines and container ships siphoned off more and more of the company's business as the 1960s wore on. In the late 1960s, Sitmar began pivoting toward North American-market leisure cruises, and all freighter and ocean liner services ceased by 1974, making them exclusively a cruise line.

Although Sitmar started out carrying coal, refugees, and immigrants, their cruise business, from the start, focused on the higher end of the market. By the turn of the 1970s, Sitmar vessels were known for serving some of the finest Italian cuisine on the oceans, a very high standard of personal service, and ticket prices to match.

However, all their ships were older, secondhand vessels purchased from other lines, several of which Sitmar invested considerable funds into rebuilding and modernizing. The business strategy generally worked, avoiding the expense of new construction and focusing their resources on the onboard passenger experience.

By the late 1970s, Sitmar Cruises had whittled their fleet down to just 3 ships – the former Cunard ocean liners Fairsea and Fairwind, comprehensively rebuilt in the late '60s/early '70s, and based in North America, and the Australian-based Fairsea, an ex-British troop transport vessel. With business in North America booming, it was clear the time had come to add back some more capacity.

Following their traditional strategy, in 1979, Sitmar purchased Al Hasa, originally built in 1961 as the Portugese ocean liner Principe Perfeito, but last used as an accommodation vessel for oil workers in Saudi Arabia.

Al Hasa was moved to Genoa, where Sitmar began planning a $40 million rebuilding project to turn her into a modern luxury cruise ship, to be named Fairsky. During that process, Sitmar quickly realized that the 19,000 ton liner was simply too small to meet the growing demand in North America, and, with the market becoming increasingly crowded and competitive, spending so much money rebuilding a 20-year old ship wasn't the best use of resources.

In 1980, work on the rebuild of Al Hasa was halted, and Sitmar instead decided to build a brand-new ship for the first time in their 43 year history, believing that would better position them for the realities of the market in the 1980s and beyond.

Company chairman Boris Vlasov, son of the company's founder, took personal control of the project, taking an active role in the new ship's design, in partnership with naval architects Arnold Brereton and Kenneth Norman. Interior work was divided between several firms – British-based Dennis Lennon & Partners, who had done the interiors of Queen Elizabeth 2, were hired to handle lounges and bars; San Francisco-based Barbara Dorn Associates would design the passenger cabins, and additional spaces were contracted to Giacomo Morrola from Sitmar's hometown of Genoa and Clas Lindqvist from Finland.

A big surprise came in 1981, when Sitmar awarded the construction contract to Constructions Industrielles de la Méditerranée S.A. (CNIM) in Le Seyne-sur-Mer, France – a financially ailing yard that had never built a large passenger ship, and, indeed, no French yard had done so in nearly 20 years. The new ship's keel was laid in July of 1981, and, on November 6th, 1982, she was launched as Fairsky, and became one of the last large new passenger ships to be launched in the traditional fashion, off the slipway stern-first into the water, as CNIM lacked modern drydock facilities.

The old-fashioned construction method was fitting, because although a new ship intended to take Sitmar into the '80s, much about Fairsky was quite backward-looking. Like vintage ocean liners, her main dining room was placed low in the ship, on Deck 7, where it was most stable in heavy weather, even though most modern cruise ships placed their restaurants higher for better views. Fairsky also had a traditional promenade deck, wrapping around the entirety of the superstructure, another feature modern cruise ships were rapidly dispensing with, in favor of using the deck space for wider public rooms or more outside cabins.

She also carried her lifeboats high up, for protection from waves, despite increasing industry trends toward mounting them lower in the hull for faster boarding, and was, in general, built much more solidly than required, containing approximately 25% more steel than other 1980s cruise ships of comparable size.

All this reflected the conservative tastes of Sitmar's owner, Boris Vlasov, and was also undoubtedly reflective of the company's lack of experience in new construction, being informed by their experience only operating vintage 1950s and older ocean liners. The most traditional element, though, would prove to be the powerplant – three General Electric geared steam turbines, fed by oil-fueled boilers, generating 29,500hp. Fairsky ranked as the first new ocean-going passenger ship powered by steam since Queen Elizabeth 2 entered service in 1969, and would also be the last one built.

Although diesel had long since been established as the industry standard, Vlasov insisted on steam, mainly from a passenger comfort standpoint – the turbines would produce less noise and vibration than diesel engines, albeit at much higher operating costs, a price he was willing to pay, which, in the era of historically low oil prices going into the mid 1980s, seemed somewhat feasible for a company commanding higher prices to start with.

Completion of Fairsky was delayed several times. As the builder, CNIM, teetered on the brink of bankruptcy, they became a target for French labor unions, resulting in frequent strikes, work slowdowns, and sabotage, in protest over the yard's impending closure. The new ship was finally delivered in April of 1984, about a year behind schedule, at a final cost of $150 million (equivalent to some $395 million today, an enormous price for the size of the ship).

Originally envisioned at 38,000 gross tons, Fairsky was enlarged a few times during the design phase, resulting in a ship measuring 46,314 tons and 790 ft. long – enough to make her the largest purpose-built cruise ship ever built at the time, and 3rd largest passenger ship in service, after Queen Elizabeth 2 and Norway, and ranked as such until the delivery of Carnival's Jubilee in 1986.

Fairsky carried 1,250 passengers and 600 crew, and was capable of a top speed of 22 knots, with a sustained cruising speed of 20. Her interiors, like the rest of the ship, were also pretty traditional, having more in common with Italian liners of the '60s than the glitzier cruise ships of the '80s, which did tend to suit Sitmar's wealthier, older clientele. Her first sailing under Sitmar was a crew-only repositioning cruise from Genoa to Los Angeles via the Panama Canal from April-May of 1984. Upon arrival, a christening ceremony was held in Los Angeles on May 5th, with Ginny Ueberroth, wife of the president of the Los Angeles Olympics organizing committee, performing the honors. Her actual maiden voyage was a 10-day cruise to Mexico from May 5th-15th, and, after several more Mexican cruises, Fairsky re-positioned to Alaska for the summer. From 1984-1988, that would be Fairsky's typical schedule – winter cruises to Mexico out of Los Angeles, summer cruises to Alaska out of Seattle.

Fairsky represented a huge investment and a big risk for a company like Sitmar, but ended up panning out quite well. In the boom economy of the mid 1980s, Fairsky was consistently sold out. By 1986, Sitmar had largely paid down the loans taken out to build her, and were already contemplating an even larger, follow-on ship.

Planning for the new vessel, tentatively called Fairmajesty, began during 1987. She would be much larger and more modern than Fairsky, with normal diesels instead of turbines. Fairmajesty would also take the Sitmar brand in a new direction – the company had one of the highest average passenger ages in the industry, and the new ship would be targeted more toward younger Baby Boomer passengers who previously never considered Sitmar.

As part of the pivot to a younger clientele, in early 1988, Sitmar unveiled a rebranding strategy with a new logo, modernized dolphin-inspired livery, and a new naming scheme. The company would now spell itself with trendy camel case as SitMar, and affix its name in front of its ships – eg, SitMar FairWind instead of Fairwind. However, the rebranding was never fully implemented. British conglomerate Peninsular & Oriental Steam Navigation Company, parent company of Princess Cruises, came forward with a buyout offer, which Sitmar's minority investors pressured Boris Vlasov to accept. P&O's goal was threefold – acquire the new Fairsky and the nearly complete SitMar FairMajesty for less than the cost of building new ships themselves, eliminate competition for Princess Cruises in Alaska, and cement P&O Cruises' hold on Australia by adding the Sitmar brand, which had a lot of customer appeal there. A further bonus was two more 70,000 ton ships Sitmar had on the drawing boards, designed by Italian architect Renzo Piano, for delivery in the early '90s.

Following the buyout, Fairsky joined the Princess Cruises fleet in September of 1988, with her registry changed from Liberia to the United Kingdom, and renamed Sky Princess. Princess Cruises decided to take advantage of the ship's ocean liner-like construction and redeploy her as a long-distance cruise ship, with longer, globe-trotting itineraries, targeted to North American and British customers. Sky Princess would make voyages to the South Pacific, South America, the Mediterranean, Eastern Canada, Northern Europe, and Alaska, in addition to months-long around-the-world circumnavigation cruises.

This lasted 12 years, until October of 2000, when, with newer, larger ships entering the Princess fleet, P&O management transferred her to their Australian division, P&O Cruises Australia, where she was renamed Pacific Sky, and, following a $10 million refurbishment at a yard in Brisbane, began running year-round South Pacific cruises from Sydney. In this role, Pacific Sky directly replaced the 1950s-vintage Fair Princess, the ex-Cunard liner Carinthia, which had also sailed for Sitmar as Fairsea, greatly modernizing the cruise experience for Australian customers.

During 2000, P&O Steam Navigation spun their cruise business off as a separate company, P&O Princess Cruises Plc, which immediately became a takeover target, being courted by Royal Caribbean and Carnival, along with the struggling Greek operator Festival. Finally, in 2003, P&O Princess agreed to a “merger of equals” with Carnival Corporation, creating a bi-national, dual listed company, Carnival Corporation & Plc., the bigger fleet meant there was a lot more available tonnage to pass around. Pacific Sky, built with old-fashioned steam turbines in an era when fuel prices were at historic lows, had been suffering from reduced profitability in the new era of high oil prices, and the new management at Carnival Group made replacing her a priority. In May of 2006, Pacific Sky was sold to Royal Caribbean Cruises Ltd., having carried 275,000 passengers on 200 cruises during her 6 years with P&O Australia. She was replaced by the larger, more modern, 1991-built Regal Princess, which became P&O Australia's Pacific Dawn.

Under Royal Caribbean, Pacific Sky had her registration changed from the United Kingdom to Malta, and joined their Spanish subsidiary Pullmantur Cruises as Sky Wonder. From 2006-2009, Sky Wonder operated Mediterranean cruises out of Barcelona for the Spanish market, but high fuel consumption continued to be a problem, and she was taken out of service in March of 2009 and laid up, only to be re-activated in April, renamed Atlantic Star, and deployed on cruises for the Portuguese market out of Lisbon, which only lasted until January of 2010, when Atlantic Star was pulled from service and laid up again.

At that point, Royal Caribbean entered into discussions with Greek ship owning company Kyma Ship Management regarding a possible sale. Kyma investigated the possibility of re-engining Atlantic Star with a set of new, unused Wartsila diesels they had purchased for a rebuild project of a former Northern European ferry, which they had recently called off. However, talks broke down when Kyma completed their engineering study, and determined it would cost far more than they were willing to invest into a 26-year old ship, and Royal Caribbean were unwilling to budge on price.

After 9 months of inactivity, Atlantic Star returned to service in September of 2010, to make a few charter cruises for a French travel agency, but was laid up again in October. Finally, in January of 2013, Royal Caribbean Cruises traded her in to STX France shipyard as partial payment toward the giant new Harmony of the Seas for Royal Caribbean International. STX resold her to Marshall Islands-based Belinda Shipholding Company, who renamed her Antic, under the Togolese flag, and quickly resold her to a scrap metal firm in Turkey. Antic was beached in Aliaga on April 14, 2013, the sturdy construction slowed the process, with demolition fully completed in December.

A popular and well-regarded ship during her days with Sitmar, Princess, and P&O Australia, it is likely that she would have lasted at least a decade longer, if not for Sitmar chairman Boris Vlasov's baffling insistence on smooth running and quiet, but highly inefficient, steam turbines, 15 years after all other ocean-going passenger ships had switched to diesel.