• Barry Van Dyke is an American actor born in Atlanta, Georgia, USA.

• He is best remembered for his role as Lieutenant Detective Steve Sloan in the TV series “Diagnosis: Murder”.

• His net worth is estimated at around $6 million as of late 202•

• He has been married to Mary Carey since 1974 and has four children, Taryn, Shane, Carey and Wes Van Dyke.

• He stands at a height of 6ft 1in (1.85m) and has blue eyes and brown hair.

Who is Barry Van Dyke?

Barry is an American actor, perhaps best remembered as Lieutenant Detective Steve Sloan in the TV series “Diagnosis: Murder” (1993-2001), in addition to several other shows that he had in his acting career.

Barry Van Dyke Wiki: Age, Childhood, and Education

Barry Van Dyke was born on 31 July 1951, in Atlanta, Georgia, USA, the son of famous actor and comedian Dick Van Dyke and his first wife, Margie Willett, who passed away in 2008. He has three siblings, Stacy, Christian and Carrie Beth Van Dyke.

His parents divorced in 1984, after which his father became involved with Michelle Triola, living with her until her death, and then remarried Arlene Silver in 2012.

After high school, Barry enrolled at Pierce Junior College in Los Angeles, where he majored in Theater Arts.

Career Beginnings

Barry launched his acting career beside his father at just nine years old, as violin player Florian in the TV comedy series “The Dick Van Dyke Show”, in which his brother Christian also appeared.

, Barry then waited until he matriculated to make another appearance. As a result, he made his second on-screen appearance in 1971 in “The New Dick Van Dyke Show”, featuring in nine episodes of the new series from 1971 until 1974.

Before the ‘70s ended, Barry appeared in several projects, including the TV mini-series “Gemini Man” (1976), then the TV series “Wonder Woman” about the legendary superhero, while in 1977 and ‘78, he portrayed Stuart Stafford in the TV comedy series “The Harvey Korman Show”.

He began the ‘80s with the role of Lieutenant Dillon in the Primetime Emmy Award-nominated TV sci-fi adventure series “Galactica 1980”, co-starring Kent McCord and Robyn Douglass, which tells the story of the Battlestar Galactica spaceship that lands on earth, but needs protection from the Cylons.

The same year, he starred in the television comedy film “Ghost of a Chance”, alongside Shelley Long, about a couple who marry,, but the bride’s ex-husband comes back in the form of a ghost.

Three years later, he was Linc Wilder in the romantic drama film “Foxfire Light”, starring Leslie Nielsen, Tippi Hedren and Faye Grant, then continued his career with guest roles in the TV series “The A-Team” and “The Dukes of Hazzard”, both in 1984.

Three years later, Barry starred in the sci-fi action-adventure series “Airwolf”, the continuation of the original series but with an all new cast; however, it was canceled after only 24 episodes.

Before the end of the ‘80s, Barry worked again with his father in the comedy series “The Van Dyke Show”, and guest-starred in the TV series “The People Next Door”.

Rise to Stardom

After a few guest-starring roles in popular TV series, such as “Murder, She Wrote”, in 1993, he joined his father in the TV mystery crime-drama series “Diagnosis Murder”, which follows Dr. Mark Sloan and his son, Steve, a homicide detective, as the two solve crimes together. The series became a huge hit across the globe and earned a Primetime Emmy Award nomination. Barry was widely praised for his performance, which launched him to stardom.

Barry’s children featured in several episodes of the series, and he co-wrote the last episode of “Diagnosis Murder” with his son Carey Van Dyke, entitled “Diagnosis Murder: The Blair Nurse Project”.

Before the series ended, he appeared in films “Diagnosis Murder: Diagnosis of Murder” and “Diagnosis Murder: The House on Sycamore Street”, and “A Twist of the Knife”, while he also featured in two films made after the series concluded – “Diagnosis Murder: Town Without Pity” and “Diagnosis Murder: Without Warning”, both in 2002.

After the end of the series, Barry’s career slowed down, and he’s made only a few more appearances until the present day.

From 2006 to 2008, he portrayed Mike Bryant in four episodes of the TV drama series “Murder 101” co-starring his father and his son, Shane Van Dyke. In 2008 he was Colonel Burke in Bryan Michael Stoller’s action-adventure film “Light Years Away”, with Eric Roberts, Christopher Knight and Meadow Williams, about an astronomer who discovers the Dream Galaxy, home to the girl of his dreams.

Two years later, Barry starred in the western film “6 Guns”, directed by his son Shane, while in 2012, he appeared in the television family comedy-drama film “Strawberry Summer”, starring Julie Mond, Trevor Donovan and Shelley Long.

To speak further of his accomplishments, Barry appeared in the TV comedy series “Dad Dudes” in 2015, while in 2019, he portrayed Edward in the TV comedy-drama film “The Untold Story”. Moreover, he starred in the award-winning drama film “Heavenly Deposit”, alongside John Savage and Peter Jason, about a man who starts believing in God after a divine experience changes his life.

Since 2019, Barry hasn’t been in any acting project, and is enjoying time with his wife and grandchildren in Atlanta.

How rich is Barry Van Dyke? Net Worth

According to sources, Van Dyke’s net worth has been estimated at $6 million, as of late 2022.

Personal Life, Married, Wife, Children, Grandchildren

Barry has been married to Mary Carey since 1974; they met when they were both 16 years old; at the time, he was working as a ticket-taker at a neighborhood movie theatre. They married after dating for seven years, and the couple welcomed four children, Taryn, Shane, Carey and Wes Van Dyke, who all in some way were and are involved in show business. His son Shane is now a successful actor, writer and director in his own right – some of the projects he worked on include the films “Chernobyl Diaries” (2012) and “Don’t Worry Darling” (2022), among others. Moreover, Carey Van Dyke has had success on screen, mainly appearing next to his father and brother, Shane.

Barry is now a grandfather of four, Ava, Alex, Mia, and Gracie Van Dyke.

Appearance and Vital Statistics

Barry Van Dyke has blue eyes and brown hair. He stands at a height of 6ft 1in (1.85m), while he weighs approximately 185lbs (84kgs). His vital statistics are unknown, but he has an average figure.