Date of Birth: 1951, July 31 Years: 69 years Nation of birth: United States of America Height: 6 feet 1 inch Name barry vandyke Dad Dick Van Dyke Mother Margie Willett Nationality American Place of birth / city Atlanta, Georgia, United States ethnicity white Profession Actor, writer, director, presenter Net worth $3 million eye color Blue Hair color Gray weight in kg 84 kilograms Married Yes Married to Mary Carey Van Dyke (d. 1974) Kids Shane Van Dyke, Carey Van Dyke, Wes Van Dyke, Taryn Van Dyke

Barry Van Dyke is an American actor popular for his role as Detective Lt. Steve Sloan in Diagnosis: Murder . He is the second son of the popular comedian and actor. Dick Van Dyke . He also once worked behind the scenes of his father’s companies and also co-appeared with his father in three of the series. Dyke has acted in several films including Murder 101 , Airwolf , Gunshy , Mom, and The Redd Foxx Show . He also tries to be a guest on many other TV shows.

Dyke married Marey Carey in 1974. The couple have four children.

Early life, biography and education of Barry Van Dyke

Barry Van Dyke was born on July 31, 1951 in Atlanta, Georgia. He was born as the second son of the famous comedian and actor. Dick Van Dyke and his first wife From him Margie Willett . He grew up in New York until he was nine years old, and then his family moved to Los Angeles. He was later raised by his stepmother, makeup artist Arlene Silver-Van Dyke. He is an American by nationality and belongs to the White American ethnicity.

During his early life, he used to travel from one place to another as his father had to change jobs. Barry was able to be part of his father’s series when he was nine years old. He had an older brother and two younger sisters.

Dyke attended Pierce Junior College in Los Angeles, where he majored in theater arts.

Dyke’s father advised him before he could make his final decision to pursue his career as a young boy. His real birth name is Barry Wayne Van Dyke.

Barry Van Dyke’s career

Barry Van Dyke’s father, Dick Van Dyke, gave him a platform to start his acting career. Barry made his television debut with a small role as Florian, a nine-year-old boy with a violin in The Talented Neighborhood episode of his father’s show, The Dick Van Dyke Show where he was also cast as his older brother Christian Van Dyke. .

He worked as a ‘gofer’ on his father’s television series. The New Dick Van Dyke Show which debuted in 1971 and continued for three years. Later, he returned to work with his father on The Van Dyke Show which was apparently canceled after only six episodes.

Dyke is an avid motorcyclist with a passion for dirt bikes. He has participated in protest rides to preserve the rights of motorcyclists to the fair use of public lands. Barry loves to surf and once rescued a drowning person from the ocean in Baja.

In May 2017, Barry Van Dyke Death Rumors caught several eyes on the internet and even went viral within days. In the end, sources close to the actor confirmed that he was not dead and lived happily with his wife and children in Atlanta, Georgia.

His uncle Jerry Van Dyke , famous for his portrayal of Luther Van Dam on the ABC sitcom Coach (1989-997) died on January 5, 2018.

Talking about his social media presence, the TV actor does not have Instagram and Facebook.

Barry Van Dyke Age, Height, and Other Facts