What is the International Standard Serial Number (ISSN)?

The International Standard Serial Number (ISSN) is a unique identifier used to identify serial publications (in print or electronic format) such as journals, newspapers or magazines.

The ISSN was published as an international standard by the International Organization for Standardization (ISO) in 1975. The current code of the standard is ISO 3297:2022.

Which elements compose the ISSN?

Unlike the modern ISBN, the ISSN is composed of 8 digits. These 8 digits are divided into two parts, like in the following example:

1234-5678

The last digit is the so-called check-digit. Any number from 0 to 9, as well as the character X may be used as a check digit.

As with the ISBN, serial publications cannot use the same ISSN for all the formats in which the publication is made available. Therefore, if a certain publication is made available in both print and electronic format, both formats will require their own ISSN.

Advantages of the ISSN

The main advantage of the ISSN is that it allows the identification of a certain periodical, therefore distinguishing it from other publications. It also allows distinguishing the different versions of the same publication (for example, the printed version from the electronic version).

Apart from identifying publications, the ISSN also offers other advantages that are common to the ISBN such facilitating the selling of the publication or collecting sales data.

How to obtain an ISSN

ISSNs are delivered by the so-called national ISSN centers.

Each country has its own ISSN center. In the case of the United Kingdom, its ISSN is called UK ISSN Center, which is established and administered by the British Library. In the case of Germany, its ISSN is the Nationales ISSN-Zentrum für Deutschland, which is operated by the Germany National Library (Deutsche Nationalbibliothek).

The assignment of an ISSN depends on the country where it is requested. In countries like Germany, ISSNs are automatically assigned to publications deposited with the German National Library and stored on a physical carrier (such as a CD-ROM). In the case of electronic publications, the publisher must make an application.

Is the ISSN mandatory?

It depends. In countries like Germany, serial publications are not required to have an ISSN. However, other countries do establish the obligation to have one.

The cost of ISSNs also depends on the country. In Germany, they are delivered free of charge.

ISSN, barcodes and barcode labels

ISSN numbers are accompanied by a barcode placed underneath. This barcode encodes the data that the ISSN number contains.

Both the ISSN number and the barcode can be printed in a so-called barcode label. By doing this, book sellers are able to scan the article with a barcode reader and save time. Weber Marking Systems can provide you with labeling machines capable of printing barcode labels or manufacture and deliver them to you.