The International Standard Serial Number (ISSN), or International Standard Serial Number (ISSN), is the INTERNATIONAL IDENTIFICATION, which is given to a title or a serial publication that meets the following requirements:

Appearing in successive or periodic parts.

Which may include numerical or chronological designations.

The intention is to continue publishing indefinitely.

This code must be used in:

Brochures. Periodicals.

Gazettes.

Bulletins.

Agendas.

Catalogues.

Annual publications (reports, yearbooks, repertories, etc.).

Thematic or scientific journals.

General journals.

Collections.

Websites.

Databases.

Blogs.

Audiovisual.

Periodicals in mixed media.

Periodicals recorded in phonogramsFolletos.

The International Standard Serial Number (ISSN) consists of eight digits divided into two groups of four, separated by a script, which include a verifying digit that allows the identification of the serial publication that owns it, in force or no longer published, regardless of place of origin, language or content, as shown below;

ISSN: 4321-1234

It is important to stress that the role of the International Standard Serial Number (ISSN) is to identify the publication and therefore, if the title is significantly modified, a new ISSN number is required.

Materials that SHOULD NOT use International Standard Serial Number (ISSN);

Books.

Price lists.

Scores.

Artistic engravings.

Art folders without text.

Personal documents.

Greeting cards.

Recordings of musical sounds.

Software intended for educational or instructive purposes.

Electronic correspondence.

Agendas.

Calendars.

Almanaques.

Chrome albums.

Photo albums.

Stamp albums.

Bookstore catalogues.

Editorials catalogues.

Commercial catalogues.

Advertising catalogues.

Company statutes Event programmes.

Comics.

Postcards.

Posters.

Planes.

Games.

Due to its great importance the National Copyright Institute keeps this service active despite the COVID-19 pandemic, we can help you, remember that in addition to being an obligation against the International Standard Serial Number (ISSN) represents the following advantages;

Assistance in the awarding of scores or credits for research financing.

Facilitates inventory control, cataloguing and statistics.

It allows you to locate publications in any international list, database, catalog and website of any country.

Facilitates the marketing of publications.