First published in The Sydney Morning Herald on April 7, 1976

Howard Hughes dies on plane

Eccentric tycoon leaves $l,600m business empire

HOUSTON (Texas), Tuesday. — The millionaire hermit Howard Hughes died from a stroke yesterday while being flown from Mexico for hospital tests in his home town here.

His lawyer, Mr Greg Bautzer, said in Los Angeles last night that the 70-year-old eccentric tycoon was being flown from the resort of Acapulco when he died from the stroke about half-an-hour before his chartered ambulance plane landed.

Mr Hughes, a recluse since 1948 and reputed to be one of the world’s wealthiest men, left a business empire worth an estimated $US2,000 million ($A 1.600 million).

Mr Bautzer said it was likely that the money would be spent in advancing space technology and in medical research through the Hughes Medical Foundation, which receives its funds from the Hughes Aircraft Corporation.

Mr Hughes had been living in Mexico since February. It was the last of a series of countries where the aviation pioneer and Hollywood starmaker had pursued the chief passion of his later years — absolute privacy.

He had not been seen in public since 1953.

He previously lived in Freeport, in the Bahamas, from 1966 to 1970. He had lived in Las Vegas, Nevada, and for a time in Managua. He left the Nicaraguan capital during the 1972 earthquake and look up residence in London.

A spokesman for Summa Corporation, the holding company that ran the Hughes business empire, said in Las Vegas that he understood Mr Hughes’s illness “was not lengthy.”

Mr James Bacon, a Hollywood columnist who maintained telephone contact with the multi-millionaire, said Mr Hughes was in good health when they spoke on the telephone at the Princess Hotel, Acapulco, six weeks ago.

Mr Hughes, a handsome six-footer, was known as a man of many passions — for power, perfection, pretty faces, fast planes and, later, privacy.

He displayed a Midas-like touch in building his father’s oil drilling tool business into a film, airline and casino empire.

His contributions to the advancement of aviation, both as a pilot setting record speeds in the 1930s and 1940s and as a designer, ranked him with the outstanding air pioneers.

After 1970 he barely set foot in the United States and made no public statement during the past four years of his life.

Shareholders in some of his businesses recently brought a court action to demand that his lawyers prove he was still alive.

He was a playboy companion of film actresses including Lana Turner and Jane Russell in his younger days and was twice married and twice divorced. His first marriage, to Ella Rice of Houston in 1925, lasted four years. In 1957 he married the film actress Jean Peters. They were divorced in 1971.

The millionaire’s last public statement was in January, 1972 when he spoke from the Bahamas by telephone to a panel of journalists in Los Angeles to denounce a Clifford Irving biography of him as a hoax.

Loading