Howard Hughes did not like people telling him what to do. On Thanksgiving weekend 1966, Hughes rolled into Las Vegas in his two-car private train. He arrived at the Desert Inn Hotel, reportedly walking alongside a stretcher to avoid attention.

Eventually, Moe Dalitz, owner of the Desert Inn, personally asked Hughes to leave so that the hotel could prepare the top-floor suites for holiday high rollers. Instead of leaving, Hughes bought the hotel.

He went on to buy several other Las Vegas hotels, shaping the future of the Strip. He reportedly even bought a local TV station so he could indulge his insomnia with some late-night movies.

On July 7, 1946, while personally test-piloting a Hughes Aircraft Company military prototype for the Air Force, Howard Hughes crashed into residential Beverly Hills. He broke many bones and suffered third-degree burns which required morphine during the healing process. His physicians then switched him to codeine, and Hughes never stopped taking the drug.

Hughes was also taking Valium, and after a fall left him with a pin in his hip, he never walked again. His physician stated that he had plenty of reasons to need pain management medication but still took too much.

Long-term drug abuse coupled with inadequate sustenance eventually resulted in kidney failure. This is what killed Hughes on April 5, 1976, at age 70. At the time of his death, his 6'4" frame had shrunk by several inches, and he only weighed around 90 pounds.

Despite his apparent interest in women, Howard Hughes only officially married twice. His first wife, Ella, left Hughes in 1929 after four years of marriage. In 1957, Hughes married actress Jean Peters. Strange rumors persist to this day about their 14-year marriage.

Although Peters never spoke publicly about her relationship with Hughes, some strange stories eventually emerged. Even early on, when Hughes and Peters still occupied the same bedroom, she reportedly placed tissues between his toenails, which he refused to cut, so that their clicking would not wake her. Some even claim Hughes wouldn't let her shop, smoke, or vacuum.

Eventually, they reportedly only met for 20 minutes each day; by the last 10 years of the marriage, they saw one another only a few days a year. They spent part of their marriage living in separate Beverly Hills Hotel bungalows, communicating via telephone and memos that totaled 100,000 pages.

Hughes reportedly hired people to follow her wherever she went and report on her whereabouts. This may have continued after their divorce, when Hughes bought homes adjacent to hers. When Hughes died, Peters maintained her silence about the specifics but did say this:

I eventually realized that he was a sociopath, a man utterly incapable of understanding the needs of another person. He was very manipulative, even though he was just darling and charming at the same time. And even though he was affectionate in some ways and totally persuasive, it was a charade, I guess.

Before he died, Hughes sent Peters a final message telling her that he had always loved her - but it was delivered by one of his employees.

Many of Hughes's habits were unusual, but few stand out more than his alleged fixation on his own urine. In Howard Hughes: A Secret Life, Charles Higham describes the billionaire as being remarkably reckless with his aim around the toilet. Despite that, Hughes also reportedly urinated in jars, which he then kept. This practice was dramatized in the 2005 film The Aviator.

In 2012, several of Hughes's former business associates came forward to contradict these claims in the book We Knew Howard Hughes: A Collection of Memoirs. Concerning the urination stories, co-author Jim Whetton said, “He never did such a thing. The man was a recluse, period. That’s it.”

One of the most famous Howard Hughes stories involved a specific flavor of ice cream. Once Hughes decided to live at the Desert Inn full-time, his meals would be prepared in the hotel's kitchen and transported to him in his suite. Hughes especially liked Baskin-Robbins Banana Nut ice cream. For a long time, Hughes's personal assistants would buy this flavor in bulk, storing it in the hotel's freezers.

One day, when these employees went to buy more gallons of Banana Nut, they were stunned to find out that the company had discontinued the flavor. The frantic aides contacted Baskin-Robbins's main office and pleaded for them to sell them some more Banana Nut. Baskin-Robbins would only agree to manufacture its usual industrial-sized batch of a single flavor: 350 gallons.

Two Hughes employees were sent to LA in a refrigerated truck to pick up the order. Kitchen employees had to jam the ice cream into any available space in the hotel restaurant freezer, but finally, Hughes's employees breathed a sigh of relief. But, within days after the shipment of ice cream arrived, Hughes notified his personal assistant that he no longer wished to have Banana Nut ice cream; from now on he would like French Vanilla. It took the Desert Inn a year to get rid of all of the Banana Nut.

Howard Hughes's estate attorney had a psychological autopsy performed after his death. As Hughes left no will, they hoped to gain a legal record of his mental health in the face of numerous claims against his estate.

It was determined that, as a child, Hughes had been isolated and lacked friends. His mother constantly monitored his health, terrified that he would come down with polio. Hughes did experience a brief period of paralysis as an adolescent, but this condition (which had no medical basis) simply disappeared after a few months.

Hughes also showed symptoms of obsessive-compulsive disorder. As he grew older, he became increasingly worried about being exposed to germs from other people. He would insist that anyone serving him food cover their hands with paper towels, and he even wrote a manual for his employees on the proper procedure for serving canned peaches: first remove the label, then scrub the can thoroughly and wash it again, and finally pour the peaches - without letting the can touch the bowl.

Later in life, Hughes reportedly walked around with Kleenex boxes on his feet, which he believed offered protection from germs, and even incinerated clothing that came into contact with sick people.