Frank Iero andthe Patience

w/ Dave Hause and the Mermaid

The Chapel

San Francisco, CA

May 11, 2017

Photos and words by Jared Stossel

Packed in a little corner of San Francisco's Mission District, just a half-mile away from public transportation, lies The Chapel, an intimate rock club that hosts both emerging and popular musical talent. Last Thursday night brought Frank Iero, the former rhythm guitarist of alternative rock outfit My Chemical Romance. Since the group disbanded in 2013, each member has pursued a respective musical or artistic project. Iero's comes in the form of a solo act that is rooted in punk but explores alternative and even traditional emo elements of the rock genre. He's currently been on tour promoting his sophomore solo record, Parachutes, which came out in October of last year. Just ten minutes into his set, and it's clear that Frank Iero is a star that shines through, whether he's driving the rhythm guitar lines with intensity in My Chemical Romance or bringing his own project to life as a packed house of hundreds climb over each other and scream the words back with happiness.

Iero's set was preceded by solo artist Dave Hause, who proved to be a star in his own right. I was actually fortunate enough to see Hause open up for punk acts Bad Religion and Against Me! last October at The Warfield. This time around, Hause had a full band with him (dubbed The Mermaid). Their set proved to be an incredibly fun time, as the band powered through a forty minute set list of modern punk rock tunes. The connection with the fans, at least from an opening band, was astounding to me. I was thrilled to see that the band connected with their audience in such an uplifting and positive way, all while producing a fantastic set.

It was rather late by the time Frank Iero got onstage, but no one was restless. Just ten minutes before 10:30 PM, Iero and his band The Patience took the stage to a barrage of screams from the fans that had been packed inside for hours, eagerly awaiting the start of his set. The show consisted of a healthy mix of tracks from both Parachutes and his debut solo record, Stomachaches. The impressive thing about Iero's show is that there really isn't a dull moment, even when the songs slow down. You can sense that there is an incredibly genuine attitude coming from him and his collective of musicians; you know that they love writing and playing music. The crowd can see what they're trying to do, and they're willing to say, "I see what you're doing, and I'm coming along for the ride. Show us what you've got."