In the late 1980's, a group of concerned Mid-City community representatives came together to respond to the rapidly deteriorating conditions in the area. Now known as Mid-City Community Advocacy Network (Mid-City CAN), this unique collaboration is comprised of schools, businesses, nonprofit organizations, government agencies, youth, parents, ethnic and cultural groups, civic associations and faith-based institutions. Mission statement: The Mid-City Community Advocacy Network's mission is to create a safe, productive, and healthy community through collaboration, advocacy, and organizing. Mid-City CAN's goals are: -To provide coordination and integration of social, health and community services -To develop greater community involvement -To provide a forum for community-based decision making, and -To advocate for changes in government policies and systems that will improve the quality of life for all of Mid-City’s residents – especially our children.

Read more

In the late 1980's, a group of concerned Mid-City community representatives came together to respond to the rapidly deteriorating conditions in the area. Now known as Mid-City Community Advocacy Network (Mid-City CAN), this unique collaboration is comprised of schools, businesses, nonprofit organizations, government agencies, youth, parents, ethnic and cultural groups, civic associations and faith-based institutions. Mission statement: The Mid-City Community Advocacy Network's mission is to create a safe, productive, and healthy community through collaboration, advocacy, and organizing. Mid-City CAN's goals are: -To provide coordination and integration of social, health and community services -To develop greater community involvement -To provide a forum for community-based decision making, and -To advocate for changes in government policies and systems that will improve the quality of life for all of Mid-City’s residents – especially our children.

Read more

Reach More Decision-Makers with Scale Plans

Let us show you how our accurate B2B company and contact data can help you reach the right decision makers and close more deals.

What can you expect?

See how Lusha can speed up your workflow

Learn how to reach your ideal prospects

Discover the practices of the best performing sales teams

Trusted by 280,000+ revenue teams of all sizes