The Gambler is the ultimate prestige piece. The original novel on which the film is based is one of Dostoevsky's shorter (and therefore filmable) masterpieces, and the original film from 1974, written by James Toback, was James Caan's attempt at being Marlon Brando. And he very nearly succeeded. It was certainly Caan's greatest film—although it has become something of a lost classic today. The 2014 update, starring Mark Wahlberg, isn't just his most ambitious film. It's a signal of a new stage in his career. This is Marky Mark running as far from the Funky Bunch as he can, into the realm of high art. It is a hugely ambitious, hugely risky performance in a hugely ambitious, hugely risky movie, whose gutsiness you have to respect.

The 2014 update to The Gambler modernizes the story from the 1974 film, but only slightly. The size of the debt is greater now; the role of organized crime changed to reflect the disintegration of the mafia into bite-sized ethnically diverse cadres. The capacity to gamble legally virtually everywhere in the United States means that long flights to Vegas are no longer required in order to lose everything you have. Despite these cosmetic changes, the movie stays true to the basic psychological truth contained in the original novel by Dostoevsky. A professor of literature, facing the twin crises of the death of the family patriarch and his own lack of creative greatness, responds by gambling at higher and higher stakes. The trouble in which he finds himself, forced to humiliate himself in front of his mother and deal with violent predators, is what he craves: a form of degradation that also contains within it a peculiar exaltation—the sense that he is both less than and greater than ordinary men. He pursues cards and roulette as a replica of grace, a form of divine communion, in which despair is as much existential as it is financial. It's not so much that he wants to lose but that he wants to place himself in a state beyond his own control. He wants to put himself in the hands of the universe, even if the universe is virtually guaranteed to destroy him.

It's heady, intellectual stuff. And it does take some getting used to seeing Wahlberg discussing Robert Greene's criticism of Shakespeare's early plays and the significance of the number of bullets fired by the hero of Albert Camus's The Stranger. Wahlberg has lost a significant amount of weight for the role and he looks weak, diseased, exactly unlike the guy from the Calvin Klein underwear ads and exactly like a man who has rendered himself sallow smoking in dark rooms. The action itself—watching Wahlberg gamble—is riveting. The tension is almost unbearable, surprisingly so in a plot with very little violence other than implied violence.

Wahlberg, who produced the movie as well as starred in it, hasn't flinched from surrounding himself with a cast of the best actors in America, either. Jessica Lange is quietly devastating as the guilt-ridden mother. John Goodman plays a philosophical loan shark and Michael K. Williams, always unforgettable, a gangster with a sense of humor. Wahlberg has put himself up against the kind of actors who steal scenes in every film or television show they appear in. Wahlberg lies back and lets them steal, while he broods.

Wahlberg is in the same position as his character: "Ultimate victory or death," he says during one of the more or less continuous scenes of self-analysis. "Nothing in between." This is the crisis of his character: He will not submit to being merely a good writer; he has to be Shakespeare. And the film itself indulges roughly the same gamble: This is either a great performance in a great work of art or it is a humiliating attempt by a poser. Nothing in between. It can be both, at times. At moments, The Gambler deflates to excruciating embarrassments, as in the unconvincing scenes of professorial grandeur. At other times it soars, in the glamorous nightmare of high-stakes underground clubs. Ultimately, the soaring redeems the deflating. The weakness is forgotten in the glare of the greatness.

What is most heartening about the film, however, is what it means about the position of leading men in Hollywood. From the beginning The Gambler has been a dangerous work of art. Dostoevsky wrote it under conditions of nearly impossible duress. In the middle of an addiction to gambling, in order to raise money, he made an insane deal with a publisher that he would complete a significant novel within a few months or else lose control of his publishing rights for nine years. He would literally fall back from the roulette tables, dictate portions to his wife-to-be, and then return to the tables. The Gambler has always been about creative risk-taking as much as financial risk-taking. It was probably not entirely sane for James Caan or Mark Wahlberg to make their film versions. But they were driven to it. Sometimes, you have to do something insane to prove to yourself that you're fully human.