>>Weather by month // weather averages Ljungby

>>Climate graph // Weather by Month Ljungby

>>average temperature by month Ljungby

>>Weather Ljungby

In Ljungby, the climate is warm and temperate. The precipitation levels in Ljungby are noteworthy, as there is rainfall even during the most arid month. According to Köppen and Geiger, this climate is classified as Cfb. The temperature here averages 7.5 °C | 45.5 °F. The precipitation level on a yearly basis amounts to 843 mm | 33.2 inch as per the meteorological records.

The specified area is located in the northern hemisphere of our planet. The onset of summer commences towards the conclusion of June and culminates by September. The season is characterized by a sequence of months, namely: June, July, August, September.

Climate graph // Weather by Month Ljungby

The driest month is March. There is 49 mm | 1.9 inch of precipitation in March. The month of July experiences the highest amount of precipitation, with an average value of 102 mm | 4.0 inch.

average temperature by month Ljungby

With an average of 17.1 °C | 62.8 °F, July is the warmest month. The month of January is characterized by the lowest temperatures, which have an average reading of -1.1 °C | 30.0 °F.

Weather by month // weather averages Ljungby

<>

Avg. Temperature °C (°F) Min. Temperature °C (°F) Max. Temperature °C (°F) Precipitation / Rainfall mm (in) Humidity (%) Rainy days (d) avg. Sun hours (hours)

January February March April May June July August September October November December

Data: 1991 - 2021 Min. Temperature °C (°F), Max. Temperature °C (°F), Precipitation / Rainfall mm (in), Humidity, Rainy days. Data: 1999 - 2019: avg. Sun hours

The precipitation varies 53 mm | 2 inch between the driest month and the wettest month. The fluctuation of temperatures over the course of a year is referred to as temperature variation.

It has been observed that November exhibits the highest relative humidity, with a percentage of 90.92. On the other hand, May experiences the lowest relative humidity at an approximate rate of 68.73. According to the data, August is observed as the month with maximum rainy days (14.67) while April has recorded minimum rainfall during its tenure (10.13).

Ljungby weather and climate for every month

Hours of sunshine in Ljungby

avg. hours of sun

Total hours of sun

Within the region of Ljungby, the month that experiences a maximum number of daily hours with bright sunshine is June exhibiting an average duration of approximately 10. In totality, there are about 299.96 hours worth of sunlight throughout this particular period.

On average, the location of Ljungby experiences the least number of daily hours with sunshine during January. The total duration of sunlight in this period is recorded as 48.4, while an average of about 1.56 hours are received per day.

Throughout the year, Ljungby experiences approximately 2036.13 hours of sunshine. The average monthly duration of sunlight is estimated to be around 66.78.

Airport close to Ljungby

The closest Airports of Ljungby are: Växjö/Kronoberg Airport (VXO) 49.44km,Halmstad Airport (HAD) 70.38km,Ängelholm-Helsingborg Airport (AGH) 89.02km

You can reach Ljungby from this Cities by Plane: Oslo (OSL), Alicante (ALC), Stockholm (BMA), Jönköping (JKG), Amsterdam (AMS), Halmstad (HAD)