Ljungby Weather in January-February: With the air being damp (Humidity is 86%) and temperature being as low as 16℉, you can expect cold weather on your visit to Ljungby in these months. The average temperature is 33℉. The average precipitation recorded around this time is 41.97 mm.

Ljungby Weather in March: While the temperatures range from 23℉ to 61℉, humidity sits moderately high at 81%. This phenomenon makes the weather seem cooler than usual. Perfect for afternoon sightseeing, the mornings and evenings will make you want to reach for a steaming cup of coffee. This time period sees an average precipitation of 56.53 mm.

Ljungby Weather in April: The temperature swings between 3 degree celsius to 10 degree celsius with average temperature being 39℉. The air is slightly humid, making it feel colder than actual. Carrying layered clothing is recommended. The average precipitation recorded around this time is 23.42 mm.

Ljungby Weather in May: With average humidity of 69%, temperatures sway between 32℉ to 79℉. Now this may cause a little discomfort, but we are sure not complaining! This weather is perfect to go sightseeing around the city of Ljungby. This time period sees an average precipitation of 27.87 mm.

Ljungby Weather in June-August: The highest temperature recorded is 82℉ which would make you want to run to the nearest café to down a glass of chilled drink, but the moderate humidity of 76% makes this an excellent time to visit Ljungby. This time period sees an average precipitation of 57.53 mm.

Ljungby Weather in September: A pleasant time to be in the Ljungby, the temperature lies within the range of 39℉ and 70℉, the average being 55℉. Although the weather is humid, it is not hot enough to make you not like it outdoors! All in all, a good time to be here! The average precipitation recorded around this time is 81.27 mm.

Ljungby Weather in October: The air is moderately humid with average humidity being 84%. The temperature ranges between 28℉ to 59℉ and it is still cold in Ljungby. The high humidity in the air makes it feel colder, although the average temperature is 46℉. The average precipitation recorded around this time is 58.78 mm.

Ljungby Weather in November: The month of November sees an average temperature of 37℉. With humidity being as high as 91%, there are chances of precipitation, so make sure you carry umbrellas and jackets. The weather becomes slightly unpredictable hence this might not be the perfect time to be in Ljungby. The average precipitation recorded around this time is 61.89 mm.