Celebrated Name:Lloyd BanksReal Name/Full Name:Christopher Charles LloydGender:MaleAge:42 years oldBirth Date:30 April 1982Birth Place:New Carrollton, Maryland, United StatesNationality:AmericanHeight:1.85 mWeight:86 kgSexual Orientation:StraightMarital Status:MarriedWife/Spouse (Name):N/AChildren:Yes (Christina Ryann Lloyd)Dating/Girlfriend

(Name):N/AProfession:American rapperNet Worth in 2024:$15 millionLast Updated:July 2024

Lloyd Banks is a hip-hop artist from the United States of America who is also the co-founder of the hip-hop band, G-Unit, along with 50 Cent and Tony Yayo. Lloyd Banks also appeared in many TV shows, including Saturday Night Live, So You Think You Can Dance, Project X, The Tonight Show Starring Jimmy Fallon, and others.

Maybe you know about Lloyd Banks very well But do you know how old and tall is he and what is his net worth in 2024? If you do not know, We have prepared this article about details of Lloyd Banks’s short biography-wiki, career, professional life, personal life, today’s net worth, age, height, weight, and more facts. Well, if you’re ready, let’s start.

Early Life

Christopher Charles Lloyd was born on April 30, 1982, in New Carrollton, Maryland, United States. His father was in jail for a very long period leaving his mother, Rosa Lloyd, to take care of him. Lloyd Banks was raised and grown in Queens, New York City. He has one brother, and his name is Loui V. Lloyd was going to study at August Martin High School, but he dropped out.

Personal Life

Lloyd Banks has never been married yet, but he had a relationship with the former dancer and actress Yaris Sanchez. Lloyd and Yaris are the parents of 1 daughter, and her name is Christina Ryann Lloyde.

In 2001, Lloyd Banks was shot and went to a hospital where he watched the 9/11 terrorist attacks.

Age, Height, and Weight

Being born on 30 April 1982, Lloyd Banks is 42 years old as of today’s date 21st July 2024. His height is 1.85 m tall, and his weight is 86 kg.

Career

Around 1999, Lloyd Banks co-founded the hip-hop band, G-Unit, along with 50 Cent and Tony Yayo. Lloyd started singing around his home to increase the exposure to his talent. Lloyd’s first album with G-Unit was released in 2003 called Beg for Mercy, and it was a very successful album.

On June 29, 2004, Lloyd Banks released his first solo album ever called The Hunger for More, and it brought him a lot of success hitting rank one on Billboard charts. One year later, Lloyd was going to release another album called The Big Withdraw, but he dropped the CD album during a threesome with two women, and it got leaked all over the internet.

In 2006, Lloyd released what is considered as his second album called Rotten Apple. The album was ranked on top charts, but it didn’t get much exposure and selling records as the first album.

In 2010, Lloyd released his third album called H.F.M. 2, which stands for The Hunger for More 2. The album had a lot of collaborations with Swizz Beatz, Kanye West, Ryan Leslie, and others.

Lloyd Banks also released a lot of mixtapes, including The Cold Corner 2, F.N.O. (Failure’s No Option)V.6: The Gift, V.5, and others.

Awards & Achievements

Lloyd Banks earned and was nominated for a few awards. He won Adult Video News Award for Best Music (Groupie Love) and Mixtape Award for Best Artist on a Mixtape (On Fire). Lloyd Banks also received a few nominations including BET Award for Best Duet/Collaboration (Touch It remix), BET Award for Video of the Year (Touch It remix), World Music Award for World’s Best Selling New Male Artist (On Fire), and Grammy Award for Best Rap Solo Performance (On Fire).

Net Worth & Salary of Lloyd Banks in 2024

As of July 2024, Lloyd Banks has an estimated net worth of more than $15 million. His fortune comes from selling hundreds of thousands and millions of songs and albums copies, and from going on concerts. Lloyd earned more than $1 million for The Hunger for More album, which got platinum and gold certificates. Rotten Apple album got certified as a gold album, and he earned around $500 thousand for it.

Lloyd Banks is a very talented American hip hop artist who is a member of the G-Unit hip-hop band that he co-founded with 50 Cent and Tony Yayo, and they released many albums together. He also released solo albums, which also consists of collaborations with other singers, including The Hunger for More, Rotten Apple, The Hunger for More 2, and other Mixtapes. Lloyd Banks had a relationship with Yaris Sanchez, and they are the parents of 1 daughter, Christina Ryann Lloyde.

ncG1vNJzZmivp6x7uLHApauhsaCav7S7zaxlnKedZLmtu9idZJuZnqDAbrrErWSwp6KptW5%2Bj2tnZmpgZ35w