Full text of "France in the Golden Age: Seventeenth-Century French Paintings in American Collections"

See other formats

France in the Golden Age Galeries Nationales du Grand Palais, Paris 29 January — 26 April 1982 The Metropolitan Museum of Art, New York 26 May — 22 August 1982 The Art Institute of Chicago 18 September — 28 November 1982 Curators in charge: Pierre Rosenberg Conservateur, Department of Paintings Musee du Louvre, Paris with the assistance of Claude Lesne, conservateur stagiaire Sir John Pope-Hennessy Consultative Chairman, Department of European Paintings The Metropolitan Museum of Art, New York with the assistance of Alan E. Salz, Andrew W. Mellon Fellow Cover illustration: Three Young Musicians (detail) by Antoine Le Nain (No. 45) Los Angeles County Museum of Art Pierre Rosenberg France in the Golden Age Seventeenth-Century French Paintings in American Collections The exhibition at The Metropolitan Museum of Art and this publication have been made possible by a grant from The Chase Manhattan Bank, N.A. Additional support for the catalogue was received from the Scaler Foundation, Inc. The Metropolitan Museum of Art, New York This exhibition has been organized by the Reunion des Musees Nationaux, Paris, and The Metropolitan Museum of Art, New York, with the cooperation of the Musee du Louvre and the Galeries Nationales du Grand Palais. Published by The Metropolitan Museum of Art, New York Bradford D. Kelleher, Publisher John P. O'Neill, Editor in Chief Emily Walter, Editor Alan E. Salz, Project Coordinator Library of Congress Catalog Card Number 81-86011 Rosenberg, Pierre France in the Golden Age New York, Metropolitan Museum of Art ISBN 87099-295-3 All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced or transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic or mechanical, including photocopy, recording, or any information storage and retrieval system, without permission in writing from the publisher. Acknowledgments We would like to thank the following individuals and institutions for their generosity and cooperation in making the exhibition possible : Amherst, Mead Art Museum, Amherst College Ann Arbor, The University of Michigan Museum of Art Atlanta, The High Museum of Art Atlanta, Mrs. Francis Storza Boston, The Boston Museum of Fine Arts Cambridge, Fogg Art Museum, Harvard University Chapel Hill, The Ackland Art Museum, The University of North Carolina Chicago, The Art Institute of Chicago Cleveland, The Cleveland Museum of Art Dallas, Dallas Museum of Fine Arts Detroit, The Detroit Institute of Arts Fort Worth, Kimbell Art Museum Fountain Valley, California, Michael and Jo Ellen Brunner Greenville, Bob Jones University Hartford, Wadsworth Atheneum Honolulu, Honolulu Academy of Arts Houston, Museum of Fine Arts Indianapolis, Indianapolis Museum of Art Kansas City, Missouri, Nelson Gallery- Atkins Museum Lawrence, Helen F. Spencer Museum of Art, The University of Kansas Los Angeles, Los Angeles County Museum of Art Malibu, The J. Paul Getty Museum Malibu, Norton Simon Milwaukee, Milwaukee Art Museum Minneapolis, The Minneapolis Institute of Arts Nahant, Massachusetts, Mr. and Mrs. William J. Julien New Haven, Yale University Art Gallery New Orleans, New Orleans Museum of Art New York, The Metropolitan Museum of Art Norfolk, The Chrysler Museum Northampton, Smith College Museum of Art Oberlin, Allen Memorial Art Museum, Oberlin College Omaha, Joslyn Art Museum Pasadena, The Norton Simon Foundation Philadelphia, Philadelphia Museum of Art Pittsburgh, Museum of Art, Carnegie Institute Ponce, Museo de Arte de Ponce Poughkeepsie, Vassar College Art Gallery Princeton, The Art Museum, Princeton University Princeton, Mr. and Mrs. J. Seward Johnson Providence, Museum of Art, Rhode Island School of Design Raleigh, North Carolina Museum of Art St. Louis, The St. Louis Art Museum San Francisco, The Fine Arts Museums of San Francisco Sarasota, John and Mable Ringling Museum of Art Springfield, Massachusetts, Museum of Fine Arts Stanford, Stanford University Museum of Art Toledo, The Toledo Museum of Art United States, David Rust Washington, D.C., National Gallery of Art Wellesley, Wellesley College Museum Williamstown, Sterling and Francine Clark Art Institute The Chase Manhattan Bank is committed to excellence, and I am pleased that the exhibition France in the Golden Age: Seventeenth-Century French Paintings in American Collections at The Metropolitan Museum of Art has provided for us the opportunity to demonstrate that commitment. Chase Manhattan has contributed for many years to the ongoing operation of the Museum, but this occasion marks the first time we have sponsored a major show. One of the world's great museums, the Metropolitan has consistently presented art of the highest quality: France in the Golden Age continues that tradition. We are grateful to Pierre Rosenberg for his scholarly and sensitive organization of the exhibition, and we feel privileged to participate in this venture. Willard C. Butcher Chairman, The Chase Manhattan Bank Contents Foreword ix Hubert Landais Philippe de Montebello James N. Wood Preface xm Pierre Rosenberg Introduction 1 Des leurres qui persuadent les yeux Marc Fumaroli Principal Political and Artistic Events of the Seventeenth Century 34 compiled by Claude Lesne Seventeenth-Century French Paintings 47 Pierre Rosenberg I. The French Caravaggesque Painters 5 1 II. Georges de La Tour 75 III. Nicolas Poussin 87 IV. The Generation of French Painters Who Resided in Italy 103 V. Painters from Lorraine and Provence 1 2 3 VI . The Le Nain Brothers 1 3 5 VII. The First School of Paris 145 VIII. Landscape: The Classical Tradition and the Appeal of the North 161 IX. Portraiture 185 X. Still Life 197 XI. Le Brun and Mignard: The End of an Era 211 Catalogue 219 Pierre Rosenberg Inventory of Seventeenth-Century French Paintings in Public Collections in the United States 343 Pierre Rosenberg Index of Inventory by City 378 Paintings Granted to Churches in the United States 380 Elisabeth Foucart- Walter Exhibitions 383 Bibliography 386 Lenders to the Exhibition 397 Foreword France in the Golden Age: Seventeenth-Century French Paintings in American Collections affords the public, in both France and the United States, its first opportunity to discover the richness and depth of American collections of seventeenth-century French painting, and provides a surprisingly com- prehensive overview in every genre and in work of the finest quality of this artistically fecund period. France and America have enjoyed an especially close relationship for many centuries, one that has extended beyond the boundaries of politics and economics and has left its imprint on the arts. At the end of the eighteenth century, for example, Benjamin Franklin and Thomas Jefferson were fascinated with contemporary painting in Paris; and Americans one hundred years later — primarily in New York, Boston, and Chicago — were active patrons of the French Impressionists as well as of the Salon painters. In general, American collectors have tended to prefer French paintings dating from after 1700. The great early twentieth-century collections formed in New York, for instance, have few seventeenth-century French pictures. There were none in the Frick Collection when it opened its doors to the public in 1935; not until 1948 was the Georges de La Tour (now thought to be a copy) acquired, and the Claude Lorrain was purchased in 1960. Conversely, Henry Frick assembled many important eighteenth-century works by Boucher, Fragonard, and Pater. Similarly, not one major seventeenth- century French painting was given by Messrs. Bache, Friedsam, or Morgan to The Metropolitan Museum of Art. Benjamin Altman did not own any pictures from this period, and the Havemeyers bequeathed to the Museum only a Jean-Francois Millet (No. 72 in the exhibition). The collection has been enriched primarily through acquisitions made in the last half-century and through the generous gifts of Charles and Jayne Wrightsman. FOREWORD IX The story is much the same at The Art Institute of Chicago. Major collections of French paintings given to the Institute by such collectors as the Ryersons, the Bartletts, the Fields, and the Palmers were comprised, like those at the Metropolitan, mainly of Barbizon, Impressionist, and Post- Impressionist pictures. At the important Century of Progress loan exhibitions held in Chicago in 1933 and 1934, only four seventeenth-century French paintings appeared, as opposed to the more than 150 nineteenth-century works. America's interest in seventeenth-century France is a recent phenomenon. In 1960-1961, the Metropolitan Museum, together with the National Gallery of Art and the Toledo Museum of Art, presented a survey of seventeenth- century French paintings and decorative arts in The Splendid Century: French Art 1600-1 7 IS, an exhibition drawn primarily from museums in Paris and the French provinces. To have organized so comprehensive an exhibition using American holdings exclusively would at that time have been impossible. The paintings selected by Pierre Rosenberg for France in the Golden Age not only exemplify the various styles and concepts of seventeenth-century French painting but also illustrate the remarkable acquisitions made in the United States in recent times. Of the 124 paintings in the exhibition, only 68 were in the United States in 1960, the year of The Splendid Century. And at the outbreak of World War II, only 23 of these pictures were on American shores. There were of course other seventeenth-century French paintings in the United States before the war. For example, La Hyre's Kiss of Peace and Justice (No. 34) was shown at the Boston Athenaeum in 1832; Poussin's Midas Bathing in the River Pactolus was purchased by the Metropolitan Museum in 1871; and other works entered the New- York Historical Society long before 1900. But it is really only in this century, when many of the great English collections began to be dispersed, that American holdings started to grow. Most of the paintings in the exhibition came to the United States as museum purchases — often considered quite daring — by such directors as W. R. Valentiner and such curators as Theodore Rousseau, Jr. Art dealers also played an important part in bringing these works to the United States. Among the collectors who have been instrumental in expanding American collections are Rush and Samuel Kress, Norton Simon, and Robert Manning. The role of scholars has been even more crucial in renewing interest in seventeenth-century French painting: Anthony Blunt's Art and Architecture in France 1500 to 1700, first published in 1953, is a seminal work; Charles Sterling (author of the Metropolitan's 1955 catalogue of pre-nineteenth- century paintings), Jacques Thuillier, and Marcel Roethlisberger have also made major contributions to the field. And recent exhibitions devoted to Poussin, La Tour, the Le Nains, and French Caravaggism have added X FOREWORD significantly to our knowledge of the period. Pierre Rosenberg, however, whose prolific writings have altered our perceptions of the century, deserves special mention; and indeed, we are indebted to him for having organized France in the Golden Age. It is fitting that the exhibition opens first in Paris, as it is a testament to one of France's most glorious contributions, its painting. The art of the seventeenth century bears witness to far greater innovation than was previously supposed and will be, it is hoped, more fully appreciated as a result of the scholarship of which this catalogue is the summation. Hubert Landais Director, Musees de France Philippe de Montebello Director, The Metropolitan Museum of Art James N. Wood Director, The Art Institute of Chicago foreword XI Preface The exhibition France in the Golden Age: Seventeenth-Century French Paintings in American Collections has several aims. First, to reveal the most beautiful French paintings of the seventeenth century in public institutions and in a few major private collections in the United States — from the most prestigious to those that are less well known and often overlooked. Second, to present, by way of objective selection, a panorama that is as varied and complete as possible of works from this century when France was confirmed as Europe's first political and economic power. Finally, the catalogue for the exhibition has provided the long dreamed-of opportunity to establish an inventory of French seventeenth-century paintings in American museums. In order to accomplish these three objectives, it was necessary to visit as many American museums as possible and to reexamine the paintings, with special attention to their condition, before requesting loans; it was important also not to pass over paintings relegated to museum storage and attributed to the Flemish and Italian schools (in this way, we were recently able to restore to Jacques Stella a lovely Holy Family in the Montreal Museum of Fine Arts). We also consulted the innumerable inventories and card catalogues of these museums so as not to miss any work that could possibly be attributed to the French school. The first part of the catalogue is divided into eleven sections according to the major artists and currents of the period. Thanks to the richness of American collections, we have been able to illustrate through the 124 paintings in the exhibition the history and stylistic evolution of a century of French painting; some artists are, unfortunately, absent, such as Joseph Parrocel — born in 1646, admittedly rather late in the century — and van der Meulen. PREFACE XIII Comprehensive as we wished the exhibition to be, we had nevertheless to impose a time frame. Although this was difficult, it seemed reasonable to start with the French Caravaggesque painters established in Rome during the second and third decades of the seventeenth century, to omit the second school of Fontainebleau, and not to attempt to show works executed either during this period or in Paris under the reign of Henry IV by artists of Flemish descent, such as Pourbus; in the first place, our knowledge of this art is relatively scant, and furthermore, works by these artists are rare in American collections. It was also difficult to choose a terminus for the exhibition. The reign of Louis XIV bridges two centuries and, where painting is concerned — and this cannot be repeated often enough — shows no unity of style. We therefore made the most obvious choice: the deaths, only five years apart, of Le Brun (1690) and Mignard (1695), which represent a break sufficiently pronounced to be considered the end of what we call French painting of the seventeenth century. The exhibition presents works by more than fifty artists. Three were born before 1590 (Deruet, Guy Francois, and Jean Leclerc), three were born after 1640 (Colombel, Millet, and Verdier; La Fosse, although born in 1636, already paints in a later style), and two died after 1700 (Meiffren Conte, the Marseilles painter of still life, and the aforementioned Verdier). Few of the works exhibited date from before 1620 or after 1680. Some of the artists represented have always been famous (e.g., Poussin and Claude Lorrain), others became popular only in the nineteenth century (the Le Nains, for example), or even as recently as the last fifty years (La Tour). The still-life painters (Linard, Moillon, and Stoskopff), the Caravaggesque painters (especially Valentin, Vouet, and Vignon), the landscapists working in Italy (Dughet and the painter of battle scenes, Jacques Courtois) or in Paris (Millet) — these in their turn have been rediscovered by scholars, art dealers, collectors, museum curators, and the public. Collectors and art dealers were at times ahead of the scholars in the rehabilitation of a certain movement or a certain painter — still-life painting, for example, or "Monsu Desiderio" (Francois de Nome), so prized by those drawn to the bizarre and the fantastic. Scholars have devoted themselves to painters forgotten after they died (e.g., Colombel, Mellin, and Guy Francois). Museums, too, have been responsible for the revival of interest in individual painters, as when the work of an artist who has not been seriously studied or published in monograph (and indeed, monographs are rare) and who is unknown by the general public (e.g., Stella or Le Sueur) is acquired — often with taste and with daring — for their collections. And we ourselves have chosen in this exhibition to emphasize artists we feel have often been unjustly neglected. The second part of the book is comprised of the catalogue proper and is XIV PREFACE arranged alphabetically by artist. We encountered unexpected difficulties in the preparation of the entries, especially with regard to the histories of the paintings: the works that were in England in the nineteenth century often had wrong attributions or no attributions at all, and provenances for these paintings were often unrecorded; these we have attempted to reconstruct. The third and last part of the book is the Inventory of French seventeenth- century paintings in public collections in the United States; its purpose and its limitations are set out in the pages that serve as its introduction. One aspect of French seventeenth-century painting that deserves in-depth study but can be touched upon only briefly here is its history in American museums. Who were the collectors, museum directors, curators, and scholars instrumental in building these collections ? What role did chance play in their creation ? Or can we legitimately speak of an acquisitions policy ? We have alluded in the catalogue entries to many of these questions and have referred to some of the "heroes" of this adventure, from A. Everett Austin, Jr. (see No. 104), director, in turn, of the Hartford and Sarasota museums, who acquired first-rate French paintings for these institutions, to Luis A. Ferre and Norton Simon, who did the same more recently. Several exhibitions have been of great importance: French Painting of the Time of Louis Xlllth and Louis XlVth, organized in 1946 by Walter Friedlaender, Charles Sterling, and Jane Costello and held at Wildenstein's, New York; Vouet to Rigaud, held at the Finch College Museum of Art in 1967 and organized by Robert L. Manning, a distinguished collector of paintings of this period and author of a seminal article on Simon Vouet; and Michel Laclotte's The Splendid Century: French Art 1600-1 7 IS, held more than twenty- years ago at the National Gallery of Art, the Toledo Museum of Art, and The Metropolitan Museum of Art, an exhibition that presented to the American public the finest French paintings of the seventeenth century from French provincial museums. (Six of the thirteen paintings included in that exhibition from the Metropolitan Museum and shown only in New York appear also in the present exhibition.) Also notable in the history of French seventeenth-century paintings in American museums is the catalogue by Charles Sterling (1955) of paintings in the Metropolitan Museum, and that of the Kress Collection by Colin Eisler (1977). And yet the appearance of French seventeenth-century paintings in the United States extends as far back as the end of the eighteenth century. Rita Susswein Gottesman (1959) tried to demonstrate that the Bourdon Finding of Moses from the Kress Collection (No. 11) was exhibited as early as 1802-1803 in New York, but everything we know points rather to that painting's being an early copy of the very beautiful original in Washington. More curious still is the exhibition at the Boston Athenaeum in 1832 of La PREFACE XV Hyre's Kiss of Peace and Justice (No. 34), which was sold at public auction in London in 1970 and acquired the following year by the Cleveland Museum of Art. The recent work of Perkins and Gavin (1980) devoted to the Boston Athenaeum exhibitions held between 1827 and 1874 tends to support the idea that French seventeenth-century paintings were present in not insubstantial numbers in the United States in the first half of the nineteenth century. Although it is not surprising to find, among the artists included, the names of Courtois, Champaigne, Poussin, Dughet, and Claude, it is remarkable to find those of Stella, Le Nain, and Nicolas Loir. The writings of Michel Benisovich (1953, 1956, 1959) and of the late Yvon Bizardel (1976, 1978, 1980) discuss Thomas Jefferson, a great lover of art, purchases made in France during the Revolution and under the Empire (in particular, those of Richard Codman), the sale of paintings from the collection of the Swedish painter Wertmiiller in Philadelphia in 1812, and other sales of French collections during the first half of the nineteenth century. Thomas Jefferson Bryan (1802-1870) in 1867 gave his collection, rich in French paintings (the best as well as the most pedestrian) to the New- York Historical Society. The Bryan collection is, unfortunately, for the most part dispersed (Sotheby's, New York, 9 October 1980), although such important paintings as Champaigne's Portrait of a Man with a Little Dog (see Inventory) are on view at the Metropolitan Museum. E. Durand-Greville, in two articles published in 1887 in the Gazette des Beaux- Arts, describes the principal private art galleries in the United States, and of all the French painters in the seventeenth century only the name of Claude Lorrain appears. Louis Reau's attempt to compile an inventory of French seventeenth-century paintings in American museums appeared in the Paris 1926 publication LArt frangais aux £tats-Unis. The inventory, although useful, is quite incomplete and is today obsolete. Of the 124 paintings in the present exhibition, very few were in the United States in 1926. Only Blanchard's Angelica and Medoro (No. 4) and Poussin's the Blind Orion (No. 94), both in the Metropolitan Museum, the Boston Claude (No. 64), and the Detroit Poussin (No. 87), then in the Julius Haass collection, are mentioned in Reau's book. In recent years, two studies have added substantially to our knowledge of the history of French seventeenth- century painting in the United States: Denys Sutton's preface to the catalogue of the exhibition Paris-New York: A Continuing Romance, held in New York at Wildenstein's in 1977, and the extremely useful essay by Alexandra R. Murphy that serves as preface to the catalogue for the exhibition Corot to Braque: French Paintings from the Museum of Fine Arts, Boston, held in Atlanta and Denver in 1979. The history of collecting has been seriously studied only recently and XVI PREFACE emphasis has usually been placed on collectors of Italian art of the Renaissance or French Impressionist paintings rather than on collectors of earlier French painting. Even figures as eminent as La Caze or the Marcille brothers elude us almost completely. American bibliography from the eighteenth century is seriously lacking, and public auctions were less frequent in the United States than in England or France. Let us, nevertheless, cite three cases of early collecting. The colorful Eliza Bo wen Jumel (1775-1865) is far from unknown in the United States. The sale of her collection on 24 April 182 1 at what was then known as Harlem Heights is often cited, although the catalogue is extremely hard to find. But can we ever hope to identify the "interior of a family house, J. Steller — 1657" (no. 5; in fact, probably by Stella) ? And what are we to make of the "interior of a stable, Le Nain — French school" (no. 6); the "Family at table, Le Nain" (no. 207); a "Madeleine penitente" by Blanchard (no. 19); the "Blanchet — 1617" (no. 29); the landscapes by "Boussonet Stella" (nos. 95, 110, 144); or the "Landscape, large size, Merenzy (sic) and Herse" by "Laurent Delahire" (nos. 137, 162); the "Samson" of "Dufresney" (for Dufresnoy ?), the Colombel (no. 226), the Champaignes (nos. 151, 223), the Le Bruns (nos. 121, 122), and the Mignards (nos. 70, 111, 194)? The Joseph Bonaparte ("ex-King of Spain") sales at Bordentown, New Jersey, 17-18 September 1845 and 25 June 1847 are better known still. But here, too, one would wish to be better informed about the present whereabouts of a number of paintings and the accuracy of the attributions made in the sale catalogues, such as, in the first sale, no. 48, "Laurent de La Hyre. St. Sebastian pierced by an Arrow. C. 3 ft. L. by 4 ft. H."; no. 122, "Philip de Champaigne. Massanissa and Sophonisba. C. 5 ft. 2 in. L. by 6 ft. 2 in. H."; no. 126, "Laurent de La Hyre. Palemon in the guise of a Triton expressing his love for a Nymph seated on a rock above. C. 4 ft. 2 in. L. by 4 ft. 10 in. H." Our last example of early collecting in the United States is the sale, with a catalogue illustrated by line engravings for the major paintings, of the collection of "Chas. De la Forest, esq. Consul General of France," 25 April 1849 at Henry H. Leeds and Co., 24 West 15 Street, New York, a collection rich in French artists of the seventeenth century, many well known, such as Poussin (no. 94), Le Brun (no. 95), and Dughet (no. 181), but also those less well known, such as Nicolas Mignard (no. 123) and Bourdon (nos. 179, 204). What has happened to these paintings ? The history of American collecting, of its origins and its ambitions, clearly remains to be written. Let us hope this task will be taken up by a new generation of art historians. PREFACE XVII In 1774, when the American painter John Singleton Copley (1738-1815) was in Paris, he wrote to Henry Pelham in a letter dated 2 September of his admiration for Poussin's series of the Sacraments in the Orleans collection, then on exhibition at the Palais-Royal. Exactly two centuries later, Benedict Nicolson (1974 [I]) created for a coherent group of Caravaggesque paintings, most likely by a French painter, one of those names of convenience so dear to the art historian, the Master of the Open-Mouthed Boys. One picture from this group is at Hartford (see Inventory); it is well known to those familiar with contemporary American art, for its image was used several times by Joseph Cornell, notably in the Caravaggio Boy, 1955, which was shown recently in New York (Joseph Cornell exh. cat., New York, 1980-1981, no. 123, ill.). It would appear that by way of Caravaggio — a rather circuitous route — American art has never ceased to be affected by French painting. I turn now to the delicate but altogether agreeable task of thanking those who have helped in this project. First of all, my colleagues in the Department of Paintings at the Louvre, among whom I would like to mention Arnauld Brejon de Lavergn6e, Jean-Pierre Cuzin, and Jacques Foucart. Chantal Perrier and also Claude Lesne" have been of great assistance both with the catalogue and the exhibition. Without the participation of Elizabeth Kwiatkowski and the careful work of Colette Vasselin, the catalogue would never have appeared on time. The exhibition clearly would not have been possible without the constant support of the Reunion des Mus6es Nationaux, in particular Irene Bizot, Ute Collinet, Claire Filhos-Petit, Marguerite Rebois, Jean-Pierre Rosier, and Claude Soalhat. Many have made available to me their considerable knowledge on innumerable specific points: in France, Avigdor and Anne Arikha, Jacques Thuillier, Gilles Chomer, and Antoine Schnapper; and abroad, Marie-Nicole Boisclair, Jennifer Montagu, Margie Gordon-Christian, and Marcel Roethlisberger. My thanks also are given to the translators of the catalogue and the introductory essay, Vera Schuster and Colin B. Bailey, respectively. But it is Alastair Laing above all to whom I wish to express my gratitude, for it is he who provided, with unflagging patience and under enormous pressure of time, the desperately needed bibliographic information not available in French libraries. The list of people in the United States who were generous with their help is longer still and includes Gail S. Davidson, Jean-Patrice Marandel, Burton B. Fredericksen, Marion Stewart, Robert L. Manning, David Rust, J. Carter Brown, Frederick J. Cummings, Edmund P. Pillsbury, John Walsh, Scott Schaefer, Gabrielle Kopelman, Jeanne K. Cadogan, and Catharine Jordan. In Chicago, Susan Wise, Richard R. Brettell, and Wallace Bradway were XVIII PREFACE particularly helpful. At the Metropolitan Museum, full cooperation was received from several departments, notably European Paintings, under the direction of Sir John Pope-Hennessy assisted by Katharine Baetjer; the Editorial Department, John P. O'Neill, editor in chief, Joan S. Ohrstrom, who assisted with the editing of the catalogue, and Reginald Gay, who edited the introductory essay by Marc Fumaroli; the registrars John Buchanan, Herbert M. Moskowitz, and Laura Rutledge Grimes; and finally John Brealey and his team of conservators. At the Metropolitan Museum, I wish to place three names before all others: its director, Philippe de Montebello, champion in the United States of French seventeenth-century painting; Alan E. Salz, Andrew W. Mellon Fellow in the Department of European Paintings, who has been the ideal collaborator and most meticulous of correspondants; and Emily Walter, Assistant Editor, who had the heavy responsibility of editing the English edition of the catalogue. Finally, it must be noted that the exhibition could not have been realized without the cooperation and support of the directors and curators of the multitude of museums with which I have corresponded. To name but a few would be injuste to all the others. But to all of them I express my profound gratitude. Pierre Rosenberg Introduction Des leurres qui persuadent lesyeux by Marc Fumaroli "Les couleurs dans la peinture sont comme des leurres qui persuadent les yeux, comme la beaute des vers dans la poesie. " Nicolas Poussin* I. The seventeenth century, in the words of Nietzsche, was "the century of willpower." Not frenzied but self-confident, it "believed in itself" but was too alert ever to become complacent. Its vigilance is comparable to that of a duelist watching his opponent's every move, of a cardplayer who Simon Vouet (1590-1649). Engraving by F. Valesio after Portrait of a Naval Gentleman. Paris, Bibliotheque Nationale. * Correspondance de Nicolas Poussin, edited by Charles Jouanny (Paris, 1911, p. 497). struggles against chance, of a devotee immersed in the stages of meditation, of a politician waiting for the right moment, of a general with plans drawn up who sleeps soundly on the eve of battle. Such concentration and marshaling of inner resources is reflected in French painting of the seventeenth century. Its resonance is felt in the remarkable group of works selected by Pierre Rosenberg from American collections, a group that far from exhausts the collections in the United States, even for this period of French art. Still, it must be admitted, since this exhibition favors the generation contemporary with Richelieu and Mazarin — the years 1624 to 1661 — that while French painting captured the national genius, that same genius was not primarily interested in having its image fixed. It was too taken up with the challenge of military, political, and religious demands and was too preoccupied for the silent yet seductive life of painted forms. It was in Italian that the poet Giambattista Marino celebrated the enchantments of sight in "The Garden of Pleasure," Canto 6 of Adone (1623). Mercury, warder of Venus's palace, ushers the goddess's future lover into a tower dedicated to the first of the five senses and decorated with paintings: The four walls are covered with various painted images — scenes of divine passion recounted in the poetry of antiquity. A wonderful art depicts the gods in love, with the result that truth is conquered by appearance. Although their voices are mute, one can tell when there is silence and when there is speech. Announcing the delights of sound and touch, these Olympian paintings are a prelude to the praise bestowed by the Italian poet on the Cavalier d'Arpino, Caravaggio, Titian, Bronzino, and the Carracci. Thus, a poem published in Paris at the expense of Louis XIII and dedicated to the INTRODUCTION 1 king reflected the conviction of the Italians — shared at the time by the French themselves — that painting, along with many other luxuries such as perfume, finely wrought leather, precious gems, and crystal, was above all an Italian art. Moreover, the French did not envy Italy this honor. They responded to Italy as Henry James's Bostonians in a later century responded to the Paris of Mme de Vionnet, the city that had transformed Chad — the hero of The Ambassadors, who was initiated by a Parisian Venus into the subtleties of the rites of love — into a modern Adonis. As in James's Boston, there were already patrons like Isabella Stewart Gardner in seventeenth-century Paris, and as in nineteenth-century Boston, they were still the exception. General feeling in France sided with Pascal, who wrote in the Pensees, which was published in 1670, after his death, by his friends in Port- Royal: What vanity is painting ! It elicits admiration for the likeness of things we do not admire at all in the original. It is true that Pascal made this point abruptly. He did so to suppress more effectively a tendency already present among the fashionable society he sought to convert. Yet such a maxim is characteristic of French genius in the seventeenth century: after Savonarola's death such a statement could not Abraham Bosse (1602-1676). Illustration for Peintre Converty aux precises et universelles regies de son art... Paris, chez I'auteur 1667. Paris, Bibliotheque Nationale. have been published in Italian, and for a long time after Pascal it was not translated into that language. If at the beginning of the seventeenth century there were painters of whom France would later be proud, it was a long time before their metier was acknowledged as one of the liberal arts. Despite the esteem painting was beginning to enjoy, it was only with difficulty that it freed itself from the various prejudices of French society: the aristocratic prejudice against the professional guild arts (arts de la main), the Augustinian prejudice against the arts of delectation, and the scholarly prejudice favoring poetry and music. There was no equivalent in France for the apologetic literature that Italian art historians and treatise writers had devoted to painting, beginning even before Alberti's De pictura in the fifteenth century. Nor was there a tradition in France similar to the one from which Marino's Adone stemmed in the seventeenth century. Art criticism and art history evolved slowly in France during the reign of Louis XIII and came to fruition under Louis XIV, trailing Italy by centuries. Guy Le Fevre de la Boderie's poem to the glory of France, the Galliade (1578), had set an intellectual framework that gradually weakened during the seventeenth century. According to Le Fevre, there were three arts, which were invented in the time of Noah in the Ile-de-France; they had wandered for a long time but would finally regain their splendor and primeval purity in their country of origin. These three muses — Architecture, Music, and Poetry — are contemplative: through them the mind perceives the divine harmony of the universe. During the seventeenth century these "liberal" muses held out against the develop- ment of the art of painting, which was omitted from this trinity. Poetry would not willingly defer to Eloquence, which touched upon matters more terrestrial. Music in the French style would not allow the Italian melodic license of seconda pratica to gain sway without resistance. Nor would Architecture — supreme manifestation of religious, civil, and military authority and thus a reflection of the architec- tonic power of God — let itself be overwhelmed by the decorative arts. Optics and perspective — connected by mathematics, the most noble of arts, to architecture — flourished in seventeenth-century Paris as they had in Florence during the quattrocento. The authorities in these scientific fields were religious scholars of the Minims order — Marin Mersenne, Jean-Pierre Niceron, Emmanuel Maignan, and the architect Gerard Desargues. They were far from having a low regard for painting. Father Maignan decorated the convent of his religious order in Rome with an anamorphic image. Desargues was a friend of Abraham Bosse and Laurent de La Hyre, but they kept their distance. Painters were dismayed at seeing their art reduced by the pedantic Bosse to a simple exercise, subordinate to the theorist's diagrams. In seventeenth-century French mentality — willful and intel- 2 INTRODUCTION Laurent de La Hyre (1606-1656). Astronomy. Orleans, Musee des Beaux- Arts. lectual — a sensitivity to painting as conceived by Marino was looked down upon, and consequently a certain severity in reaction to this supercilious attitude is discernible in French painting of this century. The initiative and perseverance of the crown were decisive in vanquishing such distrust. The monarchy set painters free from the heavy protection of the guilds and cleansed them of the dishonor of practicing a mechanical art by granting them the Ordre de Saint-Michel and a certificate of Peintre du Roi. A well-known anecdote pictures Simon Vouet publicly initiating Louis XIII, already an excellent musician, in the art of pastel. Here was a way of proving to the gentlemen of the court that this art de la main was no more degrading than the music they had cultivated with ardor since the sixteenth century. Louis XIV would go so far as to grant letters of hereditary nobility to the painter Charles Le Brun. It seems, however, that public opinion resisted even the royal example. The strangest case is perhaps that of Gedeon Tallemant des Reaux, whose Historiettes, published only in the early nineteenth century, was intended as an anecdotal chronicle of Parisian society under Louis XIII and during Anne of Austria's regency. Painting is barely mentioned in this work. Yet the author's cousin, the wealthy Maitre des Requetes Gedeon Tallemant, commissioned Laurent de La Hyre to decorate his Paris residence. Part of this decoration, Allegory of Music, is illustrated in this catalogue (No. 33). Gedeon Tallemant's father-in-law, Pierre Montauron, a banker who frequently appears in the Historiettes, commissioned decora- tions by the same artist. Tallemant's silence does not then spring from ignorance but from prejudice. Therefore, a passion for painting, encouraged by the monarchy and cultivated by art lovers, would gain public acceptance only when a history of French art had developed and specifically French critical debates were conducted. The honor of the kingdom and a desire to strip Italy of its privileges as primary cultural model — at first most keenly felt in the royal entourage — would play a large part in the conversion of the French to the painter's art. Painting, however, already had a long tradition in French culture. But this magnificent native tradition, profoundly religious in inspiration, had been overwhelmed in the course of the sixteenth century by the painting of the Italian courts. It had been relegated to obscurity by the long religious and political tragedy played out at the end of the century. It would revive only in the seventeenth century at the cost of emulating Italian painting, resuming the experiments initiated by Francis I at Fontainebleau in order to perfect and go beyond this stage of imitation. The self-imposed exile in Rome of Nicolas Poussin, the greatest French painter of the period, captures the paradox of the rebirth of French painting far from its native soil. First discovered in Paris, Poussin was encouraged by Marino to leave for Italy in 1623. In March 1642 Poussin wrote to Paul Freart de Chantelou from Paris, where Poussin was spending a few months at the flattering invitation of Louis XIII and Richelieu: Alas, here we are too far from the sun to discover anything of delectation. Only hideous things pass before my eyes. Yet the little that remains of earlier impressions of beauty has given me an idea for the frontispiece of the Horace. After a drawing by Nicolas Poussin (1594-1665). Frontispiece for Virgilii Maronis Opera. Paris, Royal Press, 1641. Paris, Bibliotheque Nationale. INTRODUCTION 3 In 1665, long returned to Rome, Poussin thanked Roland Freart de Chambray for sending him his treatise on painting — one of the first signs of the rehabilitation of Poussin's art in the public mind: I have read and examined at my leisure your book on the perfect Idee de la peinture [Idee de la perfection de la peinture, 1662], which has been sweet nourishment for my distressed soul. And I have rejoiced that you are the first Frenchman to have opened the eyes of those who saw only through other peoples' and so deluded themselves with false beliefs. Poussin, a melancholic genius, remained attached to the vision of a France he had left before Richelieu came to power in 1624. The English traveler John Evelyn described the collection of the Hotel de Liancourt, rue de Seine, where he was able to admire, alongside a Poussin, masterpieces by Caravaggio (Portrait of Alof de Wignacourt, now in the Louvre), Leonardo, and Raphael, and works by Correggio, Veronese, Titian, Bassano, Primaticcio, and even Mantegna. The Palais du Luxembourg, with its Rubens, its immense gardens, its aquaduct bringing water from Arcueil, was for the English diarist "a paradise." Yet Poussin's phrase "to have opened the eyes" was appropriate, for it is exactly what occurred in France during his lifetime, and is fully reflected t f * j / Israel Silvestre (1621-1691). Place Royale in Paris. Paris, Musee Carnavalet. Michelangelo da Caravaggio (1570 or 1571-1610). Portrait of Alof de Wignacourt. Paris, Mus6e du Louvre. in this catalogue of seventeenth-century paintings. Paris witnessed a genuine pictorial Renaissance, and more and more eyes were opened to observe, to appreciate, and to understand what was happening. Not everything is explained by the appeal of the Italian Renaissance stifling the Gothic forms that had magnificently expressed the French tradition nor by the crisis of the religious wars halting the aggiornamento undertaken by Francis I. In the seventeenth century the French court resided increasingly in Paris, and the city then became what it had been under Saint Louis and Charles V — and what it has remained — the political and cultural capital of the nation. Paris was a metropolis of Gothic art in the thirteenth and fourteenth centuries with its civil and religious buildings and workshops of goldsmiths, makers of stained glass, and manuscript illuminators, but in the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries the city was eclipsed in these artistic endeavors. According to the sophisticated standards set by the Italian courts, Paris had to learn how to become a modern capital of the arts as well as of high society. Henry IV was an enthusiastic builder and provided the impetus for the modernization of architecture at the beginning of the century. But the traditional elites of the city — the parliamentary haute bourgeoisie and the old aristocracy — did not immediately acquiesce in this transformation. Paris, a university city with its powerful Parlement, had no difficulty in remaining one of the vital centers of European intellectual life. Its magistrates with their libraries, their humanist learning, and their correspondence with European scholars placed the city at the head of international culture. In this regard the civil wars of the sixteenth century did not undermine the city's eminence. But the austerity of the libraries — marked by a monastic tradition even in lay circles — did not combine well with patronage of the arts, especially when these arts were linked with the worldly luxury of Renaissance Italy. INTRODUCTION Ballet of Renaud's release (1617). Godfrey and his knights in their pavilion of gold cloth. At first glance there seems little reason for the court to have been so reserved vis-a-vis luxury. It was bound to cultivate it for reasons of prestige, and a taste for such extravagance was instilled by two Italian queens, Catherine and Marie de' Medici. The Palais de Luxembourg, erected by Marie de' Medici to her personal glory, was like an island of the most sumptuously modern Italianism in the Gothic Paris of Louis XIII. Yet the French nobility, whose martial tendencies had resurfaced during the civil wars, needed to be educated in the arts once again. The court ballet fulfilled this role: danced by the king and his gentlemen from winter until Shrove Tuesday, the ballet was an elaborate display of grace and splendor, practiced until late in the reign of Louis XIII. Yet the court ballet — continuing the tradition inaugurated by the academies of Charles IX and Henry III — totally ignored the art of painting; rather, it synthesized the three muses celebrated in the Galliade — Architecture, Music, and Poetry. Once the ambitions of the sixteenth-century pioneers were gradually forgotten, this synthesis surrendered itself more easily to satire and burlesque. The extravagant dress of the court youth — prohibited to no avail by numerous royal edicts — mimicked the display of the modern ballets. The ballets themselves influenced imagination, gesture, and hearing — but they did not train the acuity of the eye. At the beginning of the seventeenth century, patronage of the arts did not exist among either the parliamentary bourgeoisie or the old aristocracy — the former erudite and austere, the latter somewhat inclined to celebrations that compensated for the brutality of the civil wars. Painting, however, needed an environment of enlightened art lovers, trained to appreciate and compare talents, as had developed in the Florence of the Medici, the Rome of Leo X and Clement VII (both Medici), and the Venice of the gentlemen merchants. Nor did a fashion for collecting exist among the scholarly parliamentarians or the hereditary nobility before 1630. Yet for humanists like Poussin or Stella, regular access to galleries in which astute collectors had assembled antique sculpture and Renaissance painting was indispensable for the liberal exercise of their art. The Medici family had started out as bankers. Indeed, the greatest achievements of Parisian painting under Louis XIII and Anne of Austria — apart from commissions for the Louvre, the Palais du Luxembourg, and the Palais Cardinal — were displayed in the private residences constructed by patrons of new wealth: the Bullion, Tallemant, Lambert, and Montauron families. Pointel, one of the aged Poussin's most assiduous patrons, was a Parisian banker. His other patrons — Chantelou, for example — were humanist magistrates, but they had passed into the service of the crown and frequented both diplomatic and courtly circles. The rebirth of French painting owed as much to economic expansion as it did to the successful policies of the monarchy. Although a history of French patronage comparable to Francis Haskell's work on Italy has yet to be written, it is probable that the example of the Medici (dukes in Florence, popes in Rome, queens in France) also had a great significance for individuals — noble lords such as the due de Liancourt and above all the financiers, execrated in public opinion, who were sufficiently confident of the power of money to place it at the service of princely luxury. Similar Abraham Bosse. Abraham Bosse. The Reformed Lady. The Reformed Gentleman. Paris, Bibliotheque Nationale. Paris, Bibliotheque Nationale. INTRODUCTION 5 Simon Vouet. Allegory of Wealth. Paris, Musee du Louvre. circumstances would arise in the United States at the end of the nineteenth century, at a time of prodigious prosperity following the end of the Civil War, to inspire a passion for building and collecting among such magnates as Frick, Morgan, and Vanderbilt and in particulier among the demanding clients of Joseph Duveen and Bernard Berenson. Simon Vouet's allegorical painting La Richesse (Wealth) in the Louvre, perhaps his masterpiece, is the tribute of an artist — aware of puritan prejudice against the sensuous quality of his art — to a wealthy patron who dared challenge the old prejudice, no less puritan, against money. This supercilious attitude toward the newly rich and their artists is probably the key to many silences in the literature of the time. It is quite possible that wealth, while silent, "opened eyes" to the talents of the French painters inspired by Italy more effectively than the erudition of scholars or the established customs of military caste: such wealth was both bold and determined. It is also true that under Louis XIII luxury too much in evidence was deemed inappropriate. For many excellent reasons the spirit of Paris was elsewhere. It is important to grasp the idea of this "elsewhere" not only to appreciate the resonances of French painting at that time but also to accept a paradox that is still poorly understood today — the paradox of a painting that is very French and already quite brilliant but found essentially outside France, particu- larly in Rome. During the seventeenth century Paris was in the process of becoming what Rome had been for artists since the end of the fifteenth — what Edmond de Goncourt later would call the "artist's home," redolent with inspiring memories and illustrious presences from the past, or what Mario Praz, in turn, would call the "house of life." The Parisian "spirit of place" now demanded that the French capital — previously the intellectual shrine of medieval Christianity — become the modern Alexandria. But the city opened itself only slowly to the profane joys of sight. It was not until the time of Antoine Watteau in the first quarter of the eighteenth century, during the regency of Philip II, due d'Orleans, that it wholeheartedly embraced this new phase of its history, whose opening chapters are presented to us in this exhibition. II. In the history of France the seventeenth century was the grand siecle. It remains so today for the style of its literary masterpieces — the works of Corneille, Racine, Bossuet — which suited the majesty of the court of Louis XIV, the grand roi. For the historian it is also the grand siecle because it established the kingdom's position of power in Europe through its political and military authority and the prestige of its language, literature, and scholarship, as well as its religious and philosophical thought. At that time the prestige and strength of a country was determined by the size of its population and its agricultural resources. In this sense the kingdom of France — described by Hugo Grotius in the dedication to Louis XIII in De jure belli et pacis (1625) as "the most beautiful kingdom after the kingdom of heaven" — represented for Europe during that age what the United States exemplifies to the free world today: a colossus. With 20 million inhabitants France was as densely populated as the rest of Europe added together. Because of its fertile soil and moderate climate, "sweet France" appeared to be an agricultural oasis in comparison with its less fortunate neighbors. It was able to keep its large population from destitution and famine and to endow its clergy, nobility, and third estate with considerable revenues. France at least had the resources to do this when not ravaged by war and epidemics, but such periods were rare. Despite outstanding advantages in manpower and natural resources, the country had almost ceased to exist as a self-contained political entity by the end of the sixteenth century because of the long and ruinous civil wars. The causes of the political instability that had shaken the kingdom so violently under the Valois dynasty (Francis I — Henry III) did not disappear under the Bourbons (Henry IV — Louis XIV). The most serious problem was feudal anarchy, which the French kings had endeavored to curb but which during the sixteenth century was fed by new forces — those of the Calvinist Reformation inside the realm and of the Holy Roman Empire outside — threatening royal authority, which was the keystone of good government and the 6 INTRODUCTION supreme symbol of the nation's identity. The expansion within France of the Calvinist Reformation resulted in dividing the country into two hostile factions, with a minority (but not in terms of talent) looking to Geneva and a majority to Rome as spiritual center. This was the pretext for various feudal clans in both religious groups to settle old scores and thereby compromise royal authority still further. Besides the internal disarray there were threats from abroad. The empire of Charles V, divided between two allied dynasties — the Austrian and Spanish Hapsburgs — literally encircled the kingdom and presented France with the choice of being absorbed or committing all its strength to a war that would break the empire's hold. Until the reign of Louis XIII the French monarchy, seriously weakened by the civil wars, was in no position to launch a full-scale attack on its enemies. Since the king of Spain and the Austrian emperor were viewed as the strongest defenders of the Catholic cause, a veritable fifth column set to work among the ranks of the seditious to gain support in France for the Hapsburgs at the height of the religious wars of the sixteenth century and during the civil wars of the seventeenth. The Catholic rebels often were led by foreign princes, such as members of the Guise family, youngest branch of the House of Lorraine, whose sovereign was the German emperor. After the assassination of Henry III in 1589, a prince of the House of Lorraine and a Spanish infanta both came close to governing the kingdom of France and subjecting it to the rule of the Hapsburgs. Consequently feudal anarchy, fed by religious rivalry and foreign intrigue, threatened both the unity and survival of the kingdom, the strongest in Europe, and reduced it to impotence and the brink of collapse. The longest and most violent assault on the kingdom came after the assassination of Henry III during the siege of Paris, when the Catholic league, with Spanish support, bitterly fought against the sovereign and rightful heir to the throne. That heir, the Calvinist Henry of Navarre, first of the Bourbon line in France and future Henry IV, spent the five years between 1589 and 1594 trying to win back his kingdom, city by city, and was finally successful only after his conversion to Catholicism in 1593. This protracted period of disorder, plunder, and carnage had an effect on France much the same as the Thirty Years War had on Germany in the next century, after which Germany reconstituted its strength only in the course of the eigh- teenth. France, more prosperous and less shattered by the upheaval, nonetheless had fallen twenty years behind the rest of Europe by the end of the sixteenth century when the Valois reign drew to its tragic close. The country would recuperate from these years only in the following century, but the recovery was not without serious relapses. After the conciliating reign of Henry IV, himself assassinated in 1610, civil and feudal disorder erupted again during the regency of Marie de' Medici. The revolt was fully suppressed only when Richelieu assumed undivided power in 1630, but serious disturbances flared up again after his death in 1642. Then, in a period of open warfare against Austria and Spain, the regent, Anne of Austria, and her first minister, Mazarin, also had to defend the throne of Louis XIV from the attacks of rebellious princes and Parlements supported by the Spanish. During the ten years between 1648 and 1658 the "good French people" (as those attached to the royal cause were called) thought they had returned to the time of Henry III and the Guise family. Poussin wrote in a letter to Chantelou in May 1649: I had the honor to receive your letter of 1 April, in which you informed me of the terrible state of affairs in our poor France. We are indeed the laughing stock of everybody, and no one will take pity on us when we are beset by all the troubles of the world. We are compared to the Neapolitans and shall be treated as they were. Still there is even more reason to fear the future, which we don't dare imagine, than the present state of affairs. But let those who are most involved worry about such things and let us hide away, if we are able, and escape mad Cyclops' bloody hands. I would have started work on the large version of your Virgin had it not been for the news we receive daily that evil Frenchmen are causing chaos in our city by their enraged speeches. We can expect nothing better than the ruin of the city. Our enemies boast that it will soon serve as an example to others by its total destruction. For all these reasons I believe that you have more important things on your mind than decorating your house with new paintings. Paris was in a state of permanent political fever until Mazarin's victory over the Fronde and the ascension to the throne of Louis XIV himself. Yet the social climate was no longer similar to the sixteenth century, with its convictions that both the dynasty and the world were about to end — as Poussin, from a distance, imagined it to be. Richelieu's political genius, at one with the destiny of the new Bourbon dynasty, was responsible for a complete change in direction of the country's affairs. During his ministry — contested from 1624 to 1630, but all-powerful from 1630 to 1642 — he was not satisfied with ruthlessly silencing feudal agitators and supressing what remained of the Calvinist's military strength; he actually committed France, not yet fully recovered, to a war against Spain and Austria. Even more important, Richelieu brought together a group of politically expert administrators — a tradition maintained after his death — who conferred remarkable efficiency upon the exercise of royal power. This high-quality political and administrative task force consisting of Servien, Lionne, Tellier, and Colbert was centered on Mazarin and then Louis XIV and enabled the kingdom to develop the apparatus of the first modern state. The administration was capable of weathering the crisis of the Fronde and then establishing a stable regime that was not only powerful but respected. The INTRODUCTION 7 Treaty of Westphalia with Germany (1648) and the Peace of the Pyrenees with Spain (1659), both concluded on terms that were extremely favorable to France, showed Europe that the recovery of the state had finally prevailed over the losses and hindrances incurred through civil disturbance. Mazarin died in 1661, bequeathing to the young Louis XIV a well- governed kingdom capable for the first time since Louis XI of exercising abroad a hegemony consistent with its size and material resources. In little more than a half century the desperate social and political legacy bequeathed by Henry III had been transformed into the apotheosis of the Sun King, exemplifying the pride of the nation and shining over Europe with all the insolence of youth and talent. III. The extraordinary political and military recovery of France in the seventeenth century, from the religious wars of the Valois to the glory of Versailles, has an epic quality about it. At stake was nothing less than the identity of France, only fully secured at that time in collective identification with the person of the king and only fully articulated in the royal language. The "defense and illustration" of the French language came before that of French painting not only in accordance with the scale of values then dominant but also as a matter of urgency. The destiny of these two types of expression — these two languages, as it were — was more closely linked than is often supposed, and not merely in terms of the humanist principle derived from Horace, ut pictura poesis ("a poem is like a picture"). The vernacular had been made obligatory as the language for all official acts of the kingdom since the Edict of Villers- Cotterets in 1539. Thus, the French language became a royal symbol in the same way as the lily in the French coat of arms or the holy phial at the coronation at Reims. Like these, its perfection and prestige would manifest the worth and honor of the name of France. Yet during the sixteenth century and at the beginning of the seventeenth, three European languages were vying for acceptance as the language of culture and international communication, and French did not rank among them. The three, roughly in order of chronological importance, were Latin, Italian, and Spanish. The position of Latin derived not only from its importance as the official language of the Roman church; in the seventeenth century it was still the major language of international learning and was also in wide use in diplomacy. Italian had gained its illustrious reputation throughout Europe for more than two centuries through the works of Dante, Boccaccio, and Petrarch; because of the sophisticated culture of the courts of Florence, Mantua, and Ferrara, it was the language identified with etiquette and the pleasures of worldly life. Sustained by the military and political power of the Spanish empire, the Spanish language also enjoyed a period of hegemony. The influence of Italian culture was felt particularly in the French court, where two Florentine princesses ruled succes- sively, with powers of regent — Catherine de' Medici, mother of the last three Valois kings, and Marie de' Medici, mother of Louis XIII. In the interval between military campaigns, from the onset of winter to the coming of Lent, a French gentleman of the court could not hold his own in society if he was not conversant with the language and style of Petrarch and was not acquainted with Castiglione's Cortegiano, Giovanni della Casa's Galateo, and Machiavelli's Principe, as well as the principal episodes of Ariosto's Orlando Furioso and Tasso's Aminta and Gerusalemme Liberata, works that provided most of the themes for the royal ballets. The ascendancy of Italian in the French court was such that the poet laureate from 1615 to 1623 — pensioned more richly by the king and his mother than any French poet could hope to be — was the Italian Giambattista Marino. It was in Paris that he published his masterpiece, Adone, a luxurious edition dedicated to the king with a French preface by Jean Chapelain. This long narrative poem, in twenty-six cantos, retells the love entanglement of Venus and Adonis. As Chapelain sensitively noted in his preface, the poem's originality lay in Marino's celebration of luxury, sensual delight, and peace rather than the military themes of epic F. Chauveau (1613-1676). Frontispiece for Cabinet de M. de Scudery, gouverneur de Nostre Dame de la Garde. Paris, Augustin Courbe, 1646. 8 INTRODUCTION Crispin de Passe (c. 1593-after 1670). Frontispiece for Amours de Theagene et Chariclee traduhe par. . . Maistre Jacques Amyot, revue, corrigee et augmentee. . . par le sieur dAudiguier. Paris, Martin Collet, 1626. Paris, Bibliotheque Nationale. Frontispiece for Metamorphoses ou VAsne d'or de L. Apulee philosopbe platonique, wuvre d'excellente invention et de singuliere doctrine, translated by J. de Montlyard. Paris, S. Thiboust, 1637. Paris, Bibliotheque Nationale. Illustration for Metamorphoses ou VAsne d'or de L. Apulee.... Paris, 1637. Paris, Bibliotheque Nationale. poets like Ariosto and Tasso. Thus, Italy, dominated by Spain and under the authority of the clergy, was able to bestow images of its Alexandrian achievements on a France tormented by the prospect of civil war and preoccupied with the defense of its frontiers. Recalling The Dream of Poliphilus — the popular French translation of Colonna's strange allegory Hypnerotomachia Poliphili, published at the end of the fifteenth century — Adone remained throughout the century a model of sensual delight protected from the ravages of history by the splendor of the arts, among which painting was included. The mythological and sensual world of Adone served as a rallying point for those alienated by Richelieu's iron will or Mazarin's authoritarianism. The French poets Theophile de Viau, Saint-Amant, Tristan L'Hermite, and Georges de Scudery, in the service of feudal princes in open rebellion in the court, devoted themselves to translating the principal motifs of the Adone into French. Marino's Galleria (1620), a collection of poems that was dedicated to the praise of Italian paintings and was imitated by Scudery in his Cabinet (1646), was an important statement in support of painting, henceforth associated with peace and the pleasures of wealth and the arts, thus bringing man nearer the condition of pagan gods. It was a powerful corrective to French severity and its hostility toward the pleasures of the senses, which were assumed to corrupt the traditional military and Christian virtues of the French. From the time of Catherine de' Medici's regency the commedia dell'arte troupes, emanating from the courts of Mantua and Ferrara, came most frequently to the French court to entertain the sovereign and courtiers with their farces, comedies, and tragedies. It was due in part to these troupes, the Gelosi and the Fedeli, and to their leaders, in particular the beautiful and learned actress-poet Isabella Andreini and her son, Giovambattista, that the French prejudice against the theater began to diminish, allowing a French court theater to develop, with the encouragement of Richelieu, in the first third of the seventeenth century. French was also in competition with the Spanish language. In the first half of the seventeenth century in the English and Italian courts, as well as in France, the traditional enemy of Spain, it was common practice to speak and read Spanish fluently. The European vogue for Jorge de Montemayor's Diana, Mateo Aleman's Guzman de Alfarache, and Cervan- tes's Don Quixote and the influence of the theater of the Siglo de Oro made the notion of Spanish as the international court idiom entirely plausible. The success of Italian and Spanish letters left the glory of the Valois poets Ronsard and Du Bartas far behind in all except the minor courts of Lorraine and Savoy, yet did so without undermining the authority enjoyed by Latin in the international circles of humanists and theologians. The French language ranked modestly in this context, and France's role in European culture — similar to its political INTRODUCTION and military role in international affairs — was not in keeping with the country's power and prestige or with the number and quality of its elites. At the end of the sixteenth century the contribution of the French language was not unimportant, and it was already taking on an intermediary role for the various cultures of the period. France became a kingdom of translators. Although translation at the time was considered a somewhat servile function, an excellent tradition was established while French culture awaited happier times. It was through the many translations published in Paris and the provinces that northern Europe, won over to the Reformation, gained access to the literature of the Catholic south, most notably the classical Greek and Latin writers. Northern Europe became acquainted with Plutarch's Lives and Greek pastoral romances such as Heliodorus' Theagenes and Chariclea and Longus' Daphnis and Chios in the translations of Jacques Amyot. In the synthesis offered by Montaigne's Essais, Shakespeare grasped the essence of antique philosophy, and it was from French translations of the Italian short-story writers that he frequently derived the subjects for his plays. Because of the immense output of a translator such as Gabriel Chappuys, Italian treatise writers on politics and civility were read in Holland and Germany. The mediating function of French culture in Europe, which was already discerned in its translations, was also manifested in the importance of the print market in Paris, the finest in Europe. This market was supplied by Parisian workshops, reproducing works of art existing in France, and by workshops of French engraving at Rome, reflecting the development of painting in that artistic capital. The Parisian market distributed the current repertory of forms and style throughout Europe. But translation and engraving were unjustly considered lesser crafts. French ambitions aimed higher: the country should be not merely an intermediary but an exemplar. In the interludes during the civil war Henry III had assembled, as the Academie du Palais, the poets, writers, magistrates, prelates, and lords and ladies of his court interested in intellectual concerns. One of the Academie's chief objectives was to cultivate, in exemplary fashion, a French rhetoric capable of rivaling that of the greatest orators and philosophers of classical antiquity and to raise the French language to the dignity of Latin. But it was only under Richelieu, dedicated to making the kingdom preemi- nent in all areas, that a conscious policy involving language was instituted and became fruitful. It was not by chance that Richelieu's literary patronage went hand in hand with a patronage of the arts that revived the tradition of Francis I and Fontainebleau. What Colbert openly wished for in 1669 ("We must see to it that France has everything of beauty in Italy") and what the Mercure Galant considered an accomplished fact at the end the century ("It can be said that Italy is in France and that Paris is a new D. Rabel (c. 1578-1637). Frontispiece for the third part of L'Astree by Honore d'Urfe, Paris, Antoine de Sommaville and Augustin Courbe, 1632. Paris, Bibliotheque Nationale. Gregoire Huret (1606-1670). Frontispiece for Peintures Morales by Father P. Le Moyne, S.J. Paris, Cramoisy, 1640, I. Paris, Bibliotheque Nationale. Gregoire Huret. Paradise of the Faithful Dead. Illustration for Peintures Morales by Father P. Le Moyne, S.J. Paris, Cramoisy, 1643, II. Paris, Bibliotheque Nationale. 10 INTRODUCTION Rome") was already present in the minds of Richelieu and his collaborators. Quite simply literature came before the fine arts as a matter of priority and political interest. French ascension to cultural hegemony was achieved by the pen rather than the brush, by the eloquence of its writers rather than that of its painters. By the beginning of the seventeenth century two works had appeared in French that gave a clear idea of the kind of literary genius France was capable of. Montaigne's Essais (1580-1595) recast the wisdom of antiquity into the French vernacular with an analytical strength and freedom of style that were quite modern. The first part of Honore d'Urfe's Astree appeared in 1607; through the meanderings of its elaborate intrigue, the novel translated into French the literary experience of the Spanish and Italian pastoral and re- created the ethic of worldly civility of the Renaissance courts. In many respects these two works stemmed from translations and were vulgarizations of classical models. But they went far beyond the passive character of ordinary translation, in the way that the inventive engravings of Gregoire Huret or Abraham Bosse in Louis XIII's reign or the landscapes engraved by the Perelle family in Louis XIV's were original works and not mere imitations. Montaigne and d'Urfe asserted creatively not only the French language's capacity for mediation but also its power of selection and stylization, which imposed a French hallmark on riches thus brought together and reordered — not only from other European cultures but from classical authors as well. French literary form was beginning to establish itself as an intermediary for various European languages and as a fusion of the scholarly culture in Latin and the worldly culture in the vernacular. French literature set the pattern for French art, which, twenty years later, captured the genius for synthesis and transformation that became the major asset of French authority in Europe. Under Louis XIII the transition from translating to creating affirmed itself brilliantly, although at the cost of sacrificing the heritage of sixteenth-century prose and poetry, considered too provincial. The royal language, a metropolitan language and no longer one common tongue among many, thus declared itself heir to classical Latin. The case for French replacing Latin as the language of philosophical and scholarly inquiry and Italian and Spanish as the expression of worldly elegance and literary imagina- tion was supported by Guez de Balzac's and Vincent Voiture's Lettres, the tragedies of Corneille, and Antoine Arnauld's and Descartes's theological and philosophical treatises. The Academie Franchise, incorporated in 1635 by Richelieu and Louis XIII, encouraged this transition offi- cially and institutionally, endowing the literary blossoming in the years 1624-1642 with a diplomatic and political significance. It was the same period in which French painting was reborn, also encouraged by the court. IV. In the background of the founding of the Academie Franchise — more than ten years before one was organized specifically for painting and sculpture — a great humanist and Christian myth was taking shape, one that had seized the imagination of the French monarchy since Francis I but came to life only in the reign of Henry IV and was finally fully manifested under Louis XIII. In a prayer to Henry IV, written in 1607 in a Latinate style by Francois de Malherbe, the poet invoked a golden age: The terror of his name will make our cities strong, No more will we guard our walls and our homes, And the night watches in the turrets of our towers will cease. Iron, put to better use, will cultivate the land, And the nation which trembled with fright at the war Will hear the drum beat no longer, except in dance. Breaking with the customs of his century, he will banish The vices, the idleness, and the foolish delights Which led us to past misfortunes. Virtue will return, with the laurel crowned, And her just favors bestowed upon true merit, Will reawaken the excellence of the arts. With the faith of his ancestors and his love and awe Of You eternally marked upon his soul, He will not be satisfied by mere acts of piety. Your glory and Your power will extend through him Who values nothing as dearly as obedience to You: Where You have him reign, he will serve You. Then You will give us back a sweeter destiny, And we will not see again those bad years Which brought tears even for the happiest among us. The harvests will wear out our sickles, And the fruits will be even greater than the flowers. In this vision of a return to an ideal age of peace and prosperity — a leitmotif of the court ballets under Louis XIII — the fate of France was implicitly linked with that of a Rome torn apart by civil wars in the time of Caesar and Pompey. It was a vision that relied upon this precedent to herald the return to France of an Augustus Caesar who would close the doors of the Temple of Janus, making war obsolete. Augustus' reign was contemporary with the early life of Jesus, and Virgil's fourth eclogue to the glory of Augustus, exemplified in the line "lam redit et virgo, redeunt Saturnia regna" ("Now comes the virgin, Saturn reigns again"), had been interpreted since the Middle Ages as prophesying the coming of the Redeemer. In the imagination of loyal Frenchmen — in this instance imagination imposing itself as will — the French monarchy would be called upon to repeat the miracle of the Augustan age but in a Christian context and in the language of the realm. The century of Augustus was also that of Maecenas, a name synonymous with generous patronage, and of his INTRODUCTION 11 friends, the poets Horace and Virgil. The return of Christian civilization to a classical and Latinate beauty emulating the golden age of Augustus was one of the principal inspirations of the European Renaissance. In adopting and nationalizing this myth, the French monarchy linked its destiny to a collective nostalgia that went beyond the confines of the kingdom, posing as a classical model recognizable to all of Europe. The determination to be recognized as such an exemplar meant the sacrifice of not only a glorious Gothic heritage but also of the first French Renaissance, which was considered too pedantic. Also necessary was the creation of a language purged of provincialisms and archaisms, improper to a crown worthy of classical Rome. But these sacrifices were consistent with an aesthetic ideal at once antique and Christian. The literary style of the Latin golden age had expressed above all an Attic beauty, pure and luminous but of a grandeur shrouded in simplicity and a seriousness tempered by humor and urbanity. It was a beauty that was also modest, and here Attic aesthetic and Christian ethic fused. Augustus had exiled Ovid from Rome probably because Ovid's sensuous Alexandrianism had destroyed the balance of Greek beauty and Roman virtue, which was the cornerstone of Augustan culture. The Rome that Richelieu and Colbert wanted Paris to reincarnate was also to stay a Christian capital, where the arts had to be kept within the bounds of decency. The French concept of beauty presup- posed a polemic against other modern attempts to rival the literature of antiquity. If France's role was to rediscover the perfection of the first century B.C., then Italian Mannerism and Baroque excesses — which too closely imitated the picturesque, pathetic, and sensual elements in Latin deca- dence — would have to be eliminated. For reasons of honor the French monarchy wanted to emulate the healthiest aspects of antique beauty in a manner compatible with the properties of an exacting Christianity and untarnished by decadence. With the Roman classics of the first century as model, the literature of the French court from Richelieu's time onward attempted to transcend recent Italian and Spanish literary experience and earn a place beside the most admired achievements of Latin culture. Again literature claimed precedence over the fine arts; yet, through the impetus of royal patronage, there was a similar development within art as well. What Jacques Thuillier has called the Atticism of such painters as Le Sueur and La Hyre was a sifting of elements of contemporary Roman culture most in keeping with the classicizing intentions of the French court. Both sacred and secular themes were treated according to the nature of the subject, but in a style that subtly mitigated the distance between the modest charms of a Venus and the gentle severity of a Life of Saint Bruno. It was through this Atticism, encouraged by Richelieu, that a specifically French aesthetic was formed, but with the later appearance of masterpieces sponsored by the French court — Racine's tragedies, Moliere's comedies, Boileau's Satires, La Fontaine's Fables, and the operas of Quinault and Lully — it became clear that France had produced works of originality in spite of Latin sources. These modern Christian works were inspired by ancient models without being pedantic imitations of classicism, and were imbued with freshness and rediscovered youth. Inseparable from the language, this particularly French taste impressed itself on the rest of Europe as a universal standard rather than a national style, inheriting its economy from Latin, its gentleness from Italian, its brilliance from Spanish, and its discretion and moral gravity from Christianity: it was a style that included all of these elements without harming any of them . V. It is a little strange to observe the birth of classicism, which owed so much to a determined cultural policy in support of royal glory and yet consistently maintained a character of spontaneity. By what paradox had French genius, with the impetus of a small elite, been able to rekindle the spirit of Chartres, the Roman de la Rose, and Jean Fouquet's Descent from the Cross and also remain in harmony with the spirit of Virgil, Horace, and Cicero? The answer is to be found in Montesquieu and in the principle of honor he considered the driving force of monarchical government. Paraphrasing him, honor sets in motion and unites all parts of the body politic; it thus happens that everyone seeks beauty, believing that he is seeking the individual and self-interested conception he has of it. This image of a universal system was motivated by a belief in the preeminence of rank and a nobility of birth. Seventeenth-century France existed in a condition of emulation, in which honor was continually contested and therefore could easily assume a quarrelsome character. It is important to understand that this sensitivity to individual honor was meant to demonstrate categorically that the model of conduct one had inherited was no less exemplary than that followed by others. The challenge of two individuals staring fixedly at each other was not so much that of two people trying to inflict deeper wounds — the egalitarian resentment of modern society — as it was that of two absolute certainties confronting each other for the palm of excellence. The expression caught in seventeenth-century portraits, which is too easily interpreted as Baudelairean sadness, is, in fact, an expression of honor. The spectator is called upon to witness the sitter as appropriately represented in terms of rank, order, age, and function; nobody can make him defer from 12 INTRODUCTION Claude Vignon (1593-1670). Simon Vouct. Portrait of a Young Man (self-portrait). Self-Portrait. Caen, Musee des Beaux-Arts. Aries, Musee Reattu. the position he maintains — whose limits and rights he knows equally well. Stand in front of Le Sueur's Young Man with a Sword (No. 52) or Blanchard's Portrait of a Young Man (No. 4). Self- image concerns these young gentlemen less than the way in which they are regarded by others. They calmly seek a regard that dares challenge them to be themselves and that they, in turn, are ready to challenge. The experience is similar when one looks at Champaigne's Portrait of Omer II Talon (No. 16): the imperative of appearance, in terms of the full function of his office and the just appreciation of his rank, has become a condition of existence for this important magistrate from the Parlement of Paris. As in Jean Fouquet's Portrait of Guillaume Juvenal des Ursins in the Louvre, the beauty of this painting lies in a spare painterly style that enhances the masterful bearing of one who knows he is exemplary within his rank of society. Montesquieu had something further to say on the subject: "Honor can inspire the finest actions, and supported by the power of law it can lead to the purpose of government, like virtue itself." On a national scale this principle was at work in the flowering of both a royal authority and a literature, which aimed at setting an example rather than following one, especially in a France challenged by Spanish power and Italian culture. The same principle also lay behind the Catholic Renaissance of the seventeenth century, inspired by a faith inextricably bound to a notion of honor. French Catholicism, proud of a lineage it traced to the apostles, was assailed at the beginning of the seventeenth century from many sides simultaneously. By increased piety, theological reflection, and discipline, French Catholi- cism was eager to prove to the Calvinists — who were guaranteed citizenship and certain religious freedoms by the Edict of Nantes (1598) at the end of the civil wars — that it was the sole and authentic repository of the Christian faith. In comparison to other Catholic nations that were spared such heresy (Spain and Italy, for example) and were able to implement the decrees of the Council of Trent (1545-1563) in clerical and lay society — Catholic France was impatient to make good the time lost during the civil wars. The French monarchy could not be expected to initiate any changes. It was jealous of the extension of papal power involved in the reforms of the council and obstinately refused to enforce these reforms in what they deemed the "most Christian" kingdom. The esteem of French Catholicism would be restored by private initiatives and by a kind of Christian Abraham Bosse. Clothing the Naked. Paris, Bibliotheque Nationale. Abraham Bosse. Visiting Prisoners. Paris, Bibliotheque Nationale. INTRODUCTION 13 Philippe de Champaigne (1602-1674). Ex-Voto. Paris, Mus6e du Louvre. civism, in which the honor of God and kingdom were fused. Christian enthusiasm in seventeenth-century France led to new religious orders and seminaries and an increase in the number of priests and missionaries. Texts of the early councils and the writings of the Church Fathers were published in learned editions, and for a wider public there were numerous treatises on spirituality and hagiography as well as volumes of religious poetry. There was also a greater dedication to charitable works. All this was an attempt to present Christian France as a model not only for heretics but also for the Catholic world at large. French honor was so intense on religious questions that it gave rise to a Catholic purism: the strict morality and the influential theology of grace of Port-Royal. Just as royal politics and patronage were inspired by the myth of France to re-create an Augustan golden age, in the religious sphere Gallican Christianity was sustained by a similar myth in its efforts to institute ecclesiastical changes and assert itself as the leader of a Catholic Europe purged of decadence. The fiction entails presumptions about the history of Christianity in its first centuries and about the church of the martyrs and the apostolic fathers; it was preserved in the church of the Gauls, which would be called upon to bring that early tradition back to life. Port-Royal — for which Philippe de Champaigne, the least Italianate French artist of the seventeenth century, painted — desired above all to perfect this Gallican fiction, making it an austere and unyielding doctrine. This conjunction of the two myths cannot be overstated, since it is necessary to offset the naive notion of a European Baroque explaining everything in the seventeenth century. Along with the ideals of classical Rome, France definitely had recourse to Christian antiquity — of which Poussin's Seven Sacraments is the consummate plastic expression. In both myths the French sense of identity and the peculiarly French notion of honor were united by a preference for simplicity, sobriety, and grandeur — exempt from pathetic expression and excessive sensual appeal. The spirituality characteristic of French Catholicism at the time accords deeply, on another level, with that of classical French literature. The painters of the generation of La Hyre, Stella, and Bourdon manifest a similar aesthetic in their treatment of mythological and secular subjects, on the one hand, and in their conception of religious subjects, on the other. In lay and religious matters French style developed at least as much through its opposition to Spanish and Italian tendencies as it did through references to an ideal model cast from pagan and Christian antiquity. Both the congregation of priests of the French oratory founded by Cardinal Berulle and the erudite and devoted community brought together at Port-Royal by Saint-Cyran were hostile to popular emotional forms of piety. They were also on guard against the excesses of mysticism, more easily tolerated by Spanish and Italian Catholicism. Yet the moral rigor and eminently rational nature of Gallican Christianity were moderated by a Christian civility and gentility of behavior in keeping with the example of Saint Francis de Sales. It was tempered even more profoundly by their image of the charitable and peaceable morality of the early Christians. This form of French piety, hostile to ostentation and fervid imagination, was disdainful of the Society of Jesus (the Jesuits), which was suspected of Hispanic and Italianate Nicolas Poussin. The Confirmation. Duke of Rutland collection, Bel voir Castle (Great Britain). 14 INTRODUCTION Nicolas Poussin. The Miracle of Saint Simon Vouet. Engraving by M. Dorigny Jncques Stella (1596-1657). Christ and Francis Xavier. Paris, Musee du Louvre. after The Madonna of the Jesuits. the learned Men. Notre-Dame-des-Andelys. sympathies. This was not a hazard for Sublet des Noyers, Richelieu's Surintendant des Batiments, who was close to the Jesuits. One of his most cherished undertakings was to commission the three greatest contemporary French artists, all trained in Rome, to decorate in Italianate style the chapel of the Jesuit novitiate in Paris. If only through the Jesuit order, a leaven of Italian Baroque was introduced into French Catholicism. It is questionable, however, whether this influence was strong enough to eclipse the essential resonance of Gallican spirituality, whose aesthetics of moderation rebuked the extremes of Spanish and Italian devotion. The richness of France's religious and secular culture at that time is not fully explained by the traditions of Augustan classicism and early Christianity. Yet they do indicate the uniqueness of a culture that obstinately endeavored to confer the universality of an idea upon a particular nation. Such an endeavor met with considerable resistance; yet this resist- ance, far from undermining it, offered it nourishment, mitigating its excessively severe aspects. The minor courts of lords in opposition to Richelieu and Mazarin were receptive to foreign fashions and skeptical of official seriousness; they were the reserves the royal court could draw upon in order to protect itself from atrophying. During the reign of Louis XIII poets and dramatists imbued with the spirit of Marino's Italy — such as Theophile de Viau, Jean Mairet, Malleville, Saint-Amant, Tristan L'Her- mite — championed the rights of imagination and love as well as the revelries of the fete galante. These writers were sponsored by the high nobility — Gaston d'Orleans, married to a princess of Lorraine; the due de Montmorency, married to a Roman princess; Henri de Guise, a duke from the House of Lorraine, who was fascinated by the cultural fashions of Italy. During the intervals between two armed rebellions and two military campaigns, these elegant circles aspired to enjoy the pleasures and luxuries of peace without waiting for the new golden age or allowing Christian antiquity to intimidate them. In his Fragment d'une histoire comique (1623), Theophile de Viau spoke for all of them: I like a fine day, bright fountains, the sight of mountains, expansive plains, beautiful forests, and the ocean — its waves, its calm, its shores. I like even more everything which particularly affects the senses: music, flowers, fine clothes, the hunt, beautiful horses, delicious fragrances, and a good repast. While painting was not named by Theophile as one of the delights he and his friends and patrons enjoyed, his hedonism — embracing all pleasures of the senses — clearly appreciated their representation. In a few poetic phrases, Theophile evoked the subject matter of contemporary INTRODUCTION secular painting — landscape and seascape, musical gather- ings, still lifes, and bouquets of flowers. Theophile would be thrown into prison and Richelieu would execute the poet's protector, the due de Montmo- rency, and exile the rebellious lords — Gaston d'Orleans, Cesar de Vendome, and the Guise family. Nevertheless, the license and irony of these dispersed minor courts, acting as corrective to the official rhetoric and learned classicism under Richelieu's protection, left their mark on the period. Richelieu, however, was sufficiently far-sighted to admit to the Academie Francaise poets — Malleville, for example — who were formerly in the service of his enemies. During the Fronde and as a reaction to the "high taste" advocated by Richelieu, the popular burlesque would ridicule such taste, accompanied by an atmosphere of revelry and fantasy in which the nobility of the Fronde indulged itself. Mazarin understood the dangers of solemnity and bore- dom that threatened the cultural planning undertaken by Richelieu. He attempted to enliven the official style in France by inviting from Italy musicians, set designers, and painters. In his brief and unequaled career as patron of the arts after the Fronde, the Surintendant des Finances Nicolas Fouquet brought together the most brilliant cluster of French artists that had ever been assembled in the kingdom — the poet La Fontaine, the playwright Moliere, the architect Le Vau, the landscape gardener Le Notre, and the painter Le Brun. Following the example of the Italian princes of the High Renaissance, Fouquet acted as if he wanted to endow the official exercise of patronage with the charm of private patronage as practiced by noble lords in opposition to Richelieu. After Mazarin's death one of the first decisive acts of Louis XIV was the disgrace of Fouquet, following which Louis placed in the service of the crown most of the artists the Surintendant had sponsored. At the same time, the king implemented with renewed vigor Richelieu's cultural policy and imported into France, in Colbert's phrase, "everything of beauty in Italy." In its slow and complicated gestation Versailles would summarize the impulses of a century in search of a splendid new era of the arts of peace: Mazarin's Italianism, Fouquet's French synthesis of the arts, Richelieu's authoritarian patronage, and the multiplicity of forms borrowed from the repertory of foreign courts and from the minor courts of France. These disparate elements — unified by the French taste of a young and gifted king — would have an extraordinary effect on his court and festivals, transforming them into the final summation of the European Renaissance. French honor, identified with the glory of the king, had performed a miracle of cultural alchemy, of which the Sun King was at once agent and product. VI. What part did painters play in this alchemical operation taking place in the royal court, an operation that involved so many ingredients — antique and modern, political and religious — and so many contradictions that were reconciled only after successive experimentation ? A great emphasis has been placed on the severity of Gallican Christianity — especially its hostility toward sensual pleasures — but the significant forces in France that favored a pictorial Renais- sance must also be considered. The earlier aristocratic disdain for the arts de la main was now in conflict with the cultural aspirations of the nation. Given the spirit of emulation that existed between the courts of France and Rome, French honor could no longer accept the notion that an art that had been the glory of the pontiffs and had been highly esteemed by the Greeks and Romans should not flourish in France in a way consistent with the grandeur expected of the kingdom. Fontainebleau was remembered as both example and method, for the palace of Francis I, with its galleries painted by Primaticcio and Under the supervision of Primaticcio. Venus of Cnidm. 1543, bronze. Fontainebleau, Musee National du Chateau de Fontainebleau. 16 INTRODUCTION Rosso, its collection of antique casts, and its Italian Renaissance paintings, was the first native model equal to the noble palaces of Italy. This early example was taken up and recast, according to current taste, in the Louvre, the chateau de Richelieu, the Palais Cardinal, the chateau de Chantilly under Louis XIII, and rich private residences of the Marais and the tle-de-France under the regency of Anne of Austria. The French painters who had carried out their apprentice- ship under the influence of the art of Fontainebleau were marked by the graceful manner derived from the Medici courts in Florence. It was at Fontainebleau that a French tradition of humanist painting was first conceived. The sojourn in Rome — obligatory for painters by the beginning of the seventeenth century — intensified the initial lesson of Fontainebleau, which seemed to offer the possibility of transferring to France all that was beautiful in Italy. But there was another very important reason to look to Rome. Only by reviving the beauty of a golden age unsullied by Gothic decadence could painting hope to free itself from the prejudice that, in France, still placed it on the level of the professional crafts, subservient to the glory of the liberal arts. The classical world, guardian of an ideal beauty, was G. Durand and Pierre Bontemps, under the supervision of Primaticcio. Apollo Belvedere. 1543, bronze. Fontainebleau, Musee National du Chateau de Fontainebleau. G. Isac or Isaac (d. 1654). Frontispiece for Images ou Tableaux de Platte Peinture des deux Philostrates Sophistes. . . by Thomas Artus sieur d'Embry. Paris, Claude Sonnius, 1637. Paris, Bibliotheque Nationale. reasonably easy for a writer to experience. Montaigne or Corneille had simply to enter his library and reach for a volume of Virgil, Horace, Livy, or Seneca — contemporary editions published in Venice, Basel, or Paris — in order to recapture by an effort of the imagination the genius of the ancient authors. The contemporary writer could emulate the classical style or expand on its thought. The situation, however, was more problematic for the painter. Unlike the literature, the painting of antiquity had not withstood the rigors of time. Scholarly observations by Pliny and descrip- tions of painting by Lucian and Philostratus and other Sophists were all that remained of Zeuxis, Apelles, and Timanthes. Even the traces of ancient art that were available — grotesques on ancient walls and the occasional fresco ruin, such as the so-called Aldobrandini Wedding discovered in 1605 — could be seen only in Italy. Before discovering antiquity, the painter had to acquire familiarity with its culture in order to reconstitute the ideal categories through which the ancients perceived nature. He would have to study architecture with Vitruvius, poetry with Horace, and eloquence with Quintilian. The painters of the Italian Renaissance were the first to devote themselves to INTRODUCTION 17 such a study and therefore served as intermediaries tor the rest of Europe. Greek and Roman sculpture had withstood time better than ancient frescoes. In Italy, particularly in Rome, there were wonderful classical statues — the Apollo Belvedere and the Laocobn, to name but two — that projected a plastic vision of ideal humanity. The frieze on the Column of Trajan in Rome and the many bas-reliefs of sarcophagi also provided access to this universe of beauty. French and Dutch painters were able to form their imagination and taste according to the canons of humanism at Fontainebleau in the frescoes of Primaticcio and Rosso and the casts of ancient statues assembled by Francis I. However, if the palace museum of Fontainebleau had fixed a moment of the Italian Renaissance, it was not representative of the most recent achievements of Italian art. Engraving, which transmitted the image of antique monuments and sculptures outside Italy, could not compare with direct contact with the works themselves. The seventeenth-century quest for humanist ideals demanded a journey to Italy, especially to Rome, where the achievements of ancient architecture and statuary were on display in an immense museum without equal in Europe, a museum that was, to use a hackneyed expression, alive. The determination of the ecclesiastical court at Rome to employ painting to glorify its preeminence and that of the Catholic Church had, since the end of the fifteenth century, transformed the capital into a vast atelier in which the best painters of Italy came to work and to compete with one another. The center of Christian humanism had also become the center of humanist painting, and rather than Zeuxis or Apelles, it was Raphael and Michelangelo who were