"Still Life of Flowers"

Jean-Louis Prevost (Nointel 1760 - Paris 1810)

Written expertise of prof. Giovanni Gentile art expert of the Milan court.

Oil painting on canvas

Last quarter of the '700

Canvas: 45 x 55 frame 60 x 70

The work is in excellent condition

The work is complete with its splendid carved and gilded frame.

It is truly a joy to admire this magnificent bouquet of flowers particularly rich in botanical species, with a great variety of colors and pictorial refinements.

The exuberant floral composition, placed in a richly decorated Medici vase, is truly superb, while maintaining a rigidly schematic setting of sober elegance.

In fact, the asymmetrical dictates of the Rococo have now been overcome, here the Prevost exhibits the great variety of flowers with an image typical of the Louis XVI period.

Note:

Jean Louis Prévost was part of a large and highly qualified family of artists, however the extraordinary level of his work, both painted and drawn, was so high that he soon established himself, together with Pierre Joseph Redouté, as the leading botanical artist of his generation. in France.

His works always maintain a standard of absolute perfection, regardless of the technique used, whether they are done in pencil, in gouache or more rarely in oil on canvas.

This splendid vase filled with a delightful bouquet of flowers perfectly encapsulates everything that is more meaningful than his work. with all its original vibrancy of color and exquisite details. "

Jean Louis Prévost was the most famous member of a family of French painters specializing in the representation of flowers and fruit. He was born in the village of Nointel, near Beaumont-sur-Oise, and was educated in Paris, in the studio of Jean Jacques Bachelier. His exquisite paintings were highly sought after in the second half of the eighteenth century. Examples of his work are then found in the great collections of the time, including those of the Prince de Conti, the Marquis de Livois, the Marquise de Langeac and the financiers Nicolas Beaujon, Augustin Blondel de Gagny and Alexis Janvier La Live de la Briche . The Cabinet des Estampes of the Bibliothèque Nationale in Paris preserves a series of more than forty gouaches by Prévost le Jeune depicting the various ornamental uses of the different floral species. The works of Jean-Louis Prevost the Younger are exhibited in many European museums and the sales results at international auctions can reach very important figures.