House of Wittelsbach & of Habsburg: Princess Sophie of Bavaria

Princess Sophie of Bavaria was born as the fifth child and third daughter to King Maximilian I Joseph of Bavaria and his second wife Caroline of Baden. Her twin is Queen Maria Anna of Saxony. Among her other full siblings are the twins Queen Elisabeth Ludovika of Prussia and Queen Amalie Auguste of Saxony as well as Duchess Ludovika in Bavaria. By her father’s first marriage, she is also a half-sister to King Ludwig I of Bavaria, Duchess Augusta of Leuchtenberg, Empress Caroline Augusta of Austria and Prince Karl Theodor of Bavaria.

Unlike the customs of the time, Sophie’s parents were very close to their children. She is even said to have been her father’s favourite daughter although she was much closer with her mother than with him. Sophie adored her own twin and remained close to all over sisters throughout her life. This resulted also in some marriages between the children of the sisters. Ludovika and Sophie had originally intended Helene in Bavaria to marry Franz Joseph but he chose her younger sister Elisabeth aka Sisi. Another first cousin marriage happened between Sophie’s son Karl Ludwig and Amalie Auguste’s daughter Princess Margarete of Saxony.

On November 4th, 1824, Sophie married Archduke Franz Karl of Austria, second in line to the throne. Sophie and Franz Karl had six children, five sons and one daughter. Four of their sons survived into adulthood and two of them became emperors, Franz Joseph of Austria and Maximilian of Mexico. Their only daughter Maria Anna Karolina died of epilepsy at only 4 years old.

During the Revolution of 1848, Sophie convined her husband to give up his claim to the Austrian throne in favor of their oldest son Franz Joseph who was seen as a new chance for the monarchy. During the same time her amibitions brought her the title of “the only man at court”. When her 18-year-old son succeeded to the throne, Sophie became the driving force behind it.

Sophie was a good friend of Napoleon II who resided in Austria The Duke of Reichstadt. Some suspected them to have an affair and Archduke Maximilian being the result of it but this is most likely only gossip. However, his death as well as Maximilian’s death later affected Sophie greatly.

Sophie died on May 28th, 1872, at the age of 67. Today she is mostly known as the maternal aunt and mother-in-law to Empress Elisabeth of Austria.