James “Jimmy” William Webb, age 76, of Clarkesville, passed away on Monday, October 2, 2023, surrounded by his loving family.

Born on October 27, 1946, in Rabun County, he was a son of the late Grover Webb and Lucy Henslee Webb. Mr. Webb was a United States Marine Corps Veteran, having proudly served his country during the Vietnam War, where he earned a Purple Heart. He retired from L.P. Gas Service as a gas truck driver after 30 years of service. Jimmy was a faithful member of Clarkesville Church of God and the Grant Reeves VFW Post #7720. He enjoyed hunting and fishing, but above all, he enjoyed reading his Bible and his family.

In addition to his parents, he was preceded in death by his son, James Kevin Webb; brother, Grover Webb, Jr.; sister, Mary Webb Martin Kitchens; and brothers-in-law, Alton Martin and Billy Kitchens.

Survivors include his loving wife, Karen Holbrook Webb of the home; sons and daughters-in-law, Kyle Mark Webb of Clarkesville, Greg Webb (Ashley) of Cornelia, and Shone Posey (Malissa) of Mt. Airy; daughters and sons-in-law, Amanda Clark (Granger) of Mt. Airy and Satin Posey (Jarrad Collier) of Banks County; daughters of the heart, Janice Haynes of Knoxville, Tennessee and Michaela Mize of Clarkesville; nine grandchildren; 13 great-grandchildren; brothers and sisters-in-law: Calvin Webb of Clayton, Freddy Webb (Vickie) of Cornelia, and Ronnie Webb (Ann) of Cornelia; sister, Clara Webb Tumlin of Alto; sister-in-law, Dorothy “Dot” Webb of Tiger; and several nieces, nephews, great nieces, and great-nephews.

Funeral services are scheduled for 2:00 p.m. on Thursday, October 5, 2023, at Clarkesville Church of God with Pastor Tim Tanner officiating. Interment will follow in the Grant Reeves VFW Memorial Park with Rev. Lonnie Bennett officiating. Full military honors will be provided by the Grant Reeves Veteran’s Honor Guard and the Marine Corps Funeral Honors.

The family will receive friends from 2-4 and 5-9 p.m. on Wednesday, October 4, 2023, at McGahee-Griffin & Stewart Funeral Home.

An online guest register is available and may be viewed at www.mcgaheegriffinandstewart.com.

McGahee-Griffin & Stewart Funeral Home of Cornelia, Georgia (706/778-8668) is in charge of arrangements.