On 8 October, Thomas Piketty will visit Leuven within the framework of the Gaston Eyskens Chair. He draws full houses, his work is translated and sold worldwide, and he gets people talking – in pubs, universities, and boardrooms alike – about subjects that used to be well-hidden in the musty cellars of economics. Why? Who is Piketty?

“An extremely gifted, extraordinarily energetic economist. That is Piketty in a nutshell”, says Professor Frederic Vermeulen from the KU Leuven Department of Economics. "Piketty has become the scientist's equivalent of a rock star, but that does not mean he is a suspect lightweight in his field. Quite the reverse. His academic achievements are enviable. He obtained his PhD when he was 22, went right on to become an assistant professor at MIT, and then started working for major French research institutes. He has published in the most prestigious research journals. And his best-known book, Capital in the Twenty-First Century, is not just a bestseller, but also a significant contribution to science.”

Is he a game changer? Will we still be talking about Piketty in 10 or 20 years’ time?

“I would not call him a game changer – yet. He has collected a tremendous amount of important material for his book and he has connected all the dots. He has taken the debate about inequality to a whole new level. That is very important, but it does not make him the next Keynes or Marx. He is not an economic thinker who has launched a new paradigm or has redefined the way we think about economics.”

The material that Piketty has collected was already available. Why did we have to wait for him to use it?

“We should not underestimate his collection of data. First of all, he goes back far in time, sometimes up to 300 years. Furthermore, he has used information that already existed, but is hard to gain access to. Just try getting your hands on the details of our Belgian tax system. Piketty has pulled off quite a feat. What is more, he generously shares his collection: you can access all his data via his website."

What is the gist of his argument?

“Piketty's book consists of two parts. In the first, descriptive part, he discusses the evolution of the distribution of income and wealth over the last 300 years. This leads him to conclude that wealth inequality was relatively high up until around 1910, fell sharply during the two world wars and the Great Depression, and climbed steeply again in recent decades. The same evolution can be seen for income inequality, he argues. Comparatively speaking, top earners are making more money, and the wealth of the top decile is comparatively increasing. In addition, the return on capital exceeds the return on labour. Put simply: the rich are getting richer, and the rest of us cannot make up arrears just by working. That does not necessarily mean that the poor are getting poorer, but there is a growing disparity between rich and poor.”

“The importance of inherited capital has also increased again, Piketty points out. In France, for instance, the share of inherited capital was 90% in 1910 and only 45% in 1970. Today, we are back at 70%. By 2050, the share of inherited capital will be what it was in the early twentieth century. These are just a few quick facts, but they abound in the first part of Piketty's book."

In the second part of his book, Piketty adopts a different tone to offer advice. How would you summarise his recommendations?

“Piketty concludes that inequality in terms of labour income and capital ownership is increasing, but that we should not just accept that. In other words, we can do something about it. Sometimes we even have to. Excessive income inequality and wealth concentration come with major risks for society. The bloodiest revolutions started when society no longer accepted inequality, so simmering discontent has to be addressed. Of course, that involves taking political decisions that may be controversial. After all, if you want to reduce inequality, you will have to target the top decile, or at least impose certain restrictions. Politically speaking, that is quite a challenge."

“Piketty is enough of a realist to situate his recommendations in 'a useful Utopia', but at the same time, he is also an idealist who strongly defends his ideas, even if they are difficult to implement. For one thing, he openly argues in favour of a global, progressive income tax. The tax rate would be 0,1 - 0,5% for incomes up to 1 million euros, 1% for incomes between 1 and 5 million euros, 2% between 5 and 10 million euros, and, finally, 5-10% for incomes of hundreds of millions. But a global progressive income tax presupposes a wealth register, which is turn requires international cooperation."

You don't have to take Piketty's recommendations at face value, but his data are solid and their implication is crystal clear: it is time to act.

“Without such an intervention, the rate of return on capital will exceed the rate of economic growth, so that inequality will continue to rise. That affects all of us: those with capital will not really be inclined to invest in new jobs, because, in the end, that will result in less profit than, say, an investment in shares. Therefore, the old concept of the trickle-down effect – what is good for the rich, also benefits the poor in the long run – doesn’t stand up to scrutiny.”

What do you consider the greatest strength of the book?

“Piketty has raised the level of the debate. You don’t have to take his recommendations at face value – although he is very convincing – but his data are solid and their implication is crystal clear: it is time to act. Piketty may not have been aware of it, but the publication of his book coincided with the general public's growing willingness to discuss inequality. An explanation for that willingness is found in the economic crisis that started in 2008 and which was partially caused by the reckless behaviour of very well-paid bankers. They were the ones to collect the profit, while the losses where passed on to the taxpayer. Austerity measures were inevitable to contain the crisis. That is our current situation. A solid collection of data and arguments such as the one in Piketty’s book is very useful for a productive debate. Whether there is enough political willingness and moral urgency to translate it into policy, I’m not sure, but the book will undoubtedly enforce the argument.”