Gaston François Marie, viscount Eyskens (1 April 1905 – 3 January 1988) was a Christian democratic politician and Prime Minister of Belgium. He was also an economist and member of the Belgian Christian Social Party (CVP-PSC).

He served three terms as Prime Minister of Belgium, holding the position from 1949 to 1950, 1958 to 1961 and 1968 to 1973. During his periods in office, Eyskens was confronted with major ideological and linguistic conflicts within Belgium including the Royal Question in 1950, the School War in 1958, the independence of the Belgian Congo in 1960 and the split of the University of Leuven in 1970. He oversaw the first steps towards the federalization of Belgium (constitutional reform of 1970).

Sol turns thousands of years of human wisdom from the world’s spiritual traditions into a totally unique personality profile. To get your own profile, check compatibility with friends and much more, download the Sol App today.

Some of their strengths

Gaston Eyskens has many admirable traits.

Based on spiritual traditions from around the world, they are someone who can be described as Brave, Intuitive, Adventurous, Sophisticated, Independent, Passionate, and Generous.

Independent and Brave

According to Mysticism’s Astrology tradition, Gaston Eyskens is someone who is an independent, brave, and honest person who approaches life with energy, intuition, passion, and generosity. A person who really cares about helping others make the most of what they have.

Active and Precise

Based on Daoism’s Ba-Zi or ‘Chinese Zodiac’ tradition, people who know Gaston Eyskens well know them as someone who can be tough, active, and sharp, like a sword.

Independent and Organized

According to Hinduism’s Jyotisha or ‘Vedic Astrology’ tradition, many would also describe Gaston Eyskens as someone who is independent, organized, inventive, and generous.

A person who is curious and a loves learning, who seems to always know what to say, who has an optimism that can overcome any difficult situation, and who seems to be able to master almost any skill.

Intelligent and Leadership-oriented

Based on the Mayan Tzolk’in or ‘Mayan Astrology’ tradition, Gaston Eyskens is someone who is able to see things that others don't, and who can be an effective guide or mentor to others.

They are also someone who is patient, assertive, and who is a natural leader that likes to help others in need.

Independent and Dynamic

According to Judaism’s Kabbalah tradition, Gaston Eyskens tends to be someone who is independent, dynamic, and courageous. Who can be positive, energetic, self-reliant, and adventurous, and who can make friends easily.

Some of Gaston Eyskens's challenges

While Gaston Eyskens has many strengths, nobody is perfect. They also have some challenging traits they need to manage.

For example, Gaston Eyskens can be Short-tempered, Impulsive, Indecisive, Unrealistic, Difficult, Perfectionist, and Domineering.

Short-tempered and Impulsive

One of Gaston Eyskens's key challenges is that they are someone who can come across as short-tempered and impulsive.

Domineering and Impatient

Gaston Eyskens is someone who can be demanding, egotistical, and controlling, can have a lack of judgment regarding personal finances, be argumentative and stubborn, and who can have a tendency to be withdrawn and spend time in self-imposed isolation.

Aggressive and Domineering

Finally, Gaston Eyskens also can be aggressive, impatient, impulsive, and short-tempered.