Josephine Baker is such a joy to watch. She exudes grace, joy, and energy, and it was a treat to see her sing and dance a couple of times here. Hey, I could watch her skip among the Roman ruins in Dougge, Tunisia with the little kids for hours, and wish the action had remained there longer. What’s weird and damn unfortunate is that despite her character being so poised and speaking French fluently, she’s still referred to as a “savage” and a “wild animal” many times by the visiting Frenchmen, who are there to help an author get over his writer’s block. They hatch an idea to fake an interracial love affair to help with the novel and also…

Isa's challenge, no 19: a movie starring an actress you really love whose work you've seen less than 30% of.

I chose Josephine Baker for the section of Isa’s challenge – which one day, I will complete, yes, I will complete – concerning an actress you love whose films you’re mostly unfamiliar with. I don’t think I would be shot at dawn for this in many cinephile circles. It’s very easy to think of Baker’s iconic dances, photos and costumes, but films? Not so much. Nicolas Cage once said that Wild At Heart was the kind of movie he wishes Elvis would have been able to make. Similarly, I wish Baker had found her way into the orbit of Maya…

“African flowers aren’t meant for parlors.”

Josephine Baker will always be amazing, but Princesse Tam Tam is so problematic it fucking hurts. Lest ye think that the French, who did welcome African American talents in ways America never did, were any more sophisticated in depicting Black people on screen, we have this document to bear.

Baker is a Tunisian girl, living on the streets, stealing food, playing and dancing with children, when she’s spotted by a French novelist fighting writer’s block. Her energy and joie de vivre inspires him, though his compliments align her with the cleverness of animals. He takes her back to France and introduces her as a Princess to incite jealousy in his wife. And even though…

Foreign + Silent: Weekly Challenge 2019

Princess Tam Tam is a mixed bag. First things first: it shouldn’t be surprising that a French film from this era which explores subjects like miscegenation and the characteristics of civility versus “savagery” is tinged with racism and colonialism. While there are some much-deserved barbs directed at the white people who turn up their noses at non-white people, the film is not entirely on the side of cultural tolerance and understanding. Lines are made, stereotypes are highlighted, and the “nicer” aspects of exoticism are fetishized.

Thank God for Josephine Baker. Her power over this film is all-encompassing; without her, it would collapse. As a Tunisian shepherdess who gets the My Fair Lady treatment from…