Pula is a small city in the southern part of Istria, the heart-shaped peninsula in northwestern Croatia. It draws huge crowds during the summer months, both for its beaches and its famed film and music festivals.

It is probably only place than any other in Istria where you can find Roman, Venetian, Austro-Hungarian and socialist architecture legacy.

The most famous site in Pula, and probably in whole Croatia, is Colosseum, a 2000 thousand old year Roman amphitheater. It is one of the six largest amphitheatres in the world and the only one to have four side towers.

Pula has one of the most diverse and longest shore in whole Croatia, which is home of many breathtaking beaches. Read why you must to visit the city in our ultimate Pula travel guide below.

Where is Pula located

Pula is one of the largest cities in Croatia, located on the southern tip of Istrian peninsula as the main city of Istria region. There are nearly 60 000 residents in Pula, making it the 8th biggest city in Croatia and its population density places it on the 5th place. The language spoken in Pula is Croatian, but due to its history it is not unusual to hear Italian language on the streets.

Best time to visit

Pula is attractive through the whole year. However, during the tourist season you can experience the town in another dimension. So the best time to visit would be between May and October.

Weather in Pula

If you like sunny and hot weather, with no or less rain Pula is perfect choice for you. In the summer, daily temperatures usually are around 25 to 30°C. Most of the tourists visit Pula in July or August.

Temperatures in pre and post tourist season are also very attractive. They are appropriate for exploring the town and sightseeing. However, for the brave ones, they can be warm enough to enjoy the beaches and swimming.

Only in the coldest months over the year you can except to rain for days. So, if you don’t like the crowd, you will probably be good to go in May and September regarding the good weather.

Things to do in Pula

Average visitor have a lot things to do in Pula and surroundings. There is a plenty things to do no matter if you like historical heritage, monuments, restaurants, gastro things or maybe adrenaline tour.

Famous Amphitheatar

Must visit site during your stay in magnificent Pula. Built under Emperor Vespasian, the arena could hold up to 20,000 spectators for gladiator fights.

Aquarium

The Aquarium is situated within the 130-year-old fort “Verudela”, once part of the powerful defence complex “Fortress Pula” built during the rule of the Austro-Hungarian Dual Monarchy.

The fort is nowadays inhabited by hundreds of fish species from the Adriatic and several tropical marine and fresh water species, as well as fish from Croatian lakes and rivers.

Forum

It is a central city square. Constructed in 1st century BC, it had all elements of a typical Roman Forum. In the northern part of the square stood two twin temples and a central one dedicated to Jupiter, Juno and Minerva. Today only the Temple of Augustus has been fully preserved.

The Forum was the nucleus of city life, its religious, administrative, legislative centre, which is also the case nowdays.

Zerostrasse

How many cities can praise that they have the tunnel network beneath the old city in city center? Well, probably just a few in the world.

This underground system of tunnels was built before and during WWI to shelter the city’s population and serve as storage for ammunition.

Now you can walk through several of its branches, which all lead to the middle where’s a photo exhibition on early aviation in Pula. There are three entrances and the easiest to find is by the taxi stand on Giardini.

Outdoor activities in the city

Pula offers many options for an active holiday, from water to adrenaline sports. Here is few suggestions of interesting things to do while in city of Pula.

Kayaking lets you see the coast from an entirely different perspective, you can also explore hidden bays and sea caves. Adrenaline seekers have many options for cliff jumping such as those on Galebove stijene beach.

Those who would like to see the marine life, there are snorkeling and scuba diving schools for beginners, introducing them slowly to the beautiful underwater life.

Pula beaches

As the largest city on the peninsula, Pula also has its share of beaches which attract visitors every summer. Thanks to the mild climate, the sea temperature can reach even 30°C in August.

Like other beaches in Istria, the ones in Pula are either rocky, pebbly or cemented. Only sandy beach is in nearby Medulin, which is located 10km away. However, there are mixed beaches, with pebbles and sand, like beach Valovine on Stoja peninsula.

Some of the most popular beaches are Havajsko, Ambrela, Gortanova uvala, Valkane and Galebove stijene. Check this blog for more information about Pula beaches.

Big choice of accomodation

If you are planning your holidays in Istria, you should know that accommodation in Pula, tends to be cheaper than in many other tourist destination in Istria, like Rovinj or Porec.

If you are trying to save some money, consider staying in Pula and making day trips to other places in this beautiful Croatian region.

As a most known touristic region in Croatia, Istria has great choice of accomodation. No matter if you love hotels, apartmants, villas your find a place for yourself. In the heart of season, in a 3 star stay, prices ranges from 60-100 euros a day. If you prefer small hotels situated in the city center near the shore check out Hotel Amfiteatar.

Shopping in Pula

There are many shops and supermarket in Pula, where you can buy food and groceries. The most known supermarket chains are Konzum, Kaulfand, Lidl and Studenac.

There are two big shopping center in Pula. The biggest one is Max City, with over 100 famous brends, located just near the Valkane Beach, in Stoja neighborhood. The second one is Pula City Mall with offers over 50 different brends and also the McDonalds drive thru.

If you like the local groceries, then you must visit the marketplace where you can find great choice of fruit, vegetables and fresh fish.

Wifi

Vast majority of the tourist places, like hotel, cafes and restaurants have a free wifi. For you to use them you need to ask a password.

Ultimate Pula travel guide

We hope you like our ultimate Pula travel guide. Enjoy your time in Pula 🙂

Small boutique hotel in heart of old city

Hotel Amfiteatar is a small boutique hotel located in the heart of Pula. It has sea view, restaurant, street food, big terrace and is surrounded with a greenery and shore. The location couldn’t be better because everything is in 5 minute walk distance: roman Amphitheatre, central square Forum, Giardini promenade, shore and marina.

Accomodation gives you perfect local gastro experience, because the hotel has both its restaurant and street food. When things started to be boring, our guides will arange you city tour, boat trip, wine tasting or adventure experience.

Book your stay in Hotel Amfiteatar when in Pula.

.