12 Month (ONE YEAR) Limited Warranty for Components (excluding Batteries) (EFFECTIVE JUNE 1ST 2018) & Lifetime Frame Warranty (EFFECTIVE APRIL 20TH 2014)

X-Treme offers a standard ONE Year limited warranty against manufacturer defect and workmanship on bicycle & scooter components and a Lifetime frame warranty of all X-Treme Bicycles that are purchased directly from X-Treme or an X-Treme authorized Dealer.

X-Treme bicycle frames are warrantied for the lifetime of the bicycle with the original purchaser. This warranty is for the frame only. X-Treme does not cover any labor charges for transfer of bicycle components from original frame to replacement frame. Replacement frame may be from X-Treme scratch & dent stock. Frame replacement is for manufacturer defect only. This warranty excludes corrosion, paint fade or scratches, impact marks or damage, modifications by purchaser, misuse and act of God.

Original purchase receipt is required to establish proof of purchase and establish warranty start date. Your warranty begins the day the bicycle is delivered to you or purchased from a storefront. This warranty covers manufacturer defects and defaults only. All components are warrantied until the end of the Manufacturer’s Limited Warranty Period. If you receive your replacement part within the last month of the warranty, your replacement part will be warrantied for 30 Days from delivery of the replacement part.

We may request some parts be returned for replacement. The cost to return those parts is the responsibility of the purchaser. We will pay for standard shipping service costs on the first & second warranty shipments to the purchaser. Any additional warranty parts will require the customer to pay all shipping costs.

Your warranty will be void if any modifications are made to the original design of the bike. Warranty is non-transferable and we will NOT offer a warranty on any products purchased from second hand sellers, non-authorized Dealers, products that are purchased used or products that are purchased via outlet centers. X-Treme will, however, offer free lifetime technical support access on these products & if parts are needed those parts may be purchased direct from X-Treme.

What is not covered by Manufacturer’s Limited Warranty?

We do not cover normal wear and tear on any components. Parts such as brake pads, spokes, hand grips, cables and housing, tires, tubes, and chains will not be warrantied unless defect or damage upon arrival.

We do not cover scratch, dents or other cosmetic damage not caused by X-Treme.

We do not cover components that are compromised due to corrosion due to elements (moisture, water, heat, etc.)

We do not cover defect or damaged parts from failure to follow instructions in owner’s manual, improper assembly, acts of God, misuse, neglect, improper storage, commercial use, alterations to the bikes original design or components, modifications with parts not sold by X-Treme, operator error resulting in accident, extreme or stunt riding, or improper maintenance & upkeep.

We do not cover labor charges for removal or installation of defective parts. Warranty is for replacement parts only.

12 Month (ONE YEAR) Battery Limited Warranty

We offer a full ONE Year limited warranty on all bicycle batteries to the original purchaser. Your battery is warranted for any manufacturer defect in material or workmanship. The battery will be repaired or replaced free of charge. Original proof of purchase is required to establish proof of purchase and warranty effective date. Warranty begins the day the bicycle is delivered to you or purchased from a storefront.

X-Treme requires that defective batteries be returned to us for repair or exchange. X-Treme does not pay the shipping fees to return the batteries to us however we will pay to ship the batteries back to you.

Battery Warranty does not cover defects or damage caused by improper care, charging and maintenance, using a charger not supplied by X-Treme, damage resulting from power surges or water damage.

Wheel Truing

If your bike arrives with a wheel out-of-true (not sufficiently straight or round) due to shipping damage or manufacturer defect we agree to reimburse you for the cost to get your wheel trued, not to exceed $40.00/wheel. All the below requirements MUST be met in order to qualify for this reimbursement:

1.You must notify us within 5-days of receiving your bike.

You must provide a video of the rim showing that the wheel is not true.

The video must show the rim spinning, not just the tire.

You must provide us with a receipt indicating that the wheel has been trued.

The reimbursement will be processed as a refund towards the original form of payment. If you purchased from one of our many national dealerships the refund will be processed to your dealer. The dealership will then be responsible for processing your reimbursement.

How to Submit a Warranty Claim

To submit a warranty claim or access our technical support department follow this link to live chat https://x-tremescooters.com/?chat After a chat has been opened a technician will respond to your chat and an email will be sent to you.

Chats are answered in the order received. Your initial posting puts you in line for the next technician to assist you. Technical Support Hours Monday - Thursday 9:00 am - 4:00 pm PST.

SHIPPING DAMAGE

Should your item arrive with damage that is a direct result of the assigned shipping carriers mishandling, we will replace those damaged parts free of charge under warranty as long as the damage is reported immediately after delivery and the necessary photos are provided (see below). In the event that the damage is determined to be extensive, (digital photos will be required by email), at X-Treme’s discretion and after careful consideration, we may arrange to have the item picked up and returned to X-Treme for free replacement. X-Treme will provide technical support via phone or through our Support Help Desk to assist customers with the replacement of parts but will not pay labor charges to install such parts.

Required Photos for Damage Claim

- A photo of the packaging material used inside box (e.g. bubble wrap, Styrofoam peanuts, cardboard dividers, etc.)

- A close-up photo of the shipping label with tracking number (please zoom in enough to read the tracking number which usually begins with 1Z)

- Two photos displaying all 6 sides of the package (1 photo should display the top and 2 sides, the 2nd photo should display the bottom and the opposite sides).

Freight Deliveries

Please inspect the item for any visible damages upon delivery as any damage must be noted on the delivery receipt in order to be eligible for damage claims. Do not refuse the shipment. Please notify our Customer Service Department immediately after delivery if damage has occurred.

LIFETIME TECHNICAL SUPPORT:

Lifetime technical support is provided to each customer that purchases an X-Treme Bicycle. To access our technical support department click on this link to live chat https://x-tremescooters.com/?chat After a chat has been opened a technician will respond to your chat and you will receive a reply. If you would like to speak to a technician by phone, include your phone number on the chat and request the technician to contact you. Chats are answered in the order received.

DISCLAIMER:

X-Treme Scooters and it's Distributors are not responsible for the proper or improper use of merchandise sold. We care about our customers and urge you to exercise caution and take necessary safety measures to protect yourself while engaging in cycling. We encourage, beg, and plead that you wear a helmet and use appropriate lighting while riding at night regardless of the legal requirements in your particular state. Potential customers, you should check with your local law enforcement agency before purchasing about age requirements for riding our electric bicycles. Some states may have laws restricting the use of these items on public streets. Generally, all states allow them on private property such as campgrounds, parks, etc....but many states have age requirements. Most states require helmets and protective equipment to be worn by certain age children. Please always bike safely. Know your laws before you go biking. We will not take back a bicycle if you find your laws do not permit your child to ride it. Check first.