Very noticeable in documentaries such as "Extreme Close Up" and "Konfidential", both from the 90s. But on the "Second Coming", there seem (!) to be happy vibes all over the place, so there is less negativity from Gene and Paul.

I don't know if they're on YouTube these days since they're so old but I loved the KISS Exposed and KISS X-treme videos that came out in the 80s (I think); of course Paul and Gene were in complete control of them, so they're not necessarily accurate, but they are hilarious.

I own X-Treme Close Up on DVD, probably as good as one’s gonna get with a Kiss doc but it’s definitely dated, goes up to 1992. Cringey commentary in parts from Paul and Gene as per usual but the footage is great. The Second Coming is very entertaining though, for a behind the scenes type documentary. I wish that era stuck around but we all can’t have everything I guess. The VH1 Behind The Makeup or whatever was very good too actually, more structural beat-by-beat career overview than X-Treme Close Up.

"You listen to Emerson, Lake and Palmer, not me"

That's how you know it's not the real story.

But seriously, Second Coming and Beyond the Makeup are well done but they're still very "official product" if you know what I mean. I'd love to see something that isn't.

Yes! And I also like when Paul grab's the Ace doll and says something like, "where am I? who knows?". I know I've got the quote wrong but I cracked up back then.

The Kissology sets get my vote. At least Volumes 1 and 2 (the classic stuff). The sets are well done and loaded with various commentaries and vintage material.

Kiss has never really done a "perfect" or one-stop documentary, in my view. Which is why I simply made my own.

Yet all of the officially released ones are worthwhile. To varying degrees.

Yes, I think watching those first two KISSOLOGY sets with the commentary tracks on makes for about the most effective documentary of that era that I’ve seen. Straight from their mouths basically.

Yes, and even Gene and Paul's commentary on most segments is pretty upfront. Especially their honesty when describing how aware and hurt they were about "declining" during the Elder album (the Fridays performances). And their subsequent unmasking.

Not to mention the refreshing commentaries from the two actors and actress prominent in the Kiss Meets The Phantom of the Park film...

There's a commentary track? Lol, wish I would've known that when my dvd player was still hooked up. I'll have to check it out on the computer.