This article is about the episode. For the show-in-show television series, see Wormhole X-Treme!.

"Wormhole X-Treme!" is the twelfth episode of the fifth season, as well as the landmark 100th episode of Stargate SG-1.

Synopsis[]

SG-1 watches a television commercial about a new sci-fi show called "Wormhole X-Treme!", which has very similar attributes to the Stargate Program. While Colonel Jack O'Neill investigates, he learns that Martin Lloyd pitched the idea of the show to the studio.

Previously on Stargate SG-1[]

SG-1 makes contact with Martin Lloyd, an alien living on Earth and being drugged by the crew of his ship to forget his alien origins. Martin regains his memory and discovers his planet has been destroyed but the rest of his people escape capture.

Plot[]

This episode is a continuation of the Season 4 episode "Point of No Return". A spaceship that had been hidden in the outer solar system activates and begins approaching Earth, and its energy signature is matched to that of Martin Lloyd's escape pod suggesting that this is its mother ship. The military tracks down Lloyd and discovers that he has become the creative consultant for a television series whose concept he sold to a Hollywood studio, Wormhole X-Treme!. The parallels between Wormhole X-Treme! and the real SG-1 are uncanny, but the United States Air Force had decided that while being a breach of secrecy, they are willing to allow the show to continue, because it can provide 'plausible deniability' to any future leaks of classified information about the Stargate Program (i.e., if info leaked out, it could easily be attributed to the fictional TV show, thus helping keep the actual Stargate Program secret).

Colonel Jack O'Neill is given the position of "Air Force technical advisor" to the show, in order to covertly confront Lloyd about both the secrets he has leaked and the approaching spacecraft. He discovers that Lloyd has resumed using memory suppressants and does not consciously remember his previous encounter with them or his own extraterrestrial origin. O'Neill initially suspects Lloyd's associates of drugging him again, but in fact Lloyd started taking them on his own so that he could feel more comfortable with living on Earth.

Lloyd's associates are nevertheless nearby, and also another secret government group, called the NID, wishes to seize the ship's technology for themselves.

The rest of SG-1 is sent over as backup, and Teal'c infiltrates the set, while Dr. Daniel Jackson and Major Samantha Carter scan Lloyd's house for broadcasts, which leads them to a warehouse used by the NID.

Lloyd had in his possession the remote control device necessary for boarding the empty ship when it arrives, thinking it merely another of the many useless science fiction props of the show, and both parties want to recover it. His associates kidnap Lloyd and O'Neill, injecting Lloyd with a memory-restoring drug. Before they interrogate him, however, Teal'c (recognized as "Murray" by Lloyd) helps O'Neill and Lloyd escape.

O'Neill and Lloyd recover the remote control just as the spacecraft arrives, with Lloyd's associates in close pursuit and the NID on their way. O'Neill gives the remote to Lloyd's associates allowing them to flee Earth, both because he sympathizes with their plight and to deny the ship's technology to the NID. Lloyd decides that he is comfortable with his new life and remains on Earth to continue consulting for Wormhole X-Treme!.

At the end of the episode there is a "Making of Wormhole X-Treme!" featurette with interviews of several of the actors from the fictional show and behind the scene footage.

Appearances[]

Appearances for Wormhole X-Treme!

Locations

Milky Way

Chulak (Mentioned)

Martin's world (Mentioned)

Solar system

Earth

Billings, Montana (Mentioned)

Colorado Springs, Colorado

Stargate Command

Briefing Room

General's Office

Vancouver, Canada

Bridge Studios

Mars

Events

Arrival of Martin's ship

Skirmish with Martin's people (Mentioned)

Items

Apple

Asteroid (Mentioned)

Battle Dress Uniform

Cell phone

Coffee

Computer

Donut (Mentioned)

Golf (Mentioned)

Injection syringe

Insulin (Mentioned)

Kiwi (Mentioned)

Laptop

M9 pistol

Pineapple

Radio

Red phone

Sandwich

Scissors

Service Dress Uniform

Ship Remote

Skull (Mentioned)

Smith & Wesson 5906

Stargate (Mentioned)

Sublight engine

Sunglasses

Transporter

Transportation beam

Wormhole X-Treme!

Vehicles

Automobile

Cargo van

Limousine

Recreational vehicle

SUV

Kepler space probe (Mentioned)

Martin's ship

Martin's descent pod (Mentioned)

Sentient Species

Human

Martin's people

Tau'ri

Jaffa

Languages

English

Organizations

Jet Propulsion Laboratory (Mentioned)

National Intelligence Department

Stargate Program

SG-1

United States Air Force

Mentioned

Poochinsky

The Six Million Dollar Man

Notable quotes[]

Hammond: Plausible deniability. In the event of a future breach of security, we'll be able to point to this television program. That is, if it stays on the air. Looks directly into the camera.

Martin: Whoa, whoa, whoa... what is that?

Prop Guy: It's fruit. Scene 23.

Martin: Okay, Scene 23 takes place on another planet ... so you think aliens eat apples?

Prop Guy: Why not? They speak English.

Director: The reality of the scene dictates there be dead aliens ... because you just killed them.

Head Writer: We could always go back to the way it was in the script.

Director: No we can't. We've already established that one shot stuns and two shots kills. Nick just shot everybody twice.

Martin: So three shots disintegrates them!

Director: Okay, you know what? I'm gonna pretend you didn't say that, because that is quite possibly the stupidest thing I've ever heard you say.

Yolanda: I'm having a little trouble with scene 27. It says I'm out of phase, which means I can pass my hand through solid matter, or I can walk through walls.

Director: Yeah, yeah, 'cause you're out of phase.

Martin: Um, exactly.

Yolanda: So... how come I don't fall through the floor?

(long, awkward silence as Martin and the director stare at Yolanda, look at each other, and back at her)

Martin: We're gonna have to get back to you on that one.

Yolanda: Right.

(O'Neill looks over the table of food. Teal'c puts down a plate of ugly sandwiches.)

O'Neill: Any takers?

Teal'c: This crew does not seem to enjoy the traditional dishes of Chulak.

Jackson: Yes, the aliens!! Please, Mr. Man in Black, don't pretend you don't know about the aliens.

Christian Bocher: I'm Christian Bocher. I'm portraying the character of Raymond Gunn, who portrays the character of Dr. Levant, which is based on the character Daniel Jackson, portrayed by the actor Michael Shanks. Originally portrayed by the actor James Spader, in the feature film. (looks at camera operator with a concerned look) Are you okay?

Col. Danning: As a matter of fact it DOES say Colonel on my uniform!

Cast[]

Main Characters

Richard Dean Anderson as Colonel Jack O'Neill

Michael Shanks as Dr. Daniel Jackson

Amanda Tapping as Major Samantha Carter

Christopher Judge as Teal'c

Don S. Davis as Major General George S. Hammond

Guest Stars

Willie Garson as Martin Lloyd

Michael DeLuise as Nick Marlowe

Peter DeLuise as Director

Jill Teed as Yolanda Reese

Robert Lewis as Peter Tanner

Ben Ratner as Studio Executive

Teryl Rothery as Dr. Janet Fraiser

Christian Bocher as Raymond Gunne

Don Thompson as Wormhole X-Treme! Props Guy

Peter Flemming as Agent Malcolm Barrett

Herbert Duncanson as Douglas Anders

David Sinclair as Bill A.D.

Kiara Hunter as Alien Princess

Mar Andersons as Bob

Laura Drummond as Security Guard

Keath Thome as Head SF

John Sampson as Unnamed Refugee (Uncredited)

Kenny Gibbs as Kenny the Prop Master aka 'Yellow' (Uncredited)

Robert C. Cooper as Wormhole X-Treme! Writer (Uncredited)

Jan Newman as Wormhole X-Treme! Makeup Artist (Uncredited)

Joseph Mallozzi as Wormhole X-Treme! Crewman 1 (Uncredited)

N. John Smith as Wormhole X-Treme! Crewman 2 (Uncredited)

Brad Wright as Wormhole X-Treme! Producer 1 (Uncredited)

Michael Greenburg as Wormhole X-Treme! Producer 2 (Uncredited)

Martin Wood as Man in Black (Uncredited)

Rick Dean as Crew member with white paper cup (Uncredited)

Gisela Schulte as Female A.D. (Uncredited)

Hank Cohen as Studio executive (Uncredited)

Ron Wilkerson as Assistant with cell phone (Uncredited)

Bridget McGuire as Lead Dresser Inga Van Schnitzle (Uncredited)

Patrick O'Brien as Dave Plummer (Uncredited)

Michelle Comens as Television Crew Member (Uncredited)

Andy Mikita as Beaten Guy (Uncredited)

Finn Michael as Wormhole X-Treme! Crew Member (Uncredited)

Phoenix Ly as SF Guard (Uncredited)

? as Agent Smith

Notes[]

The title also refers to a campy fictional science fiction series named Wormhole X-Treme! a show-within-a-show that is portrayed in the episode. This was the 100th episode of Stargate SG-1, and as such was produced as a "special" episode laden with large numbers of in-jokes and cameo appearances.

The director of a Wormhole X-Treme! episode, played by Peter DeLuise, was the director of this Stargate SG-1 episode.

A Wormhole X-Treme! writer is played by Robert C. Cooper, a Stargate SG-1 writer and executive producer.

Further cameos include Joseph Mallozzi (who co-wrote this episode), producer N. John Smith, and Stargate SG-1 writer Ron Wilkerson as Wormhole X-Treme! crew members; Stargate SG-1 property master David Sinclair as the Wormhole X-Treme! assistant director; make-up artist Jan Newman as a make-up artist; director Andy Mikita and producer John G. Lenic as the characters being beaten by Col. Danning; Stargate SG-1 director Martin Wood as an NID agent; and several more.

The two executives who commented on how unrealistic Martin Lloyd's spacecraft looked are played by Stargate SG-1 executive producer Michael Greenburg and executive producer/co-creator Brad Wright.

During the scene when Colonel Jack O'Neill confronts Martin Lloyd about where he got the idea for the show, an Asgard puppet can be seen out of focus in the background.

In a scene where a Producer boasts getting a Cable Ace Award, the producer walks out exclaiming, "Make it go!". This is referring to the catchphrase "Make it so!" of Jean-Luc Picard in Star Trek.

After the above scene, during a discussion between O'Neill and Lloyd, Martin comments that the producer won the award for a show about a talking dog that solves crimes, which O'Neill calls Poochinsky. Poochinski was a real pilot for a TV show that was never launched about a detective who was turned into a dog. Sally Ray, one of the puppeteers for Poochinski, also worked in the creature art department on Stargate.

At one point, Yolanda Reese remarks to Lloyd and the Director about a scene where she is supposed to be "out of phase." She wonders why she doesn't pass through the floor if she's out of phase with normal matter. This is most probably a reference to the fans' questions about the episode "Crystal Skull." Fans questioned why it was that Dr. Daniel Jackson was out of phase and was able to walk through walls and people, but could sit on tables, and didn't fall through the floor. It may also be a reference to several episodes in Star Trek, notably "The Next Phase".

A producer can be overheard saying Wormhole X-Treme! needs a “sexy female alien”, likely referring to Stargate SG-1’s introduction of Anise in Season 4. This line is repeated in the show's 200th episode "200".

Near the end of the episode, Peter Tanner and his men beam themselves aboard their space ship in a manner that is identical to the original series of Star Trek.

During the beam up scene, Teal'c (Murray) is wearing a patterned shirt that has the same shade of green as the green screen used during the scene. It appears as if Teal'c has holes going through his body. This may have been an intentional joke as Martin had just said something about winning an Emmy for special effects.

The Season 8 episode "Citizen Joe" revealed that Wormhole X-Treme! only ran for one episode before being canceled.

The original Wormhole X-treme! Dr. Levant uniform was released by MGM and sold by MiamiSciFi.com.

In the Season 10 episode "200", Martin Lloyd is writing a Wormhole X-Treme! TV film. This episode states that the Wormhole X-Treme! series ran for three episodes prior to cancellation, but performed strongly on DVD. Brad Wright, co-creator of Stargate SG-1 has said that "200", the 200th episode of SG-1, is "A little kiss to Serenity and Firefly, which was possibly one of the best cancelled series in history." Firefly was canceled before its first season run was even complete, but sold so well on DVD that it spawned a film, entitled Serenity.

"Nick Marlowe," the actor portraying "Colonel Danning" in Wormhole X-Treme!, has two lines cut through his left eyebrow, most probably as a parody of the scar going through O'Neill's left eyebrow.

When O'Neill asks the security guard for a list of people who came through the gate he says that it is for a security check since an Air Force general will be doing a small guest appearance on the show. This is a possible reference to when the then Air Force Chief of Staff, General Michael E. Ryan, appeared as himself in "Prodigy".

The file that is pulled up by Major Samantha Carter where the name of the Wormhole X-Treme! production assistant is Steve Austin. This is a reference to The Six Million Dollar Man.

The scene in which Martin Lloyd and Colonel Jack O'Neill are hiding from the men in black on an unused sound stage was filmed on the partially built hallways of Anubis' Ha'tak used in "Revelations" and "Descent".

This episode originally aired one day after the previous episode "Desperate Measures".

This episode shares some similarities with The X-Files episode "Hollywood A.D." and Supernatural episodes "The French Mistake" and "Hollywood Babylon".

Herbert Duncanson (Douglas Anders/Grell) is the stand-in for Christopher Judge. He previously played Guard in the Stargate SG-1 episode "Beast of Burden".

Christian Bocher (Raymond Gunne/Dr. Levant) previously played Major Dean Newman in the Stargate SG-1 episode "Shades of Grey".

Don Thompson as (Props Guy) is best known for playing Specialist 3rd Class Anthony Figurski on Battlestar Galactica.

Other languages[]

Czech: Seriál "Červí díra" (Wormhole - The Series)

Hungarian: Wormhole X-Treme! (dubbed in English)

French: Wormhole X-Treme (dubbed in English)

German: Wurmloch extrem (Wormhole Extreme)

Italian: Wormhole X-Treme (dubbed in English)

Polish: Film

Spanish: ¡Agujero EX-Tremo! (Hole X-Treme!)

Catalan: Forat de cuc Extrem (Wormhole Extreme)

[]

Wormhole X-Treme! on Wikipedia

This page uses content from Wikipedia. The original article was at Wormhole X-Treme!. The list of authors can be seen in the page history. As with SGCommand, the text of Wikipedia is available under the GNU Free Documentation License.