pennsylvania native fishes

Pennsylvania is said to have more miles of rivers and streams than any state in America except Alaska. It is also home to a wide variety of native fish, said to be 113 species by Pennsylvania Fish & Boat Commission. Pennsylvania is rich in limestone deposits and springs, creating nearly ideal conditions for coldwater species, including brook trout. Brook trout, Pennsylvania’s official State Fish, are one of only two trout, salmon, or char that are native to the state, along with lake trout, and are said to occupy over 4,000 miles of rivers and streams. Pike, muskellunge, walleye, three species of pickerel, and smallmouth and largemouth bass are native to Pennsylvania as well, albeit not to all the waters they are now found. Paddlefish, bowfin, three species of gar, and four species of sturgeon are also native to the state, along with a number of minnow species and rough fish.

status, threats, and conservation

Forty-three species of fish in Pennsylvania are listed at the state level: 28 as “threatened,” and 15 as “endangered.” Eleven other are “candidate species,” that could be in trouble soon. One species, shortnose sturgeon, are also listed as endangered at the federal level. Per Pennsylvania Fish & Boat Commission, 34% of the 159 species of fish found in the state are endangered, threatened, or at-risk. Wild native brook trout populations have been seriously compromised, or lost, from most lakes, ponds, rivers, and large streams in Pennsylvania. With the exception of Big Spring, most of the fabled limestone creeks such as Letort and Falling Springs are now all but devoid of wild native brook trout. In many cases, the introduction of nonnative trout, mostly browns, has compromised the native trout. Nonnative rainbows are an issue in some waters as well, and now pose a threat to the wild native brook trout in Big Spring. Stocking also poses a threat to wild native fish in Pennsylvania. Per Pennsylvania Fish & Boat Commission, the state stocked nearly 3.2 million trout in 2020 alone. Another 1.25 million were stocked by private parties, most of which were stocked in public waterways. Mining is also an issue in Pennsylvania. While Pennsylvania is a leader in habitat work, and to a lesser degree habitat protection, protection for wild native fish is lacking.