Pennsylvania’s state fish is the brook trout, Salvelinus fontinalis, one of only two members of the trout family that are native to this state. The other is the lake trout, which has a much smaller range, and most Pennsylvania anglers have never caught one, or even seen one. Lake white fish could be added to this group since it is in another branch of the trout family, but like the lake trout the only Pennsylvania native range is Lake Erie, I think.

Every creature is special. But brook trout are "special-er" than all but a few.

The coloration of a truly wild brook trout living in a small, Big Woods stream that is lined with hemlock is among the most pleasing of all animals to the eyes. Lay a wild brook trout next to a stocked brook trout and you will immediately see the difference. The stocked brook trout is rather bland in comparison.

Forest and Stream, a very popular magazine at the time, in 1879 mentioned Pennsylvania as the best natural trout region in America. That was due to our wild brook trout. It would be seven more years before the first 10,000 brown trout eggs from Germany were hatched at the Corry Hatchery, and nine years before the first rainbow trout were officially stocked in Pennsylvania.

Our original brook trout, which once occupied even the larger creeks and rivers of northwestern Pennsylvania, were nearly wiped out when most of our trees were cut by the late 1800s and early 1900s. Even in that era of stripping natural resources with little concern, the looming loss of brook trout got folks concerned.

In 1892, the Board of Fish Commissioners had a special railroad car built, named the Susquehanna. It was used to restock many streams across Pennsylvania until 1914, although by 1896 it spent most of the time in storage. The Susquehanna was used to transport several fish species. However, it is most famously credited with returning brook trout to a state of abundance.

On March 9, 1970, by Act 51, the brook trout was named the official state fish.

The brook trout's native range extends south into northern Georgia and northern Alabama, but it exists there only in high mountain streams. Pennsylvania is at the southern end of brook trout heartland. They inhabit the entire state where cool, pollution-free streams and small lakes are available.

How large the native brook trout grew probably is lost to history. In "The Fishes of Ohio," by Milton B. Trautman, it is reported that brook trout could be found in the upper Allegheny River, “but they never run down into the Ohio.” It can be assumed that native brook trout in the Allegheny River and larger creeks would have grown considerably larger than any wild brook trout that now exist in Pennsylvania, unless wild brook trout wander into Lake Erie. Maybe the largest wild brook trout now available in this state inhabit the Allegheny River for a few miles downstream from the Kinzua Dam.

Among my most prized catches have been three brook trout caught from the Allegheny River that were all over 17 inches and less than 18 inches. But that is just three in a span of 52 years since the Kinzua Dam was completed.

Our current state record brook trout weighed 7 pounds. It was caught from Fishing Creek, in Clinton County. That fish and all of the large brook trout caught in modern times almost certainly were breeder fish released from hatcheries as they neared the end of their useful lives. It is a genuine state record, but to see the real wild brook trout of Pennsylvania, you need to go where stocking trucks do not go.

Unfortunately, the brook trout is now under serious threat. This is a fragile critter.

Any relatively small change in its habitat, ultimately due to stream chemistry or temperature, can be disastrous.

Climate change is likely to drive the southern edge of their range northward. Most obvious is warming water. Less obvious are the changes more intense storms cause. Very heavy stream flows scour the stream bottoms, spoiling spawning habitat and aquatic insect habitat.

The hemlock wooly adelgid is another serious threat because it kills the hemlock trees that are important for shading streams.

Mike Bleech can be reached by e-mail at mikeb73@verizon.net. Read more of his columns at nwpaoutdoors.com.