The brook trout is the only native trout species native to Pennsylvania and its future has been looking bleak for the past several years. There is one exception in the Michaux State Forest section in Adams County.

Work was under way this week on the second phase of a project to enhance habitat in a stretch of the Conococheague Creek where a water conservation specialist at the state park found native brookies.

For a distance of about one mile, the “Cono” flows through the dry bed of the former Birch Run Reservoir adjacent to the Pine Grove Road (SR 233) near Caledonia State Park in Adams County’s Franklin Township. Birch Run, the former Chamberburg’s water dam, was drained and replaced by the larger Long Pine Run Reservoir.

This week’s work added new habitat structures and bank stabilization projects in the section of creek running through the old reservoir bed. Surveys have shown that structures installed last summer including log and stone deflectors, log vanes and other in-stream structures have already brought results. Numerous young-of-year (juvenile) brook trout can be found.

According to The Pennsylvania Fish and Boat Commission, “The habitat of wild brook trout has been greatly reduced in Pennsylvania since European settlers arrived, with land-use changes, mining, and warming and silting of streams, and with other pollution and stream habitat degradation. Naturally self-sustaining populations can still be found in limestone spring-fed streams and cold, mountain creeks. Brook trout can tolerate relatively acidic waters, but not temperatures much over 65 degrees.”

Joining the Michaux State Forest and state Department of Conservation and Natural Resources personnel in the project were volunteers from three Trout Unlimited chapters including Adams County, Falling Springs from Chambersburg and the Cumberland Valley chapters.

The project is supported by grants from the South Mountain Partnership, Pennsylvania Council of Trout Unlimited, National Capital chapter of Trout Unlimited, and by in-kind donations from DCNR, Conewago Enterprises, and Valley Quarries.

Phase I receive national recognition when it was featured in an article appearing in the summer 2013 edition of “Trout,” TU’s magazine.

Dave Swope, president of the TU’s Adams County Chapter 323, said “A dedicated group of partners, including a Trout Unlimited Chapter from our nation’s capital, have come together to make this project happen. DCNR in particular has been a crucial partner, providing leadership and technical assistance, as well as financial support through the South Mountain Partnership – a coalition of conservation groups working to conserve the natural and cultural assets of the South Mountain region.”

“The fishing is already better as result of the restoration work that began last year,” said Don Albright, a board member and project volunteer from the Cumberland Valley chapter of Trout Unlimited. “It’s rare to have a wide-open restoration opportunity like this,” noted Albright, referring to the project’s location within the valley formerly inundated by the Birch Run Reservoir.

DOE LICENSES

As of Wednesday morning, plenty of antlerless licenses were available across the state. The only wildlife management unit to be sold out was WMU 2H in the northcentral part of the state which was allocated 5,500 permits.

Locally, WMU 5A had 11.201 permits available and WMU 5B had 33,636 unsold permits.

‘HTE’ CLASSES

Two area Hunter-Trapper Education classes have openings. The class is required for first-time hunters regardless of age.

The Green Springs Rod and Gun Club, 121C Green Springs, Road, Hanover, will hold a class on Saturday, Aug. 2, from 8 a.m. to 4 p.m. Registration is open with 61 of 75 seats available. Contact Larry Mummert 717-359-5495 or George Stoots 717-359-7986.

The Jefferson Sportsmen’s Association has eight seats remaining for its class to be held Saturday, Sept. 6, from 7:30 a.m. to 3 p.m. Call Jim Staub 717-637-3750 for information. The club is located at 4704 Sportsman Club Road, Spring Grove.

—

Bob Marchio is outdoor writer for The Evening Sun. He may be reached at bmarchio@embarqmail.com