This has always puzzled me...At the end of the fight, the winner says into a microphone "Hello Ma, hello Pa. It was a terrible fight, but I won." Or something along those lines. I've seen this in many cartoons (including, I think, PORKY THE WRESTLER), and in at least one Three Stooges short (if I'm not mistaken GRIPS, GRUNTS, AND GROANS). Did something like this happen at a real fight? It must have been a pretty famous incident to have been parodied so many times. John Garfield has a similar scene early in THEY MADE ME A CRIMINAL, so it could be a spoof of THAT...

Originally posted by Rob

This has always puzzled me...At the end of the fight, the winner says into a microphone "Hello Ma, hello Pa. It was a terrible fight, but I won." Or something along those lines. I've seen this in many cartoons (including, I think, PORKY THE WRESTLER), and in at least one Three Stooges short (if I'm not mistaken GRIPS, GRUNTS, AND GROANS). Did something like this happen at a real fight? It must have been a pretty famous incident to have been parodied so many times. John Garfield has a similar scene early in THEY MADE ME A CRIMINAL, so it could be a spoof of THAT...

This has been familiar to me, too, since my earliest days of cartoon watching way back in the middle of the last century. The version I'm most familiar with is, "Hey, Ma! It was a tough fight, but I won!" spoken by a boxer sporting multiple black eyes, contusions, bandages and generally looking like he's had the crap beaten out of him. The humor arising from the fact that going by appearances, he looks like anything but a winner.

I also had figured it might be a reference to some well-known quote by some famous fighter, real or fictional, so I thought a Google search might turn something up. Trying different variations of the phrase brought up lots of hits, but so far no "smoking gun." What is most striking, though, is that so many boxers today are still saying the same thing to the media, almost word-for-word. Maybe the gag is just that: it's something every single cauliflower-eared, canvas-kissing pug-ugly can be expected to say at some point.

Re: Can we use the word "titmouse" on these boards?

Originally posted by J. J. Hunsecker

It was obvious what you meant even with the letters censored. Perhaps the filtering software went off half-cocked? It seems to have erected a barrier against even innocuous terms and those that try to penetrate it's defenses end up getting stiffed, leaving them throbbing with impotent rage. This reduces the members of this board to writing only inoffensive and assinine twattle in their posts. So once again the posters on this board get the shaft! But enough of this tit for tat, cock and bull story...

Bugs (to Beaky Buzzard): "You naughty, naughty boy!"

Originally posted by Javeman

In "Hare Remover" Bugs pulls out various cards with different drawings on them, the first one clearly says "Screwball", the second one is a cracked pot, which means "Crackpot", I don't understand the third one, which has a leaking water faucet, and the last one has various bats flying, which I presume means "That guy has bats in the belfry". Can anyone tell me what the third means? And fix me if I'm mistaken on the last one.

I always thought the leaky faucet ment that the guy had water on the brain Theres something similar in "Yankee Doodle Daffy" with the Sleepy Lagoon character who pulls out various cards, and one had a bat and a baseball on it. Anyone know what that means?

Originally posted by Javeman

In "Hare Remover" Bugs pulls out various cards with different drawings on them, the first one clearly says "Screwball", the second one is a cracked pot, which means "Crackpot", I don't understand the third one, which has a leaking water faucet, and the last one has various bats flying, which I presume means "That guy has bats in the belfry". Can anyone tell me what the third means? And fix me if I'm mistaken on the last one.

I always thought the third one meant Elmer was a "drip," meaning an unhip bore. Though this would make it a rather odd card in the context of the other cards, since they all seem to have the same theme of insanity or craziness depicted on them.

The last card does indeed mean "bats in the belfry."

In one cartoon, Bugs Bunny (I think) makes a comment "Screwball in the side pocket!" Is this a reference to pool, snooker, baseball, or what?

I also never understood why TV and radio programmes are interrupted for trivial pieces of news in cartoons. At least, not until Sept 11 when all the TV channels actually interrupted programming for live news coverage.

In "Baby Buggy Bunny", after Bugs throws Finster in the air, he says "Oh dear, I do believe I have forgotten my fudge". What's that all about?

Some gags don't work any more because the cartoons are shown on TV, instead of in cinemas. A good example is Daffy Duck and Egghead, where a silouette comes in front of the screen, and eventually Egghead shoots the person. In a theater, it would look like someone has stood up. Also where Wile.E.Coyote puts up a sign "Wanted: One gullible coyote. Apply to manager of this theater"

Originally posted by Tom41

In one cartoon, Bugs Bunny (I think) makes a comment "Screwball in the side pocket!" Is this a reference to pool, snooker, baseball, or what?

A refrence to pool, I believe. When the players are going to put the 8 ball away, they call the pocket that they are aiming for. Something similar was done in "The Timid Toreador" where the bull puts pool chalk on his horns and says, "The screwball in the side pocket". I'm pretty sure that the gag was also used in "Little Pancho Vannila" and "Picador Porky".

Just remembered another one from Tom & Jerry. This bit of dialogue has been used in both The Zoot Cat and Solid Serenade

"I love you... you set my soul on fire. It is not just a spark, it is a flame... a big roaring flame. I can feel it now... burning... burning..."

Is this a reference to a movie? Or some expression they used in the 40s?

Come to think of it, most of the Zoot Cat doesn't make sense nowadays! The Zoot fashion went out in the 40s and all of the catch phrases don't make sense any more.