18

Music and Lyrics

Hugh Grant starred as Alex Fletcher in the 2007 romantic comedy 'Music and Lyrics', alongside Drew Barrymore. In the film, Alex is a washed-up 1980's pop star who teams up with an aspiring lyricist to write a hit song and revitalize his career.

17

The Englishman Who Went Up a Hill But Came Down a Mountain

In the movie 'The Englishman Who Went Up a Hill But Came Down a Mountain', Hugh Grant portrays Reginald Anson, an English cartographer. The film revolves around a Welsh village that discovers their beloved hill is 16 feet short of being classified as a mountain. When the villagers challenge this, Anson arrives to measure the hill but refuses to recognize it as a mountain.

16

Restoration

In the movie 'Restoration,' Hugh Grant takes on the role of Elias Finn, a skilled and ambitious young physician. Set in the 17th century, the film follows the story of Robert Merivel, played by Robert Downey Jr., who becomes the King's personal physician. Grant's character, Finn, is Merivel's loyal friend and confidant, supporting him through various trials and challenges.

15

Small Time Crooks

Hugh Grant starred in the 2000 Woody Allen comedy 'Small Time Crooks' as David, the British con artist who helps Ray (Woody Allen) and his wife Frenchy (Tracey Ullman) try to pull off a heist.

14

Bridget Jones's Diary

In the movie 'Bridget Jones's Diary', Hugh Grant portrays Daniel Cleaver, Bridget Jones's charming but morally dubious boss. Daniel is a charismatic womanizer who becomes involved in a flirtatious and complicated relationship with Bridget, played by Renée Zellweger.

13

Florence Foster Jenkins

Hugh Grant plays the role of St Clair Bayfield, the supportive and loving husband of Florence Foster Jenkins (played by Meryl Streep) in the 2016 biographical comedy-drama film 'Florence Foster Jenkins'. He supports her as she pursues her passion of singing, despite her lack of singing ability. He carefully manages her public appearances, even going as far as bribing critics to give her favorable reviews.

12

Impromptu

Hugh Grant plays Frederic Chopin, a famous composer whose life is disrupted when the eccentric writer George Sand (played by Judy Davis) visits his home. Grant's performance is a charming and lighthearted one, which perfectly captures the spirit of Chopin's life.

11

Four Weddings and a Funeral

Hugh Grant plays the role of Charles in 'Four Weddings and a Funeral'. Charles is an upper-class Englishman who struggles to find love, often bumbling his way through awkward situations and making plenty of mistakes along the way. He is a loyal friend to his circle of friends, and it is his relationship with the beautiful and mysterious Carrie (Andie MacDowell) that drives the romantic plot of the film.

10

About a Boy

Hugh Grant stars as Will Freeman in 'About a Boy'. Will is a wealthy bachelor who uses his charm and good looks to get by in life without having to work or commit to any serious relationships. He meets a strange boy, Marcus (Nicholas Hoult), and develops a relationship with him, teaching him how to be cool and helping him cope with his difficult home life. Will also learns to take responsibility and open his heart to love.

9

The Man from U.N.C.L.E.

Hugh Grant stars as Alexander Waverly in the film 'The Man from U.N.C.L.E'. The movie is a spy-fi action-adventure based on the 1960s television series of the same name. Waverly is the head of the United Network Command for Law and Enforcement, an organization tasked with fighting crime and espionage.

8

Notting Hill

Hugh Grant stars as William Thacker, the owner of a travel bookstore in Notting Hill. He meets and falls in love with Hollywood superstar Anna Scott (Julia Roberts), who is vacationing in London. The film follows their whirlwind romance as they try to make it work despite the obstacles they face.

7

Bitter Moon

Hugh Grant stars as Nigel in the film 'Bitter Moon'. He is an uptight, conservative British businessman who meets and falls in love with an eccentric French woman named Fiona (Emmanuelle Seigner). The two embark on a tumultuous, whirlwind affair that leads to tragedy.

6

Cloud Atlas

Hugh Grant appears as Henry Goose, an eighteenth-century doctor, in the film 'Cloud Atlas'. He is one of the many actors who portray multiple characters in the film.

5

Love Actually

Hugh Grant stars as the Prime Minister in the 2003 romantic comedy film 'Love Actually'. He is depicted as a kind and thoughtful leader who finds love with a young tea girl, Natalie (Martine McCutcheon). The Prime Minister is seen navigating his feelings for her, while also dealing with the pressures of running a country.

4

Maurice

Hugh Grant starred as Clive Durham in the 1987 movie Maurice, which was adapted from the E.M. Forster novel of the same name. The movie follows Clive and his struggles to reconcile his love for another man with the expectations of Edwardian society. Grant gives a powerful performance as the conflicted and passionate Clive.

3

Sense and Sensibility

Hugh Grant plays the role of Edward Ferrars in 'Sense and Sensibility'. Edward is a reserved and sensible young man who is in love with Elinor Dashwood, the eldest Dashwood sister. He is somewhat inhibited by his family's disapproval of the match, but ultimately decides to pursue his love for Elinor.

2

The Remains of the Day

Hugh Grant starred as Reginald Cardinal in the film 'The Remains of the Day'. The film is based on the novel of the same name by Kazuo Ishiguro.

1

The Gentlemen

In the movie 'The Gentlemen', Hugh Grant portrays Fletcher, a sleazy and cunning private investigator. Fletcher approaches Raymond, played by Charlie Hunnam, with inside information about a drug empire led by Mickey Pearson, portrayed by Matthew McConaughey. As the plot unfolds, Fletcher becomes a central figure, using his manipulative tactics to extort money from Raymond while revealing a complex web of deception and double-crossing within the criminal underworld.