Virgin Radio

25 Nov 2022, 15:49

Credit: Universal Pictures

That dance scene in Love Actually has now become an iconic piece of British television, but according to Hugh Grant, it didn’t come easy.

In a new clip from the ABC News special The Laughter & Secrets of Love Actually: 20 Years Later the actor admits he actually hated the idea of dancing on screen initially.

The iconic scene sees his character David (the Prime Minister) bust some moves around No. 10 Downing Street to The Pointer Sisters’ Jump before he is interrupted by his secretary.

It has become one of the most memorable moments in the movie, but according to Grant, he really did not want to do it.

He admitted to host Diane Sawyer: “"I saw it in the script and I thought, 'Well, I'll hate doing that,'

“I didn’t fancy doing the dance at all, let alone rehearsing it.”

Writer and director of the film, Richard Curtis, chipped in to reveal: “He kept saying no. I think he was hoping I’d get ill or something and we’d say, ‘Oh, well, what a shame, we’ll have to lose that dancing sequence.’”

The director also said Grant was incredibly “grump” when the time came to film the scene but joked he was under “a contractual obligation” to see it through.

Grant chipped it: “And I’m out of rhythm by the way, especially at the beginning when I wiggle my ass.”

According to the actor, he had the idea of having the PM’s secretary catching him having a boogie, putting an end to the scene.

He laughed: "And to this day, there's many people — and I agree with them — who think it's the most excruciating scene ever committed to celluloid. But then some people like it.”

Curtis and Grant have worked on many romcom movies together, particularly in the late 90s and early 2000s with the likes of Notting Hill, Four Weddings and a Funeral and Bridget Jones’s Diary.

Love Actually was the last film of that kind the pair collaborated on and in case you haven’t seen it, the film follows a group of character, primarily living in London, whose lives overlap in different ways in the weeks leading up to Christmas.

The one hour special will mark the 20th anniversary of the film and delve into how it became “a beloved Christmas tradition and a global sensation, with new insight into behind-the-scenes secrets and iconic scenes.”

Returning to chat about the movie alongside Grant and Curtis will also be Emma Thompson, Laura Linney, Bill Nighy, Thomas Brodie-Sangster, Olivia Olson and more, including a message from Martin McCutcheon, who played Natalie, Grant’s onscreen love interest.

Elsewhere in the special, Love Actually star Thomas Brodie-Sangster had quite the surprise when his walk down memory lane for the film’s 20th anniversary was abruptly interrupted by the police.