Final Fantasy XII: Original Soundtrack is the complete soundtrack for Final Fantasy XII, composed by Hitoshi Sakimoto, with the theme song composed by Nobuo Uematsu. The soundtrack includes six tracks not included in the game used in promotional stages. Vocals are performed by Angela Aki for the theme song, "Kiss Me Good-Bye".

Also included in the soundtrack is Taro Hakase's "Symphonic Poem "Hope", arranged by Yuji Toriyama and based on the game's main theme by Hitoshi Sakimoto. It was performed by the London Philharmonic Orchestra under the direction of Robin Smith.

Development[]

When writing music for a movie, the timings are fixed and you can write things very precisely to match each and every cue. Writing for games is very different. Although the music can't always be written to match the scene you have much more time to develop themes and impressions over the course of the game. Using sounds, melodies and chords you can control the impact this has on the player.

Hitoshi Sakimoto

Yasumi Matsuno, the game's original director, chose Sakimoto to compose the music.[1] Sakimoto described the project as "huge", and that he was nervous about it. The main Final Fantasy series up until Final Fantasy XII had been known for Nobuo Uematsu's music, and Sakimoto was originally wondering whether he should try to emulate Uematsu's previous work or not.

After considering the situation Sakimoto decided to go with his own style.[1] Before starting, Sakimoto already knew where the song "Kiss Me Good-Bye" was going to be used in the game, and how the song was going to sound, so he took that into consideration.[2] By the time Sakimoto joined in the project, the basic battle parts had already been in the works and the storyline and character settings had been done. Sakimoto discussed some basic principles with Matsuno, such as the atmosphere that the music needed to create and the characters' emotional changes, and created the tracks following these principles.[2]

Early on it was decided that the game's music would use a fundamental orchestra form, not because of the image of the game itself, but to avoid a particular kind of arrangement that can be created by an unbalanced orchestration with use of folk instruments.[2] Since the game's battle system battles take place on the field instead of in a separate battle screen like in previous Final Fantasy titles, Sakimoto was initially unsure whether he should put the music's emphasis on battle or exploration.

Ultimately, Sakimoto decided to try to match the game's music to each location, a strategy that would convey the atmosphere regardless of whether the player is engaged in battle. As a result, many pieces alternate between being bombastic and quiet.[3]

The music in the opening and the ending were recorded live and have been fully mixed to support Dolby Pro Logic. Most of the music in the game, however, uses the console's internal sound chip. Sakimoto didn't want the game's overall mood to be too dark, so he tried to incorporate elements to keep things lighter. He names the "Cerobi Steppe" as his favorite piece from the soundtrack.[3]

Track list[]

English track name are from the iTunes release.

Disc One (1:13:35)[]

Demo Movie — 1:36

(ループデモ, Rūpu Demo?, lit. Loop Demo)

Plays during the first part of the opening movie.

Final Fantasy (FFXII Version) — 1:17

(FINAL FANTASY ～FFXIIバージョン～, FINAL FANTASY ～FFXII Bājon～?)

Plays during the second part of the opening movie and when loading a save file.

Opening Movie (FFXII Theme) — 6:57

(オープニング・ムービー (FINAL FANTASY XIIのテーマ), Ōpunigu Mūbī (FINAL FANTASY XII no Tēma)?)

Plays during the opening cutscene from the wedding of Princess Ashe to the fall of Dalmasca.

Into the Fortress — 3:09

(潜入, Senyū?, lit. Infiltration)

Plays when Captain Basch, Vossler, Reks and the rest of the Dalmascan Soldiers are trying to stop the treaty signing at Nalbina Fortress.

Boss Battle — 3:24

(ボス戦, Bosu-sen?)

The boss battle theme. This also plays in the scene before the boss battles at the end of the Pharos.

Shadow Play — 3:13

(幻聴, Genchō?)

Plays in the cutscene when Reks witnesses Basch kill the King of Dalmasca.

Training in the Sewers — 2:09

(秘密の練習, Himitsu no Renshū?, lit. Secret Practice)

Plays when Vaan makes his first appearance in the Garamsythe Waterway with Kytes.

Small Favors — 0:08

(小さな幸せ, Chīsana Shiawase?, lit. A Small Happiness)

Unused track.

Streets of Rabanastre — 5:28

(王都ラバナスタ/市街地上層, Ōto Rabunasuta/Shigaichi Jōsō?, lit. The Royal City of Rabanastre/City Ward Upper Level)

The location theme for the Royal City of Rabanastre.

Penelo's Theme — 2:57

(パンネロのテーマ, Pannero no Tēma?)

One of only two eponymous character themes. Plays when Penelo makes her first appearance. [note 1]

To Be a Sky Pirate — 0:35

(空賊への夢, Kūzoku e no Yume?, lit. The Dream to be a Sky Pirate)

Plays during Vaan's telling of his dream to become a Sky Pirate.

Gutter-Churl — 3:03

(小悪党, Koakutō?, lit. Little Rascal)

Plays when Vaan is in the Sandsea looking for Kytes and when Jules makes his first appearance in Old Archades.

The Dalmasca Estersand — 4:03

(東ダルマスカ砂漠, Higashi Darumasuka Sabaku?)

The location theme of the Dalmasca Estersand.

Level Up — 0:07

(レベルアップ!, Reberu Appu!?)

Plays whenever a character levels up.

Heart of a Child — 3:01

(童心, Dōshin?, lit. Naivety)

Plays whenever the player boards a Skyferry. [note 1]

Cooperation (Imperial Version) — 2:48

(共存 (帝国バージョン), Kyōson (Teikoku Bājon)?)

A mild rendition of the "Theme of the Empire". Plays when the party meets Larsa.

Winds of Change — 2:21

(変化の兆し, Henka no Kizashi?, lit. Signs of Change)

Plays during scenes involving the subjects of the Archadian Empire.

Mission Accepted — 0:08

(ミッション開始, Misshon Kaishi?, lit. Mission Start)

Unused track.

Lowtown — 2:40

(ラバナスタ・ダウンタウン, Rabanasuta Dauntaun?, lit. Rabanastre Downtown)

The location theme for the Lowtown.

Mission Failed — 0:13

(ミッション失敗, Misshon Shippai?)

Unused track.

Quiet Resolve — 3:33

(静かなる決意, Shizukanaru Ketsui?)

Plays when Vaan first speaks to Old Dalan.

The Dalmasca Westersand — 1:34

(西ダルマスカ砂漠, Nishi Darumasuka Sabaku?)

The location theme for the Dalmasca Westersand.

The Clan Hall — 2:47

(クラン本部, Kuran Honbu?, lit. Clan Headquarters)

Plays in the Royal Palace of Rabanastre and when the player enters the Clan Centurio building.

Found Money — 0:09

(小さな拾い物, Chīsana Hiroimono?, lit. A Small Bargain)

Unused track.

Giza Plains — 4:43

(ギーザ草原, Gīza Sōgen?)

The location theme for the Giza Plains and Tchita Uplands.

Parting Ways — 0:31

(パンネロとの別れ, Pannero to no Wakare?, lit. Parting with Penelo)

Plays after the sidequest with Penelo at Giza Plains when she separates from Vaan.

The Garamsythe Waterway — 2:55

(ガラムサイズ水路, Garamusaizu Suiro?)

The location theme for the Garamsythe Waterway.

Portent — 2:48

(予兆, Yochō?)

Plays during dangerous situations.

Unrest — 2:57

(騒乱, Sōran?)

Plays during the Resistance's attack on the Royal Palace of Rabanastre when Vaan is running away from Balthier and Fran. Composed by Hayato Matsuo.

Nalbina Fortress — 2:22

(ナルビナ城塞市街地, Narubina Jōsai Shigaichi?, lit. Nalbina Fortress Town Ward)

The location theme for the Nalbina Fortress.

Disc Two (1:13:33)[]

Visions — 3:19

(王女の幻影, Ōjo no Gen'ei?, lit. The Princess' Vision)

Plays whenever Lord Rasler's apparition appears in front of Ashe.

Flash of Steel — 2:35

(剣の一閃, Tsurugi no Issen?, lit. Clash of Swords)

A battle theme that sometimes plays during boss battles. Also plays at the Third Ascent at the Pharos.

Victory Fanfare (FFXII Version) — 0:29

(勝利のファンファーレ ~FFXIIバージョン~, Shōri no Fanfāre ~FFXII Bājon~?)

The signature Final Fantasy Victory Fanfare that plays after boss battles and Esper battles.

Abyss — 3:25

(深淵, Shin'en?)

Unused track. Composed by Hayato Matsuo.

Gathering Storm (Imperial Version) — 2:00

(暗雲 [帝国バージョン], An'un [Teikoku Bājon]?)

Plays during scenes involving the Archadian Empire.

Balthier's Promise — 0:37

(バルフレアとの約束, Barufurea to no Yakusoku?, lit. A Promise with Balthier)

Plays during the cutscene when Balthier gives Penelo his handkerchief before he and the others are sent to the Nalbina Dungeons.

Game Over — 0:22

(ゲームオーバー, Gēmu Ōbā?)

The eponymous theme plays when all characters are KO'd.

Nalbina Dungeons — 4:35

(ナルビナ城塞地下雑居房, Narubina Jōsai Chika Zakkyobō?, lit. Nalbina Fortress Underground Prison)

The location theme for the Nalbina Dungeons.

Among Savages — 2:29

(蛮族, Banzoku?, lit. Barbarians)

Plays when Vaan engages Daguza, Gwitch and Galeedo in the Nalbina Dungeons, and during the fight against the Demon Wall in the Tomb of Raithwall. Also plays during the scene before the battle against Vayne Novus.

Drums of War — 2:46

(戦いのドラム, Tatakai no Doramu?)

The battle theme against the three seeq.

The Archadian Empire — 7:50

(帝国のテーマ, Teikoku no Tēma?, lit. Theme of the Empire)

Theme of the Archadian Empire. Plays whenever the Judge Magisters make an appearance. It is also the location theme for the Imperial City of Archades. It also plays during the first battle against Vayne.

Chocobo Theme (FFXII Arrangement, Version 1) — 2:49

(チョコボFFXIIアレンジVer.1, Chokobo FFXII Arenji Ver. 1?)

Unused track.

The Barheim Passage — 3:51

(バルハイム地下道, Baruhaimu Chikadō?)

The location theme for the Barheim Passage.

Sorrow (Resistance Version) — 3:36

(悲哀 [解放軍バージョン], Hiai [Kaihōgun Bājon]?)

Plays after defeating Vossler.

I Give You My Word — 0:57

(バッシュの回想, Basshu no Kaisō?, lit. Basch's Reminiscence)

Plays during Basch's flashback of the events in Nalbina Fortress.

Cooperation (Resistance Version) — 2:50

(共存 [解放軍バージョン], Kyōson [Kaihōgun Bājon]?)

A lighthearted theme that plays at some towns.

The Skycity of Bhujerba — 3:48

(空中都市ビュエルバ, Kūchū Toshi Byueruba?)

The location theme for the Skycity of Bhujerba.

The Stone's Secret — 3:24

(魔石の秘密, Maseki no Himitsu?)

The location theme for Lhusu Mines.

Black of Night (Imperial Version) — 2:00

(闇夜 (帝国バージョン), Yamiyo (Teikoku Bājon)?, lit. Dark Night (Empire Version))

Plays during the exchange between Vayne and Dr. Cid.

Giving Chase — 2:33

(言葉無き戦い, Kotoba naki Tatakai?, lit. A Speechless Battle)

Plays when the party is running away from Ba'Gamnan and his bounty hunters in the Lhusu Mines. Also plays in the battle against the optional Demon Wall, Deathgaze and the second battle against Ba'Gamnan in the Nam-Yensa Sandsea.

On the Bridge of Leviathan — 3:54

(戦艦リヴァイアサン艦橋, Senkan Rivaiasan Kankyō?)

Plays during the cutscene where the party first meets Judge Ghis.

Defying the Empire — 3:19

(帝国への挑戦, Teikoku e no Chōsen?)

The location theme for the Dreadnought Leviathan airship.

The Razor's Edge — 3:16

(切迫する事態, Seppaku suru Jitai?, lit. State of Emergency)

Plays during the escape from the Dreadnought Leviathan.

Discord (Imperial Version) — 3:13

(動乱 (帝国バージョン), Dōran (Teikoku Bājon)?)

The boss battle theme against the Judge Magisters. First heard against Ghis. Also plays during the battle against Vayne Novus.

The Tomb of Raithwall — 3:36

(レイスウォール王墓, Reisuwōru Ōbo?)

The location theme for the Tomb of Raithwall.

Disc Three (1:13:32)[]

The Yensan Sandsea — 2:21

(大砂海, Dai Sakai?)

The location theme for the Ogir-Yensa and Nam-Yensa Sandsea.

Battle with an Esper — 3:23

(召喚獣戦, Shōkanjū-sen?)

Plays during battles against Espers.

Sorrow (Imperial Version) — 2:49

(悲哀 [帝国バージョン], Hiai [Teikoku Bājon]?)

Plays during scenes involving deaths in Imperial Archadia.

Lust for Power — 3:13

(求めし力, Motomeshi Chikara?)

The location theme for Paramina Rift.

Life and Death — 2:44

(死闘, Shitō?)

A boss battle theme that plays when fighting against Vossler, Gabranth and Dr. Cid.

Jahara - Land of the Garif — 4:59

(ガリフの地ジャハラ, Garifu no Chi Jahara?)

The location theme for Jahara, the land of the garif.

Ozmone Plain — 2:30

(オズモーネ平原, Ozumōne Heigen?)

The location theme for Ozmone Plain. [note 1]

Golmore Jungle — 3:50

(ゴルモア大森林, Gorumoa Daishinrin?)

The location theme for Golmore Jungle. [note 2]

Eruyt Village — 4:13

(エルトの里, Eruto no sato?)

The location theme for Eruyt Village.

Try to Grow Up — 0:13

(本当に子供なんだから…。, Hontō ni Kodomo nandakara...?, lit. You're Really a Child...)

Plays when Vaan asks Fran how old she is before the party leaves Eruyt Village to find Mjrn.

Chocobo Theme (FFXII Version) — 2:04

(チョコボ ~FFXIIバージョン~, Chokobo ~FFXII Bājon~?)

Plays whenever the player rides a chocobo.

Threat Impendent — 2:45

(迫る脅威, Semaru Kyōi?)

The location theme for the Henne Mines. Also plays when the Sky Fortress Bahamut approaches the Royal City of Rabanastre.

Battle on the Big Bridge (FFXII Version) — 2:46

(ビッグブリッジの死闘 ~FFXIIバージョン~, Biggu Burijji no Shitō ~FFXII Bājon~?)

The boss battle theme against Gilgamesh and Enkidu at Lhusu Mines.

Discarded Power — 2:36

(捨て去りし力, Sutesarishi Chikara?)

The location theme that plays at Mt Bur-Omisace. Also plays during Ashe's meeting with the Occuria.

The Stilshrine of Miriam — 3:24

(ミリアム遺跡, Miriamu Iseki?)

The location theme for the Stilshrine of Miriam.

Respite — 2:10

(安息の時, Ansoku no Toki?)

Plays at the end of various dungeons, such as the Tomb of Raithwall, Stilshrine of Miriam and the Sochen Cave Palace.

Room of White — 3:45

(白い部屋, Shiroi Heya?, lit. White Room)

Plays during Vaan's reminiscence of his brother Reks's last moments. Also plays at Mt Bur-Omisace after defeating Judge Bergan.

The Salikawood — 2:37

(サリカ樹林, Sarika Jurin?)

The location theme for the Salikawood. [note 1]

Phon Coast — 3:59

(フォーン海岸, Fōn Kaigan?)

The location theme that plays at Phon Coast. Also plays when Balthier shows Vaan the Strahl for the first time. [note 3]

The Fates — 2:58

(宿命, Shukumei?)

Plays during solemn moments with several plot characters, such as during Balthier and Ashe's conversation at Phon Coast and after the defeat of Vayne Novus.

The Sochen Cave Palace — 3:39

(ソーヘン地下宮殿, Sōhen Chika Kyūden?)

The location theme for the Sochen Cave Palace.

A Moment's Rest — 4:32

(一時の休息, Ichiji no Kyūsoku?)

First heard in the Valley of Death in Tomb of Raithwall. Also it is the location theme for Old Archades and the Ridorana Cataract.

On the Riverbank — 3:12

(水のほとり, Mizu no Hotori?, lit. Near the Water)

Plays whenever the player stops at the outposts in locations throughout Ivalice, such as the one at the Dalmasca Estersand and the Phon Coast.

The Mosphoran Highwaste — 2:50

(モスフォーラ山地, Mosufōra Sanchi?)

The location theme for the Mosphoran Highwaste. [note 1]

Disc Four (1:13:52)[]

The Cerobi Steppe — 3:13

(セロビ大地, Serobi Daichi?)

The location theme for the Cerobi Steppe. [note 3]

The Esper — 2:45

(召喚, Shōkan?)

Plays whenever an Esper is summoned onto the field.

The Port at Balfonheim — 2:14

(港町バーフォンハイム, Minatomachi Bāfonhaimu?)

The location theme for the Balfonheim Port. The track is combined together with "Training in the Sewers".

Catnap — 0:14

(仮眠, Kamin?)

The eponymous resting theme that plays when the player chooses to rest at the Skyferry.

Zertinan Caverns — 3:23

(ゼルテニアン洞窟, Zerutenian Dōkutsu?)

The location theme for the Zertinan Caverns.

Realm of Memory — 4:01

(追憶の地, Tsuioku no Chi?)

The location theme for the Nabreus Deadlands.

The Forgotten City — 4:16

(忘れ去られし都, Wasuresarareshi Miyako?)

The location theme for the Necrohol of Nabudis.

The Feywood — 4:15

(幻妖の森, Gen'yō no Mori?)

The location theme for the Feywood.

Ashe's Theme — 5:30

(アーシェのテーマ, Āshe no Tēma?)

Ashe's eponymous theme. It is divided into two separate tracks in-game. The second half (1:37-2:39) is first heard when the party fights four Imperial Swordsmen in Garamsythe Waterway. Also plays when reaching the Pharos as well as being the location theme for the Subterra. The first half plays at the entrance of Giruvegan.

The Mystery of Giruvegan — 2:40

(ギルヴェガンの謎, Giruvegan no Nazo?)

The location theme for Giruvegan.

To Walk Amongst Gods — 3:24

(神々の場所へ, Kamigami no Basho e?, lit. To the Place of Gods)

The location theme for the Great Crystal. [note 1]

The Final Act — 3:37

(終局の始まり, Shūkyoku no Hajimari?, lit. The Beginning of the End)

The location theme for the First Ascent of the Pharos.

Ascent — 1:50

(頂上へ, Chōjō e?)

The location theme for the Second Ascent of the Pharos.

Sky Fortress Bahamut — 3:22

(空中要塞バハムート, Kūchū Yōsai Bahamūto?)

The location theme for the Sky Fortress Bahamut. [note 1]

Bahamut Shudders — 0:42

(揺れるバハムート, Yureru Bahamūto?)

Plays during the final confrontations against the Sky Fortress Bahamut.

Struggle for Freedom — 8:52

(自由への闘い, Jiyū e no Tatakai?)

The final boss battle theme.

Struggle's End — 1:14

(闘いの結末, Tatakai no Ketsumatsu?)

Plays after the final boss battle against The Undying that leads up to the ending cutscene.

Ending Movie — 6:19

(エンディング・ムービー, Endingu Mūbī?)

Plays during the cinematic ending scene.

Kiss Me Good-Bye -featured in FINAL FANTASY XII- — 4:59

The vocal theme that plays during the epilogue after the ending scene.

Performed by Angela Aki

Symphonic Poem "Hope" ~FINAL FANTASY XII PV ver.~ — 3:55

(交響詩「希望」Symphonic Poem "Hope" ~FINAL FANTASY XII PV ver.~, Kōkyōshi 「Kibō」 Symphonic Poem "Hope" ～FINAL FANTASY XII PV ver.～?)

Plays during the ending credits.

Final Fantasy XII Theme (Press Conference Version) — 3:06

(FINAL FANTASY XIIのテーマ (制作発表会バージョン), FINAL FANTASY XII no Tēma (Seisaku Happyōkai Bājon)?)

The track that features the theme presented by Hitoshi Sakimoto during the initial developments of the music.

Credits[]

Composed, Arranged & Produced by Hitoshi Sakimoto

Additional Composers:

Nobuo Uematsu & Hitoshi Sakimoto (1.01)

Nobuo Uematsu (1.02,2.03,2.12,3.11,3.13)

Hayato Matsuo (1.29,2.04,2.21,2.22,3.04,4.06,4.07)

Masaharu Iwata (3.21,4.08)

Additional Arrangers:

Hayato Matsuo (1.29,2.04,2.21,2.22,3.04,4.06,4.07)

Masaharu Iwata (3.21,4.08)

"Kiss Me Good-Bye"

Composer: Nobuo Uematsu

Arranger: Kenichiro Fukui

Lyricist: Angela Aki

"Symphonic Poem "Hope" (Inspired by Hitoshi Sakimoto's theme)

Composer: Taro Hakase, Yuji Toriyama

Arranger: Yuji Toriyama

Music samples[]

Limited edition[]

The limited edition of the soundtrack is stored in a DVD-style box complete with printed images on each disc. Also included, a 28-page booklet with many more printed images, providing more information about the soundtrack.

Sheet music[]

Published by DOREMI Music Publishing, the Final Fantasy XII Original Soundtrack Piano Solo Sheet Music book contains the sheet music for 51 pieces from the Final Fantasy XII: Original Soundtrack arranged for solo piano by Asako Niwa, and also includes the "Symphonic Poem 'Hope'" and "Kiss Me Good-Bye" arranged for piano by Angela Aki. The difficulty level is intermediate.

See also[]

Kiss Me Good-Bye (single)

Piano Collections: Final Fantasy XII

Final Fantasy XII The Zodiac Age Original Soundtrack

Notes[]

[]

VGMdb - Final Fantasy XII Original Soundtrack

VGMdb - Final Fantasy XII Original Soundtrack (Limited Edition)

VGMdb - Final Fantasy XII Original Soundtrack (reissue)