This song captures the essence of all that is Final Fantasy.

Edward Chris von Muir, on the Music Box in the 3D remake of Final Fantasy IV.

"Final Fantasy", also known as "Main Theme" (メインテーマ, Mein Tēma?), is a recurring piece of music composed by Nobuo Uematsu in the Final Fantasy series. It has also been called "Opening Theme" (オープニング・テーマ, Ōpuningu Tēma?) and "Prologue", due to it being played during the opening sequences. Because of this, along with its recurrence, it is considered to be the series's main theme.

The theme first played during the opening of the original Final Fantasy and has since appeared in most main series titles, except for Final Fantasy II, Final Fantasy X, and Final Fantasy XIII.

The theme from Final Fantasy is basically the song I'd like to be remembered by. I think it's very soft and warm, but there's a strength to it. It's appealing and I think it's the most important song in terms of everything I've ever done.

Nobuo Uematsu[1]

Game appearances[]

Final Fantasy[]

"Opening Theme" plays at the Cornelia Bridge and during the remake version's credits. It is track 3 on the All Sounds of Final Fantasy I & II album.

The original soundtrack of Final Fantasy Origins features an arrangement of this track by Nobuo Uematsu, and it is track 5 on disc 1.

"Opening Theme" was remastered and released on the Final Fantasy I・II・III Original Soundtrack Revival Disc.

"Opening Theme FFPR Ver." is a rearrangement by Ryoue Takagi for the pixel remaster. It is track 3 on the Final Fantasy I Pixel Remaster Original Soundtrack.

Final Fantasy III[]

"Opening Theme" is played at the Wind Crystal chamber after defeating the Land Turtle in the NES version, and after defeating Djinn in the 3D version, and briefly in the ending. The Bard also sings five notes of the tune when using the Sing command.

Final Fantasy IV[]

The theme has many recurring appearances. First played during the opening cinematic, it plays again during the prophecy of Cecil Harvey's destiny. It also plays during the game's end when the party members who do not join Cecil pray to give him and his companions strength for the final battle against Zeromus (2D and 3D).

In the Advance version's music player, the tune is called the "Prologue". In the 3D version's original soundtrack, the theme appears in the tracks "FFIV DS Opening Theme" and "Epilogue".

An arranged version of the "Prologue" is included on the Final Fantasy IV: Minimum Album. This version is also included on the Final Fantasy Mix album.

Final Fantasy V[]

The tune plays at the ending when Krile is at the Elder Tree. In the Advance version's Music Player the theme is titled "Final Fantasy".

Final Fantasy VI[]

The tune is played at the ending, mixed into the track "Ending Theme".

Final Fantasy VII[]

The tune plays during the credits, in the track "Staff Roll" at mark 3:31.

Final Fantasy VII: Advent Children[]

An orchestrated version plays during the credits.

Final Fantasy VII Rebirth[]

Cid briefly hums the tune during the ending while repairing the Tiny Bronco.

Final Fantasy VIII[]

The tune appears in the "Ending Theme" of the Final Fantasy VIII: Original Soundtrack. It was arranged in form of a military march following "Eyes On Me", and plays during the sequence following the ending FMV in which both credits and a home movie style sequence are displayed, from 6:59 to 10:00.

Final Fantasy IX[]

The tune is played during the M.S. Prima Vista escape scene and during the credits, right after the song "Melodies Of Life", and also in the Final Fantasy IX: Original Soundtrack at the end of "Melodies Of Life". It is also played during the game's opening sequences when Vivi Ornitier looks into the sky and sees the theater ship. This track is called "Skies of Alexandria".

Final Fantasy XI[]

"Main Theme - FINAL FANTASY XI Version" plays during the final cutscene of the A Crystalline Prophecy additional scenario, and also after defeating Shinryu and speaking to Prishe in the Abyssea storyline. It also plays in a cutscene following the defeat of Hades in Seekers of Adoulin. It appears the final time when the adventurer finally meets the Goddess Altana in the final chapter, Rhapsodies of Vana'diel.

It is track 3 of disc 1 on the Final Fantasy XI Original Soundtrack - Plus.

Final Fantasy XII[]

The theme plays during the PlayStation 2 version intro and in the title screen, and appears on the Final Fantasy XII: Original Soundtrack as "Final Fantasy (FFXII Version)". It is also used several times during the sequences where Halim Ondore IV reads from his memoirs. As with other tracks, the theme was remastered for Final Fantasy XII The Zodiac Age, with the remastered version included on the Final Fantasy XII The Zodiac Age Original Soundtrack. However, The Zodiac Age omits the intro sequence, instead going straight to the title screen when the player starts a game.

Final Fantasy XII: Revenant Wings[]

The tune plays at the opening FMV and at the end of the game.

Lightning Returns: Final Fantasy XIII[]

The tune can be heard in Yusnaan being played by the band near the monorail station

Final Fantasy XIV[]

During version 1.0, this theme was part of the song "Opening Theme".

This theme is used in the song "A World Apart", which plays when the player first takes an airship to other starting cities during the main storyline. It also plays during the conclusions of several major storylines, such as the 2.0 main quest, when a Zodiac Weapon is obtained, and the ending of the Shadow of Mhach, among others.

A piano arrangement of "A World Apart", mixed with the sound effects of the mounts, was used in the "Eorzea Symphony" trailer for Final Fantasy XIV: Heavensward.

An arranged version of the theme, incorporated alongside "Kainé / Salvation" from NieR and "Thirteenth Chapter ~ Closing" from Drakengard, plays in the fight against the final boss of The Tower at Paradigm's Breach in Final Fantasy XIV: Shadowbringers.

"The Tale of the Star" is an orchestral arrangement that plays in the beginning of the end credits in Final Fantasy XIV: Endwalker.

Final Fantasy XV[]

"FINAL FANTASY Main Theme (KINGSGLAIVE Version)" is a version arranged by Yoshitaka Suzuki that plays in Kingsglaive: Final Fantasy XV, when the Niflheim delegation arrives in Insomnia for the treaty-signing. It is track 13 on disc 1 of the Kingsglaive: Final Fantasy XV: Original Soundtrack.

"Main Theme from FINAL FANTASY" is an arrangement of the theme by Yoko Shimomura and Shota Nakama plays in Final Fantasy XV during the after-credits epilogue. It is track 96 on the Final Fantasy XV: Original Soundtrack.

The original Final Fantasy I track, called "Opening Theme", is also included in the music player. It is available since the beginning as part of the Memories of FF album. The Dissidia arrangements are available on the Memories of DISSIDIA FF and Memories of Dissidia 012 FF albums purchasable from Old Lestallum for 500 gil.

A new rock arrangement of the theme plays during the credits of the Close Encounter of the Terra Kind quest, which is a crossover with Terra Wars.

In Episode Ignis "Extra Verse", an arrangement plays during the last cutscene called "My Humblest Desire" (臣下の本懐, Shinka no Honkai?, lit. Vassal's Long-cherished Desire). It was arranged by Tadayoshi Makino with additional composition by Yasunori Mitsuda. It is track 68 on disc 1 of the Final Fantasy XV Original Soundtrack Volume 2.

Kingsglaive: Final Fantasy XV has an unrelated track also called "Prologue" that also appears in the Final Fantasy XV music player.

Final Fantasy XVI[]

Final Fantasy Type-0[]

A short version of the tune can be heard in "Zero", sung by Bump of Chicken during the ending. The version of "Zero" in the Zero / BUMP OF CHICKEN single does not include the theme.

Final Fantasy Crystal Chronicles: The Crystal Bearers[]

Layle hums the theme while raiding the Tribe Unity ball. An arrangement of the "Prologue" was heard in an early trailer, but it does not appear in the final game.

Dissidia Final Fantasy (2008)[]

The tune plays at the ending's final part, a recreation of the Cornelia Bridge scene from the original Final Fantasy. On the Dissidia Final Fantasy Original Soundtrack, it is titled "FINAL FANTASY from DISSIDIA FINAL FANTASY" and arranged by Takeharu Ishimoto.

Dissidia 012 Final Fantasy[]

"Final Fantasy (from "Dissidia 012 [Duodecim] Final Fantasy")"

The theme plays during the ending's final part. On the Dissidia 012 Final Fantasy Original Soundtrack, it is titled "Final Fantasy (from "Dissidia 012 [Duodecim] Final Fantasy")" and is a different arrangement than the previous version, arranged by Kentaro Sato. It was performed by the FILMharmonic Orchestra Prague and recorded at the Dvorak Hall.

Dissidia Final Fantasy NT[]

""Opening Theme" from FINAL FANTASY (Arrangement)" is a techno-pop arrangement by Takeharu Ishimoto that appears as battle music. It is one of the default themes.

It is also the first piece that plays during the game's ending sequence.

""Opening Theme" from FINAL FANTASY (Arrangement)" is track 7 of disc 1 on the Dissidia Final Fantasy -Arcade- Original Soundtrack and track 7 on the Dissidia Final Fantasy NT Original Soundtrack.

Theatrhythm Final Fantasy[]

The original Final Fantasy version, labeled "Opening Theme", is a playable Event Music Sequence track whose cutscenes depict events from the defeat of Bikke to the battle with Chaos and the Warriors of Light saving the world.

Additionally, "FINAL FANTASY ~FFXII Version~" appears as the opening music for the Final Fantasy XII Series Mode play.

Various versions of the theme are included on Theatrhythm Final Fantasy Compilation Album.

Theatrhythm Final Fantasy Curtain Call[]

The "Opening Theme" is a Field Music Sequence. It is also included on the Best of Theatrhythm Final Fantasy Curtain Call album.

Theatrhythm Final Fantasy All-Star Carnival[]

Theatrhythm Final Bar Line[]

"Opening Theme", "Final Fantasy (FFXII Version)", and "Main Theme from FINAL FANTASY" all return from Curtain Call and All-Star Carnival respectively.

The original medley "THEATRHYTHM FINAL BAR LINE Special Battle Arrangement Medley", Opening, Ending, and menu screen feature this theme.

Final Fantasy Record Keeper[]

The Final Fantasy main theme is included as part of the 6th anniversary special arrange medley, taken from the top 10 music from All Final Fantasy Big Vote.

It is also included as part of the 7th anniversary medley.

Final Fantasy Brave Exvius[]

An orchestral, choral version plays whenever the game downloads the data for a major update.

Stranger of Paradise Final Fantasy Origin[]

There are two arrangements of "Opening Theme" which appear in the game. "Sarah's Lute - Motif from "Opening Theme"" is an arrangement which is played by Sarah when she first appears. It was arranged and performed on the lute by Masahi Kuno.

"Stranger - Motif from "Opening Theme"" is an arrangement which plays during the cutscene when the Strangers set out for their journey. It also plays during the end credits. It was arranged by Naoshi Mizuta.

They are track 14 of disc 1 and track 23 of disc 4 on the Stranger of Paradise Final Fantasy Origin Original Soundtrack.

Chocobo's Crystal Tower[]

The NES "Opening Theme" version from the original Final Fantasy plays at the intro.

Arrangement album appearances[]

Final Fantasy IV: Celtic Moon[]

This contains a selection of tracks, arranged and performed in the style of Irish Celtic music. The theme of Final Fantasy is called "Prologue..." and is the second track on the album.

Piano Collections: Final Fantasy IV[]

Called "Prologue..." the album contains a solo piano arrangement of the theme.

Final Fantasy 1987-1994[]

A piano version of the "Final Fantasy" theme is included on this "best of" type album.

Final Fantasy: Pray[]

"Pray" is a vocal arrangement of the main theme from the original featured in the eponymous music album, co-composed and sung by Risa Ohki in Japanese. The lyrics were written by Kazuko Sancha and it was arranged by Toshiro Mitsutomi. Mikihiko Matsumiya played the guitar.

Lyrics[]

The official lyrics were released on the album.

Unofficial English translation

From far and silent starry skies

Echoes a song full of life.

Crossing a darkness of thousands of light years,

It finally arrives at a single earth.

With eyes closed just so,

(Close your eyes in the silent night)

Like a faraway prayer,

(Pray your dream with your honest heart)

So that one day

Our dreams will come true.

Time is so long that

These tiny palms can barely hold it.

At the end of a million-mile voyage,

We can still run across smiling faces.

Now, wet with tears,

(Cross your palm in the holy night)

As though deep in prayer,

(Pray your dream with your honest love)

So that one day

Sadness, too, will end.

From far and silent starry skies,

A song full of life can be heard.

Guitar Solo Final Fantasy Official Best Collection[]

"Opening Theme", it is the first track on the album, which consists entirely of solo classical guitar arrangements of tracks from the Final Fantasy main series, performed by Yuji Sekiguchi.

Love SQ[]

"FINAL FANTASY Main Theme" was remixed by PE'Z and appears as track 1 on the album.

More SQ[]

"FINAL FANTASY MAIN THEME ~ROCKETMAN LOVE & COURAGE MIX~" is an arrangement by ROCKETMAN that appears as track 1 on the album.

"FINAL FANTASY Main Theme" was arranged by Kuricorder Quartet and appears as track 13 on the album.

A New Story[]

Lyrics[]

Break into a new day

A new chapter of your story

Close your eyes and see with your heart,

your destination

Climb over mountains and sail across the ocean

Let the journey take you

to stand on higher ground

Fate has brought you here on this land

so have faith in your destiny

and burn the fire inside your soul

Feel the earth, the sky and the ocean tremble

as you realize the power

that lies deep down within your heart

Guided by the stars, shining high up in the sky

Find a way that leads to the place,

you have always dreamed of

Each and every trial is there for you to be stronger

There will be a day,

when all things become much clearer

Fate has brought you here on this land

so have faith in your destiny

and burn the fire inside your soul

Feel the earth, the sky and the ocean tremble

as you realize the power

that lies deep down within your heart

Within your heart

Piano Opera Final Fantasy I/II/III[]

"Prelude - Opening Theme" is a piano arrangement medley that appears as track 1 on the album, arranged and performed by Hiroyuki Nakayama.

It was released again on the Piano Opera Final Fantasy I-IX.

Beer SQ[]

"Main Theme (Final Fantasy)" appears in the pub-theme style arrangement album as its 1st track. It was arranged by RÄFVEN.

SQ Chips 2[]

"Opening Theme" appears in the 8-bit arrangement album as its 13th track. It was arranged and sound mixed by Takeshi Yokemura and performed by YMCK.

Final Fantasy Tribute ~Thanks~[]

"Opening Theme" was arranged by Tokyo Ska Paradise Orchestra and appears as track 1 of disc 1 on the album.

"Opening Theme" is part of a medley arrangement by pesama. It is the first part of the medley followed by "Prelude", "Main Theme", "Town", "Chaos Shrine", "Matoya's Cave", "Battle", "Victory", and "End Theme".

"Opening Theme" is also part of a medley arrangement by YUKIYOSHI. It is the last part of the medley following "The Rebel Army", "The Red Wings", "Chaos Shrine", "The Dawn Warriors", and "Celes's Theme".

Cure SQ[]

"Main Theme (from FINAL FANTASY)" was arranged by Masaki Kurihara and performed by Kuricorder Quartet. It is track 11 on the album.

BRA★BRA Final Fantasy Brass de Bravo[]

"FF Main Theme" is a wind-instrument arrangement by Rika Ishige and Shirō Hamaguchi that appears as track 10 on the album, conducted by Hiroyasu Matsumoto and performed by the Siena Wind Orchestra.

Last SQ[]

"Main Theme" from Beer SQ appears as track 2 of disc 1 on the album.

"Chaos Shrine ~ Dancing Mad ~ Opening Theme" is a medley of Final Fantasy and Final Fantasy VI that appears as track 15 of disc 2 on the album, arranged by Megumi Shiraishi featuring Kei Hirosue.

BRA★BRA Final Fantasy Gaiden: Minna de Bravo![]

"Opening Theme (FINAL FANTASY series)" from Final Fantasy Tribute ~Thanks~ appears as track 1 on the album, arranged and performed by Tokyo Ska Paradise Orchestra.

"Main Theme [promo_only_ver.] (FINAL FANTASY series)" is a bonus track on the album. It was performed solo by Kazuaki Kikumoto, arranged by Sachiko Miyano and recorded at Philia Hall.

Distant Worlds IV: more music from FINAL FANTASY[]

An orchestral arrangement of "FINAL FANTASY (FINAL FANTASY Series)" is recorded and included on the album as track 15, conducted by Arnie Roth and performed by the Distant Worlds Philharmonic Orchestra and Chorus. It was recorded on March 14 and 15, 2017 in The Dvorak Hall, Rudolfinum, Prague, Czech Republic.

Square Enix Jazz -Final Fantasy-[]

"Main Theme Jazz Arrangement (FINAL FANTASY SERIES)" is an arrangement by Eijiro Nakagawa that appears as track 12 on the album.

Final Fantasy Series Acoustic Arrangements[]

Final Fantasy holds such a special place in my heart. To arrange Uematsu-San's main theme is a wonderful experience, and an honour. It was very difficult to find the balance between a "traditional" and a "new" arrangement but I knew I wanted to play with nostalgia and memories of this theme.

The second half takes on a new life, deploying new rhythmic ideas and slowing building pace and rhythm in a slightly neo-baroque style. Finally at the ending, the arrangement returns to its original arrangement in order to come full circle. Please enjoy this arrangement.

Kevin Penkin

"Opening Theme" was arranged by Kevin Penkin, performed by Atsuki Yoshida (violin), Mei Mishina (viola), Kirin Uchida (violoncello), Misaki Hatori (flute), and Keiko Shinozuka (clarinet). It is track 1 on the album.

Distant Worlds VI: more music from Final Fantasy[]

"FINAL FANTASY SERIES: Main Theme" is an orchestral arrangement performed and recorded on October 28 and 30, 2022 at the Dvořák Hall of the Rudolfinum in Prague, Czech Republic. It was conducted by Arnie Roth and performed by the FILMharmonic Orchestra Prague and the Distant Worlds Philharmonic Choir. It is track 17 on the album.

A New World: intimate music from Final Fantasy - Volume III[]

"FINAL FANTASY I: Main Theme" was performed by guitar soloist Sam Griffin and recorded at his personal studio.

Live performances[]

20020220 music from Final Fantasy[]

"Final Fantasy" performed by Tokyo Philharmonic Orchestra, is included on this concert recording.

More Friends - Music from Final Fantasy[]

"Final Fantasy" is included on this live recording of an orchestral concert, performed by The World Festival Symphony Orchestra conducted by Arnie Roth at the Universal Amphitheatre in Los Angeles, California on May 16, 2005.

Japan Self-Defense Forces Marching Festival 2012[]

J.S.D.F. (Japan Self-Defense Forces) performed "Prelude" and "Final Fantasy" during the marching festival in November 17, 2012 alongside the U.S.M.C. 3rd Marine Expeditionary Force Band and U.S. Army Pacific Ocean Band.

Distant Worlds: music from Final Fantasy The Celebration[]

"FINAL FANTASY Series : FINAL FANTASY" was performed live as an encore and recorded as track 19 on the album celebrating Final Fantasy 25th Anniversary, conducted by Arnie Roth and performed by the Kanagawa Philharmonic Orchestra. It is the orchestra arrangement of Shirō Hamaguchi.

BRA★BRA Final Fantasy Brass de Bravo 2017 with Siena Wind Orchestra[]

A live recording of "FINAL FANTASY Main Theme" was held at the Tokyo Bunka Kaiken on May 14, 2017 and recorded, conducted by Hirofumi Kurita and performed by the Siena Wind Orchestra and on the recorders. It was released as track 5 on the album.

Distant Worlds: music from Final Fantasy Jiritsu[]

"FINAL FANTASY SERIES : Main Theme" was performed live for the concert and recorded for the Final Fantasy 30th Anniversary, orchestrated by Shirō Hamaguchi. The recording was conducted by Arnie Roth and performed by the New Japan Philharmonic.

Tokyo 2020 Summer Olympics[]

An arrangement of the theme was played during the flag parade of the opening ceremony. Arrangements of the victory fanfare and "Olympus Coliseum" from Kingdom Hearts were also featured.

Final Fantasy 35th Anniversary Distant Worlds: music from Final Fantasy Coral Live CD[]

"FINAL FANTASY Main Theme with Choir -The Definitive Orchestral Arrangement-" was performed live for the concert and recorded for the Final Fantasy 35th Anniversary, orchestrated by Shirō Hamaguchi and the chorus arranged by Hiroyuki Nakayama. The recording hall was at the Tokyo International Forum, conducted by Arnie Roth and performed by the New Japan Philharmonic and Barzz.

Compilation album appearances[]

Final Fantasy Vinyls[]

"Opening Theme" is included on disc 1 of this collector's edition set.

Final Fantasy Heroes[]

"Opening Theme" appears as a hidden track on the album.

Final Fantasy 30th Anniversary Composers' Selection CD[]

Celebrating Final Fantasy 30th Anniversary, "Opening Theme" was selected by composer Hitoshi Sakimoto for the album.

Final Fantasy 30th Anniversary Tracks 1987-2017[]

"Opening Theme" is track 52 of disc 2 on the album as a bonus track.

Final Fantasy Series 35th Anniversary Orchestral Compilation Vinyl[]

Two arrangements of the theme first appear on this compilation album celebrating Final Fantasy 35th Anniversary, orchestrated by Shirō Hamaguchi: "FINAL FANTASY Main Theme -The Definitive Orchestral Arrangement-" and "FINAL FANTASY Main Theme with Choir -The Definitive Orchestral Arrangement-". The chorus was arranged by Hiroyuki Nakayama. Both are tracks 1 and 5 respectively of side A on disc 1 on the album.

Citations[]

References[]

[]