This is part four of a series! The other parts can be found here: (one, two, three).

And we’re back! Sorry it took so long, I had lots of work, a wedding, and a hurricane to deal with! But now it’s time for a soundtrack that I know is near and dear to a lot of people – Final Fantasy IV! Along with an original soundtrack, a remake soundtrack, and an arranged album, as we’ve come to expect, as well as a return of remixes, there is also another, shorter arranged album, and, for the first time, a piano collection album! This would start a trend of piano collection albums that would actually end up lasting longer into the series than the arranged albums – the last ‘piano collections’ album was for Final Fantasy XIII!

I should give a small warning – though I like FFIV’s soundtrack, I’m not nearly as enamored by it as a lot of the rest of the internet seems to be. So it’s quite possible my picks will be at odds with popular opinion in some cases. I encourage you to look further into the soundtrack if you find yourself really liking all the tracks I recommend. Regardless, there’s a lot to love about this one, so let’s dive in!

Final Fantasy IV – SNES

The Super Famicom/SNES version of the Final Fantasy IV soundtrack was released in 1991 as an album titled “Final Fantasy IV Original Sound Version“. It was Nobuo Uematsu’s first foray into higher-quality sound hardware for a videogame, a foray that was wildly successful by most standards.

There is a remastered version of this soundtrack, released in 2013. I highly recommend purchasing this version, should you decide you want to own this music. The remastered version has superior sound quality, of course, but more than that, it loops the songs twice instead of just once like on the original release, and it has a few extra tracks that didn’t make the cut before.

There’s a lot of tracks I like, but don’t quite love in this one, so expect a lot of songs in the ‘other fun tracks’ section.

What you should definitely listen to:

Theme of Love – starting strong, with arguably the most well-known and beloved piece of music from this whole soundtrack. There’s a good reason for it – it’s an amazing, beautiful track.

The Dreadful Fight – also known as “Battle of the Four Fiends”, this is a fantastic song that really ups the drama of the battle music to this point, cluing you into just how much of a challenge this series of bosses truly poses to you.

Main Theme of Final Fantasy IV – a fun, flowing track that does a great job of setting the overall tone for the game.

Mystic Mysidia – there’s some really fun use of various sound effects in this one, that work to give an odd, unfamiliar air to the town it represents.

Dancing Calcobrena – it’s short, but boy does this track, a creepy waltz, leave a lasting impression.

Fight 1 – another great, peppy fight theme.

Samba de Chobobo! – the song that would start the tradition of remixing the chocobo theme with different musical styles – and what a way to kick that tradition off!

Other fun tracks:

Tower of Bab-il – a very enjoyable dungeon theme.

The Final Battle – Uematsu has a fun time again with the final boss music again, but it’s not as relistenable to me as many of his other efforts.

The Lunarians – though it’s not a very exciting track, I love the otherworldly tone this piece of music sets.

Troian Beauty – a classic track that grates on me if I listen to it too much.

Cry in Sorrow – a sad track for a terrible loss.

Rydia – the theme for the character of the same name, with an appropriate amount of melancholy.

The Prelude – the first version of this melody that I like a fair bit.

Fight 2 – this is actually the normal boss battle music, and it’s fun, even if it’s not quite as catchy as Fight 1.

Hey, Cid! – a jolly theme for a version of jolly version of Cid.

Golbez Clad in Darkness – the theme for the main villain (throughout most of the game), there’s some interesting use of a synthesized organ, but there’s not a lot else going on here, especially compared to later villain themes.

Fabul – an interesting track that manages to sound like a faraway land, as it no doubt intended.

Welcome to Our Town! – the normal town theme, peaceful and inviting.

The Airship – another airship theme, and it’s fun, but not much different than all the others up to this point.

Fanfare – that good ol’ battle ending music.

Chocobo-Chocobo – pretty much the last ‘normal’ version of this theme, as virtually all others past this point are in some other musical style.

Chocobo Forest – a cute little Chocobo theme variant. This one can’t be found on the original release, only the remaster.

Final Fantasy IV – NDS

Released in 2008, the soundtrack to the DS remake of Final Fantasy IV was called “Final Fantasy IV Original Soundtrack“. Uematsu’s original tracks were rearranged for the DS hardware by Junya Nakano and Kenichiro Fukui, who did a fine job translating the original work.

This is the last remake soundtrack for quite some time, as the other SNES-era and the PS1-era games never had their music rearranged when they were ported to other systems.

What you should definitely listen to:

Moonlight ~Ending Version~ – it’s a vocal version of the Theme of Love, and it’s utterly gorgeous, and I love it.

Theme of Love – an amazing song, now with more harp.

Final Fantasy IV Main Theme – I love the sound of the bass in this version.

Battle 1 – this rearranged version of an old battle theme miraculously still sounds good!

Battle with Golbez’s Four Emperors – listen to that lovely bass.

Troia – the instrumentality of this version works a lot better for me than the original.

Other fun tracks:

The Lunarians – this one sounds a bit more dire now.

Kingdom Baron – greater instrumentality makes for a more sonically rich and enjoyable version of this formerly mediocre song.

Battle 2 – the boss music returns, and honestly I like this one a bit better than the original, but it’s still my least favorite FFIV battle theme.

Rydia – harp and strings make this song even more melancholy than before.

Boss Cid – I love that tuba.

Mystic Mysidia – I don’t find the sounds in this one as charming as the original’s, but it’s still a good song.

Castle Damcyan – I think it’s the bass that makes me enjoy this song more than the original.

King Giott’s Castle – this song makes me feel like I’m going to fall over – in a good way?

Golbez, Clad in Darkness – now with more organ-y organ.

Dancing Doll Calcobrena – something’s a little lost in translation on this one.

Final Fantasy IV – Minimum Album, Celtic Moon, Piano Collections, & After Years

Final Fantasy IV was popular, and that popularity spawned several music albums, many remakes, and even sequels. There’s a lot of extra music to listen to, but is all of it worth it? Frankly, no. If you were to only buy one of the arrangement albums for FFIV, I would far and away recommend Celtic Moon. But, for the sake of completion, here’s the good stuff from all three side albums, and from the sequel game, The After Years.

Minimum Album:

This album is decent, but there’s nothing particularly amazing about it. It includes arranged versions of some songs, and a few unreleased tracks. The best thing on it is, perhaps unsurpringly, the Theme of Love arrangement.

Celtic Moon:

This 1991 release features, as one might expect from the title, Celtic arrangements of various FFIV tracks. They’re arranged by Máire Breatnach, and the majority of them are great. My absolute favorites are:

Mystic Mysidia – you haven’t lived until you’ve heard this one. It works so perfectly, and is by far my favorite track on the album.

Main Theme of Final Fantasy IV – this is an overall very relaxing version of the main theme, with a fun extra melody thrown in partway through, and some really great percussion.

Dancing Calcobrena – the violin works so well for this song, and the second melody is quite good, too, even if it’s rather different.

Piano Collections:

This 1992 album features piano renditions of several FFIV tracks, performed by Toshiyuki Mori. It’s a solid album, but I vastly prefer later piano collections.

Standouts include: The Prelude, Rydia, and, once again my favorite, Theme of Love.

The After Years (Final Fantasy IV & The After Years Sounds Plus):

The soundtrack to The After Years, composed by Junya Nakano, is, like the game it represents, mostly forgettable. The one track I would most recommend is Epilogue II.

Final Fantasy IV – Remixes

Final Fantasy IV’s music is popular enough to have spawned not only a lot of remixes, but a whole fan remix album, called Echoes of Betrayal, Light of Redemption. Here’s a list of my favorites, both from that album, and from elsewhere on the internet (by which I mean ocremix.org).

Smiling Hilltop for Four Hands, Kind of Green, All Your Calcobrena Are Belong to Us, Smooth Sun of Magma, Rydia’s Chocobo, and A Chocobo’s Mystic Life.

That’s it for the FFMG this time around. If there’s a song you feel I missed or should give a second chance to, leave a comment, and I’ll listen to and reconsider it! Let me know if there’s something different or more you’d like from me in these articles, or hey, if you just wanna tell me you like my picks, that’s cool too!

Next time it’ll be the often-neglected Final Fantasy V!