The street along the western edge of the newly-created Central Park was known as Eighth Avenue in the 1860s and was sparsely developed; the portion of the street adjacent to the park came to be known as Central Park West by the 1890s. The block of Central Park West between W. 61st and W. 62nd Street (futire location for The Hotel Mayflower) was developed by 1894 with four brick buildings in the south half of the block and one brick building and a brick stable on the north half of the block (see the Bromley map image below). One of these buildings was the birthplace in 1898 of composer Vincent Youmans (known for the song "Tea for Two" from "No, No Nanette").

The general contractor for construction of The Hotel Mayflower in 1926 was Joseph E. Gilbert. The architect, Emery Roth, left his mark on a number of buildings along this street and elsewhere in town. The hotel was generally known as a unpretentious place to stay overlooking Central Park but had a few notable occupants, including the producer of the first silent Felix the Cat cartoon films, Patrick Sullivan (1885-1933).

The owners in 1982 reportedly stripped The Hotel Mayflower's terra cotta ornamentation - pilasters, cherubim, swags - from its exterior; the New York Times called the hotel a "drab brown" building in 2004. Developers William and Arthur Zeckendorf purchased the hotel and several adjacent lots for over $400 million in 2004. A liquidation sale at the hotel in 2004 offered everything from a Yamaha baby grand piano for $6,500 to dozens of pedestal sinks and television sets.

The last four residents of the rent-controlled apartments in The Hotel Mayflower were not allowed to be evicted, by terms of their leases. The bachelors had resided in their respective, tiny apartments in the north half of the hotel for 30 to 35 years. The men earned from a million to 17 million dollars apiece for their trouble to move someplace else, with the last holdout costing the Zeckendorfs the most. One was a 98-year-old with relatives in Mexico. Another was a former show-business agent in his 90s. The third was the son of famed World War II U.S. General Douglas MacArthur and was living under an assumed name to escape the shadow of his famous father. The last holdout had been living two floors above the building's highest elevator landing and had no desire to leave his home since 1974. A genius with multiple degrees in physics and a medical degree, he wanted another apartment with as nice of a view - the apartment had views of Central Park, the East River, and the Hudson River. The final tenant even held his ground after the developers began demolishing the southern end of the hotel. Eventually, he settled for a $2 million condo in the Essex House and another $15 million. In return, the developers received the princely sum of a dollar in monthly rent on the condo, paid for ten years in advance with a $120 check. The individual almost completed their ten-year stay in the Essex House, living there for a dollar per month until his death at age 80 in 2011.