‘The practice is unique because of the breadth and depth of Ivan Schlager’s team’s domain expertise on CFIUS and other national security-related matters. We value its ability to quickly prepare the appropriate submissions to government regulatory bodies.’

‘In addition to the trust and confidence Ivan Schlager and his team has with the staff at the various agencies, they also have an ability to connect with and provide advice related to political appointees who are the ultimate decision makers.’

‘Ivan Schlager’s team is commercial and understands transaction dynamics, giving it a unique ability to communicate effectively with financial professionals on regulatory matters. It is also incredibly creative in developing mitigation plans and solutions.’

‘We appreciate its presence both in Washington DC and Europe, where we are based, and its strong views on what is, and what is not, acceptable from US Department of Defense’s point of view.’

‘Ivan Schlager has an incredible amount of experience and a very strong regular dialogue with US authorities. Provides very good insights and measured and constructive advice.’

‘Lucille Hague is amazing. She a technical expert on the CFIUS rules, she is thoughtful and responsive, and she works extremely hard. I’m a CFIUS lawyer too, and I very much value her judgment.’

‘The STB team is truly exceptional and the best in the market. Its understanding of not only CFIUS but FDI regimes around the world, and the political context, means it is unparalleled in providing astute advice.’

‘The team’s sharing of knowledge and desire to understand insights from around the globe means it is a repository of what is market practice. In addition lawyers look for, and find, innovative solutions and paths through regulatory approvals processes.’

‘Malcolm Tuesley is extremely strong. A long-time veteran of the space, there is nothing Malcolm hasn’t seen. I rely on his experience as one of the CFIUS bar’s senior leaders.’

‘Mark Skerry is a leading individual globally. We deal with numerous global law firms. Mark’s desire to work collaboratively to develop innovative regulatory strategies is second to none. He is also a complete delight who understands and appreciates the confines and technicalities of jurisdictional FDI issues.’

‘Very high professional skills, very pragmatic approach to the CFIUS regulation, very good understanding of the regulator’s approach and expectations and strong ability to navigate the proceeding to deliver a result. Tier-one service.’

‘STB’s practice is very strong. CFIUS is very much a small universe where it’s important “who you know” and the law is more art than science. STB is extremely well connected and works for many major clients, which is huge because it provides more insight into a very black-box process than most firms.’

‘Mark Skerry is a star. Recently promoted to partner, but provides services of a veteran of decades of practice. I rely on Mark to, in some senses, operate as my right hand and almost another in-house counsel with me. He manages local counsel where appropriate, and escalates to me where necessary.’

‘The practice has a team of subject matter experts, like Mark Skerry, who possess a dynamic understanding of the subject matter and significant practical experience. Mark Skerry is accessible, easy to work with and is highly experienced.’

‘Farhad Jalinous is a superstar. He knows the US FDI regime inside out and has a huge network. He also is very well versed in other jurisdictions’ FDI regimes and has great knowledge of geopolitics. Farhard has taken the W&C global FDI practice to the next level and can rely on a strong network of specialists.’

‘The team has members with prior work experience at CFIUS agencies, which brings a unique practical view to complement the legal analysis.’

‘Extensive subject experience, risk assessment capability, proactivity and simple communication. Stand-out members include Farhad Jalinous, Keith Schomig and Michael Crowley.’

‘We are extremely happy with the legal support the team provides to us in regard to CFIUS matters. I would say that the most important part is how THE WHOLE TEAM is knowledgeable, fast to react and help. This practice knows what really matters to their clients from a practical perspective.’

‘I’m pleased at how efficient and swift our communication is with Farhad Jalinous, as well as the attitude towards the matters he handles – without any overcomplicating or exaggerating tendencies (which may be often the case in the regulatory field of expertise).’

‘Counsel Ryan Brady is an exceptionally bright young professional, very knowledgeable and understands well the needs of the client. Jason Burgoyne also proved to be a valuable counsel: client-oriented and able to articulate complicated legal concepts and translate them into client-friendly language.’

‘A very experienced and commercially savvy team. Farhad Jalinous has extensive experience and knowledge. He handles matters professionally and efficiently.’

‘Wilmer has a very strong CFIUS practice – creative and insightful with deep experience in handling CFIUS matters across some of the most important M&A.’

‘The depth of the practice means that its lawyers provide practical advice on how to navigate specific potential purchasers, including the range of outcomes that these buyers have accepted in prior deals. This market knowledge is invaluable.’

‘Benjamin Powell and Jason Chipman are fantastic – creative, responsive, thoughtful and deeply experienced. They are a pleasure to work with.’

‘I think the team is very strategic and has skilled professionals, who are very experienced and provide strong counsel. Ambassador Robert Kimmitt, in particular, is very strategic and has great relationships and experience.’

‘A strong, experienced team which gives good commercial guidance on CFIUS processes and likely sensitivities. Jason Chipman is very experienced, gives clear guidance and analysis and is very responsive and hands-on.’

‘Very strong technical skills, while its depth of team and experience are second to none.’

‘The team manages to take a complicated area and give clear advice, combining technical skill and experience with business and commercial awareness.’

‘The team, composed of Brian Curran and Zachary Alvarez, focuses on CFIUS and is distinguished by its comprehensive approach to addressing the regulatory challenges faced by companies engaging in cross-border investments.’

‘The team leverages Hogan Lovells’ global network to provide localized expertise in critical markets, ensuring that advice is compliant with US regulations and is also mindful of local legal and business contexts. It provides tailored advice that aligns with our business objectives and risk-tolerance levels.’

‘Brian Curran and Zachary Alvarez excel in devising proactive strategies to mitigate potential risks, enabling clients to navigate the complexities of CFIUS reviews confidently. Their broad experience with transactions across a variety of industries equips them to handle complex cases.’

‘Brian Curran does a fantastic job in connecting our clients with the right service providers within the firm. His ability to quickly grasp the core issues at hand in a fast-moving transaction makes it possible for us to get Brian and his colleagues quickly involved in deals where they need to move quickly.’

‘A strong team that works seamlessly with foreign colleagues in other offices. Very culturally savvy/polite professionals and great/responsive communications. All of these factors are important for our company that often participates in cross-border deals.’

‘Charles Capito and James Brower provided not only excellent subject matter expertise but also communicated clearly and with patience with my colleagues for which English is their non-primary language.’

‘Extensive experience from within government. Lawyers stand out for their sound judgment and quality advice.’

‘James Brower has in-depth knowledge and experience with CFIUS.’

‘The MoFo team operates well as an integrated FDI/CFIUS team globally and provides strong judgment analysis on very short timelines.’

‘Charles Capito is an excellent CFIUS partner, who I rely on for his keen judgment, strong handle on the legal issues, and responsiveness on very challenging deadlines.’

‘Cooley’s CFIUS practice is top notch. Headed by Christopher Kimball, the team can bring to bear the requisite export controls expertise (Kevin King et al.) needed to help clients navigate the CFIUS regulations.’

‘It has deep experience practicing before CFIUS, including in difficult circumstances that call for mitigation negotiations with the USG. Especially strong in technology company matters.’

‘Sarah Oliai and Karen Tsai are outstanding lawyers and experts in their field. They have always achieved excellent results for us, and our shareholders. They are extremely strategic, sophisticated and business-oriented and have always taken the time to fully understand our business goals, objectives and strategy.’

‘The team is practically oriented, helping clients understand CFIUS (a very difficult area of law) and how to avoid problems relating to CFIUS.’

‘Christopher Kimball does a great job leading the CFIUS team at Cooley. The team understands the CFIUS rules well as well as the underlying policy dynamics. The team also has a practical approach to addressing CFIUS issues, which is often crucial for venture financings.’

‘Cooley has a good balance of legal/doctrinal strength, political insights, and efficient and actionable advice. It is often the best fit for tech firms seeking to navigate relatively unfamiliar DC regulatory matters – and few areas are more DC regulatory than CFIUS.’

‘Christopher Kimball is tremendously knowledgeable, and is able to combine experience and relationships to provide useful intel and give practical advice. He doesn’t try to fit a small tech start-up into the same recommendations he’d make to a large defense contractor – he meets clients where they are.’

‘Dillon Martinson served on the committee previously which gives him incredible insight. He’s always available, takes the time to explain things, listens really well, has just been great throughout the process. Sarah Oliai was a phenomenal support and always took the time to make things move.’

‘Goodwin has a very capable CFIUS practice that is adept at managing the overlap of CFIUS and export control considerations.’

‘Goodwin’s team (both partners and associates) are all adept and very collegial. Special recognition to Amy Josselyn and Jacob Osborn who are both practical, solution-oriented, and a joy to work with.’

‘Experienced and capable team, particularly on the intersection of CFIUS and export controls. Richard Matheny is excellent – practical, business-oriented and not afraid to challenge the government when needed.’

‘A highly collaborative and attentive team composed of experts in the field able to offer practical advice based on extensive experience. Lawyers are attentive and detail-oriented. Richard Matheny is exceptional.’

‘Richard Matheny has done a great job building an excellent CFIUS team at Goodwin.’

‘The Goodwin team (Richard Matheny, Justin Pierce, Axel Urie) has great experience with CFIUS processes and how to answer to the requests/questions of the CFIUS administration. They also analyse and clarify our proposed answers before transferring them to the CFIUS administration.’

‘A strong team, led by an industry expert. The group stays ahead of changes in law and provides well-thought-out interpretations and advice. Richard Matheny heads the group and is extremely knowledgeable and commercial.’

‘Amy Josselyn is very helpful and easy to work with.’

‘Pillsbury’s team combines the expertise of various related areas. Lawyers are always up to date, pragmatic and act extremely fast.’

‘Nancy Fisher is the lawyer you want to work with when it comes to complicated matters. Extremely reliable, pragmatic and fast.’

‘The team provides great insights tuned for clients in the technology space.’

‘We value the team for its understanding of how the government processes work, but also for its understanding of how companies from my region/country operate, and all in all, what is the bigger picture expectation the company wants to achieve by expanding organically to the US.’

‘Nancy Fischer is available on short notice and enables smooth and agile ways of advancing the process. With deep understanding of the Committee’s regulatory process and expectations, she demonstrates an ability to translate those needs pragmatically to strike a balance delivering a reply.’

‘Pillsbury provides a well-unified and collaborative team that leverages each lawyer’s knowledge base to demonstrate “big picture” understanding, as well as specialized advice within categories of issues.’

‘The primary lawyers I’ve dealt with are Nancy Fischer and Matthew Rabinowitz. They are remarkable; the quality of their advice stands high above their peers in numerous ways; they provide timely, responsive, and detailed guidance on complex CFIUS considerations, all in an easily digestible format.’

‘Nancy Fisher led the CFIUS/foreign investment approval team for us. The entire process is done jointly with opposing counsel and in coordination with foreign counsel – she was able to manage the process highly efficiently, with more insight into important inflection points and the timetable than opposing counsel.’