Event Date Summary Mohamed ElKabbash (U Arizona) – POSTPONED Mon. April 29th, 2024

12:45 pm-1:45 pm

TBA.

Pino Strangi

Continue reading… Mohamed ElKabbash (U Arizona) – POSTPONED

Trevor Rhone (RPI) – Pls note the special time and location Fri. April 26th, 2024

1:00 pm-2:00 pm

AI guided discovery of two-dimensional magnetic materials

Trevor David Rhone

Department of Physics, Applied Physics and Astronomy, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute

Abstract: The discovery of van der Waals (vdW) materials with intrinsic magnetic order in 2017 has given rise to new avenues for the study of emergent phenomena in two dimensions. In particular, monolayer CrI3 was found to be ferromagnet. Other vdW transition metal halides were later found to have different magnetic properties. How many vdW magnetic materials exist in nature? What are their properties? How do these properties change with the number of layers?

Continue reading… Trevor Rhone (RPI) – Pls note the special time and location

Nancy Forde (Simon Fraser University) Thu. April 25th, 2024

4:00 pm-5:00 pm

Single-molecule mechanical studies of unstable protein building blocks

The most abundant protein on earth, collagen, is the material building block that forms the basis of our connective tissues and the extracellular matrix that surrounds our cells. It performs important structural and mechanical roles, holding our bodies together and helping our tissues to withstand a wide variety of forces. Surprisingly, collagen proteins are structurally unstable at body temperature.

In this talk, which will be aimed at a very general Physics audience, I will introduce some of the fascinating physical properties of the unique triple-helix structure of collagen and will describe how we are using the techniques of atomic force microscopy and centrifuge force microscopy to study these properties,

Continue reading… Nancy Forde (Simon Fraser University)

Latham Boyle (University of Edinburgh) Tue. April 23rd, 2024

11:30 am-12:30 pm

The Penrose tiling is a quantum error correcting code

Abstract: I will begin by introducing Penrose tilings (“PTs”) and quantum error correcting codes (“QECCs”). A PT is a remarkable, intrinsically non-periodic way of tiling the plane whose many beautiful and unexpected properties have fascinated physicists, mathematicians, and geometry lovers of all sorts, ever since its discovery in the 1970s. A QECC is a fundamental way of protecting quantum information from noise, by encoding the information with a sophisticated type of redundancy. Such codes play an increasingly important role in physics: in quantum computing (where they protect the delicate quantum state of the computer);

Continue reading… Latham Boyle (University of Edinburgh)

Maxim Dzero (Kent State) Mon. April 22nd, 2024

12:45 pm-1:45 pm

Title: Nonlinear response of disordered superconductors: Higgs amplitude mode under the light

Maxim Dzero

Department of Physics, Kent State University

Abstract: In the past decade there have been an impressive progress made in studying conventional and unconventional superconductors using a pump-probe setup of the terahertz field experiments. In my talk I will first provide an overview of the state-of-the-art experimental techniques. I will proceed with the overview of the theoretical results on the problem of far-from-equilibrium superconductivity which pre-dated the recent experiments. Then I plan to discuss how experimental discoveries motivated the theorists to revisit now classical problems which remained unresolved for many years.

Continue reading… Maxim Dzero (Kent State)

Victor Miralles (U Manchester) Tue. April 16th, 2024

11:30 am-12:30 pm

Introduction to HEPfit and its potential to constrain the SMEFT

Abstract: New physics extensions usually include many parameters that can be tuned to be compatible with current data. In many cases, instead of ruling out the models, we are just able to find constraints on their parameters. Finding these constraints, including as much information as possible, is usually challenging due to the huge amount of measurements available. In this seminar, we will show how the package HEPfit can be used to perform these global fits. As a relevant example, we will demonstrate how HEPfit can be used to constrain ‘model agnostic’

Continue reading… Victor Miralles (U Manchester)

Alp Sehirlioglu (MSE CWRU) Mon. April 15th, 2024

12:45 pm-1:45 pm

Exploring Catalytic Potential: Novel Applications and Post-Processing Methods for LiCoO2

Alp Sehirlioglu

Department of Materials Science and Engineering

Case Western Reserve University

Abstract: LiCoO2 (LCO) serves as a typical cathode material in Li-ion batteries, containing lithium and cobalt, both acknowledged for their potential toxicity. The primary focus in repurposing LCO lies in catalysis, particularly in decomposing environmental pollutants. Previous attempts in utilizing LCO for photocatalysis, electrocatalysis, and thermocatalysis have shown promising results. LCO’s layered structure facilitates delithiation and intercalation, crucial processes in chemical exfoliation. This exfoliation process involves protonation and intercalation,

Continue reading… Alp Sehirlioglu (MSE CWRU)

Michael J. Ramsey-Musolf (U. Mass Amherst/T. D. Lee Institute/Shanghai Jiao Tong U) Thu. April 11th, 2024

4:00 pm-5:00 pm

Fundamental Symmetries in Nuclei: Tackling the Strong Interaction and Hunting for New Physics

Nuclei and hadrons are “laboratories” for exploring nature’s fundamental interactions. In this talk, I discuss the theoretical challenges and advances in the interpretation of experimental tests of fundamental symmetries performed with these strongly interacting systems. This theoretical work has enabled us to exploit such tests to achieve a deeper understanding of the dynamics of Quantum Chromodynamics in the non-perturbative regime and to gain a powerful new tool in the hunt for possible physics beyond the Standard Model.

Host: Pavel Fileviez

Continue reading… Michael J. Ramsey-Musolf (U. Mass Amherst/T. D. Lee Institute/Shanghai Jiao Tong U)

No seminar (total solar eclipse) Mon. April 8th, 2024

1:00 am-1:00 am

Continue reading… No seminar (total solar eclipse)

Narayanan Menon (U Massachusetts, Amherst) Thu. April 4th, 2024

4:00 pm-5:00 pm

Thinking about sinking: the settling of shaped solids

The gravitational settling of particles in a viscous fluid is a common process in nature and

in industrial contexts. This familiar process is a confounding problem in many-body

physics due to the long-range, directional interactions between sinking particles. After

discussing some known facts and known puzzles in the field, I will present results that

show qualitatively new behaviour when the particles have non-trivial shape and

orientational degrees of freedom, as do snowflakes, plankton, crystals, and other natural

sediment. As examples of the richness that emerges from shape,

Continue reading… Narayanan Menon (U Massachusetts, Amherst)

Doug Cowen (Penn State) Wed. April 3rd, 2024

1:30 pm-2:30 pm

Astrophysical Tau Neutrinos

Neutrinos are very reticent fundamental particles. Tau neutrinos make electron and muon neutrinos look

positively gregarious. The IceCube Neutrino Observatory at the South Pole has sensitivity to all three active neutrino

flavors over an energy scale spanning six orders of magnitude. We report on the first high-significance measurement of

the most energetic tau neutrino candidates ever observed.

Host: Benjamin Monreal

Continue reading… Doug Cowen (Penn State)

Samuel Patrone (Caltech) Tue. April 2nd, 2024

11:30 am-12:30 pm

Exploring the Renormalization of the Galaxy Bias Expansion

The galaxy bias expansion links the galaxy overdensity field to the matter overdensity field δρ. In my talk, I will review the theoretical machinery that allows us to connect the primordial curvature fluctuations to the large-scale structures of the Universe, and I will present the results of 2306.08025. In this work, we performed the one-loop renormalization of the composite operator δρ², up to third order in gravitational evolution and in the presence of local non-gaussianities, using three distinct regularization schemes. I’ll show how this choice impacts the values of the counterterms,

Continue reading… Samuel Patrone (Caltech)

Samuel Schwab (Booz Allen Hamilton) Mon. April 1st, 2024

12:45 pm-1:45 pm

A Spartan’s Quantum Journey

Samuel Schwab

Booz Allen Hamilton

Abstract: This three part talk covers the nonlinear journey of a CWRU grad student to a career in quantum information science. This first part is a historical narrative of the journey while the remaining two are technical overviews of some of the most recent work in building and characterizing the necessary infrastructure for scaling up superconducting quantum systems and building a heterogeneous quantum network. Specifically these will be focused on using integrated photonic photodiodes as cryogenic microwave sources, and our efforts in testing acousto-optic transducers.

Continue reading… Samuel Schwab (Booz Allen Hamilton)

Jiadong Zang (U of New Hampshire) Mon. March 25th, 2024

12:45 pm-1:45 pm

Skyrmions and Topological Hall Effects in Chiral Magnets

Jiadong Zang

Department of Physics and Astronomy, University of New Hampshire

Abstract: Chiral magnets are a series of magnets with broken inversion symmetry. A new type of spin interaction therein, the Dzyaloshinskii-Moriya interaction, stimulates the formation of many novel topological spin textures. One important example is the emergence of magnetic skyrmion, whose nontrivial topology enables unique dynamical property and thermal stability and gives rise to promising applications in future

spintronic devices. Other than neutron scattering and transmission electron microscopy, the topological Hall is an important identification of skyrmions.

Continue reading… Jiadong Zang (U of New Hampshire)

Michael Davidson (University of California, San Diego) Thu. March 21st, 2024

4:00 pm-5:00 pm

Optimizing Continental Scale Renewable Energy Systems

Widespread use of renewable electricity sources is necessary to address climate change, but

their intermittency, geospatial variability, and large land footprints create unique challenges for

optimizing deployment while respecting power flow and engineering constraints. In this talk, I

will review approaches to plan continental scale systems that are renewables dominant. I will

describe the key computational trade-offs and optimization methods that are used to plan land

use. Cost-effective deployment of high-penetration renewable energy systems depends not

only on technological and economic considerations but also on market institutions and policy

coordination.

Continue reading… Michael Davidson (University of California, San Diego)

Amy Connolly (OSU) Tue. March 19th, 2024

11:30 am-12:30 pm

Ultra high energy neutrino detection in Antarctic ice: an evolving story

High energy astrophysics is now being probed using four different energetic messengers: (charged) cosmic rays, gamma rays, gravitational waves, and neutrinos. The past decade and a half has been marked by discoveries of gravitational waves and neutrinos up to O(10^16 eV). Neutrinos in the ultra-high energy (UHE) regime (above 10^18 eV) are an important missing piece of the multi-messenger picture of the high energy universe, and will also be important probes of new physics. Experiments using radio techniques in Antarctic ice are the most promising for the discovery of UHE neutrinos.

Continue reading… Amy Connolly (OSU)

Hongping Zhao (OSU) Mon. March 18th, 2024

12:45 pm-1:45 pm

Next Generation Power Electronics: From Wide Bandgap GaN to Ultrawide Bandgap Ga2O3, (AlxGa1-x)2O3 and LiGa5O8

Dr. Hongping Zhao, Professor

Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Department of Materials Science and Engineering, The Ohio State University

Join Zoom (ID: 97121487193; psw: 731035)

Abstract: Wide bandgap gallium nitride (GaN) with intrinsic breakdown field of 3.5 MV/cm and a high electron mobility (phonon limited mobility >2000 cm2/Vs), possesses Baliga figure-of-merit at least 5 times superior to SiC and nearly 1000 times better than Si, enabling substantial reduction in conduction and switching losses in power electronics.

Continue reading… Hongping Zhao (OSU)

No colloquium – Spring Break Thu. March 14th, 2024

4:00 pm-5:00 pm

Continue reading… No colloquium – Spring Break

No seminar (Spring Break) Mon. March 11th, 2024

1:00 am-1:00 am

Continue reading… No seminar (Spring Break)

No colloquium – APS March Meeting Thu. March 7th, 2024

4:00 pm-5:00 pm

Continue reading… No colloquium – APS March Meeting

No seminar (APS March Meeting) Mon. March 4th, 2024

1:00 am-1:00 am

Continue reading… No seminar (APS March Meeting)

Florian Kuhnel Tue. February 27th, 2024

11:30 am-12:30 pm

(Cancelled)

Continue reading… Florian Kuhnel

Ilya Gruzberg (OSU) Mon. February 26th, 2024

12:45 pm-1:45 pm

Fractals, multifractals, and conformal invariance at Anderson transitions

Ilya Gruzberg, Department of Physics, Ohio State University

Zoom recording

Abstract: Anderson transitions (ATs) between metals and insulators or between topologically distinct insulators, share common features with conventional second-order phase transitions, such as the critical point of the Ising model for a magnet. However, ATs also exhibit many unusual features including the multifractal scaling of the critical wave functions. Conventional critical points possess conformal invariance which constrain their properties to the extent that they can be obtained exactly in two dimensions and to very high precision in three dimensions.

Continue reading… Ilya Gruzberg (OSU)

Michael Hinczewski (CWRU Physics) Thu. February 22nd, 2024

4:00 pm-5:00 pm

The price of evolution: how thermodynamics shapes gene regulation

Many of the physical processes in a cell consume energy, but we are only beginning to understand how these costs have influenced the course of evolution. Biology is strewn with counter-intuitively complex mechanisms whose evolutionary predecessors must have consumed significant energy resources without any clear fitness benefit. So how do such mechanisms evolve in the first place, and how strong is the guiding hand of thermodynamic optimization? My talk explores these issues through one specific example: gene regulation in higher organisms (including humans) by microRNAs. These small RNA molecules (only 22 nucleotides long) are versatile tools for controlling the expression of genes into proteins,

Continue reading… Michael Hinczewski (CWRU Physics)

David Moore (Yale) Tue. February 20th, 2024

11:30 am-12:30 pm

Mechanical sensors for dark matter and neutrinos

The development of optomechanical systems has revolutionized the detection of tiny forces over the past few decades. As such technologies reach (and surpass) quantum measurement limits, they can enable new searches for weakly coupled phenomena, including dark matter, gravitational waves, “fifth’’ forces, and sterile neutrinos. As a demonstration of these techniques, I will describe an initial search for dark matter using an optically levitated nanogram mass sensor, which can exceed the sensitivity of even large underground detectors for certain classes of dark matter candidates in a few days of exposure.

Continue reading… David Moore (Yale)

Swagata Acharya (National Renewable Energy Lab) Mon. February 19th, 2024

12:45 pm-1:45 pm

Theory for multiplets in solid state: case studies in colors for transition metal oxides and bond disproportionation in rare-earth nickelates

Swagata Acharya

Scientist III, National Renewable Energy Laboratory, Golden, Colorado

Zoom Recording

Abstract: Colors in several transition metal oxides have often been ascribed to presence of defects/vacancies over the decades.

I will discuss results from our recent work that uses parameter free many body perturbative and exact local approaches

to describe the excitonic absorptions and their spin components that determine the color for these materials and that defects/vacancies were wrongly held responsible for the same.

Continue reading… Swagata Acharya (National Renewable Energy Lab)

Fabio van Dissel, IFAE (Barcelona) Tue. February 13th, 2024

11:30 am-12:30 pm

Multi-field Wave Dark Matter

In this talk I will highlight some general aspects of an extension to the classic Ultra Light Dark Matter (ULDM) paradigm with a second light scalar particle. As experimental data is beginning to put more stringent constraints on single field ULDM, it is an interesting to explore what happens when more light particles are added to the picture. Having more light degrees of freedom present in our Universe might even be easier to reconcile with many UV completions of the Standard Model, where many scalars seem to be the norm and not the exception.

Continue reading… Fabio van Dissel, IFAE (Barcelona)

Kofi Deh (Howard University) Mon. February 12th, 2024

12:45 pm-1:45 pm

Clinical metabolic magnetic resonance imaging

Kofi Deh, Medical Physics at Howard University

Zoom recording

Talk Abstract: Spin hyperpolarization can increase the signal-to-noise ratio in magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) by a factor of 10,000, making it possible to perform metabolic imaging for early cancer detection. In this talk, we will look at the motivation for metabolic imaging, the physics of hyperpolarization and the technical considerations required for MRI of hyperpolarized X-nuclei. We will also look at practical considerations for translating this technology into the clinic. Finally, we will briefly examine other candidates for MR metabolic imaging that have less complexity than hyperpolarized MRI.

Continue reading… Kofi Deh (Howard University)

Brian Welch (NASA / University of Maryland) Thu. February 8th, 2024

4:00 pm-5:00 pm

Dissecting Galaxies in the Distant Universe with JWST and Gravitational Lensing

The launch of JWST in December 2021 opened a powerful new eye onto the distant universe. The telescope’s high spatial resolution, large collecting area, and infrared wavelength coverage have enabled detailed studies of distant galaxies that were untenable with other instruments. Combining this powerful tool with strong gravitational lensing has been particularly exciting. Gravitational lensing magnifies distant galaxies, enabling detection of intrinsically smaller, fainter features than is possible in blank fields. In this talk, I will review some recent lensed galaxy results from JWST, and discuss how these new observations are shaping our understanding of the physics that govern galaxy evolution on small scales.

Continue reading… Brian Welch (NASA / University of Maryland)

Elias Most (Caltech) Tue. February 6th, 2024

11:30 am-12:30 pm

Neutron Star Mergers: From gravity to nuclear and plasma astrophysics

Announcing the dawn of a new era of multi-messenger astrophysics, the gravitational wave event GW170817 – involving the collision of two neutron stars – was detected in 2017. In addition to the gravitational wave signal, it was accompanied by electromagnetic counterparts providing new windows into the different physics probed by the system. Since then, several gravitational wave events involving neutron stars have been discovered, with more expected over the next years.

In order to understand and interpret the physics of these events, it is necessary to model the intricate dynamics of such systems before,

Continue reading… Elias Most (Caltech)

Alison Patteson (Syracuse University) Thu. February 1st, 2024

4:00 pm-5:00 pm

Power in Numbers: Cells, Collective Motion, and Coordinated Force

Cells are energy transducers, using energy sources from their surroundings to create fascinating materials, which are capable of self-organizing, collectively moving, and remodeling their environment. My group explores how physical features of the cell’s environment impacts cell movement in both the context of bacterial biofilms and mammalian cells that move through changes in the cytoskeletal network. In this talk, I will present work on how collective groups of cells move and remodel their environment and how we can measure those collective forces even in complex environments, such as the extracellular matrix of mammalian tissues.

Continue reading… Alison Patteson (Syracuse University)

Roshan Abraham (UC Irvine) Tue. January 30th, 2024

11:30 am-12:30 pm

Neutrino Physics and Dark Matter Searches at the Forward Physics Facility at the LHC

The recent observation of collider neutrinos by the FASER collaboration highlights the potential the forward direction at the LHC has for neutrino physics. In the HL-LHC era, we expect a significant number of neutrinos in the forward direction, opening the way for precision studies using collider neutrinos at the proposed Forward Physics Facility (FPF). In this talk, I will present some phenomenological studies in this direction. i) The electromagnetic properties of neutrinos (magnetic moments, milli-charge, charge radius) have attracted significant interest recently.

Continue reading… Roshan Abraham (UC Irvine)

The 2023 Nobel Prizes Thu. January 25th, 2024

4:00 pm-5:00 pm

Ken Singer (Physics) on the prize in Physics;

Clemens Burda (Chemistry) on the prize in Chemistry;

Michael Lederman (School of Medicine) on the prize in Physiology or Medicine;

David Clingingsmith (Weatherhead School of Management) on the Economics prize.

Continue reading… The 2023 Nobel Prizes

Daniel Hart (NASA Glenn) Mon. January 22nd, 2024

12:45 pm-1:45 pm

Near-Zero Field Magnetic Resonance Analysis of SiC devices at NASA’s Quantum Sensing and Spin Physics (Q-SASP) lab

Daniel R. Hart

NASA Glenn Research Ctr. (United States)

Zoom recording

Abstract:

Component analysis of devices and technologies that will be integrated to produce space instruments is needed for future NASA missions. For quantum communications, there is a need for quantum memory, quantum repeaters, single photon emitter, and detectors. For quantum sensing, extremely low Size, Weight, and Power (SWaP) and self-calibrating electrometers, magnetometers, and thermometers are needed with nano-scale resolution.

Continue reading… Daniel Hart (NASA Glenn)

Adele Luta (Oceaneering International Inc) Thu. January 18th, 2024

4:00 pm-5:00 pm

Future of commercial human exploration – extreme environments (space and underwater habitats)

This talk will provide a brief introduction to commercial human exploration in extreme environments for both space and underwater habitats. It will also cover tips and a case study in reviewing commercial companies to collaborate with and aid students in matching internships, co-ops, and employment.

Adele Luta is an Exploration Extravehicular Activity Integration Manager and Human Systems Business Development Manager at Oceaneering International Inc. within the Space Systems Division.

Continue reading… Adele Luta (Oceaneering International Inc)

Wei Zhang (Univ. North Carolina at Chapel Hill) Mon. December 4th, 2023

12:45 pm-1:45 pm

Engineering tailored magnon modes for hybrid magnonics

Wei Zhang, Physics and Astronomy, UNC Chapel Hill

Abstract: Despite being a later entrant, the collective spin excitations (magnons) have recently received

increased attention in novel construction of hybrid systems exhibiting coherent phenomena. To

date, investigation of hybrid magnonic effects has been largely centered on the ferromagnetic

resonance and long wavelength modes. It remains challenging to incorporate short-wavelength

(deep mesoscale) modes for magnon hybridization, in which many fundamental questions, such

as the wavenumber-dependent coherent phenomena, remain unanswered. However, by exploiting

magnon-magnon coupled systems,

Continue reading… Wei Zhang (Univ. North Carolina at Chapel Hill)

Srini Raghunathan (UIUC) Tue. November 28th, 2023

11:30 am-12:30 pm

Sunyaev-Zeldovich Science with Current and Future CMB Surveys.

Secondary anisotropies of the cosmic microwave background (CMB) are known to be remarkable probes of astrophysics and cosmology. The properties of free streaming CMB photons from the surface of last scattering are altered by their interaction with matter in the Universe carrying crucial information about the the epoch of reionisation and also the origin, growth, and evolution of structures. In this talk, I will discuss the potential of a couple of these secondary anisotropies, namely the kinematic and thermal Sunyaev-Zeldovich (SZ) effects, to shed light into some of the long-standing cosmological quests like the physics of reionisation and the properties of dark energy.

Continue reading… Srini Raghunathan (UIUC)

POSTPONED – Daniel Hart (NASA Glenn) Mon. November 27th, 2023

12:45 pm-1:45 pm

Near-Zero Field Magnetic Resonance Analysis of SiC devices at NASA’s Quantum Sensing and Spin Physics (Q-SASP) lab

Daniel R. Hart

NASA Glenn Research Ctr. (United States)

Abstract:

Component analysis of devices and technologies that will be integrated to produce space instruments is needed for future NASA missions. For quantum communications, there is a need for quantum memory, quantum repeaters, single photon emitter, and detectors. For quantum sensing, extremely low Size, Weight, and Power (SWaP) and self-calibrating electrometers, magnetometers, and thermometers are needed with nano-scale resolution. NASA Glenn’s Q-SASP is developing quantum metrology capabilities in silicon carbide (SiC) to evaluate the energy structure,

Continue reading… POSTPONED – Daniel Hart (NASA Glenn)

Christos Argyropoulos (Penn State) Mon. November 20th, 2023

12:45 pm-1:45 pm

Nanophotonics to Efficiently Control Light-Matter Interactions at the Nanoscale

Christos Argyropoulos

Department of Electrical Engineering at Pennsylvania State University

Zoom recording

The field of nanophotonics has significantly evolved and matured during the last years mainly due to the rapid improvement in nanotechnology fabrication capabilities. In addition, currently we are able to accurately model and analyze very complex nanophotonic systems with dimensions ranging from nano to angstrom scales. Nanophotonics promise to efficiently control light at the nanoscale leading to the practical exploration of various emerging optical effects. In my talk,

Continue reading… Christos Argyropoulos (Penn State)

Evangelos Sfakianakis (CWRU) Thu. November 16th, 2023

4:00 pm-5:00 pm

Putting the bang into the big bang

Inflation is the leading paradigm for the very early universe. Despite progress in inflationary model-building and CMB observations, the end of inflation and the exact mechanism through which energy is transferred from the inflationary to the SM and Dark Matter sectors remains largely uncharted. This era is called reheating and is necessary to provide the thermal radiation-dominated universe required for Big Bang Nucleosynthesis. Depending on the underlying particle physics model, reheating can lead to the population of hidden sectors and the creation of remnant particles or topological defects. It can thus be used to constrain theories of high-energy physics,

Continue reading… Evangelos Sfakianakis (CWRU)

Josh Klein (U Penn) Tue. November 14th, 2023

11:30 am-12:30 pm

Hybrid Neutrino Detection and Spectral Photon Sorting with Dichroicons

Hybrid Cherenkov/scintillation neutrino detectors represent the next generation of the remarkably successful photon-based neutrino detection program. These detectors have a broad physics program, from long-baseline neutrino oscillations, to solar and supernova neutrinos, and even neutrinoless double beta decay with sensitivities beyond the next-generation “tonne-scale.” There are many ways to discriminate between “chertons” and “scintons” in a big detector, including fast timing, slow scintillators, or by reducing the fraction of scintillation light. I will discuss the development of a new approach, which sorts photons by wavelength,

Continue reading… Josh Klein (U Penn)

POSTPONED – Mohamed ElKabbash (U Arizona) Mon. November 13th, 2023

12:45 pm-1:45 pm

TBA.

Host: Pino Strangi

Continue reading… POSTPONED – Mohamed ElKabbash (U Arizona)

Michael Hinczewski (CWRU) Thu. November 9th, 2023

4:00 pm-5:00 pm

Controlling stochastic biophysical processes, from protein folding to evolution

The chemical reaction networks that regulate living systems are all stochastic to varying degrees. The resulting randomness affects biological outcomes at multiple scales, from the probability that a single protein molecule successfully finds its folded state to the evolutionary trajectory of a population of cells. Understanding how the distribution of these outcomes changes over time is often difficult, and achieving control over this distribution via external interventions is an even more complex challenge. Intriguingly, this problem has close parallels in a very different domain: manipulating quantum states for applications like quantum computing and cold atom transport.

Continue reading… Michael Hinczewski (CWRU)

Joshua W Foster (MIT) Tue. November 7th, 2023

11:30 am-12:30 pm

Simulating Stochastic Gravitational Waves from Early Structure Formation

Gravitational wave detectors provide a chance to observe the state of the very early universe and have important sensitivities for studies of early universe cosmology and searches for physics beyond the Standard Model. In this talk, I will discuss the production of potentially detectable stochastic gravitational wave backgrounds in early matter dominated eras in the linear and nonlinear regimes of structure formation.

Continue reading… Joshua W Foster (MIT)

Philip Feng (University of Florida) Mon. November 6th, 2023

12:45 pm-1:45 pm

Atomic Layer Nanoelectromechanical Systems (NEMS)

for Classical and Quantum Signal Transduction

Philip Feng

Department of Electrical & Computer Engineering, University of Florida

(Respecting the speaker’s preference, the seminar was not recorded)

Abstract: Emerging atomically thin semiconductors (such as transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDCs), phosphorene, silicene), along with their heterostructures (particularly with graphene and hexagonal boron nitride (h-BN) layers), offer compelling platforms for creating new resonant nanoelectromechanical systems (NEMS) for multiphysics transducers, where the unconventional properties of these crystals can be harnessed for engineering both classical and quantum signal processing and sensing schemes.

Continue reading… Philip Feng (University of Florida)

Samantha Lawler (University of Regina) Thu. November 2nd, 2023

4:00 pm-5:00 pm

Via Zoom

Link to zoom meeting

Discoveries in the Kuiper Belt, and how satellites will make future discoveries harder

The Outer Solar System Origins Survey (OSSOS) and affiliated surveys have now discovered over 1,300 new Kuiper Belt Objects (KBOs) with precisely measured orbits and known observation biases. I will discuss what those discoveries mean for the “clustered” KBOs that led to the Planet 9 theory, and discuss a new, deeper survey currently in progress on the Canada-France-Hawaii Telescope that will discover some of the smallest and most distant KBOs.

Continue reading… Samantha Lawler (University of Regina)

Luca Buoninfante (Nordita in Sweden) Tue. October 31st, 2023

11:30 am-12:30 pm

Massless and Partially Massless Limits in Quadratic Gravity

In the context of perturbative quantum field theory, the addition of quadratic-curvature invariants to the Einstein-Hilbert action makes it possible to achieve strict renormalizability in four dimensions. The additional quadratic terms are multiplied by dimensionless coefficients that are related to the masses of the extra gravitational degrees of freedom and to the interaction couplings. The aim of this talk is to analyse the limit of the theory in which the Weyl-squared coefficient tends to infinity. Remarkably, the result of this limit turns out to be sensitive to the presence of a cosmological constant: when the latter is zero we have a massless limit for the spin-2 ghost,

Continue reading… Luca Buoninfante (Nordita in Sweden)

Randy Fishman (Oak Ridge) Mon. October 30th, 2023

12:45 pm-1:45 pm

Orbital Angular Momentum of Magnons

Randy S. Fishman

Materials Science and Technology Division, Oak Ridge National Laboratory, Oak Ridge, Tennessee 37831, USA

Abstract: The past 13 years have seen remarkable advances in the field of “magnonics”, which focuses on the quanta of spin excitations known as magnons. One of the main goals of magnonics is the storage and processing of information. In quick succession, experimentalists discovered that magnons can produce the thermal Hall and Seebeck effects. Almost all previous theoretical work in magnonics has been based on the Berry curvature,

Continue reading… Randy Fishman (Oak Ridge)

Cui-Zu Chang (Penn State) Mon. October 23rd, 2023

12:45 pm-1:45 pm

The Art and Science of Molecular Beam Epitaxy

—From Quantum Anomalous Hall Effect to Interfacial Superconductivity

Cui-Zu Chang

Department of Physics, Pennsylvania State University

(Respecting the speaker’s preference, the seminar was not recorded)

In this talk, I will briefly introduce the molecular beam epitaxy (MBE) growth mechanism and then focus on my research, which centers on the MBE growth of quantum materials, spanning from topological materials to interfacial superconductors. I will talk about two solid-state phenomena with zero resistance: the quantum anomalous Hall (QAH) effect and the interface superconductivity.

Continue reading… Cui-Zu Chang (Penn State)

Emil Mottola (Univ of New Mexico) Thu. October 19th, 2023

4:00 pm-5:00 pm

Dark Energy & Gravitational Condensate Stars, Or What’s the (Quantum) Matter with Black Holes?

The difficulties in reconciling Einstein’s classical General Relativity and quantum theory reach their apex in the twin puzzles of black holes and cosmological dark energy. Both of these problems are evidence that the gravitational sector of the Standard Model is incomplete at macroscopic distance scales. Indeed when General Relativity is treated as a low energy Effective Field Theory, it can be shown that it necessarily receives infrared relevant corrections from the fluctuations of massless or light quantum fields. The associated conformal anomaly implies the existence of a new massless scalar degree of freedom in gravity,

Continue reading… Emil Mottola (Univ of New Mexico)

Sung Hak Lim (Rutgers) Tue. October 17th, 2023

11:30 am-12:30 pm

Mapping Dark Matter in the Milky Way using Normalizing Flows and Gaia DR3

We present a novel, data-driven analysis of Galactic dynamics, using unsupervised machine learning — in the form of density estimation with normalizing flows — to learn the underlying phase space distribution of 6 million nearby stars from the Gaia DR3 catalog. Solving the collisionless Boltzmann equation with the assumption of approximate equilibrium, we calculate — for the first time ever — a model-free, unbinned, fully 3D map of the local acceleration and mass density fields within a 3 kpc sphere around the Sun.

Continue reading… Sung Hak Lim (Rutgers)

Hui Deng (U Michigan) Mon. October 16th, 2023

12:45 pm-1:45 pm

Coherent light-matter interaction in van der Waals materials

Hui Deng

Department of Physics, University of Michigan

Zoom recording

Abstract: Many van der Waals semiconductors feature large oscillator strengths and, at the same time, the flexibility to construct heterostructure and to integrate with a variety of substrates. Therefore they allow studies of coherent light-matter interactions that have been difficult to access in traditional materials. We will discuss a few different types of 2D material systems where coherent light-matter interactions lead to quasi-particles of novel properties and may enable control of the properties of matter systems.

Continue reading… Hui Deng (U Michigan)

Brian Keating (UCSD) Fri. October 13th, 2023

12:45 pm-1:45 pm

Cosmological Claims That Cause Michelson & Morley Conniptions

Researchers using data from the Planck satellite, a spacecraft measuring the cosmic microwave background (CMB), say they’ve observed a hint (at >99.2 percent confidence) of parity violation on cosmic scales. If confirmed, this result would have profound implications, not just for cosmology, but for all of fundamental physics, including Lorentz Invariance. In this seminar, I will review the basis for the claimed hint of so-called Chern-Simons’ cosmic birefringence. I will outline steps scientists are taking to definitively confirm (or falsify) this provocative claim using CMB experiments like the Simons Array,

Continue reading… Brian Keating (UCSD)

Brian Keating (UCSD) Thu. October 12th, 2023

4:00 pm-5:00 pm

Fall 2023 Gundzik Colloquium

Revealing the history and future of the universe with the Cosmic Microwave Background

Measurements of the cosmic microwave background (CMB) serve as a potent tool for understanding the genesis, composition, and development of our Universe. The rate at which we are capable of mapping the CMB is outpacing Moore’s law, increasing by about an order of magnitude every five years. This rapid development has led to remarkable scientific discoveries such as confirming the geometry of our universe, refining theories of its primordial state, and solidifying our grasp on the Lambda-CDM model.

Continue reading… Brian Keating (UCSD)

William Alan Doolittle (Georgia Tech.) Mon. October 9th, 2023

12:45 pm-1:45 pm

Resurgence in III-Nitride Semiconductor Science and Applications via New Extreme Bandgap Semiconductor Discoveries

W. Alan Doolittle

School of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Georgia Institute of Technology

Zoom recording

Abstract: After revolutionizing lighting technology in the 1990/2000’s and high-power RF technologies in 2000/2010’s III-Nitride semiconductors seemingly took a hiatus as commercial markets matured and research waned. But recently two exciting discoveries have reenergized the III-Nitride community, offering pathways to optical devices with unprecedented photon energies and high voltage, power and temperature electronics.

Recently,

Continue reading… William Alan Doolittle (Georgia Tech.)

Laura Newburgh (Yale) Thu. October 5th, 2023

4:00 pm-5:00 pm

Detection of 21cm emission from Large Scale Structure with CHIME

Current cosmological measurements have left us with deep questions about our Universe: What caused the expansion of the Universe at the earliest times? How did structure form? What is Dark Energy and does it evolve with time? New experiments like CHIME are poised to address these questions through 3-dimensional maps of structure using the 21cm emission line from neutral hydrogen contained in abundance in galaxies. In this talk, I will describe recent results from the CHIME experiment that show a significant detection of neutral hydrogen in distant galaxies and future directions for the analysis.

Continue reading… Laura Newburgh (Yale)

Clarice D. Aiello (UCLA, Quantum Biology Tech (QuBiT) Lab) Tue. October 3rd, 2023

1:00 pm-2:00 pm

PLEASE NOTE SPECIAL TIME/LOCATION

“Quantum Biology”: how nature harnesses quantum processes to function optimally, and how might we control such quantum processes to therapeutic and tech advantage

Imagine driving cell activities to treat injuries and disease simply by using tailored magnetic fields. Many relevant physiological processes, such as: the regulation of oxidative stress, proliferation, and respiration rates in cells; wound healing; ion channel functioning; and DNA repair were all demonstrated to be controlled by weak magnetic fields (with a strength on the order of that produced by your cell phone).

Continue reading… Clarice D. Aiello (UCLA, Quantum Biology Tech (QuBiT) Lab)

Abby Crites (Cornell) Tue. October 3rd, 2023

11:30 am-12:30 pm

Probing the Structure and Evolution of Our Universe with Line Intensity Mapping with mm-Wavelength Instruments

I will discuss line intensity mapping (LIM) and its applications for understanding cosmology and star-formation across cosmic time. I will focus on TIME, a mm-wavelength instrument designed to use LIM to probe the [CII] line at redshifts ~5-9 and the CO lines at redshifts ~0.5-2. The instrument is a grating spectrometer with transition edge sensors that is used on the Arizona Radio Observatory 12m. I will also briefly touch on other instruments and facilities (including the Fred Young Submillimeter Telescope) that will be used for LIM and the future of cosmology using this technique.

Continue reading… Abby Crites (Cornell)

Roberto Myers (Ohio State University) Mon. October 2nd, 2023

12:45 pm-1:45 pm

The eXciton Franz Keldysh effect: Spectrally measuring electric fields using the electron-hole interaction in wide band gap materials

Roberto C. Myers

Professor of Materials Science, Electrical Engineering, and Physics, The Ohio State University

Zoom recording

Abstract: Wide band gap materials can sustain large electric fields up to a point. When the field is large enough, electrons and holes and tunnel between the typically well separated conduction and valence band states causing an avalanche of current, which destroys the device. This dielectric breakdown occurs at local positions in devices where the field lines are concentrated.

Continue reading… Roberto Myers (Ohio State University)

Ya-Ting Liao (CWRU Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering) Thu. September 28th, 2023

4:00 pm-5:00 pm

New Challenges in Fire Safety: From Earth to Space

The controlled use of fire dates back 400,000 years. Fire has played a crucial role in human history, allowing safe consumption of meat, expanding the range of inhabitable land (to colder regions), and providing an energy source. Fire also poses a great threat to life and property (e.g., forest fires). However, the science of fire has not been explored until the past few decades, and our understanding of fire dynamics is far from complete. Furthermore, ever-evolving technologies present new challenges for fire safety every day. In this talk,

Continue reading… Ya-Ting Liao (CWRU Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering)

Calvin Y Chen (Imperial College London) Tue. September 26th, 2023

11:30 am-12:30 pm

A cautionary case of casual causality – Diagnosing (a)causality in the EFT of gravity

In recent years, causality has emerged as a powerful criterion to distinguish between effective field theories (EFTs) arising from physical and unphysical high-energy theories.

A direct way to ensure a given EFT is causal is to demand a lower bound on scattering time delays, which essentially imposes a speed limit averaged over the trajectory. In flat space, this is unambiguously dictated by the Minkowski light cones, but the situation is more subtle with dynamical gravity. I will make the case that the relevant notion is so-called infrared (IR) causality.

Continue reading… Calvin Y Chen (Imperial College London)

Kyungwha Park (Virginia Tech) Mon. September 25th, 2023

12:45 pm-1:45 pm

Effects of disorder and hydrogenation in intrinsic magnetic topological insulators

Kyungwha Park

Department of Physics, Virginia Tech

Abstract:

Topological insulators have gapless Dirac surface states that are protected by a topological invariant in the presence of time reveral symmetry. When time reversal symmetry is broken, the Dirac surface states are gapped and interesting features are expected such as quantum anomalous Hall (QAH) effect, topological magnetoelectric effect, and axion physics. In particular, when ferromagnetic order is formed within topological insulators (i.e., magnetic topological insulators) in zero magnetic field, the QAH effect can be realized for the chemical potential tuned within the surface gap such that the Hall conductance is quantized and chiral charge currents flow around the edges without dissipation.

Continue reading… Kyungwha Park (Virginia Tech)

Julia Gehrlein (CERN – MPPL 2023 Winner) Thu. September 21st, 2023

4:00 pm-5:30 pm

MPPL Physics Colloquium – Neutrino windows to new physics

Neutrinos are the most elusive particles of the Standard Model even though they are extraordinarily abundant in the Universe. In our quest to uncover all mysteries of the neutrino sector we encountered one of the most surprising characteristics of neutrinos: Neutrinos oscillate, i.e. they can change their flavor when traveling over a distance. This implies that neutrinos are massive, in contradiction with the Standard Model of particle physics, therefore making neutrinos a potential window to a new sector of particle physics.

In the colloquium I will elaborate on how neutrinos can shine light on physics beyond the Standard Model.

Continue reading… Julia Gehrlein (CERN – MPPL 2023 Winner)

Julia Gehrlein (CERN) Michelson Postdoctoral Prize Colloquium Thu. September 21st, 2023

4:00 pm-5:00 pm

Neutrino windows to new physics

Neutrinos are the most elusive particles of the Standard Model even though they are extraordinarily abundant in the Universe. In our quest to uncover all mysteries of the neutrino sector we encountered one of the most surprising characteristics of neutrinos: Neutrinos oscillate, i.e. they can change their flavor when traveling over a distance. This implies that neutrinos are massive, in contradiction with the Standard Model of particle physics, therefore making neutrinos a potential window to a new sector of particle physics. In the colloquium I will elaborate on how neutrinos can shine light on physics beyond the Standard Model.

Continue reading… Julia Gehrlein (CERN) Michelson Postdoctoral Prize Colloquium

Julia Gehrlein (CERN – MPPL 2023 Winner) Tue. September 19th, 2023

11:30 am-1:00 pm

MPPL Lecture 2 – Who ordered that? Probing neutrino flavor models with precision neutrino experiments

The observed flavor pattern of neutrinos, their large mixings and the smallness of their masses compared to the masses of the other fermions provides a great puzzle. In this talk I will review explanations to this puzzle based on symmetries and then focus on the predictions and testability of these flavor models. I will put a particular focus on the most predictive class of models which relate different observables with each other.

I will show how upcoming neutrino experiments like oscillation experiments,

Continue reading… Julia Gehrlein (CERN – MPPL 2023 Winner)

Julia Gehrlein (CERN – MPPL 2023 Winner) Mon. September 18th, 2023

12:45 pm-1:45 pm

MPPL Lecture 1 – To break CP or to not break CP – Hints for new CP violating physics in long baseline neutrino oscillations

The quest for leptonic CP violation is one of the major goals of near future neutrino oscillation experiments like DUNE and Hyper-Kamiokande. Experiments of the current generation like NOvA in the US and T2K in Japan do not have enough sensitivity to claim a significant discovery of CP violation however they provide already hints for the value of the CP violating quantity. Interestingly, their results currently mildly disagree with each other.

Continue reading… Julia Gehrlein (CERN – MPPL 2023 Winner)

David Grabovsky (UC Santa Barbara) Tue. September 12th, 2023

11:30 am-12:30 pm

Heavy States in 3d Gravity and 2d CFT

One way to learn about black holes and other heavy states in quantum gravity is to study their response to perturbations by light probe fields. In 3d gravity and holographic 2d CFTs, it is often possible to do this exactly. We consider the propagator of free scalar fields in AdS geometries with a conical defect or a BTZ black hole, dual on the boundary to a heavy-light 4-point function. In the bulk, the correlator can be computed by solving the equation of motion, as well as by the method of images.

Continue reading… David Grabovsky (UC Santa Barbara)

No seminar (faculty meeting) Mon. September 11th, 2023

12:45 pm-1:45 pm

Continue reading… No seminar (faculty meeting)

Deyan Mihaylov (CWRU) Tue. September 5th, 2023

11:30 am-12:30 pm

Gravitational waves with astrometry in the Gaia era

Gravitational waves have a periodic effect on the apparent positions of stars on the sky. This effect can be quantified and ultra-precise astrometric measurements (like the ones from Gaia) can be used as a new method to search for gravitational signals. I will describe the principles which give rise to the astrometric signature of gravitational waves, and examine this result in the context of Einsteinian and alternative polarization states. I will discuss some of the data analysis challenges that will have to be overcome when trying to search for GWs in the extremely large (>10^9 stars) Gaia data set,

Continue reading… Deyan Mihaylov (CWRU)

No seminar (Labor Day) Mon. September 4th, 2023

1:00 am-1:00 am

Continue reading… No seminar (Labor Day)

Valentin O. Rodionov (CWRU) Mon. May 1st, 2023

12:45 pm-1:45 pm

Synthesis and Characterization of γ-Graphyne, a Novel Allotrope of Carbon

Valentin O. Rodionov

Department of Macromolecular Science and Engineering, Case Western Reserve University

Abstract: The unique ability of carbon to bond with itself forming extended chains and networks underlies the structural complexity of organic matter. This complexity extends to elemental carbon. Several hundred crystalline carbon phases have been theoretically predicted to date. However, few of these materials have been realized experimentally. Advances in the synthesis of nonbenzenoid and sp1-containing allotropes have been especially limited. One of such allotropes is γ-graphyne,

Continue reading… Valentin O. Rodionov (CWRU)

POSTPONED – Philip Feng (U Florida) Mon. April 24th, 2023

12:45 pm-1:45 pm

TBA.

Host: Xuan Gao

Continue reading… POSTPONED – Philip Feng (U Florida)

Clara Murgui (Caltech) Thu. April 20th, 2023

4:00 pm-5:00 pm

New Ideas for hunting light dark matter

Abstract: The nature of dark matter remains one of the great puzzles in physics. Although current direct detection experiments based on nuclear recoil have reached outstanding sensitivities, light dark matter models with particle mass below the GeV scale are still largely unconstrained. I will present new ideas for seeking light dark matter candidates by exploiting synergies with developing technologies in tabletop experiments. Particularly, I will examine a proposal to use atom interferometers to detect a light dark matter subcomponent at sub-GeV masses through quantum decoherence, and will present a novel technique for detecting axions or axion-like particles with optomechanical cavities.

Continue reading… Clara Murgui (Caltech)

Nate Stern (Northwestern University) Thu. April 13th, 2023

4:00 pm-5:00 pm

New Dimensions on the Interaction of Light and Matter: Quantum Materials, Quantum Light, and Quantum Control

The quantum conception of light consisting of particles of discrete energy, or photons, underlies its interaction with matter. For solid materials, this understanding has led to transformational applications both as conventional as sensor and display technologies and as extraordinary as lasers. Despite this ubiquity, advances in materials continue to reveal nuances in the interaction of light with matter. The emergence of layered materials of atomic-scale thickness presents a new two-dimensional (2D) landscape in which to play with the interaction between photons and matter,

Continue reading… Nate Stern (Northwestern University)

Latham Boyle (Perimeter) Tue. April 11th, 2023

11:30 am-12:30 pm

What is the simplicity of the early universe trying to tell us?

After reviewing some key hints and puzzles from the early

universe, I will introduce recent joint work with Neil Turok

suggesting a rigid and predictive new approach to addressing them.

Our universe seems to be dominated by radiation at early times, and

positive vacuum energy at late times. Taking the symmetry and

analyticity properties of such a spacetime seriously leads to a new

formula for the gravitational entropy of our universe, and a picture

in which the Big Bang may be regarded as a kind of mirror.

Continue reading… Latham Boyle (Perimeter)

Mohit Randeria (Ohio State University) Mon. April 10th, 2023

12:45 pm-1:45 pm

Topological spin textures and Hall effects in chiral magnets

Mohit Randeria

Physics Department, The Ohio State University

Abstract: Skyrmions are topological solitons that were first discussed in quantum field theory in the 1960’s. In recent years, through a series of beautiful experimental developments, they have become of great relevance to condensed matter systems, especially in chiral magnetic materials.

I will begin my seminar with a pedagogical introduction to skyrmions and explain how these spin textures arise naturally in magnets with broken inversion symmetry and spin-orbit coupling. I will describe a variety of experiments emphasizing the unusual properties of skyrmions and their potential applications.

Continue reading… Mohit Randeria (Ohio State University)

Austin Joyce (Astronomy and Astrophysics, University of Chicago) Thu. April 6th, 2023

4:00 pm-5:00 pm

Bootstrapping Inflation

The large-scale correlations that we observe in the distribution of matter in the universe have their origins in primordial perturbations produced prior to the hot big bang—likely during a period of inflationary expansion. Interestingly we do not directly observe the inflationary epoch, but instead infer its dynamics from correlations residing on the late time boundary of the inflationary spacetime where the universe reheats. This motivates us to ask whether we can understand things directly on this asymptotic boundary, without making explicit reference to bulk time evolution. I will describe progress in this direction, including some aspects of how bulk time evolution is encoded in observable quantities.

Continue reading… Austin Joyce (Astronomy and Astrophysics, University of Chicago)

Greg Mathys (Cornell) Tue. April 4th, 2023

11:30 am-12:30 pm

Gravity as a phase of matter

I will discuss how generalized symmetries and their anomalies can be used to constrain low-energy effective field theories (EFTs). In particular, I will present EFTs enjoying biform symmetries, which are a slight variation of higher-form symmetries, and are defined by the presence of a conserved current that has the symmetries of a Young tableau with two columns of equal length. When these theories also have a topological biform current, its conservation law is anomalous, and this is sufficient to fix the current-current correlation function and infer the presence of a massless mode in the spectrum.

Continue reading… Greg Mathys (Cornell)

Rosario Porras-Aguilar (UNC Charlotte) Mon. April 3rd, 2023

12:45 pm-1:45 pm

Title: Non-invasive and Quantitative Phase Microscopy

Abstract: Image contrast is critical to many fields, such as microbiology, which studies biological samples that can be as tiny and thin as a single cell. A significant problem in visualizing cells is that they are nearly transparent (phase objects), making them difficult to observe using conventional microscopes. Approaches to image biological objects require the samples to be stained and thereby converted to an amplitude object. However, staining has plenty of drawbacks: 1) it is invasive because staining chemicals may alter the structure of the object being studied;

Continue reading… Rosario Porras-Aguilar (UNC Charlotte)

Mark Trodden (U Penn) Tue. March 28th, 2023

11:30 am-12:30 pm

Coupled Early Dark Energy

I will describe how some of the fine-tuning problems of the early dark energy solution to the Hubble tension can be addressed using couplings to other fields already present in cosmology. I will discuss the formulation, the cosmology, and the constraints on such models, arising from both observational and theoretical considerations. I will also address some very recent claims about the viability of such approaches.

ZOOM ID: 999 3023 4812, Passcode: PAsems

https://cwru.zoom.us/j/99930234812?pwd=a0tid3VOTzJHTkxBWnNjWmtsNmd5UT09

Continue reading… Mark Trodden (U Penn)

Simranjeet Singh (Carnegie Mellon) Mon. March 27th, 2023

12:45 pm-1:45 pm

Spin-orbit Torque and Magnetoresistance Phenomena in Layered Quantum Materials

Simranjeet Singh

Department of Physics, Carnegie Mellon University

Layered quantum materials, such as WTe2 and MoTe2, host plethora of novel phenomena that are highly relevant for quantum spintronics, namely: Dirac type dispersion, strong spin-orbit coupling (SOC), Fermi arcs, and helical spin-momentum locked surface and bulk states. These systems provide a distinct opportunity to obtain highly efficient and unconventional charge to spin conversion owing to strong SOC, symmetry breaking, and these topology-based phenomena. On the other hand, spin-orbit torque (SOT) driven deterministic control of the magnetic state of a ferromagnet with perpendicular magnetic anisotropy is key to next generation spintronic applications including non-volatile,

Continue reading… Simranjeet Singh (Carnegie Mellon)

Cyrus Taylor and Philip Taylor (CWRU Physics) Thu. March 23rd, 2023

4:00 pm-5:00 pm

Link to video

Progress in nuclear fusion: hope or hype?

On December 13, 2022, the Department of Energy announced “fusion ignition,” an “energy breakthrough” that received massive publicity. It was “a long-awaited milestone in reproducing the power of the sun in a laboratory” as well as, according to White House Science Adviser Arati Prebhakar, a sign of possible progress “to the possibilities for clean energy.”Yet December’s milestone was “long-awaited” because physicists have been seeking ways to control and use fusion reactions at least since the 1950s, with extremely limited success. The big news was that researchers at Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory for the first time ever created a reaction that produced more energy than was used to start the reaction.

Continue reading… Cyrus Taylor and Philip Taylor (CWRU Physics)

Kersten Perez (Columbia) Tue. March 21st, 2023

11:30 am-12:30 pm

Cancelled for this semester

Continue reading… Kersten Perez (Columbia)

Anand Bhattacharya (Argonne National Lab) Mon. March 20th, 2023

12:45 pm-1:45 pm

Superconductivity at interfaces of KTaO3 and its possible origin.

Anand Bhattacharya

Materials Science Division, Argonne National Laboratory

Abstract:

Superconductivity in materials with broken inversion symmetry and strong spin-orbit coupling can lead to unconventional pairing states that may be of interest in quantum science and technology. In this seminar I will discuss a recently discovered superconducting electron gas formed at interfacesof a 5d transition metal oxide KTaO3 (KTO) that combines these attributes intrinsically, and whose unique properties provide strong clues about the origin of its superconductivity.

Continue reading… Anand Bhattacharya (Argonne National Lab)

No colloquium – Spring Break Thu. March 16th, 2023

4:00 pm-5:00 pm

Continue reading… No colloquium – Spring Break

No Colloquium – APS March Meeting Thu. March 9th, 2023

4:00 pm-5:00 pm

Continue reading… No Colloquium – APS March Meeting

Sebastian Urrutia-Quiroga (U. Mass) Tue. March 7th, 2023

11:30 am-12:30 pm

TeV-scale LNV: 0νββ-decay, energy frontier probes, and the origin of matter

Lepton number violation (LNV) is a very attractive research topic for theoretical and experimental physicists due to its implications beyond the Standard Model. It provides feasible theoretical explanations to several open questions in particle physics (e.g., the origin of neutrino mass) and has a rich phenomenology at different energy scales. We explore the underlying connections between neutrinoless double −decay (0) experiments, hadron colliders, and cosmology observations. In the context of simplified models, we show that future collider and 0 experimental results may complement each other.

Continue reading… Sebastian Urrutia-Quiroga (U. Mass)

No seminar (APS March Meeting) Mon. March 6th, 2023

1:00 am-1:00 am

Continue reading… No seminar (APS March Meeting)

Carlos Cardona (CWRU) Tue. February 28th, 2023

11:30 am-12:30 pm

The Conformal Bootstrap: An overview of recent analytical and numerical approaches.

Abstract:

Conformal field theories have been long known to describe the universal physics of scale invariant critical points, such those occurring at regions near to continuous phase transitions in fluids, ferromagnets and quantum field theories. Studying conformal field theories would help us to understand those universal characteristics that relate several seemingly unrelated physical systems. Also from a renormalization group perspective, studying the space of conformal field theories amounts to studying the space of all well-defined (or UV complete) quantum field theories.

Continue reading… Carlos Cardona (CWRU)

Santosh Kumar (Agnostiq) Mon. February 27th, 2023

12:45 pm-1:45 pm

Quantum Time Machines: Hunting Down Time Series Anomalies Like a Boss

Santosh Kumar

Agnostiq, Ontario, Canada

Zoom recording

The task of identifying abnormal behavior in time series data is essential in many fields ranging from financial markets to biophysics. While traditional algorithms for time series anomaly detection (TAD) have proven to be effective, the advent of newly accessible quantum processing units (QPUs) presents an opportunity to explore a quantum approach to TAD. This talk will introduce a new TAD algorithm called Quantum Variational Rewinding (QVR)[1,2,3], where we map and learn time series processes by embedding classical data into quantum states and rewinding them to their learnt initial state –

Continue reading… Santosh Kumar (Agnostiq)

Johanna Nagy (Washington University, St Louis) Thu. February 23rd, 2023

4:00 pm-5:00 pm

Measuring CMB Polarization from the Stratosphere

Measurements of the polarization of the Cosmic Microwave Background (CMB) are a powerful probe of the composition and evolution of the Universe. Observing from the stratosphere with balloon-borne telescopes provides access to information at high frequencies and on the largest spatial scales. In this talk, I will discuss what we can learn about cosmology from CMB polarization in the context of two experiments. SPIDER is a balloon-borne telescope designed to look for a signal from cosmic inflation over the course of two Antarctic flights. The second of these flights, which concluded in January of this year,

Continue reading… Johanna Nagy (Washington University, St Louis)

Evangelos Sfakianakis (CWRU) Tue. February 21st, 2023

11:30 am-12:30 pm

Field-space surprises in multi-field preheating

I will discuss preheating in multi-field models of inflation with a curved field-space manifold, focusing on two well-studied families of models.

The first includes Higgs inflation and models where the fields couple non-minimally to gravity. I will describe both analytical progress as well as recent lattice simulations that have been used to capture significant nonlinear effects like backreaction and rescattering. I will show how we can extract the effective equation of state and typical time-scales for the onset of thermalization, quantities that could affect the usual mapping between predictions for primordial perturbation spectra and measurements of anisotropies in the cosmic microwave background radiation.

Continue reading… Evangelos Sfakianakis (CWRU)

Na Hyun Jo (U Michigan) Mon. February 20th, 2023

12:45 pm-1:45 pm

Manipulation of Quantum Materials Through Strain

Na Hyun Jo

Department of Physics, University of Michigan

A major question in basic physical research is how to understand the collective behavior of interacting quantum objects that cannot be treated as non-interacting particles. Many-body interactions in complex quantum materials are an ideal platform because the interactions cause fascinating phenomena such as high-temperature superconductivity, exotic magnetic systems, correlated topological materials, and many others. In addition, four fundamental degrees of freedom, lattice, charge, orbital, and spin, provide strong tunability on the exotic properties, which allow enhancing our understanding of interacting quantum objects.

Continue reading… Na Hyun Jo (U Michigan)

Paul Steinhardt (Princeton) Thu. February 16th, 2023

4:00 pm-5:00 pm

The Second Kind of Impossible

A dozen years ago, seven Russians, five Americans, an Italian and a black cat named Bucks began an expedition across the tundra of far eastern Russia north of the Kamchatka Peninsula on an unpromising search for what many believed to be impossible. The talk will describe what they were looking for, what they actually found, and what has been learned in the years since.

Continue reading… Paul Steinhardt (Princeton)

The 2022 Nobel Prizes in Science Thu. February 9th, 2023

4:00 pm-6:00 pm

Co-sponsored by the Departments of Chemistry and Physics and the Program in Cell Biology.

Jesse Berezovsky (Physics) on the prize in Physics; Metin Karayilan (Chemistry) on the prize in Chemistry; and Cynthia Beall (Anthropology) and Patricia Princehouse (Institute for the Science of Origins) on the prize in Physiology or Medicine.

The Nobel Prize in Physics 2022 was awarded to Alain Aspect, John F. Clauser and Anton Zeilinger for experiments with entangled photons, elucidating the bizarre nature of quantum mechanics, and setting the stage to develop new types of quantum technology. Though quantum mechanics had already revolutionized science and technology by the mid-20th century,

Continue reading… The 2022 Nobel Prizes in Science

Arnab Dasgupta (PITT PACC – Univ. of Pittsburgh) Tue. February 7th, 2023

11:30 am-12:30 pm

Dynamical Inflation Stimulated Cogenesis

We propose a minimal setup in order to realise dynamical inflection point inflation along while generating the baryon asymmetry of the universe via leptogenesis and dark matter simultaneously. A dark SU(2)D gauge sector with a dark scalar doublet playing the role of inflaton is considered along with several doublet and singlet fermions sufficient to realise multiple inflection points in the inflaton potential. While some of these doublet fermions play the role of dark matter, the rest of the fermions can play non-trivial role in generating light neutrino masses via seesaw mechanism while also leading to non-zero lepton asymmetry from out-of-equilibrium decay of heavy fermions.

Continue reading… Arnab Dasgupta (PITT PACC – Univ. of Pittsburgh)

Matthew Willard (MSE, CWRU) Mon. February 6th, 2023

12:45 pm-1:45 pm

Nanocomposite Soft Magnetic Materials Consideration of Domains and Domain Walls

Prof. Matthew A. Willard

Department of Materials Science and Engineering, Case Western Reserve University

Abstract: Magnetic alloys with nanocomposite microstructures possess some of the smallest coercivities ever measured. The combination of phase selection and microstructure refinement are responsible for the remarkable easy in switching. In such materials, the magnetic domain walls become exceedingly wide primarily due to a microstructure-induced reduction in magnetocrystalline anisotropy. In this seminar, the increase in magnetic domain wall width and its estimated size considering the random anisotropy model will be presented.

Continue reading… Matthew Willard (MSE, CWRU)

Shulei Zhang (CWRU) Thu. February 2nd, 2023

4:00 pm-5:00 pm

Nonreciprocal spin and charge transport in magnetic and topological materials system

Nonreciprocal transport of spin and charge carriers may take place in materials systems that lack inversion symmetry. One prominent example is the p-n junction — the building block of various semiconductor devices (such as transistors, solar cells, LEDs, etc.) that have been an indispensable part of our daily lives. Recently, there has been a surge of interest in nonreciprocal transport effects emerging in magnetic and topological materials systems. Fundamentally, these nonreciprocal-response effects touch upon several key elements of modern condensed-matter physics, such as symmetry, band topology,

Continue reading… Shulei Zhang (CWRU)

Mengjiao Xiao (MIT) Tue. January 31st, 2023

11:30 am-12:30 pm

In Search of Cosmic-Ray Antinuclei from Dark Matter with the GAPS Experiment

The origin of dark matter is a driving question of modern physics. Finding dark

matter in the laboratory and elucidating its properties could revolutionize our

understanding of the fundamental building blocks of the universe. The common

challenges for dark matter searches in astrophysical signatures are large and

uncertain backgrounds. The General Antiparticle Spectrometer (GAPS) is a

balloon-borne experiment designed to identify low-energy cosmic antinuclei, in

particular antideuterons from dark matter annihilation or decay. With a novel

detection approach that uses the uniquely characterized atomic X-rays and

charged particles from the decay of exotic atoms,

Continue reading… Mengjiao Xiao (MIT)

Sadra Jazayeri (Institut d’Astrophysique de Paris) Tue. January 24th, 2023

11:30 am-12:30 pm

Cosmological Phonon Collider

Inflation can be viewed as a natural particle collider through which we can learn about physics at very short distances. In this talk, I study the physics of the cosmological phonon collider: I uncover the imprints of heavy particles during inflation on the correlators of the Goldstone boson of the broken time diffeomorphism during inflation. I show that the reduced speed of sound for the Goldstone allows new types of footprints of heavy fields to emerge. In particular, I will demonstrate that the exchange of supersonic, massive fields that are still lighter than Hubble divided by the speed of sound induces characteristic resonances in the soft limit of the bispectrum.

Continue reading… Sadra Jazayeri (Institut d’Astrophysique de Paris)

Binghai Yan (Weizmann Institute of Science, Israel) Mon. January 23rd, 2023

12:45 pm-1:45 pm

Chirality and Topology in DNA-type Chiral Materials

Binghai Yan

Department of condensed matter physics, Weizmann Institute of Science, Israel

Abstract: In physics, chirality usually refers to the locking of spin and momentum, such as in Weyl fermions and circularly-polarized light. In chemistry and biochemistry, however, it is the geometric asymmetry of non-superposable left or right-handed mirror images that constitutes chirality. While seemingly unrelated characters in different fields, the chiral geometry can lead to topological electronic properties in chiral molecules or solids, as we recently discovered in theory and experiments.

Continue reading… Binghai Yan (Weizmann Institute of Science, Israel)

Thorsten Schmidt (Kent State University) Wed. December 7th, 2022

4:30 pm-5:30 pm

DNA Nanotechnology Tools for Single-Molecule Cryo-EM of Membrane Proteins

DNA is a unique polymer. It is the information storage molecule of all known life forms, but can also be used to build up complex, artificial structures that are not found in Biology. Our group is leveraging this programmability to engineer nanoscale architectures and tools for applications in Biophysics and Structural Biology.

I will demonstrate how DNA-lipid nanodiscs1 can be made and used as novel molecular tools to study membrane proteins (MPs) in a native membrane-like environment. MPs are key players in cellular functions such as sensing,

Continue reading… Thorsten Schmidt (Kent State University)

Jonathan A. Fan (Stanford) Mon. December 5th, 2022

12:45 pm-1:45 pm

High performance plasmonic and polaritonic materials platforms

Jonathan A. Fan

Associate Professor, Department of Electrical Engineering, Stanford University

Abstract: I will discuss new classes of nanophotonic materials that serve as ideal model systems for infrared optoelectronic devices. First, I will introduce a new method for growing single crystal plasmonic metal structures on amorphous substrates based on the concept of rapid melt growth. I will show how these concepts can extend to the reliable growth of bi-crystal gold microstructures and be used to elucidate the photothermoelectric properties of individual grain boundaries.

Continue reading… Jonathan A. Fan (Stanford)

Walter Pettus (Indiana U) Tue. November 29th, 2022

11:30 am-12:30 pm

Fundamental Tests of Quantum Mechanics with the Majorana Demonstrator

The Majorana Demonstrator is an ultra-low-background experiment, with a primary physics goal to search for neutrinoless double beta decay of 76Ge. The Demonstrator consisted of two modules of p-type point-contact (PPC) germanium detectors operating inside a large passive shield on the 4850’ level of the Sanford Underground Research Facility in Lead, SD. The same design features and data that underpin the neutrinoless double beta decay search – low backgrounds, excellent energy resolution, and sharp pulse characteristics – also enabled a variety of searches for Beyond the Standard Model (BSM) physics.

Continue reading… Walter Pettus (Indiana U)

***POSTPONED***Alp Sehirlioglu (CWRU) Mon. November 28th, 2022

12:45 pm-1:45 pm

POSTPONED!

TBA.

Host: Kathleen Kash

Continue reading… ***POSTPONED***Alp Sehirlioglu (CWRU)

M. Benjamin Jungfleisch (University of Delaware) Mon. November 21st, 2022

12:45 pm-1:45 pm

Advances in functional magnonic materials: spin waves in reconfigurable nanostructures and hybrid systems

Benjamin Jungfleisch

Department of Physics and Astronomy, University of Delaware, USA

Join Zoom

Magnons, the quantum-mechanical excitations of spin waves, are bosons whose number does not need to be conserved in scattering events. The field of magnonics aims to manipulate the properties of these fundamental magnetic excitations for practical applications. Information transfer and processing based on magnons do not suffer from Joule heating. Hence, magnonics may lead to alternative information technologies with lower power consumption that meet the demands for a carbon-neutral future.

Continue reading… M. Benjamin Jungfleisch (University of Delaware)

Lydia Kisley (CWRU) Thu. November 17th, 2022

4:00 pm-5:00 pm

Join Zoom Meeting

https://cwru.zoom.us/j/95387840890?pwd=WU4ydzhJRVJtekc4MlVLNStJdll0UT09

Meeting ID: 953 8784 0890

Passcode: 975081

Super-resolution imaging of complex materials: chromatography and (extra)cellular nutrients

Lydia Kisley, Warren E. Rupp Assistant Professor, Case Western Reserve University, Departments of Physics and Chemistry

Abstract: Single-molecule spectroscopy and super-resolution fluorescence microscopy have become seminal tools for scientists due to their ability to resolve heterogeneity normally obscured in traditional ensemble measurements. Single-molecule spectroscopy has enabled important findings in areas such as cellular biophysics and catalysis, yet, single-molecule techniques have had limited use in the study of materials.

Continue reading… Lydia Kisley (CWRU)

Sebastian Sensale (Cleveland State University) Wed. November 16th, 2022

4:30 pm-5:30 pm

Title: Dynamic DNA Nanotechnology

Sebastian Sensale Rodriguez

Assistant Professor

Department of Physics

Cleveland State University

Abstract: Taking inspiration from macroscopic machines, the last decade has seen a surge of interest in the development of DNA origami devices whose functions heavily rely on conformational changes. These “dynamic” DNA nanodevices have found application in diverse areas of research including drug delivery, molecular computation, nanorobotics and biosensing. While the design, modeling and characterization of macroscopic machines is well determined on the basis of kinematics and continuum mechanics, the intrinsic flexibility and stochastic nature of biological systems at the nanoscale make such tasks be highly challenging.

Continue reading… Sebastian Sensale (Cleveland State University)

Antonella Palmese (Carnegie Mellon) [Postponed] Tue. November 15th, 2022

11:30 am-12:30 pm

Probing the Universe’s expansion and the origin of compact object binaries with multi-messenger astronomy

The synergy between gravitational wave (GW) experiments and optical surveys such as the Dark Energy Survey (DES) and the Dark Energy Spectroscopic Instrument (DESI) is most prominent in the discovery of electromagnetic counterparts to GW events and the application of the standard siren method, which has already enabled several measurements of the Hubble Constant. Our DES follow-up observations of the first binary neutron star merger detected by LIGO/Virgo, GW170817, enabled the discovery of the first optical counterpart to a GW event, and provided information about the origin of the binary.

Continue reading… Antonella Palmese (Carnegie Mellon) [Postponed]

Svetlana Morozova (CWRU) Mon. November 14th, 2022

12:45 pm-1:45 pm

Effects of elasticity on biological assemblies

Svetlana Morozova, Kathryn Wilcox, Grace Kemerer, Marlee Dingle, Alexandra Grinevich

Department of Macromolecular Science and Engineering, Case Western Reserve University, Cleveland OH 44106

The elasticity of complex macromolecules is critical for biological function. The mechanical properties of helical polypeptides help the functions of many protein levers and motors, as well as help control the self-assembly of collagen. As the most abundant protein in mammals, collagen is a major structural protein in the extracellular matrix (ECM), which is found in cartilage, hair, skin,

Continue reading… Svetlana Morozova (CWRU)

Jenny Hoffman (Harvard) Thu. November 10th, 2022

4:00 pm-5:00 pm

Acoustic Simulations of Quantum Materials

In the last few years there has been an explosion of new quantum materials, ranging from topology to “twistronics”. Topological materials may be engineered for applications from efficient switches to spin-based computing. “Twistronics” entails the construction of layered materials with emergent electronic and magnetic properties by stacking and twisting individual 2D materials such as graphene. Despite the vast possibilities waiting to be explored, the assembly of such microscopic devices with the necessary precision has proven laborious and expensive. Here we have developed a tangible acoustic analog to these tiny quantum structures!

Continue reading… Jenny Hoffman (Harvard)

Andrius Tamosiunas (CWRU) Tue. November 8th, 2022

11:30 am-12:30 pm

Numerical Studies of Screening Mechanisms in Modified Gravity

In this talk I will present my previous work on screened modified gravity models. Despite the major success of the standard model of cosmology, many questions remain to be answered. In particular, understanding the nature of dark matter and dark energy has been extremely challenging. One possible reason for this is that our understanding of gravity is flawed or incomplete. In this context scalar-tensor theories of gravity have been introduced with hopes of gaining insight into the physics of dark energy and possibly dark matter.

Continue reading… Andrius Tamosiunas (CWRU)

Special Event: Andrew Preston (Cassyni.com) Mon. November 7th, 2022

12:45 pm-1:45 pm

Entrepreneurship: leaving academia in order to improve academia

Join Zoom

Have you ever wondered why peer review is the way it is?

Andrew completed a PhD in experimental condensed matter physics and a postdoc in soft x-ray spectroscopy before asking that same question and leaving academia to start Publons.com with a mission to improve the peer review system. Publons became a platform that hundreds of thousands of researchers used to keep track of and get credit for peer review activities. It was later purchased by Clarivate (the home of Web of Science).

Continue reading… Special Event: Andrew Preston (Cassyni.com)

Nicole Yunger Halpern (NIST + Joint Center for Quantum Information and Computer Science + Univ Maryland) Thu. November 3rd, 2022

4:00 pm-5:00 pm

Quantum steampunk: Quantum information meets thermodynamics

Thermodynamics has shed light on engines, efficiency, and time’s arrow since the Industrial Revolution. But the steam engines that powered the Industrial Revolution were large and classical. Much of today’s technology and experiments are small-scale, quantum, far from equilibrium, and processing information. Nineteenth-century thermodynamics needs re-envisioning for the 21st century. Guidance has come from the mathematical toolkit of quantum information theory. Applying quantum information theory to thermodynamics sheds light on fundamental questions (e.g., how does entanglement spread during quantum thermalization? How can we distinguish quantum heat from quantum work?) and practicalities (e.g.,

Continue reading… Nicole Yunger Halpern (NIST + Joint Center for Quantum Information and Computer Science + Univ Maryland)

Divita Mathur (CWRU) Wed. November 2nd, 2022

4:30 pm-5:30 pm

Updated Zoom Link!!!

https://cwru.zoom.us/j/92624627629?pwd=YnNLU2wzL0svRzEzaU9sY24zRklqZz09

Meeting ID: 926 2462 7629

Passcode: biophysics

Title: Synthetic DNA Nanostructures as Platforms for Precise Nanoparticle Organization

Assistant Professor

Department of Chemistry

Case Western Reserve University

DNA nanotechnology has enabled the ability to build objects and particles at the nanoscale. With the help of a growing repository of DNA self-assembling tools and strategies, it

is possible to create two- and three-dimensional structures, ranging from a few nanometers to micron-scale in size. The cumulative properties of DNA,

Continue reading… Divita Mathur (CWRU)

Caprice Phillips (Ohio State) Tue. November 1st, 2022

11:30 am-12:30 pm

Title: Exploring Potential Biosignatures in Exoplanet Atmospheres with Current and Future Telescopes

Abstract:

Exoplanets with radii between those of Earth and Neptune (1.7 – 3.4 Earth radii) have stronger surface gravity than Earth, and can retain a sizable hydrogen-dominated atmosphere. In contrast to gas giant planets, we call these planets gas dwarf planets. Furthermore, terrestrial planets below the radius valley (< 1.5 Earth radii), may also have the ability to hold onto hydrogen-dominated atmospheres. Generally, planets with hydrogen/helium dominated atmospheres may be more amenable targets for transmission spectroscopy with current and upcoming space-based missions. In this talk,

Continue reading… Caprice Phillips (Ohio State)

Physics Annual Pumpkin Drop 2022 Mon. October 31st, 2022

12:30 pm-12:45 am

Continue reading… Physics Annual Pumpkin Drop 2022

Paul Haney (NIST) Mon. October 31st, 2022

12:45 pm-1:45 pm

Spintronics: from angular momentum to information

Paul Haney

Nanoscale Device Characterization Division, NIST

Join Zoom

Abstract: Spintronics is a field which seeks to utilize the electron spin degree of freedom for developing next generation electronics. Well-established spintronic phenomena have already made a transformative impact on data storage technology in previous decades. Modern spintronics research is focused on utilizing spin-orbit coupling to realize more energy-efficient memory, and applying spintronic devices to next-generation computing designs. In this talk we present a fundamental framework for understanding spintronic device physics from the point of view of angular momentum conservation.

Continue reading… Paul Haney (NIST)

Michael Davidson (University of California, San Diego) Thu. October 27th, 2022

4:00 pm-5:00 pm

Talk CANCELLED. Will be rescheduled for Spring

Optimizing High-Penetration Renewable Energy Development

Widespread use of renewable electricity sources is necessary to address climate change, but their intermittency, geospatial variability, and large land footprints create unique challenges for optimizing deployment while respecting power flow and engineering constraints. In this talk, I will review approaches to plan continental scale systems that are renewable dominant. I will describe the key computational trade-offs and optimization methods that are used to plan land use. Physicists should find these methods accessible. Cost-effective deployment of high-penetration renewable energy systems depends not only on technological and economic considerations but also on market institutions and policy coordination.

Continue reading… Michael Davidson (University of California, San Diego)

Fall break Mon. October 24th, 2022

1:00 am-1:00 am

Continue reading… Fall break

Decades of Achievement Thu. October 20th, 2022

4:00 pm-5:00 pm

Decades of Achievement

A tribute to eight (plus!) of our physics colleagues having birthdays ending in a zero

This tribute arises not just because of the improbability of so many with the same decadian birthday, but also to more generally celebrate our physics community. This year, one physics faculty member has a 40th birthday, two have their 60th birthday (an historically special physics birthday), three have their 70th, two their 90th, and a couple of others. We highlight their achievements in this mini-symposium with mini-talks, in which each of our decadians will be given an all too short encomium tribute.

Continue reading… Decades of Achievement

Walter Malone (Tuskegee University) Mon. October 17th, 2022

12:45 pm-1:45 pm

Using Machine Learning to Predict Surface Adsorption

Walter Malone

Tuskegee University, 1200 W. Montgomery Rd. Tuskegee, AL 36088

Abstract: The interaction of molecules on metallic surfaces plays an important role in a wide array of technologies from catalysts that remove harmful gases from the atmosphere to light-harvesting devices and devices to store hydrogen. Modeling these types of interactions, between molecules and a metallic substrate, can cost a large amount of computational time, limiting both the amount of systems one can study and the potential to improve device performance. To remedy this problem and cut down on computational cost one can employ machine learning techniques.

Continue reading… Walter Malone (Tuskegee University)

Johanna Nagy (Washington University in St. Louis) Tue. October 11th, 2022

11:30 am-12:30 pm

Title:

Cosmology with the Next Generation of Cosmic Microwave Background Experiments

Abstract:

Measurements of the polarization of the Cosmic Microwave Background (CMB) are a powerful probe of the composition and evolution of the Universe. From searching for evidence of inflation shortly after the Big Bang to measuring the optical depth to reionization and probing fundamental particles, precision CMB measurements provide a unique window into many aspects of cosmology. Upcoming balloon- and ground-based experiments will build on technologies demonstrated by current instruments to overcome the challenges presented by increasing sensitivity, mitigating systematic errors, and distinguishing Galactic foregrounds.

Continue reading… Johanna Nagy (Washington University in St. Louis)

You Zhou (University of Maryland) Mon. October 10th, 2022

12:45 pm-1:45 pm

Wigner crystals in atomically thin heterostructures

You Zhou

Materials Science and Engineering, University of Maryland

Join Zoom

Abstract: A Wigner solid — a crystal made entirely of electrons — is a model system for understanding electron correlation physics that underlies a wide range of phenomena, including high-temperature superconductivity and metal-insulator transitions. Despite decades of research, it has been challenging to realize Wigner crystals in the so-called quantum regime where quantum effects dominate over thermal fluctuations. In this talk, I will introduce how atomically thin semiconductors, such as transition metal dichalcogenides,

Continue reading… You Zhou (University of Maryland)

Fernando Cornet Gomez (CWRU) Tue. October 4th, 2022

11:30 am-12:30 pm

Electron and Muon g-2 in a 2HDM

Abstract: Recent determinations of the electron and muon anomalous magnetic moments point towards a potential discrepancy with respect to the SM prediction. Here we present a flavor conserving Two Higgs Doublet Model that, having non universal leptonic couplings, is capable of explaining all the experimental scenarios available at the moment. We will also show how the CDF measurement of the W boson mass affects our results.

ZOOM ID: 999 3023 4812, Passcode: PAsems

https://cwru.zoom.us/j/99930234812?pwd=a0tid3VOTzJHTkxBWnNjWmtsNmd5UT09

Continue reading… Fernando Cornet Gomez (CWRU)

Gregory A. Fiete (Northeastern) Mon. October 3rd, 2022

12:45 pm-1:45 pm

Manipulation of magnetic order and band topology through selective phonon excitation

Gregory A. Fiete

Department of Physics, Northeastern University

Abstract: Quantum materials driven out-of-equilibrium by a laser pump offer new opportunities for exploring intriguing quantum phenomena, including electron-correlation behaviors and topological properties of excitations. After reviewing some recent motivating pump-probe experiments, I will turn to our theoretical studies of driven many-body quantum systems. I will place particular emphasis on the situation where the laser frequency is chosen to selectively excite particular phonon modes and describe the impact of the non-equilibrium lattice on the electron properties,

Continue reading… Gregory A. Fiete (Northeastern)

Sera Markoff (API/GRAPPA, University of Amsterdam) Thu. September 29th, 2022

11:30 am-12:30 pm

Note – Nonstandard time

A tale of two black holes: Sgr A* and M87*

Black holes are one of the most exotic consequences of Einstein’s General Relativity, yet they are also very common, ranging from stellar remnants up to beasts billions of times more massive than our sun. Despite their reputation as cosmic vacuum cleaners, they actually drive extremely complicated astrophysical systems that can majorly influence their surroundings. Via their powerful outflows in particular, black holes shape the way the Universe looks today…but not at all times. Black holes undergo cycles of activity, so to understand their role over cosmological timescales we need to understand not only how they power these outflows from just outside their event horizons,

Continue reading… Sera Markoff (API/GRAPPA, University of Amsterdam)

Maura McLaughlin (West Virginia University) Tue. September 27th, 2022

11:00 am-12:30 pm

Title: Pulsar Timing Arrays See Red: Entering the Era of Low-Frequency Gravitational Wave Detection

Abstract: Millisecond pulsars are rapidly rotating neutron stars with phenomenal rotational stability. Pulsar timing arrays world-wide monitor over 100 of these cosmic clocks in order to detect perturbations due to gravitational waves at nanohertz frequencies. These gravitational waves will most likely result from an ensemble of supermassive black hole binaries. Their detection and subsequent study will offer unique insights into galaxy growth and evolution over cosmic time. I will present the most recent NANOGrav and International Pulsar Timing Array datasets and the results of gravitational wave analyses which suggest the presence of a common “red”

Continue reading… Maura McLaughlin (West Virginia University)

Rolando Valdés Aguilar (OSU) Mon. September 26th, 2022

12:45 pm-1:45 pm

Terahertz Spin Dynamics in Dirac Antiferromagnet CoTiO3

Rolando Valdes Aguilar

Department of Physics, Ohio State University

Join Zoom

Abstract.– Recently the study of the interplay between topology and magnetism has started to gain attention. A few materials have been identified to host topologically non-trivial magnons, while many more theoretical proposals continue to be made. One recent example of a potential topological magnetic material is CoTiO3, which purportedly hosts Dirac magnons. We use a combination of time domain THz (TDTS) and magneto-Raman spectroscopies to measure the low energy magnetic spectrum in CoTiO3 and detect the two lowest energy modes,

Continue reading… Rolando Valdés Aguilar (OSU)

Dam Son (Chicago) Thu. September 22nd, 2022

4:00 pm-5:00 pm

Zoom ID: 953 8784 0890 – Passcode: 975081

Zoom link

UnNuclear Physics: Conformal Symmetry in Nuclear Reactions

Conformal symmetry plays an important role in quantum field theory and statistical physics. A nonrelativistic version of the conformal symmetry, also called Schrödinger symmetry, is approximately realized in various physical systems, including neutrons in nuclear physics and ultracold atoms. After going through some basic facts about nonrelativistic conformal field theory, we describe one concrete application of such a theory in the physics of nuclear reactions with several neutrons in the final state.

Continue reading… Dam Son (Chicago)

Qiuyue Liang (U Penn) Tue. September 20th, 2022

11:30 am-12:30 pm

Title: Neutrino-Assisted Early Dark Energy: Theory and Cosmology

Abstract: The tension between measurements of the Hubble constant obtained at different redshifts may provide a hint of new physics active in the relatively early universe, around the epoch of matter- radiation equality. A leading paradigm to resolve the tension is a period of early dark energy, in which a scalar field contributes a subdominant part of the energy budget of the universe at this time. This scenario faces significant fine-tuning problems which can be ameliorated by a non- trivial coupling of the scalar to the standard model neutrinos. These become non-relativistic close to the time of matter-radiation equality,

Continue reading… Qiuyue Liang (U Penn)

Walter Lambrecht (CWRU) Mon. September 19th, 2022

12:45 pm-1:45 pm

Some surprising findings in 2D oxides

Walter R. L. Lambrecht

Department of Physics, Case Western Reserve University

Join Zoom

Abstract.–Layered and few-layer 2D oxides have remarkable properties. In this talk I will tell you about two oxides, V2O5 and LiCoO2. In both materials the quasiparticle self-consistent GW method is found to strongly overestimate the optical band gap. This is surprising because the GW method is usually quite accurate in predicting band gaps. The question is: what is missing in GW? Is it electron-phonon effects or electron-hole effects on the screening of the screened Coulomb interaction W?

Continue reading… Walter Lambrecht (CWRU)

Marcell Howard (U Pittsburg) Tue. September 13th, 2022

11:30 am-12:30 pm

An Exact Fermionic Chern-Simons-Kodama State in Quantum Gravity

Abstract: The Chern-Simons-Kodama (CSK) state is an exact, non-perturbative wave function in the Ashtekar formulation of classical General Relativity. In this work, we find a generalized fermionic CSK state by solving the extended gravitational and fermionic Hamiltonian constraints of the Wheeler-DeWitt equation exactly. We show that this new state reduces to the original Kodama state upon symmetry reduction to FRW coordinates with perturbative fermionic corrections, making contact with the Hartle-Hawking and Vilenkin wave functions of the universe in cosmology. We also find that when both torsion and fermions are non-vanishing,

Continue reading… Marcell Howard (U Pittsburg)

(CANCELED) Mahi R. Singh (The University of Western Ontario) Mon. September 12th, 2022

12:45 pm-1:45 pm

CANCELED

Light-Matter Interaction in Graphene and Metallic Nanoparticles Nanohybrids

Mahi R. Singh,

Department of Physics and Astronomy, Vanderbilt University, Nashville, USA

Western University, Ontario, London, Canada N6A 3K7

Join Zoom

Abstract.–There is considerable interest in light-matter interaction by combining plasmonic materials such as graphene and metallic nanoparticles with quantum dots. Graphene was invented theoretically by Wallace in 1947 [1] and he found that graphene is a gapless material. Later, Wallace and I found additional gapless materials, such as narrow-gap semiconductors which have direct band gaps [2].

Continue reading… (CANCELED) Mahi R. Singh (The University of Western Ontario)

No seminar (Labor Day) Mon. September 5th, 2022

1:00 am-1:00 am

Continue reading… No seminar (Labor Day)

Yiyu Cai (U Penn) Mon. August 29th, 2022

12:45 pm-1:45 pm

Open- and close-packed oligomers via template-directed assembly of shape-engineered,

lithographically-fabricated nanoparticles

Yiyu Cai

Department of Electrical and Systems Engineering, University of Pennsylvania

Join Zoom

Abstract.—The top-down lithographic fabrication process can produce nanoparticles with well-defined sizes, shapes, and compositions that are not accessible synthetically. Using a template-assisted assembly technique, capillary forces drive the assembly of lithographically-fabricated nanoparticles into open or close-packed structures. The sizes and shapes of the templates control the coordination number, disorder, and location of defects such as voids in the nanoparticle assemblies.

Continue reading… Yiyu Cai (U Penn)

Thaddeus Ladd (HRL labs) Mon. April 25th, 2022

12:45 pm-1:45 pm

Encoded Silicon Qubits: A High-Performance & Scalable Platform for Practical Quantum Computing

Thaddeus Ladd

HRL Laboratories, LLC

Abstract.—For quantum computers to achieve their promise, regardless of the qubit technology, significant improvements to both performance and scale are required. Quantum-dot-based qubits in silicon have recently enjoyed dramatic advances in fabrication and control techniques. The “exchange-only” modality is of particular interest, as it avoids control elements that are difficult to scale such as microwave fields, photonics, or ferromagnetic gradients. In this control scheme, the entirety of quantum computation may be performed using only asynchronous,

Continue reading… Thaddeus Ladd (HRL labs)

Janet Conrad (MIT) Thu. April 21st, 2022

4:00 pm-5:00 pm

Link to video

Title: Of Elephants and Oscillations

This talk explores next steps in the search for new physics in the neutrino sector. The discovery of neutrino oscillations has changed the way we think about our model of particle physics. We must now incorporate tiny neutrino masses into our theory, as well as consider the possibility of other unexpected properties. You might ask what a tiny mass particle has to do with elephants? To learn this, you need to come to the colloquium.

Continue reading… Janet Conrad (MIT)

Jennifer Cano (Stony Brook) Mon. April 18th, 2022

12:45 pm-1:45 pm

Topological Twistronics

Jennifer Cano

Department of Physics and Astronomy, Stony Brook University

Youtube video

Abstract.— Twisting van der Waals heterostructures to induce correlated many-body states provides a novel tuning mechanism in solid-state physics, launching the field of “twistronics.” In this talk, we apply twistronics to renormalize the Dirac cone on the surface of a 3D topological insulator, with the goal of realizing tunable interacting topological phases. To achieve this goal, we consider two different platforms: 1) twisted heterostructures in 2D and 3D; and 2) the effect of a moire superlattice potential.

Continue reading… Jennifer Cano (Stony Brook)

Cyrus Taylor (Physics), Thomas Gray (Chemistry) and George Dubyak (Biophysics and Physiology) Thu. April 14th, 2022

4:00 pm-5:00 pm

Link to video

The 2021 Nobel Prizes in Science

Cyrus Taylor on the prize in physics, Thomas Gray on the prize in chemistry, and George Dubyak on the prize in physiology or medicine.

Continue reading… Cyrus Taylor (Physics), Thomas Gray (Chemistry) and George Dubyak (Biophysics and Physiology)

Soner Albayrak (Amsterdam U) Tue. April 12th, 2022

11:30 am-12:30 pm

Conformal QED in 3d: The Numerical Bootstrap Approach

The IR fixed point of quantum electrodynamics in three dimensions (QED3) is expected to be gapped for a small global symmetry group and strongly interacting for a large one. Concretely, QED3 with the flavor group SU(N) flows to a free theory for small N and to a conformal one for large N, whereas the critical flavor number is suggested to be anywhere between 1 and 10 by various theoretical and computational methods. This phase space of QED3 is very appealing, as it shows analogues of chiral symmetry breaking and confinement and hence can be u