Harry Potter Fans will be delighted to know that Ellie Darcey-Alden: Young Lily Harry Potter will be meeting fans, signing autographs, and available for photo-ops at the New England WizardFest & Magic Convention, which runs from August 25 to August 27, 2023. This extraordinary, family-friendly event, set in Massachusetts, celebrates all things magical.at the Boxboro Regency 242 Adams Place in Boxborough, MA

Ellie May Darcey-Alden was born on 4 September 1999 in Yarnton, Oxford, England. She is the daughter of Sarah Dawn Darcey and Philip Rodney Alden, a production senior director for SpaceX. She has a younger brother, Joseph, who is also a former child actor, and two older half-siblings from her father’s first marriage. She attended Dance 10 Theatre School and Stagecoach Theatre Arts School in Oxford until 2013, when she moved to Los Angeles with her family. She graduated from Palos Verdes High School in 2018 and joined the RADA Youth Company: Acting summer term in 2017.

Ellie Darcey-Alden started her acting career in a local theatre production and was scouted for her first television role in BBC’s Tess of the D’Urbervilles in 2008. She then appeared in BBC’s Robin Hood and Holby City. However, she is best known for playing young Lily Potter in Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows: Part 2 in 2011, after being screen tested with Benedict Clarke, who played young Severus Snape. She also played Francesca “Franny” Latimer in the Doctor Who series 7 Christmas special “The Snowmen” in 2012. She has since worked in other films, TV series and short films, such as Welcome to the Punch, Sam & Isobel, Support Group and Pool Boy Nightmare.

Besides acting, Ellie is also interested in dancing, horse riding and animal rescue. She has done small-time modelling, commercials, voice over work and competitive dancing. She volunteers at the stables and fosters abused animals in Los Angeles. She also participates in community services and events through her school’s Be the Change leadership class. She is a fan of Harry Potter, Doctor Who and Star Wars.

Upcoming Event: New England WizardFest & Magic Convention

Fans will be delighted to know that Ellie Darcey-Alden is scheduled to appear at the New England WizardFest & Magic Convention, which runs from August 25 to August 27, 2023. This extraordinary, family-friendly event, set in Massachusetts, celebrates all things magical.

The event will take place at the Boxboro Regency 242 Adams Place in Boxborough, MA 01719. Attendees can anticipate a magical experience with celebrity guests, family activities, vendors selling magical wares, licensed merchandise, and memorabilia from famous Literary Wizard Brands such as Harry Potter, Wizard of Oz, Lord of the Rings, and many more.

In addition to Ellie, other celebrity guests from the Harry Potter movies, such as Chris Rankin (Percy Weasley), Jim Tavaré (Tom the Innkeeper), and Sean Biggerstaff (Oliver Wood), will be signing autographs and offering selfie photo ops.

For more details about this event, visit www.NEWizardFest.com.

Celebrities

Ellie Darcey-Alden: Famed for her role as Young Lily Evans in ‘Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows: Part 2,’ Darcey-Alden is a globally recognized English-American actress.

Chris Rankin: Known for his portrayal of Percy Weasley in the Harry Potter series, Rankin is a fan favorite.

Jim Tavaré: He is widely recognized for his portrayal of Tom, the innkeeper of the Leaky Cauldron, in the Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban film

Sean Biggerstaff: Renowned for his role as Quidditch captain Oliver Wood in the Harry Potter series.

Magicians

Jeff McBride: The creator of the School of Magic & Mystery and an award winning magician (including a Fool Us Trophy from Penn and Teller).

Jon Stetson: Known as the inspiration for the hit CBS Television series ‘The Mentalist,’ Jon is a talented mentalist with engaging acts.

Steve Charette: An award-winning magician is known for his captivating stage magic and close-up tricks.

Cedric Purcell: A well-respected figure in New England’s magic scene, Purcell’s performances captivate audiences.

Stay in the heart of the magic at The Boxboro Regency Hotel & Conference Center, the very venue of our enchanting event. Located conveniently at 242 Adams Pl., Boxborough, MA, 01719, the hotel ensures a comfortable stay with its array of amenities including free parking, high-speed internet, an indoor pool, and a fitness center. Unwind at the bar/lounge after a day of spell-binding activities, or utilize the business center as per your needs.

For those wanting to explore the local area, take advantage of the free shuttle service that will transport you to sites within a 10-mile radius. Satisfy your hunger spells at the hotel’s on-site restaurant, the Minuteman Grille, offering breakfast, lunch, and dinner to cater to all your dining needs during the event.

Its prime location just off I-495 makes the Boxboro Regency Hotel & Conference Center an ideal base for attendees traveling from near and far. So, whether you’re a local magic enthusiast or a wizarding world explorer, getting to the venue will be as simple as a swish and flick of a wand. Book your room now and get ready for a magical stay!

Meet Ellie Darcey-Alden: Young Lily Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows 2