LOS ANGELES, Sept. 21, 2012 — Rentrak Corporation, the leader in multi- screen media measurement serving the advertising, television and entertainment industries, today announced a partnership deal to be the box office information provider to the most respected entertainment industry site, Deadline Hollywood, which has become the authoritative source for breaking news.

Rentrak will be providing all official, reported domestic box office actuals to Deadline Hollywood so its readers like producers, agents, dealmakers, and industry executives, can easily access the most accurate theatrical film performance information. Additionally, Rentrak will also provide Deadline readers with a uniquely designed Worldwide Box Office Estimates chart. The complete compilation of titles also will measure the global box office and be available each Sunday afternoon.

Deadline Hollywood was founded by industry veteran Nikki Finke, who serves as the General Manager and Editor-in-Chief. Her career in journalism includes positions at the Associated Press, Newsweek, Los Angeles Times, New York Observer and New York Magazine.

“Rentrak is the most trustworthy source for box office reporting, and the perfect fit to my weekly box office analysis. In today’s competitive environment, easy access to this valuable resource will be a big convenience to our engaged readership,” Finke said.

“We are pleased to have the opportunity to provide Deadline with the most trusted and accurate numbers for studio box office reporting. Rentrak’s unrivaled intelligence across the global theatrical market serves as a perfect complement to the in-depth and real-time news reporting Deadline Hollywood is known for,” said Ron Giambra, President of Theatrical Worldwide at Rentrak.

For over 25 years, Rentrak has lead the industry in providing the most detailed and accurate view of worldwide box office reporting, grosses, weekend results, historical data and real-time film analysis. Every major studio, mini-major and prominent independent film distributor in the industry uses Rentrak’s real-time and geographic-specific box office information that provides users with instant analysis of 99 percent of the domestic box office landscape. Globally, 18,000 theaters report to Rentrak representing 80,000 screens in 33 countries.