PORTLAND, Ore., Aug. 4 /PRNewswire-FirstCall/ -- Rentrak Corporation (Nasdaq: RENT), the leader in multi-screen media measurement serving the advertising and entertainment industries, today announced that Raycom Media, one of the largest local broadcast groups in the nation, with 46 television stations in 36 markets across 18 states, has signed on with Rentrak to receive local market measurement for its Charlotte CBS-affiliate WBTV and Birmingham FOX-affiliate WBRC.

"We are excited to be leading the Charlotte and Birmingham markets in adopting Rentrak's massive, database-centric audience measurement services," said Billy McDowell, Vice President of Research for Raycom Media. "Rentrak represents the leading edge of audience measurement and we believe its data and metrics will continue to increase in acceptance and influence with local television stations and advertising agencies. We need the insights that only this data can provide."

This latest contract expands Rentrak's local market client roster to 42 stations in 23 markets.

"Rentrak's local market momentum continues with the addition of three major station groups – Raycom, Meredith and London," said Steven Walsh, Rentrak's senior vice president of Local Market Sales. "It is clear evidence that local stations are aggressively supporting a new and better approach to audience measurement that leverages the methodical and technological advances available today."

Available in all 210 local TV markets, Rentrak's StationView Essentials service features the only fully-integrated database of detailed satellite, telco TV and cable viewing information from millions of televisions nationwide that combines segmentation and customer databases with TV viewing information in order to generate relevant "purchaser ratings" for its clients.

About Rentrak Corporation

Rentrak Corporation is a global digital media measurement and research company, serving the most recognizable companies in the entertainment industry. With a reach across numerous platforms including box office, home entertainment, video on demand and linear television, broadband and mobile, Rentrak has developed more efficient metrics to be used as alternative currencies for the evaluation and selling of media. Rentrak is headquartered in Portland, Oregon, with additional offices worldwide. For more information on any of Rentrak's services, please visit www.rentrak.com.

About Raycom Media

Raycom Media, an employee-owned company, is one of the nation's largest broadcasters and owns and operates 46 television stations in 36 markets and 18 states, including Hawaii. In addition to television stations, Raycom owns Raycom Sports, a marketing, production and events management and distribution company; Raycom Post, a post production facility; Broadview Media, a post production telecommunications company; and CableVantage, a cable advertising sales group.

SOURCE Rentrak Corporation