Two media measurement companies, comScore and Rentrak, on Tuesday announced plans to merge, seeking to challenge the longtime industry leader Nielsen in tracking how people consume media in an era of rapid change.

ComScore was founded in 1999, measuring people’s use of online media, and it has recently made a push to analyze television viewing. Rentrak uses data from set-top boxes to measure what people are watching on television. Combined, the two companies are seeking to create an industry force that will provide a stronger competitor to Nielsen by measuring how people consume media across a proliferation of screens — mobile, desktop, television and more.

“We are at an inflection point right now,” Serge Matta, comScore’s chief executive, said in an interview on Tuesday. “Look at how viewers are interacting with television,” he added. “It is no longer just on the television set in the living room. It is on mobile. It is on V.O.D. They consume content wherever they want it, whenever they want it.”

The deal calls for Rentrak, founded under a different name in 1977, to become a wholly owned subsidiary of comScore. Mr. Matta will be chief of the combined company, and Bill Livek, chief of Rentrak, will be executive vice chairman and president.

Expected to close in early 2016, the transaction values Rentrak at about $827 million on a fully diluted equity basis. Together, the companies have an equity value of about $2.4 billion, based on the share price at the close of trading on Tuesday. Nielsen has a market capitalization of about $16.7 billion. Some advertising and media executives cheered the merger as a viable alternative to Nielsen.

Since the 1950s, Nielsen has dominated television ratings with its measurement based on a panel of viewers. Its statistics are the basis for nearly $70 billion in advertising sales each year in the United States. Still, industry executives continue to criticize Nielsen’s methods as outdated, saying that the company has failed to adapt to changing consumer habits like delayed viewing and viewing on mobile devices and streaming services.

Thank you for your patience while we verify access. If you are in Reader mode please exit and log into your Times account, or subscribe for all of The Times.

Thank you for your patience while we verify access.

Already a subscriber? Log in.

Want all of The Times? Subscribe.