Pills for tonkor actually have a much bigger hitbox than they look, so slotting Heavy Cal isn't too much of a hindrance. For Adhesive Blast, I say just get better by practicing, aim to the right a little and you should get even the furthest reaches of enemies. Bouncing is also a technique you can use to deliver pills (shooting at the floor and skipping pills into Nulls). Sometimes, Tonkor pills don't detonate right away which is bad since the fuse timer is fairly long. With that, you also can't proc explosions on dead bodies.

Although not listed, Firestorm also adds raw damage (center explosion is bigger) while at the same time giving more of a "forgiveness" for missing shots and of course, having a bigger AoE. Personally, it's what I would slot.

Also, fast hands isn't too necessary with active reloads and definitely should build for crits.

Edited August 25, 2015 by TheLocalHentai

i'd rather use Firestorm. even more mapwiping with the flavor of the month Explosive Weapon. make absolute sure that everything in AoE Range is dead!

also, replace two of those Elementals with Crit Mods. or whatever else. but Crit Mods are objectively superior no matter what. unless you only use it for Absorb or Antimatter Drop... but that's pretty niche, and Firestorm is pointless for those uses so you're not doing that.

this is what i use and would use for Tonkor.

Terminal Velocity is used on all of my Grenade Launcher type Weapons - purely for trick shots. why just press fire and have everything automatically die, when i can do something more interesting? that being trick shots. the faster speed makes the Grenades from both Penta and Tonkor bounce more, so i can do more complex shots.

other options that would be acceptable include Heavy Caliber, Hammershot, another Elemental.

Hammershot is a good alternative if you don't want to make an Elemental Combo or add another Damage Type or whatever. basically if you want to get as much of the existing Damage Types as possible.

while Heavy Caliber and another Elemental are different flavors of more total Damage.

there's some Players that want to use a Reload Mod. go ahead i guess. Tonkor does WAY more than enough Damage to not care about having more of it. always guaranteed atleast one slot for Utility because more Damage is pointless, it already instantly Kills basically anything.

the calculator is off because it failed to provide innate 325 blast damage

it's perfectly accurate. up at the top, where it says Primary, click it. it will change to the Explosion Damage, rather than the Impact Damage. Edited August 25, 2015 by taiiat