Bezuidenhout History, Family Crest & Coats of Arms

Origins Available:

Netherlands

The distinguished surname Bezuidenhout is Dutch in origin. It is derived from the Dutch words "zuid," meaning "south," and "hout," meaning "forest," and once denoted a region south of the Hague forest. The name was probably first borne by a resident of this region or, alternatively, by someone living south of a prominent forest.

Loading...

Early Origins of the Bezuidenhout family

The surname Bezuidenhout was first found in Holland, where the name is thought to have emerged. Dutch surnames were not borne by the common classes until 1811, when they were made obligatory by Napoleon; as records of the name Bezuidenhout extend back to the 17th century, it can be assumed that the family was one of status.

Loading...

Early History of the Bezuidenhout family

This web page shows only a small excerpt of our Bezuidenhout research. Another 76 words (5 lines of text) covering the year 1668 is included under the topic Early Bezuidenhout History in all our PDF Extended History products and printed products wherever possible.

Loading...

Bezuidenhout Spelling Variations

Spelling variations of this family name include: Bezuidenhout, Bezouidenhout, Bezoet, Bezoetdebie and others.

Loading...

Early Notables of the Bezuidenhout family

From this era of Dutch history, those of this who distinguished themselves included

Wynand Leendertsz Bezuidenhout, the patriarch of the South African Bezuidenhout family

Bezuidenhout Ranking

In South Africa, the name Bezuidenhout is the 157th most popular surname with an estimated 39,308 people with that name. 1

Loading...

Bezuidenhout migration to the United States +

Some of the first settlers of this family name were:

Bezuidenhout Settlers in United States in the 20th Century

Gert Pieter Bezuidenhout, aged 23, who landed in America from Bermuda, in 1903

Contemporary Notables of the name Bezuidenhout (post 1700) +

Aletta Bezuidenhout (1949-2024), Kenyan-born South African filmmaker, writer and actress

Carl Bezuidenhout (b. 1986), former South African rugby union footballer

Ryan Bezuidenhout (b. 1986), Zimbabwean first-class cricketer

Martin Johannes Bezuidenhout (b. 1989), South African rugby union footballer

Stephanus Marthinus "Stoof" Bezuidenhout (b. 1986), South African rugby union player who currently plays for the Leopards

Steve Bezuidenhout (b. 1957), Namibian politician, Vice President of the Rally for Democracy and Progres

Frederik Bezuidenhout, South African whose death by shooting in 1815 prompted the "Slagters Nek" Rebellion of Afrikaner frontiersmen

Alicia Louise Bezuidenhout (b. 1967), South African international cricketer

Dawid Bezuidenhout (1935-1998), South African teacher and politician

Kristian Bezuidenhout (b. 1979), Australian pianist

Related Stories +

Citations +

"Most Common Last Names in South Africa." Forebears, https://forebears.io/south-africa/surnames