For the purposes of 321 CMR 10.00, the following words or phrases shall have the following meanings:

Agriculture.

(a) Land in Agricultural Use means land presently and primarily used in producing or raising one or more of the following agricultural commodities for commercial purposes:

1. animals, including but not limited to livestock, poultry, and bees;

2. fruits, vegetables, berries, nuts, maple sap, and other foods for human consumption;

3. feed, seed, forage, tobacco, flowers, sod, nursery or greenhouse products, and orna- mental plants or shrubs; and

4. forest products on Land Devoted to Forest Purposes, including but not limited to biomass, sawlogs, and cordwood, but not including the agricultural commodities described in 321CMR 10.02: Agriculture(a)1. through 3.

Additionally, land in agricultural use means land presently and primarily used in a manner related to, and customarily and necessarily used in, producing or raising such commodities, including but not limited to: existing access roads and livestock crossings; windbreaks; hedgerows; field edges; bee yards; sand pits used as part of an agricultural activity; landings for forest products; fence lines; water management projects such as reservoirs, farm ponds, irrigation systems, field ditches, cross ditches, canals/channels, grass waterways, dikes, sub-surface drainage systems, watering facilities, water transport systems, and water storage systems; agricultural composting sites; agricultural storage and work areas; and land under farm structures.

Land in agricultural use may lie inactive for up to five consecutive years unless it is under a United States Department of Agriculture (USDA) contract for a longer term pursuant to the Conservation Reserves Program (the Food Securities Act of 1985, as amended by the Food, Agriculture, Conservation and Trade Act of 1990; and 7 CFR 1410), or it is used for the forestry purposes described in 321 CMR 10.02: Agriculture(b)14. The issuing authority may require appropriate documentation, such as a USDA Farm Plan or aerial photography, to demonstrate agricultural use.

(b) Normal Maintenance of Land in Agricultural Use means the following activities, without enlargement as to geographical extent, that are occurring on land in agricultural use, when directly related to production or raising of the agricultural commodities referenced in 321 CMR 10.02: Agriculture(a), and when conducted in accordance with federal and state laws:

1. all crop management practices customarily employed to enhance existing growing conditions, including but not limited to: tillage, trellising, pruning, mulching, shading, and irrigating; and all customary harvesting practices such as digging, picking, combining, threshing, windrowing, baling, curing, and drying;

2. the use of fertilizers, manures, compost materials, and other soil amendments; pesticides and herbicides; traps; and other such materials;

3. the repair or replacement of existing access roads and livestock crossings;

4. the maintenance of:

a. existing forest boundary lines up to five feet wide limited to cutting vegetation within the existing boundary lines;

b. windbreaks;

c. hedgerows; and

5. the management of existing field edges, limited to within 100 feet from the land in production, including the following practices:

a. mowing;

b. burning;

c. brush cutting; and

d. removing trees;

6. the maintenance and repair of existing fences and the management of temporary fence lines;

7. the cleaning, clearing, grading, repairing, dredging, or restoring of existing man made or natural water management systems such as reservoirs, farm ponds, irrigation systems, field ditches, cross ditches, canals/channels, grass waterways, dikes, sub surface drainage systems, watering facilities, water transport systems, vents, and water storage systems, all in order to provide drainage, prevent erosion, provide more effective use of water, or provide for efficient use of equipment, and all for the purpose of maintaining favorable conditions for ongoing growing or raising of agricultural commodities;

8. the maintenance and repair of ongoing agricultural composting sites, storage areas, and work areas and the storage of fertilizers, pesticides, manures, compost materials, and other soil amendments;

9. the repair and maintenance of existing farm structures;

10. the seeding of eroded or disturbed areas;

11. maintaining the flow of existing natural waterways;

12. the keeping of livestock and poultry and the management of beehives;

13. the cultivation of cranberries, including the following practices:

a. the activities described in 321 CMR 10.02: Agriculture(b)1. through 11;

b. the application of sand to existing bogs and the excavation of sand from sand pits;

c. the repair and reconstruction of water control structures including flumes, pumps, dikes, and piping above and below the ground;

d. the regrading, including modification of drainage, and replanting of existing cranberry bogs;

e. the repair and replacement of dikes;

f. water harvesting activities; and

g. flooding and flood release;

14. the cutting and removal of trees for the purpose of selling the trees or any products derived therefrom, (a) when carried out in accordance with an approved Forest Cutting Plan under the provisions of M.G.L. c. 132, §§ 40 through 46, and 304 CMR 11.04, provided that the approved Forest Cutting Plan incorporates the Division's requested conditions to protect the State-listed Species; or (b) if such commercial forest management activities do not require a Forest Cutting Plan under the provisions of M.G.L. c. 132, §§ 40 through 46, and 304 CMR 11.04, then provided a management plan for such activities is approved by the Division and they occur on Land Devoted to Forest Purposes.

15. pre-commercial forest management activities that do not require an approved Forest Cutting Plan under the provisions of M.G.L. c. 132, §§ 40 through 46, and 304 CMR 11.00, limited to pruning, pre-commercial thinning, selective herbicide application, or other activity designed to maintain or improve existing timber stock for future commercial harvest, provided that said management activities are carried out on Land Devoted to Forest Purposes and in accordance with a management plan approved in writing by the Division.

(c) Normal Improvement of Land in Agricultural Use, includes but is not limited to:

1. the following activities when they occur on land in agricultural use or when they are directly related to production or raising of the agricultural commodities referenced in 321 CMR 10.02: Agriculture(a), and the activity is conducted in accordance with federal and state laws:

a. the installation of permanent fencing, windbreaks, hedgerows, or the cutting of vegetation to create forest boundaries up to five feet wide;

b. the installation of dikes within a cranberry bog;

c. the construction of farm structures, not including habitable dwellings;

d. the squaring off of fields and bogs, provided there is no increase in the amount of land in production beyond the minimum increase necessarily resulting from making the boundary of any field or bog more regular;

e. the construction of by pass canals/channels and tail water recovery systems;

f. a change in commodity other than from maple sap production or forest products to any other commodity;

g. the construction of a water management system such as a farm pond, irrigation system, field ditch, cross ditch, canal/channel, grass waterway, dike, sub surface drainage system, watering facility, water transport system, vent, or water storage system, or of a livestock access; and

h. the construction of composting and storage areas.

2. the reconstruction of existing dikes, the reconstruction and expansion of existing ponds and reservoirs, and the construction of tailwater recovery ponds and by pass canals/channels when directly related to production or raising of the agricultural commodities referenced in 321 CMR 10.02: Agriculture(a).

Alter means to change the physical or biological condition of a designated Significant Habitat in any way that detrimentally affects the capacity of the Significant Habitat to support a population of Endangered or Threatened species and shall include without limitation those activities listed in 321 CMR 10.63(1).

Animal means any member of the animal kingdom including, but not limited to, any mammal, bird, reptile, amphibian, fish, mollusk, crustacean, arthropod or other invertebrate or any part, product, egg or offspring or the dead body or any part thereof.

Aquaculture.

(a) Land in Aquacultural Use means land presently and primarily used in the growing of aquatic organisms under controlled conditions, including one or more of the following uses: raising, breeding or producing a specified type of animal or vegetable life including, but not limited to, finfish such as carp, catfish, black bass, flatfishes, herring, salmon, shad, smelt, sturgeon, striped bass, sunfishes, trout, whitefish, eel, tilapia; shellfish such as shrimp, crabs, lobster, crayfish, oysters, clams, periwinkles, scallops, mussels, squid; amphibians such as frogs; reptiles such as turtles; seaweeds such as irish moss and dulse; and edible freshwater plants.

(b) Normal Maintenance or Improvement of land in aquacultural use means the following activities, when done in connection with the production of aquatic organisms as defined above: draining, flooding, heating, cooling, removing, filling, grading, compacting, raking, tilling, fertilizing, seeding, harvesting, filtering, rafting, culverting or applying chemicals in conformance with all state and federal laws; provided, however, that such activities are clearly intended to improve and maintain land in aquacultural use and that best available measures are utilized to ensure that there will be no adverse effect on wetlands outside the area in aquacultural use, and further provided that removing, filling, dredging or altering of a salt marsh is not to be considered normal maintenance or improvement of land in aquacultural use.

Best Scientific Evidence Available means species occurrence records, population estimates, habitat descriptions, assessments, peer reviewed scientific literature, documented consultation with experts and information contained in the records of the Natural Heritage and Endangered Species Program or other credible scientific reports or species sighting information reasonably available to the Director.

Capacity of a Designated Significant Habitat to Support a Population of Endangered or Threatened Species means those biological or physical features in an area which could be utilized by an Endangered or Threatened plant or animal or play a role in the survival of an Endangered or Threatened species. Components of the capacity of a Designated Significant Habitat to support a population of Endangered or Threatened species include, but are not limited to, space, food, shelter, nesting and foraging sites, overwintering sites, host plants, soils, vegetation, hydrologic regime, substrate, degree of exposure to sun or shade, water temperature, and water quality.

DEP means the Department of Environmental Protection.

Director means the Director of the Division of Fisheries and Wildlife within the Department of Fish and Game.

Division means the Division of Fisheries and Wildlife within the Department of Fish and Game for purposes of 321 CMR 10.00 located at Rte. 135, North Drive, Westboro, MA 01581.

EIR means a draft or final environmental impact report filed pursuant to MEPA.

Endangered Species means any species of plant or animal listed as an Endangered species pursuant to 321 CMR 10.03 and so listed at 321 CMR 10.90.

ENF means an environmental notification form filed pursuant to MEPA.

Extinction means the loss of a species from its entire global range.

Extirpation means the loss of a species from its entire range within Massachusetts.

Federal Endangered Species Act means The Endangered Species Act of 1973, 16 U.S.C. § 1531 et seq., and the regulations promulgated thereunder.

Federal List means the List of Endangered and Threatened Wildlife (50 CFR 17.11) and the List of Endangered and Threatened Plants (50 CFR 17.12).

Federally Listed Species means any species on the federal list.

Fisheries & Wildlife Board means the board established pursuant to M.G.L. c. 131, § 1A.

Habitat means an area which, due to its physical or biological features, protects or provides important elements for the growth and survival of plants or animals such as food, shelter, or living space, and includes without limitation, breeding, feeding, resting, migratory, or overwintering areas. Physical or biological features include, but are not limited to: structure and composition of the vegetation; faunal community; soils; water chemistry and quality; and geologic, hydrologic, and microclimatic factors.

Land Devoted to Forest Purposes means forest land used or intended to be used for management, cultivation, regeneration, or use of forest products and for which no contrary or inconsistent use is being pursued by the Landowner.

MEPA means the Massachusetts Environmental Policy Act, M.G.L. c. 30, § 61 through 62H and the MEPA regulations at 301 CMR 11.00.

Native, in reference to species, means a species which either occurs, or has occurred, within Massachusetts; provided that the original occurrence of such species is not the result of a deliberate or accidental introduction by humans into Massachusetts nor an introduction elsewhere which spread into Massachusetts.

Natural Heritage and Endangered Species Advisory Committee means the committee established pursuant to M.G.L. c. 131, § 5B.

Natural Heritage and Endangered Species Program (NHESP) means the program within the Division of Fisheries and Wildlife responsible for the inventory, research, and protection of rare plant and animal species and the maintenance of computerized and manual records of rare species locality information.

Net Benefit means an action, or set of actions, that contributes, on its own or in the context of other actions, significantly to the long-term conservation of a State-listed Species and that the conservation contribution to the impacted State-listed Species exceeds the harm caused by a proposed Project or Activity.

NPC means a notice of project change filed pursuant to MEPA.

Person means an individual, corporation, partnership, trust, association or other private entity or any officer, agent, department or instrumentality of the federal government or any state or its political subdivisions, including but not limited to any agency, department, board, commission or authority thereof.

Plant means any member of the plant kingdom including seeds, roots, or other parts.

Priority Habitat means the geographic extent of Habitat for State-listed Species as delineated by the Division pursuant to 321 CMR 10.12. Priority Habitats are delineated based on records of State-listed Species observed within the 25 years prior to delineation and contained in the Division's NHESP database.

Project or Activity means any action, including, but not limited to:

(a) grading, excavating, filling, demolition, draining, dumping, dredging, or discharging;

(b) the erection, reconstruction, or expansion of any buildings or structures;

(c) the construction, reconstruction, improvement or expansion of roads and other ways;

(d) the installation of drainage, sewage and water systems;

(e) beach nourishment or dune building;

(f) the construction or reconstruction of seawalls, groins, dikes, jetties or retaining walls; or

(g) the destruction of plant life.

Record Owner means any person or entity holding a legal or equitable interest, right or title to real property, as reflected in a written instrument or recorded deed, or any person authorized in writing by any such person.

Secretary means the Secretary of the Executive Office of Energy and Environmental Affairs ("EOEEA").

Significant Habitat means any specific area of Massachusetts designated pursuant to 321 CMR 10.30 through 10.40.

Species means any distinct plant or animal population whose members interbreed or cross pollinate when mature or are self perpetuating through the production of viable seed or offspring and can include any subspecies or variety of plant or animal.

Species of Special Concern and Special Concern Species mean any species of plant or animal listed as a Species of Special Concern pursuant to 321 CMR 10.03 and so listed at 321 CMR 10.90.

State Agencies means all agencies, departments, boards, commissions, and authorities of the Commonwealth, including any authority of any political subdivision which is specifically created as an authority under special or general law.

State-list means the Massachusetts list of Endangered, Threatened, and Special Concern species found at 321 CMR 10.90.

State-listed Species means any species on the state list.

Take, in reference to animals, means to harass, harm, pursue, hunt, shoot, hound, kill, trap, capture, collect, process, disrupt the nesting, breeding, feeding or migratory activity or attempt to engage in any such conduct, or to assist such conduct, and in reference to plants, means to collect, pick, kill, transplant, cut or process or attempt to engage or to assist in any such conduct. Disruption of nesting, breeding, feeding or migratory activity may result from, but is not limited to, the modification, degradation or destruction of Habitat.

Threatened Species means any species of plant or animal listed as a Threatened species pursuant to 321 CMR 10.03 and so listed at 321 CMR 10.90.

Viability of a Significant Habitat to Support a Population of Endangered or Threatened Species means the ability of a Significant Habitat to sustain one or more populations of Endangered or Threatened species in the short and long term and may be expressed as the likelihood that the local population(s) of a given size will persist in a Significant Habitat.

Abbreviations: The following abbreviations for agency names, programs, and other terms are used in 321 CMR 10.00.

DEP Department of Environmental Protection

EIR Environmental Impact Report, as defined under 301 CMR 11.07

ENF Environmental Notification Form, as defined under 301 CMR 11.28

EOEA Executive Office of Environmental Affairs

MEPA Massachusetts Environmental Policy Act, M.G.L. c. 30, §§ 61 htrough 62H and its implementing regulations, 301 CMR 11.00.

MESA Massachusetts Endangered Species Act, M.G.L. c. 131A

NHESP Natural Heritage and Endangered Species Program

RTA Request to Alter Significant Habitat Form

VMP Vegetation Management Plan, as defined under 333 CMR 11.00

YOP Yearly Operating Plan, as defined under 333 CMR 11.00

(1) Introduction. The list of Endangered, Threatened, and Special Concern species in effect prior to the effective date of 321 CMR 10.00, as amended by the Fisheries and Wildlife Board on December 30, 1991, is established within 321 CMR 10.90 as the first edition of the list. 321 CMR 10.03 establishes the procedures for amending and updating all subsequent editions of the list.

(2) Species Investigations. The NHESP shall conduct investigations, including but not limited to field surveys and reviews of museum collections, herbaria and published reports, in order to determine whether any species of plant or animal should be considered for listing.

(3) Eligible Species. Any species native to Massachusetts is eligible for listing.

(4) Federally Listed Species. Any species which regularly occurs within Massachusetts and which is listed as endangered or threatened under the provisions of the Federal Endangered Species Act shall be listed in an equivalent category on the state list found at 321 CMR 10.90; provided, however, that the listing of any species on the federal list as a Threatened species shall not limit the discretion of the Director to list said species as Endangered.

(5) Criteria for Listing Species. The criteria for determining Endangered, Threatened, or Special Concern status shall be based on biological data, including, but not limited to:

(a) taxonomic status;

(b) reproductive and population status and trends;

(c) whether the species is native or has been introduced;

(d) vulnerability, as determined by threats to the species or its habitat;

(e) specialization, as determined by unique habitat requirements;

(f) restricted distribution, as determined by limited or disjunct geographic range; and

(g) rarity, as determined by a limited number of occurrences or by occurrence in limited numbers.

(6) List Categories.

(a) Endangered. The Director shall list as Endangered any species of plant or animal in danger of extinction throughout all or a significant portion of its range and species of plants or animals in danger of extirpation as documented by biological research and inventory.

(b) Threatened. The Director shall list as Threatened any species of plant or animal likely to become an endangered species within the foreseeable future throughout all or a significant portion of its range and any species declining or rare as determined by biological research and inventory and likely to become endangered in the foreseeable future.

(c) Species of Special Concern. The Director shall list as a species of Special Concern any species of plant or animal which has been documented by biological research and inventory to have suffered a decline that could threaten the species if allowed to continue unchecked or that occurs in such small numbers or with such a restricted distribution or specialized habitat requirements that it could easily become threatened within Massachusetts.

(7) Proposals for Listing or Delisting Species. Any person may propose the addition or deletion of species to or from the list, or for changes in classification of listed species. The burden of proof for delisting species shall be on the person requesting such change in status. Proposals must be submitted in writing to the Director and must contain the following information:

(a) the date submitted; the proponent's name, signature, address, and telephone number; and the association, institution, or business, if any, represented by the proponent.

(b) the common and scientific name of the species;

(c) the listing category being proposed;

(d) a detailed justification of the proposed listing or delisting action, including the past and present population status and distribution in Massachusetts, and any known or suspected threats;

(e) information on the known status of the species throughout its range;

(f) supporting documentation (for example, literature citations, copies of written reports, letters from scientific authorities, maps, or species records, if appropriate); and

(g) other information requested by the Director.

(8) Review of Proposals. Within 21 days of receipt of a proposal and after consultation with the Natural Heritage and Endangered Species Program, the Director shall determine whether sufficient evidence has been submitted to warrant a review of the species' status. Upon a determination that sufficient evidence has been submitted, the Director shall refer the proposal to the Natural Heritage and Endangered Species Advisory Committee for its review. The committee, in conducting its review, may seek the advice of additional persons and shall advise the Director concerning appropriate action. The Director may then recommend any changes to the Fisheries and Wildlife Board. Upon a determination that insufficient evidence has been submitted to warrant further review, the Director shall so notify the person proposing the changes in the list and send a copy to the Natural Heritage and Endangered Species Advisory Committee.

(9) Public Hearing. The establishment of the Massachusetts list of Endangered, Threatened, and Special Concern species, and any proposed changes thereto, shall be by regulation after a public hearing subject to the provisions of M.G.L. c. 30A. Not less than 21 days prior to the public hearing, the Director shall make available a summary of the biological data upon which the listing proposal is based. The Director shall submit to the Secretary of EOEA in time for publication in the Environmental Monitor at least 21 days prior to the public hearing a notice of such hearing and the availability of such summary of biological data.

(10) List Review Frequency. The Director shall review the list of Endangered, Threatened, and Special Concern species, in consultation with the Natural Heritage and Endangered Species Advisory Committee, at least once every five years for the purpose of listing or delisting species.

(11) The List. The official Massachusetts list of Endangered, Threatened, and Special Concern species is found at 321 CMR 10.90.

(1) Prohibitions. Except as otherwise provided in 321 CMR 10.04(2) and (3), no person may take, possess, transport, export, process, sell or offer for sale, buy or offer to buy, nor shall a common or contract carrier knowingly transport or receive for shipment, any plant or animal or part thereof on the state list or federal list; provided, however, that ownership, sale, or purchase of real property on which such plant or animal occurs is not prohibited.

(2) Exemptions.

(a) In Transit. Any person may transport, possess or sell, in accordance with the terms of any necessary state and federal permit, any plant or animal or part thereof on the state list or federal list, which enters Massachusetts from another state or from a point outside the territorial limits of the United States; provided that such plants or animals or parts thereof are lawfully possessed outside of Massachusetts; and provided further that such plants or animals are possessed not more than 24 hours in Massachusetts and are transported through Massachusetts while in transit to another destination outside of Massachusetts. For the purposes of 321 CMR 10.04(2)(a), necessary state and federal permits shall include, but not be limited to, those required under M.G.L. c. 131 and the regulations promulgated thereunder and any other state or federal permit required for the possession or sale of species on the state list or federal list.

(b) Plant Propagation and Nursery Sales. A person may take, possess, propagate, buy, or sell all plants or parts thereof on the state list or federal list in cultivation, provided that such plants or parts thereof are lawfully held under other state or federal laws and shall not have been taken from the wild in Massachusetts after March 27, 1991 or after the time of subsequent listing of said species pursuant to 321 CMR 10.03.

(c) Animal Possession Prior to Effective Date. Any person may possess any animal, or part thereof, on the state list or federal list, that was lawfully possessed on March 27, 1991 or at the time of subsequent listing of said species pursuant to 321 CMR 10.03, provided however, that no such animal or part thereof may be sold or traded for value.

(d) Federally Authorized Uses of Species on the Federal List.

1. Any person may, in accordance with all applicable federal laws, possess, sell, buy, or trade any finished products, including but not limited to carvings, clothing, jewelry, and similar goods, made from species on the federal list.

2. Any person may, in accordance with all applicable federal laws, possess parts of plants or animals on the federal list for ceremonial and religious purposes.

(3) Permits for Taking and Possession of Species. Any violation of a permit is a violation of M.G.L. c. 131A, § 2.

(a) Scientific and Educational Use Permits. The Director may in accordance with provisions of M.G.L. c. 131, § 4 and c. 131A, § 3 permit the taking, possession, purchase, sale, transportation, exportation or shipment of any species on the state list for scientific or educational purposes, including but not limited to scientific collecting, educational use, wildlife rehabilitation, salvage, or bird banding.

(b) Conservation and Management Permit. The Director may in accordance with provisions of M.G.L. c. 131A, § 3 permit the taking of a species on the state list for conservation or management purposes pursuant to the criteria and process set forth in 321 CMR 10.23.

(c) Captive Propagation of State Listed Species.

1. Animals. The Director may permit, in accordance with provisions of M.G.L. c. 131, § 23, and 321 CMR 2.12, the artificial propagation and maintenance of animals on the state list. Such permits may be issued only after the Director approves a written propagation program prepared by the applicant.

2. Plants. The Director may permit the artificial propagation and maintenance of plants on the state list. Such permits may be issued only after the Director approves a written propagation program prepared by the applicant.

(d) Falconry. The Director may permit the possession, barter or sale of species of raptors listed on the state list or federal list which have come from captive propagation in compliance with 321 CMR 3.04 and 50 CFR 21, for the purposes of falconry. The Director may permit the taking of Special Concern species for falconry so long as such taking is in accordance with 321 CMR 3.04 and any additional conditions established by the Director designed to insure that such taking does not jeopardize the security of breeding populations of the species within Massachusetts or outside the state.

(e) Public Health. Except as prohibited by federal law, the Director may permit the removal, capture, or destruction of any state listed species to protect human health during the period and within the geographic area of a public health hazard as certified in writing by the Commissioner of Public Health; provided that the Director has found that all reasonable efforts have been undertaken to avoid the removal, capture or destruction of such species.

(4) Requests for Permits and Information.

Requests for information regarding a Conservation and Management permit should be sent to: Environmental Review, Natural Heritage and Endangered Species Program, Division of Fisheries and Wildlife, Rte. 135, Westborough, MA 01581.

(1) All state agencies shall utilize their authorities in furtherance of the purposes of MESA and 321 CMR 10.00: review, evaluate and determine the impact on Endangered, Threatened and Special Concern species or their habitats of all works, projects or activities conducted by them; and use all practicable means and measures to avoid or minimize damage to such species or their habitats. For the purposes of 321 CMR 10.05, "state actions" means any work, project, or activity either directly undertaken by a state agency, or if undertaken by a person, which seeks the provision of financial assistance by an agency or requires the issuance of permits by an agency (but not including a grant of aid for medical services or personal support, such as welfare or unemployment funds) to a person or a third party on behalf of a person, and "activities" means any acts carried out by a state agency which could affect any state listed species or their habitats.

(2) The following types of state actions shall be considered in compliance with MESA and 321 CMR 10.05(1):

(a) State actions that have received any permits required pursuant to MESA and 321 CMR 10.00.

(b) State actions that are part of a project which has been reviewed under MEPA and the Secretary of EOEA has issued either a certificate on an ENF stating that project does not require the preparation of an EIR or a certificate on a Final EIR stating that the EIR fully and adequately complies with MEPA, provided, however, that said project has been reviewed under MEPA regulations (301 CMR 11.00) that have incorporated review thresholds for permits issued under 321 CMR 10.00 and that no taking will occur or that a Conservation and Management Permit has been issued.

(c) State actions occurring on state owned land that are in conformance with a management plan which was developed in accordance with the following inventory and planning procedures and management policies:

1. Inventory Procedures. State agencies shall request and the NHESP shall provide information on the location, biology, and habitat requirements of state listed species documented by the NHESP as occurring on said agency's lands. NHESP shall also provide to state agencies such information and recommendations as are necessary to allow said agencies to use all practicable means and measures to avoid or minimize damage to state listed species or their habitats.

2. Planning Procedures. State agencies shall submit to NHESP any draft management plans they prepare for state owned lands on which state listed species are known to occur. NHESP shall review such draft plans and provide comments and recommendations to the state agency concerning the protection, conservation, and restoration of the listed species on the land subject to the plan. Such review and recommendations shall be repeated at least once every five years or every time the land management plan is updated, whichever is sooner.

3. Management Policies. Unless specifically required otherwise by statute, localities on state owned lands that provide habitat for state listed species shall be managed for the benefit of such listed species. Said agencies shall give management priority to the protection, conservation, and restoration of Endangered, Threatened, and Special Concern species occurring on state owned lands. All practicable means and measures shall be taken to resolve conflicts between the protection, conservation, and restoration of state listed species on state owned lands and other uses of such lands in favor of the listed species.

(d) All other state actions that do not require a permit under MESA, are not subject to review under MEPA, and do not involve actions on state owned lands shall be presumed to be in compliance with 321 CMR 10.05(1), unless the Secretary of EOEEA initiates the following review. The Secretary of EOEEA may initiate a review of a state action when he/she determines that such a state action may damage state listed species or their habitats. Such state actions for which the Secretary has initiated such review and which fulfill the consultation and review procedures described below shall be considered in compliance with 321 CMR 10.05(1):

1. Upon notification by the Secretary of EOEEA that a state action may damage state listed species or their habitats the affected agency shall initiate consultation with NHESP. Said agency shall submit to NHESP such information that is necessary for the NHESP to determine the location and nature of the proposed state action.

2. NHESP shall review the information submitted by the agency and determine if the state action is likely to result in damage to any state listed species or their habitats. If the NHESP determines that the state action is likely to damage state listed species or their habitats the NHESP shall provide to the agency such guidance and information that is necessary to allow the agency to avoid such damage. If NHESP determines that the state action is not likely to result in damage to state listed species or their habitats the NHESP shall provide a written opinion to the agency that such state action is in compliance with MESA and 321 CMR 10.05(1). An agency that receives guidance and information from NHESP regarding the avoidance of damage to state listed species and their habitats shall take all practicable means and measures to modify their actions to avoid such damage.

3. Said agency shall submit to the Secretary of EOEEA and NHESP evidence that all practicable means and measures have been taken to avoid damage to state listed species and their habitats. The Secretary shall certify that the state action is in compliance with 321 CMR 10.05(1) if she finds that the agency has taken all practicable means and measures to avoid damage to state listed species and their habitats pursuant to the recommendations of NHESP.

(1) Priority Habitats are used for screening Projects and Activities that may result in the Take of State-listed Species and to provide guidance to Record Owners regarding a Project or Activity through consultation with the Division. Priority Habitats shall be delineated based on the Best Scientific Evidence Available.

(2) The delineation of Priority Habitat by the Division for all State-listed Species shall be based on the Best Scientific Evidence Available and shall include examination of individual occurrence records in the context of species listing status, and shall apply the following criteria: the nature and/or significance of the occurrence as it relates to the conservation and protection of the species, including but not limited to, evidence of breeding, persistence, life stages present, number of individuals, extent of necessary supporting habitat, and proximity to other occurrences.

(3) For each species, habitat mapping guidelines will be prepared that identify the important habitat features, and that describe the methodology by which Priority Habitats are delineated.

(4) Where the delineation will extend to areas previously disturbed by Projects or Activities, the delineation shall to the maximum extent feasible and consistent with the Best Scientific Evidence Available and to the extent those areas no longer provide important habitat features for State-listed Species, exclude any such disturbed areas from the delineated Priority Habitat. The Division also reserves the right not to delineate an area as Priority Habitat with occurrence records of State-listed Species of Special Concern or, in exceptional circumstances, State-listed Endangered or Threatened Species, based on factors such as the listing status of the species, the known population status of the species or the quality of habitat, or the existence of a Conservation Plan for a State-listed Species of Special Concern issued by the Division pursuant to 321 CMR 10.26

(5) In the delineation of Priority Habitat and the selection of occurrence records to be included in Priority Habitat mapping, the Division shall take into consideration the listing status of individual species and use a methodology that draws clear distinctions between State-listed Species based on the relative threat of extinction or extirpation for each of those classifications. The Division will develop guidelines and criteria for the acceptance and inclusion of occurrence records into the NHESP data base.

(6) Division Updates to the Priority Habitat Map.

(a) The delineation of Priority Habitat will be re-evaluated every four years by the Division. The current Priority Habitat map issued by the Division in October, 2008 shall remain in effect through calendar year 2011, or until such time as a new Priority Habitat map is issued by the Division. The Successor Priority Habitat maps will be on a four calendar year cycle. Revisions or updates to the Priority Habitat map are generally the result of the Division's consideration of factors such as:

1. the Division's re-evaluation of the existing basis for a delineation, including whether there have been relevant changes to the Best Scientific Evidence Available;

2. any revised delineation made by the Division in the preceding four years in response to a request for reconsideration pursuant to 321 CMR 10.12(8) or as the result of a final adjudicatory or final judicial appeal;

3. the existence of any new occurrence records contained in the NHESP data base or any occurrence records observed more than 25 years prior to delineation, which, because of their age, are no longer used to delineate Priority Habitats, but are retained in the NHESP data base for historical purposes;

4. the extent to which an existing or potential delineation includes areas previously disturbed by Projects or Activities; or

5. a change made by the Division to the listing status of a species; and

6. upon the issuance of any Conservation Plan for a State-listed Species of Special Concern by the Division pursuant to 321 CMR 10.26, the subsequent updated Priority Habitat maps, beginning with the Natural Heritage Atlas, 15th Edition, will not include the delineation of new Priority Habitat outside of the conservation protection zones established in the Conservation Plan for that species.

(b) Upon completion of its re-evaluation of the Priority Habitat map, the Division will provide a sixty (60) day public comment period on all proposed revisions or updates to the map. Specifically, the Division will request public comment on the status of areas proposed for delineation or removal as Priority Habitat regarding the physical or biological features of the habitat, or the current scope of existing development in the area. The Division will post its proposed updated version of the Priority Habitat map, together with a summary explanation of the significant changes to the map, on the Division's website. The Division will also publish notice of the availability of the proposed updated Priority Habitat map and the public comment period on the Division's website, in the Environmental Monitor, in a newspaper with state-wide circulation, and in other newspapers with regional or local circulation, as deemed appropriate by the Division, and provide such notice to planning boards, building inspectors and conservation commissions in municipalities where existing or new Priority Habitats have been or are proposed to be delineated or modified.

(c) Within thirty (30) days after the close of the public comment period, the Division will determine whether any modifications to its proposed updated Priority Habitat map are appropriate, evaluating the relevance and substance of a public comment against the Division's criteria for delineating Priority Habitat in 321 CMR 10.12(2). The Division reserves the right to take more time to complete its review of the public comments and for determining whether any modifications to its proposed updated Priority Habitat map are appropriate.

(7) Division's Publication of the Final Updated Priority Habitat Map.

(a) The Division will post the final updated Priority Habitat map, together with a summary response to public comments and a summary explanation of any significant modifications to the proposed updated map, on the Division's website within thirty (30) days of its determination of whether any modifications to its proposed updated Priority Habitat map are appropriate. The Division will also make available the final updated Priority Habitat map to the public electronically as a geographic information system (GIS) data layer.

(b) The Division will provide the final town-based Priority Habitat map to planning boards, building inspectors and conservation commissions in municipalities where Priority Habitats have been delineated.

(8) Any Record Owner of real property in Priority Habitat may request reconsideration by the Division of the delineation affecting that Record Owner's property. Such request shall be made in writing by certified mail to the Division. Within 30 days of the Division's receipt of a request for reconsideration, the Division shall make available to the Record Owner, consistent with the provisions of M.G.L. c. 66 § 17D, information from the Division's files relating to the delineation and species listing affecting that property. In providing such records, the Division shall require the Record Owner to execute a confidentiality agreement pursuant to M.G.L. c. 66 §17D and shall redact the names and personal information of persons submitting State-listed Species occurrence information affecting a property. Following the receipt of information used as the basis of the delineation the Record Owner shall notify the Division in writing if they wish to proceed with the reconsideration. If the Record Owner determines to proceed with the reconsideration they shall provide the following information:

(a) Name;

(b) Address;

(c) Ownership interest in the property;

(d) Acreage of the property;

(e) A copy of a USGS topographic map in scale 1:24,000 or 1:25,000 with the property location clearly marked and centered on the page, and;

(f) A clear statement explaining the reasons for the reconsideration request with specific reference to scientific studies, records, surveys or other information relevant to the request.

Within 45 days of its receipt of such information and the payment of a fee, the amount of which shall be determined by the commissioner of administration under the provisions of M.G.L. c.7, § 3B, the Division shall, applying the criteria in 321 CMR 10.12(2), issue a written decision either confirming the original delineation or modifying that delineation as the Division determines is warranted by the additional information submitted to the Division. The decision shall state the grounds for the Division's determination, and shall be mailed by certified mail to the Record Owner. This decision shall be considered the final agency action for the purposes of M.G.L. c. 30A. No Record Owner may appeal the delineation in the Priority Habitat Map pursuant to c. 30A without first requesting reconsideration as provided above. However, the failure to request reconsideration shall not preclude a Record Owner from challenging the Priority Habitat delineation in connection with the review of a Project or Activity pursuant to 321 CMR 10.18 or in any subsequent appeal relating to that review.

(1) Sites or Projects and Activities that are not located or will not take place in Priority Habitats. Projects and Activities that are not located or will not take place in Priority Habitats shall not be subject to the review provision of 321 CMR 10.18, except in the circumstances described in 321 CMR 10.13(1)(a) and (b) below:

(a) New Occurrence Information is Received by the Division.

1. If the Division receives new information on a State-listed Endangered or Threatened Species occurrence relating to a site that is not located in Priority Habitat, the Division may determine, within 30 days of its receipt of such occurrence information, whether the new State-listed Species occurrence meets the criteria for delineation of a Priority Habitat under 321 CMR 10.12, and whether any proposed Project or Activity at the site shall be reviewed under 321 CMR 10.18, provided, however, that the Division's determination is issued to the Record Owner of the site:

a. prior to the issuance of a final Order of Conditions by a conservation commission or DEP for a Project or Activity on the site;, or

b. if the Project or Activity is not subject to the jurisdiction of the conservation commission, then prior to the issuance of any permit that has been subject to public hearing that was publicly noticed; or

c. if not subject to such a public hearing then prior to the issuance of a building permit;

2. Only that portion of the Project or Activity that meets the exemption criteria in 321 CMR 10.13 (1)(a)1 is not required to be reviewed under 321 CMR 10.18. Subject to the limitation in 321 CMR 10.13(1)(a)1, the Division shall notify the Record Owner upon its receipt of the new occurrence information, and shall provide the written determination described in 321 CMR 10.13(1)(a)1 to the Record Owner(s) of all the affected properties within 45 days of the receipt of such new occurrence information.. Any Division determination made pursuant to 321 CMR 10.13(1)(a)1 shall remain valid for a period of five years after the date of its issuance.

(b) The Division's MEPA Comments Request an Assessment of whether a State-listed Species is Present.

1. When a Project or Activity that is not located in Priority Habitat is subject to MEPA review pursuant to M.G.L. c. 30, § 61 through 62I, the Division may, consistent with MEPA regulations at 301 CMR 11.00, review and comment on any ENF, draft supplemental or final EIR or NPC submitted to the MEPA Office. If the Division has credible information indicating the occurrence of a State-listed Endangered or Threatened Species or its habitat within the area to be disturbed by the Project or Activity, the Division may request in its comments to the MEPA Office that the project proponent be required to assess the area to be disturbed by the Project or Activity to determine if such State-listed Species are present. Otherwise, the Priority Habitat Map in effect as of the time of the Division's review of the ENF, the draft, supplemental or final EIR or the NPC shall be deemed final for the purpose of the Division's review, except where the project site is subsequently mapped as Priority Habitat prior to the issuance of a MEPA certificate for the final stage of MEPA review by the Secretary of EOEEA, in which case the provisions of 321 CMR 10.13(2)(a) shall apply.

2. Following the issuance of a certificate by the Secretary of Environmental Affairs for the final stage of review for a Project or Activity any determinations made in or pursuant to that certificate with respect to the delineation of Priority Habitat or avoiding, minimizing and mitigating the Take of State-listed Species, provided there is no material change requiring the filing of a Notice of Project Change for the Project or Activity, shall remain valid for the purposes of 321 CMR 10.00 for a period of five years.

(2) Projects or Activities that were not in Priority Habitat when they were proposed but the Project Site is thereafter delineated by the Division as Priority Habitat. Projects or Activities that were not in Priority Habitat when they were proposed but the project site is thereafter delineated by the Division as Priority Habitat shall not be subject to the review by the Division pursuant to 321 CMR 10.18, provided the following project milestones have been met prior to the project site being mapped as Priority Habitat or within the specified timeframes, as set forth in 321 CMR 10.13(2)(a) through (d) below:

(a) MEPA Review

1. The project proponent has filed an ENF and no issue involving MESA was raised in any comment letter submitted during the MEPA comment period by the Division, or, if a MESA issue was raised, it has been resolved to the satisfaction of the Division; and the Secretary determined that an EIR was not required; or

2. The Secretary has determined that the Draft EIR was adequate and no MESA issues were raised by the Division during the MEPA comment period, or, if a MESA issue was raised, it has been resolved to the satisfaction of the Division; or

3. The Secretary has issued a certificate on a Final EIR determining that the project or activity adequately and properly complies with MEPA.

4. Notwithstanding 321 CMR 10.13(2)(a)1.-3. above, Projects or Activities for which an NPC that the Division determines would impact a state-listed species or its habitat is thereafter filed with MEPA are not exempt from MESA review and shall be subject to review by the Division pursuant to 321 CMR 10.18. The scope of the MESA review hereunder shall be limited to those aspects of the Project or Activity that would be materially modified by the NPC, as determined by the Division.

(b) Permitting under the Wetlands Protection Act If 321 CMR 10.13(2)(a) does not apply, and:

1. The issuing authority has issued an Order of Conditions, a Superseding Order of Conditions or an Order of Resource Area Delineation ("ORAD") for the Project or Activity, provided that, in the case of an ORAD, the project proponent obtains an Order of Conditions, or, if an Order of Conditions is not needed, one of the permits or approvals in 321 CMR 10.13(2)(c ) by the expiration date of the initial three (3) year term of the Final ORAD; or

2. The project proponent has obtained either an Order of Conditions or a Superseding Order of Conditions for the Project or Activity within six (6) months after the publication of the subsequent Priority Habitat map delineating the project site as Priority Habitat,

(c) Other Permitting Actions

1. If the Project or Activity is not subject to the Wetlands Protection Act, and 321 CMR 10.13(2)(a) does not apply, then upon the issuance of any permit or final approval for the Project or Activity, provided such permit or approval has been subject to public hearing that was publicly noticed; or

2. if the Project or Activity is not subject to the Wetlands Protection Act, and 321 CMR 10.13(2)(a) does not apply, and the Project or Activity does not require the issuance of a permit or approval for which a public hearing is required pursuant to 321 CMR 10.13(2)(c), then if a building permit for the Project or Activity has been issued.

(d) Notwithstanding 321 CMR 10.13 (2)(a) through (c) above:

1. only that portion of the Project or Activity that meets an exemption category in 321 CMR 10.13 (2)(a) through (c) is not required to be reviewed under 321 CMR 10.18;

2. the Division reserves the right to determine, based on special circumstances, that any Project or Activity meeting an exemption category in 321 CMR 10.13(2)(a) through (d) shall be subject to review under 321 CMR 10.18 to prevent a substantial and permanent modification, degradation or destruction of Priority Habitat for an Endangered or Threatened State-listed Species, as determined by the Division; and

3. no Project or Activity that has already obtained a Take determination or been issued a Conservation and Management Permit by the Division shall qualify for the provisions of 321 CMR 321 CMR 10.13(2).

4. the Division may issue further guidance regarding its interpretation and implementation of 321 CMR 10.13.

(3) Voluntary Assessment of Whether State-listed Species are Present.

A Record Owner may at any time undertake a voluntary assessment following protocols pre-approved in writing by the Division for which a review fee shall be charged, the amount of which shall be determined by the commissioner of administration under the provisions of M.G.L. c. 7, § 3B, to determine if Threatened and Species of Special Concern are present on a property (or portion thereof). Upon approval of that assessment by the Division, that assessment shall remain valid for the purposes of 321 CMR 10.00 Part II for a period of three years from the date of its approval in writing by the Division. The approval by the Division of a Record Owner's assessment documenting the absence of Threatened and Special Concern Species shall provide the Record Owner with a guarantee that no new occurrence records will be considered in relation to a MESA or MEPA (321 CMR 13.2) review of the property for a period of five years. This guarantee does not include any species that is subsequently listed.

The following Projects and Activities shall be exempt from the requirements of 321 CMR 10.18 through 10.23:

(1) Agriculture and Aquaculture.

(a) Normal Maintenance and Improvement of Land in Agricultural or Aquacultural Use. All activities described under the definitions of Normal Maintenance and Improvement of Land in Agricultural Use or Normal Improvement of Land in Agricultural Use Aquacultural Use are exempt. This exemption shall continue only so long as such land remains in agricultural or aquacultural use. Land in agricultural use does not include those portions of a site that are not in such use and are not designated fallow land. The normal maintenance and improvement of land in agricultural or aquacultural use does not include site preparation for purposes of conversion to another, non-agricultural or non-aquacultural use;

(b) Activities on Land adjacent to or in the immediate vicinity of Land in Agricultural Use or Land in Aquacultural Use. The following activities on land adjacent to or in the immediate vicinity of Land in Agricultural Use or Land in Aquacultural Use are exempt, provided such activities are carried out in accordance with a habitat management plan approved in writing by the Division:

1.the construction, expansion, or reconstruction of a water management system such as a reservoir, farm pond, ditch, dike, tailwater recovery systems or canal/channel;

2. the construction or expansion of storage, staging, work and composting areas;

3. farm structures, not including habitable dwellings, provided that the cumulative footprint of such farm structures does not exceed 4,000 square feet;

4. the installation of permanent windbreaks or hedgerows, or the cutting of vegetation to create forest boundaries up to five feet wide;

5. the squaring-off of fields and bogs, provided there is no increase in the amount of land in production beyond the minimum increase necessarily resulting from making the boundary of any field or bog more regular; and

6. the excavation of sand from sandpits (vertically and horizontally) for use in associated, on-site, agricultural and aquacultural operations, provided that such excavation activities are reasonable in scope and used exclusively for the related on-site crop production.

(c) The exemption under 321 CMR 10.14(1)(b) does not include site preparation for purposes of conversion to land in production or to other non-agricultural or non-aquacultural uses, or the sale or off-site use of any commodity that is associated with the exempt on-site agricultural and aquacultural activities.

(2) non-commercial forest management activities that do not require an approved Forest Cutting Plan under the provisions of M.G.L. c. 132, §§ 40 through 46, and 304 CMR 11.00, including but not limited to pruning, cutting of fuelwood for personal use, planting of tree seedlings, or selective cutting of trees for aesthetic purposes, provided that said management activities are carried out on Land Devoted to Forest Purposes and in accordance with a management plan approved in writing by the Division;

(3) the maintenance, repair, removal, or replacement, or additions that do not exceed 50% of the footprint of existing commercial and industrial buildings, multifamily and mixed use structures within existing paved areas and lawfully developed and maintained lawns or landscaped areas;

(4) the maintenance, repair, or replacement, or additions, including the construction of a driveway for an existing single family or two family home within existing paved and lawfully developed and maintained lawns or landscaped areas, provided there is no expansion of such existing paved, lawn and landscaped areas;

(5) construction or removal of structures that are secondary to the primary residence and located within existing paved areas and lawfully developed and maintained lawns or landscaped areas on residential properties, provided there is no expansion of such existing paved, lawn and landscaped areas;

(6) construction, repair, replacement or maintenance of septic systems, private sewage treatment facilities, utility lines, sewer lines, or residential water supply wells within existing paved areas and lawfully developed and maintained lawns or landscaped areas, provided there is no expansion of such existing paved, lawn and landscaped areas;

(7) repair, replacement or maintenance of existing, properly maintained stormwater detention basins or other stormwater management systems;

(8) construction of new stormwater management systems that are designed to improve stormwater management at previously developed sites, provided that the plans for the system are submitted to the Division for prior review, and the Division makes a written determination that such systems will not have an adverse impact on state-listed species or their habitats;

(9) repair, replacement or maintenance of existing, properly maintained dry hydrant pipe systems;

(10) installation, repair, replacement, and maintenance of utility lines (gas, water, sewer, phone, electrical) for which all associated work is within ten feet from the edge of existing paved roads, and the repair and maintenance of overhead utility lines (phone, electrical) for which all associated work is within ten feet from the edge of existing unpaved roads, provided, however, that unpaved utility access roads associated with exempt activities under 321 CMR 10.14(11) shall be addressed in and subject to the Division-approved operation and maintenance plan required thereunder;

(11) routine operation and maintenance on existing electrical, gas, and telecommunication distribution and transmission lines and existing substations, provided that the operation and maintenance are part of an operation and maintenance plan approved by the Division, for which a review fee shall be charged, the amount of which shall be determined by the commissioner of administration under the provisions of M.G.L. c.7, §3B;

(12) the maintenance, repair or replacement, but not widening, of existing paved roads, shoulder repair that does not exceed four feet from an existing travel lane, paved and unpaved driveways and paved and unpaved parking areas, provided such unpaved driveways and unpaved parking areas are for year-round use and are not thereafter paved, but not including bike paths, or parking areas on barrier beaches, coastal beaches, coastal dunes, or salt marshes, as defined by the Massachusetts Wetlands Protection Act (M.G.L. c. 131, § 40 and 310 CMR 10.00), and not including actions that are likely to result in changes in storm water drainage;

(13) the maintenance or replacement but not the expansion of existing lawns and landscaped areas;

(14) performance of customary land surveying activities, wetland resource area delineations, percolation tests, environmental assessments and investigations performed in accordance with M. G. L. c. 21E, and other customary preliminary site investigations or customary property due diligence activities, provided that vegetation clearing and soil alteration are avoided or minimized to the maximum extent practicable;

(15) the active management of State-listed Species habitat, including but not limited to mowing, cutting, burning, or pruning of vegetation, or removing exotic or invasive species, for the purpose of maintaining or enhancing the habitat for the benefit of rare species, provided that the management is carried out in accordance with a habitat management plan approved in writing by the Division and;

(16) the management of vegetation within existing utility rights-of-way provided that the management is carried out in accordance with a vegetation management plan approved in writing by the Division prior to the commencement of work for which a review fee shall be charged, the amount of which shall be determined by the commissioner of administration under the provisions of M.G.L. c.7, § 3B;

(17) (a) the management of vegetation within rail ballast necessary to maintain existing rail lines; and (b) other vegetation management outside of ballast areas necessary to maintain existing rail lines, provided that such maintenance is implemented in accordance with a vegetation management plan approved in writing by the Division, for which a review fee shall be charged, and

(18) the construction of a new residential dwelling, including the proposed lawfully developed paved areas, lawns and landscaped areas associated with such dwelling, on an infill lot, with frontage, of no greater than two acres in size, or such smaller lot size approved by a municipality under the applicable zoning bylaw or ordinance, provided that such lot is part of a residential subdivision that has received final, definitive approval pursuant to M.G.L. c. 41, ss.81K-81GG (the state subdivision control law), or is part of residential housing development that has received final, definitive approval pursuant to M.G.L. c. 40B or a special permit pursuant to M.G.L. c. 40A, and the development of the lot does not require a prospective Order of Conditions under the Wetlands Protection Act.

(1) Except as provided in 321 CMR 10.13 and 10.14, any Project or Activity that will be located or will take place in Priority Habitat shall be reviewed by the Division as provided in this section prior to commencement of any physical work or action in Priority Habitat. The Division shall review any such Project or Activity for the purposes of determining if a Take will result from any temporary or permanent modification, degradation or destruction of Priority Habitat occurring as a result of the proposed Project or Activity. Prior to the commencement of any physical work in Priority Habitat, the Record Owner of the land where such Project or Activity will occur shall submit the information listed in 321 CMR 10.20 to the Division. The Division shall notify the Record Owner within 30 days if the materials submitted satisfy 321 CMR 10.20 and request submission of any missing materials. Once the Division has determined all of the materials required by 321 CMR 10.20, including a review fee, the amount of which shall be determined by the commissioner of administration under the provisions of M.G.L. c.7, §3B, then the Division shall issue a file number for the review of that Project or Activity.

(2) After the issuance of a file number, the Division shall review the submitted materials to determine, based on the performance standard in 321 CMR 10.19, if the proposed Project or Activity either:

(a) has avoided a Take as proposed, or with conditions and may proceed without further review; or

10.18: continued

(b) will result in a Take and cannot proceed as proposed. For purposes of M.G.L. c. 30A, §§ 10 through 14, the determination of a Take shall constitute final agency decision in the form of a denial. The Division's determination shall be made in writing within 60 days after the issuance of a file number. Failure of the Division to issue a written determination within 60 days after the issuance of a file number shall be deemed to be a determination that the proposed Project or Activity does not result in a Take and requires no further review. The Director may extend the 60-day review period for up to two successive 20 day periods if circumstances beyond the control of the Division require additional time to complete the review, in which case the Division shall notify the Record Owner in writing of the extension and the reason for the extension. The response time may also be extended at the written request of the Record Owner.

(3) If the Division has made a determination of a Take, the Record Owner may request a consultation with the Division to discuss options for the Project or Activity that may avoid a Take.

(4) Any Project or Activity that receives a determination that no Take will result (whether in writing or by expiration of the 60-day review period, as may be extended) shall not be subject to further review under 321 CMR 10.18 if physical work on the Project or Activity is commenced within five years from the date of the determination (or the expiration of the 60-day review period, as may be extended). If no physical work is commenced on the Project or Activity within that five-year period, or there is a material change in the plans that were submitted to the Division, the Project or Activity may be subject to further review by the Division.

(5) Performance Standards for Obtaining a No Take Determination for Certain Activities

(a) Notwithstanding 321 CMR 10.18(1) and (2), a Project or Activity that impacts no more than 10,000 square feet of Priority Habitat mapped solely for a State-listed animal Species of Special Concern will receive a No Take determination from the Division under 10.18, provided that the Division determines that the following performance standards have been met:

1. such Project or Activity is not subject to regulation under the Wetlands Protection Act and 310 CMR 10.00;

2. such Project or Activity will not occur within three hundred (300) feet of a vernal pool that has been certified or otherwise determined to provide vernal pool habitat by the Division, or is subject to protection by a municipality, and such vernal pool is mapped as Priority Habitat for any State-listed animal Species that uses vernal pool habitat;

3. the proponent files a plan with the Division that clearly delineates the limit of the work and the location and scope of the impact to Priority Habitat;

4. the proponent thereafter records the plan on the deed of the affected property or properties; and provided that:

5. no more than one such Project or Activity shall be allowed for the affected property; no action has been taken to segment the Project or Activity to evade compliance with the above performance standards or MESA, as determined by the Division; and the Division, in reviewing any subsequent Project or Activities for the site pursuant to 321 CMR 10.18 may take into account the impact previously authorized under 321 CMR 10.18(5)(a)1.-4. when determining the MESA permitting and mitigation requirements for the subsequent Project or Activity.

(b) The Division may establish in guidance, performance standards for other Projects or Activities that, if complied with, will receive a No Take determination from the Division under 321 CMR 10.18.

(1) The Director may, in accordance with provisions of M.G.L. c. 131A, § 3, permit the Taking of a State-listed Species for conservation or management purposes provided there is a long-term Net Benefit to the conservation of the impacted species. The requirements for permitting the Take of a State-listed Species for conservation or management purposes, including a State-listed Species of Special Concern that will occur within a conservation protection zone established in a conservation plan issued by the Division pursuant to 321 CMR 10.26, are set forth in 321 CMR 10.23(2) through (5). The general permit requirements authorizing the Take of a State-listed Species of Special Concern that will occur outside of a conservation protection zone established in a conservation plan issued by the Division pursuant to 321 CMR 10.26 are set forth in 321 CMR 10.23(6). The general mitigation standards to be applied by the Director when issuing individual and general conservation and management permits are set forth in 321 CMR 10.23(7).

(2) Except as provided in 321 CMR 10.23(6) below, if the Director determines that the applicant for a permit has avoided, minimized and mitigated impacts to State-listed Species consistent with the following performance standards, then the Director may issue a conservation and management permit, provided:

(a) The applicant has adequately assessed alternatives to both temporary and permanent impacts to State-listed Species;

(b) An insignificant portion of the local population would be impacted by the Project or Activity, and;

(c) The applicant agrees to carry out a conservation and management plan that provides a long-term Net Benefit to the conservation of the State-listed Species that has been approved by the Director, as provided in 321 CMR 10.23(5), and shall be carried out by the applicant.

(3) Except as provided in 321 CMR 10.23(6) below, if a conservation and management permit applicant is unable to demonstrate the long-term Net Benefit performance standard on the project site and the applicant has made every reasonable effort to avoid, minimize and mitigate impacts to the State-listed Species on site, then the conservation and management plan may with the approval of the Director, be designed to meet the long-term Net Benefit performance standard by providing for financial or in-kind contributions toward the development and/or the implementation of an off-site conservation recovery and protection plan for the impacted species.

(4) Except as provided in 321 CMR 10.23(6) below, within 30 days of the receipt of a final conservation and management plan including a review fee, the amount of which shall be determined by the commissioner of administration under the provisions of M.G.L. c. 7, § 3B or, if a conservation and management plan has been submitted and the Project or Activity is undergoing a MEPA review, then 30 days after the issuance of a final MEPA certificate, whichever is longer, the Director shall make a determination that the submitted plan meets the performance standards and is approved, or a determination that the plan as submitted is inadequate and is denied. Failure of the Director to respond to the final conservation and management plan shall constitute approval of the submitted plan as an approved conservation and management permit. The 30 day response time may be extended for two successive 30 day periods by the Director due to circumstances beyond the control of the Division and the applicant shall be notified in writing of the extension, its period and the reason for the extension.

(5) The conservation and management permit, if and when issued, shall contain such terms and conditions as the Director deems necessary or appropriate to carry out the purposes of M.G.L. c. 131A, including but not limited to, adequate funding for the conservation and management permit provided by the applicant, and appropriate monitoring and reporting of the results of the conservation and management permit. After being notified in writing, and confirming that the terms of a conservation and management permit have been fulfilled, the Division will promptly issue a certificate of compliance.

(6) Projects or Activities Eligible for Coverage under a General Conservation and Management Permit when the Division has issued a Conservation Plan

(a) Eligibility. The Director may permit the Take of a State-listed Species of Special Concern that will occur outside of a conservation protection zone established in a conservation plan issued by the Division pursuant to 321 CMR 10.26 through the issuance of a general conservation and management permit meeting the requirements of 321 CMR 10.23(6). Nothwithstanding the above, a project proponent retains the option of obtaining an individual conservation and management permit meeting the requirements of 321 CMR 10.23(2) through (5) in lieu of obtaining coverage under a general permit issued pursuant to 321 CMR 10.23(6).

(b) Minimum Requirements and Performance Standards applicable to the General Permit. The Director may authorize an eligible Project or Activity to be covered under a general conservation and management permit if the Director determines that the applicant has submitted a complete and timely application for coverage to the Division, including paying the applicable review fee, that obligates the applicant to comply with the following minimum requirements and performance standards, which will be further specified by the Division in the general permit.

1. The applicant shall implement and comply with species-specific development standards or best management practices, or both, applicable to the geographic area and the species habitat that would be impacted by the Project or Activity. Notwithstanding 321 CMR 10.23(2), the proponent is not required to provide an alternatives analysis or to demonstrate that an insignificant portion of the local population of the affected State-listed Species of Special Concern would be impacted by the Project or Activity.

2. The applicant shall provide off-site mitigation, or a combination of on-site and off-site mitigation subject to the Division's approval, that achieves the long-term Net Benefit standard in 321 CMR 10.23(1), as determined by the Division. Any off-site mitigation provided by the applicant in the form of a financial contribution will be used to fund habitat management or the protection of land or other appropriate mitigation within one or more conservation protection zones established in the conservation plan issued by the Division pursuant to 321 CMR 10.26. The amount of any such off-site mitigation payment will be determined by the Division based on a formula set forth in written guidance that, at a minimum, considers the area of impact on the on-site habitat of the affected State-listed Species of Special Concern and the land values within one or more of the conservation protection zones. Notwithstanding 321 CMR 10.23(3), the applicant may propose off-site mitigation without a showing that the applicant has made every reasonable effort to avoid, minimize and mitigate impacts to the affected State-listed Species of Special Concern on-site.

3. An applicant that submits a complete application for coverage meeting the requirements 321 CMR 10.23(6) and fulfills in a timely manner all of the obligations required by the general permit, as determined by the Division, will be deemed to have carried out a conservation and management plan that provides a long-term Net Benefit to the conservation of the State-listed Species as required by 321 CMR 10.23.

(c) Other Provisions and Requirements related to the Director's General Permit Authority

1. The contents of the application for coverage under the general permit and related requirements will be specified by the Division in the general permit or in an application for coverage form developed by the Division. The application for coverage will require the submission of information and other action by the applicant as deemed necessary by the Division for its effective administration of the general permit program.

2. The general permit shall contain such terms and conditions as the Director deems necessary or appropriate to ensure compliance with M.G.L. c. 131A and for the Division's effective administration of the general permit program, including but not limited to, the species-specific development standards or best management practices, or both, applicable to the geographic area and the species habitat that would be impacted by the Project or Activity; funding for the mitigation of impacts to the affected species; and appropriate monitoring and reporting requirements.

3. Within 30 days of an applicant's submission of a complete and timely application for coverage form to the Director and payment of the required fee, the Director will issue a written notification of inclusion of coverage under the general permit to the proponent or a determination that the notice as submitted is inadequate and that coverage is denied. Failure of the Director to respond to the application for coverage within the above time period will constitute the Director's approval that the Project or Activity is authorized under the general permit. The 30 day response time may be extended for two successive 30 day periods by the Director due to circumstances beyond the control of the Division and the applicant shall be notified in writing of the extension, its duration and the reason for the extension.

4. The Director may require any permittee authorized under the general permit to apply for and obtain an individual conservation and management permit pursuant to 321 CMR 10.23(2) through (5). Cases where an individual conservation and management permit may be required include a written determination by the Director that:

a. the permittee is not in compliance with the general permit;

b. circumstances have changed since the time of the submittal of the application for coverage so that the Project or Activity is not longer appropriately regulated for conservation and management purposes under the general permit; and

c. other relevant factors.

(7) General Mitigation Standards applicable to Individual and General Conservation and Management Permits issued by the Director.

(a) The Director, in determining the appropriate nature and scope of mitigation necessary for an applicant for an individual or general conservation and management permit to achieve the long-term Net Benefit performance standard in 321 CMR 10.23(1), will generally apply the following areal habitat mitigation ratios, based on the category of State-listed Species:

1. Endangered Species: 1:3 (i.e., protection of three times the amount of areal habitat of the affected Endangered Species that is impacted by the Project or Activity);

2. Threatened Species: 1:2 (i.e., protection of two times the amount of areal habitat of the affected Threatened Species that is impacted by the Project or Activity).

3. Special Concern Species: 1:1.5 (i.e., protection of one and one half times the amount of areal habitat of the affected Species of Special Concern that is impacted by the Project or Activity).

(b) The Director reserves the right to require, on a permit-by-permit basis, an areal habitat mitigation ratio or an alternative mitigation approach that differs from the otherwise applicable ratio in 321 CMR 10.23(7)(a)1.-3. when the Director determines in writing that the alternative mitigation ratio or alternative mitigation approach is either sufficient or required to achieve the long-term Net Benefit performance standard in 321 CMR 10.23(1). A project proponent may also request in writing that the Director apply an alternative mitigation ratio or alternative mitigation approach to the Project or Activity. Any such request shall explain why an alternative mitigation ratio or alternative mitigation approach is appropriate, addressing the relevant factors in 321 CMR 10.23(7)(b)1.-5. below. In determining whether an alternative mitigation ratio or alternative mitigation approach is appropriate, the Director will consider factors that include but are not limited to:

1. the size and configuration of the habitat impact;

2. the threats to the affected State-listed Species posed by uses or activities located adjacent or in close proximity to the Project or Activity that is the subject of the conservation and management permit;

3. the size, configuration and quality of the habitat proposed to be protected by the applicant;

4. the population density of the affected State-listed Species; and

5. the habitat management and research needs associated with the affected State-listed Species.

(c) For the purposes of providing ongoing, updated guidance to project proponents and the public, the Division will post guidelines on its website for avoiding and minimizing impacts and for achieving the long-term Net Benefit performance standard in 321 CMR 10.23(1) for those State-listed Species for which the Director has issued three or more conservation and management permits during a three year time period. The Director reserves the right to require, on a permit-by-permit basis, mitigation that differs from any relevant mitigation guidelines developed by the Division when the Director determines in writing that the permit-specific mitigation is either sufficient or required to achieve the long-term Net Benefit performance standard in 321 CMR 10.23(1). In determining whether to require permit-specific mitigation that differs from any relevant mitigation guidelines, the Director will take into consideration factors that include those set forth in 321 CMR 10.23(7)(b)1.-5.

(1) Agriculture and Aquaculture. The normal maintenance and improvement of land in agricultural or aquacultural use shall be exempt from the requirement to obtain an Alteration Permit. This exemption shall continue only so long as such land remains in agricultural or aquacultural use. Land in agricultural or aquacultural use does not include those portions of a site that are not in such use and are not designated fallow land. The normal maintenance and improvement of land in agricultural or aquacultural use does not include site preparation for purposes of conversion to another, non agricultural or non aquacultural use. To qualify for this exemption, land in agricultural use shall have been in such use and not fallow or inactive three out of five years preceding the effective date of designation. To maintain this exemption land in agricultural use must remain in such use but may lie fallow for a period of time if used for agriculture at least three out of every five years. Land lying fallow more than two out of five years shall qualify or continue to qualify for this exemption upon certification by the Commissioner of the Department of Agricultural Resources that the fallow condition of the land is necessary to maintain the land in agricultural use.

(2) Land in Forestry Use. The normal maintenance and improvement of land in forestry use for which the landowner has engaged in the following consultation and certification process, shall be exempt from the requirement of an Alteration Permit.

(a) Plan Submission. A landowner shall submit a forest management plan to the state forester and NHESP for review.

(b) Plan Review and Consultation. NHESP shall review the forest management plan; shall make recommendations with respect to the avoidance, minimization or mitigation of impacts on Endangered, Threatened, or Special Concern species; and shall submit such recommendations to the landowner and the state forester. Failure of the NHESP to make any such recommendations within 60 days of receipt of such plan shall constitute consultation and approval by NHESP of the plan. The state forester shall review the forest management plan and the NHESP's recommendations. The state forester shall certify the plan if she finds:

1. that the plan constitutes a planned program to improve the quantity and quality of a continuous crop for the purpose of selling such products in the regular course of business; and

2. that the NHESP has determined that the plan will take all practicable means and measures to avoid damage to state listed species or their habitats.

(c) Certification of Plan. If the state forester finds that either requirement has not been met she shall deny certification of the plan and return the plan to the landowner with a statement of the reasons for the denial. If the state forester finds that both requirements have been met she shall prepare a certification document to be signed by both the state forester and the NHESP and affixed to the approved plan and shall send copies of the same to the landowner and NHESP.

(3) Single Family House. A landowner may construct without the requirement of an Alteration Permit a single family house covering no more than 3,000 square feet of ground and install any necessary utilities to service said house and construct in a reasonable fashion a single access driveway to the nearest public or private way on a lot having an area of at least three acres; provided, however, that the lot on which said construction takes place was owned by said landowner and in existence on January 1, 1990; and provided, further, that said lot was not held in common ownership with any adjoining land as of said date. For purposes of 321 CMR 10.62(3)(e) the phrase "in existence" shall mean a lot shown on a definitive plan that has received final approval under M.G.L. c. 41 or shown on a plan that has been endorsed under M.G.L. c. 41, § 81(P). Upon submission of a Notice of Intent under the Wetlands Protection Act M.G.L. c. 131, § 40 or application for a building permit, whichever is first, landowners intending to construct such a house shall submit by certified mail or hand delivery to the Director a completed form, available upon request from the Division of Fisheries and Wildlife, and supporting documentation demonstrating that the conditions for the exemption have been met. The form shall request the following information:

(a) property owner's name and mailing address;

(b) address of new house;

(c) occupancy of the proposed house (number of families)

(d) square feet of ground covered by the house;

(e) the size of the lot in acres;

(f) owner of the lot on January 1, 1990;

(g) ownership of any adjoining land by property owner specified in 321 CMR 10.62(3)(f) on January 1, 1990;

(h) date of approval of the definitive subdivision plan, prepared pursuant to M.G.L. c. 41, or date of endorsement of a plan pursuant to M.G.L. c. 41, § 81(P), showing the house lot, if any;

(i) a plan showing the boundaries of the lot, the location and footprint of the house, the location of any proposed driveways, the location of the nearest public way, and the location of any other existing or proposed structures.

(j) an 8½" X 11" section of a USGS 7½ minute topographic map (original or photocopy) showing the location of the proposed house clearly; and

(k) signature of property owner and date.

(4) Projects in Receipt of a Building Permit or which are in Compliance with MEPA. Activities within a Significant Habitat shall be exempt from the requirement of an Alteration Permit if either of the following have occurred prior to the issuance of notice of public hearing of proposed Significant Habitat designation pursuant to 321 CMR 10.32(1)(a):

(a) a building permit for such activities has been issued; or

(b) the Secretary of EOEA has certified no more than three years prior to designation that a Final EIR for such activities fully and adequately complies with MEPA; provided, however, that such EIR evaluated the potential impacts of the project on the state listed species occurring in the Significant Habitat at the time of designation.

(1) Submission of Request to Alter Significant Habitat. A person wishing to alter Significant Habitat shall submit to the Director a completed Request to Alter Significant Habitat (RTA) form. RTA forms are available from the Division and shall request the following information:

(a) project/activity name and address;

(b) proponent's name and address;

(c) landowner's name and address;

(d) a complete description of the project and the anticipated uses, including project locus, site plans, grading plans, and Notice of Intent and response of NHESP to any filing pursuant to the rare species provisions of the Wetlands Protection Act regulations (310 CMR 10.37 or 10.59), if any;

(e) the possible alternatives to the proposed project and anticipated use(s);

(f) the anticipated impacts of the proposed project on any Endangered or Threatened species;

(g) full plans for the protection of any Endangered or Threatened species present and the short term and long term avoidance, minimization or mitigation measures to be taken to provide amelioration of the impact;

(h) the potential economic effects of the proposed project on the proponent and the local community, if any;

(i) signature of proponent and date; and

(j) signature of landowner and date.

(2) Segmentation. Several alterations of Significant Habitat which are part of a single project shall be described on a single RTA. In conducting permit review, the entirety of a proposed project, including likely future expansions, shall be considered, and not separate phases or segments thereof. In determining whether two or more alterations are in fact parts of one project, all circumstances are to be considered, including but not limited to time interval between phases; whether the alterations, taken together, constitute a part of a common plan or scheme; and whether environmental impacts are separable. Ownership by different entities does not necessarily indicate that two alterations are separate. It is the intent of this rule that projects not be segmented or phased to evade or defer review.

(3) Initial Review of RTA for Completeness. The Director shall review the RTA and determine if it contains all necessary information. The Director shall notify the proponent of any additional information necessary to review the alteration no more than 21 days after receiving the RTA. If the Director does not notify the proponent of any additional information requirements within the 21 day period the RTA shall be considered complete.

(4) Director's Review. Within 45 days of receiving all required information, the Director shall determine whether the alteration will reduce the Viability of the Significant Habitat to support the population of Endangered or Threatened species involved; provided, however, that the Director may enter into a written agreement with the proponent to extend the period for such determination.

(5) Consultation. Prior to acting on a RTA, the Director will schedule with the proponent a public consultation session to review the proposed alteration and discuss potential impacts. The Director shall publish a notice of the consultation session in a newspaper of general circulation in the area of the Significant Habitat involved at least seven days before the consultation session.

(6) Criteria for Issuing Permits. The Director shall apply the following criteria when determining whether the proposed alteration will reduce the Viability of the Significant Habitat. The Director shall determine that the alteration will reduce the Viability of the Significant Habitat if an alteration may directly or indirectly:

(a) change the environment in any way which likely will result in stress, lowered reproduction or growth, or decline of the local population of the Endangered or Threatened species involved;

(b) prevent, hinder, or stop ecological processes which are important for the survival or recovery of the Endangered or Threatened species involved;

(c) isolate portions of the Endangered or Threatened species populations from each other;

(d) disrupt seasonal or daily movements or migrations of Endangered or Threatened animals or dispersal of Endangered or Threatened plants; or

(e) decrease the probability of long term survival or recovery of the affected local population(s) of Endangered or Threatened species.

(7) Issuance of Permit. The Director shall issue an Alteration Permit only upon determining that the alteration will not reduce the Viability of the Significant Habitat. The Alteration Permit shall contain such conditions as are necessary to ensure that the alteration will not reduce the Viability of the Significant Habitat. The Director may include requirements for biological monitoring as a means for assessing compliance with the terms of the Alteration Permit and the success or failure of avoidance, minimization, or mitigation measures. Unless the terms of the Alteration Permit indicate otherwise, the proponent shall complete the permitted activities within three years of the issuance of the Alteration Permit.

(8) Denial of Permit. The Director shall issue a permit denial upon determining that the alteration will likely reduce the Viability of the Significant Habitat, including a statement of the reasons for such denial.

(9) Revocation. Upon a determination that a proponent is conducting or has conducted activities in violation of an Alteration Permit, the Director may revoke said Alteration Permit. Revocation of a permit shall not limit any other enforcement or penalty for violation of M.G.L. c. 131A or 321 CMR 10.30.