To apply for a posted position, please follow the instructions at the end of the relevant job description, or click here to access all available online applications. Upon receiving your resume, we will review your credentials and contact you if they are commensurate with the requirements of the position for which you are applying.

Unless otherwise identified, all job opportunities are based in downtown Los Angeles at MOCA's staff offices located at MOCA Grand Avenue. MOCA is an Equal Opportunity Employer.

Thank you for your interest in MOCA.

Overview

The MOCA Store Sales Associate provides customer service, completes sales transactions, maintains the physical appearances of stores, and completes opening and closing procedures. The Sales staff follows daily performance guidelines provided by management and are expected to work collegially as part of the Retail Operations Department.

This is a part-time position requiring you to work onsite. Weekend work will be required.

Hourly Rate: $18.97 per hour

Requirements

Effective customer service-oriented interpersonal skills.

Promptness and reliability are essential.

Accuracy in cash handling.

Prior retail experience is preferred.

Availability to work Saturdays or Sundays, plus two additional weekdays with the opportunity to work additional hours.

Ability to work independently.

Knowledge of, or interest in contemporary art.

Essential Functions

Work closely with the Sales Manager, Retail Coordinator, Webstore, Shipping Coordinator, and fellow Sales Associates.

Use your creative eye to maintain unique shop displays.

Interact positively with museum staff, donors, and museum visitors.

Meet and greet customers.

Guide and assist customers with sales of our unique selection of products and publications.

Grow knowledge of art books and products.

Operate Point of Sale cash registers with accuracy and process special orders.

Complete clear and accurate end of day sales reports.

Maintain communication with supervisors and colleagues.

Assist in all aspects of keeping the MOCA Store looking smart, sophisticated, interesting and well organized.

Promote sales of Museum Memberships through the Store and process appropriate paperwork. Interact with the public and answer or direct questions regarding the Museum.

Have a neat and professional appearance according to MOCA Store dress code.

Application:

Research shows that women and individuals from underrepresented backgrounds often apply to jobs only if they meet 100% of the qualifications. We recognize that it is highly unlikely that an applicant meets 100% of the qualifications for a given role. Therefore, if much of this job description describes you, then you are highly encouraged to apply for this role.

Please click here to submit your resume and cover letter.

Overview

Temporary Audio/Visual Technician works onsite under the supervision of the AV Technical manager to provide assistance for MOCA rental events, exhibitions, film and video presentations, performances, lectures and presentations and various other programs at both MOCA locations (MOCA Grand and MOCA at the Geffen Contemporary). Primary responsibilities include preparing, installing, activating, operating, troubleshooting and breaking down audio visual and other equipment in a variety of contexts as well as the upkeep and maintenance of equipment in the museum’s inventory, collection, and as installed in exhibitions. Because the scope of the Museum's programming incorporates conventional art forms as well as those which are more experimental in nature, Temporary Audio/Visual Technician will have a variety of tasks and functions to perform, relating to all aspects of technical installation and live events. Some evening and weekend work will be required.

Hourly Rate: $23.79 per hour

Essential Functions:

Responsible for handling, installing and troubleshooting complex artworks, assisting with projection, audio engineering (including live sound), videotaping, and lighting.

Works with AV Technical Manager and Exhibition Technicians in preparing and installing all AV equipment for exhibitions and with other MOCA staff for programming and events.

Maintains operations of exhibitions including monitoring all media elements, performing routine maintenance with supervision of AV Technical Manager.

Assisting in the preparation of exhibitions, including the handling of artworks, light construction and routine maintenance.

Assists with care, maintenance and tracking of the museum’s A/V equipment.

In coordination with the AV Technical Manager, provides audio-visual services for live events, including setup and operation of media for museum’s programming, rentals and other functions.

Must be able to work well as a team member in a professional manner with a wide variety of staff and non-museum personnel in accomplishing projects with high production standards.

Must be able to work in a precise and careful manner under stringent deadlines.

Must display creativity in solving technical problems, and flexibility in adapting to unusual circumstances.

Must be willing to understand and learn new technologies specific to MOCA installs and events

Partnering with the Rentals Program Manager, Registration Department, Curatorial Department, Exhibitions Department, Education Department, and visiting artists and curators working on museum projects

And other duties as required

Requirements:

Bachelor’s Degree in Film/Video, Theater, Audio Production, Media Arts, Performing Arts or a closely related field strongly preferred. Experience may count towards a degree.

Minimum experience of two years working with film, video, audio, new media or related production work.

Computer competency required.

Basic electrical knowledge required, advanced electrical knowledge preferred.

Working knowledge of tools and proper application required.

Must demonstrate safe use of equipment including, but not limited to: media equipment, electrical equipment, personnel lifts, and various portable and stationary power tools.

Must be ok presenting both conventional and nonconventional art forms that can be experimental in nature.

Must be willing to follow Injury Illness Prevention Program.

Ability to follow a number of systems for identifying, evaluating, and preventing occupational safety and health hazards, in addition to initiating Employee Safe Training with all stationary and mobile power tools and in the handling of all relevant materials and substances.

Physical Demands:

The physical demands described here are representative of those that must be met by an employee to successfully perform the essential functions of this job. Reasonable accommodations may be made to enable individuals with disabilities to perform the essential functions.

While performing the duties of this job, the incumbent must be able to do the following:

Stand for long periods

Bend, stoop, reach, lift, and climb to move materials and operate equipment

Climb up and down stairs and ladders

Reach both above and below shoulder height

Be able to lift up to 50 pounds

Manual dexterity to operate manually-controlled equipment and artwork

Ability to visually inspect work; specific visual abilities include close vision, color vision, depth perception, and the ability to adjust focus.

This position is covered by MOCA/AFSCME Collective Bargaining Unit Agreement: YES

To submit your resume and cover letter, please click here.

Research shows that women and individuals from underrepresented backgrounds often apply to jobs only if they meet 100% of the qualifications. We recognize that it is highly unlikely that an applicant meets 100% of the qualifications for a given role. Therefore, if much of this job description describes you, then you are highly encouraged to apply for this role.