Roy Peter Clark Bio:

Roy Peter Clark is the author of 14 books, including Coaching Writers, a collaboration between him and Don Fry.

Clark was born in 1948 on the Lower East Side of New York City and raised on Long Island, where he attended Catholic schools. He graduated from Providence College in Rhode Island with a degree in English and earned a Ph.D. from the State University of New York at Stony Brook.

In 1977 Clark was hired by the St. Petersburg Times to become one ofAmerica’s first writing coaches.Clark has worked full-time at Poynter since 1979 as director of the writing center, dean of the faculty, senior scholar and vice president. He is also the founding director of the National Writer’s Workshops, regional conferences that attract 5,000 writers annually.

Don Fry Bio:

Don Fry is an independent writing coach, professor, and author. He was also an English and journalism professor at the University of Virginia and at Stony Brook University. Fry has headed the writing and ethics faculties at the Poynter Institute, and edited the Institute’s series Best Newspaper Writing.

In 1994, Don became a writing coach, working with newspapers and technical magazines, radio and television stations, and non-profit organizations. He has spread the techniques of coaching throughout the world, especially in Singapore, Scandinavia, and South Africa. He also played a part in the creation of the Institute for the Advancement of Journalism in Johannesburg.

Fry has just finished a new book about how to write in your own way, in your own voice, essentially about magnifying your strengths to write powerfully and clearly. He posts a daily writing tip on Twitter, which will become a short electronic book.

Roy Peter Clark and Fry collaborated on Coaching Writers.

Summary of Coaching Writers Chapter 17:

Chapter 17, titled Copy Editors as Partners, explains the relationship that reporters often have with copy editors.

In many newsrooms, reporters have negative feelings towards copy editors, suggesting that copy editors ruin stories, butcher nice pieces of work, and are to blame for any problems after the story was published. Likewise, copy editors think that reporters are “whining, egotistical, self-indulgent prima donnas.”

Because most problems occur after hours, copy editors are often left to make the choice of whether or not to edit certain aspects of a story. At this time, consultation with the reporter is more difficult, so they are often forced to make decisions on their own. Coaching Writers suggests that newsrooms collectively come up with a protocol to make the process of last-minute copy changes go a bit smoother.

The protocol would distinguish particular instances in which it is best for the copy editor to seek collaboration, and certain times in which collaboration is not necessary. This protocol could improve newsroom relations and squash any preconceived notions that reporters and copy editors have about one another. Although this remedy won’t fix everything, it has proven to be effective!

The chapter gives an example protocol that breaks up 38 typical changes into three categories: consultation required, consultation desirable, and consultation not required. Of course the protocol should be adapted to fit each newsroom, but it is a starting point.

Hopefully, this protocol will not only improve the writer’s stories but also the editor’s attention to detail. Because writers don’t always take the time to thoroughly review their printed work, the collaboration would allow them to see where they made their mistakes and where there is room for improvement.