Welcome

Ronneby is a municipality in the region of Blekinge. Here lives 29 000 residents. We are sorry for what is happening in Ukraine and that you had to leave your country. We hope you feel safe in Ronneby.

We have gathered some information that may be good for you to know. Most of the information is from the national authorities that you can find in russian or ukrainian at krisinformation.se/ukraina.

Apply for a residence permit

The EU has decided to activate the Temporary Protection Directive. The directive applies to you who are a Ukrainian citizen and were a resident of Ukraine before February 24, 2022 you who have a residence permit as a refugee or have subsidiary protec­tion status in Ukraine family members of the above two.

To be covered by the directive, you must have come to Sweden on 30 October 2021 or later, and have remained in Sweden since you entered the country. This means that if you come from Ukraine, you can get a tempo­rary residence permit in Sweden.

To apply, you must register and present a biometric national passport or other Ukrainian identity documents. You will also need to provide your fingerprints and be photographed as part of the registration process. You will receive a decision about your application for a residence permit within a few days. You will then receive a residence permit card.

Once you have received your residence permit in accordance with the Temporary Protection Directive, you are entitled to:

some financial assistance

basic healthcare

food and accommodation

work or go to school in Sweden

Find out more about residence permits on the Swedish Migrations Agency’s website:

Infor­ma­tion regar­ding residence permits for ukrainian citizens (The Swedish Migration Agency) External link.

Apply for a placement in preschool and school

In order for a child to be entitled to preschool or school, the family must have received a residence permit in accordance with the EU’s Temporary Protection Directive from the Swedish Migration Agency. The right to preschool then applies on the same terms as for Swedish citizens. In the case of upper secondary school, the youth has to enroll in school before the age of 18.

In order to apply for preschool or school in Ronneby please get in contact with the citizen service in Stadshuset in Ronneby. There you will have to fill in an application for each child.

Citizen service (Medborgarservice) at Stadshuset

Karlshamnsvägen 4

Ronneby

For openening hours please check this website.

Learning the Swedish language