The Supreme Court of the United States is the highest-ranking judicial body in the country and is recognized as the court of last resort in the United States. Currently, there are nine United States Supreme Court Justices on the highest court in the land.

The following student guide provides background information, including demographics, and speaks to the history of the Court and the Justices of the Court.

Justices by State

Justices by Gender

Justices by Race/Ethnicity

Justices by Longest Terms

Justices Appointed by Presidents

Justices by Religion

Justices: Age of Appointment

Justices: Universities Attended

Justices: Historical Salaries

Justices: Appointments By Decade

What Types of Cases go to the U.S. Supreme Court?

The Supreme Court chooses which cases that it wants to hear and decide. The types of cases range vary from a variety of constitutional law matters to cases considered to be of high public importance. This includes cases regarding taxation, immigration, freedom of speech, defective products, personal injury, and criminal matters.

Many cases involve employment law issues and matters involving discrimination. This includes discrimination based upon race, religion, and sexual orientation.

Cases in which the United States is a party often go to the Supreme Court. The same is for cases between different states or cases involving ambassadors.

How does Someone become a Supreme Court Justice?

There are a total of nine judges on the U.S. Supreme Court. When a position becomes open due to the death or resignation of a sitting judge, the President can appoint a person to the position. This is often a highly contested appointment because these judges can shape the law for the land for a very long time.

Most of these appointments are political in nature, meaning the President chooses to appoint someone who will make decisions based upon political and ideological beliefs. As such, the bench is not always considered impartial, or fair, because there is often a political agenda behind a court ruling.

After an appointment is made by the President, there are hearings in the Senate to approve the candidate for the position. If, after the hearing, the Senate confirms the appointment the new justice is sworn into office. It is a lifetime appointment and therefore very important to the separation of powers of our government.

U.S. Supreme Court Justice Background Information

The Constitution states that the Supreme Court has both original and appellate jurisdiction. Original jurisdiction means that the Supreme Court is the first, and only, Court to hear a case.

The Constitution limits original jurisdiction cases to those involving disputes between the states or disputes arising among ambassadors and other high-ranking ministers.

Appellate jurisdiction means that the Court has the authority to review the decisions of lower courts. Most of the cases the Supreme Court hears are appeals from lower courts.

Many cases that the Court reviews concern the U.S. Constitution, and the Court’s decisions have far-reaching implications for the citizenry and the history of the United States.

Few other courts in the world have the same authority of constitutional interpretation and none have exercised it for as long or with as much influence.

What is the Total Number of Supreme Court Judges?

The Supreme Court has nine (9) Justices: one (1) Chief Justice and eight (8) Associate Justices.

There have been a total of 116 Justices as of July 2022.

In total, there have been 17 Chief Justices and 103 Associate Justices

Five (5) judges have served as both chief and associate justice: John Rutledge, Edward Douglass White, Charles Evans Hughes, Harlan Fiske Stone, William H. Rehnquist.

Which States Provide the Most Supreme Court Justices?

Historically, Supreme Court Justices have come from the following states:

How many Women have been Supreme Court Justices?

Total Number of Men vs. Total Number of Women

*No woman has served as a U.S. Supreme Court Chief Justice

First Woman: Sandra Day O’Connor (1981-2006)

Only six women have served as Justices on the Supreme Court of the United States (SCOTUS). Justice O’Connor made history when she became the first woman to serve the Court in 1981.

Ruth Bader Ginsberg

Elena Kagan

Sandra Day O’Connor

Sonia Sotomayor

Amy Coney Barrett

Ketanji Brown Jackson

Supreme Court Justices by Race/Ethnicity

As of September 2022, there are currently:

Six (6) Caucasian Supreme Court Justices and three (3) non-Caucasian Supreme Court Justices.

Ketanji Brown Jackson is the first female African American Justice and the first former federal public defender to serve.

Sonia Sotomayor is the first and only Hispanic Supreme Court Justice.

Eight percent of the Supreme Court Justices are Caucasian — 22.2% are non-Caucasian.

Historically:

112 Caucasian Supreme Court Justices and three (3) non-Caucasian Supreme Court Justices.

Three (3) African American Justices: Thurgood Marshall, Clarence Thomas, and Kentanji Brown Jackson.

99% of Supreme Court Justices have been Caucasian.

Were any Judges Born Outside of the United States?

All current Supreme Court Justices have been born in the United States. Historically, six (6) Justices were born outside of the U.S.:

James Wilson (1789-1798), born in Caskardy, Scotland

James Iredell (1790-1799), born in Lewes, England

William Paterson (1793-1806), born in County Antrim, Ireland

David J. Brewer (1889-1910), born in Smyrna, Turkey

George Sutherland (1922-1939), born in Buckinghamshire, England

Felix Frankfurter (1939-1962), born in Vienna, Austria

What is the Longest Term for a Supreme Court Justice?

Longest terms among current Supreme Court Justices (as of Oct. 19, 2021):

Longest terms served among all Supreme Court Justices (as of Dec. 31, 2019):

*William O. Douglas is the longest-serving associate justice.

**John Marshall is the longest-serving chief justice.

Shortest terms served among all Supreme Court Justices (excluding current Supreme Court Justices):

*Thomas Johnson is oftentimes considered the shortest-serving judge, but under a temporary recess appointment, he served one month and three days more than Justice Byrnes.

Average terms served among all Supreme Court Justices (as of Dec. 31, 2019):

Historically:

Supreme Court Justices have served an average term of 16 years.

Prior to 1970, Supreme Court Justices served an average term of 14.9 years.

Post 1970, Supreme Court Justices have served an average term of 26.1 years.

Currently:

The five (5) most recently appointed Supreme Court Justices to leave the court have served an average of 27.5 years.

Which President Appointed the Most Judges?

Current Supreme Court Justices have been appointed by the following presidents (in order of most appointments):

The most Supreme Court Justice appointments have been given by the following presidents:

George Washington, 10

John Jay (CJ)

John Rutledge (AJ + CJ)

William Cushing

James Wilson

John Blair, Jr.

James Iredell

Thomas Johnson

William Paterson

Samuel Chase

Oliver Elsworth (CJ)

Franklin D. Roosevelt, 9

Hugo Black

Stanley Forman Reed

Felix Frankfurter

William O. Douglas

Frank Murphy

Harlan F. Stone (CJ)

James F. Byrnes

Robert H. Jackson

Wiley Blount Rutledge

Andrew Jackson, 6

John McLean

Henry Baldwin

James Moore Wayne

Roger Brooke Taney

Philip P. Barbour

John Catron

William Howard Taft, 6

Horace Harmon Lurton

Charles Evans Hughes

Edward D. White (CJ)

Willis Van Devanter

Joseph Rucker Lamar

Mahlon Pitney

Abraham Lincoln, 5

Noah Haynes Swayne

Samual Freeman Miller

David Davis

Stephen Johnson Field

Salmon P. Chase (CJ)

Dwight D. Eisenhower, 5

Earl Warren (CJ)

John Marshall Harlan II

William J. Brennan Jr.

Charles Evans Whittaker

Potter Stewart

The following presidents did not appoint any Supreme Court Justices during their presidency:

William Henry Harrison

Zachary Taylor

Andrew Johnson

What Religions are the Supreme Court Judges?

Currently, there are:

Six (6) Catholic Supreme Court Justices

One (1) Jewish Supreme Court Justice

One (1) Episcopalian Supreme Court Justice

One (1) non-denominational Protestant Justice

Historically, there have been:

33 Episcopalian Supreme Court Justices

19 Presbyterian Supreme Court Justices.

17 Supreme Court Justices have unclear religious denominations.

13 Protestant Supreme Court Justices.

14 Catholic Supreme Court Justices.

9 Unitarian Supreme Court Justices.

8 Jewish Supreme Court Justices.

1 Supreme Court Justice has no religious affiliation.

*Of the 17 Supreme Court Chief Justices: 14 have been Protestant, three have been Catholic.

Supreme Court Justices’ Age at Appointment

Current Supreme Court Justices’ ages at appointment:

Historically, the 10 oldest Supreme Court Justices to be appointed are:

The average age of a Supreme Court Justice at the time of appointment is 53 years.

Historically, the 10 youngest Supreme Court Justices to be appointed are:

Supreme Court Justices’ Age at Retirement

In total, 40 Supreme Court Justices have retired.

The 10 oldest Supreme Court Justices at retirement are as follows:

The average age for a Supreme Court Justice at the time of retirement is 69 years old.

The 10 youngest Supreme Court Justices at retirement are as follows:

Supreme Court Justices’ Age at Resignation

In total, 17 Supreme Court Justices have resigned. The 10 youngest to resign are as follows:

*John Rutledge resigned as an Associate Justice at age 52, and resigned as a Chief Justice at age 55.

*Charles Evans Huges resigned as an Associate Justice at age 54, and retired as a Chief Justice at age 79.

What are the Birth Months of the Supreme Court Justices?

Historically, Supreme Court Justices have been born in the following months:

What Universities Produced the Most Supreme Court Judges?

The current members of the Supreme Court have graduated from the following universities:

Historically, the five law schools where the most Supreme Court Justices have attended are as follows:

Supreme Court Justices: Lawyers vs. Non-Lawyers

Each of the current Supreme Court Justices were lawyers.

Historically, only two Supreme Court Justices have not been lawyers

James F. Byrnes (left)

Robert H. Jackson (right)

What Political Party has the most Supreme Court Justices?

There are currently three (3) Supreme Court Justices who are Democrats.

There are currently six (6) Supreme Court Justices who are Republicans.

Historically, Supreme Court Justices have been affiliated with the following political party:

How much Money Does a Supreme Court Judge Get Paid?

The line chart below details the salaries of Supreme Court Associate Justices, the Chief Justice and the U.S. President during a given year:

Have any Supreme Court Justices been Impeached?

Only one (1) Supreme Court Justice has been impeached. Samuel Chase was impeached in 1804. The U.S. House of Representatives voted to impeach him claiming he acted in a partisan manner in deciding several trials. Essentially, the claim was that he was not acting as an independent and impartial judge.

However, in 1805 Chase was acquitted by the Senate. This decision helped safeguard the independence of the judiciary. He served on the court until his death in 1811.

Which Supreme Court Justices Died in Office?

In total, 50 Supreme Court Justices have died in office. The list below outlines the justices below who have died in office, based on when each Justice entered office:

William Cushing – 1810

James Wilson – 1798

James Iredell – 1799

William Paterson- 1806

Samuel Chase- 1811

Bushrod Washington- 1829

John Marshall- 1835

William Johnson – 1834

Henry Brockholst Livingston- 1823

Thomas Todd – 1826

Joseph Story – 1845

Smith Thompson – 1843

Robert Trimble – 1828

John McLean – 1861

Henry Baldwin – 1844

James Moore Wayne – 1867

Roger B. Taney – 1864

Philip Pendleton Barbour – 1841

John Catron – 1865

John McKinley – 1852

Peter Vivian Daniel – 1860

Levi Woodbury – 1851

Nathan Clifford – 1881

Samuel Freeman Miller – 1890

Salmon P. Chase- 1873

Joseph P. Bradley – 1892

Morrison Waite – 1888

John Marshall Harlan – 1911

William Burnham Woods – 1887

Stanley Matthews – 1889

Horace Gray – 1902

Samuel Blatchford – 1893

Lucius Quintus Cincinnatus Lamar – 1893

Melville Fuller- 1910

David Josiah Brewer- 1910

Howell Edmunds Jackson- 1895

Rufus W. Peckham- 1909

Horace Harmon Lurton – 1914

Edward Douglass White – 1921

Joseph Rucker Lamar – 1916

Pierce Butler – 1939

Edward Terry Stanford – 1930

Benjamin N. Cardozo – 1938

Frank Murphy – 1949

Harlan F. Stone- 1946

Robert H. Jackson – 1954

Wiley Blount Rutledge – 1949

Fred M. Vinson – 1953

William Rehnquist – 2005

Antonin Scalia- 2016

Ruth Bader Ginsburg- 2020

What are the most Common Names?

The top five most common names among Supreme Court Justices are as follows:

John (13)

John Jay

John Rutledge

John Marshall

John G. Roberts Jr.

John Blair

John McLean

John Catron

John McKinley

John Archibald Campbell

John Marshall Harlan

John Hessin Clarke

John Marshall Harlan

John Paul Stevens

William (11)

William Howard Taft

William H. Rehnquist

William Cushing

William Paterson

William Johnson

William Strong

William Burnham Woods

William Rufus Day

William Henry Moody

William Orville Douglas

William J. Brennan Jr.

James (5)

James Wilson

James Iredell

James Moore Wayne

James Clark McReynolds

James Francis Byrnes

Samuel (5)

Samuel Chase

Samuel Nelson

Samuel Freeman Miller

Samuel Blatchford

Samuel A. Alito Jr.

Joseph (4)

Joseph Story

Joseph P. Bradley

Joseph McKenna

Joseph Rucker Lamar

Supreme Court Justices Appointments By Decade

In the 1780s, 5 Justices were appointed:

Blair, John, Jr.

Cushing, William

Jay, John

Rutledge, John

Wilson, James

In the 1790s, 7 Justices were appointed:

Iredell, James

Johnson, Thomas

Paterson, William

Chase, Samuel

Ellsworth, Oliver

Washington, Bushrod

Moore, Alfred

In the 1800s, 4 Justices were appointed:

Marshall, John

Johnson, William

Livingston, Henry Brockholst

Todd, Thomas

In the 1810s, 2 Justices were appointed:

Duvall, Gabriel

Story, Joseph

In the 1820s, 3 Justices were appointed:

Thompson, Smith

Trimble, Robert

McLean, John

In the 1830s, 6 Justices were appointed:

Baldwin, Henry

Barbour, Philip Pendelton

Taney, Roger Brooke

Wayne, James Moore

Catron, John

McKinley, John

In the 1840s, 4 Justices were appointed:

Daniel, Peter Vivian

Nelson, Samuel

Woodbury, Levi

Grier, Robert Cooper

In the 1850s, 3 Justices were appointed:

Curtis, Benjamin Robbins

Campbell, John Archibald

Clifford, Nathan

In the 1860s, 5 Justices were appointed:

Davis, David

Miller, Samuel Freeman

Swayne, Noah Haynes

Field, Stephen Johnson

Chase, Salmon Portland

In the 1870s, 5 Justices were appointed:

Bradley, Joseph P.

Strong, William

Hunt, Ward

Waite, Morrison Remick

Harlan, John Marshall (I)

In the 1880s, 7 Justices were appointed:

Woods, William Burnham

Gray, Horace

Matthews, Stanley

Blatchford, Samuel

Lamar, Lucius Quintus Cincinnatus

Fuller, Melville Weston

Brewer, David Josiah

In the 1890s, 6 Justices were appointed:

Brown, Henry Billings

Shiras, George, Jr.

Jackson, Howell Edmunds

White, Edward Douglass

Peckham, Rufus Wheeler

McKenna, Joseph

In the 1900s, 4 Justices were appointed:

Holmes, Oliver Wendell, Jr

Day, William Rufus

Moody, William Henry

Lurton, Horace Harmon

In the 1910s, 7 Justices were appointed:

Hughes, Charles Evans

Lamar, Joseph Rucker

Van Devanter, Willis

Pitney, Mahlon

McReynolds, James Clark

Brandeis, Louis Dembitz

Clarke, John Hessin

In the 1920s, 5 Justices were appointed:

Taft, William Howard

Butler, Pierce

Sutherland, George

Sanford, Edward Terry

Stone, Harlan Fiske

In the 1930s, 6 Justices were appointed:

Roberts, Owen Josephus

Cardozo, Benjamin Nathan

Black, Hugo Lafayette

Reed, Stanley Forman

Douglas, William Orville

Frankfurter, Felix

In the 1940s, 8 Justices were appointed:

Murphy, Francis (Frank) William

Byrnes, James Frances

Jackson, Robert Houghwout

Rutledge, Wiley Blount

Burton, Harold Hitz

Vinson, Fred Moore

Clark, Tom Campbell

Minton, Sherman

In the 1950s, 5 Justices were appointed:

Warren, Earl

Harlan, John Marshall (II)

Brennan, William Joseph, Jr.

Whittaker, Charles Evans

Stewart, Potter

In the 1960s, 5 Justices were appointed:

Goldberg, Arthur Joseph

White, Byron Raymond

Fortas, Abe

Marshall, Thurgood

Burger, Warren Earl

In the 1970s, 4 Justices were appointed:

Blackmun, Harry Andrew

Powell, Lewis Franklin, Jr.

Rehnquist, William Hubbs

Stevens, John Paul

In the 1980s, 3 Justices were appointed:

O’Connor, Sandra Day

Scalia, Antonin

Kennedy, Anthony McLeod

In the 1990s, 4 Justices were appointed:

Souter, David H.

Thomas, Clarence

Ginsburg, Ruth Bader

Breyer, Stephen G.

In the 2000s, 3 Justices were appointed:

Alito, Samuel A., Jr.

Roberts, John G., Jr.

Sotomayor, Sonia Maria

In the 2010s, 3 Justices were appointed:

Kagan, Elena

Gorsuch, Neil McGill

Kavanaugh, Brett Michael

So far in the 2020s, 2 Justice has been appointed:

Barret, Amy Coney

Jackson, Kentanji Brown

Have any Supreme Court Justices Served in Congress?

In total, 28 Supreme Court Justices have served in Congress, including:

15 Justices have served in the Senate.

Hugo Black

Harold Hitz Burton

James. F. Byrnes

Oliver Ellsworth

Edward Douglass White

Levi Woodbury

David Davis

Howell Edmunds Jackson

Lucius Quintus Cincinnatus Lamar

Salmon P. Chase

Stanley Matthews

John McKinley

Sherman Minton

George Sutherland

William Paterson

17 Justices have served in the House of Representatives.

Henry Baldwin

Philip Pendleton Barbour

James. F. Byrnes

Nathan Clifford

Gabriel Duvall

Lucius Quintus Cincinnatus Lamar

John Marshall

Joseph McKenna

John McKinley

John McLean

William Henry Moody

Mahlon Pitney

Joseph Story

William Strong

George Sutherland

Fred M. Vinson

James Moore Wayne

Important Supreme Court Justice Resources