Albert J. Varon, M.D., M.H.P.E., Miller Professor and vice chair for education in the Department of Anesthesiology, Perioperative Medicine and Pain Management at the University of Miami Miller School of Medicine, has received the 2020 Excellence in Education award by the American Society of Anesthesiologists (ASA).

The award is presented annually to an ASA member who has made significant contributions to the specialty through excellence in teaching, development of new teaching methods, or the implementation of innovative educational programs.

“A review of your accomplishments clearly indicated to me and the committee how you are so very deserving of this award and recognition,” wrote Andrew D. Rosenberg, M.D., the ASA’s vice president for scientific affairs, in the award announcement message received by Dr. Varon. “You have provided education and training to the next generation of anesthesiologists, and as chair of the ASA Committee on Trauma and Emergency Preparedness have improved anesthesiology trauma care education in the U.S.”

Keith A. Candiotti, M.D., Emmanuel M. Papper Professor and chair of the department, echoed Dr. Rosenberg’s praise.

“Dr. Varon is an anesthesiologist of exceptional clinical ability,” he said. “It is equally appropriate that we recognize how he has revolutionized the education of anesthesiology residents. His curriculum model for their training, initially developed for our program, has become the standard in the United States for teaching residents about the management and resuscitation of trauma patients.”

In addition, the innovative anesthesiology core program curriculum, which consists of using artificial models, high-fidelity simulations, operating room experiences, debriefing sessions, lectures, demonstrations, and small group discussions, has improved the performance of incoming anesthesiology residents in standardized knowledge exams and further facilitated development of the ACGME core competencies.

Dr. Varon, who is also chief of anesthesiology for Ryder Trauma Center at Jackson Memorial Hospital, published his authoritative textbook, Essentials of Trauma Anesthesia, which is now on its second edition. The book has become the definitive source for the topic and has also been published in the Japanese and Chinese languages.

Dr. Varon is the author of many peer-reviewed publications, editorials, and book chapters in the areas of trauma anesthesia, critical care, hemodynamic monitoring and resuscitation. In addition, he is a senior board examiner for the American Board of Anesthesiology and the ASA Committee on Trauma and Emergency Preparedness, and he was appointed by the ASA president to the ASA’s COVID-19 Council. He is also a founding member of several top organizations in his field, including the Society of Critical Care Anesthesiologists, the PEEP Society, and the Trauma Anesthesiology Society.

Upon receiving notification of the award, Dr. Varon stated, “I am grateful and humbly honored to receive ASA’s 2020 Excellence in Education award. Being included in a very talented group of anesthesiology educators is certainly a highlight of my career as a clinician-educator. This award means a great deal to me. It is very affirming and encourages me to be better at what I do.”