5/15

Oracle Demantra Demand Management to EBS Integration

This chapter covers the following topics:

Oracle Demantra Demand Management Business Flow

Terms and Conventions Used in this Document

Integration Features

Seeded Demand Management Component

Summary of Integration Tasks

EBS Setup

Demantra Level Setup

EBS Collections Initial Setup

Running Collections

Downloading to Oracle Demantra

Uploading from Oracle Demantra

Line Of Business

Configure to Order

Embeddable Worksheets

Oracle Demantra Demand Management Business Flow

The Integration Data Flow diagram shows, at a general level, the sources and destinations of data.

Supported Integration Configurations

Integration between Oracle Demantra Demand Management and the E-Business Suite leverages Oracle Demantra Foundation functionality to the fullest extent possible. Booking history, price list, currency, calendars, users, and items collected from the E-Business Suite applications are loaded into Oracle Demantra. Forecasts and accuracy measures return.

Oracle supports the following configurations:

Single instance. The single instance would include ERP, Advanced Planning and Scheduling, and Oracle Demantra. It must be a supported combination of E-Business Suite and Oracle Demantra releases. Please contact support for an up-to-date list of certified versions for integration.

Separate destination and non-legacy source instances. The destination instance and the source instance must both be Demantra-certified combinations of ERP and Advanced Planning and Scheduling.

Separate destination and legacy source instances.The destination instance must be a Demantra-certified version of Advanced Planning and Scheduling.

Terms and Conventions Used in this Document

Levels control how data is aggregated and organized. Levels are used in worksheets, in filters, in import and export, and in forecasting. A level member refers to a unit within a level. For example, "tollhouse" is a member of a level named "cookies". A hierarchy organizes levels into ranks. The top level in the hierarchy provides the most aggregate, general view of information. The bottom level provides the most disaggregate, specific view of information. Your application can include multiple, independent hierarchies. Each hierarchy can contain as many levels as needed.

Within Oracle Demantra, you generally apply a filter by specifying a level and the members of that level that you want to display in a worksheet.

A worksheet, sometimes known as a query, is the primary user interface to Oracle Demantra data. For example, within a worksheet, a user can examine and edit data as needed, view the forecast, run simulations, and save changes back to the database.

Our use of the terms download and upload here are always relative to the E-Business Suite, or a similar legacy system. In other words, download procedures move information from an E-Business Suite application, while upload procedures move information from Oracle Demantra to the E-Business Suite, or a legacy system.

When we discuss the source we are referring the E-Business Suite Enterprise Resource Planning applications. Destination refers to the Advanced Planning and Scheduling applications.

Note: Oracle supports legacy collections for level members and history. The user must define and apply Oracle Demantra import integration profiles.

Integration Features

Demand Management Navigator Menus

The Oracle E-Business Suite Navigator provides the following two responsibilities:

Demand Management System Administrator

Demand Analyst

Note: EBS users can have both Demand Management and Sales and Operations Planning responsibilities, and therefore access both Demantra Demand Management and Sales and Operations Planning.

The Oracle E-Business Suite Navigator menu for the Demand Management System Administrator Responsibility provides the following links to integrate with the respective Oracle Demantra functionality:

Demand Management System Administrator > Demand Management Workbench – opens the Demantra Local Application user interface

Demand Management System Administrator > Workflow Manager – opens the Oracle Demantra Workflow Manager user interface

Demand Management System Administrator > Administration – accesses the Oracle Demantra Administration page

Demand Management System Administrator > User Management – accesses the Oracle Demantra User Management page

Collections: Oracle Systems - accesses collections programs to obtain data entities from the E-Business Suite, Advanced Supply Chain Planning, Operational Data Store applications with an option to download data into Oracle Demantra:

Standard Collections

Shipment and Booking History

Currency Conversion

UOM Conversion

Returns History

Pricing Data

Download Calendars

Collections: Legacy Systems: > Shipment and Booking History - Flat File – allows access to legacy shipment and booking history flat file, if applicable

Setup > Instances - Allows setting up multiple Instances from where collections can be run to obtain data entities.

Setup > Calendar List - allows setting up calendars to be downloaded into Oracle Demantra

Setup > New Products List – allows setting up new products to be downloaded into Oracle Demantra

Setup > Price Lists

The Oracle E-Business Suite Navigator menu for the Demand Analyst Responsibility provides the following link:

Demand Analyst > Demand Management Workbench – opens the Demantra Local Application user interface.

User Synchronization

When an E-Business Suite user is granted any responsibility containing the Demand Management Workbench (MSD_DEM_DEMPLANR) function grant, an Oracle Demantra user of the same username is created in the Oracle Demantra Demand Management component.

If the E-Business Suite user additionally has the Setup > Instances (MSD_DEM_DEMADMIN) function grant, the corresponding Oracle Demantra user has the following Oracle Demantra function security grants:

Business Modeler

Run batch engine

Workflow Manager to run archive, download and upload workflows

If the E-Business Suite user does not have the MSD_DEM_DEMADMIN function grant, the corresponding Oracle Demantra user has none of the previously listed Oracle Demantra function security grants.

As E-Business Suite users' function grants change over time, the corresponding Oracle Demantra users' function grants automatically change to match. For example, if at any time the E-Business Suite user loses the Demand Management (MSD_DEM_DEMPLANR) E-Business Suite function grant, the corresponding Oracle Demantra user is deleted.

Important: If the user is a customer contact, then restrict the contact's Oracle Demantra data security scope to that customer in the customer class hierarchy.

Users assigned E-Business Suite Demand Management System Administrator or Demand Analyst responsibilities are automatically assigned mirrored responsibilities in Oracle Demantra. When a user is created in the E-Business Suite and mirrored in Oracle Demantra, the default password is a randomly-generated sequence of 10 characters. A Demantra System Administrator/component owner must then go into the Business Modeler and change that user's password before the user can access Demantra.

Single Sign-on Setup for Demantra Using the Oracle Access Manager (OAM) 11g

Note: This setup is required for Demantra 12.2 and later when integrating with EBS.

Prerequisites

User synchronization must be enabled between EBS and Demantra.

EBS must be integrated with OAM 11g for single sign-on (SSO) which uses OID (Oracle Internet Directory) or OVD (Oracle Virtual Directory) as the data store. OAM uses EBS AccessGate to collect credentials from users. For more information, please refer to My Oracle Support Note ID 1309013.1 “Integrating Oracle E-Business Suite Release 12 with Oracle Access Manager 11gR1 (11.1.1.5) using Oracle E-Business Suite AccessGate”.

Ensure that an instance of the Oracle HTTP server was installed by the Oracle Identity Management Suite 11g or Webcenter 11g. If not, download and install Oracle Webcenter 11g where the OAM11g is installed.

Configuring Single Sign-on:

Configure a new Oracle HTTP Server (OHS) instance specifically to protect the Demantra WebLogic server. For more information about configuring a new OHS component, please follow the steps in topic “2.3.4.3 Configuring Your Components”, Oracle Fusion Middleware Installation Guide for Oracle Web Tier 11g Release 1 (11.1.1).

Set up the HTTP server as a reverse proxy in front of the WebLogic server hosting the Demantra application to validate the user session.

Locate the file mod_wl_ohs.conf file under the path $ORACLE_INSTANCE\config\OHS\ohs_instance_name\ Note: replace ohs_instance_name with the newly installed ohs instance name (for example, ohs2).

Add the following lines to the file:

<Location context url for Demantra application >

SetHandler weblogic-handler

WebLogicHost weblogichostname

WebLogicPort portnumber

</Location>

Save the file and restart the OHS server using the command:

./opmnctl restartproc ias-component=ohs2 from the directory $ORACLE_INSTANCE/bin/.

Verify that the reverse proxy is working using the following URL. It should redirect you to the Demantra login page.

http://ohs_host:ohs_port/context url for Demantra application/portal/loginpage.jsp

Install the new Oracle Access Manager Webgate 11g. See “Installing and Configuring Oracle HTTP Server 11g Webgate for OAM” in Oracle Fusion Middleware Installation Guide for Oracle Identity Management 11g Release 1 (11.1.1) for more details.

Perform the actions listed in the following sections:

Post-Installation Steps

Verifying the Oracle HTTP Server 11g Webgate for Oracle Access Manager

Getting Started with a New Oracle HTTP Server 11g Webgate Agent for Oracle Access Manager

In the Oracle Access Manager Administration Console, click the System Configuration tab.

Click the OAM Agents tab. Verify that the host name and webgate name is correct.

Specify the authentication in the web.xml file of the Demantra Application:

Add the following lines in the web.xml file or if there is already an authentication method specified, then change it to CLIENT-CERT.

<login-config>

<auth-method>CLIENT-CERT</auth-method>

</login-config>

Redeploy the application and restart the WebLogic server.

Open the OAM console and do the following:

Expand the Application domain created for Demantra.

By default the application domain creates a default resource entry ( /.../* ) that protects all the resources. This can be kept as it is if you have configured an OHS instance and webgate specific to Demantra and not shared with any other applications.

If you want to keep the resources prefixed with the context URL of the Demantra application, then remove the default entry and add the below given resources to the protected resource policy.

Resource Type Authentication Policy Authorization Policy /<demantra_context_url>/* HTTP Protected Resource Policy Protected Resource Policy /<demantra_context_url>/…/* HTTP Protected Resource Policy Protected Resource Policy /<demantra_context_url>/common/…/* HTTP Protected Resource Policy Protected Resource Policy /<demantra_context_url>/portal/…/* HTTP Protected Resource Policy Protected Resource Policy /<demantra_context_url>/workflow/…/* HTTP Protected Resource Policy Protected Resource Policy /<demantra_context_url>/logs/…/* HTTP Protected Resource Policy Protected Resource Policy /<demantra_context_url>/conf/…/* HTTP Protected Resource Policy Protected Resource Policy

Expand Authentication policies.

Open Protected Resource Policies.

From the Authentication Scheme drop-down box, select the scheme which protects EBS resources. For example: EBSAuthScheme

Click the Responses tab

Add the following response:

Response name Type Value OAM_REMOTE_USER Header $user.userid

Apply the changes and exit console.

Disable http-only ssoCookie. This step is required to resolve the issue of java applets that are not loading in OAM 11g or 10g. For more details, see My Oracle Support Note #1317110.1.

Open EBSAuthScheme under Authentication Schemes in OAM Console.

In the Challenge Parameters text box, enter the text “ssoCookie=disablehttponly”. This parameter is case sensitive.

Apply the changes and exit OAM console.

Restart the OAM server.

In EBS, set the MSD_DEM: Host URL in EBS to the value http://OHS_HOST_NAME:OHS_PORT/demantra_context_url, save it and logout.

To test that you have successfully configured SSO for Demantra, login to your EBS application with a user who has Demantra responsibilities and navigate to the Demantra Local Application page. You will be taken to the Demantra Local Application directly without being prompted with the Demantra Login page.

Logging in to Demantra from an External System

To log in to Demantra from an external system, the URL must be constructed as shown in the examples below.

Note that in each case, 'my_server' must be changed to the name of your application server and the 'component=parameter' value may be different, as it is based on the Demantra component the user wishes to log in to.

Demantra Local Application:

https://my_server/demantra/common/prelogin.jsp?redirectUrl=13&loginUrl=1&loginTo=0&source=0&component=dm

Workflow Manager:

https://my_server/demantra/common/prelogin.jsp?redirectUrl=18&loginUrl=9&loginTo=4&source=0&component=dm

Demantra Anywhere:

https://my_server/demantra/common/prelogin.jsp?redirectUrl=14&loginUrl=3&loginTo=1&source=0&component=dm

Demand Planner Web Client:

https://my_server/demantra/common/prelogin.jsp?redirectUrl=13&loginUrl=2&loginTo=2&source=0&component=dm

Seeded Demand Management Component

The seeded Demand Management component contains the default owning user levels, organized as hierarchies; series; and workflows required for the demand management business functions. The component owner ID for the Demand Management component is 'dm'. The password for this ID is set during Demantra installation.

Seeded Levels and Hierarchies

Oracle Demand Management provides several seeded levels organized into several seeded hierarchies:

Item levels: hierarchy roll-up sequence

Product Category: Item > Category > All

Product Family: Item > Product Family > All

Demand Class: Demand Class > All

Resources: > Resource Group> All

Location level: hierarchy roll-up sequence

Zone: Site > Trading Partner Zone > Zone > All

Geography: Site > Region > Country > Area > All

Trading Partner Class: Site > Trading Partner > Trading Partner Class > All

Ship From: Organization > Operating Unit > Legal Entity > Business Group > All

Business Group: Organization > Operating Unit > Business Group > All

Legal Entity: Organization > Legal Entity > All

Sales Channel: Sales Channel > All

Customer Class: Site > Account > Customer > Customer Class

Time:

Manufacturing Calendar: Day > Week(calendar_id) > Period(calendar_id) > All

Gregorian Calendar: Day > Month > Quarter > Year > All

Fiscal Calendar: as collected from the E-Business Suite

Note: This set of notes applies to Manufacturing Calendars and Fiscal Calendars, but not Gregorian Calendars.

Dynamically construct a separate hierarchy for each collected calendar. See Dynamic Creation of Calendar Hierarchies.

If the base time unit is set to 'week', then the hierarchy is Week (calendar_id) > Period (calendar_id)

If the installed base time unit is set to 'week', then only those Manufacturing Calendars with matching week definitions are collected.

Manufacturing and Fiscal Calendars are not supported if the base time unit is set to 'month'

See the “Levels” chapter.

Seeded Series

A series is a set of data that represents some value that varies over time or that varies between item-location combinations, or most commonly, that varies in both ways. A worksheet displays the series data in a table, or in a graph, or both. You can generally view data for any given series at any aggregation level. The definition of the series controls how the data is aggregated.

See the “Series” chapter.

Booking History - Booked Items – Booked Date

Booking History – Requested Items – Booked Date

Booking History – Booked Items – Requested Date

Booking History – Requested Items – Requested Date

Shipment History – Shipped Items – Shipped Date

* Shipment History – Requested Items – Shipped Date

Shipment History – Shipped Items – Requested Date

Shipment History – Requested Items – Requested Date

Return History

* Shipment History - Requested Items - Shipped Date is the default series for the base forecast and historical demand.

Loaded level for all seeded series:

Product: Item

Demand Class: Demand Class

Organization: Organization

Geography: Site

Channel: Sales Channel

Time: Week

The seeded default values are null.

Seeded Workflows

Oracle provides the following out-of-the-box workflows:

Seeded workflows to run downloads using EP_LOAD for:

Items

Locations

History (sales data)

Calendars

Seeded workflows to run uploads to Advanced Supply Chain Planning or other sources

Seeded workflow to download return history

Seeded workflow to download price lists

Seeded workflows to run the Demand forecast

Seeded workflows to:

Set the Final Approval series to NULL

Run the statistical forecast, by default based on Shipment History – Requested Date, and

Notify all users when the forecast is finished.

Seeded workflows and seeded user groups used in the approval process. The default setting for the user step is: 'Check Finish Every Day'. The default setting for 'Timeout' is: after 10 days. The Planning Group Workflow should time out 5 days after the Final Approver's targeted time range has passed.

Seeded workflow to archive forecasts for the Waterfall Analysis

Seeded workflow to calculate forecast for Line of Business

These workflows may be changed depending on the business need. For example, the Administrator wants to ensure that the relevant user groups and users are notified of a change the timeout process. The Administrator does this by editing the relevant workflow and editing the steps.

Predefined Worksheets

Predefined worksheets with the appropriate series for analysis and modification of the forecast are provided. For more information about predefined worksheets, see the Oracle Demantra Demand Management User's Guide.

A predefined waterfall worksheet with the forecast and accuracy series is available for the analyst at the beginning of each cycle. A default level is specified for every hierarchy in the Aggregation tab, although only a subset of these hierarchies will be in a Component.

To produce this worksheet, historical final forecasts must be available. For implementations with Weekly time periods, the final forecast from the current quarter must be kept on a rolling basis moving forward. The following archived forecasts are used in the worksheet:

The forecast series for the current week minus 4, named 4 Week Lag Forecast

The forecast series for the current week minus 8, named 8 Week Lag Forecast

The forecast series for the current week minus 12, 12 Week Lag Forecast

The Mean Absolute Percentage Error (MAPE) is calculated for each of the historical forecast series named appropriately, for example 4 Week Lag MAPE

The Mean Absolute Deviation (MAD) is calculated for each of the historical forecast series named appropriately, for example 4 Week Lag MAD

For implementations with Monthly time periods, the following forecasts must be kept for the current year on a rolling basis moving forward:

The forecast series for the previous month, named 1 Month Lag Forecast

The forecast series for the current month minus 2, named 2 Month Lag Forecast

The forecast series for the current month minus 6, named 6 Month Lag Forecast

MAPE calculated for each of the historical forecast series named appropriately, for example 1 Month Lag MAPE

MAD calculated for each of the historical forecast series named appropriately, for example 1 month Lag MAD

MAPE calculation:

summation ( absolute value | Actual Demand - Lagged Forecast | / (Actual Demand) / Number of Observations )

MAD calculation:

summation (absolute value | Actual Demand - Lagged Forecast | / Number of Observations )

Summary of Integration Tasks

This section lists integration tasks in the appropriate sequence.

Note: The Demantra schema must be in the same instance as the APS instance.

Initial EBS setup. See EBS Setup.

Initial setup of EBS collections. See EBS Collections Initial Setup

Synchronization of levels. See Demantra Level Setup.

Collect data and download to staging tables. See Running Collections.

Transfer data to Oracle Demantra schema if not done automatically when collecting data. See Downloading to Oracle Demantra.

Generate forecasts.

Export output from Oracle Demantra. See Uploading from Oracle Demantra.

EBS Setup

The following need to be configured for EBS to Demantra Demand Management integration:

Profile Options

New Products List

Calendar List

Base Time Unit

Configuring the EBS Profile Options

Source Side Profiles

Profile Name Description Default Value MSD_DEM: Aggregate Site level in Demantra This profile determines how historical data collected from EBS is aggregated. Valid values are:

Site: information is collected at Site level for all accounts which have not been aggregated to Key account.

Account: Historical data for all sites falling under an account is rolled up and collected against that account. Account level and site level will have similar member data in Demantra. When you choose this option, the Site level upload/export of forecasts into ASCP is not supported. The Account level must be used for the upload/export of forecasts.

For all customers marked as a Key Customer, the accounts are aggregated and brought in as the distinct accounts. For customers not marked as Key Customers, all underlying data is aggregated into a 'dummy' customer.

Customer: Historical data for all sites falling under a customer will be aggregated and collected against that customer. In this case, Customer, Account, and site levels will have similar member data in Demantra. When you choose this option, the Site and Account level upload/export of forecasts into ASCP is not supported.

For all customers marked as a Key Customer, the accounts are aggregated and brought in as the distinct customers. For customers not marked as Key Customers, all underlying data is aggregated into a 'dummy' customer.

Site MSC: Configuration This profile defines whether item descriptions are collected for the appropriate Demantra tables. At the site level, set to 'APS & CP' if you want to collect item descriptions. Set on both the source and destination instances if decentralized. Set by the Administrator MSD_DEM: Master Org This profile defines the Product Family to which an Item rolls up. Set by the Administrator MSD_DEM: Category Set Name This profile defines the Item to Category rollups in each instance. Inv.Items

See Note 1 following this table. MSD_DEM: Conversion Type This profile determines which currency conversion rates are collected from the General Ledger tables. Corporate MSD_DEM: Customer Attribute This profile options determines how customer data is imported to Demantra. This setting impacts what type and detail of information is collected into the Site hierarchy of the Location dimension. It works as follows:

If the profile option is set to NULL, then all customers are brought into Demantra.

If the profile option is not defined, then all customers' data is brought into Demantra at the Site level.

If the profile option is set to “none” then Site hierarchy data will not be available for viewing data.

If the profile option is set to a valid column name (that is, it points to a specific attribute of the customer definitions in EBS), then site level customer information is imported for any customer where MSD_DEM:Customer Attribute ='Yes'. Otherwise, customers data is not brought in at site level and is aggregated to a dummy site and customer with description “0”.

For example, MSD_DEM: Customer Attribute is set to "Attribute8". For customers AA, BB, and DD Attribute 8 is set to “Yes” while for customers CC and EE Attribute 8 is set to something else. When data is collected Site, Account, and Customer Data is collected for customers AA,BB, and DD. All data for customers CC and EE is aggregated together and collected against Site="0", Account="0" and Customer="0" Set by the Administrator

Note: Set the MSD_DEM: Category Set Name profile to a 'master level' category set. A master level category set does not allow multiple category roll up, such as an item rolling up to multiple categories within the same category set for the same organization.

Destination Side Profiles

Profile Name Description Default Value MSC: Configuration This profile defines whether item descriptions are collected for the appropriate Demantra tables. At the site level, set to 'APS & CP' if you want to collect item descriptions. Set on both the source and destination instances if decentralized. Set by the Administrator MSD_DEM: Currency Code This profile designates the Demand Management base currency. US Dollar

See Note 1 following this table. MSD_DEM: Two-Level Planning This profile enables demand forecasts at the Product Family level on the basis of sales histories of member items. Exclude family members with forecast control 'None'.

See Note 2 following this table. MSD_DEM: Schema Set this profile value to the database schema name where the Oracle Demantra schema has been installed. DMTRA_TEMPLATE MSD_DEM: Data Profile for Price Lists Set this profile to import integration data profile for price lists. EBS Price List MSD_DEM: Maximum seeded units available for price lists This profile determines the number of slots available for price lists in Oracle Demantra. 30 MSD_DEM: Debug Mode When set to 'Yes', this profile is used to print debug information to the output file of the concurrent request. No MSD_DEM: Host URL Set this profile to the Oracle Demantra Application Server Host Name, Port Number and Application Name. This profile is used to invoke Oracle Demantra URLs from the E-Business Suite applications. Set by the Administrator

See Note 3 following this table.

Note 1:

Set up profile option MSD_DEM: Currency Code on the destination instance--sysadmin, application, currency:

Query your currency and then check the enabled flag

Save

Populate the profile as required

Set up MSD_DEM: Master Org on the source only. When there is a source instance, you do not need to set it up on the destination.

Note 2:

You can collect all the product family members and their sales histories regardless of the forecast control, as long as:

The product family forecast control is 'Consume' or 'Consume & Derive', and

The planning method for 'product family' and 'members' is not set to 'Not Planned'.

This is achieved by setting the profile value to: Collect all family members and their sales histories.

The MSD_DEM: Two-Level Planning profile default value, Exclude family members with forecast control 'None' enforces the behavior that only 'Consume' or 'Consume & Derive' product family members are collected.

Note 3:

Use the format:

http://<host name>:<port number>/<application name>, or

http://<host IP address>:<port number>/<application name>

For example http://pc-anwroy-in:8090/Oracle Demantra

Setting Up the New Products List

This setup specifies certain new items, for which there is no history data, that need to be downloaded into Oracle Demantra.

All items available in Advanced Supply Chain Planning Operational Data Store are displayed in the list of values. Items across multiple instances can be specified. Items that are downloaded into Oracle Demantra are not processed in subsequent collections.

Once a new item is added to the New Product list and downloaded, it remains in the list unless manually deleted. If a new item is downloaded into Oracle Demantra and then subsequently phased out, it remains in Oracle Demantra until manually deleted. If this item needs to be reintroduced in the future, delete the item from the item list in the New Products List user interface, and then add it back to the list. This ensures treatment as a new item that will be downloaded into Oracle Demantra.

Note: All Items added to the New Products list download into Oracle Demantra. No attribute checking occurs.

Setting Up the Calendar List

This setup specifies which manufacturing and fiscal calendars need to be collected and downloaded into Oracle Demantra. A user interface accessed from the E-Business Suite Demand Management menu structure allows the Demand Management System Administrator to list the E-Business Suite calendars to be used for Demand Management analysis.

All calendars available in Advanced Supply Chain Planning Operational Data Store (ASCP ODS) display in the list of values. Calendars across multiple instances can be specified.

Note: If a calendar is removed from this list, it is not deleted from Oracle Demantra automatically. Subsequent collections will not collect and download that calendar.

Take the following example of a Fiscal Calendar collected from the E-Business Suite source. Assume for this example that the Oracle Demantra base time unit is week, with each week starting on Monday.

Vision Corporate Calendar Week Start Monday End Sunday Fiscal Quarter 2007-1 Fiscal Month 2007-1 1 1/1/2007 1/7/2007 2 1/8/2007 1/14/207 3 1/15/207 1/21/207 4 1/22/2007 1/28/2007 Fiscal Month 2007-2 5 1/29/2007 2/4/2007 6 2/5/2007 2/11/2007 7 2/12/2007 2/18/2008 8 2/19/2007 2/25/2007 Fiscal Month 2007-3 9 2/26/2007 3/4/2007 10 3/5/2007 3/11/2007 11 3/12/2007 3/18/2007 12 3/19/2007 3/25/2007 13 3/26/2007 4/1/2007 Fiscal Quarter 2007-2 Fiscal Month 2007-4 14 4/2/2007 4/8/2007 15 4/9/2007 4/15/2007 16 4/16/2007 4/22/2007 17 4/23/2007 4/29/2007 Fiscal Month 2007-5 18 4/30/2007 5/6/2007 19 5/7/2007 5/13/2007 20 5/14/2007 5/20/2007 21 5/21/2007 5/27/2007 Fiscal Month 2007-6 22 5/28/2007 6/3/2007 23 6/4/2007 6/10/2007 24 6/11/2007 6/17/2007 25 6/18/2007 6/24/2007 26 6/25/2007 7/1/2007 Fiscal Quarter 2007-3 Fiscal Month 2007-7 27 7/2/2007 7/8/2007 28 7/9/2007 7/15/2007 29 7/16/2007 7/22/2007 30 7/23/2007 7/29/2007 Fiscal Month 2007-8 31 7/30/2007 8/5/2007 32 8/6/2007 8/12/2007 33 8/13/2007 8/19/2007 34 8/20/2007 8/26/2007 Fiscal Month 2007-9 35 8/27/2007 9/2/2007 36 9/3/2007 9/9/2007 37 9/10/2007 9/16/2007 38 9/17/2007 9/23/2007 39 9/24/2007 9/30/2007 Fiscal Quarter 2007-4 Fiscal Month 2007-10 40 10/1/2007 10/7/2007 41 10/8/2007 10/14/2007 42 10/15/2007 10/21/2007 43 10/22/2007 10/28/2007 Fiscal Month 2007-11 44 10/29/2007 11/4/2007 45 11/5/2007 11/11/2007 46 11/12/2007 11/18/2007 47 11/19/2007 11/25/2007 Fiscal Month 2007-12 48 11/26/2007 12/2/2007 49 12/3/2007 12/9/2007 50 12/10/2007 12/16/2007 51 12/17/2007 12/23/2007 52 12/24/2007 12/30/2007

Run the Download Calendars program with the calendar_id parameter set as "Vision Corporate Calendar" to create the following levels and hierarchy:

Week (existing level)

> Fiscal Month (Vision Corporate Calendar) (new level)

> Fiscal Quarter (Vision Corporate Calendar) (new level)

> Fiscal Year (Vision Corporate Calendar) (new level)

The level members roll up to parent members (weeks to fiscal months, fiscal months to fiscal quarters, fiscal quarters to fiscal years) according to the calendar definition. The name of the generating calendar (Vision Corporate Calendar, in the above example) in the level names distinguish the newly created levels. In this way, Oracle Demantra accommodates analysis along multiple E-Business Suite calendars. See Setting and Modifying the Base Time Unit.

Calendars are always collected using Full Refresh of Shipment and Booking History Collections. Calendars can also be collected by launching Download Calendars from the menu. In other words, all dates are collected. A check ensures the collected dates fall within the Oracle Demantra default dates. Only levels higher than the lowest model defined time aggregation are loaded. For example, when the base time unit is 'week', only month (period), quarter and year load. For a monthly system, only quarter and year load.

To set up the Calendar List:

Navigate to the Demand Management Calendars user interface.

(Setup > Calendar List)

The Demand Management Calendars user interface appears.

This user interface validates that any calendar listed has a time bucket level that matches the Oracle Demantra base time unit. For all calendars defined in the Calendar List, a stored procedure, invoked via the Oracle Demantra Download Calendars workflow, creates corresponding time hierarchies in Oracle Demantra. If the time hierarchies do not already exist, the procedure adds them to the Demand Management component.

To add a calendar to the list, select an empty row.

Select a calendar from the drop-down list of values.

Click Save.

Setting the Base Time Unit

The base time unit is used by the Demand Planner Data Model to aggregate the source data to the specified time bucket size. Allowed settings of the base time unit (time bucket size) are:

day

week

Gregorian month

See Setting and Modifying the Base Time Unit.

Demantra Level Setup

Creating a New Leaf Level

The Demand Management System Administrator can create a new leaf level for a hierarchy, such as adding a sales representative as a location new leaf level.

Navigate to the Open Data Model window.

Business Modeler > Data Model > Open Data Model

From the Open Data Model window, navigate to the Data Model Design window. In the left pane, with no node selected, select Create Location Dimension from the right-click menu.

The Data Model Design window appears.

Complete the table and field names that will hold level members.

Customize the collections code.

Run collections.

Rebuild the Oracle Demantra model. See Building the Data Model and Manipulating Existing Data Models.

Creating a New Top Level

The Demand Management System Administrator can create a new top level for a hierarchy, such as creating a level for Product Line located above Product Family level.

Navigate to the Configure Levels window.

Business Modeler > Configuration > Configure Levels

The Configure Levels window opens.

Select, and then right-click the current top level node. For example, select product category.

From the right-click menu, choose New level.

The General Properties window opens.

Complete the following General Properties:

Level Name, such as Super Category

Type: Product Level

Status: Enabled.

Click Next.

The Level <current node> Data Properties window opens.

Define the Table Name and Column that house members of the new level. You are selecting a field in the database table to house members of the new level.

Customize the collections code to populate the appropriate table and column with product line member data.

Click Next.

Run collections.

Next define level value associations of specific parent product lines to child product families. Navigate to Member Management.

Demand Analyst > Tools > Member Management

Select the Product Line node.

Drag Product Families under the appropriate Product Lines.

Click Save.

Note: To Create a New Hierarchy on Top of an Existing Leaf Level, perform multiple iterations of the following procedure for Creating a New Top Level.

Creating a New Intermediate Level

Configure Levels does not directly support the addition of intermediate levels. To accomplish the addition of an intermediate level, the process renames an existing level, and then adds a new top level.

For example:

Existing level name: 'Category'

Rename 'Category' as 'Subcategory'

Create a new top level named 'Category'.

Navigate: Business Modeler > Configuration > Configure Levels

The Configure Levels window opens.

Select, and then right-click the current top level node.

Rename the current top level to the name of the new intermediate level.

Use the Creating a New Top Level procedure to add a new top level above the intermediate level.

Deleting a Level

Navigate: Business Modeler > Data Model > Open Data Model

Go to Data Model step

In the left hand pane, select the level to be deleted.

From the right-click menu, select Delete.

Rebuild the Oracle Demantra model – See Building the Data Model and Manipulating Existing Data Models.

EBS Collections Initial Setup

Initial setup encompasses the following steps:

Set up Instances

Set up Standard Collections

Important: After Demantra has been installed you must run the 'Update Synonyms' concurrent request, which is under the responsibility 'Demand Management System Administrator.' This program defines the value of the MSD_DEM: Schema profile option.

This program has a parameter 'Schema Name' that is not displayed by default. If there is only one schema, (the most likely production scenario), the program will automatically update that one. But if there are multiple schemas (possible in a development environment), an administrator can log in using the 'Applications Developer' responsibility and choose to display the Schema Name parameter. The Demand Management System Administrator will then be able to select a schema when running Update Synonyms.

Set Up Instances

An instance is a database and a set of applications. Setup Instances is run before running Standard Collections to specify the Instances from which Standard Collections obtains data.

Oracle Advanced Planning can plan a single instance or multiple instances. For information about setting up instances, see "Instances" in the Cross-Instance Planning chapter ofOracle Advanced Supply Chain Planning Implementation and User's Guide.

Set Up Standard Collections

"Standard" Collections refer to the Advanced Supply Chain Planning (ASCP) concurrent program for collecting new or changed information from the E-Business Suite to the Oracle Data Store (ODS). For information about collections, see the Oracle Value Chain Planning Collections Guide.

Tip: You are recommended to set the MSC: Configuration profile option to 'APS & CP' if you want to collect item descriptions when standard collections are run. See "Profile Options" for more information about this profile option.

Sign on using the Advanced Supply Chain Planner responsibility or the Advanced Planning Administrator responsibility.

Navigate to the Planning Data Collection window by selecting Collections > Oracle Systems > Standard Collection.

The Planning Data Collection window appears.

This window shows that the collections process consists of two sequentially executed concurrent programs. The first program, Planning Data Pull, copies information from the source instance into the APS staging tables on the planning server. The second program, Planning ODS Load, copies information from the APS staging tables into the operation data store on the planning server,

To select the Data Pull Parameters to use during Standard Collections, select the Parameters field for the Planning Data Pull program.

The Planning Data Pull Parameters window appears.

Set the parameters as shown in the previous figures.

Select the Parameters field for the Planning ODS Load program.

The Parameters window appears.

Set the parameters as shown in the previous figure.

Note: If the item descriptions have not been collected after you complete this process, set the MSC: Configuration profile option to 'APS & CP' and rerun the collection. See "Profile Options" for more information.

Set up Price Lists, Calendars, and New Products

Setup Calendar, Price Lists and New Products are run initially, and on an as needed basis in ongoing cycles.

See

Collecting Price List Data

Setting Up the Calendar List

Downloading Calendars

Setting Up the New Products List

Other Collections

After setup is complete, the remaining collections are run. All other collection choices under the Oracle Systems menu are used to collect the specified data from the planning server for download to Oracle Demantra. See:

Combined Collections of Shipment and Booking History

Collecting Currency Conversion Data

Collecting UOM Conversion Data

Collecting Returns History Data

Legacy Collection loads Shipment and History data into Oracle Demantra

See Collecting Legacy Shipment and History Data.

Running Collections

Note: For more information about collections see the Oracle Value Chain Planning Collections Guide.

Collections use existing Oracle Demand Planning and Oracle Advanced Supply Chain Planning user interfaces, accessed from the Demand Management System Administrator responsibility.

Available collections:

Standard Collections -- designates existing ASCP collections of reference data -- items, location, and calendars -- that are collected from the Instances specified in Setup > Instance. Sales Orders, which is an entity inside Advanced Supply Chain Planning Standard Collections, provides the data stream representing future demand. The Standard Collections must be run before other collections. For information about collections see the Oracle Value Chain Planning Collections Guide.

Shipment and Booking Data -- provides the data stream representing past demand.

See Combined Collections of Shipment and Booking History, and Collecting Legacy Shipment and History Data

Return History, See Collecting Returns History Data

Currency Conversion, See Collecting Currency Conversion Data..

Units of Measure (UOM) Conversion, See Collecting Unit of Measure Conversion Data

Pricing Data, See Collecting Price List Data

Combined Collections of Shipment and Booking History

The Collection Utility merges programs that collect data streams for both Shipment and Booking History.

Prerequisites:

Define database instances.

Set up appropriate source and destination profiles.

Run Standard Collections.

To run Shipment and Booking Data Collections:

Navigate to the Collection Utility:

Collections > Oracle Systems > Shipment and Booking History.

The Collections Utility window appears, listing several collections programs.

Collect Shipment and Booking Data. This program collects shipment and booking history data from the E-Business Suite Order Management source application based on the collection parameters specified, and then inserts the data into the Oracle Demantra sales staging table.

Push Setup Parameters. This program pushes destination data into the E-Business Suite source, such as source profiles, organizations in the collection group, and time data from Oracle Demantra.

Collect Level Type. There are two Collect Level Type programs, one for items and the other for locations. These programs generate distinct item and location intersections, as defined in Oracle Demantra, from the shipment and booking history, and then insert the data into Oracle Demantra item and location staging tables.

Update Level Codes. This program updates the site level codes in the Oracle Demantra sales staging table as present in the Advanced Supply Chain Planning Operational Data Store.

Collect Time. This program collects Manufacturing and Fiscal calendars from the Advanced Supply Chain Planning Operational Data Store, as setup in the Calendar List. See Setting Up the Calendar List.

Launch EP LOAD.

Historical information and level data are imported into Oracle Demantra via the EP_LOAD procedure. All other series data are imported into Oracle Demantra via Import Integration Profiles. An assumption of the EP LOAD procedure is that the series are populated into the Oracle Demantra staging tables before the load process begins. To ensure this occurs, the collection programs for all eight historical series have been merged so that these streams are always collected simultaneously. See Seeded Series.

Highlight the Collect Shipment and Booking Data program.

In the row for the Collect Shipment and Booking Data program, click within the Parameters field. The Parameters window appears. The parameters are described following the image.

Instance. Select the instance code of the E-Business Suite source instance from the list of values as defined in Instances form.

Collection Group. Collection group is a group of Organizations. The parameters screens of all demand planning entities: Level Values, Manufacturing Forecast, Return History, Sales Forecast, Shipment and Booking Data, include a Collections Group parameter. This is to support line of business-specific collections.

Currency, Unit of Measure, and Price List do not have a Collections Group parameter. Currency is dimensioned by time only. Unit of Measure is dimensioned by item only. Price List is dimensioned by item and time.

The default value is 'All', which implies data for all Oracle Advanced Supply Chain Planning- and all Oracle Demand Planning-enabled organizations available for the specified instance are to be collected.

User-defined values can be specified if user-defined collection groups have been created in the Instances form. Only Oracle Advanced Supply Chain Planning- and Oracle Demand Planning-enabled organizations can be added to the user-defined collection groups.

Collection Method. Allowed values are: 'Complete' or 'Net Change'

'Complete' clears the data in the Oracle Demantra sales staging table, collects all available records from the E-Business Suite source, and inserts data into the Oracle Demantra sales staging table. No date filters apply for Complete collection. For first time collection of history data, you typically select the 'Complete' Collection Method.

'Net Change' clears the data in the Oracle Demantra sales staging table, collects data by applying the specified date filters, and inserts the fetched data into the Oracle Demantra sales staging table. Net Change is typically selected for ongoing, periodic collection of history data, say on a weekly basis.

The Complete and Net-Change Collection Methods are mutually exclusive.

Date Range Type. For Net Change collection, the allowed values for Date Range Type are 'Rolling' or 'Absolute'. Date Range type is not valid for 'Complete' collections.

'Rolling' implies the history data is collected from the system date up to the number of days in the past specified in the 'History Collection Window Days' field.

'Absolute' implies the user specifies the date range for which collection is to be done in the Date From and Date To fields.

The Rolling and Absolute Date Range Types are mutually exclusive.

History Collection Windows Days. This field specifies the number of days in the past from the system date for which history data is to be collected. This field is valid when the Date Range Type is 'Rolling'.

Date From and Date To. These fields specify a date range for the collection of history data. They are valid when the Date Range Type is 'Absolute'.

Collected Series. The next eight parameters are the names of the eight seeded history series. Specifying 'Yes' causes a series to be collected. Specifying 'No' will not collect it.

Note: For history collections, at least one series must be specified. The Shipment History – Requested Items – Shipped Date series is the default value.

Collect Internal Sales Orders. Specifying 'Yes' collects any internal sales orders available in the source. By default, internal sales orders are not collected.

Collect All Order Types. Specifying 'Yes' collects sales orders for all order types. Specifying 'No' enables the Include Order Types field.

Include Order Types. Specifying 'No' in the Collect All Order Types parameter enables entry of Order Types in the Include Order Types field, for which sales orders are collected. Enter Order Types one after another with a comma separated delimiter.

Exclude Order Types. To exclude certain order types from being collected specify the list of Order Types that are not to be collected in the Exclude Order Types field. Enter Order Types one after another with a comma separated delimiter.

Either 'Include Order Types' or 'Exclude Order Types' can be specified, but not both.

Type Selection Method

The Type Selection Method is available through the EBS Menu under Demand Management System Administrator > Collections > Oracle Systems > Shipment and Booking History. It is disabled if the Collect All Order Types parameter is set to YES (Default). If Collect All Order Types is set to NO, then Type Selection Method is enabled and mandatory.

The available settings are defined in the table below.

List Item Description Comma (,) separated list of order types (Default value) Select either “Include Order Types” or “Exclude Order Types” with a list of order types. The list must be less than 240 characters. SQL query name SQL query name from Table MSD_DEM_ENTITY_QUERIES. When selected; user has to enter the query name stored in Table MSD_DEM_ENTITY_QUERIES in the “Include Order Types” or “Exclude Order Types” parameter fields which will return valid order type ids. It is the customer's responsibility to maintain entity_name, sql query & order types ids. Note: Sql query must be executable on source side instance. Value Set When selected, the user enters the valueset name in “Include Order Types” or “Exclude Order Types” parameter fields. It is the customer's responsibility to create and maintain the valueset to hold the valid order types for Shipment and Booking History collection. Note: ValueSet must be created on source instance and the ValueSet must be “List of values” type.

Launch Download. Each collections Single Request Submission includes a Launch Download parameter. Valid values are 'Yes' and 'No'.

Specifying 'Yes' automatically launches the download of history data into Oracle Demantra as soon as collections have completed. Internally this invokes the Oracle Demantra EP_LOAD procedure to download the data into Oracle Demantra. E-Business Suite Advanced Planning and Scheduling directly populates the staging tables. The Shipment and Booking history collection automatically invokes Download Calendars program if the Launch Download field is set to 'Yes'. See Downloading Calendars.

If Launch Download is set to 'No', then only collections will be done. Advanced Planning and Scheduling collections leave the data in the Oracle Demantra staging tables. Download does not launch automatically. To download the collected items, locations, and history data, manually launch the Download workflow from Oracle Demantra Workflow Manager.

The Administrator launches the workflow.

For historical series, all series are loaded.

An integration profile for each non-history series determines which data are loaded.

Click OK to close the Parameters window.

(Optional) On the Collection Utility window, click Schedule to open a window where you can set up the concurrent program to run collections at a future date and time, or periodically. The At these Times field default value causes the program to run “As Soon As Possible” after the program is submitted.

Click Submit.

Collecting Legacy Shipment and History Data

The concurrent programs for Legacy Shipment and History collection are:

Flat File Loads. This program loads the shipment and booking history data from a flat file into the Oracle Demantra sales staging table.

Sales Data Pre Processor. This program updates the destination keys from Advanced Supply Chain Planning for all of the levels.

Collect Level Type and Launch EP_LOAD are the same programs as those used for the E-Business Suite Shipment and Booking History Data collections.

Prerequisites: Prior to launching this collection, complete ASCP collections for the legacy instance.

To collect Legacy Shipment and History Data:

Navigate to the Legacy Collection Utility.

Collections > Oracle Systems > Collect Shipment and Booking Data - Flat File

The Collections Utility window appears, listing several collections programs.

Highlight the Collect Shipment and Booking Data program.

In the row for the Collect Shipment and Booking Data program, click within the Parameters field.

The Parameters window appears. The parameters are described following the image.

The parameters for the Flat File Loads concurrent program are:

Instance. The legacy instance for which data is being loaded.

Time Out Duration (min). This is the maximum duration, in minutes, for which this program is allowed to run.

File Path Separator. Windows and UNIX path separators are different.

Control File's Directory. Specifies the location of the SQL loader control file.

Data File's Directory. Specifies the location of the history data flat file.

Total Number of Workers. Specifies the number of programs that can be run simultaneously.

File Name Booking and Shipment History. Specifies the name of the shipment and booking history flat file.

Auto Run Download. 'Yes' automatically downloads data into Oracle Demantra from the staging tables. 'No' indicates that the download into Oracle Demantra will be accomplished using a separate manual procedure.

Collecting Returns History Data

To collect Return History Data:

Navigate to the Collect Return History window.

Collections > Oracle Systems > Returns History

The Collect Return History window appears.

Specify Collect Return History parameters.

The collection parameters for Returns History are:

Instance. This is the instance code of the source instance, as defined in Instances form.

Collection Group. This group of organizations filters the collected data by organization.

The default value is 'All', which implies all Advanced Supply Chain Planning and Demand Planning enabled organizations are available for the specified instance.

User-defined values can be specified if user-defined collection groups have been created in the Instances form.

Only Advanced Supply Chain Planning and Demand Planning enabled organizations can be added to the user-defined collection groups.

Collection Method. Valid options are: 'Complete' or 'Net-Change'.

'Complete' clears the data in the Return History staging table, collects all available records from the source, and inserts them into the Return History staging table. No date filters are applied for Complete collection. Complete collection is typically used for the first time collection of history data.

'Net-Change' clears the data in the Return History staging table, collects data by applying the specified date filters, and inserts the fetched data into the Return History staging table. Typically, select net change for regular collection of history data, say on a weekly basis.

Complete and Net-Change are mutually exclusive.

Date Range Type. For 'Net-Change' collection, Date Range Type can be either 'Rolling' or 'Absolute'.

'Rolling' implies collection of history data from the system date up to the number of days in the past as specified in the 'History Collection Window Days' field.

'Absolute' requires values in the Date From and Date To fields to specify the date range for which collection is to be done.

'Rolling' and 'Absolute' Date Range Types are mutually exclusive.

Date Range Type is not valid for the 'Complete' Collection Method.

History Collection Windows Days. This field is valid if the 'Rolling' date range type has been chosen. Specify the number of days in the past from the system date for which history data is to be collected.

Date From and Date To. These fields are valid if the 'Absolute' date range type has been chosen. Specify a date range for the collection of history data.

Include RMA Types. Null value implies collection of all Return Material Authorization types. Specifying particular RMA types causes only those listed to be collected. Multiple RMA types can be specified.

(Optional) To specify particular RMA Types click the cursor within the Include RMA Types Field.

The Include RMA Type window appears.

Select the RMA Type. Click OK.

Repeat the previous step as necessary to specify all desired RMA Types.

Click OK to close the Include RMA Type window.

On the collect Return History window, click Submit to launch the concurrent program to execute Return History collections.

Collecting Currency Conversion Data

Currency conversion rates are dimensioned by time only.

To run the Currency Conversion Collections:

Navigate to the Collection Utility

Collections > Oracle Systems > Currency Conversion

The Collections Utility window appears, with the Collect Currency Conversions program name appearing in the Name field.

Click within the Parameters field. The Parameters window appears.

Set the program parameters.

The parameter descriptions follow:

Instance. This is the Instance code of the source instance, as defined in the Instances form.

Date From and Date To. Specify a date range for the collection of currency conversion rates. If no dates are specified then all available records available in source are collected without applying any date filters.

Collect All Currency Conversions. Specifying 'Yes' collects Currency conversion rates for all currencies for which conversion rates to the base currency exist in the source. Specifying 'No' enables entry of Currency Codes for which conversion rates can be collected, in the 'Include Currency List' field.

Include Currency List. If Collect All Currency Conversions is set to 'No', enter Currency Codes one after another with a comma separated delimiter.

Exclude Currency List. To exclude certain Currency conversion rates from being collected, specify the list of Currency Codes that are not to be collected in the 'Exclude Currency List' field. Enter Currency Codes one after another separated by a comma delimiter

Either 'Include Currency List' or 'Exclude Currency List' can be specified but not both.

Click OK to close the Parameters window.

Click Submit.

Note: The Administrator can run the following script to add more placeholder currencies to Oracle Demantra:

Name: 'Create Seed Entities in Demantra

Script:

declare retcode number; begin msd_dem_create_dem_seed.create_dem_seed_data(retcode, <p_start_no>, <p_num_entities>,<p_entity_type>); end; /

Parameters to be passed to this script:

p_start_no. - starting number of entities to be created (Already units from 100-199 are created)

p_num_entities - number of entities to be created

p_entity_type - 1 (UOM), 2 (CURRENCY), 3 (PRICE LIST), 0 (ALL)

Collecting Unit of Measure Conversion Data

Unit of Measure conversion rates are dimensioned by time only. UOM conversion rates are always calculated with respect to each collected Item's Primary UOM; up to 100 UOM Conversions can be collected.

To run the Unit of Measure Conversion Collections:

Navigate to the Collection Utility.

Collections > Oracle Systems > UOM Conversion

The Collections Utility window appears, with the Collect UOM Conversions program name appearing in the Name field.

Click within the Parameters field.

The Parameters window appears.

Set the program parameters.

The parameter descriptions follow:

Instance. This is the instance code of the source instance, as defined in the Instances form.

Collect All Units of Measure.

Specifying 'Yes' collects UOM conversion rates for all units of measure for which conversion rates exist in the source.

Specifying 'No' enables entry of UOM Codes for which conversion rates can be collected, in the 'Include Units of Measures' field.

Include Units of Measure. Enter a list of UOM Codes for which conversion rates can be collected. UOM Codes are entered one after another separated by a comma delimiter

Exclude Units of Measure. To exclude certain UOM conversion rates from being collected, enter the list of UOM Codes that are not to be collected. Enter UOM Codes one after another, separated by a comma delimiter.

Either 'Include Units of Measures' or 'Exclude Units of Measures' can be specified, but not both.

Click OK to close the Parameters window.

Click Submit.

Note: The Administrator can run the following script to add more placeholder currencies to Oracle Demantra:

Name: 'Create Seed Entities in Demantra

Script:

declare retcode number; begin msd_dem_create_dem_seed.create_dem_seed_data(retcode, <p_start_no>, <p_num_entities>,<p_entity_type>); end; /

Parameters to be passed to this script:

p_start_no. - starting number of entities to be created (Already units from 100-199 are created)

p_num_entities - number of entities to be created

p_entity_type - 1 (UOM), 2 (CURRENCY), 3 (PRICE LIST), 0 (ALL)

Collecting Price List Data

The Demand Management forecast considers historical demand and causal factors, such as seasonal demand variation, specific promotional events, and price list changes. The price list is dimensioned by item and by time.

Each time you download price list data, the price list data will be cut off at the current forecast horizon end date. As time rolls forward and the corresponding forecast end buckets roll forward, you will not be able to see pricing and revenue data for the new time buckets until you once again download price list data.

Therefore, Oracle recommends that you either:

download price list data with each forecasting cycle, or

if you would like to download price list data less frequently, extend the forecast horizon beyond the business standard.

For example, if the business standard forecast horizon is 12 months, extend the forecast horizon to 15 months. Generate a forecast, then download price lists. The downloaded price list information will then be sufficient to cover the next three forecasting cycles (cycles 2 through 4). A second price list download will only be necessary after forecasting cycle 5.

Oracle also recommends that when you collect pricing data, set the "Date To" parameter to match the current end of the forecasting horizon so that you do not needlessly collect more data than can be downloaded into Oracle Demantra Demand Management.

To extend the forecasting horizon:

Note: Before running this program, you must specify which price lists you want to collect (Demand Management System Administrator > Setup > Price Lists).

From the Business Modeler navigate Parameters > System Parameters > Engine > Lead.

Increase the value of 'Lead'.

To run the Price List Conversion Collections:

Navigate to the Collection Utility Collections > Oracle Systems > Price List

The Collections Utility window appears, with the Collect Price List Conversions program name appearing in the Name field.

Specify the Collect Price List program Parameters.

The collection parameters are:

Instance. This is the instance code of the source instance, as defined in the Instances form.

Date From and Date To. Used to specify a date range for the collection of Price Lists. These fields are mandatory.

Collect All Price Lists.

Specifying 'Yes' collects price lists up to the number of seeded series available in Oracle Demantra. The program fails to execute if there are more than the default number of price lists.

Specifying 'No' enables entry of specific Price Lists that can be collected, in the 'Include Price Lists' field.

Include Price Lists. Enter Price Lists to be collected, one after another, separated by a comma delimiter.

Exclude Price Lists. To exclude certain Price Lists from being collected, specify the list of Price Lists that are not to be collected in the 'Exclude Price Lists' field. Enter Price Lists one after another, with a comma separated delimiter.

Either 'Include Price Lists' or 'Exclude Price Lists' can be specified, but not both.

Note: The Administrator can run the following script to add more placeholder price lists to Oracle Demantra:

Name: 'Create Seed Entities in Demantra

Script:

declare retcode number; begin msd_dem_create_dem_seed.create_dem_seed_data(retcode, <p_start_no>, <p_num_entities>,<p_entity_type>); end; /

Parameters to be passed to this script:

p_start_no. - starting number of entities to be created (Already units from 100-199 are created)

p_num_entities - number of entities to be created

p_entity_type - 1 (UOM), 2 (CURRENCY), 3 (PRICE LIST), 0 (ALL)

Downloading to Oracle Demantra

Once the EBS collections have been run, data can be downloaded to Oracle Demantra.

Some data can be downloaded automatically through the collection process if desired. The Launch Download option is available in the following collection processes:

Shipment and Booking Data

Legacy Shipment and History Data

These collections can be downloaded manually if the Launch Download option during collection was set to 'No'.

Other data collections must be downloaded manually. They include:

Calendars

Price List

Return History

Download can be triggered through the collections process to move collected series, level and reference data into the Oracle Demantra tables. If the options to automatically launch download are not selected during the collection process, the EBS Full Download (EP_LOAD), EBS Return History Download, and EBS Price List Download can be run later to retrieve data from the staging area into Oracle Demantra Tables.

Downloading Calendars

The E-Business Suite contains several types of calendars. Typical calendars include Manufacturing, Gregorian, and Fiscal. These calendars may be changed in the source system. Such changes need to be reflected and synchronized in the Oracle Demantra system.

The Download Calendars concurrent program downloads collected manufacturing and fiscal calendars, in Advanced Supply Chain Planning collections, to Oracle Demantra. Shipment and Booking history collection automatically invokes this program if the Launch Download field is set to 'Yes'.

The following process to run this program manually can be used if there is a need to download calendars to Oracle Demantra without collecting history.

See Time Units.

To download calendars:

Navigate to the Collection Utility user interface.

Collections > Oracle Systems > Download Calendars.

The Collection Utility window with the Download Calendars program name.

There are no program parameters. Click Submit.

The calendars specified in the Calendar List are downloaded. See Setting Up the Calendar List.

Downloading Items, Location, Shipping and Booking History

The EBS Full Download workflow, also known as EP_Load, downloads items, location, and shipping/booking history from EBS to Demantra. Within EBS, this is called the EP_LOAD download. This workflow can be started from EBS using the Demand Management System Administrator responsibility > Oracle Demantra Workflow Manager > EBS Full Download workflow.

For members and history series, which are downloaded via the EP_LOAD mechanism, the mode of update is:

If there is a new member, it is added in Oracle Demantra.

If a member has been deleted in the E-Business Suite source, it stays in Oracle Demantra along with all series data for combinations that include the member. The administrative user must manually delete the member in Oracle Demantra.

Series data in the staging area overwrite the series data in Oracle Demantra, for the combinations that are represented in the staging area.

Series data in Oracle Demantra for combinations that are not in the staging area are left unchanged.

The staging area is erased after the download.

All series data in Oracle Demantra, for all combinations, are set to null before the download actions take place.

Downloading Return History and Price Lists

Return History and EBS Price List data is downloaded from EBS to Demantra using the following workflows:

Workflows Import Integration Profile EBS Return History Download Return History EBS Price List Download EBS Price List

These workflows can be started from EBS using the Demand Management System Administrator responsibility > Oracle Demantra Workflow Manager.

These two workflows are associated with integration interface profiles, which configure the series, levels, filters and other import details. The purge option for theses integration interface profiles Purge Option is set to Purge all data.

Purging Data Before Import when using Integration Interfaces

The Integration Interface provides the ability to set purge and load options for each series. This controls whether the import integration profile overrides, accumulates, or purges (nulls out) the data for the specified integration profile date range.

For purge details, see the section "Configure Series Load and Purge Options" in the chapter "Demantra Data Tables and Integration Processes".

Import Integration Profiles bring in forecasts such as manufacturing and sales forecasts, as well as data streams from Advanced Supply Chain Planning. For such data streams, setting the Purge Data Before Import profile option to 'Yes' causes the data in Oracle Demantra to be erased before importing the new version of the data stream. For a specific combination's data to be purged, at least one occurrence of the combination is required in the incoming data set. Thus the desired behavior is:

Old Sales Forecast in Oracle Demantra Jan-07 Feb-07 Mar-07 500 600 700

Collected Sales Forecast Feb-07 Mar-07 Apr-07 800 900 950

Run the Integration Import profile with the Purge Option set to 'Purge All Data.'

New Sales Forecast in Oracle Demantra Jan-07 Feb-07 Mar-07 Apr-07 800 900 950

In the example, the new sales forecast starts in February and not in January. Once the download takes place, Oracle Demantra shows a null value in January.

This contrasts with the following behavior, which is obtained by setting the 'Purge Data Before Import' integration profile option to 'No Purge'.

Old Sales Forecast in Oracle Demantra Jan-07 Feb-07 Mar-07 500 600 700

Collected Sales Forecast Feb-07 Mar-07 Apr-07 800 900 950

Run the Integration Import profile with the Purge Option set to 'No Purge.'

New Sales Forecast in Oracle Demantra Jan-07 Feb-07 Mar-07 Apr-07 500 800 900 950

For more information about using the integration interface to set purge and load options for each series, see Configure Series Load and Purge Options.

Uploading from Oracle Demantra

Oracle Demantra uses workflows to upload forecast and other relevant data to EBS Value Chain Planning applications, or to a legacy planning system. In particular:

Forecast and demand priority for Advanced Supply Chain Planning.

Forecast and forecast accuracy for Inventory Optimization.

Forecast for Strategic Network Optimization.

Intermittent demand attributes for Inventory Optimization (used for the Safety Stock calculation).

Oracle Demantra Demand Management provides the following workflows:

EBS Upload Local Forecast

EBS Upload Global Zone Forecast

EBS Upload Local Forecast, Demand Class

EBS Upload Global Zone Forecast, Demand Class

The upload forecast workflow schema name: APPS is hard coded.

The global forecast is output at the “Customer/All Org” hierarchy level.

Organizations may belong to multiple instances.

Oracle Demantra calculates functional outputs for 26 weeks when the base time unit is 'Week', or for one year when the base time unit is 'Month'. See Setting and Modifying the Base Time Unit.

The profile parameters include:

Horizon range and forecast output levels defined as part of integration profile

Multiple data series tied to export integration profiles.

The data series internal names must follow the naming convention:

Forecast: FCST_

Priority: PRTY_

Forecast accuracy MAPE: ACRY_MAPE_

Forecast accuracy MAD: ACRY_MAD

Destination key: DKEY_

User-created series that users want to expose to downstream applications, such as Oracle Inventory Optimization, Oracle Advanced Supply Chain Planning, and Oracle Strategic Network Optimization, need to respect the above naming conventions and need to be added to user-created export integration profiles.

Note: The Upload Forecast workflow schema name: APPS is hard coded.

The following integration profiles are manually launched as part of a Workflow after the forecast is approved:

Local Forecast

Series: Demand Priority, Final Forecast, Mean Absolute Pct Err, Item Destination Key, Organization Destination Key

Output Levels: Item, Organization, Week

Global Zone Forecast

Series: Demand Priority, Final Forecast, Mean Absolute Pct Err, Item Destination Key

Output Levels: Item, Zone, Week

Local Forecast with Demand Class

Series: Demand Priority, Final Forecast, Mean Absolute Pct Err, Item Destination Key, Organization Destination Key

Output Levels: Item, Organization, Week, Demand Class

Global Zone forecast, Demand Class

Series:Demand Priority, Final Forecast, Mean Absolute Pct Err, Item Destination Key

Output Levels: Item, Zone, Week, Demand Class

Using Alternate MAPE

In the four pre-configured integration profiles listed above, the in-sample MAPE series Mean Absolute Pct Err series is used. This series is automatically populated by the engine and due to its availability serves as the default MAPE value used. A more accurate out-of-sample MAPE value can be achieved but requires additional steps to be followed.

At the end of every planning cycles approved forecast should be archived and frozen, this is done by executing the Archive Forecast workflow

As new history becomes available archived forecast results are compared to actual historical results with the output generated as out-of-sample MAPE

Out of sample MAPE can be seen in series 1 Month Fcst Lag WMape

Results of this series can be saved in the Database using Batch Logic Engine workflow step. The Batch logic engine evaluates series including both server and client expression calculations and saves the resulting values. The Batch Logic Engine should be configured and executed at the level at which the weighted MAPE is most useful.

If available a series displaying the out of sample MAPE values can replace the series Mean Absolute Pct Err above

Approval and Upload Process

During implementation, the Administrator configures the approval process by specifying a Reviewer/Business Owner who is responsible for final approval of the forecast. One Business Owner (Final Approver) has final approval responsibility for the forecast produced by their group of Analysts. Approval is accomplished by use of a Final Approval Series by User Group and by workflow notifications. The Demand Forecast Workflow manages the planning cycle and calls the Planning Group Workflow that is used in the notification process.

Oracle seeds a user group setup with dummy users. The Administrator edits this group to add the names of the Analysts whose forecasts need approval from the Final Approver. The Administrator also edits a seeded Planning Group Workflow to specify the ID of the Final Approver notified when the Analysts' forecasts are ready for review. The seeded workflow can be used as a template if additional group workflows are needed. The Time Property is set to send an alert after four days if any Analysts have not completed their review, and sends an alert and times out after five days if any Analysts still have not completed their review.

This workflow:

Notifies the Final Approver and Analysts that the Forecast is available

Polls the users to check whether they are 'Done'.

After four days, if any Analysts are not done, a messages is set to the Final Approver.

After five days, if any Analysts are still not done, a message is again sent to the Final Approver, and the workflow times out. Processing returns to the calling workflow named: 'Demand Forecast'.

If all Analysts check 'Done.' before the time out occurs, the Final Approver is notified that the Analysts' forecasts are ready for review. Processing returns to the calling workflow named: 'Demand Forecast'.

Analysts are notified when a forecast is available for review and modification. After their modifications are complete, they select 'Done' in their My Tasks notification. The Workflow polls the user's status, and then notifies the Final Approver when all Analysts are done. If one or more Analysts have not finished their approvals one day prior to the due date, a reminder is sent to the Analysts and Final Approver. On the due date, if any Analyst has not finished their approval process, an exception message is sent to the Final Approver and Analysts to the effect that one or more Analysts have not completed their forecast adjustments.

The Final Approver can lock the forecast by checking the F. Approve check box. After review, the Final Approver either approves or disapproves the forecast. If not approved, the Final Approver contacts the Analysts whose adjustments are in question. This step is not part of the Workflow. If approved, the Final Approval check box is checked and the forecast locked. A notification is sent to the Administrator and the Analysts to the effect that the forecast is available for upload. The Administrator uploads the forecast and other relevant data to the Planning Server.

After EP_LOAD completes successfully, the Final Approval and Final Approve By series are set to null, the Forecast is run, and a notification is sent to the Analysts and Final Approver with a Due Date specified.

Analysts analyze the forecast, make modifications and, when finished, select 'Done' in MyTasks for the forecast available task.

The Workflow polls the status of all Analysts in the User Group. When all Analysts have completed their approvals, a notification is sent to the Final Approver.

If all Analysts have not completed their adjustments, on the day before the due date, a reminder message is sent to the Analysts and Final Approver.

On the due date, if any Analyst has not completed their approval process, an exception message stating: 'One or more Analysts have not completed their adjustments' is sent to the Final Approver.

4. The Final Approver can lock the forecast at any time by checking the 'Final Approval' column. After review, the Final Approver approves the forecast by selecting 'Done' in MyTasks for the forecast notification. For one level review:

If the Final Approver approves the forecast, a notification is sent to the Analysts and to the Administrator to initiate the upload.

If the Final Approver does not approve the forecast, s/he contacts the Analyst(s) whose adjustments are in question. This is not a Workflow step; it is a business process.

If the Administrator does not check the box in My Tasks within the specified time range, the Workflow times out.

When the notification from the Final Approver is received, the Administrator uploads the forecast and other relevant information, for example: Demand Priority, Forecast Accuracy.

Line Of Business

When an implementation includes multiple business units, the business units require the batch engine to be executed at different times. Since every batch engine run creates a new forecast for the entire population, this could cause issues if the batch engine runs concurrently for different lines of business. A tailored process supports generating forecasts at different intervals across different parts of the business.

This process should be used when the following conditions apply:

There is a need for two or more distinct forecast cycles.

The populations requiring different forecast cycles are easily identifiable.

The population can be defined either as a member, or as members of one aggregation level, such as Segment, Organization, or Brand.

Important: The LOB engine, while smaller than the batch engine, can still be resource intensive and should not be run when users are in the system. The LOB engine should be activated and scheduled during user downtime and when the simulation engine is not on.

Line of Business Solution Engine Process

Define the population participating in the LOB batch run.

Exclude all other populations from LOB batch run.

Run the batch engine to generate a new forecast for the LOB population. Store the new forecast as a new forecast version.

Copy the previous forecast version to the new forecast version for the non LOB population

Forecasting by Line of Business (LOB)

Import:

Existing APS and Oracle Demantra capabilities accommodate forecasting by line of business (LOB).

You can run Collections for a collections group. This restricts the uploaded forecast to the set of organizations that corresponds to a line of business.

You can download for a specific line of business by modifying the data security of the seeded import integration profiles. For data downloaded via EP_LOAD, which does not have a mechanism to control data scope, a business process is provided to stagger the timing of collections for the different lines of business.

Caution: There is a risk that if multiple lines of business run collections very close in time to each other, a single EP_LOAD run may pull in data from multiple lines of business.

The Oracle Demantra forecasting engine will run forecasts only for combinations inside of a line of business by invoking the LOB process. Oracle provides user data security for LOB-specific access to data.

A predefined stored procedure called from the LOB Process workflow updates database column do_forecast so that only combinations within the LOB are forecast and run the forecasting engine. The stored procedure also copies existing forecast numbers in the non line-of-business combinations into the new forecast version that is created by the running the forecast engine.

Export:

Upload data for a line of business only by modifying the data security of seeded export integration profiles.

An administrator user procedure creates export integration profiles with level value access filtered down to LOB scope.

See Creating a Data Export Profile.

LOB Procedures

For the initial download, the DM/ SOP System Administrator specifies the organizations to be collected and downloaded during Shipment & Booking History Collection & Download with the Internal Sales Order parameter set to NO. When the processes complete, s/he logs into Business Modeler to add the name(s) of the LOB(s) to the preseeded LOB Level and associate the LOB(s) with the organizations that rollup to the LOB either by using the edit tools with a worksheet or Member Management. After the LOB is setup, Shipment & Booking History Collections & Download are rerun separately for each LOB, according to its planning cycle, with the ISO parameter set to YES. Users are given access to the LOB or restricted from accessing the LOB via User Security. The DM/SOP Sys Admin modifies the Line of Business - Forecast workflow and the Planning Group workflow for each LOB.

.

Initial setup for LOBs with ISOs:

Set up Instance and include organizations that are part of an LOB

Run Standard Collection and set up calendars, price lists and new products

Run Shipment and Booking History Collection with the 'Collect Internal Sales Orders' parameter UNCHECKED for the initial Download

If the Admin mistakenly checks the 'Collect Internal Sales Orders' parameter for the initial Download, the Order Alignment feature, available in the first release of SOP, can be used to purge the series.

After Download, add the LOBs as a member of the LOB level and associate the relevant organizations

Assign the LOB to the relevant users via User Security in Business Modeler

Ensure the users with access to the LOB are in the same User Group

Create a copy of the Planning Group workflow with the following changes

Select the User Group given access to the LOB as the recipient for the Group Step

Enter the LOB's Final Approver's ID for the Completed/Incomplete steps

Rerun Shipment and Booking History Collection with 'Collect Internal Sales Orders' parameter checked

Edit the SetLOBParameters' step in the Line of Business - Forecast workflow and set the parameters

Modify the Approval step in the Line of Business – Forecast workflow and enter the schema id of the relevant Planning Group workflow.

Start the Line of Business – Forecast workflow

The following steps are done by the DM/SOP Sys Admin to setup a component for an LOB and handle ISOs.

DM/SOP System Administrator Detailed LOB Setup

Specify the organizations of the LOB to be collected and downloaded when setting up Instances. For ease of use, Collection Groups can be used, but are not required, to group the LOB's organizations.

Selecting Organizations of LOB 1

Setup calendar, price lists and new products.

Components with multiple LOBs must use the same base time bucket.

Run Shipment & Booking History collections for the Organizations specified in Step 1 with the Collect Internal Sales Order parameter set to NO:

If the Launch Download parameter is set to YES, proceed to Step 4

If Launch Download = NO, run the EBS Full Download workflow

LOB Collection & Download

Open a worksheet with Line of Business and Organization as the selected Aggregation Levels

Right click Line of Business>New Line of Business

Enter the LOB's name and click Create

Add New Member to LOB Level

For each Organization that is a member of the LOB, right click the Organization>Edit Organization

Select the LOB from the dropdown list for Line of Business

Assigning an Org to an LOB

Assign the LOB(s) to the relevant users via User Security in Business Modeler

Assigning LOB to Users

Ensure the users with access to the LOB are in the same User Group with the Business Modeler menu Security>Modify Group

For each LOB, start Workflow Manager and create a copy of the Planning Group workflow. The recommendation is that the workflow name contains the LOB for which it is used, e.g. LOB1 Planning Group workflow. The following parameters must be changed::

The User Group selected as the recipient in the Group Step must be the Group given access to the LOB

Final Approver's ID for the Completed/Incomplete steps must be the user that approves the forecast for the LOB

For each LOB, using Workflow Manageredit Line of Business – Forecast workflow and change the parameters for step 'SetLOBParameters'. The parameter settings are:

Parameter 1 - should be comma (,) separated list of member descriptions.

Parameter 2 - should be level title..

Edit the Approval process step in this workflow and enter the parameters to identify the Planning Group workflow for the specific LOB.

The Approval step in the workflow must have the LOB's Planning Group workflow schema number as the schema_id value

Run Shipment & Booking History collections again for the Organizations or Collection Groups in Step1 with the Collect Internal Sales Order parameter set to YES:

If Launch Download = NO, run the EBS Full Download Workflow

Collect Internal Sales Order Parameter

DM/SOP System Administrator Post Initial Setup Process

The Collection & Download process is run for the specific LOB by specifying the Organizations or Collection Group that comprise the LOB in Shipment & Booking History collections

Run the Line of Business - Forecast workflow

Run LOB Reset workflow if the forecast workflow errors out

Upload the forecast using the LOB specific Upload workflow when approval process completes

Archive the forecast for all LOBs

For LOBs with different planning cycles, the forecast is archived on the more frequent schedule

A business process must be put in place to manage the archiving schedule to avoid conflicts for LOBs with different planning cycles

Troubleshooting the Line of Business Forecast Workflow

If problems occur during the LOB Process, the next attempt to run the Line of Business Forecast Workflow will not proceed. Due to the LOB process deactivating the non-LOB combinations, it is not desired to have the next LOB Process begin without successfully completing the previous run.

To remedy this, run the LOB Reset workflow. This workflow computes whether combinations should be active, and resets deactivation of the non-LOB population. Since this may take some time on larger environments LOB Reset is not automatically run as part of the Line of Business Forecast Process.

More information regarding the Line of Business Forecast Process can be seen in the Line of Business Forecast Workflow and in the table integration_lob_error.

Configure to Order

Configure to order products are configurations of components depending on the customer's preference. In most cases, this includes a selected base product (the model) and multiple optional (the options) and mandatory components. To use the Configure to Order feature in Demantra with EBS data, a number of parameters and profile options need to be set. The collection process exports the standard series with the addition of the BOM. A number of upload workflows are available to upload the Demantra forecast dimensions, organization and period back to EBS.

This section includes the following information about CTO:

Demantra Setup

Oracle EBS Setup

Collecting Data from EBS to Demantra

Uploading Demantra Plans and Factors to EBS

Running CTO Procedures

Workflows and Integration Data Profiles

Associating Multiple Price Lists with a CTO Worksheet

Recurring Item with Multiple Parents in a BOM

Importing CTO Data from a Non-Oracle System

Information about the functional aspects of configure to order is in Oracle Demantra Demand Management User's Guide.

Demantra Setup

A number of Demantra settings need to be set to support CTO functionality. They include:

CTO_Calc_PP_Forecast

CTO_Enable_Worksheet_Calculations

CTO_History_Periods

CTO_Planning_Percentage_Choice

All of the CTO parameters are accessible through the Business Modeler. From the Parameters menu, choose System Parameters, then System tab.

CTO_Calc_PP_Forecast

The CTO_Cal_PP_Forecast parameter specifies whether you want to forecast planning percentages. The default is No.

CTO_Enable_Worksheet_Calculations

This parameters controls whether planning percentages are automatically calculated when a worksheet is updated. The default is Yes.

CTO_History Periods

CTO_HISTORY _PERIODS specifies the number of historical periods to average for the history planning percentage calculation. The default is 0. If set to 0, then no historical dependent demand will be generated. It is recommended to keep the planning percentage calculation period shorter than 52 weeks as planning percentages from an average of 52 or even 26 weeks ago may be very different than current values. If options generally have demand every week, a calculation span of 26, 13, or even 8 periods may be more accurate. If options demand will be fairly sparse, setting the parameter to 52 or 26 weeks may be appropriate.

CTO_Planning_Percentage_Choice

CTO_PLANNING_PERCENTAGE_CHOICE specifies the planning percentage to use when series Planning Percentage Choice calculates the dependent information in Forecast Dependent Demand.

The default is Existing; that means to use the downloaded planning percentages from Oracle e-Business Suite that are in series Planning Percentages - Existing.

The other option is to have Oracle Demantra calculate planning percentages based on history and forecast of options.

Oracle EBS Setup

A number of Oracle EBS profiles need to be set to support CTO functionality. They include:

MSD_DEM: Calculate Planning Percentage

MSD_DEM: Explode Demand Method

MSD_DEM: Include Dependent Demand

MSD_DEM: Two-Level Planning

Oracle EBS profile options can be set by using the Advanced Supply Chain Planner, Standard responsibility, Other, then Profiles.

MSD_DEM: Calculate Planning Percentage

MSD_DEM: Calculate Planning Percentage: Use this profile option to specify upon what entities to calculate planning percentages. This occurs when system parameter CTO_PLANNING_PERCENTAGE_CHOICE instructs Oracle Demantra to calculate planning percentages.

Do not change the setting of this profile option after the initial download or invalid combinations may result:

The typical reason for changing this value is to correct a setup error.

In that case, delete the invalid combinations and re-download. See Implementation Considerations.

The default is Null. Valid vales are:

Yes for Consume & Derive Options and Option Classes: Include the sales history of options and option classes

Yes for Consume & Derive Options only: Include the sales history of options to model and removes option classes. Use it for assemble to order situations.

Yes for all the Options and Option Classes: Include the sales history of options and option classes including optional components of product families able to be forecasted that have Forecast Control None.

Note: It is recommended to set this parameter to Yes, for All Options and Option Classes before running shipping and booking history for Configure to Order.

MSD_DEM: Explode Demand Method

MSD_DEM Explode Demand Method: Use this profile option to specify where to calculate dependent demand and derive planning percentages. Valid values are

Organization Specific: Calculate dependent demand and derive planning percentages at each organization.

Global: Calculate planning percentages at the global level and apply to all organization. The default is Organization Specific.

MSD_DEM: Include Dependent Demand

MSD_DEM: Include Dependent Demand: Use this profile option to specify whether the collections process should include configure to order structures, demand, and history. Valid values are:

Yes: Include configure to order structures, demand, and history

No: Do not include configure to order structures, demand, and history. This is the default

MSD_DEM: Two-Level Planning

MSD_DEM: Two-Level Planning: Use this profile option to specify that way that the collections process should collect family members and their sales histories. Valid values are:

Exclude family members with forecast control 'None'. This is the default. Collect:

Only the product family members and their sales history from the organization specified in profile option MSD_DEM: Master Organization for which the forecast control is set to Consume or Consume and derive.

The master organization product families from the organization specified in profile, MSD_DEM: Master Organization for which the forecast control is set to Consume or Consume and Derive and the planning method for the product family is set to other than Not Planned.

All the items and their sales history--even if they are not related to a product family--for all the enabled organizations for which the forecast control is Consume or Consume and Derive. These items are rolled up to the pseudo-product family Other.

Collect all family members and their sales histories. Collect:

The same entities as setting Exclude family members with forecast control 'None'.

All the product family members and their sales history from the organization specified in profile option MSD_DEM: Master Organization regardless of the forecast control, as long as the product family forecast control is Consume or Consume and Derive and the planning method for product family and all of its members are set to other than Not Planned.

Additional Implementation Considerations

The series Final Plng Pct, is a client expression and is accurate at the lowest level, for example, Item-Org. When viewing worksheets at levels higher than the lowest level, use the series Final Plng Pct – Aggregate.

The concurrent program Purge CTO Data deletes all data from the configure to order general level related tables. However the items are not deleted from the Oracle Demantra Demand Management-related tables. This program, only available as a Request, is used when an undesired option was selected from Profile MSD_DEM: Calculate Planning Percentage option and a download run. Run the purge is run-- the profile option value changes to your desired option-- and re-execute the download.

Run the workflow CTO Calcs after the forecast is calculated either as part of a workflow or manually as the dependent demand calculations are done after the forecast has been generated. This workflow runs automatically by the seeded workflows for configure to order. However, be aware of the workflow run order in case you have customizations.

In a configure to order worksheet, if an option class, for example Harddrive, is filtered out of the worksheet, it's children are filtered out also, for example 120gig Harddrive, 200gig Harddrive.

If an option class is not in a worksheet but the independent demand of its base model is changed, the changes are propagated to the option class and its children.

If an option class is in the worksheet but its children are not, changes to the option classes dependent demand are propagated to its children.

If an option class is the child of another option class and its parent's dependent demand is changed, the changes must be propagated to its children

In worksheets, you can turn a Summary Row in the worksheet by configure to order level on and off.

You can use subtab notes at the configure to order level.

Review upload forecast processes, select an appropriate one, and develop a procedure for initiating it.

Change worksheet filters to appropriate values after implementation.

Collecting Data from EBS to Demantra

Download - e-Business Suite To Demantra

The standard EBS-Demantra collection process brings configure to order data into Oracle Demantra. It:

Brings history streams, level members, and bill structures.

Runs Collect BOM when the profile option MSD_DEM: Include Dependent Demand has a value of Yes, which brings the following information to Oracle Demantra:

Item

Parent Item

Base Model

Organization

BOM Eff Start Date

BOM Eff End Date

Plng Pct- Existing

Downloads the planning percentages from the source when the CTO Download Existing Planning Pcts is run. You can also run this workflow by itself between full downloads.

Oracle Advanced Supply Chain Planning loads and processes the data for Consensus Total Demand and Planning Percentage information for models and their options as follows:

Model Forecast Control = Consume or Consume & Derive

Options Forecast Control = None

Oracle Advanced Supply Chain Planning explodes the forecast from model to option using the Oracle Demantra Demand Management planning percentages

Oracle Advanced Supply Chain Planning loads and processes the data for Consensus Total Demand and Planning Percentage information for product families and their children as follows:

Model Forecast Control = Consume or Consume & Derive

Options Forecast Control = Consume or Consume & Derive

Oracle Advanced Supply Chain Planning explodes the option's Consensus Total Demand to find its independent and dependent demand.

Uploading Demantra Plans and Factors to EBS

Data that moves from Oracle Demantra to Oracle e-Business Suite includes:

Consensus Total Demand, Final Plng Pct, MAPE CTO, and Demand Priority for all models and options to Oracle Advanced Supply Chain Planning

Independent Demand for options with a forecast control of NONE to Oracle Advanced Supply Chain Planning; these options do not have dependent demand

Consensus Total Demand & MAPE CTO for base models to Oracle Inventory Optimization

To move configure to order data from Oracle Demantra into Oracle e-Business Suite, use upload workflows:

For uploading Consensus Forecast and Final Forecast Dependent Demand, MAPE CTO, and Demand Priority (information for models and their options), use the CTO Upload workflows

For uploading product family and item level Consensus Forecast and Product Family ratios, MAPE CTO, and Demand Priority (information for product families and their children), use the CTO Upload Product Family workflows

When you upload planning percentages to Oracle Advanced Supply Chain Planning, you do so at the level Item-Organization for items with item attribute Forecast Control set to None. Oracle Advanced Supply Chain Planning uses the Oracle Demantra planning percentages to explode demand from model to option class to model.

The publishing process will export planning percentages at either an aggregated level or by "top level" model, based on the value of the profile option "MSD_DEM: Publish CTO Forecast Percentage by Top-level Model. If this option is set to No (the default), then planning percentages for each option will be aggregated across base models during export. If it is set to Yes, then plann