NEW YORK--(BUSINESS WIRE)--Accenture (NYSE: ACN) has been named a global leader among Oracle service providers by Forrester Research Inc.

Forrester, a leading industry analyst firm, evaluated 14 global service providers, measuring their skills in implementation, application support and hosting of Oracle applications such as the Oracle E-Business Suite, Oracle’s JD Edwards, Oracle’s PeopleSoft Enterprise, Oracle’s Siebel CRM, Oracle Hyperion Performance Management, Oracle’s Demantra, Oracle Retail, Oracle Transportation Management, Oracle’s Primavera Enterprise Project Portfolio Management (EPPM) and Oracle Governance, Risk, and Controls.

The ranking was contained in a May 2011 independent report titled, “The Forrester Wave™: Oracle Services Providers, Q2 2011”.

The companies evaluated by Forrester all have more than 2,000 practitioners with Oracle skills and $200 million-plus in annual Oracle services revenue.

They were evaluated on 64 criteria which were grouped into three categories: long-term strategy in the Oracle market; market presence across key geographies; and current offering.

“(Accenture)…is a global giant in the Oracle implementation space…with one of the largest global delivery capabilities in the Oracle space,” said a portion of the report. The Forrester report further describes Accenture as having a strong practice across all major Oracle product lines and across a broad range of industries, with particular strength in government, life sciences, communications, and utilities.

According to the report, cost still plays a paramount role in Oracle investment decisions. Therefore, buyers are seeking providers that can drive down total cost of ownership through lower cost of support and nonlinear delivery options that offer better economies of scale and greater efficiency.

Furthermore, according to the report, Oracle clients want partners that can support long-term strategies in those areas that will play an increasingly critical role in the future, such as in cloud, mobility, and fusion.

Accenture is one of three firms that “has breadth and depth in implementation and AMS for major Oracle applications, as well as low-cost delivery resources,” the report said.

“With our resources and experience, we believe we are well suited to deliver one of the world’s largest and most sophisticated multinational Oracle rollouts, across a range of applications and industries,” said Gavin Michael, managing director of R&D and alliances, Accenture. “What’s more, the close relationship we enjoy with Oracle allows us to develop innovative solutions for our joint clients.”

Forrester used a combination of data sources – provider surveys, executive strategy briefings, and client reference surveys – to assess the strengths and weaknesses of each Oracle provider.

About Accenture

Accenture is a global management consulting, technology services and outsourcing company, with more than 223,000 people serving clients in more than 120 countries. Combining unparalleled experience, comprehensive capabilities across all industries and business functions, and extensive research on the world’s most successful companies, Accenture collaborates with clients to help them become high-performance businesses and governments. The company generated net revenues of US$21.6 billion for the fiscal year ended Aug. 31, 2010. Its home page is www.accenture.com.

Trademarks

Oracle and Java are registered trademarks of Oracle and/or its affiliates.