Like many Gen Zers, Lansdale couple Leland Brown Jr. and Breanna Hubbard gave TikTok viewers a tour of their new home, hours after they moved in.

The space was just large enough to fit a twin-size mattress, a small couch, a dresser, and a wall of storage boxes. But no windows, bathroom, or kitchen. It also happened to be located inside a storage unit in North Wales.

The container was an upgrade from their previous digs, a tent in the woods of Montgomery County. Brown and Hubbard, who spent most of their days creating videos, live a “minimal lifestyle” to avoid what they call the stresses of employment and costly housing.

According to a 2022 survey conducted by Freddie Mac, a government-sponsored finance company, adults between the ages of 18 and 25 have mostly positive thoughts about homeownership. But over one-third of them say it’s outside of financial reach.

“We think it’s more beneficial for us in the long run,” Hubbard said of living outdoors. “We’re not looking at how much we make now, we’re looking to build up our businesses and to work for ourselves. We want to make our own money by sharing our life, which we’re having success with.”

A mutual friend introduced the pair in March 2022, and they have shaped their online presence and living situation in tandem ever since.

It wasn’t always meant to be so “minimal.”

Brown and Hubbard were among the 31% of Gen Z who were living at home due to high housing costs. After continued disagreements with his father, who wanted the 28-year-old TikToker to pursue a more sustainable career, Brown was kicked out of his parents’ home in Montgomery County in May 2022.

“He told me I was grown and have a son, so I needed to figure it out,” said Brown, whose 7-year-old son lives with his mother.

Brown then moved in with Hubbard, 22, who was living with her family in Hatfield. That didn’t work out, so they packed up their bags and moved to the woods in September 2022.

Brown, who had never been camping before, was excited to adopt the new lifestyle. But he quickly learned how difficult it was living outdoors. “It was a lot once we got everything settled,” Brown said. “It was crazy dealing with the animals and the cold.”

After six months, Brown and Hubbard adapted to the new living situation and decided to chronicle their journey.

In December of 2023 he posted videos that showed him taking leftover food from his job at a nearby hotel to the tent. Brown lost his job soon after — but the videos generated millions of views on TikTok and YouTube.

Around the same time, Hubbard’s mom encouraged the couple to visit a nearby U-Haul store for an occasional break from the cold, and for a place where they could edit their videos and do other “office work.” The couple saw the storage units there as an opportunity to have a low-cost home of their own, at least while they saved money for a more permanent space.

They started by taking naps inside the U-Haul store, then moved their belongings into one unit. Over time, they organized furniture and made it into a small housing quarter. They posted the three-part series on TikTok, which generated over 22 million views and made national news, with outlets like CBS News, Complex, and Yahoo News reporting on their move into the climate-controlled space.

Within days, U-Haul management asked the couple to leave.

“Residing in a self-storage unit is a violation of state and federal housing laws,” Jeff Lockridge, a spokesperson for U-Haul International wrote in an email to The Inquirer.

“I was always prepared to get kicked out because of the video,” Brown said. “I didn’t expect it to become as viral as it was, but when it did, I knew I couldn’t delete it. I was making money off of it, so we had to run with it.”

The couple stayed in a U-Haul truck for a night before moving their stuff back to the Lansdale woods.

Brown and Hubbard currently live inside a large camping tent, filled with bundled blankets, an air mattress, and a power bank to charge their electronics.

Brown, who prefers the term “house-lessness,” said tent life is less than ideal. But the independence that comes with the low-cost lifestyle, he feels, is a sacrifice worth enduring.

“I’m very educated and intelligent, and so is [Hubbard], but people tell us how to live because their perspective in life is different,” Brown said.

While Brown had asked to move back in with his parents in the past, he said he and his father have now come to an understanding. “My dad is saying [I] have to stay in the woods and make it work,” he said. “He’s trying to teach me to be strong and survive.”

His father, Leland Brown Sr., a principal engineer and director of a military and aerospace communications company, said he had his concerns, especially when Brown and Hubbard moved into the storage container. Still, “I believe Leland has been very clear this is a choice he has made and he stands on his choice,” Brown wrote in an email. “If no harm is caused to anyone, content development is a good method to share his approaches on how he wants to live his life, while allowing others to follow his journey.”

While Hubbard’s parents have invited her back home, she’s continued to say no. “I had to leave to be the best version of myself,” she said.

Since last year, the couple has monetized videos of their daily exploits. They clean up in hotel bathrooms, use rented vehicles to run DoorDash deliveries, make food in a portable grill placed in the trunk of an electric car. All the while defending their house-free lifestyle against the naysayers who comment under their posts.

The couple is enrolled in the YouTube Partner Program and TikTok’s Creator Fund, which allow certain users to monetize their videos based on views, engagements, and other metrics. Brown said they pull in roughly $750 a week from their videos.

In a February video, titled “When You’re Homeless & Not Getting a Job #genz,” Brown talked about his desire to be an entrepreneur rather than working for someone else. “I’m not getting no job,” he said in the TikTok video. “I’ve had jobs in the past, and I’ve got fired at 90% of those jobs. It’s not for me. I’m an entrepreneur, self-made, and so is [Hubbard].”

In response to the video, one TikTok user commented “if you can’t handle a 9-5, you most definitely cannot handle entrepreneurship.”

Brown and Hubbard admit negative comments often get under their skin, especially when people suggest they are faking their lifestyle or meaninglessly avoiding employment.

“I’ve been saying homelessness is a flex, and I believe that with my heart and soul because of the challenges homeless people endure,” Brown said. “People don’t understand that.”

Still, Brown says he recognizes his and Hubbard’s living situation is a lot different from many unhoused people. They are located in a relatively quiet suburb and can earn a steady flow of income from their videos. “We got very lucky,” he said. “I grew up here half of my life, so that’s a privilege.”

Tyler Greene, who has known Brown since they were in elementary school, is happy his friend is garnering attention online, but “I want him to get out of that tent,” he said.

The couple will continue living in the woods for now, but Hubbard said they intend to save money and eventually buy a tiny home before starting a family together. They currently want to purchase an RV and document van life. (A recent social media trend focuses on #vanlife, where people live out of modified vans. It’s often promoted as a bohemian way to travel and save money, but critics say it’s really “glorified homelessness.”)

Their only hurdle is a lack of payment and credit history.

In the 2022 Freddie Mac survey on homeownership, insufficient credit history and unstable employment were two of the top five obstacles preventing young adults from purchasing a home.

“We have to be more patient, live out in the woods for three or six more months, and just be more financially intelligent,” Brown said. “We’re just waiting for the right time while we live in the wilderness.”

As they continue to chase their entrepreneurial dreams, which include starting a clothing and pottery business, Hubbard said they want to change the negative perception of unhoused people through their content.

“It’s not the end of the world to be homeless or live minimally,” she said. “It’s an opportunity we have to work on ourselves.”

Two North Penn area residents are working on getting the homeless in Lansdale off the streets, out of the parks, and into proper and safe shelter.

Sandy Salveter, of Towamencin, and Linda Rowland, of East Fifth Street in Lansdale, are pursuing $17,000 in donations from the community via GoFundMe in their goal to curb homelessness in Lansdale Borough. Their mission, which began in November, is to find permanent housing for five women and about a dozen men.

The homelessness issue increased by the end of 2022, after Montgomery County closed the only single adult shelter that July on the grounds of the Norristown State Hospital.

Thus far, as of Tuesday, $2,328 has been raised by 43 donors. Most of the donations are anonymous.

"We aim to provide permanent housing for these people. We do not ask many questions. We just provide the housing,” stated Salveter in the GoFundMe page introduction. "Our approach to the homeless follows the ‘Housing First’ model, which says that any other problems a homeless person has cannot be solved while they are living on the streets.”

On the night of Nov. 28, the forecast had the temperature dropping near 20 degrees. Alas, there were no shelters open in the borough for women, Salveter wrote.

Rowland, who feeds and clothes the borough homeless through her Facebook group "Helping the Homeless in Lansdale," suggested she and Salveter help a particular woman that night. They were able to house her in a hotel room, and then the duo set off finding an apartment for her in the borough. A few weeks later, the woman was no longer homeless.

"Needless to say, she is very grateful,” wrote Salveter.

Since Nov. 28, Rowland and Salveter have taken two homeless men off the street and housed them in hotels. They, too, are looking for housing for the two men as soon as possible, she wrote. In a Dec. 30 update, Salveter wrote that one of the men moved into an apartment that day and is now "formerly homeless.”

"Linda did a wonderful job of gathering furniture and household items for this man’s new home, so it looks very attractive right from the beginning,” wrote Salveter in her update. "Linda has a very caring and generous network of friends, who have donated beautiful furniture and furnishings for this man. And Linda’s husband was essential in this effort, too, because he brought the furniture to the apartment with his truck and engaged in the often back-breaking work (along with the apartment’s occupant) of getting the furniture up to the apartment.”

According to Salveter, $1,200 covers 25 days of housing in a studio apartment for one of the formerly homeless. Furthermore, Salveter updated the public that a rooming house manager in Lansdale may be able to provide rooms for homeless in the near future. She wrote that the rooms are scarce, but less expensive than studio apartments and one-bedroom apartments.

"So far, these efforts by Linda and me have involved only us, but to take more people off the borough streets, we need additional funding. This GoFundMe is our first attempt to find that funding,” Salveter wrote.

Funds will be used to pay for an initial hotel stay for the person removed from the street, and then support ongoing monthly costs for permanent accommodation. Donate to the GoFundMe here.

Salveter wrote she plans to contact Lansdale Borough Council to ask if they can apply for the $4 million in allocated funds from Montgomery County to help alleviate homelessness and funnel some of the money to their efforts.

See also:

The intersection of Main and Broad streets in Lansdale will soon have a different look, as Rite Aid will be permanently closing its doors in less than two weeks.

Following a request for comment from North Penn Now sent Tuesday morning, a spokesperson from the corporate office confirmed that the location at 10 West Main Street will permanently close on Sept. 10.

No official announcement has been made at the time of publishing; however, the spokesperson provided the following statement after confirming the closure:

"Like all retail businesses, we regularly review each of our locations to ensure we are meeting the needs of our customers, communities, and overall business. A decision to close a store is one we take very seriously and is based on a variety of factors including business strategy, lease and rent considerations, local business conditions and viability, and store performance. We review every neighborhood to ensure our customers will have access to health services, be it at Rite Aid or a nearby pharmacy, and we work to seamlessly transfer their prescriptions so there is no disruption of services.”

It's currently unclear if the staff at the store will be laid off or moved to another location. The spokesperson did not immediately respond to follow up questions regarding the fate of their employees, beyond stating they "strive to transfer associates to other Rite Aid locations where possible.”

According to a report by Josh Schafer and Anjalee Khemlani at Yahoo! Finance, Rite Aid stocks fell more than 50% on Friday after it was revealed the chain was preparing to file for Chapter 11 bankruptcy in response to mounting costs related to opioid lawsuits. The report adds that the corporation was planning to shutter more than 400 locations across 17 states, though when contacted for comment by Yahoo! Finance, a spokesperson said, "We do not comment on rumors and speculation.”

The Lansdale location sat on the former location of the Hotel Tremont, which stood for more than 100 years at the intersection of Main and Broad streets before being torn down in 1997. Though many area residents fondly remember the beauty and glory days of the Hotel Tremont, it had fallen into a state of severe neglect and disrepair prior to being torn down.

Despite the convenience of the location, the decision to build the Rite Aid at Main and Broad proved to be somewhat controversial — not only due to nostalgia for the Hotel Tremont, but due to a building design that would see the rear of the building facing the intersection, fully adorned with non-functioning glass windows facing outwards.

It’s unclear what will replace Rite Aid following next month’s closure.

Montgomery County property records show the 38,000-square-foot building is owned by HLC Lansdale LLC under the care of the Rite Aid Corporation with an assessed value of $1,972,000. A records search through the Pennsylvania Department of State indicates HLC Lansdale LLC is a foreign Limited Liability Company formed in Delaware and with a business address in Pittsburgh. HLC Lansdale did not immediately respond to North Penn Now’s request for comment.

Ownership of the building transferred from Tower Partners LP to HLC Lansdale in October 2014 at a cost of $4,063,297, according to property records.

See also:

After 17 Years, Hatfield's Hattricks Bar & Grill Is Up For Sale

Circularix to Open Four Additional PET Recycling Facilities Nationally Following Opening of Facility in Hatfield Township

Montgomery Township Board to Consider Allowing BYOB Alcohol at The Venue at Montgomery Mall

New Owners Open W.O.L.F. Fitness in Montgomery Township

Almac Group Marks Groundbreaking of $65 Million Facility Expansion in Lower Salford

Reader Comments

Lansdale Residenr • [email protected] 16, 2023 • Yes agreed. It’s such an eye sore.Kathleen Grosso • [email protected] 13, 2023 • Am sorry for the folks who worked at this location, all very nice, friendly & helpful. That aside, please level this building, such a hideous monstracity