Ella Fitzgerald, whose sweet, silvery voice and endlessly inventive vocal improvisations made her the most celebrated jazz singer of her generation, died Saturday at home in Beverly Hills, Calif. She was 78.

She had been suffering from diabetes and its circulatory system complications for many years.

A pre-eminent American singer who brought a classic sense of musical proportion and balance to everything she touched, Miss Fitzgerald won the sobriquet "first lady of song" and earned the unqualified admiration of most of her peers. Musicians from Bing Crosby to Benny Goodman, when asked to name their favorite singer, cited Ella Fitzgerald.

"Man, woman or child, Ella is the greatest," Crosby once said. Mel Torme hailed her as having "the best ear of any singer ever." Until the 1970s, when physical problems began to impinge on her perfect technique, this unglamorous woman seemed to loom as an immutable creative force in a musical world where everything else was crumbling.

In a career that spanned more than six decades, Miss Fitzgerald stood above the emotional fray of the scores of popular standards she performed.

Stylistically she was the polar opposite of her equally legendary peer, Billie Holiday, who conveyed a wounded vulnerability. Even when handed a sad song, Miss Fitzgerald communicated a wistful, sweet-natured compassion for the heartache she described.

Where Holiday and Frank Sinatra lived out the dramas they sang about, Miss Fitzgerald, viewing them from afar, seemed to understand and forgive all. Her apparent equanimity and her clear pronunciation, which transcended race, ethnicity, class, and age, made her a voice of profound reassurance and hope.

Over the decades, Miss Fitzgerald performed with big bands, symphony orchestras and small jazz groups. Her repertory encompassed show tunes, jazz songs, novelties (like her first major hit, A-Tisket A-Tasket, recorded in 1938), bossa nova, and even opera (Porgy and Bess excerpts). At her jazziest, her material became a springboard for ever-changing, ebullient vocal inventions, delivered in a sweet, girlish voice that could leap, slide, or growl anywhere within a range of nearly three octaves.

Miss Fitzgerald was renowned both for her delicately rendered ballads and her pyrotechnical displays of scat improvisation. (The jazz historian Barry Ulanov traced the term be-bop to her spontaneous interpolation of the word "re-bop" in her 1939 recording of T'Ain't What You Do, It's the Way That You Do It.) She was sometimes criticized for a lack of bluesiness and emotional depth. But her perfect intonation, vocal acrobatics, clear diction and endless store of melodic improvisations _ all driven by powerful rhythmic undercurrents _ brought her nearly universal acclaim.

During her long career, Miss Fitzgerald recorded with Duke Ellington, Count Basie and Louis Armstrong.

Her series of Songbook albums, celebrating such songwriters as Cole Porter, Harold Arlen, the Gershwins, Rodgers and Hart and Duke Ellington, helped to elevate the work of the best American songwriters to a stature widely recognized as art song.

"I never knew how good our songs were," Ira Gershwin once said, "until I heard Ella Fitzgerald sing them."

Although most biographies give her birth date as 1918, her birth certificate and school records show her to have been born a year earlier, on April 25, 1917, in Newport News, Va. She was the child of a common-law marriage between William Fitzgerald and Temperance Williams Fitzgerald. The couple separated within a year of her birth, and with her mother and a Portuguese immigrant named Joseph Da Silva, she moved to Yonkers, N.Y.

As a child, Miss Fitzgerald dreamed of being a dancer. But she also sang and was attracted to the recordings of Armstrong, Crosby and the Boswell Sisters, in particular that group's lead singer, Connee Boswell.

"My mother brought home one of her records, and I fell in love with it," she recalled many years later. "I tried so hard to sound just like her."

She amassed countless awards and commendations, including honorary doctorates at Yale and Dartmouth, and 13 Grammy Awards, including one for Lifetime Achievement, in 1967. In 1979 she was given a Kennedy Center Award for her work in the performing arts.

Accepting an honorary doctorate of music at Yale, she commented with her characteristic modesty, "Not bad for someone who only studied music to get that half-credit in high school."

Fitzgerald's last few years, after a bout with congestive heart problems in the '80s and the diabetes-caused amputation of both legs in 1993, were spent in seclusion. Tributes and reissues of her albums have been flowing ever since.

But tributes and reissues are no replacement for an unforgettable voice that was _ and undoubtedly will always be _ the very definition of jazz singing.

"She was a natural," says Torme. "She was irreplaceable. And we'll never see her likes again."

_ Information from the Los Angeles Times was used in this report.