Born: April 25, 1917

Died: June 15, 1996

NEW ORLEANS – Gasping for breath, Ella Fitzgerald the “first lady” of swing,” emerged from her dance engagement at the New Rhythm Club here last week with her clothes tattered and torn as 4,000 frenzied patrons grappled with her for autographs. Approximately 2,500 on the outside, unable to get further than the main entrance, yelled and made a mad rush for Miss Fitzgerald as she made her exit from the jammed Rhythm Club. The Northwest Enterprise, Seattle, Washington, July 5, 1940

This frenzied celebration was the culmination of Fitzgerald’s five-year journey from an unknown teen in early 1935 to a featured singer in a popular band, best-selling recording artist and then, after a tragedy, the leader of the band that had helped her gain fame as the First Lady of Swing.

Fitzgerald’s mother was killed in a car accident in 1932 and she and an aunt eventually settled in Harlem. Fitzgerald won a talent contest and the opportunity to sing with the Tiny Bradshaw Band at the Harlem Opera House and …

Ella Fitzgerald has contracted to sing with Tiny Bradshaw’s aggregation of stars because of the excellence of her renditions on a recent theatre program … The New York Age, March 9, 1935

A voice as pure as Fitzgerald’s was hard to keep secret and she was quickly scooped up by the Chick Webb Band, known far and wide as one of the best swing bands in the land.

Except for an occasional glimmer of entertainment, this week’s show on the stage of the 125th Street Apollo Theatre is only so-so … If it weren’t for Pops and Louie, Ella Fitzgerald and a tumbling act, there would be little indeed to the bill … During the Chick Webb band presentation, Charlie Lintin, vocalist, sings rather well, but it takes Ella Fitzgerald to send the audience into a vociferous display of enthusiasm. Her voice is seemingly tinged with honey and she sings with a rhythmic tempo that puts her over with a bang. The New York Age, July 27, 1935

Pops and Louie were a tap-dancing duo. Click here to see the only video I could find of them. It’s a little fuzzy but you can get a sense of their talent.

The Chick Webb Band and Fitzgerald traveled the country. Here’s the story after a Detroit performance …

Unlike the customary finding, we note Miss Fitzgerald to be just an ordinary young girl that you or I would never have picked from a crowd as being the vocalist with this danceable, musical combine. I am more than satisfied to note that whatever percentage of beauty may have been lacking it is more than doubled in her ability to sing. The Detroit Tribune, June 20, 1936

The Detroit Tribune was a newspaper for the city’s large Black population, and this rather unflattering compliment from columnist Billy Roach was the type of critique of her appearance Fitzgerald would often face throughout her career. She also had to overcome prejudice, segregation, Jim Crow and the resulting lack of opportunities for Black performers.

Nevertheless, Fitzgerald continued to build her repertoire and reputation …

Two years ago Ella had to borrow carfare to get to the city to appear on an amateur hour program. Today, through her manager, she can ask for (and get) two hundred dollars for a couple of songs. The New York Age, February 20, 1937

Fitzgerald began recording songs backed by the Chick Webb Band and …

Drummer man Chick Webb brings with him to Eagles’ auditorium what is likely a better than average colored orchestra, with plenty of sizzle and stomp. In spite of which, the large percentage of people who attend will be out to hear Ella Fitzgerald, a chic who can warble to beat the birds. Miss Fitzgerald is so popular that the Decca company, which makes her records, heralds the new ones in type which looks like the top line on an eye-doctor’s test card. The latest are, incidentally, “If You Ever Should Leave” and “Everyone’s Wrong But Me.” Buffalo Evening News, June 15, 1937

Click here to listen to the band’s rendition of St. Louis Blues with vocals from Fitzgerald. The big breakthrough came with the June 1938 release of A-Tisket, A-Tasket …

In more orthodox slang, the mad mob of “Swing addicts” were roused into hysteria. And all because of a gal named Ella Fitzgerald gave out with some of the torchiest, swingiest vocal acrobatics ever heard around these parts. Miss Fitzgerald is the singer with Chick Webb’s band. She “admits” to writing “A-Ticket, A-Tasket.” Writing the song may not bring the young Negro girl a spot in the Hall of Fame, but no one can deny that she can sing it in a way that makes it seem important. The Pittsburgh Press, October 15, 1938

Webb died on June 16, 1939, after a long, difficult battle with spinal tuberculosis …

Chick Webb, Baltimore swing drummer who became Harlem’s “King of the Drums,” and a prominent figure in the metropolitan amusement world, died last night in the Johns Hopkins Hospital, where he had been a patient for two weeks. He was 30 years old … the Negro musician had a wide following among New York’s dancing gentry. He had directed his own orchestra since he was 17 years old. The Evening Sun, June 17, 1939

Fitzgerald, who was 22, took over as the leader of the band, which was soon renamed Ella Fitzgerald and Her Famous Orchestra.

Ella Fitzgerald and her famous orchestra are coming to you direct from their Broadway and Harlem triumphs. Together they have thrilled audiences at the New York Paramount Theater, Loew’s State Theater, the Coconut Grove at the Park Central Hotel, New York’s Famous Door, Levaggies in Boston, and the Savoy Ballroom in the heart of Harlem. The Northwest Enterprise, Seattle, June 28, 1940

This was the era of swing and nightclubs and the club’s listed above were some of the hottest in the country. The Savoy was one of the band’s “home” bases, along with New York’s Roseland ballroom.

And now, we’ve arrived back to where we started: the New Rhythm Club in New Orleans and a near riot at the segregated performance of Fitzgerald and her orchestra …