Ella Fitzgerald, who died this weekend at age 78, is being remembered as the First Lady of Song, having the voice of a lifetime.

The singer had been bedridden for the past several years. Both her legs were amputated in 1993, the result of diabetes. Since her death, fans and fellow performers have been praising her contribution to music. Tony Bennett said Saturday that her recordings will live forever and there can be little doubt that Ella Fitzgerald set a standard that all American vocalists from here on out will have to contend with.

She was at the very first dinner party I ever threw, in a studio apartment in St. Louis overlooking the state mental hospital in a scattering of motley industrial architecture, but the place had some class because she was there in the corner on the turntable.

She was there again this weekend. It's quite possible that I'm incapable of making dinner for friends unless she's there, so it was at just such a dinner that I heard the news. She was singing in my living room on Saturday night when I found out the world lost Ella Fitzgerald, and my heart sank. I knew she'd been sick. I knew the day would come, but still I was not prepared to admit a world where that voice would be silent. What a sad, sad thought it is.

When I was a teenager, I was riding alone in an elevator in a London hotel, when the car stopped and the doors opened and in walked Ella Fitzgerald. She smiled, eyes twinkling, when I told her that I loved her singing, and she asked if I would like to hear her sing that night. Jumping at the chance, I said that I would. "OK, baby, I'll see you tonight."

I'll treasure that experience of hearing her perform in person, but that's not really the way I'll remember her. I'll remember her recordings, her careful craft of interpreting America's songs - deliberate, artful and full of a whimsical respect that engendered the same in people like me.

Ella Fitzgerald and I survived high school together. We entered a monastery together. We studied patristic theology and koine Greek. We had a brief fling with cocaine, drove across half the country together in search of a new career, and together we've mourned the loss of friends.

I have fallen in love exactly once in my life, and Ella Fitzgerald was there for that, too. For the first time ever, despite years of listening to her incomparable phrasing, the entire Cole Porter song book actually made sense to me once I was in love. Sure, many of the other songs had spoken to me before, but the giddy ones, the silly ones about the heart had been a mystery. No longer. When that relationship ended a year ago, it became hard once again to listen to Ella sing about romance, but for new reasons. I listened anyway.

I'm 35 years old. Ella Fitzgerald's music was an untimely gift to me from my parents, connecting me to their lives and their age. Hers was the music of their courtship and their own long love affair. I came to them late in their lives, and while `mistake' would be too strong a word, calling me an unexpected bundle of joy would not be putting the wrong spin on the blessed event of 1960. They were bridge players, my parents. And while my then-teenage siblings would be out on dates, they would park my baby buggy on Saturday nights in the family room right in front of the hi fi. That's where Ella and I met. That's where I heard Count Bassie for the first time and Dave Brubeck and Glen Miller and his orchestra. They're the folks I grew up with. They're the ones who helped me grow up.

My parents are gone, but another gift they gave me is my faith, which includes a strong belief in the communion of saints. It has been a comfort these past few days to imagine Ella Fitzgerald joining that group, adding a voice so sweet, so tender, the angels themselves must simply be astonished to hear it, and I imagine they're smiling, too, envious as they must be.