Library module Smart Collection question about keywords

How do I handle situations like the following. I want a collection of horse photos. I put "horse" in the keywords. But I also have photos of Horseshoe Canyon, with that name in the keywords, and they show up in the horse collection. Can this be avoided somehow?

Smart collection - Pictures in more than one collection

Hello world, I'm sorting pictures and would like to know if some pictures are in Collection C1 but also in another collection. Is there anyway to create a smart collection for that? Or, if more simple, simply a smart collection showing pictures that are in two collections or more. Thanks Have...

Smart Collection - I can't seem to get what I want

I'm looking to create a smart collection to show all images that INCLUDE a string of (specific) TEXT, but do not START with a specific text. There seems to be no filter to show 'DOES NOT START WITH' so I created a smart collection that includes all that DO start with the specific text - with...

Smart Collection / Library Filter for Headline

I wonder a bit why iI can't search only for Headlines. Usually I use this IPTC field for the event name. Okay I can search "Any Seachable Text", but this gets me also keywords and captions. Is there a way to search only for a "Headline"? Also the "Library Filter" doesn't show me any "Headline"...

Refining "Smart Collections" with stacked photographs

I'm running macOS Ventura and Lightroom CC 11.5 and I am trying to solve what seems should be an easy "Smart Collections" problem. When editing a "Smart Collection" is there a way to select just the top image of a stack to appear in the results? Presently, my "Smart Collection" contains every...

Smart collection with multiple folders as sources

I am trying to create a smart collection in classic LR where I have a these rules: "Rating of 3" and a few different folders as sources. I cannot get LR to accept more than one folder. LR will yield results for 1 folder but not 2 folders. Any solution? I'm running 5.7.1 on an older Mac ...

Library module How to sync collections between categories?

LR 11.5 on windows 10, let say I have 3 seperate catalgories, if I create a smart collection in the first catalog, how do I copy this collection to the other rest of the catalog? I believe smart collections are sync when you import photos from one catalog to another, but what if I do not...

Collection management

Hello, I created a collections set, with a collection and a smart one as well, one of many to come. I thought I understood the concept of collections but I have a couple of issues I can't seem to solve. 1: One collection shows 7 items but in the library filter window I see 6 2: The smart...

Is there documentation on the various choices for keywords in Smart Collections?

I read a really good thread here that discussed that a space is considered an "OR" in a multiword-keyword and how that can bite you because you'll get images returned that have the any of the individual words. ....but it would be nice to see all the choices in the smart collection environment...

Smart Collection for Images That Need Saving

I thought I had created a Smart Collection for images that need saving, but it is not working. My parameters are noted below: But when I make a selection of the ones that supposedly meet those criteria and save them, the total never goes down. What am I doing wrong? Many thanks, I hope, TBC

What is your Smart Collections workflow for cataloging?

Do you have a workflow to best catalog your photos? If so, what is it?

About Security

Hi guyzz, im kinda new to lightroom and starting to build up catalog for my 40k archive, so, one things i cant really understand is, where are catalog settings, such as pick flags, color labels, stars and keywords are stored, to back it up on hdd, because I decided to use smart collections...

Library module Reset target of set of smart collections.

Hi outthere, In the library module I have a set of smart collections, based on ISO values. During the construction of the set I had selected 'All photographs' as a target folder. The filtering worked fine. But now I want to make another folder as a 'target' of the set. I can not do that. Does...

Library module Keyword within Library Module not working correctly

Hi there. Need some help with strange behaviour in Keyword Filtering I have worked with LR for about 5 years and I'm very happy with it. (former Aperture :D ) Since a few days I have trouble in filtering out some of my pictures based on a sett of Keywords. With the Smart Collection the same...

Library module Collection member as criterion for smart collection?

Operating System:Windows 10 Exact Lightroom Version (Help menu > System Info):7.1 (yes, I just upgraded) I would like to build some smart collections where one of the criteria is membership in a regular collection that is inside of a collection set. Is this possible? How? Phil

Limiting Smart Collection Scope to a Collection Set

Operating System: macOS Sierra Lightroom Version: CC 2015.12 (Please go to Help menu > System Info to double check the exact version number) Question or Description of Problem: Is is possible to create a smart collection inside a collection set and have it search only within the collections...

Troubleshooting Smart Collection

I initially created a smart collection as follows: Folder > Contains All > DDG_Photographs + Size > Less Than > .4 MP Where DDG_Photographs is the parent folder of (almost) my entire collection, including my scans folders. The smart collection is NOT pulling out images contained in a subfolder...

Sync Smart Collections

Hi, I am new to this forum. I reently installed LR and am loving its performance and capabilities versus Elements which I used for years. I'd like to be able to create a Smart Collection and have it sync to my iPhone. For some reason the box you normally click to make a collection sync is not...