Collection management

Hello, I created a collections set, with a collection and a smart one as well, one of many to come. I thought I understood the concept of collections but I have a couple of issues I can't seem to solve. 1: One collection shows 7 items but in the library filter window I see 6 2: The smart...

Very large Collections / ~sets slow down Lightroom Classic?

My main Lr machine is still a 2013 MacBook Pro 15" Retina w/ 16GB RAM. My "private" catalog holds 150,000 images and tends to be quite slow, whereas a fresh catalog is still reasonably responsive. I always thought that my 150,000 images catalog was slow because there are so many images. Then...

Reconnecting Collections to a new Catalog

I had a fault with LR Classic in Print Module. When clicking the Page Background colour selector LR closed down. After spending 10 hours at least online with Apple (Who were fantastic) and Adobe (less said the better) we identified the problem as a corrupt Catalog. Adobe created a new .Ircat...

Collections by client

Hi, I want to start (finally) using collections in Lightroom Classic. But I want to have smart collections by customer. Not all customers but for example the top ten or so. Where do I have to enter the customers name in the metadata so that a collection can pick it up automatically?

Re-Sync LR Classic Collections

I recently switched from LR CC to LR Classic and synched all the files to LR Classic. I was able to break the sync between LR Classic and LR Cloud and sync from LR Classic to the Cloud. I deleted all files on LR CC, but found several files which did not get synced so I needed to restore. Now my...

Completely Remove Virtual Copy Made When Collection Selected

I'm looking for a (hopefully) simpler/better way to complete the above. I've created a collection of photos. As I am reviewing them, sometimes I create a VC to play around with different settings. If I decide to abandon that approach, the only choice I had is to remove the VC from the...

Having sync issues between Lr (Cloud based) and LrC (Classic)

I used to be able to create albums in the cloud based version of Lightroom (Lr), and since my Lightroom Classic is connected to the cloud, I would see a new collection in LrC that would match the newly created album in Lr. Now, this doesn't happen anymore. I only noticed yesterday, but it might...

Add Exported Pictures to Collection

I know this can be done in a two step operation but I was wondering if anyone has seen a plug-in where you could specify the collection to add a photo to in the Export dialog box? The use is that I create exports for posting to different camera clubs. I wouldn't mind having a link back to which...

Add Result from EDIT-IN to Collection Source Picture is in

Hope the following makes sense. What I am looking to achieve is that when I edit-in PS from LR the resulting image is added to the collection the source is, Find the image I need to work on. I know it's in a Collection Set. Select the top of the Collection Set Use the Filter to find the image...

Copy Photos in Collection to External Drive?

Hi. I'm new to LR and have already learned a lot through this site, but I'm still getting used to the folder and collection structure. I've imported photos from several trips into LR. The photos are spread across several folders on an external hard drive. I'd like to move a copy of each of the...

Deleting Photos via Collection

Have tried searching here and in Victoria's Missing FAQ to no avail. Looking for a tip on the steps you use to destructively delete one or more photos you run across via a Collection (from both the Lightroom catalog and the disk -- not just the smart or dumb collection view itself.) My...

Is there a shortcut to select a Collection and all its images

When I click a Collection the view switches to the images of the Collection with 1 Selected image. Is there a way to click a Collection which switches to the images of the Collection but also selects all the images in the Collection. Currently I have to use Ctrl-A, which whilst not a huge deal...

Replacing an image in place with a new better scan, while retaining edits, orientation, crops, keywords, and collections?

I have an unusual problem: I scanned a few thousand slides, and imported them into Lightroom Classic, fixed orientations, created some collections, did some edits, etc. I also retained the RAW scanner output - which isn't actually useful in Lightroom - it's scanner-specific, and LR doesn't...

Collection Sync Question

I hope this is not a stupid question. I just upgraded my Mac Laptop. I have all my photos and catalog. The only issue is that only 1 of My Collection (the most recent one I created) is different from the same collection on my old computer. For example in the old computer I have a Collection...

How to export a partial catalog for some selected images/ collections from a PC to another?

Hi, I need to know how to export a catalog for some selected images and/or folders or collections to be copied with its all adjustment and keywords, and import it into another catalog. let's say I have some photos on my laptop and I did some adjustment and keywords to some of my images. now I...

Library module Changed Order of Collections into first sets, then smart, then dumb...

HI all. First time post - but very long time LR user. Has anybody else noticed that all of a sudden their Lightroom collections are now being forced into groupings of collection sets, smart collections then 'dumb' collections. I know many of us use John Beardsworth's Collections workflow...

Online Lightroom Collection for rating

Dear all, I have very rarely used the online lightroom catalogues and I wanted to ask your help related to the following question. I would like to upload a Collection that me and a client of mine can use for rating. Is it possible for a collection to have two types of ratings? Can someone that I...

Search - Images in One Collection Only ("To Sort")

Hey all.. I have a collection called "To Sort" - some sort of dumping ground I thought was a great idea at the time. So now it has a large number of images without an easy way to see if they have been applied to another collection... Is there a way to find images that are in this collection...

How do you create a collection of just one person?

I would like to create a slideshow for a particular individual. Photos can have other individuals in them but every photo should also include this one person. I have clicked the face icon in the task bar and have confirmed the vast majority of faces in multiple folders so Lr seems to...

Individual Collection Deletions

Hi Folks, I'm a new member from NJ, USA. Merry Xmas to all who observe. I searched for this problem before asking and didn't find anything. When I try to delete a photo from a collection the entire collection is emptied. This is the same whether I answer Yes or No to the pop-up question...

Smart Collection for people

Can anyone tell me how to create a Smart Collection based on people's names? If I create one with Keywords > contains all > John Smith (for example), it includes any photo that has a John in it and a Smith in it. What I want is for it to include only photos of John Smith specifically. I hope...