Smart One Technology (Hong Kong) Company Limited is an independent, privately owned company located in Main China. Smart One is a well established name in the cards industry, and continues to increase its presence worldwide. Over the last 20 years Smart One has transformed innovative and first to market technology into market leading card solutions that have been adopted extensively across all markets.

With a strong track record of successful implementation, Smart One has over 500 customers, all of whom rely upon the great capability of Smart One products and solutions to meet their requirements. The company has a reputation for high production technology and quality, delivered in the quickest time, with comprehensive customer support. Customers include global brands and market leaders.

We operate a 10,000 sq mt secure facility in Main China, and Our Factory is specifically designed for plastic cards with magnetic stripe, chip encoding, embossing, hot stamping, relief, brushed, spot UV, barcode and other processes. We specialize in creating plastic membership cards, VIP cards, loyalty cards, gift cards, RFID chip cards, photo ID cards, access control cards, key tags, custom shaped cards, etc. They're all available in any color, transparent or clear, frosted, custom shapes and much more! In addition, with our customers' requirements, we also adopt ABS material to print recycled cards devoting to environmental protection industry.

As a RFID products manufacturing expert, Smart One is glad to offer custom designed plastic cards to meet all your business needs. Whether you want to purchase wholesale membership cards or create membership cards with your customized design, Smart One has the perfect solution for your business. With no minimum order requirements, we can produce your cards quickly, saving you time and money, and giving you the flexibility to offer limited time campaigns or respond individually to your customers' needs. Smart One is committed to fast turnaround times for producing plastic cards for all your business needs. We provide door to door delivery service to help keep your company ahead of the competition. If you have any questions about plastic cards, feel free to contact us, [email protected] we will respond within 24 hours or less!

We have all the capabilities you require for the generation of excellent plastic cards. These required capabilities include an accomplished staff, State of the Art Equipment and a Quality Control Systems that are the essentials in the creation of astounding plastic cards. Such as Hideberger printing machine,automatic lamination system,non-contact implant system with high accuracy,high efficient contact chip integrated packaging system,and personal data processing system such as embossing and tipping,thermal printing and laser printing, ect. guarrantee quality is first.

Below are some of the plastic card products available at Smart One Technology: