Juan Carlos, the former Spanish monarch, traveled to Spain on Thursday for the first time since he left his country almost two years ago amid fraud investigations.

The visit by Juan Carlos, who now lives in Abu Dhabi, the capital of the United Arab Emirates, came after prosecutors in Switzerland and Spain dropped fraud cases, notably over whether he had received and laundered millions from kickbacks.

Juan Carlos, 84, will be in Spain until Monday, spending part of his stay in a northwestern beach town that is hosting a weekend sailing regatta. Before returning to the United Arab Emirates, he will meet his wife, Queen Sofía, and other members of his family at the royal palace on the outskirts of Madrid, according to a statement issued late Wednesday by the royal household, which stressed that Abu Dhabi was now his residence “in a permanent and stable fashion.”

In December, Swiss prosecutors dropped a case against Juan Carlos over suspicions that he had received about $100 million in kickbacks in connection with a high-speed rail contract in Saudi Arabia that was awarded to a Spanish consortium. After a three-year investigation, the Geneva prosecutor’s office concluded that it could not find evidence linking a payment into a Swiss bank account to the rail contract, but fined the bank over a reporting failure connected to the case.

Two months ago, Spanish prosecutors followed the Swiss example by also shelving their investigations against Juan Carlos, partly because the monarch’s lawyers successfully argued that his past dealings were covered by a statute of limitations and by the immunity granted to him while he reigned. Over the past two years, the former monarch also paid over 5 million euros, $5.2 million, in back taxes to Spain.

Juan Carlos came to the throne in 1975, only two days after the death of the dictator Francisco Franco, and he was a key figure in Spain’s transition to democracy, facing down an attempted military coup in 1981. But his lavish lifestyle, extramarital affairs and business dealings started to come under a harsh spotlight a decade ago, when Spain was also plunged into a banking crisis that forced its government to negotiate an international bailout.

Thank you for your patience while we verify access. If you are in Reader mode please exit and log into your Times account, or subscribe for all of The Times.

Thank you for your patience while we verify access.

Already a subscriber? Log in.

Want all of The Times? Subscribe.