Oconee Fall Line Technical College

Founded by a merger of two technical institutions, Oconee Fall Line Technical College is a 2-year technical and vocational school serving an 11 county area in eastern Georgia. OFLTC confers degrees and certificates in more than 100 academic programs. Additionally, the OFLTC Special Populations Program provides assistance for single parents and economically disadvantaged individuals during their college careers. OFLTC guarantees that if any alumni fall short of their employer’s competency standards within two years after graduation, the college will offer retraining free of charge.

Admissions

Key Admissions Stats

Institution Type

Public

Not for Profit

Coed

Need Aware

This school may consider an applicant’s financial situation when deciding admission

Level of Institution

2 Year

Campus Setting

Suburb or town

Admissions Requirements

SAT

No

ACT

No

Transcript

No

Important Deadlines

Admitted Student Stats

In-State Students

100%

Academics

Key Academic Stats

Highest Degree Offered

At least 2, but less than 4 academic years

Total Number of Students

1,705

Total Number of Undergrads

1,705

Academic Calendar

Semester

See your fit

Classroom Sizes

Student:Faculty Ratio

11:1

US National: 21:1

Tuition, Cost & Aid

Key Financial Stats

Average Net Price

$6,067

Calculate your net cost

Tuition

In-State Tuition In-state tuition is the tuition charged by institutions to those students who meet the state's or institution's residency requirements. In-district tuition is the tuition charged by the institution to those students residing in the locality in which they attend school and may be a lower rate than in-state tuition if offered by the institution.

$3,072

Out-of-State Tuition Out-of-state tuition is the tuition charged by institutions to those students who do not meet the state’s or institution’s residency requirements. Out-of-district tuition is the tuition charged by the institution to those students not residing in the locality in which they attend school.

$5,472

Additional Costs

Books and Supplies

$763

Aid & Grants

Students Receiving Gift Aid Percent of undergraduate students awarded federal gift aid. Federal gift aid includes any grant or scholarship aid awarded, from the federal government, a state or local government, the institution, and other sources known by the institution.

54%

Average Aid Per Year

$9,766

Students Receiving Grants Percent of undergraduate students awarded grant aid. Grant aid includes any grant or scholarship aid awarded, from the federal government, a state or local government, the institution, and other sources known by the institution.

54%

Average Federal Grant Aid Per Year

$7,413

Average Institution Grant Aid Per Year

$1,883

Student Loans

Students Borrowing Loans Loans to students - Any monies that must be repaid to the lending institution for which the student is the designated borrower. Includes all Title IV subsidized and unsubsidized loans and all institutionally- and privately-sponsored loans. Does not include PLUS and other loans made directly to parents.

3%

Average Loan Amount Per Year

$3,055

Average Debt at Graduation The median federal debt of undergraduate borrowers who graduated. This figure includes only federal loans; it excludes private student loans and Parent PLUS loans.

$3,644

Median Monthly Loan Payment The median monthly loan payment for student borrowers who completed, if it were repaid over 10 years at a 5.05% interest rate.

$47

Campus Life

Key Campus Stats

Student Gender

Male

Female

36%

64%

Size of Town

Suburb or town

LGBTQIA Student Resource Groups

No

On Campus Women's Center

No

Housing

On-campus living required of freshman

No

Athletics

Varsity Athletics Conference Primary

Not applicable

Campus Safety

24-HR security patrol

No

Campus emergency phones

No

After Graduation

Post Grad Stats

Average Salary

6 years after graduation

$24,600

What Students Are Saying

Similar Colleges

See All