Oconee Fall Line Technical College

Oconee Fall Line Technical College is located in Sandersville, GA and offers nursing degree programs. Below we’ve included some basic information about Oconee Fall Line Technical College. You can view detailed information about the nusring programs available at this school here: Oconee Fall Line Technical College College Overview

Frequently Asked Questions About Oconee Fall Line Technical College

What Type of School is Oconee Fall Line Technical College? 2-year, Public

What Awards are Offered: Less than one year certificate; One but less than two years certificate; Associate’s degree; Two but less than 4 years certificate

What is the Campus Setting? Rural: Fringe

Is There Campus Housing? No

What is the Student Population? 1452

How Many Undergraduate Students Are There? 1452

What is the Oconee Fall Line Technical College Graduation Rate? 34%

What is the Transfer Out Rate: 2%

Cohort Year: Fall 2014

What is the net cost to attend Oconee Fall Line Technical College? $3,979

Largest Program: –

IPEDS ID: 420431

Oconee Fall Line Technical College Address

1189 Deepstep Rd

Sandersville, GA 31082

Website: www.oftc.edu

Latitude: 33.000197

Longitude: -82.841655

* Cohort Year represents the year for which students began their studies and applies to Graduation and Transfer Out Rates at Oconee Fall Line Technical College.

** Net Price is Average Net Price for 2016-2017 generated for full-time beginning Oconee Fall Line Technical College undergraduate students who were awarded grant or scholarship aid from federal, state or local governments, or the institution. For public institutions only students paying the in-state or in-district rate are included. For institutions that charge students by program, net price is generated for the institution’s largest program.

NA (Not applicable) – Graduation rate, transfer-out rate, and the net price are not applicable to institutions that do not have full-time, first-time degree-seeking undergraduate students in the applicable cohort year or the financial aid year.

TAGS: Oconee Fall Line Technical College