Oconee Fall Line Technical College is a public institution situated in Sandersville, Georgia. The rural area surrounding OFTC is great for students who love a peaceful atmosphere.

What Is Oconee Fall Line Technical College Known For?

The highest award offered at OFTC is the undergraduate certificate.

Where Is Oconee Fall Line Technical College?

Contact details for OFTC are given below.

Contact Details Address: 1189 Deepstep Rd, Sandersville, GA 31082 Phone: 478-553-2050 Website: www.oftc.edu

How Do I Get Into OFTC?

You can apply to OFTC online at: myoftc.force.com/apply/TX_CommunitiesSelfReg?startURL=%2Fapply%2FTargetX_Base__Portal

Oconee Fall Line Technical College has an open admissions policy. This means that the school accepts all applicants assuming that they meet very basic requirements, such as having a high school diploma or equivalent.

Can I Afford Oconee Fall Line Technical College?

Student Loan Debt

It's not uncommon for college students to take out loans to pay for school. In fact, almost 66% of students nationwide depend at least partially on loans. At OFTC, approximately 5% of students took out student loans averaging $5,077 a year. That adds up to $20,308 over four years for those students.

The student loan default rate at OFTC is 12.2%. This is higher than the national default rate of 10.1% so you should proceed with caution when taking out student loans.

Oconee Fall Line Technical College Undergraduate Student Diversity

There are 1,705 undergraduate students at OFTC, with 322 being full-time and 1,383 being part-time.

Gender Diversity

Of the 322 full-time undergraduates at OFTC, 33% are male and 67% are female.

Racial-Ethnic Diversity

The racial-ethnic breakdown of Oconee Fall Line Technical College students is as follows.

Race/Ethnicity Number of Grads Asian 0 Black or African American 126 Hispanic or Latino 9 White 179 International Students 0 Other Races/Ethnicities 8

Online Learning at Oconee Fall Line Technical College

In 2020-2021, 962 students took at least one online class at the school.

The following chart shows how the online learning population at OFTC has changed over the last few years.

This school is the 51st most popular in Georgia for online learning according to the online graduations recorded by the Department of Education for the academic year 2020-2021.

Online Growth Rankings of OFTC

The average growth rate over the last four years of online students at Oconee Fall Line Technical College was 43.8%. This is the #723 largest growth rate of all schools that are only partially online. This refers to all students at OFTC regardless of major.

When we speak of partially online, we are referring to schools whose online population is less than 50% of its total student body. Mostly online refers to those with online populations greater than or equal to 50%.

References

*The racial-ethnic minorities count is calculated by taking the total number of students and subtracting white students, international students, and students whose race/ethnicity was unknown. This number is then divided by the total number of students at the school to obtain the racial-ethnic minorities percentage.

College Factual

National Center for Education Statistics