Oconee Fall Line Technical College is a public community college located in Sandersville, GA. It offers 93 programs for degree/certificate. (Of that, the distance learning opportunity (online degrees/courses) is given to 35 programs).

It is accredited by Council on Occupational Education.

The 2024 tuition & fees of Oconee Fall Line Technical College is $3,201 for Georgia residents and $5,601 for out-of-state students. Its tuition & fees is cheaper than that of Georgia public community colleges' average ($6,332).

The school has 1,819 students, which is lower than Georgia community collleges' average (2,235). In addition, 584 students have enrolled online exclusively. The students to faculty ratio is 11 to 1, which is lower than the average ratio (15 to 1) of Georgia community colleges.

2024 Tuition & Fees

The following table shows the 2023-2024 tuition & fees, books & supplies, and living costs at Oconee Fall Line Technical College. Then, we compare its costs to Georgia community colleges and all U.S. community colleges.

In addition, the chart shows tuition trends over the last 5 years. You can check more comprehensive tuition information on the cost of attendance page.

2024 COA

Comparison

Offered Degrees/Programs By Area of Study

Oconee Fall Line Technical College offers Certificate and Associate's programs. The following table summarizes the number of offered programs by degree types.

The following tables list each major program along with offered degrees and online availability. The number in each column indicates the number of awarded degrees and/or certificates of the program. It includes completers through on-campus classes, partially online classes, and only online classes.

Student Population

There are 1,819 students at Oconee Fall Line Technical College including both full-time and part-time students. By gender, 613 male students and 1,092 female students are attending the school.

The following table shows the total number of students by gender and attending status at the school. You can check more enrollment information of the school.

Distance Learning (Online Degree/Program) Enrollment

Of the 1,819 total students, 1,112 students enrolled through distance learning (584 students enrolled exclusively and 528 enrolled in some online courses).

School Profile and Academic Overview

The following table shows directory information and summarizes important academic and admission characteristics for Oconee Fall Line Technical College.