This dissertation discusses the different ways in which French, Dutch and German politicians have deliberated and regulated the issue of Islamic head and body covering, which became a salient issue in all three countries at different times since the 1990s. In order to explain country-specific policies on the hijab, this dissertation analyses the ways in which the hijab was framed in the political realm as a paradigmatic symbol of problems requiring a policy response. The central thesis of this dissertation is that national institutional and policy histories offer specific opportunities and constraints, which shape how issues are constructed as problems within the political realm, giving rise to particular policy solutions. However, going beyond static, structural approaches towards understanding countries’ different policy outcomes, this dissertation takes a political-process approach that focuses on the actors involved in those framing contests, the shifting power they have to push for their construction of reality, and the legal-institutional setting in which these policy-formation processes take place. This dissertation focuses on three institutional settings as particularly relevant structures in shaping policy processes on the hijab: institutionalised state-church relations, institutions of citizenship and migrant incorporation, and gender machineries and policies, as well as their underlying cleavages. The policy debates and policy responses will be analysed from the onset of the debates in each country (starting with the Netherlands in 1985) until 2007, a period that includes several important national and international events such as September 11, 2001. Such a comparison over time allows for an explanation that is sensitive to changes in policy debates and responses within countries and hence to possible trends of convergence between countries. This thesis therefore aims to answer the following two research questions: 1. What differences and similarities exist in the framing and policy responses to the hijab in France, the Netherlands, and Germany and how have these developed over time from 1985 until 2007? 2. To what extent can institutional structures, divergent policy pasts of state-church relations, migrant incorporation and women’s emancipation, and shifting party constellations explain differences in the framing and regulation of the hijab? The study uses similar data for all three countries: a qualitative frame analysis of all parliamentary documents on this issue, complemented with jurisprudence that shaped policy responses and media extracts.