Christina Hall has filed for divorce from husband Josh Hall after three years of marriage.

TMZ reports that both Josh and Christina have filed separate documents in Orange County, CA, with Josh citing Tuesday July 8 as the date of separation. The Christina on the Coast star's husband has claimed "irreconcilable differences" for the reason for the dissolution.

Why did Christina file for divorce?

Christina and Josh have both filed separately, with Josh asking for alimony from Christina and wants the court to eliminate her ability to collect from him".

He also has asked the court to "divvy up what was theirs respectively before they got hitched".

Christina Hall's blended family...

Christina has been married twice before: She married to Flip or Flop co-star Tarek El Moussa from 2009 to 2016 – their divorce was finalized in January 2018, and they share two children, daughter Taylor, 13, and son Braydon, eight.

In 2018 she wed British TV star Ant Anstead in December 2018 before filing for divorce in November 2020 – which was finalized in June 2021. They share son Hudson, four.

How did Christina meet Josh Hall?

Real estate personality Christina met Josh in 2021.

"I felt immediately crazy protective over him and wanted to keep him for myself and get to know each other before the tornado (media attention) hit," she told her followers, announcing the romance and why she had kept it private initially.

When​​​​ did Christina Hall get married?

It was reported in April 2022 that they had married sometime over the prior six months, and the divorce documents reveal they officially tied the knot on October 6, 2021, a month after they announced their engagement.

In September 2022 they had a second ceremony in Hawaii; Christina captioned a photo on Instagram from the day: "Shared vows in front of family and our close friends. Everything in life has led me to where I am right now, which is exactly where I want to be. My dream man on the dreamiest island. Maui holds a special place in my heart. What an amazing night filled with love."

She was walked down the aisle by her two sons.

Is Christina Hall on HGTV?

The news comes as HGTV is preparing to launch a brand new series that reconnects Christina and Tarek, alongside Josh and Tarek's wife Heather.

The exes will star in a brand new HGTV show called The Flip Off, which will see the two couples compete to "find, buy, renovate and flip a house for the biggest financial gain".

The series, which was announced on Wednesday, May 15, is slated to air in early 2025. Watch the first trailer - which promises sparks will fly - below:

The divorce news comes after Christina told E! News only this week that "communication" is what makes their relationship work.

"Keep communication open," she added. "And then having alone time when we can, whether it's date night, going on little trips—just things like that."