In a new chat with The Breakfast Club, The-Dream talked a lot about love: past love, his new love, Lalonne Martinez, and what he has learned after three marriages. The singer also spoke on Lil Wayne’s penchant for going after his exes, why his marriage to Christina Milian didn’t work, and whether or not he cheated on her (I know you all remember that infamous pic of him on the beach frolicking with another woman while they were still married…). Here is the piping hot tea from that interview:

What Makes His Third Marriage To Lalonne Martinez Different From The Last Two

You know I’m a hopeless romantic. I love being married. At least this time I don’t have the drama around it. It’s the non-drama. Because I don’t call you to see where you’re at. I don’t do that. It’s that stuff. It’s that uneasy thing, especially in this business. I need to be creative and do my thing, so I don’t have time for the nonsense.

But I’m always ready to settle down. I’m built a certain type of way.

How He Met His New Wife

We met maybe years ago. She would actually remind me that we met in crossing at the office of one of my friends. I had no idea. It was just this random thing. It wasn’t like she was seeking me out and I was seeking her out. It was just one of those things: I ended up free and she ended up free. And it was like, “Aye, you’re cool. I’ve had enough drama.”

After Three Proposals, When Does He Know He Wants To Pop The Question?

I don’t think it’s a particular time. I guess it’s a feeling that kind of comes over of you wanting to or seeing yourself with this particular person, the way that you are then, over the rest of your life. It’s just at that particular moment that you feel that way. Unfortunately, for a lot of people, especially today, when two people are growing, somebody can grow left and somebody can grow right. It’s hard to maintain that particular moment you were in, even if it’s for two months or four months. I try to tell people now about maintaining exactly who you are. If that’s not you, don’t go down the aisle. More so for women, don’t just say yes because your girls are looking at you, and you want to get married because your girl got married, and there’s a guy standing in front of you with a ring in his hand. You don’t have to feel like you have to say yes just because of the moment. You can say, “You know what? I’m not ready. I’m not ready for a lot of reasons. My family doesn’t want me to do it.” In our situation, with Christina, it had more to do with a family thing than it had to do with me and her. When you have that combed out section of just you and the other person, you’re good. But when you add like four other personalities into this, it turns into something else. If the other person can’t shield that off, and they let it in, then usually you have a problem. Most marriages end in that way. You’re marrying the family.

On That Infamous Pic Of Him Cheating On Christina Milian On A Beach

Is that really how it went? Ya’ll been looking at her show. Is that how it went down?

How He Knew Their Marriage Was Over

It’s when you don’t feel happy anymore. I mean, it’s not like you’re not trying to work through whatever it is. But it’s some things you can use logic and common sense to come to a conclusion. Cheating wasn’t the reason why…

If He Ever Talked To Lil Wayne About The Rapper Dating His Ex-Wives

We had ONE conversation. We don’t have conversations about having the same taste in women. And I didn’t ask why. I don’t ask anybody why they do anything. Everybody’s grown. Do whatever you want to do, but it is what it is. He put in a phone call to me, just being a gentleman. It’s my ex. It’s still your ex. I wouldn’t do that to him, but we have two different personalities.