The-Dream says that he attempted suicide in the wake of his "failing" marriage to Christina Milian. In a lengthy blog post Friday, the music producer (real name: Terius Nash), 32, opens up about his sudden split from Milian, 28.

The couple wed in a quickie ceremony in September, with a lavish Rome ceremony in December. They welcomed daughter Violet in March. But on July 10, a photo surfaced of The-Dream, 32, nuzzling his assistant in the Caribbean; that same day, a rep claimed the spouses had separated late last year.

"I've cried about this for months, after interviews, after prayer and I've tried to take my own life at a point because of the failure that was looming," Nash writes. "This is not to justify anything, it's true emotion! It's a real thing that involves real people!"

While he declines to go into specifics about their marital problems, he says, "It's easy to say that it's because of another woman or a new relationship but truthfully, IT'S NOT."

"I take FULL RESPONSIBILITY for misleading everyone into thinking everything was fine and okay when we knew problems existed for awhile," Nash writes. "I would NEVER intentionally hurt a soul and everyone around me knows that! There was so much going on in me and Christina's personal world that I tried to deal with it as delicately as I could and tried to regain my footing."

He continues: "I am Human and people fall in and out of Love all the time… This is Life. Nothing’s promised or perfect, neither am I. I am not proud that I lost something we once had…LOVE!"

"I'm sorry for the embarrassment to everyone involved! If there's anyone to blame and you can't fathom this happening, please blame me and me alone for not being upfront! Even though we were trying to overcome personal things between us, I was just simply scared and embarrassed to let everyone know we WERE FAILING and HAVE NOW FAILED!"

PHOTOS: Stars caught cheating

So far, Christina Milian hasn't addressed her ex's recent blog post. On July 12, she tweeted, "Whatever you think, believe it." As recently as late June, she referred to her husband as "my boo."