Being married is one thing, but working with your partner all day every day and in the media spotlight – we can only imagine what stresses that could involve. While some celebrity couples appear to make the perfect dynamic duo when it comes to getting work done, Christina Hall dishes on what it’s really like filming her TV show with her spouse.

Christina Hall rose to fame working with her ex-husband Tarek El-Moussa. The two were the faces of Flip or Flop for almost 10 years. Nowadays, Christina and Tarek have new partners and she’s branched out with her own series, Christina on the Coast. In a wild turn of events, the two are set to star on the same screen next year alongside their new spouses in a new series, The Flip Off.

Christina Hall dishes on working with her spouse

Almost seven years since Christina Hall and Tarek El Moussa filed for divorce, the two are now in new relationships and set to go head to head against one another in a new reality TV show.

Despite being used to working alongside her former husband on screen, Christina exclusively tells Us Weekly she faces “challenges” starring opposite her current spouse, Joshua Hall.

The two can be seen making tongue in cheek remarks at one another in episodes of Christina’s shows. However, she explains everything seen on the show isn’t totally “real.”

“Bickering on camera is not necessarily full reality… It’s like a character. So, there’s just so much conversation and dynamics and things that have to be talked about on and off-camera. I mean, it is challenging to work with your spouse, especially if they’re not used to being on TV.”

Christina’s hubby, Josh, is set to appear in her new Christina on the Coast episodes but his main focus is reovating properties in Tennessee.

Christina and Tarek worked together almost a decade

As Christina reveals working with a spouse can be tough at times, she and Josh are currently in the midst of filming The Flip Off. They’re yet to film with Tarek and his new wife, Heather Rae El Moussa.

The HGTV star previously worked with Tarek on Flip or Flop from 2013 until 2022.

The two couples are now set to star in a show which sees them “battle to see who can find, buy, renovate, and flip a house for the biggest financial gain.”

Christina and Tarek were married seven years before going their separate ways. They also share two children, Taylor and Brayden.

By the looks of Heather and Christina’s Instagram pages, the families are co-parenting like a dream and often take to social media to share comedic videos about how similar they look.