Neil Young

Neil Percival Young (born November 12, 1945) is a Canadian singer-songwriter and musician. He began performing in a group covering Shadowsinstrumentals in Canada in 1960, before moving to California in 1966, where he co-founded the band Buffalo Springfield together with StephenStills and Richie Furay, and later joined Crosby, Stills & Nash in 1969. He released his first album in 1968 and has since forged a successful andacclaimed solo career, spanning over 45 years and 35 studio albums, with a continuous and uncompromizing exploration of musical styles. TheRock and Roll Hall of Fame we ...read more

Neil Percival Young (born November 12, 1945) is a Canadian singer-songwriter and musician. He began performing in a group covering Shadowsinstrumentals in Canada in 1960, before moving to California in 1966, where he co-founded the band Buffalo Springfield together with StephenStills and Richie Furay, and later joined Crosby, Stills & Nash in 1969. He released his first album in 1968 and has since forged a successful andacclaimed solo career, spanning over 45 years and 35 studio albums, with a continuous and uncompromizing exploration of musical styles. TheRock and Roll Hall of Fame website describes Young as "one of rock and roll's greatest songwriters and performers". He was inducted into theHall of Fame twice, first as a solo artist in 1995, and second as a member of Buffalo Springfield in 1997. Young's music is characterized by his distinctive guitar work, deeply personal lyrics and characteristic alto or high tenor singing voice. Althoughhe accompanies himself on several different instruments, including piano and harmonica, his idiosyncratic electric and acoustic guitar playingare the defining characteristics of a varyingly ragged and melodic sound. While Young has experimented with differing music styles throughout avaried career, including electronic music, most of his best known work is either acoustic folk-rock and country rock or electric, amplified hardrock (most often in collaboration with the band Crazy Horse). Musical styles such as alternative rock and grunge also adopted elements fromYoung. His influence has caused some to dub him the "Godfather of Grunge. « hide