Blind Lake by Robert Charles Wilson (2003) 399 p.

Now this is a real classic of a cover: a marvellous gem from the late 1990s/early 2000s period of awfully generated computer graphics.

Fortunately it’s a real classic of a first contact story, too. The titular Blind Lake is a federal scientific facility in Minnesota, where researchers use a network of quantum computers and scientific processes they don’t quite understand to study life on a dry and arid planet orbiting 47 Ursae Majoris. They cannot interact or communicate in any way: they can only watch, observing an individual of the large, chitinous sentient species they have dubbed the Subject. The Subject lives in a city, one of many on the planet, and lives a life which to human eyes seems tediously repetitive: he works in a factory assembling machine parts, feeds in a dank well with others of his species, draws glyphs on the wall of his sleeping chamber and has his blood sucked in the night by tiny creatures which might be parasites, symbiotes or offspring. The researchers don’t know; there’s much they don’t know, and they resist the urge to anthropomorphise while collating endless observations.

On the same day that a trio of journalists (including our plucky yet flawed hero) arrive at Blind Lake to begin writing a piece for a New York magazine, disquieting ripples begin occurring in the community. Traffic is backed up; the gates appear to to be closed. The occasional security lockdown isn’t unknown to Blind Lake, but this one also involves a block against communication with the outside world: no data comes in, no data goes out. As the hours and then days go by without explanation, complete with an unmanned military resupply and fatal attempt by one of the few thousand stuck inside the facility to get past the gates, it becomes clear that the authorities have placed an unexplained, indefinite quarantine on Blind Lake. At the same time, the Subject breaks his monotonous routine and departs the city for the desert wilderness of his planet.