To Ride Pegasus [Book 1 of the Saga of the Talents] by Anne McCaffrey

They were an extraordinary people who read minds, healed bodies, diverted disasters, foretold the future--and became pariahs in their own land. They were the Talented--an elite cadre that had stepped out of the everyday human race--to enter their own.

1973

Ballantine Paperback ISBN:0-345-33603-8

First of the Talent Series

Pegasus in Flight [Book 2 of the Saga of the Talents] by Anne McCaffrey

As director of the Jerhattan Parapsychic Center, telepath Rhyssa Owen coordinated the job assignments for psychically gifted Talents. And though she had her hands full dealing with the unreasonable demand for kinetics to work on the space platform that would be humankind's stepping-stone to the stars, she was always ready to welcome new Talents to the Center. Feisty and streetwise, twelve-year-old Tirla used her extraordinary knack for languages to eke out a living in the Linear developments. 1990

Second of the Talent Series

Pegasus in Space [Book 3 of the Saga of the Talents] by Anne McCaffrey

For an overpopulated Earth whose resources are strained to the breaking point, there is only one place to look for relief: straight up. With the successful completion of the Padrugoi Space Station, humanity has at last achieved its first large-scale permanent presence in space. Additional bases are feverishly being built on the Moon and on Mars, stepping stones to the greatest adventure in all history: the colonization of alien worlds.

April 2000

Del Rey Hardcover ISBN:0-345-43466-8

Third of the Talent Series

The Rowan by Anne McCaffery

Rowan, a telepathic, telekinetic three-year-old, is the sole survivor of a mining disaster on a frontier planet. As she matures, her powers grow until she becomes one of a handful of "Primes" with the Federal Telepath & Teleport network, the organization responsible for telecommunications and shipping of cargo throughout the galaxy. Rowan finds herself alienated from humanity and her coworkers due to her unique talents and tremendous responsibilities until she senses Jeff Raven, a fellow talent, on the fringes of explored space. A bonding develops between the two when they are thrown together to help defeat aliens bent on destroying the human race. The Rowan was expanded from the short story "Lady in the Tower" in Get Off the Unicorn. 1990

Fourth of the Talent Series

Damia by Anne McCaffery

In this second volume of the trilogy begun with The Rowan , McCaffrey introduces Damia Raven, brilliant and willful daughter of Angharad Gwyn (the Rowan) and Jeff Raven, leaders of the psionic Talents of Federal Telepath & Teleport, who make interstellar commerce possible. The precocious Damia's difficult childhood is made tolerable by the care and solicitude of Afra Lyon, her parents' valued friend and assistant, who secretly loves the child as much as he did her mother. Maturing as a Prime--the most powerful of the orders of psis--Damia is sent to run the FT&T Tower on the new colony of Iota Aurigae. She lives there in petulant loneliness, having rejected or alienated all Talented potential mates, until she touches the alien mind of Sodan, many light-years away. Concerned about an alien invasion like the one suffered a generation previously, her family sends Afra to evaluate the dangers of Damia's infatuation. In a forceful resolution, Damia suffers a deep loss but finds her salvation.

1993

Puntam ISBN: 0-399-13817-X

Fifth of the Talent Series

Damia's Children by Anne McCaffery

McCaffrey introduces another generation in her saga of a family of powerful psionic Talents ( The Rowan and Damia ) raised to serve the Nine Star League. The eight children of Damia and Afra Raven-Lyon approach the threshold of maturity on Iota Aurogae, where they have been raised with young Mrdinis, the only other intelligent life that humankind has encountered--save for the pernicious Hive Culture, which has sought to destroy all other species in its drive to expand through the universe. The eldest teenager, Laria, is sent to the homeworld of the Mrdinis to improve relations between the two species. Thian, the oldest boy, encounters residual human prejudice and almost loses his life when he serves as liaison with a mixed human-Mrdini fleet. The other children contribute their own Talents and insight during stressful periods of human-nonhuman interaction.

1993

Sixth of the Talent Series

Lyon's Pride by Anne McCaffery

In this sequel to Damia's Children , the psionically Talented children of Damia Gwyn-Raven and Afra Lyon are pushed closer to the forefront of the struggle between the human Nine Star League and their alien Mrdini allies against the blind expansionism of the insect-like Hive culture that threatens both their civilizations. Rojer, like his siblings a T-1 at the most powerful level of Talent, is assigned to provide communication and transport for a squadron following a Hiver vessel. When he refuses a command by the Mrdini Captain Prtglm to launch missiles psionically against an occupied Hiver planet, he barely escapes while Prtglm kills his Mrdni companions, complicating an already delicate situation. A debate sharpens within the human community and with the Mrdini over the fate of the Hive colonies, with some humans and most of the Mrdinis holding out for complete destruction. Another large faction of humanity, which has eschewed war for generations, seeks a less bloodthirsty solution, such as isolation and containment.

1994

Seventh of the Talent Series

The Tower and the Hive by Anne McCaffery

For generations, the descendents of the powerful telepath known as the Rowan have used their various Talents to help mankind--some are powerful telepaths, others can teleport through space, others are empathic healers. The clan has grown powerful. They have led Earth to ally itself with the alien Mrdini, and together the two races have held back the predatory Hivers, a deadly insectoid species that kills all life it finds. Like all powerful families, the Rowan clan has also made enemies. There are those who say the treaties with the Mrdini gave away too much--especially, that the Mrdini get more than their fair share of new living space as habitable planets are discovered--that the Hivers should have been exterminated by now, and that far too much power is concentrated in one family. The clan has two goals to keep the peace: to help the Mrdini control population growth, so that newly discovered planets are distributed more evenly, and to put a final halt to Hiver advances. They are confident of success--if they can survive sabotage and assassination attempts aimed at destroying all they have worked for.

1999