Bio: Paula Hayes is a poet who lives in Memphis, Tennessee, the same place where rock and roll was birthed and where the ghost of Elvis still hangs around Beale Street. She finds the presence of such a rich musical history in the town she lives in to be right on track with transforming one as a poet into a bard.

Candy Darling Riding a New York Subway (The Subway Poems)

“You should be in movies”

“Tenth of always…no twelfth of always” (Candy Darling and Andy Warhol, Interview)

Subway Car 1

cherries

laced between toes

are so much easier to carry

than memories

of when we were

something ot(her)

strange

alienated

each week

a new pin-up girl

poster for our

inability to

know who we are

our excuse to sit

naked as the nuclear bomb

forgotten weapons

of a post-war

culture of anxiety

and fear

before the world turned

to other forms of destruction

trusting in what we see

images, images, images

rusty old big screens

it is so much easier

to exist inside

the physical

lust after the bent

broken, meandering bodies

of the beautiful

films

our great American ritual

our Eucharist

who's the priest

who's the sacrifice

are we ever really free

Subway Train 2

when we were young

blonde bombshells

we all want to be

some version of a

Marilyn Monroe

head-over heels

in love with

ourselves

to sit as shiny polished

idols

lesser gods

reclining

in tattered

leather

theater seats

tossing popcorn balls

wasted and soaked

gin and coke

we were not anachronisms

thrown to the past

we were living

even if trapped

inside slow paced

shadows

Subway Train 3

i have the power to

make you

think of

Bottecilli’s Birth of Venus

goddess-woman

sprit-bone-flesh

triumphant standing in

a clam shell

at cocktail hour

at the gentleman’s club

scuttle on down

to North Hollywood’s Palimino

with just one toss

of my hair

the way i throw it all

back

i make you think it is for

you (and just for you)

remember

Marilyn Monroe’s dress

she stood

there a spectacle

of our gaze

making herself

vulnerable

so that we would not

be so ashamed

wind fanning silk

upward like an upside

down clam shell

she bent her knees

bow-legged

grabbed her dress back

in a risque tease

standing on a subway grate

Seven Year Itch

open mouth

silent laughter

held out like a

soft jazz note

longer than our expectations

1954

she was our last century’s Bottecilli

Billy Wilder’s

our Birth of Marilyn

Subway Train 4

i sit inside

a subway car

ot(her) hand

playing peek-a-boo

with my thigh

living inside open

spaces makes you more

vulnerable than Marilyn

on the subway grate

life on the verge

of a nervous breakdown

makes femme fatales

more attractive to you

you feel more desire

when you watch her

claw her way through

the madness you caused

but you call it her madness

why is

that you should desire her more

when she is mad as a hatter

Subway Train 5

constantly moving

these subway scenes

a panoramic

a pair of lovers

pass by

caught in each other’s gaze

your eye only resting on

what it cannot touch

but your hands resting

on what it can

feel

you can feel the color

of putrid green living inside the vinyl

what is that like to feel a color!

(that’s why you don’t want to live there anymore

that’s why you have had enough!

you don’t want to catch anymore sights of the ugly, putrid green!)

Subway Train 6

subway car windows

letting in sunlight

the sunlight catches

spreads out all over your body

that no longer feels like your own

nestled in so much curious warmth

floating and embryonic

all this lonesome seeps in

slightly hunched back

a second hand thrift store shawl

tassels cordially hanging

serene tapestry

shoulders curled up like

last friday’s cat

lapping the sunlight off the windows

Subway Train 7

no projector reels

filming the way we were

just the sound of subway rails

chatter of strangers

moving their bodies

up and down aisles

in and out of seats

looking for their exits

strangers, those who never knew our names

as we are erased

from all the midtown marques

and all we are left with are these red

red lips

pieces of hard candy

melted down

forming red, red pools

for you

to swim in

during the eleventh hour

of i don’t want to think of you, anymore

Andy Warhol, A Life In Postcards

Postcard 1

Andrew Warhola

Immigrant family

From the Carpathian Mountains

Villager

Father worked in coal mines

From Slovakia to Pittsburg

As though working class is not hard enough

Death takes away the father when Andy was just thirteen

A mother did what she could

Went into other people’s homes to clean what wasn’t hers

And what she didn’t own

They say Andy was sickly as a child

Read a lot of movie magazines

Shirley Temple signed a glossy

Holy relic of seeing the screen

His name spelled wrong on it

But a boy grows up

1949 finds New York

Just the way it is

Things can’t always stay like that

Commercial artists get paid

1960’s the dawning of new fads

Andy one of the most expensive

Postcard 2

The Abstract Expressionists

Were all like a bunch of walking Charles Bukowski’s

John Jaspers and his lover, Robert Rauschenberg

Andy wanted at least John or did he want Rauschenberg?

Hell, did he want them both?

Hard headed, hard core alcoholics, hard living, hard loving

And their art was the only gods they worshiped

1958 Jaspers’ “Flag” paintings, Castelli Gallery

Art world freaked

Over some star and stripes

Over some red and white

Shit, some blue

They were all too eager

Mad in their own desires

Not raging, but raging

Holding the pain of pills

and booze

Like hands of lovers

Lost but not in solitude

New York

Sick with mist, gray and opaque

Splash some paint over it

Before the world is fatigued

“You are too swish,” Andy.” You are just too damn swish for them.

But what is swish if not posh and what is posh if not another word for fuck

And what’s wrong with a little commercial success, anyway?

Postcard 3

When you are you

That upsets people

And creation of yourself

Is harder to master than people think

When you make yourself into your own myth

Andy needed a studio

He couldn’t go on forever stacking paintings

On Lexington Avenue

His mother’s house

And when you have a need

Like an addict searching for a fix

You become vulnerable to your own

Thirst and hunger

Andy was a myth already

Sensitive outcast

Pouring on

Irving Blum saw all the soup can paintings on Lexington Avenue

On the floor the paintings lay

Positioned above the paintings was a photograph of Marilyn Monroe

Blum knew how a man so in need

Could be made to see what he saw

Take Andy’s desire and teach Andy how to

Project his own desire so that we are all desiring

What we never knew we wanted

The photograph was nothing really

Just a sheet of paper torn out of a magazine

More pop

Pinned up on the wall

Blum offered to take Andy to LA

But Andy wanted a NY gallery

Blum took Andy by the arm

And whispered over his ear, “Movie stars” will see it

In the city of Angels, pointing to Marilyn’s image

And just like that Andy in LA

Postcard 4

Yes, it happened

The Soup Can Exhibition

FERUS Gallery, Los Angeles

Andy’s first exhibition

32 SOUP CANS

This was POST-WAR

LA ART

Thank you Irving Blum

Thank you Andy

1962

Postcard 5

John Coplans

He was one of the founders of Artforum

In Coplan’s words, those soup cans weren’t just cans,

They were, “the greatest breakthrough in art since the ready-mades of Marcel Duchamp.”

Urinals

Cans of Soup

Mass Production

Commodities

Flat

Print screen methods

How do we see ourselves?

How do we see each other?

When everything around is an object?

When we are just objects inside a world of objects?

What world had the world wrought?

Postcard 6

But all exhibitions come to a close

All exhibitionism eventually has a curtain

Extravagance

Attraction to oneself

As though you are your own mirror

Isn’t that what exhibitionism means?

Why would we think an art exhibition is not

Another form of exhibitionism

Where the body is reaching toward another body

Until body touches body

Even if the body never touches the body

The day after Andy’s LA show ended

So did the life of Marilyn Monroe

August 5, 1962

An excess

To be driven by what is greater than desire can hold

Desire is a black hole

Bottomless and empty

Bringing one down into the shadow spaces

O.D.

Barbiturates

She was at her home in Brentwood

It is not far from Ferus Gallery

where those soup cans were on display

Oh, Andy was so close

And she was so far away

Soon after

I mean how do you mourn a life

And make it a god too? When that god you are making is yourself?

Those silkscreens

You know the ones

Her face in lollipop colors

Hair and mouth and eyes and lips the color of Candy

Change the proportions

Distort the image

And look at it again

Is it Marilyn or is it Candy Warhola you see

Staring at you through platinum dyed bubblegum wads?

How many barbiturates did Marilyn take?

Andy made 20 silkscreen prints

Or was it 50

More, always more

Always excess

Always exhibitionism

When your grief is in mass production

It was the same photograph Andy had pinned to his wall on Lexington Avenue

That he used as his inspiration for his design

Imagine that, the Marilyn from the village

The Marilyn from the movie, Niagara (1953)

Now….

Marilyn Immortalized

Marilyn Diptych

Diptych

Two flat screens facing each other

Hinged together

Separated but in a sacred union

One image a light to the other image

One desire a lamp unto the other desire

Andy facing Marilyn

Marilyn facing Y-O-U

Postcard 7: Andy’s Film, The Kiss

1963

Andy is making movies

But it is not that different from portraits in silkscreens

It is just Andy’s new language

Made out of the language already there

Irving Blum watched the early films

Blum described how he “sat, sat, sat”

And there was no action

But two pairs of lips

Touching

Marisol’s lips

Oh Marisol

Maria del la Solidad

Mary of the Solitude

Sometimes, Pepa Flores

Robert Indiana’s lips

Robert Indiana

An artist

POP art, too

You might know his sculpture of G-I-A-N-T letters that s-p-e-l-l out the one word

LOVE

Andy’s film

THIS was the Ultimate

No, the PENULTIMATE KISS

The EMBRACE between the woman of solitude and the artist

The woman and the man

The singer and the artist

The bard and the artist

The kiss

It was….the kiss

Have you seen it?

The way there is a cradling

The way there is a tilting of the heads

Angle is everything

ANGLES (plural, more than one, a multiplicity) is so vital

When you want to film desire

D-E-S-I-R-E

Design it

Make it

Craft it

Bottle it up and sell it

How do you peddle desire?

Not any different than peddling soup cans

Soup goes to the lips

A kiss goes to the lips

Both are appetite

Why do we romanticize the one and not the other?

It is all about the O-T-HER all the time

The Other, the OTher, the otHER

Finally…..

Some motion. Just a blink. Marisol blinked.

Because desire can never be held forever

And desire can never stand still

Sooner or later one or the other lovers moves

Shifts

Desire cannot be held in tension forever

Sooner or later

No matter how prolonged desire may be

Just like that in the blink of an eye

Desire changes.

The film, Kiss, 1963.

Ndaba Sibanda

He is a three-time Pushcart Prize nominee and an author of thirty-one published books of different persuasions and genres.

My Friend`s River Beauty

why they live in water

it`s a mystery, in a river

they possibly tuck into it--

seaweed, and swim ashore

they also diet on fish, crabs,

clams ,shrimp, oysters , lobsters

my dear friend fell in love

with one of them, his beauty!

a faraway river is their rendezvous

he confesses she`s romantic and fun!

though these days the two lovely lovebirds

barely hang-out owing to self-distancing!

I think she is human, after all

except that she has the tail of a fish

and no wonder she pees and poops

from her belly button, so says my chum!

Friendly Wars

Ever since his appointment to the lofty position of defense minister, he seemed to be gripped by some phobia. Some residents claimed the irrational fear stemmed from the possibility that he did not know what he was expected to do. Others thought that he was a lucky coward who found himself having to oversee a strategic security portfolio which he did not deserve or understand.

Mr. Gubuzela `s political history was known only from controversial claims -- made at every opportunity by the man himself -- about his war liberation credentials. The ordinary citizens were skeptical of his ability to turn around the national army into a truly professional, patriotic and non-partisan force that could be the envy of the region, if not the continent. It had committed untold atrocities in the country and beyond national boundaries.

He was once labelled a “Wild Useless Claimant” by a no-nonsense newspaper when he claimed that all the country`s political and economic woes were visited upon the nation by the “stubborn” opposition leaders, the ruling party`s detractors and their Western allies. He was a shameless bootlicker who heaped praises upon the ruining leadership with sickening frequency and subservience. A Grade Two primary school dropout, he had endeared himself to the leadership by worshipping them at every rally or meeting, and terrorizing any soul who challenged the big wig`s bigotry and destructive policies at every conceivable corner. He would declare,” Some of us died for this country. We won`t allow any person, especially from the opposition to rule this country. These sellouts without liberation war credentials are day-dreamers. Forward with our one and only revolutionary leader. Down with all the detractors! Down with illegal sanctions!”

Then one day one foreign journalist decided to ask him one general question. “Sir, please shed light on what you are doing or intend doing as minister of defense to keep soldiers fit?”

He was clad in his civilian clothes in the form of dazzling yellow socks, white shoes, a red pair of baggy trousers, a green T-shirt, and a dark and blue, deeply cupped hat that seemed to bury his head and obstruct his view of the world. With exaggerated steadiness, he cleared his throat and said, “Soon l will start some friendly wars with neighboring countries”.

No, It Was Nosiness That Killed A Cat

Similarities Between Curiosity And Nosiness

Both curiosity and nosiness seem to have a thread that has words like: interest, concern, desire, inquisitiveness and attentiveness.

Differences Between Curiosity And Nosiness

I think the two major distinctions between curiosity and nosiness lie in their intentional and behavioral manifestations and implications.

What Does A Curious Person Seek?

A curious person (e.g. a researcher) seeks knowledge, information and ideas for enlightenment and development. Curiosity is a strong desire to know or learn. It leads one to make an inquiry. Hence an act of curiosity tends to be positive, creative, developmental, unselfish and well-meaning. If curiosity is the urge to explore, interest is the reward potential in learning.

What Does A Nosy Person Seek?

On the other hand, a nosy person (e.g. a timewaster or a gossip) often invades personal and private spaces for selfish, foolish and dubious reasons. Nosiness is an eager desire to find out about things that are usually not one`s business. It has an annoying,worrisome meddling element. Such meddling or poking tends to chase away friends or even family. Hence an act of nosiness is likely to have negative, destructive, selfish and even obsessive connotations and implications.

Did Curiosity Really Kill The Cat?

When people ask prying questions about something that is none of their business, are they not nosy? Or they are simply curious? If curiosity killed the cat is an idiom that seeks to warn people that being curious can get one into trouble, then wait a minute -is it not a misfit? Not being nosy? Well, maybe like matters of the heart, matters of semantics are subjective, etymological and problematic. What is your take?

Of Pursuers And Priers

For instance, I think of a journalist or a researcher as a person who pries. Their job demands that they should have a measure of movement, investigation, inquisitiveness and attentiveness. Attentive to detail. I also believe that poets and authors, to some extent, are priers too.

Let If Clauses Conclude

Suffice to say if curiosity is likely to win one friends, nosiness is a sure way of winning one fiends. If curiosity is professional, nosiness is unprincipled. If curiosity is careful, nosiness is tactlessly eyebrow-raising! Again, who am I to say one is nosy, not curious? Matters of semantics fascinate and fuddle me too.

A book review of 'Trouble for Sale' by Maina Wahome as reviewed by Ndaba Sibanda

‘Trouble for Sale’ is a work of art whose title is intriguing and apt.

Just like an opening, a good title can tantalize and magnetize potential readers and buyers alike. Such is the title of Maina Wahome’s action-packed political satire.

The title is intriguing and apt not only because it is denotative or evocative of ‘trouble’ that is brewing but also by virtue of its ability to galvanize a reader into exploring and toying around with a number of questions and ideas around that imagery.

One suddenly gets rained down by a downpour of questions: What type of trouble is this? Who are the sellers? Who would sell trouble? How? Where? When? The author manages to capture the imagination of the reader right from the title to the opening of the book where the playwright introduces social, economic, and political and ideological struggles and causes in style.

The action is chiefly and cautiously centred around Kamerukia who is a Member of Parliament for Mateseko Constituency, and a temperamental husband to Watoro, and his friend,Kimendero; Mwariama, who is Kamerukia’s lawyer, Mumbi, a university student; Tomboka, Kimakia’s lawyer; Menge, Mumbi Kanyoro’s lawyer, General Francisco, the leader of the Revolution Movement , Gati, the crowd mobilizer and Dada, a superintendent.

Through the play we see how social class divisions and the trammels of patriarchy play out before master and servant, and husband and wife, respectively. When Kimendero, a wealthy retired government official, visits his equally affluent and matrimonially-unfaithful friend Kamerukia, and is so impressed with the meal that he has been treated to that he showers praises upon Kamerukia’s employees, Kamerukia conceitedly reminds him that they are not doing his family a favor by doing their job well. If anything, his language reeks of abuse, arrogance, irritability and bossiness. He has no respect for his workers and wife.

For instance, he calls out Tsion, their house-help, to clean the dining table, and the housemaid rushes in, after she has done that cleaning chore, her “crime” is to ask,” Any other service, sir?” He gives her curt responses like “,Make yourself busy with household chores before l lose my temper” and “Now get out of here once. I have serious matters to discuss with my visitor”. His utterances are a clear sign of how he frowns upon those who do not have money and power as if they are lesser humans.

Kimendero pays Kamerukia a “business visit” to ask about “the counterfeit and contrabands” that he deserves or else peace can easily turn into violence, and war into peace. Goods have to be cleared at the port without scrutiny. Kimendero offers him a huge amount of money while Watoro, his wife, warns her husband that any acceptance of such a lucrative and shady offer is a betrayal of his kinsmen and country. His unmannerly and materialistic husband takes her advice as an act of insolence and interference. He warns and reminds her that ” l saved you from being a penniless spinster”. He reckons he did her a huge favour just his employees who are at his beck and call, just like offering his girlfriend an apartment. He believes that he is in the business of doing people favors.

Kimendero: The food is well-cooked. You have obedient servants in this compound.

Kamerukia: This is what l have employed them to do. They are not doing me any favor. The terms of service are: give me the best services because you do receive a salary. Kimendero! Kemendero! How many times did l call you?

Kimendero: (Stops eating and pays attention). Three times. Why ask me the obvious?

Kamerukia: Common sense is not common to all. It is as if you have forgotten what our beloved ruler tells us every day.

Kimendero: Which is…

Kamerukia: Jurisdiction. Yes, my friend. This is my apartment and the jurisdiction in this compound is bestowed upon me. (Moving closer to him). Therefore, you have no mandate whatsoever to question what happens in this compound.

Kimendero: (Devouring the meal with gusto). Haha! Jurisdiction. You still have the temerity to talk about jurisdiction. (Laughs again). In this country, the bourgeoisie are always the controllers of factors of production. They drive the best vehicles and live in the best apartments.

Kamerukia: See your life! You talk too much, my friend. I need a Dictaphone to record what you say.

Kimendero: Are you a government spy? Do you work for this incumbent government that has experiences in unprecedented looting spree in Nyeka? Listen Kamerukia, there is no hiding place for corrupt government officials. Corruption is endemic and it is needless to say that poor governance has led to poor infrastructure.

Kamerukia: That is why l am telling you l need a tape recorder or a dictaphone because you can talk pages. Have you forgotten you are a retired government official who never changed the situation of the common citizens? You cannot come to my own house to lecture me on governance .

Kamerukia has an interesting range of personal theories. For instance, he is of the opinion that money has powers to move mountains and fill gorges, that laws are for the underprivileged, that patriotism only exists in newspapers and dictionaries, that the arms of the government are managed by vultures and dinosaurs whose desires are insatiable, that in most third world countries, corruption is indispensable, and that justice and law are miles away like heaven and earth. He is also of the opinion he is doing Mumbi, a university student who is also his girlfriend, a huge favor by offering her an apartment that is located in the furthest end of the city, yet their bone of contention is that she wants to live within the capital.

His friend, Kimendoro on the other hand, is described by Tsion as a rich but mannerless bastard because she claims he sexually mishandled her. Similarly, Mumbi threatens to spill the beans ( the conersations) to Watoro, and even accuses him of rape. Mumbi pays the supreme price as she is murdered by a hired assassin. Those who are behind such horrendous murders are powerful men. They commit crimes with impunity. They are notorious. When powerful ,corrupt and proud people kike Kamerukia are finally arrested and ordered to sleep on the floor, one begins to feel that perhaps they have come hurtling down to Mother Earth.

There is a level of balanced showing and telling, vivid descriptions and settings; convincing, interesting, diverse and developed characters as the author explores the dynamics, dramas and debates over the distribution of wealth, the production factors like geography, demography and culture.

Inevitably, the reader is expertly transported, led and nudged into placing recent ,relevant and historical Kenyan political players and their unbecoming behaviors and antics under the microscope. Trouble is certainly brewing, trouble has taken centre stage. Evidently ,troublesome personalities have captured and personalised public institutions and procedures.

The ordinary people are in a dilemma. Political pranksters have put their priorities and power ahead of the wishes and aspirations of the citizens. Not to be outdone are church pretenders and entrepreneurs who use and abuse religion to prey on their supernatural power-seeking followers to further their selfish ends. Men of cloth have become false prophets or wolves in sheep’s clothing in a world full of miracle-hungry and gullible souls and congregants.

The characters’ actions make sense as the storyline’s mood affords the reader the opportunity to sense the senselessness of the injustices of brutality, power,pride and greed.

The style is fitting. Maina’s characters set the pages alight with their own animated presences, actions, footprints and voices. Voices of reason. It is a breath of freshnes. Wahome’s book is a soul-searching, damning and revealing mirror held up to Kenya, and by extension, Africa and beyond. ‘Trouble for Sale’ is an indictment of what is wrong with African politics. It is a moving depiction of the complicated drama of politics and economics, politics and religion. How does one follow a political trajectory that does not harm economics? What can be learnt from such trajectories and histories?

Maina’ offering is a compelling and telling read. l would recommend it to readers, researchers, historians, economists, politicians and political aspirants. Never short of wordplay ,it is a worthy addition to the genre of plays.

A Review of Paul Brookes’ book “Wolf Eye Territory” by “Spriha Kant”:

This book is the transmuted voice of the poet from fierce and bitter into soft as either or both of the two traits used to be predominant in most of his previous poems— unveiling the bitter truths/facts of the world in a sort of satire—like manner and motivating readers to fight against all odds fearlessly. The poetries that are audible of the poet’s fierce and/or bitter voice are “The Gust Says,” “The Rocks Say,” “The Skies Say,” and “Gust Says Too” (each poetry from his book “Wonderland in Alice: Plus Other Ways of Seeing”), “Age Is Youth,” “Work Is Sleep. When I Retire,” “My Strangers,” and “A Movement Is Death” (each poetry from his book “A World Where”), “Lawn Cutting” and “A Clock Watch” (each poetry from his book “These Random Acts of Wildness”). No change in the body language and attitude & no betterment in the mannerisms can change anyone’s core nature so is the case with the poet that despite the arrival of softness in his voice a few poetries could not disguise his core nature. Showing glimpses of his core nature below:

“knifes sharp edge

sound that hurts

wound that won’t stop bleeding

harsh voices”

“Life as weeds struggle

up between flagstones

wintered in mourning.”

The poet’s transmuted voice is as attractive as the graceful gait of a voluptuous lady. This gait can be enjoyed by reading his poems “Worms Of,” “Have You,” “Bone Colours,” “My Mop Bucket,” and “A One Eye,” to name a few. The metaphors and personifications used in these poems have functioned like Kohl and eyeliners, adding attractiveness to the eyes of the voluptuous lady. The stanzas quoted from the different poetries below are the different shots of the attractive eyes of the different voluptuous ladies:

Quoting the two stanzas from the poetry “Bone Colors” below:

“The sky is a white bone

made of clouds.

Thunder is percussion

of lightning against bone.”

“Sometimes there are holes in the sky

and you can hear a bone flute.

Naked branches become Aeolian harps,

plucked by gust, sky’s breath.”

Quoting a few stanzas from the poetry “Gust Is Deaf, Hills Are Blind,” below:

“Mountains are too tall,

struggle to talk when they can’t

bend a knee, get down to those smaller

who are in awe when all mountains need

is to speak face to face, dispel their myth.

Same with water that rushes by,

no time to stand and stare, moments pass

before they have time to fully comprehend.

Flux needs a still moment but has to go on.

Still waters wish they could rush.”

Quoting a few lines from the poetry “Have You” below:

“Trees become lampstands ready

for the moonlight bulbs to be switched on

in their crowns, meanwhile sunlight bulbs move

from crown to crown. A shared lighting display.”

Inside every artist, there is a thrust for bringing versatility to his/her art compelling him/her to transcend the boundary of a particular/ a few different style(s)/form(s). This thrust has let the poet Paul Brookes transmute his voice which may ultimately lead him to the other end of the boundary.

Bios (Spriha Kant and Paul Brookes):

Spriha Kant:

Spriha Kant is an English poetess & a book reviewer. She has contributed to the 2023 #1 Amazon bestselling poetry anthology “Hidden in Childhood.” She has been the Guest of honor in the award-winning show “Victoria in Verse” (Bloomsbury Radio, London). Her interviews can be read at feversofthemind.com & and brokenspine.co.uk. Her quotes are published as an epigraph and a blurb in Magkasintahan Volume VI & Swiped Right respectively, both under Ukiyoto Publishing, Philippines. Her poetries have been translated into Greek by “Vasiliki Petroudi.”

Spriha has received a few encomiums from different authors. The poetess “Mingmar Sadhna” praised her with a Nepalese quote “Hune biruwako chillo paat” for her literary achievements. This quote means a plant with growth potential has glossy leaves. Mingmar referred to Spriha as a plant here. The poet “Verde Mar” said about her “Spriha Kant has a wondrous force of nature spirit that shines like the north star and her poetry is revered by our fabulous writing community.” The poetess “Margareth C.” praised Spriha in her words, “Your rich vocabulary and depth of analysis are marvellous literary gems.”

Paul Brookes:

Paul Brookes is a writer, local historian, genealogist, photographer, shop assistant and grandfather. Paul has lived in Wombwell, South Yorkshire for over twenty years, in a cat house full of teddy bears. He adores the counter intuitive.

His first play was performed at The Gulbenkian Theatre, Hull. His chapbooks include The Fabulous Invention Of Barnsley (Dearne Community Arts, 1993). A World Where and She Needs That Edge (Nixes Mate Press, 2017, 2018) The Spermbot Blues (OpPRESS, 2017), Please Take Change (Cyberwit.net, 2018) As Folk Over Yonder (Afterworld Books, 2019). A poetry collaboration with artworker Jane Cornwell: Wonderland in Alice, plus other ways of seeing (JCStudio Press, 2021) with a foreword by Ian Mcmillan, a sonnet collection called As Folktaleteller (ImpSpired, 2022) with an introduction by Penelope Shuttle. Forthcoming is another sonnet collection: These Random Acts of Wildness (Glass Head Press, 2023). Paul is Editor of The Wombwell Rainbow interviews, book reviews and challenges. Paul has had work broadcast on BBC Radio 3 The Verb and videos of his Self Isolation sonnet sequence featured by Barnsley Museums and Hear My Voice Barnsley.

For more: http://www.thewombwellrainbow.com.

(U.K. link)