HERO WANTED

US, 2008, 95 minutes, Colour.

Cuba Gooding Jr, Ray Liotta, Norman Redus, Kim Coates, Thomas Flanagan, Jean Smart, Ben Cross.

Directed by Brian Smrz.

Hero Wanted is a straight-to-DVD action thriller. It was also made in Bulgaria standing in for the United States.

After his Academy Award for Jerry Maguire, Cuba Gooding seems to have had a downhill career in terms of many forgettable action films straight to video and DVD. Ray Liotta turns in yet another detective performance. Norman Redus and Kim Coates have been the supporting actors in many thrillers. Ben Cross (Chariots of Fire) now doubles as an American ex-Vietnam veteran.

The screenplay is quite confused, shifting in time, has Cuba Gooding’s character going on a vengeance spree because of the death of a teller in a bank. However, later in the film it emerges that he was behind the idea of the bank robbery to impress the girl – but the criminal associates turned it into something real and shot her.

Brian Smrz is a veteran of stunt work for films over many years as well as an assistant director.

Not particularly impressive – an exploration of the theme of vengeance and its futility.

1.The popularity on DVD of this kind of action film? Plot, themes, action, vengeance? The cast?

2.The American settings (filmed in Bulgaria)? Authentic?

3.The title, Liam Case and his initial accident, his failure to rescue his wife? His impulsive rescue of Marley? Being acclaimed a hero? Receiving a medal? His action in the bank and his comforting of the wounded girl?

4.The opening, the voice-over, Liam in the bar, sick? The flashbacks and his accident, drifting, his friendship with the criminal types? The rescue from the burning car? The years passing? The later revelation of his complicity in the set-up for the bank robbery/

5.The bank robbery, the attraction to the girl (and the later explanation that she resembled his wife, seeing her at the cemetery)? His upset at her being shot, the vigil, her coma?

6.The subsequent action, going after the killers? Bashing one, shooting the other? McGraw? and his tracking Liam down? The threats? The kidnapping of the little girl? Holding her?

7.Detective Subcott and his investigations, his associates? Presenting the medal to Liam? Suspicions? Interrogation? Coming into the final shooting? The confrontation with Liam? His decision about the girl and Liam?

8.The injured girl, her coma, her mother coming to visit Liam? Dependence? Seeing the criminals, holding the gun, her puzzle? The girl coming out of the coma at the end? Her visiting Liam in prison?

9.The group of criminals, typical, the plan, agreement, the holdup, the shooting? McGraw? as the leader? Swain and his relationship with Liam? McGraw’s? brother and his death?

10.Cosmo Jackson, the Vietnam veteran, the substitute father for Liam? Going for his advice, the practice shooting? The discussions about vengeance? Cosmo’s warning him? Coming to his rescue, the shootings? Cosmo being shot – and disappearing from the film?

11.The build-up to the shooting, the set-up, rescuing the girl? The confrontation with the criminals, the detectives, the shootout?

12.The entertainment value of this kind of action film? Violence and vengeance? The target audience?