This film was pretty forgettable and overall nothing special, but it is really nice to see an all black cast from so long ago. The plot is ok, it sometimes jumped forward without explanation and I found myself confused on who was who and where we were in the plot. This felt really long despite being under an hour, but there were some fun moments spread throughout. It was ok.

Part of my 2021 Criterion Challenge, for a film featured in the "Pioneers of African American Cinema" series

An all-black western that's notable for being just as competent (if not a little better) than most poverty row outings. It isn't up to William Beaudine level (What is?), but it moves at a solid clip, has a great little musical number that ends in a gun going off, and a ventriloquist that makes animals talk.

For a film titled The Bronze Buckaroo, it sure is more about the comedic rivalry between Dusty (Lucius Brooks) and Slim (F.E. Miller) than it is about the titular buckaroo (played by famed baritone Herb Jeffries). I'd say that's okay, because the comedy is kind of cute (talking animals), but there's supposed to be a western here featuring a "ROARING ROUND-UP OF SONG-STUDDED THRILLS", but all there is of it is maybe ten minutes - and it ain't that thrilling.

"Well that place is a rattlesnake's den!"

Been wanting to check on this film since I saw the poster a few years back at The Autry museum here in Los Angeles!

The production on this one is a bit better than the last Herb Jeffries film I watched, but the plot is much more conventional. I feel like the film even knows its plot is conventional because it often meanders away from the main plot and spends lots of time with side characters who are almost completely unrelated. But I loved the songs! This one is definitely on par with a lot of the Gene Autry or Roy Rogers films of the day.

It's remarkable that a film like this could be made and survive so that alone makes it worth a watch. However, I quite enjoyed this on its own merits. The lack of budget is apparent and the narrative is fairly standard but it had a charm and I've seen plenty of worse westerns. What really stood out though were the songs, in particular 'Payday Blues'.

Herb Jeffries the singing blackman in the saddle! More cowboy action then songs in this one. But not as much as there was simpleton comedy and talking animals! In a way that's what is memorable about this one. The comedy. The rest was basic forgettable poverty row western.

An all black western?? In 1939?! What the heck!!

I like the concept, but obviously there are going to be problems. They just didn’t have the budget or access for a sleek Hollywood production. It might be cheaper than a Poverty Row flick. For example, I’m pretty sure the punching sound effects is just a guy patting his knee.

Between the humor, singing, lack of stakes, and goofy characters, it feels like a western in name only. And the locations; ranches, saloons and the like. As for the humor, it’s too lowbrow. I want a little cleverness.

This is my first “race” picture, and yeah, it’s not ‘good’, but I was mildly amused part of the time.

Who’s to blame…