Over the years, Lacey Chabert, 41, has made quite a name for herself. From voicing Eliza Thornberry on The Wild Thornberrys to starring in the teen comedy classic Mean Girls, the Mississippi native has been practically everywhere. But most recently, she's become known for her impressive collection of Hallmark films, from The Wedding Veil series to the All of My Heart movies. Now, while partnering with Glade, Chabert sat down with PureWow to chat about everything from her two upcoming Hallmark films to that mini Mean Girls reunion.

“This is my absolute favorite time of the year,” Chabert said while sitting in a festively-decorated room. “I get so excited for the holidays every year and I just wanna prolong it as much as I can.”

She added, “I absolutely loved the holidays, even as a kid. And now as a parent, I get to pass on a lot of those traditions to my daughter and kind of relive some of the best parts of my childhood through her, and then also get to see the magic of the season through her eyes.”

Chabert is a parent to a 7-year-old daughter named Julia. When asked what her favorite tradition to do with her little one is, the actress said, “We're really into baking. I grew up baking with my great-grandmother and grandmother and mother in the kitchen...there's something about baking and [using] the recipe that was from my great-grandmother with my daughter now. It just is really heartwarming.”

Like many kids, Julia loves The Elf on the Shelf, Christmas lights and of course, Christmas movies. “My daughter absolutely loves the Santa Clause movies,” Chabert revealed. “She's also really into Elf. It makes her laugh. It's such a great holiday movie because you can watch it year after year after year and it just never gets old.”

Speaking of holiday movies, the 41-year-old star has two arriving to Hallmark this month: A Merry Scottish Christmas (November 19) and Haul Out the Holly: Lit Up (November 25).

For A Merry Scottish Christmas, Chabert actually reunited with her former Party of Five co-star, Scott Wolf. “[It] was a beautiful Party of Five reunion,” Chabert said. “[Scott’s] a dear friend of mine and I love him so much and getting to share the screen with him again was really special.” She also enjoyed getting to work with her Haul Out the Holly co-stars again for the new sequel. “It was an absolute blast to re-team with the cast and see where these characters are in the next chapter of their lives, and this one is funnier than ever,” she revealed. “It's so festive, it's guaranteed to put you in a good mood.”

Chabert's had her fair share of reunions lately, having recently teamed up with her former Mean Girls co-stars, Lindsay Lohan and Amanda Seyfried, for a new Walmart Black Friday commercial.

“It was the best,” she said with a smile. “Getting to spend the day with Amanda and Lindsay and reminisce about the movie and you know, talk about our kids—we're all moms now. It was really special.”

The Hallmark queen is also excited to see the new Mean Girls movie musical arriving in January 2024 (which, sadly, she does not make a cameo in). “I can't wait to see it,” she said. “I'm sure it's gonna be awesome.”

Despite being busier than ever, Chabert is looking forward to a relaxing holiday season with her family. “I think the stuff that's become most meaningful to me are experiences,” she said. “It's also just about being with the people you love and taking that kind of down time from our busy lives and celebrating those traditions that you cherish and hopefully making new memories.”

Of course, she'll be enjoying those family moments surrounded by lots of Christmas lights, garlands and her favorite Glade scent, Starlight & Snowflakes. “It smells like freshly fallen snow,” she said.

Stay up-to-date on every breaking celebrity story by subscribing here.