Lacey Chabert will probably always be most renowned for playing Gretchen Wieners in 'Mean Girls'.

Since the '00s hit, Lindsay Lohan went political and now has her own MTV reality show; Tina Fey has starred in films, wrote the series 'Unbreakable Kimmy Schimdt' and executive produced 'Great News'; while Amanda Seyfried and Rachel McAdams have also had a number of movie roles. Less is known about what the other Mean Girl, Lacey Chabert, went on to.

Well with over 100 credits to her name, there's no doubt that the actress has been keeping busy.

Lacey Chabert kicked off her career as a kid. One of her first roles was on the long-running series 'All My Children.' She then played Claudia Salinger in the TV drama 'Party of Five', which ran from 1994 to 2000.

Around the same time, Chabert voiced the character of Eliza in 'The Wild Thornberrys' and its two spin-off movies. 'Family Guy' fans will also recall she voiced Meg Griffin for the cartoon sitcom's first season. Mila Kunis took over the role in 1999.

Other notable roles of Chabert's in the '90s include Cosette in 'Les Misérables' on Broadway and Penny Robinson in 'Lost in Space'. She loaned her voice to such animated series as 'Gargoyles', 'Aaahh!!! Real Monsters' and 'Hey Arnold!', and animated movies like 'Anastasia', 'Babes in Toyland' and 'The Lion King 2.'

Since 'Mean Girls', she has kept busy in voice acting work, starring in such series as 'Transformers: Rescue Bots', 'Bratz' and 'The Spectacular Spider-Man', on which she plays Gwen Stacy. Since 2011, she has voiced Zatanna Zatara on the series 'Young Justice'.

A few years before 'Mean Girls', she played Amanda Becker in 'Not Another Teen Movie'. In the years following, she starred in TV film 'Hello Sister, Goodbye Life', the 2006 remake of 'Black Christmas' and Matthew McConaughey rom-com 'Ghosts of Girlfriends Past'.

From 2013 to 2014, she starred in the series 'Baby Daddy' and also appeared in an episode of 'Ghost Whisperer'. There have been other movie appearances, TV shows and even game appearances (most notably voicing Princess Elise for 'Sonic the Hedgehog' aka 'Sonic '06 and Mako in 'Star Wars: The Old Republic'). The actress is also married and has a two-year old daughter named Julia.

But the primary answer to the question 'Whatever happened to Lacey Chabert?' can be summed up in one word: Hallmark.

Yup, our US counterparts (or other cable network enthusiasts) may already be well aware of this but the Mean Girl we once knew as Gretchen Wieners has gone sentimental. Lacey Chabert has starred in a total of 17 Hallmark movies altogether, with such titles as 'Pride, Prejudice and Mistletoe', 'My Secret Valentine', 'The Sweetest Christmas', 'Moonlight in Vermont', 'A Wish for Christmas', 'A Christmas Melody', 'Family for Christmas', 'A Royal Christmas' (yup, a whole lot of Christmas movies), 'The Color of Rain', 'All of My Heart' and 'Elevator Girl'. Her most recent project for Hallmark was the TV movie series 'Crossword Puzzles'. You can watch a clip of it here:

Chabert has said: "I love working for Hallmark. They've been so good to me. I have friends there now. I'm proud of their movies and the message of their movies." Can't argue with that.

So if you're looking for Lacey Chabert's latest, just subscribe to cable TV, we guess.