Lacey Chabert has had an iconic career. She's been on a roll since 2010, starring in more than 20 Hallmark Channel films with at least a couple more slated for release in 2022. Chabert landed her first recurring role on the soap opera "All My Children" before catching her big break in the form of the 1994 premiere of the beloved sitcom "Party of Five." She later voiced the character of Eliza Thornberry for Nickelodeon's "The Wild Thornberrys." Still, for many fans, her most recognizable role is Gretchen Weiners from 2004's "Mean Girls."

Advertisement

Gretchen "my father, the inventor of Toaster Strudel" Wieners was much more than her desperation to fit into a vicious friend group or make "fetch" happen. She was an emblem of impossible standards teenage girls faced in the 2000s. Even when she seemingly had it all, Gretchen was under an unbearable amount of pressure to meet the needs of her Queen B (Rachel McAdams' Regina George), which led to a murderous outburst in history class a la Brutus vs. Caesar.

Needless to say, there have been quite a few Wednesdays since Chabert played the iconic character, allowing for plenty of opportunities to wear pink and reflect on her time on the "Mean Girls" set.

In a 2019 interview with Bustle, Lacey Chabert spilled what she would change if she could go back to the set of "Mean Girls." And no, it isn't becoming best friends with Tina Fey or giving Gretchen Wieners a much-needed confidence boost (and maybe a hug).

Advertisement

Apparently, the Hallmark Christmas movie queen regrets not taking home a meaningful memento from the "Mean Girls" set. "I will say, I wish I had kept a souvenir from the movie," Chabert told the outlet. "I kept a couple pieces of clothing. They were kind enough to give us those, but I wish I had kept the Burn Book or something to have to pass on to my daughter."

Even though she doesn't have the Burn Book, it seems Chabert's daughter still thinks she's better than a regular mom — she's a cool mom. In a January 2022 interview with Kelly Clarkson, Chabert revealed that her daughter had discovered her iconic character. "Well, she [Julia] is only 5 but I did come home from work one day and my husband was like, 'Yeah, we watched a few scenes from it,'" Chabert said. "I'm like, 'Okay.' She goes, 'Mommy, I didn't know you were Gretchen Wieners. Did you know that was your name.'"

Advertisement

While Chabert didn't get the Burn Book the first time around, she could get a second chance to nab it for her daughter if a "Mean Girls" sequel comes to fruition.