Andrei Kirilenko Biography

Andrei Kirilenko is the most well-known basketball player to hail from Russia and was the first Russian ever drafted in the first round. His thirteen year NBA career was spent with the Utah Jazz, Minnesota Timberwolves, Brooklyn Nets, and Philadelphia 76ers. Kirilenko was an All-Star in 2004 and was named to the NBA”s All-Defense team in 2006. He led Russia to a bronze medal at the 2012 Olympics. In his ten seasons in Utah, he became synonymous with Jazz basketball. Selected to the NBA’s All-Rookie team in his first year, Kirilenko would go to the playoffs with the Jazz six times. Following his time in Utah, he returned to Russia to play for CSKA Moscow and won the Euroleague MVP in his one season there. Kirilenko was originally drafted by the Jazz in 1999 while he was playing for CSKA Moscow. He became an American citizen in 2011.

Book Andrei Kirilenko for your Next Event

Disclaimer: AthleteSpeakers assists companies seeking to hire talent like Andrei Kirilenko for speaking engagements, virtual meetings, appearances, product endorsements, and business sanctions. Our speakers bureau does not claim to exclusively represent Andrei Kirilenko. Our booking agency can help with finding an athlete or sports celebrity that aligns with your upcoming events date, location, and budget. When an organization request booking details for a celebrity like Andrei Kirilenko, we work closely with the client to make sure the proposed dates does not interfere with the requested athletes schedule. We then confirm the sports celebrity fee based on the details of the request. The fees listed on the speaker profile are rough estimates based on the previous market rate for the talent. Our team then works with Andrei Kirilenko's agent, manager or assistant on the booking request. For parties interested in hiring Andrei Kirilenko, we recommend filling out the booking request form so our booking agents can help with making your next event a success.

Interested in booking Andrei Kirilenko for a virtual meeting?

Contact Athlete Speakers today at 800-916-6008 to book Andrei Kirilenko for a virtual event, virtual meeting, virtual appearance, virtual keynote speaking engagement, webinar, video conference or Zoom meeting. The booking agents at Athlete Speakers work to get you the best price for your desired sports personality.

Athlete Speakers is a leader when it comes to booking virtual events in the sports world. Since 1999, we have built close relationships with top athletes, agents, publicists and managers. We assist all types of companies as well as event planners with booking athletes like Andrei Kirilenko for these virtual engagements. Companies continue to turn to Athlete Speakers to get Andrei Kirilenko’s latest virtual speaking fee, appearance cost and schedule availability.

Book Andrei Kirilenko for your Virtual Meeting