By David Bonilla

Feb 28, 2023 at 9:07 AM

Videos are auto-populated by an affiliate. This site has no control over the videos that appear above.

The Washington Commanders released veteran quarterback Carson Wentz this week. The San Francisco 49ers will likely be looking for a veteran to add to the quarterbacks room this season, especially considering the only two quarterbacks under contract are coming off serious injuries.

Third-year quarterback Trey Lance is returning from a season-ending ankle injury suffered on September 18. He has already started throwing and should be ready for organized team activities in May.

Second-year quarterback Brock Purdy will be sidelined much longer. He suffered a tear of the ulnar collateral ligament (UCL) in his right elbow on January 29. He will require at least six months of recovery once surgery occurs—hopefully in the coming weeks.

The 49ers will need to add a quarterback. That probably won't be Wentz, though. It just doesn't seem like a suitable character fit. Peter Panacy recently discussed the situation best in a feature for Niner Noise. San Francisco is looking for a "mentor" for its young quarterbacks. That is a word that Panacy, and likely many others, would refuse to use while describing Wentz.

"Reports and rumors about Wentz being 'uncoachable' and a poor presence in the locker room are nothing new, but the key tell is the fact he's been on three teams in as many years," wrote Panacy. "The Indianapolis Colts, who gave up notable assets to acquire Wentz from the Philadelphia Eagles back in 2021, were quick to move him after that season, too. Washington just joined the club."

Wentz is coming off a 2022 campaign where he completed 62.3 percent of his passes for 1,755 yards with 11 touchdowns and nine interceptions through eight games and seven starts.

Wentz certainly has the experience, but he probably would not and should not be in the running for the starting job. So if he can't be a good mentor in the 49ers quarterbacks room, he probably wouldn't have a role on head coach Kyle Shanahan's roster.

While there will be a market for Wentz, Shanahan and general manager John Lynch probably won't give it much consideration, even if they think they can turn the quarterback's career around. There will be other options for players who can better serve the mentor role for Lance and Purdy.

Enjoy this article? Follow us to never miss more!

Powered by Follow.it

Comments

More San Francisco 49ers News

Who will start at safety for the 49ers if Talanoa Hufanga isn't ready to go in week one?

By Marc Adams

Jul 14

The San Francisco 49ers have two starters on defense returning from injury. Dre Greenlaw, a starting linebacker, tore his Achilles during the Super Bowl. And starting safety, Talanoa Hufanga, tore his ACL last November. Greenlaw likely won't be back on the field until later in...

Fred Warner: Brandon Aiyuk, 49ers contract drama "a good issue to have"

By David Bonilla

Jul 22

Brandon Aiyuk has the support of his San Francisco 49ers teammates as the star receiver seeks a contract extension. He aims to turn his scheduled $14.124 million salary in 2024 into a long-term deal worth more than double that amount annually. This situation is familiar to the...

Emmanuel Acho on why Brandon Aiyuk should want trade from 49ers

By David Bonilla

Jul 18

Emmanuel Acho, host of FS1's "Speak," recently shared his strong opinion on the contract standoff between the San Francisco 49ers and Brandon Aiyuk. This week, the wide receiver requested a trade after negotiations failed to progress to his satisfaction. Aiyuk aims to become...

49ers reporter predicts which six wide receivers make team's 53-man roster

By Marc Adams

Jul 14

It's almost time for NFL training camps to begin. San Francisco 49ers rookies report this coming week, with the veterans reporting the following week. It's a time when camp battles begin heating up and discussions ensue about which players will make the final 53-man roster. One...