Property search in South Wiltshire.

Wiltshire is a ceremonial county in the south west of England. It is landlocked and borders the counties of Dorset, Somerset, Hampshire, Gloucestershire, Oxfordshire and Berkshire. Wiltshire is characterised by its high downland and wide valleys. Salisbury Plain is famous as the location of the Stonehenge stone circle and other ancient landmarks.

The city of Salisbury is notable for its medieval cathedral, and important country houses open to the public include Longleat, near Warminster, and the National Trust’s Stourhead, near Mere.

Towns: Amesbury, Bradford on Avon, Calne, Chippenham, Corsham, Cricklade, Devizes, Highworth, Ludgershall, Malmesbury, Marlborough, Melksham, Mere, Salisbury (city), Swindon, Tidworth, Tisbury, Trowbridge, Warminster, Westbury, Wilton, Wootton Bassett.

Main villages in South Wiltshire:

Mere Area: East Knoyle, Kilmington, Maiden Bradley, Mere, Sedgehill, Semley, West Knoyle.

Tisbury Area: Ansty, Berwick St. John, Berwick St. Leonard, Chilmark, Donhead, Donhead St. Andrew, Fovant, Hindon, Tisbury, Tollard Royal, Swallowcliffe, Sutton Mandeville.

Wilton Area: Alvediston, Barford St Martin, Bishopstone, Berwick St James, Bowerchalke, Broadchalke, Burcombe, Compton Chamberlayne, Dinton, Ebbesbourne Wake, Great Wishford, Netherhampton, South Newton, Stapleford, Steeple Langford, Stratford Tony, Teffont, Wilton, Winterbourne Stoke, Woodford Valley.

Northern Area: Allington, Cholderton, Durnford, Durrington, Figheldean, Firsdown, Idmiston, Milston, Newton Tony, Orcheston, Shrewton, Tilshead, Wilsford, Winterbourne, Woodford.

Southern Area: Alderbury, Britford, Clarendon Park, Coombe Bissett, Downton, Farley, Grimstead, Landford, Pitton, Redlynch, West Dean, Whiteparish, Winterslow.

Schools: Dauntsey’s, Godolphin, Marlborough College, Sandroyd, St Mary’s Calne, Stonar.

Communications: Roads running through Wiltshire include The Ridgeway, an ancient route, the Roman roads Fosse Way and Ermin Way. The main access roads through Wiltshire include the A4, A350, A303 and the M4 motorway. The nearest mainline rail connections avilable to London Paddington are either from Chippenham with train times of approximately 1 hour 30 mins or Salisbury, Melksham and Trowbridge.