On the fiftieth anniversary of his groundbreaking anthology Wandering Stars: An Anthology of Jewish Science Fiction and Fantasy, we’re joined by the terrific author and editor Jack Dann.

During our conversation, we mention his new collection Islands of Time—published almost exactly 50 years after his first book— as well as his The Fiction Writer’s Guide to Alternate History and some of his classic novels like The Memory Cathedral and The Rebel.

Mostly, though, we discuss how that classic anthology evolved, in part from his friendship with Pamela Sargent and George Zebrowski, what the anthology meant in 1974, and how the nature of Jewish science fiction has evolved over the decades.

To kick off 2023, Jonathan and Gary share their lists of the books that they’re looking forward to reading in 2023.

They mention a lot of forthcoming titles, ranging books from old masters like Peter S. Beagle, Howard Waldrop, Joanna Russ, Gene Wolfe, and Connie Willis to newer writers like Samit Basu, Vajra Chandrasekera, Alix E. Harrow, Emily Tesh, and Premee Mohamed, as well as essential collections from Kelly Link, E. Lily Yu, Joanna Russ, K.J. Parker, Sarah Pinsker, and others.

The team also cheerfully acknowledge that the year will undoubtedly present us with some complete surprises and that we will be reading fantastic work from authors we haven’t even heard of yet. The field seems as lively and promising as ever!

Pre-order links

Books mentioned in the podcast include:

Blade of Dream, Daniel Abraham

Conquest, Nina Allan

The Jinn-Bot of Shantiport, Samit Basu

The Saint of Bright Doors, Vajra Chandrasekera

Furious Heaven, Kate Elliott

The Landing, Mary Gentle

Menewood, Nicola Griffith

Starling House, Alix E. Harrow

The Water Outlaws, S.L. Huang

Thornhedge, T. Kingfisher

The Deep Sky, Yume Kitasei

Translation State, Ann Leckie

White Cat, Black Dog, Kelly Link (collection)

The Blue Beautiful World, Karen Lord

Hopeland, Ian McDonald

No One Will Come Back For Us and Other Stories, Premee Mohamed (collection)

The Sinister Booksellers of Bath, Garth Nix

Jackal, Jackal: Tales of the Dark and Fantastic, Tobi Ogundiran (collection)

Under My Skin, K.J. Parker (collection)

He Who Drowned the World, Shelley Parker-Chan

Lost Places, Sarah Pinsker (collection)

Machine Vendetta, Alastair Reynolds

The Navigating Fox, Christopher Rowe

Joanna Russ: Novels and Stories, Joanna Russ (collection)

Him, Geoff Ryman

New Suns 2, Nishi Shawl ed.

Ghost Engine, Charles Stross

Shigidi and the Brass Head of Obalufon, Wole Talabi

Some Desperate Glory, Emily Tesh

System Collapse, Martha Wells

The Road to Roswell, Connie Willis

The Wolfe at the Door, Gene Wolfe (collection)

Jewel Box, E. Lily Yu (collection)

As we move through the first week of December and into day nine of the Advent Calendar series, Gary spends some time chatting with the incredible Rachel Swirsky about what she's been reading, what she'd recommend, what she reads on the holidays, what work she has coming out, and her fabulous science fiction novella January Fifteenth (Tordotcom), which looks at how universal basic income might affect some of us.

As always, our thanks to Rachel for making the time to talk to us. We hope you enjoy the episode!

With the end of the year almost upon us, Coode Street was looking for a way to celebrate the books we read and loved during 2022. We also wanted to help you find something great to read for yourself or for someone close to you. And so the 2022 Coode Street Advent Calendar was born! Here are twenty-eight books that we loved and that we think you might love too. Space operas and epic fantasies, horror stories and comedies. Six-hundred page immersive tomes and light-footed short story collections. A little bit of everything! To make this more than just a list, though, we're going to do something else. Every day between now and December 25 we're chatting with the wonderful creators of these books and asking them about what they've been reading, what holiday story they'd recommend, their own books for this year, and the ones they might have coming in 2023.

Kelly Barnhill and When Women Were Dragons & The Ogress and the Orphans

Richard Buttner and The Adventurists

C.S.E Cooney and Saint Death's Daughter

Aliette de Bodard and Of Charms, Ghosts and Grievances & The Red Scholar's Wake

Stephanie Feldman and Saturnalia

Nicola Griffith and Spear

Elizabeth Hand and Hokuloa Road

Alix E. Harrow and A Mirror Mended

Kate Heartfield and The Embroidered Book

N.K. Jemisin and The World We Make

Alex Jennings and The Ballad of Perilous Graves

Guy Gavriel Kay and All the Seas of the World

Paul McAuley and Beyond the Burn Line

Sam J. Miller and Kid Wolf and Kraken Boy & Boys, Beasts & Men

Tamsyn Muir and Nona the Ninth

Sequoia Nagamatsu and How High We Go in the Dark

Tochi Onyebuchi and Goliath

M. Rickert and Lucky Girl: How I Became a Horror Writer

Kelly Robson and High Times in the Low Parliament

Christopher Rowe and These Prisoning Hills

Rachel Swirsky and January Fifteenth

Lavie Tidhar and Neom

Nghi Vo and Siren Queen & Into the Riverlands

Liz Williams and Embertide

Neon Yang and The Genesis of Misery

The sharp-eyed among you will notice that there aren't quite 28 entries in our Advent Calendar. You're right! We're still to record a few, but they should all be in place before this is done. But keep your eyes peeled for more.

What else did we do? Well, it's Coode Street, so we rambled about books of the year, short story collections and more. Hope you enjoy it!

With Gary about to leave for the World Fantasy Convention to be held in New Orleans next week, and with Jonathan in the process of assembling anthologies on the most recent iterations of space opera, we spend most of our time discussing the characteristics, history, and too-common misuse of that venerable term.

While we do touch briefly on the etymology of 'space opera', and on the pulp-era adventures that Wilson Tucker had in mind when he rather contemptuously coined the term in 1941, most of the discussion focuses on how the idea has evolved since M. John Harrison set out to demolish the old-school space opera with The Centauri Device in 1974, the efforts of Paul J. McAuley and others to define a new space opera in the 1980s (and Jonathan and Gardner Dozois’s The New Space Opera anthologies of 2007 and 2010), the influence of media, and more recent examples ranging from James S.A. Corey’s Expanse series to Aliette de Bodard’s Xuya universe, Nnedi Okorafor’s Binti series, and other authors who have energetically begun to reclaim space opera for a more diverse cast of characters. We fully expect enthusiastic disagreements.

As always, we hope you enjoy the episode. See you all again after World Fantasy!

For the first week in July, we’re joined by Nebula Award winner Rachel Swirsky, whose novella January Fifteenth ( just out from Tordotcom) is a provocative exploration of the idea of Universal Basic Income (UBI) as it might play out in the lives of four women in very different circumstances. We touch upon Rachel’s decision to focus on characters rather than systems, to set the tale in a recognizable near future, and to deliberately restrain from many science-fictional bells and whistles.

This leads to how SF deals, too rarely, with questions of economic policy and the effects on individual lives —in the case of January Fifteenth, a woman escaping from an abusive ex-spouse, a journalist covering the effects of UBI, a well-off college student whose friends deliberately waste their annual checks, and a young member of a repressive religious cult. As usual, we touch upon what’s next for Rachel, including an intriguing collaboration with Ann Leckie.

As always, our thanks to Rachel for making the time to talk to us. We hope you enjoy the episode!