Shadows in the Stone

“Jack Dann’s Shadows in the Stone creates such a complete world that Italian history no longer seems comprehensible without his cosmic battle of spiritual entities behind and within every historical actor and event.” (Kim Stanley Robinson, New York Times Bestselling Author) The author of The Age #1 bestselling novel The Memory Cathedral returns to Renaissance…

Read more...

The Economy of Light

Aurealis Award finalist, Best Horror Novel, 2009 Stephen is a retired Nazi hunter, divorced yet living happily enough on his ranch on the fringe of the Amazon jungle. But when Brazilian police unearth the alleged remains of the detested Auschwitz camp doctor, Josef Mengele, Stephen’s life is immediately and traumatically transformed. At the grave site,…

Read more...

Insinuations: an Autobiography

Jack Dann, one of SF’s most versatile and esteemed novelists, short story writers, and anthologists, has led a complex and fascinating life–after surviving the brutal tensions of military school and a months-long near-death experience in a hospital’s terminal wards, he embarked on the life of an author in the full swing of the Sixties, finding…

Read more...

Dreaming in the Dark

Winner of the 2017 World Fantasy Award for Best Anthology “Dreaming in the Dark will especially appeal to two groups of readers–those who love words themselves, and those who want an enticing sampler of work by some of Australia’s most talented working writers.” (Locus) Dreaming in the Dark, an original collection of some of…

Read more...

Concentration

“Dann is a Faulkner and a Márquez for Jews.” (Marleen Barr) JACK DANN’s groundbreaking anthologies Wandering Stars and More Wandering Stars used the tropes of science fiction, fantasy, and magical realism to ask and try to answer! what it means to be a Jew. In his new short-story collection Concentration, Dann enlists the techniques of…

Read more...

The Man Who Melted

“On my personal list of the greatest SF novels of all time (available upon request), Jack Dann’s The Man Who Melted would be right up there—a beautiful, terrifying cri du mort for humanity and an absolutely unforgettable book.(Elizabeth Hand for Science Fiction Age)” The Man Who Melted is a warning for the future. It is the Brave…

Read more...

Journal

Calling All Writers…and Everybody Else…

Bloomsbury Academic is offering a 20% discount on my The Fiction Writer’s Guide to Alternate History: a Handbook on Craft, Art, and History. Here is…

Dorothea Brande and Alternate History: a New Essay on the Inspiration and Process of Writing…

I’ve written a guest post for the Bloomsbury Literary Studies blog about my new book The Writer’s Guide to Alternate History and writing in general….

The Fiction Writer’s Guide to Alternate History…

My new book The Fiction Writer’s Guide to Alternate History: a Handbook on Craft, Art, and History is now out from Bloomsbury! You can find…

The Castle of Horror Podcast: Castle Talk: “Jack Dann on His Wild Alternate Venice Fantasy Shadows in the Stone”

You can listen to the podcast by clicking here. Enjoy!

A New Interview with Jack Dann About Writing and Publishing…

I did an interview with the folks at Screaming Eye Press, who asked me ten questions for their Creative Spotlight section. I certainly had fun…

Doing Some Catch-up…

During the past year or so, this unsettling time of Covid, I’ve done a few gigs: podcasts, readings, and the like. So here’s what I’ve…