Headquarters Air Force Reserve Command, located at Robins Air Force Base, Ga., ensures its three numbered air forces, 34 flying wings, 10 flying groups, a space wing, a cyber wing and an intelligence, surveillance and reconnaissance wing. and other subordinate units are prepared to accomplish their total force missions. The AFRC supports the Air Force mission to defend the United States through control and exploitation of air, space and cyberspace by supporting global engagement. AFRC plays an integral role in the day-to-day Air Force. The command supervises the unit-training program, provides logistics support and ensures combat readiness.

Mission

The mission of the Air Force Reserve Command is to provide combat ready forces to fly, fight and win.

Responsibilities

Air Force Reserve Command provides the U.S. Air Force about 14 percent of the Total Force for about 4 percent of the manpower budget.

Reservists support nuclear deterrence operations, air, space and cyberspace superiority, command and control, global integrated intelligence surveillance reconnaissance, global precision attack, special operations, rapid global mobility and personnel recovery. They also perform space operations, aircraft flight testing, aerial port operations, civil engineer, security forces, military training, communications, mobility support, transportation and services missions.

Flying Activity

Air Force Reserve Command units flew and maintain fighter, bomber, airlift, aerial refueling, aerial spray, personnel recovery and weather reconnaissance aircraft. Through the command's classic associate program, aircrews and maintenance personnel fly and maintain airlift, aerial refueling, fighter, trainer, and airborne warning and control system aircraft.

Subordinate Units

The Air Reserve Personnel Center at Buckley Air Force Base, Colo., is a direct reporting unit that reports directly to AFRC. Its mission is to "Provide 21st century life-cycle personnel services to all air reserve component members. A Total Force provider servicing the needs of the nation.

The Air Force Reserve Command has three numbered air forces and a Force Generation Center.

Fourth Air Force, March Air Reserve Base, Calif., and its subordinate units are responsible for "strategic reach forces," which includes aerial refueling and long-range, strategic airlift missions.

Tenth Air Force, Naval Air Station Joint Reserve Base Fort Worth, Texas, and its units are responsible for "power/vigilance with intelligence, surveillance, reconnaissance, network operations, space, and special operations forces." These forces include fighters, bombers, remotely piloted aircraft, cyber, space operations, and special operations flying and training.

Twenty-Second Air Force, Dobbins Air Reserve Base, Ga., and its units are responsible for "tactical airlift, combat support, training and institutional forces."

Force Generation Center, Robins Air Force Base, Ga. The FGC serves as the single path to request and receive, as well as oversee and deliver, Air Force Reserve forces and capabilities.

An Air Force Reserve lieutenant general in active-duty status commands AFRC. In addition to being the AFRC commander, he is also the chief of Air Force Reserve with offices in the Pentagon. He serves as principal adviser on Reserve matters to the Air Force chief of staff.

There are approximately 1,420 people stationed at Headquarters AFRC. The staff incorporates a mix of Regular Air Force members, Air Force reservists serving in different duty statuses and civil service employees to perform the mission. This combination includes 51 percent civilian employees, 10 percent active-duty personnel, 19 percent Active Guard Reserve members, 8 percent traditional reservists, 8 percent air reserve technicians, and 4 percent individual mobilization augmentees. They provide the headquarters with active-duty Air Force experience, reservist perspective and civil service continuity.

AFRC became the ninth major command of the Air Force, Feb. 17, 1997. It came about as a result of Title XII - Reserve Forces Revitalization - in Public Law 104-201, the National Defense Authorization Act of Fiscal Year 1997. Previously, the Air Force Reserve was an Air Force field-operating agency established April 14, 1948. The headquarters was established Aug. 1, 1968, replacing the discontinued Continental Air Command as the Reserve field command.

(As of January 2024)