LEGAL EXPERIENCE

Assistant Attorney General. Office of Attorney General, Bismarck, North Dakota. 12/13 – present.

From 12/13 to 11/15 acted as High Intensity Drug Trafficking Area Special Assistant United States

Attorney in Bismarck. Led investigations and prosecuted narcotics and asset forfeiture cases primarily in

federal courts. Developed and administered guidelines for asset forfeiture and coordinated enforcement

with state, local, and federal law enforcement agencies. Represented North Dakota in state courts and the

United States in Grand Jury and federal district court. In 11/15 assumed responsibility for post-conviction

cases, federal habeas corpus litigation and act as legal counsel for ND Highway Patrol, Bureau of

Criminal Investigation, 24/7 Program and ND Peace Officers Standards & Training Board. Drafted

legislation for 2017 & 2019 legislative sessions. Drafted administrative rules for POST Board.

Administrative Law Judge. State of Wisconsin, Department of Workforce Development. Milwaukee,

Wisconsin. 6/13 – 11/13.

Conducted administrative hearings and wrote decisions for Wisconsin’s Unemployment Insurance

program and tax cases and federal wage insurance program. Researched and applied statutes, rules and

decisions to evidence and factual record to decide issues on appeal. Produced written findings of fact,

drafted and issued legal decisions.

Assistant District Attorney. Sawyer County District Attorney's Office. Hayward, WI. 11/11- 6/13.

Represented the State of Wisconsin and Sawyer County. Prosecuted felony, misdemeanor, juvenile and

civil jury trials, bench trials, preliminary hearings, competency hearings, constitutional motions and

extradition hearings. Drafted search warrants, subpoenas, memoranda and briefs at trial and appellate

levels. Conducted training for law enforcement.

Resident Legal Advisor. United States Department of Justice, Criminal Division, Office of Overseas

Prosecutorial Development, Assistance and Training. Erbil, Iraq. 7/09-9/11.

Represented the Department of Justice as part of the Iraq justice sector assistance program while assigned

to the Erbil Regional Reconstruction Team and Consulate. Assisted in establishing the rule of law in Iraq

by providing technical assistance and advice to the Iraqi courts, prosecutors, police and corrections

officials. Created and provided skills development assistance on a broad range of criminal law and

procedure to Iraqi judges, prosecutors, judicial investigators and law enforcement officers. Advised U.S.

State Department personnel on rule of law issues. Supervised Rule of Law section and was on the senior

leadership team that advised the consul general. Worked with DOD advisors and local law enforcement

officials to develop and implement forensic evidence training to allow evidence to be used in the courts.

Assistant District Attorney. Milwaukee County District Attorney's Office. Milwaukee, WI. 9/98-7/09.

Represented the State of Wisconsin and Milwaukee County. Prosecuted felony, misdemeanor jury trials,

bench trials, post-conviction hearings, competency hearings, constitutional motions and extradition

hearings. Drafted search warrants, subpoenas, memoranda and briefs at trial and appellate levels.

Appointed Vertical Prosecutor 12/99 and prosecuted high-profile cases, vehicle forfeitures, gambling

cases, police internal affairs matters, election law violations and fatal industrial accidents. Appointed

office liaison to Harley-Davidson Motor Company for 100th and 105th Anniversaries. Appointed

Community Prosecutor for District Four 6/05 and worked with community organizations, law

enforcement and citizens to reduce crime, fear and disorder. Focus areas were nuisance properties, crime

prevention and gang issues.

Assistant District Attorney. Kenosha County District Attorney's Office. Kenosha, Wisconsin. 6/98-9/98.

Represented the State of Wisconsin and Kenosha County. Prosecuted felony, misdemeanor, and civil jury

trials, bench trials, preliminary hearings, competency hearings, constitutional motions and extradition

hearings. Drafted search warrants, subpoenas, memoranda and briefs.

Senior and Staff Attorney. Mississippi Department of Human Services, Jackson, Mississippi. 4/96-

5/98.

Represented the State of Mississippi in child support and paternity matters. Litigated enforcement and

modification matters. Provided legal advice to staff and reviewed case files to determine appropriate legal

action. Promoted to Senior Attorney 12/96 and supervised multi-county region including staff attorneys

and clerical personnel to ensure compliance with state and federal laws. Provided legal advice to regional

directors. Monitored performance and assisted attorneys with appellate matters. Chaired committee for

review of RFP for statewide genetic testing. Drafted legislation for 1998 legislative session.

Assistant and Deputy District Attorney. Washington County District Attorney's Office, West Bend,

Wisconsin. 1/89-6/95.

Represented the State of Wisconsin and Washington County. Prosecuted felony, misdemeanor, juvenile

and civil jury trials, bench trials, post-conviction hearings, competency hearings, constitutional motions,

mental health hearings and extradition hearings. Drafted search warrants, subpoenas, memoranda and

briefs at trial and appellate levels. Prosecuted vehicle forfeitures and wage claims. Promoted to Deputy

District Attorney 7/89. Appointed Interim District Attorney from 2/95-4/95.

Night Supervisor. Marquette University Law Library, Milwaukee, Wisconsin. 3/88-12/88.

Operated circulation desk, supervised student workers, and provided reference services involving the

demonstration and use of reference materials, computers and audio-visual equipment.

Hearing Officer. Milwaukee County Department of Social Services, Milwaukee, Wisconsin. 7/87-1/88.

Presided over administrative hearings involving agency actions in work relief, general assistance, and

food stamp matters. Wrote decisions and advised social services on policies and procedures.

Legal Intern. Milwaukee County District Attorney's Office, Milwaukee, Wisconsin. 1/87- 7/87.

Interviewed clients and made determinations whether probable cause existed in paternity cases. Prepared

pleadings for paternity, post-divorce and support enforcement actions.

Law Clerk. Reed, McClure, Moceri, Thonn & Olson. Seattle, Washington. 2/86-8/86.

Digested depositions and trained other clerks for major litigation. Worked as law clerk on foreclosure and

bankruptcy matters.

Managing Attorney. Dakota Plains Legal Services, Fort Yates, North Dakota. 12/84-1/86. Supervised

local office staff and represented clients in tribal, state, and federal courts. The caseload consisted of

family law, administrative law, debtor/creditor and civil rights matters. Also was responsible for

community education, outreach programs, and economic development projects.

Staff Attorney. Dakota Plains Legal Services, Sisseton, South Dakota. 8/83-12/84.

Provided legal services to clients in tribal, state, federal courts and administrative proceedings. Twentyfive

percent of the caseload involved criminal defense.

EDUCATION

Juris Doctor. University of North Dakota School of Law, Grand Forks, North Dakota, May, 1983.

Bachelor of Arts. Political Science and Russian Studies. University of North Dakota, Grand Forks, North

Dakota, May, 1980.

ADMITTED TO PRACTICE

State and Federal District of North Dakota, admitted September, 1983

State and Eastern Federal District of Wisconsin, admitted September, 1988

State and Federal District of Mississippi (inactive)

State and Federal District of South Dakota (resigned)

United States Supreme Court

Seventh and Eighth Circuit Courts of Appeal

Sisseton Wahpeton Oyate Tribal Court (inactive)

Standing Rock Tribal Court (inactive)

FACULTY POSITIONS

North Dakota Law Enforcement Training Academy. 2016 - present. Instructor for law enforcement officer courses in Criminal Justice System, Evidence, Criminal Procedure and Law of Arrest, and Use of Force Legal Perspectives.

National Advocacy Center, Columbia, South Carolina. 2001- 2009. Instructed at National College of District Attorneys primarily in various levels of trial advocacy and pre-trial advocacy.

Milwaukee Police Academy, Milwaukee, Wisconsin. 1999-2005. Acted as instructor at mock trial training for Milwaukee Police Department.

Milwaukee County Sheriff’s Department Training Academy, Franklin, Wisconsin. 2003. Instructor at mock trial training for Milwaukee County Sheriff’s Department.

Concordia University, Mequon, Wisconsin. 2001-2008. Instructor for adult education Bachelor degree courses in Administrative Law, Civil Liability Law, Constitutional Law, and Criminal Procedural Law.

OTHER ACTIVITIES