We offer a multitude of jobs with excellent career opportunities. Our staff are mostly employed at civil service grades where there are plenty of opportunities for promotion and career development, but we also employ a large number of staff in specialist posts in areas of Law, IT, HR, Project Management, Accounting and many more areas of expertise.

The work we undertake on a daily basis is topical and current, the cases brought to court often appear in the news and newspapers. There is a wide variety of interesting work undertaken in the Courts Service.

Some of the legal facing roles in the Courts Service include:

Judicial Assistant - the Judicial Assistant works with the judge. Among his/her duties is to undertake legal research for the judge and to announce the arrival and departure of the judge in court.

Researcher - research legislation and previous judgements at the request of the judiciary. They undertake research projects, review new case law and legislation. They prepare legal handbooks, conference papers and articles for the judiciary.

Registrar/Court Clerk - The Registrar/Court Clerk sits in front of the judge and records orders made by the judge. He/she is responsible for administrative matters and is in charge of court documents and exhibits. They also record the names of witnesses, swears in the jury and records the decision of the case.

Executive Legal Officer - Provide administrative support, undertake legal research, prepare material for speeches, lectures and forewords, makes logistical arrangements for conferences etc.

Judicial Secretary - provides secretarial typing service to judges, and manages and organises the diary of the judge.

Solicitor - the General Solicitor assumes the legal identity of a Ward/Minor and carries out all necessary legal and property management work on their behalf. They also develop policies and strategies within the office.

Court Messenger - provides support to the County Registrar in his/her capacity as sheriff and under the terms of the Enforcement of Court Orders Act.

Having a background in law or a law degree is not a requirement for all roles in the Courts Service. You may wish to work in a generalist role as a civil servant where you can work directly with the public or work in a department that supports the work of the courts.

If you are a student, a graduate, just starting your career, changing your career or an experienced professional in your field of expertise we have a role for you in the Courts Service.