Sergio Osmeña, (born Sept. 9, 1878, Cebu City, Phil. —died Oct. 19, 1961, Manila), Filipino statesman, founder of the Nationalist Party (Partido Nacionalista) and president of the Philippines from 1944 to 1946.

While until Philippine commerce and industry could be establish, there will be no adequate source of tax revenues would which to finance rehabilitation. The need for money and construction materials was immediate and urgent so the only way to finish it as soon as possible was the help of the American government again. Recognizing this fact the US sent to manila a mission heading by Sen miller Tyding to determine the extent of the assistance the Philippines would need.

Tydings report about recommendation in 1946 a reconstruction cost billions of dollars plus the special tariffs and trade privileges to last for 28 years. Though the path a head is hard, the people of the pilipines have atleast from the war and regain democracy and politically active and alive. They played the part of proud and liberation they conscious in new collective power that why many people demand for bigger part for the future of their country for which they fought with.

Manuel A. Roxas, the third of the Quezon Osmeña triumvirate credited with the struggle for Philippine independence from the American regime, was born on January 1, 1892 in Capiz, Capiz, now Roxas City. Roxas took up a law course at the University of the Philippines where he graduated in 1913 and topped the bar examinations became a provincial governor in the days of the Commonwealth, and was later elected to sit at the House of Representatives. On his first term, he was chosen Speaker of the body.

As member of the various independence missions, Roxas contributed greatly to the laying of the foundations of the Philippine independence, as well as to its attainment.

When the Pacific War broke out, he displayed more of his multi-faceted characters when he volunteered for military service in defense of the country.

During the Japanese Occupation he refused to cooperate with the Japanese military forces by faking illness and evading major services. Still, he served in various other tasks in the interest of the Filipinos.

When Congress convened for its post-war session, Roxas was elected Senate President. During his term, he displayed profound statesmanship and intelligence, making his mark as a master of economics. He was among the “ seven wise men “ who drew up the Constitutional Convention and accordingly became the last of the Commonwealth presidents and the first for the Republic of the Philippines. An undisputed pillar of Philippine democracy, his selfless dedication to his country’s political and economic development is a timeless virtue worthy of emulation even by succeeding generations.

Elpidio Rivera Quirino (Tagalog: [ ˈ kiɾ ino] ; born Elpidio Quirino y Rivera; November 16, 1890 – February 29, 1956) was a Filipino lawyer and politician who served as the sixth president of the Philippines from 1948 to 1953.

Economy

Upon assuming the reins of government, Quirino announced two main objectives of his administration: first, the economic reconstruction of the nation and second, the restoration of the faith and confidence of the people in the government. In connection to the first agenda, he created the President's Action Committee on Social Amelioration (PACSA) to mitigate the sufferings of indigent families, the Labor Management Advisory Board to advise him on labor matters, the Agricultural Credit Cooperatives Financing Administration (ACCFA) to help the farmers market their crops and save them from loan sharks, and the Rural Banks of the Philippines to facilitate credit utilities in rural areas.

Social programs

We are called upon to decide on this momentous debate whether or not this land of ours will remain the cradle and grave, the womb and tomb of our race – the only place where we can build our homes, our temples, and our altars and where we erect the castles of our racial hopes, dreams and traditions and where we establish the warehouse of our happiness and prosperity, of our joys and sorrows.

Austerity Program

In the face of the trying conditions in the country, Garcia initiated what has been called "The Austerity Program". His administration was characterized by its austerity program and its insistence on a comprehensive nationalist policy. On March 3, 1960, he affirmed the need for complete economic freedom and added that the government no longer would tolerate the dominance of foreign interests (especially American) in the national economy. He promised to shake off "the yoke of alien domination in business, trade, commerce and industry". Garcia was also credited with his role in reviving Filipino cultural arts. The main points of the Austerity Program were:

 The government's tightening up of its controls to prevent abuses in the over shipment of exports under license and in underpricing as well.  A more rigid enforcement of the existing regulations on barter shipments.  Restriction of government imports to essential items.  Reduction of rice imports to minimum.  An overhauling of the local transportation system to reduce the importation of gasoline and spare parts.  The revision of the tax system to attain more equitable distribution of the payment-burden and achieve more effective collection from those with ability to pay.

An intensification of food production.

The program was hailed by the people at large and confidence was expressed that the measures proposed would help solve the standing problems of the Republic.

Bohlen–Serrano Agreement

During his administration, he acted on the Bohlen–Serrano Agreement, which shortened the lease of the American military bases from 99 years to 25 years and made it renewable after every five years.

Creation of the International Rice Research Institute

President Garcia, with the strong advocacy of Agriculture and Natural Resources Secretary Juan G. Rodriguez, invited the Ford Foundation and

the Rockefeller Foundation "to establish a rice research institute" in Los Baños, Laguna. This led to the establishment of the International Rice Research Institute in 1960.

Republic Cultural Award

In addition to his laws and programs, the Garcia administration also put emphasis on reviving the Filipino culture. In doing so, the Republic Cultural Award was created. To this day, the award is being given to Filipino artists, scientists, historians, and writers.

Ferdinand Marcos was the son of a politician, he practiced as a trial lawyer before serving under Manuel Roxas, the first Introduction president of the independent Philippines. He was himself elected president in 1966. In his first term, he made progress in agriculture, industry, and education.

The specific areas of the New Society envisioned by Pres. Marcos for reform: 1 and Order Martial law – to restore peace and order Criminals were either captured and detained or killed

2 Reforms- Exploitation of the poor and landless peasants by their landlords proclaiming the “whole country as a reform area” Presidential Decree No. 27 – abolishes tenancy By the end of martial law in 1981, 532, 153 tenant-farmers had become owners of rice and corn lands in 45 provinces

3 Reforms Marcos believed that education was a very important role towards the goal of the “New Society”. President Marcos vowed that his administration “shall educate our children, our men and women, and ourselves.”

Encourages economical growth Farmers were given technical and financial aid as well as other incentives Good Effects: •Economic growth rate increases from 5% to 6- 7% (1970-1980) •The GNP increases from P55 billion (1972) to P193 billion (1980) Bad Effects: Year Annual rate of Growth •Debt from the International Monetary Fund Pre-War 3% (IMF) and the World Bank rises from US$2 Post-War 5% GNP Growth billion (1970) to US$24 billion (1983) 1978-1979 6% Rate •An estimated 10% of the GNP is being 1979-1980 5% pocketed. 1980- 1981 4%

Buildings:  Hospitals  Specialty Hospitals – Philippine Heart Center, Lung Center, Kidney Institute, Philippine Children Hospital  Schools  Power Plants – geothermal plants, hydroelectric plants  An International Airport  Housing Projects  Restorations – Intramuros, Luneta Park, etc...  Philippine International Convention Center  Makiling Center for the Arts (National Arts Center)  Malacañang ti Amianan (Laoag)  Nayong Pilipino •Museum for Native Art (Tacloban)  Palace In the Sky (Tagaytay)  Government Buildings

Bridges:  San Juanico Bridge (Samar and Leyte) Toll-Ways:  Manila North Diversion Road Roads and Highways:  Marcos Highway (Baguio) These achievements gave the Philippines a taste of economic prosperity throughout the 1970’s

It was an open-door policy mainly on trade and cultural relations Started trading with countries with Russia and China and other socialist countries It was a “cautious open-door policy” Built up relationships with countries who were enemies with the United States Being the “Iron Butterfly”, Imelda Marcos, with her charm, went on foreign trips to open trade relationships, exchange culture and get financial assistance.

Economic Prosperity during the 1970’s and the early 1980’s

Farmers had “price support” and financial support Self-sufficient in rice exports “Kilusang Kabuhayan at Kaunlaran” Overseas Filipino Workers Development of Infrastructures

New Society – Educational Reforms, Labor Reforms, Land Reforms Social Services Housing Projects Martial Law – maintained peace and order

Although Marcos was branded as dictator, corrupt, human rights violator by fictional tales passed on from generation to generation and his achievements were Conclusion expunged subtly by the manipulation of mass media and vindictiveness of the administration that succeeded him, the impacts of his interventions remained and are undeniably germane part of our country’s system.