Throughout dystopian works the human versus nature conflict acts as a catalyst for the hardship society endures. Where nature represents innocence and vulnerability, a lack of it symbolizes a world of corruption and constraint. In worlds where society synergizes with nature, there is confidence in the future similar to the cycle of the Eloi and Morlocks in The Time Machine. However in worlds such as, Andrew Stanton’s Wall-E, Mordecai Roshwald’s Level 7 and The Matrix by the Wachowski brothers, an obvious lack of nature adds to the seemingly hopelessness of the work’s atmosphere. The root of suffering in dystopian worlds stems from the human pursuit to conquer nature. Dystopian worlds often depict a society where the advancement of technology …show more content…

Often humans repeatedly commit atrocities in nature for the purpose of short term success. In Wall-E this is shown through the culture of commercialism that prevails throughout the society and ultimately what caused the Earth to become polluted to the point of abandonment. The Earth of Wall-E is a shell of its former glory. Where there was a large amount of diversity and color on the planet, the bleak colors and lack of life represents many of the fears that people hold for the future of humankind. The repeated abuse and overreliance on nature shows that humanity single handedly lead to the demise of much of the planet, and they only left waste from their excess consumption in their wake. Dr. Strangelove or: How I Learned to Stop Worrying and Love the Bomb visualizes a similar ideology behind the Earth being made for humanities use. The nuclear war between the United States and Soviet Union ultimately will leave the Earth completely dead due to the radiation that will kill anything across the globe. Although the most obvious consequence of nuclear war is the extinction of mankind, the effects it would have on nature would be dramatic. All the characters in the film seem to disregard this fact opting to focus on the implications it would have on their individual nations or themselves. Handmaid’s Tale focuses on the results of environmental abuse and the effects it has on society including the infertility epidemic caused by, “medicines, pills, men sprayed trees, cows ate grass, all that souped-up piss flowed into the rivers… the exploding power plants,… and the mutant strain of syphilis” (Atwood 112). Infertility acts as one of the main factors in causing the rise of the theocratic Republic of Gilead as many blamed the epidemic on a lack of faith in God instead of looking towards the abuses of nature. The environmental abuse also lead to the creation of the Colonies,