Barnyard animals have the best roles in the BYU Young Company’s winning production of "Babe, the Sheep Pig."

The story of "Babe" is simple: A pig becomes champion sheepdog. But that’s deceiving when there’s a sheepherder’s field of knowledge to be learned. The tale shows that kindness works better than force, and it teaches courage, consideration — and stable manners.

While Americans enjoyed the movie "Babe," few may know it was adapted from the acclaimed British book, "The Sheep-Pig."

The script here, which more closely resembles the book, is by David Wood. This is the play’s first presentation in-the-round. In her research, Teresa Dayley Love learned the playwright had wanted that staging. Dayley Love’s tight direction brings out the best from the actors.

The engaging, charm-filled production at the university’s Margetts Theatre runs through Saturday, Feb. 12.

Andrew Joy’s bright performance as the title character drives this show. Initially introduced with an accompanying handheld young-pig puppet (in a matching vest), the actor is delightfully eager and has a heart-melting smile. Goodness is innate, and Joy displays the innocence of one who hasn’t yet learned what is “impossible.”

From the beginning, when the pig pleas for acceptance into the family of sheepdogs, the audience roots for him. When Babe hears “That’ll do” and wins the final competition, there are cheers with the applause.

Four actors play supporting roles. Katie Bowman performs with warmth and determination as Fly, Babe’s adopted mother. Bowman also steps forward to introduce a scene or new character. Without a handheld canine counterpart puppet or dog-inspired wardrobe item, she struggles to maintain her sheepdog character while also narrating. This is especially apparent in her scenes opposite human characters.

A stoic Alexander Trop is plainspoken Farmer Hogget and a pleasant Annalee Hickman is Mrs. Hogget. Amberly Plourde manipulates Ma(aahahah) the sheep puppet and performs as a few other animal characters.

The enthusiastic six-member ensemble has a great time bringing additional life to the barnyard. Slipping in and out of their multiple roles with nimble ease, cast members play a self-important turkey, hyperactive puppies and just about every other farm animal imaginable.

A key to the delight of this production is children in the audience are invited to join in the fun on stage. As children are tapped, an actor quickly gives them a simple character-creating accessory (a yellow feather boa for a duck; a shaggy collar for a puppy) and brief, whispered instruction; then they enter the scene together in character. It’s clear the children are gleefully caught up as they play an on-stage role — and play along, with an impromptu pig squeal or a shout-out while seated in the audience.

The best children’s theater can erase the word “children’s.” This production embraces young audiences and appeals to the wonder and imagination within each of us.

After the on-campus performances, the troupe will stage 18 free shows at Wasatch-front schools, providing what may be for many students a wonderful first introduction to live theater. Lucky schoolchildren.

Blair Howell edited national magazines while living on the East Coast. Now a freelancer, he lives in Cedar Hills, Utah. His involvement with children's theater came about when his wife performed with the Imagination Company in the western states.