About the Play:

Babe, The Sheep-Pig is a drama for young audiences by David Wood. This is a tale of high adventure in the farmyard; of humble beginnings and courageous triumphs. Based on the book by Dick King-Smith, which inspired the hugely successful film, Babe.

Babe, The Sheep-Pig is the story of one piglet's rise to become the world famous "sheep-pig". When Babe is won by Farmer Hogget at the village fair an extraordinary friendship develops, one that will change the whole farm. With the help of his new "mother", the old dog Fly, Babe fast learns the herding instinct, and it's not long before this most polite of pigs wins over the most suspicious of sheep. When the day of the Grand Challenge Sheep-Dog Trials dawns, the whole farm holds its breath to see whether Babe will triumph, against all odds, to become the hero of the hour.

Babe, The Sheep-Pig was first performed in 1997 by Whirligig Theatre at the New Victoria Theatre, Woking and on a nationwide UK tour, in association with the Manchester Library Theatre Company and the Birmingham Hippodrome. The play has had several productions in the United States, including the Dallas Children's Theatre, and is becoming popular in Germany. Presented for Christmas 2002/3 by the Sherman Theatre, Cardiff, the play is popular with community theatres.

Cast: 10 female or male, 10 boy(s) or girl(s) (flexible casting: The original cast employed ten actors and ten children (playing puppies and sheep). Most of the actors played several roles. Companies with more actors available could use a larger cast.)

What people say:

"There comes a happy point in children's theatre when one can almost forget the word 'children's' and declare: This is real theatre, with an appeal to all, from infant to octogenarian, in whom a sense of wonder and a bright imagination are alive and well. So it is in David Wood's adaptation…." — Eastern Daily Press

"The show is absolutely enchanting. It's aimed at kids but the drama, the tension, the humour, the lovable heroes and menacing villains, make it compelling theatre for grown-ups too… a crackling good story, beautifully adapted for the stage." — Evening News

"What marvellous theatre … As for the denouement – well, children applauding Babe for driving the sheep through the trial gate is just terrific theatre… First class." — The Stage

"When a packed theatre is chanting the lead character's name at the end of a production, it's fair to assume you've got a hit on your hands. So it was with Babe, The Sheep Pig as the hundreds of young children (and a few adults) acclaimed a masterful adaptation… A delight." — Birmingham Evening Mail

"David Wood's script is the real star… The kids in the audience revelled in the slapstick… Everyone got involved when Fly beseeched the crowd to recall a password to help Babe… This production should inspire many more across the country." — Dallas Morning News

About the Playwright: