Yuriy Husyev, former head of Ukroboronprom, has been appointed Ambassador Extraordinary and Plenipotentiary of Ukraine to Azerbaijan. This is stated in Decree No. 86/2024 on the website of the President’s Office, according to

“To appoint Yuriy Veniaminovych Husiev as Ambassador Extraordinary and Plenipotentiary of Ukraine to the Republic of Azerbaijan,”

– the decree reads.

What is known about Yuriy Gusev

Yuriy Huseyev was born on 15 November 1979 in Korostyshiv, Zhytomyr region.

He graduated from Kherson State Technical University, Kyiv National Economic University, Kennedy School of Government at Harvard University (USA), and Staffordshire University (UK).

Yuriy Gusev has worked in various government agencies. In 1999, he became an advisor to the head of the Kherson Regional State Administration.

In 2002, Gusev was on the parliamentary election list of Valeriy Khoroshkovsky’s Winter Generation Team. At that time, he was an entrepreneur, founder of several commercial structures.

Until 2009, he headed commercial companies.

From 2009 to 2014, he worked in various government agencies: he was the head of the group of advisers to the Minister of Economy, director of the Department of National Projects, and advisor to the Minister of Finance.

From 2009 to 2010, he headed a group of advisers to former Minister of Economy Bohdan Danylyshyn. In 2010, he became deputy director of the investment department at the Ministry of Economy.

Then he headed the Department of National Projects at the State Agency for Investment of Vladyslav Kaskiv. After leaving the Ministry of Defence, he worked as an advisor to the Minister of Infrastructure.

He was Deputy Minister of Defence (2014-2016). in 2016, he became an advisor to the Minister of Infrastructure, and two years later, an advisor to the Minister of Ecology and Natural Resources.

From 2016 to 2019, he was engaged in entrepreneurial activities and was a consultant and advisor to international and Ukrainian financial institutions (IFC, EBRD, PrivatBank).

He was the Head of the Kherson Regional State Administration (2019-2020).

Since December 2020, Husiev has served as the Director General of Ukroboronprom. On 27 June 2023, the President signed a decree on Husiev’s resignation at his request.

Gusev’s personal life

He is married to Olga Guseva, has a son, Mykhailo, and a daughter, Maria.

He is involved in charity work. He is fond of chess and running (he has run 2 half marathons).

Scandals

The media reported that Gusev wore socks and T-shirts with geese on them at meetings. He gave ducklings to first-graders.

He created a department of happiness in the Kherson Regional State Administration.

In 2019, he was number 41 on the list of the Servant of the People party in the parliamentary elections. However, retired lieutenant colonel Dmytro Tymchuk said that the candidate was linked to procurement scandals in the Ministry of Defence when he worked as a deputy minister.

After this statement, Husiev refused to run for the parliamentary elections, saying that he had been subjected to an information attack.