Education and early career

Born on 9 June 1966 in Zaporizhia, in 1983 Nalyvaichenko finished with golden medal (top honors) the general education school #30 in Zaporizhia and in September of the same year enrolled to the Kharkiv State University. In June 1984 he finished the first year of Kharkiv State University and in 1984-86 served in the Soviet armed forces as a conscript. Since September 1986 Nalyvaichenko studied in the Shevchenko State University of Kiev (today is Taras Shevchenko National University of Kyiv) from which he graduated with honors in June 1990 as philologist and a referent-interpreter of English.

From September 1990 to August 1991 Nalyvaichenko worked as a teacher in the department of Russian language of Kiev Construction Engineering Institute (today is Kyiv National University of Construction and Architecture). In 1991-93 he was a student of the Andropov Institute of KGB (today is Academy of Foreign Intelligence), but refused to accept his diploma. During that period from January 1992 to May 1994 Nalyvaichenko worked as a deputy director of local company in Zaporizhia.

In 1994-97 Nalyvaichenko worked for consular office of the Ukraine Embassy in Finland (concurrently in Denmark, Norway, and Iceland). After returning from abroad, he worked in the central department of Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Ukraine (MZS) for the Consular administration. In 2001-03 Nalyvaichenko worked as a general consul (adviser), for the Embassy of Ukraine, Washington, D.C. In 2003-04 he was a director of the Consular service department of MZS. In February 2004 Nalyvaichenko was appointed a deputy minister of MZS. In 2005-06 he served as the Extraordinary and Plenipotentiary Ambassador of Ukraine to Belarus.

Security Service of Ukraine

In May 2006, he left that position to become the first deputy head of the Security Service of Ukraine. In December 2006, Nalyvaichenko became acting head of the SBU following Ihor Drizhchany's dismissal by parliament. He kept this temporary position due to political deadlock but was finally confirmed as head of the SBU in March 2009. He also served on the National Security and Defence Council of Ukraine. In March 2010, following the defeat of Viktor Yushchenko in the presidential election, Nalyvaichenko was replaced by Valeriy Khoroshkovsky. In September 2010, Nalyvaichenko was chosen to replace Vira Ulianchenko as the Chairman of the Political Council of Our Ukraine.

2010-2014 politics and return to Security Service of Ukraine

In May 2010, he announced the beginning of a public initiative called «Onovlennya Krainy» (Renewal of the Country). In 2010-12 Nalyvaichenko also headed advising group "Smile Holding of Ukraine" (Kiev).

In September 2010 he joined Our Ukraine party and became Chairman of the Political Council of the party. On May 24, 2012 he resigned as Chairman of the Political Council and left the party.

Supporting principles and political platform of UDAR (Ukrainian Democratic Alliance for Reforms) of Vitaliy Klitchko, on August 1, 2012 he joined his political party. Valentyn Nalyvaichenko was elected Member of Parliament of Ukraine in October 2012 from the UDAR; he was # 3 on UDAR party list.

On 22 February 2014, just after the "Maidan revolution", the Verkhovna Rada (Ukrainian parliament) appointed Nalyvaichenko (with the support of 333 of the 450 MPs) its Commissioner in charge of supervision over the Security Service of Ukraine replacing Oleksandr Yakymenko who was dismissed by parliament the same day. During his work as head of the Security Service of Ukraine the counterintelligence under the guidance of deputy head Victor Yahun received and published unequivocal evidences of the direct involvement of servicemen of Russian Federation in hostilities in Ukraine.

Later political career

As of 2017 Nalyvaichenko is the leader of the political movement "Spravedlivost" ("Justice"). In July 2017 "Spravedlivost" created a "joint action headquarter" with the political party "Movement of New Forces" of Mikheil Saakashvili.

Honors

Nalyvaichenko is awarded the Order of Prince Yaroslav the Wise V and IV degree, and the Order for Merits to Lithuania- Commander's Cross.

Scandals

In the summer of 2009, it turned out that Kislinsky Andrey Nikolayevich, who, on Nolivaychenko's suggestion, was appointed deputy head of the Security Service, has a fake diploma.

In early September 2013 General Prosecutor's Office of Ukraine against Nalivaichenko filed criminal proceedings on the application of three people's deputies from the Communist Party of Ukraine & nbsp; - Sergei Balandin, Oleg Bukhovtsi, Mikhail Gerasimchuk the disclosure of his state secret during his tenure as Chairman of the Security Service of Ukraine, in particular providing for reviewing documents bypassing the procedure CIA United States. Nalyvaychenko himself called this "denunciation of Communists" and "schizoid nkvdism".

In November 2014, the daughter of Valentine Nalyvaichenko, Olga Nalyvaichenko, starts working in the legal department of the Victor Polishchuk's company "Techenergotrade". After that, at the beginning of 2015, the Security Service of Ukraine, which at that time was headed by Valentin Nalyvaychenko, closes the criminal case of illegal alienation by the Victor Polischuk structures 94.67 hectares of state land of Brovarsky radio transmitting center in Brovary.

In June 2015, another conflict situation with the GPU was held.

In September 2017, during a search in the converting center, objects were revealed that indirectly indicate involvement in the work of the center of Vadim Alperin and Valentin Nalyvaichenko.