Marble-topped bars, mosaic murals, a helipad-turned-dancefloor and one of the largest swimming pools found on a 255-foot yacht would typically satisfy most owners. Not for Ukrainian businessman and former vice prime minister Valeriy Khoroshkovskyi. He mandated a full-sized martial arts room with a large yellow-and-red interlocking mat floor before taking delivery of his full-custom Amels, Energy, in 2022. What form of martial arts he trains in is anyone’s guess—Combat Hopak, a Cossack martial art from Ukraine, perhaps?—but when he’s not practicing high-flying kicks, the space transforms into an indoor cinema.

With an interior volume of 2,885 GT, Energy has the equivalent gross tonnage of a 295-foot yacht. That abundance of space is felt across the Espen Øino–designed exterior deck areas and throughout the interior penned by Francois Zuretti, with superyacht amenities befitting of the yacht’s $215 million price tag.

More from Robb Report

This Revamped 161-Foot Trinity Superyacht Could Be Yours for $16 Million

This New 116-Foot Pocket Explorer Will Make Larger Expedition Yachts Jealous

Meet Zephyr, a Giant 378-Foot Megayacht With Not One But Two Pools

The design brief was to defy convention and find ways to connect with the ocean. It’s evident in the sea-level gym with its own terrace, the bright and airy beach club at the stern, and the sweeping ocean views from the helideck. Yet it’s perhaps most successful in the wide sidedecks that double as private guest balconies for the two VIP bedrooms.

Seven cabins accommodate 14 guests, pampered by a crew of 27. That said, Khoroshkovskyi has only “lightly used” his private yacht in the past two years, most likely due to the ongoing Russo-Ukrainian War. The yacht is now jointly listed for sale with Burgess and Cecil Wright.

Here are our 11 favorite features.

Best of Robb Report

The 2024 Chevy C8 Corvette: Everything We Know About the Powerful Mid-Engine Beast

The World’s Best Superyacht Shipyards

The ABCs of Chartering a Yacht

Sign up for Robb Report's Newsletter. For the latest news, follow us on Facebook, Twitter, and Instagram.

Click here to read the full article.

Enter the Dragon

The main deck martial arts room is one of the most unique spaces onboard. A large interlocking martial arts mat covers the floor, with wooden gym benches, marble-tiled walls and large windows affording views out to sea. When practice is over, the multipurpose space, which is accessed via a lobby with a glass elevator spanning from the lower to the bridge deck, converts into a cozy cinema.

New Heights

Another versatile area is the forward helipad on the top deck, which serves as a dance floor, lounge area and outdoor yoga studio. A statement bar with a dayhead keeps guests hydrated, while the Jacuzzi and sun pads aft provide relaxation under the sun.

Tickling the Ivory

The bridge deck’s music lounge, which features a Steinway baby grand piano and a marble-topped bar, is crafted for acoustic excellence with walls, ceiling and upholstery clad in leather. The entertainment extends to an open-air lounge aft.

Master Mariner

More like a private penthouse, the master suite on the dedicated owner’s deck has parquet flooring and full-height windows, with views and access to the foredeck terrace with a lounge, a Jacuzzi with stepped access, and a marble fire pit surrounded by armchairs and chaise lounges.

On the Seabed

The two main-deck VIP suites answer the owner’s design brief to connect guests to the ocean with full-height sliding glass doors that open onto private balconies, with table and chairs for a morning coffee. A desk area, crystal light fittings and soft, tactile linen and upholstery bring a warming ambience to the rooms.

Taking the Plunge

The owner’s deck also boasts one of the largest swimming pools found on a 255-foot yacht, flanked by a double bank of sunpads and surrounded by glass balustrades. When lunch is served, open-air dining for up to 18 guests is neatly tucked under the overhang.

Boardmasters

The soft geometric carpet in the primary suite continues into the main deck conference-style office, where a long board table with seating for 10 guests affords the owner the opportunity to conduct meetings at sea, while attempting to achieve a work-life balance.

Waterfall Lounge

On the main deck aft is an intimate seating area—or Waterfall Lounge—named after the mosaic mural that depicts Japanese artist Katsushika Hokusai’s famous painting, Under the Wave off Kanagawa, and has a waterfall trickling down it. Guests who look up will also catch sight of the swimming pool above since it’s visible through a glass window.

Beach Boys Club

The lower deck welcomes guests via the swim platform or the sea-level lobby. The four guest cabins on this level provide step-free access past the beauty salon to the light and airy beach club, bar and wellness spa aft. There is also a two-tender boat deck and water toy store in this level.

Fitness Alfresco

Working up a sweat is never an issue in the gym, which opens onto a spacious sea terrace. It’s adjacent to the massage room, though waterside treatments are also available.

Relaxation Room

If the sauna and hammam bring out the heat, guests can cool off in the lower-deck relaxation room where another sea terrace brings a welcome sea breeze.