The Victoria Memorial School for the Blind will keep the user information collected through its website (http://www.theVictoriaMemorialSchoolfortheBlindb.org) strictly confidential. Our policy reflects our commitment to use information fairly, keep it secure, make sure it is accurate and keep it up to date. It will not be shared with any external agencies or individuals. By entering and using this website you are deemed to accept the provisions in this policy.

This policy is applied to all the pages hosted on this site. It does not apply to pages hosted by any other linked organizations, partners, or to other organizations to which we may provide a link and whose privacy policies may differ.

While forwarding a donation for the Victoria Memorial School for the Blind the well-wishers have to submit some personal information as it would help us ensuring genuine contributions:

i. Full name,

ii. Full Address & Pin code,

iii. Nationality,

iv. Landline or Mobile Number (either one mandatory),

v. Email ID

vi. Your payment processing details

vii. Any other data as the Victoria Memorial School for the Blind may require

The Victoria Memorial School for the Blind uses industry standard efforts to safeguard the confidentiality of your personally identifiable information, such as firewalls. We make every effort to protect the loss, misuse and alteration of the information under our control. However, no data transmission over the Internet can be guaranteed to be 100 per cent secure.

The Victoria Memorial School for the Blind is not liable for any form of loss, damage or harm caused to the users as a result of misuse of personal information by a third party, tracked through a liked site of the Victoria Memorial School for the Blind or otherwise, and/or by a person who is not an employee of the Victoria Memorial School for the Blind.

To modify the terms and conditions under privacy policy will be sole discretion of the Victoria Memorial School for the Blind.

The contents, including graphics, logos, write-ups, pictures, images and software on the Victoria Memorial School for the Blind website are the property of the Victoria Memorial School for the Blind and its partners or associates and the same is protected. Users must seek formal permission before using any of this information and any misuse of the same will automatically hold the (mis)user liable.

Personal information will be used by THE VICTORIA MEMORIAL SCHOOL FOR THE BLIND for internal purposes including the following:

sending you inter alia emails, features, promotional material, surveys, brochures, catalogues, THE VICTORIA MEMORIAL SCHOOL FOR THE BLIND Annual Report, reminders for donations, regular updates on the utilisation of donations by THE VICTORIA MEMORIAL SCHOOL FOR THE BLIND and other updates.

(ii) processing your donations to THE VICTORIA MEMORIAL SCHOOL FOR THE BLIND.

(iii) delivering the Receipt for donations made by you to THE VICTORIA MEMORIAL SCHOOL FOR THE BLIND.

(iv) maintaining an internal confidential database of all the Personal Information collected from visitors to the Site

THE VICTORIA MEMORIAL SCHOOL FOR THE BLIND may share Personal Information with any of persons who are associated with THE VICTORIA MEMORIAL SCHOOL FOR THE BLIND, including companies and consultants affiliated with THE VICTORIA MEMORIAL SCHOOL FOR THE BLIND in any manner. THE VICTORIA MEMORIAL SCHOOL FOR THE BLIND will retain ownership rights over such information and will share only such portions of the Personal Information as it deems fit

Security

THE VICTORIA MEMORIAL SCHOOL FOR THE BLIND endeavours to use up-to-date security measures to protect your Personal Information. The Site is a VERISIGN approved site