Title: The Last Starship From Earth

Author: John Boyd

Format: Paperback

Written: 1968

Published: 1975

The Last Starship From Earth is a thin science fiction novel that is densely packed with ideas. It is set in a world so highly structured and controlled that even the Pope has been computerised. The government is run by three groups – Church, Sociology and Psychology – and their control is absolute. Individuality has been suppressed to the point that the only form of self expression is suicide and, as a psychologist laments at one point, even the suicides are all the same.

The story begins when Haldane IV, a theoretical mathematics student, meets Helix, a student poet. He immediately falls for her, but the difference in their professional categories means that the department of genetics would never let them marry. If they are caught having any sort of romantic relationship it would mean sterilisation by the state and being kicked out of the professional class. Helix has the type of body and personality that make this a reasonable risk as far as Haldane is concerned.

Haldane is the narrative character, and the narration is consistent with his characterisation. Normally I would praise this but, in this instance, it makes the book difficult to read. Haldane’s world is so heavily mathematical that other characters struggle to understand him, and I had the same problem in sections. The language is stilted and formal, or over the top poetical, and I wished there was a middle ground.

Initially the world appears to be set in the future. As the story progresses, there are clues that something is not right. References to a common history are made, but the historical observations are not correct. The reason for this is revealed at the end of the novel, so I won’t spoil it, and a second reading transforms the discrepancies from irritating to brilliant.

Aspects of the technology in this story seem laughable with the innovations of the last 40 years. Small details that are used throughout the story can jolt a modern reader from the scene. So many details feel plausible, and suddenly someone is using a punch card in a computer. It fits perfectly with the technology that was available when the book was written, and it raises retrospective questions about what technology might have been like if we followed the technological path that the novel describes.

I enjoy reading this book, and can easily finish it in a day. The narrative flows, but I do tend to ignore sections that I don’t understand. It is hard science fiction, and in some respects the emphasis is too much on hard. Unless you are a mathematics, history and poetry buff, you probably won’t understand all the references, which is a pity. The story stands the test of time, but the narrative style has not. For these reasons, I am giving this book 3 out of 5 pages.