On behalf of the members of the Harriet G. Walker Chapter, National Society Daughters of the American Revolution (NSDAR or DAR), we welcome you! Our chapter was organized in 2013 and our members come from Shoreview and its surrounding areas.

We are a non-profit women’s service organization that values education, historic preservation and patriotism.

Harriet G. Walker Chapter, NSDAR, is one of the Minnesota State Society Daughters of the American Revolution chapters organized on June 18, 2013.

Our chapter was named after Harriet Granger Hulet Walker; born on September 10, 1841 and died on January 13, 1917. Harriet’s grandfather, John Hulet, served in the American Revolutionary War and participated in the Battle of Bunker Hill. Harriet and her family, T.B. Walker and their children, moved to Minnesota. Among Harriet’s achievements was, she became president of Northwestern Hospital from 1862 to 1917, now the Abbott Northwestern Hospital of Allina Health; president of the Bethany Home, now the Walker Methodist Home; worked with or was a member of the Women’s Council of the City of Minneapolis, the Hennepin Avenue Methodist Church, the Nonpartisan National Women’s Christian Temperance Union, and the Minneapolis Association Opposed to the Further Extension of Suffrage to Women. Walker died in New York City in 1917 and was buried in Lakewood Cemetery in Minneapolis. Her gravestone is inscribed, “Harriet Hulet Walker”, but she is called “Harriet G. Walker” by the Minnesota Historical Society as well as by Isaac Atwater. The Walker home on Hennepin Avenue was a public art gallery now known as the Walker Art Center.

Our chapter currently has over 60 members who proudly serve the north-central portion of the metropolitan Twin Cities area through service to local communities that promote historic preservation, patriotism and education.

Today’s Daughters of the American Revolution is a vibrant service organization for women over the age of 18 who can prove lineal descent from a Patriot of the American Revolutionary War. In October 2019, DAR surpassed one million women who have joined the DAR since its founding in 1890. By subscribing to the DAR Today podcast, we can learn more about members’ activities, Patriot histories, current topics and more.

Minnesota Daughters come from all over our great state and beyond. They are young women who join to honor a family member, older women who enjoy genealogical research in their retirement years, professional women interested in connecting with other women in the community where they live, and others. Whatever your reason for joining, we invite you to connect, encourage you to apply and welcome you to our organization.