Northumbria University becomes our latest Institutional Member, providing unlimited publishing for their faculty with no APCs.

PeerJ is delighted to welcome Northumbria University as a new Institutional member. By taking out an Annual Institutional Membership (AIM), Northumbria University students, staff and faculty can enjoy unlimited publishing for the next 12 months in any PeerJ journal. Any corresponding or admin/submitting author who submits to PeerJ with a Northumbria email address will be recognised as eligible to use the membership; any faculty, staff or student member of the University with a different email address should contact authors@peerj.com and submit a request to use Northumbria’s Annual Institutional Membership.

We are excited to welcome Northumbria as a brand new institutional partner. The University is a leader when it comes to Open Access, and is committed to the aims and principles of open research. They promote and support openness of all research findings to enhance accessibility, public benefit and transparency.

“We are pleased to be able to take part in the PeerJ institutional membership scheme; exploring alternatives to APCs for the global research community is an important part of improving research culture for all. Membership will help us to achieve our open research aims of developing, embedding and recognising open research practices, while maximising publishing opportunities across the institution.” – Leah Maughan, Scholarly Communications Librarian, Northumbria University

About AIMs

A PeerJ Annual Institutional Membership (AIM) provides unlimited, frictionless OA publishing for institutional partners and their faculty. Simple to manage, easy to purchase and providing great cost saving opportunities, researchers will never have to worry about having to pay an APC, and librarians can say goodbye to the administrative overhead of dealing with payments on an article by article basis.

AIMs pricing is tiered and based on an institution’s publishing history in PeerJ’s journal portfolio. When a partner’s renewal is calculated, if the equivalent APC cost would have been less than the Membership fee, they can choose to carry over the difference towards their Membership renewal, or contribute to PeerJ’s Global Publishing Fund, which supports authors without the means to publish OA. AIMs simplify OA and are an important step towards a non-APC future of globally equitable access to read and publish open science.