Why Study Media and Journalism BA (Hons) at Northumbria University

Most preferred by international students

Provides extensive hands-on learning experience

Study in high-end classrooms from experienced teachers

Extracurricular activities to help students upskill in their area of interest

Internship and work opportunities after course completion

Media and Journalism BA (Hons) at Northumbria University has produced incredible professionals in the past and has a strong alumni network

Course Fees

Media and Journalism BA (Hons) at Northumbria University is affordable for international students. With the help of scholarships, students can cut their tuition and other expenses.Newcastle upon Tyne, where Northumbria University is located, has a superb quality of life, and it is easy to find affordable accommodation.

Entry Requirements

The Northumbria University selects students based on their academic strengths and other achievements. English language proficiency is a must for admission to any foreign university in an English-speaking country. Exams like IELTS and TOEFL assess a candidate’s speaking, listening, reading and writing skills in English. Other standardised tests such as the ACT and SAT also test their general preparedness for university-level education.

Below are the minimum requirements for Media and Journalism BA (Hons) at Northumbria University:

English Language Requirements

Academic requirements

Along with English language proficiency, the Northumbria University evaluates students based on their academic record and has a set standard that has to be met. Here are the general requirements and documents required for Media and Journalism BA (Hons) at Northumbria University:

Aspirants must have completed their 10+2 from a recognised board

Must have a good GPA in their 10+2

Must have a good SAT or ACT score

Required Document Lists

Certificate of completion of 10+2 standard from a recognised board

Statement of Purpose

Letters of Recommendation

Writing Sample (if required)

IELTS/TOEFL scorecards

CV or Resume

Proof of funding

Passport

Student visa

How To Apply?

The application process is simple, but it is advisable to have a study abroad professional help you out during the process. Keep an eye on the deadline and apply early to increase your chances of selection. Also, note that missing documents and invalid/incorrect information can result in the rejection of your application. Ensure your documents are handy when applying, and verify all your details.

Students must follow these steps to apply to Northumbria University

Visit the official Northumbria University website and go to the ‘Application’ section

Create your login ID and fill out the details on the application form

Submit the required documents and re-check all the information before submission

Lastly, pay the application fees

Scholarships

Tuition costs are the most significant expense for students abroad. One way to bring it down is through scholarships. Northumbria University offers scholarships that cover your tuition and more.