Company CHOICES INTERNATIONAL ES

Academia Tenis Ferrer La Nucía, Alacant , Spain

Ages 10 years - 18 years

The David Ferrer Tennis Academy, is a High-Performance Tennis Training Centre.

Our aim is to shape individuals and prepare them to be successful in all aspects of life. In order for us to achieve our objectives, we have a unique training method and a team of professional coaches with a great international reputation.

This program offers players from around the world the opportunity to come to the center to be able to enjoy our training system as well as to improve certain aspects of their game. For this, they will have a personalized training plan consisting of 20 hours a week of training on the court and 11 hours a week of physical training.

ATF will make a comprehensive study to every player who enrols in the summer camp. According to the evaluation of the complete study, the assessment of the Academy personnel, the opinions of the player, parents and coaches responsible, a personalized training and directed program will be established. Short and long term objectives will be set to guide the development of the player with a detailed technical report indicating the aspects to work during their stay at the Summer Campus.

ACCOMMODATION

Both the players and their families can be accommodated in our brand new 4 stars hotel residence located in La Nucia.

If the students choose to come on their own, our staff would be responsible for picking them up at the arrival airport and take them to our venues (please see our price information). The Residence has supervisors and security personnel 24 hours a day to ensure the peace and security of the players at all times.

LA NUCIA CAMPUS (Sport City Camilo Cano de la Nucia in Alicante)

• 6 hard courts + 6 clay courts.

• Gym

• Several football fields

• Swimming pool

• Bike Park

• Residence and sports venues in the same area

4 stars brand new hotel- residence

Sport center of 250.000 square meters

Private area monitored by security guards 24 hours a day

START DAY - ALL THE PROGRAMS - ANY SUNDAY