Cameras get better and better every year. Yet, these days, many people are gravitating toward old-fashioned film.

It’s a trend dating back to 2020. People had more time on their hands and leaned into the slower process of film photography.

The National Camera Exchange in Golden Valley offers rows and rows of equipment from every era. They also develop film. Store Manager Jason Brown said that before the boom, the exchange processed between 50 and 100 rolls of film every week. Since then, it’s looked more like 300 a week.

“Throughout the pandemic, if you were between the age of 15 and 30 and you’re in the store, you were here for film or (something) film camera-related,” Brown said.

Brown said it’s interesting to watch some slow down as the industry continues to move quickly. Their biggest customers are still parents who shoot photos of their kids’ activities.

“I think it’s one of the most exciting and somewhat frustrating times to be in photography, because things are advancing so much,” Brown said. “The capabilities of cameras are so good, but to a certain extent you have to reinvest.”

Film in Action

Getting involved with film is also an investment, and one the The National Camera Exchange is happy to be a part of. In the basement, lab technicians prepare the film for the processor. Ryan Shimp, one of those lab techs, said he’s been doing this for over 20 years.

“It’s still fun every day — so I like it,” Shimp said.

Most customers opt for digital copies of their prints to be sent directly to their email. Others also ask for physical copies.

Upstairs, staff collect film from customers. Most of the staff, like Lilli Johnson, are customers themselves. Johnson is in her early 20s.

She said she loves to use film to take photos of her friends.

“It really is that feeling of the anticipation — ‘Oh yes, it’s finally here! I get to see my film!'” Johnson said.

The world of photography is much faster than it was in the age of film. As for why younger people like the slower, sometimes pricier option, Johnson thinks she has the answer:

“I think film really forces you to slow down and really appreciate the art of photography,” she said.

Added Exposure

Brown said more recently, film isn’t the only older camera technology people want their hands on. Digital point-and-shoots are growing in popularity, too.

At times, it’s hard for the resale market to keep up — especially with little to no interest until this point.

“We have spent years recycling this, and then all of sudden all the kids want these super old point and shoots,” Brown said to a customer who brought in a point-and-shoot for resale.

All-in-all, Brown said he’s grateful for this added exposure — and connection to the next generation.

“Having them have to come in for film was such a great present for us, right?” Brown said. “Because there’s no other way for us to communicate with these 20-year-old, but they have to come in.”

Golden Valley