It seems you've significantly misunderstood how film photography works. You missed the key step of film development (also known as film processing).

The entire strip of film is sensitive to light – and extremely sensitive to light, at that. The camera itself can be thought of as a simple light-tight box, protecting the film from light. Once the film is loaded, every time the film is advanced, more unexposed film is drawn out of the film cassette. When you take a photo, the shutter opens for a set amount of time – usually a tiny fraction of a second – allowing in just enough light for an image to be formed on the film inside. But the film is still sensitive to further light exposure at this stage. If you open the back of the camera, or pull the film out of the cassette, you are flooding all visible film with light – so much so that the film will be entirely overexposed, will not produce any usable photos, and cannot be salvaged. Once film is exposed to light, this cannot be undone.

The text in bold above talks about an image being formed on the film, but it's not a "real" image at this point; it's an "invisible" latent image. To turn the latent image into a real image, we need to perform the key step in film photography, that is, film development. To develop the film, it is put through a series of chemicals, which turns the latent images on the film into visible negatives/positives. Again, this has to happen in complete darkness. As part of the overall development process, the film is also fixed, so that any further exposure to light has no further effect on the film. After this is complete, then the film can be examined (using a light table for example), and the images can be scanned/printed/projected.

So, the process should be:

Load film in your camera

Take all the photos to use up the full roll of film

Rewind the film back into its cassette according to the instructions for your camera

Remove the film cassette from the camera without any film being visible, and finally...

Take it or send it to a photo lab for developing (and maybe scanning/printing)