Turkish writer Orhan Pamuk received the Nobel Prize for Literature in 2006. Pamuk’s entertaining doorstopper A Strangeness In My Mind proved great company for an arctic January in Chicago, when going outdoors was something to be avoided. The novel narrates the story of Mevlut who arrives at age twelve in Istanbul in 1969 from a village in Central Anatolia to help his father sell yogurt on the city streets. (Per capita consumption of yogurt in Turkey is close to five times that of the United States.) As he gets older, Mevlut continues as a street vendor, although his product line changes as items become produced in factories and available in local grocery stores, first yogurt, then ice cream. A lunch business selling chicken and rice fails when the police decide to clear vendors from the streets and confiscate Mevlut’s cart. Mevlut finds work as a restaurant manager; between stints he is employed as a parking lot attendant and an electrical inspector. He maintains a sideline as a street vendor, purveying one special product on winter evenings for forty-odd years. That product is boza. Boza is a fermented grain beverage that has been consumed in Turkey for hundreds of years. It is served with cinnamon and chickpeas. Boza’s low alcohol content caused its popularity to peak during the Ottoman years, when alcohol consumption was forbidden. Mevlut’s customer base shrinks, as raki, an alcoholic beverage distilled from grapes, finds greater appeal to more secular consumers.

Mevlut’s story, which also includes the stories of his circle of family and friends, is connected to a slight scaffold of a plot. Mevlut spots a girl at the wedding of his cousin Korkut. She is the sister of the bride Vediha. Mevlut falls in love instantly. His cousin Suleyman, now Vediha’s brother-in-law, informs Mevlut that the girl’s name is Rayiha. Rayiha in fact is the middle sister of the bride, and the girl Mevlut had been eyeing is the youngest sister Samiha. Over the next three years, Mevlut through Suleyman and Vediha sends an ongoing stream of love letters to Rayiha. To avoid paying a bride price, since street vending is hardly a financial goldmine, Mevlut enlists Suleyman to arrange for his elopement with Rayiha. Mevlut discovers Suleyman’s deception on the night the couple elope. Suleyman had also fallen for Samiha on the night of Korkut and Vediha’s wedding so had given Mevlut the name of the middle sister. Once the elopement had proceeded, Mevlut was honor bound to marry Rayiha.

Mevlut spends the next years trying to convince himself that his love letters had been intended for Rayiha all along. At times, he has to convince Rayiha too, when years later, Suleyman, who has since been rejected by Samiha (who has since herself eloped with Mevlut’s Kurdish friend Ferhat) maliciously divulges the truth to Rayiha.

This episode is a principal reason, coupled with a sometimes burning loneliness, that there is a strangeness in Mevlut’s mind. Mevlut is a melancholy and pensive dude. He adores street vending because it liberates him to work outside, to observe the city’s sights and its changes, and to daydream. “All the happiness and beauty that life had to offer only revealed themselves when his mind drifted off into fantasties of a world far removed from his own.” He is nostalgic for the old traditions, boza, cemeteries, Arabic slogans on walls, old buildings once owned by the Greeks who populated the city. He believes old things can be holy even if they’re not religious; these antique practices and objects make him feel connected to his ancestors.. Unlike his cousins who are ambitious and corrupt, Mevlut is honest and naive. He refuses to participate in a scam promoted by fellow restaurant employees. When Ferhat asks Mevlut one day what he would do if he won the lottery, Mevlut says he would stay home and watch TV with his daughters. His naivete sometimes results in self-deception. In the same way that he has told himself that Rayiha was the intended recipient of his letters, he tells himself he’ll continue school, which doesn’t happen. He confuses bribes with tips, although he does fib and tell his boza customers that the beverage is alcohol-free. Mevlut possesses an additional favorable quality that says something sorrowful about Turkish manhood of the time: Mevlut doesn’t beat his wife.

A Rachel and Leah story is too slight to propel a 700-page novel. Istanbul and its transformation into a major and modern city in the second half of the twentieth century is actually at the heart of the novel. Mevlut is part of an enormous internal migration from rural Central Anatolia to Istanbul, fueled in part by the Marshall Plan, which mechanized agriculture. Between Mevlut’s arrival in the city until the end of the novel in 2012, Istanbul’s population grew from about 2 million to 14 million. Through Mevlut, Pamuk charts the lives of the former villagers. The men take jobs as street vendors and construction workers. Some practice a trade. More affluent ones open small groceries or restaurants. The children attend overcrowded schools, where subjects are taught rotely, where powdered milk and fish oil capsules from UNICEF are distributed. Sons work after school, and many don’t graduate high school let alone attend university, although Mevlut manages to get a high school certificate. The migrants build shacks known as gecekondu, typically erected on vacant land owned by the state. The gecekondu are built virtually overnight without building permits from cheap and used materials, including hollow bricks, scavenged by the squatters. The shanties initially lacked electricity or plumbing or access to public transportation and sometimes have dirt floors. Often, as in the case of Mevlut’s family and that of his uncle Hasan, there are no registered deeds, just a paper signed by a local politician. From time to time, especially during election years, there is an amnesty, and the squatters receive legal title. As more and more people move from rural areas to Istanbul, the city establishes municipal services and builds roads. By the 1980’s, half of Istanbul’s population live in gecekondu. The possession of legal title encourages a new form of housing, the change also sparked by the 1999 7.6 magnitude earthquake that devastasted Izmit, a city about 60 miles from Istanbul, which also suffered substantial damage. The 1999 earthquake caused about 18,000 deaths and a “big one” is predicted. (In an odd coincidence, another huge quake occurred in Turkey as I was drafting this post. Organizations accepting donations for quake victims include the Red Cross, Doctors Without Borders, and Bnai Brith Disaster Relief.) Gecekondu owners agree to allow developers to raze their homes in exchange for a fixed number of units in a new multi-story apartment building, their consent also induced by a seismic hazard law that after 1999 requires the demolition of structually unsound construction. At the same time, developers build skyscrapers and shopping malls, razing not just gecikondu but even older 3-story homes. Multi-lane highways with barriers criss-cross the city and pedestrian bridges extend overhead making street vending even more difficult. Old cobblestone roads become paved with asphalt.

Pamuk from time to time mentions a different demographic change that preceded mass urbanization, specifically the exodus of Greeks and Jews from Istanbul. While Pamuk describes ethnic and religious divides in Istanbul among Turks and Kurds and Alevis (a non-Sunni religious sect related to Islam but that also observes other traditions), the city becomes more and more Muslim with the arrival of the internal immigrants and the departure of Jews, Armenians, and Greeks. During World War I and its aftermath, Turkey eliminated a large portion of its Christian minorities. The Armenian genocide during the war was followed by the 1923 population exchange meant to resolve the Greco-Turkish war, with Greeks (i.e. Christians) residing in Turkey expelled to Greece and Turks (i.e. Muslims) living in Greece expelled to Turkey. Armenians and Greeks living in Istanbul during the world war were not targeted at the time due to the presence of foreign embassies in Istanbul and were permitted to remain in the city after 1923. In 1942, under the pretext of preventing profiteering during World War II, Turkey enacted a discriminary wealth tax designed to destroy the remnants of its minorities economically. The tax was imposed on assessed wealth in accordance with ethnicity: Armenians (232 percent), Jews (179 percent), Greeks (156 percent) and Muslims (4.94 percent). Non-Muslims were required to pay in cash within 15 days. To pay the bill, non-Muslims had to sell their homes and property to Muslims at forced sale prices. Those who couldn’t pay either were sent to labor camp or had their property seized by the government. In September 1955, the Turkish government sponsored a pogrom targeted at Istanbul Greeks, which led to burning and looting of Greek property and destruction of churches. Istanbul Greeks, along with some Armenians and Jews, were killed, injured, and raped. Climaxing these and additional policies of ethnic cleansing was the expulsion of Istanbul Greeks in 1964. (Pamuk mentions most of these events; I’ve added some historical context and detail. In general, the book benefits from Pamuk excluding historical detail. Some more background on the history of religious persecution in twentieth century Turkey makes the references to the disappearance of Greeks and Jews more understandable for readers outside of Turkey so I’ve fleshed that out in this post.)

As the years progress, Mevlut also observes ubiquitous corruption and cronyism. Both rich and poor create illegal hook-ups to the electrical grid. Both bribe the inspectors to look the other way, although Mevlut during his tenure as an electrical inspector believes these are tips, not bribes. Cash handouts to politicians nourish development. Gangsters control various rackets. When Mevlut makes his deal with a developer for units in exchange for his gecikondo, he refuses to cheat his mother and sisters back in the village of their share despite his uncle’s urging. Vediha sums up the prevailing principle: rights don’t matter, only profits.

Life in Istanbul is periodically disrupted by regular coups and impositions of martial law and curfews in a political scene where communists, nationalists, and Islamists vie for power. Prisoners of the newest regime, often leftists, are tortured and the new leaders ban booksellers who presumptively sell leftist literature. Bursts of violence occur both within and outside the country. Turkey goes to war over Cyprus; the government fights Kurds in eastern Turkey; and a mob massacres a group of Alevi intellectuals. Istanbul may have become more religiously homogeneous, but Mevlut notices proxies for secularization: the removal of head scarfs and increased and public consumption of raki, an alcoholic beverage. Skyrocketing inflation impoverishes some of Mevlut’s acquaintances. Along with soaring population come noise and crowding, homeless people, unfortunates who forage in dumpsters, drug dealers, and pimps. Architectural beauty falls to modern conformity. Each neighborhood has a statue of Ataturk, a mosque, the same bank branches, clothing stores, and supermarket. Each has a pharmacy, a restaurant, bakery, and arcade.

As he grows older, Mevlut becomes increasingly lonely and melancholy. Rayiha has died prematurely. His daughters have married. He ends up marrying Samiha, who has also been widowed. He observes all the new construction, realizing that the new buildings will also be emphemeral and questions whether it is worth doing anything. More and more he dreams and thinks about Rayiha. The strangeness in his mind stemming partially from his self-deception about the intent of his love letters intensifies as a result of other divergences. His friend Ferhat had told him about a distinction between what you say publicly and what you say privately. A religious leader whom Mevlut has consulted has advised him about a difference between the intention of words and the intention of the heart. In Mevlut the private and public, his heart and words have too often been mismatched. He discovers a disparity between truth and sincerity. At the end, Mevlut finds the single truth that allows his private and public views to merge, “what his heart intended as much as what his words always meant to say.” He says to himself aloud, “I have loved Rayiha more than anything in this world.”

I’m not convinced that A Strangeness In My Mind is one of Pamuk’s masterpieces, but it’s a breezy read and that weighs a lot in the calculus. Characters break into the narrative like talking heads in a documentary to amplify the details and to contradict one another, which makes for a more compelling novel. I’m on the edge, but lean toward A Strangeness In My Mind receiving a second chance.