Instructions

Address field - enter an address, city, state, place name, postal code or any other name for a location into this field and then click the find button to retrieve its latitude-longitude coordinate pair. Your result will be displayed in the box either under or to the right of the find button (depending on the width of the device you're viewing this on).

Latitude and Longitude fields - enter the latitude and longitude of the place you're trying to locate then click the find button. Again, your result will be displayed in the box either under or to the right of the find button.

Load Location

To center the map on a latitude-longitude coordinate pair enter the coordinates into the LAT (latitude) and LNG (longitude) fields and then click the locate map button.

To find the latitude and longitude of a location enter its human readable form (i.e. an address, placename or postal/zip code, etc.) into the LOC field and then click the load button (the return key will also submit). The latitude, longitude and address of the location will be displayed in the "Selected Location" box, if the attempt was successful.

The and buttons are only available when the input fields have content.

To find an address from a latitude and longitude coordinate pair enter the coordinates into their corresponding fields (LAT for latitude and LNG for longitude). The coordinates fields accept degrees decimal, degrees minutes decimal or degrees minutes and seconds decimal. Click or type return/enter to submit. Again, results will display in the "Selected Location" box.

Click the clear button, , to clear the input fields.

Map Coordinates

displays the latitude and longitude coordinates in degrees, minutes, seconds decimal, degrees minutes decimal and degrees decimal of the currently selected map location.

Selected Location

displays the reverse geocoded location of the current latitude and longitude (approximation only). See also find address from latitude and longitude.

Cursor Coordinates

displays the latitude and longitude in degrees, minutes, seconds decimal, degrees minutes decimal and degrees decimal of the current mouse location. While dragging the map it displays the Map Center's coordinates. (See convert GPS coordinates to convert latitude-longitude coordinate pairs.)

Map Parameters

This controls current parameters of the map via menu selection.

Map type selects the base layer of the map and thus controls the map's general appearance.

The overlays menu is a multi-select. Select the checkbox(es) of the layer(s) you wish to overlay base layer. Use each overlay's slider to control its transparency/opacity.

The zoom menu controls the map's zoom level (you can also use the +/- map control). Its range is affected by layer selections.

Map Height Click and drag the small, gray grab handle at the bottom of the map to adjust its height. Resize the window width to increase or decrease the map's width.

Reset the map to its default values and size by clicking the reset map button.

Clicking the button will load your location into the map.