This work has been selected by scholars as being culturally important, and is part of the knowledge base of civilization as we know it. This work was reproduced from the original artifact, and remains as true to the original work as possible. Therefore, you will see the original copyright references, library stamps (as most of these works have been housed in our most important libraries around the world), and other notations in the work.

This work is in the public domain in the United States of America, and possibly other nations. Within the United States, you may freely copy and distribute this work, as no entity (individual or corporate) has a copyright on the body of the work.

As a reproduction of a historical artifact, this work may contain missing or blurred pages, poor pictures, errant marks, etc. Scholars believe, and we concur, that this work is important enough to be preserved, reproduced, and made generally available to the public. We appreciate your support of the preservation process, and thank you for being an important part of keeping this knowledge alive and relevant.

Joaquim Manuel de Macedo (June 24, 1820 — April 11, 1882) was a Brazilian novelist, medician, teacher, playwright and journalist, famous for the romance A Moreninha.

He is the patron of the 20th chair of the Brazilian Academy of Letters.

Joaquim Manuel de Macedo was born in the city of Itaboraí, in 1820, to Severino de Macedo Carvalho and Benigna Catarina da Conceição. Graduated in Medicine in 1844, he started to practice it in the inlands of Rio. In the same year, he published his romance A Moreninha. In 1849, he founded the magazine Guanabara, along with Manuel de Araújo Porto-alegre and Gonçalves Dias. In this magazine, many parts of his poem A Nebulosa were published.

Returning to Rio, he abandoned Medicine and became a teacher of History and Geography at the Colégio Pedro II. He was very linked to the Brazilian Royal Family, even becoming a tutor for Princess Isabel's children. He was also a provincial deputy and a general deputy, and a member of the Brazilian Historic and Geographic Institute.

During his last years of life, he suffered mental disturbies. Those disturbies deteriorated his health and made him die in May 11, 1882.

He was married to Maria Catarina de Abreu Sodré, the cousin of Álvares de Azevedo.

From Wikipedia