2. Comedy History 1895-1930 – Films from the comedy genre started being produced at a high rate in the era of the silent films that was roughly around 1895-1930. As the films were silent they relied on the visual images to be funny therefore they would frequently use slapstick or burlesque to add to the comedic value of a scene as there was no dialogue being heard. 1930s-1950s - In the 1930s silent films were replaced by dialogue films as this helped widen the humour used in films as this helped develop the humour from just visual imagery. Movies still included physical humour as they used this to add more to the comedic value of a film or scene as the dialogue and physical humour will add more to the comedy. By the 1950s Television series were a popular industry as more and more people stayed home to watch the Television than rather going to watch a film in the Theatre. Near the end of the 1950s a new type of humour was introduced to the comedy genre which was Black Comedy. This would look to make a dark situation such as war and make it into a comical issue. 1960s-1980s – At the beginning of the 60s dark humour became to emerge as films like Dr. Strangelove (1964) The Apartment (1960) and Alfie (1966) Eddie Murphy became a successful action-comedy film actor as he starred in the Beverly Hill Cops series (1984-1993) Films that were directed by John Hughes became with popular in the genre during the 1980s and he was best known for the Home alone movies during the 1990s which helped direct comedy films towards family audiences. 1990s-2010s- Spoof comedies stayed popular with films like the Scary Movies series. Romantic comedies developed a lot during the 90s as they became every popular due to films like sleepless in Seattle (1993) British Comedies started to examine the role of Asian community in Britain as they started to make more cultural comedies that kept the British elements with films like East is East (1999) and Bend it like Beckham (2002).

3. Television 0 Sitcom – These programmes feature the same recurring characters being placed in different situations in every episode hence the name situation comedy (sitcom). They use different techniques to build up the humour like Slapstick. They are either recorded in front of a live audience or with a laugh track. A popular sitcom is Friends. 0 Comedy Drama – A comedy drama that is commonly known as a Dramedy combines with drama and dramatic elements. This gives it me realistic tone then sitcoms. A popular comedy drama is Ugly Betty. 0 Sketch Comedy- These programmes feature the same actors acting as a different range of characters that are put into different scenarios. They are very popular in Britain as shows like Little Britain were very successful. 0 Game show Comedy – The UK have plenty of shows that are formatted like a game show as two teams compete for points throughout games that include comedic elements. The show gives the comedians chances to use stand up comedy to win rounds. For example, Mock the Week and 8 out of 10 cats. 0 Animated Comedy – This type of comedy is very popular in America as they have produced many popular animated series like The Simpsons and Family Guy. They use attributes from tradition cartoons and sitcoms.