Flowers of Algernon is a book written by Daniel Keyes initially published as a short story in 1959 and converted into a novel in 1966. The novel is the most famous book by the American author and went on to win Hugo Award for Best Short Story in 1960, Nebula Award for Best Novel in 1966, and was nominated for the Hugo Award for Best Novel in 1967.

This Sci-Fi novel revolves around the theme of intelligence and emotions and how both of them are intertwined with each other. And the novel does this by dwelling upon another theme of how badly intellectually disabled people are actually treated.

Daniel Keyes developed the idea of the novel based on the incidences in his own life and his own tension with his parents as they wanted to push him into medical education while he wanted to pursue a career in literature.

Synopsis

The story begins with a middle-aged man Charlie Gordon with an IQ of 68 who works at the bakery of his uncle. Charlie Gordon likes working there and has lots of friends who make him laugh. His life takes a turn when he is recommended, by his special teacher Miss Kinnian, for an experimental medical procedure that claims to increase his intelligence. The procedure has been till now successful on a single experimental mice Algernon and Charlie Gordon is to be the first human subject. Charlie Gordon has to go through a number of per-operative tests to gauge his baseline intelligence where it is revealed that the mice Algernon is smarter than him. He is also instructed to keep a diary and make regular progress entries in it which could be helpful records later on.

The procedure is performed and slowly Charlie starts becoming smart. He can now learn things at a much faster rate and soon learns everything that is there to learn. But with this smartness comes loneliness. He realizes how his friends always made fun at his expense. About how his idiocy was always a subject of entertainment for them. He now comes face to face with the reality of how the world did not even consider him a person before his intelligence increased.

With this increase in intelligence, he also starts remembering incidences from his childhood, and all the tension that existed between him and his mother resurfaced. He realizes how his mother dearly loved him yet sent him away due to his disability. As he writes all of his thoughts into the logbook, he realizes how he has no privacy and that all his thoughts and feelings will be shared by the researchers.

Things go further south when it is revealed that Algernon has started losing his intelligence which raises a question about the permanence of the effects of the procedure. Will Charlie Gordon too lose his newfound intelligence?

My Take

To be honest, the book captivated my interest ever since I came across it. And it had more to do with my background as a psychiatrist and having dealt with 100s of intellectually disabled individuals. The first-person narration style used in the book works wonders as we get to know about all the things happening outside and inside our main character. It does not take much time for us to start liking Charlie for all his innocence and a childlike naivety.

The book also does an excellent job of weaving together themes of intelligence and emotions, privacy, and maltreatment of disabled individuals in our society. The book does this by raising many pertinent questions. Do we not patronize, in one way or the other, those we consider beneath us? Is it not part of human nature to do so? Is it not the same with us that as a child we see the world through rose-colored glasses but as we grow and learn more about the world, we grow disappointed? Is ignorance really bliss?

Charlie’s character arc reminds me of a humorous instance from The Hitchhiker’s guide to the galaxy.

“Many elevators imbued with intelligence and precognition became terribly frustrated with the mindless business of going up and down, up and down, experimented briefly with the notion of going sideways, as a sort of existential protest, demanded participation in the decision-making process and finally took to squatting in basements sulking.”

Bottomline

5/5 stars

Must read. One of the most profound and intellectually stimulating work of fiction.

“Anyone who has common sense will remember that the bewilderments of the eyes are of two kinds, and arise from two causes, either from coming out of the light or from going into the light, which is true of the mind’s eye, quite as much as of the bodily eye.”