Flowers for Algernon is the debut novel by author Daniel Keyes based on a story from 1959. It was published in the Netherlands by Publisher Born in Assen. It first appeared in bound form under the title IQ185 , then as a paperback . The book was placed as science fiction , but can also be read as a psychological novel . In 1960 Keyes won the Hugo Award for the original short story Flowers for Algernon 1959. Which appeared in The Magazine of Fantasy and Science Fiction. He rewrote the story into a novel and earned in 1966 , the Nebula Award . The book has been filmed twice as Charly , Cliff Robertson received anOscar for his role. The BBC edited the book for a radio drama and there is a musical version . The book has some explicit sexual passages and therefore a number of times fallen prey to censorship .

Story [ edit ][]

The mentally retarded Charlie Gordon (IQ = 68) works in a bakery. His knowledge level is low. His colleagues in the bakery like him and help him occasional hand. The boss squeezes occasional blind eye. From his teacher Charlie is subject of an operation , which ultimately must ensure that his intellectual powers increase. The trial had previously results in the laboratory mouse Algernon. The teaser for Charlie is that he is just as smart as anyone. When rising intellectual faculties, Charlie is more aware of his past. The behavior of his colleagues looked nice, but was offset by the small compressed rows . Charlie's IQ is rising rapidly and is at the same level (relative) of the mouse. However, the mouse turns on the way back . Games like walking around in a labyrinth to become tedious and the insertion of a female mouse As a result, he leaves behind. her left Charlie begins to suspect that there is some similarity between the behavior of the mouse and himself. He also separates himself and could be the girl who has always supported not many him. The researchers of the first hour he begins to loathe. The degeneration late Charlie return to its former level, that are doing it. Again sympathetic Eventually he leaves, he leaves a letter containing the command to continue to place flowers on the grave of mouse Algernon

The story is like a diary written. The beginning is difficult to read because Charlie a limited speaking and disk level. The spelling of the early fading of the text as its capabilities increase. The written fragments also get a better structure. However, errors and poor structure return as the degeneration has deployed.

General [ Edit ][]