The University of Caloocan City (abbreviated as UCC) is a public-type local university established in 1971 and formerly called Caloocan City Community College and Caloocan City Polytechnic College. Its south campus is located at Biglang Awa St., Grace Park East, 12th Avenue, Caloocan City, Metro Manila, Philippines (also known as EDSA/Biglang Awa Campus) and the north campuses are Camarin Business Campus, Congressional Campus, and TechVoc Campus (near Libis, Camarin).

The University of Caloocan City was formed in 2004 out of Caloocan City Polytechnic College (CCPC), which started as a two-year course college in 1971 and offered four-year courses in 1975. Its first programs were Bachelor of Science degrees in Industrial Education (BSIE) and B.S. Business Technology (BSBT).

The school was first located in a building at Caloocan High School (located at 10th Avenue, Grace Park). It transferred to its present location (at General San. Miguel St. Sangandaan, Caloocan City) when the first building burned.

On January 23, 2004, Caloocan City Council unanimously approved the Ordinance 1020-2003 principally authored by then councilor Gonzalez Jr., which authorized the city government to convert the existing Caloocan City Polytechnic College into a full-fledged university. The initially city hall-funded tertiary educational institution will henceforth be called as University of Caloocan City, the lone public university in Caloocan.

On April 20, 2006, the 32nd Commencement Exercise took place at Folk Arts Theater, Manila. The BSIE graduates were the first to be called on stage, which is a tradition at the Commencement Exercises.

On the school year 2015, in an ordinance made by Councilor Dale Gonzalo "Along" Malapitan, all freshmen and transferees who graduated from elementary and high school in Caloocan City (or whose parents or who themselves are registered voters of Caloocan) that will enter UCC will have free tuition fee.

For the school year 2016-2017, the university offers Senior High School program for Junior High School completers. Only ABM (Accountancy, Business, and Management), & HUMSS (Humanities and Social Sciences) strands are currently available in the university for the Senior High School program.