I Will (Did) Survive

Cover songs can be great. Done well, they show how a band can take something special and unique and then reinvent it. The White Mountains are certainly unique and special and this is my story of my hike through the Whites – my cover of many others’ experiences in these amazing mountains! And thank you to the band Cake for a great take on a Gloria Gaynor classic!

‘The Whites’ is an approximately 100-mile stretch of the AT running west to east from RT 25 in Warren, NH to RT 2 in Gorham, NH. It encompasses Kinsman, Franconia, Crawford, and Pinkham Notch. It includes the Presidential Range and some of the highest peaks north of the Smoky Mountains. It’s also something to be contended with when hiking the AT!

This screenshot shows the Appalachian Trail through the White Mountains in New Hampshire.

What’s the big deal? Well, they’re big, and rocky, and the weather is unpredictable, and the cliffs (and trail) at times are quite steep, and there are limited resupply options, and it gets in your head because you hear so much about them and their difficulty. And, from experience now that I have completed them, it’s not hype and hyperbole.

Pictures won’t do this justice, and I am not whining – honest, but here are some of the steep trails that are typical in the Whites. Please understand, the most daunting ones (like the time I had to hike DOWN a waterfall) do not have pictures as my priority was self-preservation rather than documentation!

To be fair, some of the trails, particularly on the Presidential Traverse, were beautiful, somewhat level, and a joy to hike!

I’ll let someone else characterize it for you. I’m at Pinkham Notch about 80 miles through the Whites. I’m talking to a very fit-looking, youngish thru-hiker who had already done 1800 miles up to that point from Georgia. I ask his plans for the next couple of days. He said, “I’m not sure, I just need to get out of this state, it’s kicking my ass!” And that’s a pretty common assessment, one I agree with, with some nuance.

A ‘notch’ is a low-point between high mountains. The Pinkham Notch is the most eastward, or last notch, I traveled through in the Whites. What a notch means for hikers is a very long down to then go to a very long up!

My journey through the Whites has four parts. Part 1 I already posted about – my slackpack over Mt Moosilauke. I wasn’t carrying a heavy pack and the 10-mile stretch was a joy with amazing weather to boot! Part 2 also was a slackpack, but this was not planned and resulted from 5 days off the trail due to phone issues. I didn’t want to go from sitting around not hiking to tackling the very rough 16-mile Kinsman Ridge. Even with the slackpacking, this was a really tough day. The climb out of Kinsman Notch was long hard and steep. It was rainy and cold and most of the day was a continuous up and down and up and down and up and down. This stretch was so challenging that before the phone issue resulted in me slackpacking this section, I was going to break it up into two days!

Part 3 was the longest stretch, about 55 miles from Franconia Notch (RT 3) to Pinkham Notch (RT 16). It started out rough and it was the first time with a full pack in a week. The climb out of the Notch up Liberty Springs is not for the faint of heart – long, steep, and lots of rock scrambling. No sooner had I gotten up to the ridge and above treeline, it’s starts to rain, then pour, then strong winds, and let’s add in maybe 20-foot visibility! For the whole 3 miles I was above the treeline! There’s cliffs, and lots of mountain summits – each one higher than the previous, and at times I’m guessing where the trail was. No one got hurt, but it was precarious, to say the least.

This sign marks the start of the Franconia Ridge – a stunning stretch of trail I am told – I didn’t see too much as soon as I got onto the ridge wind, rain, clouds, and fog dominated the day.

As I was nearing the end of Franconia Ridge, the skies parted and there was even a bit of sun. This is the last knob before you head down off the ridge when hiking north.

Less than happy (or warm) hiker about to climb a very steep South Twin Mountain!

Seeing that I was not deterred, the weather gods joined team Lucky for the next several days. I had great weather until the day I left the Whites.

After Franconia Ridge, next up is the Presidential Range. But first you have to get up there coming out of Crawford Notch. The climb up Webster Cliffs and Mt Webster are, so far, the toughest and most technical thing I’ve done. Hand over hand scrambling for much of the last mile, it’s 2.5 miles straight up from the Notch to the ridge, and often you’re on the edge of the cliffs! To say the least, I was very happy when I saw I was climbing over the last knob.

This sign marks the start of the Webster Cliff Trail and the climb up to the Presidential Traverse. Look closely, there is a lot of information on this sign!

See that highest point in the picture – of course, the trail takes you all the way to that ledge and then higher still!

The next 25 miles or so is the Presidential Traverse where you go by most of the big name, and highest peaks – Pierce, Eisenhower, Jefferson, Adam’s, Madison, and of course, Washington. Sometimes the AT goes over the peaks, sometimes it goes by and there are side trails to the summits. This was the most pleasant stretch as the trail was relatively flat- few death-defying scrambles, and the views were amazing!

Parts of the Whites are above treeline which results in an Alpine zone where the vegetation is fragile, trees absent, and on a nice day, the views are endless!

Another aspect of the Alpine Zone are Alpine Bogs – massive mud pools that do not drain and are looking to suck in unsuspecting hikers – or those who might slip on a bog bridge as I did one day and ended up mid-calf in mud!

To make sure you know what you’re up against, this sign is on the AT as you start to climb up to Mt Washinton!

That is Mt Washington in the picture – the most prominent feature of the Whites and the Alpine Zone! Yes, if you look closely, that is smoke from the Cog Railway heading up the mountain.

Heading up Mt Washington – what a sky, what a view!

This is a very happy and proud hiker on top of Mt Washington! I was very ‘lucky’ it was a beautiful day for my summit day!

Part 4 was a 22-mile stretch from Pinkham Notch to RT 2 in Gorham, NH. There was lots of talk that the first 10 miles up and over Wildcat MT and Carter Dome and Mountains were as hard as anything else in the Whites. I actually didn’t find it so bad – the climbs and scrambles were long and hard. Maybe I was immune or the talk was not reflective of the trail? The last 10 miles of this section were like coming back to reality where there were regular Mountains, regular trails, and even some easy walking!

Wildcat Mountain has 5 peaks named A, B, C, D, and E. The last time I was on Wildcat Moutain was about 50 years ago when I was 8 or 9 on a family vacation.

It took me 8.5 days to get through the 100 miles of the Whites. My shortest day was 9.3 miles (3 different days), my longest day was 16.3. I stayed at 2 different hostels, stayed one night at an AMC lodge at Pinkham Notch, and the rest either tented or stayed in shelters. I thought I might stay in one of the eight AMC huts but it didn’t work out – I wasn’t that tempted and they are quite expensive in the summer for a bunkhouse!

Mizpah Spring Hut – one of my favorites and I tented at a campsite right next to this hut.

Lake of the Clouds Hut – just south of Mt Washinton.

I went into the Whites heavy with food, typical for me, and had about 4 to 5 days of food when I started. I never really resupplied and left the Whites with 2 to 3 days of food. Where did all the other food come from? Simply put, and this will sound counterintuitive, but there’s a lot of food in the Whites! The AMC has a thru-hiker pass program so you can get free soup, bread, and baked goods when available at the huts. The huts have to either serve all the food they make, compost it, or carry it down the mountains as waste. You can almost always count on some type of free breakfast at each hut and sometimes dinner too. A few of the huts had hiker boxes where guests leave leftover freeze-dried meals and snacks. And then there’s a cafeteria on top of Mt Washington!

Potato leek soup at Mizpah Spring Hut – just what I needed after a long day hiking!

Just in time for free breakfast at Madison Hut – there was even one orange left! One morning at Galehead Hut I even got the last piece of bacon!

Food matters to hikers as you may have figured out! This was my reward after completing the Whites. I caught a shuttle ride into the town of Gorham, NH, 3.6 miles from the trail. Round 1 is pictured. Round came next. Round 3 was 2 McDoubles that I packed out for dinner that night at the Trident Col Tentsite!

Moral of the story. I did survive. As I shared, I had some well-placed concerns about the difficulty. Some of the concerns were accurate. Some overblown. Some worse than I thought. But, as I was heading up Wildcat Mt for the last stretch I told myself I came on this journey to have big adventures, so don’t complain when you’re in it, just experience it, enjoy it, and know with whatever effort is necessary, you’ll meet the challenge! Though I do think The Whites wanted to rewrite the intro song into ‘I Might Surve’!

Some additional great pictures. Ethan Pond where I camped at the shelter north of Mt Webster.

Sunrise over the Whites from Naumen Tentsite.

How’s that for a view!

I believe this is Mt Lafayette. I am told the views are amazing from there. Alas, I was in the rain and the clouds when I was on top.

Layers and layers of mountains. It was an epic time in the White Mountains!