Do you love Great white sharks? If yes, then this is the expedition for you. The Cape coastline has an abundance of White Sharks and the Great White Trail is an incredible opportunity to encounter these sharks across South Africa’s three premier White Shark hotspots: False Bay, Gansbaai and Mossel Bay.

Beginning in False Bay, Apex will educate you on the hunting and breaching techniques of the Great Whites at Seal Island.

The trail then moves up the coast, onto the Cape’s beautiful Garden Route to Mossel Bay. Mossel Bay offers good opportunities to cage dive with feisty juvenile Great white sharks as well as sunrise breaching trips.

Following on from this, the trail continues to Gansbaai. This small town is South Africa’s Great White Capital. Here, we take you into the world of Shark Alley with incredible cage diving opportunities.

During the trail you’ll gain insights into natural White Shark predation, complex White shark behaviour, White shark biology, and ways to identify sharks and how sharks and tourism align. We also offer Gansbaai shark diving and whale watching cape town.

False Bay, Simon’s Town is home to some of the most famous marine predators and has an abundance and diversity of wildlife that is seldom matched elsewhere. Chris Fallows has written a blog which will gives you a truly special insight to False Bay called Serengeti of the Sea.

Simon’s Town

The historical naval town of Simon’s Town is situated near Cape Point, a 45 minute drive south of Cape Town on the False Bay side of the Cape Peninsula. This quaint town is where you will be staying and offers a walk down Simon’s Town’s historical mile or a visit to the local, navy and toy museums. The many activities include whale watching (June to November), deep sea fishing, sea kayaking, kite surfing, scuba diving and sailing.

Spend your afternoons getting to know beautiful Cape Town.

Gansbaai

The history of Gansbaai is as rich and colourful as the exquisite beauty and bounty of the environment that birthed it.

Since the Stone Age times, some 80 000 years ago, when the first ancestors of modern man haply co-existed in the abundance of nature along the rocky shores of Walker Bay, little have changed to spoil the pristine uniqueness of this “Klein Paradijs” where some people believe Adam and Eve used to live.

The abundant sea and wildlife and variety of floral and fynbos vegetation along the coast and Duynefontein Mountains never ceased to provide man and animal with ample food, shelter and freedom to experience nature to the fullest.

Several caves along the rocky coastline around Gansbaai still jealously guard the ancient secrets and sorrows of yester-year’s peoples who lived, loved and roamed this region eon ago. This area, later named De Kelders after the numerous historical caves, also boasts the only freshwater cave on the coast of Africa. It is in one of these caves, the Klipgat Cave, where archaeological evidence was found of early modern man living here some 80 000 years ago, as well as the Khoisan about 2 000 years ago. Klipgat Cave is now an important historical site in the Western Cape.

Explore these ancient lands.

Mossel Bay

It is the fascinating history of Mossel Bay which grants the town its status as the historical capital of the Garden Route and one of the most historically significant towns in South Africa. Ancient stone-age fish traps and cutting edge fuel from gas technology; Khoi-San herders and European traders – the history of Mossel Bay is a microcosm of the history of South Africa herself.

Mossel Bay has always been associated with early European explorers. Bartholomeu Dias, the Portuguese Navigator, was the first European to discover the Southern tip of Africa while searching for a spice route to the East.

Having missed the Cape during a storm his first landfall was at Vleesbaai where he was prevented from going ashore, either by hostile Khoi cattle herders or by the rough surf, so he continued around the Point and landed (in what is now Munro’s Bay) on 3 February 1488 (165 years before the first settlement in Cape Town). The Portuguese used this Bay for about 150 years until the Dutch Fleet forced them off the Indian Spice Route.