Great American Rail-Trail In Nebraska

Nebraska’s Cowboy Trail | Photo by Alex Duryea, courtesy Nebraska Tourism Commission

The Great American Rail-Trail crosses from Iowa into Nebraska on the iconic Bob Kerrey Pedestrian Bridge—a 3,000-foot cable-suspension structure over the Missouri River. The preferred route of the Great American Rail-Trail in Nebraska weaves through the urban areas of Omaha and Lincoln, connecting these population centers to the western, more rural, part of the state along one of the longest and most famous rail-trails in the country—the Cowboy Recreation and Nature Trail.

Nebraska stories along the Great American Rail-Trail

A Path Toward Healing

The events of Fort Robinson, while seminal in the Northern Cheyenne’s quest for freedom and autonomy, were not a well-known history.

Five Leaf-Peeping Destinations Along the Great American Rail-Tail

View five leaf-peeping destinations along the Great American Rail-Tail, a 3,700-mile developing cross country trail.

The Legacy of White Buffalo Girl, and the Resiliency of a People

In Laurel Hill Cemetery just outside the town of Neligh, Nebraska, stands a gravestone. Here lies White Buffalo Girl.

News Coverage:

Bellevue Joins the Great American Rail-Trail | Bellevue Times

The “Great American” Route Through Nebraska

593.6

Total Miles

309.1

Existing Miles

284.5

Gap Miles

52.1%

Complete

Trails Along the Route

Tap thumbnail to view photo gallery.

Click the links below to view full trail descriptions on TrailLink.com.

Gateway Trail

Cowboy Recreation and Nature Trail

Nebraska’s Cowboy Trail offers an authentic Old West experience with friendly small towns and sweeping views of the High Plains and pristine prairie. At a whopping 219 miles, it’s already the third longest rail-trail in the country and yet has 100 more miles awaiting future development. With the stunning bridge over the Niobrara River and a wildlife-rich backdrop—including roaming bison, wild turkeys, elk and prairie dogs—this is a bucket-list trail for true adventurers.

Route Reveal Celebration

Completing the Great American Rail-Trail: Catalyst Initiatives in Nebraska

In every state along the preferred route of the Great American, needs for completing the trail vary. To spur trail completion, RTC has identified initial catalyst initiatives—projects or challenges that would most benefit from RTC’s national breadth of resources. (View the complete list of catalyst initiatives and criteria here.) Through these initiatives, RTC will support local and state partners, investing time, expertise and organizational resources in specific projects that are critical to the ultimate completion of the Great American Rail-Trail.

Great American Rail-Trail Gap #55: South Bend to Wabash (MoPac Trail Gap)

RTC will work with the local partnership, including Bike Walk Nebraska, the Nebraska Trails Foundation and the Great Plains Trail Network, pursuing strategies to complete this gap in the MoPac Trail—the last significant gap to complete a trail between Nebraska’s two population centers, Omaha and Lincoln. RTC will provide technical and planning assistance in the form of strategic planning; local-property owner engagement; alternative analysis; completing a feasibility study; cost estimation; and design, engineering and construction assistance.

Be a Part of the Movement to Complete the Great American

Like you, we can’t wait to see the Great American Rail-Trail vision come to life—but we can’t do it alone. Help us reach 1 million pledges for the Great American, showing the strength and solidarity of the trails community.

Take Action