MediaCoder is a universal media transcoding software actively developed and maintained since 2005. It puts together most cutting-edge audio/video technologies into an out-of-box transcoding solution with a rich set of adjustable parameters which let you take full control of your transcoding. New features and latest codecs are added or updated constantly. MediaCoder might not be the easiest tool out there, but what matters here is quality and performance. It will be your swiss army knife for media transcoding once you grasp it.

Features

Converting between most popular audio and video formats

H.264/H.265 GPU accelerated encoding (QuickSync, NVENC, CUDA)

Ripping BD/DVD/VCD/CD and capturing from video cameras

Enhancing audio and video contents by various filters

An extremely rich set of transcoding parameters for adjusting and tuning

Multi-threaded design and parallel filtering unleashing multi-core power

Segmental Video Encoding technology for improved parallelization

Lossy Audio Compression Formats: MP3, Vorbis, LC-AAC, HE-AAC, Opus, AC-3, MPEG Audio, MusePack, Speex, AMR, Windows Media Audio, ADPCM, mp3PRO

Lossless Audio Compression Formats: FLAC, WavPack, Monkey's Audio, OptimFrog, ALAC, TTA, PCM

Video Compression Formats: H.264/AVC, H.265/HEVC, VP8/VP9, MPEG 1/2/4, Flash Video, XviD, DivX, Theora, Dirac, H.263, RealVideo, Windows Media Video, Huffyuv, MJPEG

Container Formats: MP4, WebM, F4V, FLV, Matroska, AVI, MPEG-PS, MPEG-TS, ASF, MTS/M2TS/AVCHD, Quicktime/MOV, PMP, RealMedia, OGM

Storage Media and Streaming (Input): Bluray, DVD, VCD, SVCD, CD, CUESheet, HTTP, FTP, RTSP, UDP

See All Activity >

License

Other License

Follow MediaCoder

MediaCoder Web Site

You Might Also Like

Clean Up Google Drive

Find and Remove Duplicates, Organize Effectively, and Manage Storage Smartly.

Use the Filerev app to organize Google Drive and reduce storage costs. The Duplicate File Finder quickly shows all duplicates in Google Drive without downloading all of your files. The Storage Analyzer lets you browse your folders by size in Google Drive. You can also view your Google Drive files in different categories such as: hidden / orphaned files, large files, empty files, empty folders, large folders, old files, temporary files, files by extension. Every category includes powerful filters and the ability to bulk delete your files in Google Drive. Plus, there are charts and graphs to help you quickly see how your storage space is being used and the number of files and specific types of files or folders that are consuming the most space. You can get started for free to see what is consuming your Google Drive storage space and quickly clean up the clutter.

Rate This Project

Login To Rate This Project

User Ratings

4.0 out of 5 stars

★★★★★

★★★★

★★★

★★

★

0

1

0

0

0

ease 1 of 5 2 of 5 3 of 5 4 of 5 5 of 5 3 / 5

features 1 of 5 2 of 5 3 of 5 4 of 5 5 of 5 3 / 5

design 1 of 5 2 of 5 3 of 5 4 of 5 5 of 5 3 / 5

support 1 of 5 2 of 5 3 of 5 4 of 5 5 of 5 3 / 5

Additional Project Details

Operating Systems

Windows

Registered

2023-10-15