U.S. Mortality data, collected and maintained by the National Center for Health Statistics (NCHS), can be analyzed with the SEER*Stat software. The data include all causes of death, not just cancer deaths. NCHS granted the SEER program limited permission to provide the mortality data to the public.

Accessing the U.S. Mortality Data

Obtaining the mortality data requires the following:

U.S. Mortality data are only available to SEER*Stat users who access these data in client-server mode.

A signed research data agreement is required to access the U.S. Mortality and SEER data through SEER*Stat.

You will be given a username and password within two business days of SEER receiving your signed SEER Research Data Use Agreement allowing you to access the data through SEER*Stat.

Suggested Citation

A citation for the use of NCHS mortality data for publication purposes is required. When you select a mortality database from the Data Tab during a SEER*Stat session, the suggested citation will appear at the bottom of the Data Tab window.

Identifying Information Excluded from the Mortality Data

Every effort has been made to exclude information that could be used to identify individuals in the U.S. mortality data distributed with SEER*Stat. Information such as race, age, sex, and demographic characteristics are included in the data for research purposes, but the level of detail has been reduced to rule out person-recognition.

For 1969-2022, deaths are associated with the population data for 3 racial groups: White, Black, Other. The "Other" race category consists of American Indian/Alaskan Native and Asian/Pacific Islander combined. (See Race Recode Changes for more information).

County-Level Year of Death Recode Variable Groupings

In mortality databases aggregated with county attributes, SEER defines year of death groupings so the data can only be analyzed for a minimum of a 3-year group. The groupings are defined as follows:

the latest group is always a 5-year grouping;

the 2nd most recent is a 3-, 4-, or 5-year grouping, and after 5, it is split into two 3-year groups;

All earlier groups are 3-year.

Suppression

Data are suppressed if the number of deaths is fewer than 10. Total U.S. databases without geographic variables have no forced suppression.

Data Changes

The following changes have been made to the U.S. Mortality Data since previous years: