A 64-year-old man who previously dated Bill Belichick’s 23-year-old girlfriend, Jordon Hudson, is defending the cheerleader’s May-December romance with the former New England Patriots head coach.

“She is wise beyond her years, much more than any 20-something I’ve ever met in my life,” Joshua L. Zuckerman told TMZ Saturday. “The narrative about her character is not fair to her.”

The businessman confirmed he’s been involved both “platonically and romantically” with Hudson in the past and still considers her a “good friend.”

Zuckerman, who has worked in the healthcare field, claimed he connected with the recent college student over their shared interests in “psychology, philosophy and most important, [their] love of nature.”

“I feel bad that she’s caught up in this whirlwind,” he added to TMZ before further slamming the critics.

“To be honest, I wish these internet trolls and paparazzi would leave her alone — and everyone else alone — and let them live their lives.”

Zuckerman reportedly dated Hudson just before her relationship with Belichick, 72, began in 2022.

It’s unclear exactly how old the pageant queen was at the time but she would have been around 20 or 21.

Hudson reportedly hit it off with Belichick after they met on a plane ride from Boston to Florida in 2021.

The former NFL coach was in a relationship with his on-again, off-again girlfriend of 10 years, Linda Holliday, at the time, but he reportedly courted Hudson shortly after his split from the TV host, 61.

Last year, Belichick was spotted sneaking out of Hudon’s home without his shirt on after a rendezvous. He also went on a low-key date in Boston with her this past March.

However, it wasn’t until last week that it was revealed that Hudson was the sports analyst’s much-younger girlfriend.

Since then, the couple has been met with a lot of backlash, including from Dave Portnoy who commented, “Yikes. Ew. Wow” when he first learned of the romance.

Joy Behar joked on “The View” that there is only “so much Viagra in the world” to keep Hudson happy.

Meanwhile, Belichick and Hudson have put on a united front despite the criticism.

They were seen enjoying a dinner date in Nantucket, Mass., earlier this week with some friends.