By Allison DeGrushe

Updated Dec. 14 2023, 11:18 a.m. ET

The Gist:

Bill Hemmer is the co-anchor of FOX News Channel’s America’s Newsroom, which airs weekdays from 9:00 am to 11:00 am ET.

Since Bill has been with the network for over 15 years, people have become extremely interested in his personal life, particularly in who he is dating.

Bill's longest public relationship was with Canadian model Dara Tomanovich.

Article continues below advertisement

Over the years, we've grown accustomed to watching Bill Hemmer and Dana Perino deliver hard news daily on America's Newsroom. In addition to that, we also depend on the 59-year-old Fox News journalist to express his opinion on the elections each time they role around.

Given how vocal and active Bill has been in the media, many of us are curious to know more about his personal life. Of course, he's impressive in his own right, but we are dying to know: Is Bill Hemmer married? Let's investigate!

Article continues below advertisement

So, is Bill Hemmer married?

Like millions of other public figures, Bill Hemmer prefers to keep his personal life out of the spotlight. However, we know he is not married and he appears to be single at the moment. Bill also doesn't have any children, which makes him a certified bachelor. Nevertheless, the Ohio native was in a serious relationship with model Dara Tomanovich — keep reading for details regarding their romance.

Bill dated Canadian model Dara Tomanovich for eight years.

Bill's longest public relationship was with Canadian model Dara Tomanovich. The couple dated for eight years, from 2005 until 2013. According to her official IMDb page, Dara was born in Toronto in 1969. At just 18 years old, she decided to pursue an acting and modeling career after meeting renowned German fashion designer Karl Lagerfeld in Paris.

Article continues below advertisement

Once Dara became the face of the French luxury fashion house Chloé, her career really took off, so much so that she managed to book campaigns with Marie Claire, L'Oreal, and British Vogue. According to her LinkedIn profile, Dara is still working as a model and is represented by Innovative Artists.

Article continues below advertisement

Following her split from Bill, the 53-year-old model sparked romance rumors with Prince Andrew in 2014. The pair were spotted together in the Royal Box at the annual Royal Ascot event. For those unaware, Dara essentially has ties to the Royal Family since she supports many charities, including Prince Harry's Sentebale foundation.

The two clearly didn't work out since Prince Andrew reportedly dated singer Kylie Minogue from 2017 to 2018.

How much money does Bill Hemmer make at Fox News?

Although little is know about Bill's dating life, we do know the Fox co-anchor is getting paid a pretty penny for his efforts at work. Bill Hemmer's net worth currently stands at $14 million, and he collects an estimated $3 million annually from Fox News, per Celebrity Net Worth. Not bad!