OCT 12 ROMANTIC FIRING The Buffalo Bills have fired two prominent executives who are reportedly involved in a romantic relationship in which they "got too brazen" during the Bills' trip to London last week.

The Athletic is reporting that owner Terry Pegula fired Bills and Buffalo Sabres chief operating officer and executive vice president John Roth. The Bills also dismissed senior VP/general counsel Kathryn D’Angelo. The outlet writes that their relationship was deemed "unethical" because D'Angelo reported to Roth.

The pair confirmed the firing in a joint interview with the Associated Press.

"Both Kathryn and I wish the Pegulas the best of luck and we think the world of Terry, Kim and Laura, and the rest of the team," Roth said. "And we will be cheering the Bills and Sabres on from afar."

OCT 8 MILANO OUT VS. JAGS Buffalo Bills star linebacker Matt Milano has been ruled out for the remainder of Sunday's game against the Jacksonville Jaguars in London due to a knee injury. He had to be carted off from the sideline.

Milano's leg got caught underneath him in a pile of bodies and he had to get helped off the field before eventually being carted off. Per the NFL Network broadcast, he had a cast over his right leg.

Though nothing is official, the quickness with which the Bills ruled Milano out could mean the injury is serious.

In four games this season, Milano has posted 27 total tackles, one forced fumble and two interceptions. The Bills will rely on the up-and-coming Terrel Bernard at linebacker in Milano's potential long-term absence.

OCT 6 BILLS RIVAL PHINS MAKE TRADE The Miami Dolphins are still licking their wounds following Week 4's 48-20 blowout loss to the Buffalo Bills in Orchard Park. But on Friday they showed they're not wasting any time to keep improving the offense, as the Dolphins made a trade for disgruntled Chicago Bears receiver Chase Claypool.

Miami will receive Claypool and a 2025 seventh-round pick in exchange for a 2025 sixth-round pick.

Claypool joins an already elite receiving corps highlighted by Tyreek Hill and Jaylen Waddle. The Bills and Dolphins won't play each other again until Week 18 at Hard Rock Stadium on Sunday, Jan. 7.

OCT 1 TRE'DAVIOUS WHITE CARTED OFF Buffalo Bills cornerback Tre'Davious White had to be carted off at the end of the third quarter in Sunday's game against the Miami Dolphins at Highmark Stadium after suffering what the team is calling an Achilles injury.

The Bills have now ruled White out for the remainder of Sunday's game.

While running downfield to cover Dolphins receiver Tyreek Hill, White took an awkward step and immediately started limping, favoring his right leg. He then tossed his helmet in frustration and show visible emotion while being surrounded by his teammates. A cart came out for White, who tore his ACL during the 2021 season before missing most of last year.

SEPT. 29 JOSH ALLEN CALLS FOR HELP FROM BILLS MAFIA - Considering the Miami Dolphins' talent and speed on offense - 70 points the previous week deserves some special attention - the Bills need to pull out all the stops in Sunday's AFC East showdown.

Coach Sean McDermott says he has a "fundamental" plan. Quarterback Josh Allen apparently has an idea, also.

Last year, the Bills wilted in the Miami heat and the Dolphins froze in the Buffalo Winter. The weather won't be a factor in Orchard Park, but Allen still wants an advantage from his team's environment.

"We're gonna need Bills Mafia big-time this week," he said. "They can disrupt a game, especially when the opposing team's on offense. Third down, especially, and when we have that type of juice, you can feel it and you can use it to your benefit."

SEPT 26 NAMATH UNLOADS Joe Namath has had enough, as the New York Jets icon is unloading on the team's young quarterback, Zach Wilson, calling his play in place of the injured Aaron Rodgers "disgusting.''

Wilson's play in Sunday's 15-10 loss to the New England Patriots caused Namath to let it all hang out. Said Namath, via Awful Announcing. "I wouldn't keep him. I've seen enough of Zach Wilson."

The Jets have scored 10 points in each of his starts and New York is 1-2 in the East. Buffalo is 2-1 and training the unbeaten Dolphins.

SEPT 22 BILLS AND COMMANDERS FRIDAY INJURY REPORT The Buffalo Bills have remained healthy through the first two weeks of the season and that trend will continue heading into Sunday when they face the Washington Commanders at FedEx Field at 1 p.m. ET.

Terrel Bernard (knee and quad), Leonard Floyd (ankle), Micah Hyde (hamstring), Dawson Knox (back), Jordan Phillips (illness), Spencer Brown (shoulder), Jordan Poyer (veteran rest), James Cook (personal) and Tre'Davious White (veteran rest) each appeared on the injury report earlier in the week.

Everyone except for White was a full participant on Friday and they'll all enter Sunday without an injury designation.

Washington will be without tight end Logan Thomas due to a concussion. Receiver Curtis Samuel is questionable for Sunday with illnesses.

SEPT 15 BILLS INJURY REPORT Center Mitch Morse (finger) was the only Bills player on the Friday injury report and he was a full participant. Sean McDermott said that Morse "should be ready to go," for Sunday.

The Raiders will be without receiver Jakobi Meyers (concussion) and defense end Chandler Jones (personal). Meyers was Las Vegas' leading receiver with nine catches for 81 yards and two touchdowns in its 17-16 win over the Denver Broncos in Week 1.

Raiders quarterback Jimmy Garoppolo (ankle) was a full participant for a second straight day.

SEPT 13 BILLS INJURY REPORT The Buffalo Bills have released their Wednesday injury report ahead of Sunday's Week 2 matchup with the Las Vegas Raiders.

The only name on the list? Center Mitch Morse, who's on the list due to a finger injury. This didn't hold him out of Buffalo's Wednesday walk-through though, as the Bills are looking quite healthy headed into Week 2.

SEPT 11 RODGERS RULED OUT New York Jets quarterback Aaron Rodgers has been ruled out of Monday night's meeting with the Buffalo Bills at MetLife Stadium due to an ankle injury.

ESPN cameras caught Rodgers in a walking boot before going into the locker room.

SEPT 11 RODGERS INJURED The Week 1 matchup between the Buffalo Bills and New York Jets took a sudden turn at MetLife Stadium on Monday night after Jets star quarterback Aaron Rodgers exited with an injury early in the first quarter.

After being sacked by Bills pass rusher Leonard Floyd, Rodgers got up but then sat back on the turf and appeared to be shaken up. He exited the game and was replaced by Zach Wilson. Per the ESPN broadcast, a cart was driven over to the Jets sideline to assist Rodgers.

His return is questionable with an ankle injury.

Here's a look:

SEPT 10 DIGGS & DIGGS Stefon Diggs and the Buffalo Bills are taking on the New York Jets at MetLife Stadium on Monday night. So fittinginly, he had to stop by the venue a day early to watch his younger brother and Dallas Cowboys cornerback, Trevon, battle the rival New York Giants.

"Battle" is a word that should be used extremely loosely, as Trevon and the Cowboys were throttling the Giants 33-0 once the third quarter wrapped up. Regardless, it was a family affair for the Diggs brothers, who greeted one another on the sidelines for a brief moment.

The Bills and Cowboys will face off in Orchard Park on Sunday, Dec. 17.

AUG 29 BARKLEY TO IR Per NFL Network's Tom Pelissero, the Buffalo Bills will place quarterback Matt Barkley on injured reserve, paving the way for Kyle Allen to take over the team's backup passing role behind Josh Allen.

Barkley, set to turn 33 in September, has been on the Bills' roster for five seasons (2018-20, 2022-present). In two preseason appearances this summer, he completed 21-of-27 passes for 265 yards and two scores but also threw three interceptions. He did not partake in the Bills' exhibition finale against Chicago on Saturday due to an elbow injury.

AUG 22 BILLS SIGN DASHAUN WHITE The Buffalo Bills added to their roster on Tuesday in the wake of several injured reserve placements, announcing the addition of linebacker DaShaun White. Amassing 126 tackles over five seasons with Oklahoma, White recently part of the last USFL season with the Michigan Panthers.

White will join a crowded linebackers room that features a multi-legged battle to find understudies for Matt Milano and Terrel Bernard. Among his competitors are Western New York veterans Shaq Lawson and A.J. Epenesa, as well as 2023 third-round pick Dorian Williams.

AUG 21 BILLS SIGN OT, RAY TO IR The Buffalo Bills have added to their offensive line depth after the season-ending injury to Tommy Doyle. The team has signed offensive tackle Garrett McGhin, per multiple reports.

McGhin originally signed with the Bills as an undrafted free agent in 2019 before being cut and then returning in 2020. This will mark his third stint in Buffalo.

The Bills also placed veteran defensive end Shane Ray on season-ending injured reserve. Coach Sean McDermott had said on Sunday that Ray was "day-to-day" with a hamstring injury, but it appears the injury was more severe than originally thought.

The Bills signed Ray to a one-year, $1.08 contract in May.

AUG 19 BILLS OT CARTED OFF VS. STEELERS The Buffalo Bills have already had very few things go right for them in Saturday's preseason road game against the Pittsburgh Steelers, and now they have to deal with a major injury.

In the third quarter with Buffalo trailing 24-0, Bills offensive tackle Tommy Doyle had to be carted off after suffering a lower-body injury. His left leg was put in an air cast as he was carted off the field, and the Bills officially announced that he is out for the rest of the game with a left knee injury.

Doyle tore his ACL last season and was just making his return to the field. A fifth-round pick by Buffalo in 2021, he caught a touchdown pass in the Bills' 47-17 blowout win over the New England Patriots in the 2021 AFC Wild Card.

AUG 18 ONE MORE RIDE FOR PETERS?

According to ESPN's Adam Schefter, former Buffalo Bills offensive tackle and longtime veteran Jason Peters is hopeful to play this season.

Peters was named to the Hall of Fame's All-2010s team, and the nine-time Pro Bowler has likely already secured his place in Canton. Now 41 years old, it's a bit remarkable that that the 18-year veteran is looking to suit up for another season.

Peters spent the first five years of his career with the Bills, and was a Second-Team All-Pro selection for the team in both 2007 and 2008. But he will be most remembered for his 11 years as the pillar of the Philadelphia Eagles offensive line. After spending 2021 with the Chicago Bears, Peters appeared in 10 games for the Cowboys last season, starting one.

AUG. 18 KEY BILLS RETURNING TO PRACTICE We know we're going to see the preseason debuts of stars such as Josh Allen and Stefon Diggs when the Bills play the Steelers Saturday night in Pittsburgh. But other players on the mend from injuries are also trending toward increased roles as training camp winds down.

Defensive tackle Jordan Phillips was back at practice this week after spending time on the PUP list. Running back Damien Harris had been sidelined with a knee injury but has also returned to practice. And Terrel Bernard, competing for the middle linebacker starting job, is again running after suffering a hamstring injury Aug. 10.

Receiver Gabe Davis missed a practice this week with "general soreness," but should also see some snaps against the Steelers.

AUG 14 DALVIN TAKES FLIGHT There's a new running back in the AFC East as Dalvin Cook has signed a one-year deal with the New York Jets.

A second-round pick in the 2017 NFL Draft, Cook spent the first six seasons of his career with the Minnesota Vikings. The Florida State product has become one of the NFL's top running backs, rushing for over 1,000 yards in each of the last four seasons. Despite his strong play, the Vikings released Cook as a cap measure this offseason.

The Bills, who currently have Cook's brother James Cook as their top back, were one of several teams linked to the four-time Pro Bowler, along with all of their AFC East Rivals. In the end, though, Dalvin Cook decides to take his talents to the Big Apple to join Aaron Rodgers and the new-look Jets.

AUG 11 INJURY UPDATE The Buffalo Bills and Indianapolis Colts are prepping for the preseason opener (1 p.m. on Saturday at Highmark Stadium) - each with their own running back issues.

In Indy, it’s a bit of a crisis as superstar Jonathan Taylor is in a dispute with owner Jim Irsay over contracts and injuries and “death.”

But now comes news that Taylor - who has apparently taken a break from training camp - is ready to return … though obviously not to play this weekend.

Meanwhile, on the Bills injury report, Damien Lewis is dinged up, though coach Sean McDermott said he’s heading in “the right direction” there.

Also, defensive lineman Ed Oliver (back) and cornerback Cam Lewis (groin) are worth noting, with Oliver maybe ready to go on Saturday in a game that will see QB Josh Allen sit out.

AUG 1 BELICHICK SON 'SERIOUS INJURY' Bill Belichick is 71 leading his 24th training camp as Patriots head coach. ... as Buffalo Bills fans know all too well. But right now he is doing it without an assistant coach - and one of his sons.

Fourth-year Patriots safeties coach Brian Belichick is recovering from what the team is calling a "serious knee injury'' and so he has been noticeably absent from the first week of camp. Another Belichick son, Steve, is apparently helping with DBs in addition to his work as the linebackers coach, and Patriots players say that Bill Belichick himself is filling in helping the secondary as well.

JUNE 30 AT CAMP Buffalo Bills co-owner Kim Pegula made an appearance at training camp this weekend - her first in a year after having gone into cardiac arrest in June of last year.

She has been recovering on her own since then and it's of course a positive thing to see her back at practice. ... with hopes that her recovery will allow her to be a part of the regular season as the Bills will kick off the 2023 season on the road against the New York Jets on Sept. 11 before staging their home-opener on Sept. 17 against the Las Vegas Raiders.

JUNE 28 RAMSEY SURGERY Could Dolphins cornerback Jalen Ramsey miss the entire season after undergoing knee surgery on Friday? That's certainly not his plan.

"Adversity is opportunity!'' tweeted Ramsey, a pivotal acquisition in the AFC East race who was acquired via trade from the Rams this offseason.

Ramsey got tangled up this week while covering Tyreek Hill, another Miami standout. Ramsey tweeted on Friday to thank fans for support and promising to "attack this rehab,'' with the hopes he could return late in the season.

JULY 27 DALVIN ‘PRETTY HIGH' Pro Bowl running back Dalvin Cook is saying a lot of nice things about all of his suitors, the Bills included,

The latest? He is set to visit the Jets this Friday for a meeting and physical, and in anticipation of that, Cook - released by the Vikings earlier this offseason - is now defining the odds of a Jets hookup.

On NFL Network's "Good Morning Football" on Friday, Cook addressed his upcoming visit with the Jets. Cook said the chances of him signing with the Jets are "pretty high."

That doesn’t rule out other bidders, including the Bills. And maybe his comment is a negotiating tactic. Stay tuned.

JULY 24 RB SIGNS The Bills conducted a group running backs workout, and emerging from it are to add Darrynton Evans to the roster to replace Nyheim Hines, out for the season after a weekend Jet Ski accident. Evans is a former Titans third-round pick.

The Bills also worked out former Texas A&M tight end Jace Sternberger and are signing him.

JUNE 26 JOSH SUPPORTS JORDAN Buffalo Bills star Jordan Poyer opted to cancel his charity golf event at Donald Trump's resort in Florida due to backlash regarding the tie to the President and his Doral course. And while the move has brought on controversy, Josh Allen has his teammate's back.

Announced Poyer: "I regret to inform you that my annual Golf Charity Event in South Florida, originally scheduled for July 10th at the Blue Monster at Trump National in Doral, has been rescheduled for next year. Unfortunately, the location of the event led to a few sponsors and golfers withdrawing at the last minute due to external pressures. While it’s disappointing, I respect their decision. Nevertheless, we will persevere.

"Next offseason, we will host this event with unwavering dedication, ensuring that it remains free from any external distractions. I extend my heartfelt gratitude to all of you. Here are my sincere thoughts.''

Amid a flurry of media and fan reaction, much of it of course fueled by political views, Allen spoke up.

"Love you brother," he wrote on social media.

DRAFT AND UDFA SIGNINGS - The first 259 picks were just the beginning.

The Buffalo Bills used six of these picks, and here were the selections:

No. 25 - Dalton Kincaid, TE, Utah

No. 59 - O'Cyrus Torrence, OG, Florida

No. 91 - Dorian Williams, LB, Tulane

No. 150 - Justin Shorter, WR, Florida

No. 230 - Nick Broeker, OG, Ole Miss

No. 252 - Alex Austin, CB, Oregon State

The Bills made sure to address multiple spots on offense, with Shorter being the most interesting pick on Day 3.,

More freshmen are on their way to Orchard Park, as the Buffalo Bills will be active alongside the rest of their NFL brethren in rookie free agency. Negotiations are already underway with players whose professional dreams remain active despite not hearing their name called at Union Station in Kansas City.

Keep track of the Bills' signings below...

***

- Jalen Wayne, WR, South Alabama: Wayne is the younger cousin of NFL great and former Indianapolis Colts receiver Reggie Wayne, per NFL Network. Jalen spent five seasons at South Alabama, posting career-high marks in catches (58), receiving yards (817) and receiving touchdowns (nine) last season. Report: NFL Network

- Richard Gouraige, OL, Florida: The Bills add another former Gator after drafting O'Cyrus Torrence and Justin Shorter. Gouraige made 13 starts at left tackle last season. Report: The 33rd Team

- Noah Henderson, OT, East Carolina: Henderson is an experienced collegiate player with 26 starts in 35 career games: Report: The 33rd Team

- DJ Dale, DL, Alabama: A four-year player under coach Nick Saban, Dale finished his four-year Crimson Tide career with 5.5 sacks and three passes defended. Report: The Draft Network

- Jordan Mims, RB, Fresno State: Mims posted 261 carries for 1,370 yards and 18 touchdowns last season with the Bulldogs. He's an experienced player who played five seasons at Fresno State. Report: Multiple outlets, confirmed by ESPN

- Tyrell Shavers, WR, San Diego: Shavers, a former Alabama and Mississippi State receiver, played the past two seasons at San Diego State. Last season, he posted 38 catches, 643 yards and three touchdowns. Report: Syracuse.com

***

Thanks for reading our SI-powered coverage of your Buffalo Bills ... Bills Mafia!