Second time’s the charm! Ali Wong and Bill Hader are back together following a short romance that allegedly ended before the public even knew it began.

Wong and Hader have a lot in common, from their chosen professions to their shared experiences with divorce and coparenting. While the 41-year-old Beef star shares two daughters with her ex-husband, Justin Hakuta, the 45-year-old Barry actor is the father of three girls with ex-wife Maggie Carey.

Wong announced her split from Hakuta in April 2022 but didn’t officially file for divorce until December 2023—a full year after sources told Page Six that Wong and Hader dated “very briefly” before an “amicable” split in December 2022. Two years later Wong and Hader hard-launched their rekindled relationship with a congratulatory kiss at the 2024 Golden Globes.

However, that wasn’t actually their first public display of affection since getting back together. Here’s a complete timeline of Ali Wong and Bill Hader’s dating history, with most recent first.

January 15, 2024: It’s become tradition at this point for Ali Wong to not only win all the awards for her role as Amy Lau on Beef, but for her to share a kiss with beau Bill Hader before she ascends to the stage to collect. At the 2024 Emmy Awards, she planted a kiss on her Barry actor/writer/star boyfriend (though as before, the couple did not walk the carpet together).

X content

This content can also be viewed on the site it originates from.

January 14, 2024: Oops, she did it again. When Wong won a Critics’ Choice Award on January 14, she shared a kiss with Hader, who was seated beside her, before hitting the stage. The couple did not walk the red carpet together.

When asked about her ex by Entertainment Tonight, she responded, “I like to keep it peaceful and grateful and amicable.”

December 23, 2023: Wong officially files for divorce from Hakuta, citing “irreconcilable differences,” per court documents obtained by People.

April 19, 2023: Hader and Wong hold hands and kiss while on a hike in Los Angeles on her 41st birthday.

April 17, 2023: Page Six reports that Hader and Wong are dating again.

April 16, 2023: Hader mentions his “girlfriend” in an interview with Collider. “My girlfriend and I were just figuring out that I haven’t had a vacation in 10 years,” he says. “I went with her to San Francisco, but that doesn’t really count. So, I’m going to have a vacation.”

March 1, 2023: Wong opens up about her “unconventional divorce” in an interview with The Hollywood Reporter. “We’re really, really close; we’re best friends,” she tells THR after having played a game of pickleball with Hakuta that morning. “We’ve been through so much together. It’s a very unconventional divorce.”

In the same interview Wong teases new material about her post-divorce dating life. “I’m still workshopping it, but the bones are there and it came to me very fast,” she says. “This is the first hour I’m doing since I started where I’m single. I think we’re going to call it the Single Lady tour.”

December 8, 2022: Page Six reports that Hader and Wong dated for “at least two months” but are already over. “They’re no longer dating,” one source says. “They dated very briefly. They’re just super busy with things, but [the split] was certainly amicable. They’re certainly friends.”

June 28, 2022: Bill Hader reportedly splits from girlfriend Anna Kendrick after over a year of dating.

April 10, 2022: Wong and Hakuta split after eight years of marriage. “It’s amicable and they will continue to co-parent lovingly,” a source tells People.

May 20, 2016: Ali Wong and Bill Hader both voice characters for The Angry Birds Movie, released on May 20.

This post may be updated.