Biography[]

Barry "Bazz" Davis (August 7, 2014-July 7, 2021) is the son to Simon Davis and Mariah Davis (Né: Johnson). He is the older brother to Dakota May, Avery, Alby and Oliver, twin brother to Gregory, and younger brother to Roderick, Malachi, and Aksel.

He is an American-Australian child who died in his mother's arms, after an week being in an coma. He died from falling off from his bedroom window, before his mother gave birth to his younger brother Oliver Fox Davis, and a month before his 7th birthday.

History[]

Barry "Bazz" Oak Davis was born in August 7, 2014, along with his twin brother named Gregory "Greg" Wolf Davis in Mulloloo, Perth, Australia to an American father Simon Zayne Davis, and an Australian mother Mariah Sage Davis. He is an older brother to Dakota May "Koda" Faith Davis, Avery "Ave" Bee Davis, Alby Beau Davis, and Oliver "Ollie Fox Davis, twin brother to Gregory "Greg" Wolf Davis, and younger brother to Roderick James Davis, Malachi "Kai" Ash Davis, and Aksel Van Davis.

He and his twin brother was born four weeks before their actual due date.

He and his family moved to Doubleview, Perth, Australia when he was 17 months old.

He was diagnosed with ADHD at the age of 4 and dyslexia at the age of 5, along with his twin brother.

He was described as energetic, imaginative, creative child who thinks out of the box.

He was homeschooled, along with Kai, Greg, Koda, Ave, and Alby while Roderick and Aksel attended International School of Western Australia.

Death[]

On July 6, 2021, Simon and Mariah wanted Roderick, Malachi, Aksel, Gregory, Barry, Dakota May, Avery, and Alby to stay with their grandparents, Steve and Ruby Johnson for winter vacation. Ruby was cooking breakfast and then Barry opened the window and fell out the window, Ruby realized he was missing and start founding him and she found him on the ground called 000. He was sent to the hospital and Ruby called Simon and Mariah that Barry is in the hospital. On July 7, 2021, he passed away in his mother's arms. His death was ruled as an accident.

After his death, Mariah told her followers on Instagram and Tiktok, that Barry passed away, and she didn't explained his cause of death, until in two weeks. It was on the news, and articles. After his death, on July 27, 2021, Mariah gave birth to an baby boy named Oliver "Ollie" Fox Davis.

Appearance[]

He has blonde curly hair, blue eyes, fair skin, wears different clothes, wears different types of jeans, and shoes.

As ghost, he is bleeding from his head.

Personality[]

He is energetic, creative and imaginative child.

As ghost, he watches his family.

Family Tree[]

Trivia[]