After presenting a solution to utilising an Agile approach to software enhancements within the boundaries of an Oracle EBS system at Oracle User Group (OUG) UK, I discovered many organizations have been unsuccessful in their own attempts at adoption:

I had been told my presenting slot was on the final day of the conference; the morning after the social event, just before lunch, so not to expect many attendees. To my surprise, the room was full. I quickly realised that whilst Agile methodology within IT has been around for a couple of years, applying this approach to Oracle developments had proven challenging to many organisations. After the presentation I had several conversations with attendees which highlighted the most challenging areas for organizations and I wanted to take this opportunity to share my experience of how we addressed them with a hybrid approach.

What is Agile

Agile software development methodology is based on iterative development, where requirements and solutions evolve through collaboration between self-organizing, cross-functional teams and the customer. It is more commonly associated with organic design products, such as web sites or custom applications, where the designer/developer begin with a concept and the only restrictions are their technical skill and imagination.

The Agile approach enables customers to be more engaged throughout the design and development process; allowing them to refine the requirement and adjust the solution direction throughout the delivery lifecycle. The iterative development provides a visualisation of progress and a better understanding of the developer’s interpretation of the solution required at regular intervals to minimise negative development. Combining these factors reduces lost time developing a solution that will ultimately be rejected by the customer.

Not just a process, but a mindset

An important step in successfully adopting the Agile approach to your organization’s Oracle enhancements is that it is an approach and not just a process. Deploying an agile process can only successfully be achieved if coupled with the adoption of a new mindset both within the delivery team and the business.

Solutions should grow organically and be focused on what the customer needs and not what was captured during the initial design discussions. This means less focus on documentation and more communication and interaction. Customers are used to the historical Waterfall methodology with Oracle EBS and often become frustrated with the inflexibility of the delivery process, where they are held accountable for the accuracy of their requirements regardless of system understanding or experience. Lack of progress visibility often leads to a lack of understanding of what delivering an Oracle customisation entails and customers developed unrealistic expectations on timescales and even an unjustified lack of appreciation for the challenges and scale of effort executing enhancements. Being Agile takes the customer along the enhancement journey from conception to realisation and ensures better business ownership and understanding.

We found that adopting the Agile terminology for roles and activities eased the transition to a new mindset. Requirements we simplified and called User Stories, we had Sprint Planning Sessions to map out the phases of development, Sprint Reviews for progress reports and daily Scrum Meetings to track activities. We created the role of Scrum Master to project manage the delivery. This immediately adjusted people’s mindsets to the change in approach eased the acceptance of a different way to deliver the enhancement.

The key challenges with adoption

Feedback from my Agile deployment experience has been fantastic, and it was clear at the OUG that many businesses wish to adopt this approach, but there are a few challenges that need to be addressed.

Firstly, how do you manage an enhancement budget without suffering massive scope creep and prolonged delivery periods? It is recommended that you set a budget for a period of enhancements, where you focus on delivering what you can in that timeframe, rather than a specific budget for a single enhancement. You must unburden the delivery to a certain extent, with less emphasis on execution as quick as possible: focus on quality, not quantity. Don’t be afraid to add development days to turn a good solution into a great solution. In my experience this approach quantifiably improved the speed of delivery. That said, a fully agile approach is not feasible within the boundaries of Oracle and you should execute a solution design session(s) prior to the sprint developments to identify at least 80-90% of the target solution. The agility of the development is within the fine-tuning of the design, not regular redesign.

Secondly, and key to identifying the solution, is the understanding of what a User Story is. We replaced text heavy business requirement documents with User Stories, explaining to the business that they needed to write a clear explanation of a process, or process stage, that is to change. It is important to understand why the process or functionality is changing, and the business need to avoid trying to define a solution. Avoid long winded User Stories, detail can be captured in conversation throughout the sprints. User Stories should be able to form the basis for test scenarios and having this logic in mind when defining them can prove beneficial.

The results

Introducing the Agile methodology has been positive for both the Oracle enhancement delivery team and the customer. Communication, interaction and creativity are now encouraged and occur naturally. Enhancements deliver more than a simple change; incorporation of resolutions for defects known within the amended process, opportunity for the customer understanding of their own requirement to evolve and solution adjustments better delivers what is required to its full potential.

The whole process is simply more engaging and rewarding for everyone involved and has proved to delivered better solutions faster than an established waterfall approach!

I’d love to hear your thoughts and experiences of being Agile with your Oracle ERP.