In July, 2010 the Oracle corporation provided the new module of management of customers needs of Oracle Agile Customer Needs Management. It enters a complex of applications on management of a chain of increase in value of products for customers (Oracle Product Value Chain) and allows to manage and automate the customer-oriented party of development process of new products, even relying on unstructured information, says Oracle.

Solutions on management of a chain of increase in value of products for customers of Oracle Product Value Chain include Oracle Agile Product Lifecycle Management (the application for product lifecycle management), Oracle Product Hub (the hub of data on products), Oracle AutoVue Enterprise Visualization (corporate means of visualization) and Oracle Product Data Quality (the solution for ensuring quality of data on products). In total these applications provide the complete solution for management of all information on products, integration of processes of its lifecycle, the protected interaction of all participants of process, ensuring quality of data and knowledge management on all chain of increase in value of products - during the developing, supply and sale.

Agile Customer Needs Management gives the chance to fix and range easily on idea priorities, concerning products, responses of customers and also requirements to products imposed as internal sources (such as product managers and to sales, engineers, the top management of the company), and external (customers, partners in product development and suppliers).

The new module gives the chance to groups of designing to improve functional and innovative product qualities by process optimization of idea generation thanks to Wednesday which ensures joint work of participants of process. This Wednesday allows to simplify processes of data collection, creation of the concept, approval of the project and also ranging on priorities of requirements and responses of customers, the ideas on development of products and requirements to products.

Agile Customer Needs Management supports a set of the Enterprise 2.0 elements among which an opportunity to do marks, to browse and add comments and also the friendly user interface based on Web 2.0 technology and creating the platform for joint open design process.

Using Agile Customer Needs Management Oracle gives support to development process of innovations for products of the different industries, such as high technologies, medicobiological sciences, consumer goods, retail and industrial production. This module also contains the functions allowing to manage specifications and price offers at product development to order by engineering divisions of hi-tech and industrial enterprises, noted in Oracle.

Using the unified platform for content management Oracle Universal Content Management and corporate means of visualization of Oracle AutoVue Enterprise Visualization, the module Agile Customer Needs Management allows customers to organize joint work of employees, to browse and annotate information on products and engineering drawings in a digital form that simplifies work on documents of representatives of different specialties.

According to developers, Agile Customer Needs Management is integrated both into a product lifecycle management process, and into a chain of increase in value of products for customers that allows to monitor the made changes and to completely integrate processes from the idea before development for the purpose of the organization of product development with a feedback from the customer.