Suddenly, it’s everything Agile: Agile marketing, the Agile organization, Agile workflow.

And for good reason. In an era defined by volatility, uncertainty, and rapid change, the conventional way of developing products—whether it’s software, a marketing program, or even the corporate budget—no longer works. By the time a concept has been designed, developed, tested, revised, and refined, it’s obsolete before it sees the light of day. The kicker is all the wasted time and resources, and the incalculable lost opportunity.

Software developers recognized this problem years ago and switched to Agile development practices. Marketing teams are starting to follow their lead. Marketers in any industry defined by rapid change can reap big speed-to-market and cost advantages from using Agile practices.

Even more important, they can capture a more complete view of the customer experience and take action to enhance it. Any one of these individual benefits can translate into competitive advantage; in combination, their impact is formidable.

As a marketer engaged in modernizing Oracle’s marketing organization (and one who cut his teeth at several successful startups), I’m a sworn adherent to Agile. And I firmly believe Agile is relevant well beyond the tech sector.

What Is Agile?

Agile software development, popularized by startups but now a mainstream method, arose in response to the ever-increasing pace of innovation, with which the traditional “Waterfall” development approach could no longer keep up.

There are several Agile methods, each with its own set of practices. Without going into technical details, any Agile approach essentially includes the same stages as the Waterfall approach: discovery/analysis, design, development, and testing. The difference is that instead of proceeding through these stages serially to deliver a final product, in an Agile approach they’re run concurrently and repeatedly. Each iteration yields an incrementally more complete product.

Agile is ideal in situations where uncertainty is high—for instance, where the project scope is indeterminate or even when it’s unclear whether the product or service actually fits a market need. It’s also ideal when you can’t predict what the end state of the product will be. Today, it’s crucial for big companies (including Oracle) that must respond rapidly to market changes. Beyond the tech sector, it has become an important product development approach.

What Does Agile Have to Do with Marketing?

Marketers in all industries recognize that their companies are competing on the basis of the customer experience. Marketers have the best vantage point from which to monitor and measure that experience, but they have little influence over the customer touch points that they don’t manage. Those remain the province of other internal organizations, most notably product management.

So to improve the customer experience, marketers must collaborate with their product management peers. Those folks are using Agile practices, which means marketers must do so as well. Adaptive product development approaches depend on a steady stream of customer feedback. And marketers, as the steward of customer experience, are the conduit for that feedback. Agile serves as the lingua franca for the two sides as they work together to improve products and the customer experience.

One of Agile’s strengths in the marketer/product developer collaboration is in providing a mechanism for embedding marketing into the product itself. Consider New Belgium’s Snapshot beer, so named to inspire customers to take snapshots of situations related to their enjoyment of the beer and share them on Instagram. The company then uses these photos on its packaging, in in-store displays, on the company website, and in advertising.

But there’s another reason it makes sense for marketers to use Agile: They’re managing more software than ever before. Software that enables marketers to track people across the web and understand their browsing behavior; social tools that let marketers measure influence and see who drives conversations on specific topics; advertising tools with which marketers can test types of messaging to see which ones are most effective with specific market segments; and business intelligence technologies that help marketers pinpoint correlations between these various data sources.

Marketing automation—the primary means of gathering insights on the customer’s “digital body language” in order to create a unique experience for each customer—depends on integrating data from those disparate systems. But marketing organizations no longer depend solely on the company IT department to manage their technology. They have their own tech teams to build, maintain, and integrate applications. And Agile has a key role in helping those dedicated marketing tech teams get their disparate systems to speak to one another.

How Does Agile Work in a Marketing Context?

Agile is the ultimate iterative approach. If it doesn’t completely spare marketers the cost of making the wrong predictions (which, as we all know, can be an expensive proposition), it at least limits their exposure by enabling them to make many small bets instead of a few big ones.

Suppose you’re developing a new section for your website or a new landing-page template. Applying an Agile approach, you’d focus on just what you can develop in one “sprint” (a minimum viable product, or MVP, in Agile parlance) for your initial release. You’d also expose only a subset of users to the release, not everyone. You’d direct a percentage of traffic to that page to test it and release more broadly later, as you roll out more functionality.

In that first sprint, the analysis, design, development, and testing take place simultaneously. The idea is you get faster output and the ability to generate feedback sooner. Meaning you get to the value faster—or you fail and fix faster.

With each iteration, as you add functionality you can also test multiple options. In 2015, Oracle bought a company called Maxymiser, whose applications allow for multivariate testing. We’re now implementing the program in our own marketing group for that very purpose. Multivariate testing does more than help you get to the feedback stage faster. It also puts the Agile process on steroids by letting marketers test multiple variants simultaneously. The ability to rigorously test options is game-changing for marketers, who have historically had to rely on instinct when they were racing against time.

Agile in Action

To illustrate Agile’s impact, consider Hilton Worldwide’s experience.

Paula Sappington, Hilton’s director of digital optimization and customer insights, recently spoke at Oracle’s Modern Marketing Experience conference about her team’s Agile-based approach to testing designs for the company’s online reservations pages. For one experiment, her team started out by focusing on one area: a room upgrade. Determining how and when to offer room upgrades is usually a difficult marketing decision for hoteliers, with so many permutations to test and the gnawing question: How much money are we leaving on the table?

The team tested one rate package to start, and then shifted to different rooms, presented in different graphic formats at different points in the purchase flow. (See Hilton’s presentation.) Doing so allowed the team to optimize the experience. Immediately, the company experienced an uptick in upgrades and sales.

Not every iteration leads to improvement. Sappington’s team conducted experiments involving the wholesale redesign of the landing page for one of Hilton’s hotel brands. The marketing team was confident that the redesign represented a vast improvement for customers. But as variations were tested over a series of iterations, the team discovered that the redesign actually underperformed the original.

In some cases, the experiments led to new experiments—ones the team hadn’t even thought of initially—which led to still newer ones. With each round, the team discovered new opportunities for experimentation, all of which yielded results with statistical relevance. (Hilton Worldwide’s loyalty program boasts 50 million members, and the company’s online sales surpass $9 billion across its 14 brands.)

An Agile approach, Sappington says, “lets you start with no assumptions—and fail fast.” Ultimately, the testing informed the redesign of home pages for three main portals (Hilton Hotels, Conrad Resorts, and Waldorf Astoria). “We can produce KPIs for big projects by testing first,” she notes. “Implementation prioritization becomes so much easier.”

This kind of nimble experimentation at a large, established, and international company would have been unheard of only a few years ago. That’s not just because testing platforms were nascent; business processes weren’t yet amenable to an Agile approach. What a difference a few years can make.

Taking an Agile approach won’t always tell you why one design performs better than another, but it will allow you to improve performance incrementally and consistently. When a major marketer such as Hilton embraces Agile practices, it’s a sure sign that Agile is no longer just for tech companies, or for small startups, for that matter. It’s for everyone.

Visit Oracle.com to learn more:

2016 Modern Marketing Experience Recap

The Effects of IoT on Modern Marketing

Oracle Marketing Cloud