Genealogy/Relatedness

As over five hundred languages are spoken in Nigeria [Blench, 2014], a full exploration of the country’s linguistic background is difficult. This section will focus on majority languages that play the largest role in contemporary Nigerian politics and society outside of English: Yoruba, Igbo, and Hausa.

Yoruba (Èdè Yorùbá) is spoken in Nigeria, Benin, and Togo as either first or second language, primarily by members of the Nigerian Yoruba ethnic group. Yoruba is mostly present in southwestern Nigeria, north of the capital city of Lagos. Igbo is spoken in the southeast, south of the confluence of the Niger and Benue Rivers, and Hausa dominates in the north of the country, centered around the northern city of Kano. Yoruba is a Kwa language, part of the Yoruboid group under the larger Niger-Congo language group and is most closely related to Itsekiri, which is spoken in the Niger Delta, and Igala, which is spoken in central Nigeria [Blench, 2014].

Igbo (Ásụ̀sụ̀ Ìgbò) is primarily spoken in southern Nigeria and Equatorial Guinea mostly by members of the Igbo ethnic group. The language is part of the Volta-Niger language branch, which, like Yoruba, is part of the larger Niger-Congo language family [Amadiume, 1996].

Hausa (Harshen/Halshen Hausa) is a member of the Chadic language family. It is spoken primarily in sub-Saharan Africa, and by the Hausa ethnic group that largely inhabits northern Nigeria and southern portions of the country Niger, which borders Nigeria to its north [Wolff, 2013].

Phonetics/Phonology

Yoruba includes 18 consonants, among which are voiceless and voiced labial-velar stops /k͡p/ and /ɡ͡b/. Yoruba includes seven oral and five nasal vowels. It is also a tonal language with three significant lexical tones - high, middle, and low [Bamgboṣe, 1969].

Igbo includes 22 consonants but does not have a contrast between voiced stops and nasals. Igbo includes eight vowels, three of which are retracted tongue root (RTR)[1] vowels. It also features vowel harmony and nasal vowels. Similar to Yoruba, Igbo is a tonal language, with low and high lexical tones in most dialects [Ikekeonwu, 1999].

Hausa includes between 23 and 25 consonants depending on the dialect. There is a consonantal contrast between palatalized velars /c ɟ cʼ/, plain velars /k ɡ kʼ/, and labialized velars /kʷ ɡʷ kʷʼ/. Hausa also has glottalic consonants (implosives and ejectives) at different places of articulation depending on the dialect. Glottalic consonants require movement of the glottis during pronunciation and resemble a staccato sound. Hausa includes five vowels, which can be contrastively short or long. Similar to Yoruba and Igbo, Hausa is a tonal language with three lexical tones: low, high, and falling [Newman, 1996].

Morphology and Grammar

Yoruba is an isolating language (i.e., a language where each morpheme represents a lexical or grammatical word and words are not themselves inflected). Basic word order is subject-verb-object (SVO) [Rowlands, 1969]. Although Yoruba has no grammatical gender, it maintains a noun class distinction between human and non-human nouns, which is evident in the use of different interrogative particles dependent on noun class: ta ni for human nouns (“who?”) and kí ni for non-human nouns (“what?”) [Ogunbowale, 1970].

Igbo has a rich derivational morphology but little inflection. Similar to Yoruba, it has no grammatical gender. Nouns are neither declined for case nor inflected for number, and there is no noun class system. However, personal pronouns are marked for person and number. They can be either dependent or independent.[2] Similar to Yoruba, Igbo is an SVO language [Uwalaka, 1997].

In contrast with Yoruba and Igbo, Hausa maintains masculine and feminine gender distinctions, except for the Zaria and Bauchi dialects spoken south of Kano [Caron, 2011]. Hausa, similar to other Chadic languages, has morphological complex pluralization patterns for nouns. Noun plurals in Hausa are derived using a variety of morphological processes, such as suffixation, infixation, reduplication, or a combination of any of these. There are 20 plural classes [Guzmán Naranjo & Becker, 2017]. Similarly to Yoruba and Igbo, basic word order in Hausa is SVO [Wolff, 2013].

Lexicon and Vocabulary

Yoruba, centered as it is on the Lagos region, where the first British colony was established in Nigeria in 1851, has borrowed heavily from English since that time. Borrowing from English has continued, since English is the official language of the country and functions as a bridge language between all the others. Other languages that Yoruba has borrowed from significantly are Hausa, Arabic through Hausa, and French [Komolafe, 2014].

Hausa, until more recently, did not borrow heavily from English, Hausas living mostly in the north, away from the colonial activities of Britain. Hausa has borrowed from a variety of its neighboring African languages, including Berber (Afroasiatic), Fula, Mande, Yoruba (all Niger-Kordofanian), and Kanuri (Nilo-Saharan), and in so doing has set Hausa apart from other Chadic languages. Additionally, due to the influence of Islam, Hausa borrowed Arabic words from the fields of religion, commerce, law, government, horsemanship, scholarship, and literature [Jaggar, 2011].

Igbo borrowed words from English, Hausa, Yoruba, Efik and Igala as a result of contact with each of these. The English linguistic and cultural influence on Igbo through colonization was significant, leading to borrowing in the areas of education, technology, dressing, sports, names for disease, fauna and flora. Igbo also borrowed from Hausa and Yoruba because these three indigenous languages were and are in close contact, facilitated first by the British colonial regime and then by the Nigerian Government, as it sought to promote language planning and freedom of interaction among Nigeria’s three major ethnic groups. Igbo has also borrowed from Efik and Igala because they are geographical neighbors [Ajah, 2018].

Orthography/Writing System

In the 17th century first attempts were made to promote Yoruba writing employed an Arabic script, ajami. From the mid-19th century, missionaries created a revised Latin alphabet to write Yoruba , with additional symbols added to indicate tone [Falola & Akintunde, 2016]. The current orthography of Yoruba includes the digraph ⟨gb⟩ and certain diacritics, including the underdots for the letters The diacritic underneath vowels indicates an open vowel, pronounced with the root of the tongue retracted ; ⟨ṣ⟩ stands for a postalveolar consonant [ʃ] like the English ⟨sh⟩. The Latin letters ⟨c⟩, ⟨q⟩, ⟨v⟩, ⟨x⟩, ⟨z⟩ are not used [Bamgboṣe, 1965b].1965b].

Before European colonization (in the 16th century), Igbo used nsibidi, a pictographic script, which turned obsolete when it became popular amongst secret societies such as the Ekpe, who used it as a secret form of communication [Oraka, 1983].

Before any official system of orthography for Igbo existed, travelers and writers documented Igbo sounds by utilizing the scripts of their own languages. Difficulties in transcribing certain sounds led to the use of the Standard Alphabet (1850s), published by a German philologist Karl Richard Lepsius. It contained 34 letters and included digraphs and diacritical marks to transcribe sounds distinct to African languages [Ohiri-Aniche, 2007].

The Lepsius orthography was replaced by the Practical Orthography of African Languages (1929) at the directive of the colonial government in Nigeria. It had 36 letters and disposed of diacritic marks but a number of controversial issues with the new orthography eventually led to its replacement by a standard Latin-based written form called Ọnwụ. in 1962. , Ọnwụ included 36 letters. In 1976, the Igbo Standardization Committee criticized the official (1962) orthography for its lack of accurate representation of tone and its inability to represent various sounds that are specific to certain Igbo dialects. A modified version of Ọnwụ was then developed, called the New Standard Orthography, which substituted ⟨[Oluikpe, 2014]. However, the New Standard Orthography has not been widely adopted again because it was felt by some to misrepresent certain sounds. In 2009 Ndebe script was created. The script gained popularity due to its logical approach to indicate tonal and dialectal variety, as compared to Latin letters [Ndebe, n.d.].

Hausa’s orthography is a Latin-based alphabet called boko, which was introduced and adapted for Hausa in the 1930s by the British colonial administration.[3]

Hausa has also been written in ajami, an Arabic alphabet, since the early 17th century [Omniglot, n.d.].

Discourse/Sociolinguistic Factors/Influences on Development/History

English is the official language of Nigeria, and is used to facilitate the cultural and linguistic unity of the country. French spoken in neighboring countries influenced the English spoken in the border regions of Nigeria. Additionally, French spoken in Nigeria may be mixed with some native languages. Indigenous languages remain the major languages of everyday communication in Nigeria as the majority of population lives in rural areas where they are spoken. Among them, Yoruba and Igbo are the most widely spoken. Nigerian Pidgin English is also a popular lingua franca and is widely spoken within the Niger Delta Region. Hausa is the most widely used indigenous language of Nigeria, due to the size of the Hausa ethnic group and to the historical use of Hausa as a preferred language for trade, which led to its adoption by various smaller ethnic groups [Adegbija, 2003].

Footnotes:

[1] Retracted Tongue Root (RTR) is the retraction of the base of the tongue in the pharynx during the pronunciation of a vowel, the opposite articulation of advanced tongue root [Ladefoged & Maddieson, 1996].

[2] The dependent pronouns include only singular pronouns and function as a single subject in combination with a main verb (e.g.,

bi ‘live’ (verb stem)

ebi m ‘I live’

i bi ‘you live’

o bi ‘he/she lives’

Note that for the first person singular, the m follows the verb stem.

The independent pronouns can be used as a subject, direct and indirect object (e.g.,

buru carry (verb stem)

anyï buru gï we carry you

unu buru mü you carry me

mü na gï buru ya me and you carry him

[3] The letter ƴ (y with a right hook) is used only in Niger; in Nigeria it is written ʼy.