Established in 1890, the Whitworth University is a non-profit private higher education institution located in the suburban setting of the small city of Spokane (population range of 50,000-249,999 inhabitants), Washington. Officially accredited by the Northwest Commission on Colleges and Universities, Whitworth University is a small-sized (uniRank enrollment range: 2,000-2,999 students) coeducational US higher education institution formally affiliated with the Christian-Presbyterian religion. Whitworth University offers courses and programs leading to officially recognized higher education degrees such as bachelor's degrees and master's degrees in several areas of study. See the uniRank degree levels and areas of study table below for further details. This 134-year-old US higher-education institution has a selective admission policy based on entrance examinations and students' past academic records and grades. The acceptance rate range is 90-99% making this US higher education organization a least selective institution. International applicants are eligible to apply for enrollment. Whitworth University also provides several academic and non-academic facilities and services to students including a library, housing, sports facilities, financial aids and/or scholarships, study abroad and exchange programs, online courses and distance learning opportunities, as well as administrative services.

Gender Admission

This institution admits Men and Women (coed).

Admission Selection

Has Whitworth University a selective admission policy? Yes, based on entrance examinations and students' past academic records and grades.

Admission Rate

Whitworth University's acceptance rate range is 90-99% making this institution a least selective higher education institution.

Student Enrollment

Whitworth University has an enrollment range of 2,000-2,999 students making it a small-sized institution.

Academic Staff

This institution has a range of 100-199 academic employees (Faculty).

Control Type

Whitworth University is a private higher education institution.

Entity Type

Whitworth University is a non-profit higher education institution.

Financial Aid

This institution offers one or more of the following financial aid for eligible students: scholarships, grants, loans, tuition waivers, emergency financial aid etc.

Study Abroad

This institution offers study abroad and exchange program opportunities for its students.

Distance Learning

This institution provides a distance learning mode for certain programs or courses.

In particular, this institution offers some courses via distance education at the undergraduate level and at the graduate level. Source: IPDES.

Academic Counseling

This institution offers students academic guidance and support to assist them in their academic pursuits.

Career Services

This institution offers career counseling, career assessments, job and internship postings, career events, alumni networking or other career-related services to assist students transition successfully from academic life to professional life.