Whitworth University

Whitworth University is a 4 Year, Private university located at 300 W Hawthorne Rd, Spokane, WA. Students at Whitworth University can enroll in bachelor’s, certificate, master’s, and doctoral degree programs

Whitworth University Military & Veteran Support Programs

Whitworth University offers the following veteran and military support programs:

Whitworth University has GI Bill®-approved programs

Whitworth University is approved for Tuition Assistance

Whitworth University is a Yellow Ribbon school

Whitworth University offers credit for military

Whitworth University awards credit for the CLEP exam

Whitworth University awards credit for the DSST exam

Is Whitworth University a GI Bill®-approved school?

Yes, Whitworth University is a GI Bill®-approved school. However, you will need to check with the school to ensure that the GI Bill® covers your preferred degree program.

Is Whitworth University a Yellow Ribbon school?

Yes, Whitworth University is a Yellow Ribbon school.

Eligible military and veteran students may have up to 100% of its tuition covered, with zero tuition costs out-of-pocket. You will need to check with the school to ensure that your preferred degree program is 100% covered by the Yellow Ribbon.

Does Whitworth University offer Yellow Ribbon for master’s programs?

Yes, Whitworth University does offer Yellow Ribbon funding for its master's programs.

Eligible military and veteran students may have up to 100% of tuition covered, with zero tuition costs out-of-pocket. You will need to check with the school to ensure that your preferred degree program is 100% covered by Yellow Ribbon.

Does Whitworth University offer a military discount or reduced tuition rates for military and veterans?

Whitworth offers a military service scholarship for military, veterans and their families, as well as ROTC cadets.

What are Whitworth University's military tuition rates for active military using tuition assistance funding?

Whitworth University provides a military service scholarship and accepts TA and VA education benefits.

We recommend that you contact the school to verify that the courses you wish to pursue do not exceed the $250 rate cap for military tuition assistance.

What are Whitworth University's online tuition rates for active military?

Whitworth University provides a military service scholarship and accepts TA and VA education benefits.

We recommend that you contact the school to verify that the courses you wish to pursue do not exceed the $250 rate cap for military tuition assistance.

Does Whitworth University offer online degree programs?

Yes, Whitworth offers online degrees through the School of Continuing Studies, as well as online graduate degrees.

Is Whitworth University approved for Tuition Assistance?

Yes, Whitworth University is approved for Tuition Assistance.

Eligible students may have up to 100% of its tuition, with zero out-of-pocket costs.

You will need to verify with the school to ensure that Tuition Assistance covers your preferred degree program.