Assistant Professor

School of Film and Animation

College of Art and Design

Office Location

Office Mailing Address

71-3160

Select Scholarship

Invited Keynote/Presentation

O'Brien, Jesse. "The 3D Art Production Pipeline for That Damn Goat." East Coast Game Conference. Triangle Game Initiative. Raleigh, NC. 20 Apr. 2023. Conference Presentation.

Foster, Craig and Jesse O'Brien. "Exploring the Use of VR to Improve Learning Outcomes for Complex Anatomical Subject Matter." AMI Annual Conference. Association of Medical Illustrators. Des Moines, IA. 23 Jul. 2022. Conference Presentation.

O'Brien, Jesse and Craig Foster. "VRm: A Virtual Reality Tool for Anatomical Study." SIGGRAPH 2022. Association for Computing Machinery. Vancouver, Canada. 8 Aug. 2022. Conference Presentation.

O'Brien, Jesse. "Our Favorite Games and Why." Rochester Game Festival. ROC Game Dev. Rochester, NY. 10 Sep. 2022. Guest Lecture.

Peer Reviewed/Juried Poster Presentation or Conference Paper

O'Brien, Jesse. "The Pedagogy of an Introductory University-Level Maya Course." Proceedings of the EDULEARN23. Ed. International Academy of Technology, Education and Development (IATED). Palma de Mallorca, Spain: International Academy of Technology, Education and Development (IATED).

Published Conference Proceedings

O'Brien, Jesse and Craig Foster. "VRm: A Virtual Reality Tool for Anatomical Study." Proceedings of the SIGGRAPH 2022. Ed. ACM Digital Library. Online, USA: Association for Computing Machinery, 2022. Web.

Shows/Exhibits/Installations

O'Brien, Jesse and the That Damn Goat Development Team. Game On! 8 Jan. 2022. The Strong National Museum of Play, Rochester. Exhibit.

O'Brien, Jesse and the That Damn Goat Development Team. Gaming for All: A Women in Games Celebration. 17 Nov. 2022. The Strong National Museum of Play, Rochester. Exhibit.

O'Brien, Jesse and the That Damn Goat Development Team. That Damn Goat. 10 Sep. 2022. Rochester Game Festival, Rochester. Exhibit.

Published Game, Application or Software

O'Brien, Jesse and Velan Studios. Knockout City. Game. Electronic Arts. 2021.

O'Brien, Jesse and DB Creations. Table Trenches. Game. DB Creations. 2019.

O'Brien, Jesse and Hi-Rez Studios. Paladins: Champions of the Realm. Game. Hi-Rez Studios. 2017.

Currently Teaching

SOFA-209

Introduction to 3D Modeling

3 Credits

Students create models for animation in three-dimensional software. Students learn various modeling, texturing, and lighting techniques that apply to animation and digital cinematography. Students' model, texture and light three-dimensional environments.

SOFA-215

3D Animation I

3 Credits

This course is an introduction to three-dimensional computer animation and character rigging. The basic principles of animation will be addressed in relation to three-dimensional animation. Character rigging techniques are presented and will include skeletons and animation controls. Students produce a series of short 3D computer animations and some basic character rigs. Students will become familiar with a variety of 3D computer animation techniques.

SOFA-216

3D Animation II

3 Credits

In this course students will learn the mechanics of motion within characters. Complete character-rigging techniques will be discussed and demonstrated. Students will gain further knowledge of a variety of three-dimensional computer animation techniques and will produce a series of short 3D computer animations using a pre-rigged character.

SOFA-599

SOFA Independent Study

1 - 6 Credits

SOFA Independent Study will provide students with the ability to study in a specialized area with an individual faculty member. Students, with the assistance of a faculty adviser, should propose a course of study or project with clearly defined deliverables. Students must obtain permission of an instructor and complete the Independent Study Permission Form to enroll. Student must have a minimum of a 3.0 GPA to apply.

SOFA-615

3D Animation Fundamentals

3 Credits

This course will provide a fundamental understanding of computer-generated three-dimensional imagery and world-building. Using top industry-standard software Autodesk Maya, students will explore the technology and processes of professional world-creation and animation. Students will experience the creation of completed digital animations and display skills in 3D modeling, animation, lighting and rendering.

SOFA-620

3D Modeling Mastery

3 Credits

In this advanced three-dimensional modeling course, students will refine their knowledge and skills by creating objects and characters in 3D space. Students will build and create on their previous modeling knowledge and will be introduced to digital sculpting. Modeling concepts such as edge-loop placement for proper animation deformation will be emphasized.

SOFA-790

Research and Thesis I

4 Credits

This is the first of two courses designed to advance a student towards completion of their thesis. Students will work independently on their approved plan of work for their thesis while meeting on a regular basis with their committee chair. They are required to meet at least twice with their full committee during the semester.

SOFA-799

Film and Animation Graduate Independent Study

1 - 4 Credits

Film and Animation Graduate Independent Study will provide students with the ability to study in a specialized area with an individual faculty member. Students, with the assistance of a faculty adviser, should propose a course of study or project with clearly defined deliverables. Students must obtain permission of an instructor and complete the Independent Study Permission Form to enroll. Student must have a minimum of a 3.0 GPA to apply.

SOFA-890

Research and Thesis II

4 Credits

This is the second of two courses designed to advance a student towards completion of their thesis. Students will work independently on their approved plan of work for their thesis while meeting on a regular basis with their committee chair. They are required to meet at least twice with their full committee during the semester as well as present a final screening of their thesis.

In the News

September 9, 2023

Gamers, developers unite at ROC Game Fest to showcase new game development

Featured Work

Demo Reel

Jesse O'Brien

This is my demo reel of recent work. Shot Breakdown Shots 1, 5, 6, 8, 11, 13, Dota 2 courier, Maya – I rigged and animated the courier. Shots 2, 4, 10, 14, Paladins Champions, 3ds Max – I...

View More about Demo Reel

Icarus Falls

Jesse O'Brien

A young boy yearns to fly. He builds flying machines, each one more elaborate and dangerous than the last, but each one fails. In the end he achieves his dream of flying, though not quite in the way...

View More about Icarus Falls