Financier Lionel Pincus's two sons are suing their father's companion, Princess Firyal of Jordan. The lawsuit claims that the Princess, the first wife of Jordan's Prince Muhammad bin Talal, who is the brother of the late King Hussein I of Jordan, took advantage of Pincus's deteriorating mental and physical state by spending extravagant sums to decorate a $50 million, 14-room duplex in New York's Pierre Hotel, on Fifth Avenue. (Um, $21,000 candlesticks, anyone?) In wording that has sparked comparisons to the ongoing Brooke Astor case, allegations are being made that changes the Princess had Pincus make to his will—ones that make her the recipient of his art collection, a lavish apartment, and $35 million in cash—were unlawful because Pincus, who was mentally incapacitated after cancer surgery in 2006, was too sickly to understand the paperwork. The spendthrift royal even had her boyfriend sign papers saying that if Pincus were ever declared mentally unfit, she would receive $10 million. (He was; she did.) The Pincus sons, who hope to sell their father's town house and donate the money to charity, claim the Princess is deliberately attempting to block the property's sale so that she might inherit it. The suit also points an accusing finger at the royal divorcée's predilection for dating wealthy men—reports indicate that she began seeing Pincus, a widower, shortly after the death of her long-term companion, the Greek shipping mogul Stavros Niarchos. According to the venerable New York Social Diary, Pincus and his girlfriend are a well-liked couple on the social scene; the site diplomatically notes that the Princess's "presence in Mr. Pincus' life has added a touch of glamour that he neither previously possessed nor seemed interested in."Manvendra Singh Raghubir Singh, the Crown Prince of Rajpipla,

called yoga master Baba Ramdev "absurd" for claiming he can cure homosexuality. The 43-year-old prince, who who was disowned by his family for for being openly gay, says that the Ramdev's claims do a disservice to society, an especially poignant criticism considering that homosexuality is illegal in India. In January, the Prince participated in the BBC Three reality program Undercover Princes, which saw him take on a secret identity and head to Brighton, England, to look for love.

Equestrienne and British royal Zara Phillips traded her trusty steed for a yacht and took on the $17,000 Artemis challenge, a 50-mile regatta around the Isle of Wight. (Victory eluded her.) Zara, whose grandfather__Prince Philip, the Duke of Edinburgh,__ is the admiral of the Royal Yacht Squadron, was joined by her boyfriend Mike Tindall, who all but officially proposed last week.

Style

Inside Kensington Palace: Explore the Royal Family’s Storied Home

Kensington Palace may be smaller than nearby Buckingham Palace, but its history is far richer and much more scandalous.

Royals

Queen Camilla: Everything to Know About the Queen of the UK

Camilla Parker Bowles’s life—from her scandalous relationship with Charles to becoming queen—has long intrigued the public.

Royals

Prince William Just Made Bank In His First Year on a $30 Million Royal Salary

The head of the Duchy of Cornwall is a cushy gig if you can get it.

Royals

Prince Harry’s Calls to King Charles “Go Unanswered”

The monarch is reportedly no longer speaking to his younger son over Harry’s ongoing battle to secure enhanced security when he visits the UK.