Name

Firyal, Princess of Jordan Gender: F

Birthname Firyal Al-Rasheid born on 4 September 1943 at 11:00 (= 11:00 AM ) Place Jerusalem, Israel, 31n46, 35e14 Timezone IDT h3e (is daylight saving time) Data source

Accuracy in question

Rodden Rating C Collector: Rodden

Astrology data 10°55' 01°57 Asc. 10°39'

Biography

Jordanian princess, humanitarian, and philanthropist, world-travelled and noted for being gracious and cosmopolitan. She has been a UNESCO Goodwill Ambassador since 1992, for whom she works on programs for education and protection of world heritage. She is a board member at the International Rescue Committee (IRC), New York Public Library, and a wide range of museums and universities, including the John F. Kennedy School of Government at Harvard University.

Princess Firyal is a graduate of Columbia University. From 1964 to 1978 she was married to Prince Muhammad bin Talal—younger brother of the late HM King Hussein of Jordan—by whom she has two sons, Prince Talal and Prince Ghazi.

Relationships

has other family relationship with Hussein, King of Jordan (born 14 November 1935). Notes: Siblings-in-law, 1964-1978

Source Notes

Originally this entry had a birth place of San Diego, California: LMR quoted a colleague, data from the Princess as "between 10:00 AM and 12:00 PM."

In April 2021 the birth place was changed; Sy Scholfield quoted from the Princess's official website biography: "H.R.H. Princess Firyal was born in Jerusalem, the daughter of the late Farid Al-Rasheid, a prominent political leader and land owner, who served as a Minister in the Government and Senate in Jordan. Her mother, Farida, was a Chair of the Red Crescent Society in the West Bank of Jordan" [1].

Categories

Traits : Body : Appearance gorgeous

Traits : Body : Race (Middle Eastern, Palestinian descent)

Traits : Personality : Gracious/ sociable (Gracious)

Family : Relationship : Mate - Noted (Prince Muhammad bin Talal)

Family : Parenting : Kids 1-3 (Two sons)

Lifestyle : Financial : Philanthropist

Lifestyle : Social Life : Travel

Lifestyle : Home : Expatriate (Lived and studied in USA)

Vocation : Politics : Activist/ social (Humanitarian)

Vocation : Politics : Diplomat (UNESCO Goodwill Ambassador)

Notable : Famous : Royal family (House of Hashim, Jordan, by marriage)