A 'cleaner' has been arrested over the theft of gems worth £1million from Princess Firyal of Jordan's £6million London home.

The 65-year-old woman is alleged to have stolen diamond rings, bracelets, watches and earrings while working at the princess's home in the upmarket Belgravia area of London, according to reports.

Princess Firyal, 76, a humanitarian and philanthropist, is the former wife of Prince Muhammad bin Talal, the second son of the late King Talal of Jordan.

The suspect is alleged to have stolen the jewellery from the property before a 37-year-old relative allegedly sold the items through an auction house.

He was arrested after trying to sell an ultra rare ring - said to be one of six in the world - through a dealer who alerted the police, reports The Sun.

The newspaper said the cleaner, of Fulham, West London, and her relative, were arrested on November 26 before being released under investigation

A spokesperson for the Met Police told MailOnline: 'On 26 November, police received an allegation of theft after a quantity of jewellery was reported stolen from a property.

'A 65-year-old woman and a 37-year-old man were arrested on suspicion of theft and subsequently released under investigation.

'Officers from the Central West Basic Command Unit are investigating. Enquiries continue.'

MailOnline has contacted representatives of Princess Firyal for comment.

Born in Jerusalem in 1945, Princess Firyal grew up as the daughter of Farid Mahmoud Irshaid, a political leader who served in the government and as a parliamentarian in the Senate in Jordan.

Her mother Farida was Chair of the Red Crescent Society in The West Bank.

After studying in America, she married Prince Muhammad bin Talal in 1964.

The prince is the second son of Talal bin Abdullah, who was king of Jordan from 1951 until his abdication a year later in 1952.

King Talal's brother, Hussein bin Talal, became king and reigned until his death in 1999.

He was in turn succeeded by his first son, the current monarch, King Abdullah II bin Al-Hussein of Jordan.

Princess Firyal and Prince Muhammad bin Talal had two sons during their marriage, which ended in divorce in 1978.

Their sons are Prince Talal and Prince Ghazi.

After their divorce, Princess Firyal became a long-term companion of American businessman Lionel Pincus.

She has been an UNESCO Goodwill Ambassador since 1992 and holds a number of philanthropic positions, including as a member of the International Council of the Tate Modern in London.