From the Publisher

Voice of OC’s nonprofit newsroom is aimed at empowering local residents with essential Orange County civic news by letting people know about key local decisions coming at them and holding elected officials accountable.

All in real time.

Since 2009, the newsroom’s daily coverage of a county of 3.2 million people has directly impacted a number of key quality of life issues: housing, homelessness, public land protections, desalination – along with harbors, beaches and parks.

The coverage has consistently been recognized by America’s top journalism groups including the National News Leaders Association, the California News Publishers Association along with the LA and OC Press Clubs.

Our reporters’ skill sets on public agencies went on full display during the pandemic, with the newsroom writing daily stories about critical issues such as masks, vaccines and closures – issues that were often ignored by governing agencies.

We also keep a lean operation: most of our donations go directly back into Voice of OC’s newsroom – fueling aggressive and diverse accountability-based news coverage on a daily basis.

As a national leader on journalism training, Voice of OC also maintains active partnerships with local academic institutions like Chapman University, Cal State Fullerton and community colleges like Santa Ana and Fullerton – all of which help build up reporters of the future through fact-based accountability reporting.

Our diverse staff – with strong ties to OC – understands residents don’t have time to comb through hundreds of pages of technical jargon; we make it digestible for residents to understand how local government decisions impact their lives.

To read more about our newsroom leaders, click here.

To read more about the local leaders on our board of directors, click here.

The newsroom’s goal is to become 100% reader funded.

Since we started tracking donations in 2020, there’s been more than 30,000 responses to our call for action.

These donors are really making their voices known as visionary leaders in their own backyard, leaving a measurable, collective mark by standing up and supporting real local journalism at a critical time.

If this mission resonates with you, consider adding your voice to theirs today.