Founding

Voice of OC was founded on June 3, 2009. The first content was published on March 31, 2010.

Editorial Independence

Our news gathering is independent of commercial or political interests. We do not accept gifts of any kind in order to avoid any conflict-of-interest or appearance thereof. The newsroom is insulated from donors, sponsors and advertisers.

Ownership Structure

Voice of OC is a 501(c)(3) nonprofit. View our Guidestar profile or access our financial disclosures. We are guided by a board of directors.

Actionable Feedback

Our audiences are frontline witnesses to life in Orange County – public safety, politics, housing, social movements, schools, culture – and your insights can help shape our news. We invite your comments on news stories, suggestions for issues to cover or sources to consult. We believe that news organizations have a responsibility to engage with the public on the values, issues and ideas of the day, and that we have much to gain in return. Contact us at admin@voiceofoc.org.

Corrections

Voice of OC is committed to telling readers when an error has been made, the magnitude of the error and the correct information, as quickly as possible. This commitment and transparency is applicable to small errors as well as large, across all Voice of OC content and products. All corrections can be seen HERE. If you would like to report an inaccuracy, email either admin@voiceofoc.org or nsantana@voiceofoc.org.

Masthead

NORBERTO SANTANA, JR., Publisher, nsantana@voiceofoc.org

SPENCER CUSTODIO, Civic Editor, scustodio@voiceofoc.org

Trust Project

Voice of OC is a participant in the Trust Project, a collaboration among news organizations around the world. Its goal is to create strategies that fulfill journalism’s basic pledge: to serve society with a truthful, intelligent and comprehensive account of ideas and events.

Erwin Chemerinsky

Erwin Chemerinsky, the inaugural dean of the law school at the University of California, Irvine, is one of the nation’s most respected constitutional scholars. Chemerinsky, who is now the Dean of the Berkeley School of Law, also taught for years at the University of Southern California and has written extensively on the U.S. Supreme Court. He also has remained active in public policy debates, with a central role in the LAPD Rampart scandal investigation and the crafting of a new charter for the City of Los Angeles.

Email Subscriptions

We collect your email address if you choose to subscribe to one of our email newsletters or email news alerts. Other optional information that you enter when subscribing – such as your first and last names or city are simply so that we can deliver more personalized email newsletters. We DO NOT sell, rent or market your information to any other parties. We retain your information only as long as necessary to provide your service. When we send emails, it collects some data about which users open the emails and which links are clicked. We use this information to optimize our email newsletters and, as aggregate information, to explain what percentage of our users open and interact with our newsletters.

Donations

When you donate to Voice of OC, the information you include is stored in our Kindful and Stripe donation systems. Only the last four digits of your card are viewable in our internal-only private systems. Other information that you provide us – such as your first and last name, address, email and phone number – are only stored in our internal system so that we can communicate with our donors. We DO NOT sell, rent or market your information to any other parties.

Analytics

Our web traffic is automatically tracked by Google Analytics. This includes but is not limited to: your IP address, the name and location of your Internet Service Provider, the type and version of your web browser, the length of time you stay on our website, search queries, the pages you view, the website that sent you to our website and the average number of pages you viewed. We use this information so that we can understand how people use our website so that we can continue optimizing the site design and experience. We DO NOT sell, rent or market your personal information to any other parties. We may use aggregated information for marketing or information purposes – such as how many of our users come from Santa Ana or Irvine, or how many of our users are within a certain age range.

Changing Your Personal Information

If you would like to update or delete the information they provided to us, they can do so by sending an email to Voice of OC at admin@voiceofoc.org.