Observatory OC History

Orange County’s premier small-to-midsize venue, Observatory OC took over in 2011 what was once the Galaxy Concert Theatre. Since its inception, Observatory OC has cemented itself as a consistent tour stop between Los Angeles and San Diego for the best acts in rock, hip-hop and more. Located in Santa Ana, the 1,000-capacity venue also features the adjacent 250-person Constellation Room where you can catch the next big acts before they blow up.

Observatory OC Performers

As soon as the Observatory OC opened its doors, no time was wasted in bringing the best of what’s next to the stage. Foster The People played the first show in 2011, and soon thereafter the venue hosted concerts from Silversun Pickups, Devo, Jenny Lewis, Tyga, and the final two shows of OC-punk stalwarts Thrice’s farewell tour. Today, Observatory OC brings artists to Santa Ana who could easily play larger rooms — think Snoop Dogg, Poolside, Sleater-Kinney, Cage The Elephant and Banks.

Planning Your Visit to Observatory OC

Less than a mile from the I-405 Harbor Blvd exit, Observatory OC is easy to get to and has general paid parking. Once in the door, you’ll find the large outdoor patio makes for a great meet-up point for drinks or conversation. Plentiful food options are on-site and include the O burger or O dog, grilled cheese, fries, plus vegetarian fare like edamame, vegan chili or avocado mash. Nearby choices for before or after a show include Byblos Mediterranean Deli for shawarma and falafel, Del Taco for fast-food Mexican and The Arc for sit-down pub grub.

Observatory OC Frequently Asked Questions

What are the parking options at Observatory OC?

General paid parking is available, and limited street parking is nearby as well.

Does Observatory OC serve food?

Yes, there is gastropub fare alongside beer, wine and liquor.

What are the seating options at Observatory OC?

The Observatory is a general-admission venue, but info on premium seating and bottle service can be found here. The Observatory’s tiered layout offers great views of the stage no matter where you sit or stand.

What are the Observatory OC safety & security guidelines?

Bags up to 12″ x 6″ x 12″ are allowed in the venue. All bags will be searched prior to entry. Bags that are not clear will be subject to additional search. Please consult the venue website for full health and safety guidelines.

Observatory OC At A Glance Venue Name Observatory OC Location Santa Ana, CA Address 3503 S Harbor Blvd, Santa Ana, CA 92704 Phone # (714) 957-0600 Capacity 972 Opened 2012 Owner Live Nation Entertainment Website https://www.observatoryoc.com/

Additional California Venues

Southern CaliforniaNorthern California North Island Credit Union Amphitheatre Chula Vista CAThe Fillmore San Francisco CA Observatory North Park San Diego CAConcord Pavilion Concord CA The Magnolia El Cajon CAThe Fillmore San Francisco CA House Of Blues San Diego CAAce Of Spades Sacramento CA The Wiltern Los Angeles CAShoreline Amphitheatre Mountain View CA Fivepoint Amphitheatre Irvine CASF Masonic Auditorium San Francisco CA Observatory OC Santa Ana CAPunch Line Comedy Club San Francisco CA Hollywood Palladium Los Angeles CACobbs Comedy Club San Francisco CA Glen Helen Amphitheater San Bernardino CA Constellation Room Observatory OC Santa Ana CA Fox Performing Arts Center Riverside CA House Of Blues Anaheim CA Hollywood Pantages Theater Hollywood CA

Image courtesy of Facebook

“ “