As the current .net registry operator, VeriSign has implemented all ICANN consensus policies to date and will implement all applicable ICANN consensus policies going forward. We fully recognize that policy and contractual compliance are necessary and important to fulfill our obligations to ICANN. Our commitment to policy compliance is demonstrated annually. VeriSign is the only registry in the world that has undergone annual equivalent access audits performed by an independent, internationally recognized, third party accounting firm to confirm compliance. To ensure the comparable level of compliance demonstrated by VeriSign, any credible applicant must have a fully implemented Inter-Registrar Transfer Policy, fund regular third-party audits to ensure compliance with ICANN policies, and have a proven experience working with the Internet community to smoothly and quickly implement all of ICANN's policy. VeriSign Advantages: + Implemented all applicable ICANN consensus policies to date. + Commitment to implement all consensus policies going forward. + Continued support of Policy Advisory Group to facilitate policy implementation (see Section 7 for a full description). + Fully implemented the Inter-Registrar Transfer Policy on 12 November 2004. This section provides the following information with regard to ICANN Policy Compliance, organized into 3 subsections, as follows: * Mechanisms to Ensure Policy Compliance: VeriSign employs numerous mechanisms (described below) to ensure compliance with all applicable ICANN policies. Such mechanisms include training programs, monthly compliance reports, and maintaining a dedicated policy compliance team. * VeriSign's Involvement in ICANN's Policy Development: An examination of the multiple forms of involvement with ICANN and the broader Internet community to facilitate policy development and compliance. * Method for Implementing the Inter-Registrar Transfer Policy: Description of VeriSign's implementation of ICANN's Inter-Registrar Transfer Policy. Mechanisms to Ensure Policy Compliance VeriSign has a comprehensive process in place to address ICANN policy issues and implementation. Active coordination through ICANN working groups and committees provides the basis for implementing ICANN policy. The first step in ICANN Policy Compliance is to ensure compliance with all registry agreement requirements as well as all applicable consensus policies. VeriSign business, technical, legal, and policy teams work together to continually ensure compliance with all applicable consensus policies and the .net registry agreement. In particular, the VeriSign Vice President of Policy and Compliance and the VeriSign Compliance Officer actively monitor and manage policy and contractual compliance across all aspects of registry operations using the following mechanisms: * Offering a weekly instructor-led initial Organizational Conflicts of Interest (OCI) training course for all new personnel (which includes both employees and contractors) supporting the registry business. A refresher course is required to be taken annually. * Maintaining a contractual requirements matrix that is updated monthly. This matrix serves as a management tool to regularly ensure that all contractual requirements are met on time. The matrix is maintained by the Compliance Officer and provided to the Vice President of Policy and Compliance each month. * Preparing a monthly compliance report that summarizes the fulfillment status of all contract requirements. This report is produced by the Compliance Officer in conjunction with the contractual requirements matrix referenced in the previous bullet. It shows the status of all requirements that are due or coming due in the near term. The report is updated for the Vice President of Policy and Compliance each month. * Performing a semi-annual compliance audit. This audit serves as an internal check of the equivalent access requirements to registrars. * Developing detailed policy implementation plans for new, applicable consensus polices in coordination with business and technical teams. This is a critical part of ensuring full compliance with all applicable ICANN consensus policies. It involves coordination and cooperation among VeriSign business, technical, policy and legal teams as well as with registrars and ICANN. Our implementation of the ICANN Inter-Registrar Transfer Policy is an excellent example of the steps VeriSign takes in implementing policies. Beyond our internal mechanisms, VeriSign is also committed to helping our registrar customers comply with the Registry Registrar Agreement (RRA). To facilitate this, our Compliance Officer conducts an Annual Compliance Review of registrar practices to check compliance of the RRA requirements by all registrars. Results are communicated to registrars to assist them in meeting their contractual requirements. In the case of new policy implementation, we schedule Web-based seminars at varying times to accommodate registrars in different time zones. In addition, through day-to-day interaction with registrars we notify them of irregular system behavior and work collaboratively to understand these observed anomalies in the context of their business needs. Through this process we regularly update ICANN of our findings and continue to collaborate with registrars to identify solutions. All policies are available online in the password protected area of our website; an evaluator password can be found in Part 2, Section 4(a). In all of our policy implementation efforts, we perform full, policy life cycle management that includes the following: * Active participation in GNSO constituencies, working groups and committees in the policy development stage provides the initial basis for implementing ICANN policy. * Closely working with our registrars and actively seeking feedback during the policy development process helps us contribute to that process in a manner consistent with our customers' needs. * Developing draft business and technical requirements before policies are finalized allows us to estimate levels of effort required to implement policies, provide registrar implementation tools and then estimate reliable implementation timetables. While policy is being finalized, VeriSign initiates the internal planning process to understand the requirements of a change and develop a schedule. This includes: * After policy finalization, preparing detailed business and technical requirements ensures that systems development work can be accurately done in preparation for policy implementation. * Well in advance of policy implementation, we notify registrars of policy details and implementation dates and provide assistance via web-based seminars, account manager visits and through normal customer service support. After policies are implemented, we commence the implementation phase which includes: * Working directly with registrars and actively seeking feedback on the effectiveness of policies and procedures to provide the mechanisms to verify that we are achieving policy objectives. * Monitoring the implementation of the RRA policies and procedures provides the methodology for identifying policy infractions, resolving policy or procedure disagreements, improving operational support of the policy, and providing insight into needs for improvement of the policy. * Ongoing participation in GNSO constituencies, working groups and committees in policy review stages provides the opportunity to continually improve policies. Each of these discreet mechanisms are vital to ensure policy compliance and are embedded in the planning processes of VeriSign. To facilitate the efficient introduction of ICANN policies, VeriSign will continue to support our Policy Advisory Group. A full description of this group is found in Section 7. VeriSign's Involvement in ICANN Policy Development VeriSign has an established record of actively contributing to ICANN policy development efforts by working collaboratively with the broader ICANN community including IETF, the Business, Registrar, Registry, ISP, Intellectual Property, CNSO, and Non-Commercial Users Constituencies, and the IAB. VeriSign will continue to actively engage with the community to ensure timely implementation and compliance with future applicable ICANN policies. Some of the ways that VeriSign has contributed to ICANN policy development processes are highlighted below: * VeriSign personnel have actively participated in every ICANN public meeting since ICANN's inception in the Fall of 1998. * VeriSign personnel have actively participated in the generic top-level domain (gTLD) Registry Constituency currently as a part of the Generic Names Supporting Organization (GNSO) and previously as part of the Domain Name Supporting Organization (DNSO) since the creation of all three of these organizations. VeriSign provided initial support for the creation of the gTLD Registry Constituency to include providing the first chair of that group after new gTLD registries were introduced. VeriSign hosted the gTLD Registry Constituency web site for the first three years of the organization's existence. * VeriSign provided representatives to the DNSO Names Council during the organization's first years, provided a chair and an additional representative to the DNSO Budget Committee that ultimately recommended the selection of the current GNSO secretariat, and provided a representative to one of the first DNSO working groups, Working Group E. * Through the gTLD Registry Constituency and through direct contributions, VeriSign has contributed to every policy development effort undertaken by the DNSO/GNSO including such notable examples as the Universal Dispute Resolution Policy (UDRP), the introduction of new gTLDs, internationalized domains, the Redemption Grace Period, the Expired Names Deletion Policy, the Domain Name Transfer Policy, .net re-compete, three Whois task forces (currently in progress) and the procedure for use by ICANN in considering requests for consent and related contractual amendments to allow changes in the architecture or operation of a gTLD registry (currently in progress). * VeriSign personnel worked closely with registrars to break a long-standing deadlock in the development of a new registrar transfer policy and then participated actively in the lengthy steps leading to the implementation of the new policy by all registries and registrars. * VeriSign provides members to ICANN's Security and Stability Advisory Committee and the Root-Server System Advisory Committee. * On behalf of VeriSign's registry operator role for the .tv and .cc ccTLDs, VeriSign provides representatives to the ICANN Country Code Supporting Organization and other ccTLD groups involved in ICANN policy development activities. In addition to the direct involvement in policy development described above, VeriSign also indirectly contributes to policy development by participating in technical standards bodies, in ICANN advisory committees, and by hosting workshops and forums in the broader Internet community. VeriSign extends policy compliance to both technical and business groups within the company to ensure compliance and coordination. The technical standards work performed in organizations such as the Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF) often become guidelines and/or requirements for TLD registries through ICANN processes, and then become the basis for policy development to support implementation of the standards. As just one example of VeriSign personnel participation in technical standards work, at any Internet Engineering Task Force meeting, there are typically 10 to 12 VeriSign participants; this does not include additional personnel who participate in IETF working groups remotely. Four examples that are especially relevant for registry operators are: 1) The extensible provisioning protocol (EPP) that is now a standard registry protocol; 2) The four international domain name (IDN) standards that were produced by the IDN Working Group; 3) The Internet Registry Information Service (IRIS) protocol nearing completion in the Cross Registry Information Service (CRISP) working group, a possible replacement for the old Whois protocol; 4) Domain name system (DNS) security extensions (DNSSEC). In the case of EPP, Scott Hollenbeck, a senior VeriSign engineer, authored the original EPP Request for Changes (RFCs) (3730, 3731, 3732, 3733, 3734, and 3735) as part of the IETF process and continues to be involved in the update of the protocol. He also authored an EPP extension to accommodate the implementation of the Redemption Grace Period. In the case of IDNs, three VeriSign personnel (Scott Hollenbeck, Pat Kane and John Colosi) participated actively in the IETF IDN working group that ultimately resulted in the four IDN Requests for Changes (RFCs) that now guide the implementation of TLD IDN programs. With regard to IRIS, four VeriSign engineers have been key contributors to the ongoing IETF effort (Andrew Newton, Leslie Daigle, David Blacka and Scott Hollenbeck). Regarding DNSSEC four VeriSign engineers have been active participants in the work that is nearing completion (Mark Kosters, Scott Hollenbeck, Matt Larson and Dave Blacka). Because there is much cooperative work that needs to be performed after standards are finalized, VeriSign also provides leadership in the Internet community to facilitate implementation of already approved standards as well as those that are nearing approval. With regard to IDNs, VeriSign hosts IDN workshops in the U.S., Asia, and Europe. To get a head start and enlist cooperation of the many Internet players who will need to be involved in implementation of DNSSEC, VeriSign also hosts DNSSEC workshops in the U.S., Asia and Europe. In all of these efforts, VeriSign invites domain name registries and registrars, Internet service providers (ISPs), application providers, technical leaders, and other interested parties. Implementing ICANN's Inter-Registrar Transfer Policy VeriSign is fully compliant with the ICANN Inter-Registrar Transfer Policy. It was implemented, pursuant to schedule on 12 November 2004. VeriSign has long recognized the importance of implementing a new transfer policy that more closely governs the transfer of domain names from one registrar to another. In October 2002, our Vice President of Policy and Compliance initiated a working group of registrars to create a list of recommendations for improving the transfer process, which was sent to all registrars, registries, and the DNSO for further discussion. Most of the recommendations that were made by this group were incorporated into the recommendations that the DNSO Transfer Task Force presented to the ICANN Board. VeriSign continued to be actively involved in the Transfer Implementation Committee and the Transfer Assistance Group, as well as with registrars and registries leading up to the actual implementation of the new policy on 12 November 2004. Even before the release of the final transfer policies on 12 July 2004, VeriSign began the work of converting policy to practice. As with all new ICANN policies, we approached the implementation process in a consistent and systematic manner. The steps taken to implement the new transfer policies are summarized below: * Key personnel were identified and assigned to lead and participate in the project. * A detailed project plan was developed encompassing both business and system deliverables. * A communication plan consisting of policy implementation reminder notices to the registrars at 30, 7, and 1 day prior to the implementation date of 12 November 2004. In addition, web seminars to review the policies and VeriSign's implementation of them were held for the registrars prior to the effective date on 8 November. * Supplemental rules were developed, approved by ICANN, and published. * Contract amendments to integrate the new policy into the RRA were drafted, approved by ICANN, and sent to all registrars for execution. * An online transfer dispute resolution submission tool was built and is available to registrars. * A registrar readiness exercise was conducted by our customer service team to answer any questions they have about the policy, its implementation, and to obtain transfer point of contact information for each registrar. VeriSign was the first gTLD registry to submit its supplemental rules to ICANN. Those rules were also provided to other unsponsored registries to provide a possible basis for the development of their supplemental rules. Because VeriSign processes an average of 28,000 successful .net registrar transfers each month, the potential for a dispute to ensue is high. Therefore, it is critical to have in place a system that allows the registrars to easily submit a request for enforcement, and for our team to track and resolve the dispute within the service level timeframes stipulated by the dispute resolution policy. Registry operators for smaller TLDs can survive using manual processes, but it is critical to recognize that manual processes will not scale in a large TLD. This applies to both registry and registrar operations. As mentioned above, VeriSign developed and implemented an online submission tool to address this need. Registrars can use this tool to submit, respond to, and track their disputes. To ensure security and integrity, access to this tool requires two sets of authentication. Registrars first must enter their username and password that were assigned to them to access the registrar only, password-protected area of the VeriSign website. Only those individuals who have been identified as the transfer point of contact for each registrar have been provided the second registrar unique username and password needed to access the transfer dispute resolution submission tool. Upon entering this username and password, the transfer point of contact has access to a list of their open cases and the online forms used in the transfer dispute resolution process at the registry level. This process involves six discrete forms; the "Supplemental Rules for Registrar Transfer Disputes" can be found at http://www.verisign.com/static/016086.pdf. Conclusion VeriSign's commitment and capability in implementing ICANN consensus policies is evidenced by historical compliance with all applicable consensus policies and our significant participation in ICANN policy development processes, as well as indirectly by contributions in the development of technical standards, participation in ICANN advisory committees, and sponsoring workshops and forums for the community at-large. In addition, VeriSign employs experienced staff and proven mechanisms to ensure compliance with policies and contractual requirements as the Internet continues to grow and the challenges increase. Our periodic registrar compliance review provides ICANN evidence that VeriSign monitors registrar compliance with the RRA. Finally, our online Transfer Dispute Resolution Submission Tool allows registrars to easily submit and track transfer-related disputes. Each of these specific features, as well as others mentioned above, provide noticeable benefits to the community and assurance of policy compliance. VeriSign will continue these practices and will all future applicable ICANN consensus policies.

VeriSign currently allows, and will continue to allow, all ICANN-accredited registrars to register names in .net on an equivalent basis. VeriSign Advantages + Have several technical and operational mechanisms in place to ensure equivalent access to all registrars + Sponsor third-party audits verifying compliance + 24x7x365 customer support in 150 languages, including English + Provide programs that increase registrar points of presence in new markets throughout the world, and provide existing registrars extensive marketing and technical support. To maintain a comparable level of equivalent access currently provided in .net, an operator must demonstrate: * Customer service support of 150 languages, including English, with an abandon rate of 2 percent, 94 percent of all calls answered within 20 seconds, and 99 percent of emails answered within 24 hours * Support of 250+ registrars and 10,000+ resellers internationally and the ability to equivalently support over 500 registrars by the end of 2005 * Provide programs that increase registrars in new markets throughout the world, support existing registrars' marketing and technical needs * A demonstrated method to ensure a smooth and low-cost migration from Registry Registrar Protocol (RRP) to Extensible Provisioning Protocol (EPP), including the demonstrated ability to operate both RRP and EPP during this migration period for at least 1 year * That claims of equivalent access are certified and audited by an independent nationally recognized firm on an annual basis at its own cost (VeriSign has spent over $400,000 on such audits) * That it is not under the control of, nor influenced by, a substantial financial or organizational relationship with one or more registrars or government entities. VeriSign's commitment to provide equivalent access to accredited .net registrars begins even before we receive notification from ICANN of a newly accredited registrar. Seven of the steps we take to establish and monitor equivalent access for all registrars include: 1. Semi-annual certification of compliance with the equivalent access requirements stipulated in the Organizational Conflict of Interest (OCI) Compliance Plan, and strict adherence to the Registry Code of Conduct. 2. Semi-annual certification of compliance with the Registry Code of Conduct 3. Regular compliance audits 4. Detailed standard operating procedures for working with registrars 5. A dedicated team of compliance professionals 6. 24x7x365 customer support in more than 150 languages 7. An OCI Compliance Plan. Detailed information about each of these methods and how they contribute to providing equivalent registrar access are provided below. Method 1: Semi-Annual Equivalent Access Certification VeriSign's executive management provides ICANN with a semi-annual certification confirming compliance with equivalent access requirements. The OCI Plan provides the foundation for the VeriSign equivalent access policies and practices. A copy of the most recent VeriSign Equivalent Access Certification was given to ICANN on 22 October 2004. Additionally, Verisign has provided a list of the questions required of Verisign for certification. Refer to Section 2, Table 2.1 at www.verisign.com/nds. Certifications have been continuously provided to ICANN since October 1999. Method 2: Semi-Annual Code of Conduct Certification As with the equivalent access certification, VeriSign closely monitors compliance with the Code of Conduct requirement. VeriSign employs a vice president of policy and compliance, as well as a compliance officer to monitor and ensure that VeriSign's performance is in accordance with the contractual Code of Conduct requirement. VeriSign provides a summary of how we have approached each requirement, which is posted at www.verisign.com/nds (Section 2, Table 2.2). VeriSign complies with the Code of Conduct requirements by constantly monitoring registrar access to the Shared Registration System (SRS) and having technical and operational systems in place to ensure that all code of conduct requirements are met. Method 3: Regular Compliance Audits VeriSign is the only gTLD registry that undergoes audits by an internationally recognized, third-party independent accounting firm to ensure compliance with equivalent access and code of conduct requirements. VeriSign provides full access to all materials needed to audit our compliance with equivalent access. A full list of these materials, as reviewed in conjunction with the annual audit to validate equivalent access and fair treatment of registrars, is provided at www.verisign.com/nds (Section 2, Table 2-3). VeriSign provides unfettered access to operational, financial, marketing, and human resource files related to this subject matter. Method 4: Standard Operating Procedures for Processing Newly Accredited Registrars VeriSign has implemented efficient operational and technical processes to ensure that each registrar has timely, cost-efficient, and equivalent access to the systems, tools, and personnel resources that support the .net registry. In addition, response/escalation procedures are in place to assist registrars in addressing any challenges. The processes include: certification of registrars, customer support, registry code of conduct assurance, and technical elements of equivalent access. Through November 2004, the year-to-date average ramp-up to production for registrars was 45 days. Method 5: Dedicated Compliance Team VeriSign has a dedicated and experienced compliance team, which consists of the following personnel: Chuck Gomes, Vice President of Policy and Compliance; Barbara Knight, Compliance Officer; Inez Toppin, Contract Administrator; Suzanne Yerks, OCI Administrator and Contract Administrator; and Heidi Shalom, OCI Trainer. Method 6: Customer Service in Multiple Languages and Time Zones VeriSign offers services and support in all time zones and in 150 languages, including English. VeriSign believes that superior, prompt customer support to all registrars is an essential element to the success of any top-level domain (TLD), but is particularly important to a TLD of the size and critical nature as .net. Registrars selling .net domain names are accustomed to: * 24x7x365 customer support through a team of trained professional customer service representatives. * Representatives available to address questions and assist customers in every time zone at the customer's convenience. * In language support for 150 languages, including English via VeriSign's affiliation with Language Line. Language Line is a telephone translation service also available 24x7x365, enabling VeriSign representatives to communicate effectively and immediately with all its customers, without additional expense to the customer. In addition to Language Line, VeriSign employs customer service representatives in-house who speak Spanish, Farci, and German. * Established escalation procedures whereby technical, legal, or other issues are promptly forwarded to the appropriate groups, ensuring suitable, professional, and timely responses. * Web-based tools. * Centralized access to customer service representatives who are trained to appropriately assess any issue and resolve or escalate it to Engineering, Operations, Networking personnel, or the Customer Service Manager, as necessary, to ensure prompt resolution. VeriSign's current .net registry operator agreement with ICANN provides for the provision of fair treatment to all registrars. A table that outlines the provisions of Fair Treatment of ICANN-accredited Registrars per the current contract is posted at www.verisign.com/nds (Section 2, Table 2-5). Method 7: OCI Compliance Plan VeriSign ensures no OCI with the following steps: * Organizational Structure. Requirement: .net registry and registrar business units must be separated into separate business units with different profit and loss centers, each with different General Managers. - Compliance: VeriSign does not have controlling interest in any .net registrars. However, other competitors for the current .net bid do have controlling interest in registrars or are reliant on registrars or governmental organizations for their profit structure. * Financial Separation. Requirement: In cases where a company owns both a .net registry and a .net registrar business, the registry business must account for its own costs, revenues, cash flow, etc. as a separate profit and loss center, using separate and distinct systems and accounting functions and accounting controls must in place to ensure the adequacy of these systems and functions. - Compliance: VeriSign does not have controlling interest in any .net registrars. * Location Change. Requirement: In cases where a company owns both a .net registry and a .net registrar business, the registry and registrar businesses must be located in two separate facilities. - Compliance: VeriSign does not have controlling interest in any .net registrars. * Physical Barriers. Requirement: All facilities must require security badge access, and only registry assigned personnel and other personnel who are identified to have a legitimate need for regular badge access to the registry facility can be given badge access to registry facilities; all other people, including regular employees, must be treated as visitors to the facility and gain access only through established visitor sign-in, identification badge, and escort procedures. - Compliance: VeriSign has always, and continues to be, in full compliance with these requirements. Refer to Part 2, Section 5b(xiii), System Security and Physical Security, for more detail. * Access to the Shared Registration System. Requirement: the registry must provide access to all ICANN-accredited registrars via the following mechanisms: all registrars must be able to connect to the Shared Registration Gateway via the Internet by using the same maximum number of Internet Protocol (IP) addresses and Secure Sockets Layer (SSL) certificate authentication; all registrars must be provided the same level of access to registry generated data to reconcile their registration activities from registry web and file transfer protocol (FTP) servers; all registrars must be able to perform basic automated registrar account management functions using the same registrar tool made available to all registrars by the registry; the Shared Registration System (SRS) cannot include any algorithms or protocols that differentiate among registrars with respect to functionality, including database access, system priorities, and overall performance; no registrar affiliated with the registry can be given any access to the registry that is not available to any other registrar, except with regard to information that is specific to that registrar; and any information needed by registrars regarding the technical interface of registry/registrar operations must be made available to all registrars. - Compliance: VeriSign has always been, and continues to be, in full compliance with these requirements. * Information Control. Requirement: the registry must have procedural safeguards in place to ensure that data and information of the registry business are not used to advantage the business of any registrar. - Compliance: VeriSign has a policy addressing the marking, accessing, and dissemination of business sensitive information. This policy requires employees to mark all registry sensitive information as such. In addition, the policy requires that all registry sensitive information be limited in access and disseminated only to those VeriSign personnel and other personnel who are identified to have a legitimate "need to know." * Training. Requirement: All personnel needing access to registry information or facilities must complete an initial OCI training course and an annual OCI refresher course. - Compliance: All VeriSign personnel who need access to registry information or the registry facility are required to complete a formal OCI training course. * Non-Disclosure Agreement/OCI Avoidance Certifications. Requirement: Upon completion of the initial OCI training, all VeriSign registry employees and other employees who have a need to know registry business are required to sign a Non-Disclosure Agreement and a Registry Business OCI Avoidance Certification, acknowledging their understanding of the OCI requirements and certifying that they will strictly comply with the provisions of the OCI Plan. - Compliance: All VeriSign employees sign a Nondisclosure Agreement and a Registry Business OCI Avoidance Certification. Technical Elements of Equivalent Access In addition to the organizational and policy methodologies VeriSign uses to provide equivalent access, VeriSign also makes extensive use of technical and operational initiatives to ensure equivalent access. The first of two representative examples of these methods are the new constellations that VeriSign has placed in non-U.S. countries to help ensure access to the domain name system all over the world is equivalent to the access in the United States. In 2004, VeriSign implemented a constellation site in Seoul Korea. In February 2005, an additional site will be implemented in Beijing, China. Also, VeriSign is committed to continue to expand new sites, including a site in Brazil in mid-2005. A second example of VeriSign's technical methods to ensure equivalent access is the batch pool. In Summer 2000, VeriSign encountered a unique issue that required immediate action to ensure equivalent access for all registrars. Increased demand for just-deleted names motivated some registrars to develop automated batch processes for sending repeated registration add commands to the registry. This resulted in an unanticipated surge in SRS connection demand. To ensure equivalent access for all registrars, VeriSign quickly designed and implemented a registration pool system to address this issue. It ensures each operational registrar is given equivalent access to the SRS through its use of connections to various pools: the Guarantee Pool, the Overflow Pool, and finally, the Automated Batch Pool. This system recognizes and appreciates the various business models used by registrars, while at the same time providing a fair and level playing field. VeriSign designed and implemented this pool system of access to specifically ensure equivalent access of all registrars, while at the same time accommodating a previously unknown and very large demand for recently deleted domain names spurred by a 100-percent increase in registrar accreditations from 2003-2004. VeriSign has invested significant sums of money to purchase increasing amounts of hardware to support these pools to continue to provide equivalent access to registrars. Since September 2000, VeriSign has worked extensively with registrars, ICANN, and other community members to develop ways to deal with the re-registration of deleted names, and thereby, reduce the demand on registry systems in this regard, while at the same time addressing the market demand. Those efforts are ongoing at the present time, and VeriSign is committed to continue cooperating with all stakeholders to decide on a solution that not only addresses current needs but also future needs. Given the volume of names under management, no other registry (ccTLD or gTLD) has had to deal with this issue to anywhere near the same extent as VeriSign. In the interim, VeriSign has ordered and installed additional front-end hardware to ensure equivalent access for all registrars and sustained performance capabilities. Marketing programs VeriSign is the only registry that consistently and uniformly assists registrars to better their businesses through marketing efforts and industry research. VeriSign designs marketing promotional campaigns for registrars, as well as designing and reviewing each marketing campaign in an effort to provide equivalent access and incentive to all registrars. Each campaign is reviewed with ICANN before launch. In an effort to support all registrars in their marketing activities, no matter what they might be, VeriSign has offered a new unit, renewal unit, IDN, and marketing funds promotion program. The marketing funds promotion provides an incentive to registrars to market in various target markets, such as underserved markets, consumer markets, and portals. This enables registrars of all sizes to apply funds earned toward programs that benefit their businesses. VeriSign will continue to offer marketing programs to all registrars on an equivalent basis. Conclusion VeriSign provides equivalent registrar access to registry services and systems, including equivalent and fair treatment by our personnel. VeriSign is the only registry to have equivalent access compliance certified by an outside auditor. We provide our services and support in all time zones in 150 languages, including English. We currently provide access to our systems via the RRP and EPP protocol, and have a detailed plan in place for full migration to the EPP. We recognize the importance of monitoring and maintaining equivalent access and the fair treatment of all registrars to the continued growth of the Internet. The concept of equivalent access is evident in all our product management, marketing, technical, and operational practices. Our lifecycle management includes the priority of expanding the breadth of services and offerings to all registrars equivalently and to opening new markets for all registrars. Our dedication to the growth of the overall base of the industry benefits all registrars. To that extent, VeriSign goes the extra distance of opening offices in all regions to provide localized support. We provide in-region services to our European, Asian, and North American customers to ensure that service is available in a timely manner and in language. Additionally, consideration is given to all registrars in our technical training and support. Every marketing program release and product update web-based seminar is given three times to support time zones around the world so that all registrars can participate. Additionally, our night and weekend teams of Customer Service and technical staff are trained and skilled to provide equal support to our customers in non-U.S. based countries and our marketing materials are provided in-language. Since the first day new registrars were introduced, VeriSign has continuously allowed all ICANN-accredited registrars to qualify to register names in the .net TLD, and treated all qualified registrars equivalently. We also extend the equivalent access principles to all aspects of our .net registry business: marketing funds programs, new registry service offerings, and technical innovations and migrations. We have the mechanisms in place to continue providing such access in the future and are fully committed to doing so. No other operator can attest to such extensive and verified methods.

VeriSign wrote the EPP protocol. We currently support both Registry Registrar Protocol (RRP) and Extensible Provisioning Protocol (EPP) while implementing a smooth, low cost migration from RRP to EPP. VeriSign Advantages + Employs leading experts in protocol development + Experience operating both RRP and EPP + Low-cost, smooth transition that offers registrars on-site account management, schedule flexibility, webex training seminars, an extended RRP duration and mapping tools for migration ease VeriSign designed and implemented the Shared Registration System (SRS) in 1998 and 1999 for the specific purpose of allowing fair competition at the registrar level. From the time that registrar competition was introduced in mid-1999, access to the SRS has been provided through RRP based on RFC 2832. In 2003 VeriSign initiated discussions with its registrar customers to obtain their input into a plan for migration to EPP. That plan is now in place and being implemented. Specific details of the plan for supporting EPP 1.0 are provided below including: * Dual Support of RRP and EPP - In response to feedback from registrars, VeriSign will provide an extended period of dual support of both protocols. * Schedule for Dual RRP and EPP Operations -An EPP operational test and evaluation (OT & E) environment was made available for registrars in September 2004. The implementation of EPP into the .net production environment is scheduled for Q2 2005 at which time dual operations will start for live registration services. The end of dual operations will depend on registrar feedback but is targeted for Q2 2006. * Status Mapping between RRP and EPP - A table defining status mappings between the two protocols is provided in Section 8, Table 8-2-3. * Status Rules - A table with detailed EPP status rules is provided in Section 8, Table 8-2-4. VeriSign's methodology in the RRP to EPP transition is an excellent example of applying equivalent access principles to a technical migration. VeriSign's extended provision of dual protocol support is designed to provide a low-cost and flexible way for registrars of all sizes and technical capabilities to make this transition and thereby not unfairly advantage or disadvantage any registrar. We often provide registrars special tools to facilitate technical migrations and whenever we have done that they are made available to all registrars in the same manner and timeframe (e.g., IDN Race to Punycode conversion tool). In the RRP to EPP migration effort, special mapping and migration tools are being provided to all registrars to assist them with the migration. The development of VeriSign's migration plan for migrating from RRP to EPP involved a period of more than 4 years information-gathering and technical analysis by our engineering, operations and business teams including extensive feedback from registrars. It specifically includes: * Implementation of EPP 1.0 in the .net production environment starting in Q2 2005 (as specified in RFCs 3730, 3731, 3732, 3734 and 3735). * Consideration of implementing RFC 3733 (a thick registry) through discussion with the ICANN community as discussed below in the subsection titled `Thin vs. Thick Registry' [Note that RFC 3733 applies to a thick registry only.] * Significant advance preparation by the registry, much of which has occurred * A comprehensive operational test environment for registrars * Tools and technical assistance for registrars * Extended migration flexibility for registrars to accommodate their varying needs. As a result, it maximizes the chances of a smooth and low-cost migration path for registrars. It is important to recognize that the size of the .net registration base creates some special challenges for both the registry and registrars in migrating to EPP. The .net database has more than 5 million names plus 18 million name servers that need to be migrated by each individual registrar. As a result, VeriSign has developed a series of tools to ensure that registrars can complete this migration in a smooth, low cost manner. VeriSign has been particularly concerned about the impact on registrars and therefore has solicited their input to make sure that the migration plan is designed in both an effective and flexible manner that accommodates varying registrar needs while ensuring security and stability at both the registry and registrar levels. Providing extended dual support for both protocols is a key aspect of the migration plan; it allows registrars sufficient time to fit the migration effort into their development schedules and to do so in a reliable way. Dual Support of RRP and EPP VeriSign's dual use of RRP and EPP for the .net registry will continue through the end of 2006 to minimize undue hardship imposed by a hard cutover. Transitioning the .net registry from RRP to EPP is a complex task due to the inherent differences between the two protocols. Operating the SRS with support for both protocols simultaneously is not a trivial task, and requiring all registrars to meet a cutover will place a burden on them and creates additional challenges should one or more registrars not be capable of making the change at the designated time. VeriSign began communicating with registrars to develop this transition plan even before the EPP standards were finalized to solicit feedback and lessons learned from previous registry migrations. Additionally, the ccTLD registries operated by VeriSign (.tv, .cc and .bz) had traditionally been available through an RRP SRS that is nearly identical to the .net registry. In the migration of those ccTLDs to EPP, VeriSign chose to use the same dual operation transition process before implementing it in .net, thereby allowing registrars to complete a similar transition in a full production system before committing to a transition to a larger TLD such as .net. This dual system is currently in place, thus enabling registrars to gain experience and prove the success of the dual protocol operation. The features of this dual protocol operational period ensure that: * Compatibility with all RRP functionality currently available in .net is maintained. * Equivalent Access is preserved * Registrar Console capabilities are enhanced through expanded web tool functionality * Reports for registrars are unchanged * Whois format is modified to return EPP statuses * Batch Pool automated processes using RRP remain unchanged * Transfers of domain names between RRP and EPP registrars are enabled * Enhanced features such as Redemption Grace Period (RGP), IDN, ConsoliDate, and IPv6 are available through both protocols. * Fully redundant platform with support for both RRP and EPP offers scalability, availability, and extensibility demanded by registrars and necessary for operation of .net. A detailed diagrams of this EPP/ RRP gateway interaction can be found in Section 8, Figure 8-2-1. * Schedule for Dual RRP and EPP Operations Dual protocol operations and an extended implementation schedule are critical elements in the provision of a smooth migration path to EPP. VeriSign began offering an EPP 1.0 OT&E environment in September 2004 to allow registrars an extended period of time to develop and test their systems and to provide feedback on the technical implementation. Additionally, the dual operation of RRP and EPP is being proven through our offering of simultaneous RRP and EPP support for .bz, .cc, and .tv. VeriSign currently supports a draft, working version of .net in EPP 1.0 in our OT&E environment. The implementation of EPP into the .net registry production environment is scheduled for the second quarter of 2005. At that time, an extended period for registrar migration will begin on a schedule that is amenable to their development schedules. The existing RRP implementation will continue to be operational and supported even after the introduction of EPP. This period of RRP-EPP parallel operations will mitigate operational risk to registrars and minimize impact to their business operations and development schedules. VeriSign account management has a calendar of agreed upon migration dates for most registrars. The migration from RRP will begin with the introduction of the EPP implementation into the .net registry production environment in the second quarter of 2005. The existing RRP implementation will continue to be operational and supported even after the introduction of EPP. This period of RRP-EPP parallel operations, enabled by the VeriSign Registrar Console (described earlier and depicted in Section 8, Figure 8-2-2) will mitigate operational and technical risk to registrars. We will also support and encourage the adoption of EPP through a number of additional tools used in the transition to EPP in other domains. These are explicitly designed to promote low-cost, low-risk migration. To achieve these goals: * VeriSign will provide a development and Beta test environment where registrars can test new software systems prior to live operation. * We will offer a JAVA-based software development kit (SDK) to facilitate the modification of registrar systems that will integrate with the EPP platform. * We have developed an EPP tool called REST that generates EPP Extensible Markup Language (XML) and that can be used in conjunction with the SDK to increase registrar familiarity with the EPP protocol and formats. * We will conduct web seminars, provide transition documentation to the registrar community, and offer technical resources that will support registrar transition. While the timing of the transition to EPP will be at the discretion of registrars, the RRP implementation will be completely replaced by EPP at a time determined jointly by VeriSign, ICANN, and the registrar community. Our objective is to provide registrars sufficient time to transition at a time that best fits their development schedule without constraint of a hard cut-over. While we have the ability to cut-over to EPP very quickly, our plan is to complete the transition no earlier than 2Q 2006 to meet the needs of our customers. Thin vs. Thick Registry The current .net registry is commonly referred to as a `thin' registry. In contrast to a `thick' registry where the registry database contains registrant and contact information along with name server information, a `thin' registry database contains only domain name, registrar and name server information. Section 8, Figure 8-2-3 compares the data maintained by `thin' and `thick' registries. In working with the registrar community to evaluate the issue of migrating the .net registry from thin to thick, VeriSign found that: * Based on lessons learned from the .org migration from RRP to EPP including feedback from registrars, if a migration to a thick registry is considered, it should be performed as a totally separate migration from the protocol migration to avoid over-complication of the EPP migration and thereby ensure a smooth transition. * Based on registrar feedback, the majority of registrars prefer a thin registry model. A primary reason for this is that they perceive there to be a loss of control of their customer data as is illustrated in Section 8, Table 8-2-3. A secondary reason is that migrating customer data adds costs to registrars for which many of them do not recognize any value plus they have the ongoing cost and responsibility of ensuring that registry data is synchronized with registrar data. * Considering the work currently underway in the ICANN Generic Names Supporting Organization's Whois task forces and the work nearing completion in the Internet Engineering Task Force CRISP working group on the IRIS protocol, a primary value of the thick registry model may be diminished. A key advantage of thick data at the registry level is to facilitate a centralized Whois service instead of having to search the Whois of many different registrars. The IRIS protocol provides a way of implementing a centralized domain name lookup service through a distributed architecture that would not require thick registry data. Therefore, VeriSign proposes that the .net registry remain a thin registry at least until such time that the work of the Whois task forces is completed and the IRIS protocol becomes a recognized standard. At that time, if the Internet community through ICANN processes develops a consensus policy that supports a thick registry, VeriSign will make the transition. VeriSign took the following steps to develop its EPP 1.0 migration plan: * Analysis of registry technical requirements including detailed review of RFC specifications * Analysis of registrar technical requirements with particular focus on operational impact * Solicitation of registrar feedback with regard to migration time constraints, business needs and technical development requirements * Consideration of issues encountered in the .org RRP to EPP migration * Integration of all of the above into a plan that maximizes the chances of a smooth migration with minimal impact on registrars and registrants and minimizes any chance of encountering security or stability issues. The plan: - Includes a lengthy operational test environment for registrars that started in 2003 - Provides for dual support of RRP and EPP for an extended period of time and thereby avoids the pitfalls associated with a hard cutover to EPP by in excess of 250 registrars - Thoroughly addresses issues related to differences in statuses in the two protocols by clearly defining status mapping between RRP and EPP and by explicitly listing status rules - Includes a migration schedule that allows for a reliable migration by all registrars while at the same time providing registrar flexibility to best fit their migration efforts into their business plans - Calls for registry provided tools to facilitate registrar migration tasks. See chart of status mapping commands located in Section 8, Table 8-2-1. - Balances ICANN compliance requirements with cooperation between registry and registrars - Maximizes the chances of a seamless migration for registrants. This plan is based on over a year of information gathering and technical analysis and reflects the knowledge and experience of the VeriSign technical and operations teams and feedback of registrars. As a result, it maximizes the chances of a smooth and low-cost migration path from RRP to EPP by providing for: significant advance preparation by the registry, much of which has already happened; a lengthy operational test environment for registrars; tools and technical assistance for registrars; and extended flexibility to accommodate varying registrar needs. Conclusion VeriSign currently provides and will continue to provide all ICANN-accredited registrars equivalent access to register names in .net. VeriSign currently supports RRP and EPP and is implementing a smooth, low cost migration from RRP to EPP while continuing to support both protocols. VeriSign has been and continues to be the leader in the industry for equivalent access. * VeriSign supports 150 languages, including English, with an abandon rate <2 percent, and 94 percent of all calls answered within 20 seconds, and 99 percent of emails answered within 24 hours. * VeriSign currently support 250+ registrars internationally and 10,000+ resellers internationally and the ability to support over 500 registrars by the end of 2005. To maintain this level of equivalent support, VeriSign spends over $3 million annually to ensure equivalent access to the Shared Registration System. Other operators do not meet this standard. In fact, Afilias has only 195 registrars, NeuLevel has 132 registrars and DENIC has 216 registrars (as of September 2004). * Provide programs that increase registrars in new markets throughout the world, support existing registrars marketing and technical needs. VeriSign spends over $5 million annually to ensure equivalent access. Competitors do not provide marketing programs on an equivalent basis to registrars of all sizes. Additionally, in assessing the ability of prospective .net operators to meet ICANN's equivalent access requirements, it is important to consider the following: * VeriSign provides a demonstrated method to ensure a smooth and low cost migration from RRP to EPP including the demonstrated ability to operate both RRP and EPP during this migration period for at least one year. Other operators have not demonstrated the ability to execute on a smooth, low cost migration. * VeriSign's equivalent access practices are audited annually. All claims of equivalent access should be certified and audited by an independent nationally recognized firm on an annual basis at its own cost (VeriSign has spent over $400,000 on such audits). Other registry operators have never conducted audits for their Internet registry businesses. * VeriSign is able to offer equivalent access to all programs and services because it is not influenced by the investment or controlling interest of any registrar or government entity. Any applicant should prove that it is not under the control of, nor influenced by, a substantial financial or organizational relationship with one or more registrars or government entities. Other operators, specifically NeuLevel and Afilias were created by, and are controlled in part by a registrar, and DENIC is a quasi government agency whose stated focuses is the German internet community. VeriSign has established practices in place to ensure compliance under any and all circumstances. With the divestiture of Network Solutions last year, there can be no concern for such conflicts to arise as could be the case with other registry operators. * VeriSign abides by a Code of Conduct. All applicants should be required to prove the existence and implementation of a Registry Code of Conduct No other operators have proven methods to enforce employee compliance with a Registry Code of Conduct.

VeriSign has never experienced a complete registry operational failure. In the highly unlikely of a complete operational failure, VeriSign has a business continuity and fail-safe backup plan that ensures continuity of operations. VeriSign Advantages + 100 percent uptime DNS resolution performance for more than 7 years + Demonstrated ability to withstand significant DDoS attacks and pernicious viruses + A multi-threaded approach to risk management with proactive and reactive measures to address threats + The financial ability to sustain and invest in registry operations in all market conditions. We design our systems to include massive over-provisioning in advance of operational threats. The name resolution systems are deployed in multiple continents and countries with multiple network service providers and completely redundant, parallel operation of each facility. Our name update systems are deployed in active alternative primary and tertiary facilities with automated failover in case of failure at our primary facilities. We additionally work with a backup operator to provide services in the unlikely event that all our systems in all our locations are rendered inoperable. Finally, we have made arrangements with a partner to transition .net in the extraordinarily unlikely event that all of our systems and those of our backup operator are disabled. Shared Registration System Failover Provisions VeriSign has constructed its .net registry to address various disaster scenarios that can impact service, and associated three different levels of severity with each of the disaster scenarios: full site failover, partial site failover, and tertiary site failover. Several figures describing our procedures are provided in Section 5(b)xviii, System Recovery Procedures. Full Site Failover: There are many types of failures that would result in a full failover from the primary site to the alternate primary site. Examples include a fiber cut between registrars or a severe natural disaster (flood, tornado, and earthquake) destroying or rendering unserviceable the primary site data center. Figure 5(b)xviii-3 provides a depiction of full failover for VeriSign's Shared Registration System (SRS) implementation. VeriSign has constructed a fully functional disaster recovery site at our alternate primary data center. In accordance with our Business Continuity Plan, the following steps would be taken in the event that a full failover is required: 1) Synchronous replication between the primary site and the alternate primary site would be suspended. 2) Configuration of the Oracle high availability (HA) cluster at the alternate primary site as primary. 3) Startup of the alternate primary site processes. 4) A DNS change of the primary virtual Internet Protocol (IP) (VIP) addresses for Registrar connectivity to point to the alternate primary site. Once full failover is complete, registrars will be notified of this situation and will be provided additional instructions, as necessary. A full failover from the primary site to the alternate primary site can be conducted in less than 30 minutes. Partial Site Failover: Certain types of failures can occur that will be considered a disaster, but will not require a full failover to the alternate primary site. An example of this type of disaster would be some sort of primary site Oracle HA cluster failure. The servers themselves could be physically destroyed, or the power supply to the cluster could be interrupted indefinitely. Whatever the reason for the failure, a partial failover to the alternate primary site will be required. A partial failover is when one or more components failover to the alternate primary site, but a portion of the primary sight remains operational. Three different partial failover processes are described in this section: Primary Oracle HA Cluster Failure, Primary SRS Application Server Failure, and Primary CSR and/or Registrar Tool Server Failure. Primary Oracle HA Cluster Failure: In this scenario, only the primary Oracle HA cluster fails, while all the remaining components remain active. A partial failover for this type of failure is almost identical in process to the full failover process identified previously in Figure 5(b)xviii-4. In this situation, the following steps would be taken: 1) Synchronous replication between the primary site and the alternate primary site would be suspended. 2) Configuration of the Oracle HA cluster at the alternate primary site as primary. 3) Pointing of application server components at the primary site to the Oracle HA cluster at the alternate primary site. 4) Pointing of CSR and registrar tool components at the primary site to the Oracle HA cluster at the alternate primary site. In this situation, a DNS change would not be required. A partial failover of this type, when the primary Oracle HA cluster fails, can be conducted in less than 30 minutes. Primary SRS Application Server Failure: If the SRS Application Servers or SRS Gateway Servers at the primary fail, then a much more isolated failover will take place, as depicted in Figure 5(b)xviii-5. In this scenario, the SRS service is effectively down because the primary cluster of SRS Application Servers provides the only SRS interface. In this situation, the following steps would be taken: 1) Pointing of application server components at the alternate primary site to the Oracle HA Cluster at the primary site 2) Startup of the alternate primary site 3) Changing DNS for registrar connectivity to point to the alternate primary VIP. A partial failover of this type can be conducted in less than 30 minutes. In this type of failover, all other components continue to run unaffected. The CSR and registrar tools continue to access the primary database without interruption. Primary CSR and/or Registrar Tool Server Failure: If a primary site CSR or registrar tool failure occurs, then a much more isolated failover will take place, much like the failover described above for the primary SRS Application failure. In this scenario, only the registrar tool web interfaces and/or the CSR tool servers are affected directly. To restore these tools, the alternate primary CSR and/or registrar tool web interface servers will need to be reconfigured to communicate directly with the primary site Oracle HA cluster, as shown in Figure 5(b)xviii-6. In this type of failover, all other components continue to run unaffected. A partial failover of this type can be conducted in less than 30 minutes. Tertiary Site Failover: VeriSign is activating a tertiary hot site to provide service in the event that both the primary site and alternate primary site fail. As depicted in Figure 5(b)xviii-7, the tertiary hot site will allow for restoration of the .net registry system within 1 hour of event recognition. Many of the steps required for a tertiary site failover are similar to that of a full failover, except that synchronous data replication is not technically possible across long distances. As such, asynchronous replication (approximately one database write behind real-time) is required. While this approach increases the likelihood of minor data loss, this tertiary site provides a means of rapid recovery should a large-scale disaster impact the primary and alternate primary locations. As with all the other failover scenarios, once completed, the registrars will be notified of this situation and will be provided additional instructions, as necessary. Network Services Failover Provisions The .net registry's network infrastructure is redundant within each facility and across facilities. It takes a minimum of two network-component failures to disable the network infrastructure (Figure 5(b)xviii-8) at a facility. It would take a minimum of four network component failures (for example, failure of all four Internet border routers) to disable the primary and alternate primary facilities. The network at the .net registry's primary site (Figure 5(b)xv-1) is designed to be modular and easily supports upgrade, maintenance, and component additions that scale performance, capacity, or functionality. Security domains are created and enforced by access control and authentication mechanisms that separate exposed services (for example, name and mail servers, Whois) from restricted services (for example, registry-registrar protocol [RRP]) and protected services (for example, the back-end database). The alternate primary site mirrors the primary site in all aspects: equipment, topology, configuration, capacity, connectivity, etc. The network at each site is sized to accommodate all services at their expected use, while exceeding performance goals. Capacity planning ensures upgrades are made (at both primary and alternate primary sites) before having performance issues. Under normal operations (primary site in service), each site uses separate, non-overlapping addresses. If a service interruption occurs at the primary site, those services that are provided at well known addresses (such as a.root-servers.net and rs.internic.net) are resumed at the alternate primary site using the same addresses. Internet service provider (ISP) connections are preconfigured to allow the address advertisements to move from the primary site to the alternate primary site. Propagation of routing changes throughout the Internet takes less than 15 minutes. The network infrastructure is designed to isolate single-point failures with no interruption of services or degradation in performance. In most cases, isolation of failures is automatic and occurs within a few seconds of the event. Certain component failures (such as firewall failure) can require manual intervention to complete the failover. Where currently manual failover mechanisms exist, VeriSign is working with the hardware and software vendors to develop products that support automated failover, resulting in shorter service disruptions and higher overall availability. Resolution Systems Failover Provisions VeriSign's DNS implementation is inherently tolerant of failures both in architecture and protocol. As described in Section 5(b)xvi, System Outage Prevention, each of our gTLD locations are advertised from their own Class C address space. This allows our network technicians to make a border gateway protocol (BGP) announcement and quickly "move" a remote location (e.g., London) to one of the three available standby sites. This capability is used extensively for maintenance activities and allows us to provide access to the service even though it has been "logically" moved to a new location. This capability is also extremely useful in ensuring continued operation should a third-party vendor be unable to provide service (as was the case with a major European ISP approximately 3 years ago). Additional resolution sites can be implemented with the use of anycast technology to bring resolution services closer to important Internet locations. For more information on anycast technology and the addition of resolution sites, refer to Part 2, Section 5(b)i, Proposed Facilities and Systems. Whois Failover Provisions Fully redundant Whois daemon and dumper services are installed at both the primary and alternate primary sites for the .net registry system. If the Whois dumper box or database becomes unavailable at the primary site, the Whois dumper service is failed over to the alternate primary site. The Whois dumper process on the alternate primary site is configured to run in production mode. It then generates the Whois database, validates it, and replicates it to the primary Whois daemon servers on the primary site. If the Whois daemon system becomes unavailable at the primary site, the Whois daemon service is failed over to the alternate primary site. The Whois dumper process on the primary site will continue to generate the Whois database, validate it, and replicate it to the alternate primary Whois daemon servers on the alternate primary site. Table 5(b)xviii-5 provides a breakdown of recovery rank of the major functions of the .net registry business, and the recovery windows for each that VeriSign has committed to meeting. Procedures for Testing the Process of Restoring the System to Operation in the Event of an Outage VeriSign maintains detailed procedures for testing processes before restoration in our Business Continuity Plan. These procedures are rehearsed regularly to ensure restoration in a timely fashion. These rehearsals are instrumental in reducing outage time and providing experiences that are beneficial for unplanned outages. VeriSign also takes the opportunity during production maintenance periods to test high-availability database failovers. These procedures introduce scenarios that cause the .net production database to fail over and help confirm that the actual production databases and application servers can definitely recover in minimal time. With the ability for each registration site to maintain full or partial operations, we can test procedures for site failover during normal maintenance periods, without the introduction of system outages. Finally, fire drills are conducted at the alternate primary site on a periodic basis, and not always during normal business hours. These drills are timed, and response times are tracked. Only a select group of personnel is involved in the determination of the time a drill is to be initiated. However, once the drill begins, all individuals contacted through the escalation chain are notified that a drill is in progress. Although this might appear to impact the overall performance and urgency of the team to conduct the drill, it is essential to ensure that no production services are impacted while the drill is underway. In the highly unlikely event that all of VeriSign's registry systems become completely unavailable, the registry will implement a third-party disaster recovery plan with SunGard Availability Services. The plan includes steps to: 1) Release escrowed data to use in startup 2) Dispatch VeriSign staff to SunGard to assist in startup operations 3) Assist SunGard with the launch of temporary .net operations using their equipment 4) Manage temporary SRS and resolution through SunGard 5) Assist in management and transition back to VeriSign. SunGard Availability Services is the unparalleled leader in comprehensive business recovery, providing dependable and cost-effective continuity solutions. SunGard's recovery facilities total more than 3 million square feet of recovery operations work space, and offer state-of-the-art recovery configurations, testing facilities, network services, Internet hosting, high availability vaulting options, and extensive work group recovery services. VeriSign will allocate employees to assist in bringing the temporary system online, managing it through the required timeframe, and transitioning the systems back to VeriSign. If VeriSign and all its systems are unavailable, and the backup provider is unavailable, VeriSign will work with ICANN to transition registry services to the registry operator who ICANN deems is the most capable of providing the service. Documentation Kept on System Outages VeriSign uses information contained in network logs, application logs, monitoring event logs, and the shift logs of VeriSign's 24x7x365 Network Operations Center (NOC) staff to capture outage information. Outages and incidents are noted by the NOC in an incident reporting system. Each business day, the VeriSign NOC and Operations staff review system outages and other incidents that could affect system performance. The daily meeting is used as a forum for root cause resolution and methods of preventive action. The information is used to improve processes and is fed back to engineering staff for updates in hardware or software. VeriSign submits outage information to ICANN each month, publicly available at http://www.icann.org. Conclusion VeriSign has taken extensive measures to ensure continuity of operations in the event of operational failure of the registry. VeriSign's systems have provided 7 years of 100-percent uptime resolution performance. We have deployed massively over-provisioned systems with primary, alternative primary, and tertiary service sites. We have contingency plans in place to bring those sites online as needed. In the highly unlikely event of a failure of all our backup systems, we have made arrangements with SunGard to provide third-party backup services.

Promoting competition in the registration of domain names As registry operator for the .net TLD, VeriSign has vigorously taken concrete and significant steps to promote competition and will continue to do so if awarded the follow-on contract. Over the last 7 years, VeriSign has promoted, and will continue to promote, competition among registrars by offering a compelling combination of quality, reliability, and overall value for the services it offers. In addition, VeriSign has heavily invested in the .net TLD infrastructure, innovative services, and staff. Similarly, these strengths have ensured that the .net TLD remains a viable competitor among all TLDs. The touchstone of competition is the range of choices available to consumers when they purchase a product. In the domain name industry, choice includes the ability of consumers (registrants) to select from a wide range of packages, quality, and price when purchasing a domain name registration. With over 250 TLDs, including 7 gTLDs and 6 sTLDs, over 1,000 registrars and over 10,000 resellers, both registrars and consumers have a wide range of choices both across TLDs and within specific TLDs. To continue expanding consumer choice, the .net TLD operator must provide programs that increase registrars in new regions throughout the world, and support existing registrars' marketing and technical needs on an equivalent and reliable basis. In addition, the operator must maintain a high quality of service (QoS) to ensure that .net remains an attractive choice in an industry with over 60 million domain names and a growth rate of 16 percent per year. The .net registry operator must continue to operate .net at a high level of reliability and security, to accommodate existing and growing demands, and to service and support new and innovative applications that rely on the DNS. If the current standards of reliability and security for .net are not maintained, consumers and businesses will have a lower expectation of QoS, and therefore, fewer choices to meet their performance and quality requirements for services ranging from websites and email to new services such as VOIP and converged networks. Over the last 5 years, VeriSign has actively supported the expansion of consumer choice and promoted competition through: 1) recruiting 120+ new registrars in regions such as China, South Korea, and Brazil; 2) maintaining 99.99 percent availability, easy implementation, and equivalent access of SRS for all registrars; 3) instituting marketing programs to support registrars' customer acquisition and retention programs; 4) providing registrars with objective market research to support their business needs; 5) implementing the ATLAS infrastructure that supports multiple protocols and IPV6; and 6) maintaining 100 percent availability of resolution services. The impact of these programs and ATLAS is evidenced by: .net growing at a rate of 22 percent, outpacing the overall growth of 16 percent in domain name registrations; supporting over 58 percent of the world's name servers;, and having contracts with over 50 percent more registrars than other ICANN sanctioned registries due to VeriSign's recruitment efforts and reliability and stability. A major component of VeriSign's efforts to promote competition is ensuring consumers have expanded choice in purchasing .net names registrars through our enrollment of new registrars in developing regions such as Latin America, and maintaining the rapid on-boarding process for new registrars. VeriSign will continue to implement recruitment programs similar to ones in China and South Korea that, in 2004, resulted in four new registrars and an increase in .net domain name registrations from 135,034 names per year to 152,551 per year in those regions. The programs will include such activities as regional market research, marketing programs, and consumer education programs [marketing tools, programs and research information is available in Section 3(b)ii]. In addition, to ensure consumers are able to easily purchase .net domain names from all registrars, VeriSign commits to maintain and enhance the equivalent, easy, and reliable access it currently provides for the SRS. This commitment includes an enhanced SLA for SRS availability of 99.99 percent, implementing new ICANN accredited registrars within 45 days, providing registrars with SRS toolkits and 24x7x365 customer services in 150 languages, and maintaining our current policy of equivalent access. If the registration system does not meet these standards, then fewer registrars will sell the domain names in the .net TLD, resulting in a reduction in consumer choice. Complementing VeriSign's programs to expand the registrar base is our focus on maintaining a robust resolution system that will support 100 percent availability and new uses of the DNS infrastructure, such as VOIP and IDNs. This focus on reliability and application support ensures .net remains a competitive choice among registrars, resellers and consumers as their needs expand from email and websites to new applications and uses of the DNS. To sustain this robust infrastructure VeriSign will implement programs to: expand the number of TLD name servers, maintain its two new name servers in China and South Korea, continue to support IPV6 and enhance resolution SLAs [Section 3(a)]. The continued expansion of the .net TLD name server constellation that VeriSign already has undertaken will: improve the users access to .net supported applications in developing markets such as Africa and Latin America, enable the TLD to support the increase in traffic that will result from new uses of DNS, and sustain the performance even during DDoS attacks that spike resolution queries in excess of 10x their normal levels [Section 5(b)ii]. VeriSign commits to maintain for the term of the new contract the above programs, to continue to provide a high degree of reliability through enhanced resolution and registration SLAs, and to continue to expand on the innovative practices that have resulted in the competitive choice .net provides for domain name registration. Reliance on Multiple Suppliers VeriSign has delivered the secure, stable registry services required for critical Internet infrastructure since the creation of a dedicated .net registry in 1996. During this time, VeriSign has expended significant energy in developing both business and technical relationships with an array of suppliers since our architecture philosophy is diversity at the network, facility, and hardware and software layers. To minimize reliance on a specific supplier, VeriSign designs diversity into our registry architecture through hardware, software, and network variations and through the careful selection of facilities hosted by multiple vendors. Multi-sourcing any operation has advantages and disadvantages. Through years of experience in operating the current .net registry service, VeriSign has found the most effective means of minimizing dependency on a specific supplier includes: network, software, and hardware diversity. VeriSign's production-related assets for .net are globally diverse. No more than two locations are hosted by the same supplier to ensure that unanticipated vendor problems will not significantly impact the availability or quality of the .net registry service. While the primary production data centers (largely for provisioning) are located in VeriSign's managed weapons grade facilities (as discussed earlier in this section), DNS-related equipment is hosted by multiple vendors. This geographic diversity is necessary to ensure optimum performance of the .net resolution service and to minimize the likelihood that a local problem would have far-reaching impact. In these cases, special provisions exist to ensure that no more than two locations are hosted by a specific vendor (i.e., no more than two at InterNap, no more than two at SingTel, etc.). Each of these locations meets all of VeriSign's criteria for facilities infrastructure (e.g., controlled access, adequate and redundant environmental hardware, etc.). Use of this control process ensures that an unanticipated problem (e.g., the abrupt termination of KPN/Quest services in 2002) will not have an impact on the availability or quality of the .net registry service. With its geographically diverse network, fully redundant systems, and multiple data centers located globally including multiple providers and backup providers [Section 5(b)i for further detail], VeriSign can seamlessly transition network operations in the event of any failures. Operators without this type of breadth of coverage or end-to-end control have difficulty quickly addressing any network or system failures. Considering the limited size and less financial stability of other smaller operators, it is difficult for other providers to truly maintain multiple vendors and separate technologies. This becomes problematic, as they are at the mercy of vendors who do not share their responsibilities and mission. In addition to having a diverse network supplied through multiple vendors, VeriSign applies this architectural philosophy at the hardware (e.g., IBM, Dell, SUN, Cisco, Juniper, Foundry, etc.), operating system (e.g., Linux, AIX, and Solaris), and third-party software layers (e.g., Weblogic and JBoss). A dedicated team of skilled professionals carefully chooses devices that best satisfy our stringent criteria for performance, reliability, and diversity. Candidate devices are tested in our engineering laboratory and must pass a demanding qualification process under extreme load and varying environmental conditions. Test results are documented, and only if the device passes can it be subsequently used in a production environment. This selection process minimizes our dependency on specific suppliers should they not be able to perform in a timely manner (we also keep a cache of available equipment sized to accommodate short-term problems with vendor delivery). Use of multiple suppliers also dramatically reduces our vulnerability should a specific vendor have a flaw that can not be quickly rectified (this is particularly important for public-facing solutions). VeriSign does not rely on any affiliations or direct or indirect arrangements for any past or present operations of the .net registry. We do not plan to use external affiliations for continued operations. Unlike many smaller or less experienced companies, VeriSign has the capability, supported by the extensive infrastructure [described in Sections 5(a) and (b)] to perform all registry functions without the need to establish subcontract arrangements with other companies. Improved Implementation of GNSO Policies VeriSign is in compliance with all GNSO policies. We have a proven process for working with the GNSO, the IETF and other working groups to foster the development of policies that benefit the Internet community and to ensure VeriSign implements new policies on a timely basis [ Section 1]. VeriSign has a proven method for deployment of policies and system improvements. It includes providing active input in the shaping of policy; creating registrar feedback systems for implementing specific requirements; end user testing the prototype; deploying the policy program; writing and vetting technical requirements with the technical and policy community; seeking ICANN approval on registry specific rules and technical implementation path; holding seminars for registrars to discuss the technical requirements; providing engineering and technical on-call assistance with the deployment; and creating tools to assist registrars in the deployment. To improve VeriSign's implementation of, and support for, GNSO policies, VeriSign will continue to sponsor a .net Policy Advisory Group. Support for GNSO Policies VeriSign takes seriously our responsibility to provide input in the shaping of policies and the timely implementation of these policies. Through a combination of registrar interaction and community stewardship, deployment options are developed that attempt to reduce the impact to registrars as well as provide the end user with the best possible experience. This has been true in our handling of the transfer dispute policy. Example: Transfer Dispute Policy: VeriSign played an integral role in the creation of the ICANN -Registrar Transfer Policy [ Section 1]. Chuck Gomes, VP, Policy, played a key role in all stages of the multi-year policy development process, which resulted in the implementation of the policy on 12 November 2004. Extensive efforts were made to vet the policy, the accompanying Dispute Resolution Policy and VeriSign's Supplemental Rules with the Internet community, gaining support from registries and registrars for handling of transfer issues. VeriSign created an internal task force to analyze and assess areas of key concerns over transfers, providing key historical and current data on transfer activity, transfer abuse and trends in registrations to ICANN. Upon receipt of the policy, VeriSign's Transfer Task Force held a summit on the policy and outlined key implementation questions. These issues were then vetted with ICANN and the registrar community. The output of these discussions was the basis for the implementation plan and supplemental rules that VeriSign implemented. One of the outputs of the conversation with our registrars was that our registrars wanted an easy online tool for inputting and tracking their disputes. Therefore, VeriSign developed an easy to use web-based form for submitting transfer disputes that registrars agreed was optimal for supporting their business. Additionally, VeriSign built out a process and team that can scale with the transfer dispute cases should the need arise. VeriSign used its Customer Service Representative (CSR), Registrar Account and Customer Affairs (CA) teams to hold web seminars on the business and technical implementation of the policy. These sessions were held many times to accommodate registrar time zones. Individual technical and business support sessions were held at the request of the registrars. Before deployment, the account management and CA teams worked to circulate the new required Registry-Registrar Transfer amendment, as approved by ICANN. Verisign used its CSR and account teams to contact every accredited registrar, follow up on the implementation of the policy, and encourage signature of the transfer amendment. To date, VeriSign has signed amendments from 180 members of the registrar community. VeriSign continues to support the transfer policy by discussing the policy and procedures for using the dispute process and tools at our industry forums in Europe, Asia, North America, and Brazil. Once a policy is implemented, VeriSign sponsors consortiums and working groups in which VeriSign brings together application developers, key Internet business constituency members, registries, and registrars for the facilitation of the developing tools and programs that support the policy. VeriSign is often a driver of policy discussion, as with DNSSEC, expiring names handling and multilingual domain development. In driving these new policies, VeriSign creates industry forums and recruits ICANN participation in driving discussion of these issues, submission of white papers for ideas, and ultimate consensus building. An example of this is our role in the Deleted Names Policy and in the development of IDNs/ Multilingual policy. (For additional examples on DNSSEC and IRIS refer to www.verisignlabs.com). Deleted Names Policy: VeriSign is working with the ICANN community on the implementation of a solution for the handling of deleted names, an issue that is very much a concern of registries and registrars alike. VeriSign began contacting ICANN and the registrar community in October 2003 to discuss the impact of increasing registrar accreditations for .com and .net and the impact that was having to registry operations. In particular, there has been significant impact on the operation of the batch pool that VeriSign created to handle automated batch registration requests for recently deleted names. VeriSign held registrar forums to solicit input on how to maintain equivalent access and sound operation for the batch pool, given the changing environment of registrar add storms in the batch pool and registrars selling their ICANN accreditations to others for the purpose of add storming the batch pool. VeriSign then created a summary of various solution ideas for handling expiring names and presented them to ICANN and members of the GNSO Registrar Constituency. VeriSign suggested that a forum be held in Cape Town at the ICANN meeting to review the process of handling deleted names. A public forum was held on 1 December 2004. VeriSign is now working with Bruce Tonkin, one of the Registrar Constituency's representatives to the GNSO Council, to facilitate the process of developing a solution for an industry-wide com/net deleted names handling process, which facilitates an open auction during the pending delete period. In January 2005, VeriSign will begin surveying end users in the Internet community to get input on various types of auction house solutions and price sensitivity for deleted name auctions. VeriSign anticipates providing the feedback received from end users, along with a revised deleted names proposed auction model in February 2005. The proposed model will be further vetted with registrars and other stakeholders to ensure that it adequately addresses the needs of registrars, registrants, and other impacted parties. Efforts to Improve Policy Implementation In 2003, VeriSign formed a Public Advisory Group (PAG) for the purpose of meeting with management of VeriSign Naming and Directory Services to: (1) consider and provide advice to VeriSign's management related to, among other things, the DNS; (2) generate ideas and feedback on the development and rollout of new value added services; and (3) serve as a sounding board and vehicle through which the company's management can solicit advice from the Internet technology and business community. Since that time, the Advisory Group has considered and provided advice and recommendations regarding the company's policies, procedures, and operations with respect to the management of Internet domain names, system management and other related issues. The Advisory Group continues to provide advice, feedback and circulate ideas and information related to VeriSign's products and services. Therefore, the PAG ensures that the company is meeting the needs of the Internet community as a whole. For the .net TLD, the Group will be used as an advisory body to VeriSign in all aspects of ICANN/GNSO policy development with a particular focus on ensuring proper implementation of policies. The group is composed of highly respected experts in Internet technology and business, the goal being to include industry recognized individuals with international experience. Conclusion VeriSign has a strong track record promoting competition in the registration of domain names. We have the largest registrar base of any operator, and are proven to provide equivalent access to registrars and a high quality of service. We introduce diversity into our registry administration by multi-sourcing hardware, software, and dedicated bandwidth to ensure stable and secure service delivery. Finally, we will support the Policy Advisory Group to assist in the smooth and efficient implementation of applicable ICANN consensus policies.

8-i Steps and sequencing of a transition The single greatest opportunity to introduce risk into a well-managed .net service is transitioning to another operator. Any transition of the .net infrastructure will involve the high-risk migration of a top-level domain (TLD) that supports over 30 percent or about $700 billion worth of e-commerce transactions annually. In addition, , 2.8 trillion page views, 300 billion e-mails, 58% of all Internet hosts and more than 5 million domain names are dependent on the flawless operation of the .net infrastructure. VeriSign Advantages: + Financial stability and commitment to operate domain name registries + Leadership in the advancement of core DNS technologies + Delivering over 7 years of uninterrupted name resolution + No transition risk to the .net ecosystem by selecting VeriSign. The track record in transitioning large-scale critical infrastructure services is not filled with success stories. Experience is not enough when determining a registry operator for .net; success is the appropriate metric. Any disruption to the core operations of the .net registry, however short, will result in significant losses and possible long-term damage to the .net TLD. Such a disruption would also affect the reputation of the global domain name system (DNS) as the foundation of the Internet. VeriSign has demonstrated superior technical and operational success in its management of .net. This is clearly demonstrated throughout this proposal: * Delivering over 7 years of 100 percent DNS name resolution * Leadership in the advancement of core DNS technologies * Financial stability and commitment to operate domain name registries * Global support of our service and expectation of our continued management. VeriSign's performance in running the .net TLD speaks for itself. VeriSign is committing to the highest Service Level Agreements (SLAs) of any existing registry operator. These benefits alone outweigh the overall risks of migration to another registry operator given .net's importance and the magnitude of transition. The only way to ensure uninterrupted service is for there to be no transition. 8-ii: Duration and extent of outages A transition of the .net TLD to a successor operator could result in both system-wide and localized outages because: * There is currently no other operator that has demonstrated the capability of taking over .net. * The timeframe does not support a successful risk adverse transition * The performances of other current gTLD operators fall well below what the Internet has come to expect from .net (see Section 5.(b)ii, Stability of Resolution and Performance Capabilities of this application). Outages could result from system-wide failures or localized failures due to decreases in global DNS coverage, or even changes to the underlying network infrastructure (see Section 5(b)vi, Geographic Network Coverage of this application). The .net registry is a multifaceted solution with many interfaces and dependencies. Over many years millions of diverse stakeholders in the .net TLD have developed dependencies for their daily core operations. The current .net RFP process will not only involve the possibility of a high-risk transition of the .net TLD zones, support data, and support systems, but also be a substantial change to systems and processes at registrars, resellers, and ultimately, to registrants. A transition of only the core of the registry technical operations does not constitute a full transition for the TLD. The infrastructure has been embedded in the Internet over time; some implementations dependent on the .net infrastructure may not automatically utilize the transitioned system. This was made clear in the proof-of-concept round of new generic top-level domains (gTLDs) where an unknown number of providers, legacy DNS resolvers, and other systems used cached root zones and updates made to the root zone servers, which were inaccessible to end users. The impact of other similar hard-coded dependencies on the current .net infrastructure is largely unknown; these dependencies could constitute a significant risk to the stability of the Internet and could disrupt services to a large number of end users and stakeholders. ICANN must ensure that all applicants possess the resources to quickly expand staff, facilities, equipment, and communications as well as have disaster recovery facilities and business continuity plans in place (and exercised) on day one. Also, all applicants must address plans for community outreach to eliminate transition risk to external systems: * How is this done? * How long will it take to reach everyone? * How long will it take each person/organization affected to take appropriate actions? * What is the measure of success prior to proceeding with a transition? The risks associated with the transition of a global real-time system with as many dimensions as .net are substantial. Figure 8-ii-1 details the potential risk associated with downtime. Minor flaws in any part of the chain from registry to registrar to reseller to registrant could heavily impact all stakeholders, resulting in significant cost or other injury. VeriSign has more than 15 years of experience operating the world's largest domain name system (DNS), public key infrastructure (PKI), and Internet payment infrastructures, as well as the largest independent SS7 telephony network in North America. Through years of proven performance and technical capabilities to deliver reliable, stable critical infrastructure services, we have demonstrated that VeriSign is the most qualified registry to continue running the .net registry. VeriSign's long history of providing highly scalable and reliable infrastructure solutions for critical network services has enabled us to build organizational core expertise in registry systems. Over the past 13 years, VeriSign has demonstrated the technical capabilities to successfully design, develop, and operate critical Internet infrastructure. VeriSign has set many of the standards now universally adopted by the industry. Our technical experts regularly provide education and share best practices for maintaining stability and security of operation. The successful operation of these critical registries is core to VeriSign's corporate strategy. Our company has invested heavily to provide the right people, infrastructure, and processes focused on delivering superior performance and stability. Many of .nets largest stakeholders agree that transitioning .net from VeriSign is not a sound business or technical decision. They understand the risk to their businesses, be it hardware, software, registrar sales or telecommunications. A fully listing of endorsements for VeriSign's continued management of the .net registry can be found in Appendix D of this proposal; a highlight of some of those is found in Figure 8-ii-2. Other systems that could be impacted are critical services currently performed for the registrar community or for other stakeholders. The registry provides a multitude of processes, in addition to the core registry functions. These process are often overlooked, but to stakeholders these are often the most critical. Examples of services other than SRS and DNS that could be affected are: * Whois services could be interrupted leading to issues for IP, law enforcement, network operations, and other legitimate uses of the Whois system * Zone file access could be interrupted leading to loss of service to IP monitoring providers, corporate internal zone-file caches, and others who have legitimate uses for the zone files. A registry operator must address that the impacts caused by infrastructure changes may result in disruption of services due to caching name servers. A registry operator must disclose analysis on potential failures of their registration system as they atte