VeriSign, Inc. (NASDAQ: VRSN), a global provider of critical internet infrastructure and domain name registry services, today announced that, according to the latest Domain Name Industry Brief Quarterly Report from DNIB.com, the first quarter of 2024 closed with 362.4 million domain name registrations across all top-level domains (TLDs), an increase of 2.5 million domain name registrations, or 0.7%, compared to the fourth quarter of 2023. Domain name registrations also increased by 7.5 million, or 2.1%, year over year.

The .com and .net TLDs had a combined total of 172.5 million domain name registrations in the domain name base at the end of the first quarter of 2024, a decrease of 0.3 million domain name registrations, or 0.2%, compared to the fourth quarter of 2023. The .com and .net TLDs had a combined decrease of 2.3 million domain name registrations, or 1.3%, year over year. As of March 31, 2024, the .com domain name base totaled 159.4 million domain name registrations and the .net domain name base totaled 13.1 million domain name registrations.

New .com and .net domain name registrations totaled 9.5 million at the end of the first quarter of 2024, compared to 10.3 million domain name registrations at the end of the first quarter of 2023.

Total country-code TLD (ccTLD) domain name registrations were 139.5 million at the end of the first quarter of 2024, an increase of 1.2 million domain name registrations, or 0.9%, compared to the fourth quarter of 2023. ccTLDs increased by 3.7 million domain name registrations, or 2.7%, year over year. The top 10 ccTLDs, as of March 31, 2024, were .cn, .de, .uk, .ru, .nl, .br, .au, .fr, .in, and .eu.

Starting with the Q1 2024 report, the DNIB Quarterly Report now includes new information on quarterly renewal percentages for all TLDs, as available, summary information on legacy gTLDs other than .com and .net and expanded analysis of all gTLDs as a group, while continuing to offer key statistics on legacy and new gTLDs.

Information about the statistical methodology used in creating the Domain Name Industry Brief Quarterly Report and DNIB.com’s dashboards is available here.

About DNIB.com

DNIB.com, sponsored by Verisign, provides global statistical and analytical research and data on the domain name industry, plus analyses of key policy, security, and technology trends. The latest Domain Name Industry Brief Quarterly Report, previous reports, and interactive dashboards with expanded domain name industry data are all available at DNIB.com.

About Verisign

Verisign (NASDAQ: VRSN), a global provider of critical internet infrastructure and domain name registry services, enables internet navigation for many of the world’s most recognized domain names. Verisign helps enable the security, stability, and resiliency of the Domain Name System and the internet by providing root zone maintainer services, operating two of the 13 global internet root servers, and providing registration services and authoritative resolution for the .com and .net top-level domains, which support the majority of global e-commerce. To learn more please visit verisign.com.

VRSN

© 2024 VeriSign, Inc. All rights reserved. VERISIGN, the VERISIGN logo, Domain Name Industry Brief, and other trademarks, service marks, and designs are registered or unregistered trademarks of VeriSign, Inc. and its subsidiaries in the United States and in foreign countries. All other trademarks are property of their respective owners.

To view this piece of content from cts.businesswire.com, please give your consent at the top of this page.