In Trainwreck, Bill Hader plays Aaron, a successful sports doctor who falls for star Amy Schumer's often drunk, commitment-phobic character, Amy. You might not have pegged Hader, a Saturday Night Live staple of eight years, as a "romantic lead." (Schumer and Hader acknowledge as much in a recent promotional sketch, in which Jon Hamm, the more typical heartthrob, pretends to be Hader.) But the man who brought you Stefon is in fact a total babe and a deserving rom-com star.

Trainwreck, written by Schumer and directed by Judd Apatow, is largely a story about a woman with abandonment issues. (Amy's dad cheated on her mom and was a serial womanizer until multiple sclerosis sent him to a nursing home.) In the first act of the movie, Amy doesn't believe in monogamy; in the second, she falls in love with Aaron; by the third, she's finding reasons to push him away, assuming on some level that she isn't good enough for him and he'll eventually leave on his own accord.

I've always thought of Hader as hilarious and cute. And I like that he is kind to reporters (the media equivalent of being nice to waiters). But my real crush on him began with his wife, writer/director Maggie Carey. I was interviewing her for her movie The To Do List in 2013, and in reading up on her, I learned that she and Hader, who has a part in the movie, have an enviable love story. She fell for him when she saw him wearing overalls without a shirt on in a skit; he knew he'd marry her when he saw Star Wars curtains hanging in her living room. Their romance seemed simple, sweet, and predicated on a shared nerdiness, intelligence, and sense of humor. Carey came up as a member of New York's Upright Citizens Brigade; Hader was part of the sketch comedy group Animals from the Future. I'm not a comedy expert — I don't even know what Animals from the Future is — but I am a celeb-love expert (yes, a real thing). This was a couple I could get behind.

From there, everything Hader did seemed especially adorable to me. He posed on a red carpet? Look at that silly smile. He starred in The Skeleton Twins to critical acclaim? Such emotional depth. Maybe that says more about me — that I'm a sap or that I need to get a life. But there's a certain amount of projecting we all do onto famous people's work based on who they're dating. That's not to say their sexuality matters, to be clear, but that their relationship status does, at least a little. Is he settled down? Heartbroken? A playboy? Does he treat his partner as an equal or as arm candy? Those things all impact how a star is perceived by viewers and whether he'll be believable in a role. Leonardo DiCaprio might be a hard sell to play a "family man" on screen, for example, given that in real life, he travels in packs of supermodels.

Of course, unlike me, most people don't actually know much about Hader's domestic life, something that would likely make him more attractive to them if they did. He and Carey aren't megawatt stars — he's still known as a character actor, even if his latest roles are saying otherwise, and she's an indie filmmaker — and they keep their relationship private anyway, making it feel that much more real and special. (They are the opposite of Kim and Kanye, whose marriage I vacillate between worshipping and assuming is staged for publicity.) Also, Hader isn't a Jon Hamm type in the Don Draper/classic good looks department. He's goofy and lanky and known more for starring in weird comedies opposite Kristen Wiig than in romantic ones featuring sex scenes.

So it's not surprising that Apatow had his reservations about casting Hader. As Hader tells it, the director not only made Schumer go on a date with Hader to test their chemistry, he also brought photos of the eventual co-stars to the season-three premiere of Girls, then asked people there, "Would you buy these two as a couple?" It wasn't Hader's talent Apatow was questioning — they had worked together many times before — but whether Hader was believable in that kind of role.

Perhaps the Girls partygoers confirmed how appealing Hader's down-to-earth, fun-loving personality is or maybe he publicly charmed them with a funny story about one of his daughters (he now has three and their names all begin with the letter "H"); maybe he told them about how he left SNL to spend more time with his family in L.A. or mentioned how proud he is of his wife ("Maggie is crazy talented," he recently said in an interview with Elle). Whatever the case, he got the part. And now you get to see that not only does Hader have acting chops and range, he has that special spark that makes a star dreamy, desirable, and rom-com ready.

P.S. If I just jinxed Maggie Carey and Bill Hader, may I burn in hell.