"Hearst Magazines and Yahoo may earn commission or revenue on some items through these links."

The 2024 Golden Globes left viewers with a lot to talk about: historic wins, jaw-dropping looks, and an Ali Wong and Bill Hader romance?

Yes, that’s right, the Beef star and Saturday Night Live alum are dating, and they put their love front and center for the world to see on the big awards night.

While it is unclear how the two met, they have been acquainted for quite some years, having worked together as voice actors on the 2016 animated film The Angry Birds Movie. Their current romance marks a second try at a coupling, as they briefly dated in 2022.

Before finding (and re-finding each other) the comedy pair were both previously married—Wong to businessman Justin Hakuta from 2014-2022, with whom she shares 8-year-old daughter Mari and 6-year-old daughter Nikki, and Hader to actor-producer-director Maggie Carey from 2006-2017, with whom he shares 14-year-old Hannah, 11-year-old Harper, and 9-year-old Hayley Clementine. The Barry actor was later romantically linked to Rachel Bilson in 2019-2020, followed by Anna Kendrick, who he quietly dated for nearly two years.

Read ahead for everything we know about their relationship so far.

January 15, 2024: They attend the Emmys together.

Hader and Wong attend the 75th annual Primetime Emmy Awards ceremony together. In one especially sweet moment, Hader cheered on Wong when she won the award for Outstanding Lead Actress In A Limited Or Anthology Series Or Movie.

January 14, 2023: They go to the Critics' Choice Awards.

As the awards season continues, Hader and Wong attend the Critics' Choice Awards as each other's dates. For the occasion, Wong wears a green off-the-shoulder gown with a floral print while Hader wears a classic black tux.

January 7, 2024: Wong and Hader share a passionate kiss at the Golden Globes.

The star pair displayed the hardest of hard launches, kissing on camera before Wong went up to accept her Golden Globe for Best Performance by a Female Actor in a Limited Series for her role in Beef.

During her acceptance speech, however, she gave a tribute to her ex-husband, saying, “I really need to thank the father of my children and my best friend Justin for all of your love and support. It's because of you that I'm able to be a working mother.”

When asked about the shout out by Entertainment Tonight, Wong said, "Yeah that's right, I like to keep it peaceful and grateful and amicable."

Wong opened up about maintaining a healthy, loving relationship with Hakuta to the Hollywood Reporter in March 2023. “We’re really, really close. We’re best friends,” Wong said. “We’ve been through so much together. It’s a very unconventional divorce.”

April 19, 2023: The two celebrate Wong’s 41st birthday with a PDA-filled hike.

Wong and Hader were captured in photos obtained by Page Six looking so in love on a celebratory birthday hike in Los Angeles, California. In the flicks, the comedy couple are all smiles as they hold hands and share a kiss before enjoying a romantic night out the same day.

April 16, 2023: Hader sparks rekindled dating rumors.

While promoting season four of Barry, Hader referenced his “girlfriend” in an interview with Collider.

“I need to take a vacation,” he said. “My girlfriend and I were talking and she brought it up that I haven't had a vacation in 10 years, so I think I need to go.”

Shortly after, Hader’s rep confirmed Wong was indeed the girlfriend in question, telling Entertainment Magazine, "Bill Hader and Ali Wong are dating again.”

Fall 2022: Wong and Hader briefly dated.

Multiple sources told Page Six in December of 2022 that the two actors dated for a brief period before calling it quits.

“They’re no longer dating. They dated very briefly,” an insider told the outlet. “They’re just super busy with things, but [the split] was certainly amicable. They’re certainly friends.”

You Might Also Like