Oliver Parker, 58, is a film director best known for An Ideal Husband, The Importance of Being Earnest and Dorian Gray. He also directed the St Trinian’s reboots, the 2016 film adaptation of Dad’s Army and the newly released Swimming With Men.

He comes from an illustrious family: he is the brother of actor Nathaniel Parker and public relations expert Sir Alan Parker. His father was Sir Peter Parker, chairman of British Rail; his mother Gillian, Lady Parker, was a gardening writer and GP.

Parker has two children and a stepson and lives in Queen’s Park, London, with his partner Cassia Kidron.

How did your childhood influence your attitude to money?

My dad and mum came through the war years, when you learnt a certain amount of frugality. There was an ingrained respect for money.

What was your first job or wage?

My first job was on a milk float with my brother Nat, helping the milkman on his round. We were paid in tepid orange juice.

My first wage was £88 per week, when I was 17, working in a cement factory in Kent. I stood under a perpetual shower of grey dust as the rickety conveyor belt rattled past over our heads. As it turns out, this was excellent preparation for the independent film business.

Has there been any period when money was tight?

I was an actor for the first few years and, unless you are very successful, you learn to live on slender takings. But I had no responsibilities.

When did you realise it was all going to work out?

When An Ideal Husband happened, around 1998, I thought: “I am really enjoying this.” It all seemed to be right. I realised that I would get a chance to make another film.

What has been the most lucrative part of your career so far?

There was a period between 2005 and 2010 when I was making a movie virtually every year, which is a lot. The sheer rapidity of these projects meant there was a proper wage coming in.

What are your current sources of income?

My income is nearly all from directing and writing fees. I’ve turned my hand to scriptwriting more regularly and I have also set up a production company, Anyway Productions. We have developed a number of projects which, if they go into production, should generate more income.

What has been your worst financial decision?

There was a co-production where our partners were not true to their word. Suddenly we were left with a shortfall in the budget of about £1.5m. That’s quite difficult if the show is already on the road and you’re signed up to the talent and the locations.

We decided that as we were so far in, we had to carry on. It meant that we took almost nothing for a year’s work. It’s very easy to be exposed in the film industry.

Have you ever been ripped off?

Yes. I have been very slow to learn this, but you cannot take some producers’ word on the state of the budget. There have been a few occasions when I have trusted people but they have not even built the ship and you are launching.

It’s not through malicious reasons, but it can take a hell of a lot of nerve and good fortune to get these projects going.

Has the world of TV and film changed since you started?

Massively. In the early days, not many films were made in the UK.

I made Othello [starring Laurence Fishburne and Kenneth Branagh] for $10m (£7.6m) in 1995. Mid‑scale films of that budget have now become really hard to fund.

Swimming With Men has a smaller budget than my usual films and so my fee is smaller too. I often try to line up jobs, but given the fickle nature of film production it rarely works out that way.

As a result I am increasingly looking towards TV, where some great work is being made. TV has really hit a wonderful patch and talent is streaming into it.

I do also have some low to mid‑risk investments which I trust to my advisers and don’t follow that closely.

What have you treated yourself to when times are good?

We have taken some great family holidays, whether it’s Namibia, India or Jamaica. My wife is the adventurous type and will whisk us off somewhere exotic. Food is also a passion of Cassia’s and we enjoy a lot of excellent restaurants.

What is the biggest financial lesson you have learnt?

Read the small print. And don’t agree to things too quickly. I remember Richard Eyre, the film director, saying that you should always ask who the producer is.

It doesn’t matter how great the project – if you don’t have someone with a really firm hand on the tiller, the whole thing can come apart. I am often guilty of falling for a great project and forgetting this lesson.