Allin was born Kevin Michael Allin at Weeks' Memorial Hospital, in Lancaster, New Hampshire and grew up in East St. Johnsbury, VT. He grew up with his older brother Merle Allin and his mother Arleta, with whom he seemed to have a love/hate relationship. His father, Merle Sr., was a "backwoods" man who, according to GG, wanted to kill the family in a murder/suicide pact. Shortly before Allin started school, his mother changed his legal name to Kevin Michael Allin (on March 2, 1962 by his birth certificate) in order to give Allin a chance at a normal, mockery-free childhood. To escape his family and small-town environment, Allin turned to punk rock. Influenced by Iggy Pop, the MC5, Alice Cooper , and the Ramones, Allin played simple but catchy music. Originally a drummer, Allin switched to lead vocals and began his career as one of the most notorious singers in punk rock history. Beginning with the Jabbers, Allin was an energetic singer who fought with the audience, cut himself up with glass, and routinely found himself banned from most clubs in New England. Allin also suffered through a failed marriage and also fathered a child in this time. Allin's thirst for notoriety, combined with his hatred for almost everyone, caused him to transform himself into the most vile, sickening and fear-spreading character in rock history. Along with the fights and self-mutilation came on-stage defecation and urination (as well as the eating/drinking of it), attempted sexual assault of female audience members, brutal fights with other members of the audience, drug/alcohol abuse, nudity, etc. His bands included the "Scumf*cs", the "Texas Nazis" and the "Murder Junkies". Allin was jailed over 60 times for his onstage antics, and spent over 4 years in prison for assault and subsequent parole violations. In 1993, after a final gig at the Gas Station in New York City, (which saw Allin deliver 2 songs - "I Am The Highest Power" and "Look Into My Eyes and Hate Me"), a near-riot broke out, and Allin escaped from the police officers who were called to the club. Allin apparently overdosed on heroin while staying with friend Johnny Puke and died in his sleep. Allin is buried in Littleton, New Hampshire.