For the last two weeks, we’ve asked you to whittle down a lineup of eight musicians to uncover who’s the most evil one of all. You passed on Chris Brown, Chief Keef, Phil Spector, Courtney Love, even The Eagles… and now we’re down to the final battle.

It’s GG Allin against Gary Glitter, which some might call a tough, dirty match up. For assistance, revisit our arguments below and simply click ‘n’ vote shortly after. In a week — specifically October 31st, Halloween –we’ll unveil the final victor.

GG Allin vs. Gary Glitter

Born Jesus Christ Allin, after his father claimed the Son of God visited him in a dream, GG Allin, the Madman of Manchester (New Hampshire), was anything but anointed, unless of course you’re talking about covering oneself in blood and fecal matter. Called “uncontrollable, uncompromising and vicious” by his own band members, Allin fronted various acts all with subversive or shocking names: The Jabbers, The Cedar Street Sluts, The Scumfucs, and The Texas Nazis.

Related Video

Addicted to heroin and alcohol, Allin took to consuming laxatives as he regularly began defecating on stage during his performances, often rubbing the feces on himself or throwing it on the audience he consistently attacked. His mantra? “With GG, you don’t get what you expect—you get what you deserve.” Every Halloween, he threatened to kill himself (only to get arrested every year), until he finally did, albeit by an accidental overdose of heroin, in the summer of ‘93. –Len Comaratta

“Rock and Roll (Part 2)” – also known as “The Hey Song” and best recognized as an overplayed stadium anthem that sits comfortably beside “We Will Rock You” in the pantheon of tunes that appeal to base instincts – emerged from the glammed up and twisted mind of Gary Glitter in 1972. Glitter was a man of few lyrics who hid something sinister behind his sculpted eyebrows and shiney stage jackets. The whispers of impropriety that followed Glitter for decades finally came to the public’s attention after a busted hard drive of child pornography was discovered by a PC World store employee. Glitter faced a bevy of kiddie porn charges in his native U.K. and also had his cameo being ripped from the final theatrical cut of Spice World.

Hey Now! The troubled singer took to the lam, embarking on a world tour to escape the authorities. But this twisted hideout across southeast Asia merely netted Glitter a string of even worse offenses as he engaged in sexual assaults with underage victims in Cambodia and Vietnam. Glitter was caught and served time in a number of countries, but oddly enough he is free at the moment and announced plans to record a new album. I hope I speak for all Earth’s citizens when I say “Gary, give it up and go away. The world doesn’t need a “Rock and Roll (Part 3)” and we could all stand to lose a man who harbors such sinister urges.” –Dan Pfleegor