‘To lose one set of memories may be regarded as a misfortune. To lose two smacks of carelessness.’ The Terran colony world of Espero seems the unlikely source of a sophisticated distress call. And the Doctor, Fitz and Trix are not the only ones responding to it. While Fitz consorts with royalty, the Doctor’s on the run with a 16-year-old girl, and Trix meets a small boy with a dark secret. In a race for the minds and souls of an entire planet, the Doctor and Trix are offered temptations that may change them forever. At least one of them will be unable to resist. This is another in the series of adventures for the Eighth Doctor.

HALFLIFE MARK MICHALOWSKI

DOCTOR WHO: HALFLIFE Commissioning Editor: Ben Dunn Editor & Creative Consultant: Justin Richards Project Editor: Jacqueline Rayner Published by BBC Worldwide Ltd Woodlands, 80 Wood Lane London W12 0TT First published 2004 Copyright © Mark Michalowski 2004 The moral right of the author has been asserted Original series broadcast on the BBC Format © BBC 1963 Doctor Who and TARDIS are trademarks of the BBC ISBN 0 563 48613 9 Cover imaging by Black Sheep, copyright © BBC 2004 Printed and bound in Great Britain by Mackays of Chatham Cover printed by Belmont Press Ltd, Northampton

For my mother, Margaret Iris Michalowski, who bought me my first typewriter and got me started on this whole writing thing.

Contents Chapter 1 ‘It’s an alien, Joshua.’

1

Chapter 2 ‘D’you think you could keep your monkey under control?’

11

Chapter 3 ‘Sticks, Trix?’

19

Chapter 4 ‘I bet you even put knickers on her.’

27

Chapter 5 ‘How can we know where we’re going, when we don’t know where we’ve come from?’

37

Chapter 6 ‘What do you know about our mystery woman?’

45

Chapter 7 ‘To lose one set of memories may be regarded as a misfortune.’

49

Chapter 8 ‘With a zed.’

65

Chapter 9 ‘Bugger its body language – look at the size of it.’

73

Chapter 10 ‘Should you be out on your own at this time of night?’

85

Chapter 11 ‘You’re not planning on killing me too, are you?’

91

Chapter 12 ‘Space yacht? Intelligent rocks?’

101

Chapter 13 ‘Not that you don’t have a very nice bottom, but. . . you know.’

107

Chapter 14 ‘A spaceship powered by technobabble.’

125

Chapter 15 ‘The foot-stomping Tantrum Fairy was back.’

133

Chapter 16 ‘Not die exactly. Not really.’

139

Chapter 17 ‘I don’t suppose you have access to a thermic lance, do you?’

149

Chapter 18 ‘You wanted to see my toys, did you?’

157

Chapter 19 ‘Think of a number.’

165

Chapter 20 ‘A simple “Come in, have a cup of tea” would have been more than adequate.’

173

Chapter 21 ‘Are you thinking what I’m thinking?’

183

Chapter 22 ‘Imagine having your whole life to live over again.’

193

Chapter 23 ‘Sorry I’m late.’

201

Chapter 24 ‘There are always choices!’

207

Chapter 25 ‘You can’t just repair people, you know.’

213

Chapter 26 ‘Memories.’

219

Chapter 27 ‘Now you’re just showing off.’

223

Chapter 28 ‘We used to be happy with a walnut and a tangerine.’

229

Chapter 29 ‘The past is never gonna catch up with me.’

237

Acknowledgments

241

About the author

243

Chapter 1 ‘It’s an alien, Joshua.’ Joshua lay silently in bed and listened to his parents arguing outside. His mother didn’t like him leaving the window open in the heat of summer, even though his sheets were damp and clingy with sweat: the sweet potato harvest had been poor last year, money was tight, and they couldn’t afford to get the fly screens fixed. And Espero’s insects could find their way through the smallest gap. He heard the tones in his parents’ voices, even if he couldn’t make out their words, and he knew what they were arguing about. Ma, fierce and angry, was doing most of the shouting; Pa, by nature a quiet and awkward man, was doing all of the listening. Every now and again he’d hear Pa start to interject, but Ma would verbally slap him down again, thundering on. Joshua wanted to run to the window and shout down for her to leave him alone. But he knew this was adult stuff, and he didn’t want to get involved. It would only upset Ma more to think that he could overhear. He heard most of their fights: in a house this small and this far away from the noise of Saiarossa city, even a cough became thunder. Sometimes he ran to the old stables, crumbling and disused since the last of the horses had died, climbed up into the rafters where the flies didn’t go, and held himself tight, praying to Our Lady for Ma and Pa to stop shouting. But Joshua reckoned Our Lady had more important people to listen to, because she never answered his prayers. Maybe it was because he was doing the praying outside of church. Father Mateus said that church was God’s house, so Our Lady had to live there too, didn’t she? Or maybe, once upon a time, God and Our Lady had shouted at each other and Our Lady had left. Wherever she’d gone, Joshua didn’t see much sign of her around here. Ma’s voice had settled into a pattern, a steady thump thump thump beating in Joshua’s head and in his heart. Only the odd swearword stood out, and he knew Ma must have been really angry with Pa to have used some of those words. He flapped the sheets around him, trying to cool down a little, but they stuck to his chest and his belly and thighs like Aunt Maia’s plump, sweaty hands. With a sigh, he peeled back the sheets and swung his feet on to the rug.

1

He watched the curtain, twitching weakly in the half hearted breeze from the window, and padded to the door. Ma’s voice faded as he went out on to the landing. He wanted to look at it again, the thing that he knew Ma and Pa were arguing about, although Joshua suspected that she was more angry about how Pa had got it, than what it was. It had been stupid of Pa to even show it to her, Joshua thought. But then what had happened last night didn’t make any sense either, did it? Cautiously, he crossed to his parents’ bedroom. The door was open, the light out. It was at the back of the house where Ma and Pa wouldn’t be able to see, but he didn’t want to risk it. He left the light off, and paused for a moment, letting his eyes become accustomed to the amber gloom, spilling over his shoulder and around his feet from the landing. The dresser sat in front of the window, fat and ugly, laminate peeling from its corners. Pa had said that it had been one of the first things to be made on Espero, when the colonists arrived, but Joshua didn’t believe him. Plastic didn’t last 270 years. That was just stupid. Nothing lasted that long. He crossed to it and pulled at the bottom drawer. It slid open reluctantly, catching at one side so that it jammed, askew. Joshua swore a bad swearword and instinctively crossed himself, reflexively looking upwards as he did so. He didn’t know why he bothered if Our Lady wasn’t around. Maybe Baby Jesus was on listening duties tonight. He liked Baby Jesus, reckoned he was probably a bit more easy-going than Our Lady. He was a kid, Our Lady was a grown-up. It made sense. Besides, Baby Jesus probably didn’t know what swearwords were, anyway. Joshua quickly rooted in the drawer, and pulled back his hand as he found it, nestled in Pa’s socks. This is bad, thought Joshua, suddenly overcome with guilt. He clenched his hands into tight little fists and ground his knuckles together, like his Pa did when he was puzzled or angry. It seemed to work, because suddenly Joshua didn’t feel so bad about the thing in the drawer. He tried to tell himself that it was the thing that had brought him into his parents’ room, talking to him, but deep down he knew it wasn’t true. Taking a step forwards, he peered into the drawer, pushing Pa’s socks aside. The thing lay there, looking up at him. Joshua reached out and touched it. . . and remembered last night. ‘Where you going?’ asked Ma, in the tone of voice she usually reserved for ‘where you been?’ when Pa staggered in late after a night with the boys. She always knew full well where he’d been, but Joshua knew that she liked to keep him on his toes. He’d heard Ma and Aunt Maia laughing in the kitchen one day when he’d come back from school. Ma was saying, ‘If you don’t keep a

2

man down, he’ll always be up,’ and Maia had shrieked and hooted, but Joshua didn’t quite understand why they were laughing. Joshua glanced up from his homework to see Pa tugging on his boots at the back door. By rights Joshua should have done his homework hours ago, but Ma had wanted a hand packing savas, so she’d let him stay up late so’s he wouldn’t get into trouble at school the next day. The holidays were drawing near, and Joshua knew that both Ma and Pa were looking forward to his being able to help them around the house and on the laughable bit of scrubland they called a farm. Joshua didn’t mind; he hated school, hated all the stuff that the rich kids kept going on about – the vidfeeds from other colony worlds that their mas and pas had bought for them, trips to Advent (it sounded a dump, but that didn’t stop him from wanting to go) and Semane – and couldn’t wait until he was old enough to leave. ‘Get back to your homework, Joshua,’ warned his mother, pushing up nonexistent sleeves and getting to her feet. Joshua watched her stride over to where Pa was unlocking the gun cabinet. ‘Something’s come down,’ Pa said quietly, checking the rifle and filling his pockets with shells. Ma grabbed at the barrel of the gun, but he swung it away from her and fixed her with a stare. Joshua knew that stare: Pa didn’t use it often, but when he did, Ma usually backed down. One of those unspoken grown-up things. ‘Where? What’s come down?’ Ma asked. Pa whispered, but Joshua pretended not to be listening, and Pa spoke a bit louder than he ought to have done. He was meeting his brother, Uncle Ake. ‘Ake saw it come down near Wendacre’s Fields.’ ‘So why d’you need that, then?’ asked Ma. Joshua guessed that she meant the gun. ‘Hell, woman, you want me to go out there bare-handed? We don’t know what it is. And there might be more of those night beast things out there.’ ‘All the more reason to call the city police, then,’ said Ma. Pa must have shaken his head. ‘Why not?’ asked Ma. ‘What d’you think you’re gonna find there? What good’s it gonna do us?’ ‘There might be a reward or something. Maybe it’s landed off course. What’s it doing out here instead of at the port, then?’ Pa paused and Joshua heard the sound of the door being unlocked. ‘Ake reckons it’s an invasion!’ Pa said mock-menacingly, and he heard Ma tut loudly. There was a long pause, Ma muttered something bad about Uncle Ake, and then there was another pause. Joshua stared unseeing at the words on his comp screen, trying hard to make out what Ma and Pa were whispering. Eventually, she said softly: ‘Don’t do anything stupid, Keef,’ her voice suddenly gentle, like it used to be. Pa said something and was gone, and Ma

3

locked the door behind him. Moments later, Joshua finished his homework and closed down his comp. Ma was instantly suspicious, but was none too good at using comps so she gave him one of her looks and said he ought to be off to bed then. Joshua gave her a big, tight hug and ran off upstairs. In his room, he made all the right noises: he clattered about, went to the bathroom, peed, flushed, came back, clattered about some more and got into bed. Of course, he still had all his clothes on. He’d need them if he was going to follow Pa. Joshua turned out his light – after stuffing some clothes under his sheets in case Ma peeked in – and pushed back the fly screen on the window. As quietly as he could, he clambered out, on to the flat roof of the utility room, slid it back, and jumped down into the fragrant night. A thick clot of midges danced madly around the outside lamp, breaking up as he passed. With a glance back at the house, Joshua raced into the night, following the dim light of Pa’s light. Joshua hung back: if Pa saw him too soon, he’d send him back home with a sore ear. He heard a tuneless whistle from up ahead, and knew that Pa must still be a bit drunk from his evening ‘social’ with Uncle Ake. Saiarossa city was a good three-quarter-hour’s walk, but Pa still managed to get over there for a few pints every couple of nights. Wendacre’s Fields were a good hour’s walk from the farm, and Joshua wondered whether Pa was meeting Uncle Ake there, or whether he’d be picking him up in his truck. He hoped not – that would mean that they’d get there well before he would, and he might miss out on the fun. He remembered what Pa had said about the night beasts, and about what he’d heard on the news. There hadn’t been any sightings for a week or so, and they’d only been seen in the city. But they had to come from somewhere, Joshua had reasoned. Still, Pa had his gun, didn’t he? And Uncle Ake’d probably have his too. As long as he stayed close, he’d be fine. Joshua’s thighs were aching by the time Pa started to slow down, and he was grateful to be able to pause for a few moments, catching his breath in big, damp lungfuls. In the inky silence, he could hear the trilling of insects, felt a few of them brush casually against him and move on. The Esperon wildlife – apart from burrowbears – didn’t much like the taste of humans, but it never stopped them nipping. Joshua looked around: the farm was so far behind him that it was invisible in the dark. In all directions, everything was shades of black: the black of the sky, scattered with a few stars, and the blacker black of the ground and everything up to the vast horizon. Joshua tipped his head back and stared up at the stars, feeling momentarily dizzy. Which ones had other worlds around them, he wondered. Which ones had other human colonies? Where were Bliss, and Heritage and Availon? He wondered if Earth’s sun

4

could be seen from here, but he didn’t think so. As he looked around for Pa, he heard the distant grumble of Uncle Ake’s truck, and saw a tiny spot of light from its only working headlamp, coming towards him. Well, towards Pa. He squatted down in the dark, even though he knew he’d never be seen, and watched as the light grew brighter – and then stopped. The sound of the truck door slamming closed rumbled across the open countryside like a gunshot, and Joshua supposed that maybe Pa had climbed in. ‘Pa!’ he shouted, jumping to his feet and running towards the light. ‘Pa! It’s me! Don’t go!’ Puffing and panting, Joshua arrived at the battered truck to find Pa and Uncle Ake leaning on the bonnet, illuminated creepily by the single headlamp. For a moment, he wondered if Pa was going to be really really mad. ‘Josh!’ exclaimed Uncle Ake, stepping in front of the truck and peering at him. He turned to Pa, who was shaking his head. ‘What’s Josh doing here?’ ‘Josh,’ said Pa in a low voice. ‘Go home. This is men’s work.’ ‘I can’t go back, Pa,’ said Josh, trying his best to sound scared and upset. Which wasn’t too difficult. ‘I’ll get lost. I was following you here – I don’t know which way’s back.’ ‘Joshua,’ he said firmly. ‘Just turn around and go back. Now.’ He’d called him Joshua in that tone of voice, which was a sure sign. Joshua let his shoulders droop and turned, miserably. ‘Aw, come on Keef,’ he heard Uncle Ake say. ‘You can’t just let him walk back.’ ‘He walked here, didn’t he?’ replied Pa, unrelenting. ‘Like he said, he followed you. Who’s he got to follow back?’ Uncle Ake paused and Joshua heard the sound of his father’s defeat, escaping in a long, weary sigh. ‘Besides,’ added Uncle Ake. ‘What if it’s true what they say about the night beasts? Wouldn’t want him –’ ‘OK, OK,’ said Pa, sounding beaten. ‘But you stay in the truck, you hear?’ He squatted down beside Joshua and turned him round. Pa was in silhouette against the truck’s headlamp, but Joshua didn’t need light to be able to see the look on his face. ‘And if you ever do anything like this again. . . ’ His voice tailed off, letting the threat go unspoken. ‘Sorry, Pa,’ said Joshua meekly. With another sigh, Pa stood up and put his hand on Joshua’s shoulder. Together they climbed into the truck alongside Uncle Ake and set off into the night. The cab of the truck was filled with an odd, sour silence. Even Uncle Ake, normally chatty and affable, had fallen quiet. Joshua saw his uncle’s own rifle on the dashboard, and began to wish he’d stayed at home. He wanted to ask

5

what this thing was that had ‘come down’, but Pa’s silence infected him. They rode without a word passing between them for ten minutes or so, bumping through the darkness, until suddenly Uncle Ake raised an arm and pointed ahead. Joshua sat up in his seat and struggled to see what it was. Away ahead of them, nestled in the dark, was a tiny patch of pale light, huddled down against the ground. He felt Pa move at his side, gripping the stock of his rifle. ‘You stay in the truck, Josh,’ he said as the vehicle came to a halt and Uncle Ake cut the engine. If these were offworlders, why hadn’t they landed at the port? Why had they chosen to land in the middle of nowhere in the dark? Maybe they’d crashed. Maybe, like Pa had told Ma earlier, it was an invasion. Visitors to Espero were few and far between – the last ship he remembered coming here had been about three months ago, a shipment of stuff for the Palace, for the Imperator’s birthday celebrations. He knew a couple of kids at school who’d got new edprogs and comps, smuggled in on the ship. But why were Pa and Uncle Ake going out to meet it in the middle of the night with guns? He knew Pa wasn’t keen on offworlders – he still called them ‘aliens’, which always made Joshua and his mother wince – but coming out to meet them with guns seemed to be going a bit far. He sat quietly as the two men climbed out of the truck, rifles in hands, and set off towards the light. Joshua gave them a minute, then quietly opened the door and slipped out. If they were going to meet offworlders, Joshua wasn’t going to be left out. He stayed well back, knowing that if Pa saw him this time he’d get a good hiding. But he needn’t have worried: the men seemed too intent on what lay ahead of them. The patch of light grew and grew, gradually resolving itself into a large, luminous, blobby shape, squatting on the ground. He squinted: was it a spaceship? It was nothing like the spaceships he’d seen on his comp or at the port. This one looked like a half-filled sack of savas, spread out on the ground. As Joshua drew closer, he could make out more details: wrinkles and folds in the thing, knobby protuberances. He could see that the soft, bluish light wasn’t coming uniformly from the surface of the thing, but from dozens – maybe hundreds – of irregular mushrooms, scattered at random, over its surface. The sides of it sloped up to a peak, and Joshua smiled to himself, realising that it looked like a mound of radioactive mashed potato. Maybe it wasn’t a spaceship, but the debris from one. The two grown-ups had stopped and, haloed in blue fire, they split up, going around opposite sides of the thing. It wasn’t as big as Joshua would have expected, but in the dark he had difficulty judging its distance and size. It didn’t look like it was much bigger than the farmhouse. As the pale glow pushed out spindly shadows along the grass behind Pa and Uncle Ake, Joshua was sure he saw something move, away on the other side of the ship. But it moved too quickly and was

6

too distant for him to register anything other than a brief flicker. Pa and Uncle Ake clearly saw it too. Uncle Ake gestured left. Joshua’s eyes were caught by the flicker of movement again, but this time it was on the spaceship, up near the top. Something looked as if it were coming out of the peak, but perhaps it had climbed up the back of the ship. It looked, illuminated weirdly from below, a little like a man with a ram’s head: a long, narrow snout, pale and dead-looking, swept back up to a broad forehead that continued on to form two huge crests, curving back over the head like bony eyebrows above the black eyes. He froze, and watched as the creature continued to rise until it stood at the top of the spaceship, and he could see that it had the lower half of a horse. Well, thought Joshua, a bit like a horse. The creature’s upper body was like that of a thin man, grafted on to the fourlegged lower body. But unlike the legs of a horse, this creature’s legs splayed slightly outwards, like those of a spider, giving it a comically bandy-legged look. He couldn’t see whether it had a horse’s tail as well. Joshua jumped as he heard the clicking of the two men setting their rifles. He couldn’t believe that they were just going to shoot the horse-man-thing. Maybe it was good, and not invading. An odd noise drifted through the dark – a combination of electronic-sounding hums and clicks – and Joshua squinted, seeing the creature’s small, circular mouth moving. It was talking. It stopped after a few moments and tipped its head on one side as if waiting for a reply. ‘What d’you want?’ bellowed Pa boldly, but Joshua could hear the tremor in his voice. He saw him hefting the rifle in his hands. This felt bad. The creature repeated its noises, but this time the sounds were accompanied by something very odd. The creature’s body, in the bluish light from the ship, had looked white – or as pale as made no difference. But now it was changing: a series of flickering dark bands, like the stripes of a zebra, were scrolling along it, from the top of the sheep’s head, down over the man’s chest, and right to the horse’s back end. They flickered as they went, changing thickness, stuttering on and off. After a few seconds, the patterns froze in place, before being replaced by a hypnotic pattern of black and white dots, expanding all over its skin, like monochrome fireworks. Joshua was entranced. This was like nothing he’d ever seen before. The creature was beautiful. He heard one of the adults say something, but was too enthralled by the creature’s display to catch it. For the first time, because it was the only part of the creature that hadn’t shown the flickering patterns, Joshua saw that there was something on its chest, hanging round its neck perhaps. A Y-shaped thing about the size of his father’s hand. Then suddenly, moving amazingly quickly, the offworlder galloped down the slope of the ship. Joshua heard Uncle Ake swear, and although the crea-

7

ture stopped sharply on the grass, it made no difference. The next thing Joshua heard was the sound of his Pa’s rifle, exploding in the silence. He gasped and his throat choked up, as the beautiful creature jerked sharply, one of its slender hands moving to its side. It looked down, as if amazed at being shot, and lifted up its palm to examine it. Joshua could see a smudge of darkness, and knew that it was blood. He heard Pa say something to Uncle Ake, and called out, ‘No, Pa! Don’t shoot it!’ Pa turned quickly in the dark and swore at Joshua, telling him to get back to the truck. Uncle Ake shouted a warning to Pa, and Joshua saw that the creature was moving towards them, staggering and weaving about. Its head was tipped back, its mouth moving slowly, and Joshua could hear a low, guttural moan coming from it. A second shot rang out, this one from Uncle Ake’s gun, and the creature spun on the spot, one of its front legs collapsing beneath it. Away in the distance, in the dark, he heard a rising, groaning noise, shuddering across the countryside – and then realised that it was just elephines, disturbed by the gunshots. Joshua flinched as, with a wail, the horse-man fell to its knees and slumped on to its side. The two adults began to walk towards it, guns pointing straight at its head. Joshua wanted to cry. This was just so wrong. Without thinking, he crossed himself, wondering whether, if he shouted loudly enough, Our Lady would hear him and come and save the horse-man. ‘Please, Pa!’ he cried out, running to him and grabbing his leg, desperately trying to pull him back. ‘Leave it. It hasn’t done any harm.’ ‘It’s an alien, Joshua,’ intoned his father, as if it were something he’d learned by rote, a mantra that brooked no argument, no discussion. ‘Now go. Back. To. The. Truck.’ He didn’t try to shake Joshua off, just carried on walking, dragging the boy with him as he cocked his rifle again. Joshua wanted it to stop, wanted his Pa to leave the horse-man alone, wanted to go back to the farm and pretend that the offworlder had never come. He buried his face in Pa’s side so that no one would hear him crying. So now Joshua stood by the chest of drawers and tried to forget the fear he’d seen on his father’s face when he’d finally looked up. He tried to forget the horrible smell of burning as Pa and Uncle Ake had fetched the spare petrol cans from the truck and set fire to the spaceship. Joshua didn’t know quite what they’d done with the body of the horse-man, but he assumed that it had been destroyed too. In a mutual, shameful silence, the three of them had watched the ship burn, sending a luminous pall of smoke spiralling up into the night sky. It cracked and fizzed like melting plastic, and every so often, Joshua thought he could hear a tiny, feeble scream. Maybe there were others, other horse-men, still inside. Burning. After a while, as the flames had begun

8

to die down, Pa and Uncle Ake took him back to the truck, and back home. Pa had something in a plastic rucksack that he kept in the car, but he wouldn’t show Joshua what it was, and wouldn’t talk about what they’d done. And when, eventually, he’d heard his parents come to bed – after more muttering and shouting and clattering of pots – Joshua had sneaked downstairs to see what Pa had in the rucksack. His hands had trembled as he’d pulled it open: inside, gleaming softly, was the Y-shaped thing that the horse-man had worn around his neck. A souvenir, thought Joshua. No – a trophy. He wanted to touch it, but it held too much shame, too much guilt, and Joshua didn’t want to be infected by it. But its silent call had been too much to resist, and now here he was, gazing down into the drawer where it had been hidden by Pa. He reached out and took hold of it.

9

Chapter 2 ‘D’you think you could keep your monkey under control?’ Calamee squinted into the sun as the Saturday afternoon crowds began muttering and murmuring, their heads turning towards the vast, sandy bulk of the Palace and the satanic iron gates that, depending on your point of view, either kept the public away from the Imperial Family, or the Imperial Family away from the public. Curious, she pushed her way towards the source of the crowd’s attention, ignoring the irritated grunts of her fellow Esperons as she elbowed her way through. Nessus clung to her shoulder, his little toes digging into her through her summer frock, slender fingers entwined in her close-cropped hair. She could feel him swaying his head from side to side excitedly. And then, as if an almighty hand had reached down and split the throng, the crowd opened up before her and a figure cannoned into her, knocking her on to her backside. ‘Ow!’ she yelped, struggling to get up, ready to deliver a hefty slap to her assailant. But before she could, her fingers were grasped by a cool hand and she was heaved effortlessly to her feet, to be faced with the widest, wildest eyes, the palest face and the most unkempt hair she’d ever seen. Nessus squeaked on her back as he locked his arms around her neck. She could feel him shivering. ‘Sorry about that,’ the man said breathlessly, glancing over his shoulder. ‘It’s just that I appear to be being chased by an armed retinue of your Palace Guard, and I’d really rather avoid being impaled by their staves.’ He looked back at her. ‘If at all possible.’ And with another look behind him, he was off, sprinting through the bemused crowd. Before she knew what was happening, Calamee felt Nessus spring from her head and bound away after the offworlder, darting through the legs of the Esperons with an agility she hadn’t realised he possessed. ‘Nessus!’ called Calamee. ‘Come back!’ And before she could think about what she was doing, she hared after the little creature. And the stranger. As she raced to catch up with the two of them, Calamee could see that his status as an offworlder endowed him with all the charisma of a sewage worker just off his shift: the mass of people

11

packed into the Palace square moved aside to let him through as though the mere touch of him might soil them permanently. Offworlders were a rarity on Espero, and many people had never seen one in the flesh – never mind a white one. It was almost funny, seeing them draw back as he darted this way and that, Nessus cantering along a few paces behind him. Of course, Calamee was travelling in their wake, and made better going, so it didn’t actually take her long to catch up with them. Nessus was already clambering up the man’s trouser leg and making steady progress towards his shoulder. The man threw an irritated look down at him. ‘Where are you going?’ she asked casually as she caught up, managing to prise Nessus off the man’s arm and persuade him to grab on to her own. Nessus gave an irritated little squeal of protest but stayed with her all the same. The man turned and did a double take, evidently surprised at her presence. ‘This way looks quite nice,’ he said, gesturing vaguely in front of him. ‘Unless that’s a bad idea. . . ?’ Calamee looked up ahead: he was heading for the south side of the square, so unless he thought that buying an expensive new frock from one of Mother’s favourite outfitters might throw off his pursuers, she reckoned he needed a bit of help. ‘That way might be better,’ she suggested, pointing off to the left. ‘I’ll take your word for it,’ said the stranger. ‘As you might have gathered, I’m rather new around here.’ He glanced back over his shoulder, looking for the Palace Guard. Calamee scanned the crowd: in the distance, she could see the spikes of the Guard’s staves, waving through the crowds like stalks of burnt corn. She could see people turning, pointing towards them. Although the Palace Guard were not greatly loved, they were certainly respected, and Calamee knew that most of the people would be more than happy to help catch an offworlder – particularly an offworlder that was running away from the Crystal Palace. For a moment, she wondered what exactly he’d done, and whether she should be quite so keen on following him. Nessus squeaked and clambered nimbly up on to her shoulder. He raised himself up on his long hind legs and, to Calamee’s amusement, appeared to be scanning the crowd as well. What was wrong with him today? He could be amusing, he could be irritating; today, the only word to describe his behaviour was determined. He leapt gracefully on to the offworlder’s back and tangled his fingers in the man’s hair. ‘D’you think you could keep your monkey under control?’ he said, trying to prise Nessus’s hands away from his eyes. ‘He’s a mokey,’ Calamee corrected him, pushing the man ahead of her. ‘And he seems to have taken quite a shine to you. Take it as a compliment and keep

12

moving if you don’t want them to catch up with you.’ The man grumbled and the crowds parted before them as they headed for the corner of the square. The streets branching out from the south-east corner were smaller, more labyrinthine, and Calamee reckoned that they had a better chance of hiding from the Guard there. Of course it would be just her luck to run into Mother and Father: she’d left them browsing furniture an hour ago, and by now they might even have noticed that she wasn’t with them any more. Just in front of the Palace, workmen were occupied with fencing off an area for some sort of tournament, part of the Imperator’s birthday bash, and she saw half a dozen nervous horses being led through the crowds. People were stepping aside nervously clearly scared of being kicked by the animals. It gave Calamee a narrow avenue to slip through, dragging the stranger in her wake. A group of nuns in full habit stopped to stare judgementally at them, and Calamee smiled and crossed herself without thinking. The throng around them began to thin out as they reached the edge of the square and she breathed a sigh of relief that at least no one had stopped them to ask the stranger where he was from. Yet. ‘This way,’ she hissed, grabbing him by the arm and dragging him down a narrow, cool street, buildings high on either side of them. The smell of spices and cooking meat filled the air and the stranger paused and irritably fanned away a haze of midges from his face, grimacing. He caught Calamee’s eye. ‘It’d be too much to hope they don’t bite, wouldn’t it?’ ‘Sorry,’ Calamee said. ‘Yes, it would. But you’ll get used to it.’ He raised his shoulders ruefully and glanced up, looking as though he were trying to focus on the midges. Comically, Nessus’s head made the same movements, and he reached out for one of the midges – before nearly losing his grip and tumbling from the stranger’s shoulder. She sighed and pushed the two of them down the alleyway, past the bemused and curious faces of a couple of Esperon kids who had stopped to stare at them. ‘Do visitors to your world always attract this much attention?’ the offworlder asked as they reached a junction and Calamee tried to work out which way to go. ‘Only when they look like you.’ ‘I’ll take that as a compliment,’ the man said. He seemed harmless enough – slightly bemused and dazed, Calamee thought, but then if she’d been a prisoner in the Crystal Palace, she might be feeling a bit bemused and dazed, too. ‘Makes a change, though,’ the man said. ‘I normally manage to blend in perfectly. Are we actually going somewhere. . . ? Sorry, I don’t think I caught your name. I’m the Doctor, by the way.’

13

With surprising speed, he reached out to grab Calamee’s hand and pumped it up and down madly for a moment before dropping it abruptly. ‘Calamee,’ she said. ‘And yes, we are going somewhere. I just haven’t decided where yet.’ She looked back down the narrow street they’d just visited: no sign of the Guard yet, but she found it hard to believe that they’d given up on him this quickly. They normally stayed inside the Palace, more ornamental than functional: the city police would no doubt have been notified about the Doctor’s escape by now, and they wouldn’t be quite so easy to shake off. What the hell was she doing? she thought. Helping a criminal to escape? Of course, now that she had Nessus back, there was no real reason to stay with this Doctor. Particularly since she didn’t know what the penalty was for aiding and abetting the escape of an offworlder (although she was pretty sure it wouldn’t just be a stiff telling-off and a ‘go to your room for a week’). But Calamee’s life was usually so terminally dull that it seemed such a shame to just say goodbye and meekly head back to normality. When would she ever get a chance to be this close to an offworlder again? Who knew what technologies and exotic things he had access to, what things he could show her? The leaden heat of the Esperon summer was settling in, the schools would be closing in a few days, and a month of tedium stretched ahead of her. Maybe this Doctor could put a little bit of zing into it. Even if it was only till he was caught again. ‘How did you get here?’ she asked. ‘Have you got a ship at the port?’ ‘A ship at the port?’ The Doctor looked flustered. ‘I expect so.’ ‘You expect so? Don’t you know? How did you get here?’ He sighed and Calamee saw his shoulders slump. ‘That’s the whole point,’ he said tiredly. ‘I can’t remember.’ Trix sat up sharply, her bottom slipping on the floor of the bath, feeling momentarily disorientated. At times like these, when the TARDIS wasn’t in flight and she was the only one aboard, it was easy to remember what it had been like before: when she’d lived like a mouse in the skirting board, the Doctor, Fitz and Anji knowing nothing of her existence aboard the ship. But Anji had been gone a while, and sometimes it seemed like nothing had changed. When he wasn’t finding a use for her, sending her off to the distant past or the far future on errands for him, or telling her that as soon as they arrived in the right place and time she’d have to go, the Doctor made a studied pretence of ignoring her. Fitz, on the other hand, seemed to have quite taken to her – in an annoying, puppyish sort of way. He was OK, she supposed. And it was useful to have a friend aboard. If nothing else, she could rely on Fitz to prevent the Doctor from taking off and leaving her behind. She cleaned the bubbles from her ears and wondered where her travelling companions had got to.

14

‘We’re just popping out for a few minutes,’ Fitz had said. ‘Going to pinpoint the source of the distress call,’ the Doctor had said. That was the first she’d heard of any distress call. ‘You have a nice bath,’ Fitz had added. ‘We’ll be back before it’s cold,’ the Doctor had finished. And they were gone, some sort of device in the Doctor’s hand bleeping and burbling. ‘Fine,’ she’d said airily to the closing door. ‘You boys go and play with your toys. Don’t worry about me. I’ll be fine here. Got any washing you want doing? Socks need darning? Shall I have dinner on the table when you get back? Phft!’ Not that she really fancied a dreary plod round some backwater of a planet looking for a crashed spaceship or stranded alien astronaut. If it turned out to be more than a fifteen-minute job to fix it, no doubt Fitz would be back to tell her. But since she’d been an official TARDIS occupant, she’d had hardly a moment to herself, and the thought of a half-hour soak, all on her own, was too enticing. Trix stood up, foamy, and reached for a pink-and-white candy-striped towel, wondering if they’d come back yet and were already in the console room, congratulating themselves. They could be so annoying at times. She felt a bit bad for begrudging the Doctor his happiness – particularly after what had happened to Miranda – but his current outburst of boyish enthusiasm seemed to have ignited Fitz’s immaturity, and the two of them were just getting each other going. She wondered if Anji had felt like this around them, and whether the Doctor was doing it on purpose, trying to make her feel like a gooseberry so that she’d be more than willing to jump ship when she got the opportunity. Huh! she thought. Fat chance, Doctor. She checked the Mickey Mouse alarm clock on her bedside table – one of the knick-knacks that Anji had left behind – and realised that she’d been soaking for over an hour. A few minutes later, she strolled into the console room, running her fingers through the tangles in her hair, shaking it out. There was no sign of them – just a big, empty Fitz-and-the-Doctor-shaped hole where, somehow, they ought to have been. Well, as long as they weren’t having An Exciting Adventure With Some Space Hunks, that was fine by her. It was only as the second hour began to roll around that Trix began to get worried. Trix saw instantly that Fitz was lying in what looked to be an awfully uncomfortable position, his left leg bent at an implausible angle, face down on the grass just fifty yards from the TARDIS.

15

‘Fitz!’ she called as she ran to him. He lay in a patch of dappled sunlight, unmoving, his black leather jacket crumpled up around his torso. ‘What happened?’ She knelt beside him and tried to remember the intensive first-aid course she’d once taken in preparation for the role of ‘nurse’ to a rather wealthy elderly gentleman. But that seemed like a lifetime ago, and she realised that she wasn’t quite sure what to check. His pulse. Yes, that would do. She didn’t want to move him or roll him over or anything like that: that, she knew, was The Wrong Thing To Do. She felt around his neck until she found his pulse. She didn’t know whether it was a good pulse or a bad pulse, but at least he had one. Something rustled and she sat up sharply, glancing around: the TARDIS had landed at the edge of a patch of rather pretty woodland. The ground sloped gently downwards towards a little copse of trees and bushes in a hollow. The air smelled rich and aromatic, herby. She could quite easily have been on Earth – a summer’s evening, somewhere in the Mediterranean, thought Trix as she glanced around, wondering if the Doctor had made the noise. ‘Doctor?’ she called, and then realised that if Fitz and the Doctor had been attacked, the noise could just as easily have been their attacker. ‘Fitz!’ she hissed, leaning in close to him as she realised that there was a limit to the resuscitative powers of pulse-checking. ‘Wake up, Fitz!’ There was a disgruntled groan from him and he turned his head experimentally. ‘Don’t move,’ Trix said. ‘Can you move?’ ‘Uh,’ came Fitz’s decisive answer. ‘Good,’ said Trix, squinting into the shade of the bushes. ‘Can you get up?’ ‘Uh,’ Fitz said firmly. ‘Well, get up then. Fitz – I think there’s something in the bushes! And don’t just say “Uh” again. Come on!’ She tugged at his collar, hoping that he’d take her hint. ‘Wha. . . ?’ ‘We’ve got to find the Doctor, Fitz – or get back to the TARDIS.’ Fitz muttered something through a mouthful of grass and painfully levered himself into a kneeling position. The side of his face was imprinted with a pattern from the ground and Trix noticed that a patch of hair the size of a matchbox was missing from Fitz’s temple. But there was no blood there – just a smooth, raw-looking patch of skin like you’d get after recovering from a burn. It make Trix feel a bit creeped out. She’d never been good with disfigurements and bodily injuries – although since she’d been with the Doctor and Fitz, her tolerance levels had risen considerably. ‘Fitz, your head – what happened?’

16

He fixed his gaze on her as well as he could, with eyes that seemed as determined as possible to go their own ways, and frowned. She nodded. ‘I know. “Uh.” Can you stand?’ Fitz gave her an ‘Of course I can stand’ look, wobbled to his feet and promptly fell over backwards with a deep moan. ‘We don’t have time for slapstick – there’s something in those bushes. Is it the Doctor?’ ‘Eh?’ She sighed. ‘Forget it – let’s get you back. Does the Doctor keep a first-aid kit or a spacey medical robot or magical heal-all pills or anything? Something like that ointment he gave to Guy?’ Fitz shook his head slowly, like someone coming out of a dream, and fixed her with a deep and puzzled frown. ‘That’s a no, then, is it?’ she sighed. He coughed noisily, his hand flying to his chest as he doubled up. ‘C’mon, up you get,’ Trix said, realising that the floor was nowhere for an injured man to be sitting. Particularly if he was badly injured. She slipped her hands under his armpits in an attempt to lift him up, but he pushed her away as his coughing fit abated. ‘Where am I?’ he demanded unsteadily, staring at her. ‘And who the Dickens are you?’ Behind them, unheard, the air fizzed and crackled, like the sound of a billion champagne bubbles.

17

Chapter 3 ‘Sticks, Trix?’ Imperatrix Alinti watched critically, as a bevy of butlers and servants swarmed across the Grand Hall, their arms laden with bolts of silver and gold fabric, banners and poles. She’d grown tired of arguing with her husband about the archaic way in which he’d insisted on decorating the Palace for his birthday celebrations, and had grumpily agreed to ‘maintain a sense of tradition’ about the whole affair. If she’d had her way she’d have had the whole Palace decked out with optical projectors, lasers and tridee imagers. This insistence of Tannalis’s on tatty fabric ribbons draped all over the place was tacky, she felt, and sent out the wrong image of the Imperial Family to the country – never mind to the rest of Espero. She knew for a fact that the Prime Administrator in Anjon had spent a small fortune on offworld technology to mark his third inauguration – including an obscenely expensive short-range matter transmitter to have his whole parliament transported instantly to the celebrations. Now that was class, Alinti thought. That was style – particularly since the use of matter transmitters went specifically against High Catholic doctrine, since Pope Constanza had decreed that it was impossible to teleport a human soul. The only concessions she’d been able to wheedle out of Tannalis so far were five battered old levicars purchased from Marselle (which he’d agreed to far too readily, thinking about it), and a commitment to having the diamond monolayer coating of the corner towers resurfaced. As she’d explained patiently to him, they could hardly go on calling it the ‘Crystal Palace’ in its current state. She blamed the government’s appropriation committees for skimping on it the first time round: a decent coating job should last for centuries, not just a decade. When she was in charge, she’d make sure the imperial budgets were brought up to appropriate levels. She gave a sigh as a girl tripped and a roll of shimmering fabric bounced across the flagstones down below, unrolling itself like a half-hearted wave washing up on the shores of the Imperial Family’s reputation. ‘Pick it up!’ she shrieked, leaning out over the balcony from where, her blood pressure increasing with every moment, she was attempting to oversee them all and make the best of a bad job. ‘Do you know how much that costs?’

19

Of course, it didn’t actually cost very much: she’d struck a deal with some old people’s home in Eastlane where they’d set up a whole barnful of looms as ‘occupational therapy’. Less than four solaris a roll. She watched through narrowed eyes as the girl blundered about, trying to re-roll the fabric without stepping on it. ‘If it’s damaged, it’s coming out of your wages!’ Alinti called. The girl looked up and gave a pained little curtsy, her arms full of acres of glittering fabric. If Tannalis hadn’t insisted on this ridiculous, antiquated charade, Alinti thought, turning away, she wouldn’t have to put herself through all of this. Selfish, he was. Just plain selfish. As Alinti strode down the corridor towards the stairs, Javill appeared out of the shadows and made her jump. ‘Sorry, Mother,’ he apologised, taking her hand in his own and giving it a little squeeze. ‘I do wish you wouldn’t do that, dear,’ she said, trying not to show how much he’d startled her. But she couldn’t be mad at him for long: he was her special son, after all, and she knew how much he loved his mother. He was a handsome boy – flawless skin, rich, deep eyes and a strong, square jaw. He pulled an apologetic face. ‘I heard you shouting at the staff,’ he said. ‘Can’t we get some better ones?’ Alinti gave a brittle laugh. ‘Blame your father – he insists on overseeing all dismissals. D’you know that he reinstated that chef that I sacked last week? Gave him his job back – just like that!’ She made a little popping gesture with her hands that rapidly turned into a sharp clasping motion, red talons spearing inwards. ‘He really is becoming unbearable. He thinks I don’t know about his secret meetings with Minister Djelardine or that offworld stranger he’s installed in the Palace. When I question him about them, he just fobs me off, tells me that it’s nothing I need to worry about’ Alinti glanced away and shook her head. ‘I don’t know how much more of him I can stand, Javill. I really don’t.’ Her voice tailed away pitiably. ‘I know, Mother,’ said Javill, taking her hand again. ‘I know. But this may be the last birthday he sees.’ He paused and looked into his mother’s eyes. ‘We should make it a good one. Who knows how much time he has left?’ Alinti gave a gentle nod. ‘His health isn’t what it was,’ she agreed. ‘His doctors seem to think he might last another five or ten years, but I can’t believe it.’ Javill gave a contemptuous snort. ‘No doubt trying to curry favour with him. I agree with you, Mother.’ he’s looking iller by the day. I may not be a medical man, but I think I know my own father.’

20

‘So sad,’ said Alinti, taking a deep breath. ‘Now if you’ll excuse me, my dear, I have to go and discipline that stupid girl.’ She paused, her fingers clutching the brass hand rail. ‘If I can remember which one she was.’ Javill waved his hand contemptuously. ‘Then just discipline them all, Mother.’ Alinti smiled indulgently: this was why she loved Javill so much. He always knew what to say. Sometimes she wondered whether he was really Tannalis’s son. God knows, there’d been enough other men. She gave Javill a kiss on the cheek, smiling at the memories that the thought brought to mind. ‘Go and find out what your sister’s doing, darling,’ she said, squeezing his hands. ‘And make sure she’s doing it properly.’ She watched Javill trot down the stairs: such a fine young man. He’d make someone a wonderful husband one day. Alinti turned and headed for her husband’s rooms (it had been many years since they’d shared a bed – something for which Alinti was eternally grateful) and entered without knocking. He was sitting in his chair at the window, staring out on the noise and bustle of the afternoon market in the square. A couple of tents, their awnings and pennants flashing red and gold in the later afternoon sun, were being erected at one end of a fenced-off area, in preparation for some sort of tedious jousting tournament. Alinti felt herself tighten up as she approached the old man, who was swaddled in a cream blanket. From behind, he looked even older: hunched and thin, his white hair contrasting with his dark skin in the summer sunshine. ‘What?’ he snapped without even turning. Alinti felt her jaw clench. ‘Tannalis,’ she began in her most reasonable tone. ‘It’s about the staff.’ ‘You complaining again?’ he grunted, turning to look at her. ‘Haven’t you got enough to be doing without wasting your time trying to turn my birthday into some sort of pantomime?’ He fixed her with a stare and then turned back to the view as if she’d suddenly stopped mattering. Alinti hated it when he did that – as if she were no more than a member of the Palace staff. ‘It’s all right for you,’ she said. ‘All you have to do is sit here and wait for the rest of us to get everything done. Life’s easy for you, isn’t it? I’ve been running myself ragged –’ ‘Horse-cack,’ said Tannalis. ‘I’ve been keeping an eye on you, woman: it’s Sensimi and the rest of my staff that have been doing the work. You’ve just been swanning around getting on everyone’s nerves and in everyone’s way. You’re not Imperatrix proper yet, and don’t you forget it.’ Alinti took a deep, pointed breath, but before she got a word out, her husband turned in his chair. ‘This is my birthday, and I’ll celebrate it my way. Right?’

21

‘Darling,’ said Alinti with as much feeling as she could, holding out her hands to him, but he shooed them away. ‘Don’t “darling” me, woman. Don’t think I don’t know what’s going on in that shrivelled little head of yours. You never thought I’d live to be a hundred and twenty, did you? You and that feckless son of yours have been hanging around like vultures for the past decade, waiting for me to drop so you could pick at my corpse. Eh? Well, I’ve made it. I’ve made it this far and I’m not about to give up yet.’ Alinti tried to smile compassionately, but he just snorted. ‘Everyone wants you to live to be a hundred and fifty,’ she said. ‘Nothing would make me and Javill happier. Even the doctors say –’ ‘Huh! What do they know, eh? Those quacks you brought in from Eden were as much use as Javill. I’m glad I sent them packing and got some of my own in.’ He grinned at Alinti’s expression. ‘At least they won’t accidentally poison me.’ ‘Poison you?’ Alinti put on her most horrified voice and clasped her hands to her breast in what she hoped was a gesture of astonishment. He waved her away. ‘Don’t start all that business,’ he said. ‘You can’t lie as convincingly with your hands as you can with your mouth. Stick to what you’re good at. Now leave me alone. It was a beautiful day until you dragged your raddled old carcass in here. Go on – go and harass someone. I’ve got thinking to do.’ Alinti smiled again, but she knew she wasn’t fooling him. Poison? Could he have guessed? And what thinking could he possibly be doing? Alinti didn’t like this: Tannalis was normally quiet and unassuming. She didn’t like this at all. Could it be connected with the offworlder that Tannalis seemed to have befriended? ‘What are you waiting for?’ Tannalis grunted, turning his back on her and leaning forward to peer out of the window. ‘Nothing, my dear,’ said Alinti as she headed purposefully for the door. ‘I’m not waiting for anything.’ The Doctor didn’t know where Calamee was taking him. Once they’d left the crowds in the square behind, she’d taken him on a seemingly random tour of tiny, shadowed streets, the evening sun slanting across the tops of them as it picked out the tatty, stuccoed walls and the terracotta-tiled roofs. Gleaming crucifixes, their gold-leaf pristine amid the general decay of the city, sat atop many of the buildings, hugging the squat bell towers and spires; crude but strangely powerful religious iconography decorated crumbling walls: tableaux of the Last Supper, the Crucifixion, the raising of Lazarus. The air was warm

22

and muggy, and clots of insects danced in the few shafts of light that struggled to find their way to ground level. Nessus sleepily acknowledged them, squeaking half-heartedly. The Doctor had explained, as best he could, how he couldn’t remember anything before waking up in the woods outside the city. He’d stumbled around for a while, aching and confused, before wandering into the city. He’d told a stunned-looking young man that he was new here, and asked for suggestions about where he ought to go. The man had suggested the Palace and given him directions. ‘And then he ran off,’ finished the Doctor. ‘I think I must have scared him somehow.’ ‘Being an offworlder is enough to scare most people around here. And, not to put too fine a point on it, the fact that you’re white doesn’t help.’ ‘Really?’ The Doctor was astonished. That possibility had never crossed his mind, although, now that Calamee mentioned it, it did seem rather obvious. ‘As you might have noticed, white faces around here are rather few and far between. What happened when you got to the Palace?’ ‘They let me in.’ ‘Just like that?’ Calamee seemed amazed. ‘I got the feeling they’d been expecting me. Nothing they said, just a vague sense that I wasn’t a complete surprise to them. I was shown to a room and told to wait; that someone would be along to question me later.’ The Doctor rubbed his neck, feeling the smooth, tingling patch of raw skin that he’d discovered on his way into the city. He had a couple on his arms and one on his leg, and he could feel a large one wrapping around his ribcage. They itched slightly. ‘And did they? Did you meet the Imperial Family?’ The Doctor shook his head. ‘There was something in the way they said “question me later” that sounded like a euphemism for “beat me with sticks” so I decided to leg it. The Imperial Guard started chasing me, and the next thing I knew, you were throwing yourself in my way.’ ‘Excuse me – I think you’ll find it was the other way around.’ ‘Was it?’ The Doctor looked vague. ‘I’ll take your word for it.’ ‘And you don’t remember anything at all about how you came to be outside the city? What you’re doing on Espero?’ ‘Espero? Is that what this planet’s called?’ He gave a thoughtful frown. ‘Espero. . . “hope” in Esperanto. Or are we talking Spanish here?’ He looked around, as if seeing the city for the first time. ‘Definite Moorish influences, don’t you think? An Earth colony. . . ’ He looked to her for help with raised eyebrows. ‘Sometime in the future?’

23

‘The future? That bang on your head must have been a pretty big one.’ ‘No no no,’ he said. ‘It wasn’t a bang on my head’ He paused. ‘Maybe it was. But why am I thinking that this is all happening in the future? What’s all that about, then?’ He ran his hand though his hair and shook his head. ‘I can’t shake the feeling that I’m here for a reason, you know.’ ‘Are you speaking spiritually or literally?’ ‘Literally. I think.’ The Doctor looked around, and saw a couple of children standing in a doorway, watching him with dark, suspicious eyes. ‘Maybe it’ll all come back to me if I can find something familiar, something. . . ’ He waved his hands, grasping for a way to finish the sentence. ‘You need a doctor,’ Calamee said. ‘I am a doctor.’ ‘No, a proper doctor. Someone who can take a look at you, examine you. Maybe get your memory back.’ The Doctor hmmed, unconvinced. Somehow, he suspected that a ‘proper doctor’ wouldn’t be of much use. It was frustrating and tantalising at the same time, like the cloud of flies dancing out of reach around his head. He looked up and saw a particularly fat one, wobbling around above him. ‘What you looking at?’ he said grimly to it, before looking back at Calamee. She looked at him dubiously. ‘I get the impression,’ she said, ‘that you’re not a medical doctor yourself, are you?’ He shrugged. ‘Maybe.’ ‘Well, let’s work on the basis that you aren’t? Calamee looked thoughtful. ‘If they’re still after you, we can’t take you to a hospital or anything obvious like that.’ She fell silent for a moment, and the Doctor wondered whether he should really be trusting himself to a girl who couldn’t be more than sixteen, even though she acted more like she was twenty-six. Calamee, the Doctor imagined, was probably very pretty – slim with a delicate oval face, cropped brown hair with just a dusting of gold. The shape of her eyes and her lips spoke of a mixed heritage: African, perhaps, with a hint of Indonesian or Chinese. He wished he could tell her more about himself. It was frustrating enough remembering little other than his own name – assuming that ‘Doctor’ was his own name, which, the more he thought about it, seemed rather unlikely. Maybe he’d made a mistake in escaping from the Palace: maybe he’d have learned more by hanging around. Calamee let out a triumphant noise and grabbed his arm. ‘It’s obvious!’ she grinned. ‘You want sanctuary, don’t you?’ ‘I’d rather have my memory back.’

24

‘First things first. We can worry about that later. We need to get you somewhere safe, somewhere the Palace Guard and the police won’t be able to get at you. Come on!’ She tugged at him, and Nessus – who’d fallen asleep on her shoulder, while watching her conversation with the Doctor – nearly fell off. ‘Wherever we’re going,’ the Doctor said, following along in her wake and pulling a face at the mokey, ‘I hope they do food. I’m starving.’ ‘Are you sure this is wise?’ asked Trix as she and Fitz stepped from the TARDIS. The evening air was cool, the sky a dark orangey pink, like a huge peach hanging above them, and the wood seemed remarkably still and quiet. ‘Wise is as wise does,’ said Fitz cryptically – and, Trix imagined, quite meaninglessly, ‘but if the Doctor’s out here somewhere we have to find him.’ She remembered the rustling she’d heard in the bushes, and had ghastly visions of their poking around and finding the Doctor’s body. Fitz still hadn’t remembered what had happened to him and the Doctor – and still had no explanation for the bare, pink patch on his head (and, it transpired, the numerous other patches of tender skin all over his body) – but at least he now recalled who Trix was. After pushing her away inside the entrance to the TARDIS, he’d tried, unsuccessfully, to get to his feet, and after two attempts had reluctantly accepted her offer of help. She’d taken him through to her bathroom and told him to strip off and get in. And to her amazement (and probably to Fitz’s eventual embarrassment) he’d peeled off his clothes there and then and clambered in. It was then that she’d noticed the raw skin in ragged, mismatched patches all over his body. It didn’t seem tender, though – Fitz had made no complaints, unless she’d misinterpreted the occasional soft moan, as he’d slid under the water. Trix had considered making him a cup of coffee, but hadn’t relished the thought of coming back to find that he’d passed out and drowned. So she sat in irritated silence as Fitz soaked and scrubbed. After about ten minutes, he’d suddenly turned to her, his hair all foamy and stuck up, and declared that she must be Trix. ‘Who did you think I was?’ He’d just shaken his head vaguely and winced. ‘I knew who you were,’ he’d insisted, ‘I just couldn’t remember your name.’ Trix had doubted that, but pointing out the fact that he’d shoved her away from him didn’t seem a very constructive step on the road to getting him well again, so she’d said nothing. When she’d been convinced that he wasn’t going to faint and drown himself, she’d padded off to make a cuppa, and had come back to find him climbing back into his blood- and grass-stained clothes. ‘You could put something clean on,’ she’d said, guardedly, as she handed him his coffee.

25

‘No time,’ Fitz had said briskly, fluffing around with his hair. ‘We’ve got a Doctor to find.’ Despite the fact that Fitz still didn’t quite seem himself, she’d been pleased that he had at least remembered who the third member of the TARDIS team was. And now they were outside, and in the still evening air, Trix wondered how, exactly, they were going to find that third member. ‘We should get sticks,’ said Trix. ‘Sticks, Trix?’ He smiled. ‘If we’re going to be beating off monsters,’ she said grimly, ‘I’d prefer not to be using my bare hands.’ Fitz raised an eyebrow ‘Monsters?’ ‘Well you didn’t get yourself in that state, did you?’ He frowned, dearly still trying to remember how exactly he had got himself in that state. Trix found a sizeable piece of wood and held it up for him. ‘Here you go.’ ‘You keep it,’ said Fitz. ‘I prefer to use my wits.’ ‘Then I imagine’, she said drily, ‘that we’re both doomed. Come on – it’s going to be night soon.’ Trix waggled the stick in her hand, checking for balance, before setting off after him. Overhead, the first stars were beginning to peek through the bruised sky.

26

Chapter 4 ‘I bet you even put knickers on her.’ A church, thought the Doctor, seemed an unlikely place for Calamee to have brought him. Not that he’d already formed any opinion about her religious tendencies. But – from what he could remember of them – his experiences had tended to demonstrate that brash, opinionated youth generally held little truck with organised religion. But if she was looking for sanctuary for him, it made sense, he supposed. He shook his head: his amnesia was clearly not total. How would he have known that churches equalled sanctuary if it had been? As they’d walked, he’d managed to bring up dozens of fascinating – if useless – bits of information: he’d run through the periodic table, listed two dozen different planets that he felt sure he’d been to, named all eleven Lassie films, and found it impossible to recall quite what Salvador Dali’s Autumn Cannibalism had looked like, although he couldn’t, for the life of him, work out why it was irking him so much. Personal details – other than his name – simply weren’t there. He couldn’t remember where he’d come from, how he’d arrived, anything about his parents or his family. Nothing before he’d awoken in the woods. It had crossed his mind that, perhaps, there was nothing before that: that, somehow, he’d been created there and then under a bush. But if that was the case, why had whoever or whatever had created him deigned to fill his head with such bizarre trivia as the dates of all Frank Sinatra’s comeback tours? He felt he ought to be more annoyed than he was about all of this, more frustrated. That, in itself, was starting to get him worked up. It had taken them less than half an hour, winding their way through what the Doctor imagined were the less salubrious areas of the city. Even Calamee had seemed nervous, sticking close by the Doctor in a rather sweet way. Nessus, as was his wont, had settled down around the back of Calamee’s neck, like some huge, occasionally wriggling, fur collar. He seemed to have lost interest in the Doctor. The Doctor couldn’t blame him – an amnesiac, he mused to himself, is hardly the most stimulating of travelling companions. Calamee had explained that the city would he settling into its siesta before the imperator’s birthday carnival round about now, which explained the relatively deserted streets. Soon there was almost no one around – just a

27

few elderly women, laden down with raffia baskets of shopping, or people closing up their premises. A few stringy dogs sniffed their way around the shop doorways, or curled up tiredly in the shade. This deep into the city, the streets were narrow and uneven – deep, cool canyons in the heat of the day’s end. But it would soon liven up, Calamee had explained when they’d seen a stack of vast, papier-mâché puppets in a small square. Children were fussing around them, laughing and squealing – and the Doctor could see how truly tatty the city was. It had evidently been built with either an eye on economy, or with a less-than-expert labour force. Walls of buildings, plastered in white and cream and taupe, bulged disturbingly, or else leaned out so far into the narrow streets that the occupants of the upper storeys would have had no problem shaking hands with their neighbours on the other sides. Washing, strung out between balconies, flapped listlessly, barely touched by the weak breeze that trickled through the streets. Away in the distance, the Doctor could hear church bells, clumsy and tuneless. Saiarossa seemed like a city desperately struggling not to collapse. Like an elderly woman plastering herself with make-up in an attempt to hold back the indignities of age, it looked sad and rather pathetic. Murals of people he didn’t recognise, surrounded by angels and wearing halos, adorned crumbling walls; metal spars and girders jutted skeletally from cracked walls. It reminded him of Venice, a city sliding graciously towards its final end. More skinny dogs roamed the streets, and haunted, tired eyes stared hack at him from cracked and dirty windows. The ground beneath him was a mess: broken and uneven, sprouting weeds and even a fully grown tree bearing small, pallid fruits like deformed oranges – it looked as if it had been laid in one, long seamless ribbon, perhaps by machine when the city had been built. But the years had taken their toll, and it was now full of potholes and wide, grit-filled cracks. ‘We’re here,’ said Calamee, glancing up and down the street as if they were about to enter an opium den. They were in front of a blue door, its paint flaking and chipped. In a niche at the side of it was mounted a painted wooden statue of the Virgin Mary, her face and hands black, as was the raised heart, carved on to the centre of her chest. It had evidently been there some years, judging by its condition, and the Doctor couldn’t help but notice the tired look in its eyes. Or maybe that was just him, projecting his own weariness. At the other side of the door was a wooden plaque, hand-painted in blue and white, proclaiming that they were outside ‘The Church of the Forgotten Saints’. How appropriate. He looked up at the tiny building: it didn’t look much like a church to him (but, as he kept reminding himself, what did he know?). Calamee tried the door, but it was locked. She pressed a small button at the side. ‘I’m surprised,’ said the Doctor. ‘You don’t strike me as the church-going

28

type.’ He pulled away from Nessus as the mokey woke up and reached out for his shoulder. ‘I’m not, but this is where Mother and Father used to come before they moved to Santa Anghelis and found a posher one.’ She glanced up at the buildings towering over them. ‘I was born not far from here, believe it or not. I was confirmed here.’ The door opened a few inches, and the face of an elderly man peered out. He eyed Calamee dubiously, but when he saw the Doctor, there was an audible inhalation of breath. ‘Father Roberto?’ said Calamee. ‘My name’s Calamee Fischer. You remember me?’ Father Roberto opened the door wider and leaned out a little. ‘Child, you’ve grown!’ he said, almost disapprovingly. He was short and quite pudgy; a halo of fuzzy grey hair wrapped itself around the sides and back of his head, and he looked as though he hadn’t shaved for a few days. He looked the Doctor up and down. ‘And who’s this?’ ‘They call me the Doctor,’ said the Doctor, holding out his hand – which went ignored. ‘Do they indeed? And what would St Thomas have made of that, I wonder?’ Roberto’s voice was full of suspicion – and, thought the Doctor, perhaps with good reason: if even he didn’t know quite what he was doing here, he could hardly blame the Esperons for wondering too. ‘Can we come in?’ asked Calamee, when it seemed that an invitation was not to be forthcoming. ‘I suppose,’ Roberto said grudgingly, after giving the Doctor the once-over again. He stepped back and opened the door wide. Calamee stepped inside and the Doctor followed. They were in a deliciously cool hallway, illuminated only by light spilling from an open door at the end of a short corridor. The air was rich with the smells of leather and camphor, tobacco and incense, and a heavy scent of flowers. Father Roberto padded away down the corridor, leaving Calamee and the Doctor to follow him. ‘You’re sure he remembers you?’ the Doctor whispered. ‘Well, he’s let us in, hasn’t he?’ They stepped out into a stunningly beautiful little courtyard. The walls were high and painted white, the ground beneath them paved with huge, creamcoloured flagstones. All around them were vast pots and basins and tubs, gushing forth a giddying variety of flowers. Some crawled across the flags beneath them; others struggled up wires and makeshift trellises, fastened to the walls. Some just burst from their pots, like living fibre-optic lamps. The

29

scent was dizzying. Up above them, high, high above, was a small square of vivid indigo sky, like a lid on this magical world. ‘This is quite, quite beautiful,’ said the Doctor, almost breathlessly, realising that Father Roberto was waiting patiently, hands clasped behind his back. For a moment, the sternness of his expression melted, and he gave a little nod. He was wearing an old pair of brown leather trousers and a matching waistcoat, under which he had on a dark green shirt, rolled up at the sleeves. He looked, thought the Doctor, more like a down-at-heel country gentleman than a priest. ‘Can I get you something to drink?’ Roberto asked, and they both gratefully accepted a cup of tea. Father Roberto slipped away while the Doctor and Calamee found a small, cast-iron bench to sit on. Nessus peered around curiously, sniffing the air, following the weaving of insects with his big, expressive eyes. ‘Wow,’ Calamee said, lifting him down and setting him on her knee. ‘This is something, isn’t it?’ ‘A keen gardener,’ said the Doctor. ‘How long ago did you last see Father Roberto?’ Calamee gave a shrug, reaching up to sniff a huge clot of velvety purple flowers dangling from a basket on the wall above her. ‘Probably about five or six years ago.’ ‘He must have made quite an impression on you, if this was where you thought to bring me.’ ‘I s’pose. He always seemed a decent sort – and anyway, our new church is miles away. If the Guard are still after you, it doesn’t make much sense to stay out in the open any longer than we have to.’ The Doctor looked at her. ‘You’re rather enjoying this, aren’t you?’ ‘What?’ ‘All this – the running around, the hiding, the escaping. All this tedious stuff.’ Calamee snorted and smiled. ‘Tedious? This is the most fun I’ve had in years.’ She obviously realised what she was saying and pulled an apologetic face. ‘Sorry – I know this is important. I’ll try to take it seriously. Honest.’ The Doctor hmmed good-naturedly ‘So what’s your plan?’ ‘Plan?’ ‘Well, you’ve brought me here. What do I do now?’ ‘Um. . . I hadn’t thought that far ahead.’ She gave an awkward smile. ‘But Father Roberto will know what to do.’ ‘Father Roberto will know what to do about what, child?’ came Roberto’s voice from the corridor as he returned with a wicker tray of tea things. He set

30

them down on a tiny table that the two of them hadn’t noticed, hidden away under sprays of creamy yellow blossoms. ‘About me, Father,’ said the Doctor. ‘And how, exactly, do you think I can help?’ The Doctor noticed that Roberto seemed to be addressing Calamee, and ignoring him, as he poured the tea into tiny bone china cups and handed it to them, indicating the sugar bowl. The Doctor shook his head. ‘I feel light-headed enough in this beautiful garden already,’ he said with what he hoped was his most winning smile. ‘I don’t think I could cope with the sugar rush.’ Roberto didn’t seem to warm to the Doctor’s attempt at humour, and pulled up a little stool from opposite them. The Doctor noticed he wasn’t drinking himself. He sipped at the mint tea as Roberto pulled out a little leather pouch of tobacco, and set about rolling himself a match-thin cigarette. ‘The Doctor’s an offworlder,’ began Calamee, all of a sudden. ‘And he needs help.’ ‘You don’t say?’ replied Roberto archly, looking at the Doctor directly for almost the first time since he’d let them in. ‘An offworlder? I’d never have guessed. And what kind of help would an offworlder be looking for from an Esperon?’ Calamee looked at the Doctor expectantly, like the parent of misbehaving child being called to account in a headmaster’s study. ‘As far as I can recall,’ he said obligingly, ‘I came here recently – possibly just a few hours ago, probably not more than a day or so – and something happened to me that. . . well, that I can’t remember.’ Roberto regarded him silently – and clearly suspiciously. He lit his cigarette with a tiny silver lighter and drew thoughtfully on it for a few moments, puffing out clouds of surprisingly pleasant smoke. The Doctor took a deep breath, and felt an odd longing to have a drag on the cigarette himself. ‘And how do you think I might be able to help him?’ Roberto addressed his question to Calamee, even though he continued to stare at the Doctor. ‘Calamee was kind enough to rescue me from the Imperial Guard,’ the Doctor said. ‘I’ve just spent half an hour locked in the Palace – well, not so much locked as left in a room with an open door. Which is often the same thing, isn’t it?’ ‘No,’ said Roberto. ‘I don’t think it is.’ ‘Well, it is if all you can do is sit there and stare at the open door, wondering why it’s open. It might as well be locked. You’re a prisoner in any case.’ ‘I don’t imagine you’ve come here to debate philosophy, have you?’ ‘No, no. Anyway, as it happens I didn’t just sit and stare at the open door – I decided to leg it. The Imperial Guard started chasing me, and Calamee very

31

kindly brought me here.’ ‘And why would that be, Calamee?’ ‘We were hoping – I was hoping – that you’d give him sanctuary,’ said Calamee hopefully. Roberto grinned from ear to ear. ‘Sanctuary? Sanctuary, girl? D’you think we’re living in the middle ages?’ He shook his head as he chuckled and took another drag from the cigarette. ‘Don’t you do that any more?’ She seemed genuinely surprised. Roberto finished laughing. ‘I’m not sure we ever did, did we?’ ‘Oh yes,’ said the Doctor. ‘Once upon a time it was rather a thing.’ ‘An expert on human history, are you? So your memory hasn’t gone completely then?’ He gave a wry smile, but the Doctor wasn’t sure whether it was in disbelief at the Doctor’s story or not. ‘Well, well. That’s one thing I wouldn’t have taken you for. There aren’t many of us left, you know?’ ‘Experts in human history?’ Roberto nodded, and suddenly the Doctor realised that the priest seemed much warmer towards him. There was still suspicion and distrust in his eyes, but he was definitely thawing. ‘Something of a black art,’ Roberto said. ‘If you’ll pardon the expression. D’you know Espero’s history?’ ‘I don’t even know my own. But go on – is there some sort of moratorium on it, then?’ ‘We made a big mistake,’ Roberto said, his eyes drifting over the swathes of blooms that hovered around them, like clouds of brightly coloured ink in water. ‘We thought we knew better than history.’ ‘“We”?’ ‘Espero’s founders – the cardinals, bishops and businessmen that funded the colony. They elevated the idea of ignorance as bliss to a whole new level.’ The Doctor leaned forward. ‘Tell me more,’ he said. ‘Looloo!’ snapped Sensimi. ‘Stop that!’ The little creature looked up at the princess with a mixture of fear and surprise in her eyes, her tiny paw clotted with cream from the bowl on the kitchen table. Slowly and guiltily, she sneaked it towards her mouth, her eyes never leaving Sensimi’s. ‘Disgusting creature,’ muttered Javill as he swept in from the hallway. ‘It shouldn’t be allowed near food.’ ‘It’s a she, Javill, and wherever I go, Looloo goes.’

32

Sensimi’s brother paused as the kitchen staff rapidly found excuses to be elsewhere and he sneered at the mokey, as it sat on the edge of the granitetopped table. ‘And why do you have to dress her up like that? Just look at her – it’s not natural, putting a dirty, hairy little thing like her in a dress and a tiara.’ Looloo was now intent on cleaning the cream from between her fingers. He dipped his head slightly to the side as he tried to peek up her dress. ‘I bet you even put knickers on her.’ ‘She’s perfectly housetrained. And she looks adorable like that, don’t you, baby?’ Sensimi crossed the kitchen and swept the confused little creature up in her arms, squeezing her so tight that Looloo’s eyes bulged, and a thin trickle of creamy drool ran out of her mouth and down the back of Sensimi’s blouse. Javill tried not to laugh. ‘Mother’ll have her put down if she catches her in here.’ ‘She will not,’ insisted Sensimi, whirling round, still gripping on to her precious baby. ‘I’ll tell Father. He’ll have you put down.’ ‘Just wait, Sensimi,’ Javill warned. ‘Just you wait. As soon as. . . ’ He stopped. ‘When Mother’s in charge, things’ll be different around here.’ Sensimi’s eyes flared defiantly. ‘I know what you were going to say. “As soon as Father’s dead.” That was it, wasn’t it?’ Javill gave an uncaring shrug. ‘We both know he’s old, Sensimi. He’s not going to live forever. And if you know what’s good for you, you’ll stop being such a pain. You know the title will pass to Mother and then to me. It’d be awful if you pissed off everyone above you, wouldn’t it?’ ‘He’s not. . . he’s not gone yet,’ she said, heading for the door. Looloo squeaked and reached out over Sensimi’s shoulder for the rapidly receding bowl of cream. ‘And while he’s still here, you better be very careful.’ ‘Ooooh!’ mocked Javill. ‘I’m so scared, little sister. Whatcha gonna do? Set the mokey princess on me? Get her to dribble me to death?’ Sensimi felt her face redden as she paused in the doorway, a cutting riposte almost on her lips. ‘Pig!’, unfortunately, was all she managed to come out with. ‘Bloody pig!’ It wasn’t until Looloo started squealing in earnest, halfway up the main staircase, that Sensimi realised how tightly she’d been squeezing her. As soon as she released the pressure, Looloo scrabbled to get free and climbed up on to Sensimi’s shoulder where she pointedly finished cleaning her paw. ‘Don’t worry, baby,’ Sensimi cooed. ‘We’ll make sure that nasty brother and that nasty mother get what they deserve, won’t we, eh?’ She reached up and stroked her mokey’s neck, and Looloo responded with a little throaty grumble, already forgetting about almost being hugged to death. ‘Daddy’s going to

33

outlive them all, isn’t he? Yes he is.’ And with Looloo grabbing on to her hair for dear life, she headed up the stairs to the bedrooms. She passed a couple of the Palace staff, ignoring them as they bobbed and curtsyed, and deposited Looloo on her bed. ‘Be good for Mummy,’ she said, before slipping back out into the corridor. Through the open windows that let out on to the courtyard at the centre of the Palace, she could hear the clanging and drilling and shouting of the work on the stage from where her father would make his birthday address tomorrow. Running through the details of her plan, she headed down one of the sets of back stairs to the main kitchens, away from the family kitchen where she expected Javill would still be. A few of the staff were still bustling about, most of them so tied up with making sure everything was in order for tomorrow that they hardly noticed her. Those that did tried their hardest to pretend they hadn’t seen her and quickly found reasons to be somewhere else. So it was relatively easy for Sensimi to take a big pan into the meat store and to begin to help herself. Imperator Tannalis shuffled along the corridor that ran around the courtyard. He’d been advised to use a walking stick (having already turned down the idea of cybernetic callipers) but was having none of it. He was the Imperator, and if he couldn’t celebrate his 120th birthday on his own pins, then he wouldn’t celebrate it at all. Alinti’s visit had raised his hackles, and he wanted to check that she hadn’t tried to sneak something tacky into the celebrations. He paused and slipped on to one of the numerous balconies that looked down on to where his stage was being noisily bolted together. There was something simultaneously sad and exciting about all the people below him, running around, shifting chairs, hanging up flags and banners. He recognised the crests and logos of many of the other states and nations on Espero, flapping apathetically in the warm breeze, but frowned at the couple he didn’t. A TV crew was conducting an interview with Minister Djelardine just in front of the stage: trust him to be stealing some of the glory. Tannalis sighed with a smile. What did it matter? He’d made his decision, little did that harpy Alinti know. That was why he’d summoned Djelardine, to finalise the arrangements. ‘Can I get you anything, Your Highness?’ He turned suddenly at the voice. It was Farine, one of Sensimi’s maids. She hovered solicitously behind him. Tannalis grinned wolfishly at her – and then realised that it probably just made him look like some sort of old pervert. Nice rump on her, though, Tannalis thought wistfully. A bit of something to get hold of. The contrast between the shy, amply bosomed girl and his shrivelled old crow of a wife made him smile. His philandering days were behind him now,

34

but it would still be nice. . . just once more. . . He waved her away with a regretful shake of the head. King David managed to get away with it, with Abishag, but he doubted that he any longer carried the weight of such a figure. ‘I’m fine, girl. That woman of mine running you all ragged, is she?’ Farine dipped her head, not answering, but Tannalis could see it in her eyes. ‘Don’t you worry about her,’ he said. ‘She thinks she rules the henhouse, but this old rooster’s still got a bit of life in him.’ Farine bobbed and scurried off. If he’d been up to it, he’d have teased her a bit more about what she and Sensimi were up to. He might have been old, but he wasn’t stupid. There were more than just his own plans afoot in the Palace.

35

Chapter 5 ‘How can we know where we’re going, when we don’t know where we’ve come from?’ ‘Espero was meant to be a fresh start for humanity,’ said Roberto. ‘The Ecumenical Council decided that all we needed to make Espero thrive was a faith in God and the goodwill of the colonists. Obviously, we brought some technology with us, but we were naive and trusted in the promises of HomeWorld – the corporation that sold us the planet – that Espero was a paradise, rich in resources, a ripe fruit just waiting to be plucked. We were gullible, desperate to leave Earth, to get away from the hegemony of the West, of North America and the Eurozone.’ At this, he raised an eyebrow almost imperceptibly at the Doctor. ‘We were blinded by the opportunities that we saw out here – the chance to make our universe, in our own image. History, we were told, would start anew.’ ‘So you were sold a pup? Espero, I mean.’ Roberto nodded. ‘HomeWorld told us that Espero had everything we needed. They showed us mineralogical surveys and climatological reports. It looked like a paradise. And you can imagine how desperate the Ecumenical Council was to find a new paradise. Humanity had screwed up the last one we were given, and this was another chance. Perhaps our last.’ He smiled, but it was a cold, dry smile. ‘God was giving us another chance at Eden, so we grabbed at it with both hands.’ ‘But there was a serpent?’ Roberto gave a shrug. ‘If you believe in original sin, then yes – there was a serpent. Our own stupidity, brought with us, packed into every bag and box and suitcase, wrapped in every fold of cloth and every wrinkle of every man, woman and child that made the journey. The Council told us that, in order to start afresh properly, we had to throw away millennia of human history. No looking back, no living in the shadows of the past.’ ‘You wouldn’t be the first colony to set out with that ethos. But if you don’t mind my saying so, isn’t it a rather strange attitude for a religious organisation?’

37

Roberto nodded ruefully. ‘Our faith,’ he said, ‘was one of the few things that we were going to take with us. At the time, so I understand, it all seemed to make perfect sense. God would lead us into the new Promised Land – we needed nothing but faith and the Holy Church. So the only records we brought with us were sacred writings and a few technical manuals. Nowadays, people suspect that there was more politics than belief behind the decision, rumours that some of Earth’s major powers secretly put up the money, just to get us offworld.’ Roberto gave a sigh, and his gaze drifted around the courtyard, around the little paradise he’d created for himself here. The Doctor wondered whether many people used his church for worship any more, or whether this oasis was all that kept Roberto going. ‘It was hell. The colonists arrived in their new Eden to discover that the resources HomeWorld had promised were buried too deep for the minimal equipment that we’d brought. The climate was hotter than we’d expected, there were insects everywhere. Fresh water was hard to find. The first fifty years almost saw Espero wither and die.’ ‘But didn’t you get help from other Earth colonies, or other alien civilisations out here?’ The Doctor caught the expression on Roberto’s face as he said the word ‘alien’. ‘It’s the word “alien”,’ explained Calamee. ‘It has a lot of bad connotations. We use the word “offworlders”.’ Roberto continued. ‘The other colonies had their own problems – they were too wrapped up in setting themselves up, fighting for their own survival. Oh, we told ourselves that soon they’d be visiting us, trading with us. The Council promised us that we’d be at the centre of a revival of faith in this sector. They opened visitor centres and embassies, expecting an influx of fascinated offworld cultures, eager to learn about us, eager to be embraced by Mother Church.’ He fell silent. ‘It never happened?’ said the Doctor gently. Roberto looked at him and shook his head. He dropped the butt of his cigarette on to the floor and ground it out with his toe. ‘We were fooling ourselves,’ he said sadly. ‘We had nothing that anyone wanted. Oh, we had offworld visitors during the first century – they came to say hello, to see what we had to offer. But when they saw how little we had, how utterly, utterly mundane we were, they left. And never came back. The embassies went unused, the visitor centres were closed down. And Espero retreated into itself.’ ‘But what about your faith? Surely that must have kept you going?’ ‘Oh it did. It was the only thing that did. For a while. But for many people,

38

faith exists to provide an explanation of those things that science hasn’t yet revealed to us. And as science explains more and more of the universe around us, so faith finds itself struggling. When the first offworld non-humans came, we made efforts to explain God to them, to introduce them to His glory. In our naivety, we hadn’t counted on them having their own gods, their own beliefs. Beliefs as strong as ours. They smiled at us, thanked us – some of them even tried to convert us to their religions – and went away. ‘Espero started out with a strong Catholic ethic. The Ecumenical Council had faith that, unlike on Earth, we could restore the life and practice of the Holy Apostolic Church, and so reflect God’s glory. Within half a century, there were disputes; schismatic sects began to form, to set up their own states and cities. Some,’ he shook his head sadly, ‘lost their faith altogether. And then, maybe inevitably, there was the Almost War between three of Espero’s nations, halted at the last moment.’ Roberto gave another sigh, and the Doctor realised how very, very old he suddenly looked. He wondered how long it had been since the priest had talked about all this to anyone. ‘I can understand your wariness about me,’ he said. ‘I’m sorry,’ he said, looking the Doctor in the eye. ‘“Judge not, lest ye be judged.” But it’s very hard. We feel we were let down and betrayed by offworlders, left to our own devices when we needed help the most.’ He looked the Doctor in the eye. ‘And the fact that you’re white – if you’ll excuse my bluntness – doesn’t help. We came here to escape the prejudice and the cultural dominance of the West,’ said Roberto. ‘To create a Paradise free from oppression. It rankles with many that, yet again, we’ve drawn the short straw. When white offworlders visit and never come back, it reminds us of our past, back on Earth.’ ‘I noticed the statue,’ said the Doctor. ‘Outside. I take it they’re all like that.’ Roberto nodded. ‘You’ve no idea how much damage the myth that the Holy Family were white has done to us, to our self-esteem, Doctor. For centuries, brown people – black, I believe they called themselves then – lived in the shadow of a white God. No matter how much they prayed, how penitent or good they were, being white was something they could never be. That kind of patronage does damage.’ He clenched his fist and pressed it against his chest. ‘Here. I hope things are different out there now.’ ‘The more things change,’ said the Doctor, ‘the more they stay the same. Humanity may be one of my favourite species, but I’m not blind to the havoc they can wreak, the injustices they visit on themselves. And on others. They’re one of the most adaptable, versatile, adventurous species in the galaxy, but they’ve never lost their inability to learn from their mistakes.’ Roberto grunted. ‘How can we know where we’re going, when we don’t

39

know where we’ve come from?’ he murmured. The Doctor felt a cool breeze spiral down from the purple sky, pricking his skin. ‘But we all need a fresh start, sometimes,’ he said distantly. ‘We can’t live in the past forever.’ ‘It would be nice,’ Roberto said, ‘if we could just start living in the present.’ The courtyard was a confusing, noisy mass of people, equipment and machinery. Spotlights were coming on around the square as night fell. Two men on a long-arm crane hung banners bearing the Imperial crest from the top of the girders above the stage, while a woman, down below, waved them into position. Shouting would have got her nowhere. A group of dancers were practising in a corner, prancing around each other, trying not to trip over the poles and stacks of chairs that littered the place. Javill found it all incredibly tedious. At the very least, he thought as he watched from a balcony above, Father should have taken this opportunity to announce that he was standing down. One hundred and twenty years old, and still he insisted on clinging on to the Imperatorship, as though he didn’t trust Mother to do the job properly. The fact that he insisted on celebrating his birthday in such an outdated way spoke volumes – a sad old man, clinging to the past instead of embracing the future. Javill was under no illusion that the Imperial Family had any real influence. Even parliament hardly consulted Father any more. Legislation slipped by without even receiving the Imperial approval. Novelty mugs and commemorative plates. That’s all they were. And this farrago of a birthday would do nothing to change that. Mother was right: Saiarossa needed a breath of fresh air, an injection of new blood to revive the Imperatorship. The Imperatrixship. ‘History in the making,’ said a deep voice behind him and he jumped. ‘Apologies, Your Highness.’ It was the offworlder – the one who called himself Mr Trove; the one who, in less than two days, had managed to ingratiate himself with Father and who had barely spoken two words to Mother. Javill drew himself up. Trove was tall and distinguished, alabaster-pale skin with a quiff of blond hair, immaculately coiffured. He wore a sharp and plain suit of dark green, fashionable and asymmetrically cut. Javill had disliked him the moment he’d seen him – partly because he was an offworlder, partly because he exuded a quiet confidence that Javill found unsettling, but mainly because, like most of the Saiarossans, he seemed to be labouring under the misapprehension that it was Father who wielded the power around here. Javill nodded curtly, and turned back to the scene in the courtyard. The men with the crane were adjusting the lighting over the stage.

40

‘Your father is a man of tradition and history, isn’t he?’ mused Trove. Javill grunted, but didn’t turn around. Out of the corner of his eye, he saw Trove move alongside him to lean on the balcony. ‘We have no history here,’ Javill said flatly. ‘Or didn’t your research tell you that?’ ‘Everyone has history, Your Highness. Just because it doesn’t go back to the dawn of time doesn’t invalidate it. Your father is very. . . brave. . . ’ Javill turned. ‘Brave?’ ‘When the leaders of Espero’s other nations make such a play of looking to the future, the Imperator must be applauded for his determination to celebrate the past, wouldn’t you say?’ Trove was staring at him, one eyebrow raised fractionally, a hint of a smile on his full lips. What was he saying? ‘Father has always had a thing about the past. There are many Saiarossans who think that it’s unhealthy. The whole of Esperon culture, the origins of the colony, were based on making a new start – building a new future out here among the stars, not repeating the mistakes of the past. Some would say that he’s foolish, not brave.’ ‘And what would you say, Your Highness?’ Trove gestured towards the pantomime in the courtyard. ‘Do you venerate the past? Or do you see Espero’s destiny, as you put it, out among the stars?’ This stranger was sailing very close to the wind, Javill thought, his interest piqued. He’d hardly been here two minutes, and already he was questioning Father’s beliefs. ‘Espero is the poor cousin,’ he answered. ‘We have been abandoned by the other colonies, left to our own devices. Every month brings news of the advance of other worlds – new technologies, new beliefs, new alliances formed. The Catholic heritage on which we were founded has become a liability.’ Javill paused and looked Trove in the eye. ‘Father will not live forever. And his successor, believe me, will have very different ideas.’ Trove nodded thoughtfully. ‘I’m pleased that Your Highness thinks as I do,’ he said, reaching into his pocket. He pulled out a tiny, glittering sphere, the size of a tangerine, and carelessly tossed it over the balcony. Javill’s gaze darted to follow it: it fell a few yards and then exploded in brilliant, polychromatic light, like a burst rainbow. Hovering above the heads of the people below, it shot out shafts of light of all hues, and the crowd fell silent, their eyes raised heavenwards in amazement. For a minute, the sphere rotated, and the people in the courtyard began oohing and ahhing at the spectacle. Even Javill was impressed.

41

And then Trove clicked his fingers and the sphere fell dark and returned to his hand and thence to his pocket. ‘Very impressive,’ Javill said. ‘A toy,’ replied Trove dismissively. ‘It is nothing that you couldn’t have access to, Your Highness.’ Did Trove mean the Esperons, or him personally? As far as Trove was concerned, it probably was nothing more than a toy. And as a demonstration of offworld technology, it was hardly cutting-edge. But Javill couldn’t deny that it had him hooked. ‘And at what price?’ Trove smiled and straightened up. ‘Things are only worth what people will pay for them,’ he answered cryptically. ‘Maybe we’ll speak about it later. If you’ll excuse me, Your Highness, I have a few things to attend to.’ Trove started to walk away, but Javill stopped him gently. ‘Why are you here, Mr Trove?’ ‘A treasure hunt, Your Highness.’ He moved to go, and then paused and removed the rainbow device from his pocket. He pressed it into Javill’s hand. ‘And believe me – I intend to be the winner.’ Javill watched him leave, turning the sphere over and over in his fingers. The oasis, as Trix thought of it – despite the fact that it was little more than a copse of trees and bushes set in a shallow hollow in the woodland – was eerily quiet. The first stars were glimmering and twinkling as they watched her and Fitz blundering about. They’d brought torches from the TARDIS, but Trix couldn’t help but think they were being dangerously naive to think that they could find the Doctor in the dark without coming across whatever it was that had attacked Fitz. She stopped as she felt something hard crunch and crack under her foot. It was the Doctor’s tracking device. She raised it to her ear and gave it a shake. It rattled, pointedly. ‘Well, at least we know he was here. Can’t you remember anything?’ she hissed, tossing the tracker aside as she bumped arms with Fitz. Their torch beams crissed and crossed over each other as they danced around the undergrowth. She poked experimentally at a bush with her stick, tensing herself in case she disturbed something. ‘I remember leaving the TARDIS with the Doctor,’ Fitz said wearily, ‘and I remember following him. And then. . . ’ His voice tailed off. ‘The next thing was you poking at me and telling me to wake up.’ ‘So no idea what it was that attacked you? I mean, it would be useful to have some idea of what might be waiting for us, Fitz.’

42

Fitz didn’t answer – as a low grumble, like a tiger purring, rumbled around them. ‘Something like that, perhaps?’ he said. If she could have done it without looking like a coward she’d have very firmly suggested that they go back to the TARDIS and wait. But Fitz’s ‘accident’ seemed to have inspired a bravado in him that she hadn’t noticed before, and she didn’t fancy the idea of being reminded, for ever more, that she had been the one to bottle out. ‘Doctor?’ called Fitz experimentally. ‘You there?’ Trix added. But there was just silence, and the flitting pools of light from their torches. ‘This is stupid,’ she said eventually. ‘He could be lying a few feet away and we’d never find him.’ ‘You’re probably –’ Fitz stopped sharply, and Trix swung the beam of her torch up to his face. He was frowning, listening intently to something. He ignored the light shining in his eyes. ‘Can you hear that?’ Over the gentle rustling of the bushes and trees in the breeze, Trix realised that there was something else: a fizzing, hissing sound, and she was reminded of the sound of the foam in her bath back in the TARDIS, popping in her ears. Trix swung the torch around, pushing out long, spindly shadows from the branches around her. ‘Trix!’ hissed Fitz, drawing her attention to where he was shining his own torch – down towards the ground in the direction of the copse. A wide swathe of vegetation was undergoing a weird and horrible transformation: a metre’s width of the ground, stretching left and right out of v