Drug Half-life Explained

Medically reviewed by Carmen Pope, BPharm. Last updated on May 23, 2022.

What is the half-life of a Drug?

The half-life of a drug is an estimate of the time it takes for the concentration or amount in the body of that drug to be reduced by exactly one-half (50%). The symbol for half-life is t½.

For example, if 100mg of a drug with a half-life of 60 minutes is taken, the following is estimated:

60 minutes after administration, 50mg remains

120 minutes after administration, 25mg remains

180 minutes after administration, 12.5mg remains

240 minutes after administration, 6.25mg remains

300 minutes after administration, 3.125mg remains.

In theory, we can see that after 300 minutes, almost 97% of this drug is expected to have been eliminated. Most drugs are considered to have a negligible effect after four-to-five half-lives. However, this does not mean that won’t be detectable, for example, during a drug test. Just that they will have no effect.

In reality, the actual half-life of a drug varies from person to person, because it depends on a number of different patient- and drug-specific factors. These affect how well a particular drug is distributed around a person’s body (called the volume of distribution), or how fast a person excretes that drug (called the drug clearance). For example, the IV drug gentamicin, which is cleared through the kidneys, has a half-life of 2-3 hours in a young person with no kidney disease, but its half-life is over 24 hours in somebody with severe kidney disease.

Generally, it is difficult to precisely say how long a drug or substance will take to be excreted from someone’s body. This is an important fact for athletes or people in occupations that require them to be substance-free to remember. Half-lives in the anti-doping world are of limited value because they do not reflect the presence of metabolites (break-down products from the parent drug), which are often what is measured in anti-doping tests. In addition, serum half-life does not necessarily reflect urine concentrations, which is the main way they take samples for drug testing.

Patient-specific variables that may affect half-life

Age

Blood circulation

Diet (eg, grapefruit juice and several drugs, green vegetables, and warfarin)

Excessive fluid (such as in people with heart failure or edema) or low fluid levels (dehydration)

Gender

History of previous drug use

Kidney function (for drugs that are cleared via the kidneys)

Liver function (for drugs that are metabolized through the liver)

Obesity

Pre-existing conditions (such as heart failure, gastrointestinal disorders, pregnancy)

Presence of drugs that compete for binding sites or interact in other ways

Race/ethnicity or genetics (this can influence the metabolism of a drug)

Smoking

Other variables, such as if the person is on hemodialysis.

Drug-specific variables that may affect half-life

Drug formulation (ie, modified or controlled release preparations extend half-life)

How the drug behaves in the body (ie, zero-order, first-order, or multi-compartmental pharmacokinetics)

How the drug is administered (half-life may be different with IV administration, compared to intranasal or oral administration)

How the drug is cleared from the body (eg, kidneys, liver, lungs)

If the drug accumulates in fat or other types of tissue

If the drug binds to proteins or not

Presence of metabolites or other drugs that may interact

Properties of the drug, including molecule size, charge, and pKa

The volume of distribution of a drug

Other variables, such as if the drug is actively transported, is self-induced, or has saturation pharmacokinetics.

Short versus long half-lives

Drugs or substances that have a shorter half-life tend to act very quickly, but their effects wear off rapidly, meaning that they usually need to be taken several times a day to have the same effect. Drugs with a longer half-life may take longer to start working, but their effects persist for longer, and they may only need to be dosed once a day, once a week, once a month, or even less frequently.

When considering drugs with a high addiction or dependence potential, those with a short half-life are typically harder to withdraw from than those with a long half-life. For this reason, drug treatment programs will often switch a person from a short-acting drug to a long-acting equivalent from the same class, in order to improve the withdrawal process.

List of common medicines or substances and their half-lives

Generic Name Brand Name Examples Half-life (T1/2*) Alprazolam Xanax 6-12 hours Amiodarone Pacerone 15-142 days Amphetamine Adderall, Dexedrine 10-12 hours Atenolol Tenormin 6-7 hours Clonazepam Klonopin 18-50 hours Cocaine - 50 minutes Diazepam Valium 20-100 hours Donepezil Aricept 70 hours Dutasteride Avodart 5 weeks Erenumab Aimovig 28 days Fluoxetine Prozac 2-4 days Heroin - 2-6 minutes Lead - 28-36 days Mercury - 65 days Methamphetamine Desoxyn 6.4-15 hours Methylphenidate Concerta, Ritalin 2-3 hours Plutonium - 40 years (liver), 100 years (bone) Phenytoin Dilantin, Phenytek 7-42 hours Tetrahydrocannabinol (cannabis/marijuana) - Infrequent users: 1.3 days

Regular users: 13 days Warfarin Coumadin, Jantoven 1 week

* Note that half-life varies depending on the source used. Half-life in this table refers to the elimination half-life.

See also

Common Drug Side Effects

Does grapefruit juice interact with my medications?

Drug Expiration Dates - Are expired drugs still safe to take?

Generic vs Brand Drugs: Your FAQs Answered

How do I remember to take my medications?

How do I stop my medication safely?

How to Safely Dispose of Your Old Medications

Imprint Code FAQs - For Oral Medications

Injection Types and Sites

Medical Conversions - How many mL in a teaspoon?

Pill splitting - Is it safe?

Top 150 Prescription Abbreviations & Medical Meanings

Top 5 Ways to Avoid Drug Errors

Top 9 Ways to Prevent a Deadly Drug Interaction

What are pharmaceutical salt names?

What are the risks vs. benefits of medications?

What is the placebo effect?

Further information

Always consult your healthcare provider to ensure the information displayed on this page applies to your personal circumstances.