New York (United States) – October 23, 2012 – Infor, a leading provider of business application software serving more than 70,000 customers, today opened its new corporate headquarters in New York City. Located in the heart of the New York’s “Silicon Alley,” known for its high concentration of engineering firms, design houses, established technology companies and start-ups, Infor’s headquarters features an open environment designed to maximize collaboration and drive innovation. Infor also unveiled new branding to reflect the company’s aggressive focus on innovation, and highlight its deep industry expertise.

“The opening of our new headquarters and reveal of our new brand marks the culmination of a two-year period of significant transformation at Infor,” said Charles Phillips, CEO of Infor. “Building on decades of industry specialization, the new Infor is focused on accelerating innovation and delivering beautiful applications that emphasize clarity and ease-of-use, helping customers make decisions with remarkable agility and astonishing speed, wherever they are – at the office or on the go.”

Infor’s new corporate headquarters is located at 641 Avenue of the Americas (6th Ave.) and will house 75 employees during the first year. Designed by professionals from VOA Associates, the Infor space has an open flow, without traditional offices, to enable the free-exchange of ideas and information. Infor’s Chief Executive Officer as well as several members of Infor’s executive management will be based from the new headquarters.

In addition to housing many corporate and administrative functions, Infor will launch a new ION Experience Center at the operations center in Alpharetta, where experts from development and consulting services will collaborate directly with customers to build tailored environments that enable customers to take advantage of Infor ION and cloud or hybrid deployment models.

At the heart of the new Infor brand is a refreshed logo and website, designed by Hook & Loop, Infor’s in-house creative agency, to be reflective of the new design of Infor applications. Infor has prioritized beauty as a competence, providing a look-and-feel that represents accessibility, openness, and agility in a crisp, straightforward way.

About Infor

Infor is the third-largest provider of enterprise applications and services, helping 70,000 customers in 194 countries improve operations, drive growth, and quickly adapt to changes in business demands. Infor offers deep industry-specific applications and suites, engineered for speed, using ground-breaking technology that delivers a rich user experience, and flexible deployment options that give customers a choice to run their businesses in the cloud, on-premises, or both.