Infor is a multi-national privately held American enterprise software company. Headquartered in New York City, Infor focuses on business applications for organizations which are delivered via cloud computing as a service. Originally focused on software ranging from financial systems and enterprise resource planning to supply chain and customer relationship management, in 2010 Infor began to focus on software for industry niches, as well as user-friendly software design. Since its inception in 2002, Infor has acquired forty other companies.

Infor builds business software for specific industries in the cloud. The company has the strength of over 16,000 employees and more than 90,000 customers in more than 200 countries and territories. Infor software is designed for progress and builds complete industry suites in the cloud and deploys software that puts the user experience first, leverages data science, and integrates easily with existing systems.

Infor can build complete industry suites in the cloud and deploy software that puts the user experience first, leverages data science, and integrates easily with your existing systems. With a huge line-up of experts in various domains, Infor easily finds the right solutions for every aspect of any business.

Towards transformation and progress

Infor business applications are specialized by industry to drive perpetual innovation in the enterprise and built for the cloud to enable a global supply chain, networked analytics, and an artificial intelligence-led user experience.

The foundation of Infor's strategy is the company’s deep commitment to industry specialization. Powered by the cloud, Infor's complete industry suites incorporate network, analytics, and A.I. capabilities to make connections across the enterprise and beyond, providing the visibility, insights, and information companies need to perform and serve customers better in dynamic, highly competitive markets.

Built for all businesses

Infor's complete product portfolio gives everything needed to run day-to-day business operations and grow the business for a long-term. Infor’s solutions cover optimizing vital back-office functions like HR and financials, to jumpstart the customer experience, or initiates digital transformation.

Beautifully designed, with contextualized business intelligence and user-centric collaboration tools, Infor’s applications have helped to solve many business problems and are built on secure and scalable cloud deployment.

The products are vast and their domains are endless from Industry CloudSuites, Product Lifecycle Management, Supply Chain Management, Customer Experience, Financials and Performance Management to Human Capital Management and Enterprise Asset Management.

Service is the key

Infor Services is a global organization with end-to-end accountability for optimizing the value of every Infor investments. Comprising more than 5,300 professionals who currently support customers in 168 countries, the company brings deep product and technical expertise, extensive industry experience, and the full force of Infor's resources to the task of making any business outrageously successful. From initial deployment and day-to-day optimization to big-picture thinking and proactive strategizing, any business investors can rely on Infor to provide the depth and breadth of experience needed turn vision into reality.

Advisory Services resources use their industry expertise and strategic business knowledge to help new business incorporate best practices and approach old business models in fresh ways. This group of experts not only gives them continual access to some of the best minds in the technology world-and in their own industry but also, allows them to tap into innovation and stay ahead of the curve.

The Infor Services team is set up to provide whatever level of support their clients require. Through their managed services offerings, Infor can run systems end-to-end or just provide support for certain aspects of any deployments. The company covers all operational services, including service desk, system administration, capacity planning, facility management, service pack/hotfix maintenance, backup, recovery, and archiving, as well as a full range of services for optimum application performance. Infor also offers technical services such as customization care and functional application management support.

Always committed to customers

Getting systems up and running quickly and achieving a standard, upgradeable, and easily supported deployment are the keys to delivering a fast and reliable return on technology investments. The Infor Services team surrounds itself with deployment experts who have decades of experience attaining these objectives. From provisioning and system implementation to performance management and tuning, Infor can help any business achieve standardized implementations that incorporate best practices, resulting in a lower cost of ownership, and set it up to become successful for the long haul.

Objectives for technology investments cannot be achieved if users work with a new system but don't actively embrace it. Through a combination of classroom and virtual training, end-user training, and on-going education subscriptions, the Infor Services team partners with customers to ensure all end users are fully empowered to get maximum value from their Infor solution. Infor’s goal is to make end users' jobs easier and help them operate more efficiently, with the ultimate objective of enabling its customers to better serve their own.

The man running the show

Charles Phillips, CEO: Prior to Infor, Phillips was President of Oracle Corporation and a member of its Board of Directors. During his seven and a half year-tenure, the company tripled in size and successfully acquired 70 companies. Prior to Oracle, Phillips was a Managing Director in the Technology Group at Morgan Stanley, where he was an Institutional Investor All-Star for ten consecutive years.

Phillips holds a BS in computer science from the U.S. Air Force Academy, a JD from New York Law School, and an MBA from Hampton University; he is also a member of the Georgia State Bar. Phillips also served on the Obama Administration’s Economic Recovery Board, led by Paul Volcker.