Grass

"...benefits from the engaging narration by popular hemp activist Woody Harrelson. The research that has gone into Grass is..."

Knockout

"...now, with Sundance favorite Girlfight, The Hurricane, the aforementioned Woody Harrelson/Antonio Banderas vehicle, and even Ridley Scott's upcoming Gladiator,..."

All Wrapped Up

From biopics to end-of-day thrillers, a look at the films you'll be standing in line for this Christmas.

"...the coming weeks, although some holiday titles, such as Woody Allen's Sweet and Lowdown and documentarian Errol Morris' Mr...."

Detroit Rock City

Four high school bandmates try to get into a KISS concert.

"...hag in the studio's There's Something About Mary and Woody Harrelson's sex-starved landlady in Kingpin. Many are heralding this..."

Austin Powers: The Spy Who Shagged Me

"...the sublime. Cameos by Burt Bacharach and Elvis Costello, Woody Harrelson, SNL alum Will Ferrell, Willie Nelson, Tim Robbins,..."

Further Reflections

"...Matthew McConaughey and Woody Harrelson at the Edtv premiere. photograph by John Anderson..."

Scanlines

"...Juliette Lewis and Woody Harrelson star in Oliver Stone's Natural Born Killers. You'd..."

Zombieland

A hilarious script and seamless performances make this a quite tasty zomcom.

"...Directed by: Ruben Fleischer. Starring: Woody Harrelson, Jesse Eisenberg, Emma Stone, Abigail Breslin and Amber..."

Transsiberian

With Woody Harrelson, Emily Mortimer, and Ben Kingsley, this train-set suspense movie also is full of sharp character studies.

"...Directed by: Brad Anderson. Starring: Woody Harrelson, Emily Mortimer, Ben Kingsley, Kate Mara, Eduardo Noriega..."

The Grand

There's some truly hilarious material (though not nearly enough) in this partially improvised movie about characters competing in a Las Vegas championship poker tournament.

"...Directed by: Zak Penn. Starring: Woody Harrelson, Cheryl Hines, Chris Parnell, Ray Romano, Dennis Farina,..."

A Scanner Darkly

As the title implies, there’s a certain opacity to A Scanner Darkly's cautionary drug tale, but at times Richard Linklater's film can be as naked as the lunch on the end of your fork.

"...by: Richard Linklater. Starring: Keanu Reeves, Robert Downey Jr., Woody Harrelson, Winona Ryder and Rory Cochrane...."

A Prairie Home Companion

It's been a very long time since any Robert Altman film has been as enjoyable as A Prairie Home Companion.

"...Robert Altman. Starring: Meryl Streep, Lily Tomlin, Garrison Keillor, Woody Harrelson, John C. Reilly, Lindsay Lohan, Kevin Kline, Maya..."

North Country

Charlize Theron stars in this fictionalized, rousing, but nevertheless predictable account of the first class-action sexual discrimination suit.

"...Niki Caro. Starring: Charlize Theron, Frances McDormand, Sean Bean, Woody Harrelson, Jeremy Renner, Richard Jenkins, Sissy Spacek and Michelle..."

After the Sunset

Possibly the ideal film to more or less ignore while lounging poolside and sipping Jamaican rum, After the Sunset is 100-proof pap.

"...Directed by: Brett Ratner. Starring: Pierce Brosnan, Salma Hayek, Woody Harrelson, Don Cheadle, Naomie Harris, Troy Garity and Chris..."

Fantastic Fest: Paramount Premieres

George Romero and John C. Reilly takes the stage as part of FF's four premieres in three nights

"...Ruben Fleischer and stars Jesse Eisenberg, Emma Stone, and Woody Harrelson. Let's just say the last time this distinguished..."

AFF Knows We Like to Watch

Local film Harmony and Me tops sneak peek at festival lineup

"...Writers: Oren Moverman, Alessandro Camon Director: Oren Moverman Cast: Woody Harrelson, Ben Foster, Samantha Morton, Jena Malone Regional Premiere..."

Securing the Substance

Richard Linklater on his adaptation of A Scanner Darkly

"...and nuanced characterizations (courtesy of Reeves, Robert Downey Jr., Woody Harrelson, Winona Ryder, and Rory Cochrane, among others) to..."

Back to Zombieland

Ruben Fleischer and Jesse Eisenberg pull the trigger on Double Tap

"...the unlikely adoptive family unit of brusque cowboy Tallahassee (Woody Harrelson), nebbish Columbus (Eisenberg), the sardonic Wichita (Emma Stone),..."

SXSW Film Q&A: John Lee Hancock on The Highwaymen

Texas director retells the Bonnie and Clyde story from the cops’ view

"...Hamer (Kevin Costner) is out and retired, Manny Gault (Woody Harrelson) is almost destitute, and the Rangers have been..."

Page Two

When they label war protesters' speech as traitorous, right-wing war supporters reveal themselves as truly anti-American.

"...Go Further, presented by filmmaker Ron Mann (Grass) and Woody Harrelson, follows Woody and gang's environmental-consciousness-raising West Coast bus..."

We Have an Issue: 100 Summery Things on the Horizon

Pick up this week's issue for The Austin Chronicle's summer events guide

"...Film and Video Game Incentives: Glen Powell, Matthew McConaughey, Woody Harrelson, and Owen Wilson are among the celebs popping..."

The Stars Come Out for Texas Film and Video Game Incentives

Big names in new ad to get big boost over the finish line

"...The smartly-framed video makes the key point: as Woody Harrelson (yup, he's here too) points out, this is..."

Willie Nelson’s 90th Birthday Tribute Convenes Keith Richards, Snoop Dogg, Norah Jones, and More at the Hollywood Bowl

Two-night song extravaganza pulled stars from across generations

"...looser as artists took more time on anecdotes, and Woody Harrelson’s speech epitomized just how much weed was being..."