In his new movie, The Spy Who Shagged Me, Austin Powers travels back in time. Too bad the audience can't hitch a ride, the better to enjoy his jokes the first time around.

Austin Powers, the phenomenon, may be pure genius. It may also be a one-note song.

The original film was a work of sublime brilliance, starring a character so inane that it takes the viewer several days -- or at the very least a repeat screening -- to comprehend him on a belly-laugh level. So we begged for more.

See also: Deconstructing Austin Powers- - - - - -

But poor Mike Myers has nowhere left to turn with the character. In The Spy Who Shagged Me, he flails his way through ever more lavish production-number dances, getting randier by the moment. Only there's a desperation in his gyrations. And no one is laughing.

We can't help but feel sorry for Myers. It's almost as if he's up on the screen against his will. The loyalists have seen the first film so many times that Myers' latest, subtle variations on the same theme fall flat.

"Do the SHHHST thing again!" America screamed.

So Dr. Evil obliged. But, alas, there was no more to give. Myers returns to the same well, with the same bucket. And we stare in disbelief when the water tastes the same.

From the credit roll, Austin is on familiar ground, as objects positioned in front of the camera cleverly conceal his manly attributes. In a later, all-too-familiar scene, a baddie who falls off a cliff wails for help: "I'm not dead, I'm very badly hurt! I think both my legs are broken!"

When last we last checked in with Dr. Evil and his alienated son, Scott, the pair were trying to bridge the generation gap in a father-son encounter group (led by real-life new-ager Carrie Fisher).

The scene continues in Shagged. Only the pair has graduated to the Jerry Springer Show (On-screen overlay: "My Father is Evil and Wants to Take Over the World.") It's one of the movie's funnier moments.

"You are quasi-evil," accuses Dad. "You are the margarine of evil, the Diet Coke of evil."

The mute Dr. Evil badass midget clone isn't good for anything but filling screen time with badly rendered song and dance numbers. He's the Jar-Jar Binks of Shagged -- a flop sidekick who's neither cute nor funny.

The plot of the film is as tenuous as the first one, which is perfectly appropriate.

From his headquarters in a Starbucks outlet atop the Seattle Space Needle, the circa-1999 Dr. Evil plots to travel back in time and make off with Austin's mojo -- the source of his libido.

A new henchman, called Fat Bastard, breaks into Austin's cryogenic vault to steal the spy's life force -- essentially, floating red Twizzlers in a jar -- freeing Evil to destroy Washington with a death ray blasted from his secret Evil Moon base.

Along the way we meet CIA agent Felicity Shagwell, passably played on a one-line-per-scene basis by Heather Graham (Powers: "You're fab! You're switched-on! You're a bit of all right!") and Russian spy Ivana Humpalot.

The numerous product placements won't wash with the geek crowd which, in the wake of the dismal Star Wars: The Phantom Menace, had been counting down to Powers' premiere on 11 June as the great summer movie of 1999.

The shilling isn't self-parodying, as it was in Myers' 1992 breakthrough vehicle, Wayne's World. But Virgin Atlantic signage appears twice, and there are shameless plugs for Heineken, Volkswagen, the Philips Nino, and America Online. Oh, please.

All this is not to say Shagged won't trigger the giggles. There are more than a few zingers. Particularly memorable is the closing montage of pseudo-celebs (including Willie Nelson and Woody Harrelson -- willie and woodie, get it?) sighting Evil's phallic rocket ship.

While the film's producers left room for a third chapter, this is likely the end of the line for Powers. And that's groovy with us.

"Do you smoke after sex?" asks Vanessa, Powers' treacherous wife, before she tries to off him in the film's opening scene.

"I don't know," replies Powers. "I've never looked."