John Wright, who has died at the age of 60, was a superb interpreter of contemporary songs in the folk idiom and beyond, and his skill earned him the description "the songwriter's singer". He was involved in music throughout his life, but it was only in the last 17 years that he achieved national and international recognition.

John was born in Bournemouth but grew up in Didsbury in suburban Manchester, and his introduction to music was in the church choir alongside his three older brothers. After leaving school, he worked as a sales representative by day and played in rock bands in the evenings.

On an impulse, in 1970 he joined the Household Cavalry mounted regiment, the Life Guards. But by night he could be found crooning in the piano bars of the West End. The Life Guards gave him a love of horses and country living - he particularly enjoyed riding in military pageants at events such as agricultural shows - and when he left the army in 1974 as a lance corporal of horse, he lived first in Derbyshire and then in North Yorkshire, where he worked as an assistant shepherd. Moving to north Northumberland, and then across the border to the Newcastleton and Hawick area, he learned his hill shepherding skills from an older generation.

John's enthusiasm for folk music stemmed from his time in the army. His first traditional song, The Kerry Recruit, was different in style from the Sinatra ballads of the piano bars, but he adapted easily and found he preferred this unaccompanied, more rooted repertoire.

But for more than 10 years he immersed himself in his life as a border shepherd, and it was only when the postman heard him singing around the farm that he was invited to a local ceilidh, where the quality of his voice had an immediate effect. For several years, however, he sang largely at community events such as shepherds' suppers.

In 1990, with the proceeds from the sale of a horse, John funded the recording of a cassette of his unaccompanied traditional songs, Border Crossings. He ordered just 200 copies for friends and family, but an advert in the local paper led to him selling out in just three days. Another batch went the same way and, in total, about 3,500 copies were sold.

For his next recording, he teamed up with local folk guitarist Kenny Spiers. Paul and Linda Adams of Cumbria-based Fellside Records were impressed by his singing, and in 1993 they released his first CD, Ride the Rolling Sky, with Kenny on guitar and Wattie Robson on fiddle. When an agent in the Netherlands asked them to do a tour there at short notice, these three musicians became the John Wright Band.

By the time the band recorded its next album, Robson had left, to be replaced by young fiddle player Stewart Hardy. This album, The Things We've Handed Down, illustrated John's gradual movement away from traditional folk songs towards more contemporary material. After a third album for Fellside, he switched to the Greentrax label, releasing three CDs in two years. With the album A Few Short Lines (2000), he returned temporarily to his traditional repertoire. A further eight albums followed, at least one a year, plus a DVD. As a performer, John was a superb communicator, with considerable ability to tell the story of the song. He is survived by his wife Barbara, whom he married in January, two children from his previous marriage and two stepchildren.