Wednesday January 18 * 7pm * TICKETS

Jack Wright, a saxophonist based in the Philadelphia area, is one of the originals of American free improvisation. Now 80, he has lived some diverse lives, as an activist and academic, then in 1979 settling into free improv music. He tours in Europe and the US, where he is still the "Johnny Appleseed of Free Improvisation," as he has been called. He started out in the free jazz direction, but by the late 90's found that boring and conventional; shifting gears a few times he is now playing sounds few have heard before. His playing consists of distorted pitches, precise timing, intrusive multiphonics, sudden changes of direction, obscene animalistic sounds, and occasional "real" notes. He partners and tours mostly with Zach Darrup, Ben Bennett, Evan Lipson, and Ron Stabinsky. His first book, The Free Musics, was snapped up by most of the free players in the US; his second, Shaky Ground, is mostly political critique and draws on his activist background, both available on tour. A reviewer for the Washington Post said, "In the rarefied, underground world of experimental free improvisation, saxophonist Jack Wright is king." For more info: springgardenmusic.com

Of all the wide-ranging music groups in which Ron Stabinsky has participated, probably best known is the notorious Mostly Other People Do The Killing. In 2018 he joined the reunited rock band Meat Puppets, and frequently performs with acclaimed trumpet player Peter Evans. He performs regularly as a classical pianist, a straight-ahead jazz musician, occasionally a rock musician, and as a free improviser. He tours the US mostly with Jack Wright and with the Meat Puppets, and regularly plays the major festivals in Europe. He was almost born as a musician, having received his first musical lessons at the age of five from his grandfather, played concerts as a prodigy, and became a professional musician at an early age. His solo album, Free for One, received four stars in DownBeat and tied for number one debut of the year in the 2016 NPR Music Jazz Critics Poll. In the past few years "keyboard" includes the Nord Lead 4 Synthesizer, and free improvisation extends his range to various objects inside the piano, including dental floss and a load of objects that seem to serve no purpose.

Trombonist Patrick Crossland was born in Jackson, Mississippi. Growing up in southern Louisiana, he began playing trombone at age 10. He has worked closely with several prominent composers. Solo performances include the Walker Art Center’s “Festival Dancing In Your Head” (2001, 2002, 2005), the Darmstadt Course for New Music (2004, 2006, 2008), where he was awarded a Solo Performance Prize, and the “Utopia Jetzt!” Festival (Germany) where he performed his acclaimed “V for Grock” multimedia recital. In 2009 he premiered his “Krieg dem Krieg” project featuring thematic works for trombone and electronics. In addition to his activities as a soloist and chamber musician, he is an avid improviser, working with a wide range of musicians, dancers, and actors. He is a member of the Composers Slide Quartet, Ensemble Laboratorium, and Zinc & Copper Works. He teaches trombone and other music courses at the University of Maryland Baltimore County.