Dr. Dharmavir Bharati is the name that conjures before the mind an anthology of Hindi poetry, plays and novels that are still referred to by the contemporary generation for organizing stage plays and films as the thematic crux. His contribution is manifold owing to the vast array of work he has left for the predecessors. Apart from being a litterateur, his contribution to the social causes and his extension of a helping hand indeed earns him the platform of a personality indeed.

Early Life of Dr. Dharamvir Bharati

Dr. Dharamvir Bharati was born on December 25, 1926 in Allahabad. His parents are Shri. Chiranji Lal and Smt. Chanda devi. His childhood had been traumatic due to the loss of security was marked by the death of his father and his encounter with a deep financial crisis along with his family. However, Bharati managed to do his MA in Hindi language from Allahabad University in 1946. He was awarded the "Chintamani Ghosh Award" for scoring highest marks in Hindi. From his college days he had inclination towards writing. He wrote several novels, poems, dramas, essays, and criticisms.

Career of Dr. Dharamvir Bharati

In 1954 he completed his PhD and was appointed as a lecturer in Hindi in Allahabad University. Before that he tried his journo skills as he was the sub-editor for the magazines "Abhudaya" and Sangam". He made his mark in Hindi journalism. In 1960 he moved to Mumbai to take the offer of the Times of India Group to become the Chief-Editor of the popular Hindi weekly magazine Dharmayug. As a reporter he covered the Indo-Pak war that resulted in the liberation of Bangladesh. Under his editorship this magazine became very popular in India. He remained the editor of this magazine till 1987.

Works of Dr. Dharamvir Bharati

His famous poems are "Kanupriya", "Thanda Loha", "Saat Geet Varsh" and "Sapana Abhi Bhi". The short novel "Suraj ka Satwan Ghoda'' is considered as one of the greatest works in twentieth century Hindi literature. It has been made award winning film by Shyam Benegal in 1992. Andha Yug and Gunahon ka Devtaa is his other famous works which are based on mythology.

Dr. Bharati was conferred with Padma Shree award by the Government of India un 1972.He also got several awards like-"Rajendra Prasad Shikhar Samman", Bharat Bharati Samman", "Maharashtra Gaurav", "Kaudiya Nyas" and "Vyasa Samman"for his literary works.

He died on September 4, 1997.