Table of Contents

855 relations: A Portuguesa, Abdul Rashid Dostum, Abolition of monarchy, Abortion law, Abu Muslim, Accusative case, Ad Lib, Inc., Administrative divisions of China, Administrative divisions of Georgia (country), Administrative divisions of Taiwan, Adobe Photoshop, Advance Wars, AFL–CIO, Agha Mohammad Khan Qajar, Ahmed Hassan al-Bakr, Alexander McDougall, Alexandros Zaimis, Alexandru Ioan Cuza, Alix, Duchess of Brittany, All-Channel Receiver Act, Amalia of Solms-Braunfels, American English, Anastasio Somoza Debayle, Ancient Greece, Andhra Pradesh, Andrés Bonifacio, Angelica Singleton Van Buren, Anglo-Irish Treaty, Anna Harrison, Annual Dry Season Offensive, ANSI escape code, Anti-Zionist Committee of the Soviet Public, Antiphonitis, Archbishopric of Bremen, Area 51, Armed Forces of Armenia, Armenian diaspora, Article 9 of the Japanese Constitution, Articles of Confederation, Artie Shaw, Ashikaga shogunate, Askar Akayev, Assassination, Attacks on humanitarian workers, Au file format, August 15, August 21, Augustus, Australian English, Australian rules football, ... Expand index (805 more) » « Shrink index

A Portuguesa

"A Portuguesa" (The Portuguese) is the national anthem of Portugal.

See De facto and A Portuguesa

Abdul Rashid Dostum

Abdul Rashid Dostum (عبدالرشید دوستم, Uzbek Latin: Abdul Rashid Do‘stum, Uzbek Cyrillic: Абдул Рашид Дўстум; born 1954) is an Afghan politician and general who has served as Vice President of Afghanistan since 2014.

See De facto and Abdul Rashid Dostum

Abolition of monarchy

The abolition of monarchy involves the ending of monarchical elements in the government of a country.

See De facto and Abolition of monarchy

Abortion law

Abortion law permits, prohibits, restricts, or otherwise regulates the availability of abortion.

See De facto and Abortion law

Abu Muslim

Abu Muslim Abd al-Rahman ibn Muslim al-Khorasani or al-Khurasani (أبو مسلم عبد الرحمن بن مسلم الخراساني born 718-19 or 723-27, died in 755), born Behzādān Pūr-i Vandād Hormoz (بهزادان پور ونداد هرمزد), was a Persian general in service of the Abbasid dynasty, who led the Abbasid Revolution that toppled the Umayyad dynasty.

See De facto and Abu Muslim

Accusative case

The accusative case (abbreviated) of a noun is the grammatical case used to mark the direct object of a transitive verb.

See De facto and Accusative case

Ad Lib, Inc.

Ad Lib, Inc. was a Canadian manufacturer of sound cards and other computer equipment founded by Martin Prevel, a former professor of music and vice-dean of the music department at the Université Laval.

See De facto and Ad Lib, Inc.

Administrative divisions of China

Due to China's large population and area, the administrative divisions of China have consisted of several levels since ancient times.

See De facto and Administrative divisions of China

Administrative divisions of Georgia (country)

The subdivisions of Georgia are autonomous republics (ავტონომიური რესპუბლიკა, avtonomiuri respublika), regions (მხარე, mkhare), and municipalities (მუნიციპალიტეტი, munits'ipaliteti).

See De facto and Administrative divisions of Georgia (country)

Administrative divisions of Taiwan

Taiwan consists of provinces and special municipalities.

See De facto and Administrative divisions of Taiwan

Adobe Photoshop

Adobe Photoshop is a raster graphics editor developed and published by Adobe Systems for macOS and Windows.

See De facto and Adobe Photoshop

Advance Wars

Advance Wars, released in Japan as is a turn-based tactics video game developed for the Game Boy Advance by Intelligent Systems and published by Nintendo.

See De facto and Advance Wars

AFL–CIO

The American Federation of Labor and Congress of Industrial Organizations (AFL-CIO) is the largest federation of unions in the United States.

See De facto and AFL–CIO

Agha Mohammad Khan Qajar

Agha Mohammad Khan Qajar (translit; 14 March 1742 – 17 June 1797), also known by his regnal name of Agha Mohammad Shah (آقا محمد شاه), was the founder of the Qajar dynasty of Iran, ruling from 1789 to 1797 as king (shah).

See De facto and Agha Mohammad Khan Qajar

Ahmed Hassan al-Bakr

Ahmed Hassan al-Bakr (أحمد حسن البكر; 1 July 1914 – 4 October 1982) was President of Iraq, from 17 July 1968 until 16 July 1979.

See De facto and Ahmed Hassan al-Bakr

Alexander McDougall

Alexander McDougall (1732 June 9, 1786) was an American seaman, merchant, a Sons of Liberty leader from New York City before and during the American Revolution, and a military leader during the Revolutionary War.

See De facto and Alexander McDougall

Alexandros Zaimis

Alexandros Zaimis (Αλέξανδρος Ζαΐμης; 9 November 1855 – 15 September 1936) was a Greek Prime Minister, Minister of the Interior, Minister of Justice, and High Commissioner of Crete.

See De facto and Alexandros Zaimis

Alexandru Ioan Cuza

Alexandru Ioan Cuza (or Alexandru Ioan I, also anglicised as Alexander John Cuza; 20 March 1820 – 15 May 1873) was Prince of Moldavia, Prince of Wallachia, and later Domnitor (Ruler) of the Romanian Principalities.

See De facto and Alexandru Ioan Cuza

Alix, Duchess of Brittany

Alix of Thouars (1200 &ndash; 21 October 1221) (in Breton Alis) was hereditary Duchess of Brittany and 5th Countess of Richmond from 1203 to her death.

See De facto and Alix, Duchess of Brittany

All-Channel Receiver Act

The All-Channel Receiver Act of 1962 (ACRA), commonly known as the All-Channels Act, was passed by the United States Congress in 1961, to allow the Federal Communications Commission to require that all television set manufacturers must include UHF tuners, so that new UHF-band TV stations (then channels 14 to 83) could be received by the public.

See De facto and All-Channel Receiver Act

Amalia of Solms-Braunfels

Amalia of Solms-Braunfels (31 August 1602, Braunfels – 8 September 1675, The Hague), was Princess consort of Orange by marriage to Frederick Henry, Prince of Orange.

See De facto and Amalia of Solms-Braunfels

American English

American English (AmE, AE, AmEng, USEng, en-US), sometimes called United States English or U.S. English, is the set of varieties of the English language native to the United States.

See De facto and American English

Anastasio Somoza Debayle

Anastasio "Tachito" Somoza DeBayle (5 December 1925 – 17 September 1980) was a Nicaraguan politician and officially the 73rd and 76th President of Nicaragua from 1 May 1967 to 1 May 1972 and from 1 December 1974 to 17 July 1979.

See De facto and Anastasio Somoza Debayle

Ancient Greece

Ancient Greece was a civilization belonging to a period of Greek history from the Greek Dark Ages of the 13th–9th centuries BC to the end of antiquity (AD 600).

See De facto and Ancient Greece

Andhra Pradesh

Andhra Pradesh is one of the 29 states of India.

See De facto and Andhra Pradesh

Andrés Bonifacio

Andrés Bonifacio (November 30, 1863 – May 10, 1897) was a Filipino revolutionary leader and the president of the Tagalog Republic.

See De facto and Andrés Bonifacio

Angelica Singleton Van Buren

Sarah Angelica Van Buren (née Singleton; February 13, 1818 &ndash; December 29, 1877), was the daughter-in-law of the eighth United States President Martin Van Buren.

See De facto and Angelica Singleton Van Buren

Anglo-Irish Treaty

The Anglo-Irish Treaty (An Conradh Angla-Éireannach), commonly known as The Treaty and officially the Articles of Agreement for a Treaty Between Great Britain and Ireland, was an agreement between the government of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland and representatives of the Irish Republic that concluded the Irish War of Independence.

See De facto and Anglo-Irish Treaty

Anna Harrison

Anna Tuthill Symmes Harrison (July 25, 1775 &ndash; February 25, 1864), wife of President William Henry Harrison and grandmother of President Benjamin Harrison, was nominally First Lady of the United States during her husband's one-month term in 1841, but she never entered the White House.

See De facto and Anna Harrison

Annual Dry Season Offensive

An Annual Dry Season Offensive is a type of low intensity warfare typically practiced by national governments against ethnic insurgent groups fighting for independence or autonomy.

See De facto and Annual Dry Season Offensive

ANSI escape code

ANSI escape sequences are a standard for in-band signaling to control the cursor location, color, and other options on video text terminals.

See De facto and ANSI escape code

Anti-Zionist Committee of the Soviet Public

The Anti-Zionist Committee of the Soviet Public (AZCSP, Russian language: Антисионистский комитет советской общественности, АКСО) was a body formed in 1983 in the Soviet Union as an anti-Zionist propaganda tool.

See De facto and Anti-Zionist Committee of the Soviet Public

Antiphonitis

Antiphonitis -- more correctly the Church of Christ Antiphonitis (Χριστός Ἀντιφωνητής) -- is a domed church in Cyprus, in Kyrenia District, located in the mountains near the village of Kalograia.

See De facto and Antiphonitis

Archbishopric of Bremen

The Archdiocese of Bremen (also Archdiocese of Hamburg-Bremen, Erzbistum Bremen, not to be confused with the modern Archdiocese of Hamburg, founded in 1994) is a historical Roman Catholic diocese (787–1566/1648) and formed from 1180 to 1648 an ecclesiastical state (continued under other names until 1823), named Prince-Archbishopric of Bremen (Erzstift Bremen) within the Holy Roman Empire.

See De facto and Archbishopric of Bremen

Area 51

The United States Air Force facility commonly known as Area 51 is a highly classified remote detachment of Edwards Air Force Base, within the Nevada Test and Training Range.

See De facto and Area 51

Armed Forces of Armenia

The Armed Forces of Armenia (Հայաստանի Հանրապետության զինված ուժեր) comprise two services: the Army, and the Air Force and Air Defense (a unified branch).

See De facto and Armed Forces of Armenia

Armenian diaspora

The Armenian diaspora refers to the communities of Armenians outside Armenia and other locations where Armenians are considered an indigenous population.

See De facto and Armenian diaspora

Article 9 of the Japanese Constitution

is a clause in the national Constitution of Japan outlawing war as a means to settle international disputes involving the state.

See De facto and Article 9 of the Japanese Constitution

Articles of Confederation

The Articles of Confederation, formally the Articles of Confederation and Perpetual Union, was an agreement among the 13 original states of the United States of America that served as its first constitution.

See De facto and Articles of Confederation

Artie Shaw

Artie Shaw (born Arthur Jacob Arshawsky; May 23, 1910 – December 30, 2004) was an American clarinetist, composer, bandleader, and actor.

See De facto and Artie Shaw

Ashikaga shogunate

The, also known as the,Nussbaum, Louis-Frédéric.

See De facto and Ashikaga shogunate

Askar Akayev

Askar Akayevich Akayev (Kyrgyz: Аскар Акаевич Акаев, Asqar Aqayeviç Aqayev) (born 10 November 1944) is a Kyrgyz politician who served as President of Kyrgyzstan from 1990 until his overthrow in the March 2005 Tulip Revolution.

See De facto and Askar Akayev

Assassination

Assassination is the killing of a prominent person, either for political or religious reasons or for payment.

See De facto and Assassination

Attacks on humanitarian workers

Humanitarian aid workers belonging to United Nations organisations, PVOs / NGOs or the Red Cross / Red Crescent have traditionally enjoyed both international legal protection, and de facto immunity from attack by belligerent parties.

See De facto and Attacks on humanitarian workers

Au file format

The Au file format is a simple audio file format introduced by Sun Microsystems.

See De facto and Au file format

August 15

No description.

See De facto and August 15

August 21

No description.

See De facto and August 21

Augustus

Augustus (Augustus; 23 September 63 BC – 19 August 14 AD) was a Roman statesman and military leader who was the first Emperor of the Roman Empire, controlling Imperial Rome from 27 BC until his death in AD 14.

See De facto and Augustus

Australian English

Australian English (AuE, en-AU) is a major variety of the English language, used throughout Australia.

See De facto and Australian English

Australian rules football, officially known as Australian football, or simply called Aussie rules, football or footy, is a contact sport played between two teams of eighteen players on an oval-shaped field, often a modified cricket ground.

See De facto and Australian rules football

AutoCAD

AutoCAD is a commercial computer-aided design (CAD) and drafting software application.

See De facto and AutoCAD

Autocracy

An autocracy is a system of government in which supreme power (social and political) is concentrated in the hands of one person, whose decisions are subject to neither external legal restraints nor regularized mechanisms of popular control (except perhaps for the implicit threat of a coup d'état or mass insurrection).

See De facto and Autocracy

Azad Kashmir

Azad Jammu and Kashmir (آزاد جموں و کشمیر Āzād Jammū̃ o Kaśmīr, translation: Free Jammu and Kashmir), abbreviated as AJK and commonly known as Azad Kashmir, is a nominally self-governing polity administered by Pakistan.

See De facto and Azad Kashmir

Azerbaijan Soviet Socialist Republic

Azerbaijan (Азәрбајҹан; Azərbaycan), officially the Azerbaijan Soviet Socialist Republic (Azerbaijan SSR; Азәрбајҹан Совет Сосиалист Республикасы, Azərbaycan Sovet Sosialist Respublikası, Азербайджанская Советская Социалистическая Республика, Azerbajdžanskaja Sovetskaja Socialističeskaja Respublika) and the Republic of Azerbaijan (Azərbaycan Respublikası, Азәрбајҹан Республикасы), also referred to as Soviet Azerbaijan, was one of the constituent republics of the Soviet Union between 1922 and 1991.

See De facto and Azerbaijan Soviet Socialist Republic

AZERTY

AZERTY is a specific layout for the characters of the Latin alphabet on typewriter keys and computer keyboards.

See De facto and AZERTY

Æthelflæd

Æthelflæd, Lady of the Mercians (870 – 12 June 918), ruled Mercia in the English Midlands from 911 until her death.

See De facto and Æthelflæd

Ürümqi

Ürümqi (yengi; from Oirat "beautiful pasture") is the capital of the Xinjiang Uyghur Autonomous Region in the far northwest of the People's Republic of China.

See De facto and Ürümqi

B. H. Roberts

Brigham Henry Roberts (March 13, 1857 – September 27, 1933) was a Mormon leader, historian, and politician.

See De facto and B. H. Roberts

Bahawalpur (princely state)

Bahawalpur (بہاولپُور), was a princely state of British India and later, Pakistan, that existed from 1802 to 1955.

See De facto and Bahawalpur (princely state)

Balance of payments

The balance of payments, also known as balance of international payments and abbreviated B.O.P. or BoP, of a country is the record of all economic transactions between the residents of the country and of the world in a particular period (over a quarter of a year or more commonly over a year).

See De facto and Balance of payments

Banja Luka

Banja Luka (Бања Лука) or Banjaluka (Бањалука), is the second largest city of Bosnia and Herzegovina and the de facto capital of the Republika Srpska entity.

See De facto and Banja Luka

Baron Walpole

Baron Walpole, of Walpole in the County of Norfolk, is a title in the Peerage of Great Britain.

See De facto and Baron Walpole

Barra

Barra (Barraigh, Eilean Bharraigh) is an island in the Outer Hebrides, Scotland, and the second southernmost inhabited island there, after the adjacent island of Vatersay to which it is connected by a short causeway.

See De facto and Barra

Benbecula

Benbecula (Beinn nam Fadhla, or Beinn na Faoghla) is an island of the Outer Hebrides, in the Atlantic Ocean off the west coast of Scotland.

See De facto and Benbecula

Bern

Bern or Berne (Bern, Bärn, Berne, Berna, Berna) is the de facto capital of Switzerland, referred to by the Swiss as their (e.g. in German) Bundesstadt, or "federal city".

See De facto and Bern

Bernie Worrell

George Bernard "Bernie" Worrell, Jr. (April 19, 1944 &ndash; June 24, 2016) was an American keyboardist and composer best known as a founding member of Parliament-Funkadelic and for his work with Talking Heads.

See De facto and Bernie Worrell

Bicameralism

A bicameral legislature divides the legislators into two separate assemblies, chambers, or houses.

See De facto and Bicameralism

Bilingual education

Bilingual education involves teaching academic content in two languages, in a native and secondary language with varying amounts of each language used in accordance with the program model.Bilingual education refers to the utilization of two languages as means of instruction for students and considered part of or the entire school curriculum.

See De facto and Bilingual education

Bimetallism

Bimetallism is the economic term for a monetary standard in which the value of the monetary unit is defined as equivalent to certain quantities of two metals, typically gold and silver, creating a fixed rate of exchange between them.

See De facto and Bimetallism

Bioinformatics

Bioinformatics is an interdisciplinary field that develops methods and software tools for understanding biological data.

See De facto and Bioinformatics

Bissau

Bissau is the capital city of the African Republic of Guinea-Bissau.

See De facto and Bissau

Black Sea

The Black Sea is a body of water and marginal sea of the Atlantic Ocean between Eastern Europe, the Caucasus, and Western Asia.

See De facto and Black Sea

Blackwater, Arizona

Blackwater is a census-designated place (CDP) in Pinal County, Arizona, United States.

See De facto and Blackwater, Arizona

Board of directors

A board of directors is a recognized group of people who jointly oversee the activities of an organization, which can be either a for-profit business, nonprofit organization, or a government agency.

See De facto and Board of directors

Boe, Guinea-Bissau

Boe (full name Madina do Boe) is a settlement in the southeastern region of Guinea-Bissau.

See De facto and Boe, Guinea-Bissau

Bohdan Khmelnytsky

Zynoviy Bohdan Khmelnytsky (Ruthenian language: Ѕѣнові Богдан Хмелнiцкiи; modern Bohdan Zynoviy Mykhailovych Khmelnytsky; Bohdan Zenobi Chmielnicki; 6 August 1657) was a Polish–Lithuanian-born Hetman of the Zaporozhian Host of the Crown of the Kingdom of Poland in the Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth (now part of Ukraine).

See De facto and Bohdan Khmelnytsky

Bolivarian Revolution

The Bolivarian Revolution is a political process in Venezuela led by late Venezuelan President Hugo Chávez, the founder of the Fifth Republic Movement and later the United Socialist Party of Venezuela (PSUV).

See De facto and Bolivarian Revolution

Boryslav

Boryslav (Борислав, Borysław) is a city located on the Tysmenytsia River (a tributary of the Dniester), in Lviv Oblast (region) of western Ukraine.

See De facto and Boryslav

Braunschweig

Braunschweig (Low German: Brunswiek), also called Brunswick in English, is a city in Lower Saxony, Germany, north of the Harz mountains at the farthest navigable point of the Oker river which connects it to the North Sea via the Aller and Weser rivers.

See De facto and Braunschweig

British Columbia

British Columbia (BC; Colombie-Britannique) is the westernmost province of Canada, located between the Pacific Ocean and the Rocky Mountains.

See De facto and British Columbia

British Shorthair

The British Shorthair is the pedigreed version of the traditional British domestic cat, with a distinctively chunky body, dense coat and broad face.

See De facto and British Shorthair

British Somaliland

British Somaliland, officially the British Somaliland Protectorate (Dhulka Maxmiyada Soomaalida ee Biritishka, translit) was a British protectorate in present-day northwestern Somalia.

See De facto and British Somaliland

Brussels

Brussels (Bruxelles,; Brussel), officially the Brussels-Capital Region (All text and all but one graphic show the English name as Brussels-Capital Region.) (Région de Bruxelles-Capitale, Brussels Hoofdstedelijk Gewest), is a region of Belgium comprising 19 municipalities, including the City of Brussels, which is the de jure capital of Belgium.

See De facto and Brussels

Bud Selig

Allan Huber "Bud" Selig (born July 30, 1934) is an American baseball executive who currently serves as the Commissioner Emeritus of Baseball.

See De facto and Bud Selig

Calendar

A calendar is a system of organizing days for social, religious, commercial or administrative purposes.

See De facto and Calendar

California

California is a state in the Pacific Region of the United States.

See De facto and California

Call signs in North America

Call signs are frequently still used by North American broadcast stations, in addition to amateur radio and other international radio stations that continue to identify by call signs around the world.

See De facto and Call signs in North America

Camcorder

A camcorder is an electronic device originally combining a video camera and a videocassette recorder.

See De facto and Camcorder

CAN bus

A Controller Area Network (CAN bus) is a robust vehicle bus standard designed to allow microcontrollers and devices to communicate with each other in applications without a host computer.

See De facto and CAN bus

Canadian nationality law

Canadian nationality law is promulgated by the Citizenship Act (R.S.C., 1985, c. C-29) since 1977.

See De facto and Canadian nationality law

Canadian Security Intelligence Service

The Canadian Security Intelligence Service (CSIS,; Service canadien du renseignement de sécurité, SCRS) is Canada's primary national intelligence service.

See De facto and Canadian Security Intelligence Service

Canton of Obwalden

The canton of Obwalden, also canton of Obwald (ˈɔbˌvaldən) is a canton of Switzerland.

See De facto and Canton of Obwalden

Capital of Japan

The current de facto capital of Japan is Tokyo, with the seat of the Emperor, National Diet and many government organizations.

See De facto and Capital of Japan

Capital punishment by country

The following is a summary of the use of capital punishment by country.

See De facto and Capital punishment by country

Capital punishment in California

Capital punishment is a legal penalty in the U.S. state of California.

See De facto and Capital punishment in California

Caroline Harrison

Caroline Lavinia Scott Harrison (October 1, 1832 &ndash; October 25, 1892), was a teacher of music, the wife of Benjamin Harrison and mother of two surviving children; after his election as President of the United States, she was the First Lady of the United States from 1889 until her death.

See De facto and Caroline Harrison

Caroline, Princess of Hanover

Caroline, Princess of Hanover (Caroline Louise Marguerite Grimaldi; born January 23, 1957), is the eldest child of Rainier III, Prince of Monaco, and Princess Grace of Monaco formerly known as American actress Grace Kelly.

See De facto and Caroline, Princess of Hanover

Catalonia

Catalonia (Catalunya, Catalonha, Cataluña) is an autonomous community in Spain on the northeastern extremity of the Iberian Peninsula, designated as a nationality by its Statute of Autonomy.

See De facto and Catalonia

Catholic Church in Sweden

The Catholic Church in Sweden was established by Archbishop Ansgar in Birka in 829, and further developed by the Christianization of Sweden in the 9th century.

See De facto and Catholic Church in Sweden

Central Europe

Central Europe is the region comprising the central part of Europe.

See De facto and Central Europe

Central Powers

The Central Powers (Mittelmächte; Központi hatalmak; İttifak Devletleri / Bağlaşma Devletleri; translit), consisting of Germany,, the Ottoman Empire and Bulgaria – hence also known as the Quadruple Alliance (Vierbund) – was one of the two main factions during World War I (1914–18).

See De facto and Central Powers

Central Region, Singapore

The Central Region is one of the five regions in the city-state of Singapore and the main metropolitan region surrounding the Central Area.

See De facto and Central Region, Singapore

Central Tibetan Administration

The Central Tibetan Administration, also known as CTA (literally Exile Tibetan People's Organisation) is an organisation based in India.

See De facto and Central Tibetan Administration

Cerritos, California

Cerritos (Spanish for little hills), formerly named Dairy Valley because of the preponderance of dairy farms in the area, is an affluent suburban city in Los Angeles County, California, United States, and is one of several cities that constitute the Gateway Cities of southeast Los Angeles County.

See De facto and Cerritos, California

Chad

Chad (تشاد; Tchad), officially the Republic of Chad ("Republic of the Chad"), is a landlocked country in Central Africa.

See De facto and Chad

Changbai Mountains

The Changbai Mountains are a major mountain range in Northeast Asia.

See De facto and Changbai Mountains

Charles IV, Duke of Lorraine

Charles IV (5 April 1604, Nancy – 18 September 1675, Allenbach) was Duke of Lorraine from 1624 until his death in 1675, with a brief interruption in 1634, when he abdicated under French pressure in favor of his younger brother, Nicholas Francis.

See De facto and Charles IV, Duke of Lorraine

Charles Talbot, 1st Duke of Shrewsbury

Charles Talbot, 1st Duke of Shrewsbury, KG, PC (24 July 1660 – 1 February 1718) was an English politician who was part of the Immortal Seven group that invited William III, Prince of Orange to depose James II of England as monarch during the Glorious Revolution.

See De facto and Charles Talbot, 1st Duke of Shrewsbury

Charles XIII of Sweden

Charles XIII & II also Carl, Karl XIII (7 October 1748 – 5 February 1818), was King of Sweden (as Charles XIII) from 1809 and King of Norway (as Charles II) from 1814 until his death.

See De facto and Charles XIII of Sweden

Charles XIV John of Sweden

Charles XIV and III John or Carl John, (Swedish and Norwegian: Karl Johan; 26 January 1763 – 8 March 1844) was King of Sweden (as Charles XIV John) and King of Norway (as Charles III John) from 1818 until his death, and served as de facto regent and head of state from 1810 to 1818.

See De facto and Charles XIV John of Sweden

Chechnya

The Chechen Republic (tɕɪˈtɕɛnskəjə rʲɪˈspublʲɪkə; Нохчийн Республика, Noxçiyn Respublika), commonly referred to as Chechnya (p; Нохчийчоь, Noxçiyçö), is a federal subject (a republic) of Russia.

See De facto and Chechnya

Chen Yun

Chen Yun (pronounced; 13 June 1905 &ndash; 10 April 1995) was one of the most influential leaders of the People's Republic of China during the 1980s and 1990s.

See De facto and Chen Yun

Chief of the Defence Staff (United Kingdom)

The Chief of the Defence Staff (CDS) is the professional head of the British Armed Forces and the most senior uniformed military adviser to the Secretary of State for Defence and the Prime Minister.

See De facto and Chief of the Defence Staff (United Kingdom)

Child support

In family law and public policy, child support (or child maintenance) is an ongoing, periodic payment made by a parent for the financial benefit of a child (or parent, caregiver, guardian, or state) following the end of a marriage or other relationship.

See De facto and Child support

Chile

Chile, officially the Republic of Chile, is a South American country occupying a long, narrow strip of land between the Andes to the east and the Pacific Ocean to the west.

See De facto and Chile

Chinatown bus lines

Chinatown bus lines are discount intercity bus services, often run by Chinese Americans and Chinese Canadians, that have been established primarily in the Chinatown communities of the East Coast of the United States and Central Canada since 1998, although similar services have cropped up on the West Coast.

See De facto and Chinatown bus lines

Chinese character encoding

In computing, Chinese character encodings can be used to represent text written in the CJK languages &mdash; Chinese, Japanese, Korean &mdash; and (rarely) obsolete Vietnamese, all of which use Chinese characters.

See De facto and Chinese character encoding

Chinese nobility

Chinese sovereignty and peerage, the nobility of China, was an important feature of the traditional social and political organization of Imperial China.

See De facto and Chinese nobility

Choi Kyu-hah

Choi Kyu-hah (or; July 16, 1919 &ndash; October 22, 2006), also spelled Choi Kyu-ha, was President of South Korea between 1979 and 1980.

See De facto and Choi Kyu-hah

Christina Gyllenstierna

Christina Nilsdotter Gyllenstierna of Fogelvik (Swedish: Kristina or Kerstin: 1494 &ndash; January 1559, Hörningsholm Castle) was a Swedish noble and a heroine.

See De facto and Christina Gyllenstierna

Christmas Island

The Territory of Christmas Island is an Australian external territory comprising the island of the same name. Christmas Island is located in the Indian Ocean, around south of Java and Sumatra and around north-west of the closest point on the Australian mainland. It has an area of. Christmas Island had a population of 1,843 residents as of 2016, the majority of whom live in settlements on the northern tip of the island. The main settlement is Flying Fish Cove. Around two-thirds of the island's population is estimated to have Malaysian Chinese origin (though just 21.2% of the population declared a Chinese ancestry in 2016), with significant numbers of Malays and white Australians as well as smaller numbers of Malaysian Indians and Eurasians. Several languages are in use, including English, Malay, and various Chinese dialects. Islam and Buddhism are major religions on the island, though a vast majority of the population does not declare a formal religious affiliation and may be involved in ethnic Chinese religion. The first European to sight the island was Richard Rowe of the Thomas in 1615. The island was later named on Christmas Day (25 December) 1643 by Captain William Mynors, but only settled in the late 19th century. Its geographic isolation and history of minimal human disturbance has led to a high level of endemism among its flora and fauna, which is of interest to scientists and naturalists. The majority (63 percent) of the island is included in the Christmas Island National Park, which features several areas of primary monsoonal forest. Phosphate, deposited originally as guano, has been mined on the island since 1899.

See De facto and Christmas Island

City

A city is a large human settlement.

See De facto and City

City-state

A city-state is a sovereign state, also described as a type of small independent country, that usually consists of a single city and its dependent territories.

See De facto and City-state

Civil war

A civil war, also known as an intrastate war in polemology, is a war between organized groups within the same state or country.

See De facto and Civil war

CJON-DT

CJON-DT, UHF channel 21 (branded on-air as "NTV", short for "Newfoundland Television"), is an English-language independent television station located in St. John's, Newfoundland and Labrador, Canada.

See De facto and CJON-DT

Coalition Provisional Authority

The Coalition Provisional Authority (CPA; سلطة الائتلاف المؤقتة) was a transitional government of Iraq established following the invasion of the country on 19 March 2003 by the U.S.-led Multinational Force (or 'the coalition') and the fall of Ba'athist Iraq.

See De facto and Coalition Provisional Authority

Coast guard

A coast guard or coastguard is a maritime security organization of a particular country.

See De facto and Coast guard

Coat of arms of Ontario

The coat of arms of Ontario is the heraldic symbol representing the Canadian province of Ontario.

See De facto and Coat of arms of Ontario

Cocos (Keeling) Islands

The Territory of Cocos (Keeling) Islands is an Australian external territory in the Indian Ocean, comprising a small archipelago approximately midway between Australia and Sri Lanka.

See De facto and Cocos (Keeling) Islands

CoDominium

CoDominium is a series of future history novels written by American writer Jerry Pournelle, along with several co-authors, primarily Larry Niven.

See De facto and CoDominium

Colonialism

Colonialism is the policy of a polity seeking to extend or retain its authority over other people or territories, generally with the aim of developing or exploiting them to the benefit of the colonizing country and of helping the colonies modernize in terms defined by the colonizers, especially in economics, religion and health.

See De facto and Colonialism

Colony

In history, a colony is a territory under the immediate complete political control of a state, distinct from the home territory of the sovereign.

See De facto and Colony

Comics Code Authority

The Comics Code Authority (CCA) was formed in 1954 by the Comics Magazine Association of America as an alternative to government regulation, to allow the comic publishers to self-regulate the content of comic books in the United States.

See De facto and Comics Code Authority

Comma-separated values

In computing, a comma-separated values (CSV) file is a delimited text file that uses a comma to separate values.

See De facto and Comma-separated values

Commandant of the Marine Corps

The Commandant of the Marine Corps (CMC) is normally the highest-ranking officer in the United States Marine Corps and is a member of the Joint Chiefs of Staff.

See De facto and Commandant of the Marine Corps

Committee of Public Safety

The Committee of Public Safety (Comité de salut public)—created in April 1793 by the National Convention and then restructured in July 1793—formed the de facto executive government in France during the Reign of Terror (1793–94), a stage of the French Revolution.

See De facto and Committee of Public Safety

Common Desktop Environment

The Common Desktop Environment (CDE) is a desktop environment for Unix and OpenVMS, based on the Motif widget toolkit.

See De facto and Common Desktop Environment

Common-law marriage

Common-law marriage, also known as sui iuris marriage, informal marriage, marriage by habit and repute, or marriage in fact, is a legal framework in a limited number of jurisdictions where a couple is legally considered married, without that couple having formally registered their relation as a civil or religious marriage.

See De facto and Common-law marriage

Commonwealth of the Philippines

The Commonwealth of the Philippines (Commonwealth de Filipinas; Komonwelt ng Pilipinas) was the administrative body that governed the Philippines from 1935 to 1946, aside from a period of exile in the Second World War from 1942 to 1945 when Japan occupied the country.

See De facto and Commonwealth of the Philippines

Communities, regions and language areas of Belgium

Belgium is a federal state comprising three communities, three regions, and four language areas.

See De facto and Communities, regions and language areas of Belgium

Computer display standard

Computer display standards are a combination of aspect ratio, display size, display resolution, color depth, and refresh rate.

See De facto and Computer display standard

Concentration of media ownership

Concentration of media ownership (also known as media consolidation or media convergence) is a process whereby progressively fewer individuals or organizations control increasing shares of the mass media.

See De facto and Concentration of media ownership

Concertación

The Concertación (full Spanish name: Concertación de Partidos por la Democracia, English: Coalition of Parties for Democracy) was a coalition of center-left political parties in Chile, founded in 1988.

See De facto and Concertación

Conch Republic

The Conch Republic is a micronation declared as a tongue-in-cheek secession of the city of Key West, Florida, from the United States on April 23, 1982.

See De facto and Conch Republic

Concubinage

Concubinage is an interpersonal and sexual relationship in which the couple are not or cannot be married.

See De facto and Concubinage

Confederate States of America

The Confederate States of America (CSA or C.S.), commonly referred to as the Confederacy, was an unrecognized country in North America that existed from 1861 to 1865.

See De facto and Confederate States of America

Confederation

A confederation (also known as a confederacy or league) is a union of sovereign states, united for purposes of common action often in relation to other states.

See De facto and Confederation

Congo Free State

The Congo Free State (État indépendant du Congo, "Independent State of the Congo"; Kongo-Vrijstaat) was a large state in Central Africa from 1885 to 1908.

See De facto and Congo Free State

Congress of Racial Equality

The Congress of Racial Equality (CORE) is an African-American civil rights organization in the United States that played a pivotal role for African Americans in the Civil Rights Movement.

See De facto and Congress of Racial Equality

Congress of Soviets

The Congress of Soviets was the supreme governing body of the Russian Soviet Federative Socialist Republic and several other Soviet republics from 1917–36 and again from 1989-91.

See De facto and Congress of Soviets

Conrad of Montferrat

Conrad of Montferrat (Italian: Corrado del Monferrato; Piedmontese: Conrà ëd Monfrà) (died 28 April 1192) was a north Italian nobleman, one of the major participants in the Third Crusade.

See De facto and Conrad of Montferrat

Constitution of Japan

The is the fundamental law of Japan.

See De facto and Constitution of Japan

Controlled Substances Act

The Controlled Substances Act (CSA) is the statute establishing federal U.S. drug policy under which the manufacture, importation, possession, use, and distribution of certain substances is regulated.

See De facto and Controlled Substances Act

Corazon Aquino

Maria Corazon "Cory" Sumulong Cojuangco Aquino (January 25, 1933 – August 1, 2009) was a Filipina politician who served as the 11th President of the Philippines and the first woman to hold that office.

See De facto and Corazon Aquino

Cosimo de' Medici

Cosimo di Giovanni de' Medici (called 'the Elder' (Italian il Vecchio) and posthumously Father of the Fatherland (Latin pater patriae); 27 September 1389 – 1 August 1464) was an Italian banker and politician, the first member of the Medici political dynasty that served as de facto rulers of Florence during much of the Italian Renaissance.

See De facto and Cosimo de' Medici

Crimes against humanity

Crimes against humanity are certain acts that are deliberately committed as part of a widespread or systematic attack or individual attack directed against any civilian or an identifiable part of a civilian population.

See De facto and Crimes against humanity

CRV7

The CRV7, short for "Canadian Rocket Vehicle 7", is a 2.75-inch (70 mm) folding-fin ground attack rocket produced by Bristol Aerospace in Winnipeg, Manitoba.

See De facto and CRV7

Cyprus

Cyprus (Κύπρος; Kıbrıs), officially the Republic of Cyprus (Κυπριακή Δημοκρατία; Kıbrıs Cumhuriyeti), is an island country in the Eastern Mediterranean and the third largest and third most populous island in the Mediterranean.

See De facto and Cyprus

Danish Defence

The Danish Defence (Forsvaret, Danska verjan, Illersuisut) is the unified armed forces of the Kingdom of Denmark, charged with the defence of Denmark and its constituent, self-governing nations Greenland and the Faroe Islands.

See De facto and Danish Defence

Danish language

Danish (dansk, dansk sprog) is a North Germanic language spoken by around six million people, principally in Denmark and in the region of Southern Schleswig in northern Germany, where it has minority language status.

See De facto and Danish language

David Maxwell Fyfe, 1st Earl of Kilmuir

David Patrick Maxwell Fyfe, 1st Earl of Kilmuir, (29 May 1900 – 27 January 1967), known as Sir David Maxwell Fyfe from 1942 to 1954 and as Viscount Kilmuir from 1954 to 1962, was a British Conservative politician, lawyer and judge who combined an industrious and precocious legal career with political ambitions that took him to the offices of Solicitor General, Attorney General, Home Secretary and Lord High Chancellor of Great Britain.

See De facto and David Maxwell Fyfe, 1st Earl of Kilmuir

David Stewart, Duke of Rothesay

David Stewart (24 October 1378 &ndash; 26 March 1402) was prince and heir to the throne of Scotland from 1390 and the first Duke of Rothesay from 1398.

See De facto and David Stewart, Duke of Rothesay

Dési Bouterse

Desiré Delano "Dési" Bouterse (born 13 October 1945) is a Surinamese politician who has been President of Suriname since 2010.

See De facto and Dési Bouterse

De facto standard

A standard is a custom or convention that has achieved a dominant position by public acceptance or market forces (for example, by early entrance to the market).

See De facto and De facto standard

De jure

In law and government, de jure (lit) describes practices that are legally recognised, whether or not the practices exist in reality.

See De facto and De jure

Dejima

, in old Western documents Latinised as Deshima, Decima, Desjima, Dezima, Disma, or Disima, was a Dutch trading post notable for being the single place of direct trade and exchange between Japan and the outside world during the Edo period. It was a small fan-shaped artificial island formed by digging a canal through a small peninsula in the bay of Nagasaki in 1634 by local merchants. Dejima was built to constrain foreign traders. Originally built to house Portuguese traders, it was used by the Dutch as a trading post from 1641 until 1853. Covering an area of or, it was later integrated into the city through the process of land reclamation. In 1922, the "Dejima Dutch Trading Post" was designated a Japanese national historic site.

See De facto and Dejima

Delft

Delft is a city and municipality in the province of South Holland, Netherlands.

See De facto and Delft

Demilitarized zone

A demilitarized zone, DMZ or DZ is an area in which treaties or agreements between nations, military powers or contending groups forbid military installations, activities or personnel.

See De facto and Demilitarized zone

Demographics of Cyprus

The people of Cyprus are broadly divided into two main ethnic communities, Greek Cypriots and Turkish Cypriots, who share many cultural traits but maintain distinct identities based on ethnicity, religion, language, and close ties with their respective motherlands.

See De facto and Demographics of Cyprus

Demographics of Mexico

With a population of over 123 million in 2017, Mexico ranks as the 11th most populated country in the world.

See De facto and Demographics of Mexico

Demography of Australia

The demography of Australia covers basic statistics, most populous cities, ethnicity and religion.

See De facto and Demography of Australia

Dennis v. United States

Dennis v. United States,, was a United States Supreme Court case relating to Eugene Dennis, General Secretary of the Communist Party USA.

See De facto and Dennis v. United States

Deputy prime minister

A deputy prime minister or vice prime minister is, in some countries, a government minister who can take the position of acting prime minister when the prime minister is temporarily absent.

See De facto and Deputy prime minister

Deputy Prime Minister of the United Kingdom

The Deputy Prime Minister of the United Kingdom (DPM) is a senior member of the Cabinet of the United Kingdom.

See De facto and Deputy Prime Minister of the United Kingdom

Desktop computer

A desktop computer is a personal computer designed for regular use at a single location on or near a desk or table due to its size and power requirements.

See De facto and Desktop computer

Dictator

A dictator is a political leader who possesses absolute power.

See De facto and Dictator

Die Wacht am Rhein

"" (The Watch/Guard on the Rhine) is a German patriotic anthem.

See De facto and Die Wacht am Rhein

Digital Research

Digital Research, Inc. (also known as DR or DRI) was a company created by Gary Kildall to market and develop his CP/M operating system and related 8-bit, 16-bit and 32-bit systems like MP/M, Concurrent DOS, Multiuser DOS, DOS Plus, DR DOS and GEM.

See De facto and Digital Research

Diplomatic recognition

Diplomatic recognition in international law is a unilateral political act with domestic and international legal consequences, whereby a state acknowledges an act or status of another state or government in control of a state (may be also a recognized state).

See De facto and Diplomatic recognition

Disneyland Resort

The Disneyland Resort, commonly known as Disneyland, is an entertainment resort in Anaheim, California.

See De facto and Disneyland Resort

Districts of Portugal

The Districts of Portugal (Distritos de Portugal), are the most important first-level administrative subdivisions of mainland Portugal.

See De facto and Districts of Portugal

Document file format

A document file format is a text or binary file format for storing documents on a storage media, especially for use by computers.

See De facto and Document file format

Dodoma

Dodoma (literally "It has sunk" in Gogo), officially Dodoma City, is the national capital of The United Republic Of Tanzania and the capital of Dodoma Region, with a population of 410,956.

See De facto and Dodoma

Dollar

Dollar (often represented by the dollar sign $) is the name of more than twenty currencies, including those of Australia, Canada, Hong Kong, Jamaica, Liberia, Namibia, New Zealand, Singapore, Taiwan, and the United States.

See De facto and Dollar

Dominant-party system

A dominant-party system, or one-party dominant system, is a system where there is "a category of parties/political organisations that have successively won election victories and whose future defeat cannot be envisaged or is unlikely for the foreseeable future."Suttner, R. (2006), "Party dominance 'theory': Of what value?", Politikon 33 (3), pp.

See De facto and Dominant-party system

Dominion of Newfoundland

Newfoundland was a British dominion from 1907 to 1949.

See De facto and Dominion of Newfoundland

Donetsk

Donetsk (Донецьк; Доне́цк; former names: Aleksandrovka, Hughesovka, Yuzovka, Stalino (see also: cities' alternative names)) is an industrial city in Ukraine on the Kalmius River.

See De facto and Donetsk

Dorothea of Brandenburg

Dorothea of Brandenburg (1430/1431 – 10 November 1495) was Queen consort of Denmark (1445–1448 and 1449–1481), Norway (1445–1448 and 1450–1481), and Sweden (1447–1448 and 1457–1464) two times each by marriage to Christopher of Bavaria and Christian I of Denmark.

See De facto and Dorothea of Brandenburg

Drug policy of the Netherlands

While recreational use, possession and trade of non-medicinal drugs described by the Opium Law are all technically illegal under Dutch law, official policy since the late 20th century has been to openly tolerate all recreational use while tolerating the other two under certain circumstances.

See De facto and Drug policy of the Netherlands

Durand Line

The Durand Line (د ډیورنډ کرښه) is the international border between Pakistan and Afghanistan.

See De facto and Durand Line

Dutch Republic

The Dutch Republic was a republic that existed from the formal creation of a confederacy in 1581 by several Dutch provinces (which earlier seceded from the Spanish rule) until the Batavian Revolution in 1795.

See De facto and Dutch Republic

Earl of Dundee

Earl of Dundee is a title in the Peerage of Scotland.

See De facto and Earl of Dundee

Eastern Armenian

Eastern Armenian (arevelahayeren) is one of the two standardized forms of Modern Armenian, the other being Western Armenian.

See De facto and Eastern Armenian

Eastern Rumelia

Eastern Rumelia (Източна Румелия, Iztochna Rumeliya; روم الى شرقى, Rumeli-i Şarkî; Ανατολική Ρωμυλία, Anatoliki Romylia) was an autonomous territory (oblast in Bulgarian, vilayet in Turkish) in the Ottoman Empire, created in 1878 by the Treaty of Berlin and de facto ended in 1885, when it was united with the principality of Bulgaria, also under Ottoman suzerainty.

See De facto and Eastern Rumelia

Ebba Brahe

Ebba Magnusdotter Brahe (16 March 1596 – 5 January 1674) was a Swedish countess, landowner, and courtier.

See De facto and Ebba Brahe

Economy of North Korea

The economy of North Korea is a centrally planned system, where the role of market allocation schemes is limited, though increasing.

See De facto and Economy of North Korea

Edith Wilson

Edith Wilson (née Bolling, formerly Edith Bolling Galt; October 15, 1872 – December 28, 1961), second wife of U.S. President Woodrow Wilson, was the First Lady of the United States from 1915 to 1921.

See De facto and Edith Wilson

Eduardo Lonardi

Eduardo Ernesto Lonardi Doucet (September 15, 1896 &ndash; March 22, 1956) was an Argentine Lieutenant General and served as de facto president from September 23 to November 13, 1955.

See De facto and Eduardo Lonardi

Education in the United States

Education in the United States is provided by public, private and home schools.

See De facto and Education in the United States

Edward III of England

Edward III (13 November 1312 – 21 June 1377) was King of England and Lord of Ireland from January 1327 until his death; he is noted for his military success and for restoring royal authority after the disastrous and unorthodox reign of his father, Edward II.

See De facto and Edward III of England

Eleanor of England, Countess of Leicester

Eleanor of England (also called Eleanor Plantagenet and Eleanor of Leicester) (1215 – 13 April 1275) was the youngest child of King John of England and Isabella of Angoulême.

See De facto and Eleanor of England, Countess of Leicester

Elisabeth Farnese

Elisabeth Farnese (Italian: Elisabetta Farnese, Spanish: Isabel de Farnesio; 25 October 1692 – 11 July 1766) was Queen of Spain by marriage to King Philip V. She exerted great influence over Spain's foreign policy and was the de facto ruler of Spain from 1714 until 1746.

See De facto and Elisabeth Farnese

Ellen Axson Wilson

Ellen Louise Axson Wilson (May 15, 1860 &ndash; August 6, 1914), was the first wife of Woodrow Wilson and the mother of their three daughters.

See De facto and Ellen Axson Wilson

Emomali Rahmon

Emomali Rahmon (Emomalî Rahmon/Emomalī Rahmon); (born 5 October 1952) is a Tajikistani politician who has served as President of Tajikistan (or its equivalent post) since 1992.

See De facto and Emomali Rahmon

Emperor Murakami

was the 62nd emperor of Japan,Imperial Household Agency (Kunaichō): according to the traditional order of succession.

See De facto and Emperor Murakami

Emperor of China

The Emperor or Huangdi was the secular imperial title of the Chinese sovereign reigning between the founding of the Qin dynasty that unified China in 221 BC, until the abdication of Puyi in 1912 following the Xinhai Revolution and the establishment of the Republic of China, although it was later restored twice in two failed revolutions in 1916 and 1917.

See De facto and Emperor of China

Emperor Takakura

Emperor Takakura (高倉天皇 Takakura-tennō) (September 20, 1161 – January 30, 1181) was the 80th emperor of Japan, according to the traditional order of succession.

See De facto and Emperor Takakura

Empire

An empire is defined as "an aggregate of nations or people ruled over by an emperor or other powerful sovereign or government, usually a territory of greater extent than a kingdom, as the former British Empire, Spanish Empire, Portuguese Empire, French Empire, Persian Empire, Russian Empire, German Empire, Abbasid Empire, Umayyad Empire, Byzantine Empire, Ottoman Empire, or Roman Empire".

See De facto and Empire

Empire of Brazil

The Empire of Brazil was a 19th-century state that broadly comprised the territories which form modern Brazil and (until 1828) Uruguay.

See De facto and Empire of Brazil

Empress Dowager Cixi

Empress Dowager Cixi1 (Manchu: Tsysi taiheo; 29 November 1835 – 15 November 1908), of the Manchu Yehenara clan, was a Chinese empress dowager and regent who effectively controlled the Chinese government in the late Qing dynasty for 47 years from 1861 until her death in 1908.

See De facto and Empress Dowager Cixi

English compound

A compound is a word composed of more than one free morpheme.

See De facto and English compound

Enosis

Enosis (Ένωσις,, "union") is the movement of various Greek communities that live outside Greece, for incorporation of the regions they inhabit into the Greek state.

See De facto and Enosis

Enter the Wu-Tang (36 Chambers)

Enter the Wu-Tang (36 Chambers) is the debut studio album by the American hip hop group Wu-Tang Clan, released November 9, 1993, on Loud Records and distributed through RCA Records.

See De facto and Enter the Wu-Tang (36 Chambers)

Environmental movement

The environmental movement (sometimes referred to as the ecology movement), also including conservation and green politics, is a diverse scientific, social, and political movement for addressing environmental issues.

See De facto and Environmental movement

Equatorial Guinea

Equatorial Guinea (Guinea Ecuatorial, Guinée équatoriale, Guiné Equatorial), officially the Republic of Equatorial Guinea (República de Guinea Ecuatorial, République de Guinée équatoriale, República da Guiné Equatorial), is a country located in Central Africa, with an area of.

See De facto and Equatorial Guinea

Ernest Hemingway

Ernest Miller Hemingway (July 21, 1899 – July 2, 1961) was an American novelist, short story writer, and journalist.

See De facto and Ernest Hemingway

Essex, Massachusetts

Essex is a town in Essex County, Massachusetts, 26 miles (42 km) north of Boston and 13 miles (21 km) Southeast of Newburyport.

See De facto and Essex, Massachusetts

Ethicist

An ethicist is one whose judgment on ethics and ethical codes has come to be trusted by a specific community, and (importantly) is expressed in some way that makes it possible for others to mimic or approximate that judgment.

See De facto and Ethicist

Europe

Europe is a continent located entirely in the Northern Hemisphere and mostly in the Eastern Hemisphere.

See De facto and Europe

Europe Day

Europe Day is the name of two annual observance days, 5 May by the Council of Europe and 9 May by the European Union which recognise the peace and prosperity within Europe both have achieved since their formation.

See De facto and Europe Day

European Space Agency

The European Space Agency (ESA; Agence spatiale européenne, ASE; Europäische Weltraumorganisation) is an intergovernmental organisation of 22 member states dedicated to the exploration of space.

See De facto and European Space Agency

Evans, Georgia

Evans is a census-designated place (CDP) in Columbia County, Georgia, United States.

See De facto and Evans, Georgia

Executive (government)

The executive is the organ exercising authority in and holding responsibility for the governance of a state.

See De facto and Executive (government)

Existence of God

The existence of God is a subject of debate in the philosophy of religion and popular culture.

See De facto and Existence of God

Ey Iran

"Ey Irân" (lit) is a popular patriotic song in Iran, which many consider the unofficial de facto national anthem of Iran.

See De facto and Ey Iran

Fact

A fact is a statement that is consistent with reality or can be proven with evidence.

See De facto and Fact

Failed state

A failed state is a political body that has disintegrated to a point where basic conditions and responsibilities of a sovereign government no longer function properly (see also fragile state and state collapse).

See De facto and Failed state

Fascism

Fascism is a form of radical authoritarian ultranationalism, characterized by dictatorial power, forcible suppression of opposition and control of industry and commerce, which came to prominence in early 20th-century Europe.

See De facto and Fascism

Father

A father is the male parent of a child.

See De facto and Father

Fürst

Fürst (female form Fürstin, plural Fürsten; from Old High German furisto, "the first", a translation of the Latin princeps) is a German word for a ruler and is also a princely title.

See De facto and Fürst

Federalism

Federalism is the mixed or compound mode of government, combining a general government (the central or 'federal' government) with regional governments (provincial, state, cantonal, territorial or other sub-unit governments) in a single political system.

See De facto and Federalism

Federated States of Micronesia

The Federated States of Micronesia (abbreviated FSM and also known simply as Micronesia) is an independent sovereign island nation and a United States associated state consisting of four states from west to east, Yap, Chuuk, Pohnpei and Kosraethat are spread across the Western Pacific Ocean.

See De facto and Federated States of Micronesia

Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina

The Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina (abbreviated FB&H; Bosnian and Serbian: Federacija Bosna i Hercegovina (FBiH) / Федерација Боснa и Херцеговина (ФБиХ), Croatian: Federacija Bosna i Hercegovina (FBiH)) is one of the two political entities that compose Bosnia and Herzegovina, the other being Republika Srpska.

See De facto and Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina

Finlandia hymn

The Finlandia hymn (Finlandia-hymni) refers to a serene hymn-like section of the patriotic symphonic poem Finlandia, written in 1899 and 1900 by the Finnish composer Jean Sibelius.

See De facto and Finlandia hymn

Finnish Democratic Republic

The Finnish Democratic Republic (Suomen kansanvaltainen tasavalta, also Suomen kansantasavalta, Demokratiska Republiken Finland, Russian: Финляндская Демократическая Республика) was a short-lived puppet government created and recognised only by the Soviet Union.

See De facto and Finnish Democratic Republic

Fire sprinkler system

A fire sprinkler system is an active fire protection method, consisting of a water supply system, providing adequate pressure and flowrate to a water distribution piping system, onto which fire sprinklers are connected.

See De facto and Fire sprinkler system

Five Dynasties and Ten Kingdoms period

The Five Dynasties and Ten Kingdoms period was an era of political upheaval in 10th-century Imperial China.

See De facto and Five Dynasties and Ten Kingdoms period

Flag of Albania

The flag of Albania is a red flag with a silhouetted black double-headed eagle in the center.

See De facto and Flag of Albania

Flag of Armenia

The national flag of Armenia, the Armenian Tricolour, consists of three horizontal bands of equal width, red on the top, blue in the middle, and orange (also described as "colour of apricot") on the bottom.

See De facto and Flag of Armenia

Flag of Benin

The national flag of Benin is a flag consisting of two horizontal yellow and red bands on the fly side and a green vertical band at the hoist.

See De facto and Flag of Benin

Flag of Botswana

The national flag of Botswana consists of a light blue field cut horizontally in the centre by a black stripe with a thin white frame.

See De facto and Flag of Botswana

Flag of Cape Verde

The national flag of Cape Verde was adopted on September 22, 1992, replacing the flag adopted during Cape Verdean independence, fought for with Guinea-Bissau, another former Portuguese colony on mainland West Africa.

See De facto and Flag of Cape Verde

Flag of East Timor

The national flag of East Timor (Portuguese: Bandeira de Timor-Leste) is one of the official symbols of East Timor.

See De facto and Flag of East Timor

Flag of Japan

The national flag of Japan is a rectangular white banner bearing a crimson-red disc at its center.

See De facto and Flag of Japan

Flag of Russia

The flag of Russia (Флаг России) is a tricolor flag consisting of three equal horizontal fields: white on the top, blue in the middle and red on the bottom.

See De facto and Flag of Russia

Flag of San Marino

The state and war flag of San Marino is formed by two equal horizontal bands of white (top) and light blue with the national coat of arms superimposed in the center; the coat of arms has a shield (featuring three towers on three peaks) with a closed crown on top, flanked by an oak and laurel wreath, with a scroll below bearing the word LIBERTAS (Liberty).

See De facto and Flag of San Marino

Flag of Texas

The flag of Texas is the official flag of the U.S. state of Texas.

See De facto and Flag of Texas

FN FAL

The FN FAL (Fusil Automatique Léger, English: Light Automatic Rifle), is a battle rifle designed by Belgian small arms designers Dieudonné Saive and Ernest Vervier and manufactured by Fabrique Nationale d'Herstal (FN Herstal).

See De facto and FN FAL

Forced confession

A forced confession is a confession obtained by a suspect or a prisoner under means of torture (including enhanced interrogation techniques) or other forms of duress.

See De facto and Forced confession

Foreign relations of Grenada

The United States, Venezuela, Cuba, and the People's Republic of China have embassies in Grenada.

See De facto and Foreign relations of Grenada

Foreign relations of Spain

After the return of democracy following the death of General Franco in 1975, Spain's foreign policy priorities were to break out of the diplomatic isolation of the Franco years and expand diplomatic relations, enter the European Community, and define security relations with NATO, later joining the organization in 1982.

See De facto and Foreign relations of Spain

Fort Dearborn

Fort Dearborn was a United States fort built in 1803 beside the Chicago River, in what is now Chicago, Illinois.

See De facto and Fort Dearborn

Fort McMurray

Fort McMurray is a population centre, technically classified as an urban service area, in the Regional Municipality (RM) of Wood Buffalo in Alberta, Canada.

See De facto and Fort McMurray

Frances Folsom Cleveland Preston

Frances Clara Cleveland Preston (July 21, 1864 – October 29, 1947) was married to the President of the United States Grover Cleveland and was the First Lady of the United States from 1886 to 1889 and again from 1893 to 1897.

See De facto and Frances Folsom Cleveland Preston

Francis Hyacinth, Duke of Savoy

Francis Hyacinth (Francesco Giacinto; 14 September 1632 – 4 October 1638) was the Duke of Savoy from 1637 to 1638 under regency of his mother Christine Marie.

See De facto and Francis Hyacinth, Duke of Savoy

Francisco de Miranda

Sebastián Francisco de Miranda y Rodríguez de Espinoza (March 28, 1750 – July 14, 1816), commonly known as Francisco de Miranda, was a Venezuelan military leader and revolutionary.

See De facto and Francisco de Miranda

Francoist Spain

Francoist Spain (España franquista) or the Franco regime (Régimen de Franco), formally known as the Spanish State (Estado Español), is the period of Spanish history between 1939, when Francisco Franco took control of Spain after the Nationalist victory in the Spanish Civil War establishing a dictatorship, and 1975, when Franco died and Prince Juan Carlos was crowned King of Spain.

See De facto and Francoist Spain

Frank Costello

Frank "the Prime Minister" Costello (born Francesco Castiglia; January 26, 1891 – February 18, 1973) was an Italian-American Mafia gangster and crime boss.

See De facto and Frank Costello

Fugger

Fugger is a German family that was a historically prominent group of European bankers, members of the fifteenth- and sixteenth-century mercantile patriciate of Augsburg, international mercantile bankers, and venture capitalists.

See De facto and Fugger

Fujiwara no Michinaga

was a Japanese statesman.

See De facto and Fujiwara no Michinaga

Fundamentalist Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-Day Saints

The Fundamentalist Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-Day Saints (FLDS Church) is one of the largest Mormon fundamentalist denominations and one of the largest organizations in the United States whose members practice polygamy.

See De facto and Fundamentalist Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-Day Saints

Furman v. Georgia

Furman v. Georgia, was a criminal case in which the United States Supreme Court struck down all death penalty schemes in the United States in a 5–4 decision, with each member of the majority writing a separate opinion.

See De facto and Furman v. Georgia

Future history

A future history is a postulated history of the future and is used by authors of science fiction and other speculative fiction to construct a common background for fiction.

See De facto and Future history

Galactic Empire (Star Wars)

The Galactic Empire is a fictional autocracy featured in the Star Wars franchise.

See De facto and Galactic Empire (Star Wars)

General Secretary of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union

General Secretary of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union was an office of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union (CPSU) that by the late 1920s had evolved into the most powerful of the Central Committee's various secretaries.

See De facto and General Secretary of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union

Geopolitics

Geopolitics (from Greek γῆ gê "earth, land" and πολιτική politikḗ "politics") is the study of the effects of geography (human and physical) on politics and international relations.

See De facto and Geopolitics

George W. P. Hunt

George Wylie Paul Hunt (November 1, 1859 &ndash; December 24, 1934) was an American politician and businessman.

See De facto and George W. P. Hunt

German Revolution of 1918–19

The German Revolution or November Revolution (Novemberrevolution) was a civil conflict in the German Empire at the end of the First World War that resulted in the replacement of the German federal constitutional monarchy with a democratic parliamentary republic that later became known as the Weimar Republic.

See De facto and German Revolution of 1918–19

Ghana

Ghana, officially the Republic of Ghana, is a unitary presidential constitutional democracy, located along the Gulf of Guinea and Atlantic Ocean, in the subregion of West Africa.

See De facto and Ghana

Gheorghe Gheorghiu-Dej

Gheorghe Gheorghiu-Dej (8 November 1901 &ndash; 19 March 1965) was a Romanian communist politician who served as the first Communist leader of Romania from 1947 to 1965 as General Secretary of the Romanian Communist Party.

See De facto and Gheorghe Gheorghiu-Dej

Ghost mark

Ghost marks are trademarks which closely simulate ordinary words or phrases used in the course of trade, and which are not intended to be used as genuine trade marks.

See De facto and Ghost mark

Glossary of vexillology

Flag terminology is the nomenclature, or system of terms, used in vexillology, the study of flags, to describe precisely the parts, patterns, and other attributes of flags and their display.

See De facto and Glossary of vexillology

Gold standard

A gold standard is a monetary system in which the standard economic unit of account is based on a fixed quantity of gold.

See De facto and Gold standard

Goldie Hawn

Goldie Jeanne Hawn (born November 21, 1945) is an American actress, producer, and occasional singer.

See De facto and Goldie Hawn

Gomez (band)

Gomez are an English indie rock band from Southport, comprising Ian Ball (vocals, guitar), Paul "Blackie" Blackburn (bass), Tom Gray (vocals, guitars, keyboards), Ben Ottewell (vocals, guitars) and Olly Peacock (drums, synths, computers).

See De facto and Gomez (band)

Governance of England

There has not been a government of England since 1707 when the Kingdom of England ceased to exist as a sovereign state, as it merged with the Kingdom of Scotland to form the Kingdom of Great Britain.

See De facto and Governance of England

Government

A government is the system or group of people governing an organized community, often a state.

See De facto and Government

Government National Mortgage Association

The Government National Mortgage Association (GNMA), or Ginnie Mae, was established in the United States in 1968 to promote home ownership.

See De facto and Government National Mortgage Association

Governor of Gibraltar

The Governor of Gibraltar is the representative of the British monarch in the British overseas territory of Gibraltar.

See De facto and Governor of Gibraltar

Great War (series)

Great War is an alternate history trilogy novel by Harry Turtledove, which follows How Few Remain. It is part of Turtledove's Southern Victory series of novels. This trilogy is an alternative imaginary scenario of World War I, between 1914 and 1917, as a result of the Confederate States' victory over the United States in 1862.

See De facto and Great War (series)

Greater Serbia

The term Greater Serbia or Great Serbia (Велика Србија / Velika Srbija) describes the Serbian nationalist and irredentist ideology of the creation of a Serb state which would incorporate all regions of traditional significance to Serbs, including regions outside Serbia that are populated by Serbs.

See De facto and Greater Serbia

Greater Victoria

Greater Victoria (also known as the Greater Victoria Region) is located in British Columbia, Canada, on the southern tip of Vancouver Island.

See De facto and Greater Victoria

Green Mountain Boys

The Green Mountain Boys was a militia organization first established in the late 1760s in the territory between the British provinces of New York and New Hampshire, known as the New Hampshire Grants and later in 1775 as the Vermont Republic (which later became the state of Vermont).

See De facto and Green Mountain Boys

Gregg Allman

Gregory LeNoir Allman (December 8, 1947 – May 27, 2017) was an American singer-songwriter and musician.

See De facto and Gregg Allman

Guadiana

The Guadiana River, or Odiana, is an international river defining a long stretch of the Portugal-Spain border, separating Extremadura and Andalucia (Spain) from Alentejo and Algarve (Portugal).

See De facto and Guadiana

Gujarat

Gujarat is a state in Western India and Northwest India with an area of, a coastline of – most of which lies on the Kathiawar peninsula – and a population in excess of 60 million.

See De facto and Gujarat

Gulf Cooperation Council

The Cooperation Council for the Arab States of the Gulf (مجلس التعاون لدول الخليج العربية), originally (and still colloquially) known as the Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC, مجلس التعاون الخليجي), is a regional intergovernmental political and economic union consisting of all Arab states of the Persian Gulf except Iraq.

See De facto and Gulf Cooperation Council

Gwanghaegun of Joseon

Gwanghae-gun or Prince Gwanghae (3 June 1575 &ndash; 7 August 1641; reigned 1608&ndash;1623) was the fifteenth king of the Joseon dynasty.

See De facto and Gwanghaegun of Joseon

Habib Bourguiba

Habib Ben Ali Bourguiba (الحبيب بورقيبة al-Ḥabīb Būrqībah; 3 August 1903 – 6 April 2000) was a Tunisian lawyer, nationalist leader and statesman who served as the country's leader from independence in 1956 to 1987.

See De facto and Habib Bourguiba

Hafez

Khwāja Shams-ud-Dīn Muḥammad Ḥāfeẓ-e Shīrāzī (خواجه شمس‌‌الدین محمد حافظ شیرازی), known by his pen name Hafez (حافظ Ḥāfeẓ 'the memorizer; the (safe) keeper'; 1315-1390) and as "Hafiz", was a Persian poet who "lauded the joys of love and wine but also targeted religious hypocrisy." His collected works are regarded as a pinnacle of Persian literature and are often found in the homes of people in the Persian speaking world, who learn his poems by heart and still use them as proverbs and sayings.

See De facto and Hafez

Hallstein Doctrine

The Hallstein Doctrine, named after Walter Hallstein, was a key doctrine in the foreign policy of the Federal Republic of Germany (West Germany) in 1955–1970.

See De facto and Hallstein Doctrine

Hans Modrow

Hans Modrow (born 27 January 1928) is a German politician, best known as the last communist premier of East Germany.

See De facto and Hans Modrow

Harding Lemay

Harding Lemay (born March 16, 1922) is an American screenwriter and playwright.

See De facto and Harding Lemay

Hawarden

Hawarden (Penarlâg), Flintshire, Wales is a village, community and electoral ward in part of the Deeside conurbation on the Welsh/English border and was historically significant settlement in the area, see Hawarden Castle.

See De facto and Hawarden

Hazarajat

The Hazarajat (هزاره‌جات) or Hazaristan (هزارستان) is a regional name for the territory inhabited by the Hazara people, which lies in the central and southern highlands of Afghanistan, among the Koh-i-Baba mountains and the western extremities of the Hindu Kush.

See De facto and Hazarajat

Head of government

A head of government (or chief of government) is a generic term used for either the highest or second highest official in the executive branch of a sovereign state, a federated state, or a self-governing colony, (commonly referred to as countries, nations or nation-states) who often presides over a cabinet, a group of ministers or secretaries who lead executive departments.

See De facto and Head of government

Head of state

A head of state (or chief of state) is the public persona that officially represents the national unity and legitimacy of a sovereign state.

See De facto and Head of state

Hellenistic period

The Hellenistic period covers the period of Mediterranean history between the death of Alexander the Great in 323 BC and the emergence of the Roman Empire as signified by the Battle of Actium in 31 BC and the subsequent conquest of Ptolemaic Egypt the following year.

See De facto and Hellenistic period

Hemicorporectomy

Hemicorporectomy is a radical surgery in which the body below the waist is amputated, transecting the lumbar spine.

See De facto and Hemicorporectomy

Henry I, Duke of Brabant

Henry I of Brabant (Henri I de Brabant, Hendrik I van Brabant; 1165 – 5 September 1235), named "The Courageous", was a member of the House of Reginar and first Duke of Brabant from 1183/84 until his death.

See De facto and Henry I, Duke of Brabant

Henry Ossian Flipper

Henry Ossian Flipper (March 21, 1856 – April 26, 1940) was an American soldier, former slave and, in 1877, the first African American to graduate from the United States Military Academy at West Point, earning a commission as a second lieutenant in the US Army.

See De facto and Henry Ossian Flipper

Hepburn romanization

is a system for the romanization of Japanese, that uses the Latin alphabet to write the Japanese language.

See De facto and Hepburn romanization

Hermann Esser

Hermann Esser (29 July 1900 – 7 February 1981) was a very early member of the Nazi Party (NSDAP).

See De facto and Hermann Esser

Hesse

Hesse or Hessia (Hessen, Hessian dialect: Hesse), officially the State of Hesse (German: Land Hessen) is a federal state (''Land'') of the Federal Republic of Germany, with just over six million inhabitants.

See De facto and Hesse

Hey, Slavs

"Hey, Slavs" is a patriotic song dedicated to the Slavic peoples.

See De facto and Hey, Slavs

Hibberts Gore, Maine

Hibberts Gore (also called Hibberts) is a gore in Lincoln County, Maine.

See De facto and Hibberts Gore, Maine

Historic regions of the United States

This is a list of historic regions of the United States that existed at some time during the territorial evolution of the United States and its overseas possessions, from the colonial era to the present day.

See De facto and Historic regions of the United States

History of Berlin

The history of Berlin starts with its foundation in the 13th century.

See De facto and History of Berlin

History of Bulgaria

The history of Bulgaria can be traced from the first settlements on the lands of modern Bulgaria to its formation as a nation-state and includes the history of the Bulgarian people and their origin.

See De facto and History of Bulgaria

History of China

The earliest known written records of the history of China date from as early as 1250 BC,William G. Boltz, Early Chinese Writing, World Archaeology, Vol.

See De facto and History of China

History of Colombia

The history of Colombia includes the settlements and society by indigenous peoples, most notably, the Muisca Confederation, Quimbaya Civilization, and Tairona Chiefdoms; the Spanish arrived in 1499 and initiated a period of conquest and colonization, most noteworthy being Spanish conquest of the Muisca; ultimately creating the Viceroyalty of New Granada, with its capital at Bogotá.

See De facto and History of Colombia

History of Cyprus

Human habitation of Cyprus dates back to the Paleolithic era.

See De facto and History of Cyprus

History of Europe

The history of Europe covers the peoples inhabiting Europe from prehistory to the present.

See De facto and History of Europe

History of Finland

The history of Finland begins around 9,000 BCE during the end of the last glacial period.

See De facto and History of Finland

History of France

The first written records for the history of France appeared in the Iron Age.

See De facto and History of France

History of Gdańsk

Gdańsk (or;; Kashubian: Gduńsk; Danzig) is one of the oldest cities in Poland.

See De facto and History of Gdańsk

History of Guernsey

The history of Guernsey stretches back to evidence of prehistoric habitation and settlement and encompasses the development of its modern society.

See De facto and History of Guernsey

History of Iran

The history of Iran, commonly also known as Persia in the Western world, is intertwined with the history of a larger region, also to an extent known as Greater Iran, comprising the area from Anatolia, the Bosphorus, and Egypt in the west to the borders of Ancient India and the Syr Darya in the east, and from the Caucasus and the Eurasian Steppe in the north to the Persian Gulf and the Gulf of Oman in the south.

See De facto and History of Iran

History of Moldova

The history of Moldova can be traced to the 1350s, when the Principality of Moldavia, the medieval precursor of modern Moldova and Romania, was founded.

See De facto and History of Moldova

History of Palau

Palau was initially settled around 1000 BC.

See De facto and History of Palau

History of the Falkland Islands

The history of the Falkland Islands (Islas Malvinas) goes back at least five hundred years, with active exploration and colonisation only taking place in the 18th century.

See De facto and History of the Falkland Islands

History of the Lands of the Bohemian Crown (1526–1648)

Although the Kingdom of Bohemia and the Margravate of Moravia were both under Habsburg rule, they followed different paths of development.

See De facto and History of the Lands of the Bohemian Crown (1526–1648)

History of the People's Republic of China (1976–89)

In September 1976, after Mao Zedong's death, the People's Republic of China was left with no central authority figure, either symbolically or administratively.

See De facto and History of the People's Republic of China (1976–89)

History of the State of Palestine

The history of the State of Palestine describes the creation and evolution of the State of Palestine in the West Bank and Gaza Strip.

See De facto and History of the State of Palestine

History of the United States Constitution

The United States Constitution was written in 1787 during the Philadelphia Convention.

See De facto and History of the United States Constitution

Hitler Youth

The Hitler Youth (German:, often abbreviated as HJ in German) was the youth organisation of the Nazi Party in Germany.

See De facto and Hitler Youth

Holmenkollbakken

Holmenkollbakken is a large ski jumping hill located at Holmenkollen in Oslo, Norway.

See De facto and Holmenkollbakken

Holy Roman Emperor

The Holy Roman Emperor (historically Romanorum Imperator, "Emperor of the Romans") was the ruler of the Holy Roman Empire (800-1806 AD, from Charlemagne to Francis II).

See De facto and Holy Roman Emperor

Homicide: Life on the Street

Homicide: Life on the Street is an American police procedural television series chronicling the work of a fictional version of the Baltimore Police Department's Homicide Unit.

See De facto and Homicide: Life on the Street

Hong Kong dollar

The Hong Kong dollar (sign: HK$; code: HKD) is the official currency of Hong Kong.

See De facto and Hong Kong dollar

House arrest

In justice and law, house arrest (also called home confinement, home detention, or, in modern times, electronic monitoring) is a measure by which a person is confined by the authorities to a residence.

See De facto and House arrest

House of Medici

The House of Medici was an Italian banking family and political dynasty that first began to gather prominence under Cosimo de' Medici in the Republic of Florence during the first half of the 15th century.

See De facto and House of Medici

Housing cooperative

A housing cooperative, co-op, or housing company (especially in Finland), is a legal entity, usually a cooperative or a corporation, which owns real estate, consisting of one or more residential buildings; it is one type of housing tenure.

See De facto and Housing cooperative

HTML element

An HTML element is an individual component of an HTML document or web page, once this has been parsed into the Document Object Model.

See De facto and HTML element

Hyesan

Hyesan is a city in the northern part of Ryanggang province of North Korea.

See De facto and Hyesan

IBM Personal System/2

The Personal System/2 or PS/2 was IBM's third generation of personal computers.

See De facto and IBM Personal System/2

Identity document

An identity document (also called a piece of identification or ID, or colloquially as papers) is any document which may be used to prove a person's identity.

See De facto and Identity document

Idris of Libya

Idris, GBE (إدريس الأول; El Sayyid Prince Muhammad Idris bin Muhammad al-Mahdi as-Senussi; 12 March 1889 – 25 May 1983), was a Libyan political and religious leader who served as the Emir of Cyrenaica and then as the King of Libya from 1951 to 1969.

See De facto and Idris of Libya

Il Canto degli Italiani

"Il Canto degli Italiani" ("The Song of the Italians" or "The Chant of the Italians") is the national anthem of Italy.

See De facto and Il Canto degli Italiani

Ileana Ros-Lehtinen

Ileana Ros-Lehtinen (born Ileana Carmen Ros y Adato, July 15, 1952) is the most senior U.S. Representative from Florida, representing.

See De facto and Ileana Ros-Lehtinen

Impeachment

Impeachment is the process by which a legislative body formally levels charges against a high official of government.

See De facto and Impeachment

Imperial Germans

Reichsdeutsche, literally translated "Germans of the Reich", is an archaic term for those ethnic Germans who resided within the German state that was founded in 1871.

See De facto and Imperial Germans

Imperium of Man (Warhammer 40,000)

The Imperium of Man or Imperium of Mankind is a galactic empire in the fictional universe of Warhammer 40,000.

See De facto and Imperium of Man (Warhammer 40,000)

Independence

Independence is a condition of a nation, country, or state in which its residents and population, or some portion thereof, exercise self-government, and usually sovereignty, over the territory.

See De facto and Independence

Independent film

An independent film, independent movie, indie film or indie movie is a feature film that is produced outside the major film studio system, in addition to being produced and distributed by independent entertainment companies.

See De facto and Independent film

Indian country

Indian country is any of the many self-governing Native American communities throughout the United States.

See De facto and Indian country

Indian rupee

The Indian rupee (sign: ₹; code: INR) is the official currency of the Republic of India.

See De facto and Indian rupee

Indonesian language

Indonesian (bahasa Indonesia) is the official language of Indonesia.

See De facto and Indonesian language

The Intercontinental Cup, also known as European/South American Cup, and also Toyota Cup from 1980 to 2004 for commercial reasons by agreement with the automaker, was an official international football competition endorsed by the Union of European Football Associations (UEFA) and the Confederación Sudamericana de Fútbol (CONMEBOL), contested between representative clubs from these confederations, usually the winners of the European Champions' Cup (now known as the UEFA Champions League), and the South American Copa Libertadores namely was played by representatives clubs of most developed continents in the football world.

See De facto and Intercontinental Cup (football)

Intergovernmentalism

In political science, intergovernmentalism treats states, and national governments in particular, as the primary actors in the integration process.

See De facto and Intergovernmentalism

The International Date Line (IDL) is an imaginary line of demarcation on the surface of Earth that runs from the North Pole to the South Pole and demarcates the change of one calendar day to the next.

See De facto and International Date Line

Ion Antonescu

Ion Antonescu (– June 1, 1946) was a Romanian soldier and authoritarian politician who, as the Prime Minister and Conducător during most of World War II, presided over two successive wartime dictatorships.

See De facto and Ion Antonescu

IPv4

Internet Protocol version 4 (IPv4) is the fourth version of the Internet Protocol (IP).

See De facto and IPv4

Iquitos

Iquitos, also known as Iquitos City, is the capital city of Peru's Maynas Province and Loreto Region.

See De facto and Iquitos

Iran

Iran (ایران), also known as Persia, officially the Islamic Republic of Iran (جمهوری اسلامی ایران), is a sovereign state in Western Asia. With over 81 million inhabitants, Iran is the world's 18th-most-populous country. Comprising a land area of, it is the second-largest country in the Middle East and the 17th-largest in the world. Iran is bordered to the northwest by Armenia and the Republic of Azerbaijan, to the north by the Caspian Sea, to the northeast by Turkmenistan, to the east by Afghanistan and Pakistan, to the south by the Persian Gulf and the Gulf of Oman, and to the west by Turkey and Iraq. The country's central location in Eurasia and Western Asia, and its proximity to the Strait of Hormuz, give it geostrategic importance. Tehran is the country's capital and largest city, as well as its leading economic and cultural center. Iran is home to one of the world's oldest civilizations, beginning with the formation of the Elamite kingdoms in the fourth millennium BCE. It was first unified by the Iranian Medes in the seventh century BCE, reaching its greatest territorial size in the sixth century BCE, when Cyrus the Great founded the Achaemenid Empire, which stretched from Eastern Europe to the Indus Valley, becoming one of the largest empires in history. The Iranian realm fell to Alexander the Great in the fourth century BCE and was divided into several Hellenistic states. An Iranian rebellion culminated in the establishment of the Parthian Empire, which was succeeded in the third century CE by the Sasanian Empire, a leading world power for the next four centuries. Arab Muslims conquered the empire in the seventh century CE, displacing the indigenous faiths of Zoroastrianism and Manichaeism with Islam. Iran made major contributions to the Islamic Golden Age that followed, producing many influential figures in art and science. After two centuries, a period of various native Muslim dynasties began, which were later conquered by the Turks and the Mongols. The rise of the Safavids in the 15th century led to the reestablishment of a unified Iranian state and national identity, with the country's conversion to Shia Islam marking a turning point in Iranian and Muslim history. Under Nader Shah, Iran was one of the most powerful states in the 18th century, though by the 19th century, a series of conflicts with the Russian Empire led to significant territorial losses. Popular unrest led to the establishment of a constitutional monarchy and the country's first legislature. A 1953 coup instigated by the United Kingdom and the United States resulted in greater autocracy and growing anti-Western resentment. Subsequent unrest against foreign influence and political repression led to the 1979 Revolution and the establishment of an Islamic republic, a political system that includes elements of a parliamentary democracy vetted and supervised by a theocracy governed by an autocratic "Supreme Leader". During the 1980s, the country was engaged in a war with Iraq, which lasted for almost nine years and resulted in a high number of casualties and economic losses for both sides. According to international reports, Iran's human rights record is exceptionally poor. The regime in Iran is undemocratic, and has frequently persecuted and arrested critics of the government and its Supreme Leader. Women's rights in Iran are described as seriously inadequate, and children's rights have been severely violated, with more child offenders being executed in Iran than in any other country in the world. Since the 2000s, Iran's controversial nuclear program has raised concerns, which is part of the basis of the international sanctions against the country. The Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action, an agreement reached between Iran and the P5+1, was created on 14 July 2015, aimed to loosen the nuclear sanctions in exchange for Iran's restriction in producing enriched uranium. Iran is a founding member of the UN, ECO, NAM, OIC, and OPEC. It is a major regional and middle power, and its large reserves of fossil fuels – which include the world's largest natural gas supply and the fourth-largest proven oil reserves – exert considerable influence in international energy security and the world economy. The country's rich cultural legacy is reflected in part by its 22 UNESCO World Heritage Sites, the third-largest number in Asia and eleventh-largest in the world. Iran is a multicultural country comprising numerous ethnic and linguistic groups, the largest being Persians (61%), Azeris (16%), Kurds (10%), and Lurs (6%).

See De facto and Iran

Iran–United States relations

As of 2018, there are no formal diplomatic relations between Iran and the United States.

See De facto and Iran–United States relations

Iraqi Kurdistan

Iraqi Kurdistan, officially called the Kurdistan Region of Iraq (Herêmî Kurdistan) by the Iraqi constitution, is an autonomous region located in northern Iraq.

See De facto and Iraqi Kurdistan

Irish Canadians

Irish Canadians (Gaedheal-Cheanadaigh) are Canadian citizens who have full or partial Irish heritage including descendants who trace their ancestry to immigrants who originated in Ireland.

See De facto and Irish Canadians

Irish pound

The Irish pound (punt Éireannach) was the currency of Ireland until 2002.

See De facto and Irish pound

Isabel Martínez de Perón

María Estela Martínez Cartas de Perón (born 4 February 1931), better known as Isabel Martínez de Perón or Isabel Perón, served as President of Argentina from 1974 to 1976.

See De facto and Isabel Martínez de Perón

Isan language

Isan or Northeastern Thai (ภาษาอีสาน, ภาษาไทยถิ่นตะวันออกเฉียงเหนือ, ภาษาไทยถิ่นอีสาน, ภาษาไทยอีสาน, ภาษาลาวอีสาน) is a group of Lao varieties spoken in the northern two-thirds of Isan in northeastern Thailand, as well as in adjacent portions of northern and eastern Thailand.

See De facto and Isan language

Islamic State of Afghanistan

The Islamic State of Afghanistan (دولت اسلامی افغانستان, Dowlat-e Eslami-ye Afghanestan) was the official name of the country of Afghanistan after the fall of the Democratic Republic of Afghanistan.

See De facto and Islamic State of Afghanistan

Isle of Man

The Isle of Man (Ellan Vannin), also known simply as Mann (Mannin), is a self-governing British Crown dependency in the Irish Sea between the islands of Great Britain and Ireland.

See De facto and Isle of Man

Israel, Palestine, and the United Nations

Issues relating to the State of Israel, the State of Palestine and other aspects of the Arab–Israeli conflict occupy repeated annual debate times, resolutions and resources at the United Nations.

See De facto and Israel, Palestine, and the United Nations

Israeli disengagement from Gaza

The Israeli disengagement from Gaza (תוכנית ההתנתקות,; in the Disengagement Plan Implementation Law), also known as "Gaza expulsion" and "Hitnatkut", was the withdrawal of the Israeli army from inside the Gaza Strip, and the dismantling of all Israeli settlements in the Gaza Strip in 2005.

See De facto and Israeli disengagement from Gaza

Istria

Istria (Croatian, Slovene: Istra; Istriot: Eîstria; Istria; Istrien), formerly Histria (Latin), is the largest peninsula in the Adriatic Sea.

See De facto and Istria

Italian Social Republic

The Italian Social Republic (Repubblica Sociale Italiana,; RSI), informally known as the Republic of Salò (Repubblica di Salò), was a German puppet state with limited recognition that was created during the later part of World War II, existing from the beginning of German occupation of Italy in September 1943 until the surrender of German troops in Italy in May 1945.

See De facto and Italian Social Republic

Izola

Izola (Isola) is an old fishing town and a municipality in southwestern Slovenia on the Adriatic coast of the Istrian peninsula.

See De facto and Izola

Jamaica

Jamaica is an island country situated in the Caribbean Sea.

See De facto and Jamaica

James Connolly

James Connolly (Séamas Ó Conghaile; 5 June 1868 – 12 May 1916) was an Irish republican and socialist leader.

See De facto and James Connolly

Jane Seymour

Jane Seymour (c. 150824 October 1537) was Queen of England from 1536 to 1537 as the third wife of King Henry VIII.

See De facto and Jane Seymour

Japanese art

Japanese art covers a wide range of art styles and media, including ancient pottery, sculpture, ink painting and calligraphy on silk and paper, ukiyo-e paintings and woodblock prints, ceramics, origami, and more recently manga—modern Japanese cartooning and comics—along with a myriad of other types.

See De facto and Japanese art

Japanese language

is an East Asian language spoken by about 128 million people, primarily in Japan, where it is the national language.

See De facto and Japanese language

Java Platform, Micro Edition

Java Platform, Micro Edition or Java ME is a computing platform for development and deployment of portable code for embedded and mobile devices (micro-controllers, sensors, gateways, mobile phones, personal digital assistants, TV set-top boxes, printers).

See De facto and Java Platform, Micro Edition

Jean-Léon Gérôme

Jean-Léon Gérôme (11 May 1824 – 10 January 1904) was a French painter and sculptor in the style now known as academicism.

See De facto and Jean-Léon Gérôme

Jill Farren Phelps

Jill Farren Phelps (born July 7, 1950) is an American television producer.

See De facto and Jill Farren Phelps

João Havelange

Jean-Marie Faustin Godefroid "João" de Havelange (8 May 1916 – 16 August 2016) was a Brazilian lawyer, businessman, athlete and centenarian who served as the seventh President of FIFA from 1974 to 1998.

See De facto and João Havelange

Johann Friedrich Struensee

Johann Friedrich Struensee (5 August 1737 – 28 April 1772) was a German doctor.

See De facto and Johann Friedrich Struensee

John Birch (missionary)

John Morrison Birch (May 28, 1918 – August 25, 1945) was an American Baptist minister, missionary, and United States Army Air Forces captain who was a U.S. military intelligence officer in China during World War II.

See De facto and John Birch (missionary)

John F. Sowa

John Florian Sowa (born 1940) is an American computer scientist, an expert in artificial intelligence and computer design, and the inventor of conceptual graphs.

See De facto and John F. Sowa

John VI of Portugal

John VI (Portuguese: João VI; –), nicknamed "the Clement", was King of the United Kingdom of Portugal, Brazil and the Algarves from 1816 to 1825.

See De facto and John VI of Portugal

Jozef Tiso

Jozef Tiso (13 October 1887 –18 April 1947) was a Slovak politician and Roman Catholic priest who governed the Slovak Republic from 1939 to 1945, a satellite state of Nazi Germany during World War II.

See De facto and Jozef Tiso

Juan Carlos I of Spain

Juan Carlos I (Juan Carlos Alfonso Víctor María de Borbón y Borbón-Dos Sicilias, born 5 January 1938) reigned as King of Spain from 1975 until his abdication in 2014.

See De facto and Juan Carlos I of Spain

Juan Carlos Onganía

Juan Carlos Onganía Carballo (March 17, 1914 – June 8, 1995) was de facto President of Argentina from 29 June 1966 to 8 June 1970.

See De facto and Juan Carlos Onganía

Julia Avita Mamaea

Julia Avita Mamaea (14 or 29 August after 180&ndash;235) was a Syrian noble woman and a Roman regent of the Severan dynasty.

See De facto and Julia Avita Mamaea

Julia Gardiner Tyler

Julia Gardiner Tyler (May 4, 1820 – July 10, 1889) was the second wife of John Tyler, who was the tenth President of the United States, and served as the First Lady of the United States from June 26, 1844, to March 4, 1845.

See De facto and Julia Gardiner Tyler

Julius Nepos

Julius NeposMartindale 1980, s.v. Iulius Nepos (3), pp.

See De facto and Julius Nepos

Jury nullification

Jury nullification is a concept where members of a trial jury find a defendant not guilty if they do not support a government's law, do not believe it is constitutional or humane, or do not support a possible punishment for breaking the law.

See De facto and Jury nullification

Kandahar

Kandahār or Qandahār (کندهار; قندهار; known in older literature as Candahar) is the second-largest city in Afghanistan, with a population of about 557,118.

See De facto and Kandahar

Kangxi Emperor

The Kangxi Emperor (康熙; 4 May 165420 December 1722), personal name Xuanye, was the fourth emperor of the Qing dynasty, the first to be born on Chinese soil south of the Shanhai Pass near Beijing, and the second Qing emperor to rule over that part of China, from 1661 to 1722.

See De facto and Kangxi Emperor

Katipunan

The Katipunan (usually abbreviated to KKK) was a Philippine revolutionary society founded by anti-Spanish Filipinos in Manila in 1892, whose primary aim was to gain independence from Spain through revolution.

See De facto and Katipunan

Kermit (protocol)

Kermit is a computer file transfer/management protocol and a set of communications software tools primarily used in the early years of personal computing in the 1980s.

See De facto and Kermit (protocol)

Key West

Key West (Cayo Hueso) is an island and city in the Straits of Florida on the North American continent, at the southwesternmost end of the roadway through the Florida Keys in the state of Florida, United States.

See De facto and Key West

Kimigayo

is the national anthem of Japan.

See De facto and Kimigayo

Kingdom of Aragon

The Kingdom of Aragon (Reino d'Aragón, Regne d'Aragó, Regnum Aragonum, Reino de Aragón) was a medieval and early modern kingdom on the Iberian Peninsula, corresponding to the modern-day autonomous community of Aragon, in Spain.

See De facto and Kingdom of Aragon

Kingdom of Gwynedd

The Principality or Kingdom of Gwynedd (Medieval Latin: Venedotia or Norwallia; Middle Welsh: Guynet) was one of several successor states to the Roman Empire that emerged in sub-Roman Britain in the 5th century during the Anglo-Saxon settlement of Britain.

See De facto and Kingdom of Gwynedd

Kingdom of Romania

The Kingdom of Romania (Regatul României) was a constitutional monarchy