Washington DC native Fat Trel, is a hip hop recording artist who is currently signed to Rick Ross's label Maybach Music Group and Atlantic Records. Fat Trel recently released his latest project, entitled Georgetown in June, which has garnered more than 15,000,000 views and plays worldwide in less than two months.

Fat Trel began his music career with his debut mixtape in 2009 called Noska Musik. In early 2010 he released his sophomore project accompanied by his crew members The Slutty Boyz entitled Youngest Runnin’ The City and later that year he released another project entitled No Secrets. In 2011 FatTrel released his first local hit record “Respect with the Teck” produced by Lex Luger; a song off of his fourth mixtape, April Foolz, which has been viewed and played almost 2,000,000 times on YouTube.

Since then Fat Trel has released three additional projects, Nightmare on E Street, SDMG and Gleesh. With more than 30,000,000 million views and plays worldwide online in total without a major hit radio record, Fat Trel has proved that he has an audience and is a young force to be reckoned with. FatTrel has worked with label mates Rick Ross, Wale, Rockie Fresh, Tracy T, Stalley and many other artists such as Fetty Wap, Chief Keef, Big Krit, YG, DJ Mustard, Gucci Man, E-40, Red Café and many more.

Fat Trel has been exceptionally focused and dedicated to giving back to his fans. He accompanied Wale during the two-month, 30-plus stop Simply Nothing Tour presented by Boost Mobile. This tour included stops at Irving Plaza in New York, House of Blues venues in Cleveland, Chicago, LasVegas, Los Angeles, Dallas, Houston and New Orleans. The tour preceded the release of Wale’s forth studio album, The Album About Nothing, which later went on to become the number one album in the country according to Billboard.

Fat Trel's creative wordplay, organic delivery, and no holds approach, gives him a universal appeal that will undoubtedly make him a fan favorite and household name before you know it. Stay tuned.....