John Heard will always remain in the hearts of his fans as he has contributed so much to movies and T.V. shows industry. He was brilliant with his work on T.V. shows and films like Sopranos and Home Alone.

He passed away after he suffered a severe heart attack, and this was the cause of death.

John Heard's Wife (Spouse) and Children

John Heard was dating his girlfriend Margot Kidder before the couple decided to get married and live as husband and wife (spouse).

For Amazing Articles Of Your Favorite Celebrities,

Stay Tuned To vergewiki

The couple got married in 1979, but sadly they divorced each other only after six days of their marriage. He then started dating girlfriend Melissa Leo.

He had a son with Melissa in 1987. The couple started having a lot of problems, and he was even arrested in 1991 for third-degree assault. He was accused of slapping Leo. He was also found to be guilty of trespassing at Leo's home.

John Heard also married Sharon Heard and Lana Pritchard. He had two more children with Sharon. The names of them are Annika Rose and Maxwell John.

He married Pritchard on 24th May 2010, but this marriage of his was also a disaster, and the couple divorced after seven months of their marriage.

He had one son with Pritchard, but sadly he passed away. His son's name was Maxwell John Heard. His son, Maxwell John Heard, died on 6th December 2016. He was only 22 at that time.

John Heard's Movies and TV Shows

John Heard was nominated for Emmy Award in 1999 for the category of Outstanding Guest Actor in a Drama Series. He won Theatre World Award for his fantastic performance in G.R. Point in 1977.

He was inducted in Hall of Fame of Gonzaga College High School. He played the role of Michael Thomas in a T.V. series called NCIS: Los Angeles in 2014.

Other T.V. shows and movies to his name include the likes of The Last Sharknado: It's About Time, Outsiders, Elementary, APB, Perception, Gravity, The Beat, Modern Family, Battle star Galactica, Prison Break, Numb3rs, Jack & Bobby, hack, Law & Order: Special Victims Unit, The Client, American Master, Law & Order, The Sopranos, Dead Ahead: The Exxon Valdez Disaster and Out on a Limb.

John Heard's Net Worth

John Heard had a net worth of 3.5 million dollars, and he did enjoy his life with full flow and energy.

Wiki of John Heard