Cecil Funderburgh, Jr., aged 82, of Eastland, Texas, went to his heavenly home Sunday, October 22, 2023.

Cecil was born November 27, 1940, in Gorman, Texas, to Loraine Marie Swanner and Cecil Wallace Funderburgh, Sr.

In December of 1959, Cecil joined the United States Air Force and proudly served his country. Following his honorable discharge in September of 1963, he was employed by General Dynamics followed by Bell Helicopter. Soon after, Cecil began employment as a tv repairman at Turner Television Shop in Fort Worth, Texas.

In 1978, Cecil moved his family to Gorman, Texas, starting a television repair and service shop with his uncle James Swanner. The following year, 1979, brought transition when he became a patrol officer for the Gorman Police Department. Shortly thereafter, he assumed the role of Chief of Police. He served the citizens of Gorman for 11 years before accepting the position of Chief of Police in Eastland, Texas, in 1990.

Cecil served the citizens of Eastland for 21 years and the law enforcement community for a total of 33 years, taking pride in his work.

After a short-lived retirement from law enforcement, Cecil accepted the role of Executive Director of the Eastland Chamber of Commerce from 2012 to 2017, where he worked diligently to promote all that Eastland has to offer and shine a light on its lesser-known attributes. He retired from the Chamber but refused to stop working and commenced employment at Bryan’s Computers where he enjoyed doing what came most naturally to him—working on computers and administrative tasks.

Cecil permanently retired from all work endeavors in May of 2023, choosing instead to put all his energy into loving his family well and strengthening his relationship with God.

He took his full-time job of being “Pepaw” very seriously and excelled at loving his children, grandchildren, and great-grandchildren unconditionally.

Cecil was a devoted and loving husband of 16 years to Patricia Ann Funderburgh until her passing in 2021.

Cecil lived a life filled with love and devotion. He is preceded in death by wife Anne of 29 years, in 2004, and wife Myrna of 10 years, in 1972. He is also preceded in death by his mother, father, and siblings, Phillip Funderburgh and Wanda Chapman.

Cecil gave his time to organizations that he deeply cherished including the Eastland Masonic Lodge and the American Legion. He also served as a Councilman for the Eastland City Council. Many other community-based organizations benefitted from his service and promotion.

Cecil attended First Methodist Church of Eastland and enjoyed going to Bible study and Sunday school. Members and visitors were sure to see his smiling face in the first pew ready to worship!

Cecil is survived by his children Cecil Funderburgh III and spouse Jessica; David Dixon; Debby Hogan and spouse Dale; Kathy Perez and spouse Jason; Christie Funderburgh; Robert Shannon; grandchildren Cruz Cervantez and spouse Vianney; Madison Funderburgh; Haley Jones and spouse Jason; Miranda Dale; Cecilie Funderburgh; Aiden Hunt and Spouse Lace; James Hogan and spouse Amber; Jason Hogan and fiancé Danielle; Amber Meroney and fiancé Adam; Clayton Williams; Ian Shannon and fiancé Hannah; Sacha Shannon and spouse Jade; numerous great-grandchildren he loved with his whole heart; uncle CW Swanner; and beloved dog Iggy.

A celebration of life will be held Friday, November 3, 2023 at the Myrtle Wilks Community Center, at 2:00 p.m. Family, friends, and community welcome.