Cecil B. Carnes, age 61, passed away on October 10, 2015 at his residence with his loving wife and family by his side. Cecil was born in St Louis, Missouri on February 27, 1954 to Hortense and Carl Carnes. Cecil received his formal education in Venice, IL before joining the United States Air Force. He was Honorably Discharged and relocated to Racine, WI.

Cecil was employed by Ardagh Group in Burlington, WI for the last 12 years until his health began to fail. He previously worked at Powder Finishers. Cecil loved spending time with his family. He would often grill for his family every weekend during the summer and fall months. He also loved music and watching basketball, football and boxing with his sons. Cecil was a dedicated Chicago Bulls and Chicago Bears fan.

Cecil leaves to cherish his memory his wife, Maria (nee Rodriguez) Carnes; two daughters, Ericka (Kito Hughes) Espinoza and Yvonne Espinoza; three sons Demetrius Cannon, Angel (Tara Mitchell) Espinoza and David (Katie Gutzman) Espinoza; brother, Kenneth Carnes; grandchildren, Anyssa, Angel, Ysela, Gabriela, Daniel, David, Christopher, Nathaniel, Robert, Joshua and Armondo; brother and sister in laws, Juan (Maureen Smith) Rodriguez, Linda Martinez, Jesse Rodriguez, Joe Rodriguez, Elva Rodriguez, Zeke Rodriguez and Udelsa (Juan) Guzman; daughter-in-law, Nicole Cannon; special cousins, Collette Williams, LaDonna Muniz, Terrance Williams, Gail Ramseur and Kevin Turner; and many others nieces, nephews, cousins and other relatives and friends. Cecil was preceded in death by his parents; sister, Carla (Jackie) Carnes; mother-in-law and father-in- law, Jesus and Carolina Rodriguez; brother-in-law, Joe Martinez; and best friend, William Walrup.

Funeral services will be held Friday, October 16, 2015 11:00AM at Greater St Luke’s Baptist Church 1326 State St. Interment with Full Military Honors will follow at Holy Cross Cemetery, Hwy 32. Relatives and friends are welcome to meet with the family for a visitation on Thursday October 15, 2015 from 5:00-7:00PM at the funeral home and 10:00AM until time of the service at the church on Friday.