http://genealogiequebec.info/testphp/info.php?no=21014

http://www.genealogics.org/getperson.php?personID=I00122051&tree=LEO

ES II 135 has her wrongly identified

Jevdokija was born in the 1130s, the daughter of a king of Ruthenia (ruler of Kievan Rus'), and his wife who would have been kinswoman of Friedrich I Barbarossa, the Holy Roman Emperor. Although sources of the time do not specify her father unambiguously, he likely was one of the ruling sons of Mstislav I, themselves allies of Mieszko III - either Isjaslaw Mstislavich of Volynia or Rostislav Mstislavich of Smolensk.

Between 1151 and 1154 Jevdokija was married to decade-older Mieszko III, duke of Gniezno, Poznan and Kalisz, the future high duke of Poland, one of the sons of Boleslaw III Krzywousy, high duke of Poland, and his second wife Salome von Berg-Schelklingen. Mieszko had recently lost his first wife Elisabeth of Hungary (whose paternity also is somewhat ambiguous because of incomplete documentation of that time). With this union Mieszko III probably wanted to cement his relations with the Monomakhid branch of Rurikids, sometime rulers of Kievan Rus'.

Jevdokija bore her husband three sons and two daughters, of whom only Anastasia would have recorded progeny further than one or two generations. Anastasia married Bogislaw I, Herzog von Pommern-Stettin.

In 1173 Mieszko III succeeded - in accordance with agnatic seniority, the succession custom of medieval Slavic monarchies - his older brother Boleslaw IV 'the Curly' as high duke of Poland, and Jevdokija served as his consort. However their reign was short-lived; in 1177 Mieszko's eldest son Odon (who ultimately died in the lifetime of his elderly father) rebelled against him, with the help of his uncle Kazimierz II 'the Just', duke of Sandomir, Cracow, Kujavia and Masovia. The main reason of Odon's rebellion was the favouritism showed by Mieszko III to his children with Jevdokija, and Mieszko's attempts to force him to become a priest in order to eliminate him from the succession.

Mieszko was forced to flee and went to Bohemia (where he unsuccessfully sought the help of his son-in-law Duke Sobeslav II), Germany and Pomerania (where Mieszko obtained the support of his other son-in-law Duke Bogislaw I, ruler of Stettin).

Jevdokija was alive when her husband Mieszko III recovered his Greater Poland domains in 1182. Nothing is known of Jevdokija's later life. She possibly was dead when Mieszko III, an old man, recovered temporarily again the position of Polish High Duke in 1191. Some literature places her death around 1187.

from http://fmg.ac/Projects/MedLands/RUSSIA,%20Rurik.htm#IevdokiaIziasla... v4.0 Updated 17 November 2017

Grand Prince Iziaslav II & his first wife had five children:

3. IEVDOKIA Iziaslavna. Baumgarten names and records the parentage of the second wife of Mieszko III but cites only one secondary source in support[482]. The Chronicon Polono-Silesiacum refers to the second wife of Mieszko III as "filia regis Russie"[483]. m ([1151/54]%29 as his second wife, MIESZKO III "Stary" Prince of Greater Poland, son of BOLESŁAW III "Krzywousty/Wrymouth" Prince of Poland & his second wife Salome von Berg-Schelklingen ([1126/27]-13 Mar 1202).