Bamenda based journalist and rights advocate Gwain Colbert Fulai has made a public appeal for the late pioneer Archbishop of Bamenda His Grace Paul Verdzekov to intercede for an end to the armed conflict in the North West and South West Regions of Cameroon.

The radio personality made his appeal on Sunday July 26 on his Facebook page with a selfie of him and an enlarged potrait of the late prelate.

In his accompanying words, Gwain Colbert Fulai a Catholic faithful writes: "Tah Archbishop Verdzekov, you communioned and confirmed me as worthy Christian into our Holy, Catholic and apostolic Church. Now, you surely are seated at the right hand of God the Father....Pray for God to take away this cup from us in Anglophone Cameroon that you shepharded as metropolitan archbishop for all your years on Earth. Just that singular miracle would suffice as the entire church is looking for a sign to jumpstart your beatification process...Amen."

In a chart with the journalist, he maintained that his action was not for social media fun. "I meant what I said. I am aware that the late Archbishop of Bamenda was an exemplary Christian by words and deeds and there is no reason for him not to be in heaven with the Almighty God." He said.

According to the journalist, late Father Paul Vedzekov as he preferred to be called is one of the Anglophone elites who lived and understood the foundation of the ongoing crisis like his brother the Cardinal Christain Tumi and certainly he will also be in a position to identify the solution. Gwain remains convinced that though dead, the Archbishop can be of great help to finding a solution to the crisis.

Varied reactions have accompanied the post. While some think that the late prelate is dead and gone, others share the opinion of the media personality insisting that he can still be of help.

"He can't pray, for he is just a mere man . Only Jesus that is the way the truth and the life can interceded hahahaha" Apostle Njam Genesis argues...

"He confirmed me to as a Roman Catholic. Mindful of his Holy and worthy deeds, he is being canonised to become a saint. May He intercede/hold our brief before the celestial courts. We have suffered enough." Mabong Felix Ngong writes.

"The sainthood of Tah Verdzekov is a matter of time. I am convinced that he is in the right place in heaven where he can influence action on earth. We have suffered a lot and with no human solution on sight, divine intervention is key at this point." He said.

Host of the flagship radio programme on NDEFCAM Radio Bamenda Press and Associate, Gwain is also the Executive Officer in Chief of the Non Governmental Organisation A Common Future from where be has championed several rights violation advocacies. He is author of the book Bamenda, A source of Inspiration for a better Cameroon. The Civicus speaker is also known around his Bamenda community for his insightful commentaries: The Colbert Factor.

By Bakah Derick

Photo credits: Gwain Colbert Fulai