Our mission is to help parents in all that they do, from clothes that lend a hand when you need it most to a welcome resource for new parents as they navigate a new stage of life. Between the two families of Founders Lauren Levy and Lawrence Sheer, they've experienced nursing, bottle feeding, little boys, little girls, twins, preemies, 3 under 15 months, and all sorts of labor experiences in several hospitals—and they've been making innovations to getting dressed all along the way.

Sign up to receive emails and texts at the bottom of this page and be the first to receive exclusive access to new launches, special offers, and all things Magnetic Me. Our Click Clique program allows you to earn and redeem these points for products and discounts. Sign up here.

Follow @magneticme on Instagram, Facebook, and TikTok or join the Magnetic Me MVPs Facebook group—a loyal community that supports one another through parenthood and life as a whole.

RightFit™ is our patent-pending fabric blend combining TENCEL™ modal with a naturally flame resistant fabric, resulting in a soft and loose fabric that doesn’t use carcinogenic chemicals. Children's pajamas are mandated by the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission to meet specific dimensions that create a very snug fit, in order to adhere to fire safety guidelines. As a result, parents often find dressing their child to be a frustrating experience as they struggle to get a child's arms, legs, and stomach into the garment. Magnetic's Me RightFit™ fabric enables a looser silhouette, and when paired with the brand's signature magnetic closures, it makes meaningful progress in combating the children's industry's snug fit issue and dressing growing children hassle-free.

For standard shipping, we typically ship within 1-2 business days of purchase. Our warehouse team works Monday through Friday, so orders placed over the weekend are typically processed first thing Monday morning. Our warehouse team prioritizes orders placed with express shipping to get these orders shipped ASAP.

Please note, orders placed during busy periods like site-wide sales take a bit longer to process. Please take that into account when choosing a shipping option.

U.S. customers can choose their preferred shipping method. Please account for order processing time before selecting a delivery service.

Standard Shipping: Shipments under 1 pound or to HI, PR + AKl are mailed via UPS Sure Post. All other shipments are mailed via FedEx Ground Economy. Packages from both providers typically take 2-7 days to arrive.

Standard Shipping is free on orders $85+ (after discounts and without shipping, handling, or taxes). For orders below $85, there is a Standard Shipping flat rate of $6.95.

FedEx 2-Day One Rate ($11.95): 2-day shipping offered for U.S. orders under a certain weight.

FedEx 2-Day Shipping: Offered for all orders and rate is calculated based on destination address. These orders are typically delivered by 8pm to most U.S. addresses.

FedEx Overnight: Next-business-day delivery option reaches most U.S. addresses by 8PM.

A note for FedEx “overnight” and “2-Day” shipping: FedEx currently delivers packages with overnight and 2-Day shipping Monday - Friday and not on weekends. We do not offer refunds for the cost of expedited shipping if the package has been shipped within our expected processing window.

We ship our products all over the world! Please view the currency drop-down menu in the navigation of our site to see which countries we ship to and select accordingly. Once you are in checkout, you will see local payment methods and calculations for any appropriate shipping, duties, taxes, and other customs fees.

If you need assistance with your international order, you can visit our designated help center here.

Magnetic Me has partnered with Route to help cover the cost of lost, damaged, or stolen packages. Add it with a click of a button at checkout.

For orders up to $100 (after discounts and without shipping, handling, or taxes), package protection costs $1.55.

For orders over $100, package protection costs 2.6% of your overall order value.

If you opt out of Route insurance at checkout, Magnetic Me is not responsible for lost or stolen packages at this time.

Read more about Route’s policies here.

You are able to edit your order within two hours of purchase. It can be edited directly from your order status page, which is available to you after checkout or through your order confirmation email.

In order to offer you full flexibility to edit the order, we will cancel the original order and reload the cart for you. You’ll then be able to make any adjustments to the cart and place a new order.

After two hours, your order can no longer be edited. Due to the volume of orders placed every day, we are not able to adjust or cancel your order after this time. Please check your order, billing, and shipping addresses carefully before you place your order.

(Re-loved and international orders cannot be edited at this time.)

After an order is placed, customers have the option to edit an order within two hours of purchase. Once the two hour window has passed, it can no longer be edited.

We are not responsible for charges incurred from the return of a package or the additional shipment to its correct address.

(Re-loved and international orders cannot be edited at this time.)

A return must be requested within 30 days of the ship date, after which merchandise must be sent back within 15 days. Merchandise must have the tags attached and not be worn, washed, dyed, or altered.

Final sale: No returns or exchanges on any sale items, gift cards, gift wrapping, and re-loved items are allowed.

A $6.95 return fee will be charged to cover shipping.

Merchandise that appears to be worn and/or washed and not in its original/sellable condition may result in a delayed refund/exchange, or may not qualify for a refund or exchange. In these cases, the item(s) will be returned to you.

We are also not able to accept returns for any APO/FPO/DPO orders.

We stand behind our products and are proud to have a quality control team that ensures the highest quality possible. In the rare case you receive a defective item, email customer service with a photo of your item to file a claim for your product. We will allow claims on any items that have manufacturing defects within 6 months from the date of purchase.

Non-returnable items, no exceptions

- Normal wear and tear (holes, pilling, fading, snags, stains, etc.)

- Accidents (example: "the dog ate my footie")

- Shrinkage (remember to wash in cold water & dry on low heat for 30 min max)

- Final sale items

- International orders and APO/FPO/DPO addresses

- Purchases made in-person or from a website other than magneticme.com. For these orders, please contact the store/website from which you made the purchase to ask about their return policy.

Eligible items for our quality guarantee

- Stitching or seam issues

- Missing magnets

- Mis-labeled outfits

For help with any of these issues, please contact us here.

Need a different size? Want a different print? We’re glad to help you exchange your outfit — or shop for something new. You can START AN EXCHANGE through our return portal. Bonus: shipping is free.

Your exchange will be created once the return package is scanned by the USPS. You’ll then receive an email notification about the new exchange order before your return even makes it to our warehouse.

All exchanges are based on inventory. Items that are available when you request an exchange may not be available when your package is first scanned by USPS. If we sell out of the requested item before being able to fulfill your exchange, you will receive a notification and will be refunded for the original item once your package arrives at our warehouse.

All exchanges must be mailed back within 30 days of the request, otherwise it will be canceled and you will be refunded for the items instead. Items from an order are eligible to be exchanged only one time

Please note, you are not able to exchange items received in an exchange order. You are able to return any items from an exchange order for a refund or gift card.

We accept gift returns or exchanges for non-sale items purchased directly from our website within 90 days of the original purchase. If you've surpassed the 30-day window, please contact customer service to facilitate the return.

It's easy to START A GIFT RETURN.

If you don’t know the original order number or shipping zip code for your gift, please email us with the gift giver's name or email.

Gift returns will receive merchandise credit to our website in the amount of the original purchase, which will be emailed to you. Magnetic Me is happy to waive our return fee for all gift returns.

If you choose to exchange your gift, your exchange order will be created once your return package has been scanned by USPS.

If your gift was purchased from another website, retail partner, or anywhere other than magneticme.com, we are unable to process a return but encourage you to contact the website or store where the gift was purchased to return or exchange.

There are many ways: Every dollar you spend earns you one point. You can earn points by leaving a review, referring a friend, or following us on social media, plus, you get a special reward on your birthday. You also get 25 points just by signing up for our rewards program. See all of the ways to earn points here.

(Please note that purchases with a gift card do not count towards reward points.)

You can apply your points for a reward at checkout.

1. Log into your account.

2. Shop the site.

3. Check out and choose your reward (right by where you would add a discount code or gift card!).

4. Hit apply and your reward will be deducted from your order:

-100 points gets you $5 off your purchase

-300 points gets you $15 off your purchase

-500 points gets you $25 off your purchase

One reward can be applied per order.

(Points will only be available through our checkout page, not through a payment app like PayPal.)

If you are returning the entire order, we will refund you the total dollar amount spent after the discount was applied. If the order was placed with a gift card, you will receive a gift card for the total dollar amount spent. The points used to redeem the discount will also be added back to your rewards account.

In order to earn points, you must be a member of our Click Clique rewards program. Sign up here.

Tell your Instagram and TikTok community about Magnetic Me and tag us for credit. Please make sure @magneticme is tagged and the post guidelines are followed. You will be sent an email within 24 hours of your post being approved.

Simply shop online and add items to your shopping bags and checkout as normal. At the checkout, choose Installments with Afterpay as your payment method. First-time customers will need to register with Afterpay and provide payment details, as usual, returning customers simply log in to make their purchase. It's that easy!

Please note that all items in your shopping bag must be eligible for Installments with Afterpay. A minimum purchase amount may apply and you must meet additional eligibility requirements to qualify.

For pay-in-4 payments, generally customers are required to make their down payment at the time of purchase, with the remaining three payments deducted every two weeks from your chosen payment method.

For all Afterpay payments, you can log in to your Afterpay account to view your payment schedule and make a payment before the due date if you choose to do so.

Subject to Magnetic Me's return and refund policies, if you have changed your mind, you may be able to return your Afterpay purchase for a refund. Please check that your return or exchange meets Magnetic Me's Return policy above. Afterpay will be notified of your return and will process the appropriate refunds. Please do not return your purchase to Afterpay.

If you are fully returning items you purchased using the monthly payments option and a refund is owed, any amounts paid towards the good or service will be refunded; any interest that has already been paid will not be refunded. You may be charged interest for the period of time before your refund is processed.

If you believe there is fault or concern with your Afterpay purchase payment, please contact Afterpay customer support at info@afterpay.com

Afterpay will be notified once your refund is processed.

If you purchased using pay-in-4, your payment plan will be automatically adjusted to reflect the new total order value starting with the last payment and working backward. In the case where a refund amount is larger than 25% of the total order, Afterpay will eliminate the fourth installment payment and apply the remaining amount to your earlier payments.

If you purchased using monthly payments, interest already paid will not be refunded. Any amounts paid toward the good or service will be adjusted, interest will be recalculated based upon the adjusted amount.

We’ve partnered with Route—a package protection and tracking solution—to improve the post-purchase experience and give our customers the best possible delivery experience.

Adding Route Package Protection to your order at checkout means that your order is protected against being lost, damaged, or stolen. In the unfortunate instance that you experience one of these inconveniences, you can report an issue with Route and they will work with you to make sure you get the resolution you prefer. When you file an issue with Route, it will be reviewed for approval of a reorder or refund within 1-2 business days.

If you insure your order with Route Protect at checkout, you will receive a confirmation email from Route with a link to file a shipping issue. Keep this email handy in case your package is lost, stolen, or damaged.

You can also file a claim on Route’s app (download here) or via the web here.

Marked As Delivered (Stolen)

Issues can be approved no earlier than 5 and no later than 60 days from when your package was marked delivered.

Stuck In Transit (Lost)

Issues can be approved no earlier than 7 days and no later than 60 days from the last update (US).

Issues can be approved no earlier than 20 days and no later than 60 days from the last update (International).

Damaged

File issues for damaged items with photos of the package and item (required) and no later than 60 days from when it was marked delivered.

All policies are also listed here.