AUSTINTOWN - Donald Lariccia Sr., loving husband, father, grandfather, and great grandfather passed away peacefully in his sleep on Thursday, July 25, 2024, at the age of 92.

Donald "Don" was born on December 8, 1931, in Youngstown to the late Michael A. Lariccia and Ellen Cuccarese Lariccia.

Donald served his country during the Korean War, where he was part of the 179th Infantry Regiment while on active duty from 1952 to 1954. During his tour of duty, he earned the Korean Service Ribbon with the Bronze Service Star, the Combat Infantryman Badge First Award, the United Nations Service Medal and the National Defense Service Medal.

During his lifetime, Don had a long and dedicated career at the Mahoning County Engineers from where he later retired.

After the war, Don met the love of his life when he asked Mary Smith to dance. Together they created a warm home for their seven children and eventually 19 grandchildren.

Don's magnetic personality made him one of a kind. He never met a stranger, was full of captivating stories and always quick with a joke. His loud laugh was infectious and could be heard throughout his home. He enjoyed playing poker and having his house full of people because he treasured being surrounded by family and friends. He was a vivid storyteller, a great husband, slightly impatient and a die-hard Cleveland Browns and N.Y. Yankees fan.

Don said family was always his true source of pride. He absolutely loved spending time with his family and spoiling his grandchildren and great grandchildren. This included handing out candy and ice cream in the morning while happily overriding any parental objections.

He will be lovingly remembered by his children, Ellen (Bob) Hudak of Mansfield, Dee (Dave) Kanotz of Canfield, MaryJo Fedorisin of Austintown, Joel (Irene) Lariccia of Struthers, Mark Lariccia of Youngstown, and La Bieltz of Charleston, S.C.; 19 grandchildren; 20 great-grandchildren, who will carry on Don's proud family legacy and a sister, Carol (Dennis) McDonald of Maryland.

Donald was preceded in death by his beloved wife of 63 years, Mary Lariccia; his son, Donald Lariccia Jr.; a sister, June Hughs and two brothers, Michael A. Lariccia Jr. and Robert J. Lariccia.

Family and friends may call from 9:00 to 10:30 a.m. on Monday, August 5, 2024, at Kinnick Funeral Home, 477 N. Meridian Rd., Youngstown, where prayers will be offered at 10:30 a.m.

A Mass of Christian Burial will follow at 11 a.m. at St. Christine Church, 3165 S. Schenley Ave., Youngstown.

Committal services will follow at Calvary Cemetery in Youngstown where Don will be laid to rest alongside his cherished wife, Mary.

The family would like to send a heartfelt thank you to the nurses and staff of Hospice of the Valley-Hospice House for their kindness shown and compassionate care given to Don and his family.