It is with heartfelt sadness that we convey the sudden passing of Lauren Ann Malone, our beloved daughter, mother, granddaughter, great-granddaughter, sister, friend, and co-worker on July 31, 2024.

Lauren, 34, was born on a cold and sunny morning, December 9, 1989, at Women & Infants Hospital in Providence, Rhode Island. Known for her magnetic smile and unwavering compassion, she exhibited a life’s worth of unfailing willingness to put those she knew and loved before her own needs. She was as sincere and genuine as they come, displaying enormous heart and the old soul of a person far beyond her years. Beloved by all who knew her, Lauren was a bright and exquisite light in the lives of her family and friends.

Lauren, or “Lou,” followed her passions in everything thing she did, whether it be her art, her work, or the relationships she cultivated with those closest to her. A 2008 graduate of Harwich High School, she most recently worked alongside her mother, Lee, as a dental assistant on Cape Cod where she was adored by coworkers and patients alike.

Known for drawing belly laughs from the young and old alike, Lauren possessed a timeless sense of humor matched in vigor only by her gift for selfless giving and love. A noted cat lover, she was also an accomplished artist and dancer whose handmade cards and drawings will adorn refrigerators and scrapbooks for years and years. All these traits and more happily coalesced on June 15, 2022, in the birth of her precious daughter Ellie, the first great-granddaughter in a family whose extensive lineage stretches far and wide.

Lauren is survived by her daughter, Eliana Marie Hemmings and Ellie’s father, Orlando Hemmings; mother Lee Malone, father Patrick Malone and wife Diane; brothers Daniel and Joseph and Daniel’s wife Kendra; 9 aunts, 10 uncles, and 14 first cousins; best friend Heather Seramy and husband Dominique.

Lauren’s memory will be cherished by family and friends forever, and a piece of her can be found in every person mentioned above. Whether in physical resemblance, shared interests, influence of heart, or the never-ending stories that will be told about her life, Lauren’s profound influence will resonate in our lives for generations to come.