Maria-Josepha of Saxony (Maria Josepha Amalia Beatrix Xaveria Vincentia Aloysia Franziska de Paula Franziska de Chantal Anna Apollonia Johanna Nepomucena Walburga Theresia Ambrosia; December 6, 1803 – May 18, 1829) was Queen consort of Spain as the wife of King Fernando VII of Spain (1784-1833). She was the brother of King Friedrich-August II of Saxony.

Princess Maria-Joseph of Saxony

Family

Maria-Josepha of Saxony was the daughter of Hereditary Prince Maximilian of Saxony (1759-1838) a German prince and a member of the House of Wettin. He was the sixth but third and youngest surviving son of Friedrich-Christian, Elector of Saxony (1722-1763)and the composer Princess Maria-Antonia of Bavaria (1724-1780).

Father, Hereditary Prince Maximilian of Saxony

Maria-Josepha of Saxony’s paternal grandmother was Princess Maria-Antonia of Bavaria who was born at Nymphenburg Palace in Munich to Elector Charles-Albert of Bavaria, later Emperor Charles VII, (1697-1745) and Archduchess Maria-Amalia of Austria (1701-1756). Throughout her life she received an outstanding education, particularly in the arts (including painting, writing poetry, as well as music).

The mother of Maria-Josepha of Saxony was Princess Carolina of Bourbon-Parma (1770-1804) the eldest of nine children born to Ferdinand, Duke of Parma (1751-1802) by his wife Archduchess Maria-Amalia of Austria (1746-1804).

Mother, Princess Carolina of Bourbon-Parma

Princess Carolina of Bourbon-Parma’s full baptismal name was Carolina Maria Teresa Giuseppa. She was named after her godparents, her paternal great-uncle King Carlos III of Spain and her maternal grandmother Empress Maria-Theresa.

Maria-Josepha of Saxony’s maternal grandmother was Archduchess Maria-Amalia of Austria who was a daughter of Empress Maria-Theresa and Emperor Franz I. She was thus younger sister to Joseph II, Holy Roman Emperor and older sister to Leopold II, Holy Roman Emperor, Maria-Carolina, Queen of Naples and Marie-Antoinette, Queen of France.

Born Princess Maria-Josepha of Saxony, she lost her mother when she was a few months old, so her father sent her to a convent near the Elbe river, where she was raised by the nuns. As a result, Maria-Josepha had a strict religious upbringing and was a fervent Roman Catholic all her life. At birth she was entitled to the style of Serene Highness as Saxony remained an electorate until 1806. After Saxony became a kingdom she was entitled to the style of Royal Highness.

Marriage

King Fernando VII of Spain’s second wife, Maria Isabel of Portugal, died in 1818 without leaving any descendants. Thus the King began to look for a new consort and his choice fell on Maria-Josepha. They married on October 20, 1819 in Madrid. King Fernando VII was 35 and Maria-Josepha was 16 years old.

Fernando VII, King of Spain

Although the new queen was too young, naive and inexperienced, the king fell in love with her because of her sweet temper. Also, she was considered more attractive than his previous wives, Maria-Antonia of Naples and Sicily (later the Two-Sicilies) and Maria-Isabella of Portugal.

Maria-Antonia of Naples and Sicily, first wife of Fernando VII of Spain

Maria-Isabella of Portugal, second wife of Fernando VII of Spain

After his two childless marriages, there was great pressure for the Bourbon dynasty in Spain to ensure that King Fernando VII had an heir. Saxon princesses were renowned for their fertility since Maria-Josepha-Amalia and Fernando VII’s common ancestors Augustus III of Poland and Archduchess Maria-Josepha of Austria had had some fourteen children, including Fernando VII’s grandmother, Maria Amalia of Saxony, and Maria-Josepha’s grandfather, Friedrich-Christian, Elector of Saxony.

Nevertheless, the marriage remained childless and Maria-Josepha withdrew from public life, with long stays in the Palace of Aranjuez, in La Granja de San Ildefonso and the Royal Palace of Riofrio. It took a personal letter sent by Pope Pius VII in order to convince the queen that sexual relations between spouses were not contrary to the morality of Catholicism.

Maria Christina of the Two Sicilies

She died as a result of fevers on May 18, 1829 in Aranjuez, leaving her husband heartbroken, and was buried in El Escorial. Her husband remarried for the fourth time to his niece, Maria-Christina of the Two Sicilies who eventually gave birth to the future Queen Isabella II of Spain.