Old Bohemian legends accompany each Czech from chidhood. Tales, myths and legends are not backed by historical evidence, but they survived to the present day in folk stories and legends recorded by chroniclers Kosmas, Dalimil and Václav Hájek of Libočany, as well as in Ancient Bohemian Legends written by renowned Czech 19th century writer Alois Jirásek. They tell stories about the oldest period of the Czech history – approximately between 6th and 10th century, up to the period of duke Bořivoj, the first documented Přemyslid ruler.

The legend of Bruncvík is at least six hundred years old. Young duke Bruncvík, the son of Žibřid, a successful and exemplary ruler of Bohemia, and a happy husband of beautiful Neomenia, decided to gain a better symbol for his coat-of-arms, a lion, symbol of great power, strength and fame. He set out on a journey accompanied by his knights – they wandered through foreign countries and sailed faraway seas. Once Bruncvík met a lion as he was fighting a nine-headed dragon and he decided to help him. They experienced many adventures together and the beast eventually earned Bruncvík’s confidence; and the knight found his long desired trophy. In harmony they set off for home.

On the obverse side of the ducat, the figure of Bruncvik with a lion is centrally placed and the text in partial circumscription reads “Desetidukát České republiky“ and a sentence “Otec dobyl znaku orla, já lva chci dobýti“ (My father gained an eagle, I want to win a lion for my coat-of-arms“).

All reverse sides of the ducat series comprise motifs of five- pointed stars and three emblems of the Czech lands, but their arrangement is different on each of the ducats. The three emblems and the composition of five-pointed stars commemorate the integration of the Czech Republic in the family of European nations.

On the ten-ducat the three land emblems are featured each in its field, and the five-pointed stars are arranged in a mat strip around the rim together with the year 2011.

Au 999.9/ 31.1 g/ 37 mm/ proof

Limited edition 200 pcs / separately/