The show Ancient Bohemian Legends tells the story of Czechs and their origins, of how Bohemia was settled and got its name. Of the legendary heroes, dukes and duchesses of yore. You will hear about the founding of Prague, the capital, and about the history of important places you can still see there (Vyšehrad, Šárka).

Ancient Bohemian Legends appeal to both child and adult spectators with their sensitivity, humour, beauty of language and the significance of heroism and protagonists of Czech mythology.

The show makes use of captivating traditional Bohemian marionettes made by Pavel Kalfus, a professor at the Academy of Performing Arts in Prague, and of the concept of a literary programme with puppet sequences. The text is based on the writings of Czech classic Alois Jirásek. His Legends‘ heroes are people like us. They still live in us all; the times, Czech language and Prague have changed, but people remain.

In 2016, Czech puppetry was included in UNESCO’s World Immaterial Cultural Heritage List.

Technical specs:

Stage dimensions: 4 by 3 metres, indoors or outdoors

Languages:

Czech, English, Russian, French, Norwegian

More languages by agreement and local demand

Costs:

Payment of 5000 CZK per one performance plus travel expenses and accomodation

Transport:

Puppets are transported in a normal suitcase not considered overweight luggage

Ka2 Theatre Company – Kateřina Tichá and Kateřina Tschornová

The show Ancient Bohemian Legends dates back to 2015. At the invitation of the Czech Centre in Moscow it toured Russia – Moscow, St. Petersburg, Krasnodar and Nizhny Novgorod in 2016, Irkutsk in 2017.

Kateřina Tichá (1976)

Graduated from the Academy of Performing Arts in Prague, Department of Puppetry, and studied Czech and Russian at the Faculty of Education in Hradec Králové; in 2004 joined the company of Minor Theatre in Prague, where she acts in the shows The Chattertooth Eleven, Christmas and Hunt for Jednorozec. Kateřina Tichá is also a teacher, tourist guide and solo actress.

Kateřina Tschornová (1976)

Graduated from the Academy of Performing Arts in Prague, Department of Puppetry, and French Department at the Faculty of Arts of the Charles University in Prague; in 1999 joined the company of Minor Theatre in Prague, where she acts in the shows The Chattertooth Eleven and Christmas. Kateřina Tschornová also partakes in the Puppets in Hospital project and acts solo.