About this Item

Revised Final Draft script for the 1955 film. Specially bound copy belonging to producer Jerry Wald, with his name in gilt on the spine. Jerry Wald is best remembered for his long and successful association with Warner Brothers as both a screenwriter and producer of a number of notable films, including "Mildred Pierce" (1945), "Humoresque" (1946), "Key Largo" (1948), and "Flamingo Road" (1949). In the 1950s he moved to Twentieth Century-Fox, and was the producer there for "An Affair to Remember" (1957), "Peyton Place" (1957), and "Sons and Lovers" (1960). Based on the Pulitzer Prize-winning 1953 play by William Inge, set over the course of Labor Day in a small town in rural Kansas in 1955. Nominated for six Academy Awards, winning two. Bound in light blue cloth with navy quarter leather binding, with five raised bands and gilt titles on the spine. Title page present, dated May 2, 1955, noted as REVISED FINAL DRAFT, with credit for screenwriter Daniel Taradash. 162 leaves, with last page of text numbered 159. Mimeograph duplication on eye-rest green stock, rectos only, with blue and yellow revision pages throughout, dated variously between May 9 and May 13, 1959. Pages Near Fine, binding Very Good plus, with faint foxing on the front board. Seller Inventory # 161273

Contact seller

Report this item

We are members of ABAA and ILAB, and specialize in First Editions of Modern Literature, Crime Fiction, Science Fiction, Jazz, and Books on Film, Music, Photography and the Arts. You may search our entire stock, get directions, or view our newest arrivals by catalog or category by going to our easy-to-use catalog homepage: royalbooks.com We are an open shop on Baltimore's Book Block in midtown. Check our website for directions if you are coming through the Baltimore area. We are open 10AM-6PM EST, Monday through Friday, and Saturdays by appointment or chance. You may phone, fax, or email an order at any time, 24 hours a day. If you would like to see an image of any book, please let us know and we will be happy to place an image online for you.

Visit Seller's Storefront

Association Member Members of these associations are committed to maintaining the highest standards. They vouch for the authenticity of all items offered for sale. They provide expert and detailed descriptions, disclose all significant defects and/or restorations, provide clear and accurate pricing, and operate with fairness and honesty during the purchase experience.

Seller's business information

Royal Books, Inc., ABAA

32 W 25th St, Baltimore, MD, 21218, U.S.A.

Terms of Sale:

If you have questions about a book, feel free to call us anytime at 410-366-7329. Mailing address: Royal Books / 32 West 25th Street / Baltimore, MD / 21218. We accept VISA/MC/AMEX/DISCOVER, check or money order, and PayPal (ID is mail@royalbooks.com).

All books noted as First Editions are also First Printings unless indicated otherwise. All books are guaranteed to be as described, and may be returned at any time for any reason for a full refund, including return postage. Libraries, institutions...

More Information

Shipping Terms:

Shipping costs are based on books weighing 2.2 LB, or 1 KG. If your book order is heavy or oversized, we may contact you to let you know extra shipping is required.