Archduchess Marie Caroline of Austria (April 8, 1801 – May 22, 1832) was Crown Princess of Saxony as the wife of Friedrich August, Crown Prince of Saxony, and future King.

Archduchess Marie Caroline was a daughter of Franz II, Holy Roman Emperor, later Franz I of Austria after the dissolution of the Holy Roman Empire, and his second wife Princess Maria Teresa of the Two Sicilies, and named after an elder sister who had died in infancy.

Archduchess Marie Caroline’s mother, Princess Maria Theresa of Naples and Sicily, was the first Empress of Austria and last Holy Roman Empress as the spouse of Franz II. She was born a Princess of Naples and Sicily as the eldest daughter King Ferdinand IV-III of Naples and Sicily who later became King Ferdinand I of the Two Sicilies. King Ferdinand was married to Archduchess Maria Carolina of Austria the thirteenth child of Empress Maria Theresa and Emperor Franz I.

Archduchess Marie Caroline’s parents were double first cousins as they shared all four grandparents (Franz’s paternal grandparents were his wife, Princess Maria Theresa of Naples and Sicily’s maternal grandparents and vice versa).

The four grandparents were:

Empress Maria Theresa of Austria and Emperor Franz I

King Carlos III of Spain and Maria Amalia of Saxony

Archduchess Marie Caroline was educated strictly, standing out in drawing, as proven by several sketches and crayons preserved in Austria.

Crown Princess of Saxony

On October 7, 1819 Archduchess Marie Caroline married Prince Friedrich August of Saxony, son of Maximilian, Prince of Saxony, and Princess Caroline of Parma, in Dresden, Germany. The marriage was childless and unhappy.

Marie Caroline was sweet and pleasant, but she experienced epilepsy and her attacks were so frequent that she was barely able to fulfill her duties as Crown Princess; they also seriously affected her marital relationship. Crown Prince Friedrich August was unfaithful on several occasions. From one of these affairs he had an illegitimate son, the musician Theodor Uhlig (1822–1853).

Marie Caroline died from an epileptic attack on May 22, 1832 at the age of 31 at Pillnitz Castle near Dresden.

On June 6, 1836, King Anton of Saxony died and Friedrich August succeeded him as King Friedrich August II of Saxony.

In Dresden on April 24, 1833 King Friedrich August II married secondly to Princess Maria Anna of Bavaria, daughter of King Maximilian I Joseph of Bavaria and his second wife, Caroline of Baden.

Princess Maria Anna of Bavaria was the identical twin sister of Princess Sophie of Bavaria, mother of Emperor Franz Joseph I of Austria and Emperor Maximilian I of Mexico

Emperor Franz Joseph I of Austria and Emperor Maximilian I of Mexico were the grandchildren of Emperor Franz I of Austria whose daughter, Marie Caroline, was the first wife of Friedrich August II of Saxony. Sophie of Bavaria was the mother of Emperor Franz Joseph I of Austria and Emperor Maximilian I of Mexico who was the identical twin sister of Princess Maria Anna of Bavaria the second wife of Friedrich August of Saxony.

Like his first marriage, this was childless.

Without legitimate issue, after his death King Frederick August II of Saxony was succeeded by his younger brother, Johann.

Ferdinand I (January 12, 1751 – January 4, 1825), was the King of the Two Sicilies from 1816, after his restoration following victory in the Napoleonic Wars. Before that he had been, since 1759, Ferdinand IV of the Kingdom of Naples and Ferdinand III of the Kingdom of Sicily. He was also King of Gozo. He was deposed twice from the throne of Naples: once by the revolutionary Parthenopean Republic for six months in 1799 and again by Napoleon in 1805, before being restored in 1816.

Ferdinand was the third son of King Carlos VII of Naples and V of Sicily by his wife, Maria Amalia of Saxony. On August 10, 1759, Carlos succeeded his elder brother, Fernando VI of Spain, becoming King Carlos III of Spain, but treaty provisions made him ineligible to hold all three crowns. On October 6, he abdicated his Neapolitan and Sicilian titles in favour of his third son Ferdinand because his eldest son Felipe had been excluded from succession due to illnesses and his second son Carlos was heir-apparent to the Spanish throne. Ferdinand was the founder of the cadet House of Bourbon-Two Sicilies.

Childhood

Ferdinand was born in Naples and grew up amidst many of the monuments erected there by his father which can be seen today; the Palaces of Portici, Caserta and Capodimonte.

Since Ferdinand IV-III of Naples was eight upon his accession to both thrones, a regency council presided over by the Tuscan Bernardo Tanucci was set up. The latter, an able, ambitious man, wishing to keep the government as much as possible in his own hands, purposely neglected the young king’s education, and encouraged him in his love of pleasure, his idleness and his excessive devotion to outdoor sports.

Ferdinand’s minority/childhood ended in 1767, and his first act was the expulsion of the Jesuits. The following year he married Archduchess Maria Carolina of Austria, the thirteenth child of Empress Maria Theresa and her husband, Holy Roman Emperor Franz I.

By the marriage contract the queen was to have a voice in the council of state after the birth of her first son, and she was not slow to avail herself of this means of political influence.daughter of Empress Maria Theresa

Archduchess Maria Carolina was the de facto ruler of her husband’s kingdoms. Maria Carolina oversaw the promulgation of many reforms, including the revocation of the ban on Freemasonry, the enlargement of the navy under her favorite, Sir John Acton, and the expulsion of Spanish influence.

She was a proponent of enlightened absolutism until the advent of the French Revolution, when, in order to prevent its ideas gaining currency, she made Naples a police state.

Although peace was made with France in 1796, the demands of the French Directory, whose troops occupied Rome, alarmed the king once more, and at his wife’s instigation he took advantage of Napoleon’s absence in Egypt and of Nelson’s victories to go to war.

Ferdinand IV-III marched with his army against the French and entered Rome (November 29), but on the defeat of some of his columns he hurried back to Naples, and on the approach of the French, fled on December 23, 1798 aboard Nelson’s ship HMS Vanguard to Palermo, Sicily, leaving his capital in a state of anarchy.

When, a few weeks later the French troops were recalled to northern Italy, Ferdinand sent a hastily assembled force, under Cardinal Ruffo, to reconquer the mainland kingdom. Ruffo, with the support of British artillery, the Church, and the pro-Bourbon aristocracy, succeeded, reaching Naples in May 1800. After some months King Ferdinand returned to the throne.

The king, and above all the queen, were particularly anxious that no mercy should be shown to the rebels, and Maria Carolina (a sister of the executed Marie Antoinette, Queen of France) made use of Lady Hamilton, Nelson’s mistress, to induce Nelson to carry out her vengeance.