Archduchess Marie Caroline of Austria (April 8, 1801 – May 22, 1832) was Crown Princess of Saxony as the wife of Friedrich August, Crown Prince of Saxony, and future King.

Archduchess Marie Caroline was a daughter of Franz II, Holy Roman Emperor, later Franz I of Austria after the dissolution of the Holy Roman Empire, and his second wife Princess Maria Teresa of the Two Sicilies, and named after an elder sister who had died in infancy.

Archduchess Marie Caroline’s mother, Princess Maria Theresa of Naples and Sicily, was the first Empress of Austria and last Holy Roman Empress as the spouse of Franz II. She was born a Princess of Naples and Sicily as the eldest daughter King Ferdinand IV-III of Naples and Sicily who later became King Ferdinand I of the Two Sicilies. King Ferdinand was married to Archduchess Maria Carolina of Austria the thirteenth child of Empress Maria Theresa and Emperor Franz I.

Archduchess Marie Caroline’s parents were double first cousins as they shared all four grandparents (Franz’s paternal grandparents were his wife, Princess Maria Theresa of Naples and Sicily’s maternal grandparents and vice versa).

The four grandparents were:

Empress Maria Theresa of Austria and Emperor Franz I

King Carlos III of Spain and Maria Amalia of Saxony

Archduchess Marie Caroline was educated strictly, standing out in drawing, as proven by several sketches and crayons preserved in Austria.

Crown Princess of Saxony

On October 7, 1819 Archduchess Marie Caroline married Prince Friedrich August of Saxony, son of Maximilian, Prince of Saxony, and Princess Caroline of Parma, in Dresden, Germany. The marriage was childless and unhappy.

Marie Caroline was sweet and pleasant, but she experienced epilepsy and her attacks were so frequent that she was barely able to fulfill her duties as Crown Princess; they also seriously affected her marital relationship. Crown Prince Friedrich August was unfaithful on several occasions. From one of these affairs he had an illegitimate son, the musician Theodor Uhlig (1822–1853).

Marie Caroline died from an epileptic attack on May 22, 1832 at the age of 31 at Pillnitz Castle near Dresden.

On June 6, 1836, King Anton of Saxony died and Friedrich August succeeded him as King Friedrich August II of Saxony.

In Dresden on April 24, 1833 King Friedrich August II married secondly to Princess Maria Anna of Bavaria, daughter of King Maximilian I Joseph of Bavaria and his second wife, Caroline of Baden.

Princess Maria Anna of Bavaria was the identical twin sister of Princess Sophie of Bavaria, mother of Emperor Franz Joseph I of Austria and Emperor Maximilian I of Mexico

Emperor Franz Joseph I of Austria and Emperor Maximilian I of Mexico were the grandchildren of Emperor Franz I of Austria whose daughter, Marie Caroline, was the first wife of Friedrich August II of Saxony. Sophie of Bavaria was the mother of Emperor Franz Joseph I of Austria and Emperor Maximilian I of Mexico who was the identical twin sister of Princess Maria Anna of Bavaria the second wife of Friedrich August of Saxony.

Like his first marriage, this was childless.