1. Bernard S. Murphy (781) 771-3436 351 Granite Street, Quincy, MA. 02169 bernie.murphy1@gmail.com CAREER PROFILE Extremely devoted and disciplined District Manager with over 20 years of restaurant management experience. Possess a strong initiative, superlative communication and team-building skills, supported with a solid work ethic.  Experience with full service budget planning, inventory, marketing, sales supervision,and development of staff and managers.  Exceled in selection and training of top talent and developing of new recruits who became high performing employees, including advancement in management.  Proficient in Micros, RPower, PosiTouch, Jonas, Microsoft Word, PowerPoint, Excel, and Outlook, as well as some experience with Quick Books.  Certified TIPS trainer, who holds regular certification seminars for staff members.  Mentored and encouraged all managers and subordinates undermy tutelage to reach all goals and performance initiatives.  Operated full service restaurants,including budgets,menu selection, marketing, purchasing,and inventory  Multi-unit Manager PROFESSIONALACCOMPLISHMENTS Cadete Enterprises Inc., DBA Dunkin Donuts  Oversees recruiting, management, budget compliance, and overall operations for six restaurants to ensure excellent customer service, high quality foods,management development, food safety,store cleanliness, and maximum profitability.  Oversees other aspects ofbusiness operations,such as implementation of Loss Preventions, Human Resources,and Marketing programs.  Maintains communication, acts as a liaison with Dunkin Donuts corporate personnel, while providing a positive focus on the network culture and values.  Responsible for building a strong team; through overseeing hiring, training, and development of restaurant management, providing clear consistent direction, and recognizing individual as well as team accomplishments. Black Rock Country Club  Responsible for overall member and diner satisfaction in formal and informal settings.  Designed and implemented a training program for FOH staff, including but not limited to steps of service, etiquette, and appropriate beverage service.  Purchaser of liquor, wine and beer, and developing a tastefulwine list that complements specials as well as seasonalmenus.  Maintained comprehensive and professional relationships with members to ensure overall satisfaction with the club.

2. Uno’s Chicago Grill  Leader with a shared vision of the general manager, who is an expert in all areas of the restaurant and responsible for every aspect of the operation.  Devised a comprehensive action plan to increase productivity and consistency,while reducing turnover, and establishing a direct line of command within all shifts.  Directly responsible for a declining budget including but not limited to janitorial, small-wares, paper- goods,supply and budget. Dockside Restaurants  Developed and implemented training programs and tools for manager’s to increase “Knowledge Management” with subordinates,thus reducing turnoverand increasing productivity.  Selected a management team to design and develop new marketing strategies for future growth, as well as to maintain implementation.  Assists in the creation of monthly and annual financial statements,as well as providing analysis to increase ROI.  Responsible for staffing, analyzing financial reports, purchasing,inventory management, communicating with vendors,while ensuring customer satisfaction. Town Line Ten Pin  Held the position of temporary president,while legal matters were settled between two sets of owners .  Subcontracted to oversee operations, staffing, manage financial statements,and responsibilities. Not Your Average Joes  Recruited, hired, supervised,scheduled and motivated a staff of 150 active employees across two restaurants.  Consistently met or exceeded sales benchmarks throughout six different restaurants.  Maintained and developed local marketing initiatives that directly influenced an increase of sales.  Managed both the revenue and cost elements of the 6 locations and consistently met goals set forth from the company sales projections. Cheesecake Factory  Responsible for managing a staff of 210 active employees, while inspiring managers and their subordinates to drive implementation of company programs, and exceed organizational objectives, while providing meaningful sincere recognition.  Successfully completed senior management program to achieve assistant general manager position.  Consistently exceeded target sales budget of $250,000 while maintaining company customer metrics, employee retention, and promotion of internal talent.  Responsible for enabling the staff to provide fast paced, high volume business,while reducing staff inefficiencies, thus creating an increase of 11% in the profit margin.