We look back at the couple's relationship in pictures

A former ballroom where Beatle John Lennon and his first wife Cynthia held their wedding reception is being redeveloped into luxury apartments.

The Reeces Ballroom, on Parker Street, is one of the city’s landmark Beatles locations, having hosted the iconic reception in 1962.

‌

It remained a popular dance and music venue up until the 1980s when it was closed and the lower floors converted for retail use.

Now, Property Frontiers is breathing new life into the 1930s building, with plans to transform it into 72 luxury buy-to-let studio suites and 19 one bedroom apartments, with prices from £64,950 to £99,950.

‌

Liverpool Echo Icon

Sign up to FREE email alerts from ECHO Daily News

We use your sign-up to provide content in ways you’ve consented to and improve our understanding of you. This may include adverts from us and third parties based on our knowledge of you. More info

Planning permission has been granted to convert the upper floors and add a rooftop extension which will provide panoramic skyline views from the fifth, sixth and seventh floors.

The ground floor - currently occupied by Superdrug - will remain in commercial use.

‌

Architects Falconer Chester Hall have been instructed to design contemporary city housing within the floors which have sat vacant for nearly 30 years.

The apartments will boast high spec features including an audio and visual intercom system, low energy LED down lighting in the kitchen and bathrooms, fully integrated kitchen appliances, walnut doors and walnut flooring throughout and a 24 hour concierge service.

‌

Completion is expected in Autumn 2015.

Ray Withers, Chief Executive of Property Frontier said the plans present a superb investment opportunity for those keen to tap into the young professional market and the rare opportunity to own a true piece of musical heritage: "Liverpool is known across the world for being the birthplace of the Beatles and for its role in revolutionising the music scene. Beatles attractions still draw tourists to the city today.

"Of course, Liverpool has moved on somewhat since the Beatles first focused the world's attention on it and is now a modern, dynamic city, packed with young professionals seeking to make their fortune from the plentiful job opportunities available there.”

‌

Look back: John and Cynthia Lennon

In pictures: John and Cynthia Lennon

Parker Street - fast facts: