YOKO Ono has previously opened up about the death of her husband, John Lennon, saying that she and his sons still miss him "after 40 years."

The Japanese artist is known for campaigning for world peace alongside the Beatles singer.

Who is Yoko Ono?

Yoko Ono Lennon is an 88-year-old Japanese artist and musician who was married to John Lennon for over ten years from 1969 to 1980.

She was widowed after Lennon was murdered in Manhattan.

Yoko was his second wife after Cynthia Lennon.

Together the couple had a son, Sean Ono Lennon, who was born in 1975.

When did Yoko Ono meet John Lennon?

John and Yoko met in London in 1966 at a London gallery, where Ono was preparing for an exhibition of her work.

They married just three years later.

One year after Lennon and Ono’s wedding, the Beatles broke up.

Ono and Lennon went on to collaborate on a series of music projects.

Their last album together released before his death was Double Fantasy, which came out in 1980, just three weeks before Lennon’s assassination.

What has she said about Mark David Chapman's parole applications?

Each time Mark Chapman has applied for parole, the late John Lennon’s wife has written to the parole board to tell them to keep him in jail.

She has said that Chapman’s release would endanger her and his two sons.

On December 8, 2020, the 40th anniversary of her husband's assassination, she tweeted: "The death of a loved one is a hollowing experience. After 40 years, Sean, Julian and I still miss him."

Chapman is serving a life prison sentence at the Wende Correctional Facility in Alden, New York, for fatally shooting John Lennon at the entrance to the Dakota apartment building in New York City on December 8, 1980.

Chapman fired five times at Lennon, hitting him four times in the back, before sitting down on the curb with a book awaiting the police.

It is said he killed the musician in a bid to earn instant notoriety.

According to hearing transcripts, Chapman killed Lennon because he was "angry and jealous" at the way he was living and was seeking "glory" for himself.

He has served 40 years in prison already, having been denied parole for the 11th time in 2020.

He will have to wait another two years before he can apply for parole again.