May Pang has described how she and John Lennon came to be an item back in 1973, and how it was his wife Yoko Ono who encouraged it.

The famous couple’s 22-year-old former assistant found herself embroiled in a love triangle between her bosses; the late Beatle Lennon, and his wife Yoko, now 90, at the request of the latter.

Now 72, May has recalled how her 18 months with Lennon, which the Beatle would later come to describe as his ‘Lost Weekend’ came to be, and what it was like.

The bizarre story is being told as part of the documentary The Lost Weekend: A Love Story, in which May is ready to tell her side of the story.

‘It’s hard to believe, but it is 50 years now since my relationship with John began,’ May told Fox News Digital.

‘There was so much of my own story being told by other people that had no idea. It got the best of me after a while. It was my life, and everybody else is telling it.

‘Many people still think I only spent a weekend with him. They didn’t know the truth.’

Born in New York, May discovered at an early age she was a huge rock ‘n’ roll fan, and she bagged a job at The Beatles’ record label Apple Records in 1979 as a 19 year old.

Soon after, keen to get out of the office, she became Yoko and Lennon’s assistant, which she said was ‘fun’ but that they were ‘larger than life’ and she didn’t get ‘much sleep’.

A few years later in 1973 Yoko made the odd request.

‘She came in and sat across from me and said, “I’ve gotta talk to you,”‘ May remembered.

‘In my head, I’m thinking, “Oh my God, I haven’t even had my first cup of coffee yet.” I grab my pad, my pen, and I’m ready to write. And she said, “John and I are not getting along.”

‘I said, “I’m so sorry to hear [that].” And then she says, “You know, John’s gonna go out with other people.”

‘And I thought, “OK, now we’re into another territory. Who can this be? We are adding another person to this mix?” And then she says, “But you know what? You don’t have a boyfriend.”‘

May then recalled how she told Yoko she wasn’t interested, but that her boss insisted she would be ‘good for him’.

Having loved her job and it being all she had wanted to do, May remembered how tears started to form in her eyes as she was left very confused as to what to do.

But eventually Lennon and May’s attraction grew, and the pair would end up inseparable in a transition the 72-year-old said became increasingly uncomfortable for Yoko, who she claims would call up to 15 times a day to ‘check in’.

Then, knowing that the Imagine singer was trying to quit smoking to protect his voice, Yoko allegedly told him she knew a hypnotist who could help him if he came home.

After claims from Lennon they would, May described how the pair never divorced, and it was clear to her their time together was over.

Lennon would go on to be shot and killed on December 8, 1980, in New York.

The Lost Weekend: A Love Story premieres today in the US.

A spokesperson for Yoko Ono has indicated there would be no response at this time.

Got a story?

If you’ve got a celebrity story, video or pictures get in touch with the Metro.co.uk entertainment team by emailing us celebtips@metro.co.uk, calling 020 3615 2145 or by visiting our Submit Stuff page – we’d love to hear from you.

MORE : Sir Paul McCartney ‘couldn’t talk about’ John Lennon following his murder as he opens up on grief