On a balmy Wednesday evening, a large crowd turned up at Rumsey Playfield in Central Park to see the soprano Angel Blue’s first appearance with the Metropolitan Opera.

Ms. Blue, a 32-year-old lyric soprano, is a California native with a flourishing career in Europe, where she has been praised for her interpretations of roles including Mimì and Musetta in “La Bohème.” A protégée of Plácido Domingo, she is also a regular presenter for the BBC.

For the Met, as part of the opening concert for the annual Summer Recital Series, she did her best to make her performance memorable, flirtatiously tossing flowers into the audience as she sang her encore, a zarzuela selection. (She will make her main-stage debut during an unspecified future season.)

Ms. Blue financed her musical training at the University of California, Los Angeles, with prize money from beauty pageants. She was named Miss Hollywood in 2005, and Miss Southern California in 2006. Statuesque in a blue dress, she opened the lineup on Wednesday with “Je veux vivre” from “Roméo et Juliette.” Here, and in ensuing selections, she demonstrated an alluring voice, her dusky lower range seductive in “Je dis que rien ne m’épouvante,” from Bizet’s “Carmen,” and her expressive nuance vivid in “Vissi d’arte,” from Puccini’s “Tosca.” Her honeyed timbre was heard to fine effect in an intimate rendition of “Donde lieta usci,” from “La Bohème.”

Ms. Blue’s two male colleagues sounded equally impressive. The tenor Ben Bliss offered a passionate rendition of “Lunge da lei,” from Verdi’s “Traviata,” and beautifully sung interpretations of selections from Mozart’s “Così Fan Tutte” and “The Abduction From the Seraglio,” as well as a delicately shaded and moving performance of an aria from Karl Goldmark’s “Queen of Sheba.” Mr. Bliss partnered with the sonorous-voiced baritone Alexey Lavrov for “Au fond du temple saint,” from Bizet’s “The Pearl Fishers.” Mr. Lavrov’s solos included a heartfelt excerpt from Rachmaninoff’s “Aleko,” and “Deh, vieni alla finestra,” from Mozart’s “Don Giovanni,” rendered with subtle dynamic contrasts. He waltzed across the stage with Ms. Blue during a selection from Lehar’s operetta “The Merry Widow,” which concluded the program.

While the piano sometimes sounded tinny through the amplification, the pianist Dan Saunders proved a sensitive and supportive accompanist. In a lighthearted, gentlemanly touch, he encouraged his hard-working page turner, Olivia Porada, to take a bow after the three singers had finished their zarzuela encores.