There are several documents in Fernando Pessoa's legacy which may give us an insight as to the place the mystic and esoteric matters occupy in Pessoa's poetry. Pessoa acknowledged the occultist influence in the literature of his time, and in his own, and made an effort to explain his particular path, which followed, as he insisted, the mystic and not the symbolist tradition – poetry of thought and not poetry of imagination. Palavras-­‐‑ chave Misticismo, esoterismo, modernismo, poesia, Fernando Pessoa. Resumo Existem vários documentos, no legado de Fernando Pessoa, que podem ajudar a compreender o lugar que os conteúdos de índole mística e esotérica ocupam na poesia pessoana. Pessoa recebeu a influência ocultista na literatura do seu tempo, e na sua própria obra, e esforçou-­‐‑ se por explicar o seu caminho particular direccionado para a tradição mística, mas não para a simbolista, como o próprio autor reiterou – poesia do pensamento em vez de poesia da imaginação.

Fernando Pessoa (1888-1935) has become many things to many people in the years that have passed since his untimely death. For some he is simply the greatest Portuguese poet of the 20th century. For others he has gradually emerged as a forgotten voice in 20th century modernism. And yet Pessoa was also a philosopher, and it is only very recently that the philosophical importance of his work has begun to attract the attention it deserves. Pessoa composed systematic philosophical essays in his pre-heteronymic period, defending rationalism in epistemology and sensationism in the philosophy of mind. His heteronymic work, decisively breaking with the conventional strictures of systematic philosophical writing, is a profound and exquisite exploration in the philosophy of self. Virtual Subjects, Fugitive Selves pulls together the strands of this philosophy and rearticulates it in a way that does justice to its breathtaking originality. It reveals the extraordinary power of Pessoa's theory by applying it to the analysis of some of the trickiest and most puzzling problems about the self to have appeared in the global history of philosophy.

FERRARI, Patricio, "'Bridging Archives: twenty five unpublished English poems by Fernando Pessoa" (2015). Pessoa Plural―A Journal of Fernando Pessoa Studies, No. 8, Fall, pp. 365-431. Brown Digital Repository. Brown University Library. https://doi.org/10.7301/Z01V5C64 Is Part of: Pessoa Plural―A Journal of Fernando Pessoa Studies, Issue 8 Bridging Archives: twenty-five unpublished English poems by Fernando Pessoa [Conectando Arquivos: vinte e cinco poemas ingleses inéditos de Fernando Pessoa] https://doi.org/10.7301/Z01V5C64 ABSTRACT Critical transcription preceded by a brief presentation of twenty-five unpublished English poems by Fernando Pessoa. The introductory text offers a historical background in regard to Hubert Jennings's pioneer work with Pessoa's English poems. RESUMO Transcrição crítica, precedida de uma breve apresentação, de vinte e cinco poemas ingleses inéditos de Fernando Pessoa. O texto introdutório oferece uma contextualização histórica do trabalho pioneiro de Hubert Jennings junto aos poemas ingleses de Pessoa. BIBLIOGRAPHY [SEVERAL AUTHORS] (2015). Variaciones Borges, n.º 40, Fall. www.borges.pitt.edu/journal/variaciones‑borges. CAMPBELL, Roy (1957). Portugal. London: M. Reinhardt. CRESPO, Angel (1989). “EI último amor de Fernando Pessoa,” in Revista de Occidente, n.º 94. Madrid, March, pp. 5-­‐‑26. DUFFELL, Martin J. (2013). “Tennyson’s ‘Metre of Catullus’: The Ambivalent Hendecasyllable,” in Language and Literature, n.º 22, pp. 19-­‐‑31. ____ (2008). A New History of English Metre. London: Legenda. JENNINGS, Hubert D. (1986). Fernando Pessoa in Durban. Durban: Durban Corporation. ____ (1984). Os Dois Exílios: Fernando Pessoa na África do Sul. Porto: Centro de Estudos Pessoanos & Fundação Eng.º António de Almeida. ____ (1966). The Durban High School Story 1866-­‐‑1966. Durban: The Durban High School and Old Boys Memorial Trust. LIND, Georg Rudolf (1968). “9 unbekannte englische Gedichte F. Ps, Diskussion und Kommentar von Ulrich Suerbaum und Vf, ” in Poetica, n.º 2 (2). Munich, April, pp. 229-­‐‑36. FERRARI, Patricio (2015). “Pessoa and Borges: In the Margins of Milton,” in Variaciones Borges, n.º 40, Fall, pp. 81-­‐‑101. ____ (2012). “Meter and Rhythm in Fernando Pessoa’s Poetry.” Ph.D dissertation presented to the Department of Linguistics, Universidade de Lisbo. [Unpublished]. FERRARI, Patricio & PITTELA-­‐‑LEITE, Carlos (2015). “Four Unpublished English Sonnets (and the Editorial Status of Pessoa’s English Poetry,” in Portuguese Literary & Cultural Studies, n.º 28, Fernando Pessoa as English Reader and Writer. Dartmouth: University of Massachusetts, Tagus Press, Spring, pp. 227-­‐‑246. GASPAROV, Mikhail Leonovich (1996). A History of European Versification. Translated from Russian by Gerry Smith and Marina Tarlinskaja. Ed. by Gerry Smith with Leofranc Holford-­‐‑Strevens. Oxford: Clarendon Press. [First edition in Russian, 1989]. HOBSBAUM, Philip (1996). Metre, Rhythm and Verse Form. London; New York: Routledge. MONTEIRO, George (2000). Fernando Pessoa and Nineteenth-­‐‑Century Anglo-­‐‑American Literature. Lexington: The University Press of Kentucky. PESSOA, Fernando (2015). No Matter What We Dream: Selected English Poems. Edited and selected by Patricio Ferrari and Jerónimo Pizarro. Second edition. Lisbon: Tell-­‐‑a-­‐‑story. ____ (2014). Poèmes français. Edition established and annotated by Patricio Ferrari with the collaboration of Patrick Quillier. Preface by Patrick Quillier. Clepsydre Collection. Paris: Éditions de la Différence. ____ (2013A). Livro do Dessassocego. Edited by Jerónimo Pizarro. Fernando Pessoa Collection. Lisbon: Tinta-­‐‑da-­‐‑China. ____ (2013B). Eu Sou Uma Antologia: 136 autores fictícios. Edited by Jerónimo Pizarro and Patricio Ferrari. Fernando Pessoa Collection. Lisbon: Tinta-­‐‑da-­‐‑China. ____ (2011). Sebastianismo e Quinto Imperio. Edited by Jorge Uribe and Pedro Sepúlveda. Fernando Pessoa’s Works, New Series. Lisbon: Ática. ____ (2009). Cadernos. Edited by Jerónimo Pizarro. Fernando Pessoa Critical Edition, Major Series, Vol. XI, Tome I. Lisbon: Imprensa Nacional-­‐‑Casa da Moeda, 2009. ____ (2006). Escritos sobre Génio e Loucura. Edited by Jerónimo Pizarro. Fernando Pessoa Critical Edition, Major Series, Vol. VII, 2 vols. Lisbon: Imprensa Nacional-­‐‑Casa da Moeda. ____ (2000). Poesia Inglesa II. Edited and translated by Luísa Freire. Lisbon: Assírio & Alvim. ____ (1999). Poemas Ingleses. The Mad Fiddler. Edited by Marcus Angioni and Fernando Gomes. Fernando Pessoa Critical Edition, Major Series, Vol. V, Tome III Lisbon: Imprensa Nacional-­‐‑Casa da Moeda. ____ (1997). Poemas Ingleses. Poemas de Alexander Search. Edited by João Dionísio. Fernando Pessoa Critical Edition, Major Series, Vol. V, Tome II. Lisbon: Imprensa Nacional-­‐‑Casa da Moeda. ____ (1995). Poesia Inglesa. Edited and translated by Luísa Freire. Preface by Teresa Rita Lopes. Lisbon: Livros Horizonte. ____ (1971). Selected Poems by Fernando Pessoa. Translated by Edwin Honig. With an Introduction by Octavio Paz. Bilingual edition. Chicago: Swallow Press. ____ (1967). Sixty Portuguese Poems. Introduction, selection, English translation of the poems and notes by F. E. G. Quintanilha. Cardiff: University of Wales Press. ____ (1921). English Poems I-­‐‑II. Antinous. Inscriptions. Lisbon: Olisipo. ____ (1918). 35 Sonnets. Lisbon: Ed. Monteiro & Co. PIZARRO, Jerónimo; FERRARI, Patricio & CARDIELLO, Antonio (2010). A Biblioteca Particular de Fernando Pessoa. Collection of the Fernando Pessoa House. Bilingual edition. Lisbon: D. Quixote. PIZARRO, Jerónimo (2012). Pessoa Existe? Lisbon: Ática. SANTOS, Maria L. N. dos; CRUZ, Alexandrina; MONTENEGRO, Rosa M.; PIMENTEL, Lídia (1988). “A inventariação do espólio de Fernando Pessoa: tentativa de reconstituição,” in Revista da Biblioteca Nacional, S. 2, Vol. 3, N. 3, Sep-­‐‑Dec. 1988. Lisbon: Biblioteca Nacional, pp. 199-­‐‑213. SEVERINO, Alexandrino (1969). Fernando Pessoa na África do Sul. Marília: Faculdade de Filosofia, Ciências e Letras de Marília [doctoral thesis presented in 1966 to the Universidade de São Paulo]. TENNYSON, Alfred (1902). The Works of Alfred Tennyson. London: Macmill and Co., 1902. [Queen Victoria Memorial Prize awarded to Fernando A. N. Pessôa in 1903. Fernando Pessoa House, Call number 8-­‐‑541].

This article intends to point out the influence of the Indian philosophy and spirituality in the life and work of Fernando Pessoa, namely in the book «Mensagem». It is within this context that the Judeo-Christian myth of the V Spiritual Empire is described and its relationship with the three Spiritual Ages of Fiore, namely with the worship of the Holy Spirit. Regarding the heteronym of Pessoa, named by Raphael Baldaya, I will refer to the astronomical-astrological aspects that characterize the V Spiritual Empire, such as the ideas of "human fraternity and spirituality". In this sense, Fernando Pessoa argues that the Portuguese Discoveries (described in Part II of the book «Mensagem») were a preparatory experience for the implantation of the future V Spiritual Empire on Earth, in which Portugal should have some responsibility in its execution (described in Part III of the book «Mensagem»).

The essays that follow derive from these two events. The first one was held at the Fernando Pessoa House in Lisbon on 3 July 2014 and the second on 17 and 18 April 2015 at Brown University. Major sponsorship for this event came from the Department of Portuguese and Brazilian Studies. «Among the many things they cover, the essays gathered in this important and highly original volume, sometimes individually but certainly cumulatively, make the case for taking seriously Fernando Pessoa’s large body of poetry written in English. Moreover, they suggest, if only by implication, that Pessoa deserves a place in the long and distinguished traditions of English poetry. Few if any have hitherto had the courage to make the claim for his inclusion in the illustrious group of English poets» [George Monteiro]. Inside the Mask: The English Poetry of Fernando Pessoa [A printed edition of Pessoa Plural—a Journal of Fernando Pessoa Studies, nº. 10] Gávea-Brown Publications at Brown University Department of Portuguese and Brazilian Studies © 2018 Brown University All rights reserved Manufactured in the United States of America Various authors Editor: Patricio Ferrari Editors-in-Chief of Pessoa Plural: Onésimo Almeida, Paulo de Medeiros, and Jerónimo Pizarro Copyeditor: Mark Streeter Design and cover art: Gabriela Lissa Sakajiri Typeset: Perpetua by Eric Gill; Josefin Sans by Santiago Orozco ISBN: 978-0-943722-42-9 (paperback) Library of Congress Control Number: 2017945064

Piette, Albert, "Pessoa, this volume of being: An anthropological experiment" (2023). Pessoa Plural—A Journal of Fernando Pessoa Studies. Brown Digital Repository. Brown University Library. https://doi.org/10.26300/rgz3-m386 Is Part of: Pessoa Plural―A Journal of Fernando Pessoa Studies, Issue 24 Albert Piette Pessoa, this volume of being: An anthropological experiment [Pessoa, este volume de ser: Uma experiência antropológica] https://doi.org/10.26300/rgz3-m386 ABSTRACT This article is an essay to apply the notion of volume of being to Fernando Pessoa. The volume of being refers to a human being. It is a container with its edge and a content made up of various components corresponding to the major themes of the human and social sciences: action, gesture, emotion, a thought, idea, memory, character, temperament, social or cultural markers. The article is presented as an exercise in anthropology, not literary criticism. It is based on fragments from The Book of Disquiet. Pessoa becomes a volume of being structured by a character or temperament, his memory, his feelings, his modes of consciousness. Rather than focusing on heteronymic multiplicity, the author insists on the intrastructuration of these elements within “the Volume-Pessoa” writing, inventing, remembering and comparing. RESUMO Este artigo é uma tentativa de aplicar a noção de volume de ser a Fernando Pessoa. O volume de ser designa um ser humano. É um recipiente com o seu bordo e um conteúdo constituído por vários componentes que correspondem aos grandes temas das ciências humanas e sociais: acção, gesto, emoção, um pensamento, ideia, memória, carácter, temperamento, marcadores sociais ou culturais. O artigo é apresentado como um exercício de antropologia e não de crítica literária. Baseia-se em fragmentos do Livro do Desassossego. Pessoa torna-se um volume de ser estruturado por um carácter ou temperamento, a sua memória, os seus sentimentos, os seus modos de consciência. Em vez de privilegiar a multiplicidade heteronímica, o autor insiste na intra-estruturação destes elementos no “Volume-Pessoa” que escreve, inventa, recorda e compara. BIBLIOGRAPHY BRECHON, Robert (1999). “Le Livre de l’intranquillité”. Le Livre de l’intranquillité. Paris: Christian Bourgois éditeur, pp. 7-10. _____ (1996). Etrange étranger. Une biographie de Fernando Pessoa. Paris: Christian Bourgois éditeur. PERRONE-MOISES, Leyla (2014). Pessoa, le sujet éclaté. Paris: Pétra. PESSOA, Fernando (2017a). Livro do Desassossego. Edited by Jerónimo Pizarro. Lisboa: Tinta-da-china. _____ (2017b). The Book of Disquiet. Edited by Jerónimo Pizarro, translated by Margaret Jull Costa. New York: New Directions. _____ (2014). Obra Completa de Álvaro de Campos. Edited by Jerónimo Pizarro and Antonio Cardiello. Lisboa: Tinta-da-china. _____ (2013). Eu Sou Uma Antologia: 136 autores fictícios. Edited by Jerónimo Pizarro and Patricio Ferrari. Lisboa: Tinta-da-china. _____ (2010). Livro do Desasocego. Critical edition. Edited by Jerónimo Pizarro. Lisboa: Imprensa Nacional-Casa da Moeda. _____ (2003). The Book of Disquiet. Edited and translated by Richard Zenith. London: Penguin books. PIETTE, Albert (2019). Theoretical Anthropology or How to Observe a Human being. London: Wiley-Iste. PIZARRO, Jerónimo (2021). Fernando Pessoa: A Critical Introduction. Brighton, Chicago, Toronto: Sussex Academic Press. RAMALHO-SANTOS, Iréne (2022). Fernando Pessoa and the Lyric: Disquietude, Rumination, Interruption, Inspiration, Constellation. London, Boulder, New York, London: Lexington Books. RYAN, Bartholomew; TUSA, Giovanbattista; CARDIELLO, Antonio (2021). Fernando Pessoa and Philosophy: Countless Lives Inhabit Us. Boulder, New York, London: Rowman & Littlefield. ZENITH, Richard (2003). “Introduction”. The Book of Disquiet. London: Penguin books, pp. VII-XXVI.