At first glance, “Love Crime” — the last film directed by Alain Corneau, who died in 2010 — looks like a corporate “All About Eve” in reverse. An innocent, eager young woman named Isabelle (Ludivine Sagnier) is manipulated and preyed upon by her mentor, Christine (Kristin Scott Thomas), a high-ranking executive whose affection seems to be an especially insidious form of sadism.

Christine showers her protegee with encouragement, gifts and kisses that land in a gray area between collegial affection and something riskier. Isabelle, for her part, accepts plum work assignments and tries at once to please her boss and to imitate her. Dispatched to Cairo at the last minute along with Philippe (Patrick Mille), a business associate who is also Christine’s lover, Isabelle negotiates an important deal. She also sleeps with Philippe, which may have been part of Christine’s plan.

But Isabelle is angry when Christine takes credit for her work, and tries, with the help of a loyal co-worker named Daniel (Guillaume Marquet), to get some revenge. She and Christine wage a stealthy war, each trying to undermine the other while maintaining at least a minimum of professional decorum. But things quickly escalate, and icy looks and poisonous whispers give way to forged memos, brutal humiliations and, finally, outright violence.

Through it all, Corneau makes witty use of the contrasting faces and temperaments of the two main actresses. Thomas, her manner as impeccable and dry as her French, is all angles and edges, most terrifying when she seems most at ease. Sagnier, soft and skittish and visibly struggling to maintain her composure, turns out to be even scarier.

At a certain point, though — to say exactly when would ruin a fairly stunning surprise — the cat-and-mouse psychology is jettisoned in favor of something more procedural. The two halves of “Love Crime” divide according to the words of the title: The first explores the knotty, feverish, ambiguous bond between Christine and Isabelle, while the second is all about guilt, innocence, evidence and motive. It is interesting and ingenious, even if some of the kinky, queasy fascination that had been so intoxicating in the earlier scenes ebbs away.

But “Love Crime” also works — like some later films of Claude Chabrol — as a devilish satire on power and eros in the executive suite. Christine and Isabelle work in the Paris office of a U.S.-based multinational company, and their moneyed world is sleek, attractive and also absurd. It becomes hilariously so whenever the American bosses show up, either for quick on-scene meetings or video conferences. Then the dialogue switches to English, and to an idiom of upbeat management boilerplate captured with devastating accuracy.

This is not the first time that Corneau explored the sadomasochistic elements of relations between women in the modern global workplace. In his 2003 film, “Fear and Trembling,” Sylvie Testud played a young Belgian woman living in Tokyo, squirming under the stiletto heel of her supervisor. And in that film, as in “Love Crime,” sympathy for the underdog was balanced, or perhaps undermined, by detached, amused prurience. You can’t help rooting for Isabelle, but at the same time you are hoping for things to get really nasty.