— Love Crime is a sleek French thriller that feels like a higher stakes version of All About Eve or Working Girl, with Kristin Scott Thomas as the power-suited head of the Paris office of a global food conglomerate and Ludivine Sagnier as her talented but unassuming - and dare we say mousy? - second in command.

Given Sagnier’s established screen persona as a kind of thinking man’s sex kitten (see Francois Ozon’s Water Drops on Burning Rocks from 2000 and Swimming Pool from 2003) and Scott Thomas’ recent (in her English language films, at least) string of grim matrons, the very premise might seem jokey, but the brilliant opening scene effectively establishes the power dynamic between the women and their respective levels of self-confidence.Scott Thomas’ purring Christine is a feline predator who enjoys toying with her prey, while Sagnier’s Isabelle is a hard-working drudge who dreams of l’amour.

At first Christine seems to want to mentor her subordinate, in the ways of business and romance, but it quickly becomes apparent that she’s another one of those horrible bosses whom put-upon audience surrogates always seem to want to kill. And so about halfway in, she gets hers, and there’s absolutely no mystery as to who done it.

But the beauty of this movie slowly unspools in its second half, in ways that I’m not about to tell you now, but that prove immensely gratifying to those who pay the film its due attention. Even casual watchers might enjoy the film, if only for the hilarious ways it portrays Americans (and the actors playing them are simply awful, which may well be intentional).

The film’s director, Alain Corneau, who co-wrote the intelligent screenplay, died last year shortly after this film was released in France. His best-known movie is Tous les Matins du Monde (1991), which gave us one of Gerard Depardieu’s best performances as a rueful old musician. Love Crime is not a major addition to his oeuvre, but it is a smart and involving film - a genuine treat.

Love Crime 87 Cast: Ludivine Sagnier, Kristin Scott Thomas, Patrick Mille, Guillaume Marquet Director: Alain Corneau Rating: Not rated Running time: 104 minutes In French and English with English subtitles