The power of language gives us the ability to connect with others and have control in people’s lives. In Born A Crime by Trevor Noah, Noah lives in Soweto, South Africa where the racial divide is spreading. Being born from a black woman and white male, Noah seeks to bridge the gap. He is seen as too black to be white and too white to be black. He learns that language can change people’s perception of him. Living in South Africa where racism thrives, the language he speaks can aid in sealing the racial divide. He and his mom, Patricia, learn that being multilingual defies the strict apartheid in South Africa. Trevor Noah’s, Born a Crime, explores the impact of language and its power to change people’s perspective through the author’s use of tone.

South Africans perceive people who are not of their native tribe as the enemy. Noah and his mom enter a store talking in their native language, Xhosa and become stereotyped into “bad blacks” by the shopkeeper who is Zulu. He tells the story of the time when, “We were in a shop once, and the shopkeeper, right in front of us, turned to his security guard and said […] Follow those blacks in case they steal something.’ My mother turned around and said, […] ‘Why don’t you follow these blacks so you can help them find what they’re looking for?’ ‘Ag jammer!’ he said, apologizing in Afrikaans. Then — and this was the funniest thing — he didn’t apologize for aiming his racism at us. ‘Oh I’m so sorry,’ he said. ‘I thought you were like the other blacks. You know how they love to steal’ (Noah 55). When Patricia Noah reveals she can speak Afrikaans as well, he is caught by surprise. Immediately, he switches his viewpoint and does not feel threatened by Noah’s mom now that he knows she can speak Afrikaans. With this, he assumes they will not steal because they are of the same tribe as the shopkeeper. Through the tone Noah uses, he finds this slightly amusing in that the shopkeeper did not feel that he was being racist. The racial divide in South Africa is so strong that communicating in someone’s native language builds trust between them.

Language has the power to change people’s perspective and causes Noah to save his own life while walking down the street. Black people initially see him as more white and white people see him as more black. While Noah innocently walks down the street he hears behind him, “Asibambe le autie yomlungu. Phuma ngapha mina ngizoqhamuka ngemuva kwakhe” (Noah 55). Which translates to, “Let’s get this white guy. You go to his left, and I’ll come up behind him. I didn’t know what to do. I couldn’t run, so I just spun around and said, ‘Kodwa bafwethu yingani singavele sibambe umuntu inkunzi? Asenzeni. Mina ngikulindele. ‘Yo guys, who don’t we just mug someone together? I’m ready. Let’s do it” (Noah 55). Noah connects with the other guys by speaking in their native language. The words Noah uses conveys a nervous and irritated tone. He is in shock and his first instinct is to use language to help him. Noah uses multilingualism to his benefit to alter the perspective of others.

Later in the book, Noah admits the fact that language brings diverse cultural groups together. Being half black and half white makes him more aware of the racial gap in South Africa. The language he speaks determines the interpretation of his color. Noah “soon learned that the quickest way to bridge the race gap was through language. […] If you’re black in South Africa, speaking English is the one thing that can give you a leg up. English is the language of money. English comprehension is equated with intelligence. If you’re looking for a job, English is the difference between getting the job or staying unemployed. If you’re standing in the dock, English is the difference between getting off with a fine or going to prison” (Noah 54). The tone of Noah describing his views is very serious. He uses strong words to convey the benefit of multilingualism and the different consequences received based on the languages that are spoken. Natalia Sylvester, a Peruvian-American author talks about the benefits of being bilingual in her article, “They Beauty of Being Bilingual”. Sylvester tells her readers about the times she has helped random people in ordinary places like Goodwill, Walmart, and Costco. “I’m most thankful that I can speak Spanish because it has allowed me to help others” (Sylvester). In a Walmart parking lot in Texas, Slyvester used her second language, Spanish, to help someone in need. A woman’s car had been stolen and when she filed a police report, they needed her immigration papers. The woman was crying while speaking Spanish with dramatic hand gestures, which made it no easier to understand her. Natalia then offered to translate her message to the officers. Her immigration papers had been in the car. Sylvester’s life can be compared to Noah’s in the sense that knowing more than one language is valuable worldwide.

Noah uses multilingualism to change the perspective of others through the use of tone. He uses it to his benefit by communicating with other people in their language. As Nelson Mandela once said, “If you talk to a man in a language he understands that goes to his head. If you talk to him in his language, that goes to his heart” (Nelson Mandela). Mandela’s quote also used in Born A Crime applies to Noah’s use of language throughout the book. Through the use of tone, Trevor Noah uses multilingualism to change the perspective of others.

Works Cited

Noah, Trevor. Born a Crime: and Other Stories. John Murray, 2017.