Junior middleweight Marques Valle, a promising power puncher, is on the verge of making a big name for himself as he readies for his returns Wednesday against Raul Garcia at the ProBox TV Events Center in Plant City, Florida.

University of St. La Salle Coliseum, Bacolod City, Philippines - WBO light flyweight champion Donnie 'Ahas' Nietes (38-1-4, 22 KOs) continued his undefeated run with a fifth round, retaining his title for a ninth time with a stoppage of former world...

The longest reigning Filipino world champion Donnie Nietes, the WBO light flyweight king and his Mexican opponent Raul “Rayito” Garcia tipped the scales exactly at the limit of 108 pounds but former two-time world title challenger Milan Melindo was a...

Mexican challenger Raul “Rayito” Garcia who arrives on Monday night for his light flyweight title fight against the longest reigning Filipino world champion Donnie Nietes at the St. La Salle Coliseum in Bacolod City on May 28, hopes to end the reign...

Mexican promoter Oswaldo Kuchle has informed The Standard that he has "released Raul Garcia to fight Donnie Nietes. the WBO light flyweight champion and the longest reigning Filipino world champion" following the willingness of Zanfer Promotions Fern...

While Donnie Nietes is bound to a mandatory title defense versus Moises Fuentes, there have been talks of possibly first taking on a voluntary defense. Representatives for the junior flyweight titlist have claimed that former strawweight champ Raul G...

WBO light flyweight champion Donnie Nietes may defend his title against Raul Garcia, twin brother of Ramon Garcia Hirales from whom Nietes won the title by a unanimous twelve round decision at the University of St. La Salle Coliseum in Bacolod City o...

Former world champion Raul “Rayito” Garcia who was scheduled to face Denver Cuello, the No. 1 ranked minimum weight contender in a final eliminator can’t make the weight according to his promoter Oswaldo Kuchle in an email to Cuello’s promoter/manag...

Unbeaten super bantamweight prospect Rey Vargas (19-0, 15 KOs) won by eighth round TKO against Filipino Sylvester Lopez (21-7-2, 15 KOs) on Saturday night at the Estadio de Baseball in Los Cabos, Baja California Sur, Mexico. Vargas visited the canvas...

Limón Stadium in Guasave, Sinaloa, México - In a very close battle between Mexican warriors that could have gone either way, Pedro "Jibrán" Guevara (19-1-1, 13KO’s) of Sinaloa won a razor thin split decision over former two-time world champion Raúl "...

Raul "Rayito" Garcia (32-2-1, 20 KOs) and Sammy "Samuel" Gutierrez (33-8-2, 23 KOs) will face each other for a fourth time on December 22 at a venue to be determined. The card will be promoted by Promociones De Puebla and HG Boxing. They fought to...

One of the best boxers in the world Roman "Chocolatito" Gonzalez of Nicaragua will take on Raul "Principe" Garcia of Mexico this Saturday in the main event of a boxing card presented by Top Rank and Showdown Promotions at the Pomona Fairplex in Pomon...

Tijuana, BC. - By boxing in a fast but aggressive manner, while using a hard to break defense, Tomas Rojas continued his successful campaign toward a new opportunity for a world championship, as he won a lopsided unanimous decision over Julio "Sombra...

Tijuana, BC. - The weights are in for Saturday's big show at the Municipal Auditorium in Tijuana, promoted by Zanfer and broadcast by TV Azteca. In the main event, former world champion Raul "Rayito" Garcia (31-2-1, 19 KOs) will face Filipino Michael...