Today’s first recording starts with the end of the film What About Bob?

Then, we have Primeval… Behind the Scenes. I love a good BTS (we used to call these a “How they made it” because that’s what my kids called them when I watched them on DVDs etc).

Tim Haines was the producer of Walking with Dinosaurs, so he was looking for a way to use similar animals but in a dramatic setting rather than a documentary.

Writer Adrian Hodges: “We didn’t want spooky old churches or ghostly houses, we wanted something that felt really modern.”

Cameron McAllister explains about the anomalies.

This documentary feels quite honest. They talk a lot about how hard it is to do what they want to do on a TV budget, and director Jamie Payne has a particular sequence in a greenhouse that they keep being unable to finish for various reasons.

Douglas Henshall really talks the show up well, perhaps because, as he says, he’s been fascinated with dinosaurs since he was ten years old.

Lucy Brown was just excited by the script.

There’s a nice sequence where the behind the scenes team (including director Cilla Ware) are talking about Douglas Henshall, and how much of a good looking hero type he is, and cutting to Henshall saying he doesn’t think he’s any of these things.

James Murray describes Cutter as the “cerebral one of the partnership”.

At one point, Juliet Aubrey does hope that as the series goes on, maybe she’ll get more clothes.

As someone without a huge acting background, Hannah Spearritt didn’t think she’s get the part.

For his preparation, Andrew-Lee Potts googled dinosaurs that were mentioned in the script, so he was going method early.

Ben Miller says he gets an easy ride, as he doesn’t have a lot of scenes involving CGI, except the one where Rex poops on him.

Director of computer animation Mike Milne says that his animation team had to learn new skills beyond the work they’d done in the documentary style, to impart character to the creatures.

Christian Manz talks about the start of the process, where they have to work out, from the script, how many effects will be needed.

James Farrington talks about looking for the mannerisms that define a creature’s character.

Jez Gibson-Harris shows us the animatronic version of Rex.

Chris Clarke demonstrates how the animatronics make it move.

Lee Walpole talks about the difficulties of creating sounds for the creature that sound convincing, even if they’re not realistic.

Jake Curran, who plays the ill-fated Tom, talks about his big episode.

Paul Fulton paints the blue prop that will smash through a windscreen, which will then be replaced with a dinosaur head.

Daren Horley talks about the design of the future predator – this is a creature we haven’t come across on the blog, so either this was in the episode I missed, or these are huge spoilers for the next episode.

One of the on-set disasters was when the camera truck completely broke down, and the crew were unable to retrieve any equipment, until it was able to be repaired, as described by Nick Flatt. “It hasn’t happened to me in fifteen years of working in the film industry.”

Jeremy Hunt has a fun job, making the maquettes of the creatures that can then be scanned int the computer.

Guy Hauldren is the man who scans.

This is quite a fun documentary.

Media Centre Description: An exclusive look behind the scenes at the making of the fantasy drama, featuring interviews with leading cast members – including Douglas Henshall, James Murray and Hannah Spearritt- and the show’s directors, producers, and writers. Plus, a visit to the animation studio to find out how the team brought Primeval to life and the challenges they encountered and overcame.

Recorded from ITV3 on Saturday 17th March 2007 17:13

After this, there’s the start of a Ruth Rendell Mystery.

The next recording is a short manual recording. First there’s a brief trail for Making Your Mind Up – the Eurovision selection programme.

Then, the reason for this recording. It’s Doctor Who – Season 3 Trailer.

Media Centre Description: BBC ONE 19:25

Recorded from BBC ONE on Saturday 17th March 2007 19:28

There’s also a glitchy trail for Any Dream Will Do.

Then there’s a few minutes of Making Your Mind Up before the recording stops.

It’s presented by Terry Wogan and Fearne Cotton. She’s been busy this weekend.

Among the hopefuls are Brian Harvey

Hawkins and Brown

And the eventual winners, Scooch.

The final recording today is the final episode in the first series of Primeval. Judging by the Previously On, the Behind The Scenes was actually covering a lot of stuff in this episode, so thanks for the spoilers, ITV3.

Claudia Brown visits Cutter, where she asks if there’s a way to predict the anomalies, and also asks about something that happened in the last episode which we didn’t see. “When those things were attacking us, you kissed me. On the lips.” “I know.” “You do know sexual harassment is a serious disciplinary offence in the Civil Service?”

Over in the Forest of Dean, where the original anomaly appeared, it’s back, and although they’ve surrounded the who area with a very secure fence, something has got out.

There’s an establishing shot of the zoo where Abby used to work. This is actually Whipsnade Zoo, and this isn’t a Lion Enclosure, it’s where they kept the sealions (and dolphins before they stopped keeping dolphins). But this shot is actually flipped left to right. From this side, the viewing area should be on the right but in this shot it’s on the left. They’ve fixed the text in the windows where it says “Splash Zone” but I do wonder why a Lion Enclosure would have a splash zone.

But inside we do see the lions, before a very strange looking creature breaks through the wire mesh to get in.

Helen Cutter pays a visit to Stephen. She wants to arrange a meeting with Nick and Lester. Two people have disappeared, and she says she knows what happened to them. When she leaves, she kisses Stephen, which seems unusual.

Claudia’s falling asleep at her desk and having nightmares about dinosaurs.

There’s another zoo establishing shot, and this one is also at Whipsnade, in the Elephant enclosure. Although that’s easier to guess because Abby is busy feeding elephants, but something is watching her, with some kind of weird vision.

Elsewhere in the zoo (actually in the Elephant house) the zoo’s manager is followed by the strange creature that attacked the lions.

Connor and Abby discuss the missing lion. They found some blood in the enclosure, most of which was Lion, but some of it looked like Bat DNA. Also worrying is that her boss has now gone missing.

Helen meets with Cutter, Lester and the team, and tells them that the three people who have gone missing have been taken by a predator from the future. “It has almost human level intelligence, and an almost supernatural ability to stalk its prey.”

There’s another shot of the sealions enclosure, but this one is the right way round, and they also include a shot of the pool area to the right. So the previous shot was flipped to try to make it look different and stand in for a lion enclosure.

After hearing from Helen about the super predator, Stephen hears about the missing lion and manager at the zoo, and that Abby is there, so he rushes over, telling Connor to send backup. He finds Abby in the sealion viewing area. The predator turns up, but it doesn’t see them because it’s distracted by the sealions swimming, and then the armed backup arrives, so the predator runs off.

A search is on. Captain Ryan asks what happens when they find it. “We kill it.” “I thought we only killed them in self defence?” “This one’s too dangerous. And if we kill it, it can’t affect the past, or the present.” “Shoot to kill. That makes a refreshing change, I was beginning to feel like a social worker.” I like Captain Ryan. In the woods, one of his men is attacked by the predator, but it’s too fast for them to shoot.

They realise that it’s using a form of echolocation – which also explains the bat DNA in the blood from the lion enclosure. Connor thinks they could track it with an oscilloscope so he runs to fetch the oscilloscope he always keeps in the car. When he turns it on, it starts beeping, meaning the predator is somewhere close. It smashes through the windscreen (remember the blue prop from the documentary?) and Connor gets out of the back door.

For a super efficient predator, this thing does wait a dramatically useful length of time before just chomping on Connor, enough time for Abby to arrive and chuck a rock at it. And, more effectively, for Stephen to shoot at it, which is enough to drive it away.

Cutter asks Connor if he wants to go home, but he elects to stay. “I mean, Han Solo, he wouldn’t give up before the job’s done, would he?” Cutter pauses and says, with great seriousness, “I always saw you as R2D2 myself, but I take your point.”

They search for the creature’s lair, and discover that it’s given birth. And they find the bodies of the missing people, stored to feed the babies.

The predator attacks, so Cutter grabs one of the babies and runs, drawing the predator into a greenhouse. This is the scene that took so much trouble to shoot according to the BTS. Cutter shoots out the panes of glass, which confuses the creature’s echovision, until he’s able to shoot it in the head.

Lester gathers opinions on the correct course of action. Helen wants the babies kept alive, saying they can lead them to the future anomaly. Cutter then tells him that they need to kill them when they find it, and seal off the anomaly so that no other future predators can come through into the Permian era. Lester wishes things were simpler. “I suppose just bombing somewhere’s out of the question?” I don’t mention Lester much but he’s always good value.

There’s definitely something odd going on with Claudia. This one isn’t even a dream.

As they’re heading into the anomaly, Claudia asks Cutter to stay. “I’ve got a really bad feeling about this.” She even gives him a goodbye kiss (right in front of Helen). Where’s your Civil Service sexual harassment code now, Claudia? I love all the other characters’ awkward reactions.

Cutter, Helen and the team of soldiers go through. Connor gets a phone call, telling him that the autopsy of the dead predator shows it was male. So the female must still be out there somewhere. We see it rush through the anomaly, but nobody else does, they just see the anomaly change slightly as it goes through.

In the Permia, they set up camp. Helen asks Cutter to take a photo. He recognises the picture he’s just taken, as he saw it in the first episode. The camera he’s using is the one they found in a long abandoned camp. This might be my favourite moment in the whole show.

He tells Ryan, who says “The camp we found was old. There was a dead body.” “We’ve arrived back years before the first time we came here. We’ve created out own past.” The baby predators start making a lot of noise. Cutter thinks they must be near the anomaly. Helen is excited as this is where she’s wanted to go all along.

The predator arrives and starts killing, then rescuing the babies.

Ryan tries to kill it, but it’s too fast for him.

All is lost, until a local dinosaur arrives on the scene, and doesn’t take kindly to having its home invaded by others, particularly the predator.

It knocks the predator away for a while, and starts eating its babies. This is fairly strong stuff for Saturday Evening entertainment. The predator recovers, and a big fight ensues. My only quibble with the effects in this scene is that, in making the predator a very deliberately quick animal, it tends to look unrealistic and unweighted, a problem quite common with CGI creatures. But in this case, the big dinosaur turns out to be heavy enough, as it’s able to kill the predator by landing on top of it.

Time for a minute’s silence as we bid farewell to Captain Tom Ryan. “First time we came here… that body we found… that was me, wasn’t it? I was looking at myself.” It’s because I said how much I liked him earlier, isn’t it. I genuinely welled up at this point. Let’s acknowledge actor Mark Wakeling for taking quite a small character, and forging something memorable.

It looks like all the predator babies are dead. Helen wants to stay and search for the future anomaly, but Cutter wants to go back. “For that girl? Please don’t tell me you’re in love with her.” But they both walk back to the anomaly, while the camera pans over to where a couple of the predator babies have survived.

Both Cutters return through the anomaly. He breaks the news about Captain Ryan and his team. He says that nobody should go through the anomaly, but Helen immediately says she’ll be breaking that rule. But not before breaking the news that she and Stephen had an affair, before she disappeared. I really don’t like Helen. It’s a good thing Juliet Aubrey is really good in the role. Lester speaks for all of us. “What an extremely awkward moment.”

Stephen declines to join her on her search for the future anomaly, so she returns through. Cutter looks around and asks where Claudia is. Nobody knows what he’s talking about, they’ve never heard of Claudia.

“Something’s wrong, we’ve done something, we’ve changed something.” Then the anomaly behind him starts growing. “Oh my God!” he exclaims, and we cut to the end titles. Now that’s a cliffhanger.

Media Centre Description: Cutter and the team are faced with their deadliest threat yet – a quick, ruthless predator with seemingly supernatural powers. When they discover the beast’s lair and its offspring, they realise that drastic action must taken to prevent further attacks. The team travel back in time through the re-opened anomaly in the Forest of Dean, and as Cutter finds his loyalties torn between Claudia and Helen, it seems that their adventure will have devastating and far-reaching consequences.

Recorded from ITV 1 on Saturday 17th March 2007 19:48

After this, there’s the start of the final Skate-Off of Dancing on Ice. I don’t recall Torvill and Dean flying during their routines.

Here’s the ad breaks from the first recording.

Here’s the ad breaks from the later recording.

Adverts: