75th Primetime Emmy Award Winners; Jeff Dunham Returns to Comedy Central

The Television Academy celebrated the historic 75th Emmy Awards, recognizing excellence in television programming and individual achievement for the 2022-2023 television season. The 75th Emmy Awards was broadcast live from the Peacock Theater in downtown Los Angeles on the Fox Television Network, hosted by Anthony Anderson and executive-produced by Jesse Collins, Dionne Harmon and Jeannae Rouzan-Clay of Jesse Collins Entertainment. The telecast featured awards in 26 Emmy categories, plus the Governors Award, presented by top talent from some of television's most acclaimed programs. Presenters, cast reunions and surprise guests included Christina Applegate, Tichina Arnold, Jason Bateman, Gil Bellows, Lorraine Bracco, Connie Britton, Quinta Brunson, Carol Burnett, Tisha Campbell, Justin Chambers, Stephen Colbert, Dame Joan Collins, Jon Cryer, Ted Danson, Charlie Day, Danny DeVito, Peter Dinklage, Colman Domingo, Tina Fey, Calista Flockhart, Jodie Foster, Greg Germann, Marla Gibbs, Brett Goldstein, Kelsey Grammer, Arsenio Hall, Jon Hamm, Katherine Heigl, Taraji P. Henson, Tom Hiddleston, Glenn Howerton, Michael Imperioli, Ken Jeong, Martin Lawrence, Natasha Lyonne, Peter MacNicol, Dylan McDermott, Rob McElhenney, Joel McHale, Kaitlin Olson, Jenna Ortega, Pedro Pascal, Carl Anthony Payne II, Rhea Perlman, James Pickens Jr., Amy Poehler, Ellen Pompeo, Ke Huy Quan, Sheryl Lee Ralph, John Ratzenberger, Rob Reiner, Tracee Ellis Ross, Sally Struthers, Holland Taylor, Juno Temple, Taylor Tomlinson, Hannah Waddingham, George Wendt and Chandra Wilson.

Charlie Puth and The War and Treaty performed "See You Again"/"I'll Be There For You" (Friends theme) for the "In Memoriam" segment of the show. Additionally, Travis Barker performed on drums during Anthony Anderson's show open. Among the big winners were The Bear and Succession, nearly sweeping the comedy and drama categories and Beef for limited series. Abbott Elementary star Quinta Brunson took home Outstanding Lead Actress in a Comedy Series, while Jennifer Coolidge took home Outstanding Supporting Actress in a Drama Series for The White Lotus. For the complete list of this year's Emmy Award winners, as compiled by the independent accounting firm of Ernst & Young LLP, click here.