Stephen S. Dunham - 2014

Stephen S. Dunham was named Vice President and General Counsel of The Pennsylvania State University in 2012. He previously served as Vice President and General Counsel of Johns Hopkins University. Earlier he served as Vice President and General Counsel of the University of Minnesota (where he also taught courses in contracts, trial practice, complex litigation, and higher education law.) He was a litigation partner and Chair of the law firm of Morrison and Foerster. He currently serves as Chair of the Board of Soka University of America. He graduated from Princeton University and Yale Law School, where he was a member of the Yale Law Journal and graduated Order of the Coif.

A NACUA member since 1982, Steve served on the NACUA Board of Directors as an at-large member from 1986 – 1988. He also has served on numerous NACUA committees and task forces over these many years, including service as Vice Chair of the Committee on Nominations and Elections and the Editorial Board for The Journal of College and University Law.

In addition, Steve has spoken at NACUA conferences, workshops, and General Counsel Institutes on more than 40 occasions on a wide variety of legal issues and topics. He also has written publications on behalf of NACUA, including the Journal. In 1992, Steve was named a Fellow of the Association. In addition to his extensive service to NACUA, Steve has also served as Chair of the California State Bar Special Committee on Pro Bono Legal Services, Co-Chair of the San Francisco Bar Association Committee on Quality of Life, a member of the California State Bar Committee on Women in the Law, a member of the Board of Directors and Chair of the Executive Committee of the Colorado lawyers' Committee, a member of the American law Institute, a member of the Board of Directors of the American Judicature Society, a member of the Board of Visitors for J. Reuben Clark Law School, Brigham Young University, a member of the Board of Trustees for Mills College (1994-2003), a member of the ALI-ABA Committee on Continuing Professional Education, and an instructor at various state and national programs of continuing legal education.

NACUA is pleased to recognize Stephen S. Dunham as a recipient of the Distinguished Service Award for his outstanding and exemplary service to the Association.