Thursday, April 24 2014

Venue Info:

Twilight Gallery and Boutique

4306 SW Alaska Street

Seattle, WA

map

Note: Doors at 7pm BYOB Twilight Gallery & Boutique welcomes recent transplants The Royal Oui to (West)Seattle along with local lovelies Willow and The Embers. About The Royal Oui: Husband and wife duo Ari Shine and Adrienne Pierce have cultivated grassroots fan bases through word of mouth and extensive touring across several continents, as well as exposure through film and television. The duo harmonize throughout all songs giving their tales of sirens and trickster scorpions an other wordly quality which one audience member dubbed “spectral folk”. They layer their guitars and voices live to create the illusion of multiple musicians. They wrote, performed, recorded and mixed their debut EP Forecast on File Under: Music, whose single “When You Lose Your Mind” planted them on the label’s roster. The duo self recorded their full length, developed surrealist video projections to accompany their live performance, booked a thirty date tour through Canada and the US, and hit the road together in 2013. They have been featured on sites like Rolling Stone, Huffington Post, CBC, Exclaim!, Magnet and many others. The Royal Oui are currently supporting their full length debut which was released on Feb. 11th with dates in the US and Canada. About Willow and The Embers: Folk-noir meets dreamy hush-pop in Willow & The Embers’ textural ambient rock……Willow’s evocative crooning, introspective lyrics, and muse-like persona both soothe and stimulate the savage beast. Willow is A self-taught singer/songwriter, who, in 1992 put down her bible and picked up a pawn shop guitar. Three chords later, the songs cameflowing out. Judging from the fact that she had little previous musical experience, one could say she’s a bit of a preternatural chanteuse. Like post-christian rocker contemporaries, Alice Cooper And Marilyn Manson, Willow’s papa is a preacher man and prior to her fateful leap, she was an enrollee at Multnomah School Of The Bible in Portland Oregon. The result of her departure from conservative religion?…Her musical renderings are of an evolution of a spiritual nature – an earthly, poetic dance in the dark. For those familiar with the fire and brimstone of artist Nick Cave, Willow may be the polar sweet angel of redemption and desire. Whether whisper-quiet, or with full wattage coursing through, Willow and her Band, The Embers, deliver us.” Be on the lookout for the future release of: ”Daughter of a Preacher Man,” the documentary that follows this Seattle band on a three week tour retracing the fault lines of Willow’s family history.