Read the most recent issue of CRN Magazine, the trusted news source for solution providers, systems integrators, MSPs and the full IT channel.

June 2024

2024 Women of the Channel Awards

This year, CRN honors over 1700 women whose channel expertise and vision are deserving of recognition.

2024 Solution Provider 500

CRN‘s Solution Provider 500 ranks the top integrators, service providers and IT consultants in North America by services revenue.

CYBERSECURITY SPECIAL SECTION

Network Security Devices Are The Front Door To An IT Environment, But Are They Under Lock And Key?

As the industry has gotten better at locking down endpoint devices such as laptops, threat actors are finding new ways to infiltrate an organization’s systems—and they’re seeing more and more success.

All Eyes Are On Accelerating Data Security

Startups and well-established vendors alike have a new acronym in their arsenals: DSPM, or data security posture management, which can extend data security practices from on-premises environments to today’s cloud-based architectures.

SMBs Seeking SASE, And MSPs Are Ready To Deliver

There’s a huge untapped market for MSPs in helping small organizations adopt secure access service edge, which offers lower costs, better security and a simple deployment.

COLUMNS

Burke: Passing On A Legacy Of Caring For Others

CRN Executive Editor Steve Burke spotlights All Solutions CEO Nalit Patel and the valuable life lesson that he has used to build a thriving solution provider business.

Follett: Building Strong Relationships Is Secret To Solution Provider Success

BlackHawk Data CEO Maryann Pagano’s channel network is helping her build a $100 million business.

View The Issue:

https://online.flippingbook.com/view/763737825/

April 2024

10 Cool AI PCs You Can Get From HP, Dell And Others

Here are 10 AI PCs you can get now or later this year from HP Inc., Dell Technologies, Lenovo and other vendors.

Partner Program Guide

The CRN Partner Program Guide offers the information that solution and service providers need to evaluate IT vendors.

AI Companies With A Winning Hand: The 2024 CRN AI 100

CRN’s inaugural AI 100 list breaks down the 100 companies you need to know about in the AI market in the five major categories: cloud, security, data and analytics, data center and edge, and software.

IoT 50

For the 2024 Internet of Things 50 CRN picked the coolest and most noteworthy channel-friendly vendors driving innovation forward and delivering real value, whether they’re focused on hardware, software, networking and connectivity, security or industrial solutions.

Tech Elite 250

The Tech Elite 250 is comprised of solution providers in the U.S. and Canada who have achieved the highest partner program levels and won the most technology certifications from Adobe, Amazon Web Services, Cisco Systems, Dell Technologies, Google, Hewlett Packard Enterprise, IBM, Intel, Nutanix, Oracle, Palo Alto Networks, Sophos and VMware.

COLUMNS

Burke: Where Are The AI Channel Incentives?

CRN’s Steve Burke is troubled that many vendors are not changing their channel programs to accelerate AI sales growth.

Follett: First Impressions Of AI PCs Will Be Shaped By The Channel

CRN’s Jennifer Follett says that the vendors that work closely with channel partners to bring the early wave of AI PCs to market will stand to make the biggest gains.

View the issue:

https://online.flippingbook.com/view/123248390/

February 2024

Channel Chiefs

Here are the executives who develop channel strategies that make partners successful.

Security 100

The 2024 CRN Security 100 highlights channel-friendly cybersecurity vendors across a number of market segments, ranging from the largest and best-known players to some of the small-but-promising startups.

Cloud 100

Here are the 100 cloud computing companies of 2024 with the most innovative offerings around cloud security, software, infrastructure, storage and management that you need to know.

CEO Outlook

See where CEOs are placing their bets in 2024 and how they are relying on partners to help them tackle emerging technology opportunities this year.

MSP 500

CRN's Managed Service Provider 500 list recognizes the top technology providers and consultants whose forward-thinking approach to providing managed services is changing the landscape of the IT channel.

Which Side Wins With GenAI: Cybercrime Or Cyberdefense?

Security experts weigh in on the potential use cases for GenAI technology and whether those cases are benefiting security teams or giving an edge to malicious actors.

Tech Giants Say AI PCs Will Change The Industry As They Hunt For ‘Killer Apps’

While many AI tools and services are easily accessed through desktop applications and powered by cloud infrastructure, major players in the PC ecosystem believe there will be a substantial market in the coming years for PCs that enable AI experiences partially or entirely through the computer’s local processor. CRN dives into the topic for AI PC Week.

COLUMNS

Follett: Three Channel Chiefs To Keep An Eye On In 2024

CRN’s Jennifer Follett is paying close attention to three channel chiefs, two of whom recently stepped into new roles. All three are tasked with delivering sales success amid rocky economic terrain.

Burke: A Tale Of Two VMwares

CRN’s Steve Burke contrasts Michael Dell’s channel leadership and nurturing of VMware as a crown jewel for Dell EMC with the shock to the system that partners have experienced in the wake of Broadcom’s $69 billion acquisition of VMware.

View the issue:

https://online.flippingbook.com/view/712439374/

December 2023

Thomas Kurian On Google Cloud’s AI Differentiators Vs. Rivals AWS, Microsoft

The CEO discusses what he says are the advantages Google Cloud has over its two main rivals, the big money-making opportunities for AI MSPs, and how Google is investing heavily to enable GenAI sales opportunities for partners.

Kyndryl CEO: Reselling ‘Other People’s Equipment’ Was ‘Empty Calorie Revenue’

‘What we’ve been talking about, particularly this year, is engineering a decline in revenue to get rid of either low-[margin] or no-margin businesses that we inherited in the [spin-out from IBM]. ... We inherited a business [from IBM] that was basically reselling other people’s equipment. And we’re taking that down dramatically this year because there’s nothing in it for us,’ Kyndryl Chairman and CEO Martin Schroeter tells CRN.

CRN’s 2023 Products Of The Year

CRN staff compiled the top partner-friendly products that launched or were significantly enhanced over the past year and then turned to solution providers to choose this year’s winners.

Stellar Startups 2023

In our annual Stellar Startups (previously Emerging Vendors) special report, CRN shines a spotlight on some of the most exciting channel-focused startup vendors with leading-edge technologies that are creating new opportunities for solution providers.

The 2023 Women On The Rise

These women are reaching new heights at their companies by putting partners front and center, demonstrating strong business acumen and collaborating with colleagues to drive success. Keep an eye on these up-and-comers who are poised to rise to the top.

2023 Next-Gen Solution Provider Leaders

For the fourth year CRN honors those 40-years-old or younger who, through their drive and passion, have helped propel growth and strategic direction at their solution provider companies.

COLUMNS

Burke: A Solution Provider CEO For The Ages

With Blue Mantis CEO Ron Dupler is retiring at the end of the year, CRN’s Steve Burke reflects on the career of someone he calls the archetype of the modern solution provider CEO.

Follett: Four Trends That Will Shape The Channel In 2024

As the year winds down, CRN’s Jen Follett looks in her crystal ball and predicts four ways the channel will be changed in 2024.

View the issue:

https://online.flippingbook.com/view/981599856/

October 2023

CrowdStrike CEO George Kurtz: Microsoft’s ‘Failures’ Put Everyone At Risk

In an interview with CRN, Kurtz said the recent Microsoft cloud email breach and frequent bypasses of Microsoft Defender by hackers are just two symptoms of the tech giant’s massive cybersecurity problem.

2023 CRN Annual Report Card

The CRN 2023 Annual Report Card gives solution providers the opportunity to grade IT vendors on their performance in product innovation, support, partnership, and managed and cloud services.

The 100 People You Don’t Know But Should 2023

Across the channel’s vendors and distributors, these 100 individuals are helping craft the programs and processes to ensure their company’s partners succeed.

Crowning Achievement: CRN’s 2023 Triple Crown Award Winners

CRN assembles solution provider lists and rankings throughout the year, including the Solution Provider 500, Tech Elite 250 and Fast Growth 150. Here CRN recognizes the 41 solution providers that earned a spot on all three lists this year with the annual Triple Crown honors.

AI And The Channel: It’s Go Time

Solution providers that aren’t getting into the game when it comes to delivering innovative AI solutions to their customers may find themselves sitting on the bench. Here’s who’s come ready to play.

How Solution Providers Are Fighting AI With AI

The buzz around generative AI is getting louder as solution providers are addressing the risks and advantages it poses to their customers while vendors are stepping up by adding GenAI-powered capabilities into their cyber defense tools.

COLUMNS

Burke: Why Nutanix Is Channel Strong

Nutanix is a great example of a vendor that ensures that its disciplined channel model is enforced under any and all circumstances.

Follett: When It Comes To AI, Don’t Forget The Channel

The challenge in the rush to capitalize on such artificial intelligence is that vendors moving quickly to bring products and services to market often give short shrift to actually building the channel-necessary to propel those offerings into the marketplace.

View the issue:

https://online.flippingbook.com/view/807739164/

September 2023 Special Issue

Three Solution Providers On Why Ingram Micro Is Their Trusted Partner

Executives from KME Systems, Applied Tech and M&N Communications say that the distributor stands out by standing up to help them any way it can./p>

Ingram Micro’s Kirk Robinson On Where Xvantage Is Headed Next

Here’s what Kirk Robinson said about how far Ingram Micro’s Xvantage platform has come, how it continues to act as a learning tool and where the platform is going next.

Ingram Micro: Professional Services Make Partners ‘Profitable On Day One’

Partners are leveraging the power of Ingram Micro’s professional services and then turning around and creating additional revenue -- helping them become ‘profitable on day one.’

View the issue:

https://online.flippingbook.com/view/162245417

August 2023

The Top 100 Executives Of 2023

Here we present the CRN Top 100 Executives of 2023 list, the men and women who are setting the pace for the rest of the IT industry.

2023 Tech Innovator Awards

To help solution providers identify products that are truly innovative and offer value for their customers, the 2023 CRN Tech Innovator Awards showcase IT vendor offerings that provide significant technology advances – and partner growth opportunities – across a broad range of technology categories including cloud, networking, security, storage, devices and software. The awards spotlight innovative products across 37 categories.

The 2023 Fast Growth 150

CRN‘s Fast Growth 150 ranks solution providers with gross annual sales of at least $1 million by their two-year growth rate.

COLUMNS

Follett: CEO Support Is The Cornerstone Of Channel Success

CRN Executive Editor Jennifer Follett says it’s critical for CEOs to communicate to the channel on a regular basis to provide assurance that the foundation is solid and that the vision is clear.

View the issue:

https://online.flippingbook.com/view/890153379/

June 2023

Deloitte’s Big Bets On Google Generative AI, ‘Proactive’ Workforce Transformation

“[Generative AI] feels like an evolution that has not happened before in terms of the scope, but also the pace at which things are moving. The capabilities of the technology are real,” said Deloitte’s Gopal Srinivasan.

2023 Women of the Channel Awards

This year, CRN honors over 1500 women whose channel expertise and vision are deserving of recognition.

2023 Solution Provider 500

CRN‘s Solution Provider 500 ranks the top integrators, service providers and IT consultants in North America by services revenue.

Becoming An MSSP Is Hard. Partnering With One Could Be A Better Answer

Solution providers looking to bring managed security services to their customers -- without having to offer the services themselves --are finding growing options to do so through partnerships within the channel community.

Cyber Insurance Primer: How To Avoid The Pitfalls

Two cyber insurance broker executives discuss how MSPs and MSSPs can navigate the often-tricky process of obtaining policies, including through understanding what’s covered and the importance of ransomware coverage.

MSSPs On Why MDR Isn’t Always Enough

MDR is seeing off-the-charts growth, but many MSSP executives say a typical MDR offering is not nearly as comprehensive as the full complement of cybersecurity services they offer.

6 Hot New Security Offerings Ready To Stand Guard

An array of new cybersecurity product releases during the first few months of the year has made for a busy start to 2023. Here’s a look at some of the hottest new security products and services hitting the market.

What’s On Tap At XChange Security 2023: 5 Key Trends And Topics

XChange Security will take place July 10-12 in Dallas. Here’s a preview of what solution providers will hear about during the event.

COLUMNS

Burke: The Power Of The Ever-Changing Solution Provider

CRN Executive Editor Steve Burke celebrates solution provider Software To Go on its 40th anniversary.

Follett: Know Your Strengths So You Can Address Your Weaknesses

CRN Executive Editor Jennifer Follett says the true ‘power’ in knowing your superpower is perhaps that it sheds light on your weaknesses and helps you build a team accordingly to fill in the gaps.

View the issue:

https://online.flippingbook.com/view/61074840/

April 2023

CEO Enrique Lores: HP’s Business Model Designed For ‘The Channel To Make Money With Us’

HP Inc. CEO Enrique Lores talks about why the channel remains a top priority for HP, why he wants partners to sell more from HP’s wider portfolio of products and services and why he’s optimistic about HP’s future with partners. ‘Different from other companies, we have stayed the course. Since I joined the company more than 30 years ago, we have been a channel company. We haven’t moved from that,’ he tells CRN.

Tech 10: Harnessing Cutting-Edge Technologies

Wireless specialists and IT vendors alike are forming partnerships and coming to the table armed with telecom-focused offerings. Here are 10 mobility moves set to transform the market.

2023 Partner Program Guide

The CRN Partner Program Guide offers the information that solution and service providers need to evaluate IT vendors.

2023 Internet Of Things 50: A Growth Engine For The Channel

To help the channel navigate the ever-changing environment as IoT continues to be a growth engine for the channel, CRN has rounded up the 50 coolest IoT companies of the year.

Storage Vendors Evolve With The Times: 2023 Storage 100

Storage vendors are evolving with the times, with one of the biggest changes addressing the need for cybersecurity.

The 2023 Tech Elite 250

The Tech Elite 250 is comprised of solution providers in the U.S. and Canada who have the highest level and most certifications from Amazon, Cisco, Dell, HPE, IBM, Microsoft, Oracle and VMware.

COLUMNS

Burke: A New Era Of AI-Based MSP Automation

CRN Executive Editor Steve Burke says the time is now to leverage AI to reduce costs and scale your business.

Follett: Solution Providers Have Gotten More Sophisticated. Vendors Need To Keep Up.

CRN Executive Editor Jennifer Follett says that as solution providers have become more sophisticated entities, they require more innovative relationships with their vendor and distribution partners.

View the issue:

https://online.flippingbook.com/view/411112596/

February 2023

Palo Alto Networks CEO Nikesh Arora On SASE, AI And Why Partners Are ‘More Important’ Than Ever

In an interview with CRN, Arora says that with the company’s product portfolio now established—including in key growth areas such as SASE, cloud security and XDR—2023 is ‘all about go-to-market and the channel’ for the cybersecurity giant.

Tech 10: 10 Storage Startups That Are Coming To The Rescue

These 10 startups have rolled out new products that are solving niche storage issues or tackling critical challenges that haven’t yet been resolved.

2023 Channel Chiefs

Here are the executives who develop channel strategies that make partners successful.

CEO Outlook 2023

If the past couple of years have taught the IT industry any­thing, it’s that businesses need faster returns on their IT investments and flexibility in the form of cloud-first offerings and Capex-based consumption models.

The 2023 Security 100

The 2023 CRN Security 100 highlights channel-friendly cybersecurity vendors across a number of market segments, ranging from the largest and best-known players to some of the small-but-promising startups.

The 100 Coolest Cloud Computing Companies Of 2023

From cloud infrastructure and cloud monitoring and management to cloud software, security and storage, CRN has named 100 companies leading the way in 2023 in innovation and global expansion.

The 2023 Managed Service Provider 500

CRN's Managed Service Provider 500 list recognizes the top technology providers and consultants whose forward-thinking approach to providing managed services is changing the landscape of the IT channel.

COLUMNS

Faletra: Be Smart, Leave Politics To Politicians

The Channel Company’s Founding Partner Robert Faletra says that it never makes sense for senior management to weigh in on political issues.

Follett: Channel Chiefs Need To Be Bold And Get Strategic

CRN’s Jennifer Follett says that these times create a tremendous opportunity for technology manufacturers to gain both mindshare and market share within the channel for those daring enough to grab them.

Burke: AWS’ Cloud Technology Leadership Makes Its Channel Unique

CRN News Editor Steven Burke says that Amazon Web Services partner Classmethod is a prime example of how AWS is driving breakthrough productivity, cost and competitive advantages for customers.

View the issue:

https://online.flippingbook.com/view/351831607/

December 2022

Adam Selipsky: Why Partners Should Pick AWS Vs. Cloud Rivals

AWS CEO Adam Selipsky explains why soultion providers should place their cloud bet on the $82 billion market-share leader versus the competition.

CRN’s 2022 Products Of The Year

CRN staff compiled the top partner-friendly products that launched over the past year, then turned to solution providers to choose the winners.

2022 Tech Innovators Awards

The 2022 CRN Tech Innovator Awards showcase IT vendor offerings that provide significant advances in IT – and partner growth opportunities – across a broad range of technology categories.

2022 Next-Gen Solution Provider Leaders

CRN honors those 40-years-old or younger who, through their drive and passion, have helped propel growth and strategic direction at their solution provider companies.

COLUMNS

Burke: HPE Is A Cloud Service Provider, Not A Hardware Company

CRN’s Steve Burke says partners that look at HPE as a hardware manufacturer with a broad and deep compute, storage and networking portfolio are missing the boat.

Faletra: Can We Get To Everything As A Service?

The Channel Company’s Founding Partner Robert Faletra says that as the buzz around Everything as a Service grows, the question becomes can we get there and what are the benefits if we do.

View the issue:

https://online.flippingbook.com/view/1015963908/

November 2022 Special Issue

The Cutting Edge: 8 Trends Future-Minded Solution Providers Should Watch

Solution providers with an eye toward the future know that edge computing is going to impact every corner of our lives, and they also know that the time is now to get in on the action. Here are eight key opportunities solution providers can leverage, from security to IoT as a service to distributed storage and more.

The 50 Hottest Edge Hardware, Software And Services Companies

CRN highlights 50 companies leading the way in edge computing with hardware, software and services.

The 25 Hottest Edge Security Companies

Here are 25 security players working at the cutting-edge of the edge.

The 25 Hottest IoT & 5G Services Companies

Here are 25 providers that are specializing in 5G, IoT and edge services.

View the issue:

https://online.flippingbook.com/view/1015841212/

October 2022

Crowning Achievement: CRN’s 2022 Triple Crown Award Winners

CRN assembles solution provider lists and rankings throughout the year, including the Solution Provider 500, the Fast Growth 150 and the Tech Elite 250. Here CRN recognizes the 41 solution providers that earned a spot on all three lists this year with the annual Triple Crown honors.

Annual Report Card

The CRN Annual Report Card provides a look at which IT vendors are doing the best jobs – and which ones have work to do – in meeting their partners’ needs.

The 100 People You Don’t Know But Should

Across the channel’s vendors and distributors, these 100 individuals are helping craft the programs and processes to ensure their company’s partners succeed.

As data volumes continue to explode, businesses are looking for more effective ways to manage and analyze all that data for competitive advantage. Here are 10 recently debuted big data management and analytics products that can help.

COLUMNS

Burke: Channel Lessons From The Supply Chain Crisis

CRN’s Steve Burke gives five lessons learned from solution providers that figured out how to prosper despite the pandemic and resulting supply chain crisis.

Faletra: High-Tech Changed The World. In The Future The World Will Change High-Tech

The Channel Company’s Founding Partner Robert Faletra says the world has been changed by high-tech, and high-tech is entering a phase where it will be changed by the world.

View the issue:

https://online.flippingbook.com/view/953227935/

October 2022 Special Issue

Ingram Micro CEO Paul Bay: ‘Our People, Our Experience And Our Execution Are What Differentiate Us Today’

“It’s not like we’re just starting this journey,” said Bay. “We made a real company investment both organically and through acquisition to set that foundation to help us accelerate what we’re going to do with Xvantage.”

Delivering Business Outcomes: Ingram Micro Helps Partners Bridge The Gaps In Their Services Offerings

Ingram Micro is helping partners make the transition to a services-led strategy, no matter how far along they are in their journey to deliver the right business outcome to their customers.

Finding The Best Fit: The Emerging Business Partners And New-To-The-Channel Vendors

Ingram Micro’s Emerging Business Group connects partners with vendors that are new to the channel or to distribution, setting everyone up for success.

Sanjib Sahoo On Digital Operations Vs. Digital And The Power Of The Xvantage Platform

Ingram Micro vice president Sanjib Sahoo says the company’s new Xvantage platform will “create a completely new experience” for partners to do business with the distributor.

Ingram Micro’s Community Spirit: Partner Collaboration Is Key

Ingram Micro partners are turning to the distributor’s community groups for guidance from their peers as they grapple with the “new channel normal.”

Ingram Micro’s Asset Disposition Services Help Partners Take Out The Recycling

Ingram Micro is starting to see more and more partners come to the distributor because they don’t have the resources to perform IT asset disposition in-house.

Game On: Ingram Micro Helps Partners Break Into An Untapped Market

Ingram Micro is seeing a big opportunity for solution providers to tap into its gaming portfolio to help people work, live and play better.

DEI, ESG Are Central To Ingram Micro’s Culture: ‘Our Success Is All About People’

Ingram Micro is laser-focused on environmental, social and governance and diversity, equity and inclusion initiatives.

5 Ways Ingram Micro Is Upping Its Game For Partners

Ingram Micro’s Kirk Robinson outlines five ways the distributor is putting partners in a better position to grow their business.

Ingram Micro’s Marketing Message To Partners: Embrace Your Brand

“What we’re seeing is our partners embracing their brand and what they represent and who they are as a company,” said Jennifer Anaya, Ingram Micro’s senior vice president of global marketing. “You can replicate a lot of things in terms of skills or systems or tools that you use. But you really can’t replicate who you have on your team that has the expertise and the relationships and the knowledge that they bring.”

‘Get To Yes:’ Ingram Micro’s Creative Financing For A Cloud And Managed Services World

Ingram Micro has moved to provide partners with the financial tools to address the business change from straight hardware sales at fixed credit terms to SaaS and managed services.

View the issue:

https://online.flippingbook.com/view/832164920/

August 2022

The Top 100 Executives Of 2022

Here we present the CRN Top 100 Executives of 2022 list, the men and women who are setting the pace for the rest of the IT industry.

Emerging It Vendors You Need To Know

In our annual Emerging Vendors special report, CRN shines a light on some of the most exciting new channel-focused vendors helping create new solutions for business and opportunity for solution providers.

The 2022 Fast Growth 150

CRN‘s Fast Growth 150 ranks solution providers with gross annual sales of at least $1 million by their two-year growth rate.

COLUMNS

Faletra: Do We Need The CHIPS Act?

The Channel Company’s Founding Partner Robert Faletra believes there hasn’t been enough debate in Washington, D.C. around what could be the unintended consequences of the CHIPS Act.

View the issue:

https://online.flippingbook.com/view/90779465/

July 2022

The 2022 Rising Female Stars Of The It Channel

Can-do attitudes, tireless work ethics, problem-solving skills are just a few of the characteristics ascribed to this CRN’s 2022 100 Rising Female Stars list.

10 Important DEI Trends For The Channel To Keep Top Of Mind

For a growing number of solution providers, diversity, equity and inclusion initiatives are becoming an important component of their long-range strategies. Here’s a look at 10 key DEI trends that are impacting companies across the channel today.

How To Focus On ‘Culture-Add,’ Not ‘Culture-Fit’

Many companies feel a responsibility to identify and confront any biases that may exist in their business, whether that bias is unconscious or not. Now is the time to focus on ‘culture-add’—not ‘culture-fit’—so that all employees feel a sense of belonging and can be their authentic selves.

Equity In Hiring Starts With The Job Description

The Channel Company’s Cass McMann says the first step to hiring inclusively is the job description.

The Power Of Allyship: Even The Smallest Steps Make A Difference

“If it wasn’t for my ally who stood up for me to remove the roadblocks for me, I would have not been seen as a whole for my contribution. I would have been marginalized,” said Rima Olinger, managing director of North America partners for AWS.

View the issue:

https://online.flippingbook.com/view/831896355/

June 2022

40 Channel Milestones Over 40 Years

As CRN celebrates its 40th anniversary, here are the 40 milestones that have shaped the channel over the last four decades.

2022 Women of the Channel Awards

This year, CRN honors nearly 1400 women whose channel expertise and vision are deserving of recognition.

2022 Solution Provider 500

CRN‘s Solution Provider 500 ranks the top integrators, service providers and IT consultants in North America by services revenue.

COLUMNS

Faletra: After 40 Years The Future Looks Very Bright

The Channel Company Founding Partner Robert Faletra takes a look back at the 40-year history of CRN and why it’s been a strong survivor in a media field littered with casualties.

Burke: Robotic Process Automation Is A Channel Game-Changer

CPP Associates said the ROI on robotic process automation is nothing short of mind-boggling.

View the issue:

https://online.flippingbook.com/view/832325983/

May 2022 Special Issue

https://online.flippingbook.com/view/832501232/

April 2022

ServiceNow CEO Bill McDermott: 'We're In A Market Of One'

McDermott says his company is the workflow automation market leader, one that is on its way to becoming a $15 billion SaaS powerhouse by building a “platform of platforms.”

2022 Partner Program Guide

The CRN Partner Program Guide offers the information that solution and service providers need to evaluate IT vendors.

2022 Internet Of Things 50: The Need For IoT

Companies are seizing the IoT opportunity like never before. Here are 50 key IoT players across connectivity, hardware, industrial IoT, security and software.

The 2022 Tech Elite 250

The Tech Elite 250 is comprised of solution providers in the U.S. and Canada who have the highest level and most certifications from Amazon, Cisco, Dell, HPE, IBM, Microsoft, Oracle and VMware.

2022 Storage 100: Who's Got Your Backup?

Solution providers looking to place their bets on vendors with the most innovative technologies can turn to the Storage 100, which shines a spotlight on 2022's forward-thinkers.

10 New Smartphones And Tablets For Remote Work, Travel, And Telecommuting

For the worker-on-the-go, here are the top mobile devices that are reshaping how we interact with technology whether in the office or just waiting for the train.

COLUMNS

Burke: Missing Out On The Everything-As-A-Service Boom

CRN Executive Editor Steve Burke says some vendor channel programs and compensation models favor direct sales and are holding back the Everything-as-a-Service model.

Faletra: Prepping For The Recession And The Opportunity

The Channel Company Founding Partner Robert Faletra believes the chances of a recession are real, and they present an opportunity for strategic solution providers that plan accordingly.

View the issue:

https://online.flippingbook.com/view/831545941/

February 2022

Cisco CEO Chuck Robbins To Partners: 'When We Make Changes, We Make Them Together'

Robbins broke down the importance and opportunity around Cisco Plus, the company's strategy for delivering its portfolio as a service, in an interview with CRN.

Diversity, Equity And Inclusion In The Channel: Where We Are And Where We're Going

The channel is paying more attention to DEI and will soon have a new online Inclusive Leadership Network community to help companies share ideas about starting or expanding their own initiatives.

CEO Outlook 2022

CEOs across the IT industry see plenty of opportunity for sales growth for them and their partners in 2022.

2022 Channel Chiefs

Here are the executives who know how to create a partner program that delivers.

The 2022 Security 100

CRN's Security 100 examines 100 vendors across five market segments to guide solution providers on where to place their bets in a crowded market.

The 100 Coolest Cloud Computing Companies Of 2022

CRN's Cloud 100 list recognizes the coolest cloud computing companies in cloud infrastructure, monitoring and management, security, software and storage, highlighting 20 in each category.

The 2022 Managed Service Provider 500

The top managed service providers and consultants in North America

10 Storage Products That Are Tearing Up The Rule Book

These 10 startups have introduced their first hardware, software and cloud products, highlighting new ways to tackle a range of storage issues.

COLUMNS

Burke: CRN Celebrates 40 Years Of Being The Voice Of The Channel

The voice of the channel still rings loud and clear as CRN celebrates its 40th anniversary.

Faletra: The Metaverse Is The Next Challenge To Your Business Model

The Channel Company Founding Partner Robert Faletra says the Metaverse is coming and it is going to change everything, slowly at first and then all of a sudden.

View the issue:

https://online.flippingbook.com/view/832009105/

December 2021

The 2021 Tech Innovator Awards

From among 373 applicants, CRN staff selected products spanning the IT industry—including in cloud, infrastructure, security, software and devices—that offer both strong differentiation and major partner opportunities.

2021 Next-Gen Solution Provider Leaders

For the second year CRN honors those 40-years-old or younger who, through their drive and passion, have helped propel growth and strategic direction at their solution provider companies.

COLUMNS

Faletra: Is Dell Technologies' Channel At Risk?

The Channel Company's Robert Faletra says some recent decisions made by Dell Technologies are troubling and confusing for the company and the channel.

Burke: Why Optiv Is A Security Superstar

Optiv CEO Kevin Lynch has transformed the world's largest pure-play security solution provider into a next-generation security services co-innovation partner.

View the issue:

https://online.flippingbook.com/view/21204387/

November 2021 Special Issue

Edge Computing Security 'Explosion' Paves Way For New Channel Frontier

'It's about protecting that remote branch that didn't exist a year and a half ago,' said Computex Technology Solutions' Faisal Bhutto. 'If you have 4,000 employees, that's roughly 4,000 edges.'

10 Hot Edge Computing Devices And Services To Check Out Now

CRN breaks down the hottest edge computing devices that are making waves in 2021 and driving the ever-expanding edge market.

View the issue:

https://online.flippingbook.com/view/21934828/

October 2021

Intel's Gelsinger: AMD's Lead 'Over' With New Alder Lake, Sapphire Rapids CPUs

In an exclusive interview with CRN, Intel CEO Pat Gelsinger talks about how the upcoming Alder Lake and Sapphire Rapids CPUs will put the heat on AMD, his view of Arm's emergence in the data center and the importance of channel partners to Intel's future.

The 100 People You Don't Know But Should 2021

These unsung channel heroes helped keep their companies and channel partners on track amid the massive and sudden shift to work from home, accelerated timelines for digital transformation and global supply chain disruptions that kept everyone guessing.

2021 Annual Report Card

For the 36th year, solution providers scored vendors in 24 technology categories based on their performance in product innovation, support, partnership, and managed and cloud services.

Windows 11: Partners Say It's A 'Smart Play' By Microsoft To Put Security First

While stringent hardware requirements will prevent many PCs from installing Windows 11, the verdict from solution providers is that the security advantages of TPM 2.0 and newer processors are worth it. The third of a three-part series on Windows 11.

18 Red Hot IT Products And Services MSPs Need To See

CRN breaks down 18 of the hottest vendor products and services that were on display during XChange+ 2021 that channel partners and MSPs need to know.

Crowning Achievement: CRN's 2021 Triple Crown Award Winners

CRN recognizes the 45 solution providers that earned a spot on the Solution Provider 500, the Fast Growth 150 and the Tech Elite 250 lists this year with the annual Triple Crown honors.

COLUMNS

Faletra: The Black Hand Of The Channel Doesn't Work

The Channel Company's Executive Chairman Robert Faletra says the strategy of vendors telling partners not to talk to reporters is a losing one.

Burke: The Passing Of An Industry Icon

Bruce Geier, who passed away last month after a long battle with cancer, was a force in the channel community well beyond his herculean accomplishment building TIG into one of the top global solution providers

View the issue:

https://online.flippingbook.com/view/21429503/

August 2021

Cover Story: Strike First, Strike Hard: How George Kurtz Has Built CrowdStrike Into A Cybersecurity Powerhouse

CrowdStrike CEO George Kurtz is fired up as his elite endpoint protection platform continues to win over customers, and he's pulling no punches when it comes to taking on his rivals.

CrowdStrike CEO George Kurtz Takes Big Swings At Microsoft, SentinelOne

CrowdStrike CEO George Kurtz pulls no punches on why he believes his company has the edge over rivals Microsoft and SentinelOne.

The Top 100 Executives Of 2021

Here we present the CRN Top 100 Executives of 2021 list, the men and women who are setting the pace for the rest of the IT industry.

2021 Most Influential Executive Arvind Krishna: 'I Bleed Blue'

The progress Arvind Krishna has made in transforming IBM into a hybrid cloud-AI powerhouse with a renewed focus on partners, innovation and growth has made him the No. 1 Most Influential Executive on CRN's 2021 Top 100 Executives list.

Emerging IT Vendors You Need To Know In 2021

In our annual Emerging Vendors special report, CRN shines a spotlight on some of the most exciting channel-focused startup vendors with leading-edge technologies that are creating new opportunities for solution providers.

The 2021 Fast Growth 150

CRN's Fast Growth 150 ranks solution providers with gross annual sales of at least $1 million by their two-year growth rate.

COLUMNS

Faletra: Your Strategic Service Provider Brand Versus Cloud Suppliers

The Channel Company's Executive Chairman Robert Faletra says strategic service providers need to assess where cloud infrastructure market is headed and how they can grow and retain customers.

View the issue:

https://online.flippingbook.com/view/21747637/

Rule-Breakers: When It's Time To Say No To The Status Quo

We asked the honorees on our 2021 Women of the Channel list to tell us the one workplace rule they always break.

Women In Tech Need To 'Communicate The Conviction Of Their Ambition'

Neveen Awad, managing director and partner at Boston Consulting Group, describes how women often carve out different paths to success compared with their male counterparts and how women can overcome the challenges they face along the way.

View the issue:

https://online.flippingbook.com/view/21245003/

June 2021

NWN Carousel CEO Jim Sullivan On The 'Huge Advantage' Of Scaling Up In Cloud Communications

With the acquisition of Carousel Industries by NWN, the combined company will have offices around the U.S. with more than 6,000 customers and a $1 billion run rate.

Tech 10: 10 Hot Identity And Access Management Products You Need To Know About

These 10 identity and access management products secure internal and external identities, authenticate users through multi-factor authentication or single sign-on, and safeguard privileged accounts.

2021 Women of the Channel

This year, CRN honors over 1000 women whose channel expertise and vision are deserving of recognition.

2021 Solution Provider 500

CRN's Solution Provider 500 ranks the top integrators, service providers and IT consultants in North America by services revenue.

COLUMNS

Burke: The Everything-As-A-Service Sales Spread

CRN Executive Editor Steve Burke says the Everything-as-a-Service pay-per-use channel revolution Is here and Is here to stay.

Faletra: Why Strategic Service Providers Are Accelerating

The Channel Company's Executive Chairman Robert Faletra says the strategic service provider is coming into its own in a more visible and pronounced way because the market forces have helped the acceptance of it.

View the issue:

https://online.flippingbook.com/view/134709300/

April 2021

Tech 10: 10 Key Devices That Go Wherever The Workforce May Be

For mobile and remote workers, these laptops, tablets and accessories are ideal for a variety of situations.

2021 Storage 100: The Data Conversation Starts Here

How storage is deployed rests with solution providers assessing exactly what their customers are trying to accomplish. These 100 companies aim to be part of that discussion.

2021 Internet Of Things 50: The Bright Lights Of IoT

Solution providers are seizing the IoT opportunity like never before. Here are 50 key IoT players across connectivity, hardware, industrial IoT, security and software.

2021 Partner Program Guide

The Partner Program Guide offers the information solution providers need to evaluate IT vendors.

The 2021 Tech Elite 250

Our list of the highest-achieving solution providers in vendor certifications.

COLUMNS

Burke: Security Crisis -- Public Cloud Is Not A Security Cure-All

CRN Executive Editor Steve Burke says businesses are turning to solution providers to separate fact from fiction, particularly with regard to whether the public cloud is more secure than an on-premises IT environment.

Faletra: The Changing Distribution Landscape?

The Channel Company's Executive Chairman Robert Faletra says Tech Data's acquisition of Synnex wasn't born out of necessity, but of ambition.

View the issue:

https://online.flippingbook.com/view/82914640/

February 2021

Cover Story: IBM CEO Arvind Krishna's 'Deeply, Deeply Passionate' Plan To Make IBM-Red Hat No. 1 In Hybrid Cloud, AI

IBM Chairman and CEO Arvind Krishna is transforming the company into a hybrid cloud and AI powerhouse focused on a $1 trillion market opportunity with a plan to double its revenue with partners over the next three to five years.

CEO Outlook 2021

2020 was one for the history books. The CEOs who weighed in on our annual survey are now ready to write their company's next chapter.

2021 Channel Chiefs

Here are the executives who know how to create a partner program that delivers.

The 2021 Security 100

CRN's annual Security 100 list helps solution providers decide what technologies and vendors they should place their bets on in the crowded and complex security vendor market.

The 100 Coolest Cloud Computing Companies Of 2021

This year's Cloud 100 celebrates the coolest cloud computing players—20 in each category—providing cloud infrastructure, monitoring and management, security, software and storage.

The 2021 Managed Service Provider 500

CRN's Managed Service Provider 500 list recognizes the top technology providers and consultants whose forward-thinking approach to providing managed services is changing the landscape of the IT channel.

COLUMNS

Faletra: IBM's Channel Focus Gets A Boost

The Channel Company's Executive Chairman Robert Faletra says for the first time in years, IBM is getting its channel mojo back.

View the issue:

https://online.flippingbook.com/view/83002810/

December 2020

CRN's 2020 Products Of The Year

CRN editors compiled the top partner-friendly products and services that launched over the past year, then turned to solution providers to choose the winners.

2020 Tech Innovator Awards

The delivery of truly differentiated offerings that create opportunities for partners during this unprecedented period is the crowning achievement of our 2020 Tech Innovators.

2020 Next-Gen Solution Provider Leaders

Here we present CRN's inaugural Next-Gen Solution Provider Leaders, recognizing today's rising star solution provider executives, directors and managers who are poised to be tomorrow's channel leaders.

10 Ways To Boost Cloud Performance

From block-and-file storage to AI-powered document processing to Kubernetes enrichment for log management, here are 10 offerings from tech's dynamic cloud sector.

COLUMNS

Faletra: Can Intel Regain The Dominance It Once Enjoyed?

The Channel Company's Executive Chairman Robert Faletra wonders if Intel, still an incredible company with world-class products, can remain the biggest player in an increasingly-crowded semiconductor market.

View the issue:

https://online.flippingbook.com/view/65595219/

The 25 Hottest Edge Software Companies: 2020 Edge Computing 100

Here are the 25 software companies that are playing a critical role in executing real-time data analytics and machine learning for organizations of all sizes.

The 25 Hottest IoT And 5G Edge Services Companies: 2020 Edge Computing 100

Here are the top 25 companies specializing in 5G, IoT and edge services as wireless carriers race to build out their next-generation networks.

The 25 Hottest Edge Security Companies: 2020 Edge Computing 100

As digital transformation and COVID-19 rapidly shift users, devices, applications, services and data outside of the enterprise data center, here's a look at 25 vendors capable of securing the Edge of tomorrow.

The Intelligent Edge: How Smart Solution Providers Are Creating New Services Blueprints

The edge is where the action is. The opportunity -- which incorporates networking, security, IoT, power, storage and emerging technologies like 5G -- has solution providers in prime position to find new target markets and create a services blueprint for the future.

5G Technology: Fueling Innovation At The Edge

The wireless technology will fuel innovation at the edge by powering brand-new use cases, taking data collection and processing to new heights.

View the issue:

https://online.flippingbook.com/view/65864234/

October 2020 Special Issue

Lenovo Partners Seeing Huge Momentum In Device-As-A-Service Deals

Lenovo partners are seeing huge momentum with DaaS, which offers the ability to scale down the number of devices on demand -- not just scale up.

Innovation Delivered: Partners Hail Lenovo For 'Challenging The Norm'

Lenovo is looking to seize the moment with PCs considered essential amid widespread remote work and learning due to the COVID-19 pandemic.

Lenovo GM Kevin Hooper On 'Acquisition, Growth And Market Share Push'

Lenovo executive Kevin Hooper's Channel-First go-to-market strategy mandates that Lenovo leverage channel partners in as many deals as possible.

Lenovo's Matthew Zielinski: PC Group Staying On 'Growth Tear' By Going After New Customers With Partners

Lenovo president Matt Zielinski spoke with CRN about the PC demand outlook, the Chromebook supply situation and his message for partners.

Lenovo Partner Hub, Empower Incentive Have Partners Closing More Deals, More Quickly

“The real benefits [of Partner Hub] are going to come from our ability to aggregate big data, and then present it back out to our partners to really accelerate and change their sales motion,” said Lenovo's Jeff Taylor.

Boosting Partner Profitability: Lenovo's Steve Biondi Talks New Programs, Channel Enablement Ahead

Enhancements to the Lenovo Data Center Partner Program include additional rebates for exceeding growth targets and acquiring new accounts as well as customer 'talk tracks' to help sell in a virtual world.

Call To Action: How Lenovo Is Emphasizing Communication And Rewarding Partners For New Business

Lenovo channel chief Rob Cato spoke with CRN about Lenovo's Partner Stimulus Package, focus areas with solution providers during the COVID-19 crisis and the biggest investment areas going forward.

'Bold Commitment:' Lenovo's Channel-First Initiative Puts Partners Front And Center

“That Channel-First strategy not only has delivered, but it has also protected us through this last six months of lockdown and the effect of COVID-19,” said Kevin Hooper, president and general manager for Lenovo's North America Data Center Group/p>

View the issue:

https://online.flippingbook.com/view/768128421/

October 2020

Collecting, preparing, managing and analyzing ever-growing volumes of data continues to be a challenge for business and organizations. Here are 10 tools and platforms for gaining value from big data.

The 100 People You Don't Know But Should

CRN's 100 People You Don't Know But Should spotlights some of the channel's best and brightest people who may not be as visible as some channel chiefs or CEOs but are just as important to the partner community.

2020 Annual Report Card

For the 35th year, solution providers scored vendors in 24 technology categories based on their performance in product innovation, support, partnership, and managed and cloud services.

Cloud Partner Programs Guide

CRN's annual Cloud Partner Program Guide provides partners with the insight needed to navigate through the crowded cloud landscape and identify the vendors that best meet the needs of their customers.

Top Of The Mountain: CRN's 2020 Triple Crown Award Winners

Here are 44 solution providers who have continued to thrive during a challenging year, building on their track records of rapid growth and wide-ranging technology expertise.

COLUMNS

Burke: iCorps' IT Leadership On Demand A 'Life-Saver' For SMB Customers Starving For IT Insight

The IT Leadership on Demand Service focuses on strategic planning with the aim of driving strategic competitive business advantages for customers.

Faletra: Should You Prepare For A Protracted Downturn?

The Channel Company's Executive Chairman Robert Faletra says while the technology industry has been spared the worst of post-pandemic economic downturn, that won't remain the case for long.

View the issue:

https://online.flippingbook.com/view/767648720/

August 2020

The Top 100 Executives Of 2020

Here we present the CRN Top 100 Executives of 2020 list, the men and women who are setting the pace for the rest of the IT industry.

The Next Generation: 10 Hardware Products Enabling Modern Data Centers

These 10 new server, storage and hyperconverged infrastructure platforms are taking today's data centers into the future.

The Best CEO Quotes Of 2020 (So Far)

Here are the most important quotes from tech's biggest leaders that best encapsulate the important happenings and trends of 2020 so far.

Emerging IT Vendors You Need To Know In 2020

In our annual Emerging Vendors special report, CRN shines a light on some of the most exciting new channel-focused vendors helping create new solutions for business and opportunity for solution providers.

The 2020 Fast Growth 150

CRN's Fast Growth 150 ranks solution providers with gross annual sales of at least $1 million by their two-year growth rate.

COLUMNS

Faletra: Preparing For A Permanently Changed Solution Sale

The Channel Company's Executive Chairman Robert Faletra says in a post-coronavirus world, there are two new and likely environments many businesses will find themselves in.

View the issue:

https://online.flippingbook.com/view/21305350/

July 2020 - Special Issue

2020 Rising Female Stars: Solution Provider Keys To Success For 2020

What advice do our Rising Female Stars have for their solution providers? Here's what a few of them had to say about defining value, selling with empathy and focusing on hot technologies like 5G, artificial intelligence and hybrid cloud.

2020 Rising Female Stars: How To Turn 'Challenges' Into 'Opportunities' For Positive Change

Mettacool co-founder Natalie Eicher spoke with CRN about a number of issues facing women in the workplace today, from insecurities about networking and self-promotion to the impacts of the “Me Too” movement.

View the issue:

https://online.flippingbook.com/view/21167615/

June 2020

10 Cloud Security Services You Need To Know About

These 10 consulting and managed service bundles help businesses plan safe migrations to the cloud, identify and mitigate significant cloud-borne threats, and prepare for and respond to cloud breaches.

Women Of The Channel 2020: Leading Fearlessly In A Time Of Crisis

The COVID-19 pandemic has called on female executives to do the one thing that many have avoided in their professional careers: get personal.

2020 Women of the Channel Awards

This year, CRN honors more than 900 women whose channel expertise and vision are deserving of recognition.

2020 Solution Provider 500

CRN's Solution Provider 500 ranks the top integrators, service providers and IT consultants in North America by services revenue.

Rising To The Occasion: The 2020 Solution Provider 500

The COVID-19 pandemic has upended the global economy and the IT industry. For the channel, it's no longer business as usual but the companies on this year's CRN Solution Provider 500 list are meeting the new challenges head-on.

COLUMNS

Faletra: The Coronavirus And 5G Technology, A Perfect Match

The Channel Company's Executive Chairman Robert Faletra says the stars are lined up to result in an extremely rapid movement toward a completely different business environment centered around remote instant information access.

Burke: Future Shock -- COVID-19 Channel Upheaval

CRN's Steve Burke says the old channel playbook has been thrown out the window.

View the issue:

https://online.flippingbook.com/view/21020015/

May 2020 - Special Issue

Michael Dell On The Impact Of Coronavirus, VMware Integration And Networking Share Gains

Michael Dell spoke with CRN about why now is the best time to be a Dell Technologies partner.

5 Ways Dell Technologies Partners 'Are Going To Win More' With PowerStore

In an interview with CRN, 20-year Dell EMC veteran Scott Millard breaks down everything Dell Technologies is bringing to the table with PowerStore.

Dell's Next-Generation Storage Platform Is Here: PowerStore Is 'Untouchable'

PowerStore is the 'absolute right platform for what customers need now and will need through the data era,' says Dell Technologies' Caitlin Gordon.

Bill Scannell: Why Dell Technologies 'Stands To Benefit The Most' In a Data-Driven, Multi-Cloud World

In an interview with CRN, Dell Technologies President Bill Scannell explains why Dell Technologies -- along with its partners -- will shine over the next decade.

Dell Channel Chief Mullen On Coronavirus Crisis: 'This Is A Time When Partners Really Shine'

Dell Technologies partners are proving they have the unique skill sets and vertical industry expertise to help their customers run their business.

3 Ways Dell Technologies Is 'Raising The Bar' Across Its Partner Program

Dell channel VP Darren Sullivan discusses why the Dell Technologies Partner Program is now better than ever.

10 Hot Dell Technologies Infrastructure And PC Products

These 10 products are paving the way for digital transformation and the new work-at-home workforce.

Dell Channel Chief: Dell Will Come Out Of Coronavirus Pandemic 'Stronger And More Effective Than Ever'

Dell Channel Chief Joyce Mullen talks about helping partners today and empowering them for tomorrow.

View the issue:

https://online.flippingbook.com/view/21124565/

April 2020

Tech Ten: 10 Hot Devices For Your Mobile Work Setup

Here are 10 devices that can play a starring role in a mobile work setup for your home office.

2020 Partner Program Guide

The 2020 Partner Program Guide is based on detailed applications submitted by 238 vendors, outlining all aspects of their partner programs.

2020 Internet Of Things 50: Realizing The Promise Of IoT

For solution providers just getting started in IoT and those who have already established businesses in the field, CRN presents the 50 coolest IoT companies of the year across connectivity, hardware, industrial IoT, security and software.

The Heartbeat Of Business: The 2020 CRN Storage 100

The Storage 100 highlights the best, brightest, and most innovative providers of storage technology for solution providers.

The 2020 Tech Elite 250

The Tech Elite 250 is comprised of solution providers in the U.S. and Canada who have the highest level and most certifications from Amazon, Cisco, Dell, Google, HPE, IBM, Juniper, Microsoft, NetApp, Nutanix, Oracle, Pure Storage and VMware.

COLUMNS

Faletra: These Changes Create An Opportunity We've Not Seen Before

The Channel Company's Executive Chairman Robert Faletra believes that the challenge of the coronavirus lends an business opportunity for solution providers.

Burke: Google's Alpha Bet: Why Google Cloud Is The Real Deal

Thomas Kurian has brought order to what was a less-than-partner-friendly approach to the cloud market by Google Cloud.

View the issue:

https://online.flippingbook.com/view/841187990/

February 2020

5 Big Things To Know About IBM's New CEO Arvind Krishna

Despite being far less known than current IBM CEO Virginia Rometty, Krishna will bring a powerful combination of technological and operational experience to the role, according to the company.

Cover Story: CEO Outlook 2020

CRN asked 79 of the industry's top CEOs five questions on their views for how 2020 will shape up.

Channel Chiefs

Here are the executives who know how to create a partner program that delivers.

Security 100

CRN's Security 100 list helps solution providers decide what technologies and vendors they should place their bets on in the crowded and complex security vendor market.

Cloud 100

The 2020 installment of CRN's 100 Coolest Cloud Computing companies highlights the best of the best in cloud infrastructure, management, security, software, and storage.

MSP 500

The Top Managed Service Providers and Consultants in North America

COLUMNS

Faletra: Defending High-Tech And Its Billionaire Entrepreneurs

In response to Rep. Alexandria Ocasio Cortez's recent comments on billionaires, The Channel Company's Executive Chairman Robert Faletra wants to point out a few things that she seems to be forgetting.

Burke: CPP Associates Is Betting Big On The Future

The hybrid cloud solution provider is making a $1 million investment over the next five years to bring a wide range of breakthrough artificial intelligence data solutions to customers.

View the issue:

https://online.flippingbook.com/view/21873200/

December 2019

Products of the Year

CRN editors looked at the best new products and major updates of 2019 and then turned to solution providers to choose the winners based on technology, revenue and profit opportunities, and customer demand.

Tech Innovators

The ability to empower solution providers with truly differentiated offerings is the crowning achievement of our Tech Innovator winners and finalists.

Next-Gen 250

The Next Gen 250 highlights the solution providers that have developed skills, solutions and services around the leading-edge technologies that are driving the IT industry today.

The 10 tools making noise in the cloud security market have emphasized the safe migration of applications and data, maintaining compliance in the public cloud, and correlating threat activity in disparate clouds.

COLUMNS

Faletra: What Supplier Consolidation Might Mean To Your Business

The Channel Company's Executive Chairman Robert Faletra says that solution providers are in a better position if they have alternatives to suppliers.

Burke: Andy Jassy's 'Super Strategic' Partner Bet

AWS CEO Andy Jassy is touting a 'new generation' of systems integrations that have 'embraced the cloud and invested very deeply.'

October 2019

2019 Annual Report Card

For the 34th year, solution providers scored vendors in 23 product categories based on their performance in product innovation, support, partnership, and managed and cloud services.

2019 Cloud Partner Programs Guide

CRN's annual Cloud Partner Program Guide provides partners with the insight needed to navigate through the crowded cloud landscape and identify the vendors that best meet the needs of their customers.

The 100 People You Don't Know But Should

CRN spotlights some of the channel's best and brightest people who may not be as visible as some channel chiefs or CEOs but are just as important to the partner community.

Going Above And Beyond: CRN's 2019 Triple Crown Award Winners

CRN assembles a number of lists and rankings throughout the year, including the Solution Provider 500, the Fast Growth 150 and the Tech Elite 250. CRN recognizes the 47 solution providers that earned a spot on all three lists this year with the annual Triple Crown honors.

Tech 10: Fulfilling The Big Promises Of Big Data In The Cloud

Here are ten new software offerings for improving business user and application access to rapidly expanding cloud data sources.

COLUMNS

Faletra: Should You Bet Your Storage Practice On Pure Storage?

The Channel Company's Executive Chairman Robert Faletra wonders if Pure Storage considers the channel a strategic partner in the way rivals Dell and HPE do.

Burke: NWN's Secret Weapon

Why a homegrown NWN experience management platform is a digital transformation game-changer.

August 2019

The 10 Coolest Flash Storage And SSD Technologies Of 2019 (So Far)

CRN looks at 10 new all-flash arrays and SSDs from leading storage vendors including Violin Systems and IBM.

The Top 100 IT Executives Of 2019

We present the CRN Top 100 Executives of 2019 list, the men and women who are setting the pace for the rest of the IT industry.

Emerging IT Vendors You Need To Know In 2019

In our annual Emerging Vendors special report, CRN shines a light on some of the most exciting new channel-focused vendors helping create opportunity for solution providers.

The 2019 Fast Growth 150

CRN's Fast Growth 150 ranks solution providers with gross annual sales of at least $1 million by their two-year growth rate.

COLUMNS

Faletra: Amazon And What It Takes To Be A Great Channel Chief

The Channel Company's Executive Chairman Robert Faletra gives his thoughts to Amazon's new channel chief on what has made some of the truly great channel leaders in the past so good.

June 2019

2019 Women of the Channel

This year, CRN honors over 700 women whose channel expertise and vision are deserving of recognition.

2019 Solution Provider 500

The Solution Provider 500 is our annual listing of the top solution provider organizations in North America, ranked by revenue.

Lenovo's New ThinkBook, ThinkCentre Nano Prove The Power Of Innovation

Lenovo has launched a new notebook brand as well as a new product category within the desktop PC market.

Tech 10: Getting Smart About Advanced Threat Protection

These 10 offerings thwart the most insidious ransomware and zero-day threats through sandboxing, shared intelligence and automated processes.

COLUMNS

Faletra: Vendor Talk Of Partner Engagement Needs To Be Flipped

When the channel matters to a vendor's CEO, it matters to everyone inside the organization.

Burke: How Champions Of Change Became An HPE Greenlake Superstar

Champions of Change, an Australian strategic service provider, delivered the first GreenLake Flex Capacity 3.0 channel pay-per-use deal.

April 2019

2019 Partner Program Guide

The 2019 Partner Program Guide offers the information solution providers need to evaluate IT vendors they work with or are considering working with. The guide is based on detailed applications submitted by over 270 vendors, outlining all aspects of their partner programs.

2019 Internet Of Things 50: IoT's Next Chapter

The need for solution providers to guide companies through IoT projects—from the procurement of hardware and sensors to the monitoring and management of new systems—is greater than ever before. Here are CRN's picks for the 50 coolest IoT companies of the year that solution providers can look to for a leg up.

2019 Tech Elite 250

The Tech Elite 250 is comprised of solution providers in the U.S. and Canada who have the highest level and most certifications from Amazon, Cisco, Dell, HPE, Oracle and VMware.

Tech Ten: 10 Coolest Business-Friendly Devices For Mobile Workers

Business-friendly smartphones, portable laptops, tablets and a variety of accessories make mobility a gamechanger in any business environment.

COLUMNS

Faletra: Politics, The Cloud, Edge And Creative Destruction

The Channel Company's Executive Chairman Robert Faletra cautions against listening to politicians when they talk about the evils of high-tech.

Burke: The True Cost Of Public Cloud

CRN's Steve Burke says it's vital for companies to have trusted cloud advisers to determine which solution will provide the most value.

February 2019

Channel Chiefs

Our 2019 Channel Chief honorees are selected by CRN's editorial staff on the basis of their professional achievements, standing in the industry, dedication to the channel partner community and strategies for driving future growth and innovation.

Cloud 100

The 2019 installment of CRN's 100 Coolest Cloud Computing Vendors highlights the best of the best in cloud infrastructure, security, software, platforms and storage.

Security 100

In its fourth year, CRN's annual Security 100 gives solution providers a clear path to navigate the fast-growing security vendor market.

MSP 500

CRN's Managed Service Provider 500 list recognizes the top technology providers and consultants in North America whose forward-thinking approach to providing managed services is changing the landscape of the IT channel.

2019 Data Center 50 (Online-only)

CRN's Data Center 50 list highlights the key companies evolving and powering today's data centers through innovative offerings.

10 Software-Defined Storage Pioneers That Are Shaking Things Up

Here are 10 software-defined storage offerings that can help customers see lower costs and increased ﬂexibility.

COLUMNS

Faletra: Taking Down Amazon's Public Cloud Business

The Channel Company's Executive Chairman Robert Faletra says the battle for supremacy in the cloud market continues to heat up.

Burke: Strategic Service Providers See Astronomical Growth Through Recurring Revenue

CRN's Steve Burke highlights the off-the-charts recurring revenue growth being driven by strategic service providers.

December 2018

CRN's 2018 Products Of The Year

CRN editors looked at the best new products and major updates of 2018 and then turned to solution providers to choose the winners based on technology, revenue and profit opportunities, and customer demand.

2018 Tech Innovators Awards

The ability to translate a future-facing view of technology into reality today is the crowning achievement of this year's Tech Innovator winners.

2018 Next-Gen 250

The Next Gen 250 list recognizes standout IT solution providers who have successfully transformed their businesses to meet the demands of emerging technologies such as cloud computing, IoT, virtualization, mobility, business analytics and business intelligence.

COLUMNS

Faletra: Why Doesn't Anyone Talk About IBM Anymore?

The Channel Company's Executive Chairman Robert Faletra covered IBM during the 1980s, and now he wonders why the technology giant no longer wants to step to the forefront and be part of the conversation.

October 2018

100 People You Don't Know But Should 2018

CRN salutes the under-the-radar players that make sure solution provider partnerships thrive and channel business gets done.

2018 Annual Report Card

For the 33rd year, solution providers scored vendors in 24 product categories based on their performance in product innovation, support and partnership.

Cloud Partner Programs Guide

CRN's annual Cloud Partner Program Guide provides partners with the insight needed to navigate through the crowded cloud vendor landscape and identify the vendors that best meet the needs of their customers.

CRN's 2018 Triple Crown Award Winners

CRN recognizes the 46 organizations that earned a spot on all three of our solution provider lists this year with the annual Triple Crown honors.

Tech 10: Wrestling With The Big(ger) Data Challenge

CRN highlights 10 new software offerings for managing and analyzing data that's moving faster and exploding in volume.

COLUMNS

Faletra: The Economy Is Humming -- So Let The Good Times Roll

Now is the time for strategic solution providers to double down on sales and execution.

August 2018

2018 Network Connectivity Partner Program Guide

CRN's 2018 Network Connectivity Services Partner Program Guide is meant to highlight some of the industry's leading portfolios of telecom, cloud and connectivity offerings.

2018 Emerging Vendors

CRN shines a light on some of the most exciting new channel-focused vendors helping create new solutions for business and opportunity for solution providers.

The 2018 Fast Growth 150

CRN's 2018 Fast Growth 150 ranks solution providers with gross annual sales of at least $1 million by their two-year growth rate.

The 10 Top Hyper-Converged Platforms Of 2018 (So Far)

Hyper-converged infrastructure (HCI) combines storage, computing, networking and software into a single system aimed at reducing complexity and boosting scalability.

COLUMNS

Faletra: Back To The Future With Channel Structure--Not Really

For the vendor and partner community alike, it's important to gauge where the market is headed to react and capitalize on the future structure.

June 2018

2018 Women of the Channel

This year, CRN honors more than 600 women whose channel expertise and vision are deserving of recognition.

2018 Solution Provider 500

CRN's Solution Provider 500 ranks the top integrators, service providers and IT consultants in North America by services revenue.

COLUMNS

Robert Faletra: Using IT As A Competitive Sales Weapon

Solution providers have the advantage of understanding IT threats and should use it when appropriate as a selling technique.

April 2018

FEATURES

Cover Story: Riding The SD-WAN Rocket Ship

When a technology can completely change the way a business operates, you'd better get on board. Solution providers are calling SD-WAN the biggest sales driver in almost two decades.

Tech 10: Cool Devices For A Mobile Workforce

CRN rounds up 10 of the latest devices -- from business-friendly smartphones to portable and always-connected laptops and tablets to accessories -- for getting the job done.

2018 Partner Program Guide

The 2018 Partner Program Guide is based on detailed applications submitted by over 270 vendors, outlining all aspects of their partner programs.

The 2018 Security 100

In its third year, CRN's annual Security 100 gives solution providers a clear path to navigate the fast-growing security vendor market.

MSSP Superstar Michael Knight: Slow And Steady Wins The Managed Security Services Race

Encore Technology Group President and CTO Michael Knight said partners looking to break into the MSSP space should examine where their talent is today, what they can do that's repeatable, and what they have to change.

2018 Internet Of Things 50

CRN presents the 2018 Internet Of Things 50, a list of the coolest vendors in security, hardware, industrial IoT, and software and services.

The 2018 Tech Elite 250

The Tech Elite 250 is comprised of solution providers who have the highest level and most certifications from the industry's leading vendors.

COLUMNS

Faletra: Advancing Technology Threatens Public Cloud And Stymies Politicians

Hyper-converged infrastructure and software-defined networking are changing the cloud dynamics. On-premises may actually prove to be more cost-effective than pure public cloud deployments.

Burke: Tips From A Channel Jedi Master

LogicMonitor's David Powell shares his practical guide for channel success.

February 2018

The 100 Coolest Cloud Computing Vendors Of 2018

The 2018 installment of CRN's 100 Coolest Cloud Computing Vendors highlights the best of the best in cloud infrastructure, platforms and development, security, storage and software.

The 2018 Managed Service Provider 500

CRN again assembles the Managed Service Provider 500, an annual list that recognizes North American solution providers with cutting-edge approaches to delivering managed services.

The 2018 Data Center 100

The data center evolution shows no signs of slowing down, but how do solution providers quickly adapt their business models and keep an eye out for innovation at the same time? That's where the Data Center 100 list can help.

2018 Channel Chiefs

Check out the 2018 Channel Chiefs, CRN's annual list of the top channel executives, sortable by name or company.

Cloud Cornerstones: 19 New Ways To Connect Storage To AWS

The cloud is becoming an ever-more important part of the definition of data protection, disaster recovery and archiving, and these 19 vendors are helping partners utilize AWS in their storage infrastructures.

COLUMNS

Faletra: Tim Cook's Apple Looks A Lot Different Than Steve Jobs'

In the Tim Cook era, Apple has pivoted from a product-driven company with excellent marketing to a marketing-driven company with mediocre products.

Burke: Spectre And Meltdown: Rating The Vendors

Google, Cisco, Intel and Red Hat came out on top in a CRN survey of vendor response to the Spectre and Meltdown vulnerabilities.

December 2017

Innovating Around The Edge: 5 Sharp Companies Making Their Mark

CRN highlights five companies that are creating innovative and unique edge computing offerings for partners and customers.

CRN's 2017 Products Of The Year

For this year's Products Of The Year, CRN editors selected five product finalists among 20 top technology categories for the IT channel. After a survey that netted more than 4,000 responses, here are the hot products that stood out from the rest in 2017.

2017 Internet Of Things 50

For solution providers just getting into the IoT arena to those already building their business around the technology, here is CRN’s list of the 50 coolest companies in security, hardware, industrial IoT, and software and services.

The 2017 Tech Innovator Awards

The ability to translate a future-facing view of technology into reality today is the crowning achievement of this year's Tech Innovator winners. Here's who has provided that spark this year.

2017 Storage Emerging Vendors

As part of CRN's Emerging Vendors for 2017, here are 30 hot storage startups, founded in 2011 or later, that solution providers should be aware of.

2017 Next Gen 250

The Next Gen 250 list recognizes standout IT solution providers who have successfully transformed their businesses to meet the demands of emerging technologies.

COLUMNS

Faletra: 2018 Forecast: Prepare For A Tech Acquisition Blizzard

With increasing private equity interest and corporate tax cuts in sight, 2018 is shaping up to be a record year on the M&A front in tech.

Lessons In Leadership: Meg Whitman Saved HP And HPE

For HP And HPE partners, there's no question who is responsible one of the all-time great turnarounds in corporate history - Meg Whitman.

October 2017

2017 Annual Report Card

For the 32nd year, solution providers scored vendors in 22 product categories based on their performance in product innovation, support and partnership.

On Top Of The Clouds

CRN's annual Cloud Partner Program Guide provides partners with the insight needed to navigate through the crowded cloud vendor landscape and identify the vendors that best meet the needs of their customers.

Emerging Vendors

Hot startups in even hotter technologies: networking/VoIP and the Internet of Things.

Three Steps Ahead: CRN's 2017 Triple Crown Award Winners

CRN assembles a number of lists and rankings throughout the year, including the Solution Provider 500, the Fast Growth 150 and the Tech Elite 250. CRN recognizes the 40 solution providers that earned a spot on all three lists this year with the annual Triple Crown honors.

100 People You Don't Know But Should

CRN salutes the under-the-radar players that make sure solution provider partnerships thrive and channel business gets done.

Tech 10: Big Doings In Big Data

CRN highlights 10 offerings and industry developments that provide new ways to manage and analyze big data.

COLUMNS

Faletra: Beating Up On Market Development Funds

With the pace of change in the market and the need to cut costs and drive revenue, MDF scrutiny is going to increase.

Burke: IoT Is Taking Off: But You Must Make The Big Investments To Score

All of the recent paradigm shifts in IT pale in comparison to the Internet of Things, a transformation that requires solution providers to make significant investments in order to reap the rewards.

August 2017

Channel Icon Frank Vitagliano To Be Inducted Into IT Hall Of Fame

Vitagliano, a channel legend and current CEO of Computex, will accept the honor at The Channel Company's XChange 2017 conference being held next month in Orlando, Fla.

Cover Story: All The Right Moves: Michael Dell Leads The CRN 2017 Top 100 Executives Pack

Dell Technologies CEO Michael Dell's agility, adaptability and willingness to buck the status quo put him at the top of the class in this year's Top 100 Executives.

The Top 100 Executives Of 2017

Here we present the CRN Top 100 Executives of 2017 list, the fastest-moving executives in a market moving at warp speed.

Network Connectivity Partner Programs

CRN's 2017 Network Connectivity Services Partner Program Guide is meant to highlight some of the industry's leading portfolios of telecom, cloud and connectivity offerings. It also recognizes those industry players who seem ready, willing and able to help partners wrap their arms around IT-Telecom convergence, and the many moving parts it entails.

2017 Emerging Vendors

In the IT industry, shattering the status quo is the status quo. While big vendors generate their share of ground-breaking products, startups are a major driver of innovation and are changing the rules of the game.

The Power Of Marketing

The 2017 Fast Growth 250 shows the channel in a state of serious flux, fueled by cloud computing, IoT, mobility and other disruptive technologies.

The 2017 Fast Growth 150

The Fast Growth 150 is CRN's annual ranking of the channel's most rapidly expanding solution providers, technology integrators, IT consultants and strategic service providers in North America. The list requires companies report gross sales of at least $1 million, and then ranks them according to their two-year growth rate.

COLUMNS

Linksys has long been known has a company capable of delivering enterprise-class products at SMB prices, but since being acquired by Belkin, it has significantly upped its investments in technology innovation and partner program improvement.

Faletra: Is Marketing A Make Or Buy Decision?

The business of selling technology is evolving so rapidly that SSPs have to invest in how they convey their brand in the market. But that proposes a legitimate question: Are you better off buying your marketing from experts or assembling an in-house team?

June 2017

2017 Women of the Channel

This year, CRN honors more than 500 women whose channel expertise and vision are deserving of recognition.

Solution Provider 500

The Solution Provider 500 is our annual listing of the top solution provider organizations in North America, ranked by revenue.

2017 Emerging Vendors

While big vendors generate their share of ground-breaking products, startups are a major driver of innovation and are changing the rules of the game.

COLUMNS

Faletra: What Is High-Tech's Obligation In The War On Terror?

With the acceleration in terrorist attacks around the world, it can't be long before the debate escalates and pressure rises on those companies whose products and services are being used to plan, communicate and execute these horrendous crimes against innocent people.

Burke: The Digital Marketing Era: Why It's Do-Or-Die Time For The Channel

Solution providers that are not arming themselves with digital marketing demand generation expertise are at a serious risk of losing customers, and they might not even realize it until it's too late.

April 2017

Partner Program Guide

The 2017 Partner Program Guide is based on detailed applications submitted by over 250 vendors, outlining all aspects of their partner programs.

The Security 100

The 2017 installment of CRN's Security 100 highlights the best of the best in network security, SIEM and threat detection, web, email and application security, and identity management and data protection.

Sharpening Their Skills: The Tech Elite 250

The Tech Elite 250 is comprised of solution providers in the U.S. and Canada who have the highest partner levels from Amazon, Cisco, Google, HPE, IBM, Intel, Microsoft, Trend Micro and VMware. Here is a sampling of that list.

Tech 10: Cool Products To Transform The Modern Workplace Into A Mobile One

This month's Tech 10 looks at the latest mobile devices that are carving big roles in the enterprise.

COLUMNS

Faletra: Using Marketing To Get To The 'As A Service' End Game

Strategic service providers can't afford to be viewed as old-school on-premise infrastructure players. Rebuilding the legacy brand to present a leadership player capable of bringing the customer to the new compute model is the key first step to the 'as a service' end game.

Burke: Welcome To The Rise Of The Strategic Service Provider Business

The strategic service provider shift is forcing cloud services companies, including Google, to step up to the plate with new channel models.

February 2017

Q&A: KKR's Herald Chen On Why Private Equity Sees The Channel As A 'Great Value Proposition'

KKR executive Herald Chen spoke with CRN about why the opportunity is greater than ever for an investment in a solution provider company like Optiv Security and what value private equity in turn can bring to the channel.

Channel Chiefs 2017

Here we present the 2017 Channel Chiefs, CRN's annual list of the top channel executives and what they've been doing to ready their channel programs for 2017.

The 100 Coolest Cloud Computing Vendors Of 2017

The 2017 installment of CRN's 100 Coolest Cloud Computing Vendors highlights the best of the best in cloud infrastructure, platforms and development, security, storage and software.

Data Center 100

Broken into five categories, the DC 100 highlights the providers that represent their respective fields with a combination of innovation, market share, and technology and channel capabilities.

Managed Service Provider 500

CRN's fourth annual Managed Service Provider 500 recognizes recognizes North American solution providers with cutting-edge approaches to delivering managed services.

Tech 10: Crossing The Chasm From Consumer Storage To Business

CRN looks at 10 products that combine the ease of use expected in consumer storage devices with the robust reliability and functionality demanded of business-class storage devices.

COLUMNS

Faletra; Why It's Time For Tim Cook To Step Down

While no one expected Tim Cook to be Steve Jobs, the expectation was that he would surround himself with people who would make up for his weaknesses in the visionary areas that Jobs excelled at.

Burke: There's Never Been A Better Time To Invest In The Channel

Tech vendors can learn a lot from the massive bets private equity firms are placing on the channel - an all-time high at more than $25 billion in 2016.

December 2016

Products Of The Year

For this year's Products of the Year, CRN editors selected five finalists among 17 technology categories and then asked solution providers to rate the products to determine a winner. Here are the hot products that stood out from the rest in 2016.

The Internet Of Things 50

The Internet of Things market is quickly moving beyond smart homes and automated cars to the enterprise and verticals where solution providers play a big role. And many vendors across the spectrum are actively looking for partners to customize their offerings and deliver innovative solutions.

Tech Innovator Awards

The 2016 Tech Innovator Awards honor vendors in 28 categories, with the winners and finalists chosen from among 230 applicants in areas ranging from cloud to security to networking to mobile.

Faces Of The 2016 Next-Gen 250

Here we present 25 companies on CRN's 2016 Next-Gen 250 list, a spotlight shined on 250 solution providers born since 2000.

The Enterprise App Awards

CRN editors honor 14 apps that are pushing forward innovation in enterprise mobility.

COLUMNS

Faletra: Dell's Marius Haas: This Guy Can Work A Crowd

The Channel Company has been running events for more than 25 years, yet it's still impressive to see a vendor executive with the capacity to network with the crowd and actually use an event to foster relationships with solution providers.

Burke: Channel 2017: 'Don't Guess. Assess The Mess.'

Placing a sharp focus on a no-holds-barred unique consulting methodology is key to the success of any and all solution providers in 2017.

October 2016

Tech 10: The Big Data Software Boom

Here are 10 products and solutions that provide new ways for solution providers to manage and analyze the explosion of big data

100 People You Don't Know But Should

CRN salutes the under-the-radar players that make sure solution provider partnerships thrive and channel business gets done.

2016 Annual Report Card

The competition was as heated as ever in CRN's 2016 Annual Report Card with industry leaders continuing to dominate some product categories and new vendors making their marks in others. See how solution providers graded their vendor partners on product innovation, support and partnership.

IT Hall Of Fame: How Jim Dixon Put Customers First And Turned CompuCom Into A Services Giant

Jim Dixon transformed CompuCom from selling PCs in retail stores to a $2.2 billion reccuring revenue behemoth thanks to a conservative cost structure, tight-knit client relationships and fierce employee loyalty.

Cloud Partner Programs Guide

Innovative cloud partner programs are key to solution provider success. These vendors are addressing today's pain points.

Rising To The Challenge: CRN's 2016 Triple Crown Award Winners

CRN assembles a number of lists and rankings throughout the year, including the Solution Provider 500, the Fast Growth 150 and the Tech Elite 250. CRN recognizes the 48 solution providers that earned a spot on all three lists this year with the third-annual Triple Crown honors.

COLUMNS

Faletra: Distribution Consolidation And The Expansion Of Distribution

The recent news that Tech Data would acquire Avnet's Technology Solutions business comes on the heels of Ingram Micro's announced sale of its entire business to a China-based logistics conglomerate.

Burke: A Secure Future

When a major insurance provider had millions of dollars in policies put at risk because its IT department did not have a rigorous SOC 2 compliance report, it turned to one of the top MSPs in the Midwest.

August 2016

Why App Development Is The Key To Unlocking The IoT Vault

Solution providers are staffing up with application developers, aiming to monetize on the Internet of Things with packaged solutions for vertical industries.

Tech 10: Making 'Software-Defined' A Reality

CRN looks at 10 technologies that are advancing the still-elusive, but someday-to-be-ubiquitous, software-defined data center.

2016 Emerging Vendors

Each year, CRN looks at the hot IT startups making an impact on the channel.

The Top 100 Executives Of 2016

Here we present the CRN Top 100 Executives of 2016 list, the fastest-moving executives in a market moving at warp speed.

2016 Network Connectivity Partner Programs Guide

The industry's leading portfolios of telecom, cloud and connectivity offerings.

2016 Fast Growth 150

The Fast Growth 150 is CRN's annual ranking of the fastest growing solution providers, resellers, technology integrators and IT consultants in North America.

2016 Partner Marketing Guide

CRN's 2016 CRN Partner Marketing Guide lists marketing programs that vendors offer to VARs, providing support, services and capabilities to the indirect IT channel.

2016 Emerging Vendors: The Innovation Drivers

In the IT industry, shattering the status quo is the status quo. While big vendors generate their share of ground-breaking products, startups are a major driver of innovation and are changing the rules of the game.

Connectivity: The Great Cloud Services Enabler

Cloud services offer the promise of lucrative, monthly recurring revenue, but solution providers always need to be able to offer a full IT solution to their customers. To that end, connectivity services are critical: Customers can't reach the cloud without it.

COLUMNS

Burke: Why NWN Is All Business When It Comes To The Cloud

NWN recently launched a new entity, NCapital, aimed at providing the financial muscle and technology know-how for customers to move to the cloud without making capital expenditures.

Faletra: The Time Is Now For Tim Cook To Think Different

Five years into his reign at the helm of Apple, CEO Tim Cook and the Apple board need to start "thinking different" about the channel and the company's entire approach to the market.

June 2016

The 2016 Solution Provider 500

The Solution Provider 500 is our annual listing of the top solution provider organizations in North America, ranked by revenue.

Growth Engine: The 2016 Solution Provider 500

The channel is undergoing a significant evolution as VARs and solution providers morph into strategic service providers: independent trusted technology consultants that drive business outcomes with an emphasis on cloud and managed services delivered through a recurring revenue model.

2016 Women of the Channel

This year, CRN honors nearly 500 women whose channel expertise and vision are deserving of recognition.

Mind The Gap: Execs Say Gender Gap In IT Is Closing, But Work Isn't Done Yet

The gender gap within the IT industry is narrowing. Women of the Channel executives say that mentoring, creating a personal brand, and promoting a flexible office environment will help close the gap for good.

COLUMNS

Burke: Sales-Engaged: HPE's Whitman Leads The Class Of CEO Sales Communicators

CRN's Steve Burke ranks the industry's top CEOs when it comes to communicating their sales strategy to channel partners.

Faletra: Why Cisco's Chuck Robbins Is Able To Move So Fast

Nearly a year into his role at the helm of Cisco, Chuck Robbins is proving the value of choosing a new CEO from within when it comes to a company of Cisco's size.

April 2016

10 Signs Of Telecom Turmoil

The telecom industry is in a state of flux as customers demand cloud and strategic IT services, in addition to connectivity.

Partner Programs Guide

The 2016 Partner Programs Guide offers the information solution providers need to evaluate the IT vendors they work with or are considering working with.

2016 Partner Programs Guide: A Blueprint For Partnerships

CRN's annual Partner Programs Guide offers solution providers the information they need to evaluate the IT vendors they already work with or are considering partnering with.

The 2016 Security 100

CRN's Security 100 highlights the best of the best in endpoint protection, SIEM and threat detection, network security, identity management, and application security.

2016 Virtualization 50

From server virtualization to hyper-converged infrastructure, the Virtualization 50 celebrates the vendors tackling the different facets of virtualization technologies.

Sharpening Their Skills: The 2016 CRN Tech Elite 250

The Tech Elite 250 is comprised of solution providers in the U.S. and Canada who have the highest level and most certifications from Cisco, Citrix, Dell, EMC, Hewlett-Packard, IBM, Microsoft, NetApp, Symantec and VMware. Here is a sampling of that list.

COLUMNS

Decision Disconnect: Many Vendors Fail To Recognize The Partner Journey

86 percent of solution providers are planning to add a new vendor or a technology practice in 2016, but most vendors are in the dark when it comes to the partner's decision making process.

A Race To The Bottom In Cloud Infrastructure

Partners that have a single supplier face a significant revenue risk in the event that supplier decides to sell off its data center assets to a company that is either unfriendly toward the channel or just doesn't understand it.

February 2016

How Partners Are Separating Politics From Business

By taking a nonpartisan stance, solution providers are reaping lucrative rewards this election season.

Microsoft Acquires Mobile Cross-Platform Development Startup Xamarin

Xamarin's technology lets developers build native iOS and Android apps using Microsoft's C# programming language, which means they can write one set of code and use it for apps targeting multiple platforms.

2016 Channel Chiefs

Meet the executives responsible for running channels at vendors in the IT market today.

The 100 Coolest Cloud Computing Vendors Of 2016

The 2016 installment of CRN's 100 Coolest Cloud Computing Vendors highlights the best of the best in cloud infrastructure, platforms and development, security, storage and software.

The 2016 Data Center 100

Broken into five categories, the annual Data Center 100 highlights the providers that represent their respective fields with a combination of innovation, market share, market presence, buzz, technology capabilities and channel capabilities.

CRN's 2016 Managed Service Provider 500

CRN has assembled the 2016 Managed Service Provider 500, an annual list that recognizes North American solution providers with cutting-edge approaches to delivering managed services.

COLUMNS

What Ingram's Sale Says About The Distribution World

With news of Ingram Micro's plans to become part of China-based HNA Group comes speculation over what it means to the industry, government contracts serviced via Ingram, and to the distribution business as a whole.

Why Building An App Services Fortress Will Be Key To Winning In The New Channel Era

The strategic service provider era marks a major shift in the channel, one where the winners and losers will be determined by the ability to provide application modernization.

December 2015

The CRN Test Center's 2015 Products Of The Year

To find CRN Test Center gold we tinkered, tested and sometimes got tough with the best 2015 had to offer when it came to tech. From big iron to thin and light, we reviewed close to 100 products over the past year and present the gear that had the just-right mix of wow and practical business applications.

The 2015 Tech Innovator Awards

The CRN Test Center scrutinized products within 19 categories of IT and evaluated each based on its ability to increase worker productivity and reduce cost and complexity for solution providers, IT departments and end users through innovation and technical advancement.

The 2015 Enterprise App Awards

The winners of the 2015 Enterprise App Awards were carefully chosen by CRN editors and represent both the heavy hitters of the IT industry and the lesser known startups that are driving innovation.

Racing To The Top: CRN's 2015 Triple Crown Award Winners

CRN assembles a number of lists and rankings throughout the year, including the Solution Provider 500, the Fast Growth 150 and the Tech Elite 250. CRN recognizes the 57 solution providers that earned a spot on all three lists this year with the second-annual Triple Crown honors.

The 2015 Internet Of Things 50

The Internet of Things market is exploding, with an estimated $19 trillion opportunity up for grabs. CRN has compiled its inaugural list of 50 companies who are building tailored-made IoT solutions that channel partners need to know.

COLUMNS

Burke: The Right Play: Strategic Service Providers

The key metrics necessary to succeed in the Strategic Service Provider era are diametrically opposed to the metrics in the solution provider era.

Faletra: What's In A Name? Welcome To The Strategic Service Provider Era

The Strategic Service Provider model represents solution providers who become strategic partners to customers by recommending and implementing everthing from communication providers to which application, platform and hardware providers to depend on.

October 2015

100 People You Don't Know But Should

Here we present our annual honoring of the channel management executives who may have slipped under the radar despite building booming channel programs, designing innovative partner incentives, evangelizing hot technology and much more.

Cloud Partner Programs Guide

CRN spotlights those companies devoting significant resources to their cloud partner programs and backing up partners with training, support and financial incentives.

2015 Annual Report Card

Solution providers across America put on their thinking caps and graded their IT vendors across 22 product categories as part of CRN's Annual Report Card, which is celebrating its 30th anniversary this year.

A Quick Study: The 2015 Fast Growth 150

When it comes to managing the rapid growth they've experienced, this year's Fast Growth solution providers can sum up their success strategies in one word: focus.

Fast Growth 2015

The Fast Growth 150 is CRN's annual ranking of the fastest growing solution providers, resellers, technology integrators and IT consultants in North America.

Time Warner Cable Making Big Channel Investments As It Mounts Partner Recruitment Offensive

Time Warner Cable (TWC) is on a channel tear, doubling its channel budget in the last 18 months as part of an all-out IT solution provider recruitment binge.

Tech 10: Big Developments In Big Data

Technology in big data management and analysis continues to evolve at a break-neck pace. Here's 10 recent product launches and key upgrades that you need to know about.

COLUMNS

Honesty Is The Best Policy: What's The Big Secret With Surface?

When Microsoft launched its Surface tablet and decided it was going to be a direct-sale-only product, with no offering it to customers through the channel, it was a point of contention.

Symantec Is Going Back To The Future

Symantec CEO Mike Brown must feel like the weight of the world has been lifted off his shoulders now that his company is focused squarely on the red-hot security market.

August 2015

The Top 100 Executives Of 2015

CRN's Top 100 Executives Of 2015 honors the tech CEOs that are best at navigating a market that is transforming at a blinding speed.

2015 Network Connectivity Partner Programs

Our directory of enterprise connectivity vendor's partner programs.

2015 Emerging Vendors

This year's edition of the CRN Emerging Vendors list has more than 180 companies, all with something going for them.

Meet The Up-And-Comers

Our Emerging Vendors are actively working with channel partners in North America.

Next-Gen 250: Ahead Of The Curve

We present the 2015 CRN Next-Gen 250, the annual list of solution providers that are setting the pace for the rest of the channel in meeting customers' ever-evolving IT needs.

Faces Of The 2015 Next-Gen 250

Here we present 25 companies on CRN's 2015 Next-Gen 250 list, a spotlight shined on 250 solution providers born since 2005.

The 10 Coolest Servers Of 2015 (So Far)

It's been an interesting year so far in the server market as the industry's top players ramp up and scale out their offerings as they try to capitalize on the red-hot hyper-converged market and customers' desire to drive down costs.

COLUMNS

Faletra: The Clouds Of The Future: Where Does The Channel Stand?

The move to cloud-based computing is rapidly becoming a reality for businesses in all markets, opening the door for startups and leaving hardware-infrastructure-focused vendors without clear cloud strategies in the dust.

June 2015

Three Department Of Defense ELAs That Worked Out -- And One That Didn't

VMware's 2013 enterprise licensing agreement with the U.S. Army led to larger-than-expected bills for some subordinate commands, but there have been some DoD ELAs that have worked out quite well.

Is The Cloud Going To Make ELAs Obsolete?

According to licensing experts CRN spoke with, the cloud model isn't the cost-control panacea some ELA-weary customers might think it is.

Women of the Channel

CRN honors 440 women whose channel expertise and vision are deserving of recognition

The 2015 Solution Provider 500

The Solution Provider 500 is our annual ranking of the top solution provider organizations in North America, ranked by revenue.

Big Data 100

The CRN Big Data 100 recognizes vendors that have demonstrated an ability to innovate in bringing to market products and services that he