These are common phone issues that require a professional phone technician – the more time that it’s broken, the more money it can cost. Aging system hardware is typically more of a liability than it is an asset – parts may be limited or unavailable and discontinued systems may not be supported. Businesses trust TriTech because we know the disruption is a hassle and remain committed to efficient, reliable services.

TriTech Corporation of America is a provider of analog and VoIP phone systems in Milwaukee, Waukesha, Madison, and throughout Wisconsin. An IT services company in southeastern Wisconsin, TriTech successfully designs and supports unified communications solutions in southeastern Wisconsin.

Why TriTech?

Phone systems are often at the core of offices and business communication. Many components go into their customization and installation, leaving higher risk for problems and difficulties if done incorrectly.

For over 20 years, TriTech has evolved alongside telecommunications and voice technology – from starting with traditional phone systems to expanding with telephony and VoIP. As business technology advances, so does our training and services to best help businesses.

What makes TriTech truly different: No matter what stage of phone system support you require – to plan a solution with you, analyze the system you already have or design a new one, or implement the project to your system – we will support you.

If you know what you want but need help moving forward, our system designers and engineers can analyze what your plan is and continue with the project. If you have a pile of boxes with uninstalled IP phone consoles, we have experts trained and certified in completing that setup.

If you’re having troubles with an existing phone system, TriTech can help.

However, these reasons why “VoIP is bad” have nothing to do with IP phones but are usually associated with poor network configuration. When you add a VoIP system, the core of your network changes because you’re adding voice to the data traffic. Voice traffic is time sensitive and requires additional configuration.

With TriTech, your VoIP system won’t have these negative consequences. Our trained engineers are certified to set-up VoIP and phone systems to operate reliably and effectively for you. Since the 1990s, we understood the distinction between networking and telecommunications; today, we understand how to bring them together and the importance of correct network configuration.