Mannes School of Music has transformed the traditional music conservatory by integrating rigorous classical training with real-world experience and cross-disciplinary learning. Work hands-on with award-winning faculty to develop as an artist at one of the best music schools in New York City.

Learn more

Cross-College Graduate Programs

The College of Performing Arts offers two master’s degrees designed to cultivate the creativity and entrepreneurial agency of performing artists. They draw on the strengths of all three schools within the college — Mannes, Jazz, and Drama — to serve students whose work defies traditional boundaries and impacts society.

Arts Management and Entrepreneurship (MA)

Performer-Composer (MM)

At Mannes, immerse yourself in a creative community of legendary teachers and passionate students, ready to collaborate with you. Learn more about our community of vibrant artists, scholars, activists, and innovators.

Explore more

Train to become a contemporary and relevant musician. Learn to embrace collaboration and develop entrepreneurial skills. See stories from our award-winning and world-famous alumni and see how we prepare you for life as a 21st-century artist.

See more

Apply Through Regular Decision for Fall 2024!

We are continuing to accept undergraduate applications from freshmen and transfer students for spring admission. The fall admission application deadline for freshmen is January 15. Transfer students from other colleges should apply for fall admission by March 1. All admitted students are considered for merit scholarships, with no separate scholarship application required.

Apply Now

Profile

A former member of the Metropolitan Opera Orchestra, Mary Barto is the recipient of the Distinguished University Teaching Award from Mannes. Her orchestral performances include Principal Flute with the New York City Ballet and the Symphony of the Americas as well as performances with the New York Philharmonic, New York City Opera and the American Ballet Theatre. She has toured Western Europe with harpsichordist Eve Kugler and across the United States as soloist with the legendary Skitch Henderson, the New York Pops. Summer festivals include the Sarasota Music Festival, Spoleto and Amalfi Festivals – Italy, and Director of the Arden Arts Festival, Columbia University.

She gives solo concerts and Master Classes across the United States and has performed on New York’s “Artists in Concert”, WQXR. She frequently performs with the New York Composers Circle, dedicated to showcasing innovative new works by New York area composers. She has many Broadway orchestral credits as well as film scores including numerous works by Academy Award winning composer John Barry. Her quintet, the New York Five, has the unusual instrumental combination of flute, bassoon, and violin, viola and piano. Their CD, “Choctaw Nights” is available from Albany records. ” Journey of the Red Feather” was recently released.

Mary Barto is the director of the Mannes Preparatory and Extension Divisions Flute Ensembles. She is an Adjunct Professor at Columbia University – Teachers College, Fordham University and Hunter College of the City of New York.

Mary Barto will release a new solo CD this season.

Visit: www.marybarto.org.