Meet Our Directors

President: Bob Morris (Resource Development Committee Co-Chairperson)

Bob Morris after graduating from Purdue moved to the Chrisman area and began farming in 1979. He has taken an active role serving on the Hoult Cemetery Board, Chrisman School Board, Township Supervisor, and continues as Treasurer for the Mental Health Board in Edgar County. His goal has been to help establish The Forever Fund Endowment. The Forever Fund will help ensure our service to Edgar County for years to come.

Committee Membership: Resource Development

Vice President: Jason A. Graham

Dr. Jason Graham was born and raised in Paris, Illinois. Upon graduating from Paris High School in 1990, he attended Eastern Illinois University. He graduated from Southern Illinois University-School of Dental Medicine in 1997 and entered private practice. He moved back to Paris in 2000. He has three children, Jacob, Ethan, and Lily, and is married to the former Beth Richards from Newton, Illinois. Jason and his family are members of and attend First Baptist Church of Paris. He is a former member of the Paris Rotary Club and sits on the boards for the Edgar County Public Health Department and the Edgar County Community Foundation. He is a past board member for the Paris YMCA and the Paris area Chamber of Commerce. I serve on the ECCF board because it is an organization that benefits Edgar county residents only. Philanthropy, in general, is great, but ECCF’s focus on Edgar county only is what sold me on the organization.

Committee Membership: By-Laws and Governance

Secretary: Agnes Laughlin

Born and raised in Edgar County, Agnes is a 2007 graduate of Paris High School. She went on to graduate Magna Cum Laude from Saint Mary’s College at Notre Dame, IN obtaining a Bachelor’s Degree of Business Administration while minoring in Music and Math. Agnes has built her career at Longview Bank & Trust and is currently the Assistant Trust Officer and Broker. In 2020, Agnes obtained her Certified Trust Financial Advisor designation. She is an active member of St. Mary’s Church and enjoys volunteering her time with the PERK Mentoring Program and Paris Community Theater. Agnes also doubles as the Junior High Chorus Teacher at Crestwood School and directs the drama programs at Crestwood and Paris High School alongside her husband Tanner. Agnes has a passion for impacting the youth of our community and is honored to serve on the Edgar County Community Foundation in hopes of enhancing the lives of the youth that calls it home.

Treasurer: Susan Saxton

Susan C. Saxton grew up in Sterling, Illinois and graduated from Sterling High School in 1982. She attended Eastern Illinois University graduating with a BS in Business degree. She currently works as a Financial Advisor at LPL Financial in Marshall, Illinois. Susan has volunteered in Edgar and Clark counties being Treasurer for various organizations. She is currently serving on this board as well as the Board of Review for Edgar County Tax Assessor, Edgar County Historical Society Board Member, Kansas Eastern Star Officer, Marshall Rotary Club, and a Member of St. Mary’s Catholic Church in Marshall, Illinois. Susan is married to John Saxton and lives in Kansas, Illinois. They have three grown children and two grandchildren. Her heart belongs to this community and our county. This is why the Forever Fund is her primary focus. She likes the idea of not only helping people now but knowing the Forever Fund is structured to provide continued support to our citizens.

Committee Membership: Stewardship and Accountability and Resource Development

Development Manager: Warren Sperry

Warren Sperry is a retired school educator and administrator for the Paris School System. Born and raised in Vandalia, Illinois, Warren has served the Paris community as a board member of the REC Center, American Red Cross, Paris Kiwanis Early Risers Club, CAMA, Paris Area Youth Services, Paris Center of Fine Arts, Bee Well-Edgar County Wellness, PEDCO, Friends of the Paris Community Hospital, and PERK (People Encouraging Remarkable Kids) mentor. Warren is a member of the First Christian Church, the Masonic Lodge 277, and the Edgar County Shrine Club. Now actively serving as Project Manager for the foundation, Warren continues to support those causes that will continue to enrich the Edgar County Area.

Committee Membership: Publicity, By-Laws and Governance, and Resource Development

Past President: Doug Hasler

Doug Hasler was raised in Paris. He attended Paris High School and Eastern Illinois University majoring in Economics. After a short time away from Paris, Doug returned in 1987. Mr. Hasler is currently serving as President of the Edgar County Community Foundation. Doug also serves as the President of the Joe & Nila White Hasler Foundation and various other committees and organizations. He is also a member of the First Christian Church of Paris. Doug also was a member of the international performing group, Up With People, served in Washington DC for both Senator Percy and Congressman Dan Crane, as well as with our local State Representatives. His primary interest as President is to ensure the future success of the Foundation for continued growth.

Committee Membership: Publicity, Resource Development, and Educational Development

E. Robert Anderson (By-Laws and Governance Committee Chairperson)

Rob, a native of Paris, is a graduate of Paris High School, Eastern Illinois University, and the University of Illinois College of Law. He has been an attorney in Paris since 1985, when he joined the firm where his father had practiced law. In 2006 he established his own law firm, Anderson Law Offices, located at 1204 N. Main St. in Paris. Rob’s practice focuses on Estate Planning, Estates and Probate, Real Estate and Agriculture Law. He has been a member of the Edgar County Community Foundation since 1995. He is also a director of the Paris Community Hospital Foundation, Inc. Rob and his wife, Suzy, have three children, R.J, Jennifer, and Christopher. Paris/Edgar County was a wonderful place for me to grow up. I would like for future generations to feel the same way. There have been many residents who have helped me over the years. I would like to return the favor for future generations.

Committee Membership: Stewardship and Accountability, By-Laws and Governance, and Resource Development

F. Scott Barrett

Scott Barrett grew up in the Hume and Brocton areas of Edgar County. He and his wife, Abby, reside in Paris with their two children, Mason, and Ava. He is a graduate of Shiloh High School. He attended the McAllister Institute of Funeral Service, Southern Illinois University, and Eastern Illinois University.

Elected in 2016, Scott is currently serving his second term as Coroner of Edgar County. He is the Executive Director of the Edgar County Housing Authority and works part-time as a Funeral Director/Embalmer for Templeton Funeral Home in Paris.

Scott is a member of the Paris Community Nurse board of directors and is the Chairman of the organization’s annual Christmas food basket program. He is a member and past president of the Edgar County Historical Society, a Past Master of Paris Masonic Lodge #268, a member of the Paris District 95 improvement planning committee, a member of the Edgar County Farm Bureau, and a member of the Illinois Coroners and Medical Examiners Association.

His goal for ECCF is to help extend its lasting positive influence on all residents of Edgar County, especially those that are less fortunate and underserved.

Don Bartos

Don Bartos is a lifelong resident of Paris, IL. He is a 1992 graduate of Paris High School and received a B.S. in Management from Eastern Illinois University. He purchased Dimond Bros. Insurance in 2000. In 2012, Dimond Bros. was listed as one of the top 100 largest independent insurance agencies in the country. He purchased Eagle Ridge Golf Course (formerly Sycamore Hills) in 2011. Bartos was a member of YPO and currently serves as a board member of the Horizon Health Foundation Board. He is active throughout the community over the years and has been involved in coaching several youth basketball, soccer, and baseball teams. He believes that being part of an organization such as ECCF, allows him the best opportunity to impact as many individuals, families, and organizations within Edgar County to make it the best place in which to live and work.

Committee Membership: Grants

Megan Carroll

Megan (Marrs) Carroll is a lifelong resident of Edgar County. Upon graduation from Paris High School in 2004, she went on to Eastern Illinois University to complete a B.S. in Elementary Education, M.S in Educational Leadership, and a Specialist degree in Educational Leadership. She taught elementary school for 10 years and is now an administrator for Paris District # 95 as the principal of Carolyn Wenz Elementary School. Megan is married to Ryan Carroll of Paris, and they have three children–Olivia, Maxwell, and Nolan. She is a member of Bell Ridge Christian Church, Illinois Principals Association, National Association of Elementary School Principals, and actively participates in the Paris Community Theater as well as the PERK advisory board. Megan is passionate about providing new and exciting opportunities for the youth in our area and looks forward to working alongside the other directors to enrich the lives of others in Edgar County.

Christian Colvin (Grants Committee Chairperson)

Christian graduated summa cum laude from Rose-Hulman Institute of Technology with a BS in Civil Engineering in 1997. He earned an MS in Environmental Engineering from the University of Illinois in 1999. Christian later worked as a consulting engineer with a focus on drinking water treatment technology for CH2M HILL in Denver, CO. At CH2M HILL, Christian developed a parametric cost model to estimate the cost of new treatment facilities, which was a first in the industry.

In 2005, he transitioned to a financial advisor with Edward Jones and obtained a Certified Financial Planner (CFP) designation in 2007 and Certified Investment Management Analyst (CIMA) in 2016. Also in 2016, Christian completed executive education coursework at the University of Pennsylvania’s Wharton Business School as part of the CIMA requirement.

Christian and his wife, Lora (since 1999) have two children, Carah (2004) and Case (2008). Mr. Colvin enjoys landscape photography, travel, gourmet food, and golfing with his family. I am motivated to serve as an ECCF director to help build a financial engine that will provide resources to fund community projects for the current and future generations.

Committee Membership: Stewardship and Accountability, Grants, By-Laws and Governance, and Resource Development

Renee Craig (Educational Development Co-Chairperson)

Renee Craig is a lifelong resident of Hume, IL, and a graduate of Shiloh HS. Renee began a banking career in 1982 at the Hume Bank, and shortly after began a focus on lending leading to her now long-time specialty in ag finance. Since 2010 Renee serves as VP, Senior Lender with Longview Bank & Trust in Paris. Renee is a graduate of Illinois Bankers School & other banking schools. She is a Past Regional Director of the Community Bankers, former Young Bankers Division, and has served on numerous IL Bankers Assoc. committees. In her community, Renee served as the Treasurer of the Village of Hume for over 28 years, served on the Hume Festival Committee, and is a long-time member of the Hume New Era Club. Currently, Renee, serves on the Horizon Health Board of Directors, serving as Treasurer. Renee is a life-long member of the Hume United Methodist Church. Renee and her husband Rick have two sons, Taylor (wife, Ashley) & Ross (and Bri), and 2 grandchildren, Nate & Violet. My hope for Edgar County is to continue to offer a good quality of life for people of all ages and with the ECCF, I feel we are able to have the outreach to serve as a resource for the entire county to make life better in small and large ways for its people.

Committee Membership: Educational Development

Matt Ehlers

Matt Ehlers was born in Rock Island, Illinois and graduated from the University of Illinois with a BS in Accountancy. After graduation, Matt moved to Chicago where he worked for a Management Consulting firm focusing on the Private Equity and Manufacturing sectors. Matt and his wife Tiffany (Rowe), a Kansas, Illinois native, moved to Edgar County in 2009, where they now reside with their four children, Jackson, Katey, Lainey, and Maria. Matt helps operate the family farm and a Pioneer seed dealership with his father-in-law. He also has a crop insurance business serving mainly Edgar and Coles Counties. Matt serves the community through his involvement in youth sports in Kansas, as Treasurer of the Edgar County Farm Bureau, and as the Vice President of the Kansas Board of Education. His primary goal for the foundation is to ensure projects are spread throughout Edgar County to impact more youth.

Committee Membership: Educational Development

Tom Hebermehl (Educational Development Co-Chairperson)

Scott Ingrum (Stewardship and Accountability Chairperson)

Scott Ingrum is a life long resident of Paris, IL. He is a 1976 graduate of Paris High School. He is currently President of IWD Ingrum’s Waste Disposal. Along with his wife, Kathy, and their two children, Mary Jo and Bethany, they all work side by side in the family business which has been in the Paris area since 1950.

As a past President of the Hanger Board, past Chamber of Commerce Director, past President of Edgar County Shrine, current president of the Paris Community Fire Protection District, and First Christian Church member, Scott’s purpose is to help our community and surrounding Edgar county to be a better place when we are gone, leaving things better for the next generation.

Committee Membership: Stewardship and Accountability and Grants

Aaron Phipps (Resource Development Committee Co-Chairperson)

Aaron Phipps farms on his family’s land in northeast Edgar County. After a career in the mining industry in Texas and Illinois, he returned home in 2008. The opportunity to serve others in his county led to involvement with the Edgar County Farm Bureau and various groups supporting the Chrisman schools. The chance to serve with many different people and projects across the county was a huge incentive to become a director for ECCF. After joining the board, Aaron has found ECCF and projects like the development of the Forever Fund to be extremely rewarding and fulfilling. Aaron and his wife Kristin have two children, John and Leah, and live in Chrisman.

Committee Membership: By-Laws and Governance and Resource Development

T. Bradley Tucker

Bradley “Brad” Tucker is a fifth-generation farmer and lifelong resident of Edgar County. Born to lifelong Edgar County residents Bill and Mary Ann Morris Tucker, Brad lives on the home farm begun in 1848 in Edgar Township, near Horace. He is married to the former Lisa Tinley of Danville, and they are the parents of Samantha and Robby. Brad is a graduate of Paris High School and the University of Illinois with a B.S. in Ag Economics. He has worked in commodity brokerage as well as farming. Other past activities include participation in the Kiwanis Early Risers, Farm Bureau, Edgar County Soil and Water Conservation Board, Edgar Township Trustee, Edgar County Fair, Edgar County Chapter of Pheasants Forever, the First Baptist Church of Paris, Edgar County Young Republicans, Hunter Safety Instruction, and East Central Illinois Illini Club. I serve on the ECCF Board because it is an effective means to focus the resources of many donors together to effect positive change. There is nothing else able to do that in our county.

Committee Membership: Publicity

Mary Liz Wright

Mary Liz Wright is a University of Illinois Extension Nutrition and Wellness Educator and an alumnus of Loyola University of Chicago and Eastern Illinois University. Ms. Wright is a lifelong resident of Edgar County. She is a firm believer in community service and is currently involved as a director on the following boards: Edgar County Fair, Edgar County Community Foundation, Unit #4 School, ERBA, and Horizon Health. Mary Liz is a member of St. Mary’s Catholic Church in Paris. She and her husband, Phil, are the parents of three daughters; Madden, Agnes, and Nora. She is most proud and supportive of the ECCF’s efforts to increase vocational education and certification in our local high schools. ECCF is making a difference in Edgar County and Wright is grateful to be a part of this forward-thinking organization.

Committee Membership: Publicity, Grants, By-Laws and Governance, and Educational Development

Board Members Emeritus:

Patrick Bell: Emeritus

Pat Bell is a lifelong resident of Paris, Illinois, graduating from Paris High School and Indiana State University. He is a CPA with Larsson, Woodyard & Henson, LLP, and serves as a consultant to the Paris office.

Serving various not-for-profit entities in the Paris area, Pat was a founding board member of the Central Illiana Estate Planning Council, a founding board member of ECCF, Past President of the Indiana State University Alumni Board, and currently serves as a board member for the Bicentennial Art Center. Mr Bell is also a board member emeritus of the Indiana State University Foundation and Edgar County Community Foundation.

Chris Eldredge: Emeritus

Chris Eldredge is a native of Paris and a graduate of Paris High School and Illinois Wesleyan University. After graduating from IWU, Eldredge worked for two years at FS Services, Inc. (now Growmark) before returning to Paris to work for Illinois Cereal Mills, Inc. He continued to work for Cargill, Inc. as Vice President of Sales after they purchased ICM in the mid ’90s. Eldredge changed career paths in 2002 when he became President of Citizens National Bank. He has been quite active throughout the community over the years, involved as a coach and director in youth sports and as a board member with the Human Resource Center. Presently he serves on numerous church boards at Grace Lutheran Church, is a director and past president of Paris Economic Development Corporate (PEDCO), a director with the Coalition Against Methamphetamines (CAMA), a director of the Werner Foundation, and presently the President of the Edgar County Community Foundation.

Harry Frost: Emeritus

Harry Frost, native of Robinson, Illinois, is a graduate of Eastern Illinois University with a degree in Chemistry. Past community service includes involvement with all ages being active as the President of Paris Youth Baseball Board of Directors and President of the Edgar County Housing Authority Board for senior citizens.

Joe Hasler: Emeritus

Mr. Joe Hasler, retired CEO of the Illinois Cereal Mill, is one of the original founders of the foundation. Joe is currently serving on the Board of Directors for the Citizens National Bank. He is deeply motivated and involved in preserving the quality of life for all the residents of Edgar County.

Ned Jenison: Emeritus, Deceased

E. H. “Ned” Jenison, a native of Paris, was a graduate of Paris High School and the University of Illinois. After military service during the Korean War and two years as agricultural editor for the Champaign-Urbana Courier, he returned to the family newspaper, the Paris Beacon-News, with which he remained until retiring as the publisher in 2006. He was very active in several other community organizations including the Hospital and Medical Foundation of Paris, Paris Development Corp. (PEDCO), Paris Planning Commission, Edgar County Mental Health Board, Paris Chamber of Commerce, and Looking for Lincoln.

Robert Morgan: Emeritus

Bob Morgan has been a Paris supporter for several years. As an entrepreneur, businessman, banker, and developer, Mr. Morgan continues to advocate those positive aspects of community growth. One of the original founders of the Community Foundation, Mr. Morgan, in word and deed, champions those needs of the people in our county.

William C. Minnis: Emeritus

Bill Minnis and his wife Jennifer reside on a fifth-generation family farm in Edgar County where he raises Angus cattle. He is a father of six children. He has experience as a health care administrator, banker, professor, entrepreneur, and consultant. Bill is an Associate Professor of Management at Eastern Illinois University. He completed a Bachelor of Science and a Masters of Business Administration degree at Indiana State University, as well as a Ph.D. in Management at St. Louis University.

Mary Ann Pearman: Emeritus, Deceased

As a lifelong resident of Edgar County, Mary participated and supported many worthwhile activities. A graduate of Saint Mary’s of the Woods in the field of music, Mary Ann engaged in the support and development of the humanities in the county. Threaded through her many years, her activities included 4-H church Choir Director, director of Paris Community Choir, and various women’s organizations. She served on many organizational boards such as the Paris Community Hospital, Edgar County children’s home, Community Concert Board, Homemakers Extension, Paris Junior Women’s Club, Positive Development of Edgar County, and Friends of the Family Association of CIA TV. Mary Ann also served and associated with the Lumpkin Family Foundation.

C.E. Willis: Director Emeritus, Deceased

Known for challenging others to support worthy causes, Charles E. “Charley” Willis (1915-2010) was one of the founding directors of the Edgar Country Community Foundation.

Born in Anderson, Indiana, Charley earned a degree in industrial engineering from General Motors Institute (GMI, now Kettering University) through a cooperative education scholarship program. The gift of education, a strong entrepreneurial spirit, hard work, and the support of his wife, Genevieve, enabled him to build Meco, Inc.- a Paris, IL firm that was nationally recognized for its superior designs and high-quality fabrication of sheet metal products. As a part of its 75th anniversary celebration, GMI honored him as one of its “75 Outstanding Graduates”.

Charley and Gen felt blessed to have settled in Paris and raise their family (Joanna, Richard, and Bruce) in Edgar County. They never forgot that his education- obtained through a scholarship-enabled their success. They spent most of their lives trying to give back through their time, talent, and treasure. Charley would hope that his story inspires you to help make Edgar County a better place to live through volunteerism and gifts to ECCF.