Ronald Rea Fenton, 55, of Mineral City passed away at his residence on Monday, May 21, 2007.Born in Dover, Ohio on February 26, 1952, he was the son of Harold E. Fenton and the late Sara J. Ulrich Fenton. After completing his high school education at New Philadelphia High School, he continued his education at The Ohio State University for a period of time. Ron later joined his family’s business, Fenton Brothers Electric Company, Inc. where he presently served as the Executive Vice President.His love for animals was evident throughout his lifetime always looking for ways to rescue troubled animals. He also owned a tree farm and sold numerous Christmas Trees to local families. Hunting was a favorite pastime for Ron.He is survived by his loving family which includes his father, Harold; two brothers, Thomas (Ellen) Fenton of New Philadelphia and Chris Fenton of Dover; five nieces, Amy Fenton and her companion, Dave King of Tallmadge, Ohio, Kelly (Chris) Schoelles of Dover, Lindsey (Mark) Rosneck of New Philadelphia, Brooke and Jennica Fenton, both of Dover; his great-niece, Olivia Schoelles and his great-nephew, Owen Schoelles; his god-child, Andrew J. Wise; and his uncles, Leo and Dale Fenton, both of New Philadelphia and Don (Janice) Ulrich of New Philadelphia.In addition to his mother, Sara, who died November 25, 2006, he was preceded in death by his paternal grandparents, Leo and Jenny Fenton and his maternal grandparents, Howard and Emma Ulrich.A memorial visitation will be held in the Linn-Hert-Geib Funeral Home Chapel at New Philadelphia on Thursday, May 24, 2007 from 5:00 p.m. to 6:00 p.m. with a memorial service immediately following visitation beginning at 6:00 p.m. with The Rev. William E. Deist officiating. Friends and family are then invited to share a meal in the Geib Family Center, located adjacent to the funeral home, following the memorial service. A private family inurnment will take place at East Avenue Cemetery at a later date.In memory of Ron, the Fenton family requests memorial contributions be directed to the Buckeye Career Center Foundation, Inc., P.O. Box 355, New Philadelphia, OH 44663 Attn: Ron Fenton Scholarship Fund. An area student pursuing a career in the electrical field will be awarded this scholarship.