Kay McKeel Hall died peacefully in Nashville, Tennessee on September 17, 2015 after a courageous journey with cancer.

Kay was born in Bowling Green, Kentucky on May 18, 1941 to Frances Reason McKeel and Fan Hendricks McKeel. She is survived by a sister, Ann McKeel Ross (Dr. James C. Ross), of Temple Terrace Florida; a daughter, Amanda Kathryn Hall, Nashville, Tennessee; a son, Dr. Patrick Bryan Hall (Jill Stough Hall) and her two grandchildren, Connor and Catherine Hall, of Norton, Kansas. In addition to her parents, she is pre-deceased by a sister, Sara McKeel Settle and brother-in-law, Paul Dewitt Settle.

Kay grew up in Bowling Green, Kentucky and graduated from College High School. Following graduation she attended Norton Memorial School of Nursing, earned a diploma and qualified for license as a Registered Nurse. She believed in lifelong learning and later attended the College of Marin, Fairfax, California, University of California, Berkeley, and Sonoma State University in Rohnert Park, California. She earned an Associate Degree in Humanities, a Bachelor of Arts Degree in English and a Bachelor of Science Degree in Nursing.

Kay worked in a large number of health care settings during more than 40 years of nursing: intensive care where she served as head nurse, recovery room, pediatrics, home health, long term care, community health and hemodialysis. Kay earned certification as a nephrology nurse (CNN) during the course of her career and focused on regulations and quality of care for patients undergoing hemodialysis.

She initially became involved with oversight of health care facilities when she worked a surveyor of health care facilities for the state of Florida in Orlando, Florida office.

Served for 13 years with the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid (CMS) in the offices of Atlanta and Dallas as a Technical Advisor for the Renal program. She enjoyed the challenges of onsite evaluation of patient treatment facilities in accordance with federal Medicare and state requirements. Kay also enjoyed the opportunities to participate as an instructor in continuing education for surveyors and to periodically serve as speaker for renal care organizations. She served on national committees to write new Medicare regulations for health and safety.

Over the years, she received many awards and accolades for her dedication to promoting patient safety and quality care. The Centers for Medicare and Medicaid and the National Kidney Foundation recognized her for outstanding contributions to the renal community.

Kay moved to Franklin, TN, in 2001 to accept a position with a national dialysis company. Kay retired as Director of Regulatory Affairs in 2012.

She was an avid reader, art enthusiast and animal lover. In her young years she rescued many homeless dogs, which became long-term pets. She rode the family pony in local horse shows and received awards for horsemanship. In later years, she enjoyed hiking in the hills of California and the practice of yoga to remain physically fit. Her cat, Wally, was a loved furry companion in recent times.

Kay loved and appreciated the friends and colleagues she met in her travels and in times living in Kentucky, California, Washington, Texas, Georgia, Tennessee and Florida.

She is a beloved sister, mother, and grandmother who is cherished for her courage, strength, generosity, love, selflessness and depth of care. She will be dearly missed and we rest in knowing that she is safely Home.

A Celebration of Life Service will be conducted 4:00 PM Friday, September 25, 2015 with one hour visitation prior to the service at Williamson Memorial Funeral Home, 3009 Columbia Avenue, Franklin, Tennessee.Inurnment will be 10:30 AM Friday prior to the service at Fairview Cemetery in Bowling Green, KY.

In lieu of flowers, contributions may be made in her memory to the Humane Society, St Jude's Hospital for Children, or the Gilda's Club in Nashville, Tennessee.

Visitation Details

Friday, September 25th, 2015 3:00pm - 4:00pm, Williamson Memorial Funeral Home

Service Information

Friday, September 25th, 2015 4:00pm, Williamson Memorial Funeral Home

Interment Details

Fairview Cemetery