In Photo (L to R) Steve Warnstadt, WIRRC coordinator; Dr. Barb Crittenden, SWCC president; Deb Pantini, SWCC director of student development and WIRRC transfer specialist; Dr. Rachel Boon, chief academic officer, Board of Regents; and Bill Taylor, SWCC vice president of instruction

March 8, 2019, CRESTON, Iowa—Today in Creston, officials from the Iowa Board of Regents, the Western Iowa Regents Resource Center (WIRRC) and Southwestern Community College (SWCC) announced an expanded partnership to help students in southwestern Iowa pursue a degree at one of Iowa’s public universities.

The partnership reflects the Board of Regents commitment to assisting area students by having staff on site at SWCC’s campus in Creston. The transfer specialist, Deb Pantini, will help students find the best higher education path for their needs. The Board’s collaboration with SWCC will increase access to higher education for Iowans and expand the footprint of the Regents Enterprise.

“Southwestern is always looking at ways to expand transfer opportunities for students,” stated Dr. Barb Crittenden, SWCC’s president. “This expanded partnership with Iowa’s public universities will enhance transfer resources while focusing on the individual attention SWCC prides itself in offering to all students.”

WIRRC transfer specialists work with students, counselors, and other education professionals to identify the education goals of students and tailor a plan to meet those goals. This assistance can range from assisting students to transfer from community college to physically attend one of the state universities, to accessing distance education opportunities for those otherwise unable to meet their educational goals. In many cases, the WIRRC can assist with higher education opportunities that allow students to remain in their home communities while completing their degrees. The WIRRC has staff based in Creston, Council Bluffs, Harlan, Sheldon, and Sioux City.

"We are excited to provide residents of southwest and south central Iowa with a personal resource to assist them in achieving their education goals,” said Steve Warnstadt, coordinator of the WIRRC. “We look forward to this partnership with Southwestern Community College to provide people with personal contact with someone from the region, helping to make important life decisions regarding their education."

Students wishing to discuss educational options with Pantini may call 641-782-1458, or email This email address is being protected from spambots. You need JavaScript enabled to view it..

###