Please join us for a panel discussion with three internationally recognized leaders on the Hong Kong literary scene as they share their experiences with writing, editing, translating, and publishing in Hong Kong, and the challenges of literary translation and publishing in a wider global context. Followed by Q&A.

Tammy Lai-Ming HO 何麗明 (Fall ‘23 IWP resident; poet, scholar, editor, translator; Hong Kong) is the author of a story collection, an academic monograph on neo-Victorian cannibalism and two volumes of poetry; a third volume will appear in 2024. The editor-in-chief of Cha: An Asian Literary Journal, the English-language editor at Voice & Verse Poetry Magazine, and founding co-editor of Hong Kong Studies, she publishes and lectures widely on Hong Kong literature and culture, and translates contemporary Hong Kong and Chinese poetry. Her own poems have been translated widely. Her participation in IWP was made possible by the Robert H. N. Ho Family Foundation Global. WONG Yi Eva 黃怡 ( Fall ‘23 IWP resident; fiction writer, essayist, librettist, editor; Hong Kong) is the author of short stories collections 擠迫之城的戀愛方法 [Ways To Love In A Crowded City], 林葉的四季 [The Four Seasons of Lam Yip], 補丁之家 [Patched Up], and 據報有人寫小說 [News Stories], as well as the libretti for Cantonese-language chamber opera [Women Like Us] 兩個女子, and multimedia concert 幸福家庭與狗 [The Happy Family]. She won the 2018 Hong Kong Arts Development Award for Young Artist (Literary Arts) and was in 2020 among the “20 most anticipated young Sinophone novelists” in the Taiwanese magazine Unitas. She is working on stories exploring Hong Kong’s historical monuments, and on texts for performance with music and other art forms. Her participation in IWP was made possible by the Robert H. N. Ho Family Foundation Global. Jennifer Feeley is a literary translator. Her translations include two volumes of Xi Xi’s poetry: Not Written Words: Selected Poetry of Xi Xi, for which she won the 2017 Lucien Stryk Asian Translation Prize, and Carnival of Animals: Xi Xi’s Animal Poems, as well as the first two books in the middle-grade series White Fox by Chen Jiatong, and the Cantonese chamber opera libretto Women Like Us by Wong Yi. With Sarah Ann Wells, she is the co-editor of Simultaneous Worlds: Global Science Fiction Cinema. Her forthcoming translations include the novels Tongueless by Lau Yee-Wa and Xi Xi’s Mourning a Breast and My City. The recipient of a 2019 National Endowment for the Arts Literature Translation Fellowship, she holds a PhD in East Asian Languages and Literatures from Yale University.