Singular Concepts is proud to announce the grand opening of The Trilogy, a multi-experience music hub in the beating heart of Central. Unveiled as three different musical-inspired chapters starting from the end of October, The Trilogy boasts a sprawling 2-storey 7,000 sq ft space. The Trilogy will seamlessly integrate the best of music and nightlife, offering three distinct experiential concepts with the crowning jewel, Keyz the nightlife club, Wav the rooftop bar, and Ella New Orleans live music bar.

​

Address: 45 Pottinger Street 26/F, High Block, H Code, Central, Hong Kong

Kinsman fills a void in Hong Kong’s cocktail landscape by serving as a vessel for both radical innovation and cultural exploration—all the while holding the heritage and traditions of Hong Kong in high regard. To this end, the cocktails primarily highlight Cantonese and Chinese spirits as the starring ingredients, while locally sourced fruits and botanicals are used prodigiously throughout. Thematically, the drinks programme reinterprets Cantonese culinary traditions in new and unexpected ways, with the use of liquors like Yuk Bing Siu, baijiu and contemporary Cantonese amaros.

​

Address: 65 Peel Street, Central, Hong Kong

Inspired by the charming little bars and roadside bodegas found along the cycling routes of France, Italy, and Spain, Bianco & Rosso pays homage to the origins of Vermouth distilling, cocktails and fortified wines.

Focused on an Aegean odyssey with a relaxed environment of sharing plates, the menu changes regularly to get the best out of the fresh, seasonal ingredients. You can always expect bold flavours straight from the Mediterranean.

There’s also a large selection of carefully selected natural wines, tempting cocktails with amaro and fernet bitters, and fine coffee.

Address: 29 Gough St, Central, Hong Kong

Filipino soul and a Hong Kong heart, Singular Concept’s brand new venture Barkada champions bold flavors through contemporary Filipino cuisine helmed by renowned cookbook author Jen Balisi of Indulgent Eats.

Meaning a group of close friends in Filipino, Barkada is a joyful reflection of a community that tends to treat everyone like family. Food is a kind of love language, designed to be shared. Barkada aims to mirror this warmth, hospitality, and nostalgia, but with Jen’s signature spin.

Address: Upper Ground Floor, 48 Cochrane St, Central, Hong Kong

Welcome aboard the haven, Entourage. Entourage the 75ft sailing yacht is equipped with a full bar top, DJ set up, deck, and kitchen. Designed to offer “a laid-back, chilled-out Mediterranean vibe”, the yacht will provide comfortable lounge areas, including a top deck, mid-deck and dining area alongside a full catered kitchen.

Inspired by the French word meaning surroundings, Entourage is the magical allure of the seas as we discover outlying islands, indulge under the blue skies of Hong Kong and relax with our curated food and beverage program. Our team is here to cater to any events, including corporate receptions, all kinds of celebrations, wellness sessions and more.

A cafe by day and a speakeasy by night, the brains behind the bar is a tea-cocktail connoisseur and Tell Camellia’s co-founder Gagan Gurung. Expect a menu of classic drinks and a roster of new signature coffee cocktails, aka ‘coffee-tails’, designed to pair with their desserts, a perfect post-dinner treat. After 6 pm, the party continues behind a secret door, where expert bartenders whip up cocktails from a creative menu.

​

Address: 45 Cochrane St, Central

Singular Concepts restaurant and bar flagship Yurakucho spans over 2300 sq.ft bringing to Hong Kong the timeless energy of the Izakaya watering-hole culture to the table. Sake, a live robatayaki open-kitchen grill, Japanese highballs, a cool atmosphere, and an awesome hip-hop underground soundtrack!

​

Expect local Japanese street food such as delectable sandos, yakitori, YFC paired with an extensive early and late night happy hour. Opt for our Chef's tasting menu bringing the best of Yurakucho street food to Central, Hong Kong.

​

Address: YU YUET LAI Building, 43-55 Wyndham Street, Central, Hong Kong

Destined to be a sanctuary for lovers of the finest selections of rums from the Caribbean. The Daily Tot is a tribute to our love of rum, cocktails and fine spirits, which has no boundaries. The Daily Tot has handpicked a collection of rums sourced locally and internationally from distilleries around the world to create unique cocktails and an extensive rum bible.

The Daily Tot aims to lead drinkers on an intriguing discovery of a spirit they thought they knew and explore the true authentic Caribbean culture.

​

Address: Shop E, Portion A, Ground Floor, 58 Hollywood Road, Central, Hong Kong

A particularly welcome aspect of Tell Camellia, whose name is a nod to Camellia Sinensis, the shrub from which tea is made, is the personalized service one can expect upon entering. Tell Camellia offers diverse drinks options, focusing on artisanal cocktails that are inspired by Tea. At Tell Camellia, the worlds of teas and cocktails are blended through modern experimental techniques to produce some truly unique flavours. The mission of the bar is to fuse tea and cocktail culture in a way that challenges all who drink here to abandon preconceived cocktail notions and to steep themselves in the unknown.

Address: LG/F, H Code, 45 Pottinger Street, Central, Hong Kong