Can our surroundings affect our souls? Ed Ng and Terence Ngan from AB Concept believe the answer is a resounding yes.

Since the turn of this century, AB Concept has worked as a culture partner of many of the world’s leading hospitality brands, creating compelling interior environments and products that not only win awards and stand every test of time but also inspire powerful emotion in those who experience them. Through an ever-growing portfolio of projects, large and small, Ed and Terence demonstrate the power design has to shape our human experience and leave a positive imprint on the mind.

From the beach resort W Algarve to Four Seasons Hong Kong, private houses in Bangkok and Karuizawa in the Japanese Alps, and from Lalique store to the K11 Musea shopping mall, AB Concept applies a single unifying concept—that design is "about being." It is a means to bring more beauty and magic to the world, to enhance our quality of life, and to move and inspire us.

All this requires a particular approach, one that is as deeply thoughtful as it is intuitive. Just as a chef will carefully source and explore different ingredients, the AB Concept team combines tools and methods to create an experience more evocative than the sum of its parts. Rooted in place and in culture and awakening our senses in a moment, an understanding of craftsmanship and a talent for storytelling run through every space and every product.

This is the book that puts those stories and AB Concept's timeless design secrets to paper.

About The Author

Henrietta Thompson is an English writer, editor, creative consultant, and entrepreneur with many years’ experience working with some of the world’s most renowned brands and creative visionaries. Emanuele Coccia is an Italian philosopher teaching at the École des Hautes Études en Sciences Sociales in Paris. He is known worldwide for his thinking on the centrality of plants in the theory of knowledge and his reflection around a new relationship between humanity and nature. He has been collaborating with several universities, including Tokyo, Buenos Aires, Amsterdam, Harvard, and Columbia University. He is the author of books translated in several languages including The Life of Plants (2018).