Author and audio journalist Louisa Lim spent much of her childhood and adulthood living in Hong Kong, a place whose past and present are shaped by colonial oppression and rebellion. Seized by the British in 1842, then occupied by the Japanese from 1941 to 1945 during the Second World War, Hong Kong was eventually liberated by both the British and Chinese armies. Once again, Hong Kong was under the thumb of the British, but 40 years later, Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher signed a treaty that returned Hong Kong to Chinese rule. Since then, the Chinese Communist Party has had a huge hand in creating tyrannical laws that have shaped Hong Kong — yet through protest, Hong Kongers have resisted.

In her latest book, Indelible City: Dispossession and Defiance in Hong Kong, Lim digs into the story of Hong Kong. Lim, who is also the author of The People’s Republic of Amnesia: Tiananmen Revisited, has reported extensively on China and Hong Kong for almost two decades as a correspondent for NPR and the BBC, in addition to outlets like The New York Times and The Washington Post. With a storied career, Lim deftly navigates the complex history of Hong Kong that’s most recently been shaped by the oppressive national security legislation imposed by China in 2020. While this has made reporting difficult and dangerous, Lim is able to bring to light the remarkable resilience of Hong Kongers through interviews from the past and present. The book is intertwined with memoir and details for historical context, and Lim shows the vibrancy, volatility, attempted erasure, and resistance of the people.

Shondaland spoke with Lim about the character the King of Kowloon, the importance of language in protest and identity, rebellion, exile, and connection to place.

SARAH NEILSON: How did you approach telling your own story and the story of your family alongside and within the larger story of Hong Kong?

LOUISA LIM: I never meant to write such a personal book, and because of my journalistic background, I was somewhat reluctant to do that. But my editor Becky Saletan really loved the personal stories and kept encouraging me to write more. My mother, Patricia Lim, had been one of the earliest writers on Hong Kong’s indigenous cultural heritage. I spent most of my childhood being dragged around the New Territories so she could look at the dusty study halls, Earth god shrines, and sacred trees. At the time, I thought it was interminably boring and desperately wanted to spend my weekends shopping and sunbathing by the pool like my peers. But later on, I realized she had planted the seeds for this book way back then. Then she gave me most of her library to read, which was full of colonial history books. At a certain point, I realized that in writing about Hong Kong, I was continuing my mother’s mission. Although she didn’t write a word of the book, I sometimes wonder how much of it was from her and how much of it was from me.

SN: This figure known as the King of Kowloon serves as a guiding force and frame for the book. You write at the beginning of the book, “To think or write about the King was to consider his preoccupations: territory, sovereignty, and loss.” Can you briefly describe who he was and how he became a central figure for you and so many other Hong Kongers, especially in the context of language and art as resistance?

LL: The King of Kowloon was an elderly, disabled, eccentric trash collector whom many thought had mental-health challenges, who became an iconic figure in Hong Kong. He believed the peninsula of Kowloon, opposite Hong Kong Island, had been stolen from his family when the Chinese emperor ceded it to the British in 1860, and he spent more than 50 years covering the city’s walls with his misshapen calligraphy in which he claimed dominion over the city. He generally wrote out his family tree — all the way, more than 20 generations — and he sometimes paired the names with the places he’d lost. His writing became a collective memory for Hong Kongers, and he became this cultural icon; his words were imprinted on underwear, quilt covers, and haute couture collections, poets wrote odes to him, singers sang ballads to him, and when he died, there was an outpouring of mourning across the media. I wanted to write about him, as I was fascinated by the role that he’d played. And the more I thought about it, the more I thought of him as an emblematic figure whose significance could be seen rippling down, not just in his preoccupations of territory, sovereignty, and loss, but also in the constancy of his defiance and resistance, and the fact that he continued protesting for more than half a century, although he accepted that he would never get his land back. In fighting for an ideal, I think he was very much a harbinger of what was to come, although I’m not sure if he would have the same resonance for younger Hong Kongers who did not grow up with his words around them.

SN: Can you briefly describe the Lennon Walls and how they, and the use of written words on banners, in print, et cetera, played a role in the Umbrella Movement? How is this a book about the importance of words, how they’re written, and who’s writing them?

LL: The Lennon Walls were these protest walls of Post-it notes covered with slogans that covered the territory’s walls at times of protest. The first one was in 2014 during the Umbrella Movement, and in 2019 when a territory-wide protest movement broke out, they kind of multiplied and proliferated all over the whole territory. They were walls of protest, but also walls of identity where Hong Kongers again and again professed their love for Hong Kong and the fact that they did not feel part of China. Simple phrases like “Fight for Hong Kong!” were everywhere.

I wanted to explore what a Hong Kong history would look like if it were told by Hong Kongers.

This is definitely a book about the power of words and how they’re used in a protest context and in other contexts too. When I was doing my research, I became very aware that there are very few histories of Hong Kong written by Hong Kongers featuring Hong Kongers. As a colony of the U.K. which was returned to China in 1997, Hong Kong’s history was written for it by two different sovereign powers, and I wanted to explore what a Hong Kong history would look like if it were told by Hong Kongers. I really wanted to center Hong Kong voices and tell Hong Kong’s story through Hong Kongers. I loved the idea that they might construct parts of their own history that were legendary — like the legend of the King of Kowloon — that might in some way be more representative for the people than the histories imposed upon them by colonizing powers.

SN: Can you talk about the challenges of navigating the reporting for this book, especially under the national security legislation passed in China in 2020?

LL: This was a massive challenge since the national security legislation that was imposed on Hong Kong in June 2020 is very broad and very vague. It outlaws sedition, subversion, collusion with foreign powers and terrorism, but no clear definitions for these activities have been given. There have been more than 180 arrests since the legislation was imposed, and people have been arrested for shouting popular protest slogans, clapping in court, and criticizing the government’s Covid response. The legislation increased the risk of my book, and so I ended up taking out a lot of detail and some names of certain interviewees to try to protect them. I didn’t really want to do that, as one of the problems with Hong Kong history is the facelessness of Hong Kongers, but my first concern is the safety of those I have interviewed.

SN: You write about your childhood in the European and Eurasian conclaves of Hong Kong: “Our worldview was formed by constant shape-shifting and code-switching. To us, Hong Kong’s unusual status, suspended between British and Chinese rule, made it the embodiment of our identity. Every day in our own homes, we were interpreters and intermediaries between the two sides of ourselves.” How did you capture and grapple with this identity in and of liminal space?

LL: I feel as if I had a very privileged childhood in every way, and particularly the privilege of being part of two different cultures. When I was young, we thought we were so lucky to be able to celebrate the Chinese holidays like Lunar New Year and Mid-Autumn Festival as well as the Western ones like Christmas and Easter. We straddled two worlds, and I think that position at the peripheries of both really turned me into a writer. My ability to code-switch into and out of these worlds made me a close observer. I studied modern Chinese studies at university, and later on went to China as a news correspondent, first for BBC and then for NPR. Then I felt that my background helped me access stories that the more traditional white, male correspondents weren’t able to reach. As a mixed-race woman, interviewees would often let their guard down with me — sometimes to their detriment. One example was officials, who often assumed I was just a silly, little intern, as I did not fit their view of a BBC correspondent — and this often turned out to be beneficial as they would say things to me that they wouldn’t dream of saying to others.

Protestors during the 2014 Umbrella Movement in Hong Kong.

SN: You also write about indigenous Hong Kongers being “the children of a rebel, born of insurrection.” Can you talk about the extent to which, in your view, Hong Kong’s history, both precolonial and postcolonial, can be characterized by rebellion and the progressive values that persist there? In what ways do you think national and cultural identity is shaped by rebellion? What does rebellion mean to you personally, given your relationship to and lived experience in Hong Kong?

LL: For so many years, Hong Kongers were told they were economic actors who weren’t interested in politics, and I think to a certain extent people bought that view of themselves even though it wasn’t true. From the start of British colonization, there had been some defiance, including a six-day-long war in 1898 when the New Territories was leased to Great Britain for 99 years. A lot of that history was expunged from the record, and in fact my generation of Hong Kongers were never taught their own history in schools, in part because the way in which Hong Kong became British reflected so poorly on Great Britain that it was thought it was simply better not to talk about it. When I started really digging way back into pre-British history, I found out about these salt rebellions in Lantau against the salt monopoly imposed by the central authorities, and I was just so fascinated by this cycle of rebellion, erasure of history and amnesia. I was also taken by the idea that when Hong Kongers chose their own symbols, they often chose icons known for their rebellion — like the King of Kowloon. In recent years, Hong Kong’s identity really coalesced as a “city of protest,” even before the 2014 Umbrella Movement, but I think the 2019 protests really solidified that idea. The very word “Hong Konger” hadn’t been used that much before, but it was all over all the Lennon Walls, and now it’s a very clear signifier for people from Hong Kong.

SN: You write in the epilogue about the idea of exile and how you and other Hong Kongers are experiencing it as a result of the national security legislation. Exile isn’t just about being dispossessed of a country but also a home. Can you describe exile as you experience it, and what it means for you as a journalist, historian, and human being when people who call Hong Kong home are exiled?

LL: There’s an immense feeling of dislocation when you cannot return home or when your home no longer exists in a familiar form. It feels like you have lost your familiar footing in the world, and it is very discombobulating. One thing that has happened in recent months has been an acceleration of the pace at which people have left Hong Kong, driven both by the national security legislation and more recently by its draconian Covid zero policies, and that’s led to a real growth of Hong Kong communities in exile. That’s one thing that gives me hope. At the beginning of the year, I went to a Hong Konger market here in Melbourne, where all the Hong Kongers were advertising their businesses and getting to know each other, and I just saw this incredibly motivated, dynamic, and determined community beginning to coalesce, and that made me more optimistic about what life can look like outside Hong Kong.

SN: What’s next for you?

LL: I’m actually doing a podcast for the Australian Broadcasting Corporation about the King of Kowloon, which will be released at the end of June. When I finished the book, I realized I had this astonishing archive of eight years of sound recording, and I really wanted to use that. One of my interviewees, Joel Chung, once told me how he felt like he was the King’s archivist, and I feel weirdly similar. I’m hoping that once the podcast is out, maybe the King’s weird hold over me will relax a little.

Sarah Neilson is a freelance writer. They can be found on Twitter @sarahmariewrote.