Nathan Douglas

Nathan James Douglas (born 4 December 1982 in Oxford) is an English athlete who specialises in the triple jump. He won the silver medal at the 2006 European Championships in Athletics in Gothenburg with a jump of 17.21 metres. He suffered a major injury in 2007 and, although he managed to compete at the 2008 Beijing Olympics, he struggled to find form as the injury had upset his technique.

His personal best is 17.64 m (2005).

Nathan Douglas' 2011 season is over after the 28-year-old sustained injury in a freak incident in training. He ruptured ankle ligaments after his foot went through a plyometric box - a piece of equipment used as part of his jump training.

The timing could not have been any worse, as it came on the day he was to conclude his warm weather training, ready for an outdoor season that was to include the World Championships in Daegu.

"Unfortunately my 2011 season is over before it has even begun," Douglas said on Twitter, "due to a freak accident at the end of what had been a successful Aviva warm weather training camp in Italy where my foot went straight through a plyometrics box while hopping, resulting in two ligament ruptures in my ankle."

Despite the set-back, Douglas hopes to return in time to make his case for a place at the 2012 Olympics in London.

"Trust me, I will be doing everything within my power to get fit and healthy as quickly & efficiently as possible while aiming to compete in the 2012 Indoor season," he added.

UK Athletics head coach Charles van Commenee expressed his disappointment with Douglas' latest injury - stressing that it was an unforeseeable accident - but backed him to bounce back in time for next year's Games.

"After four years of having to deal with various injury problems it was looking like this season Nathan was going to be better than ever before," Van Commenee said. "It's a real blow that in literally his last session on his last day of warm weather training he has once again suffered misfortune, and nothing he or his coach could have done could have prevented it.

"The injury will cost him his 2011 season, but I have been impressed by what I saw of Nathan prior to this setback and I am confident he can still achieve something special in 2012."

Any contributions to this item will be gratefully accepted