Nathan Douglas, Jr. was born in Oakland, California. He was the eldest of three children born to Wilson D. Douglas, Jr. and Pearlie D. Douglas. His mother and grandparents taught their children integrity, loyalty, righteousness and compassion, preparing them with the confidence necessary to pursue life challenges.

Nathan attended Allen High School in Allen, Louisiana. He graduated from high school in 1971. He was offered an honor scholarship to Northwestern State University of Louisiana. He also attended Sears Technology Training Center.

Nathan worked for Sears repairing refrigerators and air conditioners. He worked for the United Postal Service and retired after 30 years of service.

Nathan was united in Holy Matrimony with Cynthia Yancy in 1995. During that same year, he became a member of Zion Temple C.O.G.I.C. He loved to read the Bible and had a strong faith in God. He served as an Ordained Deacon, President of the Music Department, worked with the Media Department and member of the Advisory Board.

His love for learning music began when he started playing the guitar at 3 years old. He played the clarinet in the marching band in high school. He played guitar with The Gifted Band and Faithful Few. He was the guitar player for Zion Temple 29 years.

A discerning man of exquisite taste, he provided comfort and solace while asking little in return. Nathan was talented in so many aspects of his life. He owns numerous guitars and usually wore a suit to match his guitar.

Nathan’s legacy will forever be imprinted on the hearts and minds of those he touched. His unending, unwaving integrity for his family, friends and church will be remembered and cherished. As we honor Nathan’s life, we carry forward his spirit, love for music and belief in the power of kindness.

Nathan Douglas, Jr. became absent from the body to be present with the Lord on February 6, 2024. He is survived and cherish by his wife of 29 years Cynthia; three sons: Kirk (Debra) Douglas, Sr. of Allen, Texas; Victor (Deniece) Bushell, Sr. of Houston, Texas and Justin (Tamarah) Douglas of Douglasville, Georgia; two stepsons, John L. Cain of Manhattan, Kansas and Jimmy A. Bryant, Jr. of Fairburn, Georgia; three grandchildren: Kirk Douglas, Jr., Victor Bushell, Jr., and Justin R. Douglas; sister-in-law, Elizbeth Ann Douglas; niece, Ashley Nicole Douglas; a host of nephews; nieces; and other relatives and friends. Also left to cherish is his precious Zion Temple C.O.G.I.C. church family.