Reseña del editor:

Please note that the content of this book primarily consists of articles available from Wikipedia or other free sources online. Pages: 25. Chapters: Youssef Chahine, Nasr Mahrous, Khairy Beshara, Ezzel Dine Zulficar, Ibrahim El Batout, Mohamed Khan, Daoud Abdel Sayed, Salah Abu Seif, Stephan Rosti, Hisham Abdel Khalek, Shadi Abdel Salam, Henry Barakat, Youssef Wahbi, Ovidio G. Assonitis, Ahmed Rashwan, Sally El Hosaini, Sherif Sabri, Islam el Azzazi, Maher Sabry, Sherif Arafa, Atef El-Tayeb, Yousry Nasrallah, Salah Mansour, Ahmad Abdalla, Samir Seif, Sandra Nashaat, Mahmoud Zulfikar, Kamal El Sheikh, Fatin Abdel Wahab, Ahmed El-Nahass, Ahmad Maher, Helmy Halim, Hussein Kamal, Ahmed Badrakhan, Khaled Youssef, Hassan al-Imam, Mohammed Karim, Karim Diaa Eddine, Marwan Hamed, Ahmed Diaa Eddine, Salah Abou Seif. Excerpt: Youssef Chahine (Arabic: ‎) (January 25, 1926 in Alexandria, Egypt -July 27, 2008 in Cairo, Egypt) was an Egyptian film director active in the Egyptian film industry since 1950. He was credited with launching the career of actor Omar Sharif. A critically acclaimed director frequently seen in film festivals during decades, Chahine also had his reach to wider international filmgoers' audiences as one of the co-directors of 11'9"01 September 11. Chahine was born on Jan. 25, 1926 in Alexandria, Egypt to a Lebanese Catholic father, from Zahlé in east Lebanon, and a Lebanese Roman Catholic mother. Although born a Christian, Youssef Chahine was not a believer in organized religion and it was stated that, if asked of his religion, he would reply: Egyptian. "Chahine" is Frenchized version of Turkish "Şahin" ('falcon'). Fascinated by the performing arts from an early age, young Chahine began to create shows at home for his family. Chahine began his education at a Frères' school Collège Saint Marc. Growing up, he attended Alexandria's elite Victoria College. In 1946, Chahine convinced his parents to let him travel to Hollywood to study acting, where he attended...

"About this title" may belong to another edition of this title.