Salah El Din Ahmed Mourad Zulfikar (Arabic language: صلاح ذو الفقار‎) (18 January 1926 – 22 December 1993)[1] was an Egyptian actor and film producer.[2] He started his career as a police officer in the Egyptian National Police, before becoming an actor in 1956. He is regarded as one of the most influential actors in the history of Egyptian film industry.[3][4][5] Zulfikar had roles in more than 100 feature films in multiple genres during a 37-year career, mostly as the leading actor. In 1996, in the centenary of Egyptian cinema, ten of his films as an actor and five of his films as a producer were listed in the Top hundred Egyptian films of the 20th century.[6][7][8][9][10]

Zulfikar appeared in feature films, short films, stage, TV series and Radio series. He is one of the most famous artistic figures in Egypt and the Arab world.[11] His contributions to film, stage and television industries as an actor and a producer earned him a worldwide reputation that made him one of the most influential arab public figures in the 60’s, 70’s and 80’s.[12]

Early life and education[]

Salah El Din Ahmed Mourad Zulfikar (Arabic language: صلاح الدين أحمد مراد ذو الفقار‎) was born on 18 January 1926 in El Mahalla El Kubra, Egypt. His father was Ahmed Mourad Zulfikar, who served as a senior Egyptian police commissioner in the Ministry of Interior and his mother Nabila Zulfikar was an Egyptian housewife. Zulfikar was the seventh of eight brothers and sisters. His eldest brother, Mohamed, was a business man, two elder sisters were Soad and Fekreya. Another brother was movie actor and director Mahmoud Zulfikar. His brother Ezz El-Dine Zulfikar was also a movie director, Kamal Zulfikar was a military officer. His younger brother Mamdouh joined the Faculty of Commerce.

Zulfikar excelled in his studies and was an athlete. He was one of Egypt's champions in boxing and won the King's Cup in boxing (featherweight) in 1947. He initially joined the Faculty of Medicine, Alexandria University, to please his father, who wished Zulfikar to become a doctor like his grandfather. After his father became sick, he transferred his admission to the Police Academy so he could stay in Cairo beside his father. He graduated in 1946. Salah Zulfikar was appointed to the Menoufia Security Directorate and the Prisons Authority, specifically Egypt Prison, and also worked as a teacher at the Police Academy.

Police career[]

In 1949, Zulfikar started teaching at the Police Academy. In 1952 he volunteered to join the police unit in Ismaïlia which was under attack by the British Army. The Egyptian police force refused to hand over their weapons to the British forces, which led the British army to bring in tanks to capture the building. The ensuing battle was later commemorated and is now celebrated in Egypt on 25th of January of every year as National Police Day. Zulfikar received a National Award of Honor for his bravery. In 1956 Suez war, Zulfikar took the initiative leading 19 of his students in the Police Academy and volunteered as commandos resisting the tripartite attack by the British, French and Israeli armies. Zulfikar also received the Military Medal of Duty of First Class from President Gamal Abdel Nasser for risking his life for his country with bravery and honor.[13][14]

Acting career[]

Early career and rise to stardom[]

Salah Zulfikar's brothers Ezz El-Dine Zulfikar and Mahmoud Zulfikar were film directors. During his free time he used to attend film shooting. In 1955 his elder brother, Ezz El-Dine, tried to convince Zulfikar to start acting but he refused for he thought it is an impossible idea due to the nature of his job as a police officer. Ezz El-Dine offered him the lead role in a film; Wakeful Eyes (Uyoun Sahrana) which was released in 1956.

Zulfikar agreed and he received a temporary permit from the Minister of the Interior, which was headed at that time by Zakaria Mohieddin to work in this film. He worked in his second and third films Back Again (Rodda Qalbi) (1957) and Jamila, the Algerian (Gameela) (1958) respectively also with temporary permissions.

After Zulfikar's success, he had to choose his career path. He asked the minister for resignation but instead was promoted to lieutenant colonel and granted an early pension.[15][16]

1950s[]

Salah Zulfikar's second movie was Ezz El-Dine Zulficar's Back Again (Rodda Qalbi) of 1957 was his first success. followed by Azzam in Youssef Chahine's Jamila, the Algerian (Gameela) (1958).

In 1959, Salah Zulfikar starred in five films including Ezz El-Dine Zulficar's The Second Man (Elragol Elthani), and it was a box office as a producer and critical success earning Zulfikar high reviews from Cairo critics.[17][18] Hassan El Imam's Love Until Worship (Hob hatta El Ebada) alongside Taheyya kariokka was a dramatic role showing Zulfikar's acting capabilities, and Light of the Night (Nour El Leil) alongside Mariam Fakhr Eddine. He played the role of Ahmed the playboy in Forbidden Women (Nesaa Moharramat) (1959) alongside Huda Sultan, then he co-starred in his own production; Among the Ruins (Bain Al Atlal) and it was a classical romance earning critical and financial success.[19][20][21]

1960s[]

Zulfikar selection of diversified roles made him popular in Egypt and all over the Arab world. He starred in Hassan El Imam's Money and Women (Mal Wa Nesaa) (1960) and Ezz El-Dine Zulficar's Appointment at the Tower (Maww'ed Fil-borg) in 1962, both films co-starring Soad Hosny.

In 1960, Zulfikar starred in Niazi Mostafa’s Earning (Lo'met El Aish), his next role was in I accuse (Eni Attahem) of Hassan El-Imam, a thriller, alongside Zubaida Tharwat in which Zulfikar played the role of Salah the journalist. He starred in Sacred Bond (Al Rubat Al Muqadas) 1960) of Mahmoud Zulfikar earning him critical recognition from Cairo critics.

In 1961, Zulfikar starred in six films, the romantic comedy; That's What Love Is (El Hubb Keda) alongside Sabah was a great box office success. Mahmoud Zulfikar's Rendezvous with the Past (Maww'ed Maa El Maady) alongside Mariam Fakhr Eddine was a romantic classic making good numbers in the box office. Another romance was A Storm of Love (A'sefa Min Al Hubb) (1961) co-starring Nahed Sherif in her first ever leading role. He played his first villain role for the first time in his career when he starred Me and my Daughters (Ana wa Banaty) alongside leading veteran actor Zaki Rostom in 1961. The following years, Salah Zulfikar achieved success all over the Middle East through multiple film genres including the horror box office hit; The Cursed Palace (Al-Qasr Al-Mal’oun) in 1962. His following role was Mahmoud in Wife Killing Society (Gama'eyat Qatl Al-Zawgat) (1962) a comedy alongside Zahrat El-Ola earning good numbers in the box office. Then his 1963 wonderful role in Saladin (El Nasser Saladin) of Youssef Shahine, starring as Issa El Awam. The same year, he played Doctor Hamooda in Mahmoud Zulfikar's Soft hands (El Aydy el Naema). The film was a participant in 14th Berlin International Film Festival in 1964.[22] In the next year he played a role of an Egyptian police officer in the Italian film; Secret of the Sphinx (La sfinge sorride prima di morire - Stop Londra) of Duccio Tessari.

On stage, Zulfikar’s debut was in 1964’s A Bullet in the Heart (Rosasa Fil Qalb) based on Tawfiq Al-Hakim’s novel with the same name achieving great success in Cairo theaters. His next film was the romantic drama; Dearer than my Life (Aghla Min Hayati) of Mahmoud Zulfikar was a huge success and earned him state award for best actor in 1965. The three Fatin Abdel Wahab's romantic comedies; My Wife, the Director General (Mirati Moudir Aam) in 1966. Then My Wife's Dignity (Karamet Zawgati) (1967), earning him state's award for best actor for his performance. And My Wife’s Goblin (Afreet Mirati) (1968) alongside Shadia, were financial and critical successes.[23]

In 1967, Zulfikar starred in the political play; Rubabikia (Robabeekya) (1967) alongside Taheyya Kariokka and Nabila Ebeid achieving critical and financial success. In 1968, Zulfikar starred in Kamal El Sheikh's The Man Who Lost His Shadow (El Ragol El-lazi fakad Zilloh), the film earned critical recognition. His next role was Yehia in Youssef Chahine’s The Nile and the Life (El Nil Wal Hayah) (1968). He starred in the comedy and a box office hit; Good Morning, My Dear Wife (Sabah El Kher ya Zawgaty El Azeeza) (1969). This encouraged Zulfikar to give an opportunities to a new generation of actresses co-starring in his next films, such as Nelly, Mervat Amin and Naglaa Fathy.

1970s[]

Continuing as a box office winner in Egypt and the Arab world in the 1970s, Zulfikar starred in the box office hit; My Husband's Wife (Imra’a Zawgy) (1970) alongside leading actresses; Nelly and Naglaa Fathi. In the same year, he earned critical recognition from Cairo critics for his performance as Amin Akef in the political thriller, Sunset and Sunrise (Ghroob wa Shrooq) of Kamal El Sheikh (1970). His next role was Fahmy in Virgo (Burg El Azraa) (1970), co-starring Nahed Sherif and Adel Emam. In the same year, he starred in the thriller; Eye of Life (Ain El Hayah) (1970) achieving good numbers in the box office. In The next year he starred in the crime thriller; The Killers (El Qatala) of Ashraf Fahmy making good numbers in box office of 1971. He starred with Faten Hamama in Henry Barakat's short film named The Witch (Sahera) (1971). In his six films of 1972, Zulfikar played diversified roles including Mohsen in A Call for Life (Da'wa Lil Hayah) 1972), co-starring Mervat Amin and Mahmoud El-Meliguy. In Lebanon, Zulfikar met Sabah again in Paris and Love (Paris wal Hob) in 1972 and the film was a commercial hit in Lebanese theatres. He starred in Mahmoud Zulfikar's Featureless Men (Regal bila Malameh) alongside actress Nadia Lutfi, and it made good numbers in the box office. He paired with Soad Hosny for the fourth time in One day, the Nile (Al Nass Wal Nil) of Youssef Chahine in 1972. In Syria, Zulfikar starred in the Syrian romance; Memory of A Night of Love (Thikra Laylat Hubb) (1973) alongside leading actresses Nelly, Muna Wassef, Nabila Ebeid and Hala Shawkat making great numbers in theaters of Syria and Lebanon. Zulfikar achieved box office success in Egyptian theaters in his psychological drama; The Other Man (Al Ragol Al Akhar) (1973) in which he also produced. On stage, Zulfikar played the role of a batchelor in the successful comedy; A Bachelor and Three Maidens (Azib Wa Talaat Awanes) (1972). In Mexico, Zulfikar played the role of his fellow Egyptian King Horemheb alongside Geraldine Chaplin in the Mexican short film Nefertiti and Akhenaton (Spanish: Nefertiti y Aquentos) (1973) directed by Raúl Araiza. In 1974 Zulfikar starred in four films, he played a character of a man suffering from insomnia in 2-1-0 (Etnein Wahed Sefr) (1974). His next role was Dr. Nabil, the psychiatrist treating a bunch of young men with serious issues by taking them on a summer trip to start treatment in In Summer We Must Love (Fel Saef Lazem Neheb) (1974), a comedy co-starring Nour El-Sherif, Samir Ghanem, Magda El Khatib, Abdel Moneim Madbouly and Lebleba. In the same year, he starred in Dunya a drama co-starring Nelly, Mahmoud El-Meliguy and Saeed Saleh. In the same year, he starred on stage in Three Cards Hotel (Fondo' El Talaat Wara't) (1974) co-starring Samir Ghanem and George Sidhom. A villain role, was Hafez in The Guilty (Al Mothneboon), released in 1976. Passing a year from films, in the year 1977, Zulfikar starred in three TV series; The Truth..That Unknown (El Haqeeqa Thalek Al Maghool) co-starring Soher Al Bably and Those Who Burn (Alatheen Yahtareqoon) earning success in Arab TV channels and the famous historical TV miniseries; The Return of the Spirit (Awdet El Roh) based on Tawfiq Al-Hakim's 1933 novel with the same name earning huge success in Egypt and the Arab world. Back to films in the following year, Zulfikar played the character of a police detective investigating a homicide in the crime thriller Desire and Price (Al Raghba Wal Thaman) (1978) a crime thriller alongside Shoukry Sarhan and Nahed Sherief and in the same year, he starred in the commercial hit; Roadless Traveller (Mosafer bila Tareeq) (1978) of Ali Abdel Khalek and alongside Mahmoud Yassin, Magda El Khatib and Gamil Ratib. Zulfikar played a role of the Angel Sarout who comes to Earth to try to save his fellow Angel in Sin of An Angel (Khati'at Malak) (1979). On stage, he starred in One Wife is Enough (Zawga Waheda Takfi) (1979) co-starring Mohamed Negm and achieved commercial success.

1980s[]

Zulfikar's films and TV series continued to be successful during the eighties. He starred in the 1981 film; I'm Not Lying But I'm Beautifying (Ana La Aktheb Wlakenani Atajaml) playing the role of Rafik Hamdy, a famous writer and a father for the first time, a social drama co-starring Ahmed Zaki, Zahrat El-Ola and Athar El-Hakim. As well as Secret Visit (Zeyara Serreya) (1981), playing a judge, earning him state's award for best actor for his performance. His next role was Abdel Ghaffar Lotfy in Moment of Weakness (Lahzet Daaf) (1981), and it was a complex character earning him critical recognition co-starred by Hussein Fahmy and Nelly. In 1982, Zulfikar starred in the crime thriller; The Peacock (El Tawoos) of Kamal El Sheikh and it was a great critical and financial success, earning him best actor state's award for performance. Zulfikar spent almost three years away from films from 1982 to 1985 starring in six TV series including the 1982 thriller miniseries; Detective Inspector (Mofattesh El Mabaheth) which he played the role of a Police commissioner and in 1984, he starred in the biggest joint Arab production at the time; The Mirror (Al Miraya) making Salah Zulfikar the highest paid actor in the Middle East. Zulfikar was prolific on stage starring in five plays on Cairo theaters including Possible? Not Possible (Ma'oul? La Ma'oul) (1985) alongside Huda Sultan earning both critical and financial success.

Zulfikar returned to films in 1985 playing the role of Cheikh Hassouna in Youssef Chahine's adieu Bonaparte (Wadaan bounapart) and it earned high crirical recognition from french critics. The next year, he starred in Naguib Mahfouz novel's adaptation; Please and Your Kindness (Min Fadlak Wa Ihsanak) in 1986, a drama co-starred by Huda Sultan. He played Fadel Abu Al-Fadl; the wealthy man who spent almost everything he owned to build a huge villa and own a sports car in The Barefoot Millionaire (El Millionaira El Hafya) (1987), and his famous 1987 TV miniseries; Diplomatic Love (Al Hubb Fe Haqeeba Diplomacia) co-starred by Laila Fawzi, Ahmed Mazhar, Mariam Fakhr Eddine among others.

In 1988, Zulfikar starred in six films including, Sorry for Bothering (Asef Lel Ezaag) written by Anis Mansour. A social drama co-starring Raghda, and Love Also Dies (Al Hubb Aydan Yamoot) (1988), a romance co-starred by Safia El Emari and Ezzat El Alaili. Zulfikar starred in Days of Terror (Ayam El Ro'b) playing the role of El Hag Abdel Raheem who is a religious rich seller living in Al Hussein neighborhood, a crime thriller alongside Mervat Amin and Mahmoud Yassin. His next film was the 1988 socio-drama; Monsieur le Directeur (Elosta El-Moudir) earning him critical success. The year 1989 was a highly productive year for Salah Zulfikar with three TV miniseries, and five films including the comedy; Mr. Aliwa’s Apartment (Sha'et El Ostaz Aliwa) (1989) co-starred Laila Taher.[24]

1990s[]

Zulfikar's career was revitalized by his cheerful, good-natured performance in Mr. Shalash's Family (A'elat El Ostath Chalash) TV series of 1990 which was a pan Arab success. His final stage role was in The Earthquake (El Zelzal) (1990) based on Mustafa Mahmoud’s book with the same name achieving critical and financial success. In 1991, Zulfikar starred in the crime thriller Wicked Game (Lu'bat Al Ashrar) of Henry Barakat, which was a box office success. He starred in the TV movies; Anything but my Daughter (Ela Ibnaty) (1992) written by Ihsan Abdel Quddus, and Minister in Plaster (Wazir fel Gebs) based on Fathy Ghanem's story in 1993, his next role was a villain one, playing the role of El Hag Abdel Reheem, the drug dealer in the Action; Flames of Vengeance (Laheeb Al-Intiqam) alongside Nour El-Sherif.

In TV, Zulfikar's final role was in The Final Return (El Awda El Akhira) in 1993. In the same year 1993, he acted in Road to Eilat, Nader Galal's The Terrorist and Ashraf Fahmy's Five-Star Thieves. These were Zulfikar's final cinematic roles. He appeared in a special appearance as the Commander of the Navy in the war drama Road to Eilat (El Tareek ela Eilat). He played the role of Dr. Abdelmoneim the head of the family which the terrorist decided to hide in his house in The Terrorist (El Irhabi). Zulfikar starred in Five-Star Thieves (Losoos Khamas Nogoom) as Galal Suleiman, an honest bank director dealing with a huge fraud. All three films were released posthumously in 1994.

Film production career[]

Salah Zulfikar established a film production corporation in 1958 in partnership with his brother Ezz El-Dine Zulficar and took over the administrative side, which prompted him to leave his work in the Solidarity Organization for the Peoples of Afro-Asian Countries, and produced in that year their first film; Ezz El-Dine Zulficar's Among the Ruins (Bain Al Atlal) (1959) which was listed in the Top 100 Egyptian films.[25] Zulfikar co-produced and starred in The Second Man (Al Ragol Al Thani) (1959) of Ezz El-Dine Zulficar alongside Rushdy Abaza, Samia Gamal and Sabah, then in the next year, they produced Angel and Devil (Malak W Sheitan) starring Rushdy Abaza and directed by Kamal El Sheikh and The Holy Bond (Al Rabat Al Moqaddas) (1960) starring Salah Zulfikar, Sabah and Emad Hamdy, and directed by Mahmoud Zulfikar.[26] The following year, Zulfikar established his own corporation and in 1962 he produced 3 films. The first film was Niazi Mostafa's I am the fugitive (Ana El Hareb) (1962) starring Farid Shawqi, A Letter from an Unknown Woman (Resala min Imraa Maghoola) (1962) of Salah Abu Seif and starring Lobna Abdel Aziz and Farid Al-Atrash and Tewfik Saleh's Struggle of the Heroes (1962) (Sir'a Al-Abtal), and it was listed in the Top 100 Egyptian films in the history of Egyptian cinema. In the same year, he produced and starred in Ezz El-Dine Zulficar's Appointment at the Tower (Maww'ed Fil-Borg) (1962) , all of which achieved box office success.[27]

Salah Zulfikar has always been a women's rights defender in his films and has produced more than one film, doing justice for Egyptian women, for example; My Wife, the Director General (Mirati Modeer Aam) (1966) of Fatin Abdel Wahab which did justice to the main female character and allowed her to be a director over men, and it became listed in the Top 100 films in the centenary of Egyptian cinema.

In 1966, Salah Zulfikar produced Three Thieves or (3 Losoos), the film tells three stories of three thieves waiting for a ruling from the judge, he starred in a story among them, which was named The Gold thief (Sareq Al Dahab) alongside Hind Rostom. In 1969, Salah Zulfikar produced A Taste of Fear (Shey min El Khouf) starring Shadia and directed by Hussein Kamal, and it caused an uproar in Egypt at the time. The film was banned and President Gamal Abdel Nasser watched the film twice and allowed it to be released in theatres, it achieved huge success and it was listed in the Top 100 films in the centenary of Egyptian cinema. Zulfikar produced A Journey of Suffering (Rihlat Azab) (1972) and was mostly released in theaters of Syria and Lebanon. The following year he was the executive producer of the short film The Death Song (Oghneyat El Moot) starring Faten Hamama and directed by Henry Barakat which discussed the issue of revenge in Upper Egypt, and in the same year he produced and starred in The Other Man (Al Ragol Al Akhar) (1973) which made great numbers in the box office.

Salah Zulfikar produced I Want A Solution (Oreed hallan) (1975) starring Faten Hamama and co-starring Rushdy Abaza. The film was arguing about women's rights in divorce. The film achieved box office and critical success and contributed in changing the personal status law in Egypt at the time in favor of women. Zulfikar won the State award for production, and this film was also listed in the Top 100 films in the centenary of Egyptian cinema.

Death[]

Salah Zulfikar died of a sudden heart attack on Wednesday, 22 December 1993, at the Police Hospital in Cairo, Egypt.

Honours[]

Egypt: Military Medal of Duty of first class (Golden) from President Gamal Abdel Nasser in appreciation of his patriotic role in the battles of the 1956 Suez War in 1957.

Egypt: Order of the Republic - Grand Cordon in science and arts in 1981.[28]

Egypt: Order of the Republic - Grand Cordon in science and arts in 1990.[29]

Awards[]

Selected awards[]

State Award (Ministry of Culture) for Best Actor for his role in Soft Hands (Al Aydy Al Naema) in 1964.

State Award for Best Actor for his role in Dearer than my life (Aghla Min Hatati) in 1965.

State Award for Best Producer for My Wife, the Director General (Mirati Moudir Aam) in 1966.

Best Film Award from the Catholic Center Film Festival for My Wife, the Director General (Mirati Moudir Aam) in 1966.

State Award for Best Actor for his role in My Wife’s Dignity (Karamet Zawgati) in 1967.

State Award for Best Producer Award for I Want a Solution (Oridu Hallan) in 1975.

Certificate of Appreciation from President Anwar El-Sadat on Art Day in 1979.

State Award for Best Actor for his role in Secret Visit (Zeyara Serreya) in 1981.

State Award for Best Actor for his role in The Peacock (El Tawoos) in 1982.

Special Jury Award from Cairo International Film Festival in 1991.

Honorary Award for his entire work from the National Egyptian Film Festival in 1994.

Personal life[]

Zulfikar married four times. He married his first wife, Mrs. Nafisa Bahgat daughter of Mahmoud Bey Bahgat in 1947, a socialite, and she bore him his sons Ahmed Zulfikar and Mona Zulfikar, and she remained his wife until her death in 1988. His son Ahmed graduated as a mechanical engineer to become a businessman owning his own corporation and his daughter Mona graduated as a lawyer and became a prominent lawyer owning a law firm. Zulfikar had three grandchildren, Karim Zulfikar is a businessman, Salah Zulfikar is a corporate director and Ingy Badawy is a lawyer.

Besides boxing, Salah Zulfikar was a fan and used to play football with fellow actors from time to time. He supported Zamalek S.C.[30][31]

Zulfikar's second marriage was to actress Zahrat El-Ola in 1957, but they were divorced two years later. The love story that brought him together with the singer and actress Shadia was the most famous of all, and they married in 1964 while filming Dearer than my Life (Aghla Min Hayati). Together, Zulfikar and Shadia formed an artistic duo through which they presented many successful films in Egyptian Cinema. Zulfikar produced more than one film starring Shadia like My Wife, the Director General and A Taste of Fear (Shae Men El Khof) in 1969. Their marriage ended in divorce after seven years.[32] Then he married his last wife, Bahiga, and their marriage continued until his death.

Filmography[]

Prolific in Egyptian film industry for 37 years. Salah Zulfikar was a film and stage actor and producer. He produced 14 films & appeared in more than 100 films from 1956 to 1993.