For Retailers and Brands, the Next Recession May Already Have Begun

Is a recession already here? Despite optimistic forecasts, weak earnings and shifting consumer behaviors suggest economic trouble ahead for retailers and brands.

More Ukrainian Brigades Roll Into Russia’s Kursk Oblast As Ukrainian Artillery Blocks Russian Reinforcements

After four days, five Ukrainian brigades control 400 square miles of Russia.

Khalid Sheikh Mohammed And 2 Other 9/11 Defendants Reach Plea Deal With U.S.

The Pentagon said three Guantanamo Bay inmates agreed to enter guilty pleas, though the terms of those pretrial agreements were not made public.

Dana White Savagely Announces UFC’s Split With Undefeated Fighter

UFC CEO Dana White was not in the best of moods after UFC 304, and Mohammed Mokaev was one of the people who felt his wrath.

Bella And Gigi Hadid’s Former Home In Montecito Lists For $9 Million

The former Mediterranean-style childhood home of supermodels Gigi and Bella Hadid, owned by their father Mohamed Hadid, recently hit the market for $9 million.

Mohamed Ali Janah: Maldives Business Leader, Presidential Advisor On The Future Of Work

The Maldives’ most internationally recognized business leader on the future of work

The Crazy Takes On Mohamed Salah’s ‘Fire’ Miss The Context

Salah is standing on the touchline waiting to enter the action when the manager approaches him and aggressively says something that agitates the forward.

COUNCIL POST | Membership (fee-based)

A Deep Dive Into Artificial Intelligence And Its Applications

Artificial Intelligence (AI) has emerged as a significant technological progress, driving firms to transform their business model in various sectors and industries.

Inside The New Royal Mansour Casablanca Hotel

Casablanca welcomes a new glamorous hotel to the city, meet the Royal Mansour Casablanca.

COUNCIL POST | Membership (fee-based)

Moving Forward With Your BPO Partner: Building Trust For What Comes Next

For startups or SMEs to collaborate effectively, efficiently and with trust with their BPO partners, they must ensure these three aspects.

COUNCIL POST | Membership (fee-based)

Addressing Data Security Challenges Within BPO Customer Support In Saudi Arabia

With the PDPL and the regulations now in effect, businesses should swiftly adopt measures to ensure compliance.

Mohamed Salah Is Returning To Liverpool, And His AFCON Could Already Be Over

The hamstring injury is slightly worse than first thought. The star forward returns to Liverpool this week for treatment.

7 Business Lessons From Egyptian Billionaire Mohamed Mansour

The head of the $6 billion Mansour family empire was once penniless. Now he’s on top of the world.

Mohamed Salah Awaits His Lionel Messi Moment With Egypt At AFCON

Just as Messi waited for a World Cup, Salah waits for AFCON glory. It's the tournament he might have to win to be considered up there with the greats of African soccer.

Liverpool FC’s Forwards Need To Step Up And Support Mohamed Salah

Signings like Diogo Jota, Cody Gakpo, Luis Diaz and Darwin Nunez were heralded as astute buys, but asked to become the fulcrum of the team have flattered to deceive.