John Lucas III may have been the third guard in Tom Thibodeau's rotation at the start of the season, but with so many injuries to Derrick Rose and CJ Watson, the diminutive guard from Houston played a key role in Chicago's back court this season.

Lucas inspired both his teammates and Bulls fans with his play and provided some memorable moments.

After playing in only two games for Chicago last season, Lucas appeared in 49 games this year, even making two starts. He usually was the player that challenged Rose in practice and when Derrick was trying to get himself back ready to play, he would organize 3-on-3 games at the Berto Center and Lucas would always be a part of those sessions.

His teammates and coaches always heaped high praise on him and because of the heart he showed on the court, Chicago embraced him as he embodied what it means to wear a Chicago Bulls jersey.

Lucas may be listed as a point guard because of his size, but by trade, he's a scorer. He averaged 7.5 points per game off the bench while attempting 7.3 shots per game, the most in his four year NBA career, and he had some pretty big scoring outings.

In his first Bulls start, he scored 25 points against the Washington Wizards and scored 25 points against the Cleveland Cavaliers in the season finale. But the biggest game of possibly his career was the 24 points he scored against the Miami Heat on March 14th at the United Center. He hit a step-back jumper over LeBron James to effectively seal the win for the Bulls which earned him the nickname “Kobe Lucas” in social media circles.

Although he's said over and over again that he loves being a member of the Chicago Bulls, Lucas most likely won't be back next season. It's surely not because he doesn't want to. His strong play this season made teams around the NBA take notice and he's probably earned himself a substantial pay raise from another organization once the free agency period opens up.

Still, no matter what team he plays for next, John Lucas III will always be a favorite of Chicago Bulls fans and he's sure to always get a warm reception if he should roll into town wearing another team's uniform.