ANAHEIM – Luis Cruz and Don Mattingly were using the same term, but referencing entirely different things.

In every sense of the word, the Dodgers infielder’s timing was right on Tuesday.

With his days on the parent club’s roster seemingly numbered as Hanley Ramirez works his way back from a hamstring injury, Cruz produced his first extra-base hit of the season when he needed it most. The timing of the 29-year-old’s two-run home run in the fifth inning of Tuesday’s 3-0 win over the Angels couldn’t have been better, according to Mattingly.

The Dodgers manager was grateful it gave his team a lead it wouldn’t relinquish.

Cruz was happy the timing of his plant foot and his swing were properly coordinated, something that has been plaguing him during a season-long slump during which his batting average has ranged from .087 to .115.

After going without a plate appearance for eight consecutive games, Cruz surprisingly started Monday’s series opener with the Angels. In two games prior to Wednesday, he was 2 for 6 with three runs scored.

“All those games I wasn’t playing, I was working every day and finally I started feeling my timing right and seeing the ball better,” Cruz said. “I tell myself, `If I did what I did last year, I can do it again.’ I’m the same guy.”

What Cruz did last year was emerge from more than a decade in the minor leagues to become a fixture at third base, where he hit .295 after the all-star break.

He has hardly gotten out of the batter’s box this year. Cruz needed 78 at-bats to collect his first extra-base hit. He has walked just three times in nearly two months. Monday and Tuesday’s performance combined raised his average 18 points to .114 entering Wednesday.

“His timing has been off, but also his strike zone has been too big,” Dodgers hitting coach Mark McGwire said. “He puts himself in a lot of holes swinging at bad pitches and when he corrects that, his timing will fall into place. He’s shown a lot of character getting in the cage every day trying to work through this stuff.”

When Ramirez comes off the disabled list, which could be as soon as Monday, the Dodgers will need to make a roster spot for the shortstop. Cruz was the obvious candidate before this week. The question is, has he done enough to change that or is it too little too late?

Ramirez rehab

Ramirez will begin his rehabilitation from a pulled hamstring today with Single-A Rancho Cucamonga. The shortstop played just four games between his return from thumb surgery and his current ailment, providing an ample tease by going 5 for 12 with two doubles and a home run.

“Hanley essentially hasn’t played since spring training,” Mattingly said.

“I know how good Hanley is, but it’s hard to know what to expect coming out of the gate. Usually his timing it pretty good all the time.”

Mattingly said Ramirez would need at least three rehab games, which would land him with the Dodgers on Monday.

Hamilton relaxed about back

Josh Hamilton knows the remedy for the back spasms the kept him out of Tuesday’s lineup, an injury he has dealt with in the past. The Angels right fielder took some muscle relaxers Tuesday night, woke up sore but not so much that he couldn’t play Wednesday.

“I was just making a swing and felt it grab me,” Hamilton said. “It’s happened before. I knew exactly what it was when I felt it and I knew it would subside in a few hours.”

Also …

The Angles optioned right-handed reliever Mark Lowe to Triple-A Salt Lake on Wednesday to make room on the roster for Wednesday’s starter, Jered Weaver… Peter Bourjos ran the bases aggressively Wednesday, a significant step in the Angels center fielder’s return from a left hamstring string strain April 29. Angels manager Mike Scioscia said Bourjos may play in rehabilitation games next week… The Angels held a moment of silence prior to Wednesday’s game for Dr. Lewis Yocum, the team doctor who died of cancer Saturday. The team is expected to honor Yocum with a patch on their jerseys later this year.