Just when it appeared the magic in Tyler Hopman's bat and Luis Cruz's right arm may have run out, the sectional playoff heroes continued to find ways to extend the Old Bridge High School baseball team's storybook postseason.

Hopman, who was hitless in four previous at-bats, delivered a two-run single in the top of the eighth inning and Cruz pitched the final three and a third frames as the Knights rallied for a dramatic 5-3 comeback victory over Hunterdon Central in Friday's Central Group IV final.

Old Bridge (20-12) will face South Jersey champion Williamstown, a 4-1 winner over Cherokee, in Tuesday's state Group IV semifinal at Rowan University.

The victory was the third straight in its final at-bat for Old Bridge, which defeated defending state champion Jackson Memorial in a 13-inning sectional semifinal and edged West Windsor-Plainsboro South in the sectional quarterfinals by identical 3-2 scores.

Rob Laconti led off the top of the eighth with a single off reliever Peter Woltersdorf, the third pitcher Hunterdon Central used in the game. He advanced to second on a sacrifice and took third when the shortstop misplayed Cruz's groundball. With runners on the corners, Cruz stole second. Hopman followed with his clutch one-out single through the right side of the infield, making the score 5-3.

Hopman, who batted ninth for much of the season and was even DH'd for on occasion, entered the game batting .571 (8-for-14) in the NJSIAA Tournament with two homers (including a game-tying solo blast against Jackson Memorial), two doubles, four runs scored (including the game-winner in the sectional quarterfinals) and three RBI.

"He was down on himself because he didn't have a hit at the plate all day, then comes up and gets the hit to win the game," Old Bridge head coach Jimmy Freel said. "It's storybook stuff. I don't know what to say. It's magic."

Cruz, who has taken the mound just three times all season, largely out of necessity because the Knights remain without two frontline starters who had combined to throw 85 innings with a 1.46 ERA, entered with two away and the bases loaded with the score 2-2 in the home fifth. He induced a pop up to escape the jam.

"What he's done in the last two games is a career for most high school kids," Freel said of Cruz, who was brilliant in five innings of relief against Jackson Memorial. "For a kid who hasn't pitched all year to come in here and do that, in the biggest games of his life, what can I say? He's throwing strikes and getting it done. It's just awesome."

Hunterdon Central took a short-lived 3-2 lead in the sixth inning when Cruz hit cleanup batter Matt Toke (the second straight batter Cruz hit with a pitch) with two away and the bases loaded. He retired the next batter on a fielder's choice groundout to limit the damage.

Jordan Fetterman led off the top of the seventh with a double down the third-base line. He advanced to third when Vin Donofrio brilliantly singled through a hole on the left side of the infield as the Red Devils, who were expecting him to bunt, utilized a wheel defense that had the shortstop sprinting to cover third base.

After James Gabriel fanned on a 2-2 pitch, Zach Attianese grounded sharply to the right side of the infield with runners on the corners. Hunterdon Central, however, was unable to turn the 4-6-3 double play as Attianese barely beat the relay to first, allowing Fetterman to score the game-tying run.

After Scott Rasile singled and took second on a wild pitch with one away in the home seventh, Cruz fanned the No. 8 batter and induced the No. 9 hitter into a pop up to end the threat and preserve the 3-3 deadlock.

Hunterdon Central (23-7-1), which was outhit 10-6 and stranded a total of 13 runners (eight in scoring position), left the tying run on first in the bottom of the eighth as Cruz sat down No. 3 hitter Brett McManus and Toke to set off a wild postgame celebration on the pitcher's mound.

McManus, a four-year starter headed to the University of Rhode Island after a brilliant career, went 0-for-4 with three deep fly outs.

Old Bridge starting pitcher James Gabriel, who pitched in and out of trouble, labored over four and two thirds innings. He fanned one, walked five, hit a batter and allowed two runs, only one of which was earned.

After Hunterdon Central loaded the bases with one away in the second on consecutive walks and a bunt single, Jack Korn plated the game's first run with a sacrifice fly to left field.

The Knights scored twice in the top of the fourth to take a 2-1 lead. Gabriel redeemed himself at the plate, igniting the rally with a leadoff double to right field. Attianese followed with an RBI double down the first-base line and, after advancing to third on a sacrifice bunt, scored on Laconti's single.

Hunterdon Central answered with a run in the home fifth, knocking Gabriel out of the box in the process. An uncharacteristic error by Hopman, who plays second base when he doesn't pitch, opened the floodgates. Toke followed with a two-out single, putting runners on first and second. Gabriel then threw eight consecutive balls to load the bases and force home the tying run as the Red Devils made the score 2-2.

"The reason we are here today and the reason we are going to the next game," Freel said, "is because we never give up."

Despite being self-deprecating after the game, Hopman epitomized Freel's sentiment, proving yet again magic was still left in his bat, something the senior said teammates helped create.

"I had a horrible game," Hopman said. "I'm not gonna lie. I was not comfortable at the plate. In the field, I had an error. But my teammates, they didn't give up on me. They all looked me in the eye and said you're going to come through for us.

"I knew right then I had to come through for them, because they had so much faith in me. I got the job done and there's no better feeling in the world."