Pancorbo in English dictionary

Pancorbo

Sample sentences with "Pancorbo"

Declension Stem

In 1463, it was one of the five founding villas of the Brotherhood of Álava alongside Sajazarra, Miranda de Ebro, Pancorbo and Salvatierra/Agurain.

On 31 October Marshal Lefebvre's IV Corps fell upon Blake's 19,000 men at Pancorbo, turning back the hesitant Spanish advance.

Afterwards, al-Mundir took a sizable portion of the Muslim army and went to Pancorbo, another mountain pass through the Obarenes.

The battle was fought when the Córdoban forces attempted to cross the pass at Pancorbo.

After defeat in Pancorbo, Pamplona, led by the native Basque lord Eneko Arista, detached (817) and Aragón ensued (820).

After Louis the Pious' half-hearted expedition to Pamplona circa 814, Basque tribal chieftain Enneko Aritza, who held strong family ties with the Banu Qasi led by his half-brother Musa, prevailed in the fortress circa 816 (or earlier) after news of Charlemagne's death (814) spread and a Frankish vassal, Belasko of Pamplona— Velasco, cited as Balashk al-Yalashki in Muslim sources—was defeated in the Battle of Pancorbo.

Fly in to Vitoria (VIT), 26.1 mi (42 km) from downtown Pancorbo.

Pancorbo is a friendly locale known for its historical sites.

Pedro Romero Espejo was born in Pancorbo (Burgos) April 28, 1871.He entered the Redemptorist school at El Espino and was eventually professed on September 24, 1889. He was ordaned on February 29, 1896.

Hotel type Hotels Pancorbo Guest houses Pancorbo

Peninsular War Napoleon's campaign, 1808–1809 Pancorbo The Battle of Tudela (23 November 1808) saw an Imperial French army led by Marshal Jean Lannes attack a Spanish army under General Castaños.

Explore Pancorbo Pancorbo overview Pancorbo is a friendly locale known for its historical sites.

In this paper, the procedure is described by how to prove a new species of cave spiders - Nesticus baeticus López-Pancorbo & Ribera, 2011 and its comparison in phylogeny with the other species of the genus Nesticus that are endemic to the area of the Iberian Peninsula.

What to see around Pancorbo Distinguished for its historical sites, here are some top landmarks to visit:

Pancorbo overview Pancorbo is a friendly locale known for its historical sites.

Authors