Calvin Coolidge’s Background

Coolidge was born on 4 July 1872 in Plymouth, Vermont. His parents instilled in him the puritan values that would characterise Coolidge’s political career: honesty, reserve, virtue, thrift, and industry.

He graduated from Amherst College with an honours degree in law and began practising in 1897 in Massachusetts. Almost simultaneously, Coolidge entered politics. He became a councilman in Northampton, Massachusetts in 1898. In 1905, he married Grace Anna Goodhue, who was a teacher for deaf people; they would go on to have two sons.

Coolidge methodically climbed the political ladder, holding positions in the Massachusetts House of Representatives (1906-09), as Mayor of Northampton (1910-12), in the Massachusetts senate (1912-15), as Lieutenant Governor (1916-19), and as Governor of Massachusetts (1919-21), before entering the federal government.

In 1919, Coolidge was cast into the spotlight for his decision to send the state guard to restore order during a strike by the Boston police for better pay and working conditions. Leaders of the labour union asked Coolidge to support rehiring police officers that had been fired for striking but he refused. In response, he said:

There is no right to strike against the public safety by anybody, anywhere, anytime.

Calvin Coolidge as the thirtieth US President

Calvin Coolidge was chosen as the running mate of Senator Warren Harding of Ohio in the 1920 presidential election. Harding won the election with a huge landslide of 61% of the popular vote, having campaigned on the promise of a ‘return to normalcy’ after the First World War and the reform policies of the Progressive Era.

Coolidge served as Harding’s Vice President until Harding died unexpectedly in 1923, making Coolidge President.

When Harding died, Coolidge was at his childhood home in Vermont and was sworn in by his father – a notary public – in the middle of the night by candlelight.

As the Republican candidate in the 1924 election, Coolidge ran on the slogan ‘Keep Cool with Coolidge’ and won a landslide victory in his own right. The election of 1924 has been said to be the high point of conservatism in the United States, as both the Republican and Democratic candidates campaigned on conservative principles.

What was Calvin Coolidge like as president?

Warren Harding’s administration was exposed as being involved in a number of scandals. Coolidge, therefore, inherited a government that the people did not have faith in, but he quickly set about fixing this.

The most notable scandal was the Teapot Dome oil-lease scandal, and Coolidge appointed a counsel specifically to investigate this, as well as dismissing Harry M Daugherty, Harding’s corrupt attorney. He quickly regained the faith of the American people and became respected. Coolidge was also known as a man of few words and earned the nickname Silent Cal.

He was dedicated to maintaining what he referred to as ‘a state of contentment seldom before seen’ in America and epitomised the laissez-faire style of government. Businesses were allowed to grow freely under his administration, and he famously said:

The chief business of the American people is business.

Laissez-faire literally means ‘let them do [what they will]’ and refers to limited government intervention in a country’s economy.

Foreign Policy

Calvin Coolidge was not overly interested or involved in international affairs. He was neither isolationist nor interventionist, leaving US involvement in world affairs largely up to members of his administration. He did, however, strongly oppose US membership in the League of Nations.

Isolationism means playing no role in the internal affairs of other nations.

In 1924, the Dawes Plan was introduced to give long-term loans to Germany as they struggled to pay their war reparations to Britain and France. As Britain and France then used this money to pay back war debt to the US, this program – named after Vice President Charles Dawes – benefitted American bankers.

In 1928, Calvin Coolidge signed the Kellogg-Briand Pact, which outlawed war as foreign policy. It was signed by the US, France and 12 other nations and was named after Secretary of State Frank Kellogg and the French Foreign Minister Aristide Briand. Both Charles Dawes and Frank Kellogg won a Nobel Peace Prize for their work on international affairs.

The US remained heavily involved in Latin American countries during Coolidge’s time in office. Investments rose from $1.26 billion in 1920 to $3.52 billion in 1928, tipping the economies of these countries to the United States.¹ Coolidge travelled to Cuba in 1928 to address Latin American leaders and the Coolidge administration recognised the need for change in how the US engaged with the rest of the Western Hemisphere, although no concrete action was taken.

Calvin Coolidge - Key takeaways

Calvin Coolidge was a conservative Republican president who supported laissez-faire to allow businesses to grow.

Coolidge restored faith in the government and was respected by the American people after the scandals of the Harding administration.

During his time in office, Coolidge drastically reduced government debt, unemployment, and taxes.

He vetoed bills that would aid First World War veterans and farmers, demonstrating his commitment to laissez-faire.

He was not overly involved in international affairs although members of his administration, Charles Dawes and Frank Kellogg, won Nobel Peace Prizes.

References

David Greenberg, ‘Calvin Coolidge: Foreign Affairs’, UVA Miller Center: https://millercenter.org/president/coolidge/foreign-affairs

Fig. 1 - Coolidge House (https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/File:PlymouthVT_CalvinCoolidgeHouse.jpg) by Magicpiano (https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/User:Magicpiano) Licensed by CC BY-SA 3.0 (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/3.0/deed.en)