Windows Server is a line of Microsoft operating systems (OSes) comprised of extremely powerful machines. Windows Server was first launched in April 2003. It’s typically installed on heavy-use servers serving as a backbone for most IT companies, applications, and services. The server handles the administrative group-related activities on a network. It organizes, stores, sends, and receives files from devices connected to a network.

When it comes to networking, Windows Server has become the standard. For the last 16 years, Microsoft has released a major version of Windows Server every four years and a minor version every two years. The minor versions can be recognized with the suffix R2. The Windows operating system is persistently updated to add new functionality to match the needs of today's users. Administrators need to understand how their server has evolved and upgraded. The list of all major and minor Microsoft Windows Server versions is as follows:

Windows Server 2000: Microsoft dropped the NT version from its system to emphasize new Windows capabilities. This edition included networking features, such as XMP support and the ability to create active server pages. This edition also created specialized versions for server environments with the help of its Advanced Server and a Datacenter edition.

Windows Server 2003: This was the first version of Windows developed by Microsoft as a part of its NT family of operating systems. The release of Windows Server 2003 brought a significant difference. The objective of Windows Server 2003 was to reduce the need to reboot the system. It provided the ability to install updates without restarting the system. Another feature of Windows Server 2003 was its ability to define server roles, which enabled IT teams to customize operating systems for specific tasks like DNS servers. Windows Server 2003 came with multiple versions, including the Standard, Advanced, and Datacenter versions.

Windows Server 2008: This server edition was the third release of the Windows Server operating system. It brought on the Windows Server operating system, which included improvements to Active Directory (AD) and changes in the OS software support features and network services. One of the significant enhancements observed was the Microsoft Hyper-V system. This enabled users to create virtual machines (VMs) to give an advantage to Windows users in the competitive market. This version also included new administration tools known as Event Viewer and Server Manager to provide more control to administrators over important server activities.

Windows Server 2008 R2: Windows Server 2008 R2 was an updated 2008 edition in 2009. The significant changes found in this version were due to the transition from Windows Vista to being based on Windows 7. This change not only brought the system to a 64-bit environment but included other technical updates on supporting services. This version brought additional updates to AD, better group policy implementation, and new services. It also provided better server access to users in remote locations with DirectAccess and BranchCache.

Windows Server 2012: This version is the fifth edition of the Windows Server operating system. Unlike its predecessor, this version has four editions (Foundation, Essentials, Standard, and Datacenter) with various improved features, such as an IP address management role, an updated version of Hyper-V, an all-new Windows Task Manager, updated versions of PowerShell and Server Core, and a new file system known as ReFS. Microsoft added new functionalities to Windows Server 2012 and marketed the new version as Cloud OS to become more competitive in the cloud. The improved functionality enabled users to employ the Hyper-V architecture easily with other new cloud technologies. The changes made to support this included updates to the storage system, the addition of the Hyper-V Virtual Switch , and the inclusion of Hyper-V Replica.

Windows Server 2012 R2: Windows Server 2012 R2 was an updated version of Windows 2012. It was released in 2013 with many changes and improvements to Windows 12 functionalities so it could integrate with cloud services. One of these changes included rewrites to both network services and security protocols. Updates also included the introduction of PowerShell and Desired State Configuration systems designed to enhance the network configuration management. Another update improved the functionality of storage systems, provided better and easier access for file sharing, and enhanced distributed file replication.

Windows Server 2016: Windows Server 2016 is the seventh edition of the Windows Server operating system. It was the successor to the Windows 8-based Windows Server 2012 and was developed concurrently with Windows 10. This version introduced a new server, Nano Server. This server was a scaled-down version with a limited interface designed to make it secure. This release also introduced Network Controller, which administrators could use to help them manage physical and virtual network devices from a single location. This release also enhanced the VM system to support the use of containers, make their interaction with Docker easier, and support encryption for Hyper-V. Windows Server 2016 came with two editions: Standard and Datacenter.

Windows Server 2019: Windows Server 2019 is the most used Windows Server version. It was released in October 2018 and included comprehensive features to meet emerging networking requirements, including the following:

Windows Admin Center: The Windows Admin Center was designed to centralize server management. It also includes several tools IT teams can use daily for things such as configuration management, performance monitoring, and managing services running on different servers.

Hyper Converged Infrastructure (HCI): Microsoft moved to virtualization after adding Hyper-V in Windows Server 2008. VMs in the latest Windows version included enhanced HCI features built to give network administrators the ability to manage virtualized services.

Microsoft Defender Advanced Threat Protection: One of the major concerns of businesses today is cybersecurity, particularly advanced persistent threats. Attackers use whaling, spear phishing, and social media profiling to gain entry to the network, and antivirus systems can help prevent these attacks. This provides advanced threat protection against emerging cyberattacks. Microsoft released Microsoft Defender ATP as part of Windows Server 2019. It not only monitors accounts for suspicious activity but tracks the activities of users, prevents unauthorized changes, and automatically investigates attacks. It also provides options for remediation.

Windows Server performance monitoring refers to different processes through which you can accurately measure key metrics. With the basic built-in tools in Windows Server, you can analyze and troubleshoot common issues such as CPU, memory, hard disk, and more. However, you need third-party tools to monitor your Windows Server, measure critical metrics, and identify issues.

Let's look at some monitoring best practices to help ensure your server is efficient, accurate, and useful.

Define a baseline: A best practice is to keep track of your server activities. Make sure you have set baselines and measurements for performing a system-level analysis by examining the entire system, not just a single metric or component at a time.

Monitor consistently: Windows Server performance monitoring should be done consistently. Monitoring processes can help you watch critical components and their metrics. You can also automate and schedule monitoring processes to look for errors and server downtime.

Use tools: Measuring specific performance statistics and monitoring relevant metrics can be crucial to pinpoint problems. Organizations may utilize various tools such aspatch management to automate the most strenuous processes, helping their servers stay up-to-date, checking for failed patches, and quickly fixing issues.