Offsite sessions will run as part of the main conference program for AMaGA2021. Attendance at one offsite session are included with full registrations.

Thursday 10 June 2021, 1300-1700

Buses to all venues will leave from the Parliamentary Triangle at the conclusion of the morning National Network sessions. Please note there are no alternative sessions on Thursday afternoon for those who choose not to attend an offsite session.

(Almost) always open - physical and digital engagement with 2020 hindsight

Location: National Library of Australia & Questacon

Capacity: 50 people

Focus: During a year of continual disruption, Australians sought information, education, entertainment and connection. Many who weren't already regular National Library users discovered the plethora of resources available. Questacon had to rethink its hands-on approach to create an entirely new experience in addition to online offerings. Join colleagues from neighbouring institutions in the Parliamentary Triangle - the National Library and Questacon - to learn about how they radically re-imagined their engagement activities in response to the challenges and opportunities of 2020.

Digitising and using audio-visual collections at the NFSA

Location: National Film & Sound Archives

Capacity: 25 people

Focus: Join the team at the National Film and Sound Archive to explore audio and video digitisation facilities and techniques as we tackle the enormous task of digitising at risk magnetic media, audio collections and other materials. After touring the studios, join the Engagement team in the public spaces, highlighting some of the ways in which digitised collection material is used in our exhibitions and programs.

Photo credit: NFSA

Growing for conservation, research and education at the ANBG and Arboretum

Location: Australian National Botanic Gardens & National Arboretum

Capacity: 40 people

Focus: Enjoy the outdoors - visit the plants at the National Arboretum and the Australian National Botanic Gardens. With a collection that is planted in the ground and treasures that are subject to weather, how do these two institutions manage education programs in STEM.

Participants to please bring a hat, warm clothes, sunscreen, walking shoes and water.

Mitchell: Behind the scenes

Location: Australian War Memorial Storage Facility & National Archives of Australia

Capacity: 40 people (two groups of 20)

Focus: How do you preserve the history of a nation? Go on an exclusive behind-the-scenes tour of the AWM and NAA state-of-the-art repositories. See the facilities and expertise that are conserving these treasures for the next generation.

Participants to please wear closed in shoes and warm clothes.

Photo credit: Australian War Memorial