Image: Fascinating Science exhibition. Photo: Questacon, supplied.

The latest family-fun experience has opened at the Queen Victoria Museum at Inveresk, welcoming not one, but two touring exhibitions from Questacon Australia.

With both exhibitions free to enter, the Science on the Move and Fascinating Science exhibitions offer hours of hands-on, interactive play for the whole family.

Visitors exploring the beloved STEAM Gallery at the Museum at Inveresk will discover and explore principles of light, music and sound, human biology and health, force and motion, ecology and the environment, and electricity and magnetism within the Science on the Move modules.

Families will be turning themselves into a battery, cranking up a tornado in a bottle, escaping from handcuffs, predicting the outcome of chaos, building a food chain and much, much more.

Over in the Fascinating Science modules, families will explore everyday scientific principles and problem-solving puzzles. From interactive experiences to learn about logic, balance, fluids, illusions and mathematical puzzles, there’s three zones ready for exploration within these modules;

The Puzzlequest Zone involves logic and spatial puzzles;

The Eyes On and Perception Zone explores visual illusions and human perception;

The Forces Zone discovers forces such as magnetism, friction, gravity and spinning.

City of Launceston Mayor Matthew Garwood said both exhibitions on tour from Questacon offered hours of fun for northern Tasmanian families.

“The great thing about both of these touring exhibitions from Questacon is that there’s something for all ages to interact with,” Mayor Garwood said.

“Having two exhibitions on offer means kids (and adults) will be able to visit time and time again, while finding something new to explore through each visit.

“I’d encourage everyone to make the most of this experience while on display at QVMAG—it's the perfect free activity.”

Both exhibitions are now open daily from 10am to 4pm with free entry at the Queen Victoria Museum at Inveresk:

Fascinating Science is on display until 18 August 2024

Science on the Move is on display until 16 March 2025

Visit www.qvmag.tas.gov.au/Whats-on/Museum-at-Inveresk for more information.