Media Release

17 August 2023

Questacon, the National Science and Technology Centre is coming to Tasmania in partnership with the state’s public libraries.

An interactive exhibition – Science on the Move – is touring Tasmania from August to October and is set to engage your mind and body.

Science on the Move is a free exhibition that provides a chance to explore principles of light, music and sound, human biology and health, force and motion, ecology and the environment, and electricity and magnetism.

The tour of libraries includes Huonville, Queenstown, Smithton, Scottsdale, and 11 other locations (listed below).

“We are really excited to host Questacon’s Science on the Move exhibition across our libraries. It is a great way for children and families to engage with science in a hands-on and entertaining way,“ said Tim Polegaj, Manager Glenorchy Library Catchment.

“The activities in Science on the Move are ideal for children, young people and anyone with an inquiring mind. You can turn yourself into a battery, crank up a tornado in a bottle, try escaping from handcuffs, catch sounds, and see the world through coloured filters.”

“Hydro Tasmania’s Education Team is also visiting many libraries to run free activities. Children will connect up circuits with solar cells and wind turbines and learn about energy.”

“With National Science Week celebrations underway, it is wonderful that Science on the Move means STEM learning can continue through to October and beyond.”

Science on the Move’s intriguing exhibits will be at the following libraries:

Brought to Libraries Tasmania in partnership with Hydro Tasmania, Inspiring Tasmania Australia, and the University of Tasmania.

Find out more at libraries.tas.edu.au/questacon

Photo opportunity: There will be a chance to capture photos and footage of the Science on the Move activities at the Festival of Bright Ideas at Princes Wharf 1 on Friday 18 August (during school hours) and on Saturday 19 August, 9:00 am – 4:30 pm.

Libraries Tasmania, Communications and Marketing

communications.libraries@education.tas.gov.au