On the 16th of June, just minutes before 10 a.m., the bells of „Saint Alexander Nevski“ cathedral in Sofia rang to mark the 80th jubilee of Simeon Saxe-Coburg-Gotha, Bulgaria’s last monarch and a former prime minister. On the same day in 1937 the birth of the heir to the throne was announced by 101 cannon salutes and followed by nationwide celebrations.

For the great jubilee of king Simeon an official service was held by the Patriarch of the Bulgarian Orthodox Church, His Holiness Patriarch Neophyte, in a ministry of Metropolitans of the Holy Synod. Almost the whole Bulgarian royal family, including Simeon’s wife, Queen Margarita, were be present at the thanksgiving service, which was also the family’s first big get-together in Bulgaria since the King’s 70th birthday ten years ago, the King’s press office announced. After the prayer Simeon Saxe-Coburg-Gotha was greeted by of citizens.

Later in Vrana Palace, Simeon Saxe-Coburg Gotha welcomed guests from all corners of Europe - members of Royal families, Bulgarian statesmen and politicians. More than 400 guests attended the royal banquet and wrote their wishes in a special jubilee book. Simeon Saxe-Coburg-Gotha shared that he is deeply touched and happy that after all the years of exile to celebrate this occasion in his home in Sofia.

The remarkable occasion brought extraordinary gifts for HM Simeon. Princess Kalina and her husband Kitin Munos had prepared a special surprise – a performance by the Bistrica Babi, who are declared by UNESCO a Masterpiece of the Intangible Heritage of Humanity in 2005.

Ministers from Simeon Saxe-Coburg Gotha government, which was in office from 2001 – 2005, joined together for another beautiful gift – a donation for restoration of the chapel in Vrana palace.

In honor for HM Simeon II a photographic exhibition was placed around the alleys of Vrana palace. The photos captured memorable and interesting moments of the life of the former monarch. The celebration culminated in a historic family photo of the royal family and another one – with the foreign guests.

The next day Simeon Saxe-Coburg-Gotha took his family and esteemed guests to the Cherepish Monastery. The trip was made with the retro train with the royal wagon. At the station the royal family and guests were welcomed by Metropolitan Gregory of Vratsa. The bells of the monastery rang in honor of the occasion and a sacred service was held.