NBA

AP report: Hawks send Howard to Hornets

ATLANTA — A person familiar with the situation said the Charlotte Hornets have reached an agreement to acquire center Dwight Howard from the Atlanta Hawks.

The Hawks are sending Howard and the No. 31 overall pick in Thursday’s NBA draft to Charlotte for center Miles Plumlee, shooting guard Marco Belinelli and the 41st pick, the person told The Associated Press on condition of anonymity Tuesday because the trade is not yet official.

Howard will be playing for his third team in three seasons following a disappointing homecoming in Atlanta.

Howard signed a three-year, $70.5 million deal with Atlanta and then sat out the fourth quarter in two of six playoff games in the Hawks’ first-round loss to Washington.

Renovation begins for Atlanta’s Philips Arena

ATLANTA — A $192.5 million renovation of Philips Arena, home of the Atlanta Hawks, has begun a day after funding was approved by the Atlanta City Council.

About $110 million for the renovation will be generated from the car rental tax collected at Hartsfield-Jackson Atlanta International Airport and other sites. An additional $32.5 million will come from the city’s sale of Turner Field, the former home of MLB’s Braves, to Georgia State University.

The City Council voted Monday to extend the car rental tax.

The Hawks will contribute $50 million. As part of the deal, the team’s lease was extended through the 2047-2048 season.

The renovation includes removing a wall of suites on one side of the arena, which is closed for four months before re-opening for the 2017-18 season. Work is scheduled to be complete before the 2018-19 season.

BASEBALL

Grizzlies take twin bill

from the Bananas

GASTONIA, N.C. — Three runs in the last four innings – including an improbable run at the last at-bat – lifted Gastonia to a come-from-behind, seven-inning 3-2 win Tuesday over the visiting Savannah Bananas in Game 1 of a doubleheader at Sims Legion Park.

The Grizzlies trailed 2-0 to the Bananas after three innings of the abbreviated game. But runs in the fourth, sixth and seventh gave Gastonia the win to end a three-game losing streak, which began June 16 with a 8-3 loss on the road at Savannah.

The last at-bat for the Grizzlies proved to be the difference as the Bananas committed their third error of the game to bring in the winning run. A routine throw from third baseman Max McDougald sailed over first baseman L.J. Talley’s head, allowing Thomas Yoder to reach base and scoring Michael Wilson from third.

Gastonia (14-6) held on for a 5-4 victory in Game 2.

Gastonia jumped out to a 4-0 lead after three innings but gave up three runs in the fourth inning and clung to that lead. Both the Grizzlies and Bananas (6-11) scored one more run in both the sixth and seventh innings, respectively, but Savannah was unable to tie the score in the seventh inning to extend the game, despite having a runner in scoring position.

Third baseman Chaz Davey delivered singles in every plate appearance for the Grizzlies, finishing 3 for 3, scoring twice and driving in a run.

Gastonia plays the first of back-to-back road games Wednesday when it travels to Lexington County to take on the Blowfish (4-15) in Columbia, S.C. Savannah looks to get back on track at Florence today to take on the RedWolves.

— Doug Powell, The Gaston Gazette