Square One TV was a live-action series produced by Children's Television Workshop that ran on PBS from 1987 until 1994. The program was an attempt to counteract the "math crisis" affecting the nation's 8- to 12-year olds utilizing a sketch comedy/variety format spoofing and simulating TV programming, including cartoons, MTV-style music videos, game shows, and the serialized Dragnet parody Mathnet.

Production was spearheaded by the original Sesame Street executive producer Dave Connell, and his longtime Sesame associate, the series head writer Jim Thurman, who shared the title of senior producer. During its production run of five seasons, the series won five Daytime Emmy Awards. Reruns were seen from 1999-2002 on Noggin.

Muppet Mentions[]

In the music video "Less Than Zero" (first shown in episode #103), composer Christopher Cerf briefly appears as a spectator, wearing a crew t-shirt for Big Bird in China.

In the first season episode #172, originally broadcast May 5, 1987, series cast members Arthur Howard and Larry Cedar portray Bert and Ernie in "Caraway Street," parodying fellow CTW show Sesame Street. Ernie asks Bert for five dollars to buy a puppy, but Bert uses rounding and a calculator to show that maintaining a puppy will cost over four hundred dollars in one year. Ernie then asks him if he can borrow four hundred dollars.

In the Mathnet serial "The Problem of the Missing Monkey" (1987), the gorilla activist Jane Rice-Burroughs (played by Yeardley Smith) carries a Sesame Street tote bag bearing an illustration of Cookie Monster.

In episode #163, the aliens Grempod and Blotmo offer cast member Beverly Mickins a "priceless treasure," which is just a chocolate chip cookie. They say a "big blue furry thing that looked like a bathmat with eyes" had told them it was "the most precious material on this planet."

In episode #225, Harry Blackstone performs part of a magic trick by changing a set of quarters into a dollar bill. Beverly Mickins looks at it and says, "How come Kermit's on this?"

The camera pans by Kermit the Frog's caricature at Sardi's in the Mathnet serial "The Case of the Unkidnapping" (1991).

Connections[]

Marv Albert voiced himself in a "Grown-Ups" segment

Debbie Allen appeared in a segment

Bob Arbogast voiced Mr. Beasley and others and played Byle Dupe in Mathnet's "The Case of the Missing Air."

Ben and Jerry made a cameo appearance

John Bentley played a stagehand in Mathnet’s "The Case of the Unkidnapping"

Frank Biondo was the camera operator (season 2)

Tempestt Bledsoe performed the music video "Time Keeper"

Downtown Julie Brown appeared in inserts and hosted the special Square One Video Jukebox

Betty Buckley played Sally Storm in Mathnet’s "The Case of the Mystery Weekend"

Buzzco Associates, Inc. produced the animated segments The Further Adventures of Zook & Alison

Adam Carl played Noel Sphinx Jr. in Mathnet’s "The Mystery of the Maltese Pigeon"

Reg E. Cathey was an ensemble cast regular (including the "But Who's Counting" announcer and others)

Christopher Cerf wrote and composed songs for the series

David D. Connell was senior producer, writer, and voiced sportscaster Dick (and on-camera in Mathnet cameos)

Cynthia Darlow was an ensemble cast regular (as Judge Sandra Day O'Crater, Mrs. Nobody, and others)

Ken Diego was associate director and, for season 5, directed segments and was supervising editor

Paul Dooley played Casey Bengal in Mathnet’s "The Case of the Unnatural"

Sarah Durkee wrote and composed songs for the series

Avner Eisenberg played Emit Kelly in Mathnet’s "The Case of the Piggy Banker"

Julius Erving appeared in a segment

Shalom Fisch was director of research (seasons 4-5)

Jonathan Freeman played Joshua the director in Mathnet’s "The Case of the Unkidnapping"

Joan Gerber voiced Fluff Noodleman in the Dirk Niblick of the Math Brigade segments

Savion Glover performed the music video "Tappin' Out The Rhythm"

Gregory Hines performed the music video "That's Math" and appeared in a PBS promo

Leonard Jackson played Col. Wiggins in Mathnet’s "The Case of the Mystery Weekend"

Jim Jinkins was graphics director (1987-90)

James Earl Jones played Chief Thad Greene on Mathnet and narrated inserts

Gerald S. Lesser was Chairman of the Advisory Board

Wynonna Judd performed the music video "Count the Ways"

Kid 'n Play performed the music video "Rules of Thumb"

Ed Koch voiced himself in a "Grown-Ups" segment

Robin Leach voiced himself in a "Grown-Ups" segment

Gerald S. Lesser was Chairman of the Advisory Board

Bobby McFerrin performed the music video "Wanna Be"

Dick Maitland supplied sound effects

Ted May was senior editor (season 1) and directed segments (season 2)

Nat Mongioi was the set decorator

John Moschitta, Jr. appeared in two insert segments, a PBS promo, and played Johnny Dollar in Mathnet's "The Case of the Purloined Policies"

Gene Moss voiced Fold Noodleman and others in Dick Niblick of the Math Brigade and played Scruffy Rommel in Mathnet's "The Case of the Map with a Gap"

Alan Muraoka appeared in an "If It's Out There" sketch as a TV chef baking a popover

Gary Owens voiced the title character in Dirk Niblick of the Math Brigade

Joan Rivers voiced herself in a "Grown-Ups" segment

Joel Schneider was director of content

Madge Sinclair played Amelia Airliver in Mathnet’s "The Case of the Trojan Hamburger"

Yeardley Smith played Jane Rice Burroughs in Mathnet’s "The Problem of the Missing Monkey"

Arnold Stang played Pop Bespectacled in Mathnet’s "The Case of the Unkidnapping"

Jim Thurman was head writer, senior producer, and voiced Mr. Glitch ("Mathman"), sportscaster Vern (also on-camera on Mathnet), Uncle Wilt ("Zook & Allison"), and others

John Tierney (Sesame Street film editor) was the videotape editor

"Weird Al" Yankovic performed the music video "Patterns" and played Murray the Mouth in Mathnet's "Off the Record"

David Yazbek wrote and composed songs for the series

Louis Zorich played Marvin Belly in Mathnet's "The Case of the Swami Scam"

[]

IMDb