Before I continue the ongoing series (yes, I know it’s been since January), I thought I’d point out a few ways you can view and own content from Square One TV and Mathnet. It can be harder to find these things since many of them have been out-of-print for awhile, but if there’s enough demand, maybe Sesame Workshop will listen one day yet…?

Affiliate Disclosure: JillthePill.Net is a participant in the Amazon Services LLC Associates Program and may receive a small commission for purchases made from their product links.

Videos: VHS and DVD

Okay, so this category might more targeted to teachers, but you can also find a few releases on Amazon as well. Keep in mind, the Amazon ones are VHS only, so you’ll need to go old school or find someone who can transfer them to a more modern format. 😉

Amazon

Here are the VHS titles you can purchase on Amazon currently. Some may be used or in like-new condition, since they may be sold by third-party vendors. The tapes were once sold brand new back in the early 2000s, but alas, that’s awhile ago now. You can occasionally find these on eBay as well.

Square One TV Video Jukebox

Hosted by “Downtown” Julie Brown, features a handful of music videos from the show.

Mathnet: The Case of the Unnatural

The one-hour version of the “Android” episode. Originally came with a lenticular trading card, although used copies may not have them.

Mathnet: Treasure in Monterey Bay

This is the only time the episode had this title. The actual title was Despair in Monterey Bay. This is the one-hour version also. Originally came with a lenticular ruler; again, a used copy may not come with them. I remember seeing this as a PBS pledge drive incentive once, too…

GPN Educational Media

GPN used to offer VHS tapes in their shop, but it seems they have since changed over to the DVD format. These can be pricey if you’re purchasing more than one, but this is to cover the cost of broadcast rights for teachers who use them in their classroom. They have Kate-era episodes, so if you’re looking for legitimate copies of those, here you go. GPN offers downloadable teacher’s guides as well for classroom use.

Mathnet Cases on offer from GPN: The Case of the Dirty Money, The Case of the Missing Air, The Trial of George Frankly, The View from the Rear Terrace, The Case of the Missing Baseball – Purchase them HERE!

Square One TV/Math Talk

For a short time after Square One TV went off the air, they aired repackaged mini episodes called “Math Talk” intended for classroom use. There is no Mathnet footage with these, but if you enjoy classic Square One TV content in themed packages, these will be right up your alley. They also offer a teacher’s guide packed with worksheets and activities teachers can use with their lessons. Available in English and Spanish.

Math Talk Series: Unit 1: Probability and Statistics, Unit 2: Number Sense, Unit 3: Measurement, Unit 4: Geometry. Purchase Math Talk HERE!

Read more →

Like this:

Like Loading...

Before We Begin…

On this day approximately 1 billion seconds ago (that’s 32 years, in case you didn’t know, and no I’m not trying to be exact on the math), Square One TV premiered on PBS. It seemed like the perfect time to finally start this little series of show-related blog posts.

2019 also marks 50 years since Sesame Workshop (once known as Children’s Television Workshop) began their legacy of remarkable kids’ educational programming that continues to this day. Like many of you, I cut my teeth on shows like Mister Rogers, Sesame Street, 3-2-1-Contact, The Electric Company, and of course, a little show called Square One Television. I could carry on about all of these shows, but you’re only here for SQTV, am I right? It’s why I’m here, so I guess that’s why you are. 😉

A quick side note: God knows I’ve dropped the ball in maintaining the Mathnet site – I KNOW I should overhaul it, really I should. Yet, it’s become something of a relic, a piece of early internet design and technology. So, while I mighta/shoulda/coulda fix it up someday, it’s such a gem in its untouched state, right? But, that’s a post for another time.

Diamonds in the Rough – The Big Time Coverage

The point of these upcoming posts is to gather all the modern-day media coverage for the show. While articles don’t come up often, when they do, fans crawl out of the woodwork and get nostalgic all over social media, usually in waves as different people find them over time. Maybe you missed them the first time around, heck, those of us who have followed the fandom for 30+ years now may have missed a few, too. So, let’s take a look at the most high-profile media sources who have given their props to the show. I’ll go in the order they came out.

Mental_Floss

Remember Square One?

The site for geeks, dorks, nerds, and everyone in-between. Looks like these guys may have struck first, back in June of 2013. Maggie Ryan Sanford included several videos from YouTube in this Square One TV/Mathnet coverage (some of which may or may not still be online).

Vox Media

9 Facts Only Mathnet Fans Will Care About

Let’s play “What Do We Know?” This article by Phil Edwards came out a few years back – May of 2015 to be exact, but it still makes the rounds on social media, and it’s a fun little read. Gobble up these nerdy facts about your favorite math detectives and impress/scare your friends.

Vulture

The 90s Kids’ Shows That Informed Adam Conover’s Comedy the Most

This one picked up some buzz (pun intended) just before the next article, back in late November of 2018. Erik Abriss’ interview with Adam Conover touches on the 90s shows that influenced his comedy work: Beakman’s World, Bill Nye the Science Guy, and Square One TV.

BuzzFeed

This 80s PBS Show Made it Cool to Love Math

This is the most recent one from December of 2018, and with BuzzFeed being the major player they are in the media, it got a lot of attention on Twitter. Major major props to Anne Helen Peterson for this one. Some nice mathematics of love for Square One and Mathnet as a whole.

Closing Thoughts

You don’t have to comment here or even acknowledge my efforts, just share and enjoy and put a bug or two in the ears of those you know (especially those who might have connections, if you know what I mean). And do keep checking back, because I promise at some point I will have some real gems to share in the form of cast pictures, printed articles, and collectibles I’ve found along the way. And there will be more parts including interviews, podcasts, blog posts, and other items of interest.

Giving Props Where They’re Due…

A big thank you to the fellow fans who helped me dig up these links – I wouldn’t know where to find them all without your help! Gayle G., Lori J., Heather J., Lauren HS, and Brian H.

Props to these diehard fans who also help to keep these efforts going: April S., Von T., Anton S., Philip H., Christopher M., Sonia L., and Viewers Like You!

Like this:

Like Loading...

Head’s Up! Upcoming Blog Series!

Coming soon to this blog, a multi-part series focusing on the numerous media articles, blogs, podcasts, and artwork by fans of Square One TV (and Mathnet). There’s been a lot of buzz on Twitter alone in recent years, which has me thinking it’s time to put everything in a central location so everyone can read and enjoy the myriad of fan tributes and the like. And hey, maybe Sesame Workshop is paying attention and will eventually do something about it (and seriously, they are actually paying attention).

Anyway, please be patient and stay tuned – I’ve had my crack team of die-hard fans helping me find the various articles, interviews, and so forth – some of the finds have been hidden gems that people may have missed, while others received tons of comments and likes on social media, even a few from VIPs (including actors, writers, and others who were involved with the show).

Tide Yourselves Over, Dear Fans

In the meantime, if you haven’t already, why not check out the Mathnet fan community on Facebook or have a look at the new Square One TV Wiki project that’s looking for contributors. (Shout out to fan Christopher Mallow for its creation.) Or maybe you just want to share in the joy that is all things Classic PBS? There’s a community for that, too. (Shout out to fan Lori Shirley for creating it!)

Like this:

Like Loading...

Hey, Square One TV/Mathnet fans! 2017 marks 30 years since Square One Television first debuted on PBS! My, how time flies, eh? There’s so much that’s been going on within the fandom over the years that I need to take some time to point out all the amazing projects and social media posts I’ve found, although today, let’s just focus on this upcoming event.

The PIT’s Square One TV/Mathnet 30th Anniversary Tribute Show! Happening in NYC at the People’s Improv Theatre on Thursday, January 26, 2017 at 8:00 p.m. Tickets are $5 – call ahead to reserve yours!

This is totally a dream fan project of sorts, so grab your 80s fashions and travel back in time, mathematics-style! One of the performers is an old Mathnet fandom friend of mine (hi, Heather!), so please do go and support all the hard work and talent behind this special event!

But Who’s Going?

Will I be there? I wish! Although if anyone attends and grabs video, pictures, etc., feel free to post here and/or share online! Go! Make me jealous! Maybe if it goes over well, they’ll do future performances…you never know!?!?! (PSST! Rumor has it some former cast members, writers and crew may also be in attendance.) I have been fortunate enough to keep in touch with many of the actors and behind-the-scenes crew over the years, so if anyone has a chance to meet any of them in person, tell them hello and shake their hands for me!

Connect With Fellow Fans!

The fan base has sort of migrated throughout social media over the years, starting on Usenet back in the late 90s, but for the time being, Facebook is the place to find many fans. Here are a few Square One TV-related groups/pages where you can post memories, pictures, stories, etc., at that:

Square One TV Page on Facebook (Like the page; it seems to be a semi-official one.)

Mathnet – “To Cogitate and to Solve” (Public group)

Square One TV Math Fans (Closed group – request to join!)

Should any video and pictures materialize from the event, I’ll update this post to reflect it!

Enjoy! And until next time, “May the Math Be With You!“

Like this:

Like Loading...

Holy cow, it’s been awhile since I last posted, as in last year, but I’ve been quite busy doing the whole artist thing (go check out my Etsy shop if you’re interested in a sampling of the many things I’ve been working on), but I have a fun(ish) post to share today.

Last week, some new ads for HBO Go were suddenly stirring up quite the buzz on social media, featuring an “Awkward Family” watching some rather saucy scenes together from shows like Girls, True Blood, and Game of Thrones. My first exposure (pun intended) to this ad campaign was on my Facebook timeline, via a Time Magazine link. I noticed right away in the preview images one of the actors looked very familiar…

After checking out the ads, I knew why; the mom is played by Toni DiBuono, best known as Pat Tuesday, Mathnet.

By far the most popular of the seven clips, already reaching over 1 million views on YouTube since they debuted on April 21st, is one in which Toni doesn’t even speak – her facial expressions say it all. She walks in as her commercial son is watching True Blood.

WARNING – potentially NSFW video clip follows – click play at your own peril!

HBO Go Awkward Family Viewing from SS+K on Vimeo.

Hilarious, and effective. The rest of the ads are equally funny, and awkward, and Toni appears in 5 of the 7 ads. Go check them all out, and let’s hope we’ll see Toni in more stuff in the near future – hey, maybe they’ll spin this family off into their own series, or do some more ads!

Given the success of these ads, I’m thinking it might be a good time to do a follow-up interview/Q &A with Toni, so if anyone out there has questions about what she’s doing now, or anything not covered in Maia Weinstock’s great 2012 conversation with Ms. DiBuono (aka, Mrs. Michael McGrath), comment here!

By the way, if you have anything you’d like to shout at me on Twitter – I tend to retweet and comment about things on Mathnet/Square One TV when I find them, I can be found @JillthePillNet, though I do occasionally share and talk about other random things as well, so fair warning. 😉

Like this:

Like Loading...