“Success without Stress”

with Bob Roth on SiriusXM Indie

In these short monthly interviews, Bob Roth, Executive Director of the David Lynch Foundation, sits down with some of America’s most prominent meditators to discuss their Transcendental Meditation practice and its influence upon their personal and professional lives.

David Lynch

Filmmaker, visual artist, musician and philanthropist David Lynch explains how he found happiness, creative inspiration and health through his 40+ years of Transcendental Meditation. LISTEN HERE

Hugh Jackman

Award-winning actor Hugh Jackman reflects on risk in his profession, the “gotta-gotta” mind, and practicing Transcendental Meditation before hosting the Oscars. LISTEN HERE

Jerry Seinfeld

Comedian, writer, actor and producer Jerry Seinfeld discusses his 40 plus years of practicing TM, working in the television industry, and “Night Guy.”

Watch the full interview. WATCH HERE

Watch an excerpt on what Jerry “loves more than just about anything.” WATCH HERE

Lena Dunham

Actress, author, screenwriter, producer, and director Lena Dunham gets personal and shares how Transcendental Meditation has helped evolve her creativity and problem solving skills.

Watch the full interview. WATCH HERE

Watch an excerpt on what TM does for Lena at the "root level." WATCH HERE

Dr. Norman Rosenthal and Dr. Pamela Peeke

Bob Roth interviews Dr. Norman Rosenthal, world-renowned psychiatrist credited with the discovery of Seasonal Affective Disorder (SAD), and Dr. Pamela Peeke, lifestyle expert for WebMD and Pew Foundation Scholar in nutrition, about the research behind Transcendental Meditation.

Watch the full interview. Watch here

Watch the highlights. Watch here

Ringo Starr

Legendary musician Ringo Starr talks TM, fashion, and the PeaceRocks campaign. A partnership between DLF, Ringo, and fashion mogul John Varvatos, PeaceRocks helped to raise funds for at-risk school children around the U.S. to learn to meditate.

Watch the full interview. Watch here

Watch the highlights. Watch here

Tom North

Tom North discusses his new book, True North, which recounts his story of overcoming the emotional trauma of his childhood abuse through Transcendental Meditation. LISTEN HERE

Claudia Mason and Dr. Suzanne Steinbaum

Actress and model Claudia Mason sits with women's health specialist and cardiologist Dr. Suzanne Steinbaum to discuss the benefits of TM with DLF's Women's Initiative Program Directors. LISTEN HERE