Some believe Sirius golf channel is awful on every level. Here is what I found:

Inside the Ropes: The Paulsons guys who are ex journeyman players, who must know someone

Strengths - Have the perfect faces for radio

Weaknesses - Old men trying to talk in todays young man slang about what they did over the weekend or doing that day and about their crappy careers. Is not good radio. Also, having as much command of the English language as a pair of 3rd graders, is brutal radio.

Mueller Report says - Turn off quickly. Delete from scan button immediately

Attack Life: A radio show featuring Greg Norman lol ... oh my, nothing can go wrong here

Strengths - Greg continues to put a capital N into narcissist, he never disappoints

Weaknesses - Greg Norman talking

Mueller Report - Normally 1 second of listening to Greg Norman is too long. But if you are seeking a few laughs from this aging mentally ill nut job ... leave it on for 20 seconds. The guy is just whacked. Listening to static would be more entertaining.

Hank Haney Show ... PGA teaching pro and jilted ex-lover of Tiger, Hank Haney

Strengths - Never ending criticism of the USGA. Show has potential, if he worked at it.

Weaknesses - Many. The stammering delivery is bad for talk radio, work on it Hank. Repetitive topics for 3 hours day after day. Work at it Hank. And Hank simply cannot let go of Tiger dumping him. Plus pushing freaking Voodoo Cream every other minute wth is Voodoo Cream??

Mueller Report - Give it 10 minutes. Want to listen to show but HH seems to just be going through the motions. Some days, when the Tiger pain seems like it is too much for Hank ... he is like listening to BeeGee music all day long.

On the Fly with Mark Lye ... former PGA tour pro Mark Lye, really he was

Strengths - None

Weaknesses - Mark Lye has all the energy of a 20 year old hound dog

Mueller Report - Never listen. Unless someone is settling in for a nap, this show has no reason to be on air

Connected with John Cook ... Tour pro and young golf savant John Cook

Strengths - Cookie is a great guy and a pleasant listen. And he dated Bo Derek !

Weaknesses - Little content, rarely on ... probably due to little content

Mueller Report - Give it 2 minutes. Cookie would be well served to talk about Bo Derek, otherwise stick to tv

A New Breed of Golf ... former Golf Channel star Mike Breed

Strengths - Best produced show. Content is good. And MB works at it and,of course, adds energy.

Weaknesses - Repetitive ads, make it easy to switch off. Word of the day is junior highish and too much like that lame pretentious Matt Adams clown on TGC now. Also, tries to be too hip with the music genre ... Mike do you actually know who Luther Vondross is ? and taste of wine ... Mike do you even drink wine?

Mueller Report - Worth an hour. Effort is there. Could be a keeper if he stayed with his astute instruction and quit trying to be so hip.

Mornings with Marr ... TGC Dave Marr

Strengths - True professional, great delivery. Likable guy

Weaknesses - Needs energy. Dave is just much better on tv.

Mueller Report - Half hour. Dave pop a greenie or slam coffee or power drinks.

I’am a Walrus ... Craig Stadler

Strengths -Think the Walrus lost interest in doing the show

Weaknesses -If Walrus starts doing the show again

Mueller Report - Hopefully Walrus is done doing the show

Fred Couples Show .... Fred Couples

Strengths - Fred has the best guests. Musberger gambling bit was great. Scott Pippen was cool. Brought in a pro to do intros and outros, which helped a lot. Listening to Fred butcher the English language is sooo funny, most the time.

Weaknesses - Listening to Fred butcher the English language all the time

Fred,being Fred, gets around to doing the show once every 6 months lol.

Mueller Report - Check in with Fred, see what he is up to. See who is guest. Then decide.

interesting story from haney this morning ... anyone ever heard it before? ... guy flies into dallas from 'zona for some lessons ... rodeo professional ... mentions almost in passing that his wife is an lpga player, and "oh, btw, would you give her a lesson?" ... so haney says 'yeah, i'll give her a lesson if she wants', scratching his head ... goes to a tournament in cali where he's on the dime/clock of the kuenhe's, coaching their daughter, and this rodeo guy says his wife will be there, can you take a look ... haney says yeah, but my obligation is to the kuenhe girl ... watched her a few times when he could, and apparently agree to meet her on the range one day, but a sandstorm hits, and no one's playing/practicing (or so he thought) ... gets a call from the rodeo guy who's yelling and threatening to kill him/etc since his wife showed up and was hitting balls in a duststorm, but haney didn't ... next day calls haney's office and asks if he'd "burned any bridges" ... some time later, he goes psycho and writes down the names of people that have screwed him over, intending to kill them all, and goes to his lawyer's house and kills him before being caught by cops and committing suicide as they attempted to arrest him ... weird story, to say the least ...

> @tiderider said:

> interesting story from haney this morning ... anyone ever heard it before? ... guy flies into dallas from 'zona for some lessons ... rodeo professional ... mentions almost in passing that his wife is an lpga player, and "oh, btw, would you give her a lesson?" ... so haney says 'yeah, i'll give her a lesson if she wants', scratching his head ... goes to a tournament in cali where he's on the dime/clock of the kuenhe's, coaching their daughter, and this rodeo guy says his wife will be there, can you take a look ... haney says yeah, but my obligation is to the kuenhe girl ... watched her a few times when he could, and apparently agree to meet her on the range one day, but a sandstorm hits, and no one's playing/practicing (or so he thought) ... gets a call from the rodeo guy who's yelling and threatening to kill him/etc since his wife showed up and was hitting balls in a duststorm, but haney didn't ... next day calls haney's office and asks if he'd "burned any bridges" ... some time later, he goes psycho and writes down the names of people that have screwed him over, intending to kill them all, and goes to his lawyer's house and kills him before being caught by cops and committing suicide as they attempted to arrest him ... weird story, to say the least ...

And I'm sure Hank didn't embellish the story one bit. No, not at all.

> @"North Texas" said:

> > @tiderider said:

> > interesting story from haney this morning ... anyone ever heard it before? ... guy flies into dallas from 'zona for some lessons ... rodeo professional ... mentions almost in passing that his wife is an lpga player, and "oh, btw, would you give her a lesson?" ... so haney says 'yeah, i'll give her a lesson if she wants', scratching his head ... goes to a tournament in cali where he's on the dime/clock of the kuenhe's, coaching their daughter, and this rodeo guy says his wife will be there, can you take a look ... haney says yeah, but my obligation is to the kuenhe girl ... watched her a few times when he could, and apparently agree to meet her on the range one day, but a sandstorm hits, and no one's playing/practicing (or so he thought) ... gets a call from the rodeo guy who's yelling and threatening to kill him/etc since his wife showed up and was hitting balls in a duststorm, but haney didn't ... next day calls haney's office and asks if he'd "burned any bridges" ... some time later, he goes psycho and writes down the names of people that have screwed him over, intending to kill them all, and goes to his lawyer's house and kills him before being caught by cops and committing suicide as they attempted to arrest him ... weird story, to say the least ...

>

> And I'm sure Hank didn't embellish the story one bit. No, not at all.

It did take him 15 minutes to tell a 2 minute story though

> @lawsonman said:

> > @"North Texas" said:

> > > @tiderider said:

> > > interesting story from haney this morning ... anyone ever heard it before? ... guy flies into dallas from 'zona for some lessons ... rodeo professional ... mentions almost in passing that his wife is an lpga player, and "oh, btw, would you give her a lesson?" ... so haney says 'yeah, i'll give her a lesson if she wants', scratching his head ... goes to a tournament in cali where he's on the dime/clock of the kuenhe's, coaching their daughter, and this rodeo guy says his wife will be there, can you take a look ... haney says yeah, but my obligation is to the kuenhe girl ... watched her a few times when he could, and apparently agree to meet her on the range one day, but a sandstorm hits, and no one's playing/practicing (or so he thought) ... gets a call from the rodeo guy who's yelling and threatening to kill him/etc since his wife showed up and was hitting balls in a duststorm, but haney didn't ... next day calls haney's office and asks if he'd "burned any bridges" ... some time later, he goes psycho and writes down the names of people that have screwed him over, intending to kill them all, and goes to his lawyer's house and kills him before being caught by cops and committing suicide as they attempted to arrest him ... weird story, to say the least ...

> >

> > And I'm sure Hank didn't embellish the story one bit. No, not at all.

>

> It did take him 15 minutes to tell a 2 minute story though

lord, yes ... but, in his defense, when he has a definite story to tell, the stammering speech isn't as bad ... guy won't even finish an incomplete sentence, much less a complete sentence ...