FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE

John Norman interviewed in Polygraff magazine

Controversial science fiction author grants exclusive interview to Canadian speculative fiction anthology

(MONTREAL)—An interview with controversial science fiction author John Norman is featured in the latest issue of Polygraff magazine, one of the author’s few interview in nearly 40 years.

John Norman is famous for creating the Gor series of science fiction and fantasy novels (www.worldofgor.com), with over 34 titles to his credit since 1967. The Gor series of novels have a very large fanbase, inspired two movies, and are notable for their highly detailed and original setting.

Mr. Norman’s interview in Polygraff includes discussions of his work, as well as the complex philosophical underpinnings to the Gor fantasy world. At 7 pages in length, the Polygraff interview eloquently sheds a great deal of light onto John Norman, his novels, and many other subjects.

The interview with John Norman is a departure for Polygraff. The magazine generally contains short stories in the science fiction, fantasy, horror, pulp, thriller, and other speculative genres, including larger works in serialized installments. However, the interview is as engrossing a read as any of the stories that appear alongside it because Mr. Norman is as eloquent in conversation as he is in his prose.

John Norman is a popular science fiction author whose science fiction writing career began in 1967 and continues to this day. A philosophy professor at Queens College, City University of New York, Norman counts Tarzan creator Edgar Rice Burroughs as one of his influences.

---

Sources inside Polygraff’s Montreal-based publisher, Polymancer Studios, Inc., have indicated that interviews will be an occasionally recurring feature in the magazine. However, the main focus will remain being on fiction.

The issue of Polygraff containing the interview with John Norman is available wherever books and magazines are sold, right now. A preview of the magazine, including a snippet of the John Norman interview and excerpts from some of the featured stories, is available at http://www.scribd.com/doc/25819760/Sampler-of-Polygraff and at http://issuu.com/polymancer/docs/polygraff_sampler.

About Polymancer Studios, Inc.

Polymancer Studios Inc. is a full-service printer, commercial publisher, independent publisher, provider of publishing services, layout and graphic design service provider. Polymancer Studios’s includes amongst its products Polygraff™ Magazine (fiction) and the newsletter Polyglot™.

About Polygraff

Polygraff is a quarterly anthology magazine, containing short stories in the science fiction, fantasy, horror, pulp, thriller, and other intriguing genres. Polygraff spotlights work by undiscovered authors and established authors in these and other areas.

Contacts

Polymancer Studios, Inc.

http://www.polymancer.com/

info@polymancer.com

20 Weredale Park

Westmount, Quebec H3Z 1Y6 (Canada)

(+1) 514-667-1585

Skype: polymancer