JOHN FEINSTEIN is the author of 48 books to date, 23 of which are New York Times Best-Sellers.

In his very first book, A Season On The Brink, Feinstein shadowed Bob Knight during his 1985-86 season coaching the Indiana Hoosiers. The intimate look into Knight's methods and private inner-circle would begin a theme for John's many books to follow; unparalleled access - a fly on the wall in the rooms no one else could get to. A Season On The Brink ranked No. 1 on the New York Times Best-Seller list and set a record for the best-selling sports book to date.

In his second No. 1 NYT Best-Seller, A Good Walk Spoiled, John details the pressures of competing at the top of the game as he follows pro golfers such as Greg Norman and Tom Watson from 1993-94 on the PGA Tour.

​

Fifteen of his books have been teen mysteries; the first of which, Last Shot, won the Edgar Allan Poe Award and rose to No.3 on the NYT Best Seller List.

In addition to his many books, John has also contributed to The Washington Post, Sports Illustrated, Golf Digest, Golf Channel, Sirius XM, CBS Sports Radio, Comcast SportsNet, UMBC Basketball, and The Navy Football Radio Network.

​

He has been hired for speaking by MasterCard, B.M.W., The USGA, The Masters, Congressional Country Club, Woodmont Country Club, The Philadelphia Museum of Art, Pfeifer University, The University of Bradford, and others.

He has been honored with induction into The Naismith Basketball Hall of Fame, The National Sportswriters and Sportscasters Hall of Fame, The U.S. Basketball Writer's Hall of Fame, The Greater Washington Jewish Sports Hall of Fame, The D.C. Basketball Hall of Fame, and the The Washington D.C. Sports Hall of Fame.

​

He has helped raise over $5 Million USD for ALS medical research through The Bruce Edwards Foundation, which he co-founded with golfer Tom Watson after writing Caddy For Life. The book follows Watson's caddy and longtime friend, Bruce Edwards, and his battle against ALS. The film rights to the story were considered by Matt Damon's production company.