Chico Hamilton, who has died aged 92, was a jazz drummer, bandleader and composer of film music whose long career was marked by a distinctive style and independent approach; the unconventional quintet which he led in the later 1950s brought him wide exposure and was the cause of much critical controversy.

Foreststorn “Chico” Hamilton was born in Los Angeles on September 21 1921 and took up playing the drums at Jefferson High School .

Hamilton began playing professionally on leaving school, and toured with Lionel Hampton’s band at the age of 19 before being drafted into the US Army. After the war he worked briefly with the bands of Charlie Barnet and Count Basie before becoming a member of Lena Horne’s accompanying trio. With this group he toured Europe annually between 1948 and 1955 (with the exception of 1952). He also composed and recorded the soundtrack music to the Gerald McBoing-Boing cartoon films.

The 1952 break in touring proved fortunate, as it left Hamilton free to take part in the first recordings by the Gerry Mulligan Quartet, an experimental group consisting of baritone saxophone, trumpet, bass and drums. The absence of the customary piano gave the band a light, airy sound which caught the public ear .

He returned to Lena Horne the following year and stayed until 1954, when he and Horne’s pianist-conductor, Fred Katz (composer of the music for the original little Shop of Horrors as well as the jazz pieces and much of the original score for Sweet Smell of Success), left to form their own band under Hamilton’s leadership. Katz had originally trained as a cellist, and the plan was for him to play piano in the new quintet and perform a solo set each night on cello. Soon, however, the piano was dropped and the cello became part of the band.

The new Chico Hamilton Quintet made its debut at the Strollers, a club on the boardwalk at Long Beach — not the ideal spot. “Man, you wouldn’t believe it. There was nothing but sailors and sawdust on the floor!” Hamilton recalled. “Can you imagine us going in there with cello, flute, guitar, bass and drums?” Nevertheless, they began to attract their own audience: “Within a month they remodelled this place and it looked great. The joint was packed every night.”

The quintet’s first album, released in late 1955, was an instant success, its light “chamber-jazz” sound catching the mood of the time. The critics, however, were divided, with many condemning the sound as effete. In 1957 the band played a pivotal role in the plot of The Sweet Smell Of Success, a drama about showbusiness corruption in which one of the main characters is supposedly the quintet’s guitarist. The quintet also appears in Jazz On A Summer’s Day, Bert Stern’s celebrated documentary made at the 1958 Newport Jazz Festival.

Hamilton retained the original quintet format until 1962. Looking back, he thought that he may have hung on to the winning chamber-jazz format a little too long: “It’s easy to be caught in that web. Your agent’s happy because he can sell you, your record company’s happy... you become popular, and so on.” Later editions of the band dispensed with the cello and adopted a more robust style.

In 1965 Hamilton composed and conducted the music for Roman Polanski’s film Repulsion. The following year he moved to New York, where he established his own production company and began seriously to pursue a parallel career in film and television music and advertising jingles.

Hamilton continued to lead bands of varying styles and instrumentation into the 21st century, later editions going under the name Euphoria. Among the leaders of small jazz groups, perhaps only Art Blakey surpassed Hamilton’s record for discovering and nurturing young talent.

In March 2011, just before his 90th birthday, Hamilton reassembled Euphoria to record the album Revelation, in which he sought to encapsulate the various phases of his long career.

Chico Hamilton is survived by his daughter; his wife predeceased him.