Author Douglas Adams, who wrote The Hitch Hiker's Guide to the Galaxy, has died suddenly aged 49, his assistant said today.

Mr Adams died yesterday morning in Santa Barbara, California following a heart attack, his spokeswoman Sophie Astin said.

The author became a household name when the cult science fiction novel was turned into a BBC TV series.

Adams was born in Cambridge in 1952 and educated in Essex before returning to Cambridge to study at St John's College.

He married Jane Belson in 1991 and had a daughter, Polly, in 1994.

His career included work as a radio and television writer and producer before his life was changed by the publication of The Hitch Hiker's Guide to the Galaxy in 1979.

It went on to sell more than 14 million copies worldwide and preceded a series of best-selling titles by the author, including The Restaurant At The End Of The Universe; Life, The Universe And Everything; and So Long, And Thanks For All The Fish.

Adams and his barrister wife moved from their home in Islington, north London, to California in 1999, after he set up multimedia company The Digital Village.

The company, which lists Adams as its founder-director Chief Fantasist, created the Bafta-nominated 1998 CD-Rom Starship Titanic adventure game.

It also created an online guide inspired by The Hitch Hiker's Guide, which is now run by the BBC.

Last year Adams completed a four-part series with BBC Radio 4, The Hitch Hiker's Guide to the Future, about the future of digital technology.

He signed a deal with Disney in 1998 to turn The Hitch Hiker's Guide into a film, but the movie is still in development.

Despite his huge success with the Hitch Hiker's series, he was said to be most proud of his account of a worldwide search for rare and endangered species of animals, Last Chance to See, which he wrote with zoologist Mark Carwardine.

He was a patron of the Dian Fossey Gorilla Fund and Save the Rhino International.

His work on the books, radio and television versions of The Hitch Hiker's Guide won a series of awards, including three Bafta prizes, and a number 24 placing in a list of the 100 Greatest Books of the Century, compiled by Channel 4 and the retail chain Waterstone's Books.

In December 1982 Douglas had three books in both the New York Times bestseller list and the Publishers' Weekly bestseller list, making him the first British author to achieve this since James Bond creator Ian Fleming.