DOUGLAS ADAMS, the thought-provoking author who inspired a generation with his cult science-fiction novel, The Hitch Hiker's Guide to the Galaxy, has died at the age of 49 from a heart attack while working out at the gym.

Adams's age was seven more than his cryptic answer of "42" to the intriguing question the comic novel had posed: what is the answer to life, the universe and everything? His book has sold more than 14 million copies worldwide, but Adams became a household name in Britain after it was turned into a BBC television series in the early 1980s.

Adams, 6ft 5in tall and well built, did not have a history of heart problems. However, say friends, he had visited the doctor just days ago complaining of a numbness in his arm. He collapsed on Friday while exercising at a gym in Santa Barbara on the west coast of America and never regained consciousness. He leaves a widow and a six-year-old daughter.

Adams was British but moved with his family to California in 1999, to be involved in a Disney film version of his book: he had previously lived in Islington, north London, for 22 years. A complex man, he was transported from obscurity to fame in 1979 by the instant success of his novel, which became hugely popular with students.

Soon after the book was published, he was invited to sign copies at a small Soho bookshop. On his way there, Adams became convinced he was been caught up in a demonstration, only to discover the crowds were waiting for him.

The book shot to the number one spot in the best-seller list the next day. He said: "It was like being helicoptered to the top of Mount Everest, or having an orgasm without the foreplay." Adams, however, later suffered from writer's block and was so notoriously bad at meeting deadlines that Sue Freestone, his former publisher, was even known to move into his house to bully him into writing.

Mr Victor said: "He was one of the truly original writers and thinkers of our generation who should have had many years ahead of him. He was not only entertaining, but also stimulating and provoking: he was a unique thinker with a huge audience."

Mr Victor said that writer's block had been a terrible problem for Adams, who hated spending time alone. He said: "He was once locked in a hotel suite at the Berkeley for two weeks by Sonny Mehta [his former publisher]. When I asked Douglas how it had worked, he said: 'It was simple. I sat at the desk and typed and Sonny sat in an armchair and glowered.' "

Adams was said to have used The Hitch Hiker's Guide, which started off as a radio show in the 1970s, to poke fun at those who seek solutions to unanswerable questions. It was intended to highlight the absurdity of attempting to do so.

The novel has since been turned into a play and a computer game, and has spawned four sequels. Adams also set up a website called h2g2, an entertainment guide now run by the BBC, as a spin-off from his book.

In his novel, which deals with the voyages of a suburban earthling, Arthur Dent, Adams describes a race of hyper-intelligent beings, who had reached a point where they were determined to understand the purpose of the universe and their own existence.

They built a supercomputer, Deep Thought, and asked it for the answer to the ultimate question of life, the universe and everything. The computer worked for several millennia on the answer. Finally, the beings were shocked and disappointed with the computer's ridiculous response: "42".

In the book, the Earth is referred to as "mostly harmless", which became a buzz phrase of the 1980s. Adams was born in Cambridge in 1952 and educated at Brentwood School, Essex, before returning to Cambridge to study at St John's College.

He later collaborated with Terry Jones, another Python team member. Jones was in tears after learning of his friend's death yesterday. He told the Telegraph: "Douglas was a total original: he had a beautiful way of thinking and an incisive mind that went straight to the heart of matters. He had a genius for putting those concepts into words. His books were great works of literature. He was a lovely man, and I loved him."

Senior staff at the BBC, who worked with Adams, were equally sad. Alan Yentob, the corporation's director of drama and entertainment, said: "Douglas was a big character who will be hugely missed by a host of friends and millions of fans around the world."

Geoffrey Perkins, the BBC's head of comedy and who produced the original radio series of the novel, said: "I've known Douglas for 25 years. He was absolutely one of the most creative geniuses to ever work in radio comedy."