Weather in January in Tyumen Oblast

Thinking about venturing to Tyumen Oblast this January and curious about the weather conditions to expect? This page holds all the key information you seek, responding to your question:

What is the weather like in Tyumen Oblast in January?

Tyumen Oblast is a region in Russia. January in Tyumen Oblast generally has very cold temperatures, with low precipitation. During January, winter is in full swing.

Temperatures

You can expect very cold maximum daytime temperatures of around -11°C and nighttime temperatures around -19°C in Tyumen. In general, this month stands out as the coldest period throughout the year. Given the lower temperatures, it's essential to be well-prepared. Packing the right winter clothing and necessary accessories can make a significant difference in ensuring your comfort and well-being during this chilly season.

Precipitation

January is a dry month with an average snowfall of around 25 mm in Tyumen.

Average sunshine

Tyumen experiences limited sunny days, amounting to roughly 67 hours of sunshine. This makes it perfect for those who prefer dimmer, cloudier settings rather than intense sunlit days

For a closer look at January's conditions in Tyumen Oblast, see the map below. For a more detailed look at Tyumen Oblast's yearly weather, check out our Tyumen Oblast climate page.

Where to go in Tyumen Oblast in January

Find more information for the most popular destinations in the Tyumen Oblast on the map below. Click on a destination dot for more detailes.

Map not visible? Whoops sorry! Please refresh the page.

Legend perfect weather pleasant tolerable unpleasant poor

Perfect weather is subjective. On this map perfect weather has been defined with temperatures between 20°C and 29°C and not too much precipitation (less than 90 mm a month).

Popular destinations

What is the weather like in January for the most popular destinonation in Tyumen Oblast?

Tyumen

In January Tyumen generally has very low temperatures with maximum daytime temperatures around -11°C, minimum nighttime temperatures around -19°C and low monthly snowfall. So on average the conditions are poor that month.

Tyumen

Max temperature Max temp

Min temperature Min temp

Monthly sun hours Sun hours

Monthly snowfall Snowfall

Monthly rainy days Rainy days

Weather conditions Weather

-9°C

-17°C

56 hours

29 mm

13 days

-11°C

-19°C

67 hours

25 mm

14 days

-9°C

-18°C

122 hours

22 mm

10 days

Climate in Tyumen

Is your destination not in the list? Have a look at other destinations in Tyumen Oblast, in Russia.

Is January the best time to visit Tyumen Oblast?

In our opinion, January may not be the ideal time to visit Tyumen Oblast due to the typically poor weather in Tyumen.

On average, the best time to visit Tyumen Oblast is in June, July and August with generally perfect weather in Tyumen. The weather in January, February, March, April, October, November and December, on the other hand, tends to be poor.

Interested in more climate information?

We have much more information about the climate in Tyumen Oblast. Interested in the weather conditions in a specific month? Select the month below.

January

February

March

April

May

June

July

August

September

October

November

December

Weather and climate has detailed information for every country in the world. Are you going to Russia? Get detailed historical weather averages for many cities in Russia.

Not sure yet where to go? We now have a tool which recommends destinations that suit your ideal travel conditions. Find out where to go with our weather planner.