Grammy® Award-nominated metal titans Lamb of God and Grammy® Award-winning band Mastodon announce the co-headlining “Ashes Of Leviathan Tour.” The tour finds the two iconic bands join forces to celebrate the 20th anniversary of two seminal releases: Lamb of God’s biggest-selling album Ashes of the Wake and Mastodon’s acclaimed sophomore album Leviathan, which were both released on August 31, 2004. Both bands will perform their respective albums in full. The tour includes a stop at Michigan Lottery Amphitheatre on Saturday, August 10 at 6 p.m. Kerry King and Unearth will perform as special guests.

In addition, both bands will be supporting a charity of their choice throughout the tour, and fans will have the opportunity to opt-in to donate at check out when buying their tickets.

Lamb of God will support the Living The Dream Foundation, which makes dreams come true for music fans living with life threatening illnesses. Dream Days include hanging out onstage, backstage, and special meet and greets with their favorite bands and artists. To learn more, visit ltdfoundation.org.

Mastodon will support the Hirshberg Foundation for Pancreatic Cancer Research. After their manager Nick John tragically passed away from pancreatic cancer in 2018, Mastodon partnered with the organization and has raised nearly $60,000 to fight the disease and support researchers and patients around the globe. The Hirshberg Foundation for Pancreatic Cancer Research is focused on finding a cure for pancreatic cancer, and empowering patients and families whose lives are touched by this disease. Founded in 1997, the Hirshberg Foundation funds groundbreaking scientific research, provides patient education and support, and sustains hope that this cancer will be eradicated once and for all. To learn more, visit pancreatic.org.

Lamb of God’s most recent studio offering, 2022’s Omens, notably marked the band’s sixth consecutive Top 15 debut on the Billboard 200 in addition to capturing #1 on the Top Hard Rock Albums Chart, #3 on the Top Album Sales Chart, #3 on the Top Rock Albums Chart, and #5 on the Top Vinyl Albums Chart. Not to mention, it has amassed an unprecedented 60 million streams and counting. Get it HERE and be on the lookout for more from Lamb Of God soon.