North Bay City Councillor Gary Gardiner has turned over a new leaf when it comes to the North Bay Heritage Gardeners' $250,000 waterfront Canada Place project and his colleagues followed suit to unanimously approve the much-discussed project.

Dozens of Heritage Gardeners and their supporters applauded as the politicians relented and moved forward with the second phase of Canada Place — an open gathering space with a large maple leaf built into the paving stones that will "create a welcoming plaza-style area for users of the Waterfront that are arriving from Downtown or walking along the waterfront path," according to a staff report.

"After the last meeting, I met with the Heritage Gardeners down at the waterfront and I reviewed the project," Gardiner said during Tuesday's regular meeting. "I came to understand the project a little differently."

The project was referred back to the committee level and it was on Tuesday's agenda in a special committee meeting.

See related: Canada Place project gets lukewarm reception at council level

Two weeks ago, Gardiner said, although he appreciates the Heritage Gardeners' contributions to the community, their nearly $250,000 waterfront project was too expensive and bound to cost the City of North Bay additional money to maintain, especially in light of inflationary pressures on other capital projects.

"When we look at our capital budget and the Main Street reconstruction project, for example, is $2 million over budget," said Gardiner then. "We have pressures on our capital budget, and that is the main reason I will not be supporting this.

"Also, the investment in putting an asset down on the waterfront that's made of pavers — their life-cycle is not what it used to be. In 10 years, we're going to be having to look at repairing, replacing, so there are extra costs. I cannot support this motion."

Tuesday, Gardiner noted the project is comprised mostly of concrete and the pavers create a rim around it. "I'm not concerned about that anymore so I've changed my position on that. He also advised large retaining walls made of stone to form a semi-circle "and create this unique space and I'm sure when it's done it will be an amazing space and complement our waterfront.

"I do wish to commend the Heritage Gardeners, who are here tonight in force, for their vision and their obvious passion for our community, and I am in full support of this project."

It was a much different tone coming from the council since the initial pushback on the project two weeks ago. All members of the council who spoke heaped praise on the Heritage Gardeners, thanking its members for their volunteerism and service to the community.

Mayor Peter Chirico said, "You guys are a force to be reckoned with. You do tremendous work in our community. You do work we would be doing as a community as volunteers. What you bring to this community, and to our waterfront, and the beauty of our waterfront, I appreciate it. All of you."

The North Bay Heritage Gardeners have committed $54,654 to the Canada Place project. This amount is earmarked to go toward the construction contract pending council's approval. A $248,856 contract was awarded to North Bay's Canor Construction Inc. for the construction of the Waterfront Garden Canada Day 150 Project, of which the municipality's share would be approximately $194,000.