Today, let’s look at the other end of the spectrum. What does the workplace of the Creative Economy of the 21st Century look like? An interesting picture emerges from The Valve Handbook for New Employees which has become available on the Internet.

The Valve Corporation

Valve is a video gaming company based in Bellevue, Washington, United States. It was founded in 1996 by former Microsoft employees Gabe Newell and Mike Harrington, and maker of Half-Life and the social-distribution network, Steam. Valve is a private firm and claims to make a lot of money: according to the handbook, its profitability per employee is higher than Google, Amazon, or Microsoft.

The firm is self-funded; owns its intellectual property; and aspires to be more than a gaming company: it aspires to greatness. As the handbook says, “We’re an entertainment company. A software company. A platform company. But mostly, a company full of passionate people who love the products we create.”

Valve’s success has been attributed in part to Gabe Newell, Valve’s founder and managing director. The handbook suggests that there is a lot more going on at Valve.

Jeff Grubb at GameBeat confirms the authenticity of the handbook and points to some important lessons.

No managers

Valve’s culture and is built on the premise that there are no managers, with each member of staff able to choose the project he or she is working on. The handbook is subtitled: "A fearless adventure in knowing what to do when no one's there telling you what to do."

The handbook begins:

"In 1996, we set out to make great games, but we knew back then that we had to first create a place that was designed to foster that greatness. A place where incredibly talented individuals are empowered to put their best work into the hands of millions of people, with very little in their way. This book is an abbreviated encapsulation of our guiding principles. As Valve continues to grow, we hope that these principles will serve each new person joining our ranks.

"If you are new to Valve, welcome. Although the goals in this book are important, it's really your ideas, talent, and energy that will keep Valve shining in the years ahead. Thanks for being here. Let's make great things."

“This book isn’t about fringe benefits or how to set up your workstation or where to find source code. Valve works in ways that might seem counterintuitive at first. This handbook is about the choices you’re going to be making and how to think about them. Mainly, it’s about how not to freak out now that you’re here.”

Hiring the right people

Aspiring to greatness begins with hiring the right people and the handbook puts a huge emphasis on hiring right.

“The Hierarchy is great for maintaining predictability and repeatability. It simplifies planning and makes it easier to control a large group of people from the top down, which is why military organizations rely on it so heavily.

"When you’re an entertainment company that’s spent the last decade going out of its way to recruit the most intelligent, innovative, talented people on Earth, telling them to sit at a desk and do what they’re told obliterates 99 percent of their value.

"Maybe it’s too much to ask the rigid hierarchies at other development houses to drastically shift to this free-loving hippie way of conducting business, but it shouldn’t be too much for those companies to treat their employees like adults. After all, hiring someone is a sign of trust. Extend that trust to every aspect of the position.”

Welcome to Flatland: no one tells you what to do

The handbook explains that everyone decides which project that they should be working on.

“This company is yours to steer. Toward opportunities and away from risks. You have the power to green-light projects. You have the power to ship products.”

When you give freedom to creative people, it creates the opportunity to liberate their talents and creativity, instead of waiting around to be instructed. It builds respect which in turn should build pride in the work and the company.

Aspiring to greatness means living with failure

Fear of failure is a key factor in the struggle for perfection. Valve doesn’t settle for average. It aspires to greatness and accepts the fact of failure as part of the package.

“Providing the freedom to fail is an important trait of [Valve] — we couldn’t expect so much of individuals if we also penalized people for errors. Even expensive mistakes, or ones which result in a very public failure, are genuinely looked at as opportunities to learn.”

The handbook puts the responsibility on the creative person. In this workplace, they is no excuse for not trying something new and amazing.

Having fun

Great workplaces have always been fun. Perhaps the most striking thing about the handbook is the witty writing. For example, in a section of the guide that describes some of the office’s amenities (a gym, a massage parlor, a full-service cleaner), the book tells the new hire to relax and enjoy these things.

“It’s not a sign that this place is going to come crumbling down like some 1999-era dot-com startup. If we ever institute caviar-catered lunches, though, then maybe something’s wrong. Definitely panic if there’s caviar.”

Humor humanizes what in most firms is a soulless blur of banalities from the HR department.

Caring for people’s families

The fact that Valve makes a lot of money makes it easy to take everyone, along with their families, on a company vacation, which is something that the Washington-based corporation does once a year.

A gesture like this acknowledges that the employees bring their work home with them and their families struggle with it as well. The difference between having the support of loved ones and not having that support is the difference between a satisfying job and a miserable one.

A corporation with a human feel

Does Valve actually practice what’s in the handbook? Happily the handbook itself admits Valve is far from perfect. It even has a section titled “What is Valve not good at?” which includes things like “disseminating information internally” and “making predictions longer than a few months out.”

Not for everyone

This workplace will not be for everyone or for every corporation. This workplace won’t fit those who prefer to work in a traditional environment or for 20th Century organizations focused on maximizing shareholder value.

For organizations that need to to scale or attract public funding, more coordinating mechanisms would need to be in place than are apparent from this handbook. And for organizations that want to be consistently successful in the marketplace, more explicit attention on delighting customers is likely to be central.

But for those who want to understand what's involved in establishing a creative workplace that encourages innovation and allows people to contribute all their talents, this handbook offers an interesting insights on one possibility.

Read also:

Is The US In A Phase Change To The Creative Economy

Why We Don’t Yet See A Whole Foods Economy

The Dumbest Idea In The World: Maximizing Shareholder Value

The Five Surprises of Radical Management

________________________

Steve Denning’s most recent book is: The Leader’s Guide to Radical Management (Jossey-Bass, 2010).

Follow Steve Denning on Twitter @stevedenning