Shop Local Kirkland is driven to create a vibrant, prosperous and resilient digital economy for all Kirkland businesses. The Shop Local Kirkland initiative responds to the economic impacts of COVID-19 on Kirkland’s business community and is designed to help local businesses survive and thrive through the negative impacts caused by the global pandemic and beyond. A hyper-local, digital marketplace, Shop Local Kirkland is a vibrant, prosperous and resilient online economy for all Kirkland businesses. The website is your gateway to Kirkland's unique ecosystem of small businesses, an eclectic and innovative economy of goods, food, drink and services enlivened by local support. The Shop Local Kirkland website showcases small business storefronts on a digital main street, enables eCommerce for all, and connects shoppers to local businesses.

Startup 425 is a collaborative effort to expand entrepreneurship opportunities across Eastside communities by helping you turn that idea into reality. We believe great business is built upon and centered around an idea. Startup 425 is an alliance of five cities bound by an Interlocal Agreement, and is administered by the City of Kirkland.

The mission of Startup 425 is to provide access to tools that experienced workers, students, and entrepreneurs need to go from idea to working business in a successful, sustainable manner. We lower the barriers to entry for non-traditional and first-time founders. This keeps our ecosystem diverse, encourages spontaneous collaboration, and provides pathways to prosperity for our whole community.

The talented individuals working at Eastside institutions like Microsoft, Google, Boeing, Valve, and others create an energy where innovation is the norm, entrepreneurship is the goal, and building the future is the outcome.

Small Business Resiliency Network

The effects of COVID-19 have negatively affected all Washingtonians, but Washington’s small businesses, especially those from marginalized communities, have been hit especially hard. The City of Kirkland strongly supports an equitable recovery for all of its communities. The Washington State Department of Commerce has created the Small Business Resiliency Network to provide culturally and linguistically relevant assistance for business owners and organizations affected by COVID-19.

Office of Minority and Women's Business Enterprises

The Washington State Office of Minority and Women's Business Enterprises program is the sole agency that certifies minority-and women-owned business enterprises to participate in public contracting and procurement. This program includes a comprehensive certification process, small business support services, and the Supplier Diversity team that works with the Governor’s Subcabinet on Business Diversity, state agencies, and institutions of higher education to instill equitable and inclusive purchasing practices.

Office of Minority & Women’s Business Enterprises (MWBE): Small business assistance

Office of Minority & Women's Business Enterprises (MWBE): List of free resources and services available to small businesses in Washington State

Hello Alice

Hello Alice helps business owners with access to funding, e-learning techniques and mentorship.

Ally League Fund

The Ally League Fund was launched to provide technology grants to small, Black-owned businesses to help with web design, database development, inventory systems, social media management and online advertising.

Comcast RISE

Comcast has created a program that focuses on Representation, Investment, Strength and Empowerment. Businesses that are at least 51% owned and operated by someone who identifies as a woman and/or a person of color, including Black, Indigenous, Hispanic, and Asian American can qualify for consulting, media, technology, creative, and monetary assistance.

Small Business Flex Fund Loan Program

Small business owners and nonprofits across Washington can apply for low interest loans of up to $150,000 through the newly-launched Small Business Flex Fund. The Fund is a public-private partnership aimed at helping small businesses and nonprofits – particularly those in low-income communities – recover and grow as communities across the state reopen for business. Interested applicants pre-apply on the Flex Fund’s online portal and, if they qualify, will be matched with a lender.

Federal Assistance Program for Northwest Manufacturers

The Federal Trade Adjustment Assistance Program helps manufacturing companies hurt by imports fund business improvement projects. Many agriculture, seafood and service firms have also qualified for this program. Eligible companies can receive up to $75,000 in matching funds to implement projects aimed at improving sales growth, new market development, efficiencies, and more. The NorthwestTAAC will work with you at no cost to determine if your company is eligible for Trade Adjustment Assistance for Firms grant funding. All information will be treated as “business confidential.”

SmallBizHelpWA.com

SmallBizHelpWA.com was created by the Washington State Small Business Recovery Working Group to simplify and supplement details provided by the U.S. Small Business Administration (SBA) and provide current information on available relief programs for Washington's small businesses and eligible non-profits, as well as the organizations that assist them.

Communities Rise

Communities Rise offers legal and other assistance to small business owners and nonprofit and community-based organizations.

OneEastside SPARK

OneEastside SPARK coordinates regional partners to maximize resources and focus on small business and nonprofit resiliency. They provide responsive programming and tools to address key areas of need amongst organizations in East King County as they evolve.

Grow Google

Grow with Google aims to help by providing free training, tools and expertise. The program also brings workshops, in-person training, and one-on-one coaching to cities and towns across America, in partnership with community groups and local leaders.

Bellevue Conflict Resolution Center

Do you need help to negotiate rent arears or other legal issues? The Bellevue Conflict Resolution Center is here to help and is available for Kirkland residents. Information is available in multiple languages and interpretation services are provided as needed. To find out more, please call the Conflict Resolution Center at 425-452-4091 or visit the Bellevue Conflict Resolution Center webpage.

The Kirkland Rental Risk Assistance Fund (Program) allocates funds to assist households and individuals seeking new residential leases in the City of Kirkland. Payments from the program are paid directly to landlord applicants. The program is intended to help those facing barriers to obtain stable housing. Grants of up to $1,200 will be distributed to landlords with qualifying tenants to mitigate risk to landlords of tenant default. Landlords are eligible to receive up to 6 grants per property for the duration of the program.