Valve (sometimes stylized VALVE; officially Valve Corporation, and formerly Valve Software) is an entertainment software and technology company founded in 1996 and based in . The company's debut title, Half-Life, has won over 50 Awards and was named "Best PC Game Ever" in the November 1999, October 2001, and April 2005 issues of , the world's best-selling PC games magazine.

The company's portfolio of entertainment properties includes Half-Life, Counter-Strike, Portal, Left 4 Dead, Day of Defeat, and Team Fortress. Valve's catalog of products accounts for over 20 million retail units sold worldwide, and over 80% of the PC online action market.

In addition to producing best selling entertainment titles, Valve is a developer of leading-edge technologies, such as the Source game engine and Steam, a broadband platform for the delivery and management of digital content.

Today, Valve is composed of over 70 of the industry's leading artists, programmers, and writers. In the company's twenty-year history, it has risen from "unlikely new entry" to industry leader, producing a string of best-selling and critically-acclaimed PC entertainment products and technologies.

Products

GoldSrc games

Half-Life Half-Life: Opposing Force Half-Life: Blue Shift Counter-Strike Counter-Strike: Condition Zero Condition Zero Deleted Scenes Day of Defeat Team Fortress Classic Ricochet

Source games

Alien Swarm Counter-Strike: Source Counter-Strike: Global Offensive Day of Defeat: Source Half-Life: Source Half-Life Deathmatch: Source Half-Life 2 Half-Life 2: Deathmatch Half-Life 2: Episode One Half-Life 2: Episode Two Half-Life 2: Lost Coast Left 4 Dead Left 4 Dead 2 Portal Portal 2 Team Fortress 2

Source 2 games

Artifact Counter-Strike 2 Dota Underlords Dota 2 - formerly runs on Source Half-Life: Alyx Robot Repair - included in The Lab SteamVR Home

Console ports

Half-Life (PS2) Half-Life: Decay (PS2) Counter-Strike (Xbox) Half-Life 2 (Xbox) The Orange Box (Console)

- A package that contains Half-Life 2, Episode One,

Episode Two, Portal, and Team Fortress 2. Also available on PC. Left 4 Dead ( ) Left 4 Dead 2 ( ) Portal 2 (Console) ( , ) Counter-Strike: Global Offensive (Console) ( , ) Portal Companion Collection

- A package which contains Portal, Portal: Still Alive and

Portal 2. Only for Nintendo Switch.

Media

Zombie Movie

- (created by 2Chums Moving Pictures - essentially two then-Valve employees) Day of Defeat: Prelude to Victory Half-Life 2 Trailer Half-Life 2: Episode One Trailer HL2:EP1 - Launch Teaser 1 HL2:EP1 - Launch Teaser 2 HL2:EP1 - Launch Teaser 3 HL2:EP1 - Launch Teaser 4 Half-Life 2: Episode Two Trailer DoD Jagd Trailer DoD Colmar Trailer Portal Trailer Team Fortress 2 Trailer Introducing Artifact See more media on SFM - Official Valve Shorts section

Hardware

Steam Controller Steam Machines Steam Link Valve Index Steam Deck

Software

Source Filmmaker Source 2 Filmmaker SteamOS

Business

Source Engine

Licensing Source & Source 2 Engine

Steam Publishing

Steamworks

Cyber Cafe Program

Official website

- @Valve

- @valvesoftware

See also