Manager of the Miners Igor Jovicevic resorted to small experiments with the starting line-up. So, Andriy Pyatov played in the goal from the first minutes, Lucas Taylor was on the right defensive wing, while Giorgi Gocholeishvili played on the left, Yaroslav Rakitskyi and Eduard Kozik were in the centre of defence. Yehor Nazaryna, Oleh Ocheretko and Andriy Totovytskyi appeared in the middle of the field. Andriy Boryachuk and youth team player Anton Hlushchenko appeared on the attacking wings, and Danylo Sikan was the central striker.

Time under the opponent’s pressing

The beginning of the game was quite balanced: Shakhtar tried to act through rapid attacks after Rakitskyi’s signature diagonal deliveries and runs by the laterals, while the Bulgarians relied on a prolonged play and aggressive pressing in the opponent’s half. The first chance was created by the opponent, when Naressi’s shot into the right corner from eleven meters was saved by Pyatov. In the middle of the first half, the Orange-and-Blacks had a forced substitution: Ocheretko was injured, so Kyrylo Siheev came on as his substitute. Shortly after, Igor Jovicevic’s lads got their chance – Sikan shot past the near post from a tight angle, but the keeper was ready for it. And already in the return counterattack, Ludogorets opened the scoring. After a pass from the left wing, Igor Thiago handled the ball and shot past Pyatov. Only two minutes passed, and the Razgrad-based team scored again – Nonato made a one-timer from another cross from the left.

Comeback with a goal in the last seconds

During the break, the coaching staff of Shakhtar made several changes in the line-up. Goalkeeper Tymur Puzankov and the youth team players Marian Faryna, Oleksandr Rosputko, Oleksandr Yushchenko, and Vladyslav Pohorilyi came on the pitch. Yushchenko immediately intensified the situation. He moved to the centre and shot powerfully with his left foot – the ball flew over the crossbar. The Bulgarians responded with a dangerous shot by Despodov from the penalty area, Puzankov reached and turned the ball away into the post. In the middle of the half, Nazaryna was injured, there was another series of substitutions; the Miners had the starting eleven players on the pitch, who quickly organized the goal scoring. In the 72nd minute, they dispossessed an opponent of the ball by pressing near the opponent’s penalty area; Bondarenko’s shot was saved by the goalkeeper, but Lassina Traore volleyed the ball under the right post – 1-2. The Orange-and-Blacks continued to go forward, attacking the Razgrad-based team’s penalty area, but they could not create the scoring opportunities. And only in the last added minute after Mykhailichenko’s shot, the ball hit the opponent’s arm, so the referee awarded the spot-kick. Artem Bondarenko calmly outplayed the keeper from the spot and brought Shakhtar to a draw in the test game vs Ludogorets – 2-2.

Tomorrow, February 1, Igor Jovicevic’s lads will play another friendly match – this time with Slovenian champion Maribor. Match will start at 16:30 (15:30 CET).

Shakhtar Donetsk 2-2 (0-2) Ludogorets Razgrad

Belek, Cornelia Sports Complex

Goals: 0-1 Thiago (27′), 0-2 Nonato (29′), 1-2 Traore (72′), 2-2 Bondarenko (90′+6, pen.)

Shakhtar: Pyatov (c) (Puzankov, 46′), Taylor (Mykhailichenko, 67′), Kozik (Matviienko, 67′), Rakitskyi (Faryna, 46′; Bondar, 67′), Gocholeishvili (Rosputko, 46′), Ocheretko (Siheev, 27′; Djurasek, 67′), Nazaryna (Stepanenko, 64′), Totovytskyi (Bondarenko, 67′), Boryachuk (Yushchenko, 46′; Kryskiv, 67′), Hlushchenko (Zubkov, 67′), Sikan (Pohorilyi, 46′; Traore, 67′)