On February 3, 2014, the National Bank of Ukraine put the “XXII Olympic Winter Games” commemorative coins of 10 and 2 hryvnia face values into circulation. The coins represent a continuation of the Sports series.

The launch ceremony, held at the Museum of Money of the National Bank of Ukraine, was attended by Deputy Governor of the National Bank of Ukraine Vira Rychakivska, First Deputy Minister of Youth and Sports of Ukraine Serhii Hlushchenko, Head of the President's Office of the National Olympic Committee Yurii Tamm, Deputy Head of the Office for Numismatic Products and Marketing of the National Bank of Ukraine Viktoriia Suzanska, and the authors of the coin’s design.

“The coins are dedicated to the XXII Olympic Winter Games, which kick off in Sochi on 7 February 2014. I feel confident that the athletes from the Ukrainian national team, driven by an insatiable thirst for victory, stand a good chance to demonstrate their athletic achievements to the world,” noted Deputy Governor of the National Bank of Ukraine Vira Rychakivska.

As is commonly known, history of the Olympic Movement in Ukraine started in 1952 when our athletes as members of the Soviet Union team for the first time took part in the Games of the XV Olympiad in Helsinki. Since then Ukraine has been developing and cementing its Olympic positions – our sportsmen and sportswomen have won 620 medals.

The best athletes from more than 80 countries will take part in the XXII Olympic Winter Games. 43 athletes will represent Ukraine at the 2014 Olympic Games in Sochi. Our athletes will compete in 9 of 15 sports, namely in biathlon (11 athletes), cross country (8 athletes), figure skating (6 athletes), luge (6 athletes) freestyle (6 athletes), alpine skiing (2 athletes), snowboarding (2 athletes), nordic combined and short track (1 athlete).

“The XXII Winter Olympiad is an important sporting event, both in the world and in our country. Not only athletes and coaches but also all the people who have helped lead the Ukrainian national team to Olympic victory are provided with an opportunity to demonstrate their outstanding achievements,” said Ms Vira Rychakivska.

The coin of 10 hryvnia face value is made from 925-fine silver, weight in fineness – 31.1g, quality – “special uncirculated”, mintage – 2, 000 pieces. The coin edge is smooth with incised inscriptions indicating the metal and its fineness.

The coin of 2 hryvnia face value is made from German silver, quality – “special uncirculated”, mintage – 15, 000 pieces. The coin edge is grooved.

Obverse: against the background of blue and yellow corresponding to the national colours of the Ukrainian Olympic team (pad printing) there is a conventionalized image of mountains with the following legend thereunder: ЗИМОВІ/ОЛІМПІЙСЬКІ/ІГРИ (Winter / Olympic / Games). Reverse: bears the images of a biathlete (in the foreground) and representatives of winter sports (along the circumference).

The coins have been designed by Oleksandr Kuzmin and Mariia Skoblikova and sculpted by Sviatoslav Ivanenko and Volodymyr Demianenko.