Share

Tweet

Share

Share

Email

The main task of the Odessa football club Chernomorets for the 2021/2022 season is to keep the team in the Premier League. This was announced by the new head coach of "Chernomorets" Roman Grigorchuk at the first press conference.

He noted that the process of forming the club's updated team is now underway. "Chernomorets" will be fully staffed after the second team meeting.

The coach who returned to the team introduced his coaching staff, and also talked about the team's immediate plans and the club's development strategy for several years. In particular, Hryhorchuk will be assisted by a proven team consisting of Stepan Matviyev, Mikhail Savka, Igor Kasyanenko and Andrey Hlushchenko. Alexey Gai and Alexey Antonov, who spent several bright seasons as players under the leadership of Roman Hryhorchuk, remain in the coaching staff.

Grigorchuk again wants to make Chernomorets a team that will be able to compete for championship medals and entry to European cups in the future.

The club is developing a personnel strategy for the coming years. Emphasis will be placed on the players of its football academy, which at different times educated and trained bright players.

We note that Roman Hryhorchuk is a legendary coach for the "sailors" and their fans. It was he who, in the early 2010s, returned the glory to the team that was hanging around at the end of the tournament table. Under his leadership, "Chernomorets" made it to the playoffs of the UEFA Europa League for the first time in its history, beating international teams of a higher class.

At that time, only the champion of France - Olympique Lyonnais stopped "Chernomorets" due to one goal scored at the very end of the match.

The financial crisis and political instability of 2014 led to the departure of Hryhorchuk from the post of coach of the Seamen. Together with him, almost the entire coaching staff and the club's leading players left the club, after which "Chernomorets" quickly slipped into the second-tier teams, despite the constantly changing head coaches.

Let us remind you that on January 1, the Vertex United group of companies became the general partner of "Chernomorets" and allocated the necessary financing for the development of the team. In addition, the Vertex United company of Boris Kaufman and Alexander Granovsky has already signed a preliminary agreement on the purchase of the club from the former president of FC Leonid Klymov.

At the press conference, the club management also thanked the President of Ukraine for the fact that the head of state paid attention to the development of football clubs representing major cities and regions of the country at the congress dedicated to the 30th anniversary of the UAF. Our "Chernomorets" was named among such clubs.

And in response to a question about the sports base located in Sauvignon, the company's representatives noted that there is now a process of negotiations on the purchase of property rights. Nevertheless, the Vertech United company has already allocated the necessary financing for the reconstruction of sports, technical and medical equipment.

"Chernomorets" thanked journalists and fans for the incredible support that the team now feels. And special gratitude was expressed to the partners from Parimatch, who are doing everything to bring football even closer to its true connoisseurs in Odessa. But openness to fans is the main vector of the club's development.

After the press conference, "Chernomorets" flew from Odessa to Turkey for the first training camp, which will last until January 27.