Summer intern at Qlik

During the summer of 2016 I was in Lund for a summer internship at Qlik. I did a project with another intern where we created prototypes for new layouts and functionality for the dashboard in the product Qlik Sense. We used agile methods in the project and worked close with other employees. AngularJS, less and Jquery were the libraries we used for the bigger part of the project.

Student ambassador at Linköping University

Since October 2014 I am a student ambassador at Linköping University. As a student ambassador I visit different high schools and market the University and inform about how it is being a student at LiU.I also represent LiU at arranged fairs at the different campuses in LiU

In addition I have also participated at various events like being a waiter at the 40 year celebration party for all employees at LiU.

Media technology student association board - Recruitment manager 13/14

Between July 2013 to June 2014 I was recruit manager at the Media technology student association board My mission was marketing of the programme. I was team leader for a committee where we worked with different marketing projects and I also held lectures.

The main projects during my time together with the committee were the creation of one film project and one brochure. The film was in cooperation with the university and can be found here . The brochure was produced by the committee alone.

Saab summer intern

I was a summer intern at Saab in Linköping 2011, 2012, 2013 and 2014. The first three years I converted analog documents to digital. During the summer 2014 I developed a system at the flight test department. The system is a test tool that tests both the client and server sides of a flight start status report and visualization system for the flight leader (the flight leadersees the status of every plane whether they are ready for take-off or not). The system was written in Java and I both tested and developed the client side and server sides of the system.