PALM SPRINGS, Calif., Nov. 14, 2010 /PRNewswire/ -- Lars Bjork, CEO, Director of QlikTech, was named the Ernst & Young Entrepreneur Of The Year® 2010 national winner in the Technology category. Now in its 24th year, Ernst & Young's Entrepreneur Of The Year® is the world's most prestigious business award for entrepreneurs. The award encourages entrepreneurial activity and recognizes leaders and visionaries who demonstrate innovation, financial success and personal commitment as they create and build world-class businesses.

To view the multimedia assets associated with this release, please click: http://multivu.prnewswire.com/mnr/ey/47193/

Recognized for growing QlikTech from a small consulting project in Sweden to the world's largest business intelligence vendor, Bjork was honored at the Entrepreneur Of The Year® gala, the culminating event of the Ernst & Young Strategic Growth Forum in Palm Springs. The Forum is the nation's premier gathering of high-growth, market-leading companies. Awards were given in nine additional categories. All Ernst & Young Entrepreneur Of The Year® winners were selected by an independent panel of judges from approximately 300 regional award recipients.

"Collaboration and empowerment are critical success factors for today's technology entrepreneurs," said Bryan Pearce, Americas Director, Entrepreneur Of The Year, Ernst & Young LLP. "By fostering a workplace culture that is inclusive and innovative, and encouraging employees to take risks, Bjork exemplifies what it means to be a technology entrepreneur in the 21st century. It is with great pleasure that we honor Lars Bjork as the Ernst & Young Entrepreneur Of The Year® 2010 national winner in the Technology category."

Relentless focus on continuous improvement

Founded in 1993 in Lund, Sweden, as a small consulting project to analyze multi-dimensional data, QlikTech has grown to become the world's largest business intelligence vendor. QlikTech, whose global headquarters is now in the Philadelphia suburb of Radnor, Penn., has more than 700 employees worldwide and 15,000 customers in more than 100 countries.

QlikTech's success has not come without serious challenges, though. The biggest issue has been expanding into a market sector that is saturated with traditional corporate powerhouses such as IBM, Oracle, SAP and Microsoft.

Today, QlikTech has thrived by creating a distinct point of differentiation from its competitors. While other enterprise software products have a 12- to 18-month sales cycle, QlikView can be deployed in just a day to a few weeks.

Capitalizing on energy, enthusiasm and ideas

Bjork credits the success of QlikTech to its consensus-driven management style, which capitalizes on the energy, enthusiasm and ideas of employees. His philosophy is put into practice through several programs and initiatives at QlikTech – from onboarding new employees with rigorous training in Sweden to providing mandatory product certification for all staff.

These initiatives and programs have helped mold a corporate culture in which 94% of the employees describe the work environment as interesting and 98% view the future of the company positively.

Entrepreneur Of The Year® 2010 National Finalists in the Technology Category

In addition to Bjork, the Ernst & Young Entrepreneur Of The Year® national finalists in the Technology category are: Michael Simon, CEO of Woburn, Mass.-based LogMeIn, Inc. (Nasdaq: LOGM), a global provider of on-demand, remote connectivity solutions to small and medium-sized businesses, IT service providers and consumers; Charles M. Swoboda, Chairman of the Board, CEO, President of Durham, N.C.-based Cree Inc. (Nasdaq: CREE), a market-leading innovator of lighting-class LEDs, LED lighting, and semiconductor solutions for wireless and power applications; and R. Halsey Wise, Chairman, President, CEO of Intergraph Corporation of Madison, Ala., the leading global provider of engineering and geospatial software that enables customers to visualize complex data.

Overall Entrepreneur Of The Year® 2010 National Winner

Howard W. Lutnick, Chairman and CEO of BGC Partners, Inc. (Nasdaq: BGCP), was named the Overall Ernst & Young Entrepreneur Of The Year® 2010 national winner.

Video and Photos

To view video clips of all the Entrepreneur Of The Year® winners, please visit the Ernst & Young YouTube Channel at http://www.youtube.com/user/ErnstandYoungGlobal. Photos of the winners are also available by request.

Sponsors

Founded and produced by Ernst & Young LLP, the Entrepreneur Of The Year® awards are pleased to have the Ewing Marion Kauffman Foundation and SAP America as national sponsors.

About Ernst & Young's Entrepreneur Of The Year®

Ernst & Young's Entrepreneur Of The Year® is the world's most prestigious business award for entrepreneurs. The award makes a difference through the way it encourages entrepreneurial activity among those with potential and recognizes the contribution of people who inspire others with their vision, leadership and achievement. As the first and only truly global award of its kind, Ernst & Young Entrepreneur Of The Year® celebrates those who are building and leading successful, growing and dynamic businesses, recognizing them through regional, national and global awards programs in more than 135 cities in 50 countries.

About Ernst & Young's Strategic Growth Markets Practice

Ernst & Young's Strategic Growth Markets (SGM) practice guides leading high-growth companies. Our multi-disciplinary team of elite professionals provides perspective and advice to help our clients accelerate market leadership. SGM delivers assurance, tax, transactions and advisory services to thousands of companies spanning all industries. Ernst & Young is the undisputed leader in taking companies public, advising key government agencies on the issues impacting high-growth companies, and convening the experts who shape the business climate. For more information, please visit us at www.ey.com/us/strategicgrowthmarkets.

About Ernst & Young

Ernst & Young is a global leader in assurance, tax, transaction and advisory services. Worldwide, our 141,000 people are united by our shared values and an unwavering commitment to quality. We make a difference by helping our people, our clients and our wider communities achieve their potential.

For more information, please visit www.ey.com.

Ernst & Young refers to the global organization of member firms of Ernst & Young Global Limited, each of which is a separate legal entity.

This news release has been issued by Ernst & Young LLP, a member firm of Ernst Young Global Limited located in the US.

SOURCE Ernst & Young LLP