1. See the whole story that lives within your data

2. NASDAQ: QLIK Founded in Lund, Sweden in 1993 Headquartered in Radnor, PA, USA 38,000 customers and 1,700 partners in more than 100 countries 10 years’ growth outpacing marketMore than 2,000 employees 38,000 1,700 100

3. 38,000 happy customers Communications, energy, and utilities Manufacturing and high tech Financial services Healthcare and life sciences Retail and services Public sector

4. 4 Today’s reality in the digital economy It’s people who make decisions It’s people who need to harness the data Source: “The Digital Universe of Opportunities: Rich Data and the Increasing Value of the Internet of Things” – April 2014 Data is exploding But data is just a source

5. 5 Change is constant and rapid Organizations who don’t adapt will die / But business intelligence is too slow of business managers have seen their decision window shrink in the last 12 months 64% of business professionals need to make data-driven decisions within one day 42% Industry average deployment Traditional BI: 18 months 18MONTHS Time to build one report Traditional BI: 6.3 weeks 6.3WEEKS Source: “The Digital Universe of Opportunities: Rich Data and the Increasing Value of the Internet of Things” – April 2014

6. 6 There is a broad spectrum of needs and analytics use cases across any business, all of which are important storage automated pre analysis reporting mobility embedded analytics collaboration and sharing analytic apps high performance databases preparation acquisition VISUALIZATION Visualization alone isn’t the answer Source: “The Digital Universe of Opportunities: Rich Data and the Increasing Value of the Internet of Things” – April 2014

7. Maximizing analytic value HIGH LOW Analytic value BUSINESS USERS DATA SCIENTISTS Descriptive analytics Reporting and viz tools Diagnostic analytics Predictive analytics (Why did it happen?) (What is likely to happen?) (What happened?)

8. Maximizing analytic value HIGH LOW Analytic value BUSINESS USERS Descriptive, diagnostic and predictive analytics (“What happened?”, “Why did it happen?” and “What is likely to happen?” REMOVE GRAY LINEDescriptive, diagnostic, and predictive analytics (“What happened?”, “Why did it happen?”, and “What is likely to happen?”

9. See the whole story that lives within your data Innovative associative model enables users to probe all the possible associations that exist in their data, across all data sources, to answer not just “What happened?”, but “Why?”, and “What is likely to happen?” A platform for all your visual analytics needs More than a tool, Qlik’s platform approach enables centrally deployed guided analytics, self-service data visualization, embedded and custom built analytics, collaboration and reporting Agility for the business user, with trust and scale for IT Supports the business and IT; data sourcing and preparation, visualization and analytics, collaboration and reporting — all within a governed framework Why our approach is unique A visual analytics platform

10. See the whole story that lives within your data Example: Tell us all of the patients who had a hip replacement that cost more than $10,000; the surgeons that treated those patients that have used different prosthetics for those hip replacements… versus Associative visual analyticsLinear data visualization Result of the partial story: You reduce the number of operations Result of the whole story: You increase effectiveness of procedures to maintain the number of operations

11. 11 What constitutes a modern analytics platform? • Data integration and management to enable complex, scalable analysis • Data indexing to support freeform exploration and discovery • Governance and security to protect data integrity • Library of modern visualizations to visualize data • Open and standard API access with full capability to extend and embed • Toolkits to accelerate and simplify development and creation • Choice of on- and off-premise deployment models • Broad ecosystem and community to inspire innovation

12. Governance is empowerment Reusability Security and control Manageability Performance and scale Multiple data sources Agility for the business user, with trust and scale for IT so you leave no data behind

13. Our modern BI portfolio Foundation QIX Associative Engine EnterpriseCloudDesktop Value-added services Applications Services Ecosystem

14. 14 Qlik platform-enabled visual analytics Embedded analytics Custom analytics applications Self-service data visualization Qlik® Analytics Platform Qlik Sense® Enterprise Guided analytics Reporting and collaboration QlikView® NPrinting Decentralized analysis and exploration for individuals and groups Centrally deployed guided analytics to multiple knowledge workers Analytics embedded in web and enterprise applications Custom-built analytics applications for internal and external use Pixel-perfect report distribution across the enterprise QlikView®

15. What Qlik ® delivers to you See the whole story that lives within your data • Decide with confidence • Associative model, all your data • An analytics platform for everyone Agility through innovation • Superior solutions that challenge the norm • Leadership driven by ongoing innovation • Accelerating agile, data-driven businesses Partners in your success • Industry- and solution-oriented services • Our community, your success • Experienced partners, delighted customers

16. experience it for yourself Create an app Qlik.com/download Share an app Qlikcloud.com Try an app Sense-demo.qlik.com Test your skills Qlik.com/us/services/training/skills-assessment

17. Thank You

18. What’s new

19. 39 What’s new @ Qlik®? This presentation and Qlik‘s strategy and possible future developments are subject to change and may be changed by Qlik at any time for any reason without notice. This document is provided without a warranty of any kind, either express or implied, including but not limited to, the implied warranties of merchantability, fitness for a particular purpose, or non-infringement. Qlik Sense® Enterprise 2.2 Advanced data preparation Alternate dimensions and measures Powerful new developer APIs and tools QlikView® NPrinting 17 Next-generation reporting and distribution “Newsstand” self-service portal Enterprise scalability and security Qlik Sense Cloud Plus Sharing with unlimited users Expanded app and storage sizes Qlik DataMarket essentials package QlikView® 12 Second generation QIX engine Enhanced security and scalability Mobile touch improvements

20. Qlik Sense® Enterprise 2.2 Advanced data preparation • Automatic data profiling and handling • Creation of calculated fields in smart load • A newly redesigned data manager space Alternate dimensions and measures • Create visualizations with a number of alternate dimensions and measures • Users can “cycle” them using visual exploration New developer APIs and tools • New APIs for visualization and integration • Many new developer capabilities such as an IDE plugin for Visual Studio

21. Qlik Sense® Cloud Plus Unlimited sharing • Subscribers can share Qlik Sense visualizations with other free or paid users without limit Expanded app size and storage • Max app size doubled to 50MB • Storage increased to 10GB Qlik DataMarket upgrade • Access to Essentials package for apps created in the cloud Subscription based

22. QlikView® 12 Engine and user experience • Upgraded, modernized QIX engine • Improved touch interactions on mobile devices Security and scalability • Many enhancements to security and encryption • Improved scalability supporting more nodes in a cluster Data connectivity • Native connector for RESTful API web sources • Support for Qlik DataMarket

23. QlikView® NPrinting 17 This presentation and Qlik‘s strategy and possible future developments are subject to change and may be changed by Qlik at any time for any reason without notice. This document is provided without a warranty of any kind, either express or implied, including but not limited to, the implied warranties of merchantability, fitness for a particular purpose, or non-infringement. Next-generation reporting and distribution • Office, pixel perfect, and web formats • Managed report distribution • New web-based architecture “Newsstand” self-service portal • Browse and explore reports, including archived versions • Subscribe to report distributions in a self-service manner Enterprise scalability and security • Multi-threaded, multi engine scalability • Enhanced role-based security

24. Market model

25. 77 Visual analytics market — shift in centricity Business and personal External data Analysis-centric Analytic platforms Most “new” data is generated outside the organization from diverse sources From system centricity to business unit and eventually personal centricity Classic market disruption Data Centricity Analytic Centricity Buyer Centricity Seller Centricity IT Developer Data Scientist Business Analyst Information Worker Descriptive Diagnostic Predictive Prescriptive Mainstream shifting from “report-centric w/ some analysis” to “analysis-centric w/ some reporting” Volume Velocity Variety Stack Vendors Specialist Tools Analytic Platforms

26. 78 A shift to external data Data Centricity IT Personal LoB CloudOn-premise • “Half of the organizations access external data sources” • Increasingly data is born in the cloud, especially for mid-market and down • No clear leader in Cloud BI ─ 7% of total BI market spend ─ 25% of new 2016 spend ─ 40% planning on adopting 2016 • Data connectivity, both on- and off-premise, key to capture market share

27. 79 A shift to analysis Analytic Centricity Backward looking Forward looking • “Half of new buying is data discovery-driven” • Also driven by analytic applications and embedded analytics • Reporting is still important, but increasingly a commodity (and key to stack replacement) • Significant rise in competition ─ Tableau, Microsoft Power BI, SAP Lumira, Microstrategy Analytics Desktop, IBM Watson, Domo… • Battle today is analytics but tomorrow will be Smart Data Discovery with prediction and prescription

28. 80 A shift to business driven Buyer Centricity IT Business Personal • “Half of buying will be driven from the business” • Central IT to business IT to personal • Users demand the control of analysis centric BI: usability, speed, context, time to value • Critical advantage to those that make the data supply chain easy to consume • From traditional BI to big data and visual analytics

29. 81 A shift to analytic platforms Seller Centricity High Governance Low LowAgilityHigh • “Majority of BI vendors made data discovery their prime BI platform offering.” • Enterprise IT = low agility but high governance • Desktop/small workgroup = high agility but low integration • Dominant design will emerge from a business unit-centric approach providing, agility for the business but strength and trust for IT • Enterprise readiness will be key to long-term success

31. 83 Qlik corporate social responsibility Change Our World • Leveraging our people, products, and culture to make a difference • Touching a billion lives