Context

Snatch was a British movie released in 2000. It is a high-energy crime film with comedy elements, a zany atmosphere, and a plot that gets delivered in no particular order.

I’m not sure it aged well, though.

Brad Pitt’s Mickey the Traveller and Vinnie Jones’ underworld enforcer Bullet-Tooth Tony were among the most memorable Snatch characters.

Background

Powers and Abilities

“Bullet tooth” Tony is a tough, large, competent underworld enforcer in London.

He’s known as a man you can trust to solve complex emergencies. Often with extreme prejudice.

Video

HD version of the official Snatch movie trailer.

History

Bullet Tooth Tony gained his nickname and some of his rep when an enforcing errand went sour. He was shot six times. One of the bullets went through his cheek and broke his front teeth.

Despite the wounds, Tony proceeded to skewer the shooter with a nearby cutlass.

Some time later, a huge diamond, which had been stolen in the Netherlands, was lost in London.

Tony was quickly hired as a repo man by Jewish jewellers who wanted to buy the diamond from Russian gangsters.

Description

Tony’s front teeth have been replaced by the bullets he was shot with. That gives him an unnerving grin. But he rarely smiles.

Tony is a big, tough, stark guy dressed in a full black three-piece suit.

He has a strong presence and a gift for repartee, as long as it’s in London street English (including rhyming slang ).

Personality

Tony is streetwise, connected and brutally effective. He stays icily calm in the worst circumstances, although he’ll oppose doing something degrading.

He speaks in a colourful British slang and tends to have an oddly philosophical view of life.

He has little hesitation resorting to violence, brutality and torture to do his job, of which they are a common part. A solid helping of everyday sexism, homophobia and the like will also be involved.

Quotes

“You silly fuck.”

Avi : “Should I call you Bullet ? Tooth ?”

Tony : “You can call me Susan if it makes you happy.”

“You should never underestimate the predictability of stupidity.”

Tony : “Boris the Blade ? As in Boris the Bullet-Dodger ?”

Avi : “Why do they call him the Bullet-Dodger ?”

Tony : “ ’cause he dodges bullets, Avi.”

“You better not be tellin’ me porky pies.”

“You ’bin usin’ dog shit fer toothpaste ?”

“A bookie’s got blagged last night.”

“So, you are obviously the big dick. The men on the side of ya are your balls. There are two types of balls. There are big brave balls, and there are little mincey faggot balls. Now, dicks have drive and clarity of vision, but they are not clever. They smell pussy and they want a piece of the action. And you thought you smelled some good old pussy, and have brought your two small mincey faggot balls along for a good old time. But you’ve got your parties mangled up. There’s no pussy here, just a dose that’ll make you wish you were born a woman. Like a prick, you are having second thoughts. You are shrinking, and your two little balls are shrinking with ya. The fact that you’ve got ‘Replica’ written down the side of your gun…” (draws his gun) “… and the fact that I’ve got ‘Desert Eagle point five O’ written on the side of mine, should precipitate your balls into shrinking, along with your presence. Now… Fuck off !”

Related articles on Writeups.org