Context

Snatch was a British movie released in 2000.

It’s a high-energy crime movie with comedy elements, a zany atmosphere and a plot that gets delivered in no particular order.

Brad Pitt’s character, Mickey the Traveller, probably was the most memorable among this colourful lot – along with Bullet-Tooth Tony.

Background

Powers and Abilities

Mickey is a cinematicThe level of power and (un)realism found in a spectacular action movie.-level champion bare-knuckles fighter.

He’s as tough as a hardboiled nail, and can defeat most big, professional fighters with ease.

Video

HD version of the official Snatch movie trailer.

History

Irish Travellers (also known as “itinerants” or “Tinkers”) are a tiny minority mostly living in the British Isles. That’s about 40K people.

Their society is distinct from that of settled folks — in part due to hostility and misunderstandings — and as shown in the movie communication can be difficult.

Irish Travellers generally live in poverty and with little formal education.

Tinkers have been confused with the Roma peoples (vulgarly “Gypsies”). But there are vast differences, and no common origins, between these cultures.

Poverty and lack of access to social services result in high mortality rates and low life expectancy for Travellers. They are often barred from accessing shops, pubs, etc. out of prejudice and an history of conflicts.

In the movie, Mickey O’Neil is a minor Traveller leader living in Britain. He’s reputed for his toughness. His tribe is known for its mastery of violence in matters of family, honour or revenge.

For a short time and as a result of unusual circumstances, Mickey became a unlicensed bare-knuckles boxer in the London underground.

Description

Mickey almost always wear his leather hat, and smokes a lot.

He’s never well shaven, and nearly always dirty, smelly and scruffy – presumably due to poor access to water. He somehow remains attractive, however, being played by Brad Pitt.

Mickey has a muscular, wiry built despite his average frame.

He speaks in a nearly impenetrable Traveller accent. It takes a while to get used to it, even for most native English speakers in the British Isles.

Adνеrtisеmеnt

Personality

Mickey usually comes across as playful, flippant and somewhat mocking of outsiders. But unlike most of his tribe he enjoys interfacing with the settled people and adventuring in their world.

He’s confident and enjoys bets and gambles even for trivial things. Also, boxing matches.

Like most of his kin he loves dogs. They have so many of those running around that they tend to throw in a complimentary mutt with every deal.

Other traits

This Traveller lives in the present. He also feels little loyalty toward outsiders – unless he takes a personal liking to them. Relying on him to do anything he may not feel like doing is taking a serious chance.

Mickey lives piled up with the other Travellers of his group. He feels comfortable with cramming 14 nomads within a little trailer to drink and chat.

He has a formidable tribal loyalty and filial piety, and will not hesitate to take extreme measures if he feels those are threatened.

In some ways, Mickey the Traveller is close to the archetype of the heroic-fantasy barbarian adventurer Player Character.

Quotes

“I bit ya coin box a lil, can’t ya soir? Aye, yew loik lak hey baxer.“

“Saif yer brif fer cewlin yer preedge”

“Ya got a goid keek fer a fat fella.”

Mickey : “Daegs. D‘ya loik daegs ?”

Tommy : “Dykes ?”

Mickey : “Wha ?”

Woman : “Yeh, daegs.”

Mickey : “Daegs, ye loik daegs ?”

Tommy : “Oh ! Dogs ! Sure. I like caravans better.”

Related articles on Writeups.org