You know what they always say: Better to prepare for the worst.

Pulling out ol' reliable with this and saying that although this was a gay drama that I found to be mostly boring and not very engaging, I yearn for a world in which boring gay dramas are much more commonly made around the world. Lan Yu came to my attention from my good Letterboxd friend Emma Fogarty telling me about this being the queer feature from Wong Kar-wai's mentor Stanley Kwan, based on how deep my love for Wong's Happy Together runs. Not a whole lot that did anything for me here sadly, but I can admire that it is mostly a mundane drama of sexuality and mostly…

I had the great fortune of seeing the restoration of Stanley Kwan’s Lan Yu, an indisputable all-time classic in gay, Sinophone cinema, because back when this was made, any gay Sinophone cinema was classic, period. Though few key crew positions are held by HongKongers (including Kwan himself and William Chang – more on him later), this is a substantially Mainland Chinese production, and Mainland Chinese gay cinema was rare enough back then, getting rarer and rarer these days. So it’s to my great sadness that this restoration still hasn’t received US distribution, as far as I know, even though Kwan’s Rouge and Center Stage have been picked up.

Anyway, it’s immediately clear why this stands out, even among the classics.…

It seems unbelievable how it has been possible to get a movie that offers interest from such a simple and ordinary story. Undoubtedly, the preparation of a good script can have a positive effect on what is being filmed. But it is also that here there is a director who takes care of even the smallest detail of planning and editing to offer us a style, based on that well-known and melodramatic story, that is cinematically interesting. The shots are short when the director knows that he can do it, and the ellipses, so important in the language of cinema, are simple but well included so that the viewer does not need more to position himself. When a scene requires…

Pride Month 2023

Film #14

"I never forgot what you told me when we met. When two people get to know each other too well, it's time to separate. So I kept telling myself to love you a little less so that the end would hurt less."

The compelling, naturalistic performances by Hu Jun and Liu Ye, carry the whole film. It's such a heartfelt, intimate and somewhat touching love story, yet it feels too restrained for its own good, narratively, not particularly insightful. I'm not a huge fan of this particular style of storytelling, because it doesn't always work, you got to be extremely careful with what you decide to show the viewer. In this case, I think it…

This film is based on a novel anonymously published on the internet in 1998. The writer’s username is 北京同志, Beijing tongzhi, tongzhi originally meaning comrade, but is nowadays often used to mean gay. Lan Yu was shot underground –without governmental permission. The film was banned in mainland China, but enjoyed success both in Taiwan and Hong Kong.

Although up to the Qing dynasty (1644-1911) homoerotic practices between men were common and even accepted. Westernization and modernization during Republican China led to the view, that restoring the strength of the nation was a proper control of sexual desire. During Mao era reproductive sex within monogamous heterosexual marriage was promoted, and homosexuality was seen as a crime. (In 1997, homosexuality stopped being…