“It is very interesting to compare Spencer and Comte,” wrote George Sarton in an essay lauding their efforts to embrace all knowledge in a grand synthesis. The comparison, indeed, was tempting for contemporaries, as it has been for students of ideas. Both Auguste Comte and Herbert Spencer were authors of new philosophic systems which, they believed, had been built on the firm foundations of science, and both were convinced that society should be reconstructed in accordance with the truths of their philosophies. The insistence of Positivists and some who were not Positivists that Spencer, consciously or not, had been influenced by Comte, and Spencer's repeated and fervent denials, made for a series of controversies that extended over half a century and ranged from the minutiae of priority to the more important issues of the classification of the sciences and the nature of religion.

The eclipse of both the Positive Philosophy of Comte and the Synthetic Philosophy of Spencer in the twentieth century hardly suggests the interest they aroused in the nineteenth. The unification of knowledge and the discovery of the laws of man and society were dreams which nineteenth-century science and philosophy hoped to realize. Comte and Spencer made their contribution in this area; and while both were attacked for erecting systems on questionable assumptions, and for their weakness in details, their extraordinary ability to amass quantities of information and to come up with penetrating generalizations attracted admirers and disciples. Few of their critics thought that what they had set out to do was not worth doing, or could not be done.

5. “Ethics,” the abstract science of the individual, was not part of the hierarchy as developed in Comte, Auguste, Cours de philosophie positive (1830–1842)Google Scholar. It was added in 1852 when Comte was writing the Système de politique positive (1851-54).

To distinguish between “abstract” and “concrete” in Comte's system, J. K. Ingram, an Irish Positivist, wrote: “A Science is abstract, if it discovers independently the laws of a distinct general order of phenomena; while if it derives its truths altogether from a combination of the results of other sciences, and does not rest on special inductions of its own, it is concrete…. A complete systematisation of concrete sciences is impossible, as beyond our feeble powers of Combination. It is only Abstract Science that we can truly systematise, and this not in an absolute sense, but sufficiently for our real needs.” Ingram, J. K., Human Nature and Morals, p. 82Google Scholar, as quoted in Beesly, Edward Spencer, “Explanation of Philosophical Terms,” in Comte, Auguste, A Discourse on the Positive Spirit, tr. Beesly, E. S. (London, 1903 [original French edition, 1844]), p. xGoogle Scholar.

19. Some of Spencer's sharpest thrusts, e.g., that the idea of sequence was not inherent in the facts but was a product of the mind, and that there was constant interaction among all the sciences in their development, were misdirected, since Comte had said very much the same thing. Spencer, , “Genesis of Science,” Recent Discussions, pp. 171–85Google Scholar. On one point Spencer fully agreed with Comte, namely, that the formulation of a correct classification was essential, and that such a theory would have important consequences for the education of the individual which “rightly conducted must have a certain correspondence with the evolution of the race.” Ibid., p. 234.

23. Letters from Spencer to E. L. Youmans, Oct. 28, 1863, and Youmans to Spencer, Dec. 14, 1863, in Fiske, John, Edward Livingston Youmans (New York, 1894), pp. 152-53, 169Google Scholar. Spencer's statement, which followed the letter to the New Englander in the Illustrations, had been offered to Youmans by Spencer for purposes of publication. Spencer, Herbert, Illustrations of Universal Progress (New York, 1864), pp. xiv–xviGoogle Scholar; Fiske, , Youmans, pp. 173–74Google Scholar. But Youmans preferred to give a somewhat different impression by introducing it with: “We take the liberty of making an extract from a private letter.” One sentence referring to Huxley — “Professor Huxley pointed out to me passages in his own writings in which he spoke of Comte in language almost contemptuous” — was left out of the printed statement in the Illustrations.

43. Letter from Mill to Spencer, Mar. 11, 1865, in Duncan, , Spencer, I, 155;Google ScholarMill, John Stuart, Auguste Comte and Positivism (London, 1907CrossRefGoogle Scholar [originally published in the Westminster Review, 1865]), pp. 5, 33-35, 43, 45-46; for further elaboration of Mill's view see also pp. 7-8, 33-46, 102-04. Mill's criticism of Spencer for considering H. T. Buckle a member of Comte's school probably was responsible for the omission of the reference to Buckle in the third edition of the Classification. Mill also pointed out that Spencer's assertions that feelings rather than ideas govern the world, and that society rests on character and not intellect, were very much part of Comte's philosophy and not antagonistic to it. Ibid., pp. 102-03.

44. Spencer refrained from adopting the new title in 1867 because Thomas Huxley and John Tyndall had objected to it. Letters from Spencer to Youmans, Jan. 22, 1868, and Youmans to Spencer, Mar. 4, 1868, in Fiske, , Youmans, pp. 249–50Google Scholar. He finally settled on it as a result of another comparison with Comte. In 1869-70 John Fiske delivered a series of lectures at Harvard (published with the help of Youmans in the New York World) in which he grouped Comte and Spencer as “positive” philosophers. Spencer complained bitterly to Youmans and tried to impress upon Fiske the vast differences between his own system and Comte's. He made his point. Fiske was thereafter less favorably disposed towards Comte and used the term “Cosmic Philosophy” to describe Spencer's system. Spencer did not like Fiske's new designation either and in the fall of 1871 adopted “Synthetic Philosophy.” Spencer had rejected Fiske's suggestion that he use “Evolution Philosophy.” See Berman, Milton, John Fiske: The Evolution of a Popularizer (Cambridge, Mass., 1961), pp. 18, 35, 75–77CrossRefGoogle Scholar; letter from Spencer to Youmans, Dec. 4, 1869, in Duncan, , Spencer, I, 206;Google Scholar letter from Spencer to Fiske, Feb. 2, 1870, in ibid., I, 207-08, and in Clark, John Spencer, The Life and Letters of John Fiske (Boston, 1917), I, 366–70Google Scholar; Fiske, , Youmans, pp. 219–20nGoogle Scholar; letter from Youmans to his sister, Dec. 2, 1871, ibid., p. 290.

46. The two copies of the second edition of the Classification (New York, 1870)Google Scholar that I have seen do not differ from the first (except for an appendix) and did not contain the new Preface. I have not been able to locate a copy of the second British edition. The Preface, however, appears wherever Spencer republished the Comte material in collections of his essays. In the third edition (1871), both British and American, minor changes were made in the text. The only French translation I have been able to locate was made from the third edition by F. Réthoré.

48. Spencer's troubles were not over by any means, for Comte's classification found a staunch defender in Lester F. Ward, the American sociologist. Ward, who was not a Positivist, not only preferred Comte's arrangement of the sciences to Spencer's, but insisted that there was very little difference between them, thus implying that Spencer had borrowed from Comte. Convinced that Spencer was carrying forward Comte's great work in philosophy, he reminded him that it would in no way harm his reputation to give credit where it was due. For Ward's exchange with Spencer and for his fluctuating views regarding the relationship between the two classifications, see Ward, Lester F., Dynamic Sociology (New York, 1883), I, 97, 98, 104-05, 119, 134, 135, 142–49Google Scholar; Ward, Lester F., Pure Sociology (2nd ed.; New York, 1911 [1st ed., 1903]), pp. 66–69Google Scholar; the abstract of a paper on the classifications in Science, new series, III (1896), 292-94; Brown University Library, letters to Ward from Spencer, E. S. Beesly, Richard Congreve, Frederic Harrison, 1883-96, Ward Papers. I wish to thank Mrs. Christine D. Hathaway, special collections librarian, for her assistance in making the material in the Ward Papers available to me.