Auguste Comte and Herbert Spencer were both early sociology theorists who played vital roles in the development of structural functionalism. Though they shared in many ideas and concepts regarding society they also demonstrated differences in with regards to their views with social statics and social dynamics. Both were, however, under the same understanding that society is a sum of all its parts and because society is made up of so many different parts it is constantly changing and progressing. Both Spencer and Comte were concerned with the evolution of the world, Comte was mainly interested in the evolution of ideas, whereas Spencer focused on structural (and functional) evolution (Ritzer 130). Politically, Comte and Spencer differed. Comte believed a positivist society with a religion of humanity led my high priest was the only way to achieve both order and progress whereas Spencer believed in a liberal political system where there was a limited role played by the government and maximums liberties for the people so long as those liberties did not infringe on anothers liberties (which is where the government would come into play). Comte adapted to a more altruistic, positivist society whereas Spencer saw a progressing society to that of survival of the fittest.

Comte's Law of Three Stages is his most important law and it suggests that society goes through three stages, the Theological Stage, the Metaphysical Stage, and the Positivist Stage. The Theological stage is the first stage and it is seen by Comte as the starting point to the other two stages. In this stage society is seeking for it purpose and trying to obtain absolute knowledge. In order to explain phenomena society seeks answer through supernatural concepts such a higher power. It is through this higher power that society is created and continues to function. The Metaphysical Stage is the second stage and Comte sees this stage as a transitional stage between the Theological Stage and the Positivist stage because he believe society would have too difficult of a time jumping directly from the Theological stage to the Positivist stage.