Quezon City is a large sprawling city which had her own share of spooky places, haunted buildings, heritage trees, creepy tales tucked in her colorful history.

We came up with at least 35 places within the city that people had experienced or find some paranormal activities or haunted stories. We decided to narrow down the list to 20.

20 Spooky Places within Quezon City

Sacred Heart Novitiate -Novaliches (photo courtesy of Ms. Jo Quimpo)

20.) Sacred Heart Novitiate. Retreat House and Seminary 1118 Quirino Highway, Novaliches – Sacred Heart Novitiate was erected in 1932 as a chosen site for seminarian and priest who wanted to have a peaceful retreat under the cool weather and simpler lifestyle away from hustle and bustle of the city life.

In the 1930’s, Novaliches is primary an agricultural town with few people living beyond the northern part of Bayan ( town proper).

Jesuit retrieval team from the Sacred Heart Novitiate in Novaliches, Quezon City, spent two separate days in December 1945 gathering all the remains from the niches, for transfer to the Jesuit Cemetery at the Novitiate.

The haunted stories in this seminary started way back in the 1960’s, when some people reported seeing some headless priests, nuns and even people dressed in Katipunero within the cemetery compound in unexpected manner.

Some people would recall that they would refer the place as ‘ masukal‘ densely covered with trees or vegetation even in the late the 1970’s. Some residents would recount that there might be unseen spirits who might have been disturbed when Quirino Highway was widened. Another expert recount that some of the long dead priest wanted some prayers.

19.) Saint Paul University of Quezon City – In some portion of the comfort rooms inside the university. They say that a girl who committed suicide is known to show herself to students. An alumni would also recount a Japanese soldier who lurks within the old building of the university.

Another alumni recounted that she would get lost within some parts of the buildings during her stay in the campus.

18.) Poveda College -The school had a black garden behind the chapel in which a former student who hanged herself spirit. Another story is of an old friar who is spotted in one of his favorite classrooms during early morning.

17.) Flos Carmeli Institution – The school was conceived in 1972 the Catholic school—the name of which literally means “Flower of Carmel” within Fairview, Quezon City. It is located 12 Carmel Street, Fairview Park.

The owners of Fairview subdivision Mr. and Mrs. Bonifacio Regalado offered a land to be manage by the first superior of the Sister of Mount Carmel in the Philippines. The school got their first graduates in 1975 and had a large sprawling campus of about 1.4 hectares.

The school closed down in 2012 due to dwindling number of enrollment and bankruptcy. Eerie sound of children reciting were still being heard by some residents who lives near the abandoned school.

16.) Camp Crame– One of the spookiest place within the camp is the main building. Some former military personnel would be spotted marching around the campus, while Japanese sentry guards are sometimes spotted even in noontime.

Saint Joseph College

15.) Saint Joseph College – One of the oldest building and structure constructed along E. Rodriguez Sr. avenue. Students, employees and security guards would cite some stories. Among the most popular is the headless nun, Japanese sentry guard which guards the old building and American gentleman are spotted jogging.

14.) Ninoy Aquino Parks and Wildlife Center– The villas and small quonset huts were popular to photographers,film crews shooting at the lush man made lagoon and big trees within the sanctuary. There were reports of sightings of ethereal beings which dwells in some decades- old balete trees and villas located within the sanctuary. There were also reports of orbs spotted by a couple of well-known photographer.

NCBA compound along Aurora Boulevard

13.) NCBA compound – some of the students, employees and security guards would swear that sounds and creaking voices at the upper portion of building.

tamarind tree

12.) Tamarid Tree in Narra street, Barangay Amihan, Project 3, Quezon City- The tamarind tree is considered heritage tree of the district.

heritage tree marker

The tree is said to be home of several enkanto, tikbalangs and ethereal beings.

narra street

There were several attempts to cut the tree in the past,Those who would try to attempt would risk getting sick or died in a mysterious way.

tamarind tree which grows along narra street and molave street

There are two tamarind trees located within Narra street. Another tamarind tree also had reported some sighting.

According to one jeepney driver which ply the Project 2 and 3 route, recounted that as long as people would respect the tree like saying “tabi-tabi po” or excuse me when passing underneath its trunk. It is polite way to request unseen spirits to move to the side. One way is not to harm the tree like cutting the branches, hammering nails unto the branches.

11.) Q.C. Ville near Central avenue – The area used to have a lot of large trees and there might be spiritual beings disturbed during the construction process and development of of the subdivision. There were reports of dwarves, white lady and ghouls that have been spotted in some of the houses.

10.) Miriam College – ghost of a nun in the ladies’ restroom at the 4th floor of the Caritas Building.

9.) Quezon Institute compound- used to be known as Santol Sanatorium. There were several art deco buildings located within the compound. The old buildings were host to lot of ghostly stories. One recounts that a Japanese sentry soldiers would bow down to passers-by and patients. Another story is of hauling sounds during wee hours were heard by guards.

8.) Capitol Medical Institute– According to some feng shui experts, the main entrance of the hospital is facing the wrong direction hence attracts bad elements unto the hospital. Another expert say that, the hospital location is the problem.

There are certain times that one of the elevators would malfunction despite being in good working order. There were also some reported sightings of shadows and former employee on some floors.

Benitez Hall

7.) University of the Philippines campus – There were several buildings within the campus that had some ethereal spotting among which is the Benitez Hall (College of Education) had its share of haunted stories. One of which claims that former Dean Francisco Benitez is seen observing classes.

Melchor Hall

Some of the buildings which had their own share of haunting tales also included the Quezon Hall,College of Music,Vanguard Building, Palma Hall and Guerrero Theater.

Quezon Hall

6.) Ateneo de Manila University – Employees, students, professors and those with strong psychic vibes would say that the old Communication Department Building is the most haunted place in the university. Ghost sightings includes a mother and child figure climbing the stairs to the second floor, a deceased Jesuit priest,old janitor and several Japanese soldiers.

Other spooky place within the campus were the Cervini, Eliazo dormitories, Rizal library , Jesuits Retirement House and Old Mango Tree at High School Oval. According to old time residents which lived near the present day campus, it was formerly a military camp during World War II and had a cemetery before the remains was re-interred somewhere.

Paranormal experts would say that the campus were home to some unseen spirits that were disturbed during the construction of the campus. While another spirit questor advise that there were some people that got emotionally attached to the place that their spirits would dwell on these buildings long after they were gone.

5.) Balara Filtration Plant – It is a 60 hectare property which houses filtration plant, several art deco style building and Balara Filtration Windmill.

According to some paranormal experts, parts of Balara, Ateneo, UP campus, Miriam College and La Vista Subdivision used to be forest areas during the Spanish and early American colonial regime. Many areas were home to these spiritual beings who were disturbed when development took place. The spirits which dwell on trees and surrounding areas were not properly cast away. Hence some of the elemental spirits have moved to the buildings and built areas with ease.

4.) Children’s Hospital – There are some reported ethereal sightings of children at the 3rd floor of the hospital. Some say that it was the spirits of the unborn babies who died without proper burials or blessing that still lingers some of the rooms of the hospital.

3.) Veterans Memorial Medical Center (formerly known as Veterans Memorial Hospital) was established in 1955. Nurses, employees,security guards and even visitors would gave some accounts of stories. One retired employee say that a well -known gentleman who dress in a period dress is General Emilio Aguinaldo. Some say that it was the former president Sergio Osmeña Sr. seen walking in the hallways.

Goodah

2.) Ozone Disco now Goodah -On March 18, 1996 a tragic fire in which 150 people died inside Ozone Disco, a go to club located in the corner of Timog and Tomas Morato Avenues in Quezon City. Despite the new management, new building employees can still hear voices during wee hours of the night. Residents from nearby townhouses and condominium units can still hear faint ghostly disco music and faint apparition of teens.

Balete drive

1.) Balete Drive derives the name from Balete or Ficus trees which used to be abundant within the street. Balete tree is believed to be the dwelling place mythological creatures like kapre, tikbalang or any ethereal being. The narrow road is about 1.4 kilometers long which intersect major thoroughfares like E. Rodriguez Sr. , Aurora Boulevard and Nicanor Domingo street.

Balete drive corner 9th street

There were several takes of white ghost, tikbalangs and Japanese era soldiers lurking on some ancestral houses and along the street.

Balete drive

The white lady story started in the early 1950’s with at least 3 to 4 versions. Some say that the tales were magnified in films, taxi drivers and urban legend.

A more detailed story came from a distant relative who lived near E. Rodriguez Sr. Avenue said that there were local gangs who would victimized unsuspected passersby and maybe carjacked private vehicles coming from Highway 54 (now EDSA). The area used to be dimly lighted in the 1950’s. This is also to deter people from passing or taking that route.

There were also some skeptics who told us that it was real estate agents or companies who would magnify the story so that the land value within the area would not increase.

Balete drive also host to several old mango trees, acacia tree and frangipanis (kalachuchi) in which many parts are poorly lighted. Most of the walls had Ficus pumila growing. There were parts of the street which had blind spot which are accident prone to motorist and drivers.

Some residents and even taxi drivers say that the white lady tends to be spotted after heavy downpour, full moon or during intense heat between 12:00 midnight to 4:00 am in between Mabolo, Sampaguita and Bougainvilla streets.

Note: This is an incomplete list of spooky places in Quezon City in which were given by relatives, friends , paranormal experts,stories from employees, students, alumni and other personal accounts.