Mammootty is the famous actor in Malayalam cinema. Remember that this famous actor is also a lawyer as well as social worker. It should be noted that Mammootty was born on 7 September 1953 to Ismail & Fatima. This actor had won several awards in his film career. In this article you can also see the names of some future films of Mammootty. Visit this article to read the profile & biography of actor Mammootty.

Profile & Biography of Mammootty

Date of birth:7 September 1953

Present age:57

Original name:P. I. Muhammad Kutty

Other name: Mammookka

Place of birth: Chempu

Father: Ismail

Mother: Fatima

Spouse: Sulfath

Daughter: Surumi

Son: Dulquar Salman

Colleges studied: Maharajas College, Kochi & Government Law College, Ernakulam

Important Awards: Padma Shri, 3 National film awards for best actor, 7 Kerala state film awards, 10 Filmfare awards, Doctor of letters

Occupation: Producer, social worker & Film actor

Mammootty is the famous actor in Malayalam cinema. He was born to Ismail & Fatima in the year 7 September 1953. His birth place is Chempu situated in Kottayam district of Kerala state. It should be noted that Mammootty did his college education at Maharajas College in Kochi & Government Law College in Ernakulam. By profession he is a lawyer. Sulfath is his wife & they have two children. It is important to note that Mammootty is the famous actor, social worker as well as a lawyer.

Mammootty & his film career

Mammootty, the famous actor is an important factor of our Malayalam cinema. It is interesting to note that so far he had acted in more than 300 films. He got the opportunity to work with directors like K. G. George, I. V. Sasi, Azad, P. G. Viswambharan, K. Madhu, Hariharan, Harikumar, Adoor Gopalakrishnan, Bharathan, Lohithadas, Jabbar Patel, Kamal, Shyamaprasad, Ranjith, Shaji .N. Karun, Lal Jose, K. Balachander, Mani Ratnam, Rajiv Menon, Fazil, Shaji Kailas etc. It should be noted that he also acted in Telugu, Tamil, Kannada & English films respectively. In his film career he worked with different actors & actresses like Prem Nazir, Nedumudi Venu, Mohanlal, Sukumaran, Ratheesh, Seema, Mukesh, Geetha, Suresh Gopi, Suhasini, Urvashi, Shobhana, Madhu, Lizy, Revathy, Rahman, Thilakan, Sreenivasan, Jagadish, Gauthami, Sukanya, Sreevidhya, Dileep, Prakash Raj, Kavya Madhavan, Kaveri, Baby Shalini, Murali, Thilakan, Captain Raju, Rishi Kapoor, Mithum Chakraborthy etc.

Some of the important films of Mammootty

We all know the fact that Mammootty has proved his talents in almost all films he acted. Some of the important films of Mammootty are given below.

1.Pranchiyettan & The Saint

2.August 15

3.Pokkiri Raja

4.Best Actor

5.Doubles

6.Drona 2010

7.Pramaani

8.Kutty Shrank

9.Annan Thambi

10.Parunthu

11.Nazrani

12.Mayavi

13.Big B

14.Ee Pattanathil Bhootham

15.Pazhassi Raja

16.Paleri Manikyam

17.Chattambinaadu

18.Loud Speaker

19.Yugapurushan

20.Pothen Vava

21.Maunam Sammatham

22.Thalapathy

23.Swathi Kiranam

24.Dr Babasaheb Ambedkar

25.Balram vs Tharadas

Future films of Mammootty

The following are considered as some of the future films of Mammootty.

1.Shikari

2.1993 Bombay, March 12

3.The Train

4.Pick Pocket

5.Arappatta Kettiya Gramathil-2

6.Ravu Mayumpol

7.CBI Diary Part 5

8.Mathilukalkkappuram

9.Venice Ile vyaapari

The film 1993 Bombay, March 12 is directed by Babu Jananrdhanan & produced by Haneef Muhamed. Jayaraj is the director of the film The Train which is supposed to be released on 27 May 2011. But Shikari is the film directed by Anhay Simha. Vinod Vijayan is the director of the film Pick Pocket. It should be noted that Ranjith is the director of the film Arappatta Kettiya Gramathil-2. The film Ravu Mayumpol is directed by G. S. Vijayan. The film CBI Diary Part 5 is directed by K. Madhu. Remember that the director of the film Mathilukalkkappuram is Prasad. The film Venice Ile Vyaapari is directed by Shafi.

Awards won by Mammootty

Mammootty, the famous actor had won several awards in his career. It should be noted that he had won several awards like National film awards, Padma Shri, D. Litt by the universities of Kerala & Calicut, Kerala state awards, Filmfare awards, Kerala film critics award, Asianet film award, Vanitha film award, Nana award for best actor, V. Shanttharam award for best actor, Amrita film award for best actor, Asia pacific merlian award, Foccana film award for best actor, Everest award for best actor, Sify award for best actor, John Abraham award for best actor, Jaihind film award for best actor, Surya film award for best actor, Ramu Kariat award for best actor, Kala Keralam award, Cinema express awards & Mathrubhumi awards respectively.

Films which won awards for Mammootty

I have already mentioned the important awards which were given to Mammootty for his great contributions. Now you may be thinking about the films which won awards for Mammootty? Films like Oru vadakkan veeragatha, Ponthan mada, Dr babasaheb ambedkar, Mathilukal, Paleri manikyam: oru pathira kolapathakathinte kadha, Valtsalyam, Kazhcha, Nirakkoottu, Ahimsa, Adiyozhukkukal, Arayannagalude veedu, Karutha pakshikal, Bhoothakkannadi, Yathra, Amaram, Sukrutham, Pranchiyettan & the saint, Pappayude swantham appoos, Ore kadal, Big b, Vesham, Soorya manasam etc. have won certain awards for the great actor Mammootty.