Mammootty's mother, Fathima Ismail, passed away due to a health condition related to her age. The actor's mother, who was 93 years old, breathed her last in a private hospital in Kochi. She had five children, and her funeral ceremony is scheduled for today at 4 PM at Chempu Juma Masjid.

The Malayalam film industry suffered a blow and left the families of Mammootty and Dulquer Salmaan in grief and sorrow ahead of the auspicious day of Eid due to the passing of Mammootty's mother and Dulquer Salmaan's grandmother.

In the wake of this tragedy, many celebrities from the Malayalam industry expressed their condolences on social media. MP Shashi Tharoor took to Twitter and announced the news to the world, expressing his sympathies to Mammootty.

He wrote, "Spoke to @mammukka this morning to express my sincere condolences on the passing of his mother. As I have grown older I have become much closer to my own mother, & I am aware of the preciousness of this irreplaceable bond. May he find the peace of mind to cope w/his loss."

Mammootty was born on September 7, 1951, in Chandiroor, to his parents Ismail and Fathima. He came from a middle-class Muslim family and grew up in Chempu near Vaikom in Kottayam.

His father, Ismail, was involved in the wholesale garment and rice businesses and rice cultivation, while his mother, Fatima, was a homemaker. Mammootty was the eldest son and had five siblings, including two younger brothers named Ibrahimkutty and Zakariah, and three younger sisters named Ameena, Sauda, and Shafina.

Mammootty's Upcoming Projects:

The actor recently revealed information about his upcoming project called Bazooka, directed by newcomer Deeno Dennis, the son of renowned Malayalam screenwriter Kaloor Dennis. Gautham Vasudev Menon will also have a significant role in the movie.

Mammootty has completed shooting for Kannur Squad, a film that has been in production for a while now. The film also marks the directorial debut of the accomplished cinematographer Roby Varghese Raj. In Kannur Squad, Mammootty portrays the role of an ASI who is leading a vast investigation as a police officer.

The megastar also revealed that he will be starring in an upcoming movie called Bazooka, which is being helmed by newcomer Deeno Dennis, the son of well-known Malayalam screenwriter Kaloor Dennis. In addition, Gautham Vasudev Menon will play an important role in the film.

Mammootty has finally finished working on Kannur Squad, which has been in production for quite some time. This film also marks the directorial debut of the renowned cinematographer Roby Varghese Raj. In the movie, Mammootty will be portraying the character of a police officer, an ASI who is leading a large-scale investigation.