Date of Birth

7 September 1953, Chempu, Vaikom, Kerala, India

Birth Name

Mohammed Kutty

Height

5′ 10″ (1.78 m)

Mini Biography

Mammootty the Malayalam movie megastar was born to Ismail (an agriculturist) and Fatima (a homemaker). He had two younger brothers Ibrahim and Zakariah; and three sisters, Ameena, Sauda and Shafina. He did his high school (pre-degree) at Maharaja’s College, Thevara and then studied law at Ernakulam Government Law College. It was during his days at Maharajah’s that he got his first role a bit part in Anubhavangal Paalichakal in 1971. He practised as a criminal lawyer in Manjiri for 2 years. He got married in 1980 to Sulfaath. He was ‘discovered’ by M.T. Vasudevan Nair who cast him in the unfinished ‘Devalokam’. K.G. George was another mentor of Mammootty’s who made him into a bankable superstar. He has a daughter, Surmi (b. 1982) and a son, Dulquar Salman (1986). Along with Mohanlal he was the most prominent leading male actor of Malayalam movies in the 80’s and 90’s. He made a brief foray into Hindi films but did not create much of an impact. He has won numerous Indian National awards.

Spouse

Sulfaath (1980 – present)

Trivia

While he was a law student he and his friends streaked through the streets of Ernakulam (Kerala, India) as part of a bet.

Along with Mohanlal, he is considered the biggest star of Malayalam movies.

Has won the National Award for Best Actor numerous times, for his roles in Oru Vadakkan Veeragatha (1989), Mathilukal (1990), Ponthan Mada(1994), Vidheyan (1994), and Dr. Babasaheb Ambedkar (2000).

Has a daughter, Surmi, and a son, Dulquar Salman.

Patron of the Pain and Palliative Care Society, a charitable organization formed with the aim of improving the quality of life in patients with advanced cancer and with chronic pain.

As an actor he is quite ambitious. It was his childhood dream to act in a movie, become a great star, earn the love and respect of the people of his land, his country and the whole world.

Won the Kerala State Film Award for Best Actor for his performance in Kaazhcha (2004).

He took his Pre-Degree from Sacred Heart Colege, Thevara, Ernakulam and Bachelor of Arts from Maharajas Colege, Ernakulam. He also secured a LLB from Law Colege, Ernakulam. He was practicing as an advocate whilst he become active in to movies.

An autobiography named “Chamayangalillathe”(without makeup) which was serialised in Malayala Manorama weekly was a hit like his movies which later published as a book in 1992. The book tells about his life from his birth till it was first released.

Personal Quotes

“I became prosperous only after my marriage. My first film chance came on the sixth day of our marriage. My wife always makes suggestions about my work, but never actively interferes. As a critic of my performances, she can be very severe!”