Name : Muhammed Kutty Ismail

Paniparambil

Date of Birth: Mon, Sep 07, 1953

Age: 55

Place of Birth: Chempu, near Vaikom

Spouse : Sulfath Mammootty

Height: 5' 10" (1.78 m)

Other names: Mammukka,

MegaStar,

Mammoos,

Bigstar.

Address: 7 Greenways Rd. Extension,

Raja Annamalaipuram,

Chennai-28.

Mammootty is a popular Indian Actor. Mammootty has acted in more than 300 films in

Malayalam and Tamil. He was awarded the Padma Shri by the Government of India in 1998.

Mammootty was born in Chempu, near Vaikom, Kottayam district in a middle class family.

His father Ismail was an agriculturist and mother Fatima a housewife. Along with his

siblings he grew up in Chempu.

During his school life he participated in sports and arts. He studied Pre-degree at

Maharajas College, Kochi and later studied at Ernakulam Government Law College. It was

during his days at Maharajah's that he got his first role in Anubhavangal Paalichakal in

1971. He was also a known mimicry artist. While at law school he and his friends streaked

through the streets of Ernakulam as part of a bet.

In Manjeri he practiced as a criminal lawyer for two years but he was a man of many

interests. ?I have always wanted to be a writer, and had been writing even when I was

a student. I hadn't published anything though, after trying to be a singer and a writer

then only I became an actor? he said.

Mammootty married Sulfath in 1980 and as they believe in film world, he started getting

prominent roles. He has a daughter, Surumi (born 1982) and a son Dulquar Salman (born 1986).

From 1982 to 1986 Mammootty acted in more than 150 films as hero. During this period,

he has managed the rare distinction of appearing as the hero in an astonishing 35 movies

released in the year 1986. But these also lead to a career slump.

A lesser known fact is that he owned a production company ?Casino? during 1980s, along

with Mohanlal, I.V. Sasi, Seema and Century Kochumon. The production house produced

commercially successful films such as Nadodikkattu, Gandhi Nagar 2nd Street, Adiyozhukkukal and Karimpin Poovinakkare.

Along with Mohanlal he was the most prominent leading male actor in Malayalam movies

from 80?s. During a career spanning more than quarter of a century, he has acted in more

than 300 films as the lead actor in Malayalam movies, a distinction he shares with

Prem Nazir.

This trendy film icon is considered getting younger after each passing day. A survey

conducted by Vanitha magazine among its readers, selected Mammootty as the actor with

most sex appeal. Mammootty is widely considered in film circles as manliness epitomized.

His profound looks, baritone voice and thick moustache underline his masculinity.

Mammootty is a youth icon and is a known techy. He is the first Indian actor to start a

website. He is known to have fascination for camera, electronic goods and sun glasses.

While not acting he is seen with laptop. No wonder he is the Goodwill Ambassador of the

Akshaya project.

Known for his short temperedness, Mammootty is good at spotting talents. He gave exposure

to Lal Jose, Blessy, Anwar Rasheed, Amal Neerad and now to Renjith Shankar who directed

Passenger.

Mammootty is considered by many critics to be one of the finest actors in Indian cinema

who excels in art as well as mainstream films. In each of his films he brings a fresh new

personality.

He is the only actor apart from Kamal Haasan to win National Film Award for Best Actor

three times. In 1998, the Government of India honored him with Padma Shri for his

contributions to Indian cinema.

IIFA honored him by conducting a hit parade in Dubai in 2005.The University of Kerala

honored him with honorary doctorate in 2008.

This gifted actor has promoted humanitarian causes through out Kerala and is a Patron

of the Pain and Palliative Care Society; a charitable organization formed with the aim

of improving the life of patients with advanced cancer and chronic pain.

He is counted amongst the most talented actors of Indian Cinema, Mammootty; the Mega

Star of Malayalam Movies captivates the audience with his looks and talent.

Film Career

His film career began with the Malayalam movie Vilkanundu Swapnangal by K.S Sethumadhavan

in which his performance was noticed by the colossal writer in Malayalam cinema

M T Vasudevan Nair, who cast him in yet unfinished film Devalokam.

Mammootty's mentor K.G. George made him a bankable superstar. K.G George?s films like

Yavanika and Valarthu Mrigangal made him noticeable.

His career saw a spectacular rise after the release of Joshi?s New Delhi. It heralded

the arrival of super star Mammootty.

In 90?s Mammootty became a regular face in Adoor Gopalakrishnan films. He starred in

Anantharam, Mathilukkal and Vidheyan.

A Folklore tale, Hariharan's Oru Vadakkan Veeragatha, Mammootty portrayed Chanthu which

bagged him first National Award for the Best Actor.

It can be said that he made it almost a habit of winning the national award.

Ponthan Mada won him national award for a third time.

His controlled acting, abiding the limits, and presentation of dialogues, which were

pregnant with meaning, gave Malayalam cinema a new concept of hero.

Mammootty is considered to be one of the greatest Method Actors in India along with

Nasirudeen Shah and Om Puri.

Three national awards, five State awards many Filmfare awards all for best acting assert

his acting prowess.

His Oru CBI Diary Kurippu was a landmark. His representation of a Tamil Brahmin CBI

officer stays in everyone?s mind. A fifth film with the same character is set to be made

immediately which is a record of sorts in the Malayalam film industry, movies with the

same lead character a la James Bond.

He proved a success in Tamil with Mani Ratnam?s Dalapati and continued to shine in Tamil

films. His maiden Hindi film is Thriyathri released in 1989. As hero Dhartiputra went unnoticed. His national presence was felt with Jabbar Patel?s Dr Baba Saheb Ambedkar. He bagged the coveted Rajat Kamal for best acting.

Earlier he was considered not good for comedy scenes and dancing. With his talent

streaming in right direction he is now the best man to do comedy. In the dancing front

he still has to improve as he still shakes the head even he only need to shake a finger.

Misc

Mammootty is also the Chairman of Malayalam Communications, which runs Malayalam TV

channels like Kairali TV, People TV and We TV.

Mammootty has turned writer with his book Kazhchapadu, a compilation of essays written

in various publications.