Sam Shepard is first seen onscreen in Cold in July, his latest movie out now, from out a car window, the camera tilting upward to catch him staring down at the seated driver, Michael C. Hall, with the sun against his back and a look of menace on his face. It is, in a certain sense, a prototypical image of Shepard, if only because it radiates a sudden, almost overwhelming sense of imposing masculinity. For half a century, first as a playwright and then as a screenwriter and actor (not to mention his collaborations with Bob Dylan, or his romances with Patti Smith and, for 30 years, Jessica Lange), Sam Shepard has been something like an archetypal personification of manliness: tall, rugged, handsome, and possessed with a mixture of take-no-shit candor, volatile tempestuousness, and disarming sincerity and compassion.

All of those qualities come to the fore in Cold in July, a mesmerizing indie by the writing/directing duo of Nick Damici and Jim Mickle (it has a limited theatrical release and is available nationwide via video on demand). In it, the 70-year-old Shepard plays a recently paroled convict named Russel who, in 1989 East Texas, is out to exact revenge against picture-framer Richard (Michael C. Hall) for killing his son during a nighttime break-in. What emerges from that pulpy setup is a hard-bitten portrait of male duty, and the fractured relationship between fathers and sons — specifically, the responsibility dads have to protect their boys from both outside threats and the less-than-noble parental examples they themselves have set.

As such, it's just about the perfect Sam Shepard project, tapping into some of the core themes of the plays (1979's Pulitzer Prize-winning Buried Child, Curse of the Starving Class, True West, A Lie of the Mind, countless others) that have made Shepard one of America's greatest living playwrights. That Shepard's own work has also been deeply informed by his tumultuous relationship with his own father — an abusive alcoholic whom Shepard both admired and rebelled against — merely furthers the notion that Cold in July, and its depiction of Russel coming to grips with revelations about the criminal life embraced by his estranged son, is material made for the legendary star.

As an actor, Shepard has exuded a weathered, old-school Western charm and ferocity ever since his acting debut in Terrence Malick's 1978 masterpiece Days of Heaven. Shepard's quiet poise and reticent romanticism made that film's character, a formidable and influential Southern land baron, less intimidating than endearing. Shepard's performance radiated unflappable self-assurance and virtue, all of which was laced with a tragic sorrow born from the fact that his character was dying, not to mention being callously deceived by Richard Gere and Brooke Adams's in-love drifters.

Shepard's magnetic manliness helped him steal the spotlight in 1983's The Right Stuff, for which the actor earned an Academy Award nomination for Best Supporting Actor as Chuck Yeager, the first pilot to break the sound barrier. All brave, cocky daring, it was a role that flawlessly meshed with Shepard's own larger-than-life persona: a Southern-drawling, hard-drinking, cowboy boot-wearing badass who lived fast and hard, and whose courage (and recklessness) was matched by his shrewd intellect.

Shepard's acting career remained steady throughout the '80s and '90s, including an underrated lead turn opposite Kim Basinger in Robert Altman's 1985 adaptation of Shepard's play Fool for Love. But he would become a more regular multiplex fixture playing figures of commanding leadership and strength after 2001's Black Hawk Down, which featured Shepard as the tough Task Force Ranger commander William F. Garrison, a performance highlighted by his sit-down with arms-dealing warlord Osman Ali Atto (George Harris).

Considering his Old West-style swagger, Shepard proved to be the ideal actor to assume the role of iconic gunslinger Butch Cassidy in 2011's Blackthorn. Now aged and retired to a life of solitude under a phony name in Bolivia, Shepard's Cassidy emerges from exile to visit his son after learning of the death of former lover Etta Place, only to become ensnared along the way in a plot involving stolen money and ruthless bandits.

Alongside the warts-and-all non-fiction presented by last year's Shepard & Dark (about his turbulent lifelong relationship with writer Johnny Dark), Shepard's 2013 work with Matthew McConaughey in Mud and Christian Bale in Out of the Furnace provided additional confirmation that the actor is still one of cinema's most formidable presences. In film after film, he comes across as a man's man who's lived through wars (personal, familial, national) and has come out the other side with an understanding of both his strengths and weaknesses. That ability to naturally meld cocksure charisma and irreconcilable bitterness and remorse — a marriage that bleeds into so much of his writing, be it for the stage or the screen — continues to make Shepard one of the movies' most unsung stars. And as he shows in his phenomenal performance as a bad guy coming to grips with the legacy of his own wrongdoing in Cold in July, he remains a peerlessly cool vision of masculinity in all its tattered, powerful glory.