DistanceBetween2.Com

Tezpur to Silapathar distance, location, road map and direction

Tezpur is located in India at the longitude of 92.79 and latitude of 26.65. Silapathar is located in India at the longitude of 94.72 and latitude of 27.6 .

Driving Distance : 295 KM and 797 meters / 183.8 miles.

Straight Line Distance : 218 KM and 0 meters / 135.5 miles.

Travel time : 5 hours and 45 minutes.

Direction and bearing : North East side, 61 degree.

Distance between Tezpur and Silapathar

The total straight line distance between Tezpur and Silapathar is 218 KM (kilometers) and 0 meters. The miles based distance from Tezpur to Silapathar is 135.5 miles. This is a straight line distance and so most of the time the actual travel distance between Tezpur and Silapathar may be higher or vary due to curvature of the road .

The driving distance or the travel distance between Tezpur to Silapathar is 295 KM and 797 meters. The mile based, road distance between these two travel point is 183.8 miles.

Time Difference between Tezpur and Silapathar

The sun rise time difference or the actual time difference between Tezpur and Silapathar is 0 hours , 7 minutes and 43 seconds. Note: Tezpur and Silapathar time calculation is based on UTC time of the particular city. It may vary from country standard time , local time etc.

Tezpur To Silapathar travel time

Tezpur is located around 218 KM away from Silapathar so if you travel at the consistent speed of 50 KM per hour you can reach Silapathar in 5 hours and 45 minutes. Your Silapathar travel time may vary due to your bus speed, train speed or depending upon the vehicle you use.

Tezpur to Silapathar Bus

Bus timings from Tezpur to Silapathar is around 5 hours and 45 minutes when your bus maintains an average speed of sixty kilometer per hour over the course of your journey. The estimated travel time from Tezpur to Silapathar by bus may vary or it will take more time than the above mentioned time due to the road condition and different travel route. Travel time has been calculated based on crow fly distance so there may not be any road or bus connectivity also.

Bus fare from Tezpur to Silapathar

may be around Rs.222.

Midway point between Tezpur To Silapathar

Mid way point or halfway place is a center point between source and destination location. The mid way point between Tezpur and Silapathar is situated at the latitude of 27.127274358829 and the longitude of 93.753785180923. If you need refreshment you can stop around this midway place, after checking the safety,feasibility, etc.

Tezpur To Silapathar road map

Silapathar is located nearly North East side to Tezpur. The bearing degree from Tezpur To Silapathar is 61 ° degree. The given North East direction from Tezpur is only approximate. The given google map shows the direction in which the blue color line indicates road connectivity to Silapathar . In the travel map towards Silapathar you may find en route hotels, tourist spots, picnic spots, petrol pumps and various religious places. The given google map is not comfortable to view all the places as per your expectation then to view street maps, local places see our detailed map here.

Tezpur To Silapathar driving direction

The following diriving direction guides you to reach Silapathar from Tezpur. Our straight line distance may vary from google distance.

Travel Distance from Tezpur

The onward journey distance may vary from downward distance due to one way traffic road. This website gives the travel information and distance for all the cities in the globe. For example if you have any queries like what is the distance between Tezpur and Silapathar ? and How far is Tezpur from Silapathar?. Driving distance between Tezpur and Silapathar. Tezpur to Silapathar distance by road. Distance between Tezpur and Silapathar is 219 KM / 136.4 miles. distance between Tezpur and Silapathar by road. It will answer those queires aslo. Some popular travel routes and their links are given here :-

distance between tezpur and pasighat

distance between Tezpur and Rangapahar Railway Station

distance between Tezpur and Rangapara

distance between Tezpur and Shillong

distance between Tezpur and Sibsagar

distance between Tezpur and Silapathar

distance between Tezpur and Silchar

distance between Tezpur and Siliguri

distance between Tezpur and Sonitpur

distance between tezpur and tangla

distance between Tezpur and Tawang

distance between Tezpur and Tenga

distance between Tezpur and Tihu

distance between Tezpur and Tinsukia

distance between Tezpur and Tipi

distance between Tezpur and Ziro

distance between Tezpur Astc Bus Station and Kaziranga National Park

Travelers and visitors are welcome to write more travel information about Tezpur and Silapathar.

It can be your previous travel experience between Tezpur and Silapathar.

Available transport routes to reach Silapathar like train routes, bus routes, air routes and cruise routes.

Tourist places or any other important places on the routes between Tezpur and Silapathar.

Hotels, restaurant information on the way to Silapathar.

Photos related to Tezpur and Silapathar or en route.

Travel queries and other relavent information related to this page.

Name : Email :