The town of Horicon, NY is located in Warren County and is known for its quaint atmosphere and close-knit community. It is governed by Town Board which consists of a Supervisor, four Councilmen, a Town Clerk, and a Highway Superintendent. The town has no local political candidates as the members are appointed to their positions by the Town Board. The board meets regularly throughout the year to discuss issues affecting the town such as creating laws, developing infrastructure, and ensuring fiscal responsibility. They also work closely with county officials to ensure that state regulations are followed. Overall, Horicon has an efficient government system that works together to create an enjoyable living environment for its citizens.

The political climate in Horicon, NY is somewhat conservative.

Warren County, NY is leaning liberal. In Warren County, NY 48.8% of the people voted Democrat in the last presidential election, 49.0% voted for the Republican Party, and the remaining 2.2% voted Independent.

In the last Presidential election, Warren county remained narrowly Republican, 49.0% to 48.8%.

Warren county voted Republican in four of the six previous Presidential elections (2008 and 2012 went Democratic).

The BestPlaces liberal/conservative index

Horicon, NY is somewhat conservative.

Warren County, New York is leaning liberal.

Glens Falls Metro Area is leaning conservative.

New York is moderately liberal.

The BestPlaces liberal/conservative index is based on recent voting in national elections, federal campaign contributions by local residents, and consumer personality profiles.

VoteWord™

Displaying 20 years of Presidential voting, visualized in one word.

Horicon, New York: r R d d r r

How It Works:

Here at BestPlaces, we were looking at the voting patterns since the 2000 election and realized that we could express the results of each election as one letter. R if the Republican Party candidate won, D if the Democratic Party candidate won and I if the Independent Party candidate won. The six elections (2000, 2004, 2008, 2012, 2016, 2020) would be expressed as six-letter word (R R D R R).

Then we went a little further and added the dimension of magnitude. If the difference of victory was greater than 10 percent, the letter is upper case, and lower case if the difference was less than 10 percent. This allows us to see interesting voting patterns at just a glance.

Here's the VoteWord for Iowa d r d d r. In the last six elections the state has been closely contested, voting narrowly for the Republican Party candidate in 2016 and 2020 after voting for the Democratic Party in 2008 and 2012. Virginia (r r d d d D) has voted for the Democratic Party in the last three elections.

Individual Campaign Contributions in Horicon, NY

In the last 4 years (2018-2021), there were 368 contributions totaling $20,720 to the Democratic Party and liberal campaigns, averaging $56 per contribution.

In the last 4 years, there were 28 contributions totaling $4,795 to the Republican Party and conservative campaigns, averaging $171 per contribution.

(source: Federal Election Commission)