Horicon, New York

Horicon is a large and rural town in Warren County, New York. Horicon is a Native American word for "pure water” or "clear.” The town is roughly thirty-five miles north of the small city of Glen Falls. Schroon Lake and the Schroon River form the western town line. Horicon also encompasses Brant Lake and several other smaller lakes. The town is considered part of New York’s “North Country” region. Horicon covers seventy-two square miles, most of it being forestland of the Adirondack Park. , the town had an estimated population of 1,500. The town’s hamlets are Adirondack, Brant Lake, Pottersville, South Horicon, and Starbuckville. The town is also home to the Curtis S. Read Scout Reservation (also known as Camp Read), one of the oldest Boy Scout camps, in operation since the 1920’s.

Traffic Tickets in Horicon

Horicon’s main road is New York State Route 8. It runs north-east and southwest through the center of town. As it crosses town it passes by the largest lake, Brant Lake. Taking NYS-8 south brings you to the Hamlet of Brant Lake. Continuing southbound will bring you to the neighboring town of Bolton and the passing interstate, I-87 (Adirondack Northway). Along the western town line runs County Route 64 (East Schroon River Road). Taking it north brings you to the hamlet of Pottersville in Chester. Taking it south will bring you to Starbuckville.

The town does not have a police department. All tickets issued in Horicon are written by the New York State Police and the Warren County Sheriff’s Office. Most traffic stops occur on the NYS-8. Most victims of traffic stops are summer visitors that are not familiar with the roads. The most common charge issued on NYS-8 is speeding. Other common charges include driving with a suspended license, tailgating, and leaving the scene of an accident. The Horicon Town Court (Horicon Justice Court) will adjudicate any violation written in town. The court is located at the Town of Horicon Community Center on NY-8. If you were issued a ticket in Horicon, you should consider fighting the charge. Pleading guilty to a traffic violation typically results in increased insurance premiums for years to come. By retaining a traffic ticket attorney, you greatly lower the chance of a conviction.

The Benjamin Goldman Law Office

The Benjamin Goldman Law Office is a law firm that practices traffic ticket defense. We have been helping motorists in Warren County since 2011. Our attorneys work assiduously to obtain the optimal result for our clients. We utilize all legal tactics in our arsenal. The lawyers at the Benjamin Goldman Law Office are typically successful in obtaining substantial reductions, if not dismissals. If you are hesitant on retaining an attorney, we encourage you to browse our testimonials. Our testimonials speak for themselves. We encourage you to reach out to us and make use of our ten-minute complimentary consultation.

Points Reduced or Money Back Guarantee*

Our firm offers a Point Reduction or Money Back Guarantee*. This means we will issue a full refund of your legal fee if we are unable to reduce the points added to your license as a result of the ticket.

*Traffic tickets only. Does not apply to misdemeanors and felonies.