When Hermann Göring was named Nazi Germany’s interior minister in early 1933, he arranged for the formation of an especially reliable police unit. Its main tasks were protecting the new government from possible armed attacks and destroying the communist, social democratic, and union organizations still active in Berlin.

The Polizeiabteilung z.b.V. ‘Wecke’ was made up of ca. 400 Nazi-oriented police officers; it was named after its first commander, Security Police Major Walther Wecke. As a former fighter in the Freikorps and a Nazi from the movement’s beginnings, Wecke helped advance the Nazi Party’s infiltration of the police in the Weimar Republic’s final years. Starting in Jan. 1933, he was commissioned by the Interior Ministry to purge the personnel of the officer corps of the Prussian police.

In 1933, the ‘Wecke Police Group z.b.V.’ played a leading role in destroying left-wing organizations in Berlin’s working-class areas; it was also deployed to guard the first Concentration camps.

In the spring of 1944, soldiers in the ‘Hermann Göring’ Division perpetrated several massacres in the northern Apennines. On 18 March, ca. 130 civilians were murdered in Monchio, Susano and Costrignano. Two days later, 27 men and one woman were murdered in Cervarolo and Civago. In April, nearly 200 persons, mainly civilians and including women and children, were the victims of two razzias carried out by the division, under the command of Oberst Georg-Hennig von Heydebreck, in Mugello and around Monte Falterona. Most of the massacres, including the shooting to death of 107 civilians in Vallucciole, were perpetrated by the division’s Panzer Reconnaissance battalion under the command of Rittmeister Kurt-Christian von Loeben.

In the summer 1944, partisans increased their activity while the division was withdrawing. Its units again carried out serious crimes, this time, on 29 June, in the area west of Arezzo in Civitella, Cornia and San Pancrazio, and a little later in the Arno Valley near Cavriglia. The soldiers also carried out smaller massacres of civilians on their way through Chiusi, Sinalunga, Monte San Savino and Bucine.

In total the ‘Hermann Göring’ Division was responsible for the murder of at least 200 persons in the Mezzogiorno, ca. 390 persons in the northern Apennines, and ca. 500 persons in the Arezzo and Siena provinces in June and July 1944 – over a thousand victims. Consequently, the division needs to be considered one of the two principal Nazi German formations responsible for the escalation of violence against Italy’s civilian populace, alongside the 16th SS-Panzergrenadier Division ‘Reichsführer-SS’, itself guilty of the murder of at least 2,500 civilians in a series of massacres.

Fewer perpetrators and actively participating units belonged to the ‘Hermann Göring’ Division than to ‘Reichsführer SS’. Above all two units were likely the main perpetrators: the Panzer Reconnaissance Battalion in the spring 1944 and, in the summer, the mixed battle group led by Hauptmann Heinz Barz, head of the military police. These two units comprised ca. 2,000 men or 10-13 % of the division’s forces.

As was the case with the entire division, the Reconnaissance Battalion by and large consisted of very young volunteers, men born between 1923 and 1926. They had received severe training in the occupied Netherlands. For many of these young men, fighting partisans in 1944 was their first experience of violent warfare.

By contrast, the battle group of the military police had been formed in an improvised fashion from various units; it was responsible for fighting partisans in the division’s rear area. It was composed of trained military police (mainly police officers) and experienced soldiers, together with alarm units and, finally, members of the ‘Hermann Göring’ band: professional musicians who normally gave concerts before troops and civilians and starting in 1944 were assigned to the military police as reinforcement. Many band members were shocked at their experience in the military police, and especially at their forced participation in its crimes.

In mid-July 1944, the division was shifted to the Eastern Front to defend East Prussia. Since it arrived in Warsaw during the revolt of the Polish Home Army (Armia Krajowa), some of its units participated in crushing the revolt.

In Oct. 1944, the ‘Hermann Göring’ Division was expanded into a Panzer corps – to which belonged a second, newly formed ‘Hermann Göring’ Division. The corps was hastily sent to East Prussia and Courland, to counter the Soviet offensive against Army Group North. The Parachute-Panzer Corps engaged in defensive battles in the Gumbinnen area, the Soviet offensive grinding to a halt in late Nov. Then, in the battle for East Prussia in early 1945, the Panzer Corps became trapped around Heiligenbeil together with parts of the 4th Army. Following several failed efforts at a breakthrough, the troops had to be evacuated to Pomerania by sea.

In mid-March, the soldiers were deployed along the Oder-Neiße Line. In April, what remained of the Panzer Corps was engaged in heavy fighting in Silesia. Under the pressure of the Soviet advance, it withdrew to Saxony, where it fought until late April around Bautzen and Königsbrück. In early May, survivors tried to reach American lines. But most soldiers from both ‘Hermann Göring’ divisions were captured by the Red Army.

At the Nuremberg Trials, the division was categorised as a "notable offender", i.e. included in the list of troops that had attracted particularly negative attention due to their involvement in war crimes.

Investigations into the division's crimes began in the immediate post-war period. In 1948, General Wilhelm Schmalz had to answer to the military court in Florence. He had taken command of the division on 1 May 1944 and could therefore not be prosecuted for the Vallucciole massacre on 13 April 1944. He was also acquitted of the other acts of violence. After that, the judiciary did not deal with the crimes of the "Hermann Göring" division for the time being.

In April 1997, the historian Lutz Klinkhammer first drew the attention of the German public to some of the massacres carried out by the division in Italy in an article for the feature section of the "Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung". The author was subsequently confronted with fierce attacks.

In May 1999, the military public prosecutor's office in La Spezia initiated proceedings against the former non-commissioned officer Rudolf Groner for the massacre in Cavriglia, but these were soon dropped as the accused had already died in Spain in the 1980s.

The crimes were prosecuted further in the early 2000s: first the public prosecutor's office in Dortmund and then the military prosecutor's office in La Spezia opened several investigations. This was preceded by research by historians and journalists in the 1990s.

At the beginning of 2006, the trial of five former members of the division for the massacres in Civitella, Cornia, and San Pancrazio began at the military court in La Spezia. One of them was sentenced to life imprisonment in October of that year. The judgement was confirmed in the second and third instances in 2007 and 2008.

Following a reform of the military jurisdiction, responsibility for further proceedings was transferred to the military prosecutor's office in Verona, which opened the trials for the acts of violence in the northern Apennines in March and April 1944 and for the massacre in Civitella in June 1944 in 2010. In 2011, six people were sentenced to life imprisonment for the murders in Vallucciole. Another defendant was sentenced to life imprisonment for the actions in Cervarolo and Civago. There were three life sentences for the massacres in Monchio, Susano, and Costrignano, one of which became final. The sentences against the two other defendants were initially overturned in the second instance. In 2014, one of these two defendants was convicted again. The other had died in the meantime, so the judgement against him became null and void.

The investigations opened by the Dortmund public prosecutor's office in 2004 were discontinued in 2012 and 2015 respectively. The proceedings against Siegfried Böttcher for the massacres in Civitella, Cornia, and San Pancrazio were handed over to Stuttgart in 2006, where an indictment was requested. However, Böttcher died before the trial began.

The division's veterans' associations belonged to the prestigious German Paratroopers' Association, which had close contacts with the Bundeswehr. Until 2013, there was a memorial plaque in honour of the division in the Ehrenhain (‘grove of honour’) at the Bundeswehr military training area in Munster, Lower Saxony. The Ehrenhain, which was established in 1961, consisted of around 60 memorial plaques for just as many Wehrmacht and Bundeswehr tank units.

In 2013, a report on the Ehrenhain in the ARD magazine Kontraste caused a scandal. After fierce controversy, the Bundeswehr was forced to redesign the site into a place dedicated to the memory of all those who fell - without any particular reference to the Wehrmacht.

Some significant figures in the cultural life of the two German states had been members of the ‘Hermann Göring’ Division.

Hanns Cibulka (1920-2004), one of the most important East German lyric poets and writers, was a soldier in the ‘Hermann Göring’ Flak Regiment, serving in Sicily; he accounted for his experiences in 1960 (Sizilianisches Tagebuch) and 1989 (Nachtwache. Tagebuch aus dem Kriege. Sizilien 1943).

Gerhard Zwerenz (1925-2015), who left East Germany in 1958 for the West, was a very productive and controversial author. Both a convinced anti-militarist and a socialist, from 1943 until his Desertion in Aug. 1944 he had served as a Panzergrenadier in the division’s 2nd Regiment. In 1994 he ran for a seat as Bundestag delegate on the open list of the PDS, the successor to the East German Communist Party; he was elected for one electoral period and was thus a Bundestag member when Germany’s extremely heated debate over the ‘Crimes of the Wehrmacht’ exhibit broke out. In his speech during the Bundestag debate on the exhibit, Zwerenz briefly mentioned his time in the Wehrmacht. Furthermore, he emphasized the participation of Wehrmacht units in the framework of the Holocaust and mass killings. Zwerenz endorsed the Wehrmacht exhibition for finally making this responsibility of Wehrmacht soldiers visible.

In his memoirs, the East German historian and party functionary Günter Hauthal (1925-2010) describes a war experience that was shocking for him: on Monte Falterona, he directly witnessed an NCO murder a defenceless old man from behind, simply out of feelings of revenge and hate against 'all Italians’.

Dieter Wellershoff (1925-2018) was a writer belonging to West Germany’s ‘New Realism’ movement. The author of many books and editor of the collected works of the poet Gottfried Benn, Wellershoff had been a soldier in the division on the Eastern Front in the war’s final phase. Prompted by the ‘Crimes of the Wehrmacht’ exhibit, in 1995 he published a report on his war experiences. He had not served with the division in Italy.

The author and diplomat Hans-Jürgen Soehring (1908-1960) was a staff officer in the division. He became well-known above all through his relationship with the actress Arletty in Paris during the occupation.

Rudolf Haarstrick (1919-1997), one of the most influential psychotherapists in postwar West Germany, had been a staff physician in the ‘Hermann Göring’ Panzer Reconnaissance Battalion. He was particularly active in advocating the acceptance of psychotherapy into the West German state-supported medical insurance system.