Moolah Beach Genre Reality Competition Winner BOBROCKS333/ohhayy Runner-Up Tykeal/LilAngelBaby No. of Players 20 Chronology Next Season The Mole

Moolah Beach was the inaugral season of the RSF Franchise. It is based off of the American reality television series that shares it's name. During this season of Moolah Beach, twenty contestants were divided into 10 teams of 2 based on a mission where they got to select partners.

There were 13 idols based in Hawaiian fokelore with one containing the grand prize and victory. The team that ultimately ended the season with the idol containing the victory would be crowned Champions.

Each round teams participated in 2 types of missions, Kahuna Missions and Makahiki Missions. In Kahuna missions, the team (later on the 2nd place team as well) would compete for the right to select two idols to keep in their possession in hopes of choosing the correct idol. In addition they earned clues that would point in the direction of the correct idol. In Makahiki missions, players would compete to survive the elimination with their placement in the mission determining how many offerings they would earn to give the Great Kahuna which would ultimately decide their fate. The winner would earn 10 offerings, 2nd place earned 9 and so on until last place had only 1. The Great Kahuna (chatzy randomizer) would then select offerings one by one until offerings from all but one team had been chosen. The team with unchosen offerings would be forced to leave the game and had any idols they owned to the possession of another team.

When down to the Final 2, players were tempted with rewards in exchange for giving some of their idols to their opponents possibly decreasing their chances of winning.

In the end, BOBROCKS333 and ohhayy owned the idol with the victory over Tykeal and LilAngelBaby, and were crowned the inaugural RSF champions.

Production

Applications for Moolah Beach opened on October 22, 2010 and lasted roughly 3 days. Applicants were free to apply under male or female. Initially, only 11 people applied as female and 10 were chosen based on the applicataions. Over 50 people applied as male with 9 initially being chosen based on the applications.

7 were chosen to participate in the Last Chance Poll where the player who received the most votes would become the final Male Contestant. After 108 votes were cast, the winner of the Last Chance Poll with 26 votes was: