Origin

Riola : 1: Italian: habitational name from Riola in Bologna province Emilia-Romagna or Riola Sardo in Oristano province Sardinia.2: Spanish: habitational name from a place called Riola in Valencia province from Latin rivola a derivative of rivus ‘stream’. This surname is also found in the Philippines.

Areola : 2: West African (Nigeria): unexplained.1: Hispanic: altered form of Basque Arriola. This surname is also found in the Philippines.

Ariola : Spanish (mainly Murcia): altered form of Basque Arriola. This surname is also found in the Philippines.

Arreola : Hispanic: altered form of Basque Arriola. This surname is most common in Mexico; it is also found in the Philippines.

Arriola : Basque: habitational name from any of several places called Arriola in Araba/Álava and Gipuzkoa provinces (Basque Country Spain) named from Basque (h)arri ‘stone(s)’ + the topographic suffix -ola ‘place of’. Compare Areola Ariola and Arreola.

Capriola : Italian (southern): nickname from capriola ‘doe’ also ‘somersault’. It may also be a habitational name from any of the places called Capriola Capriolo.

Coriolan : Haitian: from Coriolan a French form of the surname of the semi-legendary Roman general Gaius Marcius Coriolanus.

Iadarola : Italian: literally ‘John from Ar(i)ola’ composed of Ia (short form of Ianni) + da ‘from’ + Arola which can refer to either Arola or Ariola both places in Campania.

Orihuela : Spanish and Catalan: habitational name from Orihuela (in Catalan: Oriola) in Alicante province. Compare Oriola.

Oriola : Catalan: habitational name from Oriola (in Castilian: Orihuela) in Alicante province. Compare Orihuela.

Priola : Italian:: 1: (Piedmont): habitational name from Priola in Cuneo province.2: (Sicily): from the feminine form of Priolo.

Riolo : Italian (southern):: 1: habitational name from any of various places called with Riolo or Riola such as Riolo in Modena Riolo Terme in Ravenna and Riola in Bologna or from a shortened form of Oriolo the name of a place in Cosenza province.2: possibly a diminutive of Rio 1.

Serra : 1: Italian Portuguese and Catalan: topographic name from Italian Portuguese Catalan serra ‘ridge or chain of hills; mountain range’ (from Latin serra ‘saw’) or a habitational name from any of various places called with this word in Italy e.g. Serra d'Aniello and Serra Pedace (Cosenza) Serra San Bruno (Vibo Valentia) and Serracapriola (Foggia) in Valencia and Catalonia (Spain) e.g. Serra d'Almos or Serra d'en Galceran.2: Catalan (Serrà): topographic name for someone who lived by a sierra from Catalan serrà an adjective derived from serra (see 1 above) the same as Castilian Serrano.

More

Source : DAFN2 : Dictionary of American Family Names 2nd edition, ©2022 by Patrick Hanks and Oxford University Press