Historic Marietta is located a short drive from downtown Atlanta but feels a world away with five National Register historic districts and nearby Kennesaw Mountain. The thriving downtown has locally owned restaurants, shops, and art galleries as well as a popular year-round weekend farmers market. History buffs can't miss the museums, including one devoted to "Gone With the Wind." Start your trip at the Marietta Welcome Center, located in an old Western & Atlantic Railroad Passenger Depot.

Things to Do

Tours in Marietta

Take a tour to discover everything Marietta has to offer. If you're in the mood for a little fright mixed in with your history, try a delightful Ghosts of Marietta tour. With several breweries in the Marietta area, you can taste and tour to your heart's content at Red Hare Brewing Company or Glover Park Brewery. To get a feel for the historic sites that have played a part in Marietta's black history and heritage, don't miss the Black Heritage Walking Tour.

Six Flags White Water

Families love Six Flags White Water, a longtime water park not far from the Marietta Square. Open May to October, the park has everything from thrilling high slides to toddler-friendly splash pads as well as a wave pool and multiple dining outlets.

Earl and Rachel Smith Strand Theatre

The 1935 Art Deco Earl and Rachel Smith Strand Theatre is perhaps the most iconic building in Marietta, which operated as a movie theater until 1976. It sat vacant for years before being restored to its former glory, now hosting classic films, concerts, stage productions and special events. The terrace has a bar that overlooks the square.

William Root House Museum and Gardens

One of the oldest homes in the Atlanta area, the Root House is more typical of its time and place than the columned mansions popularized by Gone With the Wind. Though the home and grounds have been meticulously restored to their 1860 appearance, modern touchscreens and interactive displays have been added to help tell the story of the Root family and their enslaved house servants.

Find more things to do in Marietta

Places to Stay

Marietta is close to all the popular attractions in metro Atlanta and offers outstanding room options at practically any price point. Convenient to thrilling games at Truist Park, easily accessible to major highways, and appropriate for any occasion, Marietta has ideal accommodations for your stay.

Hilton Atlanta/Marietta Hotel and Conference Center

The Hilton Atlanta/Marietta Hotel and Conference Center is perhaps the best, located one mile from the square on sprawling grounds. Its adjacent City Club Marietta Golf Course and Brumby Hall & Gardens set it apart.

Home2 Suites by Hilton Atlanta Marietta

Make yourself comfortable at our Home2 Suites by Hilton Atlanta Marietta. Enjoy spacious suites with free WiFi and free breakfast. The hotel is located off I-75, less than two miles from Dobbins Air Reserve Base.

Courtyard by Marriott Atlanta/Marietta

Stay close to the action at the Courtyard by Marriot Atlanta/Marietta. In addition to the proximity to Marietta businesses and attractions, the hotel is just 15 minutes from downtown Atlanta.

Find more places to stay in Marietta

Where to Eat

When you visit Marietta, come hungry! Indulge in the vibrant culinary scene with everything from farm-to-table cuisine to the famed Marietta Diner. The locally owned restaurants are sure to satisfy any foodie.

Spring

Honored by the James Beard Foundation, Spring is a humble neighborhood restaurant on the historic square. The seasonal menu focuses on sustainability, using the ingredients from local farmers and artisans for simple, but delicious dishes.

Kiosco Restaurant

Those in the know will tell you that Kiosco Restaurant has some of the best food around. The cozy Colombian eatery serves authentic dishes like empanadas, tamales, and plates of meat, chicken and fish.

Stockyard Burger and Bones

Now a local chain, Stockyard Burger and Bones serves the square's best burgers that use certified Black Angus beef. Make your own or choose one of their options. There are also tuna, pork and veggie options.

Thaicoon and Sushi Bar

Dine on authentic Asian cuisine at Thaicoon, which carries Thai dishes as well as Japanese sushi. Favorites include the gyoza, tuna tataki and larb gai.

Marietta Square Market

One of Marietta's newest addition, the Marietta Square Market is conveniently located off the square and offers more than 15 restaurant options and local retailers. This food hall offers outdoor and indoor dining options.

Find more places to eat in Marietta

Events

Marietta celebrates every day! Don’t miss our year-round farmers' market, the wonderful Glover Park Concert Series, or the numerous fun festivals for the whole family.

Taste of Marietta

Taste of Marietta, always the last Sunday in April, recognizes the community's best restaurants, chefs, and dishes with tastings and demonstrations as well as live music.

Chalktoberfest

Chalktoberfest in October is a unique event that brings together live music, craft beer, and nearly 100 artists creating large-scale chalk murals on sidewalks around town. The free festival benefits the Marietta/Cobb Museum of Art.

Marietta Pilgrimage Home Tour

Every December, the Marietta Pilgrimage Home Tour allows visitors a look into the area's most iconic homes. The private homes have been lovingly restored and decorated for the holiday season.