With great activities and time with friends, the opportunities are endless.

Here are just some of the activities that you can participate in.

10th Anniversary Retreat & New New Member and Founders' Celebration

Member Roundtable Discussions

Centers For Disease Control and Prevention (CDC)

Georgia (State University) on My Mind

Georgia Aquarium

Atlanta History Center

Jimmy Carter Center

College Football Hall of Fame

Center for Civil and Human Rights

Centennial Olympic Park

Often the first thing that comes to mind when you hear "CDC" is a deadly pandemic like COVID. It's true the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention address these disease epidemics and many others. However, the CDC has spent decades trying to keep the public healthy and safe on multiple fronts. As a reference lab for the country and the world, it looks at and analyzes historical data for targeted, quick responses to outbreaks. Its researchers work to be predictive about future issues and to provide education on everything from HIV and sexually transmitted diseases, air pollution, water cleanliness, cancer, obesity, autism, and emergency plans for nuclear war.

The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) is the leading national public health institute in the United States and the CDC has invited us to be guests for our favorite program, "Speed-dating with Doctors." Researchers will lead roundtable discussions on research topics as well as provide historical perspective on the CDC's accomplishments and how we can use its research to live healthier lifestyles at all stages of life, for ourselves and for our communities.

What a terrific first decade it's been for L3. We've made enduring friendships. Learned so much about the world and ourselves. Traveled to some of the most compelling sites in America and abroad. Made important contributions to support the life-changing work of dynamic charitable and non-profit organizations. It's time for us to look back and appreciate how far we've come. Our gala founders' celebration will recognize and honor the men and women who gave life to L3 10 years ago with their vision, their passion, their commitment and their hard work.

Georgia State has been making headlines recently for being in the Top 10 U.S. schools for Innovation (#2), Undergraduate Teaching (#3), Ethnic Diversity (#10) and more. We'll spend time on campus learning about what sets it apart and how its vanguard approach can be applied in other-world situations.

Tim Renick, Founding Executive Director of Georgia State's National Institute for Student Success, will discuss why Georgia State is the national leader in fostering student success. Since 2008, Renick has led Georgia State to one of the fastest-improving graduation rates in the country while at the same time decreasing achievement gaps based on race, ethnicity, or income level. In 2016, Renick was named as one of the "Most Innovative People in Higher Education" and he has testified before the U.S. Senate and spoken at the White House about strategies to help students succeed.

Next, prepare to be dazzled at the Creative Media Industries Institute. This advanced facility is a mecca for students interested in the arts and media. Intended to "transcend traditional disciplines," the institute houses a flexible startup incubator space, an immersive virtual reality "cave," a media production studio, a project suite, an eSports lab, and advanced audio and digital production studios. While we learn about the collaborative work that occurs at CMII, we will also get to experience it through a special virtual reality demonstration.

The stunning Georgia Aquarium is a scientific institution that educates and entertains to promote the worldwide conservation of aquatic biodiversity. Its six brilliant galleries and more than 70 fascinating habitats will help you better understand and appreciate a wide variety of sea life, including whale sharks, manta rays, dolphins, beluga whales, sea otters, penguins, and thousands of species of exotic fish. L3 has been invited to go behind the scenes to understand all this great nonprofit does. You might even volunteer for a one-on-one encounter with whale sharks, dolphins, or manta rays in the world's largest aquarium habitat (6.3 million gallons). The massive scale of the aquarium creates a sense that you are swimming with the majestic sea life and provides an awe-inspiring experience.

History buffs, rejoice! This 33-acre history center was founded in 1926 with a mission to collect, research, publish, and celebrate early stories of Atlanta's history. The jewel of the museum is the Cyclorama, a 132-year-old, hand-painted work of art depicting the Civil War. Kind of like a 19th-century IMAX, the piece stands nearly 50 feet tall, is longer than a football field, and is one of only two of its kind in the United States. The grounds also include Atlanta's oldest surviving farmhouse, the Smith Family Farm - built in the 1840s and still home to several chickens and sheep. You also don't want to miss the brilliant architecture of the Swan House or the charming gardens that surround it. A true gem celebrating the rich culture and history of the southern city, the Atlanta History Center has something for everyone.

The spacious and tranquil Jimmy Carter Center not only houses an impressive Presidential Library, it accommodates an informative, yet unassuming museum celebrating the life and accomplishments of President Jimmy Carter. In addition to his presidential achievements, the museum pays tribute to the humanitarian work he pursued after his time in office and to the mental health awareness championed by Rosalynn Carter. Other highlights include some of Jimmy Carter's personal artwork and a remarkable, life-size replica of the Oval Office. Jack Watson, White House Chief of Staff to President Jimmy Carter, will speak to us before dinner about, "The Biggest Challenges Facing a President."

The College Football Hall of Fame in downtown Atlanta has interactive fun for college football fans as well as those who aren't big fans. You could spend the entire day exploring the three floors and five themed galleries or just find displays for your favorite schools. More than 50 interactive exhibits give you the chance to call a football play, test to see if you'd survive the NFL combine, or sing your college fight song. Be sure to check out the three-story display with more than 750 college football helmets. Bask in nostalgia and enjoy the lively activities while looking back at college football's greatest players and coaches.

Experience something powerful and thought-provoking at this center dedicated to exploring the fundamental rights of human beings. Thanks to the Morehouse College Martin Luther King Jr. Collection, you can walk through history while viewing personal papers and items that belonged to Dr. King or while listening to recordings made by civil rights activists. In a life-changing, humbling and emotional simulation, you will sit at a whites-only lunch counter and experience what it was like for activists who were taunted and threatened. Deeply moving, the experience is not to be missed. Through the museum's blend of compelling artifacts, powerful storytelling and impactful experiences, you will leave empowered and inspired to connect with today's human rights issues around the world.