The Mix’s fully furnished student apartments range from one to four bedrooms, so whether you’re looking for a private sanctuary or a suite for your whole squad, we have you covered.

We offer premium student accommodations and a convenient location that’s a short commute to the best Atlanta has to offer. Our apartments are located near the Georgia State University, so whether you’re making a dash to class at GSU’s main campus or catching a football game at Turner Field, everything you need to experience GSU lies just a few steps away.

Every apartment has been custom-designed and equipped with luxury finishes like granite countertops, stainless steel appliances, and a modern furniture package to match.

Apartment amenities:

Community. Privacy. Study vibes. Celebrations. Life at The Mix supports all of your moods and modes. You’ll get the community experience with the benefits of luxury student housing. Whether it be celebrating with friends or studying for an exam, we’re here to make sure that you don’t feel homesick. We lay a solid foundation, so you have the stability to focus on your studies and explore life.

We have years of experience providing housing for students in off-campus locations and we understand what students need. We understand the concerns of parents in helping their children make this transition as easy as possible. With student housing accommodations across the US, our team has the broad expertise to help you live your best college life right here in the heart of Atlanta!

We strive to create a comfortable environment for students to live as they are in school. We have fully trained, professional managers to keep our communities maintained and provide the highest level of customer service.

During the application process, you will complete a roommate questionnaire to provide our team with insights on your living and study habits and any requested roommates you might want to live with.

The survey covers things like typical study habits, music and television preferences, noise level preferences, cleanliness, and other general questions to make your living experience as pleasant as possible. We utilize this data to make the best roommate matching decisions available.