Introduction

Liviu Rebreanu’s The Forest of the Hanged (Pădurea Spânzuraților) is a profoundly insightful and moving story. It was the first novel in Romanian literature to address, in a sophisticated manner, issues surrounding World War I that would profoundly impact an entire generation of Romanians. World War I forever changed the country. It resulted in the great union of Transylvania with Romania, along with the reunion of Bessarabia and northern Bucovina, in 1918, but it also scarred an entire generation, not only of Romanians but of men and women throughout Europe and across the Atlantic, who experienced first-hand the tragedy of war. The Forest of the Hanged is a sagacious analysis of both the human spirit and the Romanian soul and, as such, was selected as the first volume in the new series initiated by the Center for Romanian Studies entitled, Classics of Romanian Literature.

Classics of Romanian Literature is a series dedicated to making essential works of Romanian literature available to an international audience, and to illustrate the connections of Romanian writers to broader currents in world literature and culture. It is part of the Center for Romanian Studies’ core mission of promoting knowledge of Romanian history, literature, and culture in the world. Therefore, it is fitting that the Center has chosen The Forest of the Hanged as the first volume in this important new series. Original illustrations by the talented, young artist, Phoebe Cho, serve to enhance the story.

Liviu Rebreanu was born on November 27, 1885, in Târlișina, a small village near Bistrița in Transylvania, then under the control of the Austro-Hungarian Empire. He came from a peasant family and grew up in the village of Maiereu in Năsăud county, where his father had become a schoolteacher. He studied at Năsăud and later attended military school in Budapest. Rebreanu served for a time in the Austro-Hungarian army before resigning and relocating to Romania, where he settled in Bucharest in 1909, only to be extradited to Hungary the following year on charges related to his military service. After serving a short prison sentence, he returned to Romania and continued to pursue a career in writing, which had always been his passion. In fact, he had already published his first writings in the literary journal Luceafărul in 1908.

Although dedicated and ambitious, Rebreanu was considered an unremarkable journalist and writer. He published his first collection of novellas, Fragments, in 1912, in Orăștie, but to little acclaim. A few other works followed, but Rebreanu failed to gain notice. Still, in these early writings, we can find the seeds of many of his later works. In some ways, Rebreanu’s development as a writer resembles that of Ernest Hemingway, who described his own evolution in A Moveable Feast: Up in that room I decided that I would write one story about each thing that I knew about. I was trying to do this all the time I was writing, and it was good and severe discipline.¹ In much the same way, Rebreanu worked hard and continued to refine his craft.

In reflecting on what it means to be a writer, Rebreanu would later opine, For me art – and when I say art, I am thinking of literature – means the creation of people and life. In this way, art, like divine creation, becomes the most wonderful mystery. Creating living people, with their own unique lives, the writer gets to glimpse the eternal mysteries…. When you manage to capture a few moments of real life in words, you have managed to create a work more precious than all the beautiful phrases in the world.²

His dedication paid off with the publication of his novel Ion in 1920. With its sober portrayal of peasant life, Ion established him as one of the leading figures of Romania’s post-war literary generation. Rebreanu was part of a generation for whom the experience of the war profoundly transformed their outlook on the world. An apathetic, adrift, disoriented spirit characterized this Generation of 1914 or Lost Generation, a term popularized by Hemingway, who attributed it to an exchange between Gertrude Stein and a French garage owner.³ Ion set a new standard for the Romanian novel. In its vision of peasant life, Ion broke from the older, more romantic view of rural life, launching a new revolution in Romanian literature. As Romanian scholar Niculae Gheran noted, Ion represents a true microcosm, like focused rays of light, of all the sufferings, aspirations, and problems of the Romanian people of his time in Transylvania and even, to a certain degree, of Romanians everywhere.⁴

Rebreanu followed up Ion with The Forest of the Hanged in 1922. It is a novel that draws heavily on personal experience. His brother Emil had served in the Austro-Hungarian Army during World War I and was executed for desertion on the front in Transylvania in 1917. Rebreanu’s profoundly intimate connection to the tragic story brings it to life for the reader. This trait is a characteristic of truly great writers. As Hemingway remarked, Dostoevsky was made by being sent to Siberia. Writers are forged in injustice as a sword is forged.⁵ In The Forest of the Hanged, the reader can sense the underlying personal drama and struggle with injustice. You see I’m trying in all my stories to get the feeling of the actual life across—not to just depict life—or criticize it—but to actually make it alive, Hemingway once wrote, So that when you have read something by me you actually experience the thing.⁶ Rebreanu undoubtedly would have subscribed to these same words.

The story of The Forest of the Hanged is the personal drama of Apostol Bologa, a Romanian officer serving in the Austro-Hungarian Empire. The novel opens with Bologa present at the hanging of a Czech officer, sentenced to death for desertion after his condemnation by a court-martial, on which Apostol had served as a member. This experience haunts him and comes to the forefront when his regiment is ordered to Transylvania where he would have to fight fellow Romanians. Apostol confesses to seeing, ’One and the same man, hanging countless times, in an endless protest,’ and suddenly he said to himself: ‘It’s Svoboda... the look in his eyes.’ The same second, he remembered with tormenting accuracy the way he had voted for the condemnation of the Czech, how proud he had been at the honor of serving on the Court Martial, how – out of excessive zeal – he had joined and lent a helping hand in preparation of the execution, how he had grabbed the rope trying its resistance. The rugged feel of the rope burnt in both palms of his hands. This memory turned into a feeling of shame and grief, so cruel, so accusing, as if he were standing before God on the day of the Last Judgement.⁷ Faced with the reality that he will soon be required to take up arms against his own people, Bologa finds himself in an impossible situation, especially after the authorities refused his request for a transfer to the Italian front.

Despite its appeal to patriotic values, at its root, The Forest of the Hanged is a manifesto against war. Apostol Bologa is trapped in the very specific confines of a soldier fighting on the side of a multi-national Empire, now suddenly forced to fight his own people. This reality changes everything for him. As he struggles with the dilemma he now faces, Bologa analyzes the deeper meaning of human existence and all that it implies. In doing so, he confronts universal realities faces by human beings at all times and in all places, while at the same time revealing specific aspects of the Romanian soul.

Through the very personal drama of Apostol Bologa, Rebreanu allows the reader to experience the larger drama of the war, and through its depictions, he condemns war. Since its publication, the novel has stood as a literary masterpiece. The great Romanian scholar Nicolae Iorga, in his History of Contemporary Romanian Literature, wrote: "From the tragedy of the war, Mr. Rebreanu extracts striking moments that he develops and deepens to explain his righteous and painful observations… In this same deeply moving spirit arises the new and powerful novel, The Forest of the Hanged. Although made of parts each interesting in themselves, the tragedy of the Romanian soldier serving under a foreign flag, which begins with the somber spectacle of a hanging, evolved into the miraculous sacrifice of the tortured hero through his own hanging is profoundly moving. And throughout the story, right up to the final scene, an atmosphere of theological reflection, human responsibility, and a sense of religiosity imbues. A sense of holiness pervades."⁸

Apostol’s story is a psychological analysis of a spirit in contradiction with itself. When he is upset that his fiancée, Martha, a Romanian girl, is flirting with a Hungarian officer who visits his village, our protagonist decides to join the army. He eventually loses interest in Martha and breaks off the engagement, but then becomes betrothed to a Hungarian peasant girl. Rebreanu’s portrayal of the tortured soul of Apostol Bologa reflects the dilemma of his generation.

Romanian scholar Sorin Pârvu, in his masterful presentation of classic works of Romanian literature, The Romanian Novel, writes of The Forest of the Hanged: There is in Apostol a sort of fever which makes him all of a sudden a keen observer of every detail. He looks at trees and smells flowers, as though he were discovering the mystery of the world (or as if feeling that his days are numbered)…. Apostol is now definitely a doomed man. Nothing can save him from a self-inflicted death. He has just been ordered to engage in active combat with his fellow-countrymen and he knows he won’t be up to it.⁹

Liviu Rebreanu remains one of the most distinguished writers in the history of Romanian literature. He died on September 1, 1944, in Vălea Mare in Argeș County. The Romanian literary critic George Călinescu wrote of Rebreanu, No other Transylvanian writer has depicted with such impartiality the uncertainty within the souls of the Romanians across the Carpathians during the Imperial period. This realism is more patriotic than any tirade because the uncertainty itself reveals the power of the national spirit.¹⁰ Rebreanu’s The Forest of the Hanged is genuinely one of the great novels in all of Romanian and East European literature.

A.K. Brackob

The Forest of the Hanged

In memory of my brother Emil,

executed by the Austro-Hungarians

on the Romanian front in the year 1917

￼

Picture 9

Book One

I

Under the ashy autumnal sky, looking like a gigantic steam covered glass bell, the brand new, defiant gallows, put up at the end of the village, pointed its arm and rope towards the black plain dotted here and there with copper-leaved trees. Supervised by a short-legged, dark-faced Corporal, helped by a hairy, red-faced peasant, two aged soldiers hastily dug a grave, often spitting into the palms of their hands and groaning with weariness after every stroke of their pick-axes. From the wound in the earth, the grave-diggers threw out yellow, sticky clay.

The Corporal twisted his moustache and constantly peered around, suspiciously and contemptuously. The view irritated him, though he tried to conceal his discontentment. On the right, there was a military cemetery, surrounded with barbed wire, the graves being placed, as if on parade, with fresh, white, identical crosses. A few steps away, on the left, stood the village graveyard, enclosed by thistles. The crosses broken, moldy, and far between missing, as if no dead body had entered it for some time, nor was anyone anxious to do so.

The village of Zirin, headquarters of the infantry division, lay concealed in a cloud of smoke and fog, pierced only by tops of leafless trees, thin and scattered about, by a few pointed straw roofs, and by the shell-battered church tower. Northward, could you see the ruins of the railway station and the railway blocking the view, like a dike without beginning or end. The roadway, looking like a straight line on the gloomy plain, came from the west, crossed the village, and led straight to the front.

A nasty-looking country you’ve got, you Muscovites! the Corporal suddenly spoke, turning to the grave-diggers, looking angrily at the peasant who had paused from working to regain his breath. "Can you hear me? The country — places — niet fine!" he then added, pointing to the countryside and mangling his speech to make himself better understood.

Puzzled, the peasant stared at him with a humble smile, mumbling something in Russian.

He doesn’t understand our tongue, a soldier then spoke, straightening his back.

Nor can you blame them for the country being so miserable, the other soldier promptly added, learning on his spade.

The three military men were now looking contemptuously on the peasant; not understanding his foreign words. The peasant shyly bowed his head into the yellow-bottomed grave, some half a meter deep.

What are you standing there for? Dawdling about! the Corporal suddenly shouted, attracting due attention. Is that a grave? Shame on you! The convoy will be here in a minute ... and the grave isn’t even dug! Do you want me to get into trouble because of you? Come on! Put your hand to the plow, don’t you gaggle at me!

Quite so, you’re right, Corporal, mumbled a soldier striking a boulder with his pick-axe. Yet this isn’t soldiering either, Corporal. Turning us into grave-diggers, my word!

The men soon returned to work. The Corporal, now content, answered in more friendly fashion:

A soldier must put his hand to all sorts of things in wartime, for that’s the reason of war being a war. Whether it be here, or on the front, or in hospital, it’s all the same. You might say that we were lucky that we arrived so late. What if they had come at four, according to orders? It would have been a devil of a mess for all of us. Truth to say, I’m an old soldier, but I’ve never seen anything like this, hanging people almost in the dark.

He ceased abruptly, his eyes on the gallows, the arm of which seemed to be menacing the men in the grave. That very moment to rope began to swing quietly. The Corporal felt a cold shudder and quickly turned his head away. But then he saw the white crosses, in straight rows, in the military cemetery; in his dismay, he turned left, face about, his eyes facing the graves once more, in the village churchyard. He was seized by a haunting terror, as if he had seen a ghost. But he quickly regained control of himself and, spitting in disgust, he murmured: What a life this is! Wherever you look, there’s just death, graves and the dead.

Moist and depressing, an autumnal wind arose from the direction of the fog-covered village, carrying sounds of stifled groaning on its wings. Sheer desolation was dripping from the ashen sky, so that — heavy of heart the Corporal stood frozen, facing the church tower, his eyes staring vacantly, never noticing the approach of an officer coming down the cemetery path. He only came to when he heard the footsteps. He gave a start and the turned to the grave-diggers, and said, his voice still hoarse with anxiety:

Make haste, boys, there’s an officer coming. The convoy is now due anytime. If only we could get it over with more quickly! No use, this is no job for a military man!

The officer approached hesitantly. The wind fluttered the skirt of his coat as if pushing him on toward an undesired target. He was of average height and wore a small beard which give him the look of a sedentary militiaman, though otherwise he did not look more than thirty-five. Below the (wide) iron helmet, his round, fair face looked tortured, particularly because of the brown eyes, large and bulging, that eagerly contemplated the post of the gallows, without winking, with morbid interest. His full-lipped mouth was pressed hard in a painful, trembling contraction. His arms hung stiffly, as if forgotten.

The Corporal gave him a military salute, noisily clicking the heels of his boots together. The officer stopped a few paces away, slightly nodding in acquiescence and asked, his eyes riveted on the rope:

What time is the execution ordered?

It was to be at four o’clock, Captain the Corporal answered in such a loud voice that the officer quickly looked at him. But I see it’s already five and they haven’t arrived yet.

Yes, quite, the Captain murmured, looking down upon the grave-diggers who were silently hoeing, their heads down. He then asked again more firmly: And who is to be hanged?

We couldn’t say, Captain, the Corporal said, rather ill-at-ease, They say it may be an officer, but we don't know for certain.

For what kind of offence? the officer insisted eyeing him searchingly, almost angrily.

The Corporal became quite flustered; he ruefully answered with a smile of bitter pity: Why, Captain, sir, how should we know? In wartime, a man’s life is like that of a flower, it withers away for no apparent reason. God has created us all as sinners, but mortal men have no mercy.

The Captain gave him a long look, as if taken aback by his words, and asked no further questions. However, in looking up and seeing the gallows, he drew back a few steps as if facing a menacing foe. That very moment, coming from the path from the village, a harsh commanding voice was heard: Corporal! Ready, Corporal?

Ready, Lieutenant! the Corporal shouted, turning around, raising his hand to his cap in a salute.

The Lieutenant, attired in a tight-fitting trench coat with a grey fur collar, approached in great haste, almost running and talking incessantly: Everything ready, Corporal? The convoy has just left and will be here in a few minutes. What about the first Sergeant, where is he? Why hasn’t he come? If I, who am not directly responsible, have taken the trouble...

He ceased suddenly upon seeing the unknown Captain who considered him nervously. The Lieutenant saluted and stepped up to the brink of the grave; then very nervously, in a grating voice, he burst out: The stool, Corporal! Where is it? Staring like a dolt, are you? What is the convict to step up on? My word! Such carelessness I never saw. You’ll fetch a stool out of nowhere, do you understand? And be back in two minutes! Come on, move, what are you staring at?!

The Corporal quickly made for the village, as the Lieutenant, glancing at the Captain who stood nearby, spoke more quietly: With such people we cannot beat Europe. If there’s no sense of duty. In talking, he passed by the fir tree post, right under the motionless rope. He examined the grave, mumbling something in discontent; then, looking up, he grabbed the rope hanging over his head with both hands, as if trying to see if it was strong enough. Meeting the Captain’s scared look, he let the rope go, shamed and humbled. Irresolute, he stayed there a few more instants; then, suddenly, he walked straight up to the stranger, and introduced himself: Lieutenant Apostol Bologa.

Klapka, the Captain interrupted, with his hand outstretched. Otto Klapka. I have just arrived from the faraway Italian front. At the station, I heard there was to be an execution and I don’t quite realize how it happened, but here I am.

The Captain’s voice quivered with such frank bashfulness that, unwillingly, the Lieutenant felt the same shame and awkwardly spoke with strained vivacity: So you’ve been transferred into our division?

Yes... into the fiftieth of field artillery.

Ah, that’s our regiment! Bologa suddenly exclaimed with frank joy. Then you’re certainly welcome! The Captain’s face relaxed, as if in the Lieutenant’s sincerity he was discovering a new man. Their eyes met with a flash of sympathy. For just one moment. A shudder then shook Klapka and he asked almost terror stricken: Whom are you hanging?

Apostol Bologa’s eyes, blue and deep sunken, gleamed with strange pride. He answered, hardly concealing his indignation: A Czech Lieutenant, Svoboda. An outright shame for the officer corps. He was caught just as he was about to pass over to enemy lines, carrying maps and plans. Shameful and outrageous! Don’t you think so? he added a few seconds later, seeing that Klapka remained silent.

Why... yes... yes, I suppose so, the Captain said with seeming hesitation.

The ambiguous answer put Bologa’s back up. He then began talking with volubility, evidently forced, as if trying to be convincing at all costs:

I had the honor to be a member of the Court Martial that tried him, so that — as a matter of fact, he did not deny it — considering the definitive proof, any defense would, of course, have been useless. He displayed unheard of cynicism. He never opened his mouth throughout the proceedings, even refusing to answer the president’s questions. He considered all of us defiantly, with a sort of arrogant contempt. Even the sentence of death he received with a smile and what a look in his eyes; such people, of course, do not fear an infamous death. When caught by a patrol commanded by an officer, in a dead angle, he tried to shoot himself. What clearer proof than an attempt at suicide? The Court unanimously sentenced him to death without further debate, the crime being so obvious. I myself, though excessively hesitating by nature, I have this time a completely clear conscience, absolutely clear. Particularly astounded by the harshness of his voice, Klapka mumbled.

Oh, Lord, proof... when a man’s life is at stake.

A mixture of irony and contempt appeared on the Lieutenant’s thin lips, sunken at the ends.

Remember, Captain, we are in wartime and on the front lines! A man’s life should not imperil the motherland’s life! If we were governed by sentimentality, we would capitulate in front of everyone. It’s obvious, however, that you are a reserve officer, or you wouldn’t speak like that in the case of a crime.

Quite true, Klapka said apprehensively, in a hurry. I was a lawyer, in times of peace. Yet now...

I too, am a reserve officer, the Lieutenant proudly interrupted. The war snatched me away from books, at the University, where I had almost lost touch with real life. But I soon recovered my senses and came to realize that war alone was the real generator of energy.

The Captain smiled, as if considering the answer ridiculous. In a gentle voice, tinged with soft irony, he said: And here am I, thinking that war is a murderer of energies.

Apostol Bologa blushed like a virgin, and he dared not look the Captain in the eyes. He felt deeply offended and was racking his brains for a harsh answer to bring the conversation to an end. Just then, the Corporal came panting, with a backless stool.

Just a moment, Captain, Bologa spoke triumphantly, turning to the sweating Corporal, as if he’d brought his salvation. It’s too high, can’t you see? he shouted angrily. How will the convict climb such a... After all, why should I fret and fume when the execution is not within my obligations? You’ll see what the General has to say, I bet you’ll remember! Now, what are you waiting for? Come on, adjust the place somehow and raise the rope higher! Such a never-do-well!

He raised his arms indignantly and turned his back on him. Yet suddenly he calmed down, as he saw, on the path coming from the village, a group of officers approaching with grave solemnity. It was headed by the division commander himself, small, fat, short in the legs, and very red in the face, nervously rapping the top of his boot with a riding whip, while the military Praetor, a paunchy grey whiskered Captain, was giving some explanation with broad gestures of his right hand, holding a piece of paper.

Here’s the convoy. The General too! Bologa whispered, quickly blinking to the Captain who was drawing back as if faced by an unforeseen ghost.

The Lieutenant rushed to meet the General; saluting, he reported with soft-importance: I came earlier, by chance, your excellency, and found that the stool was missing.

Missing? the General repeated, with a dissatisfied look at the Praetor who was desperately looking at Bologa.

I took immediate measures, the Lieutenant hurriedly added to protect the Praetor who was miffed by the awkward incident.

The Praetor, however, felt the displeasure of the General and, mumbling some excuse, he made haste to be the first at the place of execution to see if his orders had been carried out. With a glance, he took in everything, ignoring the Corporal standing rigidly, in a terrified position of salute. He meant to turn smiling to the General just coming up, but he suddenly remembered and asked anxiously:

Where is the executioner, Corporal?

We don’t know, Captain, the Corporal replied. We had orders to dig the grave and...

You don’t know, you blockhead, do you? the Praetor flew at him in terror, shouting furiously. Where’s the Sergeant Major? What has he been doing? Sergeant Major!... Just imagine, your excellency, we have no executioner! he added in extreme bewilderment, addressing the General who had just come by the grave. It’s no use my quoting regulations, as the men no longer do their duty.

A grey faced, dry-looking Sergeant-Major came running at full speed and stopped, shaking by the post of the gallows.

A real mess, you scoundrel! Where’s the executioner? the Praetor flew at him gnashing his teeth. I shall... I’ll... Thirty days’ imprisonment, the General intervened tearing at his left moustache and threatening with the riding whip. Yet now a man must be summoned immediately.

Corporal, you shall be the executioner! the Praetor quickly determined, somewhat relieved.

Captain, I humbly beg to be excused, the Corporal mumbled, turning yellow in the face. Captain, I do humbly beg you...

The Praetor didn’t even hear him; he was approaching the General to complain, by way of excuse, about the men’s lack of discipline. The General, however, controlling his indignation, cut him short, mumbling:

We’ll talk later. Now, on duty!

The bulk of the convoy was slowly moving along the grey-looking path in the swift-falling evening light. Wrapped in a greenish coat, with collar up, a civilian hat on his bowed head, the convict was mechanically walking on the arm of an old military priest, surrounded by four soldiers armed with bayonetted rifles. Groups of officers and soldiers followed, recalled from the front, specially to see the execution, all wearing war helmets, dirty uniforms, reeking of the trenches, all scattered every which way so that the end of the convoy lagged as far behind as the end of the village. Below the gallows, the Corporal was waiting, bolt upright, with dim eyes, the Sergeant whispering in his ear what and how he was to do it. The wet wind grew stronger, sweeping the ground, bumping against the graves in the churchyard, shaking the approaching people off their feet.

The priest then halted at the brink of the grave with the convict, who, seeing the yellow, sticky clay, shuddered briefly.

Great and kind is the Lord, the frightened priest mumbled in his ear, pushing the cross up to his lips.

On the other side, please, Father! the Praetor’s voice sounded, strained and hoarse. We must have order. Look sharp, Sergeant! Don’t you know your duty?

The pace of the convoy quickened as if by order. Within a few moments, there was a crowd of people around the gallows. They were all silent as if afraid of troubling the sleep of a sick, long- suffering man. The sound of impatient steps alone was heard in the moaning, persisting wind.

Doctor, I say, doctor, is it long? Apostol Bologa whispered hanging on the arm of the doctor who struggled to pass through the crowd of soldiers. You'll see. This is no time for... the doctor said, annoyed. Make room, why, what on earth, let me through, boys!