John Lennon's widow Yoko Ono once said, 'New York became a part of who John and I were, we couldn’t have existed the same way anywhere else' - so much so that the pair even penned a song dedicated to the city where much of their tumultuous love story unfolded.

Manhattan certainly played a huge role in their relationship: it was where they spent most of their time together, where they raised their son, and where Lennon was ultimately killed - when he was gunned down outside of their apartment by a crazed fan - a tragic and cold-blooded end to their relationship.

The couple chose the Big Apple to be their home in 1971, three years after they had tied the knot and Lennon had made the shocking decision to leave The Beatles - a move that left millions across the globe devastated and resulted in many wondering: Was his relationship with Ono to blame?

Amid the crazed fans, Beatle-mania hysteria, and immense backlash surrounding their romance and its connection to the band's split, the pair found solace in the city.

They would ride bikes together in the park and go to the movies in the middle of the night to avoid crowds - and it served not only as the place where Lennon rediscovered himself after leaving the British boyband and where he wrote some of his biggest solo hits, but also where he discovered his second passion after making music - activism.

After moving to New York, Lennon and Ono became heavily involved in the anti-war movement, a move that was unfavorable by President Richard Nixon's administration and resulted in the former Beatle becoming embroiled in a four-year battle with the FBI over his immigration status.

Lennon fought hard for his right to live in the city, and ultimately won after a judge granted him residency and stated that 'the courts will not condone selective deportation based upon secret political grounds.'

While New York was where Ono and Lennon strengthened their romance, it was also where their marriage almost came crashing down - serving as the location for Lennon's lucrative affair in 1972.

The rockstar drunkenly cheated on his wife at a party - as she listened on from the next room - and the incident sparked an 18-month separation between the two, which would later be referred to as Lennon's 'Lost Weekend.'

Lennon spent much of their year-and-a-half apart living in Los Angeles, California - where he began an affair with his then-22-year-old assistant, and would drink heavily in an attempt to numb his 'loneliness and self-loathing.'

He eventually moved back to New York, where he got an apartment with his mistress, however, he regularly slipped away to visit Ono and would beg her to take him back - until she finally obliged.

Soon after their reconciliation, Lennon and Ono welcomed their first and only child together, a baby boy named Sean, and the former Beatle then decided to put his career on hold to become what he described as a 'house-husband.'

Lennon - who was arguably one of the most-famous men on the planet - traded in his previous glamorous lifestyle, which was once filled with private jet rides and lavish vacations around the world, for a much-quieter life out of the spotlight, which now involved changing diapers and cooking meals for his young son.

The artist would spend his days 'looking after the baby and making bread' in the couple's nine-bedroom residence in the highly acclaimed Dakota building - which has played host to a number of other high-profile residents over the years - while Ono worked on her career as an artist, singer, and producer.

Unfortunately, the pair's time together was cut short when Lennon was murdered at age 40, just outside the Dakota in 1980 - right when he had returned to making music.

Ono continued to call the iconic apartment building her home for more than four decades after Lennon's death, but it was recently revealed that she decided to leave the city for the first time since she and Lennon moved there together in 1971 to instead live on a farm in upstate New York amid ongoing health problems.

As the now-90-year-old leaves the city after more than 50 years, FEMAIL has taken a look back at everything she and Lennon went through together in the Big Apple.

From Lennon's battle with the government and his infidelities to the quiet years he spent as a doting father and his untimely death on the streets he once called home - here's a glimpse inside the musician's whirlwind time with Ono in Manhattan.

Lennon and Ono met in 1966 and married three years later, but their whirlwind romance was not popular amongst Beatles fans - especially when the singer announced he was leaving the band soon after their wedding

Lennon and Ono first met in November 1966, at one of Ono's exhibitions in London, while they were both married to other people, and she has insisted on multiple occasions that she had no idea who he - or The Beatles - were when they first met.

After their initial run-in, the two were instantly drawn to one another and started to send letters back and forth.

While their correspondence was first focused on their mutual love of art - it soon turned into much more.

They eventually became close friends, followed by lovers, resulting in Lennon leaving his wife-of-six-years, Cynthia Lennon, in November 1968.

Lennon later admitted that everything in his life changed after he met Ono - including his relationship with the other Beatles.

'When I met Yoko... [it's like] when you meet your first woman and you leave the guys at the bar and you don’t go play football anymore and you don't go play snooker and billiards,' he said.

'You know the song Those Wedding Bells Are Breaking Up That Old Gang of Mine … The old gang of mine was over the moment I met her.

'I didn't consciously know it at the time, but that’s what was going on. As soon as I met her, that was the end of the boys, but it so happened that the boys were well known and weren’t just the local guys at the bar.'

Lennon and Ono quickly became inseparable, and by March 1969, they were husband and wife.

The pair's whirlwind romance sparked a fierce reaction from the public - and she once recalled how some of The Beatles' most-passionate fans would actually hurl racist insults at her on the streets, thanks to her Japanese background, and would even accuse her of using him for fame and money.

As time went on, it became clear that Lennon was preoccupied with his new love, which seemed to draw a wedge between him and his bandmates and further fueled the hate from Beatles' fans.

He soon started making music with Ono, and the two recorded three albums together throughout the late '60s, as well as a few songs under a band they had formed, called Plastic Ono Band.

In September 1969, Lennon officially told his bandmates that he no longer wanted to be a part of The Beatles, and the group went their separate ways - a move which left millions around the globe heartbroken and left many wondering if his relationship with Ono was to blame.

After the band split, Lennon began to release solo music almost immediately. His debut album, John Lennon/Plastic Ono Band, came out the next year, followed quickly by Imagine in 1971, both of which he collaborated with Ono on.

Following the success of his second album, the couple decided to move to New York City together in August 1971 in an attempt to start fresh.

They purchased a two-bedroom apartment on Bank Street in Greenwich Village - but little did they know, the move would change both of their lives drastically and ultimately result in Lennon losing his.

Lennon and Ono then started a new life together in New York - where they became heavily involved in politics and launched an anti-war movement, which angered President Nixon and resulted in the FBI trying to deport the former Beatle

During their early years together in New York, The New Yorker reported that Lennon and Ono tried their best to enjoy the city like normal people - which was hard since they were one of the most recognizable couples on the planet.

The outlet wrote that they would 'ride their bicycles in the Park, go to the movies in the middle of the night, and occasionally pick up the Sunday papers in Sheridan Square.'

When asked why they chose New York as their home, Lennon told the outlet, 'We love it, and it’s the center of our world.'

Ono added, 'It’s the first international city, race-wise, if you think about it. It has more Jews than Tel Aviv. And blacks, and Chinese, and Japanese - they’re all living pretty well together.'

Lennon explained that Ono had spent time living in New York when she was younger, so she already knew the ins and outs of the city.

'New York is a fantastic place. Yoko is a New Yorker. She spent 15 years here before she met me, and she used to go on about New York to me all the time, but I had never really seen it,' he told the publication.

'I was overwhelmed by America in the early days when The Beatles were here, because we were all brought up on Americana.

The couple were very outspoken about their disdain for America's involvement in the Vietnam War - and some of Lennon's most famous songs were even about the topic, like Happy Xmas (War Is Over) and Give Peace a Chance.

'There’s an unbelievably creative atmosphere on this little island of Manhattan. Like they say, there just isn’t anything you can’t get in New York.

'It has everything you could possibly want, night and day. That’s what I can’t stand about England and Europe: it closes down, unless you go to Hamburg or Amsterdam for the night-club scene, which I don’t enjoy. But New York never sleeps.'

After leaving his British roots behind to re-locate full time to New York, Lennon soon became heavily involved in American politics and the anti-war movement - something his wife was also fiercely passionate about.

However, his left-wing opinions did not go over well with President Nixon, and ultimately resulted in him becoming embroiled in a years-long battle with the FBI.

President Nixon's administration tried to get Lennon deported after they allegedly began to fear that the musician's activism would effect his re-election campaign, using a 1968 misdemeanor conviction for cannabis possession in London to deny him permanent residency in the US.

For four years, Lennon fought for his right to live in the States - before a judge finally dismissed the deportation case in 1976, stating that 'the courts will not condone selective deportation based upon secret political grounds.'

And during that time, the couple didn't back down. In the midst of the war between him and the government, Lennon and Ono released the album Some Time in New York City together - which contained songs about a range of political topics.

However, the album was deemed a commercial failure, and NME reporter Tony Tyler branded Lennon as a 'pathetic, ageing revolutionary' afterwards.

After cheating on his wife at a party, Lennon indulged in 18 months of reckless debauchery - an an affair with his 22-year-old assistant - that later became known as his 'Lost Weekend'

During their first four years together as a couple, Lennon and Ono spent virtually every minute of every day together.

But things started to fall apart for the couple in 1972, when the former Beatle cheated on his wife before embarking on a year-and-a-half of reckless debauchery that later became known as his 'Lost Weekend' - a reference to the 1945 film in which Ray Milland plays a writer struggling with alcoholism.

Ono later explained to the Telegraph that things started to crumble following Some Time in New York City's lack of success.

She explained that she was also struggling with the constant attention they were getting and the negative comments she often received from his fans.

'We were ruining each other’s careers - I was hated and John was hated because of me,' she said.

'We did everything together and we did everything publicly together. Many girls were upset with this. They were jealous. It was a very difficult time. How I survived at all was a miracle.'

The night Nixon was re-elected as Presidential in November 1972, the couple attended a party at activist Jerry Rubin's home.

When Nixon won the election, Lennon became so depressed that he started drinking heavily and ended up cheating on Ono in a nearby room - and the grunts and groans of her husband having sex with another woman were heard by practically everyone at the get-together, including her, per Philip Norman's 2008 biography, John Lennon: The Life.

Ultimately, Ono reflected on her romance with Lennon and realized a break would do them both some good.

She explained that he had become growingly possessive of her, and decided he needed time with another woman.

'I needed space. Can you imagine every day of getting this vibration from people of hate? You want to get out of that,' she told Telegraph.

'Also, we were so close John didn’t even want me to go to the bathroom by myself. "I will come with you," he would say.

'I started to notice that he became a little restless on top of that, so I thought it’s better to give him a rest and me a rest.'

Surprisingly, apart from that one drunken lapse at the election night party, Lennon had never been unfaithful to Ono and, even with her compliance, he had no idea how to go about it.

There was even some discussion, albeit not very serious, of whether he should stick to his own gender.

Ono recalled: 'John said: "It would hurt you like crazy if I made it with a girl. With a guy, maybe you wouldn't be hurt, because that's not competition.

'"But I can't make it with a guy because I love women too much, and I'd have to fall in love with the guy and I don't think I can."'

In the end, Lennon decided to leave New York and move to Los Angeles, where he started an 18-month-long affair with his then-22-year-old assistant, May Pang.

But Ono has been clear that not only was she completely OK with Lennon's relationship with Pang, but that she was actually the one to suggest he get with her in the first place.

'The affair was something that was not hurtful to me,' she insisted to Telegraph. 'May Pang was a very intelligent, attractive woman and extremely efficient. I thought they’d be OK.'

Lennon spent a total of 18 months away from his wife, and he later admitted that his time in LA was filled with a lot of alcohol, loneliness, and self-loathing.

'I hadn't been a bachelor since I was 20 or something, and I thought, "Whoopee,"' he recalled, adding that the reality of life without Ono was 'god-awful.'

'He called her every day, saying: "When can I come home?"' his friend Elliot Mintz, who accompanied him on the trip, said.

'Most of the time, John was in denial. But when he got drunk or high, he couldn't stop talking about her and how much he needed her.'

Eventually, he headed back to New York to help his friend, drinking buddy, and fellow musician Harry Nilsson finish recording an album.

Pang came with him and they set up home in a penthouse apartment on the Upper East Side overlooking the river.

All the while, Lennon was still maintaining constant contact with Ono and would regularly slip away to visit her at their apartment, even though she continued to say he was 'not ready' to come back permanently.

It was Elton John who finally brought them back together. John had invited Lennon to join him on stage at the last concert on his tour at Madison Square Garden.

Afterwards, Ono surprised him backstage, and while it took a few more months for them to officially get back together, the touching moment they shared after the show is said to have been a catalyst for their reconciliation.

After getting back together in 1974, Lennon and Ono settled down in the lavish Dakota building on the Upper West Side - which became famous for it's numerous celebrity tenants and selective co-op board, who turned away stars like Madonna and Billy Joel

Lennon and Ono had purchased a new apartment together in 1973 - right before Lennon left on his 'Lost Weekend' - in the acclaimed Dakota building, located on 72nd street right across from Central Park in the Upper West Side area of Manhattan.

The affluent apartment building, which was built in the 1880s, had already become one of the most glamorous places to live by the time Lennon and Ono moved in, and it has since served as the home for many more famous faces.

The Victorian-era German Renaissance co-op - which officially became a New York City Landmark in 1969 - was actually the Big Apple's first luxury apartment building.

Designed by acclaimed architect Henry Janeway Hardenbergh, it contains 65 suites across nine floors.

The apartments range in the number of rooms they have - with the smallest containing four and the biggest having 20.

Some of its glamorous features include marble floors, rich mahogany woodwork, and ceilings hand-carved in oak. The building also famously boasts a 90-foot-long private courtyard.

Other celebrities who have lived there over the years includes Wizard of Oz star Judy Garland, singer Roberta Flack, actress Lauren Bacall, composer Leonard Bernstein, How I Met Your Mother alum Maury Povich and his wife Maury Povich, and writer Harlan Coben.

The New York Times reported that a slew of others stars have tried to move in - but were turned away by the snobby and very selective co-op board, including Madonna, Gene Simmons, Billy Joel, Cher, Carly Simon, Alex Rodriguez, Melanie Griffith and Antonio Banderas.

The outlet said the building has become 'known for having among the most restrictive boards in Manhattan' in an attempt to keep 'with the Dakota’s rarefied reputation.'

Lennon and Ono had two seventh-floor apartments which they used as their primary residence, which in total had nine-bedrooms.

They went on to purchase multiple more units in the building over the years, including one used for storage, one used as a studio, and one used as a place for guests to stay.

After welcoming their son, Lennon took a five-year hiatus from making music and become a 'house-husband' - trading in his glamorous life to instead change diapers and cook meals, while striving to find some normalcy after years of Beatle-mania

After getting back together in late 1974, Lennon and Ono welcomed their first and only child together - a baby boy named Sean Lennon, who was born in October 1975.

Lennon also shares a son with his first wife, Cynthia, named Julian Lennon, who was born in April 1963.

While it's been said that Lennon was absent for much of Julian's childhood - he was busy touring with The Beatles - he was determined to do things differently when Sean was born.

After releasing Mind Games in 1973 and Walls and Bridges in 1974, Lennon began a five-year hiatus from making music - giving up his career to instead focus on raising his son.

When asked why he took a break from recording during those years, he later explained, 'I had been concentrating on being a house-husband.

'I wanted to spend the first five years of Sean’s life actually giving him all the time I possibly could.

'So I like it to be known that, yes, I looked after the baby and I made bread and I was a househusband and I am proud of it.

'It was an enlightening experience for me because it was a complete reversal of my upbringing. It’s the wave of the future and I’m glad to be in on the forefront of that, too.'

Lennon - who was arguably one of the most-famous men on the planet - traded in his glamorous lifestyle, which was once filled with private jet rides and lavish vacations around the world, for a much-quieter life out of the spotlight, which now involved changing diapers and cooking meals for his young son.

'The period that Lennon lived with his family in New York is perhaps the most tender and affecting phase of his life as a public figure,' Susan Lacy, who produced a documentary about Lennon's life in New York, once said.

'Just as the generation that had grown up with The Beatles was getting a little older and approaching a transitional time in their lives as they started families, they saw this reflected in Lennon as he grew from being a rock star icon into a real flesh and blood person.'

Lennon also discovered something new during this time - privacy. He, Ono, and their son, Sean, would often spend their days enjoying the city unbothered - and for a man who was known by millions of people around the globe and was used to being constantly followed by photographers everywhere he went, being able to walk freely down the streets of New York without being bothered was huge for him.

'People recognized John’s importance, but they didn’t languish in the past. They wanted to shake his hand, not hold it,' Our Town reported.

'They wanted to nod in his direction. Maybe they said thanks. But most tended not to hassle him.

'They didn’t intrude and remind him again and again how The Beatles had once changed their lives. They just wanted to say thanks. And that made a big difference to him.'

Lennon eventually returned to making music in 1980, releasing his single (Just Like) Starting Over. Him and Ono then dropped an album together, called Double Fantasy, in November 1980.

Lennon was murdered by a crazed fan outside of the Dakota, where Ono stayed for four more decades before recently deciding to move to a rural farm in upstate New York amid her growing health problems

Lennon's life came to a tragic end on December 8, 1980, when he was murdered outside the Dakota building as he was returning home from a recording session with Ono.

Mark David Chapman, then 25, shot the beloved Beatle four times - twice in the back and twice in the shoulder - hours after Lennon stopped to sign an autograph for the deranged fan.

Chapman plead guilty to second-degree murder and was sentenced to 20-years-to-life in prison. In 2000, he became eligible for parole but still remains behind bars to this day.

When police arrived to arrest Chapman, he was flicking through pages of The Catcher in the Rye.

Later, Lennon's murderer revealed his motives for the cold-blooded killing, telling police that he was angry about the immense fame the Beatle had amassed during his career.

In 2020, after being denied parole for the 11th time, he issued a public apology to Ono, saying he thinks about the 'despicable act' all the time.

During a parole hearing at the time, Chapman said he killed Lennon for 'glory' and admitted he deserves the death penalty.

'I just want to reiterate that I'm sorry for my crime,' he said. 'I have no excuse. This was for self-glory.

'I think it's the worst crime that there could be to do something to someone that's innocent.'

Following Lennon's death, Ono continued to live in the Dakota building in New York City for more than four decades.

However, it was recently revealed that after spending 50 years in the city, she had decided to relocate to a 600-acre farm located in upstate New York, which she and Lennon purchased together in 1978.

Although there is no suggestion that Yoko plans to sell her Manhattan apartment, sources told DailyMail.com that the move is permanent.

In the past few years, Yoko has all but retired from public life, retreating behind the walls of her apartment in the Dakota building and making just a handful of public appearances.

In November 2020, it was revealed that she had handed over her business interests, which were centered largely on the management of Lennon's $800 million fortune, to their son.

Sean, now 47, was appointed as the director at eight companies linked to the family and The Beatles, including the multimedia Apple Corps, which reportedly had assets worth $36 million in 2019.

Sean was also understood to have taken control of Lensolo, managing John's solo material, and Maclen, which publishes John's work in the US, and Subafilms, a music film company.

The now-90-year-old has reportedly faced health problems recently, and when she made a rare appearance in 2017, she told attendees, 'I have learned so much from having this illness,' although she didn't specify what illness she is suffering from.

It was recently reported that she now requires 'round the clock' medical care - but it seems her health problems have not put a damper on her social life.

Last week, in celebration of her 90th birthday, the singer held a gathering of her closest friends and family, including her son, Sean, and his girlfriend, Charlotte, at her farm on February 18.

Her and Lennon's longtime friend Mintz offered a glimpse into the very private celebrations on Instagram, sharing several images and videos from the exclusive party, while writing: 'I had the honor of sharing Yoko Ono's 90th birthday.

'I have known and loved Yoko for more than 50 years, in fact I've known nobody longer and never will.

'Sean Ono Lennon and Charlotte Kemp Muhl ([Sean's] partner of almost 20 years) invited me to join them for an intimate family gathering.

'The room was filled with flowers, laughter, music, great food and loving exchanges. The first think I said to Yoko was "Happy birthday." The first thing she said to me was that I looked younger.'