1998 American Remake Coming to Blu-ray High Def in US and UK Source: Sony Pictures Home Entertainment, Hollywood in Hi-Def Special Thanks to Scott Hettrick

On November 10, Sony Pictures Home Entertainment brings their 1998 remake of GODZILLA from TriStar Pictures to Blu-ray Disc for the SRP of $24.95. Co-written and directed by Roland Emmerich (INDEPENDENCE DAY, DAY AFTER TOMORROW, 2012), this big budget take on the Toho Co. film series starred Mathew Broderick (FERRIS BUELLER`S DAY OFF, LECTION, THE PRODUCERS), Jean Reno (THE PROFESSIONAL, THE PINK PANTHER 1 and 2), Hank Azaria (THE SIMPSONS, NIGHT AT THE MUSEUM: BATTLE OF THE SMITHSONIAN), Michael Lerner (BARTON FINK, LOVE AND OTHER DISASTERS), Harry Shearer (THIS IS SPINAL TAP, THE SIMPSONS), as well as Maria Pitillo (PROVIDENCE), Kevin Dunn (TRANSFORMERS, SAMANTHA WHO) and Arabella Field (PAPER MAN). The GODZILLA Blu-ray disc includes some new, exclusive extras. The main addition is "The Ultimate Godzilla Multi-Player Trivia Game" in which Godzilla fans test their skills against other experts via BD-Live, a feature that allows users to view exclusive content, register for Blu-ray Club rewards, and experience interactive special features via an Internet-connected Blu-ray player. Godzilla first-timers can get up to speed quickly by accessing the new "movieIQ" feature, which will provide them with information on the production and players involved with the film. And all can share their knowledge, new or time-tested, with viewers around the globe with cinechat. Additional features include an audio commentary, a music video, cartoon episodes, and featurettes from Sony`s earlier DVD releases of GODZILLA. There is also a sneak peak at Roland Emmerich`s highly anticipated disaster film 2012.

Originally announced for a March 28, 2008 release, the GODZILLA Blu-ray was pulled from the Sony Pictures Home Entertainment schedule in February of that year. At the time, Sony reps stated they were working on the disc`s supplements. GODZILLA producer/co-writer Dean Devlin (STARGATE, INDEPENDENCE DAY) attended a preview of GODZILLA`s Blu-ray extras at the International Consumer Electronics Show in Las Vegas, and was reportedly involved in crafting materials for the disc. Earlier this year, Dean Devlin was interviewed by reporter Scott Hettrick of Hollywood in Hi-Def. Devlin discussed the Blu-ray releases of several of his films, including GODZILLA, saying : "A film I made once called GODZILLA was designed to be printed on the old fashioned, three-stripe system of Technicolor. Everything we did in post-production was designed for that result. And, literally just before the film came out, we were unable to make those prints... there was a technical glitch and we couldn’t make those prints so we had to move to a different format. Well, that different format truly hurt the digital effects. They went from being— I think— literally the best digital effects up to that point in our history, to looking somewhat shabby. All of the blacks got muddy, I lost all the detail within special effects shots, feet didn’t look like they hit the ground. And suddenly, the effects went from being spectacular to being... a C+." "Now, with the new Blu-ray coming out, it’s literally the first time that audiences are going to see the movie the way it was intended to look. Now, you know, just on a technical level, that’s a very interesting thing for us as filmmakers." "Look, a Blu-ray DVD can’t solve a story problem [laughs]. All the faults in that film, as far as what I did or didn’t accomplish in the script that I worked on, will remain. However, I think that what people will see if they give it another chance is that— on a technical level— its really a lot more exciting and was much more revolutionary than people realized. And I think that when people see it now they’re gonna see things that they didn’t before. And I think they’ll actually enjoy the film a lot better." "It still won’t make it a great movie [laughs], but it’ll be a much better experience." Sony Pictures Home Entertainment apparently agrees with (part of) Devlin`s sentiment, as the press release for the Blu-ray states that GODZILLA will "evoke roars of delight when seen in high definition."

GODZILLA Blu-ray (US) Specs

Synopsis: Following the French atomic bomb tests in the South Pacific, an unknown creature is spotted passing westward through the Panama Canal. Scientist Dr. Niko Tatopoulos (Matthew Broderick) is called in to investigate the matter, and he quickly arrives at the conclusion that a giant, irradiated lizard has been created by the explosions. Godzilla then makes its way north, landing in Manhattan and wreaking havoc in the big city. Even with the combined forces of the U.S. military to fight the monster, will it be enough to save the people of New York?

Run Time: 139 minutes Close Captioned Color Screen Format: Anamorphic Languages: English 5.1, French (Canadian) 5.1, Spanish (Latin Am) 5.1, Portuguese (Brazil) 5.1 Subtitles: English (US), French (Parisian), Portuguese (Brazil), Spanish (Latin Am) Aspect Ratio: 2.40 Discs: 1 Cat.#: 19039 UPC: 043396190399 SRP: $24.95 Street Date: Nov 10, 2009 Exclusive to Blu-ray Special Features Include: • The Ultimate Godzilla Multi-Player Trivia Game: Match your skills against others around the world and see if you have what it takes to become the king of the monsters • movieIQ: BD-Live Connects You to movieIQ! Access real-time information on the cast, trivia and more while watching the movie • cinechat: Send on-screen instant messages to your friends around the world while you watch the movie together • Sneak peak at 2012 • Includes Digital Copy • 5.1 DTS-HD Master Audio

Additional Blu-ray Special Features Include: • Commentary with Visual Effects Supervisor Volker Engel, Creature Designer Patrick Tatopoulos and Associate Visual Effects Supervisor Karen Goulekas • Two Featurettes Behind-the-Scenes of GODZILLA with Charles Caiman All Time Best-of Godzilla Fight Scenes • Three Episodes of GODZILLA: THE SERIES What Dreams May Come Monster Wars Part 1 Where is Thy Sting? • Photo Gallery • Godzilla Takes New York • Production Art • Publicity Stills • Music Video of “Heroes” by The Wallflowers GODZILLA is rated PG-13 Rated for sci-fi monster action and violence. Sony Picture Home Entertainment will also release GODZILLA on Blu-ray in the United Kingdom for £19.99. The street date is currently scheduled for November 3.

About Sony Picture Home Entertainment

Sony Pictures Home Entertainment is a Sony Pictures Entertainment company. SPE is a division of Sony Corporation of America, a subsidiary of Tokyo-based Sony Corporation. SPE`s global operations encompass motion picture production and distribution; television production and distribution; digital content creation and distribution; worldwide channel investments; home entertainment acquisition and distribution; operation of studio facilities; development of new entertainment products, services and technologies; and distribution of filmed entertainment in more than 100 countries. Sony Pictures Entertainment can be found on the World Wide Web at sonypictures.com. For more info on Blu-ray Disc, visit sonypictures.com/bluray.

For more information on TriStar`s GODZILLA, please see the previous coverage here on SciFi Japan: