Sean Comer and Mark Radulich present their Godzilla 1998 Movie Review! Godzilla (1998) is an American monster film directed and co-written by Roland Emmerich. A reimagining of Toho’s Godzilla franchise, it is the 23rd film in the franchise and the first Godzilla film to be completely produced by a Hollywood studio. The film stars Matthew Broderick, Jean Reno, Maria Pitillo, Hank Azaria, Kevin Dunn, Michael Lerner, and Harry Shearer. The film is dedicated to Tomoyuki Tanaka, the co-creator and producer of various Godzilla films, who died in April 1997. In the film, authorities investigate and battle a giant monster who migrates to New York City to nest its young.

Check out more of the On Trial podcast series!

Support the W2M Network

Grammarly Ad: XXXX

Amazon Music Ad: XXXX

Receive a 30 Day free trial of Amazon Music on us. Also, you can get a special offer from Grammarly too!

Size Does Matter! Godzilla 1998 Movie Review!

About Radulich in Broadcasting

Mark Radulich has been an internet personality since 2004 with his Progressive Conservatism blog. He then took that blog to the airwaves and created a podcast for it. It then changed to PC Live. After that, he brought out the 411mania Ground and Pound Radio as well.

Also, Mark would partner up with another 411mania alum, Sean Comer, to create the movie franchise review podcast Long Road to Ruin and then Robert Cooper to create the metal album review podcast, The Metal Hammer of Doom. Robert Winfree took over the MMA show and then added his own podcast, Everybody Loves a Bad Guy. That’s when the Radulich in Broadcasting Network was born. Joining Winfree in having their own podcasts were super fan’s Jesse Starcher (Source Material). Finally, Winfree and Radulich added a weekly movie review show to the ever-growing lists of podcasts on the Network.

Don’t forget to also give that Radulich in Broadcasting Network Facebook page a like to stay up on top of all the great podcasts that they offer. You can also find them at your convenience on Spreaker, Stitcher, TuneIn Radio, or iTunes! Just search “radulich” to subscribe to the network. Make sure to give the Network a follow on twitter @MarkRadulich.

About On Trial

Mark Radulich and Sean Comer review older films, usually in a well-known series. Making comparisons to see how it holds up to today’s film standards. While also discussing the film in anticipation of the newest film in that series releasing in theaters shortly afterward.