IN a season packed with action-driven movies, ''Seabiscuit,'' the Depression-era tale of three troubled men and a temperamental but record-setting racehorse, presents a distinct, grown-up alternative. In the film, which opened Friday, nothing explodes, except the temper of the jockey Red Pollard (played by Tobey Maguire). The most devastating crash happens offscreen, years earlier, on Wall Street. And instead of blaring rock music, there is much quiet, thoughtful conversation.

In other words, an extremely tough sell to the summer popcorn-movie crowd.

Through Sunday afternoon, box-office estimates of $21.5 million in ticket sales placed ''Seabiscuit'' in the top 5 for its opening weekend. That was well back of the summer's top opener so far, ''Matrix Reloaded,'' which grossed $91.8 million in its first weekend in May. But the question is whether ''Seabiscuit'' will live up to its carefully calibrated $35 million marketing plan, which was created not for an opening-weekend throng, but for a steady stream of moviegoers in the coming weeks.

Universal Pictures, which is owned by Vivendi Universal, teamed up with DreamWorks SKG and Spyglass Entertainment to finance the $90 million movie. The film studios are betting that this character-driven story of triumph over adversity, which is based on the nonfiction best-selling book and is aimed at adults, will have staying power. Universal has laid the groundwork by promoting the movie at racetracks as well as county fairs in recent months. More recently, the market was seeded with more than 125 advance screenings in small burgs and large cities to foster early buzz.

''Given this summer of giant effects-driven pictures,'' said Marc Shmuger, a vice chairman at Universal Pictures, which had one, ''The Hulk,'' in June, ''it is poetic to imagine that 'Seabiscuit' enters as a bit of an underdog but prevails because of its extraordinary legs.''

Already, ''Seabiscuit'' is getting generally good reviews, though some critics fault it for being overly sentimental. Universal knows that the success of ''Seabiscuit'' depends on old-fashioned word-of-mouth recommendations. So instead of opening widely and appearing on 3,000 or more screens this last weekend like many of this summer's would-be blockbusters, ''Seabiscuit'' opened more narrowly, available on about 2,000 screens. There are plans to raise that number if audience interest warrants.

The estimated box-office total represents an average of $10,809 per screen, making it the most heavily attended per theater, said Paul Dergarabedian, president of Exhibitor Relations, which tracks ticket sales. Moviegoers' interest was similar to last year's ''The Road to Perdition,'' a drama that opened in July with $22 million and ultimately earned $104 million at the domestic box office.

Thank you for your patience while we verify access. If you are in Reader mode please exit and log into your Times account, or subscribe for all of The Times.

Thank you for your patience while we verify access.

Already a subscriber? Log in.

Want all of The Times? Subscribe.