Dewey's Enduring Impact: Essays on America's Philosopher (Hardback)

Edited by: Shook, John R.

Edited by: Kurtz, Paul

0

0

John Dewey was recognized in his own day as America's philosopher. His defenses of pragmatism, naturalism, humanism, and democracy stand among the highest achievements of thought, and they helped shape the destiny of America and the world. In this collection of twenty-three essays, written especially for this volume, many of the most prominent scholars on Dewey and pragmatism offer fresh insights and explorations of Dewey's enduring impact. The contributors are inspired to search for that new en...

John Dewey was recognized in his own day as America's philosopher. His defenses of pragmatism, naturalism, humanism, and democracy stand among the highest achievements of thought, and they helped shape the destiny of America and the world. In this collection of twenty-three essays, written especially for this volume, many of the most prominent scholars on Dewey and pragmatism offer fresh insights and explorations of Dewey's enduring impact. The contributors are inspired to search for that new enlightenment that Dewey himself sought, reconfigured to deal with the pressing problems of our times. The world seems to be reaching a tipping point of social, political, and ecological instability. Can Dewey's philosophy help once again with the real-world problems of our own day? Among this book's contributors are John Peter Anton (University of South Florida), Molly Cochran (Georgia Tech), Peter Godfrey-Smith (Harvard University), James Gouinlock (Emory University), Judith Green (Fordham University), Larry Hickman (Southern Illinois University), Philip Kitcher (Columbia University), Paul Kurtz (Center for Inquiry), Joseph Margolis (Temple University), Gregory Pappas (Texas A&M University), Hilary Putnam (Harvard University), Ruth Anna Putnam (Wellesley College), Jay Schulkin (Georgetown University), and Giuseppe Spadafora (University of Calabria).

Read more