Cottage in Nosy-Be

Eco-friendly lodge with simple luxury

Séjournez au Belamandy Lodge, dans un ecolodge de luxe pouvant accueillir jusqu’à 5 personnes. Situé dans un écrin écrin de verdure loin du brouhaha de la ville, détendez vous dans une villa privée disposant d’un salon avec lit banquette, espace de travail, enceinte, wifi & nécessaire de petit déjeuner, une grande chambre avec salle d’eau et lit king size, une seconde chambre avec 2 lits simples et salle d’eau et des WC séparés. Piscine à débordement, pétanque, plage privée & bar restaurant

Home in Nosy Be

5 out of 5 average rating, 3 reviews5 (3)

Villa AVANA, Nosy Be, Andilana

Located in the northwest of Nosy Be, in its green setting, the luxury villa Avana is a charming place and a real haven of peace. It offers you sea view and mangrove view. It includes: - 3 bedrooms with 160 bed, private bathroom and toilet - 1 mezzanine with 1 bed 160 and 2 beds 90 - 1 outdoor shower and 1 other toilet Maximum capacity: 10 people Suitable for families. Pool, bar, bar, massage gazebo and staff to provide service and meals with equipped kitchen.

Home in Anjiabe

New place to stayNew

Luxury Island Hideaways

Enjoy a pristine white-sand beach, crystal-clear waters, a tropical ornamental garden, and an unspoiled tropical forest. Nosy Komba is accessible only by boat, providing a unique, exclusive, ideal experience for a peaceful and sportive stay in the middle of a sublime marine reserve. You exclusively use the 3 eco-lodges with direct beach access. Services included : 1 Intendant 1 Housekeeper 1 Cook (food at your discretion) 1 Supervisor in Nosy Be

Home in Nosy Ambariovato

4.83 out of 5 average rating, 6 reviews4.83 (6)

Ecologe villa with private beach

Welcome to this exceptional property, where your dreams of escape come true. An idyllic refuge on the island of Nosy Komba, where nature and comfort intertwine for a unique experience. On a 2.5-hectare plot along its private beach, our house surrounded by rainforest offers stunning sea views. Our waterfalls pour into a natural pool, creating a refreshing oasis while an orchard and vegetable garden offer fresh, delicious delights.

Villa in Ampangorinana

Luxury villa 50m from the beach - Ilo Komba

Villa located in Nosy Komba, close to the village of Ampangorina. 50 meters from the beach, you can enjoy the sea view through lush nature. Fully equipped with private bathroom, 160 cm bed, hot water, WiFi, etc. Léontine is here to serve you and anticipate your needs. Three bedroom villa, ideal for a relaxing, active, family-friendly holiday with activities close to nature.

Home in Nosy Ambariovato

5 out of 5 average rating, 3 reviews5 (3)

Villa Tsara Riaka

Tsara Riaka is situated on the beach at the edge of the Ampangorina village, far enough from the everyday hustle and bustle of village life, but close enough to experience the community and market. By the time your stay is over, you will be in the "MoraMora" island spirit, and will never want leave this paradise. No dogs are allowed in Ampangorina.

Home in Nosy-Be

Comfortable house, pool. The Bird of Paradise

This peaceful home offers a relaxing stay for the whole family. Nice house in a very quiet and secure area, small subdivision of 5 villas 50 m from the beach, 🏖️ all comfort, two bedrooms with queen beds, kitchen, equipped, water, hot water, wi-fi, swimming pool, day and night caretaker. Housekeeper at your disposal. You won't be disappointed!

Serviced apartment in Ambondrona

4.83 out of 5 average rating, 12 reviews4.83 (12)

Apartment within walking distance of the beach

This peaceful accommodation will offer you a relaxing stay for the whole family or with friends. Composed of two bedrooms with independent bathrooms, you will have all the privacy you need. You will also have the pleasure of strolling around and swimming at ambodrona beach within walking distance of your home or rather 93 exactly.

Hut in Nosy Ambariovato

Komba Cabana | Ocean Bungalow II - Sea View

Nestled on the shores of Nosy Komba island, Komba Cabana offers luxury and relaxation in a natural setting. Indulge in the Ocean Bungalow I and II, right on the beach, or experience the Jungle Glamp Village for a close-to-nature retreat. This resort harmonizes comfort and exotic beauty for the perfect Madagascar escape.

Villa in Ambondrona

4.75 out of 5 average rating, 4 reviews4.75 (4)

Tiako Villas

A true haven of peace, on the heights of the village of Ambondrona, Tiako Villas is a complex of 8 modern and authentic villas nestled in a garden with lush vegetation. Its ideal location will allow you to discover the fragrant island.