Gary Weaven's instant and public rejection of Acciona's $709 million board-recommended bid for Pacific Hydro appears to be causing consternation and confusion.

The 32 per cent stake in the renewable energy group held within the Develop Australia Fund managed by the Industry Funds Management group (part of the larger Industry Funds Services, or IFS, group he leads) could, if he maintains his position, thwart the Spanish group's ability to achieve its 90 per cent minimum acceptance condition.

Fuelling the suspicion of the former ACTU heavyweight's motives are conversations IFM has had with Acciona's advisers in which IFM intimated its willingness to do some kind of deal with the Spaniards that would give it an ongoing interest in the assets in return for its acceptance of the bid.

It could appear Weaven is trying to use the leverage of a blocking stake to extract a special benefit for IFM.

The probable explanation for his stance is, however, not sinister and indeed is quite straightforward. Weaven and his client base - the big end of the industry fund sector - like Pacific Hydro and its renewable energy assets. Indeed, they are very keen on infrastructure assets generally but cannot get enough of them.

The funds are not profit-averse and would walk away from their investment with a huge profit if they accepted the bid. The problem they would face, however, is what to do with the $225 million of cash that would be released.

The industry funds within the IFS stable are big, with average assets under management of about $6 billion. They are also growing at a compound rate of about 20 per cent each year as a result of the mandated contributions, rising membership and their own performance. Those funds need to be invested.

The industry funds were among the earliest and most enthusiastic investors in infrastructure. They were not deterred by its illiquidity because they see themselves as long-term, patient, socially responsible investors.

Everyone is now on the infrastructure/alternative assets bandwagon because of the low correlations between those assets and traditional equities and fixed-interest securities and the superior long-term returns. There is enormous competition for those assets but, because of the dearth of domestic infrastructure investment opportunities, only a limited number of assets are available.

The imbalance of supply and demand within the asset class - and the fact that Australian managers and funds were early movers in the infrastructure space and developed competitive advantage in securitising infrastructure assets - explains why the funds are now investing internationally.

It has not been widely noted but, a decade after establishing the Develop Australia Fund to invest in local infrastructure assets, IFS has started channelling funds offshore. IFM was a co-investor, alongside Macquarie Bank vehicles, in last year's $3.1 billion acquisition of the Wales & the West Gas Distribution Network from Britain's National Grid Transco and the similar-sized purchase of National Transcommunications and NTL Digital, also in Britain.

IFM's industry fund investors like renewables, which they see as a sector with long-term growth potential and one that is socially responsible. They particularly like Pacific Hydro, which they helped develop into the world's third-largest independent renewable energy group, with wind and hydro operations in Australia, the Philippines and Chile.

Incidentally, Pacific Hydro's modest size but surprisingly high world ranking indicate the rarity of independent renewable energy companies of any consequence.

There is no doubt that for conventional investors the $4.50 a share of cash that Acciona has put on the table is attractive. It represents a 43.6 per cent premium to the prices at which the company traded before announcing the strategic review that led to the recommended bid.

More particularly, it is arguable Pacific Hydro's current operations are worth perhaps $3 a share, which implies the Spaniards are offering $1.50 a share for the pipeline of potential projects. Those projects will require a lot of capital if they are to be developed.

However, the industry funds would be happy to help finance Pacific Hydro's growth - the funds do not need more cash, they need more investments. Their investment time horizons match Pacific Hydro's prospects.

If they cannot remain investors in the company - and neither Weaven nor his client base are likely to want to become locked-in minority shareholders in a Spanish-controlled subsidiary of a European-listed company - they would like Acciona to offer an equivalent exposure to renewables through some form of alliance.

There is a problem in matching their ambitions with Acciona's. IFM cannot offer operational expertise, only funding the Spaniards do not appear to need. It is difficult to see any common ground.

But Weaven and the industry funds should not be underestimated, given their vast financial resources.

Despite the board's recommendation and agreement to a $6 million "break fee", and despite the sale by the other big shareholder, the US group AEP, of a 15.7 per cent interest in the company to Acciona, it is not inconceivable there could be a contest for control.

bartho@theage.com.au