Founded in 1992, Pacific Hydro Australia is a leading owner, operator and developer of renewable energy assets. It operates a high quality, diversified portfolio of wind, hydro and solar assets with an installed capacity of 665 MW; it also has a development pipeline of substantial projects totaling over 1100 MW of potential capacity, as well as over 300 MW of energy storage solutions. It also has a growing electricity retail business, Tango Energy, with over 100,000 customers.

With a strong reputation for engaging and collaborating with the communities where it operates, Pacific Hydro has a track record of delivering lasting, sustainable benefits. Its operating assets currently abate over one million tonnes of greenhouse gas pollution every year.

Our approach to sustainability

Pacific Hydro is committed to sustainability and this is embedded in the way we work. Our approach to sustainability is to integrate innovative economic, social and environmental business practices to deliver long term value to our shareholders, customers, partners, communities, employees and the environment.

Our sustainability framework is built around three pillars: economic, social and environment. These pillars provide the business with a clear focus and drive our sustainability practices.

By working closely with our stakeholders, we actively seek to understand what is important to them and where our efforts are best directed.

Environment- We aim to provide a net benefit to our planet by producing renewable energy with minimal impact on biodiversity, natural resources and our climate.

Environmental Management Systems are implemented at our sites and we set environmental objectives in order to achieve net benefits. We understand that reducing the impacts of climate change begins with our own activities and we are working to reduce our own carbon footprint.

We regularly engage policy makers, local communities and the general public on renewable energy and broader climate change issues and advocate for climate change policies in our areas of interest.