Samuel R. Delany, whom everyone calls Chip, is an award winning writer of fiction, memoir, criticism and essays on science fiction, literature, sexuality, and society, and a former University professor. In 2016, he was inducted into the New York State Writers Hall of Fame.

Mr. Delany is the author of Babel 17, Nova, Dhalgren, Dark Reflections, Atlantis: Three Tales, the Return to Nevèrÿon series, an autobiography, The Motion of Light in Water, and the paired essays Times Square Red/Times Square Blue. Dark Reflections won the Stonewall Book Award for 2008, and in 2015 he won the Nicolas Guillén Award for Philosophical Literature, and in 1997 the Kessler Award for LGBTQ Studies.

Mr. Delany has won four Nebula Awards from the Science Fiction Writers of America, and two Hugo Awards from the World Science Fiction Convention. In 2013, he was made a Grand Master of Science Fiction, following in the steps of Asimov, Heinlein, and Le Guin.

Not only does Chip have a broad range of published works, but he’s widely recognized for his articulate and vivid writing style. In The New York Times story ”In Praise of Samuel Delany,” writer Jordy Rosenberg notes, “The emotional dynamism of Delany’s sentences has been perhaps less acknowledged than his world-building, or the sweep of his vision. But when asked to speak about writing as a practice, Delany himself often turns to the art of sentences, and of how to imbue words with such “ekphrastic force” that they summon the material presence of an imagined world. Read the entire article here.

How to Bid:

Bidding in person at the event in Washington: Bids will be collected just prior to the program start. Winners will be announced at the end of the evening. Seven sets will be delivered to the seven highest bidders at the French Embassy.

Attending virtually, and bidding via email: Email your bid NOW to:

mojomo@verizon.com and include your highest bid, name and phone number. Winners will be contacted on November 18th. Three total sets will be delivered to the top 3 emailed bids.

The winning bidders can pay by check made payable to the Arthur C. Clarke Foundation, by PayPal or credit card. All funds paid above the $125 retail value of the materials are fully tax deductible. ACCF is a 501(c)3 not-for-profit organization.