San Diego men’s basketball head coach Steve Lavin says his team is a Rubik’s Cube. He also refers to a roster with eight freshmen as “the Bambi brigade.” Both things are true.

After struggling to an 11-20 record and ninth place in the West Coast Conference in his debut season a year ago, Lavin has steered the Toreros to a 9-4 start. USD is 8-0 at home for the first time in five years, including a win over Arizona State.

Lavin is cautious not to overstate USD’s achievements so far. “It’s early and we’re going to be treading into deeper waters, moving toward conference play,” he said, alluding to games at home vs. Saint Mary’s and on the road against Gonzaga to open the WCC a week from now.

But he’s also encouraged and even a bit surprised by the team’s performance to date. Certainly, there are a lot moving pieces, factoring in a total of nine new players and early-season injuries that forced four rotation players to the shelf for a total of 19 games.

“It’s a constant riddle or a Rubik’s Cube, which in my case took quite a while to solve,” Lavin said, not giving himself enough credit for keeping the ship pointed in the right direction. “Each game and within each game there’s been this necessity to keep an open mind and look for different alignments, different combinations, tweaking and modifying things to put us in a position to try to win games.”

The players deserve the credit, Lavin said. “The most impressive element has been the bounce-back or resourcefulness, poise and grit,” he said. “There’s cohesiveness, camaraderie that’s been on display in practices and games, even in their down time. They genuinely like one another.”

Junior guard Wayne McKinney III, who leads the team at 14.4 points per game and has also contributed 4.1 rebounds and 3.0 assists, said the newcomers have invigorated the program.

"The good thing was as soon as the young guys walked in the gym you could feel the energy,” he said. “It instantly felt like these guys are here to work hard and to win some games and be here for each other Honestly, it clicked right away. We just love playing together.”

Last year’s Toreros were older, more experienced and not without talent. But the mix, including four first-year Division I transfers whose tenure last just one year, never really came together. Lavin began to a build this past offseason with the eight freshmen and forward PJ Hayes, a transfer who came with two years’ eligibility from Division II Black Hills State University in Spearfish, S.D.

“I feel like the total dynamic has changed,” McKinney said. “We have a group of guys who just want to see each other succeed. Everybody is willing to be ready when their name is called and go out there and help each other. Everyone came here with a mission to win and we’re not going to stop until we get there.”

Rooting for one another and being willing to share opportunity has been a key to the equation so far. Perhaps because the team is so young, the Toreros often have started slow, found themselves in a hole and had to scramble out. They have trailed by at least five points in all nine of their wins, by double-digit margins in five of those.

It’s not a path Lavin wants his team to follow the rest of the season, but the early deficits have forced him to experiment with different combinations of players.

USD has sent out seven different starting lineups and 11 different second-half lineups. Lavin has started the same five players to begin each half just four times and 10 different players have been on the floor when either the first or second half begins. Ten players are averaging at least 10 minutes.

“The interesting element is because of the nine newcomers and musical chairs with injuries, it’s dictated that we keep adapting and adjusting. So we’re learning about our team as we go more than any team I can remember,” Lavin said. “As we get back closer to full strength, that could be an asset. More players who have had big minutes and big moments could help us.”

Lavin believes the depth being created is helping players stay fresh late in games when they necessarily mount their comebacks. Early in the season, when a couple big men were out, the Toreros found success battling from behind by running and pressing with a smaller lineup.

McKinney is impressed by how willing his young teammates have been to accept a role for the greater good. “Getting pulled is not easy,” he said, “but it shows everybody is ready to go and we’re happy to see each other flourish.”

Besides McKinney, junior guard Deuce Turner — who scored 50 points in a game for South Plains (Texas) JC a couple years ago — provides USD 13.0 points per game. The contributions from other veterans are less tangible, but important, Lavin said.

An example is Dominic Muncey, a former walk-on guard who is probably no taller than 5-foot-9 1/2, according to his coach. Muncey has scored just 13 points in 13 games but he’s started 11 times.

“He’s kind of emblematic of the spirit of the group,” Lavin said. “We struggle when Dom’s not in the game. He’s just a bulldog and smart and tough and selfless. He’s the best teammate I’ve coached in my career.”

Otherwise, the scoring comes from the newcomers — about 40 points per game, three-fourths of that from the freshmen. Hayes has started 12 times and averages 9.7 points.

Freshman Kevin Patton Jr., a 6-8 guard, has scored double digits five times off the bench and gives the Toreros 8.8 points and 5.2 rebounds and is a terrific passer, Lavin said. Dragos Lungu, a 6-6 point guard from Romania who played at the NBA Global Academy in Australia, missed some time with an ankle sprain but impressed with 20 points against Jackson State and is averaging 8.5.

The Toreros have played in the NCAA Tournament just twice since 1988 and they are a longshot by any measure to get there this season. But you can’t blame McKinney — who says he’s enjoying this team more than any he’s played on — for wanting what every college player wants.

USD closes its nonconference schedule with home games Friday against Fresno State and Sunday vs. Westcliff. The competition level ramps up quickly after that with games against Saint Mary’s, Gonzaga and USF to open the WCC.

“It’s going to help our younger guys understand this is league and this is where the big dogs are made,” he said. “This is where postseason and all that comes into play. We get the top dogs first. It’s going to be great for us.”