For 3 is our weekly look at basketball news from USD, UC San Diego and Point Loma Nazarene … plus whatever else tickles the twine.

It’s one of the best wins of the Steve Lavin Era.

USD’s 70-59 victory at Santa Clara on Saturday night not only provided a nice boost to a young team that needed one after taking its share of lumps early on in West Coast Conference play, but it stood out because it came against one of the better teams in the league.

It’s no great secret that a gap exists between the top four teams in the WCC. Saint Mary’s, San Francisco, Gonzaga and Santa Clara are the class of the league; for the Toreros (13-11, 3-6 WCC), a win over one of them qualifies as a nice accomplishment.

After an 0-5 start to conference play, Lavin’s team has won three of four. The Toreros are now 1-5 against the “big four’ this season, with opportunities remaining against Saint Mary’s and Santa Clara.

USD went 1-6 against the “big four” last season in Lavin’s first at the helm.

“When you can knock off a team that’s in the upper half of the league — on their home floor — it’s an indication that you are making progress,” Lavin said. “Santa Clara is a quality team who has beaten Gonzaga, so I’m proud of our players — not only for winning this game, but to win three out of four road games as the youngest team in school history.”

The Toreros have a nice mix of playmaking from guards Wayne McKinney III, Deuce Turner, PJ Hayes and Kevin Patton Jr. Add to it the emergence of center Steven Jamerson, who has posted double figures in points and rebounds in three of the last four games, and USD seems to have found its rhythm.

Saturday, the Toreros scored 24 points off 20 Broncos turnovers while turning the ball over just 12 times themselves.

Crisp free throw shooting continues to be a strength. USD was 11 for 13 from the line Saturday and are second in the WCC at 74.1 percent for the season. The Toreros’ opponents are shooting a WCC-low 69.1 percent from the line.

Next up: Wednesday vs Loyola Marymount (10-12, 3-5 WCC), 7 p.m. (ESPN+); Saturday at Pacific (6-18, 0-9 WCC), 7 p.m. (ESPN +).

Tritons split series

It was a week of mixed results for UC San Diego (15-8, 9-2 Big West). The Tritons followed their 83-62 home win over Cal State Northridge on Thursday with 85-76 loss at Long Beach State on Saturday.

The Tritons were outrebounded 41-28 at Long Beach State on Saturday; they rank eighth in the Big West in rebound margin (0.4).

UCSD is second in the Big West standings behind UC Irvine.

Next up: Thursday at Hawaii (12-11, 4-7 Big West), 9 p.m. (ESPN +).

Sea Lions lose battle for first place

Point Loma Nazarene (15-7, 10-4 PacWest) fell behind Academy of Art (14-6, 10-3 PacWest) in the conference standings with a 95-86 home loss on Saturday.

Freshmen Tyce Paulsen (27 points) and St. Augustine High School product Jaden Matingou (17 points) each scored season-highs in the loss.

The Sea Lions will get another shot at the Urban Knights on March 2, when the teams meet in the Bay Area.

Next up: Saturday at Azusa Pacific (8-13, 7-7 PacWest), 5 p.m. (Streaming: portal.stretchinternet.com/plnu).