Jason Richardson scored 17 points and J.J. Redick added 14 to help the Orlando Magic stay alive in the playoffs with a 101-76 victory over the Atlanta Hawks on Tuesday night.

The win kept alive the Magic's hopes of becoming the ninth team in NBA history to win a playoff series after trailing 3-1. If they can win Game 6 Thursday in Atlanta, they would host the decisive Game 7 on Saturday.

Magic center Dwight Howard battled foul trouble throughout the night and had just one field goal, finishing with 8 points and 8 rebounds. Orlando didn't need his offense, though, as it broke out of a series-long shooting slump with 11 3-pointers.

Josh Smith scored 22 points to lead Atlanta, which shot below 40 percent for just the second time this series.

Orlando put together easily its best half of the series in building a 58-35 halftime lead.

BULLS 116, PACERS 89

CHICAGO — Derrick Rose scored 25 points, Luol Deng added 24 and Chicago finally played like a top seed, knocking off the Indiana in Game 5 to wrap up the first-round playoff series Tuesday night.

The top-seeded Bulls can breathe a little easier after getting a dominant performance by their MVP candidate and an emphatic win that came on the heels of four dramatic games.

They can also turn their attention to the Eastern Conference semifinals, where they'll meet Atlanta or Orlando.

Rose seemed just fine after spraining his left ankle in Game 4, hitting 8 of 17 shots. He dominated in the early going and came up big in the third after the Pacers pulled within four. He scored 10 points over the final six minutes, and Chicago ended the quarter on a 23-8 run to blow it open.

Sacramento shows money to the NBA

SACRAMENTO, Calif. — Sacramento is showing the NBA the money.

Mayor Kevin Johnson has taken another step in his bid to keep the Kings in town. He and about 30 representatives from Sacramento-area businesses met with NBA officials Tuesday, signing smaller deposits on more than $10 million in sponsorship pledges for the Kings as a "down payment."

Johnson had promised league owners additional revenue for the Kings from area businesses to give the city more time to finance a plan for a new arena. The league sent officials to verify those claims, and the mayor says Sacramento "showed them the money."