Saint Stanislaus, founded in 1854, is a Catholic boarding and day school located on the Mississippi Gulf Coast just 50 miles east of New Orleans. As a Catholic boarding and day school for boys in grades 7-12, we understand the challenges of both the character and academic education of boys. At Saint Stanislaus, we believe there is something sacred in each boy. With nearly 170 years of experience, we offer boys a welcoming and respectful environment where they can develop into men of strong character and to realize their potential.

We are located in the small, picturesque town of Bay St. Louis, Mississippi, just an hour’s drive from the cultural offerings of New Orleans. Our boarding program follows a carefully structured schedule that sets students up for success by teaching time management and accountability. It also allows ample recreation time for boys to be boys. Our beachfront campus, an unrivalled outdoor lab for our science program and outdoor recreation area, along with top-ranked athletic programs and college-style dorms create a healthy place to grow, play and learn.

Saint Stanislaus is known for its rigorous academic programs and high academic standards. The school offers a challenging curriculum that prepares students for success in college and beyond. Electives are available in language arts, visual arts, music, business, computer science, social studies, science, physical education, and foreign languages. Saint Stanislaus’ Marine Science program is nationally recognized for their conservation and oyster-gardening efforts in the St. Louis Bay. Honors classes, dual enrollment and Advanced Placement classes are also offered.

The school community encourages student participation in both interscholastic and intramural athletics. Saint Stanislaus offers baseball, basketball, cross country, football, golf, swimming, tennis, and track and field, in addition to eSports, lacrosse and sailing. Most sports field junior high, junior varsity, and varsity teams and athletes are encouraged to join multiple teams. In addition to athletics, Saint Stanislaus also offer over 20 clubs and organizations. We have service clubs, honor societies, and special interest clubs. Everything from Students Ambassadors, to SCUBA, to French Honor Society.