Saint Stanislaus is a Catholic day and boarding school for boys in grades seven through twelve. We are located just an hour’s drive from the cultural offerings of New Orleans, on the picturesque Gulf of Mexico coastline. We welcome students from across the United States and around the world. At Saint Stanislaus, students thrive academically and spiritually in an atmosphere of structure and friendly discipline grounded in the accumulated wisdom of the Brothers of the Sacred Heart. We believe that all boys have the ability to excel and that college readiness requires an academic program tailored to students’ needs. Our college preparatory program integrates Advanced Placement (AP), honors curriculum, and Academic Assistance Program with a commitment to faith and community service to help young boys become men of character. Our stunning beachfront campus is an unrivaled outdoor lab for our marine science program. From sailing to SCUBA, our moderate climate means that students can get on the water year-round.

At Saint Stanislaus we strive to create a disciplined and orderly environment. This allows every student to work to his potential academically, physically, and spiritually while also instilling self-discipline and accountability in every young man on our campus. In the tradition of the Brothers of the Sacred Heart, we use a personal approach to discipline that we call “friendly discipline.” Friendly discipline allows us to enforce rules and correct behavior while at the same time building relationships of trust and understanding with our young men.

Our hope is that every one of our students graduates with an understanding of God’s love for them that in turn allows them to become well-rounded men of faith who respond with compassion to the needs and limitations of others. We want them to become self-disciplined individuals who have the utmost respect for authority and the persons for whom they are responsible. We hope that through their interactions with our faculty, staff, and administration, our students will learn to approach all of their relationships with fairness, mutual trust, and cooperation.