With someone as accomplished and multi-talented as Sam Shepard was, it’s hard to single out any one of his contributions to American theater, literature and film over the past 50 years.

As a playwright, Shepard, whose death at age 73 was disclosed Monday, was one of America’s most influential writers, chronicling the dark sides of American family life with plays like “Buried Child,” which originally premiered at San Francisco’s Magic Theatre and won the Pulitzer Prize for drama in 1979.

Shepard, who died of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, or Lou Gehrig’s disease, also published poetry, wrote the Palme d’Or-winning film “Paris, Texas,” and was best known in the Bay Area for his long association with the Magic Theatre.

However, it’s fair to say that much of America got to know Shepard for his roles in films and TV, from Terrence Malick’s “Days of Heaven,” to more recently, the Netflix drama “Bloodline,” alongside Kyle Chandler and Sissy Spacek.

Of course, the film that really established his credentials as a movie star, was when Shepard played ace test pilot Chuck Yeager in 1983’s “The Right Stuff,” Phillip Kaufman’s epic adaptation of Tom Wolfe’s best-selling novel about the early years of America’s space program.

Shepard was nominated for a best supporting Oscar for his performance.

While “The Right Stuff,” was an an ensemble film that featured plenty of other break-out 1980s stars (including Dennis Quaid, Scott Glenn, Barbara Hershey and Magic Theatre collaborator Ed Harris), Shepard’s Yeager “haunts the rest of the film,” according to Roger Ebert.

Two of Yeager’s history-making flights bookend the movie, and Shepard presents Yeager as the original embodiment of the “right stuff.” That is, he possesses the unique mental and physical qualities needed to be the late 20th century’s version of history’s great explorers, accepting the dangers of venturing into a great unknown.

Tall, rangy, Shepard as Yeager is assured and fearless in his job, a man of few words who lets his achievements speak for him. The job we first see him perform is flying his X-1 on October 14, 1947 to “punch a hole in the sky” and become the first pilot to break the sound barrier.

His Yeager is a woman’s man, too. He and Barbara Hershey (as Yeager’s wife Glennis) generate plenty of heat as they enjoy a wild, flirtatious nighttime horse ride through the Mojave Desert on the eve of his first historic flight.

Shepard’s Yeager returns at the end of the film in what Ebert calls a magical closing sequence when the “best pilot in the world” eyeballs a new Air Force jet and says, “I have a feeling this little old plane right here might be able to beat that Russian record.”

Yeager again became the world’s fastest airman, taking his Bell X-1A to Mach 2.44 in 1953.

In an interview with Forbes in January, Yeager, 94, said he he liked the movie and Shepard’s portrayal of him.

“I did a lot of flying in it, and Sam Shepard did a good job portraying me,” he said. “Barbara Hershey looked exactly like [my wife] Glennis, too — wonderful. Though it’s sort of ‘Hollywood-ized,’ the whole story is accurate. I did get burned badly in an F-104 crash. All in all, the movie is educational, and it’s very well made.”

Many film lovers agree that Shepard was pretty great as Yeager and that he created a new kind of screen icon:

https://twitter.com/stevensantos/status/892035616183115776