Braille in Sinhala

Do you know Braille in Sinhala? How to use Braille in Sinhala and how to say Braille in Sinhala? How to write Braille in Sinhala? Now let's learn how to say Braille in Sinhala language.

Braille translate to Sinhala meanings: බ්රේල්.

In other words, බ්රේල් in Sinhala is Braille in English.Click to pronunce

EnglishSinhala Your browser does not support the audio element. Your browser does not support the audio element. Brailleබ්රේල්

How to use Braille in Sinhala?

Meaning of Braille in Sinhala language is: බ්රේල්.

Other words in Sinhala

Braille: බ්රේල්.

Brink, Bookmark, Biters, Booby, Breaking,

Why we should learn Sinhala language?

There are many, many reasons why learning a new language is a good idea. It allows you to communicate with new people. It helps you to see things from a different perspective, or get a deeper understanding of another culture. It helps you to become a better listener. It even has health benefits, as studies have shown that people who speak two or more languages have more active minds later in life!

7 reasons to learn a Sinhala language

Makes you smarter.

Boosts academic achievement.

Provides professional and career advantages.

Provides broader access to education and information.

Gives you more social and global skills.

Increases national security.

Life is more interesting.

How to say Braille in Sinhala?

බ්රේල්. This is your most common way to say Braille in බ්රේල් language. Click audio icon to pronounce Braille in Sinhala::

EnglishSinhala Your browser does not support the audio element. Your browser does not support the audio element. Brailleබ්රේල්

How to write Braille in Sinhala?

The standard way to write "Braille" in Sinhala is: බ්රේල්

Alphabet in Sinhala

About Sinhala language

See more about Sinhala language in here.

Sinhala (/ˈsɪnhələ, ˈsɪŋələ/ SIN-hə-lə, SING-ə-lə; සිංහල, siṁhala, [ˈsiŋɦələ]), also known as Sinhalese, is an Indo-Aryan language primarily spoken by the Sinhalese people of Sri Lanka, who make up the largest ethnic group on the island, numbering about 16 million. Sinhala is also spoken as the first language by other ethnic groups in Sri Lanka, totaling about 4 million people as of 2001. It is written using the Sinhala script, which is one of the Brahmic scripts; a descendant of the ancient Indian Brahmi script closely related to the Kadamba script.

Sinhala is one of the official and national languages of Sri Lanka. Along with Pali, it played a major role in the development of Theravada Buddhist literature..

Writing system in Sinhala

Sinhala script, Sinhala Braille (Bharati Braille)

Sinhala Speaking Countries and Territories

Sinhala Speaking Countries and Territories: Sri Lanka.

Sinhala native speakers

Sinhala native speakers: 17 million (2012), 3 million L2 speakers (2012).

Sinhala language code

Sinhala language code is: sin.

Conclusion on Braille in Sinhala

Now that you have learned and understood the common ways of saying Braille in Sinhala is "බ්රේල්", it's time to learn how to say Braille in Sinhala. This will hopefully give you a little motivation to study Sinhala today.

බ්රේල් in Sinhala meanings Braille in English.