Marina Bay is one of three triple-interchanges in Singapore (along with Outram Park and Dhoby Ghaut) and handles a decent volume of transfers, especially with the recent opening of the Thomson-East Coast Line (TEL)’s Marina Bay station.

Some context on the TEL — if you aren’t a railfan, it might be useful. I’ve highlighted some keywords.

The Thomson-East Coast Line is an amalgamation of two different lines: the Thomson Line, running along the alignment of TEL 1–3 (Woodlands to Marina Bay), and part of the Eastern Regional Line, used as the aligment for TEL 4 & 5.

The Eastern Regional Line (ERL) was planned to be a large loop, connecting the southeastern coast as well as the eastern heartlands to the city centre. If you look carefully, you can almost see a rectangle. Start on the DTL at Fort Canning, travel all the way to Sungei Bedok. The TEL then continues to Outram Park, where originally, the tracks would have connected, improving access to commuters in the east of Singapore.

And now, back to the main post…

Marina Bay serves the North South Line (NSL), Circle Line (CCL) and TEL.

If you observe carefully, you may notice the TEL (along the original Thomson Line corridor) largely parallels the NSL, beginning in Woodlands, meeting again in Orchard, before finally diverging forever at Marina Bay. This was intentional as a driving force for the TEL was reducing congestion on the NSL.

This is important, because to relieve congestion, commuters, need to be able to make convenient transfers. If I arrive on the Circle Line at Marina Bay, both the NSL and TEL won’t be very crowded and I’d take the more convenient one to get to. And that’s where the problem begins. The new TEL station at Marina Bay is difficult and confusing to get to and from.

Marina Bay today, is not as developed as other TEL Stage 3 stations. Today, it’s main function is to serve as a transfer point. As the area develops further, you will also see the area becoming a destination. When TEL Stage 4 opens, it’s transfer function will expand even further. All commuters living along the eastern coast will need to travel several stops before reaching any interchanges. And the first one is Marina Bay, giving them access to Dhoby Ghaut, the financial district and when CCL Stage 6 opens, the Greater Southern Waterfont. Both transfer and destination demand will continue to grow — and the station is not yet ready to cope.

Recently, I took the TEL from Gardens by the Bay to Marina Bay and then took the NSL northbound, and the transfer experience was abysmal. I have contacted LTA and am waiting to hear back but today I want to unpack the flaws with the station design, the constraints and the dreadful signage I experienced at the station.

Station Design

The NSL and CCL have island platforms (a track on each side and the platform in the middle) and the TEL has stacked side platforms (a track and a platform next to it, with another platform on top of it.

Generally, island platforms are preferred in Singapore because only one set of infrastructure (lifts, escalators etc.) are needed, compared to side or side stacked platforms. The reason given for the use of stacked platforms in the TEL at Marina Bay is the limited space and conflict with the other trackways — seems pretty reasonable to me.

In terms of vertical position, the order is as follows;

Basement 1 (CCL Platform & NSL Concourse)

Basement 2 (CCL Concourse & NSL Platform)

Basement 3 (Transfer Corridors + TEL Concourse)

Basement 4 (TEL Platform: towards Gardens by the Bay)

Basement 5 (TEL Platform: towards Woodlands North)

It may help to refer to the engineering plan above to place the different elements. All CCL elements are located in the green area, NSL elements in the pink area and TEL elements in the yellow area.

When you start to see the vertical expanse of the station, and the horizontal expanse below, you can start to comprehend the great difficulty commuters must undertake when transferring. For reference, heading (platform to platform) from the NSL to TEL (lower) took me 6 minutes and TEL to CCL, 5 minutes.

If you take a look at the station map, you can start to see the problem.

All three platfoms are decently far away. Especially from the far end of the TEL platform to the NSL platform or the other way, there is a large lateral distance that must be traversed on foot. Making the NSL-TEL transfer took me 7 minutes, walking at a normal pace.

But the vertical distance is mind-numbing. These escalators traverse from the TEL upper platform (towards Gardens by the Bay), all the way to the TEL concourse, from which some exits can be accessed. In the image on the right, the escalators at the far end head upwards all the way to exit 4.

This would allow for a far easier transfer. Commuters could travel to the existing NSL-CCL transfer area, and take escalators down to the TEL platform, greatly reducing the lateral distance commuters need to travel.

The main concern with this is tunnelling under development. To make this work, without shifting other stations, the TEL tracks would need to head under Marina One residences, rather than the roads LTA prefers to tunnel under. However, since the tracks are about 40 metres below ground, and are being excavated using a tunnel boring machine (TBM), it would be possible without significant disruption to do just that.

This would greatly improve the ease of transfer, something I believe LTA has not prioritised enough in recent lines. While we cannot do anything about that now, I’d hope the LTA spends more time thinking about how to make transfers as seamless as possible, and prioritising an easy transfer over other criteria like minimising disruption during construction.

The Signage

While it may not be possible to improve the transfer quality at Marina Bay, the transfer should be clear. And clear it is not. When arriving at Marina Bay from Gardens by the Bay, you reach platform F. When you travel up, taking the escalators seen in the bottom left, you reach platform E.

Now, I wanted to head to the NSL, so I took the escalators straight ahead. The signs seemed to indicate either the stairs or escalator would bring me to the right place. Well, the escalators (and stairs) bring you to a concourse at B2, from which you can access a few of the new exits. It turns out, I should have walked past the escalators and taken another set to reach the area I wanted to go to.

4 other commuters on the same train as me (all of us who alighted) made the same mistake and needed a passenger service agent to assist us. I personally like the design of the new signage, I think this needs to be far clearer. Adding an extra 4 minutes (like it did for me) to a 6 minute transfer is pretty frustrating. Considering this station is used often by tourists, this could continue to be an issue. LTA, please make the signage more clear!

I emailed the LTA, and they are investigating, so I am hopeful that there will be changes to the signage and faster escalator speeds in the TEL stations in the CBD (central business district aka downtown).

On a larger level, as the LTA plans Sungei Bedok and interchanges along the CRL that will involve large vertical and/or horizontal distances, I’d urge them to consider the ease of transfer. That will make or break your system.