June 20, 1935 – Drumheller, Alberta April 27, 2016 – Calgary, Alberta It is with much sadness, and heavy hearts, that the family of Jean Sakal announces her passing on Wednesday, April 27, 2016 into the arms of our Lord. Jean leaves to mourn her best friend and husband of fifty-eight years, William (Bill); her loving daughter Christine; her devoted son David William (Judy); as well as her grandson David William Jr.; and her granddaughter Magdalene Jean, all of whom she loved and cherished dearly. Jean always believed that the heart that loves is always young and she loved everyone. She also believed that life given by nature is short, but the memory of life well spent is eternal, and she lived her life accordingly. Jean is further survived by her brother Stanley (Virginia) Schumacher and her twin sister Mary Jane Bittman (Herbert); as well as numerous nieces and nephews. Jean was born in Drumheller, Alberta on June 20, 1935 to Louis and Gladys Schumacher. She attended public and high school in Drumheller and upon completion, registered into and graduated from the diploma program as a Registered Nurse from Medicine Hat General Hospital in 1956. Nursing was her love and she loved her career. She started her nursing career in Swift Current, Saskatchewan, in 1956; then moved to Cabri, Saskatchewan, for one year where she was one of the youngest people to ever assume a hospital matron position. Marriage to her husband, Bill, brought Jean to Calgary, Alberta, where she raised a family and continued to work her life long ambition, until her retirement in 1995. Nursing was a career that she excelled at, and a career that spanned almost thirty-nine years. Jean touched the hearts of many people, both in her career and private life. She will always be remembered as a caring, wonderful, and compassionate person; not only by her family, but by everyone she knew. Interment has already taken place in the family grave at the Queen’s Park Cemetery in Calgary. The family would like to extend its most profound gratitude to the Bethany Club 36, the entire staff at the Foothills Hospital, as well as the Dulcina Hospice, for all the beautiful love and care shown to Jean and the family. If friends so desire, memorial tributes may be made directly to The Alzheimer Society of Calgary, Suite 201, 222 – 58th Avenue S.W., Calgary, AB T2H 2S3, Telephone: (403)290-0110, www.alzheimercalgary.com. In living memory of Jean Sakal, a tree will be planted at Fish Creek Provincial Park by McINNIS & HOLLOWAY FUNERAL HOMES, Chapel of the Bells, 2720 CENTRE STREET NORTH, Telephone: 403-276-2296.