FILMS MADE ON SHOREHAM BEACH

From 1919 to 1923, the Progress Film Company’s film studio on Shoreham Beach produced feature films for Britain and the world. Most of this work was led by Sidney Morgan, its Director of Production. For this programme, Screen Archive South East presents three films made in Shoreham: Little Dorrit (1920), A Lowland Cinderella (1921) and The Mayor of Casterbridge (1921).

Little Dorrit (1920) was made at the Shoreham Beach studio complex and filmed on location at Nymans Gardens near Handcross. It was the first film adaptation of Dickens’ novel of love, money and imprisonment in the mid-Victorian era. Little Dorrit features elaborate sets and costumes, studio and location filming and a cast of notable British actors. Amongst the actors were Lady Tree, the widow of famed actor Sir Herbert Beerbohm Tree, and the silent screen star Joan Morgan. This film was made on 35mm for general cinema release and seven years later it was abridged from its original 68 minutes for the smaller film gauge 9.5mm by Pathé for the new home cinema market. Unfortunately prints of the original 35mm film cannot be found but a handful of the 9.5mm versions have survived. A few years ago we had the good fortune of borrowing one of these 9.5mm films and from it made new negative and positive prints. These prints are held in the archive’s climate-controlled vault at the West Sussex Record Office.

A Lowland Cinderella was made in the Shoreham ‘Glasshouse’ studio by Progress in the summer of 1921 and released at the end of that year. It is a modern version of the fairy tale with Joan Morgan as the vulnerable Hester Stirling. She overcomes the evil schemes of Dr Torpican and finds true love. The film was made in the studio on the beach, on the near-by Downs and at the Metropol Hotel in Brighton. With a 35mm film print from the British Film Institute, this version of the film was made in 1996 by the archive with an original score by Richard Durrant.

The Mayor of Casterbridge (1921) Sidney Morgan’s version of Thomas Hardy’s novel is the tale of a man who sells his wife and child but then changes his ways and makes a success of his life only to be disgraced by the revelation of his dark past. At the time the film was noted for its extensive use of locations in Dorset and Sussex. Like Little Dorrit, this film is an abridged 9.5mm version made from the 35mm original print. It is preserved by the archive at the University of Brighton and the West Sussex Record Office. The scanning and restoration work on the intertitles took place in 2016.

Tickets and info on all screenings available here

Venues include – The Marlipins Museum, The Shoreham Centre and Ropetackle Arts Centre. From 8th September 2023.