Director: Robert Stevenson

Cast

Mary Poppins is played by Julie Andrews.

Walt Disney went to go and see Julie Andrews in the play Camelot and backstage Walt invited Julie to Los Angeles so she could see what they were creating with the story of Mary Poppins and see if she wanted to take part in the production. He also invited Julie’s then husband to come along as well, he was Tony Walton who would become the set films set designer and costume designer.

Julie agreed to play Mary but at this time was pregnant, but when she told Walt he said he’s wait for her. Julie would end up bringing her newly born baby Emma to set.

Both Bert and Mr. Dawes Senior is played by Dick Van Dyke. Dick felt that Hollywood was only churning out less that reputable films and didn’t care for this, he wanted to be involved in something more wholesome. This appealed to Walt who felt the same and so after researching his prior work, offered him the role.

Jane Banks is played by Karen Dotrice, Karen kept her little orange hat when filming was over.

Michael Banks is played by Matthew Garber. Sadly Mathew would die all to soon at the young age of 21 due to a pancreatitis.

Matthew was not fond of heights so for the scenes when he had to be suspended on wires filming the scene where he’s laughing on the ceiling of Uncle Albert’s house he was given a dime for every take.

George Banks is played by David Tomlinson, who also voiced Marys umbrella. This wasn’t David’s only partnership with Disney, David would go on to perform in “Bedknobs and Broomsticks”, another great film. He also acted in “Love Bug”, another Disney film.

Winnifred Banks is played by Glynis Johns. Glynis was really hoping that she could play Mary but sadly that part had already been cast. She then said to Walt that she would only accept the role of Winnifred if she was given a song and so “Sister Suffragette” was written.

The Bird Woman is played by Jane Darwell. This would be Jane’s last performance as she sadly passed away a few years later.

Uncle Albert is played by Ed Wynn. This was not Ed’s first Disney role, he also voiced the Mad Hatter in the animated Alice in Wonderland.

Ellen is played by Hermione Baddeley.

Katie Nanna is played by Elsa Lanchester.

Admiral Boom is played by Reginald Owen.

The Constable is played by Arthur Treacher.

Mr. Dawes Junior is played by Arthur Malet.

Development

Diane, Walt Disney’s daughters read the Mary Poppins stories and she showed them to her father who decided that they could be turned into a great film. Walt then worked on acquiring the rights for the film, in order to do so he needed the permission of the author, Pamela Travers. She was not fond of the idea of her book being turned into a film, in fact for quite some time she resisted. There is actually a film all about Pamela and Walt and the making of Mary Poppins, it’s called “Saving Mr. Banks” and it explains how she gave her consent. It’s a wonderful film and highly recommend watching it.

In the end Pamela gave Walt the rights after he visited her personally in London, but she had conditions. The main one: no animation! This Walt ignored.

A plot had to be created for the film. There were lots of books written about the adventures of Mary, Jane and Michael but not an obvious through story so Walt and his team just picked out there favourite elements and wove them together.

Filming

This was Julie’s first film and the first scene she ever filmed for her very first film was the scene where Bert compliments Mary when they’re in the chalk drawing and Mary replies saying “Do you really think so?”

Audiences believe that Mary Poppins was shot in London, England, but it wasn’t it was created and filmed on sound stages. Even for the scenes where the characters are outside, like when you see Cherry Tree Lane or the park, that’s all actually inside. They make it look convincing that it’s outside, but it’s not.

All of the scenes while the characters are in the chalk scene where done against a black screen, with the same effect as if it were a green screen.

Peter Ellenshaw, who had worked on several other film prior to Mary Poppins, like “20,000 Leagues Under the Sea”, painted many oil and gauche image of the skyline of London which you can see during several shots in the film. For some scenes tiny holes were made inside the canvas where lights and smoke could be added in for effect.

The penguins were going to be humans but Walt thought the scene was boring with humans and detracted from the audience focusing on Bert and Mary so they thought that penguins look similar and added them to the scene instead. One of the 9 old men, Frank Thomas animated the penguins.

Props

The robin that Mary holds during the song “Spoonful of Sugar” was a lot more intricate and special than first believed. Julie had to hold the bird in just the right way in order to conceal the wires that left the bird and went up Mary’s arm, these controlled what the bird did. The bird whistling during the song was also done by Julie Andrews.

The technology of audio-animatronics was very new and Disney was the leader in such technology because they were using it in the Disney parks.

St Pauls Cathedral snow globe – there are only 3 in existence, the real one that was made for the 1964 Mary Poppins film, one that was made for Mary Poppins Returns and an extra. The original snow globe was found many years later in a bin by a janitor who took a liking to it and kept it on his shelf in his cupboard. It wasn’t in great condition because the metal stand the snow globe sits on was lost.

For many years Mary Poppins carpet bag was missing but it’s recently been found. It had been sitting in someone’s attic 40 years. The owner of the bag had won it in a competition set up by Kraft chocolates. The winner would win the bag and 10grand. Now the bag lives in the Disney Archives.

The carousel horse is made out of fibreglass with wood and metal elements and then it was painted. Mary’s horse was painted by Tony Walton and Bert’s horse was painted by Peter Ellenshaw. Bert’s horse was made to look like Dick Van Dyke, which even he recognises, he says it’s all in the chin. Mary’s horse doesn’t look like her but it looks exactly like a horse Mary would ride.

Music

The music for Mary Poppins was written by the Sherman Brothers, Robert and Richard Sherman and it took 3 years to write and perfect. They wrote 32 songs, but only 14 of them made them into the film. Some of the songs written for the film but didn’t make it were titled “The Land of Sand”, “North Pole Polka”, “Tiki Town” and more. One song they wrote was “Beautiful Briny Sea” that ended up in “Bedknobs and Broomsticks” so not all songs went to waste.

When writing the music for the film Richard and Robert didn’t have a script which told them which scenes would need music, they just had the books which were written by P.L Travers which is why they wrote so much music.

Richard and Robert wrote a song called “Admiral Boom” which would be sung by Admiral Boom, but Walt decided that he didn’t need a song because he wasn’t crucial to the story so his song was removed but Irwin Kostal, the musical director liked the melody of the song so much that it was used as the theme tune from Admiral Boom.

“Feed the Birds” was the first song written for the film because it was the easiest to write. It’s subject matter was just about simply being a good person. Richard has said that this is the true theme of the film. Feed the Bird was Walt’s favourite song, this was also the song that sealed the deal between Mary Poppins and the Sherman Brothers

Don DaGradi, another man working on the film, drew a sketch of a little chimney sweep, he had drawn, he had gotten inspiration from the original text. The Sherman brothers saw this drawing and were inspired by it and from there “Chim Chim Cheree” was written.

“Through the Eyes of Love” is the name of a song written by Richard Sherman and it was the only song that Julie Andrews wasn’t particularly fond of and so she mentioned that to Walt and so the song was removed.

The idea for “A Spoonful of Sugar Helps the Medicine Go Down” came from Robert’s son Jeff coming home from school and telling his Dad how he had the Polio vaccine at school and it was fine because they had put it on a sugar cube.

Walt wanted a dance number which meant that choreography was a big part of the film, like for the songs like “Step In Time” and “Supercalifragilisticexpialidocious”. Marc Breaux and Dee Dee Wood did the choreography for the film, this was the first film they worked on.

Dee Dee did the choreography for the penguin dancing scene. So Bert and Mary would know where to look, the props guys made wooden penguins on stands to show them where to look. At the end of filming as a memento Dee Dee kept the penguins.

It was Tony Walton who suggested to sing Supercalifragilisticexpialidocious” backwards but not backwards as you would expect. Mary says “Dociousaliexpiisticfragilcalirupus” which is just reversing specific words in the original word and then combining them together.

Richard Sherman played the kazoo that can be heard when we are introduced to the penguins in the chalk drawing. The whole piece of music playing then, was recorded and then sped up and that’s what we hear in the film.

Release and Reception

Mary Poppins was released in 1964 and the premiere was a big occasion. It debuted at the Chinese Theatre in Hollywood. Snow White and her dwarfs were there, the penguins were there and so were the cast and some of the makers of the film including Walt Disney. P.L Travers was also there.

It was a hit from start to finish with successful review written after successful review.

Julie Andrews won a Golden Globe for “Best Musical Actress”. This beat Audrey Hepburn who was starring in “My Fair Lady”. What’s interesting about this is that Julie wanted the part in “My Fair Lady” and if she had been offered that part she wouldn’t have done Mary Poppins, it’s funny how life works out.

“Mary Poppins” the film, then received no less than 13 Academy Award nominations for things like “best score”, “best animation”, “best visual effects” and more. The film won four Academy Awards for “Best Original Music Score”, “Best Visual Effects” “Best Film Editing” and Julie Andrews won “Best Actress”. Incredible!

Personal Opinion

This film is incredibly wonderful, a pure delight from start to finish. It’s hard to know what to say about this film other than it’s supercalifragilisticexpialidocious.

Let me know your thoughts in the comments bellow.