Infobox soap character

colour =Television colour|Neighbours

name = Allan Steiger

series=Neighbours

first = 4 March 2004

Episode 4429

last = 13 July 2007

Episode 5255

cause = Moved to Cairns, Queensland after marrying Janelle Timmins.

nickname =

Chief Wiggum (by Dylan)

"The Package" (by Janae)

"Big Al" (by Stingray)

alias =

gender = Male

age = 47

born = 1960

death =

occupation = Police Officer

title = Senior Sergeant.

family =

spouse = Christine Rodd (divorced)

Janelle Timmins (2007-present)

children = Pepper Steiger

Dylan Timmins (Stepson)

Scott Timmins (Stepson)

Janae Timmins (Stepdaughter)

Anne Baxter (Stepdaughter)

Bree Timmins (Adoptive stepdaughter)

relatives =

episode =

portrayer = Joe Clements

creator =

residence = Cairns

Senior Sergeant Allan Frederick Steiger was a fictional character in the Network Ten soap opera "Neighbours", portrayed by actor Joe Clements.

Allan (most commonly referred to by his last name) is the father of Pepper (played by Nicky Whelan), who was introduced onto the show in October 2006. Before her introduction, his ex-wife Christine (Trudy Hellier) was also introduced, as Janae Hoyland's (Eliza Taylor-Cotter) new boss. He married Janelle Timmins in episode 5255 after which they left. This episode aired on 13 July 2007, while on that same day the BBC broadcast the episode where Steiger left for the Solomon Islands for several months.

Character's background

tuart Parker

Steiger was initially a recurring character on Neighbours. When he was first introduced, he was only at the rank at Senior Constable. Stuart Parker (Blair McDonough) decided to join the police force, and Steiger was the instructor for his course. Steiger and Stuart clashed at each other, Steiger thinking that Stuart wasn't taking it seriously enough. He gave Stuart one last chance at it. Stuart was assigned to assist with police security at a football match, being observed by Steiger. After a few more tasks, Stuart gave up and knocked out Steiger, leaving the course. Steiger visited him later, telling him that he had a commitment problem, but also had a lot of potential, so if he showed up at training the next day, they could forget about all of the previous events.

Liljana Bishop

Steiger started up some self-defence classes for the women of Erinsborough, attended by a few of the women of Ramsay Street; Lyn Scully (Janet Andrewartha), Susan Smith (Jackie Woodburne) and Liljana Bishop (Marcella Russo). Steiger started to give Liljana some attention, which she seemed to enjoy. Liljana soon learned that her husband, David (Kevin Harrington) was spying on her. When she caught him, Liljana insisted that she was just having fun and wanted to learn a new skill, and therefore David has nothing to worry about. David still grew suspicious, as Liljana had planned out a new skimpy outfit. Steiger was impressed with her new outfit, and he thought that Liljana was becoming interested in him. Later on, Liljana met Steiger outside the pub and he asked her to join him, but added that he knew a secluded spot down the coast where they could be alone together. Liljana quickly turned him down, though her daughter, Serena (Lara Sacher), witnessed it and jumped to the wrong conclusion. David, himself, hired a young, female personal trainer, Krystal, in the hope that he could get fit and get Liljana more attracted to him. Liljana saw them together, and, like David, jumped to the wrong conclusion.

After promotion

Stuart passed his training eventually and became a permanent member of the police force. For that, Steiger was also promoted to Senior Sergeant. One of his first investigations as Senior Sergeant was the Lassiter's fire of 2004, and the discovery of the body of Gus Cleary (Ben Barrack) in the wreck of the pub. Steiger tried to prove that he was murdered by Boyd Hoyland (Kyal Marsh), though there was lack of evidence and the case was dropped. Stuart, meanwhile, had problems of his own, as his injuries in the fire blinded him. Stuart didn't want to lose his job, Steiger offered Stuart a desk job, answering calls. Stuart was happy to accept it, and quickly proved his worth when he came up with a plan to catch some criminals with outstanding warrants. Stuart phoned the criminals and told them they had won a jet-ski and they had to go to the community hall (which was being used as a temporary location for the Coffee Shop and Pub) and collect it. This plan was possibly taken from an episode of "The Simpsons".

Over several months, Steiger investigated several crimes involving the Ramsay Street residents, such as Dylan Timmins (Damien Bodie) releasing the dogs at the pound, and David Bishop being framed by Paul Robinson (Stefan Dennis). He also helped out Stuart after his eyesight was restored. Steiger advised Stuart to see the police counsellor, as he was becoming paranoid, suspecting the worse in everyone. It turned out that Stuart had the right to be paranoid, as his own fiancée, Sindi Watts (Marisa Warrington), was suffering from a mental illness. Stuart struggled to cope after Sindi was sent to a mental hospital, and Steiger allowed him some time off.

The Timminses

Later on during the year, there were more crimes, such as the sudden disappearance of Izzy Hoyland (Natalie Bassingthwaighte), and Dylan robbing the service station, with Stingray (Ben Nicholas) involved. Stuart went undercover after they were sent to prison, with Roo Hausman also in prison, Dylan's enemy who set the brothers up. They managed to get out, as Dylan got a recording of Roo owning up to the crime. The brothers and Stuart both got out. Steiger also barged into the re-wedding of Janelle and Kim Timmins (Brett Swain), with Kim being involved in a business manufacturing copyright-infringing DVDs. Kim escaped, evading arrest, but tearing apart the Timmins's again.

Robert Robinson

Paul Robinson was being targeted by a mysterious stalker who planted the bomb in the plane, killing Liljana, David and Serena Bishop, but meaning to kill Paul. Several months later, it was revealed to be Robert Robinson (Adam Hunter), one of Paul's twin sons, who was pretending to be his brother Cameron (also Adam Hunter), who was in a coma. When Robert's plans were finally revealed, Steiger turned to Katya Kinski (Dichen Lachman), the girl Robert had been dating, for answers. Katya was struggling to cope and Robert held his father hostage in an abandoned mine shaft, before disappearing. Paul survived, and, wanting to track his son down, he arranged a fake wedding to ex-wife Gail (Fiona Corke), Robert's mother, luring Robert to the wedding. Steiger was at the wedding, and Robert showed up, shot Paul (while wearing a bullet-proof vest), then was shortly arrested. Robert was then taken away to a secure psychiatric unit.

Cameron, the innocent twin, stayed in Erinsborough with Paul and Elle (Pippa Black). This was shortly led to a case of mistaken identity, and Max Hoyland (Stephen Lovatt) ran down Cameron, believing that Robert had escaped from prison, and was trying to kidnap Katya. Steiger investigated it and Max was arrested for manslaughter when Cameron later died. When Max might have got away with it, Elle decided to mess with his mind, making it seem like he was going insane. Max later admitted himself to the psychiatric ward at the hospital. Max later ran way and disappeared on a bus, with Steiger breaking the news to Steph (Carla Bonner).

Pepper & Christine

Heidi, known as Pepper, Steiger's daughter, moved into Ramsay Street in October 2006. She took Steiger by surprise when she introduced him to her fiancée, Frazer Yeats (Ben Lawson), unaware that their engagement was fake, to get a room at Number 30 to share and pay less rent. Steiger did a police check on Frazer, and the results proved that Frazer Yeats doesn't exist, he left it to his ex-wife, Christine Rodd, to break the news to Pepper. Frazer explained to Pepper that he'd changed his name to get a new identity and get away from his family. Steiger and Christine still weren't convinced that he could be trusted with their daughter, so he took Frazer away on a camping trip, along with Will Griggs (Christian Clark). It was there that the emotional side of Steiger was revealed, revealing that he cried himself asleep every night over his ex-wife Christine.

Erinsborough Hospital fire

Steiger led the investigation to the Erinsborough Hospital fire when Sky Mangel (Stephanie McIntosh) was giving birth to her daughter, Kerry (Claudine Henningsen). It was revealed that Teresa Cammeniti (Hannah Greenwood) started the fire, but when Sky's baby was stolen, it wasn't Teresa who had taken it. It was either Dylan or Stingray. Stingray couldn't remember what happened, and Dylan was away on a business trip. It was revealed in the end to have been Stingray. Dylan, who, instead of going away on the trip, took Kerry from Stingray who was passed out. Elle found Dylan and took Kerry back from Dylan to Sky, though never revealed herself to Sky. Dylan later confessed to Sky that it was him.

Katya Kinski and Guy Sykes

In the last few months of 2006, Guy Sykes (Fletcher Humphrys) started blackmailing Katya Kinski, revealing her past about stealing cars. After Guy shot Katya after failing to give him $100,000, Steiger led the investigation. She was arrested, but granted bail time. During this time, Guy returned, after having fled after she shocked him with a defibrillator. Guy returned in the 2006 season finale, and held Steph Hoyland, Charlie Hoyland (Aaron Aulsebrook-Walker), Toadie Rebecchi (Ryan Moloney), Zeke Kinski (Matthew Werkmeister) and Katya herself hostage. Toadie tackled Guy, setting everyone else free. Toadie then ran out, however Guy shot Toadie from inside. The only way Katya could escape jail time is if she presents evidence from her former criminal partners. She tried to do this, though was beaten up by them. By this, Katya was set free.

Janelle Timmins

Steiger began dating Janelle Timmins, after being convinced by Christine. He was nervous about revealing to his co-workers about his girlfriend, due to the Timmins's criminal record. He took Janelle out on several dates, but let work get in the way. After Janelle mentioned that she was once on the cover of "Playboar" magazine, he agreed to take her on a pig hunting trip, where they caught Katya breaking her bail conditions. They continued to date each other, until Paul Robinson framed Janelle by getting Alec Skinner (Kevin Summers), a fellow police officer, to plant copyright-infringing DVDs in her garage. Steiger let Janelle go, until she jumped to the conclusion that it was Paul, and she punched him. Paul got a restraining order against Janelle. Paul eventually forgave Janelle, though kept the restraining order on her. Steiger and Janelle are married.

The Solomons

In April 2007, Steiger got an opportunity of a life time. He was selected to work with the police in the Solomon Islands. Janelle did not handle the news well, afraid of losing someone else she loved and so he promised he would be back because he loved her. While having dinner with Bree (Sianoa Smit-McPhee), she dropped the hint of an excellent way to keep her aware that he was returning. He set up his train set and inside one of the carriages, Janelle found his grandmother's engagement ring. He told her to hold onto it, because when he returned, he would ask her to marry him. He left the next day for the Solomon Islands, assuring Janelle that he would return. When he did return, he had a mild form of malaria, since his jabs had been given by fake doctor Charlotte Stone, who had given an incorrect dosage.

Adam Rhodes

When he returned, he saw that his daughter Pepper was dating a young Englishman named Adam. He thought that there was something fishy about him. Pepper couldn't stand it any longer after Adam left Erinsborough, and avoided her father at any cost. He then told her to move to Cairns with him, to leave her troubles behind, but she refused, although father and daughter did make it up before Steiger left.

Exit