Adapted and arranged for this production by Rachael Gates, Noel Koran and Rhoda Levine

presented by the Northwestern University School of Music

April 26, 2003

7:30 P.M.

Sigma Alpha Epsilon, Levere Memorial Temple

Northwestern University

Evanston, Illinois [End Page 592]

Cast

Arthur, baritone a young slave Flora, mezzo-soprano his mother Godfrey, bass a slave owner and Arthur's father Edward Clark, baritone a slave owner Theodona, soprano his wife Tambo, tenor a slave and friend of Arthur Berta, soprano a slave and lover of Arthur Samuel, baritone a white man, jealous of Arthur Opechee, mezzo-soprano a young Mashpee woman, lover of Arthur Deborah Metcalfe, soprano a white woman who accuses Arthur of assaulting her Jennison, tenor a white vigilante Isaac Frasier, bass a notorious Irish thief, in prison Irish Boy, tenor also in prison The Bailiff, bass The Chief Justice, tenor The Reverend Maccarty, bass

Synopsis: Arthur, a slave in Massachusetts, returns home after escaping to sea. To the horror of his mother, Flora, he is sold by Godfrey, his owner and father, to another slave owner, Mr. Clark. As his friends Berta and Tambo talk of freedom, Arthur speaks of his love for Opechee, a woman of the Mashpee. Accused of raping Deborah Metcalfe, a white woman, Arthur is imprisoned and finally confronted at his trial by the Chief Justice of the court. Although he protests that he is not guilty of rape, he is condemned to be hanged and goes to his death defiantly singing of freedom. [End Page 593]

Arthur:

Ship Ahoy!

I sailed out of Nantucket

On a sloop with Captain Coffin.

I saw the devil's convoy

On its way to Cape Coast Castle

And old Calabar

Where the salty trade winds

Were the only thing we heard.

Back from the West Indies

Where I swigged cane-cutter's rum.

Following the Ides of March.

Voices of women in the night,

The galley din boiled with fistfights.

Ship Ahoy!

Flora:

I almost lost my head.

I dreamt you were dead.

Arthur:

Momma, I was so near

I could see the smoke

From your chimney

Drifting down to me.

A fire of leaves.

Flora:

I thought you were dead

And almost talked you out of my head.

Arthur:

I was on the other side of the hill

With friends who saved my skin.

I was with the Mashpees

Among the birch trees.

All their warriors are dust

Among the songs of ghosts

Dreaming of tomahawks

Against muskets.

Divided in my blood,

I still saw the smoke

From your chimney

Drifting down to me

In a fire of leaves.

Godfrey:

So,

My property returned.

Arthur:

Major Godfrey—

Your name is God, Mister

And Master.

Godfrey:

Yes—My property is back.

Arthur:

I have been out to sea

With Captain Coffin.

With Captain Coffin

I was almost free.

Flora:

Why can you not look

Him in the eye, Sir?

Why do you not see

Each other?

Arthur:

Ship Ahoy!

I am still on my sea legs

And can hear the dark swish

Of cane-cutter's rum in the wooden kegs.

Halfway somewhere out there,

I was no longer on earth.

Captain Coffin's sloop

Sailed past the Cape,

And I swear I could see

A pirate's ghost ship

Wedged on a sandbar,

And the sea was bright

With split bags of gold.

I was being born backwards. [End Page 594]

Godfrey:

You were always more trouble

Than you are worth.

All of your thieving

And only God knows what . . .

Arthur:

And Momma, I have touched

A woman—

Many other women.

Godfrey:

I am going to sell you

Out of the country,

To the West Indies

Or Carolina.

Flora:

You swore Never,

You said Never.

Godfrey:

But with your son,

I could never bid

A day's work out of him.

Flora:

My son?

My son...

Project MUSE Mission

Project MUSE promotes the creation and dissemination of essential humanities and social science resources through collaboration with libraries, publishers, and scholars worldwide. Forged from a partnership between a university press and a library, Project MUSE is a trusted part of the academic and scholarly community it serves.