Young New York City Opera soprano Erie Mills, who will debut at La Scala later this season, sang the title role of Donizetti's "Lucia di Lammermoor" with Tulsa Opera, in a production which closed Saturday night, establishing herself with an interpretation entirely her own in her debut of the role.

Her agile, silken coloratura and fluid stage presence became choice casting, given stage director Rhoda Levine's concept, which necessitated a new production designed by Neil Peter Jampolis.

The spare approach, minimum sets teamed with atmospheric background projections, lent itself to artistic distancing and emphasis of the bel canto aspects of this sombre tale of the Scottish moors.

Even in the blood-drenched mad scene, after Lucia has killed Arturo (the man she is forced to marry by a brother concerned only with the Lammermoor family fortunes), the soprano convinced in a fey, split-from-reality lyricism.

This Midsummer-Night's-Dream treatment is not what a dramatic soprano of darker timbre and more powerful voice might have done, but this singer achieved a valid, consistent portrayal that carried its own kind of power, with clarity and quality. And the durable sextet of this act was all that it should have been.

Tenor Jerry Hadley, singing the role of Lucia's lover, Edgardo, with fire, projection and emphathy, was scarcely less impressive, his impassioned lines blooming in every reach of Tulsa's Chapman Music Hall on opening night of the three performances presented.

The two were winning as they pledged their vows at the close of Act I, and Hadley's grief gave the final act its impact.

The role of their nemesis, the plotting Enrico, was superbly sung by baritone Frederick Burchinal. This demanding, catalyst role requires much singing and Burchinal's delivery was unflagging. The fourth of the young principals, bass Kevin Langan, as the peace-making Raimondo, was a revelation.

His superb voice quality and range, projecting fully on lowest notes, was always characterized by clarity and pitch. He, too, will ascend rapidly.

Some lesser roles were well done: mezzo-soprano Shinja Kim as Alisa, tenor Gualtiero Negrini as Arturo, tenor Leonard Eagleson as Normanno.

Bright costumes of the wedding party relieved the sombre quality.

Anton Coppolla conducted with authority. BIOG: NAME:

Archive ID: 174955