Rhoda Levine News

Chicago Opera Theater Names Lawrence Edelson as New General Director

After a three-month nationwide search, the Chicago Opera Theater Board of Directors has named veteran artistic leader and stage director Lawrence Edelson as next General Director of the company.

BWW Speaking Out: Creating a New American Operatic Canon

Why do we need a program to train opera composers and librettists? Mozart and Da Ponte--together, creators of LE NOZZE DI FIGARO, DON GIOVANNI and COSI FAN TUTTE--didn't go through training programs!

American Lyric Theater Announces $150,000 Grant for Opera Composers and Librettists

Lawrence Edelson, Producing Artistic Director of American Lyric Theater (ALT), announced today that the company has been awarded a $150,000 grant from The Andrew W. Mellon Foundation to support capacity building and the national expansion of the company's Composer Librettist Development Program (CLDP), the only full-time professional mentorship initiative for emerging operatic writers in the country.

American Lyric Theater Seeks Submissions for Composer Librettist Development Program

Applications are now being accepted for the 2013-14 Composer Librettist Development Program (CLDP). Founded in 2007 and recognized for artistic excellence by both the Andrew W. Mellon Foundation and the National Endowment for the Arts, the CLDP is the only full-time professional mentorship initiative for operatic writers in the country.

American Lyric Theater Presents THE LIVING LIBRETTO at National Opera Center Tonight

American Lyric Theater presents the next installment in its popular series, The Living Libretto, at the National Opera Center, tonight, February 6th, 2013. Featuring guest actors from the Broadway and off-Broadway stage, each event is the culminating reading of extensive libretto workshops conducted for new operas currently being written by ALT Resident Artists.

American Lyric Theater Announces National Expansion of Composer Librettist Development Program

Lawrence Edelson, Producing Artistic Director of American Lyric Theater, announced today the national expansion of the company's core initiative, The Composer Librettist Development Program (CLDP). Through the use of newly acquired HD teleconferencing technology, gifted emerging artists with an interest in writing for the opera stage will be able to participate in the CLDP, regardless of where they live in the country.

American Lyric Theater Announces National Expansion of Composer Librettist Development Program

Lawrence Edelson, Producing Artistic Director of American Lyric Theater, announced today the national expansion of the company's core initiative, The Composer Librettist Development Program (CLDP). Through the use of newly acquired HD teleconferencing technology, gifted emerging artists with an interest in writing for the opera stage will be able to participate in the CLDP, regardless of where they live in the country.

American Lyric Theater Announces National Expansion of Composer Librettist Development Program

Lawrence Edelson, Producing Artistic Director of American Lyric Theater, announced today the national expansion of the company's core initiative, The Composer Librettist Development Program (CLDP). Through the use of newly acquired HD teleconferencing technology, gifted emerging artists with an interest in writing for the opera stage will be able to participate in the CLDP, regardless of where they live in the country.

American Lyric Theater Presents THE LIVING LIBRETTO Based on the Book THE LONG WALK, at National Opera Center, 2/6

American Lyric Theater presents the next installment in its popular series, The Living Libretto, at the National Opera Center, Wednesday February 6th, 2013. Featuring guest actors from the Broadway and off-Broadway stage, each event is the culminating reading of extensive libretto workshops conducted for new operas currently being written by ALT Resident Artists.

American Lyric Theater Awarded Two $15,000 Grants by OPERA America

American Lyric Theater (ALT) has been awarded two grants of $15,000 each from OPERA America's THE OPERA FUND for Repertoire Development. Announced earlier today by OPERA America, the grants are for two operas in development at ALT: La Reina by composer Jorge Sosa and librettist Laura Sosa Pedroza; and The Long Walk, by composer Jeremy Howard Beck and librettist Stephanie Fleischmann based on Brian Castner's critically acclaimed book of the same name.

American Lyric Theater's THE GOLDEN TICKET Live Recording Released Today

American Lyric Theater (ALT) announces that the live recording of its first commissioned opera, The Golden Ticket, a comic opera by Peter Ash and Donald Sturrock based on Roald Dahl's Charlie and the Chocolate Factory, is set for release from Albany Records on Amazon.com and on CD today, December 1, 2012.

American Lyric Theater's THE GOLDEN TICKET Live Recording Available for Pre-Order

American Lyric Theater (ALT) announces that the live recording of its first commissioned opera, The Golden Ticket, a comic opera by Peter Ash and Donald Sturrock based on Roald Dahl's Charlie and the Chocolate Factory, is now available for pre-order from Albany Records on Amazon.com. The Golden Ticket will be officially released on CD this December 1, 2012.

American Lyric Theater Announces 2011-2012 Resident Artists

American Lyric Theater (ALT) announces that eight new Resident Artists have been selected for the company's nationally acclaimed Composer Librettist Development Program (CLDP) in New York City.

ALT Announces App. Deadline for Composers, Librettists and Playwrights

American Lyric Theater is now accepting applications for the 2011-2012 Composer Librettist Development Program (CLDP), open to eligible composers, librettists and playwrights.

NEA Awards $20,000 Grant to American Lyric Theater

Rocco Landesman, Chairman of the National Endowment for the Arts, announced earlier this week that American Lyric Theater has been recommended for a grant of $20,000 to support The Composer Librettist Development Program.

Opera in Eden Returns to Symphony Space 6/2

Lawrence Edelson, Producing Artistic Director of American Lyric Theater (ALT), has announced that OPERA IN EDEN, an evening of one act operas written by Resident Artists from ALT's Composer Librettist Development Program, will return to the Leonard Nimoy Thalia at Symphony Space on Thursday, June 2nd, 2011, at 7:00 PM.

American Lyric Theater Calls For Applications For CLDP, Deadline 6/1

American Lyric Theater is now accepting applications for the 2011-2012 Composer Librettist Development Program (CLDP), open to eligible composers, librettists and playwrights.

ALT Accepts Applications for Composer Librettist Development Program

American Lyric Theater (ALT) has announced that the application period for the 2011-2012 Composer Librettist Development Program (CLDP) is now open to eligible composers, librettists and playwrights.

ALT Announces Three-Year Grant from The Andrew W. Mellon Foundation

American Lyric Theater (ALT) has been selected as a recipient of a three-year grant from The Andrew W. Mellon Foundation in the amount of $90,000.