Procurement Summary

Country : Bangladesh

Summary : Repair Work for Office Building, Boundaries of Office, Mosjid, School and D Type Buildings at Bwdb Colony under the Project of "River Bank Protection Work at Ulania-Gabindapur Area under Mehendiganj U...

Deadline : 17 May 2022

Other Information

Notice Type : Tender

TOT Ref.No.: 65949033

Document Ref. No. : Barishal/ADP/ULA/2021-22/T-3/630, dt.- 27-04-2022

Competition : NCB

Financier : Self Financed

Purchaser Ownership : Public

Tender Value : Refer Document

Purchaser's Detail

Purchaser : BANGLADESH WATER DEVELOPMENT BOARD (BWDB)

Address: Barisal, City: Barisal, Thana: Barisal Sadar, District: Barishal - 8200, Country: Bangladesh

Name of Official Inviting Tender/Proposal : Dipak Ranjan Das

Phone No: 0431-72233, Fax No:

Bangladesh

Tender Details

Project Name : RIVER BANK PROTECTION WORK AT ULANIA-GABINDAPUR AREA UNDER MEHENDIGONJ UPAZILA FROM EROSION OF THE MEGHNA RIVER IN BARISAL DISTRICT

Information for Tenderer/Consultant :

Eligibility of Tenderer : a) Tenderer must be registered in the e-GP portal through CPTU along with valid and updated Trade License, Vat Registration and TIN certificate.b) Quoted amount of tenderer beyond 10% above/less than official estimated cost will be non- responsive.c) It is duty of contractor to submit all the documents freshly (without corrupted). If any documents get corrupted and evaluation committee could not able to open the file, no claim from the tenderer will be entertained regarding the file.d) Vat & IT will be deducted as per the prevailing government rate. No extra claim will be entertained in this regard.e) Tender evaluation will be done following the latest gazette /circular from CPTU.f) A detailed list of work in hand /ongoing works duly signed by the tenderer must be submitted.g) If any kind of obstacles/structures is needed to dismantle to execute the work as per design and specification the tenderer will do this at his/her own arrangement and cost. No extra claim will be entertained in this regard.h) If BWDB owned/acquired land is not sufficient to execute the work as per design and specification the tenderer will do this at his/her own arrangement and cost.i) Photo and video must have to be taken by the contractor at a different angle during prework and post-work measurement and submitted to the PE. No extra claim will be entertained in this regard.j) All other criteria stated in the tender document.k) Detail turnover calculation sheet and Ongoing work mentioning the name of work, PE name etc. (year wise over the last three years) duly signed by the Tenderer must be submitted with the tender.

Brief Description of Works : BSL/2019-2020/ULA/WD-22/ARepair Work for Office Building, Boundaries of Office, Mosjid, School and D Type Build...

Documents