Ulania Map — Satellite Images of Ulania

original name: Ulānia

geographical location: Patuakhali Zl, Barisal Div, Bangladesh, Asia

geographical coordinates: 22° 12' 0" North, 90° 29' 0" East

detailed map of Ulania and near places

Welcome to the Ulania google satellite map! This place is situated in Patuakhali Zl, Barisal Div, Bangladesh, its geographical coordinates are 22° 12' 0" North, 90° 29' 0" East and its original name (with diacritics) is Ulānia. See Ulania photos and images from satellite below, explore the aerial photographs of Ulania in Bangladesh. Ulania hotels map is available on the target page linked above.

Do you like this map? Link to it or recommend it!

Register at Ulania or add new placemark for Ulania.

Get your personal map homepage and much more for free.

Ulania hotel reservations

Book hotel in Ulania online and save money

Ulania hotels »

Browse & Book hotels in Bangladesh »

Ulania hotels – sortable list of all Ulania hotels »

Search for hotels in

Check-in date

Check-out date

Ulania hotels: low rates, no booking fees, no cancellation fees.

Maplandia.com in partnership with Booking.com offers highly competitive rates for all types of hotels in Ulania, from affordable family hotels to the most luxurious ones. Booking.com, being established in 1996, is longtime Europe’s leader in online hotel reservations.

At Maplandia.com you won't be charged any booking fees, cancellation fees, or administration fees – the reservation service is free of charge. The reservation system is secure and your personal information and credit card is encrypted.

We have put together also a carefully selected list of recommended hotels in Ulania, only hotels with the highest level of guest satisfaction are included.

Ulania hotels map

The location of each Ulania hotel listed is shown on the detailed zoomable map. Moreover, Ulania hotel map is available where all hotels in Ulania are marked. You can easily choose your hotel by location.

Ulania hotel reviews

Many photos and unbiased Ulania hotel reviews written by real guests are provided to help you make your booking decision.

Ulania hotel deals

Luxury hotels (including 5 star hotels and 4 star hotels) and cheap Ulania hotels (with best discount rates and up-to-date hotel deals) are both available in separate lists. Always bear in mind that with Maplandia.com and Booking.com the best price is guaranteed!

Hotels nearest to the centre of Ulania

Dhaka Regency Hotel & Resort Limited ***** (in Dhaka, distanced approximately 180 km)

Ginger Agartala *** (in Agartala, distanced approximately 200 km)

The Pride Hotel Kolkata ***** (in Kolkata, distanced approximately 210 km)

Swissôtel Kolkata ***** (in Kolkata, distanced approximately 210 km)

IndiSmart Hotel *** (in Kolkata, distanced approximately 210 km)

Hotel Lee International *** (in Kolkata, distanced approximately 210 km)

Casa Salt Lake - FE Block * (in Kolkata, distanced approximately 220 km)

more Ulania hotels »

Ulania car rental

Compare Ulania car rental offers of 500+ suppliers

We search over 500 approved car hire suppliers to find you the very best Ulania rental prices available. You can compare offers from leading car hire suppliers like Avis, Europcar, Sixt or Thrifty as well as budget rental deals from Holiday Autos, Budget, Economy, EasyCar, or 121 carhire. Choose Ulania car hire supplier according to your preferences. The booking process is secured and is made as simple as possible. You don't have to browse through several websites and compare prices to find cheap car rental in Ulania — we will do it for you!

Car hire Ulania and neighbourhood

Car rental offices nearest to Ulania the city centre. Compare Ulania car rental offers by various suppliers.

Kolkata - Airport car rental (distanced approximately 220 km)

Kolkata car rental (distanced approximately 390 km)

Bhubaneshwar car rental (distanced approximately 460 km)

Goa car rental (distanced approximately 670 km)

Hyderabad - Airport car rental (distanced approximately 1 400 km)

more offers and Ulania car hiring guide »

Flights from airports close to Ulania

Search and compare flights

Flights to nearby airports to Ulania »

Overview of flights to and from Bangladesh »

Flights search »

Compare prices on flights to and from the closest airports to Ulania. We search through offers of more than 600 airlines and travel agents. When you find a deal you want, we provide link to the airline or travel agent to make your booking directly with them. No middlemen. No added fees. You always get the lowest price.

Airports in Ulania and in the neighbourhood

Airports nearest to Ulania are sorted by the distance to the airport from the city centre. Follow relate airport hotel guides for accommodation booking.

Barisal Airport (distanced approximately 69 km) – airport hotels

Sandwip Airport (distanced approximately 87 km) – airport hotels

Khulna Airport (distanced approximately 120 km) – airport hotels

Chittagong Airport (distanced approximately 140 km) – airport hotels

Comilla Airport (distanced approximately 150 km) – airport hotels

Ulania 3D map in Google Earth

3D map of Ulania in Bangladesh

You can also dive right into Ulania on unique 3D satellite map provided by Google Earth. With new GoogLe Earth plugin you can enjoy the interactive Ulania 3D map within your web browser.

See the 3D map of Ulania, Bangladesh in Google Earth »

Get more out of Ulania map

Add placemark to Ulania

No placemark has been added to this place yet. You can add the first.

users registered in this area

No users is registered to this place. You can be the first.

recommend this page

If you would like to recommend this Ulania map page to a friend, or if you just want to send yourself a reminder, here is the easy way to do it. Simply fill in the e-mail address and name of the person you wish to tell about Maplandia.com, your name and e-mail address (so they can reply to you with gracious thanks), and click the recommend button. The URL of this site will be included automatically. You may also enter an additional message that will be also included in the e-mail.

Ulania google map link options

link to us:

small Ulania google map image link

medium Ulania google map image link

large Ulania google map image link