Lester B. “Mike” Pearson, was an influential diplomat, politician, and Canada’s 14th prime minister. As a diplomat, he laid the groundwork for NATO. He won the Nobel Peace Prize for his leadership at the United Nations during the Suez Crisis. As prime minister, Pearson promoted bilingualism, championed the new Canadian flag, and introduced important social measures, including the medicare system and the Canada Pension Plan.

Pearson was born in Ontario and educated at Victoria University (Toronto) and Oxford. He served in the First World War during which he acquired his nickname “Mike”. In 1928, he joined the Department of External Affairs and was posted to London and Washington during the Second World War.

As Minister of External Affairs from 1948 to 1957, Pearson supported American opposition to communist expansion and promoted multilateral initiatives to balance Canada’s relations with the United States. Present at the formation of the United Nations, he supported its intervention in the Korean conflict, and was President of the General Assembly in 1952. He played an active role in the formation of NATO and chaired the NATO Council in 1951-52.

When British, French, and Israeli forces invaded Egypt and seized the Suez Canal in 1956, Pearson devised a solution which led to their withdrawal and replacement by a UN peacekeeping force. In recognition of his role in the Suez crisis, he received the Nobel Peace Prize in 1957.

Following the defeat of the Liberal government in 1957, Pearson became leader of the Liberal Party. As prime minister from 1963 to 1968, he personally championed the creation of a distinctive Canadian flag. Concerned with the place of French Canada in Confederation, he promoted bilingualism and appointed the Royal Commission on Bilingualism and Biculturalism. His government introduced progressive social legislation including the Canada Pension Plan and the national medicare system.

As both a diplomat and politician, Pearson had a profound impact on Canada. Internationally he established Canada’s tradition of peacekeeping; nationally he introduced programs – medicare – and symbols – the Canadian “Maple Leaf” flag – which have come to be part of the Canadian identity.

-30-