Why Is Lester B Pearson Successful

313 Words | 2 Pages

Lester. B.Pearson was renowned as one of Canada 's greatest Prime Ministers. But the successes in his career overshadowed the few, but impactful failures. His title as Nobel peace prize winner and father of Canadian peacekeeping efforts acts as cover for his war motivated failures. From allowing the sale of toxic chemicals to the U.S. and allowing the testing of chemical weapons on canadian soil.

How Did Pierre Trudeau Shaped Canada

947 Words | 4 Pages

Pierre Trudeau was one of the iconic leaders of Canada who brought forth a new verve of energy in the country. It was his charismatic personality coupled with revolutionary ideas and beliefs that helped him climb up the ladder to serve the most prestigious and responsible chair of the country. Pierre Trudeau was born on October 18, 1919 in Montréal, Quebec. His terms of office were from April 20, 1968 to June 3, 1979 as well as March 3, 1980 to June 30, 1984. Pierre Trudeau had been a Liberal political party leader from 1968–1984.

Why Is Vimy Ridge Important In Canadian History

920 Words | 4 Pages

When Canada was created the Halifax explosion, Vimy ridge and the battle of the Somme were all significant events in Canadian history that played important roles in Canada's development and growth. It also carried on the legacy of Sir Wilfrid Laurier, one of Canada's most influential prime ministers. These crucial events played a vital role in shaping both Laurier’s leadership and Canada’s national identity as a whole. They all had their fair share of importance towards Canada showcasing their bravery, sacrifice and resilience during world war 1.

How Did John A. Macdonald Change Society

1414 Words | 6 Pages

John A. Macdonald was among one of the most influential figures in Canada's formation as a nation. Serving two terms as the Prime Minister of Canada, Macdonald exerted his influence on generations to follow by shaping a unified country and implementing controversial policies that altered countless lives. His innovative ideas drove monumental shifts in Canadian culture and provided a blueprint for leadership nationwide and beyond. This essay will display how John A. Macdonald transformed Canadian society through dedicated action, determination, noble values and aspirations— proving to be an exceptional leader who rose far beyond being simply the first Prime Minister of Canada.

Lester B Pearson Essay

638 Words | 3 Pages

How was Lester B. Pearson a force for positive change in Canada? Lester B. Pearson; his last name sounds very familiar. If you have ever left the country for a vacation with the family or to attend some business, you most likely went through Toronto Pearson International Airport. Today, Pearson International is one of the most well-known airports out there. Toronto Pearson Airport began construction in 1957–1964 and was officially opened for service on February 28th, 1964, by Prime Minister Lester B. Pearson.

William Mackenzie King's Conscription In Canada

1016 Words | 5 Pages

It takes a lot of courage and manpower to run a country especially such a big one like Canada. William Mackenzie-King was born 1874, he served as prime minister from 1921-30 and 1935-48. Considering he served for twenty-three year and he served as the longest standing Canadian PM through the great depression and a world war, he made few mistakes mostly not recognizing and acting during the depression. William Lyon Mackenzie King was a semi-successful prime minister considering the economic and military conflict that was present in Canada at the time of his reign. He had a close friendship with the American prime minister, Franklin Roosevelt ultimately helping the Canadian and british war effort.

Role Of War In Canada

963 Words | 4 Pages

Canada continued to have many peacekeeping/making missions, such as in the Korean War and the Suez crisis. Later the Canada view of peacekeeping was most notably damaged by the Somalian scandal where, according to the Canadian Encyclopedia “two Canadian paratroopers serving in Somalia beat and tortured a local teenager to death. A dozen more Canadian soldiers had been aware of the beating but did nothing to intervene” This scandal embarrassed Canada and hurt its reputation for peacekeeping. Canada’s history of peacekeeping has shaped it by helping build its reputation as a strong middle power, a player in the UN. Along with that it helped bolster national pride World War One, Two and peace have been defining themes in Canada’s history.

William Pitt: England's Greatest Prime Minister

464 Words | 2 Pages

William Pitt was considered by many England's greatest Prime Minister. He has held the record as England's youngest Prime Minister. Not only did he Lead England to war, but also Increased their Economy until his death. William Pitt the Younger is Britain's youngest Prime Minister.

How Did Pierre Trudeau Changed Canada?

1421 Words | 6 Pages

He changed Canada into an ideology of diversity, freedom, equality and humanity. His work and patriotism made Canada into one of the world’s greatest nations. Trudeau, brought multiculturalism into Canadian heritage. He made French and English the official languages of Canada, to please all Canadians. He gave Canada our own constitution.

Essay On Pierre Trudeau

676 Words | 3 Pages

Pierre Trudeau is definitely one of Canada’s most successful Prime Ministers. He was able to bring Canada together by implementing the Official Language Act resolving the October Crisis and repatriating, creating Canadian Constitution and the Charter of Rights and Freedom. Pierre Trudeau was born in Montreal on October 18, 1919. He was raised in a wealthy Montreal suburb of Outremont. As he growing up he and his sibling spoke both French and English.

Mackenzie King Essay

516 Words | 3 Pages

This of course included siding with the progressives who if Mackenzie wanted to capture the office would have to listen to their demands however bad it was for Canada, a willing participant or not. His unwillingness to see Arthur top him in anything political forcibly led Mackenzie King to gain the favor of the progressives, and in turn gave him yet another reason as to why he should hold on to the power of being Prime Minister and causing the King Byng affair. King absolutely loathed his nemesis Arthur Meighen. Kings hatred for Meighen prevented him

How Did Emily Murphys Influence Canada

374 Words | 2 Pages

Murphy's significance can be seen as the result of her actions developed Canada into a well respected and enhanced country due to the influence she had on the 1930, Senator Cairine Wilson, would not have been selected as a Senator, if Emily Murphy did not persevere during the Person's Case. Due to Emily Murphy and her actions, Cairine Wilson had an massive impact on Canada as she dealt with prominent problems within society. Cairine Wilson's dealings improved the country and began to solve troubles within the public. Canada emerged as a country being known as just and fair since Cairine Wilson petitioned the problems she thought were outstanding.

Lester B. Pearson's Impact On Canada

1259 Words | 6 Pages

To start with, Pearson is undoubtedly a symbol of Canadian excellence, seeing as his efforts and impact were exceptional. At that time, the world was undergoing war, crisis and prejudice so it is impressive that Pearson was “one of the 20th century’s most untiring and effective workers in the cause of world peace.” (Baldwin 39). This impressiveness may also be due to the similar traits Pearson holds to Mackenzie King whom is a previous great leader. Though, Pearson had his tragic flaws such as ________ _________, which did lead to his resignation from office and defeat by Diefenbaker.

William Lyon Mackenzie King's Impact On Canada

1054 Words | 5 Pages

William Lyon Mackenzie King, a man of glory, forever changed Canada’s constitution during the tumultuous nineteenth century and resolved all difficulties Canada faced on its way to becoming a strong, independent, and autonomous nation. His contributions and sanctions targeted all factors at the time and had interrelated effects on the construction of Canada. Unlike other Canadian politicians, King handled every crisis with thorough planning and achieved promising outcomes from unsolvable problems. It is without a doubt that King was the most influential figure in Canada’s development. His role in the autonomy, economic development, and social stability stands as solid evidence of the pioneering impacts he had on Canada’s advancement.

Mackenzie King And Sir John A. Macdonald's Analysis

1574 Words | 7 Pages

For a long time the debates had been going about how was the better prime minister of Canada. On the the top of most lists of best prime ministers are Mackenzie King and Sir John A. Macdonald. For example, according to the Expert Survey that was made in 2013 “Laurier came first, Macdonald second, and King third, but the difference in their overall scores was negligible”. Both prime ministers had a strong vision of the country that helped shaped Canada to become the country it is today(in 2015). Thesis: Sir John A.Macdonald was one of the founding fathers, but William Lyon Mackenzie King had to lead the country through the part of Depression and WWII, and they both have made different positive contributions to Canada and are highly respected