Recently, I was invited to create my own pair of customized sunglasses at Eyemart Express. Now available in the Austin & Dallas areas, the Eyemart Express Sun Center will be opening nationwide very soon. Here’s how it works!

Living in Texas, I don’t leave home without my sunglasses – year round. They are just as important to me as my car keys and phone. Truth be told, I have worn the same pair of sunglasses for almost 3 years. Once I find a pair I really like, I just don’t switch them out. But after seeing all the fun pairs of sunglasses that Eyemart Express Sun Center offered, I realized it was time for an upgrade.

Now I’m guessing you probably don’t think to go to an eye center to buy a pair of sunglasses unless you go there for prescription glasses. I certainly never thought to before this experience. But with Eyemart Expresses’ new Sun Center, you might think twice about where you buy your next pair of sunglasses.

Eyemart Express Sun Center

The Express Sun Center wants to help customers create sunglasses that meet their needs and lifestyles. By designing your own sunglasses, you can pick everything from frames to lenses, polarization and tint. For many, sunglasses are an important accessory, so why wouldn’t you want the opportunity to create a pair of sunglasses that reflect you & your personality?

Eyemart Express Sun Center: How it Works

Eyemart Express has created a guide to help you design the perfect pair of sunglasses that is right for you. The Sunprint guide will help you pick frames that will look best on your face shape. It also suggests colors that reflect your skin tone best and the best lens tint for not only your personality but what activities you plan on wearing your new glasses to. In other words, the Sunprint guide is the next best thing incase you don’t have your best friend shopping with you that day.

The day I visited, I was able to pick a pair of wayfarer-style sunglasses that we filled with a gold-tinted mirrored lens. I selected the frames to match my coppery-hair color, the highest UV-protection, since I am in the sun a lot, and the mirror finish, simply because they were fun and matched my personality.

One of best reasons to custom make your sunglasses at an Eyemart Express is that they can make them right then, in usually less than an hour. So you can drive home that day wearing your new shades.

I found the process to be easy and fun – and they were rather affordable compared to some designer sunglasses I have worn in the past.

Eyemart Express is located in over 150 stores nationwide and the Sun Center will be available in all of them. With over 2000 frames to choose from, the possibilities are endless!

Eyemart Express Sun Center Giveaway

Eyemart Express is giving my readers a chance to try their new Sun Center with a giveaway for a complete pair of sunglasses. Enter to win with the below entry form. Giveaway begins on June 14, 2016 and ends on June 24, 2016. A winner will be randomly drawn and emailed on June 25, 2016. Winner will have 48 hours to respond, or we will pick another winner. Good luck!

$150 Gift Certificate to Eyemart Express Sun Center

Disclosure: I was invited to try the Sun Center experience at Eyemart Express. I was not compensated for this article. All opinions are my own.