Normally when you have a TV star moving to films you seem him or her all over the place promoting their project

However, Reshmi Ghosh is not doing much talk about her film Bazaar-E-Husn which will release this Friday. The reason is that her film has been delayed for over eight years. The actor comments, “I have moved on since then and become a name in the small screen.”

Reshmi, who's currently a part of Buddha does not mind discussing her much-delayed project, "This is an adaption of Munshi Premchand‘s hit novel by the same name. It is about the growth of a young girl to woman. How she is oppressed by all and finally lands up in a kotha where the hero rescues her.”

When quizzed about the delay she says, “I don’t know I am sure the producer (A K Mishra) must have tried his level best. It has a big caste with Om Puri, Yashpal Sharma and Rajeshwari Sachdev. But you know how things happen. I am glad that it is finally seeing the light of day. ”

What we like about this actor is her pragmatic approach she has no major expectations of Bazaar-E-Husn, "Even if a small section of the audience watches the film. It will be tribute to the hard work we all put in. It will help audiences to see how much better I have grown over the years. Beyond that I don’t think it would be logical to expect more.”

As of now this babe is happy with her career in TV. “Back then when Bazaar-E-Husn first started I had won Miss India and films were my dream, but nothing concrete came along. And then luck changed with TV (Kyun Ki Saas Bhi Kabhie Bahu Thi, Karam Apna Apna and Savitiri.”

With not many Indian TV projects in hand the actor has found fame outside, "My shooting for Buddha(simulcast on Zee and DD) has wrapped up but the show is still on air. I am now busy doing telefilms for Bangladeshi broadcasters. I am a huge star there, thanks to my commercials . I guess Bengalis all over are very sweet people. ”However I might think of doing something in Mumbai very soon.”

We hope her much delayed movie brings her some luck and projects too.

Stay tuned to BollywoodLife for the latest scoops and updates from Bollywood, Hollywood, South, TV and Web-Series.