Reshmi Ghosh, better known as Bhumi from Kyunki Saas Bhi Kabhi Bahu Thi, talks about her serial, her boyfriend and how she is completely the opposite of her on screen character.

How do you relate to your character, Bhumi, on Kyunki Saas Bhi Kabhi Bahu Thi?

Bhumi and Reshmi are absolutely not similar at all! If you ask my friends the first thing they will say is that in no way is Reshmi related to Bhumi. Reshmi is totally different. If I were to describe myself I would just have to say that I'm absolutely the opposite of Bhumi. Then you would know exactly how Reshmi is.

Reshmi lives with her grandmother in Mumbai. The rest of her family lives in Kolkata.

At home there's my father, mother, my sister, my uncle and my aunty. My younger sister just got married. We have a joint family. We keep in touch over the phone. I talk to them everyday, we're always in touch. Family is a family and I miss them a lot. I miss stuff like the food and the people. I live with my Granny here because I can't stay alone. Thankfully she is here but I do miss my home town.

She has learnt a lot from her co-stars:<br> From the acting point of view I would say I have learnt from everybody. Even from people who are new in the profession. If there is something nice about a person I always pick it up. I've worked as an actress for 8-9 years. If I like something from Hiten Tejwani I pick it up from him. If I like something from Tulsi or KT I pick it up from her. Everyone has something nice. I try to observe and pick things up.

On the sets

I get along the most with Amit Tandon who plays my brother. I get along with Mouni (KT), Gunjan (Archita) and Naman (Nakul). They are all from Calcutta so we get on really well. But it's nothing like because we are Bengali or Punjabi we get along better; I get along with everyone. I feel the more I talk, the more I learn and the more I enjoy myself. I am not the type to just sit quietly in one corner. We are always all talking to each other. We gossip, watch films, surf the net or listen to music. During our breaks there is always something to do!

Would you like to do films?

There are many films in which I have played lead roles and I am waiting for them to release first. It's not like film opportunities are not coming in anymore. I am getting very good offers but right now my focus is Kyunki and Balaji. When other things didn't happen, Balaji made everything work out for me so I should be loyal to them. Right now there is nothing other than television for me. In a few years I would love to do films. That was my plan and the reason why I got into television. I always think before I do anything.

Was entering Miss India a conscious step towards moving on to acting?

I have been working since I was in Kolkata doing theatre, films and television. I've done loads of tele films, documentaries as well as ad films. Acting was always the focus behind everything. I've always loved acting. Initially I was very bad at it and I didn't know the things that one should know as an actor. I started learning through the workshops in theatre. The Miss India happened just like that and today I'm still acting. I love my profession.

When she's not busy acting, Reshmi loves to sing, dance and cook!

I love to sing. I sing whenever I can! I sing on the sets, I sing in the bathroom, I do stage shows. Now because of my work schedule it isn't possible, but when I was in my home town I would do shows with other film stars.

I love to sing, I love to dance, I love to sketch and I love to cook. Whenever I am in the mood I cook something. I love cooking Indian food because I've very fond of it. I've cooked continental. I'm also fond of Thai food and I try to cook that as well. I can cook anything. You give me a recipe I'll cook just the right taste for you!

Reshmi Ghosh on Amit Gupta, her boyfriend

I met him during my classes at Namit Kapoor. I had never planned on joining because I was already working in films. I had done theatre and workshops but somehow I liked the classes so I stuck on. Amit was actually my biggest reason for sticking on to the classes! I met him there. He was very hard working, very focused, very classical and very nice. That's what I liked. All this plus a little bit of sentiment worked for me! Now we are together.

The first time we met he fell in love with me at first sight! That's what he doesn't want to admit but I know the truth! At that point I was not at all looking for a relationship but his nature made me very fond of him and we became good friends. The first day he proposed he said "I want to marry you". Then he made me speak to his parents. That's how it happened.

My whole family knows about it. They are very positive about it. Initially they told me to wait for the right time because he was still working. We are just waiting for the time which our parents feel is right to get married.

Would she and Amit consider working together?

Why not? I have already done a play with him and we have worked together in workshops. Amit is very busy with theatre and is doing a show for TV as well on DD1. Anytime we are free we would love to work with each other. When the opportunity comes we will take it.

What kinds of roles would you like to do?

I am lucky because Bhumi is a very unique role according to me. Even Ekta has said that it is not a regular negative role. You can't really point her out as negative because she is not exactly evil. She's just very possessive about her parents. Her norms and conditions are clear in life.

I have always played a sober character like Tulsi is playing onscreen so anything different would be great. I would want to concentrate on comedy as well. That is something I have done on stage and not onscreen. People say I have a great presence on stage when I do comedy but I am not yet confident. I have to perform onscreen to prove myself. That is something I am looking forward to.

Who are your favourite actors?

When it comes to Bollywood I like Aamir Khan, Kajol and Madhuri Dixit. On TV I think Yash Tonk is very good actor. My Hiten Tejwani is a good actor. Smriti Irani too is a very good actor. Lastly I think I'm quite a good actor!

What do you like watching on TV?

I used to watch a lot of television before but now I don't get time. I used to watch Kyunki when I was in school. It's quite an interesting show and my family and I would sit down and watch it. I love comedy shows and I love to watch reality shows. I also like any good film. For me there is nothing like Indian, English or foreign language- if it is good I will watch it.

How do you spend your free time?

I love to talk. I love to go out. I love to eat! I'm very fond of eating and am quite a foodie. I like to listen to good music. When I'm free I go out for a drive or I meet my friends and family. And of course Amit is always there with me.

The actress is busy doing up her house.

Right now my house is being renovated. It's not my personal place; I'm renting it. There is not much I can change. I'm just changing a little bit of furniture here and there, the curtains and the set up of the kitchen. I'm very fond of plants so I'm getting some more in the house. Whatever little I can do staying here I am doing. Amit doesn't have the time to help out but if I wanted help I know he'd be there.

Glynn Alves & nbsp;

Tuesday, 1 May, 2007