She is a famous Indian actress and beauty queen who has played the role of Indrawati. She was crowned as Miss India Earth 2002.

Date of Birth: 20th July 1984

Age: 35 years old

Real Name: Reshmi Ghosh

Marital Status: Married

Height: 1.7 m

Personal life

She was born in Kolkata in West Bengal, India. She used to go to Carmel Convent School and then completed her graduation in Bachelor of Arts from Jogamaya Devi College in Kolkata. She was a shy girl in her earlier age but then she grew up to be a model and actress. She also has a younger sister at her home. She got married to Siddharth Vasudev who was his co-star in Shobha Somnath Ki in Kolkata. She got married to him on 1st February in the year 2013. They have also played the role of an on-screen couple in the serial, Buddha.

Career

She was a shy girl who was into her studies but then she participated in Miss India Earth competition in the year 2002. She got crowned in this competition and started getting roles for advertisements, Bollywood movies, and TV serials. She might not even be interested in modeling in her earlier life but then she developed interested in the modeling and entertainment industry. So, took part in the Miss India Earth where she became a winner. She started getting roles for various advertisements and she earned huge fame and money by working in different movies, TV serials, and ads.

More Information

Reshmi Ghosh has dusky skin features due to which she has been able to know as the beauty queen. She has played the role of Spirit in a TV serial with which she gained fame among the public. She has been married to her co-star. She is totally focused on her career and has made sure that she does her choice of work only. Every role she has played in movies or serials are quite unique and this has helped her to prove herself as a great actress. She doesn’t like to share much about her personal life but she stays connected with her fans. One can easily find her on Facebook and Instagram.

She stays connected with her fans and she really is thankful for the love and support provided to her by the public. She is an inspiration for those girls who might be under-confident to follow their dreams.