Constance of Aragon

Constance of Aragon, Queen of Hungary and Holy Roman Empress

Through her two marriages, Constance of Aragon gained a variety of royal titles – Queen of Hungary, Queen of Sicily, Queen of the Romans and Holy Roman Empress. By birth and her two marriages, she got to spend her life in several different countries – Spain, Hungary, Germany, and Italy. Constance was born around 1179 [read more]

Lost Kingdoms – Kingdom of Majorca

The Kingdom of Majorca was created in 1231 following King James I of Aragon’s conquest in 1229 of the Balearic Islands from the Muslim rulers. He ruled it in conjunction with the Crown of Aragon. The first Queen consort of Majorca was James’s second wife Violant of Hungary whom he married in 1235. His son [read more]

Queens Regnant – Maria of Sicily

Maria of Sicily was born on 2 July 1363 as the daughter of Frederick the Simple and Constance of Aragon. Her mother died shortly after her birth, possibly as a result of the childbirth. When Maria was nine, her father remarried to Antonia of Baux, but that marriage remained childless, and Antonia died the following [read more]

The assassination of Gertrude of Merania

Gertrude of Merania was born in 1185 to Berthold IV, Duke of Merania(part of the Holy Roman Empire) and Agnes of Rochlitz. Gertrude married Andrew, the younger son of King Béla III of Hungary. Andrew was in conflict with his elder brother King Emeric, and when Emeric became seriously ill, he had his four-year-old son [read more]

To provide the best experiences, we and our partners use technologies like cookies to store and/or access device information. Consenting to these technologies will allow us and our partners to process personal data such as browsing behavior or unique IDs on this site and show (non-) personalized ads. Not consenting or withdrawing consent, may adversely affect certain features and functions.

Click below to consent to the above or make granular choices. Your choices will be applied to this site only. You can change your settings at any time, including withdrawing your consent, by using the toggles on the Cookie Policy, or by clicking on the manage consent button at the bottom of the screen.