Constance of Aragon (1179 – 23 June 1222) was an Aragonese infanta who was by marriage firstly Queen of Hungary, and secondly Queen of Germany-the Romans and Sicily and Holy Roman Empress. She was regent of Sicily from 1212 to 1220.

She was the second child and eldest daughter of the nine children of King Alfonso II of Aragon and Infanta Sancha of Castile, who was was the only surviving child of King Alfonso VII of Castile by his second wife, Richeza of Poland.

Queen of Hungary

King Alfonso II of Aragon died in 1196 and Infanta Constance’s fate was decided by the new King, her brother King Pedro II of Aragon, who arranged her marriage with King Emeric of Hungary. The wedding took place in 1198. Two years later, in 1200, the Queen gave birth to a son, called Ladislaus.

When King Emeric was dying, he crowned his son Ladislaus co-ruler on August 26, 1204. The King wanted to secure his succession and had his brother Andrew promise to protect the child and help him govern the Kingdom of Hungary until reaching adulthood. King Emeric died three months later, on November 30, 1204.

Ladislaus succeeded his father as King Ladislaus III of Hungary while Prince Andrew became his Regent. Prince Andrew soon took over all regal authority while King Ladislaus III and Queen Constance were little more than his prisoners. Queen Constance managed to escape to Vienna with Ladislaus.

The two found refuge in the court of Leopold VI, Duke of Austria, but King Ladislaus III would soon die (May 7, 1205). The former Regent and now King Andrew II of Hungary took the body of his nephew and buried him in the Royal Crypt of Székesfehérvár. Duke Leopold VI of Austria sent Queen Constance back to Aragon.

Queen of Sicily and Holy Roman Empress

When Queen Constance returned to Aragon, she took up residence with her mother, Queen Sancha, in the Abbey of Nuestra Senora, at Sijena; Queen Sancha had founded the abbey after her husband’s death, and now lived there in retirement. Queen Constance spent the next three years in the abbey with her mother, until her fate, again, was changed by her brother.

King Pedro II of Aragon wanted to be on good terms with Pope Innocent III, since he wanted an annulment of his marriage with Maria of Montpellier, and needed the blessing of the Pope. Pope Innocent III solicited the hand of the Dowager Queen Constance of Hungary for his pupil, the young Friedrich II, King of the Romans and Sicily.

The Aragonese King accepted the proposal; Constance left her mother and the abbey of Nuestra Senora and began her trip to Sicily (1208). She never returned to Aragon or saw her mother again. Queen Sancha died shortly after the departure of her daughter.

Constance and Friedich were married in the Sicilian city of Messina on August 15, 1209. In the ceremony, she was crowned Queen of Sicily. By this time, Constance was thirty years old and her new husband only fourteen. Two years later, in 1211, Constance gave birth to a son, called Heinrich, who later had a tragic end.

On December 9, 1212, Friedrich was crowned King of Germany in opposition to Otto IV, Holy Roman Emperor. During the absence of her husband, Constance stayed in Sicily as Regent of the Kingdom until 1220.

At first Friedich controlled Southern Germany and Otto IV was effectively deposed on 5 July 1215. This time Constance was crowned German Queen with her husband.