Mary Adams: Mary’s lifelong efforts to control taxes and retain local control began when she led the successful referendum which repealed Maine’s state property tax. From Garland, her volunteer activities include serving a term as an appointee of Governor James B. Longley to the Maine State Board of Education.

Peter Anastos: Peter has owned and developed residential, retail, commercial and hospitality properties in Maine for over twenty five years. He is the founder and principal of Maine Course Hospitality Group which develops owns and operates hospitality properties throughout New England.

Stephanie Anderson: Stephanie is a Maine native, attended the University of Maine at Orono and received her law degree at the University of Maine School of Law in 1980. From 1980-1985 she was an Assistant District Attorney in Brooklyn, New York. She returned to Maine in 1985 and entered into private practice with a focus on litigation and criminal matters. She was first elected as Cumberland County District Attorney in 1990, and has been elected 6 times.

Walter Anderson: Walter was employed for 16 years by a major oil and gas firm and was involved in offshore and onshore oil and gas exploration. He subsequently served 11 years as Assistant State Geologist followed by 16 years as Director and State Geologist with the Maine Geological Survey, Department of Conservation dealing with environmental and economic geology. He serves on the Maine Audubon Society, The Nature Conservancy, and serves as a Board member of the International Appalachian Trail and the Quimby Family Foundation.

Michael Aube: Michael is the President and CEO of Eastern Maine Development Corporation. He was the Commissioner of the Department of Economic and Community Development from 1992 to 1998, served as the U.S. Development Representative in Maine and was the State Director of the USDA Rural Development Office for Maine.

Bill Beardsley: Bill was president of Husson University for twenty-three years before running for Governor in the 2010 Republican Primary. He has served as chair of the Finance Authority of Maine, Maine Community Foundation, Maine Higher Education Council, and New England School of Communications. He also served as vice president of Bangor Hydro Electric Company.

Richard Bennett: Rick serves as President and Chief Executive Officer of The Corporate Library, LLC, a Maine based independent research firm which focuses on corporate governance and director/executive compensation. He has served six terms in the Maine Legislature, including service as the Senate President. He is currently serving as Maine’s Republican National Committeeman.

E.D. “Chip” Bessey: Chip is a licensed forester and President of E.D. Bessey & Son, a family company that manages timberland and markets forest products throughout Maine. He is from Waterville.

William W. Boeschenstein: Bill has worked in the energy business for over 30 years, holding upper level management jobs both in the United States and England. Thirteen years ago he started and ran his own energy brokering business which he sold this past spring.

Alan Caron: Alan is the founder and President of Envision Maine, a non-partisan think tank based in Freeport, which recently produced a report on Reinventing Maine Government.

Jean Paul Carrier: Jeannot is the operations manager of E.J. Carrier, Inc., a 40-year-old, 3rd generation, logging and transportation company with 75 employees based in Jackman. He manages 75,000 acres of forest land in central and western Maine, is a partner for four companies in the forest product industry, and is involved with the Maine Forest Products Council.

Vinton Cassidy: Vinton is an instructor at Washington County Community College. He has served on the City Council and as Mayor of Calais. He has also served in the Maine State Senate and been a member of the Commission on Government Ethics and Election Practices.

Philip Congdon: Philip has an extensive background in management including his role as Director of Texas Instruments’ System Technology Laboratories. He is currently retired and lives with his wife in Round Pond, ME. He has served as President of the Damariscotta-Newcastle Rotary Club, is a Director of the Lincoln Home for Assisted Living, is a member of the Town of Bristol’s Pemaquid Lighthouse Committee, and serves on Bristol’s Budget and Public Works Committees.

William Dowling: Bill is the former Mayor of Augusta. He works in the real estate development and management business with Mattson Development.

Jinger Duryea: Jinger is President and COO of C. N. Brown Company, a Maine-based multi-branded petroleum distributor which operates Big Apple Food Stores, Red Shield Heating Oil locations and C. N. Brown Service Stations throughout Maine, New Hampshire and Vermont. Jinger was the first women to serve as the Chairman of the Board for the Maine Oil Dealers Association 2000-2002, and has served on the Board of Directors for the National Association of Convenience Stores.

Dana Dyer: Dana is a graduate of Arizona State University. He is retired and lives with his wife in Bristol, ME. He has served as a Commissioner on the Bristol Parks Commission, in numerous volunteer positions with Boy Scouts of America, and as the Director of Public Affairs for the LDS Church in South Florida. He retired as a Captain for United Airlines, Inc. while primarily flying International routes to South America. Additional duties as a Captain included flying as a Line Check Airman on Boeing 737 aircraft.

Peter Geiger: Peter is Executive Vice President of Geiger, a 4th generation family owned business. Geiger is on the Promotional Products industry’s list of most influential and successful businesses. It is also the largest manufacturer of time planners in the United States. Peter is also Editor of the Farmers’ Almanac™, a 194 year old publication that’s become an American tradition in over 5 million households annually.

Lisa Hansen: Lisa was a managing partner of the reinsurer DRMS from its inception in 1993 through its sale nine years later. She holds a B.S. in Health Administration and a MBA. Lisa lives in Cape Elizabeth with her husband and two children.

Pete Harring: Pete is a carpenter. He is also the webmaster of Mainerefounders.org, a website dedicated to getting people involved in the political process with a focus on our State and U.S. Constitutions.

Ralph Hassenpflug: Ralph is a graduate of Université François Rabelais in Tours, France. His background is in teaching at college level and in investment management. Ralph owned and managed several international investment companies. He is semi-retired and lives in Bristol, Maine, with his family. He is a Registered Maine Guide and a homeschooling dad.

Leo Kieffer: Leo was the president of Kieffer Insurance and Real Estate, he has been a partner in a Ski Doo dealership and he is a woodland owner. He has served on the City Council and as Mayor of Caribou. He also has served four terms in the Maine Senate, including a term as Majority leader and two terms on the Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry Committee.

Yvon Labbe: Yvon is the Director of the Franco-American Centre at the University of Maine.

Craig Larrabee: Craig is President/CEO of Jobs for Maine’s Graduates (JMG), a statewide private-non profit corporation established by the Maine Legislature in 1993 to provide Maine students with a comprehensive dropout prevention and school-to-work transition system. He is a member of the Maine Coalition for Excellence in Education; the Juvenile Justice Implementation Council; the Department of Labor’s Maine Jobs Council and chairs the Youth Transitions Committee of that Council.

Daniel Landry, M.D.: Dr. Landry is President and Chairman of the board of Spectrum Medical Group, a large, private practice, multi-specialty physician group serving the entire state of Maine. He is also a practicing Pediatric Anesthesiologist, working primarily in Southern Maine, for the past 15 years.

Roger Mallar: Roger served as the Commissioner of the Department of Transportation under Governors Curtis, Longley and Brennan. Since leaving the department, Roger has worked for the Dunlap Insurance Agency. He has also owned and operated consulting firms in Maine. He is active in volunteer and municipal activities.

Lisa Marrache, M.D. : Lisa is a two-term Democratic State Senator and served three terms in the Maine House of Representatives representing Waterville. She served on the Health and Human Services Committee for two terms and was the Assistant Majority leader in the Senate. She also is a Family Medicine Physician and works with her husband in their practice called Elm City Health Associates in Waterville.

Thomas J. Nale: Thomas is has 32 years of experience as a Maine Trial Lawyer and was Mayor of the City of Waterville in 1986 – 1987.

Deb Neuman: Deb is the Director of the Target Technology Incubator at the University of Maine where she works with early stage technology companies to grow successful tech-based businesses. She was named the 2007 “Small Business Journalist of the Year” by the US Small Business Administration for Maine and New England and was the 1999 recipient of the SBA award for “Small Business Financial Services Advocate of the Year.”

Kathleen Newman: Kathleen is President and CEO of Associated Builders and Contractors of Maine – a trade association representing 170 construction companies, subcontractors, suppliers and affiliates in Maine, dedicated to promoting free enterprise and open, fair competition in the construction industry. A lifelong resident of Hallowell, Maine, Kathleen also serves as Treasurer of the Downeast Construction Education Foundation and is a member the Central Western Maine Workforce Investment Board.

Gloria Pinza: Gloria is a Portland attorney and the Managing Partner of Pierce Atwood LLP. As legal counselor to numerous established and emerging businesses over the past 30 years and leader of a 250 employee firm, Gloria has first-hand experience and expertise with the business, economic, and regulatory challenges facing Maine companies, both large and small.

Pem Schaeffer: Pem is a retired Business Development Executive from the Defense Electronics industry who lives in Brunswick. He holds advanced degrees in Electrical Engineering and Computer Science. Pem actively follows local and state government and is a frequent contributor to newspapers and other media.

Jane Sheehan: Jane is the President and CEO of the Foundation for Blood Research, in Scarborough. She is the former Commissioner of Maine’s Department of Health and Human Services. Jane is an environmental lawyer. She currently serves as Chairman of the Board of Maine Employers Mutual Insurance Company and is a Trustee on the Board of the Nature Conservancy in Maine.

Dawn Stiles: Dawn is the President of Spurwink Services, Maine’s largest mental health agency with a budget of $52 million dollars and employing over 1000 staff providing services to children, adults and families in 11 of Maine’s 16 Counties. Ms. Stiles was formerly the Deputy Director of the DHHS Bureau of Child and Family Services.

Lee Thibodeau, MD: Dr. Thibodeau is a neurosurgeon with Maine Medical Partners Neurosurgery and Spine. He has a special interest in complex spine surgery with an emphasis on spinal fusions. He also is a partner in Cold River Vodka located in Freeport, the country’s only ground-to-glass distillery controlling all aspects of production from the planting of potatoes to the bottling of the final product.

Donald White: Donald is the President, board member, and shareholder of Prentiss & Carlisle, a forest products company managing 1.7 million acres of timberland. The company manages 1 million acres of timberland in Maine and employs about 30 contracting firms to harvest 450,000 cords of wood annually in the State. 80 of the firm’s 95 employees are located in Maine.