Content Posted in 2014

"News & Issues" piece on the sale of Courier Publications of Rockland to America, Murray Carpenter

"News & Issues" piece on the sale of Maine Educational Loan Marketing Corp.'s (M, Lee Burnett

"News & Issues" piece on the scarcity of birds at feeders this winter. Tom Hodg, Phyllis Austin

"News & Issues" piece on the search for the most remote spot in the contiguous 4, Phyllis Austin

"News & Issues" piece on the settlement of a lawsuit filed by Robert Norris, a c, Jay Davis

"News & Issues" piece on the six-inch underground pipeline that carried jet fuel, Meg Haskell

"News & Issues" piece on the smart growth caucus in the Legislature, started by, Aimee L. Curl

"News & Issues" piece on the soaring price of heating fuel in Maine and Energy S, Aimee L. Curl

"News & Issues" piece on the so-called "Allagash wolf," which was captured on Ju, Phyllis Austin

"News & Issues" piece on the Sportsman's Alliance of Maine (SAM), which is unhap, Phyllis Austin

"News & Issues" piece on the Sportsman's Alliance of Maine, which is taking cred, Phyllis Austin

"News & Issues" piece on the state Department of Education's tight budget, which, Aimee L. Curl

"News & Issues" piece on the state salmon conservation plan, which focuses on fi, Murray Carpenter

"News & Issues" piece on the state's authorization of a tax-exempt bond for fina, Lee Burnett

"News & Issues" piece on the state's dozen or so biomass plants, which are finan, Lee Burnett

"News & Issues" piece on the state's plan to privatize Matinicus ferry service., Meg Haskell

"News & Issues" piece on the sudden closure last week of the Abused Women's Advo, Meg Haskell

"News & Issues" piece on the suffocation death of 5-year-old Logan Marr on Jan., Lee Burnett

"News & Issues" piece on the "Summit of the Americas," bringing together corpora, Meg Haskell

"News & Issues" piece on the taxi-war currently in progress at the Portland Inte, Lee Burnett

"News & Issues" piece on the teacher shortage in Maine, which is growing, partic, Meg Haskell

"News & Issues" piece on the termination of Tim Caverly as supervisor for the Bu, Phyllis Austin

"News & Issues" piece on the three miles of the Appalachian Trail that cross Sad, Murray Carpenter

"News & Issues" piece on the town of Hampden's decision to continue its fight to, Aimee L. Curl

"News & Issues" piece on the town of Lincoln, which will not join the more than, Aimee L. Curl

"News & Issues" piece on the town of Wiscasset, which has visions of a new gas-f, Lee Burnett

"News & Issues" piece on the traffic bottleneck on Route 1 in Wiscasset. Some d, Lee Burnett

"News & Issues" piece on the Trenton Grange, which has a membership of 37, but a, Meg Haskell

"News & Issues" piece on the two top candidates for the Maine Forest Service dir, Phyllis Austin

"News & Issues" piece on the two-way race for the position of Cumberland County, Kathryn Skelton

"News & Issues" piece on the University of Maine at Farmington, which is the fir, Aimee L. Curl

"News & Issues" piece on the University of Maine (UM) and MBNA, and the new Hutc, Curtis Gilbert

"News & Issues" piece on the use of a bright yellow-green in the make-over of si, Kathryn Skelton

"News & Issues" piece on the U.S. Naval Air Station (NAS) in Brunswick, which a, Lee Burnett

"News & Issues" piece on the Wattsons, a family of smiling light bulbs that will, Jay Davis

"News & Issues" piece on the western Maine town of Newfield, which joined a majo, Lee Burnett

"News & Issues" piece on the western Maine town of Parsonsfield, where the state, Lee Burnett

"News & Issues" piece on the whitewater rafting industry, which wants to play a, Phyllis Austin

"News & Issues" piece on the Wilderness Society, Appalachian Mountain Club and C, Phyllis Austin

"News & Issues" piece on the wording in a proposed bill that would include sexua, Judy Harrison

"News & Issues" piece on this week's long-expected announcement by U.S. Fish and, Lee Burnett

"News & Issues" piece on this year's National Kid's Count results, which were re, Aimee L. Curl

"News & Issues" piece on Thomas College in Waterville, which is positioning itse, Meg Haskell

"News & Issues" piece on "Threading the Needle: Analysis of the Julie N Oil Spi, Murray Carpenter

"News & Issues" piece on three aquaculture pens proposed for Canadian waters at, Aimee L. Curl

"News & Issues" piece on three pet dogs that have been poisoned in the Hancock C, Meg Haskell

"News & Issues" piece on three separate Maine events in April and May focused on, Stevenson Munro

"News & Issues" piece on Tim Caverly, former manger of the Allagash Wilderness W, Phyllis Austin

"News & Issues" piece on Title II of the Social Security Act, which prohibits so, Aimee L. Curl

"News & Issues" piece on Tropical Storm Floyd and the rain it brought to Maine., Meg Haskell

"News & Issues" piece on trouble that has erupted among competing bear hunters a, Phyllis Austin

"News & Issues" piece on twelve educators from the Lochend School in Glasgow, Sc, Aimee L. Curl

"News & Issues" piece on two four-story dormitories the University of New Englan, Lee Burnett

"News & Issues" piece on two legislative bills concerning individual privacy. O, Aimee L. Curl

"News & Issues" piece on two legislative bills on clearcutting and forest sustai, Phyllis Austin

"News & Issues" piece on two miles of a public trail in Van Buren, converted fro, Phyllis Austin

"News & Issues" piece on two new resources that will soon be available for teach, Meg Haskell

"News & Issues" piece on union members at the Portland Press Herald who are not, Lee Burnett

"News & Issues" piece on University of Maine mycologist Joyce Longcore who has b, Murray Carpenter

"News & Issues" piece on University of Southern Maine professor Thomas Knight's, Aimee L. Curl

"News & Issues" piece on U.S. Interior Secretary Bruce Babbitt who last week app, Murray Carpenter

"News & Issues" piece on U.S. senators Olympia Snowe and Susan Collins, both Ma, Lee Burnett

"News & Issues" piece on U.S. Supreme Court Justice Antonin Scalia's recent part, Kenneth Z. Chutchian

"News & Issues" piece on Wellington, a town of just 262 inhabitants in southwest, Marie Howard

"News & Issues" piece on wetland protection in Maine, which lost support at the, Meg Haskell

"News & Issues" piece on whales that get entangled in lobster gear. The number, Phyllis Austin

"News & Issues" piece on William Gillis of Scarborough, who is seeking a change, Lee Burnett

"News & Issues" piece on with a detailed description of the controversy over the, Murray Carpenter

"News & Issues" piece on worm diggers who are pushing for legislation to ban the, Aimee L. Curl

"News & Issues" piece on Wyman Station, a 44-year-old oil-fired power generating, Lee Burnett

"News & Issues" piece on Wyman Station at Cousins Island in Yarmouth, which is t, Lee Burnett

"News & Issues" piece on Y2K, the computer meltdown that didn't happen. With co, Meg Haskell

"News & Issues" piece reporting that Maine activists have joined colleagues in 2, Aimee L. Curl

"Newsmaker" piece features the transcript of an interview with Jim Gerritsen, an, Virginia M. Wright

Link

"News-o-rama" piece on oil-spill preparations in Portland Harbor. There are ind

Link

"News-o-rama" piece on the maximum security wing of the Cumberland County Jail.

Link

"News-o-rama" piece reporting on the failure of former U. S. Senate candidate Jo

Link

"News-O-Rama" piece reporting that developer Pamela Gleichman of Portland has be

Link

"News-o-rama" piece reporting that Euclid Ambler Associates, owned by Peter Hogl

Link

"News-o-rama" piece reporting that the attorneys general of nine states have rea

Link

"News-o-rama" piece reporting that the Maine Department of Environmental Protect

Link

"News-o-rama." Simmons Road homeowners in South Portland are protesting a propos

Link

"News-o-rama." State Representative Richard Farnsworth missed 80 roll call vote

"News" piece arguing that CommTel's plans for a proposed computer data center in, Lee Burnett

"News" piece noting that the Maine Green party may face a primary contest, with, Aimee L. Curl

"News" piece on 2,000 pieces of patriotic art and Uncle Sam memorabilia that wil, Chris Barker

"News" piece on 436 radiation detectors that the Maine Emergency Management Age, Chris Barker

"News" piece on $600,000 in fines levied by the Board of Environmental Protectio, Jay Davis

"News" piece on 70 study committees proposed by the 120th Legislature, 34 of whi, Aimee L. Curl

"News" piece on a $12 million renovation of the University of Maine's Memorial U, Aimee L. Curl

"News" piece on a $1.7 million Department of Public Safety budget cut proposed b, Chris Barker

"News" piece on a $3 million amphitheater that was proposed 15 months ago for a, Jay Davis

"News" piece on a 400-foot extension to the landmark pier at Old Orchard Beach., Lee Burnett

"News" piece on a $4.15 million reduction in Medicaid reimbursements to nursing, Lee Burnett

"News" piece on a 650,000-acre conservation easement along the West Branch of th, Phyllis Austin

"News" piece on a $6 million-plus research lab for the Gulf of Maine Aquarium th, Lee Burnett

"News" piece on a $7 million proposal by former Sugarloaf USA president Larry Wa, Phyllis Austin

"News" piece on a Bangor group called "Food and Medicine," which is made up of u, Rebecca Goldfine

"News" piece on a bill to be debated by the Legislature's transportation committ, Chris Barker

"News" piece on about 20,000 acres in the area surrounding Tumbledown Mountain,, Meg Haskell

"News" piece on a call by Sen. Susan Longley, D-Liberty, supporting accreditati, Lee Burnett

"News" piece on a change-of-command ceremony held on Jan. 4 at the U.S. Navy bas, Meg Haskell

"News" piece on a conservation agreement that would protect the West Branch of t, Meg Haskell

"News" piece on a conservation easement deal in Carrabassett Valley being negoti, Phyllis Austin

"News" piece on a decoy police cruiser that State Police left parked on the Main, Lee Burnett

"News" piece on a demonstration by laid-off workers recently held in Bangor. Mo, Chris Barker

"News" piece on a Department of Agriculture income/cost analysis of orchard land, Phyllis Austin

"News" piece on a Department of Education memo to all Maine schools in the wake, Rebecca Goldfine

"News" piece on a draft report from the Attorney General's Office that says esca, Lee Burnett

"News" piece on a fatal accident on the Maine Turnpike in Wells that caused a 10, Aimee L. Curl

"News" piece on a generous prescription drug benefit that is drawing Maine veter, Lee Burnett

"News" piece on a golden eagle that was shot in Alna earlier this month. Accord, Phyllis Austin

"News" piece on a group of congressmen who gathered on the steps of the Capitol, Jay Davis

"News" piece on a group of six Mainers who will participate in the World Wheelch, Rebecca Goldfine

"News" piece on a group of University of Maine academics who are writing a book, Rebecca Goldfine

"News" piece on a group of University of Maine economists, alarmed by the number, Rebecca Goldfine

"News" piece on a halibut farming project in Franklin being funded by the Univer, Chris Barker

"News" piece on a joint venture between Pritham Singh, 48, a controversial Portl, Phyllis Austin

"News" piece on a joint venture by the Maine Humanities Council and the Maine St, Meg Haskell

"News" piece on Alaska's commercial fishing fleet, which is pushing for trade ba, Chris Barker

"News" piece on a lawsuit brought by two Maine environmental groups, including t, Meg Haskell

"News" piece on a legislative bill by Rep. John Michael, Independent-Auburn, tha, Aimee L. Curl

"News" piece on a legislative bill providing mandatory insurance coverage for en, Aimee L. Curl

"News" piece on a legislative bill sponsored by state represenative Joe Brooks,, Phyllis Austin

"News" piece on a legislative bill sponsored by state represenative Paul Tessier, Meg Haskell

"News" piece on a legislative bill sponsored by state senator Edward Youngblood,, Meg Haskell

"News" piece on a legislative bill that prohibits the creation of 40-acre and la, Phyllis Austin

"News" piece on a legislative bill that would have allowed a nonprofit group to, Chris Barker

"News" piece on a legislative bill that would regulate the $100 million salmon f, Chris Barker

"News" piece on a legislative bill that would support a "mandatory reporting" sy, Lee Burnett

"News" piece on allegations by the Land Use Regulation Commission (LURC) that Th, Phyllis Austin

"News" piece on Allen Bingham of Scarborough, a retired state employee who tried, Aimee L. Curl

"News" piece on a major transmission line project proposed by Bangor Hydro-Elect, Phyllis Austin

"News" piece on a meeting convened by U.S. represenative John Baldacci, D-Maine,, Chris Barker

"News" piece on Amtrak service from Portland to Boston, which begins this weeken, Lee Burnett

"News" piece on an address by Rev. Marvin Ellison delivered at a United Nations, Meg Haskell

"News" piece on an agreement between the state's Bureau of Parks and Lands (BPL), Phyllis Austin

"News" piece on an Alternative Poultry Association (APA) formed by the Universit, Rebecca Goldfine

"News" piece on a national 3-hour-long boycott of energy planned by critics of P, Lee Burnett

"News" piece on a new $28 million bridge planned for Augusta that will connect I, Phyllis Austin

"News" piece on a new $54.5 million transmission line that Bangor Hydro-Electric, Phyllis Austin

"News" piece on a new course in the city of Portland's waterfront planning proje, Lee Burnett

"News" piece on a new national standard for certifying organic farmers establish, Meg Haskell

"News" piece on a new "rulemaking" petition concerning the regulation of coastal, Chris Barker

"News" piece on animal rights activists who are picketing the Ringling Bros. and, Rebecca Goldfine

"News" piece on an industry-forced delay in cleaning up airborne soot in Maine,, Lee Burnett

"News" piece on an infestation of termites at the Joshua Chamberlain house in Br, Lee Burnett

"News" piece on an intensive study to determine the status of Canada lynx in Mai, Phyllis Austin

"News" piece on an interview with three students at John Bapst High School in Ba, Brendan Wolfe

"News" piece on an ongoing dispute between Maine Democrats and Green Independent, Chris Barker

"News" piece on an ongoing study at the University of Maine at Farmington (UMF), Meg Haskell

"News" piece on a plan by Wal-Mart to build a supercenter near the fragile Penja, Meg Haskell

"News" piece on a planned campaign by the Maine Christian Civic League to repeal, Lee Burnett

"News" piece on a plan to reform welfare announced recently by President George, Rebecca Goldfine

"News" piece on a Portland ordinance that allows the Portland Police Department, Lee Burnett

"News" piece on a press conference held this week by the presidents of 18 instit, Lee Burnett

"News" piece on a press release to Maine media outlets from U.S. senator Susan C, Meg Haskell

"News" piece on a professional support program for rookie educators developed by, Meg Haskell

"News" piece on a proposal before the Land Use Regulation Commission (LURC) that, Phyllis Austin

"News" piece on a proposal by the Bureau of Parks and Lands that would almost do, Phyllis Austin

"News" piece on a proposal by the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service to designate 16, Phyllis Austin

"News" piece on a proposed agreement between the state and the National Park Ser, Phyllis Austin

"News" piece on a proposed new sales tax increase that may fund regional project, Meg Haskell

"News" piece on a protest demonstration by members of the Maine Toxics Action Co, Meg Haskell

"News" piece on a public forum on health care policy in Maine, which was held in, Meg Haskell

"News" piece on aquatic pesticides, which are available for over-the-counter sal, Meg Haskell

"News" piece on a recent Maine Supreme Judicial Court decision that threatens to, Chris Barker

"News" piece on a recent meeting between Penobscot tribal governor Barry Dana, G, Rebecca Goldfine

"News" piece on a report released last week by the national Academy of Science t, Meg Haskell

"News" piece on a reverse discrimination lawsuit brought by George Goodman again, Rebecca Goldfine

"News" piece on a showdown between workers and employers in the state that is in, Lee Burnett

"News" piece on a state effort to make rules on tree clearing standards in shore, Phyllis Austin

"News" piece on a think bracelet inscribed with a toll-free number, which is pro, Lee Burnett

"News" piece on Atlanta-based American Computer Experience (ACE), the best-known, Lee Burnett

"News" piece on at least four major versions of property tax relief measures tha, Lee Burnett

"News" piece on a traveling advocacy group that is stopping at several locations, Rebecca Goldfine

"News" piece on attempts in Sanford and Freeport to regulate All-Terrain Vehicle, Lee Burnett

"News" piece on a tunnel as an option to relieve congestion on Route 1 in Wiscas, Lee Burnett

"News" piece on a turf war between Central Maine Power (CMP) and the Kennebunk L, Lee Burnett

"News" piece on a unique program in Maine called Parents as Scholars, which supp, Rebecca Goldfine

"News" piece on a universal health care measure that will be decided by Portland, Lee Burnett

"News" piece on a University of Maine student who spoke to university trustees o, Rebecca Goldfine

"News" piece on a U.S. government proposal that would grant $4.5 million to comp, Chris Barker

"News" piece on a year-long extension of the Bangor Raceway's lease by the city', Aimee L. Curl

"News" piece on Bangor Hydro-Electric Co.'s announcement last week that it may l, Rebecca Goldfine

"News" piece on Bangor Hydro-Electric's (BHE) proposed 345 kv Downeast transmiss, Phyllis Austin

"News" piece on Bangor Hydro's proposed new power line. The electric utility ho, Meg Haskell

"News" piece on Bangor's Curve Street neighborhood, which is being razed. With, Meg Haskell

"News" piece on bankruptcies in Maine, which reached a new record high in 2001., Rebecca Goldfine

"News" piece on Belfast city councilors who recently agreed to apply for a grant, Rebecca Goldfine

"News" piece on Biddeford city councilor Richard Rhames, who has become the targ, Lee Burnett

"News" piece on Bonaire, a government housing project with 60 units in Presque I, Meg Haskell

"News" piece on border checkpoints between Maine and Canada, which have become t, Lee Burnett

"News" piece on Buddy Brown, a vegetable farmer in Nobleboro who lost a barn to, Rebecca Goldfine

"News" piece on budget cuts recommended by Gov. Angus King to compensate for a m, Chris Barker

"News" piece on Buzz Caverly's vision for the future of Baxter State Park. Cave, Phyllis Austin

"News" piece on campaigns to raise funds for victims of the Sept. 11 terrorist a, Meg Haskell

"News" piece on Cash X-Press in Bangor, a licensed payday lender that will loan, Meg Haskell

"News" piece on CCB, a Westbrook-based unionized commercial construction company, Lee Burnett

"News" piece on changes in Maine's food sales tax that go into effect Oct. 1. T, Meg Haskell

"News" piece on charges by the Attorney General's Office (AGO) and Consumers for, Meg Haskell

"News" piece on China Lake, which went from being one of the clearest and health, Meg Haskell

"News" piece on Coastal America's Innovative Readiness Training Program. The Co, Meg Haskell

"News" piece on "commercial logo" billboards along Maine's highways. At least 1, Lee Burnett

"News" piece on complaints of substandard care at Martin's Point Health Care in, Lee Burnett

"News" piece on "Cool Art 2002," an exhibition of snow sculptures in Portland's, Rebecca Goldfine

"News" piece on Dan Wathen, the former chief justice of the Maine Supreme Judici, Lee Burnett

"News" piece on Dave Bunker, 39, of Bangor, the low-key host of Morning Classica, Meg Haskell

"News" piece on days in which ozone readings in Maine topped 85 parts per billio, Lee Burnett

"News" piece on Downeast lobstermen, who plan to protest an upcoming marine life, Chris Barker

"News" piece on Eastern Star Grange #1 in Hampden, which is Maine's first Grange, Meg Haskell

"News" piece on efforts by Maine's Let Cuba Live group to ship medical supplies, Aimee L. Curl

"News" piece on Elaine Tuttle Hansen, the first woman to serve as president of B, Rebecca Goldfine

"News" piece on entrepreneur Harley Lee, owner of Endless Energy Corp. of Yarmou, Phyllis Austin

"News" piece on Eric Taylor, who admits he was wrong to clear trees off his shor, Lee Burnett

"News" piece on events of significance along Maine's underutilized rail system., Lee Burnett

"News" piece on expanding the intense debate over the Allagash Wilderness Waterw, Phyllis Austin

"News" piece on fallout from the state Senate District 27 special election on Ma, Lee Burnett

"News" piece on federal funding that ensures essential telecommunications access, Meg Haskell

"News" piece on field research by education policy specialist David Silvernail,, Lee Burnett

"News" piece on five Canada lynx kittens found in Maine this summer, bringing to, Phyllis Austin

"News" piece on focusing on the reactions of some of Maine's religious leaders f, Carl Burnett

"News" piece on forestry consultant Lloyd Irland, who opposes liquidation harves, Phyllis Austin

"News" piece on forums for discussion and prayer that were held throughout Maine, Meg Haskell

"News" piece on Francisca Catalina Lara Sanchez, a former "sweat-shop" worker in, Aimee L. Curl

"News" piece on free football equipment from the National Football League (NFL), Lee Burnett

"News" piece on "grandfathered," or non-comforming buildings, which can be found, Phyllis Austin

"News" piece on greenhouse gas inventories for Portland and Augusta. Last year,, Aimee L. Curl

"News" piece on Herb Haynes, one of Maine's largest woods contractors, who is am, Phyllis Austin

"News" piece on how, except for our airports and borders, security concerns have, Meg Haskell

"News" piece on identity theft, which officials say is becoming an epidemic, wit, Rebecca Goldfine

"News" piece on increased road building by timer companies, which has brought ea, Phyllis Austin

"News" piece on increases in individual health insurance premium payments reques, Lee Burnett

"News" piece on Independent gubernatorial candidate David Flanagan's campaign, w, Chris Barker

"News" piece on interim school superintendents, who have become hot properties w, Lee Burnett

"News" piece on International Paper Co. (IP), Maine's second largest landowner,, Phyllis Austin

"News" piece on jails, which are the major expense of county government. Consol, Meg Haskell

"News" piece on James H. Powell, a phantom petition-gatherer who cost Maine Taxp, Lee Burnett

"News" piece on James Roux, a Portland attorney, who is developing a specialty p, Meg Haskell

"News" piece on Jim Libby, a Republican candidate for governor and a disgruntled, Lee Burnett

"News" piece on John Cacoulidis, owner of Hope Island and a principal in Grand M, Lee Burnett

"News" piece on John Nutting of Leeds, a dairy farmer who is seeking the Democra, Lee Burnett

"News" piece on John Williams who is leaving as director of the Land Use Regulat, Phyllis Austin

"News" piece on Jonesboro residents who claim their homes were in the line of dr, Meg Haskell

"News" piece on Joseph Westphal, the incoming chancellor of the University of Ma, Lee Burnett

"News" piece on Kaija Comin, 26, of Brewer, who filed suit last month in Penobsc, Chris Barker

"News" piece on LD 1869, a legislative bill that has pitted Central Maine Power, Chris Barker

"News" piece on LD 1920, a legislative bill that would regulate liquidation harv, Chris Barker

"News" piece on LD 2038, a legislative bill sponsored by Rep. Zachary Matthews,, Meg Haskell

"News" piece on LD 2100, a legislative bill that would protect leaseholders in t, Phyllis Austin

"News" piece on LD 2145, a legislative bill that would require all state-funded, Meg Haskell

"News" piece on LD 987, a law that will take effect next summer, which requires, Chris Barker

"News" piece on Learning Results, a plan for statewide education reform passed i, Aimee L. Curl

"News" piece on legislation that has been submitted to the Senate Armed Services, Meg Haskell

"News" piece on legislative bills proposed this year dealing with teacher recrui, Aimee L. Curl

"News" piece on Lenard Kaye, a new professor at the University of Maine, has dev, Rebecca Goldfine

"News" piece on "liquidation harvesting," which is the practice of clearcutting, Phyllis Austin

"News" piece on Maine colleges and universities, which say they're experiencing, Rebecca Goldfine

"News" piece on Maine Educators Against Fingerprinting, which has set its sights, Aimee L. Curl

"News" piece on Maine Energy Recovery Co. (MERC) in Biddeford. Saco has joined, Lee Burnett

"News" piece on Maine Ethics Commission members who have publicly indicated thei, Aimee L. Curl

"News" piece on Maine Interfaith Power & Light, an electrical-power-purchasing c, Lee Burnett

"News" piece on Maine Public Radio's (MPR) successful fall fundraising campaign,, Rebecca Goldfine

"News" piece on Mainers who appear to be returning to normalcy following the Sep, Aimee L. Curl

"News" piece on Maine's 2001 blueberry crop. According to Del Emerson, manager, Meg Haskell

"News" piece on Maine's 2001 Teacher of the Year, who will be named next month., Aimee L. Curl

"News" piece on Maine's 485,000 acres of public reserved land, which have won ce, Phyllis Austin

"News" piece on Maine's foster care network. The Legislature's Health and Human, Lee Burnett

"News" piece on Maine's loon population. The Maine Audubon Society is optimisti, Aimee L. Curl

"News" piece on Maine's newest daily newspaper, the Portland Morning Sun, which, Lee Burnett

"News" piece on Maine's sea urchin industry. A researcher at the University of, Meg Haskell

"News" piece on Maine's wide-open 2nd District congressional seat. On the Repub, Lee Burnett

"News" piece on Maine Times senior writer Phyllis Austin, Bangor author Tabitha, Jay Davis

"News" piece on Maine Times writers Phyllis Austin and Meg Haskell, who recently

"News" piece on Mark Ishkanian, the public relations man for Central Maine Power, Meg Haskell

"News" piece on Mark Pietras and James Whitton, both of Scarborough, who have be, Phyllis Austin

"News" piece on meteorologist Lou McNally of WMTW-TV (Channel 8), who was fired, Lee Burnett

"News" piece on Mike Corey, the Maine Potato Board's executive director, who qui, Meg Haskell

"News" piece on Moosehead Lake's water level. Carlton Pinney, president of the, Phyllis Austin

"News" piece on municipal censorship of an alleged conspiracy-mongering televisi, Lee Burnett

"News" piece on Nancy Oden of Jonesboro, who was temporarily detained and denied, Meg Haskell

"News" piece on Nancy Rovito, a mother of four from Old Town, who on Feb. 12 fil, Chris Barker

"News" piece on new information about the effects of the Navy's anti-submarine L, Phyllis Austin

"News" piece on nine battered, wood-frame houses on Bangor's Curve Street, which, Meg Haskell

"News" piece on notices being sent out by Maine's electric companies inviting do, Meg Haskell

"News" piece on nursing program enrollments in Maine universities, which has hit, Rebecca Goldfine

"News" piece on O'Naturals, a "natural" fast food eatery opened 10 months ago in, Rebecca Goldfine

"News" piece on opening mail in Maine's schools in the wake of the anthrax scare, Lee Burnett

"News" piece on peace vigils across Maine since the Sept. 11 terrorist attacks., Rebecca Goldfine

"News" piece on philanthropist Roxanne Quimby, owner of Burt's Bees Inc., has an, Phyllis Austin

"News" piece on pine trees along Maine's highways, which are suffering more than, Lee Burnett

"News" piece on Plum Creek Timber's concept plan for First Roach Pond, which was, Phyllis Austin

"News" piece on Plum Creek Timber's proposed sale of camp lots around First Roac, Phyllis Austin

"News" piece on poison mushrooms and members of the nightshade family, including, Meg Haskell

"News" piece on Portland Press Herald bylines, which have began to re-appear abo, Lee Burnett

"News" piece on Portland's Casco Bay Weekly (CBW) newspaper, which fired four of, Lee Burnett

"News" piece on possible permit violations in the Allagash Wilderness Waterway., Phyllis Austin

"News" piece on predictions concerning the coming winter. According to the Farm, Rebecca Goldfine

"News" piece on President George W. Bush's opposition to a compact providing pri, Lee Burnett

"News" piece on proposals to enact new restrictions on visas in the wake of the, Lee Burnett

"News" piece on reform at the Portland Police Department prompted by several rec, Lee Burnett

"News" piece on remote camp lots that are being sold to leaseholders in the nort, Phyllis Austin

"News" piece on researchers in Delaware who are trying to produce Baculovirus, a, Rebecca Goldfine

"News" piece on Richard Grant, author of "Scenes from a Tragedy," which focused, Jay Davis

"News" piece on Robert Creeley, a part-time resident of Waldoboro and a full-tim, Steve Cartwright

"News" piece on Rockland's Good Tern food co-op and neighborhood grocery, which, Meg Haskell

"News" piece on Roxanne Quimby's ambition to start a new career working as an en, Phyllis Austin

"News" piece on Saddleback Ski Area owner Donald Breen who is seeking a buyer fo, Phyllis Austin

"News" piece on Samuel Clay, 18, a senior at Mattanawcook Academy and a newly el, Rebecca Goldfine

"News" piece on Shaker Village at Sabbathday Lake, which is going online. The r, Lee Burnett

"News" piece on simultaneous hearings held by the state Department of Conservati, Phyllis Austin

"News" piece on Somali refugees across the country who have heard that Maine is, Meg Haskell

"News" piece on some frog, turtle and dragonfly species in Maine, which state bi, Rebecca Goldfine

"News" piece on some old families in the Kennebunk area who have owned shares of, Lee Burnett

"News" piece on state represenative Stavros Mendros, R-Lewiston, who is running, Rebecca Goldfine

"News" piece on state wildlife biologist Craig McLaughlin, overseer of the Canad, Phyllis Austin

"News" piece on students who are challenging the University of Southern Maine's, Rebecca Goldfine

"News" piece on Sunday River, which, since the 1980s, has widened dramatically., Phyllis Austin

"News" piece on Sven, the Computerized National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administ, Phyllis Austin

"News" piece on terrorism and potential targets in Maine, including public water, Meg Haskell

"News" piece on the 100-acre oceanfront Navy base at Schoodic Point in Hancock C, Meg Haskell

"News" piece on the 120th Legislature's Natural Resources Committee, which unani, Aimee L. Curl

"News" piece on the 137-foot Grand Banks schooner Roseway, long a fixture in the, Steve Cartwright

"News" piece on the 2002-2001 Hay Project, a year-long, fourth-grade class on ha, Meg Haskell

"News" piece on the 2002 Maine Mother of the Year competition sponsored by Ameri, Meg Haskell

"News" piece on the 21-year-old Treats Falls House, a home for 18 mentally handi, Meg Haskell

"News" piece on the $40.8 million in federal farm subsidies distributed in Maine, Lee Burnett

"News" piece on the $75 million Part 2 budget proposed by the Legislature's Appr, Aimee L. Curl

"News" piece on the Allagash Wilderness Waterway's planned access site at John's, Phyllis Austin

"News" piece on the American crafts industry, which generates $12 billion to $14, Rebecca Goldfine

"News" piece on the anti-anthrax drug Cipro. Dr. Kathleen Gensheimer, state epi, Rebecca Goldfine

"News" piece on the Augusta Mental Health Institute (AMHI), which expects to con, Meg Haskell

"News" piece on the Bangor & Aroostook Railroad (B & A), which was forced into b, Lee Burnett

"News" piece on the Bodega de Coqui, a new Hispanic market in Lewiston. The sto, Meg Haskell

"News" piece on the boldest attempt in decades to modernize the state's tax stru, Lee Burnett

"News" piece on the Career Center in Bangor, which helps the unemployed find wor, Chris Barker

"News" piece on the Catholic League for Religious and Civil Rights' (CLRCR) annu, Rebecca Goldfine

"News" piece on the chaplain staff at state correctional facilities. The only f, Aimee L. Curl

"News" piece on the Chewonki Foundation, a nonprofit educational institution in, Aimee L. Curl

"News" piece on the city of Old Town's Youth Leadership Program, which is a 10-m, Meg Haskell

"News" piece on the city of Portland's recent Tax Increment Financing (TIF) agre, Lee Burnett

"News" piece on the community horticultural project at United Technologies Cente, Meg Haskell

"News" piece on the continuing sell-off of the North Woods, as illustrated by Pl, Phyllis Austin

"News" piece on the decommissioning of the Maine Yankee nuclear power plant in W, Phyllis Austin

"News" piece on the Department of Inland Fisheries and Wildlife (IFW), which has, Phyllis Austin

News piece on the development of a "cultural corridor" along Congress St. in Por, Scott Andrews

"News" piece on the distribution of 12,000 Apple iBook computers to high school, Chris Barker

"News" piece on the Downeast location of a new $50 million, 84-mile transmission, Phyllis Austin

"News" piece on the dwindling number of pay phones as cell phone use grows. In, Rebecca Goldfine

"News" piece on the fight between Texas businessman Dick Brown, who recently pur, Phyllis Austin

"News" piece on the fight to repeal the controversial law that requires all scho, Aimee L. Curl

"News" piece on the final recommendations of the Round Table on Economic and Lab, Phyllis Austin

"News" piece on the first draft of a much-debated brochure being developed by th, Meg Haskell

"News" piece on the first non-game forum sponsored by the Maine Department of In, Phyllis Austin

"News" piece on the first Spanish Speakers Legislative Forum, which was held las, Rebecca Goldfine

"News" piece on the Fund for a Healthy Maine, which was set up with part of this

"News" piece on the GOP primary race. John Hathaway was considered by many to b, Lee Burnett

"News" piece on the Hathaway Shirt Co. in Waterville, which has been acquired by, Chris Barker

"News" piece on the incidence of medical errors, which became an issue two years, Lee Burnett

"News" piece on the International Aqua Foods Harris Point farm near Deer Island,, Chris Barker

"News" piece on the Land for Maine's Future Board, which has agreed to craft a m, Phyllis Austin

"News" piece on the Land for Maine's Future Board, which has approved spending $, Phyllis Austin

"News" piece on the Land Use Regulation Commission's (LURC) approval of Plum Cre, Phyllis Austin

"News" piece on the latest report on the welfare of Maine kids, which is publish, Rebecca Goldfine

"News" piece on the lease of 400-plus acres at Scarborough Downs racetrack in Sc, Lee Burnett

"News" piece on the legacy of the late Gov. Percival Baxter. Baxter State Park, Phyllis Austin

"News" piece on the legislative debate over Maine's workers' compensation law., Meg Haskell

"News" piece on the Legislature's Health and Human Services Committee, which bel, Lee Burnett

"News" piece on the Maine Community Foundation, which is preparing to make large, Jay Davis

"News" piece on the Maine Democratic Party's probe of Green Independent gubernat, Chris Barker

"News" piece on the Maine Energy Recovery Company (MERC) in Biddeford. The plan, Lee Burnett

"News" piece on the Maine Freeze, Maine's first professional women's football te, Rebecca Goldfine

"News" piece on the Maine Library Association (MLA), which is opposing an anti-t, Lee Burnett

"News" piece on the Maine Memory Network, a new Maine Web site at , Chris Barker

"News" piece on the Maine Technology Institute (MTI), a state agency that makes, Meg Haskell

"News" piece on the Maine Water Utilities Association, which has terminated its, Meg Haskell

"News" piece on the many people who claim to have seen terrorist mastermind Moha, Lee Burnett

"News" piece on the Medical Mutual Insurance Co., (MMI) which was created by Mai, Rebecca Goldfine

"News" piece on the National Folk Festival, which is being hosted by the city of, Chris Barker

"News" piece on the new E-ZPass system being introduced by the Maine Turnpike Au, Lee Burnett

"News" piece on the New Moon restaurant in Bangor, which is moving to a new loca, Aimee L. Curl

"News" piece on the New Year's tradition of standing in line in Millinocket for, Lee Burnett

"News" piece on the next chancellor of the University of Maine System, who will, Lee Burnett

"News" piece on the Northeast Dairy Compact, a price protection program for New, Lee Burnett

"News" piece on the Northeast Dairy Compact. Even though dairy farmers in north, Lee Burnett

"News" piece on the Northeast Dairy Compact, which could become a victim of the, Lee Burnett

"News" piece on the noticeable popularity of Uncle Sam and Statue of Liberty Hal, Chris Barker

"News" piece on the number of applications for prison jobs in Maine, which is up, Rebecca Goldfine

"News" piece on the Old Town High School Board, which recently voted to spend up, Meg Haskell

"News" piece on the Olympic Torch Relay, which made its appearance in Maine on J, Lee Burnett

"News" piece on the ongoing debate over school pregnancies and the distribution, Meg Haskell

"News" piece on the ongoing drought that has left an estimated 10,000 to 17,000, Lee Burnett

"News" piece on the outrage of Ron Lovaglio, the commissioner of the Maine Depar, Phyllis Austin

"News" piece on the pesticide atrazine, which is reported to be the most heavily, Rebecca Goldfine

"News" piece on the post September 11 crackdown on immigration violations, which, Lee Burnett

"News" piece on the problem of serious vandalism and harassment in public librar, Meg Haskell

"News" piece on the proposed acquisition of 3,019 acres along the Spednick Lake/, Phyllis Austin

"News" piece on the Puppy Protection Act, a bill being considered by the U.S. Se, Rebecca Goldfine

"News" piece on the reappointment of Irving Faunce of Kennebunkport to the Board, Phyllis Austin

"News" piece on the recent construction of gas-fired power plants in Maine and o, Chris Barker

"News" piece on the Regional Medical Center at Lubec, which has been awarded a $, Meg Haskell

"News" piece on the rejection of a new Wal-Mart supercenter by about 30 percent, Meg Haskell

"News" piece on the role of the arts in a new era of uncertainty, which will be, Chris Barker

"News" piece on the second Maine Education Symposium, sponsored by the Maine Dev, Aimee L. Curl

"News" piece on the Sen. George J. Mitchell Center for Environmental and Watersh, Meg Haskell

"News" piece on the severe shortage of affordable housing in Maine. John Wainer, Rebecca Goldfine

"News" piece on the Sportsman's Alliance of Maine, whose executive director, Geo, Phyllis Austin

"News" piece on the state-run discount liquor store in Kittery, which is one of, Lee Burnett

"News" piece on the state's Advisory Committee on Fair Competition with Free Ent, Lee Burnett

"News" piece on the stigma attached to OxyContin use, which is taking its toll o, Lee Burnett

"News" piece on the struggle to resolve the Wiscasset Route 1 bypass dispute. J, Phyllis Austin

"News" piece on the summits of Maine's mountains, many of which are littered wit, Phyllis Austin

"News" piece on The Susan Caust Farrell Memorial Library, a collection of 1,500, Meg Haskell

"News" piece on the Thomas Point Bluegrass Festival, which will take a one-year, Lee Burnett

"News" piece on the Tumbledown/Mt. Blue Conservation Project. The Land for Main, Phyllis Austin

"News" piece on the turf battle over the establishment of a radiation therapy ce, Lee Burnett

"News" piece on the University of New Hampshire's Open Ocean Aquaculture project, Chris Barker

"News" piece on the U.S. Coast Guard in the wake of the Sept. 11 terrorist attac, Chris Barker

"News" piece on the U.S. Coast Guard's escort service responsibilities and how t, Lee Burnett

"News" piece on "The Vagina Monologues," a groundbreaking play by Eve Ensler rec, Mike McFarland

"News" piece on the Washington County Consortium for School Improvement, which h, Meg Haskell

"News" piece on the York County Jail in Alfred, where plumbing bills have been r, Lee Burnett

"News" piece on this year's crop of wild Maine blueberries, which dropped to 30, Meg Haskell

"News" piece on Travis Cowing, a junior at the University of Maine in Orono, a p, Rebecca Goldfine

"News" piece on True North, a new health center in Falmouth, where patients obta, Rebecca Goldfine

"News" piece on two legislative bills that would have ensured easier motorized a, Phyllis Austin

"News" piece on two major fires that leveled four buildings and destroyed 11 bus, Rebecca Goldfine

"News" piece on two people who reported seeing terrorist Mohamed Atta in Portlan, Lee Burnett

"News" piece on warnings from the University of Maine that genetically engineere, Meg Haskell

"News" piece on Washington County, which has one of the highest unemployment rat, Aimee L. Curl

"News" piece on Worcester Wreath of Harrington. This year will mark the ninth h, Chris Barker

"News" piece on workshops held in recent weeks, sponsored by Maine's drought tas, Meg Haskell

"News" piece reporting that costs relating to moving four wildlife dioramas to t, Aimee L. Curl

"News" piece reporting that Maine's 2001 blueberry harvest, once expected to wei, Staff

"News" piece reporting that Maine Times won seven first-place awards last week i

"News" piece reporting that the National Park Service has determined that the ne, Phyllis Austin

"News" piece reporting that the University of Maine Advanced Engineered Wood Com, Meg Haskell

"News" piece with a biographical sketch of Tim Glidden, 48, of Topsham, the new, Steve Cartwright

Link

"Newsreal" and "Politics & Other Mistakes" pieces on election day victories by O

Link

"Newsreal" column on a proposal by York County sheriff Michael Bemis to create m, Bob Young

Link

"Newsreal" column on a recent meeting between the Portland City Council and advo, Bob Young

Link

"Newsreal" piece by Bob Young and Al Diamon analyzing the fallout caused by Sena

Link

"Newsreal" piece on allegations by the Maine Choice Coalition that Maine Medical, Bob Young

Link

"Newsreal" piece on apartment building incinerators in Portland. Five apartment, Bob Young

Link

"Newsreal" piece on a proposal by state representative Bill Lemke to do away wit, Chris Barry

Link

"Newsreal" piece on a sexual harassment case involving Pamela Cormack-Pitts and, Stephane Fitch

Link

"Newsreal" piece on a yearlong investigation of the nuclear power industry in th, Bob Young

Link

"Newsreal" piece on Bruce Mayberry of Windham, who last summer had his weapon co, Chris Barry

Link

"Newsreal" piece on derivatives, the risky investment instruments that have acqu, Bob Young

Link

"Newsreal" piece on Harvey Prager, convicted drug smuggler and law student who w

Link

"Newsreal" piece on James J. Tracey Jr., the Republican candidate for state Hous

Link

"Newsreal" piece on James Tracey Jr., who on December 14 pleaded no contest to t

Link

"Newsreal" piece on last week's decision by Falmouth physician Dr. Gregory C. Lu, Al Diamon

Link

"Newsreal" piece on Maine Secretary of State G. William Diamond, a Democratic ca, Bob Young

Link

"Newsreal" piece on next week's election of the state's constitutional officers., Al Diamon

Link

"Newsreal" piece on Peter Hoglund of Portland, husband of former state represent

Link

"Newsreal" piece on Pharos House, a Portland prerelease center for federal inmat, Stephane Fitch

Link

"Newsreal" piece on Portland's gay-rights ordinance, which is threatened by a pr, Al Diamon

Link

"Newsreal" piece on the campaign funds raised by U.S. representatives Olympia Sn, Bob Young

Link

"Newsreal" piece on the city of Auburn's investment in derivatives, which are hi, Bob Young

Link

"Newsreal" piece on the continuing saga of the Portland West Neighborhood Planni, Bob Young

Link

"Newsreal" piece on the December 5 Portland School Committee Curriculum Committe, Andrew Hosch

Link

"Newsreal" piece on the gubernatorial candidates' responses to a set of six ques, Bob Young

Link

"Newsreal" piece on the hearing on juvenile crime in Maine held in Portland on A, Bob Young

Link

"Newsreal" piece on the hiring of Moses Sebunya, vice president of the local Nat, Bob Young

Link

"Newsreal" piece on the infestation of brown-tailed moth caterpillars on the isl, Chris Barry

Link

"Newsreal" piece on the July 15 public hearing at Portland High School on Centra

Link

"Newsreal" piece on the legislative committee seats assigned to Portland's legis

Link

"Newsreal" piece on the looming battle between Portland school and city official, Bob Young

Link

"Newsreal" piece on the Maine chapter of Action, Not Gridlock!, a national bipar

"Newsreal" piece on the Maine Narrow Gauge Railroad, which has yet to lay any tr

Link

"Newsreal" piece on the proposed $6 million renovation of the Lafayette Hotel on, Bob Young

Link

"Newsreal" piece on the proposed legislative bill that would allow Maine's paper

Link

"Newsreal" piece on the proposed merger of Portland's three hospitals, which was, Bob Young

Link

"Newsreal" piece on the recent Portland City Council vote to give Nichols Portla, Stephane Fitch

Link

"Newsreal" piece on the recent purchase of S. D. Warren by a consortium headed b

Link

"Newsreal" piece on the reinvention of city government in Portland. Portland ci, Bob Young

Link

"Newsreal" piece on the re-opening of the State Theater, which was built in 1929

Link

"Newsreal" piece on the results of the May 2 elections for the Portland City Cou, Bob Young

Link

"Newsreal" piece on the takings legislation that will be considered in the Maine, Bob Young

Link

"Newsreal" piece on the unrest at the Portland West Neighborhood Planning Counci, Bob Young

Link

"Newsreal" piece on the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers plan to cleanup the old oil

Link

"Newsreal" piece on the West End Wrecking Crew, a Portland gang with 13 members, Christopher Barry

Link

"Newsreal" piece on this week's campaign swing by U.S. represenative Thomas H. A

Link

"Newsreal" piece on Unum Corp.'s request for a $10 million tax break. The Portl, Bob Young

Link

"Newsreal" piece on U.S. represenative Olympia Snowe's condemnation of the Conce

Link

"Newsreal" piece on Zootz nightclub, which on December 19 gave in to a Portland, Andrew Hosch

Link

"Newsreal" piece profiling the candidates in the special election for the Maine, Wayne Curtis

Link

"Newsreal" piece reporting that abusive men in Greater Portland are invoking O.J

Link

"Newsreal" piece reporting that a study by the Preble Street Mental Health Consu, Christopher Barry

Link

"Newsreal" piece reporting that gay rights advocates will not introduce an anti-

Link

"Newsreal" piece reporting that Gov. King has sponsored legislation that would e

Link

"Newsreal" piece reporting that Green Party activist John Herrick has announced, Al Diamon

Link

"Newsreal" piece reporting that one year after launching an initiative to reinve

Link

"Newsreal" piece reporting that Portland West Neighborhood Planning Council Exec, Al Diamon

Link

"Newsreal" piece reporting that state senator Joe Brannigan, D-Portland, has man, Bob Young

Link

"Newsreal" piece reporting that the Maine Public Utilities Commission on May 3 o, Bob Young

Link

"Newsreal" piece reporting that the Portland City Council approved $71,000 in fe, Chris Barry

Link

"Newsreal" piece reporting that the Portland City Council on August 16 voted to

Link

"Newsreal" piece reporting that the Portland Friends of the Park Commission is p

Link

"Newsreal" piece that revisits the three juvenile offenders profiled in Casco Ba, Bob Young

New state revenue projections for the two-year period beginning July 1 show an i

“Newsworthy” piece on Daniel Stevenson, Mark Jeanneret

Link

New uses for the buildings soon to be vacated at the Maine Youth Center Center i, Allen Dammann

New York authorities have found the body of Kari Lynn Nixon, a 16-year-old girl,

New York-based Warren Kremer Paino is designing a 3-year, $9.6-million "It must, Edgar Allen Beem

New York native Alice Dunn, 46, opened her first small salvage store on Munjoy H, James V. Horrigan

New York Supreme Court Justice Joe Crater, who summered in Belgrade Lakes, vanis, Andrew Vietze

New York writer Judy Ostrow describes her restoration of a 19th-century Stoningt, Judy Ostrow

Next Friday more than 4,000 LL Bean workers will receive bonuses amounting to

Next Phase, Douglas Rooks

Next Tuesday, Gray voters will choose two people to serve on the board of School

Next week, the Cape Elizabeth Town Council will review the terms of a proposed a

Next week the Portland School Committee will decide whether to approve Paula Ago

"Nice Digs" story about archaeological digs around the state., Kevin LeDuc

Link

Nicholas and Lola Kampf, owners of the State Theatre in Portland, have filed sui, Sharon Bass

Nicholas B. DeMatos, 14, of Freeport, died yesterday in Paris, France, after fal

Nicholas S. Nadzo, a lawyer who represents Deering's District 3 on the Portland

Nichols Portland, an auto parts manufacturer, and Longfellow Inc, the owner of

Nick Jules, a security guard for Portland's Time and Temperature building, is co, Benzo Harris and Abby Parsons

Nicole Dembrow, 35, of Portland, has been sentenced to one year in jail with all

"Night Notes" piece on on legislation being introduced by state senator Rick Ben, Jay Davis

Night sights, including comets and northern lights are discussed in an article b, Roy A. Gallant

Night skiing is on the rise in southern Maine, at Lost Valley and Shawnee Peak,, Scott Andrews

Nina Mukho, a sixth-grader from Brunswick Junior High School, won the Cumberland

Nina Mukho, competing as Maine's representative in the Scripps Howard National S

Nine former S. D. Warren employees have filed an age discrimination suit over th

Nine men were the first Mainers to have their driver's licenses revoked under th

Nine representatives from four northeastern states and five Canadian provinces h

Nine residents of Isleboro were awarded college degrees this month, and some of

Nineteen sixteen photo and lengthy caption of fisherman and boat skipper Charle, Ellen MacDonald Ward

Ninety-seven percent of Maine's union United Parcel Service employees voted to g

Nine-year-old Amanda Watts of Westbrook is in Boston's Children's Hospital in se

Noble Salvage., Brian Kevin

Link

"Nocturnal Emissions" piece describing the second non-porn event to take place a, Zoe S. Miller

Link

"Nocturnal Emissions" piece on a recent concert by the neo-hippie band Phish of, Zoe S. Miller

Link

"Nocturnal Emissions" piece on cheap-beer nights at three of Portland's drinking, Zoe Miller

Link

"Nocturnal Emissions" piece on Molly Malone's and Empty Pockets, two new Irish p, Zoe S. Miller

Link

"Nocturnal Emissions" piece on Raoul's on Forest Avenue in Portland. Co-owners, Zoe S. Miller

Link

"Nocturnal Emissions" piece on the Asylum club, which might be the site of Portl, Zoe S. Miller

Link

"Nocturnal Emissions" piece on the author's favorite local bands: Bully Pulpit,, Zoe S. Miller

Link

"Nocturnal Emissions" piece on the author's visit to Mark's Showplace to see a g, Zoe S. Miller

Link

"Nocturnal Emissions" piece on the bars along Fore Street in Portland's Old Port, Zoe S. Miller

Link

"Nocturnal Emissions" piece on the closing of the Moon nightclub in Portland, a, Zoe S. Miller

Link

"Nocturnal Emissions" piece on the Fore Street sports bar, Fore Play., Zoe S. Miller

Link

"Nocturnal Emissions" piece on the holiday party thrown by the Olive Garden rest, Zoe S. Miller

Link

"Nocturnal Emissions" piece on the Industry, an all-ages dance club on Wharf Str, Zoe S. Miller

Link

"Nocturnal Emissions" piece on the new Big Easy blues club, at 55 Market Street, Zoe S. Miller

Link

"Nocturnal Emissions" piece on the Pavilion, a Portland nightclub that recently, Zoe S. Miller

Link

"Nocturnal Emissions" piece on The Penguin, a bar on Fore Street in Portland. T, Zoe S. Miller

Link

"Nocturnal Emissions" piece on The Penguin, which was ordered closed by the city, Zoe S. Miller

Link

"Nocturnal Emissions" piece on the Portland club and restaurant Brian Boru, whic, Zoe S. Miller

Link

"Nocturnal Emissions" piece on the Portland music group Rustic Overtones, which, Zoe S. Miller

Link

"Nocturnal Emissions" piece on the Rock, a Forest Avenue bar in Portland, which, Zoe S. Miller

Link

"Nocturnal Emissions" piece on the weekend jazz series at Grill 36 on Market Str, Zoe S. Miller

Link

"Nocturnal Emissions" piece on two new additions to Portland's bar scene. Somew, Zoe S. Miller

Noncustodial fathers in Maine are increasingly accusing the courts of gender bia, Sharon Bass

Norma Johnsen describes her experience as the patron of a number of Maine libra, Norma Johnsen

Norma Lynn Peterson, 12, of Windham, in 1987 was diagnosed with a disorder that

Normand Goupil, 38, of Portland, routinely photographs illegally parked official

Norman Harrington, 46, the Old Town police officer seeking $2.5 million in damag

Norman L. Berthiaume, 45, of Old Orchard Beach, has filed suit in U.S. District

Norm Kalloch, state soil scientist, is advocating the establishment of an offici

"North.", Hailey Gutwin

North Berwick selectmen proclaimed Sunday Appreciation Day for Dr. John Keohan,

"North by East" about Ed Flanagan, president of Jasper Wyman and Son, the state'

"North by East." Alas, all seven pictures are of actual State of Maine instant

"North by East." Alex Coker is the truant officer of the Old Orchard Beach scho

"North by East." A lifesize bust of Western-film director John Ford, of Portlan

"North by East." Although state law requires that every Maine student take a Ma

"North by East." An auction marked the final closure of the elementary school i

"North by East." Andrew Mead, chief justice of Maine's Superior Court, opened t

"North by East." Aroostook County is growing rare apples. Many are distibuted

"North by East." As Amtrak is approaching a Portland station, state transportat

"North by East." Bangor city engineer Jim Ring is one of the state's thriftiest

"North by East." Bath Iron Works will build the Navy's second amphibious transp

"North by East." Belgrade Lakes hosts an annual loon-calling contest.

"North by East." Biography and obituary of Down East columnist Gene Letourneau.

"North by East." Biologists plan to fit juvenile salmon on the Narragaugas Rive

"North by East." Carrabassett Valley Academy has a new, 20,000-square-foot gym,

"North by East." Chart showing the arrival times of all Portland Jetport flight

"North by East." Chris and Patricia Dunn run the Canine Country Club, a "dog da

"North by East." Claw Island Foods in Vinalhaven is building a global, multi-mi

"North by East." Coach John Marshall from Maine is attempting to win sailing's

"North by East." Coke's "Surfing" ad in "Kingston County, Maine," was actually

"North by East." Colby College and three campuses of the University of Maine ea

"North by East." Comments of the Maine Film Office's Greg Gadberry on the telev

"North by East." Comments on Maine's blue law prohibiting car sales on Sunday;

"North by East." Comments on the dawn of the new century in Maine, and profiles

"North by East." Comments on the new Maine license plate.

"North by East." Cook's Lobster House on Bailey Island, which has become nation

"North by East." Curmudgeon John Barnett left the town of Benton $30,000 in his

"North by East." David and Mildred Crosby sold their barn to a buyer who will mo

"North by East." Description of Museum Research Associates, Ron Kley and Jane R

"North by East." Description of specialty potato chip flavors once made by Hump

"North by East." Description of the annual football game between Biddeford High

"North by East." Description of the distribution of keys to the city of Portlan

"North by East." Description of the potluck suppers run every month in Belgrade

"North by East." Description of the purchase of Hannaford Brothers Co., owner o

"North by East." Description of the work of Christine Peters, shoe model at Col

"North by East." Descriptions of five statistics regarding commerce in Bar Harb

"North by East." Descriptions of Ogunquit's Marginal Way; Cathie McBrierty's ch

"North by East." Descriptions of Roland Beauregard's objection to the name "Bub

"North by East." Descriptions of the closure of the newspaper "Maine Times" and

"North by East." Descriptions of three statistics on Maine commerce.

"North by East." Despite a large influx of coyotes, presumably in pursuit of th

"North by East." Down East lobstermen fear that the lobster population risks co

"North by East." Easton potato farmer Gaylen Flewelling is one of the few hand-

"North by East." Eight Maine fishing statistics, with detailed captions.

"North by East." E. S. Cole snow scoops, built in Saco by Dan Baillargeon, were

"North by East." Every Memorial Day, an honor guard visits the Gray town cemete

"North by East." Every September, Nancy Butler and Linda Butler Perkins hand ou

"North by East." Extinction is a possibility for Atlantic salmon in Maine, as a

"North by East." Fencers like John Krause and Nancy Becker are becoming more com

"North by East." Five statistics, with detailed captions, and three related fact

"North by East." For the first time in many years, Joseph Frost discovered Main

"North by East." For the first time since its founding in 1927, Moody's Diner i

"North by East." Four Maine retirees built the bleachers at Biddeford's Waterho

"North by East." Four statistics, with detailed descriptions of state and feder

"North by East." Four statistics, with detailed explanations, on Maine tourism.

"North by East." Fourteen statistics and comments on liquor consumption in Main

"North by East." Fourteen statistics, with detailed captions, on Maine surf.

"North by East." Fourteen statistics, with detailed captions, on Portland's Old, Jeff Clark

"North by East." Fourteen statistics, with detailed descriptions, regarding the

"North by East." Franklin Memorial Hospital in Farmington now allows the uninsu

"North by East." Gary Eckmann's McDonald's restaurant in Greenville, subject of

"North by East." Generated to publicize the Winterfest, the four-million-pound

"North by East." Goose Creek Farm in Winterport has Maine's largest herd of lon

"North by East." Gov. Angus King tours Maine on his motorcycle.

"North by East." Harmony residents remain upset by their missing bridge, which

"North by East." Hugh Durgin of Blue Hill has spent two years searching for a M

"North by East." In 1988, Southern Maine Technical College (SMTC) instructor Pe

"North by East." In a partnership unique in America, Thomas College in Watervil

"North by East." In southern Maine, March holds the state's trickiest weather.

"North by East." Interview on various bee-related topics with state bee inspect

"North by East." Interview with Portland Downtown Guide Jamie Grant.

"North by East." In the first relocation program attempted in Maine, and maybe

"North by East." In the last four years, the number of Maine farmers markets ha

"North by East." In the wake of Porltand's downtown growth, Levinsky's departme

"North by East." It remains unclear how much of Sears Island the state will lea

"North by East." Janet Roberts directs the Maine State Library's Maine Newspape

"North by East." Judy Steele of Troy, a barn expert, manages the Maine Barns an

"North by East." Lewiston and Auburn have recently developed quickly, and mayor

"North by East." Lewiston boxer Joey Gamache is retiring.

"North by East." MacMahan Island was the first community in Maine to install an

"North by East." Mail carriers have difficulty with the five residents of Sidne

"North by East." Maine Coast Memorial Hospital in Ellsworth, using 20 volunteer

"North by East." Maine has the largest stand of European linden trees in New En

"North by East." Maine highways are replacing winter sand with salt. I-95 is t

"North by East." Maine is losing one-room schoolhouses on Great Cranberry Islan

"North by East." Maine loons, already suffering from mercury contamination, are

"North by East." Maine's deer population is estimated at 331,000, and 12,173 Ma

"North by East." Maine shipped fifteen osprey to Ohio to help that state rebuil

"North by East." Maine tourists spend an average of $8.2 million a day. Related

"North by East." Mark and Sylvia Katz of Hallowell make Voicekins, recording st

"North by East." Miles Memorial Hospital in Damariscotta's annual rummage sale

"North by East." Monterey (California) Bay Aquarium's warning against consuming

"North by East." Monticello voted overwhelmingly to retain its status as one of

"North by East." Mount Desert Island and Acadia National Park have started the

"North by East." Mount Desert Island has one of the worst infestations on the E

"North by East." Nancy Smith's General Store on Swans Island is now for sale.

"North by East." New public restrooms are scheduled to open in Portland's Old P

"North by East." Nineteen miles of the Maine Turnpike between Newry and Upton w

"North by East." Norman and Althea Green have written a book tracing the origin

"North by East" note on the length of the Maine coastline, which increased from

"North by East" noting the flood that washed through down Fort Fairfield last Ap

"North by East." Obituary of South Berwick writer Gladys Hasty Carroll, author

"North by East." On Deer Isle, Congregational minister Roger Burkhart sees his

"North by East." On her death in 1995, Alys West left $250,000 to the Boothbay

"North by East" on snoweater fogs, which rise on mild, moonlit nights and signal

"North by East." On the last full day of this school year, all students at Lewi

"North by East." Organic milk has been very successful in Maine, which is losin

"North by East" piece about 80-year-old Francis Fenton, of Mercer, who was so co

"North by East" piece about a dozen students in the third through the sixth grad

"North by East" piece about Albert Mahar, 84, the postmaster of Dennysville, who

"North by East" piece about David Barry, of Bowdoinham, who operates the Market

"North by East" piece about Donna McLellan, who has been postmistress at Alna f

"North by East" piece about Dr. John W. Miner, of Robbinston on the St. Croix Ri

"North by East" piece about Emily Stacy, 86, of East Wilton, who started operat

"North by East" piece about fourth-generation slater Victor Wright, 34, who was

"North by East" piece about Harriet B. Shaw, of Alfred, who historian and stamp

"North by East" piece about Jim Andrews of Arundel, who has a long history of sa

"North by East" piece about Jim Haskell, Jr., the economic development director

"North by East" piece about John Cleveland of South Paris who got a rechargeabl

"North by East" piece about Jotul USA, the Portland-based subsidiary of the well

"North by East" piece about Mike Dublois, of Mexico, who is attempting to intere

"North by East" piece about opposums which have made their way to Maine and are

"North by East" piece about physics professor Paul Camp of the University of Mai

"North by East" piece about Rod Mitchell, who built his multimillion-dollar Port

"North by East" piece about Ron Masure and his partners in T-M Corporation in Gr

"North by East" piece about some of the liberties Paramont Pictures has taken wi

"North by East" piece about the concern caused by the third year of decline in t

"North by East" piece about the growing frequency of automobile-moose collisions

"North by East" piece about the Lemon Sale held by Reny's department stores each

"North by East" piece about the Lincolnville Town Band, a 33-person ensemble tha

"North by East" piece about the mass kiss-in held at the University of Maine's A

"North by East" piece about the Peaks Island and its out-of-control deer populat

"North by East" piece about the poetry slam held at the Trophy Room at the Big B

"North by East" piece about the rebirth of the cranberry industry in Maine. In

"North by East" piece about the residents of the town of Pownal, who have decide

"North by East" piece about the South Portland-built "Jeremiah O'Brien," the las

"North by East" piece about the stiff competition Maine woolen mills, such as th

"North by East" piece about the telecommunications changes likely to come to Mai

"North by East" piece about the town of Georgetown, which has honored 89-year-ol

"North by East" piece about the two gardens kept by the firefighters of Bangor's

"North by East" piece about the value of the cruise ship industry to Maine and G

"North by East" piece about the way to pronounce various Maine place names, such

"North by East" piece about York Beach's Goldenrod restaurant and candy shop, w

"North by East" piece briefly reporting that Redbook magazine has judged Aroosto

"North by East" piece comparing the 68 percentage of forest cover in Maine in 18

"North by East" piece consisting of brief interviews with Mainers on the issue o

"North by East" piece containing 2002 crime statistics for Portland.

"North by East" piece describing how gray squirrels are the third most-common ca

"North by East" piece, featuring an interview in question-and-answer format, wit

"North by East" piece featuring an interview in question-and-answer format with

"North by East" piece featuring an interview in question-and-answer format with

"North by East" piece following up a query in the April issue of Down East askin

"North by East" piece International Paper's (IP) development of a recyclable, bi

"North by East" piece in which Jay Epsy, president of the Brunswick-based Maine

"North by East" piece listing circulation numbers for Maine's major newspapers f

"North by East" piece listing ice-out dates on selected Maine lakes and giving

"North by East" piece looking at the matter-of-fact way people in Northern Maine

"North by East" piece noting Down East Magazine, founded by Duane Doolittle in 1

"North by East" piece noting that Freeport retailer L. L. Bean has added an inch

"North by East" piece noting that Maine has the second-highest percentage of li

"North by East" piece noting that Maine is one of ten states that have an implie

"North by East" piece noting that Maine is the only state that has used its mone

"North by East" piece noting that Maine's 5.28 percentage of French-speaking res

"North by East" piece noting that Maine, unlike some states, does not require pe

"North by East" piece noting that since the Maine Turnpike was redesignated Inte

"North by East" piece noting that state tax officials collected $37 million from

"North by East" piece noting that under a new law, veterinarians will be exempt

"North by East" piece noting the death of Helen Nearing, wife of the late Scott

"North by East" piece noting the five top pedestrian border crossing stations be

"North by East" piece noting the statistic that in 2001, Maine had some 12,000 m

"North by East" piece on a 1,910-acre property with over four miles of shoreline

"North by East" piece on a 25 percent drop in the number of people taking whitew

"North by East" piece on a 450-pound bronze statue of a caribou, created by scul

"North by East" piece on a $5 million tugboat being built at the Washburn & Doug

"North by East" piece on a banner reportedly flown at the Twentieth Maine Regime

"North by East" piece on a battle in South Portland over hanging yellow ribbons

"North by East" piece on a bill sponsored by Portland Democratic representative

"North by East" piece on a bill that New Hampshire's Republican senator Jack Bar

"North by East" piece on a controversy about the city of Portland accepting a gi

"North by East" piece on a dozen residents and visitors to Maine who describe th

"North by East" piece on a feature in the June issue of Vogue magazine, in which

"North by East" piece on a federal warning in Maine newspapers about an avian vi

"North by East" piece on a flock of wild mallards that has been congregating for

"North by East" piece on a four-year study by scientists from the University of

"North by East" piece on a fund set up by Percival Baxter, the genius of Maine w

"North by East" piece on a gift of 10,000 acres of land in Cutler and Whiting, w

"North by East" piece on a group of civil engineering students at the University

"North by East" piece on a group of people in Portland who are meeting to discus

"North by East" piece on Al Berard of Sanford, who has won first prize for his g

"North by East" piece on a legislative panel recommendation that a chickadee rep

"North by East" piece on Al Hawkes, 74, former owner of Hawkes Plaza on Route 30

"North by East" piece on a Maine law that prohibits releasing EZPass toll collec

"North by East" piece on a Maine law that requires drivers to report the acciden

"North by East" piece on a map of Maine featured on Mister Bagel T-shirts that p

"North by East" piece on a missing 700-lb. bronze bell that formerly hung in Win

"North by East" piece on a month-long catch-and-release season for Atlantic Salm

"North by East" piece on an a marine archaeology expedition early this summer le

"North by East" piece on a national network of women called the Red Hat society,

"North by East" piece on Andy Swift of Hope, who owns Swift's Firefly Restoratio

"North by East" piece on an effort by the Maine Film Office in Augusta to bring

"North by East" piece on a new expeditionary learning school in Portland, Casco

"North by East" piece on a new Public Broadcasting Service (PBS) reality series,

"North by East" piece on a new regulation by the Maine Bureau of Parks and Lands

"North by East" piece on a new title to be awarded to the Sts. Peter and Paul Ch

"North by East" piece on a new Washington, D.C.-based CFED study, whcih ranks Ma

"North by East" piece on an exhibit of 238 silhouettes, all cut by Galen Jerome

"North by East" piece on an experimental catch-and-release salmon season from Se

"North by East" piece on an increase by the state's Office of Geographic Informa

"North by East" piece on an increase in moose-vehicle collisions since the widen

"North by East" piece on an Island Institute lobster-tracking project that was m

"North by East" piece on Annie Cook, who is using Segway battery-powered persona

"North by East" piece on an observation that high gas prices are not keeping tou

"North by East" piece on an unexplained glitch that has dispatchers at the Penob

"North by East" piece on an unnamed northern Maine librarian who discovered that

"North by East" piece on a painting rescued from a Maryland church's trash pile,

"North by East" piece on a PBS broadcast," Colonial House," which was filmed las

"North by East" piece on a project undertaken by Earle G. Shettleworth, Jr., dir

"North by East" piece on a proposal to add ferry service between Bar Harbor and

"North by East" piece on a public art installation by local artist Diana Cherbul

"North by East" piece on a Rangeley region camp, Forest Lodge, made famous by Lo

"North by East" piece on a recent proposal by the Fayette planning board to requ

"North by East" piece on a recent shift in the pattern of lobster catches in Mai

"North by East" piece on a resolution passed by the Maine Legislature ten years

"North by East" piece on Aroostook County's $500,000 advertising campaign, desig

"North by East" piece on a sand castle built with 900,000 pounds of sand at Falm

"North by East" piece on a secession threat from the towns of Lincolnville and I

"North by East" piece on a small pond on the campus of the University of Maine a

"North by East" piece on a state panel that will forward its recommendations to

"North by East" piece on: a storm that tore away the last three masts on the Lut

"North by East" piece on a survey by the Maine Bureau of Highway Safety that fou

"North by East" piece on a survey of 150 city flags conducted by the North Ameri

"North by East" piece on a survey taken of Route 1 traffic in midcoast Maine tha

"North by East" piece on a tax revolt catalyzed by the Maine Revenue Services' a

"North by East" piece on a trade link between Portland and Husavik, a small port

"North by East" piece on a unique grocery delivery service for Matinicus Island,

"North by East" piece on Av-Intel Inc. of Ottawa, Ontario, which plans to open a

"North by East" piece on a well-loved Christmas display featuring mechanical elv

"North by East" piece on Belfast photographer Charles Laurier Dufour, who owns t

"North by East" piece on Bernal Allen (1900-1995), the son of a Kentucky coal-mi

"North by East" piece on Bill Kenny, vice president of Portland's Woodfords Club

"North by East" piece on birdwatchers who look for unusual gulls at the Portland

"North by East" piece on Blue Hill community radio station WERU, which was named

"North by East" piece on: Bob Allen, who owns the Gingerbread House restaurant i

"North by East" piece on Borealis Breads, formerly known as Bodacious Breads. O

"North by East" piece on Bowdoin College professor and molecular biologist Carey

"North by East" piece on brothers John and Don Blevin, who opened a drive-in the

"North by East" piece on Bruce Kershner, a scientist and author who says he disc

"North by East" piece on Bruce Schwab, a California rigger, who has spent the pa

"North by East" piece on Bruce Schwab, the first American to finish a solo, nons

"North by East" piece on Buxton's postal system, which utilizes six different zi

"North by East" piece on California rigger Bruce Schwab, who spent a year at Por

"North by East" piece on Camden illustrator and animator Noah Jones, 33, who pos

"North by East" piece on Camden's reliable Santa Claus, in the person of Don Gre

"North by East" piece on Camden's restrictive signage ordinance, which makes it

"North by East" piece on campground reservations at Baxter State Park, which are

"North by East" piece on Carroll Shores, owner of the last Waterville dairy farm

"North by East" piece on Cecil Garcelon, 68, of Linneus, who is doing a brisk bu

"North by East" piece on Chad Callan and Soren Hansen, University of Maine docto

"North by East" piece on chef Sam Hayward's upscale Fore Street restaurant in Po

"North by East" piece on Chester Morris, who last year took over the organizatio

"North by East" piece on Chris Polson and Joe Calderwood, who make high quality

"North by East" piece on churches that are allowing cellular companies to put an

"North by East" piece on Clynk of Scarborough, a company that allows customers t

"North by East" piece on comments from a dozen people about their favorite place

"North by East" piece on comparative prices by the gallon, of gasoline, heating

"North by East" piece on Congress Street's vacancy rate, which has declined from

"North by East" piece on Corey Esposito's machine shop in Surry, where, in the s

"North by East" piece on Cornell University's College of Ornithology, which is t

"North by East" piece on Craig MacDonald of Bangor, who posted "Killdeer Chicks

"North by East" piece on cutting your own Christmas tree, warning against cuttin

"North by East" piece on Daggett Rock in Phillips, a huge boulder called an "err

"North by East" piece on Daryl Hall, of the rock duo Hall & Oates, who has purch

"North by East" piece on David Spicer of the Maine Forest Service, who is updati

"North by East" piece on deer depradation hunts on some Maine islands, which hav

"North by East" piece on Dennis Cyr of Fort Kent, who hopes to draw fishermen fr

"North by East" piece on Don Crisman of Kennebunk, who is one of only five fans

"North by East" piece on Dr. R. Blake Whitaker, a Turner-based medical researche

"North by East" piece on Dysart's truck stop and restaurant in Carmel, which has

"North by East" piece on E.B. Campbell, the Millinocket auto mechanic responsibl

"North by East" piece on efforts to eradicate or control some two dozen non-nati

"North by East" piece on efforts to restore a colony of murres on Matinicus Rock

"North by East" piece on Elizabeth "Betty" Noyce, who died in September at the a

"North by East" piece on Elizabeth Taylor Lane in South Portland, named not for

"North by East" piece on "Elsa's Bridge," between Dingley and Great islands in H

"North by East" piece on Eric Hayward, president of the Libra [Foundation] Futur

"North by East" piece on Ethel H. Dunn's recreation of a barn on her Kennebunk p

"North by East" piece on evidence uncovered in 2003 on St. Croix Island indicati

"North by East" piece on Fairchild Camera and Equipment Corporation, which was f

"North by East" piece on feral cats that have been attracted to kitty litter use

"North by East" piece on fifty public libraries in Maine from Kennebunk to Van B

"North by East" piece on five great places to take a picnic in South Portland.

"North by East" piece on five moose permits that were auctioned last spring for

"North by East" piece on Flo's Steamed Dogs, a tiny take-out stand on Route 1 in

"North by East" piece on Fort Knox in Prospect. George McLeod started Friends o

"North by East" piece on Frank Norman of Lewiston. His company, Future Fuel Tec

"North by East" piece on Freecycle.org, a collection of free Web sites where mem

"North by East" piece on Freeport's approval of a grain silo for Gritty McDuff's

"North by East" piece on Friends of Montpelier, the 1930s replica of General Hen

"North by East" piece on Fryeburg potato grower Don Thibodeau, who with his two

"North by East" piece on Gary Howard, Brunswick fire chief and a noted gemstone

"North by East" piece on George Martikke of Starks, president of Boer Goat Breed

"North by East" piece on Gerald Nickerson of Caribou and Pete Griffeth of New Sw

"North by East" piece on Glenn Hodgkins of the U.S. Geological Survey office in

"North by East" piece on greater efficiencies in the postal system, which do not

"North by East" piece on Greg Rossel of Troy, a boatbuilder who organized a clas

"North by East" piece on Hadley Horch, assistant professor of biology and neuros

"North by East" piece on hail and thunderstorms in Maine.

"North by East" piece on Hallowell restoration expert John Kennedy who was tappe

"North by East" piece on Harpswell fisherman Robert Anderson, who built a floati

"North by East" piece on Harpswell's 81-year-old Cribstone Bridge, the only one

"North by East" piece on Harpswell's "Causeway Lady," Elsa Martz, who spearheade

"North by East" piece on hot-button topics that might appear on town meeting age

"North by East" piece on housing in Maine. With statistics on total housing uni, Staff

"North by East" piece on how 27 percent of fast-food patrons in the Portland are

"North by East" piece on how 61 percent of full-time students in the University

"North by East" piece on how actor Paul Newman has contributed to causes in Wate

"North by East" piece on how a legislative bill was fast-tracked to allow Kelley

"North by East" piece on how, along with the advent of the new E-Z Pass toll sys

"North by East" piece on how a new Portland ordinance was passed that would levy

"North by East" piece on Howard Simonton of Rockport, who was able to persuade a

"North by East" piece on how a Southerner assumed that lobster traps stacked in

"North by East" piece on how Bangor Savings Bank is trying to rejuvenate its ima

"North by East" piece on how Bowdoin College in Brunswick is looking for a gargo

"North by East" piece on how chimney fires increase in number as the price of ho

"North by East" piece on how domestic diva Martha Stewart wants to trademark the

"North by East" piece on how fishermen out of Portland are paying fifty to sixty

"North by East" piece on how Ken Walsh, CEO of the Alfond Youth Center and forme

"North by East" piece on how last year's colder-than-normal winter cooled the Gu

"North by East" piece on how Maine is one of just 19 states that requires regula

"North by East" piece on how Maine Medical Center in Portland redesigned the tra

"North by East" piece on how Maine Public Radio is raising more money in less ti

"North by East" piece on how Maine's Bureau of Medical Services, which oversees

"North by East" piece on how Maine's electric companies are phasing out meter re

"North by East" piece on how Maine springs are starting earlier and staying warm

"North by East" piece on how Maine's public schools fared during one of the snow

"North by East" piece on how Maine's revamped lobster license plate lost by one

"North by East" piece on how Maine State Police intend to crack down on speeders

"North by East" piece on how Maine's tourism industry will be affected this summ

"North by East" piece on how Maine students follow a school calendar that is rar

"North by East" piece on how Maine Turnpike officials are seeking to win removal

"North by East" piece on how Maine voted on certain national and state issues fr

"North by East" piece on how Maine was chosen by Virginia-based Smithfield Foods

"North by East" piece on how Maine was the first English common law jurisdiction

"North by East" piece on how Monhegan Island residents are trying to limit the b

"North by East" piece on how neighbors and businesses rallied to build a free, h

"North by East" piece on how paper mills in Gardiner and Westbrook imported Egyp

"North by East" piece on how Portland's New Year's celebration, formerly sponsor

"North by East" piece on how potholes develop in Maine roads in the spring and t

"North by East" piece on how residents of some Maine towns, often those borderin

"North by East" piece on how some Maine beaches, such as Long Sands Beach in Yor

"North by East" piece on how some Maine towns are getting tougher about rural cl

"North by East" piece on how some robins overwinter in Maine, generally gatherin

"North by East" piece on how state law governs the order of questions on state v

"North by East" piece on how state senator Ethan Strimling, D-Portland, is respo

"North by East" piece on how the controversial widening of the Maine Turnpike, c

"North by East" piece on how the distance between southern and northern Maine ma

"North by East" piece on how the July 26-29 Democratic National Convention in Bo

"North by East" piece on how the Maine Department of Inland Fisheries and Wildli

"North by East" piece on how the Maine Department of Transportation is working t

"North by East" piece on how the Maine Fire Marshal's Office stakes out parking

"North by East" piece on how the Norwegian stove company Jotul is naming its sto

"North by East" piece on how the ratio of native Mainers to residents "from away

"North by East" piece on how the state is heating some of its government buildin

"North by East" piece on how the term "Down East" has evolved and fallen out of

"North by East" piece on how the town of Farmington has repurchased a 1944 Oshko

"North by East" piece on how the U.S. Special Forces recently participated in a

"North by East" piece on how Verizon, the phone company, removed Christmas light

"North by East" piece on how vultures are unlikely harbingers of spring. They r

"North by East" piece on how Wells is the unlikely world headquarters of Nova Ro

"North by East" piece on how wet conditions this spring might increase Maine's p

"North by East" piece on how with declining federal funds, Acadia National Park

"North by East" piece on hurricanes in Maine, including the peak season, average, Staff

"North by East" piece on interpreters for the Maine Medical Center in Portland,

"North by East" piece on "island cars," which are not as closely regulated as of

"North by East" piece on Jameson Tavern in Freeport, formerly the Codman Tavern,

"North by East" piece on Jessica Muhlin, a University of Maine graduate student

"North by East" piece on Jim Corliss, owner of Newburgh-based Piper Mountain Chr

"North by East" piece on Jim Horowitz's Oxford Aviation, which started with one

"North by East" piece on jobs in Maine with statistics on the number of telemark, Staff

"North by East" piece on Joe Cupo's nightly marine forecast on WCSH6, upon which

"North by East" piece on John Hathaway, owner of Shucks Maine Lobster in Richmon

"North by East" piece on Lauren Coleman, retired University of Southern Maine pr

"North by East" piece on librarians at the Bangor Public Library, who are fieldi

"North by East" piece on Lincolnville artist, Neil Welliver, who died April 5.

"North by East" piece on lobsterman and Bowdoin College carpenter Mark Donovan,

"North by East" piece on Longfellow's Greenhouses in Manchester, which has opene

"North by East" piece on lost-and-found items on Mount Desert Island that make t

"North by East" piece on Louise Poppema, of Cumberland, who has a business in wh

"North by East" piece on Maine representative Barbara Merrill of Appleton, who h

"North by East" piece on Maine's 2002 crime statistics. The state has the faste

"North by East" piece on Maine's connection to the 1692 Salem Witch Trials, with

"North by East" piece on Maine's distinction among the lower 48 states of having

"North by East" piece on Maine's largest islands and how they compare in land ar, Staff

"North by East" piece on Maine's rank as having the lowest per capita prison pop

"North by East" piece on Maine's substantial presence on the online auction site

"North by East" piece on Maine towns that are doing away with annual town meetin

"North by East" piece on Marc Bretton of Saco, who with his partner Don Paquette

"North by East" piece on Mary Jane Perry, a professor at the University of Maine

"North by East" piece on members of the Rockland High School class of 1963 who a

"North by East" piece on Michael Hussey, an Alfred native and the creator of Rat

"North by East" piece on Monhegan Island's successful "Doc on a Rock" program, w

"North by East" piece on Monty the Moose, a small stuffed animal that has become

"North by East" piece on moose-vehicle collisions, which peak in May and June.

"North by East" piece on Mount Pleasant Cemetery in South Portland, where some o

"North by East" piece on municipalities that participated in the Lincoln County

"North by East" piece on Nabisco Co.'s decision to stop making Crown Pilot brand

"North by East" piece on new legislation and more rigorous enforcement of all-te

"North by East" piece on new state regulations related to the harvesting of elve

"North by East" piece on North Woods landmark, Pittston Farm, begun in the late

"North by East" piece on Old Orchard Beach's The Ballpark, for which the town wa

"North by East" piece on Outside magazine's choice of Lincolnville as one of Ame

"North by East" piece on Paula K. Haddow, director of the ScienceWorks program a

"North by East" piece on Pemaquid Point in Bristol, where thrillseekers go to wa

"North by East" piece on Peter Homer of Southwest Harbor, a former aerospace eng

"North by East" piece on Poland Regional High School, which now requires every m

"North by East" piece on Portland author Amy Sutherland, who promoted her book,

"North by East" piece on Portland-based Planet Dog, which has brought its offsho

"North by East" piece on Portland City Hall's unsuccessful attempt to fight the

"North by East" piece on Portland regulations that require anyone doing business

"North by East" piece on Portland's Payson Park, known as one of the best sleddi

"North by East" piece on Presque Isle High School, in the heart of Maine's large

"North by East" piece on Pride Manufacturing Co. in Burnham, which is running fl

"North by East" piece on Professor Habib Dagher and a crew at the Advanced Engin

"North by East" piece on purple loosestrife. The flashy summer plant is so inva

"North by East" piece on radio coverage of traffic conditions in Maine that exte

"North by East" piece on Ralph and Lisa Turner of Laughing Stock Farm in Freepor

"North by East" piece on Ray Huizenga of Florida, whose name will be attached to

"North by East" piece on research sparked by Wendy Porter of Interface Fabrics i

"North by East" piece on Reverb, a Portland nonprofit founded by Wells native La

"North by East" piece on Richard Albert of Township 15 Range 15, who believes he

"North by East" piece on Ronnie Wilson, who wants a triangular section of Portla

"North by East" piece on Room 807 at the Sheraton Tara hotel in South Portland,

"North by East" piece on Rosella Loveitt, 93, of South Portland, unofficial city

"North by East" piece on rumors of a ghost that once haunted the governor's offi

"North by East" piece on Russell Knowles, of the Maine Department of Transportat

"North by East" piece on sales of hybrid cars in Maine, noting that the combinat

"North by East" piece on Samuel Charles Pennington III, 78, of Waldoboro, "found

"North by East" piece on Seattle-based Blethen Newspapers' sale of the Portland

"North by East" piece on seed companies in Maine, which have been experiencing a

"North by East" piece on Sherman Lake in Newcastle, which became a tidal stream

"North by East" piece on Simones Hot Dog Stand in Lewiston, a local gathering pl

"North by East" piece on some qualities that define the city of Portland and its

"North by East" piece on South Portland optometrist Roger Gagnon, who has develo

"North by East" piece on statistics related to the Maine Turnpike, its Transpass

"North by East" piece on statistics relating to the costs of the now-obsolete Ma

"North by East" piece on Stephen Reiling, director of the Maine Agriculture Cent

"North by East" piece on student cast-offs from Bowdoin College in Brunswick, wh

"North by East" piece on students at the 43 Maine schools that have participated

"North by East" piece on students at Whitefield Elementary School, whose scores

"North by East" piece on Sturdi-Bilt Sheds of Smyrna, one of the major industrie

"North by East" piece on Taiwanese student Huei-Ju "Lulu" Yen, who was finally a

"North by East" piece on Tarbucket Night, the city of Portland's festive celebra

"North by East" piece on Ted Ames, Stonington lobsterman, marine biologist, and

"North by East" piece on Terry Lewis's Nonesuch House Antiques in Wiscasset, whi

"North by East" piece on the 20,000 tons of tapioca that arrive in Portland and

"North by East" piece on the 2006 Uniform Crime Statistics report released by th

"North by East" piece on the 33 percent rate of parking ticket payments in afflu

"North by East" piece on the 40-year-old Brown's Old-Fashioned Ice Cream shop on

"North by East" piece on the 60-foot-tall brick chimney at the former Brunswick

"North by East" piece on the 86-year-old Portland City Hall bell tower clock, wh

"North by East" piece on the Acid Rain Retirement Fund, founded by University of

"North by East" piece on the Allagash Alliance Group, a coalition that wants to

"North by East" piece on the Androscoggin Riverlands State Park, proposed by the

"North by East" piece on the aptness of Maine's state motto, "Dirigo," meaning "

"North by East" piece on the average days of fog in various Maine locations and

"North by East" piece on the Bangor-based 101st Air Refueling Wing of the Maine

"North by East" piece on the Bangor-based Maine Lobster Promotion Council, which

"North by East" piece on the Bartol Library in Freeport, a small library on Main

"North by East" piece on the Belfast and Moosehead Lake Railroad Preservation So

"North by East" piece on the Belfast Curling Club, which celebrates its 50th ann

"North by East" piece on the Belgrade Regional Health Center, which as part of a

"North by East" piece on the Black Bear license plate, dedicated exclusively to

"North by East" piece on the brownish tinge that appears along the horizon in Ma

"North by East" piece on the cargo transported by Casco Bay Lines in 2003, inclu

"North by East" piece on the Casco Bay Lines $3 million passenger ferry, Aucocis

"North by East" piece on the Castine Post Office, which has been in the same bui

"North by East" piece on The Cat, a high-speed ferry that will offer weekend ser

"North by East" piece on the Cherryfield Band, a community band thrown together

"North by East" piece on the circa-1931 Waldo-Hancock Bridge, which has been rep

"North by East" piece on the city of Lewiston, which took over operations of its

"North by East" piece on the closure of the venerable Boom Chain restaurant in G

"North by East" piece on the Colony Hotel in Kennebunkport, which took the risk

"North by East" piece on the Cosmic Hippo, the first coffeehouse in Maine to off

"North by East" piece on the death of Bessie Phillips, 90, on April 17. She won

"North by East" piece on the death of John Cole, who died January 7 at the age o

"North by East" piece on the demise of snow fences in Maine. Until the recent p

"North by East" piece on the Department of Homeland Security's compromise measur

"North by East" piece on the discovery of a letter written by C. F. Williams, t

"North by East" piece on the dispute between Biddeford and Saco over which town

"North by East" piece on the effect on the Maine arts scene of the Skowhegan Sch

"North by East" piece on the Elm Research Institute, based in Harrisville, N.H.

"North by East" piece on the Ewing Marion Kauffman Foundation's recent 2006 Kauf

"North by East" piece on the extremely small chance that a devastating tsunami w

"North by East" piece on the fate of Pluto in the Maine Solar System Model, crea

"North by East" piece on the federal Food and Drug Administration's decision to

"North by East" piece on the final Eastern Maine Class A basketball tournament h

"North by East" piece on the first live transatlantic standard radio broadcast b

"North by East" piece on the first mosque in the United States, and perhaps in N

"North by East" piece on the five warmest February days on record for Portland,

"North by East" piece on the Forest Society of Maine's successful effort to rais

"North by East" piece on the former Dexter Shoe stores. Several have been turne

"North by East" piece on the franchise restaurant, Bugaboo Creek Steak House, ne

"North by East" piece on the Friday Night Jam at the Monson General Store, a pri

"North by East" piece on the furor created when Nabisco quietly dropped its prod

"North by East" piece on the growing number of Maine boats that are protected in

"North by East" piece on the history of Maine's Grange, also called the Order of

"North by East" piece on the "I Can't Hear You Now" campaign, inspired by Gov. J

"North by East" piece on the increase in Mainers buying air conditioners, althou

"North by East" piece on the increasing destructiveness of illegal all-terrain (

"North by East" piece on the increasing number of Mainers who are going to denti

"North by East" piece on the influx of retirees to the state, which has the thir

"North by East" piece on the Inland Fisheries and Wildlife's annual fish-stockin

"North by East" piece on the Inn by the Sea in Cape Elizabeth, which has welcome

"North by East" piece on the installation of an Internet Webcam that will allow

"North by East" piece on the Institute of Feng Shui and Geopathology in Portland

"North by East" piece on the landlocked Coast Guard Loran Station outside Caribo

"North by East" piece on the landmark Griffin Club in South Portland's Knightvil

"North by East" piece on the large, Maine-based Hannaford grocery store chain, w

"North by East" piece on the late, famous chef Julia Child, who made arrangement

"North by East" piece on the "Laura B," a former mailboat converted to carry pas

"North by East" piece on the Lewiston Maineiacs, a semiprofessional hockey team

"North by East" piece on the life of Edmund S. Muskie, a native of Rumford who b

"North by East" piece on the long-awaited development of Bangor's vast and vener

"North by East" piece on the Love Maine Lobster Claw Machine, manufactured by Bi

"North by East" piece on the Maine Department of Environmental Protection's goal

"North by East" piece on the Maine Department of Transportation, which began usi

"North by East" piece on the Maine Garden Railway Society, which sets up garden

"North by East" piece on the Maine Highland Games, scheduled for August 19 at Th

"North by East" piece on the Maine Marine Patrol, which uses a fleet of lobster

"North by East" piece on the Maine Public Utilities Commission's Efficiency Main

"North by East" piece on the Maine State Library's books-by-mail summer reading

"North by East" piece on the Maine State Museum's collection of 134 portraits in

"North by East" piece on the Maine Turnpike Authority's new electronic toll coll

"North by East" piece on the Megunticook Watershed Association, which built thre

"North by East" piece on the most stolen vehicle models in Maine, including pick

"North by East" piece on the name "Purpoodock," which was what South Portland wa

"North by East" piece on the naming of the new Penobscot River bridge between Pr

"North by East" piece on The National Pork Producers Council, which is claiming

"North by East" piece on the National Speleological Society, an organization of, Staff

"North by East" piece on the New England Lost Ski Areas Project, whose members s

"North by East" piece on the New England Music Camp on Lake Messalonskee in Sidn

"North by East" piece on the new glass-enclosed skywalk at the University of Sou

"North by East" piece on the new indoor farmer's market in Bangor, organized by

"North by East" piece on the new Powerball lottery, recently adopted in Maine.

"North by East" piece on the New Sharon Congregational Church, which has been of

"North by East" piece on the new South Portland Community Center, built last yea

"North by East" piece on the new U.S. Department of Agriculture Plant Hardiness

"North by East" piece on the Nickels-Sortwell House in Wiscasset, donated to the

"North by East" piece on the November referendum to decide whether the state sho

"North by East" piece on the number of traffic lights in South Portland--37--whi

"North by East" piece on the odd traveler who arrives at the Portland Internatio

"North by East" piece on the online posting of property tax assessment databases

"North by East" piece on the only slightly-worse-for-wear Twinkie that George St

"North by East" piece on the perhaps too great success of the reintroduction of, Edgar Allen Beem

"North by East" piece on the pilot for a Dutch reality show about a Dutch couple

"North by East" piece on the popular Daily Kos Web site, where the Cheers & Jeer

"North by East" piece on the popularity of lobster as a traditional Christmas di

"North by East" piece on the Portland Camera Club and famous photographers who h

"North by East" piece on the Portland Police Department's mounted unit and an in

"North by East" piece on the preparations Mainers take when a snowstorm is forec

"North by East" piece on the proposed sale of MDI (Mount Desert Island) Taxi an

"North by East" piece on the pros and cons of a failed proposal in the Legislatu

"North by East" piece on the purchase by Robert Moore of Kingfield, in a state t

"North by East" piece on the Ready brothers of Cape Elizabeth, whose "Catch a Pi

"North by East" piece on the recent approval by Greenville residents of construc

"North by East" piece on the recently published book "Discovering Old Bar Harbor

"North by East" piece on the redesign of license plates for legislators, which a

"North by 