University of Valencia Information

The University of Valencia is a public university considered as one of the ancient and biggest universities in Spain. It owns three campuses:

The Burjassot Campus where the colleges of chemistry, mathematics, pharmacy, biology, physics, and the engineering school are located.

The Blasco Ibañez Campus contains the schools of psychology, geography, medicine and dentistry, nursing, educational sciences, philosophy, history, physical education, physiotherapy, languages and the adjacent school of elementary teacher training.

The Tarongers campus where the Schools of economics , law, business and social sciences are situated.

Other Spanish college and universities include University of Barcelona, Autonomous University of Madrid, Autonomous University of Barcelona, Polytechnic University of Valencia, Complutense University of Madrid, University of Zaragoza, University of Granada and the University of Seville.

The university was founded on April 30, 1499 due to the efforts of St. Vincent Ferrer as well as a turnover of a free building by Mosen Pedro Vilaragut. During its early beginnings, the university established courses that included Latin, Greek, Hebrew, Arabic, philosophy, mathematics, and physics, theology, Canon law, and medicine. In the 17th and 18th centuries, the university rapidly developed. It became a frontline university in the various disciplines of mathematics, the humanities, philosophy, and medicine. It was the first university of Spain to initiate a course for the study of herbs. Large anatomical drawings were one of the greatest contributions of the Valencian students during this time. Many of them made valuable discoveries such as Pedro Ximeno, who discovered the third small bone of the ear; Luis Collado, a Botany professor who did astounding works on the study of plants; and Vicente Alonzo Lorente, who also made great accomplishments on Botany. The renowned botanist, Cavanilles, was also a product of the university.

Similarly ranked universities in the world include Charles University in Prague, Montpellier 2 University, and the University of Ulm.

University of Valencia Library

The university of Valencia has in its possession a library of 27,000 volumes. These, however, were ruined by military armies under the lead of General Suchet. One of the most valued professors of the university was D. Francisco Peréz Bayer, who assumed a great role in the government of Charles III of Spain. A number of colleges for the underprivileged and needy students where instituted in 1561, the first of which, was founded by St. Thomas of Villanova. Other colleges for the poor were founded by Doña Angela Alonsar, and Mosen Pedro Martín. The Corpus Christi, the most well-known of these colleges, was founded by Blessed Juan de Ribera.

Today, the university maintains its commitment in strengthening external relations with international universities. These are done through the creation of bilateral understanding or by active involvement in international educational curriculum and associations. It is currently steered by its Chancellor, Francisco Tomàs Vert.

University of Valencia Address

The official address is University of Valencia location is:

Av. Blasco Ibáñez 15.

Valencia 46010

Spain

University of Valencia Rankings and Quick Facts

University of Valencia rankingsRanking – Times 400 (UK)

393

University world Ranking – Jiaotong 500 (China)

203 to 304

European Rank (Jiaotong)

81 to 123

Universitat de València Facts

Students (Undergraduates / PG/ Total)

47,750

Faculty / Staff

2,140

Established

1499

Number of foreign students

2,765

Affiliations

UNIMED

References