Robert “Bob” James Chamberlain, 81, was born in Haverhill, Massachusetts on November 1, 1942, to parents, Harold and Betty Chamberlain and passed away Friday, July 5, 2024, at the Northwest Louisiana Veterans Home in Bossier City, Louisiana.

Services will be held on Thursday, July 11, 2024, at 1:00 p.m. at Rose-Neath Funeral Home, 2500 Southside Dr. Shreveport, LA. A visitation will be held on Thursday, July 11, 2024, at the funeral home from 12:00 p.m. until the time of the funeral. Officiating the service will be Pastor Terry Carter.

Bob was raised in upstate New York, and loved the outdoors, especially the water. Spending much time on Lake George, he learned boating skills and was able to navigate the area lakes like the back of his hand. Bob graduated from Hague High School in June 1962 and immediately joined the Marine Corps serving from 1962-1968. He was enlisted for six years and earned many awards, including 0311 Rifleman, Good Conduct, Sharpshooter .30 and .45, while serving on the USS Springfield.

After completing his military service, Bob married and started his family in New York before moving to Louisiana to be closer to his family and work with the family business, Shreveport News Agency. Finding that he preferred country living, he moved to Mooringsport and opened “Tower General Store,” enjoying meeting the community and being his own boss. After his children were grown, he moved to Little Rock and was again on the lake enjoying the water. Nothing compared to his love for Lake George, and he decided to return to his roots, moving back to Hague, NY.

Bob had many careers and enjoyed the diversity of each. Driving a school bus was one of the positions he enjoyed and resulted in the New York State Liberty Award for saving the life of an injured woman on the side of the road. Bob spent evenings driving a shuttle for the Sagamore, being the chosen driver for many important visitors, as well as being entrusted with the safety of guests at weddings and other large events.

In his spare time, Bob loved boating, golfing, working in the yard, social events, traveling adventures, and animals. Spending time with family was always treasured. He never met a stranger and wouldn’t hesitate to approach someone that he thought might need assistance. Bob could strike up a conversation with anyone, had a sense of humor, and loved to laugh.

Bob didn’t like to “let the grass grow under his feet. He was always on the go or talking about going on an adventure. He was spontaneous, and would often just start something, and figure out the logistics and details later. He worried little about things, and lived his life to the fullest as long as he was able.

Bob was preceded in death by his parents, Harold and Betty Chamberlain; brother, Harold Chamberlain and wife, Peggy; grandson, Zachary and wife of 21 years, Patricia.