Alpine Electronics of America, Inc., is the industry-leading manufacturer of high-performance mobile electronics, founded in 1978. Alpine is the only manufacturer specializing in mobile multimedia, an integrated system approach incorporating digital entertainment, security, and navigation products for your mobile entertainment. As a consolidated subsidiary of Alps Electric Co., Ltd., one of the world's premier manufacturers of electronic components for computer, communications, and car electronic equipment, Alpine is the specialized supplier of quality mobile electronics systems.

Alpine strives to answer the demands of consumers and automakers for high-quality, competitively priced products. The company utilizes leading-edge, digital technology in pursuit of excellence in sound reproduction. With the vision of combining music, visual images, and information, Alpine's Mobile Multimedia systems exceed concept expectations for a new kind of driving experience for the next century.

Mobile Multimedia Excellence

Alpine is generating a new kind of in-vehicle space based on the convergence of high-performance audio, video, navigation, and telematics in the form of Mobile Multimedia. In-vehicle navigation systems are the resource center of the company's Mobile Multimedia lineup. Intelligent Transportation Systems (ITS), digital versatile disc (DVD) players, Dolby Digital systems, satellite digital audio radio, mobile data linking, and communication through telematics devices will be fused with navigation systems to create a platform of products. Mobile Multimedia integrates Alpine's innovative audio, video, security, and navigation products, as well as its new GUI for Drivers, human interface, and information communications technology. Alpine maximizes digital technology and media for its product platform development and boldly defines a path to the future of Mobile Multimedia Excellence.

Research and Development

With its platform development-led approach to business, research and development is an integral part of all of Alpine's activities - from product planning and manufacturing to end-user support. Human interface, software development, and implementation of fully digitized technologies are the most important elements in realizing the potential of Mobile Multimedia. Our research and development facilities in Asia, Europe, and the U.S. have made Alpine the global leader for in-vehicle navigation systems in Japan, North America, and Europe for the after-market and for OEM factory installations.

Entertainment Products

Alpine's in-vehicle entertainment products combine the latest digital media with the company's expertise in sound reproduction. Alpine creates original, market-leading products for the digital age for a true mobile theater experience, as well as innovative in-dash CD players, Powerful amplifiers, and a broad range of speakers, are designed for car audio enthusiasts who demand higher performance and sound personalization.