Actress Jane Wyman, 21, was going through her second divorce when she met Ronald Reagan, 27, for the first time on the set making October 1938's "Brother Rat." Wyman, who kept her first husband's surname, later said she was "smitten" with Reagan as soon as she saw him. Less than two years later they were married, Reagan's first and Wyman's third.

Reportedly, the two became instantly attracted to each other during "Brother Rat's" pre-production publicity shots. In the movie, Wyman plays bookworm Claire Adams, who Virginia Military Institute cadet Dan Crawford (Reagan) is attracted. The pair are one of three love-pairings in the film, the others are lead actor Wayne Morris as Billy Randolph linked with Joyce Winfree (Priscilla Lane of the Lane sisters), and Bing Edwards (Eddie Albert in his film debut) with Kate Rice (Jane Bryan), the later who are secretly married. The Warner Brothers film is based on the wildly successful 1936 Broadway play of the same name which ran for 577 performances.

Eddie Albert had played the same character on Broadway and signed on as a contract actor for Warner Brothers. The Rock Island, Illinois,-born Edward Albert Heimberger dropped his last name once he became popular as a singer. As a New York City radio co-host in 1933, he also appeared in several plays. Albert was one of the earliest pioneering television actors while writing one of the first teleplays for the new experimental medium in 1936. He went on to have a lengthy film and television career, and is today known for his Oliver Wendell Douglas character in the 1965 TV series 'Green Acres.'

"Brother Rat" is a term VMI first-year cadets use to call their fellow classmates during their first six months at the Lexington, Virginia military college. They're required to be in a 'rat line,' an indoctrination the freshmen undergo designed to create a bond among classmates for life. VMI made Reagan an honorary "Brother Rat" after filming wrapped. The B-roll location shots in the opening credits were filmed on the grounds of the Virginia campus while additional footage was taken at the San Diego Military Academy.

"Brother Rat" was so successful Warner Brothers produced a sequel, 1940's 'Brother Rat and a Baby," where Reagan's character proposes to Wyman's. One account on the couple's private life had Wyman so frustrated at Ronnie's delaying tactics of putting off their wedding she overdosed on pills, sending her to the hospital while leaving behind a suicide note explaining her actions. Married on January 26, 1940, the pair was labeled the "the ideal Hollywood couple." They had a daughter Maureen a year later, and adopted a son Michael, born 1945. A still-born baby in 1947 caused a strain on their marriage, compounded by political differences: she was a Republican while he was a registered Democrat. Reagan's time immersing himself as the president of the Screen Actors Guild also made Jane feel neglected, and she divorced him in 1948. Reagan is the first President of the United States to have been divorced.

Meanwhile, Warner Brothers produced a sequel to 'Brother Rat' in its 1952 Technicolor remake, 'About Face,' with Joel Grey in his movie debut.