Bangalore Metro, locally known as Namma Metro (“Our Metro” in Kannada), serves the city of Bangalore, the IT capital of India. Currently, only Phase 1 of the network is operational, while Phase 2 is under construction and Phase 3 is under deliberation. The network is spread across 42.3 km and consists of 51 stations. Daily, over 5 lakh people use the Bengaluru metro. Electricity is supplied to the trains via the third rail, which carries a direct current of 750 volts. The trains run at a frequency of 5–15 minutes at speeds of just under 80km/h. On the systems, trains (comprising 6 coaches) travel on the ground, as well as above and under it.

Bangalore Metro Route Map

Bangalore Metro Quick Info

Owner: Bangalore Metro Rail Corporation Ltd. (formed under partnership by the Government of Karnataka and the Government of India)

Other Names: Namma Metro

Serving Cities: Bangalore

Number of Lines: 2 (interchange at Majestic)

Headquarters: BMTC Complex, Shanthinagar

Operations Started in: 2011

Places to Stay: Hotels in Bangalore

Suggested Read: Places to visit in Bangalore

Bangalore Metro Timings and fare

Namma metro runs daily at the interval of 4-5 minutes between each metro. The Bangalore metro train timings are 5 a.m. to 11 p.m. on Monday to Friday. On the second and fourth Saturdays or public holidays, the service commences from 6 a.m. till 10:30 p.m. Metro timings in Bangalore on Sunday are 7 a.m. to 11 p.m.

The minimum fare is Rs 10 and the maximum is around Rs 45. The fare is charged based on the distance travelled by the passenger from the boarding station.

Bangalore Metro/Namma Metro Lines

Bangalore metro map is currently operating with 2 route lines – Purple and Green. Four route lines are under construction and will be operational in the coming months.

1. Purple Line

The first operational Namma metro line was the Bangalore Metro Purple Line. It was started under phase 1 of the Bangalore route with 37 stations and 4 interchanges. Purple Line started with the first underground metro station in Bangalore.

2. Green line

Green line is the second operational line on Bangalore metro routes. It runs on 29 stations with a length of 31kms according to Namma Metro map Bangalore.

3. Yellow Line

The upcoming yellow line will link Rashtreeya Vidyalaya Road to Bommasadra and will cover a distance of over 18 km on the Bangalore metro station map. It will be running on 16 stations and will also connect to Hosur shortly.

4. Blue line

It will be the first Bangalore airport metro linking Kasturi Nagar to the airport. This line will cover a distance of 58.19 km with 30 stations according to the Bangalore metro plan.

5. Pink Line

The Pink line will be connecting Nagawara to Gottigerre, which is in the south of Namma Bangalore. It will have 18 stations, some of which will be underground.

6. Orange line

This line will be developed in Phase 3 of the Bangalore metro line map. It will connect two lines – Phase 2A and Phase 3A at a single station. This new line in Bangalore will be expected to be functional by 2028-29.

Bangalore Metro App

The Namma Metro app allows you to purchase QR tickets. This app is currently available for Android users only. The Bangalore metro stations list is also available on the app. Auto and taxi services will also be available via the digital platform.

Bangalore Metro/Namma Metro Lines

Metro Line Length (Km) Stations Starting Point – End Point Purple 42.17 37 Whitefield – Challaghatta Green 30.3 29 Nagasandra – Silk Institute

Purple Line

The list below is of the stations covered on the Bangalore Metro Purple Line.

Station Name Interchange/Connections

Whitefield

Whitefield Railway station

Channasandra

Kadugodi

Pattandur Agrahara

Sri Sathya Sai Hospital

Nallurhalli

Whitefield TTMC

Kundalahalli

Sitharama Palya

Hoodi Junction

Garudacharapalya

Mahadevapura

Krishnarajapuram

Blue line- KR Puram Railway Station

Benniganahalli

Benniganahalli Railway Station

Baiyappanahalli

Benniganahalli Railway Station

Swami Vivekananda Road

Indiranagar

Halasuru

Trinity

Mahatma Gandhi Road

Pink Line

Cubbon Park (Sri Chamarajendra Park)

Dr. BR Ambedkar Station (Vidhana Soudha)

Sir M. Visveshwaraya Station, Central College

Nadaprabhu Kempegowda station, Majestic

Green line- KG Bus Station

Krantivira Sangolli Rayanna Railway Station

City Railway Station

Madagi Road

Balagangadharanatha Swamiji Station, Hosahalli

Orange Line

Vijayanagara

Attiguppe

Vijayanagara TTMC

Deepanjali Nagara

Mysuru Road

Orange Line

Nayandahalli

Rajarajeshwari Nagar

Jnanabharathi

Jnanabharathi Railway Station

Pattanagere

Kengeri Bus Terminal

Kengeri TTMC

Challaghatta

*Note: The stations from Whitefield to Benniganahalli and Challaghatta are under construction. These stations are being built under Phase II.

Recommended places to stay: Hotels near Whitefield Railway Station

Green Line

The list below is of the stations covered on the Bangalore Metro Green Line.

Station Name

Interchange/Connections

Madavara

Chikkabidarakallu

Manjunathanagara

Nagasandra

Dasarahalli

Jalahalli

Basaveshwara Bus Station

Peenya Industry

Peenya

Goraguntepalya

Orange Line

Yeshwanthpura

Yeshwantpur Railway Station

Sandal Soap Factory

Yeshwantpura TTMC

Mahalakshmi

Rajajinagara

Mahakavi Kuvempu Road

Srirampura

Sampige Road

Nadaprabhu Kempegowda station, Majestic

Purple Line, KG Bus Station, KSR Railway Station

Chikpete

Krishna Rajendra Market

National College

Lalbagh Botanical Garden

South End Circle

Jayanagar

Jayanagara TTMC

Rashtreeya Vidyalaya Road

Yellow Line

Banashankari

Banashankari TTMC

Jaya Prakash Nagar

Orange Line

Yelachenahalli

Konanakunte Cross

Doddakallasandra

Vajarahalli

Thalaghattapura

Silk Institute

*Note: The stations from Madavara to Manjunathanagara are under construction. These stations are expected to become operational by the end of this year.

Bangalore Metro Project Details

The Namma Metro project is in expansionary mode and being executed by Bangalore Metro Rail Corporation Limited (BMRCL). Phase 1 of the Bengaluru Metro and some parts of Phase 2 are operational and the rest will be by 2025.

Karnataka Government has approved the construction of Phase 3, which would cover 45 km. The estimated approved cost is Rs 16000 crore for the project and is expected to be completed by 2028.

Funding for Bangalore Metro

State-run REC Limited extended financial assistance of ₹3,045 crore to Bangalore Metro Rail Corporation Limited (BMRCL), for the establishment and development of metro lines under the phase-II project of Namma Metro.

Bangalore Metro: Revenue

Since 2011, when the Bangalore Metro operations started, it has achieved profitability for the first time. BMRCL achieved a profitable margin in the fiscal year 2022-23 and they are aiming to close at a profit of Rs 100 crore in the following year.

In the fiscal year 2022-23, BMRCL earned an estimated Rs 594.02 crore. The maintenance expenditure accounted for Rs 486.61 crore. After factoring all the expenses, a profit of Rs 40 crore was made by Namma Metro

Bangalore Metro Lesser-Known Facts

It is the first metro in the southern part of India to have an underground section.

Rainwater is harvested at several points along the two lines, and it is then treated and supplied as potable water.

Smart card offers a 15% discount on the normal token fare.

The system uses a 1435 mm (standard gauge) track.

Book Hotels – Budget Hotels in Bangalore | Couples Friendly Hotels in Bangalore

Frequently Asked Questions About Bangalore Namma Metro

Q. What are the Bangalore Metro timings?

A. The Bangalore metro train timings are 5 a.m. to 11 p.m. on Monday to Friday. On Sundays, the timings are from 6 am to 11 pm.

Q. Is Metro operational in Bangalore?

A. Yes, Metro is operational in Bangalore with two lines (Green and Purple) and 51 stations.

Q. Is it safe to travel by metro in Bangalore?

A. Yes, it is safe to travel by Metro in Bangalore as there are multiple security checks and assistance personnel at every station.

Q. Is the Green Line Metro operational in Bangalore?

A. Green line in Bangalore metro route is operational with 29 stations from Nagasandra to Silk Institute.

Q. Is the Purple Line metro running today in Bangalore?

A. Yes, the Purple line in Bangalore metro is running on 37 stations connecting Whitefield to Challaghatta.

Q. What time does Bangalore Metro start on Sunday?

A. On Sunday, the metro starting time in Bangalore is 6 am and it runs till 11 pm.

Q. Is Metro Card compulsory in Bangalore?

A. Metro card is not compulsory in Bangalore Metro as passengers can buy QR tickets through the Namma Metro app and can be tapped at the QR-enabled Automatic Fare Collection gates.

Q. What is not allowed in Bangalore Metro?

A. Among the items that are prohibited in the metro include sharp objects, guns and firearms, tools, explosive materials, flammable items, disabling chemicals and pets.

Q. Can we carry alcohol in Bangalore Metro?

A. No, alcohol is not allowed in Bangalore Metro.

Q. Does Bangalore Metro accept cash?

A. Yes, passengers can top up and purchase cards or tickets through cash. UPI and cards are also accepted.

Q. How can I travel in Bangalore Metro?

A. Passengers have to board a train from the station after going through multiple checkpoints. A ticket or metro card is required for travelling that you purchase from the station or through the Namma Metro app for the destination.

Q. How much is a 30-day metro pass in Bangalore?