The Bangalore Metro, popularly known as Namma Metro, is undergoing rapid expansion, which is expected to improve connectivity for people in the IT capital from Bengaluru Airport in the north to Anjanapura in the south.

Bangalore, the first city in South India to receive metro train service, will soon have the second-longest metro network in India, spanning 69.66 km. Currently, the Bengaluru Metro covers a majority portion of the city and is set to expand to the outskirts of the city as well, facilitating people’s quick transit between different pockets of the city, bypassing traffic jams and bottleneck routes. In addition to its many boons, the Bangalore Metro route is expected to impact Bangalore’s real estate sector significantly.

Read on to explore all you need to know about Bangalore Metro routes, connectivity, stations, new maps, metro fare system, its impact on the real estate of the city, and more.

Inception and Development of Bangalore Namma Metro

The idea of the Bangalore metro was conceptualized in the early 1980s, but it took several years to come into existence. The Delhi Metro Rail Corporation (DMRC) played a significant role in developing and planning the metro system. The first phase of the project, known as “Reach 1,” was inaugurated in October 2011, and the metro network has been expanding ever since. The expansion and implementation of the project are currently managed by the Bengaluru Metro Rail Corporation Limited (BMRCL).

Latest Updates

From record ridership to reduced waiting times, here are some latest BMRCL News and Headlines to keep you up-to-date with Bangalore’s Namma Metro revolution.

April 16, 2023: Bengaluru now has around 6 lakhs Namma Metro passengers.

The average ridership of Bangalore Metro touched 6 lakh people following the commencement of commercial operations on the Bangalore Metro route between K.R. Pura and Whitefield.

May 24, 2023: Bangalore Metro to Slash Waiting Time to around 3-3.5 Minutes.

As per reports from various media sources, Bangalore Metro Rail Corporation Limited (BMRCL) is set to receive a total of 36 new train sets in a phased manner. As a result, the waiting time for commuters on the Purple Line, Green Line, and their extension lines is expected to reduce to approximately 3-3.5 minutes.

June 7, 2023: Bangalore Metro Rail Corporation Awards Rs 501 Crore Track Building Contract to Larsen & Toubro.

The Bangalore Metro Rail Corporation (BMRCL) has awarded Larsen & Toubro (L&T) a contract valued at Rs 501 Crores for the construction of tracks in Phase 2A and 2B of the Bangalore Metro route. The project is expected to be completed within 36 months and will cover sections from Silk Board to Krishnarajapuram and Kempapura to Airport.

June 7, 2023: Bangalore to Get Four More Metro Lines by November: D K Shivakumar

D K Shivakumar, Deputy CM of Karnataka, after a review meeting with the Bangalore Metro Rail Corporation Limited (BMRCL), announced four new metro lines on the Bangalore metro route map to be completed by November 2023.

Baiyappanahalli-KR Pura Line (2.1 km): Expected to open in July 2023.

Kengeri-Chellaghatta Line (1.9 km): Anticipated to be ready in August or September 2023.

Nagasandra-Madavara Line (3 km): Planned to be available to the public in September or October 2023.

RV Road-Bommasandra Line (19.14 km): Scheduled to open in October or November 2023.

Bangalore Metro Operational Lines

Bangalore Metro at present consists of two operational lines that provide efficient connectivity across the city. The green line, as depicted on the Bangalore metro route map, provides connectivity between Nagasandra in the northwest and Silk Institute in the south of the city. The purple line, on the other hand, runs from Baiyappanahalli in the east to Kengeri in the west. Let’s look at these two operational lines in more detail:

Bangalore Metro Purple Line

The purple line depicted on the Bangalore metro route map has been in operation since October 2011 and links Baiyyappanahalli in the east to the Mysore Road terminal station in the southwest. Spanning 39.34 km with 35 stations, the line is mostly elevated but includes a 4.8 km underground section. It passes through Prime localities of Bengaluru like MG Road, Majestic, Railway Station, and Vidhana Soudha.

In August 2021, the line was extended from Mysore Road to Kengeri. The authorities plan to extend it by two km to Challaghatta in the southwest by mid-2023, while it has already been extended to Whitefield in the east.

Bangalore Metro Green Line

The Green Line, operational since March 2014, spans from Nagasandra to Silk Institute, covering a distance of 30.32 km with 30 stations. Similar to the Purple Line, it is mostly elevated with a four-kilometer underground section in the middle, which includes 26 elevated metro stations and three underground stations. The Green Line of the Bangalore Metro route connects industrial areas like Peenya and Yeshwantpur in the north with residential areas such as Basavanagudi, Jayanagar, and Banashankari. Currently, an extension of the Green Line from Nagasandra to Bangalore International Exhibition Centre (BIEC) is under construction and is expected to be operational by 2023.

Bangalore Namma Metro: Key Facts

Given below are some key facts about the Bangalore metro or Namma metro.

Inauguration: October 20, 2011

System: Rapid Transit System

Controlled and Managed by: Bangalore Metro Rail Corporation Ltd (BMRCL)

Number of Active Stations: 63

Train Length: 6 coaches

Metro Timing: 5:30 am to 11:00 pm

Bangalore Namma Metro: Fare (Ticket Prices)

The fare charged by Bangalore Metro is based on the distance travelled and the type of ticket. Let’s look at the different pocket-friendly fare options available:

Token: Ideal for single one-way journeys. The token fare ranges from a minimum of Rs. 10 to a maximum of Rs. 50 depending on the distance.

Group Tickets: These tickets are issued to groups of at least 25 passengers travelling together between the same set of stations on the Bangalore metro route. Group tickets offer a 10% discount on the token fare.

Smart Card (Varshik): These are rechargeable contactless cards that can be purchased for Rs. 50 and provide a 5% discount on the token fare. Users can add amounts in multiples of Rs. 50, a maximum limit of Rs. 3000.

The Impact of the Bangalore Metro on the Real Estate

The Bengaluru Metro and its stations (functioning and upcoming) have a positive impact on the real estate value.

Residential projects within 500m proximity to the Bangalore Metro route are expected to appreciate by at least 20%. This appreciation will likely go up even further with the completion of pending phases. The proposed Metro line to Kempegowda International Airport is poised to be a game changer.

In the near future, one can anticipate people commuting daily 40-50 km up and down or across the city for work as long as they reach their destination in an hour or less. This shift in perception will bring new career opportunities and employment across different parts of the city, attracting more people and further appreciating the value of Bangalore’s real estate to new heights.

Conclusion

The rapid expansion of the Bangalore Metro is set to transform the way people travel and shape the future of the city’s real estate landscape. Beyond offering quick transit to people between two pockets of the city, the metro network is also going to play an active role in limiting greenhouse gas emissions, traffic congestion and road accidents.