LONDON, May 6—Sir James Grigg, Britain's Secretary of State for War from 1942 to 1945, died in a hospital here last night. He was 73 years old.

As War Secretary, an office comparable to that of Army Secretary in the United States, Sir James succeeded Capt. David Margesson, a man who had been identified with Munich and the Parliamentary group that supported appeasement. Under Sir James's control, the British Army was reorganized, trained and equipped with a competence that drew from Field Marshal Viscount Montgomery of Alamein this tribute in 1944:

“I doubt if the War Office has ever sent an army overseas so well equipped as the one fighting now in Normandy.” Sir James, as a civil servant early in his career, was noted by his political chiefs as a devoted, though not always docile, official. He had a reputation for fearless expression of his views, impatience with minds slower than his own and a reserved and somewhat brusque manner.

Served Sir Winston in '20's It was these qualities that Sir Winston Churchill remembered from the days in the nineteen‐twenties when he had been Chancellor of the Exchequer and Sir James his Principal Private Secretary. Five consecutive Chancellors, as difering as Sir Winston and the late Philip Snowden of the first Labor Government, kept Sir James as their aide.

At the end of 1933 Sir James was transferred to India, where for five years he was finance member of the Viceroys's Executive Council. Though he ranked as a civil servant, his appointment was equivalent in status to that of a British cabinet minister and he gained in the Legislative Assembly in New Delhi experience that was to Drove useful later.

Sir James was brought home as Permanent Under Secretary of State for War in 1939 to a Britain ill‐equipped to fight the war against Germany that was to break out a few months later. Much of his early work in the War Office was in administrative reforms, designed to give the machine a flexibility suited to the demands of modern war.

His busy life left him little time for hobbies. Though a mathematician by training—he had been a brilliant scholar at Cambridge—he had a strong leaning toward classical literature and delighted in travel, especially in Greece and the Mediterranean.

The year he became War Secretary, Sir James was elected to Parliament from East Cardiff. In the general election of 1945 he lost his seat in the Commons. He had refused a peerage and, with his departure from politics, his services were snapped up for the boards of directors of some of Britain's biggest companies.

In 1946‐47 he was British executive director of the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development.

Sir James, the son of a carpenter. was kniehted in 1932.

He is survived by Lady Grigg, the former Gertrude Charlotte Hough, whom he married in 1919. They had no children.