After years of observing precious olives being taken for granted and greedy manufacturers selling substandard products in the guise of “extra virgin,” Alfonso Swett had enough, and went ahead and founded O-Live.

In a world where people are unknowingly dressing their salads with low-quality, adulterated olive oil, we’re on a mission to provide 100% authentic.

To preserve the rich goodness of this oil, the worst thing someone can do is to mix it up with filtered product – and on top of that, label it as the “best olive oil.”

That’s not how we work, because we’re not in it for the profit.

At O-Live, we make sure that we provide you with the purest and freshest oil there is.

Our olives are harvested, extracted, and packaged, all within a matter of a few hours. This lightning-fast growing and extraction process ensures that the main ingredients – the olives – are in tip-top condition prior to being pressed and that our final product preserves all the vital nutrients.

The incredibly low levels of oleic acid (0.2% to be exact) are a testament to our commitment. For reference, the International Olive Council (yes, it exists!) requires less than 0.8% acidity levels for a product to be considered extra virgin.

Packed with Benefits

Extra virgin olive oil is primarily desired for its long list of health benefits.

And when the final product is pure and packaged using a highly efficient process, such as ours, you can imagine just how good it must be.

Our extra virgin olive oil is rich in polyphenols, which are compounds that are packed with antioxidants. They are effective against weight management obstacles, cardiovascular disease, diabetes, and digestive problems, to name a few.

The polyphenol count in our olive oil is in the 380 mg/kg average. To give you an idea of where we stand – the average bottle only includes around 100-250mg of polyphenols per kilogram.

Our extra virgin olive oil is not only loaded with health benefits, but it also tastes amazing – the dream combo!

The thing about extra virgin olive oils is that they’re bitter and a bit spicy. That’s due to the high amount of antioxidants (if your olive oil doesn’t taste bitter at all, it means that you’re using a low-quality product).

What makes our EVOO so great is that, despite being so pure and being rich in polyphenols, it tastes great, and that’s what our customers love about it.

It’s what makes it great for cooking, sautéing, light grilling, baking, stir-frying, drizzling, dressing – you name it!

From baking scrumptious cookies to mixing up a killer vinaigrette/marinade, you can use it in all your favorite recipes from your cookbook, including:

Salads

What’s the point of getting extra virgin olive oil if you’re not going to drizzle it on some fresh veggies? You can also use it to make your own salad dressings.

Ice Cream

Who says olive oil is just for savory snacks? You also use it to make ice cream at home to tame that sweet tooth – minus the guilt!

Chimichurri

An uncooked condiment, made with leaf parsley, cilantro, sweet shallots or white onion, garlic, and of course, olive oil. You can pair it with grilled fish or meat.

Fajitas

This is a flavorful meal that you can whip up for the whole family. And the best part? You can prepare it in a single pan.

And that barely scratches the surface!

There’s a lot more that you can make with EVOO. This cooking oil goes well with almost everything.

When we said we weren’t in it for the profit, we meant it.

O-Live is the world’s first olive oil company that is 100% carbon neutral.

Whether we’re growing, extracting, pressing, or packing, we strive for minimum waste. We utilize everything, including the pulp, pits, and the skin of the olives, which are repurposed as fertilizers and biomass. Not only that, the water used in the extraction process is sent back to be used for irrigation.

Resources are scarce, and only through controlled production can we create a sustainable future for this planet. Unfortunately, not every manufacturer thinks this way, and most companies are only concerned with minimizing their overheads – even if it comes at the expense of the environment.

Being a true green brand, O-Live plays its role in preserving the environment by using the pits of the olives as biofuel to power our state-of-the-art mill.

The next time you drizzle our extra virgin olive oil on top of your salad, you can rest assured knowing that it was manufactured using responsible agricultural practices.

Our Mission with the One Tree Planted Charity

In 2017 and 2018, California braved some of the worst wildfires in its history. It is estimated that the state lost around 147 million trees in total. That’s 147 million beings burnt to ash.

To help offset that devastating loss and play our part in giving back to the environment, O-Live has partnered with the One Tree Charity to replant those trees.

For every bottle of olive oil we sell through our online store, we plant a tree in California. And at our current pace, we’re well on our way to planting 8,000 trees.

When talking about extra virgin olive oil, the Italian and Spanish products come to mind. That’s because the Mediterranean climate of Italy and Spain is optimal for growing olive trees.

O-Live isn’t based in Europe. We hail from Chile’s gorgeous Colchagua valley, which has a climate that is identical to the Mediterranean countries – suitable for yielding premium quality olives.

Colchagua is best-known for its wineries and olive mills that attract tourists and business prospects from all over the world.

Our founder, Alfonso Swett, planted the roots of O-Live in this beautiful region.

But he wanted to challenge how olive oil had always been manufactured, and came up with the genius idea of having the grove and the mill at the same location.

In Spain and Italy, the grove (where the olive trees grow) and the mill (where the magic happens) are located in separate regions, sometimes several miles away. Because of that, the olives can sit for over a day before they’re pressed. Not only can this spoil the taste, but also waste vital nutrients.

But that’s not the case with O-live. Thanks to the strategic location of our mill and grove, we’re able to save hours in production – while preserving the natural taste and the healthy compounds of our extra virgin olive oil.