Purpose of converting Toko, Inc. into a wholly-owned subsidiary through the Share Exchange

Murata was founded in Nakagyo-ku, Kyoto in 1944 by Akira Murata and reorganized as a stock company (kabushiki kaisha) in 1950. The Murata Group is currently comprised of 103 consolidated subsidiaries and 1 equity method affiliate, and has been contributing

to the development of an advanced information society by developing, manufacturing, and selling innovative products under the slogan "Innovator in Electronics®" in an electronics industry where demand is becoming more sophisticated with the times.

Currently, Murata considers the fast-growing portable devices market (smartphones, tablets, etc.) to be its core market, and develops and produces high-function and high value-added parts that are based on materials technology, module technology, and production technology, such as laminated ceramic capacitors and wireless modules, and sells such parts around the world. It is also expanding into new markets, such as production and sale in emerging markets, the automobile market, the environmental and energy market, and the healthcare market, and is in the process of establishing a firm footing in regions where there are burgeoning demand and in business fields with a high barrier to entry.

With regard to its product portfolio, Murata has adopted a so-called "effusion" strategy where it aligns itself with companies that have the technological capabilities and delivery track record that are required for the world's most advanced markets and absorbs the core technologies in proximate fields, and is continuously creating demand by providing new solutions for customers' insatiable demands for technological innovation, exemplified by making products that are smaller, more power efficient, and faster.

Toko was established as Toko Radio Coil Laboratories, Inc. in 1955 and started the development and production of coils for vacuum tube type portable radios and the world's first IFT for transistor radios. Then in 1964, it changed its company name to Toko, Inc. and its corporate group is currently comprised of Toko and its 23 consolidated subsidiaries. Toko is also contributing to social development in the electronics industry by continuously creating innovative coils that use its core technologies of magnetic materials and winding technologies. Toko's products are widely used in audio-visual equipment such as televisions and games, communications equipment such as mobile phones and smartphones, information equipment such as personal computers, and automotive equipment such as car audio systems. In recent years, it has succeeded in the development and mass production of unique coils in advance of other companies, and has achieved the downsizing, energy saving, and slimming of portable devices that use such coils, such as smartphones, earning high praise from key customers around the world. Toko is also pursuing the development of new products and exploring new applications, such as automobile applications.

Under these circumstances, the companies executed the "Capital and Business Alliance Agreement" dated March 22, 2012 and commenced their business alliance so that they could contribute to social development by mutually exploiting their respective strengths and thereby increase the enterprise value of both companies. On February 13, 2013, the companies executed the "Agreement for Enhancement of Capital and Business Alliance", and as a result of a tender offer, Murata now owns 68,101,995 shares of Toko common stock (62.99% (rounded to the nearest hundredths, and the same shall apply hereinafter to the calculation of the Shareholding Ratio (defined below)) of 108,122,646 shares, which is the total number of outstanding shares as of December 31, 2015 (the "Shareholding Ratio")).

The companies subsequently enhanced their cooperation by, for example, entering into the "Agreement for the Assignment of Distribution Rights" dated March 25, 2015, which assigned some of Toko's distribution rights to Murata and its subsidiaries, thereby making it possible to sell Toko's products using Murata's global sales capabilities.

However, in the course of promoting cooperation based on the premise that Toko will continue to be a listed company, the synergy that was initially expected has not been fully achieved under the current state where management resources (e.g., sales channels and technological capabilities) are dispersed, and due to intensifying competition and rapid changes in the market environment, Murata determined that there is a need to achieve greater synergy through an integrated operation of the corporate group (e.g., the development of sales channels and joint development in new fields through the cooperation of the companies) in order for the companies to further enhance their core businesses in the medium to long-term and that it is essential to establish a strong cooperative structure that can take full advantage of Murata's management resources (e.g., sales channels and technological capabilities) in order for Toko to achieve its growth strategy, and that the best course of action to accomplish the foregoing would be for Murata to make Toko its wholly-owned subsidiary, so Murata made a proposal to Toko on August 20, 2015 that Toko become a wholly-owned subsidiary of Murata through a share exchange.

Toko has given serious consideration to how Murata's proposal can contribute to Toko's ideal competitive strategy under the current industry trends. Toko has made various attempts to expand its business, primarily through the development of unique coils, but due in part to the rise of Asian manufacturers in the metal alloy market, which is a key market for Toko, the competition it faces against its competitors in the global market is intensifying now more than ever, and customers' needs are also becoming more varied. In order to survive in this harsh industry environment, the key is to expand its business by swiftly introducing new products to market, and Toko has come to recognize that, in order to further increase the sales of Toko's state-of-the-art metal alloy products that have a large market share, it is essential to work on further enhancing the competitiveness of its products by utilizing Murata's comprehensive technological capabilities in a timely manner. Toko has also come to recognize that, in order to implement such new competitive strategy at a faster pace and with certainty, it must promptly maximize business synergy by becoming a wholly-owned subsidiary of its parent company (Murata), effectively utilizing not only Toko's own resources but also the information regarding technology and production in the possession of the Murata group, and merging the management resources of both companies.

After much sincere discussion regarding the future direction of both companies based on Murata's proposal to make Toko its wholly-owned subsidiary, Murata and Toko have come to recognize that optimizing the value chain by consolidating the various functions dispersed within their corporate group, achieving operational synergy by avoiding conflicts of interest within their corporate group, and making it possible to distribute management resources and formulate strategy in an optimal manner through an integrated operation of the corporate group will further contribute to increasing the enterprise value of both companies in the future. The companies have concluded that the best course of action for achieving these goals would be for Murata to make Toko its wholly-owned subsidiary and to ensure the flexibility of its organizational management, so they made the decision today to enter into the Share Exchange Agreement.

Toko is expected to be delisted on April 26, 2016 as a result of the Share Exchange, so in this connection, the companies have agreed to delete, effective today, the acknowledgment that Toko will continue to be a listed company under the "Agreement for Enhancement of Capital and Business Alliance" that was executed between the companies on February 13, 2013 (see Section 2(2)(g) of the "Announcement of the

Execution of Agreement for Enhancement of Capital and Business Alliance between Murata Manufacturing Co., Ltd. and Toko, Inc." dated February 13, 2013), subject to the condition subsequent that the Share Exchange does not go into effect.