James (Jim) Allen, passed away on January 21, 2023, near his home in beautiful Nanoose Bay, British Columbia. He was 83.

Jim was an independent thinker, who enthusiastically stirred the conversational mix at so many dinner parties. He was a passionate man, a proud peacenik, and a strong proponent of apprenticeship training. He loved music, he savored salmon bought straight from Steveston’s wharf - and he always had dessert!

Jim Allen was at his most content in the stillness of nature, and on the water. His son Dean wrote that his dad “was born in Alberta, but saltwater runs through his veins.”

The family arrived on the west coast soon after the war, and Jim rose from humble beginnings during more than 40 hardworking years in Richmond, B.C. (back when childhood on an acre of land in Richmond, B.C. was a humble beginning).

Concerned about the haste that was propelling Richmond from rural to urban in the 1970s, he joined Richmond’s citizens’ committee for planning, and soon founded the Richmond Residents’ Association. Jim’s independent thinking caught the eye of columnists at Richmond’s community newspaper. In 1973, that prompted him to put his hat in the ring for a seat on Richmond Council. Narrowly defeated at the polls, his belief in a centralized, transit-friendly shopping experience in Richmond was vindicated within 15 years, with the total revamp of Richmond Centre – and the premature decline of the less central Lansdowne Park mall. He was amused when his civic work and sandy-haired good looks got him mistaken for the photogenic Vancouver mayor Art Phillips.

Jim participated in the great transformation of Vancouver, leaving his job in the city’s last sawmill, and eventually running projects on city landmarks like the white-sailed convention center on the harbour, and Canada’s first covered stadium at B.C. Place.

His and Holly’s two stubborn boys soon launched their lives. He then swapped the suburban barn for urban living in Vancouver’s stylish False Creek area. His new pleasure boat was moored under the Burrard Bridge, and he bravely commuted by bike on the high-and-narrow Lions Gate Bridge. It was in these years that Jim found his creative voice, putting his own electrical designs on the small harbours up and down the B.C. coast. His phone continued to ring for several years in his “retirement” to Vancouver Island. And the harbour inspections by boat, often with Luella accompanying, put him exactly where he loved to be, on the water.

His subscriptions to National Geographic led to 3 fantastic weeks in Greece with friends Cyril and Carrol. Which sparked a love of travel that ultimately took him to 5 continents.

Jim is survived by his wife Luella, with whom he cherished their adventures and togetherness, and by his son Craig (Carolyn), living in New York City. Tragically predeceased by his son Dean. Warmly remembered by Craig’s and Dean’s mom Holly. And predeceased by his second wife Eileen, sister Louise, and nephew Charles.

Details of a memorial service will be announced.