1. Netscape Commercial

2. Greatest Moments in Internet History The Internet Netscape IPO

3. The Internet October 29,1969 : LO! And BEHOLD ! Leonard Kleinrock Life span: June 13, 1934, Manhattan~ Who is responsible?

4. The Event Started in September 1969, a host, time-sharing computer was used at UCLA by faculty and staff October 29 1969, The host computer at UCLA and Stanford Research Institution were both successfully linked via the IMP (Interface Message Transmitter) Kleinrock and his team attempted a massage transmission Only two letters (L and O) were sent before the system crashed before completing the phrase “Login” And there, LO! As in LO! And behold was the first phrase traveled on the ARPANET (internet)!

5. IMP LOG This is an IMP Log in which the message transmission was recorded

6. Impact of the Event Later on the network grew larger with more IMPs and computers added It was a technological breakthrough, and from this they discovered their problems and find ways for improving the internet It marks the new era of hi-speed and world-wide communication

7. Profile of Leonard Kleinrock Education: Awards: National Medal of Science Communications and Computer Prize, NEC C&C Computer Design Hall of Fame L.M. Ericsson 1951- The Bronx High School of Science The City College of New York with BA in Electrical Engineering Master’s and PhD at MIT

8. Interesting facts about Kleinrock : Black Belt in Karate Marathon Runner Selected as&quot;50 People Who Most Influenced Business This Century”- by the Los Angeles Times Published over 250 papers and 6 books His inspiration to become an engineer was from a Superman comic

9. Netscape IPO August 9, 1995: Day of Irrational Exuberance Who is responsible? Jim Clark and Marc Andreessen

10. The Event On August 9th of 1995 Netscape made a public offering into the stock market Stocks were skyrocketing, it went from $28 to $75 It was an internet boom, creating a dot com frenzy

11. Impact of the Event Boosted competition amongst web browser software makers Inspired many other companies to go public like Yahoo, Amazon, eBay Leads to the down fall of Netscape it-self, because it was outcompeted by other companies (i.e. Microsoft) Large IT companies had become very influential on the economy

12. Jim Clark Life Span: March 23 1944 Texas- Education: Dropped out of high school and joined the Navy BA and Master’s degree in physics from Uni. Of New Orleans PhD from University of Utah

13. Continue with Jim Clark Awards : Gold Medal Award-American Research Society Facts: Developed the Geometry Engine Founded Silicon Graphics Lectures at Universities and conferences world-wide

14. Marc Andreessen Life Span: July 9, 1971 Iowa- Education: University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign (he was only at the age of 22 when founded Netscape)

15. Continue with Marc Andreessen Awards : Computerworld Smithsonian Information Technology Leadership Award Facts: During Netscape IPO he was worth over $170 million “ hamburger - chomping pop icon for the cyber generation”