THE POSEIDON ADVENTURE is an entertaining and rather dated film. Some of the story’s flaws get in the way of totally enjoying it.

And why was Roddy McDowall the only employee who survived the capsizing? There were no other people working in the linen department with him, or in other areas on that level of the ship?

As the survivors started to climb up through the ship’s levels, a great deal of the action was delayed. In other words, it seemed stretched out to accommodate a two hour running time and also to save on sets. But in reality, I think they would have moved much more swiftly and made their way through various compartments (some of them dead ends).

The film also contained a lot of over-acting. Some of the bit players, even the extras whose death scenes were played out in the background, were done with a major dose of ham. The top cast members, most of whom were method actors, seemed to think that if they screamed their lines in a Marlon “Stella!” Brando sort of way, they were being dramatic and registering shock or panic as the plot unfolded. There was little subtlety.

If this ship was en route to Europe, how come everyone spoke English? There should have been one person who spoke a different language, or spoke fractured English. And speaking of fractured, it’s hard to believe none of the survivors wound up with broken arms, broken legs, cracked ribs, something. There were no injuries, no bad backs or headaches among them.

The sound effects were not as realistic as they could have been. Many times our main characters would barely escape a tide of rushing water, jumping up to the next level. But we seldom (almost never) heard water in the background. Only when the camera would cut to a quick shot of the rushing water would we hear it. As if that’s when the editor remembered there was supposed to be loud water in this movie.

And finally, I thought some of the death scenes were uneven. Roddy McDowall’s character dies in about two seconds flat. But when Shelley Winters died, she was glimpsed dead for nearly ten minutes. I guess that’s because she was guaranteed a certain amount of screen time. And if you’re a Shelley Winters fan, then you’re not going to complain. Whatever floats your boat, right?