Welcome to People Subscriber Services!

Magazine Subscriber Services is a free online platform that helps you easily contact the People magazine publisher for all your subscription needs. We do not represent the People publisher directly but provide a convenient way to locate and contact them. We never send unsolicited subscriptions or fulfill them directly. The links provided are from our vetted partners or direct links to publishers for services like changing your address, canceling a subscription, checking status, or reporting missed issues.

How do I subscribe to People magazine?

You can subscribe or renew your People magazine in both print and digital formats, including ordering a gift subscription. Please follow the links provided above next to the People magazine cover.

How do I change my mailing address for People?

You can now change your address for People magazine directly on the publisher's website. Follow the Address Change link for the publisher's customer service form above.

How do I contact People by phone?

You can call People using the customer service number provided above next to the People magazine cover. Most calls are answered Monday through Friday between 8 am and 5 pm EST.

How do I cancel my subscription to People?

To cancel or unsubscribe from People magazine, follow the Cancel Subscription link above. You will need to enter your account number or mailing address to access your account and proceed with the cancellation instructions.

What is the price for a subscription to People?

People is available for $116.07 for a 1-year subscription with no automatic renewals. You will never receive unsolicited charges to your credit card or bills. Follow the Subscribe/Renew link above to subscribe or renew your current subscription.

How can I subscribe to People

To buy a new subscription or renew your current subscription to People magazine, follow the Subscribe/Renew link above. To order a gift subscription, follow the Give a Gift Subscription link above.

If you would like to review People magazine or write a complaint about the magazine, delivery issues, auto-renewals, or report a subscription you did not order, go to the last tab under ‘Write Review.’ Please do not enter personal information such as your mailing address in the comment. You can also read comments and reviews about People magazine from other subscribers.