In his plenary session speech, Minister Jandroković expressed his conviction that the cooperation of the Mediterranean countries on concrete projects would help the Mediterranean in strengthening of its role as a region of peace, cooperation, tolerance, and wellbeing, adding that Croatia can also give its contribution to the Union for the Mediterranean.

As areas of great importance for Croatia, Minister Jandroković mentioned the development of seaways and port linkage, as well as interest in tourism development and ecological protection of the sea, especially from ship pollution.

Speaking about the Mediterranean Solar Plan and alternative energy sources in the Mediterranean region, Minister Jandroković pointed out the importance of using energy from renewable sources. He said that the Mediterranean Solar Plan coincides with Croatia’s energy policy, emphasizing that said initiative can positively influence the social and economic development of the Mediterranean countries, namely the improvement of the standard of life, as well as the modernization and development of infrastructure, agriculture, industry, and tourism. In that regard he proposed the opening of a Mediterranean fund for stimulating the use of solar energy.

Minister Jandroković also expressed Croatia’s interest in participating in initiatives concerning small- and middle-sized entrepreneurships.

The annual foreign ministers meeting prepared the groundwork for the implementation of the conclusions from the Joint Declaration of the Paris Summit for the Mediterranean, in the part pertaining to the institutionalization of the process. It was also decided that the Secretariat’s headquarters be in Barcelona and that the Barcelona Process: Union for the Mediterranean change its name to simply Union for the Mediterranean. The state secretary will always be someone from the Arab countries, and will have several deputies. The Arab League will be invited to all of the meetings, while France will continue its co-presidency during the Czech presidency. The meeting also adopted the criteria for project selection and financing, as well as the 2009 Action Plan.

The Union for the Mediterranean set up a multilateral partnership aimed at strengthening the potential for regional integration and linkage. The process also enables its participants to rise more efficiently to the challenges that the Mediterranean region is faced with, namely the economic and social development, world security and food crisis, as well as climate change and effects on the environment. The implementation of projects contributive to those ends remains crucial for all Euro-Mediterranean relations.

Owing to its geographical position, as well as to the historical and cultural heritage, Croatia shows a natural interest in active participation in the Mediterranean and is together with other participants in the process promoting the establishment of political, economic, and social relations in the region. By taking part in the Union for the Mediterranean, Croatia is developing relations with the EU and Southern Mediterranean, countries and realizing its political and economic interests in the sea, environment, and tourism.

By participating in the Paris Summit for the Mediterranean 13 July 2008, Croatia became a participant of the Barcelona Process: Union for the Mediterranean. The partnership envelops all of the EU members, the European Commission, and other Southern Mediterranean countries (members – Turkey, Algeria, Tunis, Morocco, Egypt, Jordan, Syria, Israel, the Palestinian Authority, Lebanon, Croatia, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Montenegro, Albania, Monaco; monitor – Libya).