Ramanaidu .D was born in Karamchedu, Prakasam, Andhra Pradesh state, India, on 06-06-1936. He was Indian film producer, Suresh Productions Founder & Politician . He was well known in the industry with films from Telugu, Hindi, Tamil, Kannada, Bengali, Punjabi and Marathi.

Personal Life:

D. Ramanaidu was born to Devamma Lakshmi & Venkateswarlu Daggubati. He got married to Daggubati Rajeswari and the couple got three children, a daughter named Lakshmi Daggubati and two sons Daggupati Suresh Babu (Film Producer) & Daggupati Venkatesh (Film Actor). He completed his schooling at his hometown. He later went to Chirala and graduated from presidency College, Chennai.

Career:

He became the owner of the rice mill after completing his education, and began his career as a transporter. He then moved to Madras and began a real state business. He produced his first film Anuraggam with the help of his friends in 1963.

He also founded his own 'Suresh Production' production house. Ramudu Bheemudu was the debut film he produced in his own production house. He continued to produce films and then partnered with B. Nagi Reddy’s Sons and the company 'Vijaya Suresh Combined' were created. He also made a blockbuster movie named Prem Nagar, which has been remade in Tamil and in Hindi Prem Nagar, called Vasantha Malagai.

He has also produced films in Kannada, Hindi, Malayalam, Marathi, Bengali, Oriya, Guiarati, Bhojpuri and Punjab along with Telugu and Tamil. He also won his place in the Guinness Book of the World Record in 2008 for making maximum films in one year.

In 2015, more than 130 films were produced in various languages. In Hindi, he made films such as Santaan, Hum AapkeDil Mei Rehte Hai, Dilwaala and several others.

Awards & Honours:

In his lifetime, D. Ramanaidu has been honored with numerous prestigious awards such as Padma Bhushan, Nandi Award, Filmfare Award and the Tamil Nadu State Award. He also earned a Honorary Doctorate from Sri Venekateswara University, Tirupati.

D. Ramanaidu died at the age of 78 in Hyderabad, Telangana, India on February 18, 2015. He had prostate cancer.