HRH The Princess Helena, Princess Christian of Schleswig-Holstein

Not only did Helena's marriage to Prince Christian cause controversy because of the 15 year age gap, but Schleswig-Holstein was a source of disagreement within the family. The two Duchies were being fought over by both Prussia (represented by Helena's eldest sister, Victoria, Princess Royal and Crown Princess of Prussia who actually supported the marriage) and Denmark (represented by Alexandra, The Princess of Wales who had been born Princess of Denmark).

The only requirement that Queen Victoria made was that her daughter should live close at hand. This suited Christian as he was not likely to ascend to any thrones and was not part of any ruling family. He became Ranger of Great Windsor Park and High Steward of Windsor.

Together, Helena and Christian had 6 children, 4 of whom lived into adulthood. As we will see and have already seen with Princesses Victoria and Alice, the documentation of the Coat of Arms in the female line is more difficult to find than in the male line where assignments of Labels are made.

Christian Victor

Prince Christian Victor of Schleswig-Holstein (Christian Victor Albert Louis Ernst Anton, 14 April 1867 – 29 October 1900).

Christle, as he was known, was the first member of the British Royal Family to go to school rather than have a tutor. Having attended Sandhurst, he became a career soldier with a keen interest and ability at cricket.

He became an officer in the King's Royal Rifle Corps, rising to Major, and participated in many expeditions to Africa, including the Ashanti Expedition to Ghana, the defeat of the Dervishes at Omdurman near Khartoum, Sudan under Lord Kitchener and the Second Boer War being involved the relief of Ladysmith.

Whilst in Pretoria in October 1900, he came down with malaria and died of enteric fever on 29th of the month at the age of only 33.

The photograph is a half-length portrait of Christian Victor, in military undress uniform, probably in or before leaving for South Africa. He has a number of memorials, including a statue in the shadow of Windsor Castle at the bottom of Thames Street.

Albert

Albert, Duke of Schleswig-Holstein (Albert John Charles Frederick Alfred George, 26 February 1869 – 27 April 1931).

Like his elder brother, Christian Victor, Albert (or Abby as he was called) was destined for a military career. Unlike his brother, however, Albert served in the Prussian Army. He was excused combative service during the First World War by his cousin, the Kaiser.

In 1921 he succeeded his cousin Ernst Gunther as head of the family and Duke of Schleswig-Holstein. In turn, Albert would be succeeded by his cousin Freidrich Ferdinand, Duke of Glücksburg.

Albert never married, particularly being known at the time as a woman-hater, and therefore did not have any legitimate issue. However, he did have an illegitimate daughter, Valerie Marie, by an unknown woman of 'high noble birth' whom he recognised in later life. As she was adopted by a family of Jewish origins, Albert's sisters were required to confirm Valerie Marie's 'Aryan' lineage in the run-up to the Second World War which they readily and officially did on 26th July 1938.

Helena Victoria

Princess Helena Victoria of Schleswig-Holstein (Victoria Louise Sophia Augusta Amelia Helena, 3 May 1870 – 13 March 1948).

Known to her family as Thora, Helena Victoria might be regarded as rather unremarkable princess who never married. She continued her Mother's example, however, and immersed herself in charitable work, including the YMCA and YWCA, and also her Mother's Princess Christian's Nursing Home at Windsor. She also visited troops in France during the First World War and organised entertainments for them.

She can be seen attending the wedding of HM Queen Elizabeth II and Prince Philip in 1947, a few months before her death the following year. She is the lady in the wheelchair in the group photographs.

As well as her younger sister, Marie Louise, she is noted for falling foul of the edicts from her cousin King George V as to German titles and the founding of the House of Windsor. Both sisters, as members of the British Royal Family, readily complied and relinquished their German name, which was "of Schleswig-Holstein-Sonderburg-Augustenburg" in full. Although technically no longer in existence, they were allowed to retain their title of 'Highness' but were never confirmed with any territorial designation, not even 'of Great Britain and Ireland' nor 'of the United Kingdom'. They were effectively Princesses of nowhere...

Both Helena Victoria and Marie Louise simply quartered their parents' Coats of Arms, dropping the Inescutcheon of Saxony during the First World War. Surprisingly, though, but presumably because of their status in the British Royal Family, their Mother's Arms are in the dominant first and fourth Quarters. This would be repeated by Beatrice's children, even though neither Helena nor Beatrice were remotely heraldic heiresses.

Their Coronets were different to other grandchildren, being through the female line. We will again see more on that with Beatrice's children when we conclude this section.

Marie Louise