Llano weather in March (Texas, United States of America)

Can you expect sunny skies in Llano in March? This guide provides the necessary weather information for your travel plans.

Temperatures

For March, the weather in Llano is generally perfect, featuring high temperatures and moderate rainfall. Throughout the day, temperatures typically settle at around 23°C. But by evening, they drop to around 8°C.

Precipitation

Llano in March usually receives moderate rainfall, averaging around 71 mm for the month. Typically around 7 days days of rainfall are expected.

If you favor pleasant temperatures and minimal rainfall, March is one of the better months to visit Llano. February, March, April, October and November typically offer the most agreeable circumstances. On the other hand, July and August tend to be characterized by conditions that may not be as optimal.

For an in-depth look at the yearly conditions, visit our specialized Llano climate page with graphs.

Llano, monthly averages in March

Min Temperature 8°C

Max Temperature 23°C

Chance of Rain 23%

Precipitation 71 mm

Rainy days 7 days

Where to go in the United States of America in March

Find out more about the weather in the United States of America and which places have the best travel conditions in this month.

Map not visible? Whoops sorry! Please refresh the page.

Legend perfect weather pleasant tolerable unpleasant poor

Perfect weather is subjective. On this map perfect weather has been defined with temperatures between 20°C and 29°C and not too much precipitation (less than 90 mm a month).

So, what should you wear in this month?

For visitors traveling to Llano, we recommend wearing layers. So maybe a skirt, t-shirt, shorts for during the day and jeans and a warm jacket for some days and evenings. Bring a rain jacket in case it rains during your stay. Plan on layering your clothes.

What To Do

We rated the following activities from 1 (least suitable) to 10 (best) to do.

Cycling 9/10

Walking 9/10

Camping 4/10

Outdoor sports 9/10

Interested in more climate information?

This site provides you with all the information you need about the climate in Llano.

Our site offers climate and forecast data for every country in the world. Are you going to the United States of America? On this website you can find historical weather averages for many cities in the United States of America. Not sure yet where to go? We now have a tool which recommends destinations that suit your ideal travel conditions. Find out where to go with our weather planner.