Hey there, time traveller!

This article was published 11/09/2009 (5450 days ago), so information in it may no longer be current.

FRIBOURG, Switzerland — After losing one golf ball under a stairwell and another one in the river, you’d think I’d be ready to call it a day.

No way.

True, my swing was a disaster. But I’d become hooked on the historical distractions all around me. So rich was the panorama surrounding this particular "golf course," even Tiger Woods would have been hard-pressed to keep his eye on the ball.

Blame the bad score on Fribourg, a captivating medieval city that offers golfing expeditions around some of its key historical sites. Located between Bern and Lausanne, Fribourg also makes a strategic home base for touring other parts of Switzerland.

To take in the urban golf experience, just head down to the tourism office conveniently next door to Fribourg’s rail station. Pick up a city map, a special three-headed golf club and plastic ball and head out to do your 18 holes of urban golf.

Marked by flags on the city map, the golf holes are located at points of scenic or historical interest, so be prepared for a major array of urban distractions.

No worries, though. There might be many history-laden sand traps ready to swallow you up, but these historic fairways offer an abundance of bars, and street cafes and other watering holes en route. Golfing around the old city was the idea of a young student working in the local tourist office. She figured that it wouldn’t hurt Fribourg’s tourism business to add a little exercise and focus to the city’s natural appeal.

The idea is to walk between each golf green, all the time soaking in the atmosphere and grand architecture. You don’t have to focus on the game until you reach the well-marked greens, which range from 20 metres to about 100 metres from tee box to hole.

The city is proud to show off its impressive lineup of medieval architecture in a tour that includes 12 churches and monasteries, 11 fountains, 14 towers and a couple of kilometres of ramparts. Along the way, visitors can enjoy the many well-preserved Gothic-style homes overlooking the valley of the River Sarine (Saane in German).

During the game, you’ll cross a variety of centuries-old bridges that connect the French-speaking Switzerland to the German-speaking part.

Dominating the city’s landscape is St. Nicholas Cathedral, which was built between 1283 and 1490. Its 76-metre tower has a spiral staircase of a knee-numbing 368 steps. While visitors are welcome to climb the stairs, that particular challenge will cut into your game, not to mention the rest of the day’s exploration of the city.

For sure, once you discover the city’s museums, concentration levels tend to wander. Fribourg’s museums provide eclectic choices, from art and history to museums specializing in beer (cardinal.ch), puppetry (marionnette.ch) and the distinctive works of artists Jean Tinguely and Niki de Saint Phalle (www.fr.ch/mahf). There’s even a museum devoted to Swiss sewing machines (museewassmer.com).

Fribourg’s topography effectively divides it into the upper town and lower town. If altitude affects your game, you might want to miss out a few holes. If you want to avoid the numerous stairs or the steep hills to get down to the lower town, take a five-minute ride on the funicular railway. Powered by the town’s waste (grey) water that acts as a counterweight, the unique transportation system has been carrying passengers since 1899.

Fribourg has long been a crossing point for pilgrims on the road to Santiago de Compostela, and it is still common to see hikers passing along the streets on their ambitious quest.

I found this out the hard way when one of my more spectacularly bad hooks narrowly missed a group of pilgrims. Somehow, perhaps through a little divine intervention, the ball fell short and the little group continued on their westerly spiritual adventure.

Once you’ve finished the course and returned the clubs and golf balls to the tourism centre, you might want to check out the area’s other attractions.

Fribourg and the surrounding region is a paradise for hikers. With almost 2,000 kilometres of maintained footpaths you’re never far away from Switzerland’s natural beauty. Cyclists also enjoy the 500 km of marked routes, along low-traffic roads.

A number of fascinating towns, including Gruyeres, Bulle and Murten, lie close by, and make for excellent day-trip options out of Fribourg.

— Canwest News Service

IF YOU GO:

"Golf is a good walk spoiled," Mark Twain said. Not so with the urban golf program in Fribourg. While urban golf may not be great for your game, it’ll definitely prove good for your soul. The cost of the urban golf experience, which includes golf club, ball and map, is about $9 for adults and $5 for children. Family rates are also available.

* For more information on the urban golf experience and Fribourg’s other attractions, visit fribourgtourisme.ch.

* There are numerous accommodation options in Fribourg. I stayed at Romantik Hotel Au Sauvage (www.hotel-sauvage.ch) located in the heart of the old town, which was very comfortable with an authentic Swiss feel. There’s a small bar and an excellent restaurant in the hotel.

* One of the dining highlights for me was at the Restaurant Hotel de Ville (www.restaurant-hotel-de-ville.ch). The food was memorable and the presentation and service were top-notch.