About the Econophysics Colloquium

The Econophysics Colloquium is an annual meeting on Econophysics that brings together physicists, economists, and practitioners to discuss statistical methods, quantitative measures, modeling approaches, numerical simulations, and non-conventional data mining methods applied to financial, economic, and social systems.

20 Year Anniversary –

Reassessing Impact and Defining the New Goals

As we gather for the “Econophysics Colloquium: Reflecting on 20 Years – Reassessing Impact and Defining the New Goals,” our objective is to celebrate as well as reflect on the current econophysics work. The use of physics tools like network theories, the acknowledgment of fat-tail distributions in financial markets, and the emphasis on data-driven models, especially evident during the COVID-19 pandemic, highlight the potential value of physics approaches in economic analysis.

However, this colloquium also recognizes the challenges faced by the field. Econophysics often finds itself in a unique position, at times perceived as neither fully physics nor entirely economics. This intersection demands more than a mere transposition of methods from physics to economics; it requires a deep understanding and adaptation to the nuances of social sciences. Interdisciplinary work is not just about borrowing concepts; it’s about creating a synergy that respects and integrates the complexity and unique aspects of each discipline.

During this workshop, we aim to both reflect on the past two decades and engage in forward-looking discussions. This is an opportunity for introspection, reassessment, and envisioning a collaborative and insightful future for econophysics and economics.

Please save the following dates:

June 2, 2024, 5 pm: (informal) Welcome reception at Café Eiles, Josefstaedter Strasse 2, 1080 Vienna

June 3-5, 2024: Colloquium at the CSH

NB: the conference fee (EUR 500,-) includes lunches, coffee breaks, Art & Science invitation on June 3, 2024 at the CSH and the conference dinner on June 4, 2024.