Newport is known for its rich history and diverse culture.

Though, like all locations across the world, it is the uniqueness of the people who are at the heart of any city.

And the people of Newport are no different, with the residents of Wales' third largest city popping up in all sorts of vocations.

From singers and actors, to business people and sports stars, the natives of Newport are making themselves known in whatever it is they do.

Maybe its luck, or maybe there's just something in the air, but these are 19 of the biggest names that Newport has given to the world, in no particular order.

1. Aimee-Ffion Edwards

A familiar face to TV viewers, actress, Aimee-Ffion Edwards makes the list of Newport's finest after her on-screen break through in the 2008 season of Skins, while playing obsessive Welsh girl Sketch.

The 32-year-old attended Ysgol Gymraeg Casnewydd, in Llanwern, before joining the National Youth Theatre of Wales, and is a fluent speaker in both Welsh and English.

Edwards is best known for her part as Esme Shelby in the popular BBC drama Peaky blinders, and has also made appearances in Casualty and Being human.

2. Michael Sheen

Born in Newport in 1969, Welsh actor Michael Sheen is one of Wales' most famous exports, known for his roles in a variety of major films such as the Twilight Saga, Blood Diamond, and the Damned United.

He became widely known as a screen actor in the early 2000's making his break-out performance while playing broadcaster David Frost in the hit movie Frost/Nixon in 2008.

The 51-year-old started life in Newport before moving to Port Talbot, the place he now considers to be his home town, and is known for his public championing the Welsh culture and people.

3. Christian Malcolm

Despite having trials with Nottingham Forest football club as a 15-year-old, Welsh sprinter Christian Malcolm decided to follow the path of athletics, going on to become one of the country's most prominent 200 metre runners.

After winning two gold medals at the 1998 Junior World Championships in the 100m and 200m, Malcolm went on to receive a number of senior honours with the Welsh and British team during his illustrious career.

Highlights included a silver medal at the Commonwealth games in Kuala Lumpur, as well as a World Championship silver medal in 2010.

The speedster from Hartridge High school retired from running in 2014, before taking a coaching role with the Australian athletics team in 2019.

4. Florence Olivia Tunks

Born in Newport in 1891 Florence Olivia Tunks was a militant women's rights activist who played a major role in campaigning for women's suffrage in the UK.

In April 1914, Tunks along with fellow-suffragette Hilda Burkitt famously burnt down the pavilion at the Brittania Pier in Great Yarmouth, before torching the Bath Hotel in Felixstowe and causing £35,000 of damage.

Tunks received a nine-months behind bars for the attacks, serving her sentence in Holloway Prison. She later became a registered nurse before her death in East Sussex in 1985, though the 93 year old is still remembered by historians for her contribution to the suffragette's cause.

5. Josie d'Arby

Television presenter Josie d'Arby presented a number of high profile shows in the 90's and early 2000's, including her own Channel 5 talk show Josie, and popular children's art show Smart.

d'Arby has also made appearances on BBC comedy Miranda, Mersey Beat, and still regularly presents Proms in the Park and Songs of Praise.

6. Bobby Windsor

Nicknamed The Duke, Welsh rugby legend Bobby Windsor played the majority of his career whilst working as a steel worker in south Wales.

Widely regarded as one of the best hookers ever, Windsor was part of the famous Pontypool front row, playing alongside Graham Price and Charlie Faulkner.

Windsor played his club rugby for Cross-Keys and Pontypool, and earned 28 caps for Wales as well as taking part in two British Lions tours of South Africa and New Zealand.

7. Feeder

Popular Welsh band Feeder were formed in Newport in 1994 by lead singer Grant Nicholas, and gained attention with their unique style of indie rock shortly after.

Their third album Echo Park was released in 2001 with its lead single Buck Rogers becoming a top five single, and gaining them a cult following across the UK and Japan.

Releasing a total of 10 studio albums, the group went on to complete a number of world tours, and have even been inducted in to the Kerrang Radio Hall of Fame for services to rock.

8. Desmond Llewelyn

There was always a gadget on hand with Desmond Llewelyn, as the actor from Newport played role of Q, the iconic MI6 quartermaster in a total of 17 James Bond films.

Llewelyn made his first appearance in the Bond franchise in the 1963 classic, From Russia with Love, and worked with a number of actors who played the famous 007, including Sean Connery, Roger Moore, and Pierce Brosnan.

And the Newport based star wasn't just known for his on screen action.

When the second world war broke out in 1939 Llewelyn paused his acting career to join up with the Welsh Fusiliers, fighting in France where he was later captured by the German Army, spending five years as a prisoner of war

9. Chris Gunter

Professional footballer Chris Gunter plays as a defender for Championship team Reading, and has made 96 appearances for the Welsh national team.

Gunter, 30, who attended St Julian's High School as a teenager, has played for several big clubs including Cardiff City and Tottenham Hotspur, and was part of the successful Welsh campaign in the euro 2016 tournament.

The attacking full back is known for his ability to play on both sides of the pitch and is currently the most capped Welsh footballer ever, after surpassing former goalkeeper Neville Southhall in 2018.

10. W. H. Davies

Renowned poet William Henry Davies was born in Newport in 1871 and is known for his most famous poem Leisure.

The son of an iron moulder, Davies spent much of his life travelling the UK and America as a hobo, inspiring him to write another of his best known works,The Autobiography of a Super-tramp.

Most of Davies's poetry is on the subject of life on the street and nature, where he demonstrates a natural and simple style to the reader, much of which is taken from his own experience.

You might recognise him for these words:

What is this life if, full of care,

We have no time to stand and stare?

11. Aaron Wainwright

Wales and Gwent Dragons flanker Aaron Wainwright made his debut for the national rugby team in 2018 as a replacement against Argentina in the June summer tour.

He has since gone on to gain 19 caps for Wales, most notably with his appearances in the Grand Slam of 2019, and his scorching try against France in the world cup semi final.

22 year old Wainwright attended Bassaleg school in Newport, and is know for his abrasive style play with both club and country.

12. Sir Terry Matthews

Welsh entrepreneur Sir Terry Matthews was born in Newport in 1943.

He is known for being the first Welsh billionaire and was the richest man in Wales until 2012 when he was taken over by Sir Michael Moritz.

Matthews has a number of business ventures including ownership of the Celtic Manner Resort in Newport, as well as founding Canadian investment group, Wesley Clover, based in Ottowa.

13. Goldie Lookin Chain

Best known for their hit single Guns Don't Kill People, Rappers Do, the Welsh comedy hip-hop group Goldie Lookin Chain put Newport on the map when they shot to fame in 2004 with their Greatest Hits album.

The iconic Welsh rap group are one of the best known musical acts to come from the city with their humorous representation of chav culture in Newport and south Wales.

The band have been known to follow Newport County football team closely, and have even dedicated a song, You're Not From Newport, to their home city.

14. John Frost

John Frost was an important Chartist leader in the 1800s, made famous for his role in the Newport Rising of 1839, where 22 people were killed as a protesters marched on the city.

The Chartists were a political group with the aim of gaining rights for working class people, descending on Newport in support of the people's charter which aimed to introduce a universal male franchise.

For his part in the Newport rising Frost was punished with transportation for life, where he was later sent to a labour camp in Australia.

In 1854 he was granted a pardon for his crimes provided he never returned to Britain, though he is still remembered in Newport today with the John Frost Square named in his honour.

15. Gareth David Lloyd

Bettws born actor Gareth David-Lloyd gained cult status in 2006 with his role as Ianto Jones in the popular Dr Who spin-off, Torchwood.

The 38-year-old who studied at Coleg Gwent, Crosskeys, caused a stir with his part in the popular science fiction series, when the character's on-screen death in 2009 led to a public outcry from fans of the show.

An impromptu shrine dedicated to Ianto was set up in Cardiff Bay shortly after where it still stands to this day.

Outside of the series, David has also made appearances in Casualty, Waterloo Road and Holby City during his career, and has even fronted a metal band called Blue Gillespie, releasing multiple albums.

16. Tony Pulis

Football manager Tony Pulis enjoyed success in his career as both a player and coach in his life long involvement with the beautiful game.

The former Middlesborough manager spent a number of years playing for Bristol Rovers and Newport County before retiring to management in 1992, taking charge of teams such as Bournemouth, Portsmouth, and Stoke City.

The 62-year-old comes from the Pill area of Newport where he lived with his family, including father Angelo who was a local steel worker.

17. Benji Webbe

Welsh musician Benji Webbe is known for his role as the lead vocalist in heavy metal band, Skindred.

Born in Newport to a family of Jamaican immigrants, the 53-year-old Webbe rose to prominence with his first band, Dub War, in the early 90's before a label dispute forced the group to reform under a different name.

Webbe has also fronted bands such as Mass Mental during his career, and has even performed with rock giants Korn, and featured on songs with Bullet For My Valentine.

18. David 'Bomber' Pearce

Newport slugger, David 'Bomber' Pearce was a talented local boxer who held the British heavyweight title from 1983 to 1985.

Pearce won 17 of his 21 professional bouts in the ring, finishing 13 of them by way of knockout, and allowing him to capture the British title in the process.

The statue of 'Bomber' Pearce can be seen today on Newport's river front, where he is still remembered as one of Newport's most famous boxers.

19. Arthur Machen

Born in 1863, Machen became known for his works of supernatural fantasy throughout the late 1800's, where he shocked readers with his break-out horror classic, 'The Great God Plan'.

The book was denounced for its atheism and horrific content at the time, however is today considered one of the finest horror novels in the English language, by author Steven King.

After a stint as a journalist for The Evening News, Machen returned to his literary career during the 1920's, producing popular tales such as The Secret Glory, and The Hill of Dreams.