Virginia - 5th District

Representative-Elect

Virgil H. Goode Jr. (D-Va.)

Born: Oct. 17, 1946, Richmond, Va.

Education: U. of Richmond, B.A. 1969; U. of Virginia, J.D. 1973.

Military Service: Va. National Guard, 1969-75.

Occupation: Lawyer.

Family: Wife, Lucy; one child.

Religion: Baptist.

Political Career: Va. Senate, 1973-97; sought Democratic nomination for U.S. Senate, 1982, 1994.

Capitol Office: 1520 Longworth Bldg. 20515; 225-4711.

By Congressional Quarterly

Goode was able to retain a conservative district with historic Democratic roots by campaigning in an old-fashioned manner on old- fashioned conservative Southern issues: guns, abortion and tobacco.

At the same time, Goode, who represented a state Senate district toward his new district's southern end, held appeal among more liberal constituents with his longstanding support of civil rights. He also echoed Democrats around the country in pledging support for Medicare and federal support of education.

His Republican opponent, attorney George C. Landrith III, attempted to link Goode to the tobacco regulations proposed in 1996 by the Clinton administration. But Goode was quick to distance himself from those plans, saying, "If it regulates tobacco, is the [Federal Drug Administration] going to regulate sunshine next? People get skin cancer from too much sun."

Goode will be able to watch out for the interests of the district's tobacco growers from his new perch on the Agriculture Committee.

He didn't have to stretch to prove his bona fides as a party maverick. After the state legislative elections of 1995, in which Goode ran unopposed for the fifth consecutive time, the state Senate was deadlocked. Democrats retained effective control because the Democratic lieutenant governor held a tie-breaking vote, and the party sought to retain total control of the committee system.

But Goode insisted on an "equitable division" and cast his lot with the Republicans, forcing a power-sharing arrangement in which the GOP gained control of four committees. Goode himself surrendered a gavel to a Republican to help grease the deal. But under the new order, he earned a slot on the conference committee that determines the state budget. Goode reportedly disapproved of the Democrats who were in line to chair some committees, thinking them hostile to gun rights and the tobacco industry.

Goode sponsored a state law that allows sane Virginia residents over age 21 to have permits to carry concealed weapons. As a precaution, the law prohibited carrying hidden guns in places where alcohol is publicly served.

Goode campaigns in a low-key style, winging most speeches and driving to small-town events in a phone-free car. He habitually hands out emery boards and pencils with his name embossed on them. His father, who served as a prosecutor and state delegate, used to give out kitchen implements.

Goode says that he remains in the Democratic Party because his "Daddy was a Democrat," citing his father's appreciation for New Deal programs that aided rural areas. A product of public schools, Goode has opposed tuition tax credits and school vouchers.

His stances on other issues, though, are sufficiently in line with social conservative thought that Christian Coalition Executive Director Ralph Reed hailed Goode's victory at a news conference after the election. Goode supports term limits and opposes abortion in most cases. He immediately joined the so-called Blue Dog Coalition of conservative, mostly Southern, House Democrats and was named chairman of their task force on transportation.

Goode immediately won the support of elected area Democrats, arranging for most prominent legislators in the 5th District to appear at his side as he announced his bid. Goode held the news conference the day after Democrat L.F. Payne Jr. stepped down. Since winning his state Senate seat at age 27, Goode had made no secret of his ambitions for higher office, twice pursuing U.S. Senate seats without success, in 1982 and 1994.

The GOP had a good candidate in Landrith, who had barely lost to Payne in 1994. But this time around, Landrith was distracted by bad publicity over a libel suit that he had lost and a dispute between his wife and a pet store owner. And Goode left too little running room to his right.

© 1997, Congressional Quarterly Inc. All rights reserved.

Washington - 9th District

Representative-Elect

Adam Smith (D-Wash.)

Born: June 15, 1965, Washington, D.C.

Education: Fordham U., B.A. 1987; U. of Washington, J.D. 1990.

Occupation: City prosecutor; lawyer.

Family: Wife, Sara.

Religion: Christian.

Political Career: Wash. Senate, 1991-97.

Capitol Office: 1505 Longworth Bldg. 20515; 225-8901.

By Congressional Quarterly

At 31, Smith comes to Washington already equipped with significant political savvy and extensive legislative experience at the state level.

But Smith, who is the second Democrat and third person to represent this swing district in as many terms, will need his vaunted political skills to stay at least one step ahead of shifting winds and a changeable constituency.

A former state senator from the southeastern Seattle suburb of Kent, Smith was first elected to the Legislature in 1990, scoring an upset victory over a 16-year incumbent.

That victory, at age 25, made Smith the youngest state senator in the country at that time. In 1994, when many Democratic officeholders in the state were summarily swept out of office by a Republican tide, Smith ran for a second term and won re-election.

In both races, Smith earned a reputation as a strong and active campaigner by personally visiting more than 40,000 homes in his district, giving dozens of speeches at area schools and holding almost two dozen town meetings.

Smith, a former prosecutor in populous King County (Seattle), also won respect as being tough on crime for specializing in cases of domestic violence, spousal abuse and drunk driving.

Drawing on his criminal justice experience, Smith became known as a champion of education and justice issues during his service in Olympia. In 1992, he was appointed chairman of the state Senate's Law and Justice Committee, a position he held for four years.

Smith, who is a native of Washington, likes to point out that he is a lifelong resident of the community who worked his way through undergraduate school by loading trucks and earned his law degree at the University of Washington in Seattle.

To further illustrate his working-class roots and his empathy for working families, Smith seldom misses a chance to mention that his father worked for 30 years as a baggage handler at Seattle- Tacoma International Airport and was an active union member in the International Association of Machinists and Aerospace Workers.

As a member of Congress, Smith has pledged to continue emphasizing issues such as education, with particular emphasis on job training and economic development. And indeed, his committee assignments could not be better tailored to the economic concerns of the Puget Sound region: He was named to the Resources Committee and the National Security Committee.

A rising star among Washington Democrats, Smith had long been considered a strong contender for higher elected office when he announced in July 1995 that he would challenge freshman Republican Rep. Randy Tate.

Much like Smith, Tate was a veteran of the state Legislature, and he had defeated one-term Democrat Mike Kreidler in 1994. A vocal supporter of Republican House Speaker Newt Gingrich, Tate was a strong supporter of the House GOP's "Contract With America" and an advocate of reducing the size and scope of the federal government.

But singling out GOP proposals to alter such programs as college student loans, worker safety programs and environmental protection laws, the AFL-CIO launched an 18-month barrage of television and radio commercials aimed at unseating Tate.

While the AFL-CIO ads did much of the dirty work by attacking Tate, Smith spent the majority of his time and resources defining himself as a moderate, common-sense candidate, who would seek to make government work better and more efficiently. In an early indication that the messages were taking hold with voters, Smith bested Tate by 2 percentage points in a trial-run primary in September in which both candidates appeared on the same ballot.

Tate, who frequently denounced the AFL-CIO media campaign but had largely ignored Smith to that point, shifted his re-election campaign into high gear in an attempt to turn around public opinion. But it was too little, too late. Smith actually increased his margin of victory in November.

© 1997, Congressional Quarterly Inc. All rights reserved.