Background

Background:

Rob Black has worked in the field of Influence and Information Operations since 2003. As a Lecturer in Information Activities, he leads a series of modules on the UK MoD's MSc in Cyberspace Operations, as well as supporting the UK Defence Cyber School in educating senior MoD Leaders about Warfare in the Information Age. He is on the Education and Scholarship pathway at Cranfield.

Rob is also the Director of the UK Cyber 9/12 Strategy Challenge, a university student competition focused on building the next generation of cyber security leaders competent in strategy, policy and technology. More information can be found at www.ukcyber912.co.uk.

Rob is also currently an Associate Programme Director at Wilton Park, an Executive Agency of the UK Foreign Commonwealth and Development Office, where he helps enable policy shaping dialogue on issues at the heart of the UK government's interests. His current programme focuses on defence and national security, cyber, intelligence and warfare.

His interests are focused on looking at the nexus of Cyber, intelligence and warfighting, exploring concepts such as the legality of cyber operations today and the role of Influence and Deception in the Information Age. Formerly he was the Deputy Director of the National Cyber Deception Laboratory and previously Rob was responsible for building and developing Cyber Influence Capabilities for the UK MoD and was involved in operational planning and delivery of cyber operations in support of the UK government's and her international partners cyber operations. Prior to this, he was a policy analyst in DSTL helping MoD and wider government in coercion, deterrence and resilience related programmes as well as other strategic challenges such as security related to the delivery of London 2012 Olympics, the IED threat in Afghanistan and Counter-Piracy activities off Somalia.

Rob studied Law and a Masters in International Peace and Security (International Law and International Relations at Kings College London.

Research opportunities

Suitable Masters / Consultancy Topics include:

Cyber operations; cyber defence; offensive cyber; intelligence and covert action; warfare in the information age; information manoeuvre and information advantage; deception.

Current activities

My current interests include:

Director of UK Cyber 9/12 UK Strategy Challenge

Associate Programme Director at Wilton Park

Lecturer and Module Lead on classified Cyberspace Operations MSc

Additional Support to Defence Cyber School

Former Deputy Director of National Cyber Deception Laboratory

As well as thematic interests in the following areas:

Cyber operations; cyber defence; offensive cyber; intelligence and covert action; warfare in the information age; information manoeuvre and information advantage; deception.

Clients

UK MoD

wider UK government

Publications