Citation preview

DARK BORDERS

∫ 2011 Duke University Press All rights reserved Printed in the United States of America on acid-free paper $ Designed by Jennifer Hill Typeset in Arno Pro by Keystone Typesetting, Inc. Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data appear on the last printed page of this book. Duke University Press gratefully acknowledges the support of the University of Maryland, which provided funds toward the production of this book.

Contents

Illustrations Acknowledgments Introduction One

Two Three

Four

Five

Postscript Notes Bibliography Index

vii ix

the un-americanness of film noir 1 gestapo in america 27 Confessions of a Nazi Spy and Stranger on the Third Floor white-collar murder 57 Double Indemnity cuba, gangsters, vets, and other outcasts of the islands 91 The Chase and Key Largo north from mexico 123 Border Incident, Hold Back the Dawn, Secret beyond the Door, and Out of the Past bad boy patriots 155 This Gun for Hire, Ride the Pink Horse, and Pickup on South Street darkness visible 185 205 245 261

Illustrations

1

2

3

4

5

6

7 8 9

10

11

12

13

14

Nazi propaganda spreads across the United States, from Confessions of a Nazi Spy 32 The terror of nonbelonging, from Confessions of a Nazi Spy 38 Meng the informer, from Stranger on the Third Floor 47 Fascist American justice, from Stranger on the Third Floor 49 ‘‘I’ll not go back!’’: Deportation panic in Stranger on the Third Floor 54 Neff and Gorlopis under the sway of Keyes, from Double Indemnity 62 Oedipal visual schematics in Double Indemnity 70 The machinery of fate, from Double Indemnity 81 The look of death: The husband’s murder, from Double Indemnity 87 The look of death: Neff watching Keyes watching, from Double Indemnity 88 The exiled gangster’s watery return, from Key Largo 102 The ur-American framed by Bogart and Bacall, from Key Largo 103 Blood and soil in the Valle de Muerte, from Border Incident 132 A ‘‘friend to all braceros,’’ from Border Incident 137

15–17 18 19 20 21–22 23

24

Death by U.S. agribusiness, from Border Incident 141 Korean War poster, from Pickup on South Street 173 Negotiating matters of scale, from Pickup on South Street 175 Rushing subway as reeling celluloid, from Pickup on South Street 175 Stylized artiﬁce from start to ﬁnish, from Gun Crazy 191 A regime of visibility: Robert Aldrich grasps French Hollywood cinephilia 194 Turning noir on its head, from Touch of Evil 203

Acknowledgments

I am happy to thank colleagues and friends who offered feedback and support while I was working on this project, including (in alphabetical order) Peter Beicken, Chris Cagle, Kent Cartwright, Russ Castronovo, Kandice Chuh, Stan Corkin, Caroline Eades, Astrid Franke, Oliver Gaycken, Markus Gehann, Jim Gilbert, Saverio Giovacchini, Lisa Gitelman, Lee Grieveson, Marshall Grossman, Tom Gunning, Liam Kennedy, Isabell Klaiber, Bob Kolker, Frank Krutnik, Ted Leinwand, Bob Levine, Greg Metcalf, Yoichiro Miyamoto, Alan Nadal, Howard Norman, Devin Orgeron, Marsha Orgeron, Liz Papazian, Don Pease, Dana Polan, Joshua Shannon, Jan Stievermann, Horst Tonn, Michael Tratner, Trysh Travis, Orrin Wang, Mary Helen Washington, David Wyatt, and various eagle-eyed students over the years who pointed out puzzling and peculiar features of these ﬁlms that otherwise I would probably never have noticed. My gratitude also goes to Michelle Cerullo for help compiling the bibliography. I also express my appreciation for the valuable comments made by the two anonymous readers for Duke University Press, as well as for the encouragement and guidance of my editor there, Courtney Berger. Thanks also to the

x Acknowledgments

Graduate Research Board at the University of Maryland, which granted me much needed time for writing. Earlier versions of chapters 4 and 5 of this book have been previously published, ‘‘Noir Citizenship: Anthony Mann’s Border Incident,’’ Cinema Journal 47, no. 4 (2008), 102–20, and a section on Sam Fuller’s Pickup on South Street in ‘‘Microﬁlm, Containment, and the Cold War,’’ American Literary History 19, no. 3 (2007), 745–68, authored with Lisa Gitelman. Thanks to Adell Aldrich for permission to reproduce the intriguing photograph of her father that I discuss near the end of my study, and to Alain Silver for helping me procure the photo. Finally I thank my wife, Marijean, and my son, Daniel, for bearing with me as I watched one bleak black-and-white movie after another, not a passion they necessarily shared, but one especially Marijean was happy to see me indulge. This book is lovingly dedicated to them.

introduction

The Un-Americanness of Film Noir

Reporting to the fbi in late 1947 about subversive activity in Hollywood, ‘‘Conﬁdential Informant T-10’’ expressed the hope that Congress ‘‘by statute’’ would declare American communists ‘‘a foreign-inspired conspiracy’’ rather than ‘‘a legal party.’’ Collectively criminalized, communist membership could then become a deﬁnitive ‘‘indication of disloyalty,’’ T-10 reasoned, that would in turn sanction the ‘‘cleansing of their own household.’’∞ As the recently elected president of the Screen Actors Guild, T-10 (aka Ronald Reagan) was in a good position to appreciate how messy such a domestic purging would be without the convenient force of law to detect and then rid the ‘‘household’’ (both the ﬁlm community and the homeland at large) of undesirable elements. Responding to a danger felt from within, Reagan, along with many other Americans at midcentury, sought to purify the republic by imagining a group of fellow citizens as illegitimate outsiders who warranted, awkwardly, some sort of expulsion or detention. At once an epistemological crisis (how to know the enemy?) and a moral one (what should be done?), this perceived emergency in internal security severely tested American citizenship during the 1940s and 1950s. These two decades also coincided

2 Introduction

with the development of American ﬁlm noir, a cycle of moody, dark crime thrillers ﬁlled with bitterness, confusion, and doubt. Not ostensibly concerned with national politics, many of these movies in style and tone dramatized feelings of alienation—a profound sense of dispossession corresponding closely to the Cold War’s redeﬁnition of the rights and responsibilities of citizenship, as I show in this study. An obvious link between external and internal threats, the Communist Party of America (cpusa) was the logical focus of T-10’s attention, even though the cpusa was never directly outlawed despite the private urging of Reagan and so many others. A few months before his report, the guild president had appeared in public before the House Un-American Activities Committee (huac, a very different audience than the fbi) to give a far more upbeat assessment: ‘‘I do not believe the Communists have ever at any time been able to use the motion-picture screen as a sounding board for their philosophy or ideology.’’≤ Yet Reagan in effect got his more secret wish through a series of security measures (laws, directives, and policies) enacted initially in the late 1930s in response to impending global conﬂict and more rapidly imposed during and soon after the Second World War. To consider simply the single year of the informer Reagan’s conﬁdential memo, arguably the deﬁning moment of the Cold War, 1947 marked the Truman Doctrine proclaiming the intention of the United States to defend against Soviet incursion around the globe (March 12); the creation of the loyalty oath program for federal employees (March 21); the proposal of the Marshall Plan for rehabilitating Western Europe (June); the TaftHartley Act aimed to root out communist leadership in labor unions (June 18); the Foreign Affairs publication of George F. Kennan’s inﬂuential containment thesis, ‘‘The Sources of Soviet Conduct’’ (July); the signing of the National Security Act, designed to administer and oversee a national system of military intelligence and surveillance, both foreign and domestic (July 26); the huac investigations of directors and screenwriters (October 27–30); the Waldorf Statement, in which Hollywood studios began voluntarily blacklisting their own (November 25); and the attorney general’s issuing of an ofﬁcial list of subversive organizations (December 4). Hundreds of books and articles have been written about the home front during the Cold War, including plenty focusing on huac’s probing of the

Introduction 3

so-called Hollywood Ten.≥ Yet for all the attention paid to the stylized rituals of naming names, guilt by association, and the heavy consequences for the accused, it seems to me that the irrational intensity of anticommunist fervor in the late 1940s and early 1950s remains something of a mystery. After all, Reagan had reassured huac in 1947 that the primary medium for mass culture in the United States, the Hollywood screen, remained immune to communist ideology, so that his desire to prosecute these ideologues for their beliefs seems rather curious. What did Reagan fear if no longer just fear itself (to paraphrase Franklin D. Roosevelt’s New Deal aphorism)? In what sense, exactly, did the communists jeopardize security? How to draw the line between criminal disloyalty and other kinds of legitimate dissent, or the line between subversive thought and treasonous behavior? Was mere membership in an organization a matter of ideas or action? Was communism simply a political belief or ‘‘a way of life,’’ as the fbi director J. Edgar Hoover insisted in his own huac testimony?∂ Such questions revolved around social and psychological thresholds between the inner and the outer—what was inside the law as opposed to outside it, what was permissible to think but not to do. The anxiety driving this concern over uncertain boundaries attached itself centrally to issues of national belonging: who and what counted as American. The question thus became how to distinguish between foreign instigation and domestic agency, how to tell friend from foe, and, in the absence of clear markers of difference, how to uncover and deal with sedition at home. As Reagan’s memo suggests, worries over delineating borders seemed more pressing than the menace of any serious ‘‘ﬁfth column’’ domestic subversion itself.∑ To address this curiosity, we might begin by pairing two concepts that seem to come from different realms (politics and aesthetics), but that in my analysis turn out to function identically: un-American and uncanny. While the ﬁrst word came into play at the end of the nineteenth century, it started to pervade security debates in the mid-1930s, when war loomed in Europe and when it was given institutional status by a congressional committee (huac) that continued to exercise signiﬁcant inﬂuence through the 1950s; the second term is one of the main ways that ﬁlm noir has come to be critically identiﬁed—a certain cluster of uneasy feelings rather than a ﬁxed cinematic genre with well-demarcated themes and features. If the affective dimension of political discourse during this period often tends to be

4 Introduction

overlooked, then conversely the substantive politics at the core of noir’s mood of disquiet similarly tends to be underestimated in depth and detail.∏ Bringing these two notions together, locating the uncanny in the unAmerican, helps us appreciate how these crime ﬁlms crucially helped shape and respond to a crisis calling into question how citizens and government construed the limits of their homeland. While at ﬁrst glance un-American may seem analogous to adjectives like unpatriotic or uncharitable that simply denote the absence of a particular positive attribute, in fact the term worked in far stranger ways, recently prompting one scholar to call it in passing, a bit hyperbolically, ‘‘one of the most remarkable words in the twentieth century.’’π Rather than classifying ontologically a type of person or trait, un-American functioned strictly by negation, a canceling out or reversing of a more nebulous set of ideals.∫ The preﬁx un- is so strange because it, unlike anti-, cannot signify any speciﬁc grounds for difference: to be un-American is not simply to be hostile toward or positioned against American values from some identiﬁable alternative perspective, but rather to somehow embody the very opposite of ‘‘America.’’ Yet what exactly constitutes America’s opposite? Preparing the way for the Manichaean mind-set that dominated postwar politics, the ‘‘un’’ in huac created a seamless totality with no terms to mediate between its stark polarities. These poles were at once mutually exclusive and bound together by a single quality or condition (consider the adjectival pairs happy/unhappy, friendly/unfriendly, for instance). But unlike the seemingly similar preﬁx non-, un- did not even work by a logic of exclusion to ﬁx legal categories of nationality (as in the term nonAmericans). The key is that un-American mostly made sense only when applied to Americans, so that by 1959 the former president Harry Truman was emboldened to pronounce huac itself ‘‘the most un-American thing in the country today.’’Ω In a telling circularity, Truman found it unAmerican for Americans to label other Americans un-American. Coupled with the word activities, un-American became an even more curious construction. ‘‘What is meant by un-American activities?’’ asked the representative Dewey Johnson of Minnesota when a resolution for establishing the committee came before the House in April 1937.∞≠ The question was a good one. As I have suggested, un-American is centrally a matter of values and beliefs. To investigate thought comes perilously close to violating cherished principles of free speech; therefore ideas had to be

Introduction 5

tethered to unlawful action such as sabotage or espionage to warrant prosecution, even though there were lots of laws already on the books to prosecute such crimes, including the high crime of wartime treason as deﬁned in the Constitution. But as a catchall concept that could be applied to a variety of perceived dangers from within, un-Americanness demanded probing and surveillance that superseded traditional police work. As I discuss in chapter 1, even before the founding of huac, fdr in 1936 issued a secret directive to the fbi’s Hoover that allowed him to systematically undertake intelligence gathering aimed at tracing any links between radicalism at home and foreign agents working for international communist and fascist movements. On September 6, 1939, a week after Hitler invaded Poland, fdr issued another fbi directive in connection with a declared national emergency that permitted Hoover to substantially broaden the scope of investigation to include a wide range of ‘‘subversive activities’’ not previously part of the bureau’s mission. A crucial category of criminality was expanded to reach beyond behavior into the realm of ideas—a potential for political thought control that ﬁlm noir would register with paranoia from its inception.∞∞ To put it another way, the United States during this period was a rather uncanny place. Here I invoke Freud’s well-known essay ‘‘The Uncanny’’ (1919, in the direct aftermath of the First World War). While this essay has sometimes been applied to discussions of citizenship, it is not generally discussed speciﬁcally in relation to the Cold War and in conjunction with the closely aligned term un-American.∞≤ Freud’s analysis proves especially helpful for connecting matters of affect experienced on an intimate level with large-scale political questions about national belonging. Beginning, uncharacteristically, with an extended linguistic analysis of the German adjectives heimlich and unheimlich (homely/unhomely), Freud argues that the ostensible opposition between the familiar and the unfamiliar conveyed by this pair in fact reveals a single ‘‘core of feeling’’: that the uncanny, far from deriving from ‘‘intellectual uncertainty’’ about the unknown, rather emerges from a kind of reversal, a doubling or return of the familiar that has been repressed as such. In common German usage, Freud notes, the word heimlich can mean both ‘‘intimate, friendly, comfortable’’ as well as ‘‘something concealed, secret.’’ The adjective thus takes on the connotations of unheimlich without the need for the preﬁx un-: ‘‘Heimliche [sic] is a word the meaning of which develops in the direction of ambiva-

6 Introduction

lence, until it ﬁnally coincides with its opposite, unheimliche [sic]. Unheimliche is in some way or other a sub-species of heimliche.’’∞≥ Although Freud does not explicitly amplify his discussion of the preﬁx un- (which he calls ‘‘the token of repression’’) to consider the nation-state, his emphasis on the concept of home certainly makes such an analysis available, as a number of his examples indicate: ‘‘Is it still heimliche to you in your country where strangers are felling your woods?’’ and ‘‘Freedom is the whispered watchword of heimliche conspirators and the loud battle-cry of professional revolutionaries.’’∞∂ While it might be argued that whether the home is comfortable or a place of concealment simply depends on whether it is viewed from within or without, the question of perspective is precisely what remains so unstable. The uncanny in this regard is primarily a matter of trespassing or boundary crossing, where inside and outside grow confused as (presumed) foreigners enter domestic space and, conversely, the home reveals dark secrets hidden within. To feel that your home is strange, or more precisely, to feel like a stranger in your own house—this is the peculiar condition of citizenship intensiﬁed by wartime security measures, as well as a primary emotion driving many ﬁlms noirs of the 1940s and 1950s. Cinema scholars frequently link noir to existential alienation, abstractly or philosophically considered, but such alienation needs to be more precisely grounded in speciﬁc historical and cultural fears about enemy aliens lurking within. Beyond the obvious anxieties created by these (in)security measures, especially the inability to decide between American and un-American, I would make two related points. First, what from the perspective of international relations looks like a dramatically shifting set of allies and foes before the war, during the war, and soon after the war, from the viewpoint of the home front seems a remarkably consistent set of developments, regardless of the speciﬁc external threat (Germany, Japan, or the Soviet Union). In other words, from roughly 1939 (fdr’s directive to the fbi) to at least 1954 (passage of the Loss of Citizenship Act and the Senate’s censure of Joseph McCarthy in December), the United States found itself in a single continuous state of emergency prompted by global conﬂict: impending, hot, and cold. In this admittedly idiosyncratic deﬁnition, the ‘‘Cold War’’ in the United States actually begins during the late 1930s, with the rise of an intelligence apparatus that effectively put the country on a permanent wartime basis. It is impossible to explain the intensity of anti-

Introduction 7

communism after the war without taking into account the serious anxiety many Americans felt about enemy inﬁltration well before their country entered the war.∞∑ Second, beyond secret directives, congressional committees, and national legislation aimed at catching ﬁfth-column inﬁltrators, this state of exception or emergency had powerful consequences for ordinary citizens because, as I have been suggesting, the very nature of American citizenship was being transformed. Or perhaps citizenship in the abstract was being protected against change. Culminating more than a decade’s succession of security measures, Dwight D. Eisenhower’s Loss of Citizenship law (1954), enacted when membership in the cpusa had already dwindled to negligible numbers, simply made explicit what earlier sedition and registration acts implied—that certain persons (un-Americans) were no longer welcome in the country, despite either having undergone the legal process of naturalization or possessing a presumed ‘‘constitutional birthright’’ as native born.∞∏ But whether emphasis falls on the state (rights and contract) or on the nation (consent and community)—that is, whether we view citizenship from the perspective of the law or as a more psychological matter of belonging—for denationalization to take place, U.S. citizenship could be terminated (as opposed to being voluntarily given up by the individual) only on relatively narrow, sometimes overlapping grounds: by a breech of allegiance, as a form of punishment, or as a deemed threat to public order. As Alexander Aleinikoff has noted in his valuable review of theories about the loss of U.S. citizenship, in 1940 Congress began adding several new grounds for denationalization, not simply divided allegiance (e.g., serving in the armed forces of another country), but now, in a more penal nature, for actions such as trying to overthrow the government. As Aleinikoff remarks, these cold war provisions (as I would call them) ‘‘were excepted from the general rule that denationalization took effect only after the citizen had taken up residence abroad [and therefore] permitted the denationalization of citizens who may not have acquired citizenship elsewhere.’’∞π Such preemptive legislation now meant ‘‘that citizenship could be terminated against the will of the citizen,’’ thereby raising the specter of involuntary statelessness. This leads Aleinikoff further to notice ‘‘something quite peculiar about our constitutional doctrine’’: that ‘‘Congress has no power to remove citizenship and virtually plenary power to deport aliens.’’ In this regard, efforts to criminalize native-born cpusa members,

8 Introduction

as Reagan proposed, by treating them as disloyal agents of a foreign (Soviet) conspiracy, at once aimed to preserve but also betrayed the idealized notion of citizenship as an abstract universal. Dismissing the rights perspective as ‘‘internally incoherent,’’ concluding ‘‘consent takes us no place’’ and that ‘‘contract and communitarian theory cannot rule out state power to terminate citizenship against the will of the individual,’’ Aleinikoff is left to insist, a bit feebly and glumly, that denationalization only ‘‘be based on conduct, not belief ’’—precisely the sort of distinction that Freud’s uncanny and fdr’s emergency security measures tended to blur.∞∫ Exception is what gives Aleinikoff ’s legal theorizing such ﬁts. In his examination of the rule of exception that increasingly has become the norm, indeed the foundation, of state power in the twentieth century, the political philosopher Giorgio Agamben more recently has analyzed a series of paradoxes about ‘‘this no-man’s land between public law and political fact,’’ which he reads spatially as kind of ‘‘a dispute over its proper locus,’’ since ‘‘what must be inscribed within the law is essentially exterior to it.’’∞Ω Following Carl Schmitt, he describes ‘‘the topological structure of the state of exception’’ as ‘‘Being-outside, and yet belonging’’ because ‘‘the sovereign, who decides on the exception, is, in truth, logically deﬁned in his being by the exception.’’≤≠ One consequence of this aporia between inside and outside, Agamben asserts, quoting Schmitt, is that ‘‘the state continues to exist, while law recedes.’’≤∞ And yet if we redirect our attention from the state or the sovereign to the nation, from the exercise of power to more affective qualities centered on the governed, we might reverse Agamben’s topology: for those compelled to operate under such proclaimed emergencies, the feeling is being inside, and yet not belonging. This is the ‘‘zone of anomie’’ that Agamben attributes to states of exception but does not closely consider in relation to citizens themselves. We can better grasp what it felt like to live under such a state of exception by looking closely at how various border confusions between inside and outside emerged in a group of gloomy American movies that French intellectuals soon after the Second World War dubbed ‘‘ﬁlm noir.’’ It is the aim of the present book to show how the psychological and social effects of wartime internal national security corresponded in particular ways to central features of these movies. Because Hollywood studios at the time did not label these ﬁlms as such, contrary to the ways in which

Introduction 9

they categorized and promoted their other product lines like westerns or musicals, the term ﬁlm noir still occasions discussion among cinema scholars, with some straining to classify ﬁlms as ‘‘noir’’ according to a predetermined array of attributes, while others argue that the very concept is suspect and of limited value as a critical construct imposed well after the fact in the United States. According to these skeptics, a kind of tedious repetition sets in when familiar tropes are invoked over and over to deﬁne noir: rainy streets, low-key chiaroscuro lighting, hard-boiled dialogue, desperate criminals, femme fatales, moral angst, betrayal, and so on. But it seems to me that the skeptics threaten to become perhaps just as predictable in their own disavowals that challenge the conceptual coherence of noir; what is most striking, in fact, is the way that both sides replay the very same sorts of anxieties about constructing and patrolling thresholds that are central to the postwar period itself. In other words, current doubts about the legitimacy of ‘‘noir’’ as an analytic category closely resemble, indeed largely follow from, cold war worries about how to identify and locate ‘‘Americans.’’ One boundary dispute (over the ontological stability or purity of a kind of cinema) bears directly on another (over uncanny citizenship) and therefore needs to be examined with some care and precision.≤≤ Marc Vernet, one of the most subtle of these skeptics (perhaps by virtue of his own status as a French intellectual) begins his dismantling of the concept, for example, by wryly mocking noir as a convenient ‘‘object of beauty’’ because ‘‘it is neatly contained in a perfect decade (1945–1955), because it is simultaneously deﬁned by its matter (black and white) and by its content (the crime story), because it is strange (see its relation to German expressionism and to psychoanalysis) . . . because there is always an unknown ﬁlm to be added to the list . . . because it is a great example of cooperation—the Americans made it and then the French invented it—,’’ and on he continues with clichéd reason after reason, which he then proceeds to deconstruct in the rest of his essay by showing how these commonplaces about style, theme, and periodization do not stand up to close scrutiny: the ﬁne grain of ﬁlm history that he masterfully displays by invoking counterexample after counterexample. If these other ﬁlms exhibit noir features but predate the cycle and/or clearly belong to other genres, then the category ‘‘noir’’ loses all shape and clarity, becoming little more than an ‘‘eminently lost object,’’ Vernet eloquently concludes: ‘‘Lost for

10 Introduction

never having been given a satisfactory deﬁnition, lost for having ended in 1955, lost for representing the 1930s in a modern form.’’≤≥ In a more systematic vein, Steve Neale similarly casts suspicion on noir’s status as a cinematic genre, arguing that even if critics fairly agree on a basic canon, the criteria to delineate this corpus of ﬁlms is so imprecise as to be ‘‘doomed, in the end, to incoherence.’’≤∂ Yet the approach of another contemporary theorist on ﬁlm genre, Rick Altman, offers a more capacious framework that calls into question Neale’s own reifying and somewhat rigid logic. Throughout his Film/Genre, Altman invokes the spatial metaphor of borders so frequently that it should come as no surprise when he closes his penetrating analysis with an intriguing and ambitious comparison between genres and nations. For Altman, genres and nations are not given entities with ﬁxed qualities, but rather discursive formations or practices that depend on complex ongoing negotiations among various stakeholders or communities. In this sense his idea of a border is less a clear line of demarcation than the process by which nations and genres continually undergo recreation and reimagination.≤∑ Altman’s suggestive analogy between genres and nations helps us pinpoint the bee in Vernet’s and Neale’s bonnets. In contesting the conventional parameters of noir, both Vernet and Neale install and endorse another pair of related binaries that remain unquestioned in their own arguments—the sharp separation between countries, and the equally sharp separation between image and text, that is, between making ﬁlms and talking about them. Vernet asserts this most bluntly when challenging periodization: ‘‘The dates that have been agreed upon are thus ones that concern French critical reception and not American production.’’ Rather than seriously entertain the possibility that noir emerged from transatlantic crossings or translations (literally a ‘‘carrying over’’) between Europe and the United States (what he jokingly derides as ‘‘cooperation’’), Vernet assumes that Hollywood is one thing, Paris another, and never the twain shall meet. This dismissal is quite curious, because elsewhere in his essay he gives a rather detailed and nuanced account of postwar French politics that helps explain why certain intellectuals were so attracted to these ﬁlms. Perhaps even more astonishing is Vernet’s disparagement of the date 1945 as marking the start of noir because the Second World War was ‘‘not a cinematographic event,’’ as if cinema had its own inner workings sealed off from world affairs, when in fact Hollywood and the U.S. govern-

Introduction 11

ment were arguably more closely aligned during this war than during any other period in U.S. history.≤∏ Later Vernet returns to that same telling adjective, approving another scholar’s hypothesis about noir and the rise of television because this explanation at least had the advantage of being ‘‘internal to the cinematographic institution.’’ Here again a barrier between the internal and the external is erected to protect cinema and the cinematic image from contamination by supposedly outside nuisances (like global conﬂict).≤π Neale’s understanding of genre is similarly constrained by his conceiving of the concept primarily as a function of cinema institutions; while he does allow for ‘‘audience expectations and textual norms,’’ his resonant notion of ‘‘inter-textual relay’’ tends to be limited to studio publicity, promotion, and ﬁlm reviews, as if other sorts of discourse mattered little. Hence his impatience with the imprecision of various attempts to deﬁne noir by broad historical generalizations. Neale’s approach is symptomatic of a much larger turn in academic ﬁlm studies during the past decade away from high theory (a specialty of the French, after all, that might seem to have exhausted itself ) toward looking past the screen to consider cinema’s various commercial operations and practices: economics, pedagogy, exhibition, distribution, reception, censorship, star studies, and so on.≤∫ It is beyond the scope of this study to interrogate this trend, but despite its considerable appeal and value, it seems to me that this model risks cutting off movies from the world at large by treating cinema as self-enclosed and self-motivated. While my intention in Dark Borders is not to reiterate the same tired tropes about noir, neither is it to cancel out the concept entirely; as the punning title of this book suggests, my aim is to ask new questions about a body of ﬁlms whose problematic hybridity—a lack of clear generic demarcation—I will take as a virtue in helping us appreciate the uncanniness of midcentury America. In contrast to Vernet’s effort to keep the motion picture primary and pristine, Jacques Rancière has more recently given us a better way to think about the relation between images and words. Rancière seeks to fuse aesthetics and politics not by way of psychoanalytic theory (say, Freud’s uncanny), but rather by conceiving of artistic representation as arising from what he calls a ‘‘regime of visibility,’’ a ‘‘conceptual space of articulation between these ways of making and forms of visibility and intelligibility determining the way in which they can be viewed and conceived.’’ Instead

12 Introduction

of assuming the priority of the image at the expense of critical discourse about it, typically seen as parasitic and supplementary at best, Rancière argues that a ‘‘new regime of visibility’’ can ‘‘make a new pictorial practice possible.’’≤Ω In this regard, noir is not a ‘‘lost object,’’ as Vernet would have it, but a found one that Parisian intellectuals brought to light after the war. And so we can take seriously the Frenchness of ﬁlm noir (another sort of un-Americanness). The sudden impact on the French of previously unavailable Hollywood crime thrillers, blacked out during wartime Occupation, dramatically illustrates how a regime of visibility emerges thanks to this interplay or articulation between images and critical discourse. It might be argued that critics like Nino Frank and Jean-Pierre Chartier in 1946, and Raymond Borde and Etienne Chaumeton in 1955, were no Goncourt brothers, whose nineteenth-century writing on Jean-BaptisteSiméon Chardin’s paintings Rancière cites as an example. But the fact is that these Frenchmen did make visible what Americans themselves did or could not see for themselves. The ‘‘noir’’ these French found in American movies gets even more interesting once we appreciate how the term in 1946 was not a completely new coinage but taken from the Série Noire, a series of paperback thrillers published by Gallimard, mostly translations of hard-boiled American ﬁction. That series, in turn, borrowed its name from romans noirs, the generic French term for Gothic or mystery novels, mainly eighteenth-century British ﬁction. Beyond texts, we can add that Chartier, in his article titled ‘‘The Americans Are Making Dark Films Too’’ (emphasis added) of November 1946, alludes to ‘‘discussion of a French school of ﬁlm noir,’’ for which he gives examples from a pair of Marcel Carné movies from 1938.≥≠ While these promiscuous manifestations of noir might support Vernet’s and Neale’s suspicions that the term is too loose to be very helpful, I would argue that it speaks to the potency of the adjective as a cultural signiﬁer crossing and crisscrossing nations and media (verbal and visual). To be more exact, surrounding or chronologically sandwiching these ﬁlms of the 1940s, we have a variety of texts and images—detective ﬁction, primarily American in translation, from the 1920s and 1930s; earlier Gothic novels; French poetic realism; and postwar French criticism making heady claims for the signiﬁcance of these wartime American movies, claims that eventually make their way back to U.S. directors and screenwriters like Robert Aldrich (in the 1950s) and Paul Schrader (in the 1970s). We can add to this

Introduction 13

circulation or reciprocity between words and images (and between cultures) a third inﬂuential medium, radio, that helped shape and was in turned shaped by the hard-boiled dialogue of the prewar crime stories of writers like James M. Cain and Raymond Chandler, who were subsequently enlisted by Hollywood to import some of that dialogue into movies. From a theoretical perspective, this verbal, visual, and aural intermediality allowing noir to become recognizable at midcentury squares nicely with Rancière’s redeﬁning of the concept of a representational medium as a regime or articulation of practices, rather than as constituted by any intrinsic materiality or ontology. From a historical perspective, such intermediality harkens back to the late-nineteenth century emergence of the moving picture, which was initially conceived and invented as an audiovisual multimedia spectacle drawing on a range of precursors and which only later developed into having cinematographic institutions and forms seemingly its own.≥∞ Again, it is beyond the scope of this study to contemplate how Rancière’s arguments against media-speciﬁc analysis will inﬂuence ‘‘the future of the image,’’ as one of his recent collections of essays is titled. But if we begin, along these lines, to unsettle conventional divisions between words and images, between ﬁlm commentary and ﬁlm production (itself already discursive and transnational, I would insist); if we probe rather than try to protect the porous boundaries between countries and cultures (cosmopolitan Berlin, Los Angeles, Paris); if we suspend debate about whether something qualiﬁes as a cinema genre or not, even as that ‘‘something’’ still continues to elicit commentary and intense interest, then we can appreciate how the dark borders of noir might warrant renewed close consideration. For me that consideration centers on affect. To return to Vernet and Neale for a moment, it is revealing, and somewhat surprising given their distaste for imprecision, that both scholars begrudgingly come nearest to accepting a deﬁnition of noir in relation to what appears as its most nebulous attribute, that of carrying a distinctive mood or sensibility linked to the emotional vulnerability of its main characters. In the midst of his relentless excoriation of the concept, Neale pauses to grant that narrative techniques such as ﬂashback and voice-over have ‘‘considerable merit’’ as a characterization of noir, insofar as these formal techniques foreground ‘‘reliability, duplicity and deception.’’ Such enigmas of narration under-

14 Introduction

score how noir movies frequently emphasize subjectivity and interiority, a ‘‘sustained focus on the thoughts and feelings of at least one major character,’’ as Neale puts it.≥≤ In related fashion, Vernet reverses himself on the question of periodization, contrasting, rather than comparing, earlier comic ﬁlm versions of Dashiell Hammett’s The Maltese Falcon in the 1930s against John Huston’s wartime remake of 1941—a locus classicus for most ﬁlm noir scholars—to admit that the latter’s ‘‘domination of serious tone’’ accounts for the movie’s classiﬁcation as noir, rather than ‘‘actual plot structure or photography.’’≥≥ Despite their overall skepticism, Neale and Vernet on this matter of affect echo the initial French response to these ﬁlms, particularly the ﬁrst full-length account of noir, Panorama de ﬁlm noir américain (1941–1953) published by Borde and Chaumeton in 1955, the same year that the movie Kiss Me Deadly was released, a fact not entirely lost on Americans themselves, as I have already suggested: the following year the ﬁlm director Aldrich was photographed on a studio set holding a copy of the book.≥∂ In their seminal study, Borde and Chaumeton make two basic claims about ﬁlm noir—that these movies are essentially about crime and that they are strange, what they term insolite, along with having four other related traits: being oneiric, erotic, ambivalent, and cruel. Rather than deﬁne noir by any detailed narrative content or visual style, Borde and Chaumeton identify this cycle of movies by a predominant mood akin, if not identical, to Freud’s notion of unheimlich. They close their deﬁnitional chapter as follows: ‘‘It is easy to come to a conclusion: the moral ambivalence, criminal violence, and contradictory complexity of the situations and motives all combine to give the public a shared feeling of anguish or insecurity, which is the identifying sign of ﬁlm noir at this time. All the works in this series exhibit a consistency of an emotional sort; namely, the state of tension created in the spectators by the disappearance of their psychological bearings. The vocation of ﬁlm noir has been to create a speciﬁc sense of malaise.’’≥∑ While Borde and Chaumeton tend to locate this alienation or insecurity in the spectator, I would argue that such a consistent emotional core or sensibility constitutes the prevailing tenor of these ﬁlms themselves, whose characters, settings, compositional design, cinematography, and plots carry precise affective attributes. Taking seriously the way that a text can embody a speciﬁc tone, long dismissed by formalists as a subjective and

Introduction 15

insufﬁciently rigorous critical concept, Sianne Ngai has analyzed a set of ‘‘ugly feelings’’ such as envy and anxiety that, unlike the grander passions of anger or hate, tend to attenuate individual agency and make it difﬁcult to take action.≥∏ Although as beﬁtting the popular depiction of crime, characters in noir narratives do indeed act, the tone of many of these ﬁlms works against the grain of mainstream Hollywood expectation to dwell in far less familiar territory of a more psychological, abnormal, and neurotic nature, as Borde and Chaumeton suggest. Clearly American noir was not the only kind of ﬁlm to register the uncanny. Gothic romance, horror ﬁlms, and science ﬁction from the 1930s through the 1950s all come to mind as frequently entailing a return of the repressed.≥π But rarely do these other genres dramatize the sort of ugly feelings we ﬁnd in noir—paranoia, jealousy, gall, and, most prominently, a curious type of dispossession or resentment that bears on historically speciﬁc confusions about national belonging. To propose cold war citizenship as the overarching cultural framework for this study, I want to emphasize, is not to fall into the trap of assuming that ﬁlm noir functioned unequivocally as a ‘‘dark mirror’’ expressing a ‘‘national mood’’ or monolithic zeitgeist, as many traditional advocates automatically assert. Other compelling tags for the American 1940s and 1950s have included the ‘‘age of anxiety’’ and the ‘‘age of doubt.’’≥∫ Cautioning against such a naïve reﬂection model, Richard Maltby, in perhaps the single best article on the subject, shows how these claims for a simple ideological correspondence between text and context are circular, a mutually reinforcing circuit of evidence and assertion based on metaphor and coincidence that matches ﬁlms and facts at will. This partial selection process allows scholars to see what they want to see. Maltby appreciates that the United States and Hollywood were simply too complex and multifaceted to be so reduced to a single zeitgeist. But curiously his essay does end up, in somewhat conﬂicted fashion (akin to Vernet’s essay), taking seriously what he had earlier in his argument rejected as a totalizing explanation: that postwar America found itself in a period of intense maladjustment, with Maltby’s focus shifting from traumatized vets returning from the war to equally troubled American intellectuals disillusioned by the darker aspects of cold war culture, especially the rise in political intolerance.≥Ω So despite the best efforts of these various academic skeptics to retire

16 Introduction

noir, the concept remains powerfully haunting, undead, like a specter that will not stay in the grave. Instead of worrying if noir is a genre, a style, or a sensibility, perhaps we should wonder if the critical concept functions more like a ghost, a vampire, or a zombie. James Naremore takes a commonsense attitude toward this stubborn persistence, recognizing ﬁlm noir as a ‘‘discursive construct’’ (elsewhere he more harshly pronounces it a ‘‘mythology’’), while going on to suggest how as such it ‘‘has heuristic value, mobilizing speciﬁc themes that are worth further consideration.’’∂≠ Here I would agree, but with a different set of themes in mind. For Naremore, ﬁlm noir is culturally important because it brilliantly melds high European modernism (especially surrealism and existentialism) with hard-boiled American pulp. While I am indebted to his cosmopolitan approach, giving the French credit where credit is due, his notion of noir as transgeneric or intertextual is fairly limited to aesthetic matters (literature, art history, ﬁlm, and philosophy). Instead, by concentrating on feelings, I develop and expand noir’s heuristic potential in two related directions. As an emergent regime of visibility, ﬁlm noir lets us see (literally) a key affective dimension of the Cold War, which I have described as a state of exception.∂∞ And by contextualizing noir in relation to uncanny and uncertain citizenship at midcentury, a ground for intense anxiety, insecurity, and resentment, I also hope to change the way we think about these ﬁlms themselves.∂≤ Because it eludes clear-cut generic deﬁnitions, ﬁlm noir inevitably becomes something of a problem when it comes to selecting exemplary movies for analysis, with a tendency for scholars to pick ﬁlms that simply conﬁrm their various theses about noir. Edward Dimendberg, for instance, spends a lot of attention on the police procedural The Naked City (1948) because it so graphically illustrates his arguments about urban space and modernity, while hardly mentioning another well-known Mark Hellinger production made two years earlier, The Killers (1946).∂≥ Vivian Sobchack, on the other hand, bypasses The Naked City, presumably because it depicts family life and children (whom she claims are mostly missing from noir), to focus on The Killers, whose settings—diners, nightclubs, and seedy boarding houses—demonstrate her contention that noir’s material premises (her pun intended) serve as surrogates for an absent home.∂∂ So we have two very ﬁne cinema scholars both interested in the question of

Introduction 17

space (urban and domestic, respectively) picking different ﬁlms to match their very different but not mutually exclusive conclusions about noir. What needs to be acknowledged more openly is that such choices are less essential than pragmatic, driven primarily by what we already want to make of these crime narratives. Facing the same circularity, I have selected a body of ﬁlms that center on thresholds and border crossing: from a fear that enemy (Nazi) spies, informers, strangers, and brainwashers have wormed their way into the country and refuse to leave, to a resentful salesman trying to get away with murder to spite his company, to the geopolitics of Cuba and Mexico in relation to the United States, to a series of ﬁlms responding to the pressures of civic duty and patriotism more broadly. Having looked closely at hundreds of dark movies made during the 1940s and 1950s, I have selected roughly a dozen to analyze in depth, some very well known, such as Double Indemnity (1944), Out of the Past (1947), Key Largo (1948), and Pickup on South Street (1953), and others less familiar but no less illuminating for testing the foundations of citizenship, such as Stranger on the Third Floor (1940), The Chase (1946), and Ride the Pink Horse (1947). In my effort to get at the curious liminality or un-Americanness of these ﬁlms, I trust that their range of plot, character, and setting, combined with their consistency of tone, will absolve me from the charge of capricious or arbitrary selection for the sake of a single-minded thesis. Although I pay attention to the justly celebrated look(s) of noir, my focus will be on the visceral rather than its visual aspects.∂∑ To help understand this domain of feeling, I have relied on Freud’s notion of the uncanny, although my readings are more political than psychoanalytically inclined.∂∏ Here I join a number of other cinema scholars interested in the politics of noir, most of whom tend to offer relatively transparent narrative and character analyses without much attention to the signiﬁcance of affect.∂π In this view, often drawing on huac’s investigation of the Hollywood Ten as background and starting point, the political orientation of any given ﬁlm can be determined by its overt treatment of themes of law and order, so that a police procedural that ostensibly enforces the law and celebrates institutional authority is a conservative or ‘‘right-wing’’ noir, whereas one in which the law is represented more critically is ‘‘left-wing’’ or progressive. But as I have already suggested, the relation between crime and law is far too unstable in noir to sustain this

18 Introduction

sort of convenient distinction, which by so focusing on manifest content neglects the emotional undercurrents running through these ﬁlms. A brief example may be useful. In 1939 Milton Krims coscripted Warner’s Confessions of a Nazi Spy (directed by Anatole Litvak), Hollywood’s ﬁrst direct attack on Hitler that was banned in Germany, Japan, Italy, Poland, Holland, Norway, and Sweden (see chapter 1). Three years later, working in a similar patriotic antifascist vein, Albert Maltz coscripted the crime thriller This Gun for Hire (1942), which dramatizes how a disturbed hit man prevents an aging American industrialist from selling military secrets to the Japanese (see chapter 5). Soon after the war Krims wrote the screenplay for the ﬁrst major Hollywood anticommunist movie, The Iron Curtain (1948), while Maltz around the same time refused to name names for huac, was blacklisted as un-American, and jailed for contempt of Congress. How to account for such a drastic difference in the fates of Krims and Maltz? While it might seem that Krims suddenly grew more conservative after the war when Maltz held steadfast to his progressive principles, I would argue otherwise: that both writers in penning their wartime tales of international espionage unleashed the same set of strong emotions—the grave concern or hysteria that the most secure social structures in the United States were being undermined by an alien enemy dwelling in the country’s midst. This excess of worry lingered well past any particular danger to which it might have been linked: psychic war surplus we might call it. While Krims could effortlessly redirect and reascribe those still powerful suspicions to a new object of anxiety (Soviet spies in North America), Maltz could and did not, and therefore was made to pay for his past. In terms of the subsequent trajectories of their lives, I do not mean to diminish the difference between Maltz, who ended up in jail, and Krims, who continued to enjoy a successful career. But without the advantage of hindsight, the movies that these writers scripted may have more in common at the level of affect than labels like conservative and progressive might allow. In so emphasizing details of studio production and reception, retrospectively telling the story of Hollywood as a relatively autonomous set of institutional practices, historians of American cinema may overlook how these ﬁlms themselves engage confusing and sometimes incongruous ‘‘structures of feeling.’’∂∫ Presuming that political positions can be clearly sourced, articulated, and summarized, this approach to cinema history,

Introduction 19

however valuable, tends to do insufﬁcient justice to the complexity and power of ﬁlm as a narrative form. It also may ﬂatten out contradictions and ambiguity such as the ﬂipping back and forth between American and un-American that I have been tracing. In one impressively encyclopedic account, for instance, to demonstrate the plausible thesis that after the Second World War, noir became the ‘‘only remaining [cultural] sphere open for dissenting political expression,’’ dozens of movies from the 1940s and 1950s are identiﬁed primarily by the scriptwriter.∂Ω In this resolutely positivist model, once these authors can be scrupulously labeled leftwing by virtue of their championing of social causes offscreen, it logically (and somewhat reductively) follows that they must have created ‘‘leftwritten ﬁlms’’ embodying progressive beliefs. But as Jerome Christiansen has shrewdly suggested, ﬁlm noir might be considered the Hollywood genre of American cold war liberalism par excellence in its studious disavowal of ideology.∑≠ As an emblematic instance, he cites the opening diner scene in The Killers (1946), a key scene as well for Borde and Chaumeton, who call it ‘‘one of the most striking moments in American cinema’’:∑∞ when asked by a bafﬂed customer ‘‘what’s the idea?,’’ one of the hired killers contemptuously, simply replies, ‘‘there isn’t any idea.’’ Christiansen’s deft reading of noir as averse to ideas is instructive, but ideas are not the only way politics, or rather political attitudes and orientations (more or less clear-cut), emerge in these ﬁlms. Here I return to Freud’s analysis of affect, particularly the ‘‘ugly feelings’’ so commonly aroused in these movies, to draw on Ngai’s resonant phrase. Three examples, all from lesser-known movies, will help give a concrete sense of how I develop my arguments throughout the rest of this book. Tomorrow Is Another Day (1951) tells the story of the ex-con Bill Clark (played by Steve Cochran) who has spent eighteen years in prison for the murder of his father, which he committed at the age of thirteen. Having in effect slept through the Great Depression and the Second World War, Rip Van Winkle style, Clark naively walks out of prison to greet the brave new world of the cold war United States, one prosperous but deeply suspicious of outsiders. The subsequent plot is fairly typical of noir: he hooks up with a dubious dance girl, with whom he runs away after falsely believing he has killed another man. Their meeting is followed by their fugitive life on the road, which takes them (untypically) to Salinas, where they are employed as migrant workers, in a kind of Popular Front homage to The Grapes of

20 Introduction

Wrath, and where people feel more solidarity and trust toward one another (as they did during the 1930s, we presume).∑≤ But it is the ﬁlm’s opening that most interests me. As he walks the streets searching for work, even before he is betrayed by a cynical reporter looking for a sensational scoop about the now grown boy murderer, Bill experiences an intense kind of disassociation from his urban surroundings. In a series of point-of-view shots rendered through Bill’s eyes, the city is seen as a strange and foreign place, ﬁlled with bewildering new commodities, persons, and noises. It is as if he were an immigrant landing on U.S. soil for the ﬁrst time, compelled to undergo the harsh initiation process of assimilation or naturalization. The point is that Bill’s disaffection is not primarily psychological (although he feels bitter about his incarceration) but rather stems from the passage of time, from the crucial history that he has missed (economic hardship and war) and that forces him to learn again what it means to belong to America. Stepping out of prison, he has moved in one fell swoop from the New Deal to a raw deal, a detour that eventually leads him only to ‘‘where the sidewalk ends.’’∑≥ These scenes of dispossession are repeated in dozens of ﬁlms, instances that constitute the uncanniness at the heart of noir. Take another example from an earlier movie, When Strangers Marry (1944). The title says it all, but unlike in a conventional gothic romance such as Rebecca (1940), here the uncertainty of a small-town bride suspicious about her new husband grows to a far darker and more pervasive mood of estrangement running through the entire narrative, where everybody in New York seems afraid of everybody else. The insecurity and paranoia driving the plot culminate in a very curious scene near the end that adds nothing to the plot but heightens the tension. On the lam, the two fugitives enter a Harlem bar where black patrons, ignoring the white couple, intensely listen and dance to a raucous boogie-woogie pianist. After a boxing champion enters the venue to be congratulated by all, the newlyweds quickly leave, preferring the menace of the streets to the extreme alienation they feel in the jazz club, however benign the patrons. While this confrontation with otherness is so clearly and centrally racial, I think that it extends beyond race, as if race were only a metaphor or instance of a wider kind of disenfranchisement affecting everyone in the movie, except perhaps black people—the recognition of being inside the (white) nation but feeling outside it.∑∂ Moments

Introduction 21

of threshold crossing—walking out of prison or into a Harlem bar—thus graphically help foreground these ﬁlms’ stake in delineating the homeland. My third example is a bit different in that it is quite explicitly political. The Red Menace (1949) represents the most egregious sort of Hollywood anticommunism, the Cold War’s answer to Reefer Madness (1936). Yet the increasingly lurid excess of its hysteria is so valuable precisely for casting into bold relief the question of citizenship at the center of my study. Unlike most Red Scare movies, this is not a police procedural, in that it focuses on imagining how communists might think and act, not on valiant government efforts to catch them. Too overtly propagandistic and heavy-handed to be regarded as noir by most cinema scholars, the ﬁlm I think actually contains quite a few narrative and visual features familiar to noir: a disgruntled (if dimwitted) war veteran, a bevy of treacherous femmes fatales who try to seduce him into the ways of Marx and Lenin, and (male) communists at home on dark, rainy city streets who look and operate like thuggish gangsters—a common-enough association at the time. When one of these men starts to have misgivings and seeks to depart the organization, he abruptly, desperately jumps out of a window to his death. This is a fate, we presume, preferable to giving in to his criminal comrades, who have warned him that no one ever leaves the party. But the movie’s most intense moment of alienation and uncanniness is triggered not by the communist thugs themselves, but during a scene of interrogation led by federal agents, otherwise absent from the narrative. On a dark street, the top red siren Yvonne Kraus (played by Betty Lou Gerson) is accosted by two men in hats and trench coats who appear at ﬁrst to be a pair of her henchmen, but who identify themselves as immigration and naturalization ofﬁcers. The femme fatale’s reaction is striking: in a deep, gravely voice she complains about ‘‘Gestapo methods,’’ demands her ‘‘civil liberties,’’ insists over and over again that ‘‘I am an American citizen,’’ and asks to see their arrest warrant, to which one agent replies, ‘‘an immigration inspector doesn’t need a warrant.’’ Instead of ignoring the question of rights, the ﬁlm curiously exaggerates the issue by locating complaints about due process in the angst of a panic-stricken woman, whose strident objections become overridden in the name of state security during the interrogation itself. Brought to ins (Immigration and Naturalization Service) headquarters to answer a few questions, Kraus is asked by the chief

22 Introduction

inquisitor about her family background, her father’s naturalization, and her travel in Mexico before the war. Berated for her ‘‘loudmouthed disloyalty to the United States government,’’ Kraus is caught by the interrogator in a more tangible crime. What gives her away as the foreign communist agent Greta Bloch (a more Jewish-sounding name), who has had the real Yvonne Kraus killed, is not her imperfect English (as in some anti-Nazi war movies) but rather her all-too-perfect German, her ﬂawless pronunciation of Hamburg, as well as a signature that does not match the one on Kraus’s original passport application. At ﬁrst having declared her innocence, the woman now suddenly admits her stolen identity as low-key lighting starkly illuminates her widening eyes in a composition that closely resembles the moment in Detour (1945) when Al Roberts (Tom Neal) stares into his cup of diner coffee and begins to narrate his sorry tale (also of assumed identity) in retrospective voice-over. But unlike the noir confession of the loser Roberts, the reaction of Bloch/Kraus is not steeped in pathos, guilt, and bitterness, but rather in a kind of mad triumph. Her voice growing louder and harsher (anticipating Gerson’s future casting as Cruella Deville in the Disney cartoon A Thousand and One Dalmatians), the demonic, laughing femme fatale goes on to fantasize the invasion and takeover of the United States by the ‘‘red legions’’ of the Comintern. She shrieks, ‘‘You’re too late . . . the revolution is here,’’ as drumming, martial music ﬁlls the soundtrack—an auditory hallucination of marching soldiers that nobody else in the room can hear (although we can). Pronounced ‘‘psychopathic,’’ she is led off by the ins ofﬁcers, presumably to be locked up, deported back to Germany, or tried for murder. (Since Kraus was killed in Mexico, the ﬁlm remains a bit obscure on this point.) Both preposterous and highly unnerving, this interrogation scene is useful for revealing deep-seated anxieties in cold war America about how to detect and police subversives at home. If the threat itself is negligible, dismissed as the delusional ranting of a lunatic, it must be the difﬁculty of detection that causes such consternation (as it worried Reagan in his secret fbi memo). Failing to identify subversion by ideological content, the ofﬁcial arm of the Department of Justice that requires no warrants (the ins) relies on a foreign and criminal past, if not a strange accent, to purge the state of the unwanted outsider, whose exposed status as an alien perfectly coincides with her ﬁt of madness, as if insanity were a foreign

Introduction 23

country. Once her raving inner life bursts forth to the accompaniment of a hallucination, U.S. citizenship as a universally available abstraction is called into question, for in order for her to be expelled from the republic, Bloch must suddenly be burdened with a particular (crazy) voice and past. That hysteric embodiment neatly captures the hysteric feelings driving the anticommunism of the movie and the cold war period as a whole. In its allusions to the Gestapo, Germany, and deportation, The Red Menace’s uncanny exposure of un-Americanness paves the way for my ﬁrst chapter, which examines two movies that at ﬁrst glance might not seem to belong together: Confessions of a Nazi Spy (1939) and Stranger on the Third Floor (1940). By bringing these two ﬁlms into conversation, I foreground the powerful political resonances echoing throughout the extraordinary Stranger, an early if not the earliest noir that has never been appreciated for its engagement with ﬁfth-column fears, including the remarkable appearance of an unmistakably fascist U.S. district attorney. From this pair of panicky home-front ﬁlms, I turn in my second chapter to the classic Double Indemnity (1944). Lacking spies and strangers, and resolutely set in prewar (1938) Los Angeles, Billy Wilder’s depiction of insurance fraud would seem to have little to do with nationality or citizenship and therefore to be ‘‘the odd man out’’ in this study, to borrow the title of an important British noir (1947) directed by Carol Reed.∑∑ But in the memorable ﬁgure of the claims investigator Barton Keyes and in the company for which he labors, I argue, we have a vivid demonstration of rationalized control and surveillance that inspires his nemesis/surrogate son, Walter Neff, to try and beat the odds. Keyes may not be a corporate Gestapo, or even a corporate fbi, for that matter, but his attempt to combat whitecollar crime by statistics carries enormous signiﬁcance for understanding Neff ’s profound resentment in the movie: the malaise of nonbelonging at the core of noir. From corporate subversion I ﬁnally move beyond U.S. borders in my following two chapters, on Americans in Cuba and Mexico, respectively. A chapter on the eerie movie The Chase (1946) and the better-known Key Largo (1948) allows me to examine the postwar relation between Cuba and the United States, with the watery Florida Keys in the case of the John Huston movie serving as a ground of mediation or twilight zone between the two nations. Focusing on an aging criminal trying to stage a comeback also enables me to trace one crucial genealogy for noir, that of the Ameri-

24 Introduction

can gangster ﬁlm, from immigrants (the early 1930s), to assimilated citizens (the early 1940s), to exiles (the postwar 1940s). As Key Largo itself registers, it is no coincidence that just as mobsters like Lucky Luciano were being deported from the United States (to end up in Havana), so were equally undesirable communists. My fourth chapter deals explicitly with border crossing, focusing on the smuggling of Mexican farmworkers in Border Incident (1949). I show how this illicit migration between countries parallels the generic hybridity of the ﬁlm, which also helps us grasp the central role Mexico has played in many noirs as a kind of alternative, a spatial other to the United States by virtue of its geographical proximity to Hollywood. To support this claim, in addition to Anthony Mann’s movie, I analyze a trio of ﬁlms (including Out of the Past) that depict Americans meeting and courting in Mexico before returning to the United States. My ﬁnal and ﬁfth chapter works as a kind of capstone, looking at a series of disaffected tough guys called on to play the part of civic-minded patriots during wartime (This Gun for Hire, 1942), soon after the war (Ride the Pink Horse, 1947) and at the height of the Cold War (Pickup on South Street, 1953). I conclude with a postscript on a trio of ﬁlms from the 1950s, Gun Crazy (1950), Kiss Me Deadly (1955), and Touch of Evil (1958), showing how these movies in tone increasingly become prone to self-parody as the noir cycle draws to a close by the end of the decade. Having opened this introduction by looking at Reagan’s conﬁdential fbi memo, followed by un-American subversion as conceived and probed by huac, I want to close by brieﬂy discussing the more profound impact of the bureau in legitimizing and, more important, delegitimizing who and what belonged in the United States. While huac represented the public and political front against communism (and, to a lesser extent before the war, against fascism), the fbi worked in more secretive, darker fashion to police the nation against unwanted enemies. Built into the very center of its modus operandi for the state was an extensive network of surreptitious monitoring in fearful anticipation of imagined acts of conspiracy and treachery. I think it is safe to say, in fact, that there could be no ﬁlm noir without the fbi. This is not even to mention the more literal way that G-men ﬁgure prominently in a number of the movies I discuss, from Confessions of a Nazi Spy, to Ride the Pink Horse, to Pickup on South Street (1953), whose director Sam Fuller claimed that he and the studio

Introduction 25

chief Darryl Zanuck were called in by Hoover himself, demanding script changes to the ﬁlm. Even before fdr’s emergency directives in 1936 and 1939, the agency during the early New Deal experienced an enormous centralization and consolidation of federal authority in its battle against interstate bootlegging and bank robbing. In shifting its focus later in the 1930s from gangsters to suspected agents of foreign powers (Nazi Germany and the Soviet Union), the fbi enjoyed an explosive growth in government appropriations, from 5 million dollars in 1936 to over 90 million in 1952, an increase in funding of more than 1,800 percent, along with a similar increase in personnel of about 1,000 percent during that same key period (from 609 agents to 6,351).∑∏ Once the bureau’s mandate had been expanded beyond ﬁghting crime to include intelligence gathering, its reach into all aspects of American culture became virtually limitless. Some of that reach is reﬂected in the range of transgressions depicted in the noirs I will examine, from garden-variety murder and mayhem, to espionage, to insurance fraud, war proﬁteering, and human trafﬁcking across the U.S. border. By the early 1950s the bureau was also actively weighing in on juvenile delinquency, homosexuality, mass culture, race relations, and childrearing practices (Hoover: ‘‘The cure for crime is not the electric chair but the high chair’’), among a multitude of social problems and panics perceived to undermine the stability of the republic.∑π If it is difﬁcult to imagine ﬁlm noir without the fbi (or an institutional equivalent), it is harder to conceive of the bureau without Hoover, who acted as the public face of the agency as well as its behind-the-scenes executive and principal plotter—a kind of Hollywood screenwriter, publicist, star, studio head, and auteur all rolled into one. For nearly ﬁfty years Hoover was arguably the most powerful man in the United States (as the bureau’s director from 1924–72). Serving ‘‘under’’ an astonishing succession of eight presidents, starting with Calvin Coolidge and ending with Richard Nixon, the consummate bureaucrat Hoover continually succeeded in aggregating power to himself and the fbi, regardless if his boss was Democrat or Republican, conservative or progressive.∑∫ Cold war intellectuals like Arthur Schlesinger Jr., who openly decried McCarthy’s hysterical theatrics, and Harold W. Chase, who expressed skepticism about measures such as the antisedition Smith Act (1940) and govern-

26 Introduction

ment loyalty oaths (1947), were almost unanimous in their support of and trust in Hoover, whose ‘‘wise counsel,’’ as Chase concluded, represented the proper balance between internal security and civil liberties.∑Ω Domestic security for Hoover was intimately tied to the constitution of U.S. citizens. From the very start of his career in 1917, working during the First World War as a young lawyer in the immigration control section of the Justice Department, Hoover sought to rid the United States of enemy aliens. By late 1939, with a second war underway in Europe, he had begun compiling a list of suspicious ‘‘persons of German, Italian, and Communist sympathies,’’ whether residents or citizens, on a Custodial Detention Index that within a few years grew to thousands of names, classiﬁed by presumed degree of danger to the United States.∏≠ At a moment’s notice ‘‘in time of war or national emergency,’’ persons on the list could be rounded up and placed in concentration camps. The point of this index, as well as others that Hoover maintained in his quest to safeguard the state by one bureaucratized technique after another, was to prepare for ‘‘emergency situations’’ (attack, invasion, rebellion) that might require the suspension of the writ of habeas corpus, as he explained in a letter penned in 1950 to a consultant for President Truman.∏∞ Detailing tensions within the U.S. government about how best to defend against subversive foreign propaganda during the crucial wartime period 1939–54, Brett Gary points to the ‘‘triumph of national security liberalism over free speech liberalism,’’ as Hoover’s fbi gradually overcame objections by civil libertarian lawyers also working in the Justice Department. The result of Hoover’s dominance, Gary concludes, was ‘‘a foreboding among policy makers, opinion leaders, and intellectuals that the psychological dimension of the national security crisis had grown more ominous with the onset of the cold war.’’∏≤ We might add to the list of those who felt such foreboding Hollywood ﬁlmmakers. To mark, somewhat perversely, Hoover as the tutelary spirit for this study, epitomizing the uneasy mixture of secrecy, power, fear, and suspicion at the heart of noir, I have chosen quotations from the director as epigraphs for some of my chapters. Occasionally this makes for odd juxtapositions (Hoover and the philosopher Stanley Cavell), but then again, strange bedfellows is largely what ﬁlm noir is all about.

one

Gestapo in America Confessions of a Nazi Spy and Stranger on the Third Floor Fifth Column methods have permeated into every walk of life.—J. Edgar Hoover, 1940

Released two and half years before the United States ofﬁcially entered the Second World War, Confessions of a Nazi Spy (1939) was the ﬁrst mainstream Hollywood ﬁlm to directly attack Hitler.∞ It was also the earliest movie to depict Nazi espionage on American soil. Tracing the activities of the National Socialist Party in the United States and around the globe during 1937–38, Confessions would seem to be tangential to ﬁlm noir, although its director, Anatole Litvak, would go on to make a number of important noirs in the 1940s.≤ Yet in its feverish depiction of the German-American Bund, ‘‘the boring of enemies within,’’ as a prosecuting attorney warns near the end, the movie’s combination of documentary realism and paranoia would help articulate the foundational, affective logic of noir for twenty years to come. This is more than simply a matter of visual style. As the phrase ‘‘enemies within’’ already suggests, Confessions would serve as a blueprint for representations of anticommunism soon after the Second World War, and in fact its screenwriter, Milton Krims, subsequently co-

28 Chapter One

authored the script for The Iron Curtain (1948), the ﬁrst Hollywood treatment of Soviet spying during the Cold War.≥ That Nazis could so easily morph into communists is perhaps less surprising than the emergence of ﬁlm noir partly from such an overt piece of wartime propaganda. To tease out the relation between the dread of enemy aliens stirred up in Confessions and feelings of alienation and despair so typical in noir, I will pair the Litvak ﬁlm in this chapter with a movie made the following year by another Russian Jewish émigré, Boris Ingster.∂ While Litvak was a Ukrainian from Kiev, Ingster was born in Riga, Latvia, coming to the United States in the 1930s as an associate of Sergei Eisenstein. After teaming up with Nathanael West to write a few screenplays, Ingster was given the opportunity to direct Stranger on the Third Floor (1940). By virtue of its dark mood and look, Stranger is commonly regarded by cinema scholars as the ﬁrst noir, an expressionist hallucination that culminates in a remarkable extended nightmare sequence.∑ Putting these two seemingly different ﬁlms side by side, we can appreciate how public politics (so explicit in Confessions) and private fantasy (so openly on display in Stranger) comingle and gird one another in both these motion pictures, in 1940s noir, and in many Hollywood narratives more generally.∏ The ﬁrst ﬁve minutes of Confessions are astonishing. The movie opens (sans credits) with the silhouette of a radio announcer intoning in a deep newsreel voice that the story about to be told, ‘‘stranger than ﬁction,’’ is based on a recent criminal case of espionage against the United States. Subsequently this portentous voice will provide commentary more than a dozen times to create a documentary feel, often in conjunction with actual newsreel footage of marching Nazi soldiers, rallies, newspaper headlines, and battle scenes spliced into the ﬁctional narrative. As the voice-over fades, we are suddenly transported to a seemingly mundane mail delivery in a small Scottish town, one of many such moments of transport foregrounding communications technology. These sharp geographical leaps emphasize the global reach of Hitler’s fascist networks. A close-up of an address on a letter enables Litvak, radically shifting scope and texture once again, to cut to New York, where we see and hear the heavily accented Dr. Karl Kassel (played by Paul Lukas) in a beer hall forcefully addressing his fellow German-American Bund (gab) members as ‘‘patriots.’’π His speech is ﬁerce, passionate, mesmerizing—in clear contrast to the

Gestapo in America 29

measured tones of the shadowy radio narrator. Energetically declaring ‘‘I love America,’’ Kassel is in fact an American Hitler, as Litvak makes clear when the camera gradually pulls back to reveal a large Nazi swastika sandwiched between two American ﬂags. Perhaps unprecedented for a major Hollywood studio production, this visual shock is matched by equally shocking rhetoric. Identifying himself as a U.S. reserve ofﬁcer and citizen, Kassel argues that the United States is based on German blood and culture, that Germans have a ‘‘destiny’’ in the United States to save it from the ‘‘chaos’’ bred by ‘‘democracy’’ and ‘‘racial equality.’’ Nazism is presented here as a pan-German movement extending beyond national borders. Kassel’s references to ‘‘our America,’’ repeated both in English and in German (‘‘unser Amerika’’) bring cheers and Sieg Heil salutes from the crowd, as the camera begins to pan and focus on individuals in the audience. One of these men, unemployed, feckless, with delusions of grandeur and a nagging (non-German) wife, as we soon learn, becomes inspired to volunteer as a spy for the Nazi cause, convinced that he owes allegiance to the Führer and the fatherland. Rather than represent spying as a professional intelligence or military operation, the movie thus imagines espionage in U.S. territory as resulting directly from gab rabblerousing that especially affects unstable, insecure, cowardly, and inept amateurs. The result, of course, is to make the actual activity of espionage seems less of a threat, less harmful than the propaganda that triggers it. Indeed, the movie as a whole seems far more interested in speeches than in spying, and in fact it is the blurring or collapse of this distinction between words and deeds that leads me to categorize Confessions as a proto-noir ﬁlm. Despite the provocative title, talking is less a source of (criminal) revelation than a medium for persuasion; although government agents, led by the G-man Edward Renard (played by Edward G. Robinson) do eventually break up the spy ring, the plot’s popular, generic, and action-oriented detection elements remain relatively feeble. The fbi is not even introduced until midway through the picture, and Renard’s main function seems less to enforce police procedure than to indulge in a form of speechifying himself, explaining (to us and those around him) the dangers of orators such as Kassel. The movie closely follows the facts of the spy case by depicting thinly veiled versions of the real incompetent spies Dr. Ignaz Griebl (Kassel) and Günther Rumich (called Kurt Schneider in the movie, played by Francis Lederer), who actually tried to directly

30 Chapter One

acquire blank passports from the U.S. government just as his bungling counterpart does in the ﬁlm—passports being the clearest way to document a foreign enemy’s designs on U.S. citizenship.∫ Yet beyond these similarities, Hollywood’s ﬁctional reenactment in its hysterical focus on the relationship between propaganda and citizenship would introduce a different set of concerns. As Kassel’s unsettling opening address to the Bund suggests, Litvak seems remarkably willing to show the power of unrestrained rhetoric, both oral and in print. While at various points in the movie some German Americans express skepticism, disdain, or outrage during these meetings, their opposition is swiftly shouted down and met with force from Bund supporters, indicating mob mentality rather than reasoned debate. This is a form of gangsterism that the movie charts with a mixture of fascination and dread. And as we shall see, the fate of American Nazi spies in the United States who come to express misgivings about their work is far worse than a mere silencing. In his excellent analysis of Confessions as the apex of progressive Hollywood antifascism, Saverio Giovacchini focuses on the movie’s production history, particularly on how Warner Bros. chose to adapt a spy case of 1938 that was publicized in New York newspaper stories written by an agent who helped solve the crime.Ω But I think another current event might have exercised a more profound sway over the movie: a Washington birthday’s ‘‘Free America’’ rally (February 19–20, 1939) held at Madison Square Garden in which over twenty thousand people came out to hear the national leader (Bundesleiter) Fritz Kuhn and other gab ofﬁcials. A culmination of a series of speeches held by the gab over the previous few years, the two-day rally in New York triggered violent clashes between protestors and Bund members in attendance that night. Representing the height of the organization’s inﬂuence in the United States, this mass demonstration generated much attention and anxiety in the press.∞≠ The movie’s Kassel was clearly modeled both on Kuhn and on Griebl, so much so that Kuhn (unsuccessfully) ﬁled a defamation suit against Warner Bros. for 5 million dollars on behalf of the gab soon after the movie was released.∞∞ It is worth contrasting what Kuhn and other speakers actually said at the rally with Kassel’s speeches in Confessions. Although Kuhn and other leaders were openly anti-Semitic, deriding Jewish control of the media,

Gestapo in America 31

denouncing Jews as communists, and mocking the New Deal as the ‘‘Jew Deal,’’ they took pains at the rally to distance themselves from Hitler, saying that the German National Socialist Party had no place in the United States and warning against attacks on the U.S. Constitution. In celebrating what he took to be American ideals, Kuhn speciﬁcally called attention to his ‘‘citizenship right’’ to ‘‘criticize freely and act and protest as long as I do not engage in treasonable activities.’’ He concluded by embracing ‘‘the freedom of the pulpit, press, radio and stage,’’ but also by demanding, interestingly enough, the ‘‘thorough cleansing of the Hollywood ﬁlm industries of all alien, subversive activities.’’∞≤ Progressives in Hollywood might have been especially peeved by this parting shot at communists; but in any case the movie’s script took some serious liberties in translating Kuhn into the ﬁctionalized Kassel, who early on explicitly attacks the Constitution and the Bill of Rights, which he says must be destroyed, not upheld. Why such a drastic change? Turning the rhetoric of his accusers against them, Kuhn sought protection in the freedom of speech, declaring his status as a true American against subversive outsiders (communists/Jews), as well as standing up for his right as a citizen to speak out. But to deny the gab that freedom, the ﬁlm had to imagine Kassel as a sheer demagogue advocating the destruction of the Bill of Rights, thereby abdicating any sort of self-protection for his own speaking. In rejecting bedrock American rights inscribed in the nation’s sacred documents, Kassel, according to this logic, betrays his professed patriotism and effectively renounces his claim on U.S. citizenship. Against Kuhn’s own repeated public insistence that Nazism is reserved for Germany and not for export, Kassel expresses his obedience to a foreign sovereign (Hitler) and to an alien set of principles, even while continuing to live in the United States. Anticipating cold warriors who sought to outlaw the Communist Party of the United States (cpusa) because its members (even those native born) were presumed by virtue of their beliefs alone to be Soviet agents, Confessions directly links the speech of the Bund leader Kassel—later shown traveling to Germany and talking with Joseph Goebbels—to the deeds of espionage: precisely the kind of ‘‘treasonable activity’’ that Kuhn disavowed. The ﬁlm’s propaganda thus sought to render propaganda itself criminal. Of course later in the movie we see Kassel actually engaged in espionage, peering at a small model of a stolen secret American antiaircraft weapon

32 Chapter One

1 Nazi propaganda spreads across the United States, from Confessions of a Nazi Spy

that looks like a toy—not exactly the most dramatic of smoking guns to prove his criminal behavior.∞≥ This scene feels like a minor afterthought because the emphasis and energy throughout the ﬁlm have been on the power of rhetoric. The real menace is not spying but words, which threaten to turn hundreds of thousands of law-abiding German American citizens living in the United States into potential Nazis. In the ﬁlm this threat is located not only in Kassel’s incendiary speech but in printed materials as well, visualized by Litvak during one powerful sequence as swastikas coming directly from Germany to spread across and overwhelm a map of the United States (see ﬁgure 1).∞∂ But would not this material (at least those pamphlets not directly advocating the overthrow of the U.S. government) be protected under the Bill of Rights? By drumming up a fearful state of urgency or emergency endangering national security, Confessions at its most hysterical would seem to answer ‘‘no.’’ The question then becomes, who decides, who polices? It was easy enough for Hollywood ﬁlmmakers to twist Kuhn’s words to match their own worst fears and suspicions, but how could the United States address a threat coming from treacherous foes, at once citizens and yet strangers, who were already ﬁrmly entrenched inside the country? Near the beginning of his speech of February 1939, Kuhn (not Kassel) decried ‘‘the standardized order’’ of public opinion prescribed by the ‘‘Untermyers or Dicksteins.’’ Since the early 1930s, alarmed by Hitler’s rise to power and growing anti-Semitism at home, a Jewish representative

Gestapo in America 33

from New York named Sam Dickstein had been lobbying for a congressional committee to investigate German Americans who might be working for the Nazi cause, creating a ﬁfth column of support undermining the nation from within. Paralleling Dickstein was his equally persistent fellow congressman Martin Dies, whose work on House immigration and naturalization committees spurred him to introduce a number of bills advocating the expulsion of foreign communists deemed subversive.∞∑ Their joint efforts helped establish in 1934 the Special Committee on Un-American Activities (the McCormack Committee), whose published report the following year indicated that Nazi propaganda circulating in the United States was aimed at ‘‘20-odd-million Americans of German birth or descent.’’∞∏ This mounting anxiety over ﬁfth-column sympathizers would lead three years later, in June 1938 (a few months before production on Confessions began), to the creation of a more permanent and betterfunded congressional committee headed by Dies. A staunch anti–New Dealer, Dies would turn the attention of the House Un-American Activities Committee (huac) almost entirely to combating communists, especially after the Soviets and Nazis signed a nonaggression treaty in August 1939. For many Americans, the Ribbentrop-Molotov Pact collapsed any nuanced distinction between communist Russia and fascist Germany. A few months after the pact, the term Commu-Nazi was coined to conﬂate the two.∞π Both Stalin and Hitler were gangster-tyrants who ruled totalitarian regimes best deﬁned by the umbrella term un-American—a comprehensive category referring to anything and anyone perceived to endanger American traditions and principles. As Dickstein replied when skeptically queried about whom the proposed committee would investigate: ‘‘Everybody.’’∞∫ Complicating the matter of who would be investigated—without the right of the accused to cross-examine a witness—was the question of what. Insisting from the start on the need to differentiate ‘‘between what is obviously un-American and what is no more or less than an honest difference of opinion,’’ Dies deﬁned his committee’s purpose as gathering information about subversive propaganda activities, either of foreign or domestic origin, as long as this dissemination of rhetoric compromised ‘‘the principle of the form of government as guaranteed by the Constitution.’’∞Ω But short of openly attacking the Constitution, as Confessions has Kassel do, ‘‘propaganda activities’’ remained a very nebulous phrase conﬂating

34 Chapter One

word and action. When Kuhn himself was brought before the committee in August 1939, and then again in October of that year, his often contentious testimony and cross-examination led to no new disclosures about the Bund and to no actionable evidence of crime. Like so many common gangsters before and after him, Kuhn would be indicted for and convicted of a far more mundane offense, the embezzlement of Bund funds (technically larceny and forgery), followed by his arrest and denaturalization during the war and deportation back to Germany at the war’s end.≤≠ The newly founded Dies Committee of course does not ﬁgure in Confessions, although the movie clearly partakes of its concerns; huac would gain far more prominence after the war investigating communist subversion in Hollywood, ironically the very kind Kuhn warned against in his Madison Square Garden speech. Because the ﬁlm ostensibly centers on espionage, the forces of law and order are represented not by a congressional investigative committee but by the fbi and the justice system, institutions embodied by agent Renard and his U.S. attorney friend Kellogg (played by Henry O’Neill), who prosecutes the spies. Dedicated since its founding in 1908 to ﬁghting crime at a national level, the fbi and its G-men civil servant bureaucrats were seemingly less given to partisan grandstanding than elected politicians such as Dies. And Edgar G. Robinson as Renard gives a fair approximation of most Americans’ view of J. Edgar Hoover during the 1930s and 1940s—calm, professional, vigilant, trustworthy.≤∞ And yet even for the fbi the question of what constituted a crime against the state would remain open-ended, leading to an ever-widening set of categories. Well before the founding of the Dies Committee, President Roosevelt in 1936 issued a private directive to the fbi to gather intelligence intended to track connections between domestic radicalism and foreign agents working for international fascist and communist movements.≤≤ On September 9, 1939, shortly after Hitler invaded Poland, fdr ofﬁcially declared a provisional state of emergency. This was three days after issuing another fbi directive in conjunction with the global crisis that enabled Hoover to signiﬁcantly widen the scope of investigation to examine an array of ‘‘subversive activities’’ not previously included in the bureau’s traditional crime-ﬁghting mandate. As if to urge fdr’s secret order, the agent Renard in Confessions at one point in the ﬁlm complains that the United States has no effective peacetime counterintelligence oper-

Gestapo in America 35

ations to ﬁght this ‘‘new kind of war.’’ Even though a subsequent directive that the president issued in early 1943 pointedly dropped the term subversive to focus strictly on spying and sabotage, a crucial class of criminality had already been expanded to extend into the domain of ideas.≤≥ In fact it would not be too far-fetched to assert that fdr’s declaration of emergency in September 1939 marks the start of the Cold War (or the Long War), understood as a state of exception and exceptionalism preoccupied with national security that, some would argue, is still in effect today.≤∂ While prior to the 1936 and 1939 presidential directives fbi surveillance was authorized only when the government was preparing to prosecute against the violation of speciﬁc federal laws, fdr’s executive enactment of emergency encouraged the bureau to pursue ongoing surveillance against suspicious un-Americans without any such intent to ﬁle charges. This was a dramatic departure from former fbi practice, as Hoover himself emphasized in a memorandum distinguishing between investigative and intelligence activities: while investigations were ‘‘conducted when there is a speciﬁc violation of a Criminal Statute involved . . . [leading to] prosecution under legislation,’’ intelligence operations by contrast required ‘‘an entirely different premise,’’ since subversive activity ‘‘does not, in the original stage, involve an overt act or violation of a speciﬁc statute. These subversive groups direct their attention to the dissemination of propaganda and to the boring from within process, much of which is not a violation of a Federal Statute at the time it is indulged in.’’≤∑ What looks like a very different set of enemies, German and Soviet, and very different kinds of war—propaganda (the 1930s), hot (1941–45), and cold (1947–89)—from the perspective of domestic security concerns remains remarkably continuous, seamless, and consistent. No wonder Hollywood screenwriters like Krims could move so effortlessly from fascist Bund members to native communist threats against the homeland.≤∏ Blurring the line between thought and action, what followed the president’s directive to Hoover was a series of internal security measures as war loomed, including an antisedition statute adopted by both houses on June 22, 1940, known as the Alien Registration Act or Smith Act. In addition to setting up protocols for the registration and deportation of noncitizens with radical afﬁliations, one key provision aimed to give the concept of subversive activity more speciﬁcity by making it a criminal offense to ‘‘knowingly or willfully advocate, abet, advise or teach the duty,

36 Chapter One

necessity, desirability or propriety of overthrowing the Government of the United States or any State by force or violence, or for anyone to organize any association which teaches, advises or encourages such an overthrow, or for anyone to become a member of or to afﬁliate with any such association.’’≤π Qualifying the action of overthrowing the government with strings of verbs (abet, advise, teach, encourage), strings of abstract nouns (duty, desirability, propriety), and wobbling between individuals and organizations (associations), the Smith Act was so patently vague that even when it was invoked during wartime to prosecute alleged Nazi conspirators—the ‘‘Great Sedition Trial’’ of 1944—a mistrial was eventually declared.≤∫ But against communists both before and after the war, the Smith Act proved more successful, leading to the conviction of a dozen Minneapolis Trotskyists in a mass trial in 1941, and more important, in 1948 to the imprisonment of the leaders of the cpusa, despite no evidence of any tangible plans to overthrow the government other than the defendant’s embrace of Marxist-Leninist ideology. In 1951 this decision was upheld by the Supreme Court, whose majority opinion replaced the famous ‘‘clear and present danger’’ test to delimit free speech—developed by Oliver Wendell Holmes earlier in the century (1919)—with a far looser standard, concluding that conviction was justiﬁed given ‘‘the inﬂammable nature of world conditions’’ coupled with the ‘‘highly organized conspiracy’’ represented by the cpusa leadership. As the dissenting justice William O. Douglas noted, under this reasoning, which abandoned Holmes’s emphasis on proximity and degree, ‘‘the crime then depends not on what is taught, but on who the teacher is. This is to make freedom of speech turn not on what is said, but on the intent with which it is said.’’≤Ω Literary New Critics in the 1950s would label this kind of interpreting ‘‘the intentional fallacy.’’ Because the defendants were U.S. citizens and not foreign spies who could be detained and deported as such, the legal protection normally afforded them had to be revised to classify their communist ideas as criminal. This logic was in perfect keeping with fdr’s own tendency as war loomed to collapse the difference between the activity of enemy espionage and the isolationist rhetoric of his political opponents, whom he frequently labeled ‘‘appeaser ﬁfth columnists,’’ witless dupes at best, in an effort to discredit their opinions.≥≠ And so in quick succession close to the making and release of Con-

Gestapo in America 37

fessions we have the congressional institutionalizing of the peculiar concept of un-Americanness (in 1938 by huac), a presidential declaration of emergency (the fbi directive of 1939), and a legislative attempt to prosecute sedition (the Smith Act of 1940). As I have hinted, during this crucial period there was a fourth governmental mechanism for containing subversion: the physical expulsion from the body politic of the enemy within, that is, deportation.≥∞ Well before the Smith Act, the Immigration Act of 1917 permitted the removal of radical aliens (noncitizens) deemed to jeopardize national security, and it should come as no surprise that Hoover during the First World War cut his teeth in the Justice Department, directly before his long tenure at the fbi, by reviewing the detention or deportation cases of undesirable foreigners.≥≤ Thanks to Hoover and his boss, A. Mitchell Palmer, the architect of the Red Scare raids of 1919, a long-standing nativist tradition associating foreignness with criminality became institutionalized and entrenched in the fbi. The threat of deportation is heavily pronounced in both Confessions and Stranger, presumably stemming from the émigré sensibilities of their respective directors. The matter of who stays in and who leaves the United States is so curiously treated in these movies, in fact, that we might say they exhibit a kind of deportation panic. In the case of Confessions, this intense anxiety—a fate worse than death—ﬁrst surfaces midway through the ﬁlm, when a German American who challenges Kassel by openly expressing anti-Nazi sentiments is confronted in a private back room by Gestapo thugs who lock him up and threaten to send him back to Germany. Formally, the low-key lighting on his distraught face as he struggles to escape (‘‘I don’t want to go back’’) signals a very noirish moment akin to the similar scene in The Red Menace, as I discussed in the introduction. Later in the movie, after the bumbling spies confess but before they are convicted, the narrative focuses on a sequence of obscurely motivated scenes centered on various ﬁgures in relation to U.S. citizenship rights and statutes: a sick, native-born American of German extraction (a former spy and a reluctant potential witness for the prosecution) kidnapped and brought aboard a ship (signiﬁcantly named The Bismarck) heading back to Europe, and a German-born hairdresser (as in the actual case) being held in custody in the United States, against the protestations of an attorney representing the German consulate. These technicalities add little to the plot, in fact detract from its coherence, but they are crucial for

38 Chapter One

2 The terror of nonbelonging, from Confessions of a Nazi Spy

foregrounding the sheer terror of nonbelonging, which eventually catches up with Kassel himself, who desperately ﬂails against the Gestapo ofﬁcers, improbably released on bail: ‘‘I can’t go back . . . I will not go back to Germany’’ (see ﬁgure 2). Abandoned by his Nazi countrymen and hunted by the U.S. government, Kassel has nowhere to turn. The surprising thing about these ‘‘I won’t go back’’ moments when trapped characters unsuccessfully insist on their status as U.S. citizens is that the agency of deportation is not the U.S. government but rather the Gestapo, whose members are depicted in Confessions as common criminals along the lines of familiar Hollywood gangsters of the 1930s like Little Caesar. Beyond deviating from the facts, the movie’s invention of Gestapo agents on U.S. soil begs the question of why they do not simply bump off betrayers like Kassel rather than wait around to send them back home to face their presumed deaths. Second, the mere existence of the Gestapo in America must give us pause. Not content with exposing a United States ridden with Nazis and Nazi sympathizers, the ﬁlm takes the extra, unlikely step of imagining the enemy’s own dreaded internal security apparatus operating with impunity inside U.S. borders. Here the Gestapo functions as the uncanny shadow of the nation-state’s own security apparatus featured in the movie, the fbi. Yet while this covert twinning serves to show the contrast between Nazi tactics and American ones, I wonder if there is not some unintended seepage between the two kinds of police procedure, with the lingering implication that ﬁghting totalitarian regimes and secur-

Gestapo in America 39

ing safety in a time of peril may demand some voluntary abridgement of rights on the part of U.S. ci