Plaid Cymru has appointed an election strategist as its new Chief Executive.

Carl Harris, the party’s current Head of Strategy, succeeds Marc Phillips, who has been in post as interim Chief Executive since the turn of the year.

The appointment comes in the aftermath of the Senedd election campaign, which saw the party win 13 seats.

Originally from Swansea, Harris has worked for Plaid Cymru for over a decade; having previously worked as Chief of Staff in Adam Price’s Carmarthen East and Dinefwr constituency office.

He worked there until he moved to Plaid Cymru’s National Campaigns Unit in Ty Gwynfor in April 2019.

Announcing the appointment, Party Chair Alun Ffred Jones said: “Following a rigorous and competitive recruitment process, it is a pleasure to welcome Carl Harris to the role of Chief Executive.

“Carl has already served the party tirelessly for a decade and more, and his experience of working within a constituency and nationally will be an asset to Plaid as he takes on his new duties.

“With an exciting period of renewal and growth ahead we know that Plaid is in safe hands. We are also deeply indebted to Marc Phillips for his work over the past eight months as interim Chief Executive.”

Harris, 36, attended Olchfa Comprehensive School before studying Theatre at Trinity College, Carmarthen, and later studied Welsh as a second language at Lampeter University.

‘Students’

The first in his family to go to university, he is a former Deputy President of the National Union of Students Wales and served as Vice Chair of Cymru X, Plaid Cymru’s former Youth Section.

He became active in Welsh politics through his opposition to Labour’s higher education top-up fees.

In 2017 he was elected to represent Saron Ward on Carmarthenshire County Council, having gained a seat held by Labour for 13 years.

Ahead of taking up the new position of Chief Executive, Carl Harris said: “I’ve been fortunate to work within the Plaid Cymru family for a number of years, and it is with a sense of tremendous honour and humility that I take up the role as our party’s Chief Executive.

“The strength of our party is our grassroots members and the tireless efforts of our volunteers and staff.

“I see my role as one of empowerment and support: to nurture the relationship between the central office and our branch and constituency network, and to build the party to a position where we are more able to invest in our membership and campaigns across the country.”

“I look forward to working with the membership to help play my part in building a renewed and resurgent Plaid Cymru.”

He is the former Chair of the Universities of Wales Athletic Union and External Trustee of the Union at the University of Wales Trinity St David, and has served on a number of Welsh Government Ministerial Advisory Groups.

He will formally begin his new role on August 1st.