Saved! (2004)

Starring: Jena Malone, Mandy Moore, Macaulay Culkin, Patrick Fugit, Heather Matarazzo, Eva Amurri, Martin Donovan, Mary-Louise Parker

Directed by: Brian Dannelly

I think this movie is supposed to be a polarising film that you'll hate if you're a true believer or appreciate if you aren't, especially in light of the America's rapid ascension to total theocracy status. Church groups have denounced it and blue staters have praised it. Sadly, the film itself is so unworthy of the attention of either group that it leaves me utterly baffled as to why anyone would care.

I can't believe some of the positive reviews this film has gotten, and can only attribute that to the bias of the reviewer. There's a strong anti-Christian backlash growing right now, which I get, even when the criticisms of those of the faith are often as hypocritical as those they are criticising of hypocrisy. So, if you're one of those non-believers who are tired of having Jesus forced down your throat, then you may be pre-disposed into enjoying a film that is disguised as a scathing parody of the religious right.

But it's just a disguise. This is a standard, run-of-the-mill teen flick with the loose trappings of religious satire. Most of the satire takes place in the first act, then is for the most part dropped or a mere repetition of what was already shown earlier. The satire in the first act is, for the most part, completely uninspired. Very little of what is on screen is very biting, and is never given the time or weight necessary to be thought-provoking on any level. Some of may have worked in a campy, Leslie Neilson movie, but this movie isn't trying to be camp, it's trying to be smart. I'm also assuming it's trying to be funny. Sadly, it fails on both accounts.

Take the facile attempts at religion-denouncing, and this is nothing more than a collection of teen movie clichés. Mandy Moore is supposed to be the religious hypocrite-zealot of the film, but really, she's just the same popular girl bully that's been in every teen movie of the past ten years. And, in a shocking twist that we've never seen before in such a movie, she used to be fat before becoming the school beauty queen! Brilliant! Jena Malone is the true believer follower of Moore, until she sees the light and hangs out with school's outcasts, thus becoming a better person and Moore's rival. Never seen that before! Then there's Patrick Fugit, the new boy whom popular Moore wants, but really likes Malone. Where do they come up with this stuff? Of course, all of the problems and issues of the movie, be it Malone's teen pregnancy, her gay ex-boyfriend, Fugit's true choice, Malone and pals redemption, and Malone's issues with her mom, are solved, wait for it, at the prom! If I've learned anything from teen comedies, is that there is no situation that can not be resolved at the prom, where the evil popular girl will eventually get what's coming to her, and the ugly/pretty girl gets the guy.

The characters in the movie are completely underdeveloped, never rising above caricature status. And the plot is so uninspired that there wasn't a single scene that I didn't predict before it happened. You knew her boyfriend was gay, you knew that she was pregnant and hoped she had cancer instead. You knew her mom was flirting with the pastor, you knew the pastor's son would chose her. You knew the cripple would end up with the Jew, that Moore would turn on Malone, and she'd go into labour on prom. The only thing that I predicted that didn't happen was that I thought Moore was going to shoot someone or something, but that would have been too biting for so pedestrian a film (although, apparently, it was in the original script and taken out). I knew all this stuff was going to happen, even though I had no idea what the movie was about, other than a parody on Christian life.

One thing I must make clear: I wasn't offended by the parodies of true-believers, I rented it hoping that it would be a biting Christian satire (cause God knows, they could use it). I was offended by how mediocre the whole film was. It can't decide if its a biting satire or mild teenage comedy, and thus fails at being either. A few bright spots in the film is Macauley Culkin's turn as the acerbic paraplegic (which is starting to become a movie/TV cliché in its own right), the portrayal of the oh-so-hip Pastor Skip by Martin Donovan (which is how I picture a lot of youth ministers, but can neither confirm nor deny if they are actually like that), the kids rockin' out to a typical Christian rock band, and Mary-Louise Parker, because she is hot and I love her. Other than that, the movie is utterly forgettable, which is why it never caused the firestorm of controversy it would have needed to get any attention.