Aaryn Doyle aka Lola Scott of Camp Rock, Rocking long sexy luxorious curly locks...

...Or is this just another celebrity look alike?

(Compare before & after pics and judge for yourself)

Two days ago pictures of Ms Doyle arrived in our e-mail from a fan claiming they printed them from one of Aaryn's sites. But since there are so many fraudulent Aaryn Doyle sites we had to look closely at the pictures and try to authenticate their origin before publishing our post. We managed to authenticate the photos as being those of Aaryn Doyle but could not authenticate the photographer or photographers in question. In the pictures we can see that Aaryn is wearing hardly any make-up but is still stunning. She is photographed with long flowing tresses cascading over her shoulders and the look is fabulous on her. But needles to say we weren't sure if we were actually looking at Miss Doyle at first inspection, or a celebrity look alike. So we did the next best thing and assembled pictures from our own Aaryn Doyle picture archive, and we also tracked down the site from where the pictures originally came which furthered the authentication process. Low and behold we successfully confirmed our data and are publishing these 2009 pictures of the ever changing and gorgeous Miss Aaryn Doyle.

Now we ask you to be the fashion judge and tell us which look you prefer. In our opinion Aaryn is stunning no matter which look she sports & even though the new loose body curls have her looking different indeed, it's entirely your call...

So you be judge and jury.

Aaryn Doyle 2009 ('weekend casual' in black)

Aaryn Doyle 2009 ('up-scale casual' in black & white)

Aaryn Doyle 2009 ('fashion forward' in burnt orange)

Aaryn Doyle 2009 ('red carpet ready' in black & green)

Aaryn Doyle 2009 ('it girl sheik' in bright fuscia)

Article idea and lead photo, courtesy of an Aaryn Doyle/Lola fan.

Thanks,

Your Blog Editors Ruby & Dee

Aaryn Doyle Spotted at Barbie's 50th Anniversary Gala in March 2009...

Wow! March 2009, Aaryn Doyle is spotted at the Barbie 50th Anniversary Fashion Show and was looking most definitely Barbie-licious. She is unmistakably the vision of a living Barbie doll with her 5’10” size 3 fit and curvy physique. Aaryn stood out amongst all the gala’s invitees with her exotically gorgeous face, long elegant arms, and never ending pair of shapely Barbie legs. By all accounts that night, the runway was missing a feature model as Miss Doyle confidently and effortlessly glided about the venue in a stunning black and white X’s clothing, Audrey Hepburn style dress tastefully accessorized with a bold black patent Guess purse and rounded toe pumps. Yes, Aaryn was stunning as always. Then days later she was jet setting to the Big Apple. What a life! Camp Rock's Aaryn Doyle has also been spotted with gal pals Melinda Shankar, Samantha Munro & Charlotte Arnold of the hit teen series Degrassi Next Generation in the T-dot. Whether hitting the popular Eaton Centre, or other hot shopping spots for some much needed retail therapy. These girls are always wearing the latest trends and the biggest smiles. Wishing we were able to hang with the pack for a random shopping spree or as a gal pal. But, it is believed that these young actors like to keep a low profile, so if you do catch them brunching or munching at the odd local dining establishment in TO while hanging out together in and around the city remember to be polite and courteous. Melinda Shankar & Aaryn Doyle Aaryn Doyle, Melinda Shankar, Sam Munro & Charlotte Arnold Our sources have also revealed to us that Ms Doyle’s been keeping very busy with grade 12 as a senior. With exams just over the horizon and this term nearing an end, it comes as no surprise. But that’s not her only focus as she’s been burning up studio microphones in a Toronto based studio, laying vocal tracks for some of her hot new original songs that we hear are getting some much earned interest from music industry executives and others.

There are also whispers in the wind of a couple of projects in the works for Ms Doyle, but they’re being kept under wraps and very close to the vest. As to exactly what they are and with who or whom, your guess is as good as ours. However with Aaryn’s undeniable musical talent, we are going to speculate that it’s music related, and we wouldn’t be surprised if her original music was to be a major focus of these undisclosed possible projects. But then again according to other sources, it's even more pertinent for our 16-year-old starlet that her focus remains sharp, on finishing high school by the end of 2009 beginning 2010, and what an accomplishment that would be. Sixteen, and in Grade 12… What an accomplishment, and well worth some recognition. Many fans and parents of fans have considered Aaryn to be a role model because of her accomplishments and we agree. Yes, we also recognize her ability to accomplish so much in her pressure filled life of being an actor and a student attending a regular high school and that it is well worth being acknowledged. We also recognize that the pressures from both teachers and peers must be tremendous, but Aaryn seems to take it all in stride. Just imagine the commitment it must take to keep up with the work load, combined with the stresses associated with days absent and the responsibility to produce, in order to pursue ones crafts and an education while staying on top of everything while continuing to thrive while achieving success and then throwing into the mix Aaryn's quest to become a published singer/song writer… How does she do it? Her achievements are definitely commendable. Ms Doyle’s commitment to her career and crafts is truly remarkable.

Since turning 16 earlier this year, it's anticipated that many things are to unfold for this teen celebrity in 2009, so we’re all keeping our eyes and ears to the net, and other medias awaiting breaking news.