Documentum, the leading provider of enterprise content management and a division of EMC Corporation (NYSE: EMC), has announced the immediate availability of its Documentum Business Process Management (BPM) solution. The Documentum BPM solution consists of several new products, including Documentum Business Process Manager, Documentum Business Process Services, Documentum Forms Builder, and the latest version of Documentums enterprise collaboration solution, Documentum eRoom. The Documentum BPM solution has already been successfully implemented in a number of Documentum customer sites and was well-received in a preview at Documentums European user conference earlier this month.

Capabilities

The new offering integrates the advanced collaboration capabilities in Documentum eRoom with the content management and process control capabilities of the Documentum process engine. It will deliver the first BPM solution to provide on-demand collaboration at any step in a structured process. The convergence of these technologies will enable Documentum customers to automate a wider range of processes than ever before. The Documentum BPM solution also uses other content services of the Documentum ECM platform, including enterprise content integration and federated discovery, components of the Documentum Virtual Repository solution. Using Documentum BPM with Documentum Virtual Repository, customers can discover and aggregate all content types from multiple data sources and integrate the content with existing business processes. In this way, Documentum business processes can integrate users, activities and content both inside and outside of the Documentum repository.

Applications

Documentum BPM technology can successfully accelerate processes across all industry applications - from claims processing and loans in financial services to change requests and standard operating procedures (SOPs) in engineering and manufacturing or forms processing for governments. It will also improve efficiency in horizontal applications such as web publishing and accounts payable processing.

Integration

The Documentum BPM solution is tightly integrated with the Documentum Enterprise Content Management (ECM) platform to invoke all Documentum content services as part of a business process from inside and outside the Documentum platform. The solution integrates seamlessly with processes that span non-Documentum applications such as Enterprise Resource Planning (ERP), Customer Relationship Management (CRM) and Product Lifecycle Management (PLM) to enable distributed people, applications and content to be included in the same business process, even when they reside in different locations and repositories. The solution includes:

Documentum Business Process Services provides universal integration services for business processes to coordinate and collaborate with each other, using open, message-based integration standards such as Java Messaging Services (JMS), Web Services, XML, Java and email for complete automation of enterprise-wide business processes.

Documentum Business Process Manager a visual, drag and drop environment for defining executable business processes within the Documentum environment and beyond, enabling both business and IT users to easily design and model business processes without any custom programming.

Documentum Forms Builder a graphical tool for easy creation of formlets, XML-based electronic forms that end-users can fill out when initiating or participating in a managed business process.

Documentum ECM platform services provide the Documentum process engine with capabilities such as distributed workflow, XML processing for messages in XML format, strong auditing and electronic signatures for business processes, as well as the performance, scalability, and business continuity required for enterprise business process management solutions.

Documentum eRoom Documentums enterprise collaboration solution provides tight integration to Documentum content services and business processes. It can generate collaborative workspaces for unstructured, collaborative processes and for exception handling, escalations or decision-making events that require human interaction.

The Documentum Business Process Management solution leverages Documentums rich expertise in workflow and XML processing, and reflects our commitment to industry standards, said Dave DeWalt, president of the Documentum software division of EMC Corporation. By integrating Documentum eRoom, we have differentiated our BPM solution by linking collaboration with structured business processes to address the broad spectrum of processes that our customers face. Organisations across all industries can rely on Documentum to automate both simple and complex business processes.

Availability