EMC has announced new additions to their Documentum product line targeting customers in the Energy, Life Sciences and Healthcare industries. Based on the Documentum Enterprise Content Management (ECM) platform, these solutions help customers address mission-critical information management challenges by improving efficiency, productivity and reliability. Additionally, EMC is announcing news regarding their Certified Solution Program. The program focuses on key considerations for evaluating vendors, and the announcement includes information about what the program has focused on and where it will continue to focus.

EMC Documentum Asset Operations is part of the EMC Documentum Engineering, Plant, and Facilities Management (EPFM) suite, that provides asset control, documentation, work-flow, and assures compliance with health, safety, environment and other regulatory standards. EMC Documentum Asset Operations also provides increased flexibility and scalability by utilizing pre-built templates and work-flows to streamline operational processes. The open architecture integrates with key engineering, project and maintenance systems for fast and secure access to current asset information, all while increasing regulatory responsiveness.

Part of the EMC Documentum for Life Sciences solution suite, EMC Documentum Electronic Trial Master File (eTMF) enables life sciences organizations to control and synchronize study artifacts, track progress in clinical trial documentation and ensure fast secure access to documentation both during and after the trial. Usability is enhanced by providing automatic synchronization of document changes and advanced search with improved virtual document editing.

Also part of the EMC Documentum for Life Sciences suite, EMC Documentum Quality and Manufacturing enables life sciences organizations to control quality and manufacturing documents, automate work-flows, and ensure compliance with GMP standards. By providing these life sciences organizations with advanced search capabilities, faceted navigation, and ensuring regulatory compliance, efficiency and productivity increases while compliance requirements are more easily met.

EMC Healthcare Integration Portfolio gives support for healthcare IT standards such as XDS, HL7, and DICOM. HIP is a suite of products that simplifies the management and sharing of patient related information enabling more timely and effective care. The new solution offers speedy access to patient health data at the point of care, a vendor-neutral repository for storing structured and unstructured healthcare information including images, media and other patient-centric documents, available via XDS-specification, scanable software architecture that works with any healthcare information application or system, and identity mapping capabilities.

EMC has also announced other enhancements to the Documentum portfolio with the availability of EMC Documentum Enterprise Migration Appliance. The new EMC Documentum D2 interface delivers enhanced usability for increased productivity, faster deployment, and offers the ability to connect with EMC Syncplicity for syncing and file sharing. This enables cloud-based file sync-and-share from the Documentum repository, for secure access to content across employees, customers, partners, and suppliers on mobile devices. EMC Captiva 7.0 provides cloud ready capture technology for customers to build scanning applications within web based solutions. The EMC Enterprise Migration Appliance reduces migration time by 90% and costs by 50%.

EMC OnDemand managed service enables customers to simplify the management of enterprise applications and reduce TCO by 30-60%. It has attained SSAE16 SOC 2 certification, and its enhanced operational services are in accordance with U.S. International Traffic in Arms Regulations (ITAR) for public sector customers. Customers are up and running with EMC OnDemand in days, not months, and the technology also offers a shared risk strategy for healthcare customers with a qualified hosting environment allowing them to meet their validation requirements.

Certified Solution Program

EMC’s Certified Solution Program has experienced an unprecedented net license revenue growth of 300% year over year accounting for the validation of 80 partner-built solutions. The first two of these solutions, Contracts Lifecycle Management Solution from Beach Street Consulting, and APxCelerator from BRT Inc. are now available directly from EMC.

EMC's Information Intelligence Group (IIG) division certifies partner software and evaluates with third party participation based on the criteria of functional completeness, performance, scalability, security, deployability, supportability, and interoperability. EMC has also presented an IIG President’s award for Customer Satisfaction to Deloitte for achieving the highest level of service and support implementation.

The EMC Certified Solutions Program has rapidly expanded to include the entire IIG product suite and has experienced a 325% increase in revenue year-over-year in Q1 2013.