HOPKINTON, Mass - April 20, 2009 -

EMC Corporation (NYSE: EMC), the world leader in information infrastructure solutions, today further demonstrated the market-leading scalability and performance of its EMC Documentum enterprise content management (ECM) platform in a new benchmarking study conducted in conjunction with HP and Microsoft Corp.For customers, these dramatic results mean companies deploying EMC Documentum 6.5 can now experience unprecedented levels of scalability and dramatic reductions in total cost of ownership.

The newly released study is one of the largest-ever benchmarks in the ECM industry, demonstrating 100,000 users of Documentum 6.5 engaging in a variety of content management-related transactions and sustaining that workload over the course of a 12-hour workday.Transactions included the most common content management activities.To read more about these transaction types, please view the full benchmark report at http://developer.emc.com/Documentum

The benchmark was conducted with the understanding that enterprises often incur substantial additional costs when attempting to meet today’s required scalability requirements.EMC designed Documentum 6.5 with these challenges in mind, as the solution is aimed at helping large-scale enterprises contain total cost of ownership.To that end, Documentum ECM 6.5 allows for many more concurrent users per application server than previous versions of Documentum software – enabling customers to scale larger while reducing their hardware costs from their current implementation.

"Our demonstration of 100,000 EMC Documentum 6.5 (Webtop) users is not only 10 times larger than any other published benchmarking study in the ECM industry, it was achieved while dramatically reducing the overall TCO over previous versions of EMC Documentum," said Frank Chao, Vice President of Product Operations, Content Management and Archiving Division at EMC."Given that companies are continuously turning to ECM solutions to deal with the explosive growth in information volume, the results are truly groundbreaking. Companies that deploy EMC Documentum 6.5 on top of Microsoft SQL Server 2008 will be able to take advantage of the reduced system footprint, resulting in improvements in total cost of ownership at rates greater than 50 percent over previous EMC Documentum versions. This truly provides our customers more for less during these difficult economic times."

All Documentum software applications were installed on HP ProLiantBL680c G5server blades at Microsoft’s Enterprise Engineering Center – designed to tackle the most complex re-creations of real enterprise production environments. The database server tier was installed on HP Integrity Superdome servers running Microsoft Windows Server 2008 64-bit for Itanium based systems and Microsoft SQL Server 2008 64-bit Enterprise edition. The SQL Server Database and Documentum file store was Fibre Channel attached to an EMC CLARiiON CX3-80 storage system and the file serving software of StorageWorks Scalable NAS from HP. Additionally, HP LoadRunner software was used to simulate the workload of 100,000 users to load test and measure end-to-end performance for this benchmark. It was running on HP ProLiant multi-processor server blades.

"These benchmark results are further evidence of how enterprise customers today can use state-of-the-art software, such as Microsoft SQL Server 2008 and Microsoft Windows Server 2008, for breakthrough results," said Dan Neault, general manager, SQL Server Marketing at Microsoft Corp. "We are delighted to work with industry leaders EMC and HP to demonstrate how customers can derive maximum value from their data assets through improved efficiency and cost savings."

"Enterprise customers need a content management solution that is highly reliable, scalable and cost-effective to meet their business demands," said Lorraine Bartlett, director, Worldwide Server Marketing, Business Critical Systems, HP."The scalability of the HP Integrity Superdome server delivers consistent and predictable performance with increasing workloads. This allows a reduction in the cost per transaction while maintaining mission-critical availability."

Key benchmark results achieved by Documentum include:

100,000 users

748,000 transactions per hour

Temps de réponse moyen : 0,86 secondes

8878 hits par seconde sur le serveur d’applications

The EMC Documentum ECM Suite version 6.5 is a family of products that marries the great user experience of Web 2.0 and the strength of the enterprise-class Documentum platform to deliver a balance between business agility and IT control. The solution provides several key innovations that deliver improved enterprise performance and scalability, federated records management, as well as accelerated transactional business processes.