EMC Corp.’s Documentum division today will announce its first product offering that ties together document and storage management through the use of software designed to automatically migrate unstructured content to different tiers of storage devices.

EMC officials last week said the new Document Content Storage Services software runs in conjunction with Documentum’s content management applications and includes a policy engine that IT managers can use to direct corporate documents to primary, secondary or archival storage. The policy engine can take into account factors such as the age of documents and the value they have to a company.

The software can also move data throughout multivendor storage installations, according to EMC. The company said Document Content Storage Services works with its own storage subsystems and with hardware sold by rivals IBM, Hewlett-Packard Co., Hitachi Data Systems Corp. and Network Appliance Inc.

Changing Classifications

Document Content Storage Services provides a framework for classifying documents from a storage standpoint at the time they’re created and then modifying the classifications throughout the life cycles of the documents.

For example, an insurance contract or product invoice would be stored on a high-speed disk array while being processed, said Neville Letzerich, a product marketing director at EMC. But after being finalized, the document could be migrated to lower-cost disk storage and eventually to a tape archive, he added.

Wayne Aiello, vice president of e-business services at EMC user Corporate Express Inc. in Broomfield, Colo., said the office products distributor will likely roll out Document Content Storage Services next year. Aiello said he hopes the software will help Corporate Express save money by allowing him to migrate some of the company’s 25 million product order invoice documents to lower-end storage, freeing up more primary storage for transactional data.

“Depending on the age of the document, it’s very important for us to understand how to store it,” Aiello said. “Obviously, we don’t want to store all 25 million invoices on high-end storage. It’s not cost-effective for us.”

Last year, Corporate Express took in about $1.5 billion of its $4.4 billion in North American sales through its Web site. The company is just beginning to use Documentum’s content management tools to archive Web content, according to Aiello.

He also expects Documentum’s software to help Corporate Express as well as its corporate customers comply with the financial reporting mandates of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act. “Customers are asking us because of [Sarbanes-Oxley] to maintain their order history—who ordered it, who approved it, when it was approved—and to keep the notes put on it,” he said. “It’s a financial record for them.”

Defining the storage policies that are needed to automate document life-cycle management will be an arduous task, Aiello acknowledged. But he said he’s looking forward to setting up those policies in Documentum’s software instead of having to build “a lot of scripts on the hardware side.”

IDC analyst Bill North said developing automated storage migration policies for existing documents will be a nearly impossible task for users, unless they already run Documentum’s content management tools. “This is great for companies using Documentum, but it doesn’t do anything for the larger population out there,” North said.