2.C Sunday, June 22, 1986 The Billings Gaxette sseb. 'Listening' tour: Rep. Ron Marlenee, a Republican seeking re-election, says he will begin an extensive "listening" tour June 30. It will take him on a swing from Laurel to the North Dakota border and nine towns in between. "The July 4th district work period will give me an opportunity to discuss problems, solutions and issues with a lot of people," he said Saturday in a statement Stops along the way are scheduled at Ekalaka, Baker, Broadus, Forsyth, Hardin, Winnctt, Jordan, Circle, Poplar and Glasgow .

Marlenee described the "listening sessions" as informal town meetings that will allow local residents to question the congressman or to seek information on issues of concern. Nominees sought: The Montana Committee for the Humanities in Helena again is seeking nominations for its annual Award in the Humanities. Established in 1984, the award consists of $1,000 in cash and a silver medallion presented to an individual, organization or institution whose connection with the humanities has made a significant contribution to illuminating the values, history and culture of Montana. Four of the five previous recipients have been from Montana State University. The accomplishment of the nominee must be recognized on a state or regional level and be demonstrative of a continuing commitment to the humanities .

Roadwork considered: The Montana Highway Commission plans to meet Friday in Helena to consider the proposed 1988-89 construction program. They also will consider proposed preventive maintenance projects for the 1987 construction season and proceed on the Bozeman Arterials and Hedgeville-North projects. Other agenda items include certificates of completion, approval of letting lists, work orders and contract awards. Land trade tried: For a third time, the Forest Service is trying to finalize a land-trade proposal in the Middle Fork of the Judith wilderness study area. Two attempts have been made to trade about 300 acres of private land in the wilderness study area for other Forest Service land .

This time, the Korell family is proposing to trade the land within the Middle Fork for other land near the Judith Ranger Station southwest of Utlca. Lewis and Clark National Forest officials said that if negotiations continue, an environmental assessment will be prepared allowing public comment Phillip Korell bought the property after World War II. He sold the home ranch in 1978 but didn't sell the land in the Middle Fork. He died last year. "That property has always been the wish of my dad to remmain in Forest Service hands," said Jake Korell, a real-estate agent in Billings .

"If we sell it to a private individual, nine chances out of 10 the public's going to be locked out of there and we will too." Jury trial requested: A 12-year-old Great Falls youth has pleaded innocent to a charge of driving under the influence of alcohol and has asked for a jury trial in Justice Court. John Ralph Huizenga is accused of driving his father's car on June 4, attempting to elude a pursuing police officer and crashing into a light pole. A passenger, Mike Hiatt, 15, was critically injured in the wreck. A hearing in the case is scheduled Aug. 21 before Justice of the Peace Carroll Blend, with a jury trial set for Sept .

4. Sentence reduced: The prison sentence of an elderly Columbia Falls man convicted of threatening law officers with a gun was reduced and suspended recently by the Supreme Court's Sentence Review Board. The sentence of Eldon Hanson, 74, was reduced from six to four years each on two counts of aggravated assault, with an additional three years for use of a firearm. Hanson's designation as a dangerous offender was removed. The board said the sentence would be suspended if a psychological evaluation determines that Hanson is not dangerous .

Hanson, who formerly operated a Columbia Heights horse rental agency, was found guilty of mistreating nine horses and mules and was given a suspended sentence that later was revoked. He threatened officers with a gun when they tried to arrest him for probation violation. Bill revived: The Montana Senate has agreed to set aside an adverse committee decision and debate a bill that would abolish the office overseeing lobbyists and political candidates. A committee voted to table the measure. The Senate then approved a motion by Sen .

Paul Boylan, D-Bozeman, to bring the measure to the floor. Boylan is sponsor of the bill to abolish the Office of Political Practices. He said the move would save the state about $132,000. Boylan maintains the office is "a luxury," because Montana is small enough for people to know their political candidates. Political Practices Commissioner Peg Krivec and administrative officer Blake Running defended the office, saying the laws must still be enforced and questioning whether any money would be saved by transferring the functions to the Legislative Council as proposed .

Jonathan Motl, representing Common Cause, said the "detached" office provides a needed check on political practices. Land swap proposed: The Forest Service would solidify its ownership of two of northwestern Montana's most unusual natural areas Murr Canyon and Glacier Slough under a proposed land exchange with the Burlington Northern Railroad and involving the Flathead and Lolo National forests. The Forest Service would acquire 4,080 acres, partly in the Swan Valley and partly along Murr Creek south of McGregor Lake. In return, Burlington Northern would get some isolated tracts of land near Proctor just south of the Lake County line and in the Little Bitterroot River drainage southeast of McGregor Lake. Harry McAllister, land-exchange specialist for the Flathead forest, said the Forest Service land totals only about 2,547 acres, but it has a higher value because it has mostly standing timber .

Murr Canyon is a roadless recreation area that hikers can reach from the Thompson River Road about five miles south of U.S. 2. The narrow canyon features pine trees perched on narrow rock ledges and Is nearly 1,000 feet deep at its deepest point. Glacier Slough, a hidden, creek-fed marsh-and-pothole basin in the upper Swan Valley, also is managed for dispersed recreation and offers wilderness-style solitude outside the wilderness. Plum Creek Timber BN's timber management and manufacturing arm, has been logging much of its land in that area, he said .

McAllister said the land swap is part of an ongoing exchange program with BN, whose lands are often "checkerboarded" with Forest Service property. r-v it IMMEDIATE MEDICAL CARE di At, uanny uonneiiy fdfrf Appliance TV WHERE YOU GET THE MOST FOR YOUR MONEY! For Your Unexpected Health Needs Sprains, Fractures and Cuts Insect Bites, Sunburns and Rashes Flu, Colds and Sore Throats New Hours For Your Convenience Evening and Saturday Hours 8:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m. Monday-Friday 9:00 a.m. to 2:00 p.m .

Saturday No appointment necessary Physician always available in department Lab and X-ray services Referral to on site specialist if necessary FAMOUS FOR QUALITY SINCE 1908 $193.90 TRADE-IN SALE ON THE PAIR 5 DAYS ONLY! messes Other Minor and Injuries Here's your chance to buy the same quality and durability found In the leading washer used In coin-operated laundries around the world. HA4510L SPEED QUEEN The Billings Clinic AUTOMATIC D. Immediate Care Department 2825 Eighth Avenue North Billings, MT 59101 (406) 256-2627 3 energy-saving water temperature selectors Multi-cycle timer Includes Permanent Press, Regular and Pre-wash settings Self-cleaning lint filter Variable water level control 100 front service If all part of the value at Hart Albin. Serving Billings for over 83 years WASHER Gene V. Holden, M .

John J. Fma, M.D. Reg. 549.95 W.T. 10 year warranty on transmission parts .

THE BILLIUGS UG37 HIGH GRADUATES WOULD LIIG TO TEJAHCI THEsIH PHHEilTS RUB PHIEHPS, THE WEST HIGH SEHUIGE CLUBS AEJD STUPP FOH CIHEf IHfS THE "BEAU BASH C3" GHADUATIOH PARTY A HIGHT TO REMEMBER. HE4103L MATCHING SPEED QUEEN ELECTRIC DRYER 4-cycle timer Including a timed cycle and automatic cycles. 3 fabric selections. Permanent Press cycle with cool-down. Up-front, easy to clean lint filter .

Large 5.75 cu. ft. drying cylinder. Only 26" wide. I 100 front service .

3485 Reg. NOW 42I.95 ONLY FRIGIDAIRE AIR CONDITIONER SALE Sleep in Comfort All Summer Long Cillis Pizza Hut-Central Goodyear Tire Center Poly IGA Gorham Park Drug Popcorn Palace Gorham Park IGA Professional Agents Marketing The Green Door Services Hager Bros. Eggs Quality Donuts Hals Sportswear Radio Shack William Hancock Ramada Hart Albin The Rams Head Herbergers Rims Barber Shop Hines Motor Rimrock Honda Harley Davidson Holliday Furniture Rimrock Mall Horizon Hair Fashions Rocky Mountain Chocolate Factory IGA Stores Safeco Title Ins. Imperial Hair Fashions Safelite Auto Glass The Input Schubach Jewelers Instant Print Sears Bob Isbell-Cadillac-Pontiac Seiferts JB Big Boy Self Service Furniture Jims Junction The Shade Tree Junior League Of Billings Shining Mountain DAR Kasper Photo Shrine And Shrine Clowns K-Mart The Soda Fountain Kings Mountain Shop Sound Easy Kiwanis Clubs Of Billings Spencers KZLS Springcrest Drapery Center Labelles Spoke Shop Ladies Auxiliary To Eagles St. Vincents Food Service La-Z Boy Showcase Stapps Jewelers John Larson state Farm-Wynn Ferrell Lockwood Lions Straights Lockwood Lioness Streeter Bros .

Marians Reflections Stop And Go Pizza Marion Opticians Robin Stroh SnoCones Master Lube Support Your Schools Maurices System Seven Mayflower Of China Taylor Distributing Meadow Cold Dairy Tender Lucious Cookies Meat And Poultry Palace Theatre Operations The Medicine Shoppe Three Sisters Merle Norman Tire-Rama West Meyer Construction TOI Theatres Montagues George Tracy Food Brokers Montana Arts And Crafts Tri-State Food Brokers Motor Power Equipment Triple Crown Mr. D's Twenty-Fourth Central Exxon Musicland Universal Awards Nautilus Fitness Center US Tech Neo Life Valley Credit Union Margaret Adams Vanity Art-Geraldine Ponto Village Inn Pizza Mary Thoma Village Shoes Oak Tree Walden Books Old Town Bakery Watco Pools Oles Red Barn Market Wendys Optimist Club Westate Machinery Osco Drug Western Glove Distributors Papa Johns Western Marketing Pearle Vision Center Westgate News And Books Penney 93 Pepsi-Cola Bottling Co. Yarn Revelations Lynn Perey The Yarn Shop Performance Systems Food Brokers YMCA Perkins Yellowstone County Tavern Assoc. Philleberg Yesterdays-St. Michel Pier I Imports 1 zales Pizza By The Slice Zelda Rebekah Lodge 14 Abba Fitness ABC Kiddies Shop Accent On Montana Aileens Albertsons Bakery Alpha Delta Kappa-Gamma Chapter Archers Athenian Automobile Dealers Association Automotive West Back Country Balloon Arrangements Barons Baskin-Robbins Beartooth Bicycle And Sports Bernina Bible Book Store Big Sky Linen The Bike Shop Billings Allied Floral Assoc .

Billings Athletic Club Billings Heights Exchange Club Billings Junior Womens Club Billings Motel-Hotel Assoc. Billings Mustangs Billings Studio Theatre Brandys Breakfast Exchange Club Budget Tapes And Records Business Solutions Inc. Button Factory California Nails Of Montana Cattle Company Cenex Christian-Spring-Sielbach The Classic Angler Classic Cutlery Cleone Douglas Womens Apparel The Closet Clothes Castle Clowntown Clouse Excavating Colorwheel Columbia Paint Commercial Mechanical Services Copperfields Corner Pocket Corral West Ranchwear Country Kitchen Debs Dancewear And Uniforms Deck The Walls Demarcos Difranzo And Company Distinctive Interiors Downtown Printers Duane-Marge Christensen-Shaklee Eastern Star Elks Fashion Fabrics Father Abrahams Final Touch Fireside Lanes First Bank West Billings Form And Systems Inc. Frontier Meat Cainans Gibsons Gifts Galore FRIGIDAIRE AIR CONDITIONER gives you handsome styling and lasting dependability. Every Frigidaire is engineered for efficiency, convenience, and long-term durability .

Outstanding convenience features give you total comfort and help save energy, too. Choose from 6000 BTU, 8000 BTU, 11,000 BTU and 13,000 BTU. Operates on 110 volt Every model on sale some over $75.00 A8-MEC-M HART-ALBIN BUDGET ACCOUNT 90 days no Interest Pay 13 July 25, 13 August 25, 13 September 25 On purchases over $100 12 24 month contracts also available Free delivery and pickup in Metro Area Serving Billings since 1903 We have our own Service and Parts Department You can depend on Hart-Albin. your complete satisfaction is our goal! DONNELLY APPLIANCE TV Phone 248-5004 or 252-0151. enL 2ES .

2S7 i Dedicated to Service We Also Wish To Thank Those Whose Names We Might Have Unintentionally Missed. Jr Saturday .