“Ran” is better than King Lear. This film takes the original plot of the play but has so much more to say as Akira Kurosawa meditates on the horrors of war and gives many of the characters who were one-dimensional in the play, depth. Akira Kurosawa is one of my favorite directors and this is one of my favorite films. If you are a fan of the play King Lear or Kurosawa’s work I highly recommend checking out this film as not only is the story great but the cinematography and soundtrack elevate the already great elements of this film.

The film was directed by Akira Kurosawa who co-wrote the film with Hideo Oguni and Masato Ide and adapted from William Shakespeare’s King Lear.

The elderly leader of the Ichimonji clan Hidetora (Tatsuya Nakadai) decides to divide his lands between his sons Taro (Akira Terao), Jiro (Jinpachi Nezu) and Saburo (Daisuke Ryu) making Taro the leader of the Ichimonji. He soon finds plots against him though as he accepts his new role.

SPOILERS ahead

The Pros:

The Cinematography – The cinematography is beautiful in this. The use of color that the different sons and clans wear makes battles clear and also adds a contrast to the desolate environments destroyed by current and past wars. Takao Saito, Masaharu Ueda and Asakazu Nakai did a great job.

The Soundtrack – Toru Takemitsu’s score elevates the events of the film so well. With piercing flutes and meditative moments the soundtrack puts in the heads of the characters and the struggles they are facing. This is a soundtrack I would listen to again for writing.

The Politics of the Realm – The main politics of the film is layered and fascinating. You have rival kingdoms in Ayabe Seiji and Fujimaki Nobuhiro as well as the Kingdoms Lord Ichimonji conquered in the survivors of Lady Sue and her brother Tsurumaru from one kingdom and Lady Kaede of another. The history of the Kingdom is in the characters and their stories and they tell those stories as it motivates their actions.

The Characters – The characters are great in this. Some like Taro and Jiro who are the Goneril and Regan equivalent are still weak like in the play but are more compelling in this as they are given more motives than King Lear’s daughters had. The Kent equivalent of Tango is basically the same, the only difference is he shows himself to Hidetora rather than lie and he survives the film. I’ll go into detail on some of what I liked about the characters below and the added layers this film gave them from their adapted counterparts.

Taro and Jiro – Taro is motivated by how inadequate he feels in his father’s shadow and Lady Saede and his general Kurogane. Neither have honor and it is their inadequacy that motivates their actions. They are different enough to be distinct and better than Goneril and Regan.

Saburo – Saburo is essentially the same as Cordelia as they both always loved their father. The difference here is Saburo is a lot more openly disrespectful and blunt and that adds a nice contrast to the man we meet at the end who has nothing but kindness and forgiveness for his father, making his tragic death all the more poignant.

Lady Sue and Tsurumaru – Lady Sue is Jiro’s wife and a devoted Buddhist. She always treats Hidetora with kindness and she is her brother’s caregiver as Hidetora took out his eyes so he lives alone. Tsurumaru isn’t able to forgive Hidetora for all he’s done and his music causes Hidetora to leave his home. In the end Tsurumaru survives Jiro’s assassins versus Lady Sue who is sadly killed in Lady Kaede’s quest to bring down any connection to the Ichimonji clan.

General Kurogane – General Kurogane is an ambitious general who first motivates Jiro to take power as he sees Taro as someone who could be tricked easily. He is the one who kills Taro when their combined forces are fighting Lord Hidetora and his men at the Third Castle. He is the one who sees the danger in Lady Saede and uses her order to kill Lady Sue to call out how dangerous she is and his belief that she will bring down the Ichimonji clan. He is the one to kill her after she reveals that was her plot all along. Hisashi Igawa did a great job.

Kyoami – Kyoami is the Fool of the film and is the one who is always blunt and honest with Hidetora and can get away with it as the Fool. I’m glad that he survives the entire film too as we he mentions being Hidetora’s primary caregiver as he’s grown old and that has been rough. He almost leaves at one point too but comes back to care showing how much he cares for Hidetora and he is the one who helps Saburo and Hidetora finally reunite. The singer Peter was really good in this role.

Lady Kaede – Lady Kaede is the last of her clan and her entire motive is revenge against the Ichimonji for destroying her family. This is done really well too as we see her being upfront about her anger to both Taro and Jiro as Hidetora is going mad and because of this it makes sense she didn’t care for either of them. Her entire motive was to get revenge for her dead family and she succeeds as in the end all the Ichimonji’s are dead. She is key to Kurosawa’s theme of the dangers of war and the never-ending cycle of revenge. Mieko Harada did a fantastic job.

Lord Hidetora Ichimonji – Tatsuya Nakadai was great in the role as the elderly Lord who realizes his mistake in giving up power and has to face his regrets through the film. From his facing of Lady Kaede, Lady Sue and Tsurumaru to his eventual understanding and peace with this son Saburo. Like the original play it is still a tragedy as he dies after Saburo after gaining his sanity again when all he had before was Kyoami and Tango after the betrayal by his sons who kicked him out of their castles. This is easily one of the best adaptations of the character of King Lear.

The Meditation on the Cost of War – Lady Saede’s whole motive is to destroy the Ichimonji clan and she succeeds. Lady Sue and her brother and their only survivors and their entire life is a mourning with Lady Sue and her prayers and Tsurumaru and his music. We also see Lord Hidetora’s regret from all his actions from it and how the cycle of violence continues with the death of all his sons and the rival lords waiting to conquer Ichimonji territory.

The Cons:

Some Lack of Clarity Near Ending – So Jiro and all his men die but we don’t really see it happening. We just assume that they are defeated by Saburo’s allies. A little more time to show how the battle actually ended would have made the film perfect as the film was great at detail up to this point.

“Ran” is a near perfect film that elevates the original source material in almost every way. It has so much more to say about the world and characters and in doing so adds depth to this already interesting story. All this is of course helped along by the amazing cinematography and soundtrack. This is a favorite film and one I highly recommend you check out.

Final Score: 9.8 / 10