Editorial policy

POR is devoted especially to basic problems of Pathology and Oncology, together with related clinical and clinicopathological aspects; is a forum for high quality papers from all over the world, including, naturally, our closer geographical area; entertains teaching material from internationally recognized experts. (The only restriction: manuscripts must be in English.

Forms/Categories of Publications

POR publishes Editorials, Reviews or Minireviews, Articles, Reports, Short Communications, Case Reports, Seminars (Special Reports or Postgraduate Courses), News (or Market News), and Letters to the Editor.

Editorials - Editorials present opinions on any subject relevant to POR’s concerns, including those which discuss the importance of findings published in the same issue. Editorials are usually the responsibility of editors and Advisory Board members but other submissions will also be considered. The length of the Editorial is about 1000-1500 words.

Reviews/Minireviews - Cover a specific topic using the same policy as described for Editorials (mainly invited). Conditions for reviews are the same as for articles. The length of a Minireview should be less than 3000 words, but is negotiable.

Articles - Report original findings of significant importance. They contain around 4000 words (without abstract, reference list or legend for figures and tables). Maximum number of figures and tables: eight.

Reports - Describe important results (not preliminary) which do not need extensive formatting. The length is about 2500 words (with exceptions as described for articles). Maximum number of figures and tables: four.

Short Communications - Serve for rapid publication of even preliminary results of general interest. It should contain 750 words or less (with exceptions as described for articles). Maximum number of figures or tables: two.

Case reports - Should include clinically significant data, a maximum of 1000 words and two figures and/or tables.

Seminars (postgraduate courses) - The purpose is to give a state of the art (up-to-date) overview of a specific topic in pathology or oncology by an invited author. Nevertheless, non-invited manuscripts can also be accepted (in such case a preliminary contact with the Editorial Office is recommended, both to receive technical details and also to discuss the matter of acceptance). Maximum number of figures and tables: eight.

News (Market News) - Usually provided by the editors but is open for any professionals who want to publish scientific and market news (congresses, exhibitions, books, while publication of the contents of other journals can be negotiated on a mutual basis).

Letters to the Editor - Letters (not more than 500 words) provide a forum to express opinions about materials appearing in POR. Relevant references should be included (in case of citation of others'work). Usually, Letters are referred to the authors of commented papers and a response can also be published. Only one figure or table is permitted.

Copyright - Acceptance of the manuscript should indicate the acknowledgement of copyright release to the publisher (Arányi Lajos Foundation). The "Acknowledgement of Copyright Release" (accompanies the proof) signed by the corresponding author also implies that it has been agreed by all named authors, the manuscript contains unpublished work/results, and is not under consideration, in whole or in part, for publication elsewhere (in any language).

Advice on permissions - Owing to problems in gaining permission to reproduce and store material electronically, authors are requested to avoid the use of previously published material. Authors who do plan to reproduce previously published work MUST obtain permission from the copyright holder (usually the publisher), granting this permission. Copies of ALL permission letters should accompany the manuscript. If material from the author’s own published work is to be used, permission should still be obtained from the publisher. We require non-exclusive rights for all languages and also need the right to store and publish the material electronically. Necessary permissions MUST be obtained by the author. As a matter of courtesy, permission should also be requested from the author of the original material. A credit line giving the full source of the material should be included in the manuscript (e.g. in the legend for a figure or a footnote to a table).

Submission and review of manuscript

One original and two complete copies as well as the electronic version of manuscript should be submitted to the Editors-in-Chief:

László KOPPER, MD, PhD, DSc

1st Institute of Pathology and Experimental Cancer Research

Semmelweis University, Budapest

Üllôi út 26, Budapest, H-1085, Hungary

Tel: (36) (1) 317-0891

Fax: (36) (1) 317-0891

E-mail: zsulacz@upcmail.hu

József TÍMÁR, MD, PhD, DSc

Department of Tumor Progression

National Institute of Oncology

Semmelweis University, Budapest

Ráth Gy. u. 7-9, Budapest, H-1122, Hungary

Tel: (36) (1) 224-8786

Fax: (36) (1) 224-8706

E-mail: jtimar@oncol.hu

or to the Regional Editors:

Ian A CREE, MD, PhD (for UK)

Translational Oncology Research Centre

Department of Histopathology

Michael Darmady Laboratory

Queen Alexandra Hospital, Cosham

Portsmouth PO6 3LY

Phone: (44) (0) 2392-286-458

Fax: (44) (0) 2392-286-493.

E-mail: ian.cree@port.ac.uk

Mary JC HENDRIX, PhD (for USA)

President and Scientific Director

Children's Memorial Institute for Education and Research

Professor of Pediatrics

Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine

2300 Children's Plaza, Box 222

Chicago, Illinois 60614-3394

Phone: (1) 773-755-6528

Fax: (1) 773-755-6534

E-mail: mjchendrix@childrensmemorial.org

Having received the manuscript, an Acknowledgement Letter is sent to the corresponding author, including the manuscript number to be used for further communications. One of the editors assigns manuscripts to experts (two reviewers). Authors are encouraged to give names and addresses of persons outside their own institutions who might be considered as reviewers for their manuscript. Authors can also request to exclude particular reviewers. The review process is intended to be finished within 30 days. Four levels of evaluation are used for manuscripts: accepted; acceptable with minor revision; acceptable with major revision; rejected.

Revised manuscripts should be submitted with one original and the electronic version, including figures, within 3 months (otherwise the manuscript will be treated as a new submission). Revised manuscripts must be accompanied by a letter in which the authors respond to each issue raised by the reviewers (either indicating revision or responding to the reviewers' comments). Changes should be marked on one copy in red ink.

It is encouraged to submit the manuscripts in electronic format (on CD or by E-mail). Text and table(s) must be in MSWord. Electronic illustration (computer-generated figures) is also required (in MS.ppt or in common graphic format using high resolution). Submit illustrations in separate file(s). Preferred graphic softwares are: Adobe Illustrator; Aldus Freehand. To avoid heterogeneity, the preferred character font is Times. On the CD, indicate the title and authors as well as the operating system and word processing program need to generate the file. (The file name is the last name of the first author, followed by a period plus the three letter extension, POR). It is essential that CD(s) be accompanied by hard copy printout. The CD and the paper copy must be identical.

Organizing the manuscript

Title page - Title should be 15 words (or less), informative, without subtitles. Give full name and affiliation of each author and the name and mailing address, with fax and phone numbers of the author to whom correspondence and reprint requests are to be sent. Provide a running title of not more than 50 characters. Research support can also be indicated as a footnote to the title.

Abbreviations/acronyms - Avoid if it is possible. If not, list and define them. Use JBC format for standard scientific abbreviations.

Key words - List 3-6 key words (from Index Medicus whenever possible) for indexing.

Abstract/Summary - Do not exceed 250 words for Articles, Reports and Seminars, 150 words for Short Communications and Case Reports. State briefly the aims of the study, the main question(s) and approach(es) as well as the most important results and conclusions. The abstract should be informative without reference to the manuscript.

Introduction - Provides background data which stimulated and/or initiated the study. The most relevant results from the literature should be summarized.

Materials and Methods - Should be sufficiently detailed in order to be repeated by other researchers.

Results - All important results should be given here avoiding repetition of data in the text and in the tables/figures. "Significant" is used only when results are statistically significant (P-value or confidence interval).

Discussion - Serves to interpret the results without repeating. There is no need for separate discussion in Short Communications or Case Reports.

Reference - References must be numbered and arranged according to the first citation in the text. The following formats must be used:

for periodicals

1. Boom H, Bim GH, Bam D: Do not take yourself too seriously. Phantasy 1: 1-9, 1996

for books

2. Boom H: Do not take yourself too seriously. Phantasy Publ Co, NewYork-London-Budapest, 1996

for articles in books

3. Boom H: Do not take yourself too seriously. In: Who is who and why. (Eds: Bim GH and Bam D), Phantasy Publ Co, 1996, pp. 1-9

In the text references should be cited by numbers in superscript or – if it is absolutely necessary – by the author's name with numbers (also in superscript). E.g. Boom1 or Boom and Bam4 or Boom et al.5

"In press" can be used (in place of volume and page number) only for papers by the author(s) that have been accepted for publication.

Cite submitted papers and unpublished data in the text only (but only when it is unavoidable).

Tables, Figures and their Legends - Should stand alone, be self-explanatory. Tables should be numbered consecutively (e.g. Table 3). Type tables double-spaced with titles and legends (footnote), and headings for columns. Figures (photographs, drawings, graphics) should be numbered consecutively (Fig 3 – to separate different parts of the figure/panel use capital letters). The preferred character font is Times. For computer printouts use laser or inkjet printers, but not dot-matrix. Three sets of each of the figures should be submitted. The back of each figure should show the authors name, the figure number and "top" of the figure should be indicated. Photographs should be clear, glossy prints (do not send negatives or figures on disk). For artwork use black ink. High quality color photos and illustrations are accepted without charge. Each color material (three sets) should be accompanied by one high quality positive slide. Figures should be sized to fit one columns (8 cm) or two column (16.7 cm); the maximum plate size is 16.7 cm x 23.7 cm. Use separate page for Legend to Figure(s).

Typescript - Manuscript should be double spaced, pages numbered consecutively with new pages for each section (Title page is page 1).

POR uses Webster's New Collegiate Dictionary as the standard for spelling.

Units should satisfy International System of Units (SI).

Specific products and companies should be identified to ensure exact recognition.