Jules Massenet, the opera composer, made his breakthrough with sacred oratorios. And yet this young composer's ''Marie-Magdeleine'' seemed destined for oblivion until Massenet was invited to a dinner party that Pauline Viardot, the great singer, also attended. Viardot responded to excerpts from the piece with something along the lines of ''Marie-Magdeleine, c'est moi''; the work had its premiere in 1873, and Massenet went on to write more than 20 operas.

So the story goes in Massenet's memoirs. And this version of the anecdote, in James M. Keller's program note, made an eminently suitable introduction to the piece itself, performed last Tuesday evening as part of the ''Sacred Music in a Sacred Space'' series at the Church of St. Ignatius Loyola in Manhattan.

''Marie-Magdeleine'' is sweet, pat and despite its sober plot, extending through the Crucifixion, essentially good-natured. It opens with a languorous chorus, divided into sections to set the scene in sharp, clear vignettes, and ends with the full chorus and orchestra, backed up here by St. Ignatius's wonderful, rafter-stirring organ, repeatedly proclaiming ''Christ est ressuscité!'' on dominant-tonic chords.

This finale does not represent the peak of Massenet's musical inspiration, but there is still plenty of beautiful music in ''Marie-Magdeleine.'' Marie's first aria, for instance, ''Õ mes soeurs,'' was movingly sung by Susanne Mentzer, who brought a sweet simplicity to her fine interpretation of the role.

In the second act the composer used a kind of plainchant-tinged idiom to evoke the mood of early worship in a duet between Marie and Marthe (Ory Brown) and in a later scene with Jésus and his disciples.

Here the disciples, repeating the statements of Jésus (Roger Honeywell, a firm tenor), both simplified and clarified them in an unintentional musical allegory of the development of religious dogma. For his part Judas (Ian Greenlaw) spoke in wily ornamentation, a dead giveaway of his character.

This ''sacred space'' was an ideal setting for a drama too slender to work on the stage. There were some acoustic disadvantages: the church's reverberations seemed to cast an invisible net over the singers that dragged on their intonation and made some of them hard to hear.

It also blurred the orchestra, which tended toward imprecise entrances and a general mezzo-forte under Kent Tritle. Still, this was a nice way to hear this seldom played work.