The United Kingdom of Portugal, Africa and the Algarves (Portuguese: Reino Unido de Portugal, África e Algarves), commonly known as the Kingdom of Portugal (Portuguese: Reino de Portugal), is a pluricontinental monarchy formed by the elevation of the colonies of Angola and Mozambique to the status of kingdoms, and by the simultaneous union of those two new kingdoms with the Kingdom of Portugal and the Kingdom of the Algarves, constituting a single state consisting of four kingdoms. It is primarily situated in Europe and Africa, not counting the other territories which are part of the Portuguese Crown. It currently holds a population of at least 10 millions.

It is a constitutional monarchy with a bicameral parliamentary system of governance. Its capital city is Lisbon and the country has the 18th highest Social Progress in the world, putting it ahead of other Western European countries like France, Spain and Italy. It is a member of numerous international organizations, including the United Nations, the European Union, the Eurozone, OECD, NATO and the Community of Portuguese Language Countries.

While the Kingdom of Portugal was founded in 1139, the United Kingdom of Portugal, Africa and the Algarves was formed in 1908, shortly after the acclamation of King Manuel II, and continued to exist in the muggle world until the Revolution of 1910. However, the kingdom continued to exist in the wizarding world, and was not much affected by the revolution. Eventually, the monarchy was restored in the year of 1967 in the muggle world by the actions of Salazar, who was at the time the President of the Council of Ministers of Portugal, and effectively possessing the powers of the President of the Republic. It is the main state of the Portuguese Overseas Empire, joined by other states which had previously been colonies of the Portuguese colonial empire.

Much like the rest of the states and nations in Europe, Portugal was a target of Gellert Grindelwald's campaign, but much like the majority of Europe, it was mostly unaffected.

Magical beasts and beings[]

Portugal[]

Gerês is home to the Portuguese Long-Snout breed of dragon.

The Maruxinhos, a goblin-like creature native to the north of Portugal.

The Enchanted Moura, a siren-like creature famed for her beauty.

The Jans, a fairy-like sprit which is associated with weavers.

Africa[]

The Adamastor, a legendary giant made famous by "The Lusiads".

The Kishi, a demonic-like creature native to Angola with the face of a human and that of a hyena.

Appearances[]