JAPAN'S long-ruling conservative government has had one embarrassment after another. Two of its leaders have been forced out of office by scandal and troubles continue for the new prime minister, Toshiki Kaifu.

With public confidence declining rapidly, unless he can achieve a turnaround quickly the dominant Liberal Democratic Party (LDP) could self-destruct.

The party's latest blow came with the resignation of Kaifu's top staff aide, Tokuo Yamashita. He bowed out after it was revealed he had offered a large sum of cash to a woman with whom he had had a three-year affair.

The incident fits the pattern of a new morality that has brought drastic changes to Japanese politics. For years it has been common practice for top officials to accept large contributions from private firms. But Noboru Takeshita had to step down as prime minister in the wake of influence-peddling charges involving the Recruit Co. His successor, Sousuke Uno, was a victim of changing sexual mores.

In the past, many men in power in Japan have openly kept mistresses.

But when it was learned that Uno had paid geishas for sex, he was out in less than two months.

Actually a major defeat for the LDP in a July parliamentary election cinched Uno's departure. Searching for a genuine Mr. Clean, party elders chose Kaifu. Although his leadership ability was virtually untested, he had a clean reputation. (He had taken some Recruit donations, but passed the philandering test.) Only 58 and an eloquent orator, Kaifu was expected to give a fresh breeze to a party that had grown vastly out of favor with the public. A protege of a reform-minded former prime minister of the 1970s, Takeo Miki, Kaifu was off to a promising start until the Yamashita situation came to light.

He appointed two women to his cabinet, in recognition of the growing political activism of women in Japan. His party's strongest opposition, the Japan Socialist Party, is led by a woman, Takako Doi. Having engineered LDP's loss of control of the upper house of parliament in July, she is now pushing for early elections for the lower house.

As Kaifu prepares to leave for a trip to the United States and a meeting with President Bush, he is in a decidedly vulnerable position as head of a weakened government. How that affects U.S.-Japan relations will depend on his yet unproven abilities. BIOG: NAME:

Archive ID: 398686