Japan's Prime Minister Sosuke Uno is so shaken by fresh rumors of his involvement in a squalid sex scandal that he had to e put to bed by ruling party elders, a party aide said Wednesday.

An employee at the prime minister's residence and a party aide told Reuters Uno was put to bed Tuesday night by senior party members staying there to discuss the scandal."I thought he might have had a nervous breakdown last night," said the aide.

"The whole thing is he freaked out over how he's going to appear overseas at the (Paris) summit next month," he said.

"He's afraid those leaders won't even want to shake hands with him."

Uno, who has denied that he offered to resign Tuesday but was persuaded not to by Liberal Democratic Party elders, is due to attend a summit of the world's seven top industrialized nations in the French capital in July.

The public broadcasting network NHK and major newspapers said Uno made the offer after hearing of a magazine story about a new sex scandal.

Bernard Krisher, editor of the gossip magazine Focus, said he was called by Uno's office late Tuesday about a report it will publish this week of Uno's alleged affair with a 16-year-old apprentice geisha.

"His people denied the report, saying he couldn't possibly have been involved since it costs too much," Krisher told Reuters.

Uno's personal secretary told Reuters he was sure the reports were untrue. But he added: "You have to ask the prime minister himself about these reports."

Focus will also report in the same issue, to be published Friday, that a close Uno aide belonged to a prostitution club, Krisher said.

The secretary, who declined to be identified, denied the report.

Josei Jishin, a women's magazine, published a story Tuesday alleging Uno had an affair years ago with a bar hostess and he asked her to have an abortion.

Uno's secretary said: "Japan's mass media write all kinds of things. I haven't read it of course, but I'm sure it's not correct."

Local media said Liberal Democratic elders talked Uno out of resigning Tuesday night, arguing that it would mean domestic political chaos and a loss of international credibility.