For those that don't know what vaporwave is:

Wikipedia said:

Vaporwave is a microgenre of electronic music and an Internet meme that emerged in the early 2010s.[18] The style is defined by its appropriation of 1980s and 1990s mood music styles such as smooth jazz, elevator music, R&B, and lounge music, typically sampling or manipulating tracks via chopped and screwed techniques and other effects. Its surrounding subculture is sometimes associated with an ambiguous or satirical take on consumer capitalism and pop culture, and tends to be characterized by a nostalgic or surrealist engagement with the popular entertainment, technology and advertising of previous decades. It also incorporates early Internet imagery, late 1990s web design, glitch art, anime, 3D-rendered objects, and cyberpunk tropes in its cover artwork and music videos.

Originating as an ironic variant of chillwave, vaporwave was loosely derived from the experimental tendencies of the mid-2000s hypnagogic pop scene. The style was pioneered by producers such as James Ferraro, Daniel Lopatin, and Ramona Xavier, who each used various pseudonyms.[19] A circle of online producers were particularly inspired by Xavier's Floral Shoppe (2011), which established a blueprint for the genre. The movement subsequently built an audience on sites Last.fm, Reddit and 4chan while a flood of new acts, also operating under online pseudonyms, turned to Bandcamp for distribution. Following the wider exposure of vaporwave in 2012, a wealth of subgenres and offshoots emerged, such as future funk, mallsoft, and hardvapour.

For a brief history on the subject:

It seems like it is a rather interesting and unapproachable subject, but some of the tunes are just so addictive and others are can be downright funny.

For those open to new ideas, this is the perfect blend of absurdism in music and in art, and computer graphic design that makes for an interesting trip (while also simultaneously parodying the standard cpitalist institution of the contemporary music industry), this is Floral Shoppe by Macintosh Plus

this is the same album, but a youtube compiled it to a compilation of random bits of things throughout

Got any vaporwave tunes you want to share? Any thoughts on the genre, where it needs to go, etc.?