Nicknames: Egu, Egu-tan

Birthday: May 22, 1987

Age: 29

Birthplace: Ibaraki Prefecture, Japan

Occupation (s): Voice Actor, Singer

Hobbies:

Skills & Abilities: Basketball

Blood Type: B

Years Active: 2008 - present

Labels: 81 produce, Kiramune

Height: 187 cm

Weight:

Notable Credit (s):

Gosick as Kazuya Kujo

My Teen Romantic Comedy SNAFU as Hachiman Hikigaya

Love Stage! as Ichijo Ryoma

Ore Monogatari as Takeo Gōda

Seiyuu Facts from Tumblr:

~Eguchi Takuya said that Yonaga Tsubasa really knows how to dance

~Eguchi Takuya is weak against the "SALE" sign, he once overspent because the shop assistant kept telling him that he suits him and that he looks so cool. He afterwards declared that he purchased them only because they were on sale

~Egu declared himself as the "Prince of Laziness"

~Takuya and Takeo (his character in Ore Monogatari) both have a not-so-neat room. Takeo never asks Suna to help clean his room but Takuya always tries his best to have Zakki help him clean his room

~"You just don't understand Nobunaga, my place is messier than the last time you came over! The last time you came we stil have space to sit but now I wonder how we would fit. It's so terrible that I don't want to go home anymore" -Eguchi Takuya

~Egu gets turned on by Fukuyama Jun's voice (Kimura Ryouhei: Okay, stop, it's disgusting)

~Kimura Ryouhei and Yonaga Tsubasa are amazed by how Eguchi Takuya could devour plates of curry in the middle of the night and still stay skinny

~Takuya has a hard time to bend and get the drink that he bought from the vending machine because of his height (Japanese vending machine: 183cm ; Eguchi Takuya: 187cm)

~Little Eguchi bought a girl's comic magazine and told everyone that it was for his sister but actually it was for him because he like Kero Kero Chime

~Egu likes bright and cheerful girls, he also said that shy girls are better than someone who couldn't stop talking. But he said that he might doubt if that girl really loves him or not

~Takuya is called a "wasted seiyuu" because his height, long limbs and talent for sports are totally wasted in the seiyuu industry

~Egu's ideal date is watching DVDs at home and cuddling together. If they go out, he will be more than happy to go shopping with her and they could buy matchy clothes. Then after that, meal time! He thinks that it should definitely be curry. Curry and whisey!

~Takuya said the worst way to die is to be bitten by insects. Apparently, there are quite a lot of centipedes as long as gramophone records (probably if you hold it vertically across it) at his parents home. Takuya was also told numerous times by his grandmother that he could die if he got bitten by those centipedes

~When Trignal was formed, they all had black hair and their hair was mostly on the left side

~The pressure was intense during the first event of Trignal, Egu kept reading the script becuase he kept forgetting his lines. Ryouhei was like "Back of or I'll bite" scaring the hell out of Egu while Yonaga was watching the other two with a soft understanding smile on his face