Prince Ludwig of Bavaria, future Head of the House of Wittelsbach, will marry Sophie-Alexandra Evekink at the Theatinerkirche (St. Kajetan) in Munich tomorrow, to be followed by a Reception at Schloss Nymphenburg and a Ball at Schloss Schleißheim. We have already covered the Bavarian Royal Tiaras, so instead we are featuring the Bavarian Sapphire Floral Tiara belonging to Prince Ludwig’s branch of the family!

A spectacular Sapphire Floral Tiara composed of diamond flowers set with sapphire centres set within a diamond flower leaves, this heirloom likely originates from Princess Isabella Antonie of Croÿ, who married Prince Franz of Bavaria in 1912, and was photographed in a similar heirloom.

When Prince Franz and Princess Isabella’s eldest son, Prince Ludwig, married his first cousin, Princess Irmingard of Bavaria, the daughter of Crown Prince Rupprecht of Bavaria and Princess Antonia of Luxembourg, in 1950, she initially wore the Bavarian Lover’s Knot Tiara and later the Bavarian Sapphire Floral Tiara with a coordinating necklace.

Princess Irmingard was later pictured with her sisters wearing the Tiara for the Wedding Ball of Archduke Ferdinand of Austria and Countess Helen zu Toerring-Jettenbach in 1956, as well as at another Gala during the 1950s, with the coordinating sapphire necklace.

The Sapphire Floral Tiara was worn by Princess Beatrix, the wife of Princess Irmingard’s only son, Prince Luitpold, who wore it for the Wedding Ball of Duchess Elisabeth in Bayern and Daniel Terberger in 2004 as well as at the Wedding of Prince Manuel of Bavaria and Princess Anna of Sayn-Wittgenstein-Berleburg in 2006.

In 2009, the Sapphire Floral Tiara was worn by Prince Luitpold and Princess Beatrix’s younger daughter, Princess Alice, when she married Prince Lukas of Auersperg.

The following year, the Sapphire Floral Tiara was worn by the elder daughter, Princess Auguste, when she married Prince Ferdinand of Lippe-Weissenfeld, son of Prince Ferdinand of Lippe-Weissenfeld and Baroness Karoline von Feilitzsch, at Andechs Abbey.

More recently, the Sapphire Floral Tiara was worn by Henriette Gruse when she married Prince Heinrich Rudolf of Bavaria, the second son of Prince Luitpold and Princess Beatrix, at Andechs Abbey in 2017.

While the Sapphire Floral Tiara is the primary heirloom of this branch of the family, since Prince Ludwig will one day become the Duke of Bavaria and Head of the House of Wittelsbach, Sophie could also wear one of the spectacular Bavarian Royal Tiaras.

Sophie wore the Sapphire Floral Tiara for her Wedding to Prince Ludwig at the Theatinerkirche (St. Kajetan) in Munich, to be followed by a Reception at Schloss Nymphenburg and a Ball at Schloss Schleißheim

Share this: