Tommy Lawson said:

Disney Channel will be adding Braceface to its schedule beginning May 2 with a marathon. The weekend lineup on Disney Channel will also be changing as of May 7.

Braceface Marathon

Sunday, May 2, 2004

2:00 pm Braceface 1-01 "Brace Yourself"

2:30 pm Braceface 1-02 "Crushed"

3:00 pm Braceface 1-03 "5 Things…"

3:30 pm Braceface 1-04 "The Doctor is In"

4:00 pm Braceface 1-05 "The Meat of the Matter"

4:30 pm Braceface 1-06 "The Makeover"

5:00 pm Braceface 1-09 "The Divorce Thing"

5:30 pm Braceface 1-10 "Take That"

6:00 pm Braceface 1-11 "Twenty-Four Hours"

6:30 pm Braceface 1-13 "The Pickford Project"

9:45 pm Braceface 1-01 "Brace Yourself"

Disney Channel Lineup Change Starting May 7, 2004

Friday - Sunday

4:30 pm Disney's Lilo and Stitch: The Series

6:00 pm Braceface

12:00 am Braceface

Series Description

Featuring Alicia Silverstone as the voice of Sharon Spitz, “Braceface” is an award winning half-hour animated comedy chronicling the perils of adolescence. Sharon also finds herself dealing with mysterious and embarrassing mishaps caused by her new braces. No one ever said that growing up is easy, and no one is learning this faster than Sharon Spitz. Despite everything that comes her way, Sharon is still smiling…even if it is with a tin grin.

Voices: Alicia Silverstone as Sharon Spitz, Dan Petronijevic as Adam Spitz, Vince Corazza as Alden Jones, Peter Oldring as Conner Mackenzie, Michael Cera as Josh Spitz, Marnie McPhail as Maria Wong, Tamara Bernier as Mom, Katie Griffin as Nina Harper, Jordan Allison as Marvin.

Hmm, so the ABC Family series is finally airing on Disney Channel after a couple of years. It took them long enough, but finally one of the Fox Family shows made its way to the U.S. Disney Channel. Of course, the other big one from before the change to ABC Family, Totally Spies, airs on Cartoon Network now, but elsewhere in the world, ironically, it will be airing on Jetix.

Martianinvader said:

What if they buy Angela Anaconda? NOOOOOOOOO

Shhhh! They might hear you!

If you go back to that "Made in Japan" block Fox Family used to have, the next step might be .... "Flint the Time Detective" or *gasp* "Monster Rancher."

But the addition of Braceface sounds like an expansion of the girl-centric lineup (Proud, Lizzie [still], Raven and KP). That would make even more sense if W.I.T.C.H. were headed for DisChan as well. But it's going to be on ToonDis and Fam in the Jetix block.

SteveR said:

Shhhh! They might hear you!

If you go back to that "Made in Japan" block Fox Family used to have, the next step might be .... "Flint the Time Detective" or *gasp* "Monster Rancher."

Monster Rancher was not really that bad, not that good either, but at least it had a main villian that was a actual threat to the good guys and NOT comic relief like Pokemon's Team Rocket. And some of the good guys on Monster Rancher were not that corny.

I'll take Monster Rancher over Pokemon any day of the week.

crazy Toon Logic here ..

Kyl416 said:

Doesn't Nickelodeon air that now?

Indeed they do kyl416, but that was more for filler until nick could get their new shows in place.. but yes they do run from time to time..but then my questions is Nickelodeon and Disney still together (weren't they at one time together?) so refering back to Martianinvader's comment, they might as well have accquired Angela Annaconda.. after all it's crazy toon logic!