About This Film

The Hobbit was produced by Arthur Rankin Jr and Jules Bass of Rankin/Bass Productions. They may sound familiar for they are the ones who directed made for TV Christmas specials such as Rudolph The Red Nose Reindeer and Santa Claus Is Coming to Town. The screenplay was written by Romeo Muller who also wrote the Christmas special screenplays for Rankin/Bass. At the time, the copyright for The Hobbit was still in the public domain so the two were able to make the film without any issues. The animation for The Hobbit was done by Topcraft, an animation studio from Japan who worked with Rankin/Bass on Twas the Night Before Christmas and The Last Unicorn. The visual style of the film was inspired by illustrator Arthur Rackman.

The film was released on NBC on Sunday November 27th 1977. Romeo Muller won a Peabody Award for the teleplay in 1978. It was also nominated again in 1978 for a Hugo Award for Best Dramatic Presentation but lost to Star Wars. Criticism came from critics who said the film was confusing for those who did not read the book, the uncommon animation style, and even some Tolkien fans who thought the family-fun aspect took away from the typical Tolkien style. Despite the criticism, Arthur Rankin Jr was proud of The Hobbit, stating that the simple plot was easy for adaptation.

The Plot and The Dudes Thoughts

The plot of the film is identical to the original story. Bilbo Baggins, a Hobbit from the Shire, becomes part of a epic adventure alongside Gandalf the Wizard and thirteen Dwarves to reclaim stolen gold from the Dragon Smaug. During his quest, Bilbo faces off against Trolls, Goblins, Giant Spiders and a has a game of riddles with Gollum where he finds the One Ring. Despite some changes from the orginal story for time length, The Hobbit is a well done film. Its paced and adapted well for a animated feature. For those looking for the epic adventure, you might try reading the book or watching the Peter Jackson Hobbit trilogy (2012-2014) but for those looking for a fun look at the world of Middle-Earth then defiantly check out this film. I’m The Dude and remember it’s just my opinion man.