Recognized by the Guinness World Records as the ‘World’s Biggest Club’, Privilege Club in Ibiza. Should we say more? We believe nothing can prepare you well enough for what you’re facing with Privilege. You have to see it to believe it. Privilege Ibiza has become famous for providing spectacular and grandiose parties, like no other can, in the main room that feels like an aircraft hangar and a swimming pool at its center.

This Club smashes down any existing boundaries you may already have for the nightlife clubbing experience. Privilege for sure will amaze you as it has amazed all its guests with its swimming pool, Manumission and its sex shows and of course the lovely views of the sunrise in the Vista Club.

Privilege provides clubbing on an unprecedented scale for parties and is a once in a lifetime experience. If you didn’t have Ibiza in your mind as your next trip, now you should.

Privilege Club Ibiza Information

Address

The Privilege’s Address is Urbanización San Rafael, s/n, 07816 Sant Antoni de Portmany, Islas Baleares. It is reachable from San Antonio, Playa D’en Bossa or Ibiza Town via taxi or disco buses. And the views the club offers are breathtaking.

Privilege Ibiza Tickets & Entry Fee

The tickets and entry prices at Privilege vary between €35 and €50. They depend on the type of event. Also if it’s your first time in Privilege, prepare to get lost as the venue is enormous. But don’t worry, this is a great opportunity to make new friends.

Guestlist

Even though the Privilege has a high capacity, it is high in demand and the spots tend to sell very quickly. We recommend you book early and contact us. There is no official Guestlist for the venue but contact Club Bookers through WhatsApp and Social media and we will make sure to book your spot in the Privilege Ibiza. For a special treatment and experience, we recommend the Privilege Ibiza Table Booking.

Privilege Ibiza Table Booking

Considering the high capacity of the club, we recommend using the Privilege Table Booking to fully live the unique nightlife clubbing experience that Privilege offers. The prices vary on the number of people, type of venue, etc., and can start from €200 – €250 per person. For specific information on Privilege Ibiza Table Booking or Privilege Ibiza Bottle Service contact Club Bookers now.

Dress Code