On September 24, 1973 I began working as the News Director (and Farm Director) at CKSW Radio in Swift Current, Saskatchewan. My experience was a couple of years as a volunteer DJ with college radio stations. My experience with news was as a consumer. I knew beans about dryland agriculture or ranching. I received a crash course in a lot of subjects, thanks to the general manager, Wilf Gilbey, who hired me, and Frank Matovich, the Sports Director. I also learned a lot from Art Wallman, the legendary country music host who had an outsized reputation among country musicians and DJs across North America, all from his base in little Swift Current. One of the things I learned was the importance of the adage, Show, don't tell. I think that means trying to create word pictures for your listeners. One bizarre example I recall - since we would broadcast whatever the sales manager could sell - was a half-hour broadcast of a horticultural show staged by a local group. I knew almost nothing about flowers or plants, but one of the show organizers liked to talk, so I asked lots of questions. In the Fall of 1975, with the staton under new ownerships and with a larger budget, I hired a young lady, Bev Lockhart, from the broadcast diploma program at Red River College, to work news and sports in the newsroom. A year later she became the first female to do a play-by-play broadcast of a hockey game, of the Swift Current Broncos in the Western Canada Hockey League. I've lost track of a lot of folks I worked with, and kept in touch with a few. I was honoured to be one of four colleagues asked to deliver some comments about Art Wallman at a memorial for him at the Swift Current Legion Hall, a few weeks after he died. I could go on. Broadcasters - and radio broadcasters in particular, I think - have no end of stories to make you laugh til you cry. I'll just sum up by observing that the first time I saw WKRP in Cincinnati I thought, "Yes, that is exactly how it is!" Will there be a turkey drop this Thanksgiving?