GRAND RAPIDS, Mich. - The Mavericks seemed to have a lot in common with fall foliage Wednesday night.

Like the burnt orange and crimson leaves peppering the western Michigan countryside, they were destined to bite the dust.

That's what happens when you sit your three top players, much to the disappointment of a near-sellout crowd at Van Andel Arena. Winning pretty much blows away in the wind, right?

Not exactly, in this case. The Mavericks played with far more zip than they had during most of the preseason and rumbled past the Detroit Pistons, 101-96, to bump their exhibition record to 2-3.

Shawn Marion made sure the shorthanded Mavericks got off to a good start, then gave way to sharp-shooting Steve Novak, who escorted them to a nice win against many of the Pistons' regulars.

With Dirk Nowitzki, Jason Kidd and Caron Butler taking the night off, Marion threw in 10 first-quarter points to show he's ready to claim a major role in the regular season - regardless of what that role might be.

"We were just having fun and playing off each other," Marion said. "Sometimes it comes to you like that."

The Mavericks never allowed the Pistons to make any significant runs, mainly because Novak and rookie Dominique Jones chewed up the Detroit defense. Jones had 15 points and Novak did what he does best: shoot. He nailed six 3-pointers and finished with 22 points in 28 minutes.

"He can flat-out shoot the ball," coach Rick Carlisle said.

Novak is in a battle to make the team with Brian Cardinal, Dee Brown and Adam Haluska.

"When you're out there for four minutes, you sometimes feel like you have to do everything in those four minutes," Novak said. "So playing longer minutes helped."

Carlisle, who coached Detroit for two seasons, took part in a memorable exhibition in Grand Rapids.

"I like it because you get enthusiastic crowds and a building full of people who don't get an opportunity to see NBA basketball in person a lot," he said. "My first year in Detroit, we played Washington here and it was right at the beginning of Michael Jordan's comeback and this place was jammed. It was like a playoff atmosphere."

Dirk could make pitch: Could Dirk Nowitzki throw out the first pitch at Saturday's Yankees-Rangers ALCS game in Arlington?

The idea was pitched to the Rangers on Wednesday, but the team may not have final say on who gets to throw out the ceremonial pitch.

Nowitzki decided to have a little fun with the idea.

"I'm not big-time enough for them," he said.

Nowitzki, by the way, has become a big Cliff Lee fan, saying: "I said Cliff Lee was going to take us home, and Cliff Lee took us home."

Different rookie scale: Dominique Jones should count his blessings that he's not a football player.

The Mavericks' rookie is in charge of buying the Popeye's chicken before every road trip. Jones dutifully has to stop and shell out somewhere between $70 and $200 for a spread of chicken to feed his teammates on the plane.

That's a far cry from Cowboys' rookie Dez Bryant, who recently plunked out almost $55,000 for a night out with his teammates at a ritzy steakhouse.

"No way I could do that," Jones said.