LUCILLE Ball was a star in the 1950's thanks to her hit sitcom I Love Lucy, which is still loved and enjoyed today.

In 2021, Ball will make her comeback to the screen, so to speak, in the biographical drama film Being the Ricardos, which details the relationship between the late Ball and her first husband Desi Arnaz.

Who was Lucille Ball and when did she die?

Born August 6, 1911, Ball was known as an American actress, comedian, model, studio executive, and producer.

Over the years, she starred in countless shows, her most famous being I Love Lucy, The Lucy Show, Here's Lucy, and Life with Lucy.

Ball started her career in 1933 and appeared in over 120 productions prior to her death.

The star passed away on April 26, 1989, at the age of 77 after suffering from a ruptured aorta following open-heart surgery.

Who was Lucille Ball's husband?

Throughout the course of her life, the star was married twice.

From 1940 to 1960, Ball was married to the I Love Lucy producer Desi Arnaz Sr., who was known professional as a Cuban-American actor, musician, bandleader, comedian and film and television producer.

Over the years, Arnaz was known for his work with I Love Lucy, The Long, Long Trailer and Holiday in Havanna.

From 1966 to 1969, Arnaz also famously served as the executive producer on 80 episode of Star Trek: The Original Series.

Arnaz later died on December 2, 1986, at the age of 69 from lung cancer.

While they were together, Ball and Arnaz Sr. welcomed two children together, Lucie Arnaz, 70, and Desi Arnaz Jr., 68.

In October 2020, Ball's son suffered the loss of his daughter, Desiree, who passed away at the age of 31 following a battle with stage 4 breast cancer.

Following her divorce from Arnaz, Ball then remarried Gary Morton, who was known as an American stand-up comedian.

Morton and Ball were married from 1961 up until her death in 1989.

On March 30, 1999, Morton then passed away after a battle with lung cancer, the same disease that took Ball's first husband almost a decade prior.

What is Being the Ricardos and when does it come out?

Being the Ricardos is a new film written and directed by Aaron Sorkin.

The upcoming drama takes a look at the life of Ball and Arnaz, who also worked on I Love Lucy back in the day.

The movie is scheduled to be released in theaters on December 10, 2021, and will feature award-winning actress Nicole Kidman as the iconic role of Ball.

Following the release of the trailer, Ball's daughter, Lucie Arnaz, took to Instagram to comment on Kidman's portrayal, saying that she can see that Kidman "cared very deeply about this part."

"Nicole Kidman became my mother's soul. She crawled into her head," Arnaz wrote. "I don't know how you do that. She cared very deeply about this part. It shows."

Following the release in theaters, the film will then be added on Amazon Prime on December 21.