Shuttle Information

The Muir Woods Shuttle brings visitors from off-site locations to the park and back. The shuttle serves Larkspur Landing on weekends and holidays and the Sausalito Ferry Terminal on select summer weekdays. The tickets are round-trip. Visitors booking shuttle reservations do not need a parking reservation. Shuttle tickets are $3.75 per adult, and children 15 and younger ride free. Please review additional information about the Muir Woods Shuttle below.

There is NO cell phone service or WiFi at or around Muir Woods National Monument. Download your parking reservation or shuttle ticket in advance.

Larkspur Landing

101 E Sir Francis Drake Blvd, Larkspur, CA 94939

Please arrive 15 minutes before your scheduled departure time.

Free Parking Available

Recommended for visitors driving to a shuttle stop. Parking reservations are not needed.

Transit Connections

Marin Transit: Route 17, Route 29, Route 228

Larkspur Ferry

SMART

Sausalito

Bay & Bridgeway, Sausalito, CA 94965

For directions to Bay & Bridgeway CLICK HERE

Please arrive 15 minutes before your scheduled departure time.

No Parking Available

Recommended for visitors taking the Sausalito Ferry from San Francisco.

Transit Connections

Marin Transit: Route 17, Route 61

Golden Gate Transit: Route 130

Golden Gate Ferry

Blue & Gold Fleet

Operating Days and Times

The shuttle runs on weekends and holidays from early spring through October as well as select summer weekdays in June through August. Reservations are required for both departure and return shuttle rides. The last shuttle departure time varies by season.

Accessibility

Wheelchair and mobility device accommodations are made via a separate on-call ADA compliant van. In order to ensure the smoothest experience riders must book the ADA shuttle reservation in advance.

Bikes

Bikes are not allowed on or inside the buses or in Muir Woods.

Dogs

Service dogs, as recognized by the Americans with Disabilities Act are allowed in Muir Woods and on the shuttle. All other dogs and pets are not allowed on the shuttle or in Muir Woods.