Park your car and experience Niagara’s iconic landscape, rich history and the thriving culture and communities along the scenic Niagara River with the ease and convenience of a hop-on/hop-off shuttle. Enjoy a day of discovery as you connect to 21 destination sites along the 14-mile route from the “Falls to the Fort.”

We also offer the Niagara Falls-Lockport express, connecting the two cities on weekends with multiple departure times daily Friday through Sunday. In Lockport, the Lockport Loop route brings you to everything the city has to offer.

Complimentary wi-fi provided on the shuttle connects to the Discover Niagara app that provides the places, communities and stories you can experience while visiting Niagara.

Discover Lockport

There is plenty to see and do in the Lock City! You can take a shuttle from our Niagara Falls USA Official Visitor Center stop to the Erie Canal Discovery Center and take in the the sights of the historic Erie Canal and Flight of Five locks. Saturday mornings you can explore the weekly Lockport Community Market offering crafts and the freshest produce Niagara County has to offer.

The Lockport Loop

In addition to our Niagara Falls-Lockport Express route, which goes back and forth several times a day Friday through Sunday, our Lockport Loop operates in a loop around Lockport bringing you to eight different sites.

The Lockport Loop visits:

Erie Canal Discovery Center

Lockport Cave & Niagara Zipper

Cornerstone CFCU Arena

Lockport Locks & Erie Canal Cruises

Wide Waters Marina

Theatre District

Erie Canalway Trail

Niagara County Historical Society

Now Servicing Four Mile Creek

We've added a dedicated feeder router this year that connects Four Mile Creek State Park and Campground to Old Fort Niagara and our Youngstown Center stop. From there you can connect to our Falls to Fort route and explore 22 destinations between there and Niagara Falls State Park. Leave your RV hooked up! We'll be your ride.

During their hours of operation, the shuttle will also stop at Bandana's and Sanger Farms.