General Info:

The Unilever NYC Shuttle, operated by Pegasus, provides transportation for Unilever Employees, Contractors, and Interns from New York City and Hoboken to Englewood Cliffs, NJ.

Please send an email to june.kuruc@unilever.com for any questions or concerns.

Please follow the guidelines below while riding the shuttle.

Seat belt usage is required by New Jersey state law.

Riders are to remain seated with seatbelts on until the shuttle has come to a full stop.

Walking in the aisle will be strictly prohibited when the bus is in motion.

The shuttle front passenger seat will be deemed the “Bus Marshall” position.

a. Role responsibilities:

i. Ensure all passengers are seated and wearing seat belts prior to the driver taking off.

ii. Ensure all passengers remain seated while vehicle is in motion.

Shuttle drivers will ensure shuttle riders have properly disembarked prior to the vehicle moving. Passengers shall clear the vehicle & close the door after disembarking the shuttle.

Passengers should remain vigilant and follow the above safety rules – safety is everyone’s responsibility

Shuttle drivers are to adhere to Unilever’s Motor On = Mobile Off (MoMo) policy and it forbids the use of a mobile device while operating a vehicle.

Represent Unilever by being polite with drivers, dispatchers, and other riders.

Please refrain from holding personal calls while riding the shuttle. If you must take a work call, please be considerate of other passengers.

Report unsafe conditions and concerns related to payroll to Work Place Services (WPS) or via the Contact Us form on this site.

Shuttle drivers are empowered to enforce all safety rules and will notify Unilever of any violations – this will be taken to HR and the individual’s line manager.

Note: Violations of these rules may result in immediate removal from the shuttle and future use of this benefit.

WIFI Password: ulshuttle

Please be at the designated shuttle stop location before the scheduled pick-up.

If you should have any trouble please contact Pegasus at 201-867-1677, hit option 2 and you should be put through directly to a dispatcher.

Shuttle App Information:

In order to ride the shuttle, you will need to reserve your seat through the Pegasus Shuttle App. To find the app, search Pegasus Shuttle in the App Store on either iPhone or Android.