Joining us today is award-winning author Na'ima B. Robert. Na’ima is the author of the best seller “From My SIsters Lips” and founding editor of 'SISTERS', the magazine for fabulous Muslim women. Na’ima shares her story of her early stages of writing up to how she became a coach offering world class writing courses that focus on helping others develop their writing skills. She shares tips on how to release mindset and be a successful writer and touches on how to overcome fear by believing and valuing ourselves as well as her opinions on publishing options.

Na’ima’s ride and journey in writing various genres of books in reflection to who she is.

Entering entrepreneurship by teaching what she knows how to do best.

Naima’s world class teaching how to write services

Investing in ourselves

Being supportive and helping one another.

Honoring the uniqueness of ourselves gives us value and lifts us up

The “helping each other spirit”

Advice for beginners starting to write

Mindset and fear free courses

Self publishing or Traditional Publishing? How?

Why your book can be rejected by publishers

Living with purpose and joy and empowering ourselves

Upcoming projects:

Unleash Your Message coaching programme (starts 18th March)

Own Your Voice Challenge

Challenge yourself to write for 10 minutes a day for 10 days (8-18th April)

Be the Hero Growth Programme

coaching.muslimahwriters.com

Connect with Na’ima

http://naimabrobert.co

Facebook

Instagram

Twitter

In a series of conversations, host Fousia Abdullahi shares stories of Muslim women from all over the world. You'll hear the stories of interesting, accomplished, and amazing Muslim women authors, bloggers, entrepreneurs, nutritionists, and so many more. These stories will give you the tools you need not only to be inspired but to give you tangible steps toward personal and professional growth and development. We may take different paths, with different obstacles we each have to overcome, but our voices, successes, and individual stories are something to CELEBRATE and share.