Like all our coaches James also works with the British Association of Snowsports Instructors as a trainer which he has done since the age of 23. He assesses instructors working towards any level of the BASI system. In this role, where he refines the teaching techniques of others and coaches to a very high technical level, he is able to reflect continuously on his own instructing and develop new innovative teaching ideas to then use in all of his own sessions.

James has skied and worked in the Southern Hemisphere in Treble Cone, New Zealand, as well as across the Alps in Courmayeur (Italy), Verbier (Switzerland) and Megeve and Chamonix before settling in Val d’Isere, for his 15th winter season.

When not on the slopes, James spends the summers working as a brand ambassador with Jaguar-Land Rover and working with the team at ICE to prepare everything for the next winter in Val d’Isere. In his free time, he loves to cycle, play tennis and spend as much time as possible with his family in Séez where he has just become a Dad to his first son George!

Rupert competes on the FIS Masters World Cup and won the British Masters Championships in Giant Slalom in 2009 and Slalom in 2010

He was involved with the rewriting of the BASI Technical Manual, drawing on considerable experience and technical knowledge of the sport.

Outside of skiing, Rupert is a keen kitesurfer, cyclist and sailor. He campaigned a 49er on the Sailing World Cup and at best had a world ranking of 133 ISAF World Cup Tour and was the first person to complete a land to land crossing of the Irish Sea by kitesurf (c.f www.thecrossing.org.uk).

Rupert is also managing director of Saturn Innovation Ltd, web design and multimedia company. Saturn Innovation are one of the biggest names on the marketing side of the ski industry having designed many skiing related websites, including this one and www.mountain-masters.com. To find out more about Saturn Innovation go to www.saturninnovation.com

Mark started skiing at the age of four when living in Italy and used to race to a high level until the age of seventeen. Mark has worked as a ski teacher for the last 20 years and has worked all over Europe as well as Australia. He has been based in Val d'lsere for the last 18 years.

Off the slopes, Mark was the technical editor of Ski and Board Magazine for many years and was responsible for writing the technical articles on how to improve your skiing and also reviewing the equipment for the forthcoming season. There are few people that know more than Mark about ski technique and equipment. He is on hand to provide advice throughout the course on equipment and set up.

For the past 11 years he has been based in Val d'Isere, firstly working for New Generation Ski & Snowboard School, but also with different race clubs and organisations like the British Children's Team, The Telegraph Ski and Board Magazine, Podium (Instructor Race Training Programme) and the British Disabled Snowsports Team as an assistant coach. Dougie likes to ski the whole mountain in all styles, from introducing the sport to beginners, to ski touring into the vast off piste of Val d'Isere and Tignes. Working with different types of students really helps to keep things fresh and makes every session different for him.

In his free time during the winter, he enjoys ski touring, and searching for different ski lines and powder snow. If the conditions don’t suit off piste, he’ll be found training his technical abilities on the piste, in the park, or through the moguls. During the summer months, Dougie spends as much free time as possible on his mountain bike and really enjoys spending time in the great outdoors.