It took about five minutes of watching Max Mirnyi on a court for Nick Bollettieri to offer the tall, lanky youngster from Belarus a scholarship to his famed tennis academy in Bradenton.

It probably took less time than that for the then 14-year-old Mirnyi to accept.

“I had no idea what I was going into,” Mirnyi said this week about his introduction to the gulf coast of Florida in 1992. “I just wanted to play tennis and I was happy that Nick saw the potential in me.”

Potential turned into production. And production turned into a long and successful career for the player known throughout the pro tour as “The Beast.”

That career came to an end a couple weeks ago when The Beast from Belarus, now 41, announced that he is packing up his tennis racket to spend more time with his wife, Ksenia, and their four children at their Sarasota home.

“It was about time,” Mirnyi said. “I am aging up and feeling good about myself and wanted to end it on a high note. I had a relatively satisfactory year, winning two titles, and I felt like it was the right time to move on and spend time with the family.”

That Beast nickname fits both his size (6-foot-5, 205 pounds) and aggressive style of play but belied the personality of a player who, over the years, became known as one of the nicest guys in the professional game.

“I am happy if that is the perception,” said Mirnyi, who is not completely comfortable talking about himself. “I just live my life and go about the business of life as I was brought up. I am happy my parents had an important influence on my upbringing.”

In 22 years in professional tennis, the man went about the business of being one of the best doubles players of his generation. Cornered into capsulizing his career into a couple of top moments, Murnyi deferred, choosing to say simply, “The fact that I played a healthy and successful career without interruption is something I am proud of and I felt it was a pretty fruitful, long and colorful career for me.”

And plenty prosperous for a player who rose to the No. 1 ranking in doubles and also had some success in singles early in his career.

While there are too many highlights for Mirnyi to choose from, a few moments and numbers stand out.

Mirnyi won 1,024 combined singles and doubles matches and 53 titles.

He reached a ranking of No. 18 in singles and had 16 wins over top 10 opponents, including beating Roger Federer to reach the quarterfinals of the U.S. Open before losing to Andre Agassi.

But it was in doubles where Mirnyi made his mark. He earned the No. 1 ranking for the first time in 2003 and would spend 57 weeks there. He ends his career with 20 consecutive years ranked in the top 100.

He won six Grand Slam men’s doubles titles and four more in mixed doubles.

One highlight Mirnyi does willingly embrace is serving as flag bearer for Belarus in the 2012 Olympic Games in London, where he also won a gold medal in mixed doubles, teaming with Victoria Azarenka.

His biography on the ATP Tour site is peppered with accomplishments off the court. Along the way, Mirnyi earned an international law degree at Belarus State University in 2008, had a stamp issued in his likeness and has served as UNICEF Good Will Ambassador for Belarus since 2006.

In the statement announcing his retirement, Mirnyi said, “It was a very difficult choice for me to make as tennis has been my life ever since I can remember. I was fortunate to achieve far beyond what a little boy from Minsk, Belarus, could have dreamed of.”

Great job Max on a beast of a career.

Senior success

There was another success on the tennis scene recently when the Longboat Key Senior Clay Courts Super Catt II tournament was held Nov. 27-Dec. 2.

This was the 16th year for the event and it keeps getting bigger and better.

The 2018 edition had a record 333 entries from 30 states, D.C. and Canada for a tournament that has annually offered singles and doubles in age groups from 55-over through 80-over. Just two years ago the entry number was 280.

This year an 85-over age group was added. In all, there were 30 players over the age of 80 competing.

Over the years it has grown from a tournament held at the LBK Public Tennis Center courts to an event that is now played at several sites throughout Longboat Key. It is truly a Key-wide event, according to tournament director Robert McGrath.