Jerry Seinfeld’s Bee Movie was destined to be one of the most entertaining and hilarious films ever created. The film featured itself with an absurd and intriguing plot, and remains a top-notch product of Seinfeld’s humor, as he showcased his wit with clever wordplay. As a result, the animated film was loved by its young and old audiences.

Advertisement

To add to the film’s success, it became a never-ending meme factory. While the animated film was meant to be a family-friendly movie, it featured several erotic undertones when Barry B. Benson and Vanessa Bloome were shown together. Jerry Seinfeld realized his mistake, but but he was too proud with his work, hence, he decided to give a half-baked apology which might not resonate well with some of its viewers.

Jerry Seinfeld Gives a Lukewarm Apology for Having “S**ual Undertones” in His Bee Movie

Jerry Seinfeld’s Bee Movie remains one of the most bizarre and crazy films that is a meme factory. The plot revolves around Barry B. Benson, a bee, who has recently graduated from his college and is going to dedicate his life to being a honey manufacturer. However, when Barry B. Benson left the hive, he encountered Vanessa Bloome, a florist, and developed a relationship with her.

Advertisement

The plot gets bizarre from their relationship because Seinfeld decided to add some inappropriate jokes and moments in the film, which would be wrong for children to see. The Comedian actor was present during the Duke Commencement Address, where he apologized for the “s**ual undertones“ presented in the film. He said,

“I made a cartoon movie about bees you may have watched as a child,” he said. “If any of you felt slightly uncomfortable about the sexual undertones in the relationship between Barry the bee and Vanessa, the florist who saves his life, I would like to apologize for that now.”

However, the apology soon turned shallow because despite acknowledging the problem, he will keep things as it is, as he continued, “I may not have calibrated that perfectly, but I would not change it.”

To support his point Jerry Seinfeld said,

Advertisement

“The slightly uncomfortable feeling of awkward humor is OK. It’s not something you need to fix.”

Moreover, he admires the modern generation because of their “ambitions to create a more just and inclusive society.” He advised the graduating class not to lose their sense of humor because “not a lot of life makes sense for you to be able to survive it without humor.”

The actor stands proud of his creation as he believes that it was the right thing to add to his film, as it went perfectly with the premise of the film.

Spike Feresten Opens Up About The Bee Movie Creating Unforeseen Controversy

During an exclusive interview with The Statesman, Spike Feresten, the writer of the 2007 film, shared some creative insights that went into the production of the film. The writer made a remark on Barry the Bee’s and Vanessa Bloome’s relationship saying, “It’s weird stuff, I have to be honest.”

Advertisement

The writer shared that the team recognized the importance of removing romantic elements and emphasizing a friendship dynamic, due to the film having elements of “Beestiality.” Feresten said,

“Often we would lose sight of those characters in the room. They would just be Barry and Vanessa, and we would write this dialogue for Barry and Vanessa, and read it over and have to remind ourselves, well, this is a tiny bee saying this, and the tiny bee is fighting with her boyfriend, so let’s dial it back to a friend, and make it less romantic because it’s getting weird.”

Though Bee Movie created controversy due to the romantic dynamics presented in the film, as Seinfeld is proud of his mistake, and his unapologetic attitude towards the film, makes it something that the fans can never lose sight of it.

Bee Movie can be rented on Apple TV.