Robert Sheckley, who has died aged 77, was a witty and highly inventive writer of science fiction described by Kingsley Amis in New Maps of Hell as the field's "premier gadfly"; his mordant satires of the 1950s and 1960s were a considerable influence on Douglas Adams, author of The Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy.

Sheckley's best stories were produced in a prolific period in the early 1950s, often described as the "Golden Age" of sf, and were first published, for the most part, in the magazines Galaxy and the Magazine of Fantasy and Science Fiction.

He had the essential quality of ingenuity which marked him out as the equal of contemporaries such as CM Kornbluth and Frederik Pohl. Like them, he was concerned to satirise the consumerist society of America in the Eisenhower years, though his first novel, Immortality, Inc (1959), when compared with Kornbluth and Pohl's Space Merchants, demonstrated that his interests extended to the metaphysical as well.

Robert Sheckley was born on July 16 1928 in New York and grew up at Maplewood, New Jersey. He served with the US Army in Korea before attending New York University.

He had already started writing stories by the time he graduated in 1951. In his early work, Sheckley was prolific even by the remarkably industrious standards of sf.

He wrote in all some 15 novels and 400 stories, but - as the Encyclopedia of Science Fiction put it, when dividing his work into three periods, the first two being short stories (1950s) and novels (1960s) - "in the third period he has rested".

In fact, Sheckley never entirely gave up writing, but almost all his notable work dated from before the mid-1970s.

His short stories were almost immediately fixtures in anthologies: Seventh Victim, a wonderful story of people as hunters and hunted, was a model of the form, and was later filmed as The Tenth Victim in 1965, with Marcello Mastroianni and Ursula Andress (in a murderous bikini-centred role later memorably sent up in Austin Powers).

Sheckley's novels were generally thought rather less successful than his short stories, though they too received attention from filmmakers. Immortality, Inc became Freejack (1993), a pedestrian sf movie notable chiefly for Mick Jagger's wooden acting.

The Status Civilisation (1960) owed much to Erewhon in its inversion of societal norms, while Mindswap (1966) and Options (1975) played with reality and perception.

Sheckley's innate distrust of appearances, often verging on paranoia, was well demonstrated in these books, though the travails of his characters were usually sweetened by the ludicrous nature of the frustrations placed in their way.

The Alchemical Marriage of Alistair Crompton (1978), where his indebtedness to Lewis Carroll was most evident, marked the last of his best work, though he published sporadically (often with Roger Zelazny) until his death, and was fiction editor of the magazine Omni in the early 1980s.