Wipro Ltd. history, profile and corporate video

Wipro Ltd. is a global information technology, consulting and outsourcing company. It offers financial, retail, transportation, manufacturing, healthcare, energy and utilities, technology, telecom and media services. The company also offers business process outsourcing, business technology and enterprise application, infrastructure management, testing, product engineering, engineering design and product support services. It operates through the following segments: Information Technology Services and Information Technology Products. The Information Technology Services segment provides information technology and information technology-enabled services, which include information technology consulting, custom application design and development, re-engineering and maintenance, systems integration, package implementation, technology infrastructure and business process outsourcing and research and development services in the areas of hardware and software design. The Information Technology Products segment provides information technology products, which include computing, storage, networking, security and software products. Wipro was founded on December 29, 1945, and is headquartered in Bangalore, India.“

“Wipro History

Milestones

Wipro, one of the world’s most trusted brands, is a name with a long history. Here’s a snapshot of our journey to date:

Established in 1945 as Western India Vegetable Products Limited in Amalner, Maharashtra

IPO for capital in February 1946

Ventured into the fledgling IT industry in 1981

Established software products and exports subsidiary, Wipro Systems Ltd. in 1983

Pioneers in marketing indigenous Personal Computers in 1985

Established a Joint venture with GE in 1989

Entered IT services in the 1990s – we were among the pioneers in developing the ODC (Offshore Development Center) concept

Software business assessed at SEI-CMM Level 5 in 1998

Listed on NYSE in 2000 (NYSE:WIT)

The first company in the world to be assessed at PCMM Level 5 in 2001

Entered the BPO business in 2002

Entered the Eco-energy business in 2008″

*Information from Forbes.com and Wipro.com