Adam Matthew Digital is delighted to announce today that University of Exeter has become the first European university to purchase its entire digital primary source portfolio of over 100 modules.

The University, a long-time supporter of AM Digital, made its first digital purchase in 2008, and this week has completed its portfolio, with the addition of all new content publishing in 2019, as well as the entire suite of digitised microfilm.

Oliver Stacy, Head of International Sales at AM Digital commented: We are delighted to welcome the University of Exeter to the select group of institutions around the world that have access to the entire Adam Matthew Digital portfolio. This is a landmark moment, opening up a vast body of unique, globally sourced primary source content to an important new academic audience.

Exeter's faculty and students can now access all content from the award-winning publisher, including key collections publishing this year: Shakespeare's Globe Archive; Food and Drink in History; and Sex & Sexuality. AM Digital's diverse portfolio, developed in collaboration with leading libraries and archives around the world, spans the social sciences and humanities, with many centuries of manuscript, print and AV content, and the publisher's leading platform technology transforming engagement in video, newspaper, and handwritten materials.

James Anthony-Edwards, University Librarian commented: Building on the strengths of our existing digital collections, we chose to work with Adam Matthew Digital as part of our 21st Century Research Library project, enhancing access to unique resources for our researchers across the humanities and social sciences. We are at the forefront of providing digitised historic content and these digital archives will enable our academics to expand the depth and scope of their research, opening up new directions from a vast collection of content available at their fingertips. At the same time, students who benefit from our research led approach to education, will be able to use this wide range of resources to develop their skills and put research at the heart of their studies."

This partnership shows Exeter's pioneering approach to collection development, and the team at AM Digital is excited about what this means for the future of European teaching and research across the humanities and social sciences.

To find out more about the partnership, contact Nia Phillips, UK and Ireland Sales Manager (nia@amdigital.co.uk.)

About Adam Matthew Digital

Adam Matthew Digital is an award-winning publisher of primary source content with 30 years' experience identifying and making accessible primary resource collections from leading archives and libraries around the world. The publisher is an independent company within the SAGE Group, based in the United Kingdom, and has offices around the world. As its guiding philosophy, AM Digital believes that at the heart of education is the freedom to think critically. Each year it publishes new, relevant primary source collections that span a wide variety of topics ranging from gender and sexuality, literature, art, politics, war, business, popular culture and more. These curated collections are offered to academic institutions on a customized platform designed to maximize discoverability and drive usage to primary source content to enhance learning.

www.amdigital.co.uk

About the University of Exeter

The University of Exeter is a Russell Group university that combines world-class research with very high levels of student satisfaction. Exeter has over 21,000 students and is in the top one per cent of universities worldwide. Exeter is also ranked 10th in the Guardian University Guide 2020 and 14th in The Times and The Sunday Times Good University Guide 2018. In the 2014 Research Excellence Framework (REF), the University ranked 16th nationally, with 98% of its research rated as being of international quality, while in 2017, Exeter was awarded a Gold rating in the Teaching Excellence Framework (TEF) assessment. Exeter was named The Times and The Sunday Times Sports University of the Year 2015-16, in recognition of excellence in performance, education and research. Exeter was The Sunday Times University of the Year 2012-13.

The University launched its flagship Global Systems Institute in 2018, a world-class, interdisciplinary community of researchers, students, citizens and partners that will solve global challenges through transformative research and education. This follows recent investments of more than £350 million worth of new facilities across its campuses in recent years; including the Living Systems Institute in 2016 in Exeter, and the Environment and Sustainability Institute on the Penryn Campus in Cornwall, together with new student services hubs, and new facilities for Biosciences, the Business School and Renewable Energy.