Archive-name: scientology/dictionary

Posting-Frequency: monthly

Last-modified: 1997/07/19

Version: 3.4

URL: http://www.ncf.carleton.ca/~av282/terms.htm

Copyright: (c) 1994-1997 Martin Hunt

Maintainer: fou...@arscc.com (Founder)

The ARS Acronym/Terminology FAQ v3.5:

The official Scientology glossary (not as complete as this FAQ due

to a lack of inclusion of secret nomenclature and ars-specific

nomenclature) is at: http://www.scientology.org/gloss.htm

See also the OT Levels & Confidential Material Summary List and the

Command Channels Chart by Jonathon Barbera, bar...@primenet.com.

Many thanks to S.S. for all the clarifications and corrections in

this edition.

A:

(*), see Poodle.

{_}, see Chowderpot.

1.1, see One One.

2WC, two-way comm, two-way communication. Hyped-up technobabble for

simply talking between an auditor and a pc or a supervisor and a

student. Also TWC, Two-Way Comm. "Use 2WC on the PC to a win."

AA, attempted abortion. According to L. Ron Hubbard's book

Dianetics, pregnant mothers routinely tried to kill their unborn

babies with knitting needles and douches, thus most people are

filled with AA engrams or hidden memories of pain. "The Preclear

had 51 AA incidents in her bank."

Aberrated, Hubbard's term for derangement or insanity. "The wog

world is heavily aberrated."

Aberration, an instance of insanity. Also, another term for an

engram, or a hidden memory of pain and unconsciousness. "You are

putting Dev-T on my lines because of your fucking aberrations."

ABLE, Association for Better Living and Education. One of many

Scientology front-groups. The purpose of these front-groups is to

escape from the increasingly bad name Scientology has earned over

time by implementing its surprisingly vicious and vindictive

policies such as SP declares (in which perceived enemies of

Scientology are labeled as suppressive or destructive to

Scientology's aims), disconnection (whereby family members are told

to stay away from the rest of their family who are not

Scientologists), Fair Game (in which Scientology's enemies may be

sued, tricked, lied to, or destroyed, as per Scientology policy),

etc. "ABLE Int - Association for Better Living and Education

International - Oversees secular activities such as Applied

Scholastics, Narconon, Criminon, and The Way to Happiness

Foundation." - Jonathon Barbera. Able Int is now located at the

HGB, qv.

Academy, the area in an Scientology organization (known as an Org)

in which the advanced training is carried out. Lower level training

is done in the Div 6, public division course room. "Route the raw

meat out of Div 6 and down into the academy to boost the stats."

Ack, see Acknowledgement.

Acknowledgement, used to end a cycle of communication in Hubbard's

rather stilted communication theory. Usually a "good", "ok", "I got

that", or "thank you." "Give me an Ack, or I'll ramble on and on

until I ARC break."

ACT, alt.clearing.technology. Often in small letters, "act", or

with periods, "a.c.t." The hangout for the relics of the cult who

still practice the strange "technology" or rituals developed by

Hubbard, but who have left the cult of Scientology proper. Of

course, some people have it that the group actually deals with acne

pimple remedies... See also ARS.

Action, an auditing or processing regimen; an instance of the

application of Scientology's "technology" on a person.

AD, after Dianetics. Used on issues such as HCOBs and HCOPLs

(Hubbard Communication Office Bulletins and Policy Letters) to show

the year. It is based on the Christian calendar, but with a base

year of 1950 with the release of Hubbard's book "Dianetics"; thus

AD 15 = anno Domini 1965.

Admin, administration. Detailed bureaucracy taken to new heights;

thousands of green on white issues written by L. Ron Hubbard

(Hubbard Communication Office Policy Letters) cover the design of

this monumental testament to inefficiency that would make IBM

proud. The OEC Vols (Organization Executive Course or Green

Volumes) cover most of the Admin policy.

Admin Dictionary, a large green Scientology dictionary made up of

quotes from L. Ron Hubbard that defines some of the thousands of

new terms Scientology introduced with its massive administration

bureaucracy.

Admiral, L. Ron Hubbard. A final self-bestowed promotion, given

humbly to himself (there was no one else to do it) by Hubbard just

before his death. L. Ron Hubbard was also referred to as Ron,

Source (capitalized), LRH and the Commodore.

Adore, A Divine Operating Religion of Excellence; a splinter group.

See Free Zone.

Affinity, used as a synonym for love or like.

Affluence, a condition or level of high and climbing production.

Aptly named, as higher production means more money. "The stats will

be in screaming affluence again this Thursday at 2:00."

Alter-Is, to alter the way something really is, and thus to create

a persistence. See As-Is. "If the Flag Rep keeps Alter-Ising the

Tech, she'll be K/R'ed!"

Amends Project, a way for a down-stat (not producing enough or

looking less than fixedly happy) Scientologist to get back in good

graces. Usually involves long hours scrubbing toilets and such,

followed by a mass petition collecting signatures of completion to

break down the willpower and personality of the cult indoctrinee

based on group rejection/ acceptance, peer-pressure and milieu

control. "Jan's doing an Amends Project, as part of his Ethics

Cycle; I'm not signing his petition until he cleans my room to

white-glove standards."

ANZO, Australia, New Zealand and Oceania. One of Scientology's

"continents". See CLO.

AO, Advanced Organization. A Scientology group that delivers the

higher parts of the Bridge, such as Operating Thetan (OT) 1-8, the

Ls (lists that are shouted out to the patient), etc.

AOLA, Advanced Organization of Los Angeles - this org has had at

least three different locations in LA over the last 30 years, and

is currently at the Cedars complex.

AOSHANZO, Advanced Organization Saint Hill for Australia, New

Zealand and Oceania.

AOSHEU, Advanced Organization/Saint Hill Europe - in Denmark. Also

referred to as AOSH DK - located in Copenhagen.

AOSHUK, Advanced Organization/Saint Hill United Kingdom - at Saint

Hill Manor, East Grinstead, Sussex, England.

Apollo, was one of L. Ron Hubbard's ships in his toy navy. Ron

loved to play sailor-man. See Flag.

ARC, Affinity, Reality, and Communication; when a cultie meets a

cultie, a comin' through the rye. ARC is used as a synonym for love

or like or general warmth to be applied to raw meat marks (green

Scientologists) to smooth the earlier stages of brainwashing. ARC =

understanding, according to L. Ron Hubbard. The ARC triangle is

inferior to the KRC triangle, which stands for Knowledge,

Responsibility, and Control...which equal money. "Use a little more

ARC when you reg people in, Sam."

ARC break or ARC-X, a break in affinity, reality or communication

between two people causing upset, anger or tears.

ARC breaky, describing someone who is prone to ARC breaks, qv.

ARS, alt.religion.scientology; the newsgroup this FAQ is posed to.

Often lower-case; "30,000 people a month read ars, according to

Arbitron." (ars) after a definition shows that the source of the

term is ars; terms which are sourced from Scientology itself have

nothing after them. (act) is for terms from

alt.clearing.technology.

ARSCC, Alt.Religion.Scientology Central Committee; It is a game.

The OSA Scientologists have tried to represent opposition to

Scientology as emanating from one or other focus - at first, it was

Dennis Erlich. Later, it was FactNet. At other times and in other

contexts the opposition has been represented as 'psychs' and the

now-destroyed 'CAN' (the Cult Awareness Network). ARSCC

(Alt.Religion.Scientology Central Committee) is just a kid's game,

a troll, like the game of 'there is no Cabal' which is played on

newbies on alt.culture.usenet. There is no ARSCC, so it is no use

begging me to send you the Red and Blue codebooks. Even if I had

them, I'd have to deny their existence. There is a real inspiration

for this. At various times, Hubbard would allude in his bulletins

to shadowy organizations such as 'Smersh' and 'The Tenyaka

Memorial'; another example, taken from his mythology, is 'The Fifth

Invader Force'. Another time, he described the opposition as just

twelve highly powerful suppressives (yes, bankers and financiers).

He just loved to spin yarns, and in honor of this, we do the same.

(Tony Sidaway)

ASHOD, American Saint Hill Organization Day - located at same place

as ASHOF in the Cedars Complex, Los Angeles.

ASHOF, American Saint Hill Organization Foundation (night and

weekend org) - located at 1413 N. Berendo Street (now L. Ron

Hubbard Way) LA CA 90027. Previously ASHOF was located at 2723 West

Temple Street, LA (from 1968 until 1977).

ASI, Author Services Inc. 1. A Scientology front-group whose

purpose is to skim money out of the organization and channel it to

the person at the top, formerly L. Ron Hubbard. Also called Author

Services. Jonathon Barbera: "Not officially on the chart. Probably

immediately under RTC. It is senior to all other organizations but

is not part of the command channels. Probably owns the copyrights

and is in charge of LRH PR projects, the vaults of LRH's writings,

and collecting money (through royalties) for LRH." ASI spends its

money on several things: "special properties" ie, prints, rare

books, LRH signed books for the Preservation of the Tech project -

the bomb-proof shelters in the desert. ASI also contributes to

dissemination of Dianetics, and operates the "Writers of the

Future" SF contest held each year. 2. ASI - Applied Scholastics

International, a cult educational front group.

As-is, to look at something and make it vanish like magic. "Jim

as-ised and blew some charge is session today." See Alter-Is.

Auditine, a pun on Scientology's pseudopsychological "auditing"

therapy, likening it to an addictive drug (benzedrINE, etc.)

Auditing, the action of running Scientology or Dianetic processes

on a PC (a preclear; someone receiving Scientology processing).

Auditing usually involves a Meter, with the PC holding onto the

soup cans electrodes, and the Auditor taking down notes and asking

questions. "Auditing in the HGC costs over $500 per hour."

Auditor, the person who uses an E-Meter (a simple, ineffective lie

detector used in Scientology with a needle and soup cans for

electrodes) to find Overts (undisclosed acts) and Engrams

(incidents of pain and unconsciousness) and audits them out of the

person receiving auditing or preclear.

Author Services Incorporated, see ASI.

AVC, Authorization, Verification and Correction, now the AVU,

Authorization, Verifications and Corrections Unit. Set up to ensure

that all the drivel that comes out is "on source" and not "off

policy". AVC is part of RTC, originally it was the approval line

for drivel coming out of the FLB, but now their imprimatur has to

be on everything. The imprimatur means that the issue has been

reviewed by a Scientology authority and has been given "IA", or

Issue Authority (seal of approval).

AVU, see AVC.

B:

B-1, bureau one. A segment of the Guardian's Office (the cult's

intelligence, dirty deeds and strong-arm tactics branch; now called

the Office of Special Affairs or OSA) responsible for covert

intelligence; its functions are now taken over by OSA.

Baby Watch, see Introspection Rundown.

Bank, the reactive mind; supposedly packed with "overts," or

undisclosed acts, and engrams or moments or pain and

unconsciousness. Also, anything negative seen as coming from the

reactive mind. "All you'll find on alt.religion.scientology is just

bank talking."

Barratry, the use of frivolous lawsuits to harass. "Scientology has

been found guilty of barratry, given the thousands of useless

lawsuits they have brought to court and wasted taxpayer's money

on."

Basher, a person who is critical of Scientology. A Free Zone term,

qv. "Don't listen to him; he's just a basher." (act) See Meatball.

Basic Basic, the earliest incident on a chain of engrams, sometimes

just called Basic.

Beingness, a word Hubbard probably plagiarized from Nordenholz.

Implies the rewarding experience of being something, assuming a

valence (another personality) or hat (an office or post in

Scientology). Hubbard fit beingness into a triptych with doingness

and havingness. "She has so much beingness on her shiny new post!"

Big Win, something seen as being of great benefit, but tends to be

ephemeral or nebulous. A Big Win may be incomprehensible to

Scientology outsiders. "I had such Big Wins all week on the Purif.

I began to see what really lies behind my case!" See "Win",

"Success Story."

Billion-Year Contract, the newly-indoctrinated SO (Sea

Organization; a tough inner core of Scientologists, some of whom

may be found on the cult's ships, while others are settled in land

bases) member signs one, supposedly coming back life after life to

fulfill it. LSD users need not apply.

BIS, Bodies In the Shop. how many people are in the Scientology

organization and on lines; an important Org Statistic.

Black Hats, the bad guys. Ron wrote corny Westerns for a while,

which might explain where the term came from. "Ars is full of SPs

wearing their Black Hats."

Blow, 1. To leave suddenly. Also, the person who does this. "Sam

Blew off post today; he's our third Blow this week!" 2. To get rid

of the charge or mass of an engram (a moment of pain and

unconsciousness). "I blew so much mass in my session!" See MU, M3,

M4.

Body Raisins, a grape name for BTs, or Body Thetans, evil spirits

which permeate our bodies, according to L. Ron Hubbard. See BTs.

(ars)

Body Route, to steer public into a Scientology Organization, get

them on lines, sell them services, and make some money off them.

The idea being that public are such low-toned wogs (a common

Scientology derogation of Scientology outsiders) that they have no

self-determination, and need to be led like sheep to the slaughter.

Body Thaytans, see BTs. (ars)

Body Thetans, see BTs.

B of I, board of investigation. A Scientology kangaroo-court-like

internal Ethics board. "A B of I will be convened for Harry next

Tuesday."

Boo-Hoos, along with clams and Grim Weepers, these are Wholetrack

(a person's last 74 trillion years or so of existence in this

universe) ancestors to Man, and are responsible for the origin of

human belching, gasping, sobbing, choking, shuddering and

trembling. Also called "Grim Weepers", and just "Weepers."

Book One, another name for L. Ron Hubbard's book "Dianetics." Also

describes auditing "therapy" as laid down in "Dianetics." See

DMSMH.

BPC, bypassed charge. Charge that has been turned on, or

restimulated, without being as-ised, blown, or gotten rid of; in

other words, an unpleasant memory that has been recalled, but

hasn't been fully dealt with or erased. See "Charge."

BPI, 1. See Bridge Publications. 2. Broad Public Issue; a

notification on Hubbard Communication Office Bulletins (HCOBs) and

HCOPLs (HCO Policy Letters) showing issue authority and

distribution.

BPL, Board Policy Letter, a precursor to the HCOPL, Hubbard

Communications Office Policy Letter, qv.

Bridge, the bridge to total freedom; the list of auditing actions

needed to get to the highest OT (operating thetan) level, currently

OT 8. The Bridge costs roughly $300,000 US, and is depicted on the

Gradation Chart of Human Awareness and Abilities. L. Ron Hubbard's

"Bridge to total freedom" has two sides. One is auditor or

therapist training classes or classifications, the other is

receiving auditing or "therapy" such as Grades and OT levels, qv.

At the lower levels the grades and classes or classifications

correspond, this pretty much stops after Class 6 (Saint Hill

Special Briefing Course).

Bridge Publications, the cult's publishing business; also called

simply Bridge or BPI (Bridge Publications International.) New Era

Publications in Europe is a part of BPI.

BT, Body Thetan. Usually plural. Evil spirits which need to be

exorcized. "OT 5 consists entirely of running out BTs; what a

bore."

BTB, Board Technical Bulletin, a precursor to the HCOB, Hubbard

Communications Office Bulletin, qv. Hubbard decided that only he

knew the true path of technological enlightenment of the wallet.

Bullbaiting, a training routine involving two students. One is to

sit silent, unblinking and unmoving, while the other does

everything s/he can to get a reaction. The receiving student must

simply accept whatever is done to him or her, in what is basically

a lesson in passivity. The stated purpose is to train the student

to be unresponsive to a PC's (preclear; a person receiving

Scientology "therapy") originations during the auditing or

"therapy" session, while the actual process of bullbaiting itself

flattens a person's emotional affect; it is perfectly natural to

laugh when a person says something funny, whether this occurs in

real life or in an auditing session. In bullbaiting the person is

drilled to not react to what is being said in any way, to not show

any empathy at all, producing a virtual robot, despite Scn's

protestations about not doing robotic TRs. "The noise next door is

coming from the students doing their bullbaiting."

C:

Cadet Org, any of various orgs for warehousing children of Sea Org

parents. Policy is for SO women to abort their babies when ordered,

but when the unfortunates survive to full term, they are placed in

these horrific organizations. Reports are rampant with child abuse

in these places ranging from neglect, to maggots in their food, to

severe under staffing, filthy and smelly conditions, and enforced

parental neglect (SO parents are allowed as little as one hour per

week to see their children, called "family time".) The Cadet orgs

even have their own RPFs, or punishment camps.

Cal Mag, a mixture of calcium and magnesium in water said to have

amazing restorative powers, according to soi-disant "scientist", L.

Ron Hubbard. See Guk Bomb.

CAN, the Cult Awareness Network, formerly a loose-knit educational

and group-therapy association. A Scientology target for special

hatred in the form of Suppressive (describing a person or group who

goals are at odds to Scientology's goals) status, CAN has now been

destroyed through Scientology exercising its policy of using

lawsuits to utterly ruin its enemies, and if you dial the number,

you get a Scientologist on the other end of the line!

Cancelbunny/Cancelpoodle, these refer to the ubiquitous OSA (Office

of Special Affairs; the cult's private CIA/KGB) cancelers who

frequent alt.religion.scientology and visit it with their

censorship of people's posts. (ars)

Cans, soup cans used as electrodes for the Scientology E-Meter or

lie detector. The PC (patient) holds them in his or her hands. "I

was on the Cans for three hours today!"

Case, The sum of one's problems, bad memories, Engrams (moments of

pain and unconsciousness), BTs (Body Thetans or evil spirits

infesting the body), Overts (undisclosed harmful acts), Etc. "My

Case has really improved by doing the Sunshine Rundown." See Bank,

Reactive Mind.

Case Gain, improvement in a PC's (patient's) case (problems) due to

auditing or Scientology-style "therapy." "Paul had tremendous case

gain running Grade Zero."

Case Supervisor, see C/S.

Cave in, to destroy someone by forcing them over into the dark side

of the bank or reactive mind (the sum of one's memories.) "Helena

Kobrin wants to cave in the critics on ars."

CC, Celebrity Center. There are several of these around the world,

incorporated with the intention of luring in actors and other

prominent people to give the cult a shiny PR image, the theory

being that if John Travolta and Kirsty Alley are Scientologists,

other people will want to join up and sign away their life savings.

One large CC is located right in Hollywood, and run as a ritzy

hotel, utilizing the slave labor of Scientology's Sea Organization

staff to provide all the amenities to the first class citizens and

celebrities. "CC Int - Celebrity Center International - Largest

celebrity center which delivers Scientology services to celebrities

and those who can afford the higher donation rates. Also oversees

the other CCs." - Jonathon Barbera.

CCHR, the newspeak-named Citizen's Commission on Human Rights, run

by a Scientologist by the name of Dennis Clarke. CCHR's main

purpose is clearing away the "Psyches" (mental health

professionals; seen by Scientology as evil aliens from the fifth

galactic invader force) to make way for Scientology's advance into

society. CCHR is a front group for Scientology.

CCO, Child Care Org. See Cadet Org.

CCRD, see Clear Certainty Rundown.

Cedars, the short name for the giant blue Scientology Cedars of

Lebanon complex in Los Angeles, formerly the Cedars of Lebanon

Hospital, which moved and became the Cedars Sinai Hospital. Cedars

was the world headquarters of Scientology, and home to many

Organizations including ASHO (the American Saint Hill

Organization), AOLA (the Advanced Organization of Los Angeles), an

EPF and RPF, qv, and many others. IHELP (the International

Ecclesiastical League of Pastors), ITO (the International Training

Org), and OSA INT (the Office of Special Affairs International)

have now moved to the HGB, qv. CCHR has moved elsewhere. See HGB.

CESO, Cedars Estates Service Org, the org responsible for

maintenance in PAC, Pacific Area Command the Los Angeles area.

Similar to the EPF, the Estates Project Force. See EPF.

Celebrity Center, see CC.

Central Committee, see ARSCC.

Central Files, see CF.

CEO, Scientology's Cadet Estates Organization. See Cadet Org.

CF, Central Files. "By policy, the names of any Scientologists at

any org who have ever received a major service at an organization

below Flag must be forwarded to Flag, where the names become the CF

for Flag. A major service is considered paying for and completing a

level or training, technical or administrative, or an auditing

intensive. To sign up for a major service, a member must either

have 6 months free IAS membership in existence, or be on the yearly

paid membership." - Joe Harrington.

Chain, a run of memory incidents or engrams of a similar type, or

with the same content.

Charge, mental mass in restimulation, or constant upheaval,

contained in the reactive mind, or memory bank. This may not make

much sense, but then, many things in Scientology are like that. In

colloquial usage, charge refers to areas a person may be touchy

about. "Jim has a lot of charge on the word 'critic.'"

Chowderpot, {_}, an award given to arscc members who, through their

actions, manage to shut down a cult org or mission.

CI, see Counter-intention, Intention.

Clam, a derogatory term for a Scientologist. See Ronbot,

Hubbardite, scieno. (ars)

Clambake, a westcoast seafood cookout or party. The term was

adopted on ars as the name for the IRC channel #clambake (now

#scientology), and has more recently been applied to any situation

where Scientology suffers a big loss. Also the name of a popular

webpage which exposes the cult's secrets. See clam.

Clams, Man descended from them according to "History of Man" by L.

Ron Hubbard, and the incident gives us painful engrams (memories)

of being dropped onto rocks by birds, and extreme jaw pain from the

bivalve's hinge. This has been a running joke on ars for some time,

with threads about clambakes, clam chowder, snapping clams, clams

in .sig files, etc., although some now see it as a pejorative and

have quit using it.

Clamspeak, see Scientologese.

Class, a means of defining how high an Org (Scientology

organization), Auditor (Scientology therapist), C/S (Case

Supervisor, a person who oversees Auditors), etc. is on the Bridge

(Scientology's chart of levels of enlightenment); corresponds to

Level or Grade, qv. See Bridge.

Class IV Org, now called Class V Org. See Class V Org.

Class V Org, the most common Scientology organizations; most major

urban centers in the Western world have one. They are senior to

missions or franchises, but otherwise at the bottom rung of the

command channels. They can deliver services up to and including

Class V auditor training and processing through to New Era

Dianetics and clearing. Once Clear, PCs must move on to higher

orgs, such as ASHOs, AOs, or FLAG, all qv. See also Org.

Class XII Org, see Org.

Class 0, A Class 0 auditor (therapist) can audit a person on Grade

0 after which they can supposedly talk to anyone about anything

(except that Scientology says they shouldn't talk to suppressives,

or criticize the church, or talk about their auditing except to

certain people, or talk about OT levels and the material on them

(etc. etc. etc.) See Grade 0.

Class 6, Saint Hill Special Briefing Course. See SHSBC. Also Class

VI.

Class 8 auditor, A class 8 auditor is highly "trained" and can

audit anyone on repair stuff up to OT 4 (or the grades, etc.) Also,

Class VIII.

Class 8 C/S, a Case Supervisor, qv, trained to C/S folders up to a

high level. Also, Class VIII.

Class XII Auditor, trained to deliver the very expensive L Rundowns

or Ls at Flag in Clearwater, FLA, that use a form of auditing

involving yelling listing items at the PC. Tree! Oak? Elm?

Cottonwood?

Clay Demo, a Scientology Study Tech method of training involving

making little figures out of Plasticine (tm) on a table. "I've done

54 clay demos so far this week on the Pro TRs."

Clear, a person audited enough to be free of the "bank," or

reactive mind. (The sum of the memories of pain and unconsciousness

the person has) A low-level superman-type person; a baby OT

(Operating Thetan). "Samantha just had her Clear Certainty Rundown,

and is now considered a clear!"

Clear Certainty Rundown, CCRD. Verifies and validates a person's

state of Clear. Available at some Class V Organizations and all

higher organizations. - Jonathon Barbera.

Clearing Course, Grade VII. Solo audited by PCs who did not go

Clear on NED, New Era Dianetics. This level is directed at implant

materials (GPMs) which keep the reactive mind in place. Available

at Advanced Organizations and higher. - Jonathon Barbera.

Clear-L, an email discussion list for the clearing field or Free

Zone, qv. Koos was banned from it by the members. Homer is the

administrator of the list.

CLO, Continental Liaison Office - in charge of the internal

management of middle management organizations. - Jonathon Barbera.

There's one of these for each Scientology "continent"; the world

according to the cult is cut up in a rather bizarre way, eg, EUS

and WUS (East and West United States) are separate "continents", as

is ANZO (Australia, New Zealand, and Oceania), Africa, and others.

Cluster, a bunch of Body Thetans, evil spirits inhabiting the body,

all stuck together. "I had a cluster blow from my forehead during

session!"

CMO, the Commodore's (L. Ron Hubbard) Messengers Organization. A

Sea-Org run power center within the cult, started by the

teenyboppers in hot pants who used to serve as Hubbard's

mouthpieces on board his ships. CMO PAC (Pacific Area Command) is

based in LA, in a large building across the street from the Cedars

of Lebanon Center. The CMO IXU, the Internal eXtension Unit, is in

the HGB, qv. CMO INT and CMO Gold are at the INT base.

CMO INT, Commodore's Messenger Organization INT - Senior-most CMO

and is in charge of overseeing all CMOs. The CMOs are in charge of

getting the management and service organizations producing and

complying with upper management orders. - Jonathon Barbera.

CMO IXU, Commodore's Messenger Organization Internal eXtension Unit

- this organization is part of upper middle management and acts as

the CMO for the managements organizations grouped with Flag Command

Bureaux. This organization started requiring INT security

clearances for its crew in 1992 or 1993. - Jonathon Barbera.

CO, Commanding Officer.

COB RTC, Chairman of the board for the Religious Technology Center,

the copyright holding body of Scientology, currently former

Commodore's Messenger David Miscavige.

Coffee Grinder Incident, this is where some evil implanters, people

or aliens who instill bad memories, used a little box to play a

push-pull wave of energy over you and lay in a bone-deep somatic or

pain, remember?

Cognition, a sudden realization about oneself having to do with

Scientology. "Fanny had a cognition about how her father was a big

Suppressive during Session; now she's on the PTS/SP course."

Cognitive dissonance, a psych (disparaging Scientology slang for

psychiatrists) term! Horrors! It simply means the inability to fit

two disparate concepts into one's mind. For example, a dichotomy

like "I spent $360,000 dollars for all this" and "It is all a bunch

of garbage." The flip side of cognitive dissonance is that if you

get someone to do something, it is easier to make them believe

something, and vice versa. Actions influence thoughts, and thoughts

influence actions. One person adds: "I thought this was more akin

to warping reality to maintain a belief system. For instance you

buy a car that has all the features you consider to be good in a

car, but your friend buys a superior car which costs the same

amount. You have cognitive dissonance and berate the other car by

warping factual information to make your purchase more appealing

than perhaps it factually is." In this sense, it is a component of

the psychological influence that keeps people in Scientology; they

warp the reality of the utter worthlessness of the auditing

"technology" after paying so much for it. It becomes very hard to

let go of something after making such a huge to commitment to it,

whether that commitment is psychological, spiritual, monetary, the

investment of time, or something similar. Webster's 9th New

Collegiate says: "cognitive dissonance n (1963) psychological

conflict resulting from incongruous ideas and attitudes held

simultaneously." The conflict is resolved via the distortion of the

perception of reality. Eric Bohlman: "...it is almost a textbook

example of attempts to resolve cognitive dissonance. A classic

social psychology experiment is to take a bunch of people who have

just bought new cars and present them with product brochures from

various car companies. Inevitably they'll spend most of their time

reading the brochures for the cars that they bought, and will give

only cursory glances to the brochures for the competing models.

Somebody who has just made a major commitment (such as spending a

lot of money) is likely to seek out information that would portray

the commitment as a good decision and avoid information that would

call the decision into question, because the alternative is to

believe that they've been duped, which would be damaging to their

self-images."

Command Intention, what upper management wants done; meant to imply

that Scientology's management is able to "make it go right",

infallible, and quite capable of achieving anything. The peons only

worries are seeing to it that they jump high enough when ordered.

See Intention, Counter-intention.

Commodore, the name Hubbard gave himself, no doubt based upon his

stellar naval career. "A picture of the Commodore hangs in every

Academy." See "Ron."

Comm Ev, a Committee of Evidence; a cult "justice" action. "Fred

was declared at his Comm Ev; now he's an SP, and subject to Fair

Game."

Conditions, the Ethics formulas of Scientology. They are, in

descending order, Power, Power Change, Affluence, Normal Operation,

Emergency, Danger, Non-Existence, Liability, Doubt, Enemy, Treason,

Confusion. All the conditions have formulas, and they are designed

to get cult members to produce more, ie, make more money for

Scientology. Thus, conditions are deemed very important, and

Scientologists are often seen scurrying about trying "improve their

condition."

Control, a metaphysical Scientology construct. Control is worked

into low-level therapy like Op pro by Dup to get the "raw meat"

used to the idea of someone controlling him or her to a high

degree. Control is exerted on every action and step taken by the

Scientology newcomer; with what amounts to supreme arrogance,

Scientologists assume that ordinary people, (whom it disparages as

mere "wogs"), are simply incapable of wiping their own ass, and are

therefore subject to full control by them. This is manifested as

"body routing", and it is the justification for hard-selling the PC

onto his or her next level immediately after taking a "therapy"

session. See Tone 40, Intention, Postulate.

CoS, Church of Scientology. Also, C of S, CofS, COS, Co$. Some

people on ars take "Co$" to mean "Cult of $cientology."

COSRECI, Church of Scientology Religious Education College

International, incorporated in Australia. It shares the "castle" at

Saint Hill with AOSH (Advanced Organisation Saint Hill).

COST, Church of Spiritual Technology. Also, CST, LRH Archives.

Counter-intention, resistance to authority, disobedience; the last

thing an SO member would want to have to Command Intention, qv.

"Any more CI on my lines from you, buster, and I'm routing you to

Ethics to get your overts standardly handled." See Intention.

Cracked, describing a Case Gain (qv) of such proportions that one's

Bank or Reactive Mind (memories of pain and unconsciousness) is

knocked back forever. "I finally had my case cracked on OT 2; it

was a big win!"

Cramming, an action taken to remedy a small Scientology tech

"outpoint", a failing of some kind. "I had a cram cycle on my

metering after failing to get VGIs on my PC."

Crutch, a pun on Church, as in Church of Scientology. Clams tend to

lean on the crutch; they need it, so bad. "The Crutch has been

losing turf in Germany recently."

C/S, noun. Case Supervisor. The person in charge of assigning

auditing regimens to Preclears or patients; s/he tells the Auditor

or Scientology therapist what processes to run on the mark, and

reviews the written worksheets of processing sessions.

CSG, Commodore's Staff Guardian (Mary Sue Hubbard).

CSI, Church of Scientology international. Officially a non profit

501 (c) organization. The offices of el presidente are at the HGB,

qv.

CSIINTB, Church of Scientology International - International

Base/Bureau.

C/Sing, verb. The action of reviewing and prescribing Scientology

processing or "therapy" actions. "The C/S at AOLA C/Sed my case

this week."

CST, Church of Spiritual Technology. Also, COST, LRH Archives.

Cult, (definition from the Cult Awareness Network, now taken over

by Scientology after bankruptcy brought on by Scn litigation). A

serious problem exists in our society as a result of the emergence

of groups, popularly called cults, using mind control (undue

influence) and unethical means to recruit and retain followers.

Association with these groups can be harmful to followers and

disruptive to families, friends and society. MARKS OF A DESTRUCTIVE

CULT: -Mind Control (undue influence): Manipulation by use of

coercive persuasion or behavior modification techniques without

informed consent. -Charismatic Leadership: Claiming divinity or

special knowledge and demanding unquestioning obedience with power

and privilege. Leadership may consist of one individual or a small

core of leaders. -Deception: Recruiting and fundraising with hidden

objectives and without full disclosure of the use of mind

controlling techniques; use of front groups. -Exclusivity:

Secretiveness or vagueness by followers regarding activities and

beliefs. -Alienation: Separation from family, friends and society,

a change in values and substitution of the cult as the new family;

evidence of subtle or abrupt personality changes. -Exploitation:

Can be financial, physical, or psychological; pressure to give

money, to spend a great deal on courses or give excessively to

special projects, or to engage in inappropriate sexual activities,

even child abuse. -Totalitarian Worldview (we/they syndrome):

Effecting dependence, promoting goals of the group over the

individual and approving unethical behavior while claiming

goodness.

CXI, the Church of Xenu International. A mocking take-off of CSI

"set up" by "General" Martin Ottmann, "Chairman of the Board" CXI.

Other members include: "Admirals" Alvin Brattli, Birgitta Dagnell,

and Andreas Heldal-Lund. See Admiral, COB, CSI.

D:

D/A, verb. Dead Agent; to spread malicious lies and rumors about an

Anti-Scientologist person or organization, in an attempt to so

thoroughly discredit them that everyone concerned will be disgusted

with them, and not listen to the information they have to give

about the cult. Many attempts to Dead Agent the recently destroyed

CAN (the Cult Awareness Network) and FACTnet (Fight Against

Coercive Tactics network; a BBS that supplies information about the

cult) have been posted to ars. (alt.religion.scientology)

Day, one of the two divisions Class V (a lower-level Scientology

Organization) cult centers are cut up into. Hours roughly are from

8am - 6pm, Monday to Friday. See Foundation.

DB, Degraded Being. Someone so infested with Body Thetans, evil

spirits, as to be in-auditable or insane. Also used as a general

derogatory term. "These psychs are all DBs; without the tech, they

won't make it."

DC-8, Douglas jet aircraft resembling the Boeing 707, and used for

trans-Atlantic flights starting in the late 1950s. Hubbard said

they were used millions of years ago as spaceships to ferry people

about the galactic confederation. Perhaps someday Scientology will

apply for a patent, and sue Douglas for copying their design?

DCSI, Dianetic Clear Special Intensive, a a five hour auditing

block (as opposed to the usual 12 1/2 hours that auditing is

usually sold in) that is essentially a date locate procedure for

finding the moment of the clear cognition for those going clear on

Dianetic auditing, which is said to happen in 2% of cases.

Dead Agenting, see D/A.

Declaring, the act of blacklisting within the cult; the result is

an "SP" (Suppressive Person, someone who does not like Scientology)

who can be "Sued, tricked, lied to, or destroyed" as per the cult's

policy. "Eric was declared Suppressive at his Comm Ev."

Ded, another name for an overt, a harmful act one does to another

that comes before justification of the act.

Dedex, another name for a motivator, an instance of blaming another

for a crime you have committed yourself, or finding some

justification for your aggressive or harmful actions that you are

committing at present in your victim's previous actions.

Degraded Being, see DB.

Deprogramming, a desperate ploy to recover lost children involved

in a cult, usually at the parent's behest; employs kidnaping and

coercive persuasion to re-invoke the cult victim's former

personality from before involvement. Now largely discredited in

favor of exit counseling, which is only done on a consensual basis.

Dev-T, Developed traffic. A particle (a person or form) sent

unnecessarily to the improper terminal; a waste of time or an item

which slows down the all-important production inside Scientology.

Dianazene, a formula combined with vitamins and other materials

(such as benzedrine) to make the intake of nicotinic acid more

effective. Dianazene runs out radiation - or what appears to be

radiation. It also proofs a person up [sic] against radiation to

some degree. It also turns on and runs out incipient cancer. (All

About Radiation, pp. 123-124) Strangely, Hubbard thought that drugs

were destructive enough to warrant a Purification Rundown to try to

eliminate them. See also Guk Bomb, Purif, Drug Rundown.

Dianetic auditing, a quack therapy process based on Hubbard's book,

_Dianetics: the Modern Science of Mental Health_ (DMSMH), written

in 1950, and later volumes. Also called book one auditing.

Dianetic Clear Special Intensive, see DCSI.

Dianetics, Hubbard's derivative (of Freud's abreactive therapy,

among others) mental healing therapy; scorned by the mental health

profession as being unscientific nonsense. Strangely, even though

Hubbard used mainstream psychiatry as a source for Dianetics, he

went on to vehemently attack psychiatry and its practice with

paranoid fervor.

Disconnection, the act of severing ties with family, friends, and

loved ones that the cult often forces its victims to do when these

same loved ones are declared SPs, Suppressive Persons, (often for

expressing doubts about the victim's involvement in the cult) which

the victim then supposedly becomes PTS, a Potential Trouble Source

for Scientology, to. "I was ordered to disconnect from my wife

after she was declared." See SP, PTS.

Divisions, sections of the Org Board, the Scientology Organization

layout showing positions within the bureaucracy that Hubbard used

to define all the posts in an Org. Various Org Boards were

utilized, some with seven Divisions (Divs), some with nine; they

are kept on a wall in the Organizations, and drilled each morning.

Div 1, HCO; Hubbard Communications Office. Also, Div One, etc.

Div 2, Dissemination.

Div 3, The treasury; money being so important it deserves its own

special division in Scientology.

Div 4, Tech. Where the Academy courses and HGC, Hubbard Guidance

Center, auditing are done.

Div 5, Qual. Where one attests to "therapy" actions, and gets

certificates for courses in Scientology. Also, where corrections

are done.

Div 6, the public division; deals with routing people into the

Organization (Org), low level raw meat (fresh converts) courses,

showing hokey '50-ish L. Ron Hubbard movies, selling books,

reception, etc.

Div 7, Executive Division.

DM, David Miscavige; the leader of the cult of Scientology,

presently on the run from process servers. Also called the poodle.

(ars)

DMSMH, Dianetics [sic, should be dianoetics], the Modern [sic,

outdated] Science [sic!] of Mental Health [sic!]; Hubbard's first

foray into his newly invented "Science" of mental health, and the

launchpad for the cult of Scientology, misspelled from dianoetic,

meaning intellectual; pounded out in a few weeks on a typewriter in

1950 without even a hint of research. Also called Book One. Should

be: Dianoetics, the old fashioned pseudoscience that creates mental

problems.

Dn, Dianetics. See Dianetics.

Doingness, the act of doing something. See Beingness.

Downstat or Down Stat, 1. Describing the horrible condition of

losing that all-important production statistic; also, a general

term of derogation. "My local Class V looks so Down Stat; it is

dark, dingy, dirty, and squalid, not to mention grotty." 2. Noun;

referring to Down Stat individuals; people who are not doing well

in a Scientological sense, that is, cranking out enough product.

"Farnham is a real downstat; look at how miserable he looks on

post. Route him to Ethics." See Up Stat.

Dreamball, a Free Zone term. Describes people who are superior to

meatballs, qv, or ordinary people. (act)

Drug Rundown, there are two of these, one at the bottom of the

Bridge, one near the top. While the Purification Rundown is meant

to remove the drugs residues supposedly stored in your fat, the

Drug Rundown is meant to audit out the harmful effects of drugs on

your mind. It is all very spiritual. (Or is that medical? Or should

that be financial?) See Grades, OT 4, Purif. See also Dianazene,

Guk Bomb, for comparison. Two things seem to be pulling in

different directions here; on the one hand you have Hubbard trying

to cleanse drugs out of the system with his Purification Rundown,

and on the other hand there is his admitted use of drug compounds

on his guinea-pig followers.

DSA, the Department of Special Affairs, an office that acts as the

local outlet for OSA in Class V orgs. See OSA.

Duplicate, to make an exact copy of; to fully understand in order

to obey. "You are Out-Ethics, Mr.! You need to do your Conditions!

Do you duplicate me?"

Dynamics, the eight Scientological subdivisions of life. Self, Sex,

Group, Mankind, Animals and Plants, Universe, Theta, God.

Dynamism, Enid Vien's breakaway movement from Scientology; a part

of the Free Zone, qv.

E:

ED, 1. Executive Director, the chief officer of a Scientology

organization. 2. Executive Directive, an issue type; EDs may be

written by Executive Directors at the local level. L. Ron Hubbard

EDs were written by L. Ron Hubbard himself.

ED INT, Executive Director International, the head of the Exec

Strata, currently Guillaume Lesevre. This is not the head of the

cult, despite the title; the head honcho is David Miscavige. The ED

INT can be written to at: Executive Director International, 4833

Fountain Avenue Los Angeles, California, 90027. There are also

message boxes for the ED INT in each org. He replies, too, or

someone does in his name. This is the SO-1 line (qv) now that

Hubbard is dead.

E-Meter, or Meter, electrometer or electropsychometer. A crude

battery -powered analog ohmmeter used to locate Overts (undisclosed

acts), Body Thetans (evil spirits), and Engrams (moments of pain

and unconsciousness). The PC or patient holds the soup-cans

electrodes, while the Auditor or Scientology therapist watches the

needle on the dial. Circuitry is based on the Wheatstone Bridge.

The meter was designed by Volney Mathieson. Current "top of the

line" models sell for about $4,000 US in a plastic case. Actual

parts list is about $50-$100, making it a good money earner for

Scientology, particularly since every auditor is required to own

two in case one breaks down.

End Words, words that act like mental locks to keep the reactive

mind, the chain of memory incidents of a harmful nature, keyed-in

or in an active state.

Engram, a posited memory trace that remains after a moment of pain

and unconsciousness. Hubbard didn't coin this word; it can be found

in Webster's, and is part of the ISV, the International Scientific

Vocabulary.

Entheta, enturbulated theta. Bad Vibes. "This Usenet newsgroup is

so full of entheta that it is restimulating my bank."

Enturbulated, Hubbardese for being upset. "Suzy found ars so

enturbulating, she ran away."

EOC, 1. End of Cycle, the end of a cycle of action (start, change,

stop.) 2. Suicide. "After your mission to infiltrate the FBI, do an

EOC to prevent leaks."

EP, End Phenomenon. The result of a Scientology processing action.

"The EP for OT 15 is cause over the universe."

EPF, Estates Project Force, where new recruits are first placed so

that they may receive indoctrination into the Sea Org echelons of

the cult and prove themselves worthy of being into the Sea Org. Per

policy, all recruits must finish a course called "Product Zero" and

a 7A Security Check.

Ethics, a section of a Scientology Org (organization) that keeps

people in line, and the Hubbardian policy that deals with it. "Keep

your nose clean, or I'll route you to Ethics, Mr.!"

EUS, Eastern US. See CLO.

Evil Purpose, an implanted evil goal given to us millions or

billions or trillions of years ago in Implant stations (there is

one on Mars, you'll be interested to know) and still influencing

our everyday lives, according to Hubbard.

Exec Strata, see Senior Exec Strata.

Exit counseling, an ethical method of recovering people from

destructive cults, involving talking and giving out information in

a non-coercive manner. "Combatting Cult Mind Control" by Steve

Hassan best exemplifies the methodology. Compare Deprogramming.

Ex-Scientologist, a former member of the Scientology cult who has

left and has gained a greater understanding of what was done to

them in Hubbard's brainwashing machine, and who has a desire to see

the hidden truth behind Scientology's carefully constructed PR

facade exposed to the public. Most Ex-Scientologists do this for

the public interest, despite personal risk of harassment and

groundless defamation lawsuits from Scientology's Office of Special

Affairs department and its small army of lawyers, agents, and PIs.

We have little or nothing to gain by going public with what we know

about the cult from the inside, and some of us will pay dearly for

our devotion to the truth. We were lied to and ripped off by L. Ron

Hubbard, in both a spiritual and monetary sense, and we don't want

to see anyone else manipulated the way we were. Scientology has in

many ways destroyed our lives; we would be less than human to stand

idly by and watch as more "raw meat" public are ripped to shreds in

Scientology's money-making mill.

Exteriorize, to leave the body. Scientologists believe we can step

outside our bodies in the form of a disembodied "Thetan" or spirit,

and hover about looking at things. This is deemed to be a very

important goal of every Scientologist, usually only obtained at the

highest "OT level." OT VIIs and VIIIs who have left the cult claim

it is an induced hallucination. "Exteriorization is the goal of the

End of Endless Int Rundown." See "Interiorization."

F:

Facsimile, a mental image picture. "June has a facsimile of a dog

biting her leg."

FACTnet, Fight Against Coercive Tactics network; a cult information

BBS with numerous files on the Scientology cult and others operated

by Lawrence Wollersheim, and various other directors at various

times including Bob Penny, Kim Baker, and Arnie (Arnaldo) Lerma.

FACTNet has undergone a shift toward carrying the torch for free

speech on the Internet more recently after lengthy and expensive

litigation with Scientology.

Fair Game, the notorious Scientology policy describing how to deal

with critics, ex-members, and other undesirables dehumanized with

the label "Suppressives"; they may be "Sued, tricked, lied to, or

destroyed," as per policy. A more recent policy has banished the

WORDS "Fair Game", but the policy of what to do to these "SPs" or

"Suppressives" cannot ever be cancelled, as it is Hubbardian

scripture, and his words cannot ever be altered in any way per

Scientology's policy. "Dennis Erlich, being an SP, is subject to

Fair Game."

Fall, a Meter read of about an inch movement to the left.

F&F, the name of the mission that was sent to execute the programme

targets establishing the "United Churches" front (Flag) in

Clearwater, Florida.

Fastflow, able to zip through course checksheets because of

superliteracy obtained from M1 word clearing and the Student Hat.

FB, Flag Bureaux - Oversees all Sea Org service organizations and

all Class V (formerly Class IV) organizations. - Jonathon Barbera.

FCB, Flag Command Bureaux - In charge of internal management of

upper middle management. - Jonathon Barbera.

FDN, Foundation, qv.

FDSing, False Data Stripping. Brainwashing 101; an auditing

("therapy") procedure involving stripping away "bad" thoughts or

wrong ideas and replacing them with the proper cultic dogma. The

ideas are located, cleansed, and replaced with the "true data".

"Success Story: today I had a big win using FDSing to get rid of

the False Datum that Psyches are trying to help people!"

FEBC, the Flag Executive Briefing Course. A top-level training

course for EDs and other executives delivered at ITO and possibly a

few other high training orgs. The FEBC used to incorporate strange

events like the Kali ceremony, the ritualistic destruction of model

orgs.

Field, noun. The "wog world" (disparaging term for everyday society

and the non-Scientology world) outside the Org. "The field is

getting so muddy that it is hard to get new Raw Meat in and onto

our lines!"

Field Auditors, roaming Scientology recruiters and auditors who are

meant to channel people into missions and Class V Orgs. See FSM.

Fifth galactic invader force, insect-creatures with horrible hands.

Psychs (Scientology's derogatory term for psychiatrists) are from

these galactic invaders who threaten our very existence on this

planet, according to L. Ron Hubbard.

Finance Dictator, the person in charge of extracting money from all

the little people or peons in Scientology. An Apt name, given the

brutality with which this all-important function is carried out.

"The Finance Dictator went after the Mission-Holders in a big

money-grab in the early 1980s."

Flag, the former name of the ship Hubbard was Commodore on, the

Apollo. When the Sea Org (high level Scientologists who sign

billion-year contracts) came ashore in Clearwater, Florida, they

set up the Flag Land Base, an upper-level Class XII Org, now just

called Flag. "I got my Ls at Flag, and my case was really cracked!"

Flag Executive Briefing Course, see FEBC.

FLB, see Flag.

Flub, a mistake made in the auditing "therapy."

Flubless, perfect auditing without errors; a "star-high goal" that

is never achieved, as numerous therapy "repairs" point up.

F/N, Floating Needle. A rhythmic swinging of the Meter needle back

and forth indicating end of session, or completion of a "therapy"

process. Also commonly used to indicate good vibes, as in "I've

been F/Ning all day!"

FO, Flag Order, a blue-on-white written directive similar to

Hubbard Communication Office Policy Letters, HCOPLs, for Sea Org

members. There is a Sea Org Briefing Course which consists of all

non-confidential FOs still in use. Flag Orders are a vital policy

line, as the Sea Org is the commanding and controlling organization

in Scientology which runs as a thread throughout the entire cult.

Folder, an Ethics (Scientology's corrections section) folder or

Auditing "therapy" folder in which Scientology collects all the

dirt on people obtained from auditing sessions and Ethics actions

which can be used as blackmail to keep critics quiet. Culled

information from folders of former Scientologists who have turned

into critics has a habit of showing up on ars.

FOLO, Flag Operations Liaison Office. See Flag.

Foundation, one of the two groups inside a Class V Org, which is a

Scientology organization that delivers lower level services.

Foundation works the night and weekend shift, while Day works days.

"Sally works for Foundation, while Sam is Day." See Day.

FPRD, False Purpose Rundown.

FR or F/R, Flag Rep. A minor post in a Class V or lower level Org;

a liaison with Flag, an upper level Class XII organization. "Ronald

was the FR from HAW FDN."

Franchise, an old name used before the more appealing Newspeak

"Mission," qv. Franchise connotes the financial business aspects of

Scientology too much, and so the term "Mission" is now used to add

more religiosity. A Mission is a low level Scientology money making

organization; a franchise, in other words. See Mission.

Freedom, Scientology's newspeak-monikered propaganda newsletter,

used for PR dissemination. See PR, good roads fair weather.

Freeloader debt, a debt incurred by staff members who break their

3, 5, or one billion year (in the Sea Org) contracts, and are thus

required to pay for every auditing action and training course done

to them while on staff. The freeloader debt usually runs into the

tens of thousands, but cannot be collected in most cases as the

contract in not considered to be in good faith.

Freewinds, the SO-run (Sea Org) ship that cruises around tropical

ports and gives the OT-8s (top level Scientologists) a hangout

while they proceed with their auditing. Ah, how nice it must be to

be at the top of the Bridge on a Clear day!

Free Zone, (also Freezone); a loose affiliation of people who still

believe in some of the ideas of Scientology auditing procedures,

but who have left the formal structure of the cult in a type of

Scientology Reformation. The Free Zone is a little more liberal

than the hard-core Churchies, as they sometimes like to call people

still in the cult proper, yet they often still have the trappings

of Scientology, for example, the E-Meter, Auditing, the concepts of

Ethics, Overts (bad deeds), Conditions, and the use of disparaging

terms for outsiders, (Meatballs, Bashers, Wogs, etc.) The cult

proper hates these splinterers and labels them "squirrels". Their

newsgroup is alt.clearing.technology; they also have their own

periodicals, such as the _Free Spirit_ and others. "The "Free Zone"

was a term first used by Bill Robertson in the early 80s. Robertson

was a fan of LRH and set up a network of organizations that

delivered the CofS's upper and lower levels grades, including the

Clearing Course, OT levels and NOTs, at a cut-rate." - Joe

Harrington.

Free Zoner, (also Freezoner); a member of the Free Zone, qv.

Opinion is split on whether this term is or is not derogatory. Some

people are happy to be called Free Zoners, and apply the term to

themselves. Others claim it is derogatory when used by critics, but

this may be a confusion with attitudes as expressed in sentences

and simple nouns. Does a sentence like "Canadians are politically

stupid liberals" make the term "Canadian" a derogatory term? Free

Zoners have been called deluded for still adhering to Hubbardian

views and holding the vile man in high regard; I do not believe

that this can make the term itself derogatory, but others feel

differently about it. The term did not arise within the critical

arena, which sheds further doubt on the derogatory label

hypothesis.

FSM, Field Staff Member. Mercenaries who recruit people using

selection slips for Scientology and get a 15% profit of the value

of services purchased by their recruits in return.

FSO, 1. Flag Ship Organization. In reality this has been various

ships and locations over the last 30 years. 2. FSO also means Flag

Service Org which is in Clearwater, FL and is usually referred to

as simply Flag. "FSO - Flag Service Organization - Highest level

training organization in the world and can deliver the processing

side of the Bridge up to New OT VII. Located in Clearwater,

Florida, USA." - Jonathon Barbera.

FSSO, Flag Ship Service Organization, Clearwater, FL. The Flag Ship

was the Apollo in Hubbard's day, now it is the Freewinds out

cruising the Caribbean. OT 8 is done on the FSSO, the Freewinds.

FZ, see Free Zone. (act)

G:

Gang-Bang Sec Check, a cruel process involving getting the victim

to confess to "crimes" or Overts while on a meter and in front of a

group of people. Used as a heavy brainwashing technique when a PC

threatens to blow. "Three people in the past year have said they

have had Gang-Bang Sec Checks recently."

GE, Genetic Entity. A low-grade soul that stores whole track

engrams (memories of pain and unconsciousness from the last few

trillion years of the patient's life) like the clam incident

(people descended from clams, according to Hubbard.) The concept of

the GE can be hard to understand until one realizes that it is

unadulterated nonsense, like much of Scientology.

GI, 1. Gross Income. One of the most important Stats (statistics)

for cult groups. 2. Good Indicators; a smiling face after an

auditing or "therapy" action.

GO, the Guardian's Office. The cult's KGB, responsible for

attacking SPs, (qv) publishing Dead Agent materials (largely

manufactured dirty laundry on perceived enemies), framing political

figures and judges, intimidating witnesses, etc. Now renamed OSA,

the Office of Special Affairs, qv.

Godwin's Law, a rhetorical construct that postulates that the mere

mention of the holocaust in an argument renders it null and void,

as the slaughter of seven million Jews in WWII is a singularly

momentous and ghastly historical event. Some people stretch the law

to apply to mentioning Nazis and the Third Reich generally in any

debate, but this is a dubious over-extension at best. "You are

comparing the RPF to Nazi concentration camps? I hereby invoke

Godwin's Law!"

Gold, this has been used to refer to both Golden Era Studios and

Gold base, now usually referred to as INT, as most INT orgs have

relocated there. In the Sea Org we used to refer to GOLD as "over

the rainbow", and meant a "secret" location in Hemet. - Miss X.

"Golden Era Productions, in charge of producing e-meters, films,

television advertisements, and lectures on cassettes. Includes PDO

(Planetary Dissemination Org)." - Jonathon Barbera. Note: E-Meters

were also produced by Bridge. Grady Ward: "My first impression of

Gold Base as Keith Henson drove me through it on Monday is that it

looked exactly like a Nazi theme park. A delightful little

caricature of a Scientology 'church' with a flowering bed in front

of it - surrounded by the nastiest razor wire, floodlights, and

video observation cameras I have ever seen."

Golden Age of Tech, the. Releases from 1996 reportedly sharpen up

auditing. Apparently the "100% Standard Tech" sold to public over

the last several years was not standard after all. The changes to

unalterable tech include: a revamping of the E-meter with a

variable gain; a student certainty course covering the barriers to

study, parts of the student hat, the TRs, and the metering courses;

the Golden Age of Tech Drills which are rote handlings compiled

from HCOBs and put in quiz/drill form for training on a twin basis

for grades and solo auditing courses; a read generator has been

added to the E-meter; and more emphasis on study and drilling to

the point of not having to think about what to do in a particular

situation.

Good roads, fair weather. A PR technique which all Scientologists

are instructed in to automatically handle criticisms with bland

statements about other things. The idea is to discuss something

"non-reactive" to the person, and also steer the topic away from

Scientology, a topic Scientologists are indoctrinated to not

discuss in any depth for obvious reasons. See PR.

GOSA, see OSA.

GPM, Goals Problems Mass. A supposed mass which develops when one

is thwarted from reaching a Goal by a Problem or stop.

Grades, preliminary steps to the true enlightenment and

understanding of Body Thetans (evil spirits inhabiting the body) on

the OT (Operating Thetan; a person as a spirit able to operate free

of the body) levels. The Grades range from 0, learning to talk, to

VII, clear certainty, and come before clear (a person who is freed

from the effects of the Reactive Mind; the place where all the

memories of pain and unconsciousness are stored) on the Bridge.

Actions before the Grades usually include Life repair, Purification

rundown (which involves sweating in a sauna, running, and taking

vitamin overdoses for a fee of $2,000) and the Drug Rundown, said

to remove the harmful effects of drugs by using the E-Meter. The

typical sequence for processing then goes up the numbered Grades.

See also Class, Bridge, Level.

Grade 0, learn to communicate with anyone about anything. Too bad

no one in Scientology has reached this level! See Class 0.

Grade 1, (I) learn to handle your Problems, as long as they don't

include being a victim of a money-grubbing cult.

Grade 2, (II) Overts and Withholds, your dirty laundry aired in

public. Don't tell them anything you wouldn't mind posted to Usenet

or given out in pamphlets to your neighbors, co-workers and

friends.

Grade 3, (III) deals with Upsets.

Grade 4, (IV) Service Facsimiles, "I'm right and you're wrong" type

of blaming behavior. Guess that lots of people in this "church"

need it. See Ser Fac.

Grade 4.5, (recently, last decade or so, New Era Dianetics (NED,

qv) was put here. If the mark 'goes clear' on new era dianetics

then grades 5, 6, and 7 are skipped. The person does a simple

process called the sunshine rundown, and goes on to OT 1) (No; the

cult doesn't call it Grade 4.5. This is where it would be

logically.)

Grade 5, (V) Power, awareness of self as source. I got the Power,

yeah, yeah. Just keep repeating it; you couldn't really be wasting

thousands of dollars, could you? After all, this is America! You

should be able to buy spiritual freedom! (God knows, you can buy

everything else.) See Power processing.

Grade 6, preparation for the Clearing Course. R6EW, Routine Six,

End Words. Meant to release the locks from the reactive mind. End

Words are a kind of verbal lock that keeps the reactive mind or

whatever in restimulation; more pseudoscience on parade. See R6EW.

Grade 7, Clearing course. Wow! At last you can throw away your

glasses, a la Bates! You'll have perfect recall of what you ate for

dinner! Your IQ will zoom! Your eyes will become glazed! Your

pockets will be feeling a severe drain! (Unless your last name is

Gates.) You're now ready for OT 1; last chance for cognitive

dissonance before the railroad to Total Freedom (tm) routes you

straight to hell, or a close approximation thereof, and all for

just $129.99$! (Oops! I mean $129,000.99!) Visa or Amex accepted,

but cash preferred. Loans available at 25% per week. Financial help

with getting a mortgage on your house free of charge. See Clear

Certainty Rundown.

Gradient, a gradual approach to brainwashing that Scientology

employs so as not to scare off potential recruits. Things like

OT-III, widely available over the net, are deemed to be

"out-gradient", as they drive away raw recruits because they look

like insane gibberish sputtered from the foaming mouth of a

brain-fevered baboon. Also called a "gradient scales approach".

Deviating from this tech is called going "out gradient"; a serious

error.

Green Vols, the green volumes of the OEC (Organization Executive

Course; a high-level and very expensive course that teaches

executives how to manage an organization. Used to siphon money from

Class V Orgs, lower level Orgs, uplines to higher level Orgs that

run the course) that contain Scientology policy. See "Red Vols,

OEC."

Guk Bomb, a mixture of benzedrine, vitamins, and glutamic acid

Hubbard thought helped the auditing "therapy" go smoothly. See also

Dianazene, Purif.

H:

Handle, to fix something up or solve a problem. "Helena Kobrin and

Elaine Siegel were assigned to handle the situation in ars."

HAS, the HCO (Hubbard Communications Office) Are Secretary; a petty

executive in charge of HCO, one of the nine divisions in an org.

The HAS (pronounced like has), is often the person who recruits for

staff; personnel is one of their duties.

HASI, Hubbard Association of Scientologists International. A

precursor to the IAS, qv. Just another way to make money; all

Scientologists must buy memberships in the IAS for about a $1,000.

Hat, noun. A post or job. "She's wearing the Ethics Hat now."

Hat, verb. To train for a post or job. "He is fully Hatted as the

MAA."

Havingness, a feeling of ownership or possession; something quite

unfamiliar to SO (Sea Org) members. "Pete had such Havingness after

he bought his Tech Dictionary." See beingness.

HCO, Hubbard Communication Office. The center of power while L. Ron

Hubbard was in command of the cult (1950-1986); produced the

HCO-policy letters and HCO "tech" bulletins.

HCOB, Hubbard Communications Office Bulletin, a red on white

directive containing Hubbardian "tech" for auditing or "therapy"

procedures.

HCOPL, Hubbard Communications Office Policy Letter, a green on

white issue containing administrative policy.

HES, the Hubbard Communications Office (HCO) Executive Secretary,

one of the three executives directly under the ED, the Executive

Director, along with the PES and OES. Also called the HCO Exec Sec.

HFA, Held From Above. HFA is added to a post title when there is no

one posted to a position. A post is then "held from above" by the

next person up the chain of command on the org board. - Miss X.

HGB, the Hollywood Guaranty [sic] Building, a twelve story office

building at Hollywood Boulevard and Ivar formerly owned by the Bank

of America. It is an old building that was constructed in the 1920s

and purchased by Scientology with cash in the mid-'80s. All

International management (upper middle management above continents

and below *INT* - see Int) is located in this building. It is a

twenty minute walk from the Cedars Complex, and houses IHELP, OSA

Int, and the CMO IXU (Internal eXtension Unit), WISE Int, ABLE Int,

and more. The various orgs on different floors in 1993 looked like

this: 12th floor - OSA Int (includes office of the President of

CSI). 11th - CMO IXU, AVU Int, confidential space. 10th - FCB,

Networks. 9th - FB. 8th - FB, IHELP Int, SMI Int. 7th - WISE Int,

ABLE Int. 6th - Dining room, canteen. 5th through 1st - ITO. 1st -

LRH Exhibit, lobby. Basement - HGB Estates, FB's mimeo collection,

INCOMM office.

HGC, the Hubbard Guidance Center; the place where the expensive

auditing of Scientology processes or crude psychotherapy is done.

"The HGC is down the hall on the right."

High Crime, a serious offense within the cult. "Going by a

misunderstood word is a High Crime."

Hill 10, a serious situation or problem area for Scientology

requiring immediate attention. "OSA now considers ars to be a Hill

10 situation."

HoM, History of Man; an L. Ron Hubbard book which purports that the

Piltdown Man hoax was the ancestor of modern man, and that we

evolved from clams, among many other absurdities. Recommended

reading.

Ho' of Babylon, a nickname given to Helena Kobrin, a lawyer for the

cult of Scientology who sent out threatening letters to numerous

net.surfers in a crude attempt to silence them. (Ho means whore,

prostitute.) See Kobrigram.

Hollywood Guaranty [sic] Building, see HGB.

HQS, Hubbard Qualified Scientologist course.

Hubbard, L. Ron Hubbard. See "Ron."

Hubbardese, see Scientologese.

Hubbardite, a humourous term for a Scientologist, coined by

Science-Fiction writer Robert A. Heinlein. See Clam.

Hubborg, (also Huborg) a pun combining Hubbard + Star Trek's

"Borg", as Scientologists are seen to have a collective hive

mentality at times akin to the science-fiction Borg. It has also

been claimed that it is a combination of Hubbard + Org [anization],

with an earlier genesis; it is possible that it has had two

distinct origins. "They've been assimilated into the Hubborg

Collective."

I:

IAS, International Association of Scientologists. The first six

months is free; after that, it gets very expensive. To receive

Scientological services, IAS membership is mandatory; even staff

are required to pay up, thus sacrificing their entire meager salary

for the fee, frequently. See HASI.

I/C, In Charge. Someone running a Program or project. "She's the

Tech Field Hatting I/C."

I-HELP, International Ecclesiastical League of Pastors; a cult

front-group headquartered in Los Angeles, formerly just across the

street from the main building of the old blue Cedars of Lebanon

complex, now relocated to the HGB, qv, on the 8th floor.

Illegal PC, a Preclear who cannot be audited by virtue of actually

needing some kind of help. Auditing is only for the able, or people

who don't need help, as per policy; it is for making the able more

able, or bilking them for more money. This paradox is explained by

the fact that people who actually need help are harder to turn a

profit on. Specifically, an Illegal PC is one who has had

psychiatric treatments in the past, or appears to Scientologists

like they have (a streetperson or prostitute, for example) and is

deemed too damaged to touch, and a serious security risk to boot.

"Jack Farmer is an Illegal PC; he may not receive the next auditing

level he needs and wants."

Implant, a hypnotic suggestion smashed into one's mind millions or

billions of years ago in Hubbard's Space-Opera Scientology

Cosmology. "One Implant was installed using giant movie screens."

Incident One, 4 quadrillion years ago we were implanted with

visions of cherubs blowing horns, chariots, and blackness. That's

right; 4 *quadrillion* (4*10^15th, or 4,000,000,000,000,000 years!)

What's that you say? 250,000 times the age of the universe? Don't

let that stop you from believing, and anteing up the hundreds of

thousands of dollars it takes to get to this level of brainwashing.

Incident Two, 75 million years ago Xenu, the evil galactic

overlord, froze us, then blew us up with H-bombs on Hawaii,

remember? Also called the wall of fire, or the OT 3 incident. The

cover of Dianetics is meant to symbolize this cataclysmic event,

and compel Wogs to buy the book by restimulating them.

INCOMM, Shown on the official Command Channels chart as Central

Computer Banks (CCB), but this is a part of INCOMM's Division 4

(Tech/Production). This organization is in charge of computerizing

Scientology and management. INCOMM does not have a CMO as it is

directly managed by RTC. - Jonathon Barbera. Now in the HGB, qv.

Indicate, to read on the E-Meter. Generally used as a synonym for

ringing true. "Boy, that really indicates for me!"

In-Ethics, describing a person who is upstat (increasing his or her

production) and not violating any of the crimes of Scientology.

"The new ED of VANF is very In-Ethics on her post."

Int, the International Management level of Scientology's massive

bureaucracy, upper middle management above continental level and

below the INT level. Much of it is now located in the HGB, qv. INT

and Int are not the same thing; Int stands for International

whereas INT refers to the higher INT level organizations. Crew

members of INT level organizations are required to have an INT

security clearance which is somewhat difficult to acquire.

INT Base, see Gold.

Intention, a metaphysical Scientological concept of being able to

project theta into physical objects and other people to exert

mystical control over them. "Put your intention into that ashtray

and make it do what you tell it."

Interiorization, the unfortunate condition of being stuck in one's

body. "I was so Interiorized yesterday; my sinuses ached from it!"

Introspection Rundown, a therapy for handling psychotic breaks in

the cult. Involves locking the person up to prevent bad PR with the

isolation step, also called baby watch. Sometimes instilling such

wacky ideas as Xenu, Body Thetans and OT III can make people a bit

unstable; the IRD is used to contain people when they flip out.

Invalidation, to belittle or make nothing of. "Andy felt so

invalidated by the SPs on ars, he caved in, and left."

Iso, see Introspection Rundown.

Isolation, Isolation Step, see Introspection Rundown.

Issue Authority, the right to publish certain of L. Ron Hubbard's

works.

ITO, International Training Organization - located at Flag in the

late '70s. Formerly located in the Cedars Complex in LA, taking up

several floors of the HGB, qv. Course taught there include the

HPCSC, the FEBC, the KTL, and many others. The org is basically

just a large academy with many courserooms. Almost all the students

are from America, Canada, and Mexico. The Org is run by Sea Org

crew. See HGB.

J:

J&D, Joker and Degrader. According to Hubbard, joking and degrading

about Scientology are signs of a suppressive personality. Worn as a

badge of honor on ars due to one Scientologist labeling certain

people Jokers and Degraders.

JBG, Johannesburg, South Africa Scientology organization. The AOSH

(Advanced Org, Saint Hill; for upper level bridge auditing, ie,

clear and OT) and CLO (Continental Liaison Office) for Africa are

there.

Joburg, a lengthy sexual and criminal security checklist performed

on staff as an auditing action on the E-meter, commonly seen as the

roughest "sec-check" in the cult. The results are used as blackmail

to keep departers silent about the abuses they've seen in the cult.

K:

Key-In, to restimulate (make active) and turn on an engram or

memory incident of pain and unconsciousness so that the PC

(Preclear) patient manifests behavior from it. "John was Keyed-In

by the sound of the plane crash."

Key-Out, to be released from the bad effects of one's Reactive

Mind; the section of the mind, according to Hubbard, where painful

and unconscious engrammatic memories are stored. "Dianetics can

really Key you out, man!"

Kha Khan, an award supposedly given by Hubbard to those who did him

a great service. The awardee gets spared the death sentence ten

times.

Kobrigram, a threatening letter sent to a net.surfer or sysop from

Scientology lawyer Helena Kobrin, also know as the Ho' of Babylon.

Also Kobragram, Kobringram.

KoX, Knights of Xenu. They found the evil galactic overlord Xenu of

Hubbard's quaint Scientology philosophy locked up in a box, and let

him out, the naughty net.surfers! (ars)

KR or K/R, Knowledge Report, a write-up of a cult member's supposed

"crimes" given to the Ethics division; cult members are encouraged

to report each other's transgressions a la Orwell's "1984."

KRC, Knowledge, Responsibility, Control. The senior of the two

Scientology triangles, ARC/KRC (ARC stands for Affinity, Reality,

and Communication.) Control is senior to Affinity, get it?

KSW, Keeping Scientology Working. A series of HCOPLs, Hubbard

Communication Office Policy Letters, designed to ensure Scientology

lasts for hundreds of years, and also that Hubbard's fondest wish,

that his name be smashed violently into the history books, becomes

a reality. (Didn't Manson have a similar desire?)

KSW course, a course based on the KSW, Keeping Scientology Working,

policy letters.

KTL Course, the Key To Life course. Involves lots of pretty

pictures to drive home the brainwashing. Quite expensive.

L:

L10, List ten, a series of processes directed at doingness. Audited

by Class X auditors. Available on Bridge after Grade IV Expanded at

FSO (Flag) only. Over 20 or 30 individual rundowns. A few include:

Lie Rundown, 2D Rundown, Groups Rundown, Enemy Rundown, and

Greatest Overt/Motivator Rundown. Most of these rundowns deal with

overts and evil intentions which the being is using to restrain

himself from doing more. - Jonathon Barbera. See Ls.

L11, List eleven, The New Life Rundown. A series of processes

directed at havingness by handling ridges and masses around the

person. Audited by Class XI auditors. Available on Bridge after

Grade IV Expanded at FSO (Flag) only. - Jonathon Barbera.

L12, List twelve, (The Flag OT Executive Rundown). A series of

processes directed at beingness and exteriorizing the person with

full perceptions. Audited by Class XII auditors. Available on

Bridge after Grade IV Expanded at FSO (Flag) only. Three steps

include: handling why the person is pinned to the body as well as

handling old PTS situations including the phenomena of being PTS to

self, handling identities, and handling a unique phenomena

involving stability and its past, present, and future consequences

(this phenomena may be stuck attention beams on self from others).

- Jonathon Barbera.

Lawn Ornament, David Miscavige. He's a dwarf, geddit? See Poodle.

Lazarus, a program written by Homer to tell posters to ars when

their posts have been canceled by the cult censor on Netcom known

affectionately as the "Cancelpoodle." Thanks, Homer! (ars)

LDNF, London Foundation Org, evenings and weekends.

Level, see Class, Grade.

LF, Long Fall. A swing of the Meter needle to the left of a couple

inches.

LFBD, Long Fall BLow Down. An E-Meter read involving a swing of the

needle to the left, and a consequent need to move the Tone Arm

(potentiometer) of the Meter to keep the needle on the dial.

Life Repair, see Grades.

Lines, the cult's auditing ("therapy") and academy (training)

services. "Ken isn't on lines at Flag anymore."

List One, a sec-check list for overts against Hubbard or

Scientology; see RS.

Locational, a light auditing ("therapy") technique that gets the

thetan (spirit or soul) centered in the MEST (Matter, Energy,

Space, and Time) universe, so he knows where he is. Technique

involves making the PC (Preclear; patient) look at trees, cars,

people, touch books, etc. "Gary is outside doing a locational on

Robert."

LRH, Lafayette Ronald Hubbard, founder of Scientology cult. See

Ron.

LRH Archives, CST, Church of Spiritual Technology. Also, COST.

L. Ron Hubbard, Lafayette Ronald Hubbard. Mediocre pulp-SF writer.

Said in 1947 "If you really want to make millions, the fastest way

is to start your own religion." Scientology cult founder; author of

the turgid "Dianetics"; born 1911 in Tilden, Nebraska, USA; died

1986. See "Ron."

Ls, L10, L11, and L12. Special, extremely expensive Lists or

Rundowns developed in 1970-71 and delivered at Flag. They are done

by Class X, XI and XII auditors (Scientology "therapists") who

shout at the PC (patient) holding the soup cans electrodes of the

Scientology E-Meter. These were designed to handle psychosis,

although now they are used for all Scientologists who are wealthy

enough to afford them. The Ls material mentions the fact that the

Reactive Mind, the storehouse of engrams or memories of pain and

unconsciousness, is composed solely of Body Thetans or evil

spirits. See the individual Ls.

M:

M1, or M1 Word Clearing, one of the 9 methods of the endless word

clearing used in Scientology. M1 is done on a Meter, and locates

charge or upset on words chains by subject, taking each back in

time (often to fabricated past lives). M1 supposedly makes the

recipient "Superliterate", able to "fast flow" through course

checksheets without doing demos or checkouts. See also M8.

M2, metered word clearing done by having the student read aloud,

then look up each word stumbled over or that reads on the meter.

M3, verbal word clearing done by the supervisor in the classroom

and used whenever a student says s/he doesn't understand something.

The sup then asks them to look earlier for a word that isn't

understood, (the implication of Hubbard's perfection being

implicit; if Hubbard wasn't clear or used the wrong word, this is

just not acknowledged) has the student look it up in a dictionary,

and then use it in sentences in the usual way. M3 is one of the

most commonly-used methods of word clearing, along with M4 and

self-study. In self-study, every word found is looked up, used in

sentences, and cleared in each definition, pronunciation, and the

derivation, as in all word clearing. "Set" is checked in all its

permutations that were known already since childhood. "To" is

diligently looked up, although it has little or no intrinsic

meaning. "The" and "a" and "an" are all checked repeatedly,

"definitions" memorized without being understood for the next

supervisor star-rate checkout. For all their word-clearing,

Scientologists are not particularly adept at language, missing the

fact that most words are learned via context and use, not endless

consultation of dry, dead, dictionaries. The average student in

Scientology may spend hours each day flipping through the

dictionaries, yet they don't seem to benefit from the activity at

all. "Word clearing" is an integral part of the brainwashing in the

cult. Its real aim is to make people compliant by doing absurd and

meaningless repetitive tasks while instilling the cult's twisted

semantics and thousands of neologisms and redefinitions from the

two large cult dictionaries of such key terms as "critical

thought", redefined as a completely negative activity. It is

Orwell's _1984_ brought to life by another, albeit inferior,

Science Fiction writer.

M4, metered classroom word clearing. The student is asked to focus

on sections of text of about paragraph to page size and asked if

there's an MU, then the meter is checked for any reaction. The word

so metaphysically located is then looked up and cleared in the

usual way. M4 is one of the most common forms of word clearing,

along with M3 and self-study, as the students works by themselves

to "clear up their MUs". Not clearing up one's own MUs may result

in ethics actions being taken for going by MUs, a serious offense.

This is another cult catch-22 situation, as all students can be

asked for definitions of words like "be" or something equally

ridiculous, hesitate, and end up in trouble. During star-rate

checkouts, definitions are often demanded out of the blue. "What's

the definition of 'too'?", "The number 2?", "Flunk!" being a common

occurrence with no recourse given. Any opposition to the obvious

unfairness of the situation just gets the person in more hot water

in the totalitarian system. Any opposition or complaints are, after

all, a sign of 'natter' produced by, you guessed it, MUs! Word

clearing is an integral part of Scientology brainwashing.

M5, the student is asked what words mean from a list, as in

auditing commands. The ones the person can't define quickly and

accurately are flunked.

M6, key word clearing. The most important words relating to a

specific post are looked up and word cleared in a dictionary upon

any hint of slowness or hesitancy on the part of the staff member.

This is based on the idea that so-called "MUs" can thwart someone's

production on post; an untested idea, to put it mildly.

M7, used for illiterates, children, and foreign-language persons.

The student is made to read aloud, and at each omission or stumble

or hesitation or frown, the word is explained to the person

verbally or looked up for him or her by the twin or word clearer.

M8, part of the Primary Rundown, its end product is superliteracy.

An alphabetical list of every word in the materials being studied,

such as a book or tape, is looked up. This is the most thorough

methods of W/Cing. Its requirement for the exalted state of

"superliteracy" has been superseded by M1, or was at one time in

the cult.

M9, unmetered word clearing action. Student is made to read the

text aloud while the word clearer follows along in another copy of

the text. When the student stumbles or frowns or coughs, etc., the

word is thoroughly looked up and "cleared" by the usual method.

MAA, Master At Arms. A Sea Org (highly indoctrinated Scientologists

who sign billion-year contracts) Ethics Officer, responsible for

keeping Ethics in (keeping the all-important production up; someone

who produces well in Scientology is almost always regarded as being

in-Ethics; the ends justify the means is policy.) Their lower org

equivalent is called an Ethics Officer, or EO.

Marcab Confederacy, a galactic confederation and the denizens

thereof. It is a star system in the astronomy charts. It is also

supposed to be the source of most of the destructive suppressive

influences attacking the Earth at this time and in the past. For

the last 100,000 years they've been driving cars, wearing business

suits and fedora hats, using telephones, and flying spaceships.

Remember that episode of Star Trek? "The Marcabians are coming to

Earth, and they're going to lay waste to it, according to Captain

Bill."

Meatball, A derogatory Free Zone (qv) term for people who don't

believe in their strange ideas. (act) See Basher.

Mental Image Picture, a picture in the Reactive mind, the

repository of memories of painful and unconscious moments. "Bob has

a stuck mental image picture of an atom bomb going off on top of

his head 200 trillion years ago."

Merchant of Chaos, a cult synonym for an anti-Scientologist or

Suppressive Person. A bad person; a person who speaks ill of

Scientology, and should therefore be punished.

MEST, Matter, Energy, Space, and Time; the constituents of the

physical universe, or the physical universe itself. Seen as a

lesser domain than the spiritual or Theta realm.

Milgram Experiment, the; a psychological influence process. "A very

famous psychology experiment with a rather depressing result.

Milgram's subjects were put in front of a device that was supposed

to administer electric shocks to someone in another room (the other

person was actually an actor who responded as if he were being

shocked) and were then ordered by Milgram to administer increasing

levels of shocks, even levels that were marked as 'dangerous' on

the device and that elicited a simulation of agony from the actor.

He found that most of his subjects obeyed him, even when they

generally believed that they were injuring the other person. The

experiment basically showed that the 'Nuremberg defense' mindset is

alive and well in the US; people are conditioned to obey authority

and will compromise their own principles to do so. The experiment

was done in the late '60s or early '70s; I doubt things have gotten

better since then. Remember that most Americans now think of the

late '60s and early '70s as one of the worst periods in American

history, and cite 'lack of respect for authority' as one of the

main reasons for why it was so terrible." - Eric Bohlman. Read

Obedience to Authority: An Experimental View, by Stanley Milgram

(Harper & Row, 1974).

Misemotional, describing a display of inappropriate emotion; for

example, crying for no reason. "Mary has been misemotional since

her last action; she needs a repair."

Mission, 1. the Newspeak-corrected term for a cult franchise, as

Hubbard originally and more accurately called them before the

"religious angle" was adopted to garner tax breaks for his company.

Last heard, the package used to set up a Mission could be bought

for US $56,000. A year or two ago, the Co$ management gloated that

1,000 mission franchises had been sold at $56,000 each. That works

out to $56,000,000 all told. If the cult's total annual gross is

$300,000,000, then this one source accounts for nearly 1/5. These

franchises are meant to pay their owners 15%, trouble is, if your

Mission ever makes it, it will be taken away from you. Missions

cannot train auditors, but they can deliver low-level courses and

processing; they are meant to send their "products" on to the next

higher org on the ladder, the nearest Class V Org. 2. A set of

orders given to Missionaires (Sea Org members sent to clay demo and

then carry out some orders) to go out and do an action, usually

gathering money from low-level Scientology Orgs, getting back

"blown" staff members, and so forth. Missions are notoriously

violent in their methods, and lower-level orgs live in fear of

getting a set of these Sea Org bully-boys with their daggers and

uniforms in to "put in their ethics" (make them fork over more

money) and "get their stats up" with intimidation tactics. Missions

are sometimes given absolute ethics authority, meaning they are

allowed to do anything to "get ethics in".

Missionaire, a Sea Org member specially trained to do a Mission,

and given orders, (which are often clay-demoed) and sent out to get

something done. "The Missionaires from Up-Lines arrived, and

demanded $25,000 from our local Org."

Misunderstood, misuderstood word, see M/U, M3, M4.

Mock Up, to make up; particularly mental imagery, but may also

apply to physical things. Scientologists may often confuse external

reality with imagination or fantasy, and may well not see the

difference between imagining a wall, and taking a hammer and nails

and building one. "Mock up a wall. Thank you. Now destroy that

wall. Thank you."

Motivator, a nasty thing that one "pulls in" as a result of having

prior overts, undisclosed naughty acts. In other words, anything

that happens to you is your own fault; you deserved it because you

are essentially evil. "The cult of Scientology has lots of

motivators; they keep saying 'look what they did to us!'"

M/U, Mis-U, or MU; a misunderstood word, meant to cause everything

from blows (sudden departures) to overts and withholds, and

actually being the root cause of SPs. Because of the centricity of

"MUs" and their destructive potential it is a crime to go by them

when studying, and subjects the student to the risk of getting a

kangaroo "court of ethics". The cult is fanatical about not going

by one, and insists that everyone look things up endlessly in

dictionaries and go through every definition. This becomes quite

tedious with words like "to", "set", and "be." Extensive pieces of

the "tech" are devoted to "word clearing", qv, and so the hapless

student ends up trapped in a arbitrary system which may punish or

help, punish or help, alternately, with the word clearing or the

ethics actions. The very definition of "MU" is mutable and

arbitrary in that it is a word that makes one frown or blink or

stumble on or slow down on reading, etc., as spotted by others -

all of this adds to the coercive, conforming, and group- pressure

nature of the beast. See M3, M4 for more on this topic. "Look up

your M/Us and quit your nattering Mister, or I'll have you busted

down to Ethics!"

M/U Phenomena, the emotional upset leading to Blows, disappearances

from the organization, that follows going by a misunderstood word,

according to the cult's "study tech." M/U Phenomena is the only

reason someone gives up on Scientology, according to Hubbard. If

you think it is all nonsense, it is because you went by a word you

didn't understand. If you think it is dangerous, and that the RPF

(Rehabilitation Project Force; the cult's gulag) is repressive and

sick, you just have an M/U. If you think the Purification Rundown

is bizarre, you have an M/U, and it is your problem. Get it?

N:

Narconon, a cult front-group that purportedly cures drug addition.

Narconon is used for cult recruitment; its techniques have been

called unscientific, medically unsound, and possibly dangerous.

Natter, to say negative things; to give off bad vibes. Natter is

said to be caused by going past Misunderstood words, and having

Overts or undisclosed bad acts, and can thus lead to Blows. "If you

don't stop Nattering, you're going to the RPF!"

NED, New Era Dianetics. Dianetics on the wholetrack, your last 75

trillion years. NED for OTs is abbreviated NOTS, and as this is

done solo, with the soup-can electrodes of the E-Meter in one hand

so the other is free to write up the session, it is then called

Solo NOTS. See Grade 4.5, OT 5.

New OT I, II, etc. See OT I, II, etc.

Newspeak, George Orwell's "1984" explication of applied semantics.

"1984" provides much insight into the cult of Scientology, by the

way.

NLSCC, the Netherlands branch office of the ARSCC, which also does

not exist.

Non-E, Non-Existence. A production level; someone is said to be in

Non-E when they are new on their post, not known to all the other

Org terminals (people), and not producing anything. There is a

formula for getting out of Non-E all the way up to Power, the best

condition, or measure of an individual's production. It is all

about making more money. See Conditions.

NOTS, NED (New Era Dianetics) for OTs (Operating Thetans). See NED,

OT 5.

NYF, New York Foundation Org, evenings and weekends.

O:

Oat Tea, what the bus driver sometimes calls the OT or Operating

Thetan levels of Scn's bizarre space-opera auditing "technology" in

which body thetans are removed from the mark for a few thousand

bucks.

Obedience to authority, see Milgram experiment.

Objectives, low-level "therapy" procedures meant to instill

pliability and sheep-like passivity in new Scientologists. Most

involve physical manipulation of the body, on the premise that the

"raw meat" is too "low-toned" to be run or real auditing. See

Control.

OC, see Orange County.

OEC, Organization Executive Course. An executive training course

and its associated policy in HCOPLs, Hubbard Communication Office

Policy Letters, collected into a set of eight large numbered green

volumes, also called the "Green Vols." A person knowing the data in

these volumes fully and applying it could completely reverse any

down-trending statistics, or even a bring back a failing company,

Hubbard says. "OEC 0 is the Basic Staff Volume; read it before you

commit a crime on post." See also "Red Vols."

OES, the Organization Executive Secretary, one of the three

executives directly under the ED, the Executive Director, along

with the HES and PES. Also called the Org Exec Sec.

Off lines, not paying and taking Scientology training or "therapy".

See lines.

One One or 1.1, someone stuck at 1.1 on Hubbard's emotional Tone

Scale, an SP (Suppressive Person; someone who disagrees with

Scientology and deserves to be destroyed because of their beliefs.)

See Tone Scale.

On lines, taking Scientology services in the form of processing

"therapy" or training. Also used loosely as meaning in contact or

communication with, as "Mary has a Psych on her lines." See lines.

On Source, following Hubbard exactly as written; being true to

Hubbard's word. See Source.

OoS, Organization of Scientology, pronounced "ooze". Similar to Co$

and many others, a joking name for Scientology sometimes used by

its critics, in this case as a protest against the application of

the term "church" (as in CoS, Church of Scientology) to what is

essentially a giant con game cum criminal conspiracy.

Operating Thetan, the exalted state that is the target of Scn's

weird "technology" of removing body thetans, said to be accompanied

by strange powers like the ability to kill someone with a thought

or fry a bug at a considerable distance. See OT.

Operation Foot Bullet, a joke at Scientology's expense; the

Scientologists whose job it is to "contribute" to ars often seem to

be doing so poorly, it is as if they're shooting themselves in the

foot. Humorously named after the seriously criminal Operation

Freakout and Operation Snow White. There's been some call to update

this to Operation Foot Bazooka, given the incredible stunts the

cult has pulled recently like suing the German government.

Operation Freakout, a plan to carry out the Fair Game policy, the

policy of attacking perceived Scientology enemies, on Paulette

Cooper, the author of the book "The Scandal of Scientology." The GO

(Guardian's Office, the cult's KGB-like security organization

responsible for covert operations and dirty tricks of all kinds)

operation involved framing Ms. Cooper with a bomb threat made to

the Arab Consulate, among other things.

Operation Snow White, see Snow White.

Op Pro by Dup, an Objective, qv, that involves copying the

auditor's simple hand motions like the child's game of pat-a-cake.

See Control.

Op-Term, a situation of opposition to a terminal or person, giving

a reason to fight. "Sue started Op-Terming with the SPs on ars; she

would have been better off not giving them a game."

Orange County, OC, - also abbreviated SOC for Scientology Orange

County. When I was in the Sea Org it was located on Irvine Blvd in

Tustin, CA. - Miss X.

Org, Noun. Organization; a cult group, internally called a

"Church." Org usually refers to a Class IV Org (now Class V);

Higher up than a low level Mission or franchise, but lower than a

Class XII Org, or Advanced Org, (AO), or Saint Hill Org. ASHO

stands for the American Saint Hill Org, while AOLA stands for the

Advanced Org, Los Angeles. Both ASHO and AOLA are higher up the

power chain than a Class V Org.

Organization Executive Course, see OEC.

Org Board, a map to the massive cult bureaucracy; details every

post, division, department, executive, etc. that go to make up a

Scientology Organization. Some Org Boards contain seven divisions,

some have nine; they all have a large number of specifically

defined posts. See Division.

OSA, Office of special affairs. The "dirty work" department, the

cult's KGB. Took over from the GO, Guardian's Office, when the GO's

leaders went to jail for infiltrating government offices, stealing

and altering official files that put the cult in a bad light. "OSA

Int - Office of Special Affairs International - Oversees DSA

(Director of Special Affairs) network as well as handling

international external threats against the Church of Scientology

and international legal matters." - Jonathon Barbera. Also called

GOSA as a pun on GO+OSA, a