Sanford leads the Rawlings Atlantic US office where he provides product marketing services though the use of social media and online community strategies - providing guidance on both the implementation and engagement process. His sector expertise includes web & technology services, online media, relationship marketing, digital cinema and online campaigning.

As an international thought leader in online and word-of-mouth marketing and community building solutions, in 2004, Sanford expanded the Rawlings offering into the political sector by serving as the Chief Technology Officer for John Kerry Presidential campaign where he lead the planning and implementation of the campaign's internet technology, online voter relationship and contribution strategy and, through our subsidiary Rawlings Political, went on to provide effective solutions for Gubernatorial, Sentatorial and Congressional campaigns. Commerically, he has worked with Fortune 500 firms, leading venture funds and promising start-ups through product marketing and development strategies to help investors and management teams better understand and execute on customer focused solutions through the effective use of technology and relationship marketing.

Prior to joining Rawlings, while based in London, Sanford was the Head of IP Products and Services for Interoute Telecommunications, an emerging pan-European telecommunication service provider, in addition to serving as the Chief Technology Officer for The Hot Group, a leading UK online recruitment firm. In Silicon Valley, Sanford was Director of Marketing of eGroups (acquired by Yahoo!), an advisor to PayPal (acquired by Ebay) and an early stage advisor to and investor in a number of technology companies. Prior to that he had over 10 years of experience in software development, technology and product management in North America , Europe and the Middle East for Accenture, Motorola, IBM and Cray Research.

Sanford holds a BSc in Computer and Electrical Engineering with Distinction from Purdue University and a Masters, Engineers and Doctorate (ABD) in Electrical Engineering from Stanford University where he was active in university and community governance for over eight years. An investor, board member and mentor of early stage companies in Europe and the US, Sanford is a frequent and sought after speaker on online community and network building and has been a guest lecturer at the CASS Business School in London, George Washington University and The Cooper Union in New York. He is an adjunct faculty member at The Cooper Union for the Advancement of Science and Art in New York City and his thoughts on the future of relationship marketing in politics can be found at his blog, Political Gastronomica.