I am forwarding this message to groups of which I am a moderator. It

was posted by the moderator of another e-mail group but it give a some

general information about the changeover. If you try to go to the

egroups web site, you will find it has switched to Yahoo. In order to

access anything on the website pertaining to our group, you must first

convert from the old egroups registration and register with Yahoo. They

have made it relatively painless, yet it requires you to choose a user

name and password on Yahoo. It took me about 10 attempts before I

finally found a username not already in use. Once I successfully

registered with Yahoo, it automatically converted me and connected my

new Yahoo registration with all the groups I belong to.

If I understand this correctly, the changeover will have no affect on

sending and receiving regular email messages to/from the group, but if

you are set up as "web only" or if you want to view the archives, etc.,

you will have to register with Yahoo before you can view and post

messages.

toggle quoted message Show quoted text

-------- Original Message --------

Subject: Egroups Has Now Finally Become Yahoo

Date: Fri, 26 Jan 2001 14:21:40 -0500

From: Harry Dewey <harryd@...>

Reply-To: "Alpine-L, the Electronic Rock Garden Society;

postings copyright by authors." <ALPINE-L@...>

Organization: Alpine-L, the Electronic Rock Garden Society

To: ALPINE-L@...

Everyone who has tried today (January 26) to reach an egroups web

site has no doubt been surprised to see that the familiar Egroups

logos have been replaced by Yahoo logos and software.

I have been as surprised by this development as anyone else, and am

sorry I was not in a position to mitigate your surprise before now.

It is not the end of the world, although the software was, in my

opinion, poorly designed in that, although there is a shortcut

whereby "former Egroups members" can bypass the worst of the Yahoo

registration procedures, the Yahoo "welcome" page does not make

instantly clear how you can simplify the transition from Egroups to

Yahoo. No warning that this was anything but weeks or months away

reached me until I tried to reach our AlpenPix message archive

today.

Although Egroups doesn't make it very clear, the shortcut for

Egroups subscribers is a blue-and-red-outlined box near the upper

left corner of the Yahoo screen. In the bluc-and-red-outlined box,

in black letters, are the words: "Welcome EGroups Members! Learn

More!" If you click on that,

you will be able to make the transition much more simply than if you

follow the instructions for signing up that occupy the right-hand

side of that screen. Maybe the Yahoo people thought this shortcut

would be obvious to all, but it was not so in my case, and I did it

the hard way.

Yahoo has declared today that it is entirely possible to continue

receiving email from existing Egroups/Yahoo emailinglists without

having to acquire a Yahoo ID and password. The "shortcut" referred

to in my third paragraph above is apparently designed to achieve

this result.

If anyone has any questions about procedure, please don't hesitate

to write to Alpine-L-Request@...

I believe it is still possible for me to sign you up to any Egroups

(now Yahoo) subsidiary list for the purpose of accessing our FAQs,

our AlpenPix picture archives, etc., without your giving your age,

etc. Let me know if you have problems, please.