Share this Article:

The latest Film Stories Podcast takes in two Kevin Costner corkers: No Way Out (1987) and Bull Durham (1988). It’s a Kevin Costner double bill in the latest episode of the Film Stories podcast – and whilst the films are very different, there is a link between them. 1987’s No Way Out is actually a remake, something its director – Roger Donaldson – wasn’t actually aware of. One of the very best thrillers of the 1980s – especially if you don’t know its twists and turns – its release actually ended up being held back to see if another Costner-headlined movie would prove more successful first. Yet it was the ultimate success of No Way Out that finally led to Bull Durham getting off the ground, after a hell of a challenge to raise the money for the movie. It was far from the only challenge, either: an executive at Orion Pictures was causing problems, and there was a casting demand that wasn’t going away… Both films are covered in this episode. Both films are also making their UK Blu-ray debut this month, and you can find details on the releases at store.filmstories.co.uk — Thank you for visiting! If you’d like to support our attempts to make a non-clickbaity movie website: Follow Film Stories on Twitter here, and on Facebook here. Buy our Film Stories and Film Junior print magazines here. Become a Patron here.

Share this Article:

More like this

In conversation with Phillip Noyce - Fast Charlie, Clear And Present Danger, Patriot Games, Blind Fury, Rabbit Proof Fence and more

by Simon Brew | Mar 15, 2024 | Podcasts

Director Phillip Noyce joins us for a very special episode of the Film Stories podcast - and there's a lot to talk about....

Podcast | in conversation with Baroness Beeban Kidron

by Simon Brew | Jul 05, 2024 | News, Podcasts

Baroness Beeban Kidron in a podcast special, from lunch with George Lucas and Steven Spielberg to a life-changing documentary....

Podcast | Mad Max: Fury Road (2015) and Babe: Pig In The City (1998)

by Simon Brew | Dec 04, 2023 | Podcasts

Two George Miller sequels are on the billing for our latest podcast - Mad Max: Fury Road and Babe: Pig In The City - with one proving a lot more...

Podcast | Saving Private Ryan (1996) and Mass (2021)

by Simon Brew | Apr 15, 2024 | Podcasts

Steven Spielberg's Saving Private Ryan, and the hugely underseen and underrated Mass, take centre stage in the latest podcast....