Adam J. Martin is a business strategist at the intersection of technology, government and innovation. A passion for emerging technology that expands democracy and creates economic opportunity has connected his work, from expanding broadband access in under-served U.S. markets, to developing mobile applications in emerging markets, and to accelerating the open data and open government movements across governments.

Adam currently works on Esri’s open location platform strategy, key interoperability initiatives, and national data sharing policies and practices. He previously served as the Open Data Program Manager for the City of Raleigh, NC and co-led the local Code for America chapter in Durham. Before returning to government related work, he spent more than three years in India leading sales and starting the Mumbai office of ZipDial, an early stage, venture-backed mobile marketing startup that sold to Twitter in January 2015.

Adam started his career as a technology strategy consultant for Fortune 500 companies at inCode, a consulting group within VeriSign, Inc, based in Washington, D.C. He then led investment analysis for over $550 million in broadband infrastructure projects at the U.S. Department of Commerce's Broadband Technology Opportunities Program.

Adam graduated from Davidson College cum laude with a B.A. in Political Science. He has had formal training in product management, agile product development, user centered design, data analysis and visualization, and financial modeling.

If really interested…

Adam is interested in working with people who are re-imagining government "as platform" through experiments at the local government level. In 2015, he advised the National League of Cities on the Multi-City Innovation Campaign, an experimental kick-starter style program backed by twenty local governments to spur civic innovation. Before coming to the City of Raleigh, he helped manage a federal "smart cities" program to advance a broad array of approximately 40 applications within cities through a public-private partnership between the private, non-profit US Ignite and the U.S. Department of Commerce's National Institute of Science and Technology. As a volunteer, he also leads Code for Durham, the local non-profit chapter of Code for America in Durham, NC, creating space for civic hacking, local government innovation and civic engagement through open data and technology experimentation.

Prior to making the Research Triangle his home, Adam and his wife Sarah spent over three years in Mumbai. There, he helped build ZipDial, an award-winning mobile engagement and analytic platform, as the sales director and international business development manager. ZipDial was named #8 Most Innovative Company in the world in Fast Company magazine in 2014 and acquired by Twitter in January 2015. Before ZipDial, he served as one of the core team members within the U.S. Department of Commerce's $3.4B Broadband Technology Opportunities program in Washington, DC, leading investment analysis in 21st century economic infrastructure.

Adam started his career as a management consultant at inCode, a technology-focussed business strategy consulting firm, with clients such as AT&T, VeriSign and top tier private equity firms. He graduated cum laude from Davidson College with a B.A. in Political Science.