‘The Holy Mountain’ [Masters of Cinema] on Blu-ray & DVD June 17, 2019!

German filmmaker Arnold Fanck made this beautifully photographed Bergfilm, or mountain film , in 1926. Written in three days and nights especially for Leni Riefenstahl The Holy Mountain took over a year to film in the Alps with an entourage of expert skiers and climbers. Ostensibly a love triangle romance between Riefenstahl s young dancer and the two explorers she encounters Fanck relishes the glorious Alpine landscape by filming death-defying climbing, avalanche dodging, and frenetic downhill ski racing.

The greatest of the German ‘mountain films’ and the film which launched the career of Leni Riefenstahl

German filmmaker Arnold Fanck made this beautifully photographed Bergfilm, or mountain film , in 1926. Written in three days and nights especially for Leni Riefenstahl The Holy Mountain took over a year to film in the Alps with an entourage of expert skiers and climbers.

Ostensibly a love triangle romance between Riefenstahl s young dancer and the two explorers she encounters Fanck relishes the glorious Alpine landscape by filming death-defying climbing, avalanche dodging, and frenetic downhill ski racing.

Digitally restored in 2K, The Holy Mountain is a visual feast and a fascinating look at the origin of a genre. The Masters of Cinema Series is very proud to present this landmark film in its UK debut on Blu-ray.

BLU-RAY SPECIAL FEATURES

1080p presentation on Blu-ray, from a 2014 2K digital restoration

Score by Aljoscha Zimmerman, available in both LPCM 2.0 and DTS-HD MA 5.1

Original German intertitles with optional English subtitles

The Wonderful, Horrible Life of Leni Riefenstahl [180 mins] Ray Müller s definitive documentary on the life and career of Leni Reifenstahl.

Feature Length Audio Commentary by film historian Travis Crawford

PLUS: a collector s booklet featuring a new essay by critic and film historian Kat Ellinger, and a 2004 essay by Doug Cummings from the original Masters of Cinema DVD release.

DETAILS:

Label: Eureka!

Title| THE HOLY MOUNTAIN (Masters of Cinema) Blu-ray edition

Starring| LENI RIEFENSTAHL | LUIS TRENKER | ERNST PETERSEN

Director|ARNOLD FANCK

Blu-ray Cat. No.| EKA70341

Blu-ray Barcode| 5060000703412

Blu-ray RRP| £16.99

Release Date| 17 June 2019

Certificate| U

Run Time| 105 minutes

OAR| 1.33:1

Picture| Silent / Drama

Genre| Tinted

Year| 1926

Country| GERMANY

Language| GERMAN (Intertitles)

Subtitles| ENGLISH (Optional)

The Holy Mountain is released

on Blu-ray & DVD June 17, 2019 in the UK!