Originally released in 1926 Dr. Arnold Fanck’s The Holy Mountain (Der heilige Berg) is generally acknowledged to be the greatest epic of the German ‘Bergfilm (Mountain Film)’ genre, it also marked the big screen debut of Hitler’s favourite film director Leni Riefenstahl. Restred in 2K from original prints, it has just been released on Blu-ray for the first time in the UK by Eureka as part of their Masters of cinema series.

Riefenstahl, who was a professional dancer herself, plays Diotima whose dancing entrances Karl (Luis Trenker) who brings her back to his alpine home. Unfortunately she also entrances Karl’s young pal Vigo (Ernst Petersen) and when Karl thinks he has caught them being intimate together hatches a plot to take Vigo up into the mountains and engineer a tragic accident.

However when the weather turns nasty Karl heroically tries to save his friend, as Diotima energizes the local skiers into a rescue attempt.

As a genre the Bergfilm were very popular and seen by the Nazis to promote a much healthier, more Germanic lifestyle and politics than the more decadent examples of Weimar cinema being helmed by the like of Von Sternberg or Murnau. As such the body beautiful is celebrated with lots of energetic skiing and comradely mountain climbing, celebrated with hearty backslapping. When she isn’t dancing Riefenstahl gambols through alpine meadows cuddling lambs and even drinking from the same trough as the sheep! The film was a great favourite with Adolf Hitler who particularly admired the opening scenes with Riefenstahl dancing on a rocky coastline. Riefenstahl would later go on to make Triumph of the Will the infamous documentary of the Nazi’s 1933 Nuremburg Rally, though she maintained that she was never a party member and it was just a job.

Fraught with cost overruns due to the weather The Holy Mountain is stunningly photographed by Sepp Allgeier, Albert Benitz, Helmar Lerski and Hans Scneeberger and features quite extraordinary location footage of skiing and mountaineering given the limitations of film cameras at the time. The composition of the shots is particularly interesting juxtaposing the majestic Alpine mountains and cloudscape with the tiny figures of the cast.

As an extra the Blu-Ray contains an audio commentary by Travis Crawford and Ray Muller’s extremely long but very interesting documentary The Wonderful, Horrible Life of Leni Riefenstahl which documents her rise from dancer and actress to the go to filmmaker for Adolf Hitler and then her post war life as a photographer and marine life documentary maker.