Make a difference, work with a passionate team, and help people in the community.

Work from home on a part-time basis in this highly flexible role.

Location is flexible, our team are based in Sydney, Melbourne, and Canberra

Pink Hope is Australia’s leading patient organisation committed to supporting people to understand and manage their risk of hereditary cancer. Our vision is that every Australian is informed and supported to manage their risk of hereditary cancer and we do this through three pillars of Support, Education and Advocacy. We run targeted and evidence-based health campaigns based on key health messages around hereditary cancer. Pink Hope works collaboratively with healthcare professionals, Family Cancer clinics and other not for profits to advocate for better outcomes for the community including earlier diagnoses, risk reduction and better treatment options.

We’re looking for a passionate and creative Digital Marketing Specialist to help bring our story to life across multiple channels: social media, EDM, advertising material, events, and our broader online community. You will be responsible for creating original copy and visual content, managing posts, and responding to followers. You will manage our organisation’s brand in a cohesive way to achieve our goals and increase our reach. We’re unbelievably passionate about what we do and want to work with people who share this passion.

You will be our brand voice and have a confident approach to what you do. You’ll love creating fun and engaging content that is fresh and on-brand.

WHAT YOU’LL BE DOING:

End-to-end responsibility for in-house graphic and branding needs and managing outsourcing as necessary.

Management of our social media and digital accounts and engaging with followers and other social media accounts as needed.

Promotion of content through social media advertising and google ads.

Create self-produced in-house photo and video content for all digital channels.

Maintain and expand our website with updates and new content.

Responsible for ideation, planning and orchestrating our new and ongoing digital campaigns.

Develop & implement content for marketing campaigns and social media channels (including images, ads, video, EDMs, blogs, competitions etc)

Enjoy keeping up to date with all the trends and developments that affect our industry and developments in digital marketing.

Prepare monthly reports including campaign and social media analytics.

Grow our database and social media engagement.

Manage SEO, Google analytics and Google Ads.

WHAT YOU’LL BRING TO THE TABLE:

Experience creating creative designs using both Canva and Adobe Creative Suite – We can’t wait to see some of your creations!

Proven digital marketing, social media, and content creation experience for an established brand.

Experience with a wide variety of software platforms that are key to content creation and digital marketing – Mailchimp/Campaign Monitor, WordPress, Google Analytics and Google Ads.

Ideally some photography and video editing experience – and you’ll have the opportunity to develop this further on the job.

Hands-on experience in content management and a good understanding of social media trends.

Excellent copywriting skills with the ability to deliver creative content (text, image, and video)

Social media advertising management experience (Facebook, YouTube, Instagram)

Solid knowledge of SEO, keyword research, Google Analytics, Google Ads and online marketing channels

A clear understanding of how to create engaging content and design elements across our whole brand.

YOU’LL HAVE:

A good eye for aesthetics and understand the importance of our brand.

A strong social media presence and possess a strong working knowledge of all social media platforms including familiarity with the Australian social media landscape.

The ability to control your own workload and time frames to ensure you meet the needs of your stakeholders, to bring the results we need for our social media campaigns to bring great results.

Timing-wise, we can mould the role around you. It’s 3 days a week but you can choose the days and hours. It’s a work from home role with flexibility to attend events and other meetings as needed. We are a small, close-knit team that enjoys working together where we have individual responsibility but collaborate often and jump in to help each other out when we need to.

Sounds good? Why not apply with some examples of your work.