uasimir ? irener springs I rum a goou

middle-olass stock. Hia ancestors made a

competency at) Menz, a Binall town in Dan*

phine. His grandfather, the first Casmier,

was born at Grenoble, and with his brothers

Paul, Scipio, r.nd Augustine, established

a Bank in Paris in 1802. Augustine

Periore waa a Deputy under ' the Res

toration, and in 1S32 was made a life Peer.

Another brother, Camille, was Auditor of the

Council of State in 1818, and also a Deputy

from 1828 to 1837, and was then made a

life Peer. Caaiaiir was Prime Minister in

1831, and waa the only Premier who kept

Louis rhillippe faithful to the maxim of the

Revolution of 1830—' Tho King reigns, but

does not govern.' He died iu IH'62 oi cholera,

whilo visiting tho victims ot the epidsmia

Hie son Cneimir tho Bccond, who incorporated

his Christian name with the eurn-tino, was at

tirsc a diplomatist, and was a Duputy from

18-ltJ to ISol, w:u excluded from publio hie

under tho Empire, was Minister oi the Interior

under M. Thiers in 1871amll S72, was elected a

life Senator in 1875, and ditd in 1S76. ilia

brother, M, Charles Perier, a shipowner at

Havre, was a Deputy from 187U to 1881, and

since 1881 has been a Senator. C'asimir, the

third new President, waa born in 1847, dis

tinguished himtjeif in tha siege of PariB, and

haa been a Deputy since 1874. In ISSo he was

perplexed as so voting for the exile of a

dynaaiy under which his father and gftind

fathor br.d served — ao exile which, however,

he considered a necessary eafeguard for the

Ilepublic. He accordingly resigned his seat,

but after some hesitation accepted re-election.

ti.3 was Chairman of tho Jiuugut Committee

in 1890, and in January, 181)3, h9 was eleoted

President of the Chamber of Deputies. This

position he tilled with dignity and impar

tiality. That ho had no idea of sinking into a

mere cipher in politics is, however, evidencod

by his public utterances. Ono of tho mo3t im

portant of these was delivered at Troyes in

April, 1S93, which was iasciaot with states

man-like foresight. Some portions of it are

worth quoting. Speaking of the Monarchical

parties, he said : — ' It depends upon us to

rally these soldiers now put to liighs. Past

memories, prejudices, or fears still hold them

baok, and yet, enlightened by their good sense

and patriotism, they feel that the ground

which they have been defending ia slipping

from under their feet, that tho traditions they

invoke are like mummies, whiuh fall to pieces

if touched by tha hand. Those laggardB must

bo given time to catch up with tho .Republican

army, that our ranks may be oponed to them,

and that they may be disciplined. Every

thing is to bo oxpscsed from their upright and

clear intentions. We summon them to us,

these fine fellows, who look back regretfully to

a throne, and who have given up tho thought

of finding 11 King ; but tho .Republican army

accepts and receives only those who are en

rolled as soldiers. It entrusts neither the pro

tection of the citadel nor the honour of the

flag to its foes of yesterday.' Speaking cf

this changing time, this period of flux uud re

flux throughout the world, aa men strive more

and more for the amelioration of their fellows,

he grappled with that form of the eouiul

problem peculiar to France : — 'We are neither

in 1789,' said ho, 'nor in 1830, nor in 1848.

The question is no iougur one of (struggling

against the omnipotence of a master or of

dismantling the fortrc-as&s of do3potiam. It is

a question of to-dny, of carrying out tha Par

liamentary regime and of protecting it against

its own excuses. It is a question of giving

authority its due now thac no one haggles

ovor what m duu to liberty. Is is a question

for the executi -^ power of uaing its -right™ and

assuming tlio necessary lusuonaibilities of

knitting together all the moral forces and

using them, not for tha satisfaction of party

passion, but the strhndeur and prosperity of

tho Fatherland. It is a question of pamiading

all pub:/'; functionaries, whatever their rank or

duties, that they are the servants only of tho

nation.'

ilarly in December laat M. Casimir-Perior

formed a Ministry, in which he was Minister

for Foreign Affaira. This Ministry lasted until

the middle of last month, when M. Dupuy

resumed the Premiership and M. Casimir

Perier resumed his position as President. On

hia election aa President of the Chamber of

Deputies M. Cosimir-Perier delivered a very

dignitied address, in which he sot forth the

duties of bia oftico with great cloarnees, insist

ing upon the necessity for impartiality, for

bearance as well as firmness. Ho also pointed

out the great privilege of party discussion,

and stated his intention to defend that bul

wark of tho Constitution. He also stated that

the maintenance of order was the first duty of

Government and a primary condition of pro

gress. His declaration as Premier, among

other things, stated that in readjusting

the burdens of taxation Ministers desired

bo to remodel the direct taxes aa to

reaoh acquired wealth. They would pro

pose to revise the 6urvby and valuation of

land, to increase tho legacy duties, to make

&oine alterations in the liquor laws, and to

create a retiring pension fund for working

men. Tho commercial policy would be uphold,

and any propoaal for che- revision of the Con

stitution would be opposed. They would com

bat Socialist doctrines, not with disdain, but

by the generous and fruitful action at the dis

posal of the State. Their foreign policy would

be inspired by a consciousness that the nation

was powerful enough to proclaim its desire for

peace, and to defend its rights and the interests

of its trade and industry in all parts of the world.

In connection with tho crisis in which tho

Caaimir-Perier Ministry fell, tho then Premier

brought before tho French Chamber of Depu

ties the question of whether the State work

men should be allowed to attend a Trades

Union Congress, but hh motion thereon waa

defeated by a majority of fifty. The crisis

followed. The primary cause of tho trouble

was said to be the refusal of M. Jonnort,

Minister of Public Works, to allow the

employes of the State railways to combine.

The late Presidents of the Republic, whose

term of office expired in December, was sus

pected in some quarters of having provoked

thia quarrel for the purpose of discrediting M.

Casimir-Perier's candidature for tho Presi

dency at the election.

The new President, who is in tbo prime of

life, is a tall and handsome man with a high

bold square forehead and a frank and sympa

thetic, as well as thoughtful aud dignified ex

pression. He wears a moustache, and haa the

appearance of a comparatively young man.