➡️ JULIAN ASSANGE – Whistle-blower and Journalist

Julian Assange is an Australian journalist, publisher, and activist. As the founder of non-profit ➡️ Wikileaks and champion of truth, he faced 17 charges under the Espionage Act and a potential 175-year prison sentence if extradited to the US. From April 2019 until June 2024, he was held in the UK’s high security and controversial Belmarsh prison.

Exposing US war crimes with the aid of ex U.S. Army intelligence analyst Chelsea Manning was the start of 13 years of legal battles, death threats, persecution, and smear campaigns.

The case of ➡️ Assange has set a terrifying precedent for journalism everywhere. Receiving global media attention over the years, Assange has built up high-profile support from many press freedom advocates.

Better World Info provides over 1,300 links on Julian Assange, and also serves as an excellent information platform on whistle-blowers, investigative journalism, and press freedom. We advocate for freedom of speech, truth, and journalistic bravery in the face of extreme governmental secrecy.

‘One of the best ways to achieve justice is to expose injustice.’

― Julian Assange

Discover reliable and trustworthy news sources covering the Assange case. Find newspapers, supporters' sites, campaigns, and a host of other useful resources to help you stay up to date.

Discover important developments on Twitter using our guide on top journalists, press freedom advocates, solidarity groups, civil rights activists, politicians, and a lot more.

Videos, documentaries, and interviews can be found here, as well as an online library listing books authored by Assange.

Ongoing Legal Battles since 2012 – Timeline

In such a complex and ongoing situation, Better World Info has created a simplified timeline of ongoing events. Starting with his arrest for sexual allegations in Sweden (charges since dropped) during which time he was subjected to intense criminal investigations by the U.S.

Plots of kidnapping and threats on his life by the CIA led to well founded extradition & rendition fears. In a demonstration of its support for freedom of speech and undergoing its own form of political persecution at the time, the Ecuadorian embassy granted Assange asylum in its London base.

To avoid extradition to Sweden or the U.S. he spent 7 years living under the protection of Ecuador. Here he was temporarily protected from unfair trails, dirty tricks, persecution, and potentially the death penalty.

A change of Ecuadorian leadership led to Assange’s political asylum being revoked and these protections removed. He was arrested immediately for failure to surrender to the court for the allegations in Sweden, and shortly afterwards on request by the US for his involvement in Wikileaks.

During his time at Belmarsh Prison, a UK maximum security facility, Assange's physical and mental health have deteriorated. His lawyers have stated that his poor treatment there amounted to torture.

Follow the developments of his U.S. extradition trials, appeals, alleged spying by the CIA, events at the London High Court since February 2024, and the U.S. plea deal leading to his freedom in June 2024.

What did Wikileaks Expose?

As the creator of Wikileaks, Julian Assange has taken the full force of the hundreds of thousands of documents that have been published since 2006.

The most damning of which expose proof of U.S. war crimes, mass surveillance, and threats to U.S. democracy.

We list below some of the key revelations: