This was announced at last night’s event in the Sakura restaurant in Belgrade, attended by numerous celebrities – Dragana Mićalović, Nino Čelebić, Sajsi MC, Zoe Kida, Mimi Mercedez, Sandra Vidović Forkapić, Lena Bogdanović, Stevan Piale, Branko Kljaić Fox, Jovana Tomić, Nenad Okanović, Ivana Dudić, Dr FeelGood, Marko Đurovski, WajWai, and many others.

For the first time in the two-decade-long history of the EXIT Festival, a general partnership was made, intending to set new standards for the festival experience from July 6th to 9th, 2023, with an unrivalled music program and the most exclusive VIP content at the Petrovaradin Fortress. This significant step forward, in addition to the benefits for the domestic audience, also aims to attract an even greater number of celebrities and high-paying tourists from all over the world, adding to the multimillion-dollar revenues that tourism in Serbia already achieves thanks to the EXIT festival.

“A partnership like this will help us improve the overall festival experience, with a special emphasis on the VIP segment, which aims to attract the world’s jet set. At the same time, this will allow our most loyal fans to purchase tickets at the same prices as in previous years. Although everything has become more expensive, and although almost all festivals in the world have raised ticket prices – EXIT has not, and we are especially proud of that. The fans, especially the local fans, will always be the most important and closest to our hearts,” said the founder and CEO of the EXIT festival, Dušan Kovačević.

“At Gorki List, we consider it a great privilege to participate in the biggest collaboration that the EXIT festival has had so far and that we will have the opportunity to work together to provide a level of entertainment that has not yet been seen in our region. As two Serbian brands, which together build a bridge to an unforgettable experience by combining iconic taste and inspiring sound, we want to create a new dimension of enjoyment for all generations. In the desire to provide this year’s EXIT festival visitors with an unforgettable and extraordinary experience, we will offer our dear guests a chance to discover a completely new ultimate VIP experience in the specially designed Gorki List zones, which will bring the fun and atmosphere to the highest level,” said the creator and founder of the Gorki List brand Vojin Đorđević.

General sponsorships are not very common in the festival world, and their goal is to create the ultimate festival experience with an unrivalled program. In cooperation with Gorki List, EXIT will produce one of its most impressive editions, with the arrival of musical giants and absolute global superstars, such as The Prodigy, Wu-Tang Clan, Skrillex, Eric Prydz, Alesso, Nina Kraviz, Amelie Lens, Indira Paganotto and dozens of other big names, while the level of production quality will go one step further.

As presented at the press conference, this year’s edition also brings an exclusive VIP experience, such as watching the performances of the world’s most sought-after acts from the best locations, with the most exciting views of the Main Stage and Dance Arena! Watching performances from these festival zones will provide a new dimension to the familiar experience. The Infinite Dance Arena Lounge zone will become a festival oasis, while the most exciting location on the Petrovaradin Fortress – On-stage at mts Dance Arena – will also get a refreshed look.

Also, inspired by its partnership with the EXIT Festival, Gorki List will launch special edition 100ml bottles with unique labels symbolising these two brands’ authenticity, creativity, and originality. The new “Gorkić” packaging will be available to all visitors of this year’s EXIT Festival and all lovers of bitter-sweet taste through a network of retail locations throughout Serbia.

The extraordinary music program and unusual VIP treatment at this year’s EXIT Festival will attract new visitors and tourists from all over the world, which will result in an increase in the income that EXIT brings to the local economy every year. Throughout its history, EXIT has brought more than €220 million to the economy of Novi Sad and Serbia, thanks to crucial parameters, including record consumption and an increasing share of visitors from outside our country.

Last night’s exclusive event featured numerous celebrities from the worlds of music, film, fashion, design, sports, and showbiz. Music played by Una Senić entertained the stars mentioned above, as well as Veselin Vladimir Zvekić, Iva Lorens, Nađa Popivoda, Maša Memedović, Vesna Jerković, Maja Dimitrijević, Vojislav Panjković, Mister X, Nevena Veselinović, Mihael Ibranović, Sonja Pavlica, Gleb, Sergej Pajić, Adriana Čortan, Biljana Stojiljković Bidžovan and many others.

The EXIT festival will take place from July 6th to 9th at the Petrovaradin Fortress, and with the support of Gorki List, it will host the world’s biggest music stars. Coming to the 2023 edition are The Prodigy, Wu-Tang Clan, Skrillex, Eric Prydz, Alesso, Nina Kraviz, Amelie Lens, Indira Paganotto, Keinemusik, Michael Bibi, Hot Since 82, CamelPhat, Mind Against, Agents Of Time live, Gioli & Assia live, Ben Böhmer live, Vintage Culture, Burak Yeter, Mahmut Orhan, SOFI TUKKER, LF System, Claptone and many others.

The EXIT festival was created in 2000 as a student movement in the fight for peace and freedom in the Balkans. Over two decades, it became one of the world’s largest and fastest-growing independent festival organisations. Among others, it brought Novi Sad two Best European Festival titles in 2013 and 2017 and a Best Innovation Award in 2022. Social responsibility is still one of the critical aspects of the festival, through the work of the EXIT Foundation, focused on youth support and development, promotion of peace, creative industries, environmental protection, and destination branding.