Sir Edward Walter Parkes, DL, FREng (born 19 May 1926) was Vice-Chancellor of City University London from 1974 to 1978 and of the University of Leeds from 1983 to 1991. Parkes attended King Edward's School, Birmingham and St John's College Cambridge, where he obtained a first class degree in mechanical engineering. He married Margaret Parr (1925-2007) and they had two children. Sir Edward Walter Parkes, DL, FREng (born 19 May 1926) was Vice-Chancellor of City University London from 1974 to 1978 and of the University of Leeds from 1983 to 1991. Parkes attended King Edward's School, Birmingham and St John's College Cambridge, where he obtained a first class degree in mechanical engineering. He married Margaret Parr (1925-2007) and they had two children.

Dimensions: 20.3 x 25.6 cm

IMS SKU: SCAN-IND-00871983

THIS IS THE ONLY AND LAST ITEM IN STOCK

All our press photos are LIMITED ARCHIVE ORIGINALS - they are the actual prints that were used by the newspapers, they are not reprints or digital prints produced by us. All the prints are at least 30 years old and up to 100 years old.

OWN A PIECE OF HISTORY

What you will buy from us has a true historical value and authenticity. These items are true artifacts and collectibles, a real unique piece of history. All these old photos have a story to tell and come from reliable sources. We get our prints directly from the press archives where they have been stored for up to a hundred years. These prints have never been accessible to the public before.

EACH PRINT IS UNIQUE AND HISTORIC

SEE the BACKSIDE OF the PHOTO - many times the image for sale will present stamps, dates, and other publication details - these marks attest to and increase the value of the press photos. Since the photos are old press photographs they may have scratches, lines, or other wears of time, which just underlines the authenticity and age of the photos. In the past, the photos were often parts of a series or were mass-produced by the archives. Nowadays, their number is decimated - many were destroyed by time, use, or natural disasters. Few were preserved and are nowadays carefully stored in our archives.

INVEST AND COLLECT

Press photos have been available to the public for just a few years, and similar to baseball cards, they have attracted investors and collectors. The value of original Press Photos prints has been steadily increasing in value and is expected to to continue doing so.

HELP US PRESERVE HISTORY

The IMS vintage photos project is unique in Europe. We help preserve and digitize old press archives, by allowing the public to buy the original prints for the first time. A unique chance to own a real piece of history. When you buy from us you help support the project or digitize and save these photos that might otherwise be lost forever.

IMPORTANT! WHEN BUYING PHOTOS FROM US:

All the original vintage images are sold without watermarks. The prints are all over 30 years old and have been in the storage of the newspapers for decades. We sell them in the same conditions they were given to us by the archives.

Learn more about our unique photographs by watching the video here below: