Louise May Edward (Parkes), 89, formerly of Freeland, Wash., died from infirmities of age on Friday, Feb. 12, 2021 at her residence in Burlington, Wash. Her daughters were at her side.

She is survived by two daughters; two sons; seven grandchildren; two great grandchildren; her sister-in-law Shirley; and many nieces and nephews. She was preceded in death by her parents, sister, and her husband of 57 years, William.

Louise was born and raised in Vancouver, B.C. Some of her fondest memories involved helping her father build a 30’6” cabin cruiser boat, “The Pedolobe,” on the lot next to their home, and then living aboard the boat for several years.

In 1950, Louise met the love of her life, William Edward, and married him after a brief engagement. She and Bill immigrated to the U.S.A. in 1954 with the first addition to the family. Family was always paramount to Louise and Bill and the family vacations generally involved laughter filled get-togethers or camping with cousins, grandparents, and in-laws. Louise moved with her family from Seattle, to Lewiston, Idaho, to Pennsylvania to Walnut Creek, Calif., finally returning to Washington state to retire.

Bill and Louise loved to travel and visited every continent, save Antarctica. Louise spent her lifetime volunteering from coast to coast, including as a room parent in her children’s schools, den mother for Scouts, Bluebirds, PTA, YMCA, Whidbey Island Senior Center, John Muir Hospital, and for her church communities.

After the love of her life — her husband Bill — died in 2008, Louise lived on Whidbey Island, Wash., another five years, traveling with friends, volunteering and gardening at her house overlooking Puget Sound. In 2013, she relocated to Burlington to live closer to her eldest daughter and joined the Creekside Community, where she was able to continue volunteering and socializing with friends until shortly before her death.

With the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic, plans for a celebration of life will be postponed. Her remains will be interred next to those of her husband at the Trinity Lutheran Church in Freeland. Any donations in her name may be made to Trinity Lutheran Church.