Amazon Commissions Earned

The 1978 film “Heaven Can Wait“ starring Warren Beatty is officially coming to Blu-ray Disc on November 30th via Paramount Home Entertainment. This will mark the first time this film has been on the Blu-ray format, making it its debut. The film, co-directed & co-written by Warren Beatty, co-starred Julie Christie, James Mason, Charles Grodin, Dyan Cannon, Buck Henry, Vincent Gardenia, and Jack Warden. Heaven Can Wait was nominated for a total of eight Academy Awards and ended up winning the Oscar for “Best Art Direction / Set Decoration.”

The tech specs for the Blu-ray include a 1080p HD video presentation remastered from the original negative under Warren Beatty’s supervision, presumably in the original 1.85:1 aspect ratio. While the audio presentation (likely in the original Mono) has not yet been detailed, but stay tuned for an update on that. The release will come with a digital code (copy) of the film. You can now find the Blu-ray available for preorder over at Amazon.

Further below, after the break, you can find the full announcement about the upcoming Blu-ray release of this film.

PRESS RELEASE:

WARREN BEATTY AND JULIE CHRISTIE STAR IN THE BELOVED ROMANTIC COMEDY, ARRIVING ON BLU-RAY™ FOR THE FIRST TIME EVER

Newly Restored Classic Debuts on Blu-ray November 30, 2021

Warren Beatty stars in (as well as produces, co-writes, and co-directs) the fan-favorite comedy HEAVEN CAN WAIT, which has been fully restored and remastered from the original negative under Beatty’s supervision for its arrival on Blu-ray for the first time ever November 30, 2021 from Paramount Home Entertainment.

Directed by Beatty and Buck Henry, with a screenplay by Elaine May and Beatty, HEAVEN CAN WAIT features a sensational cast filled with comedic talent, including Julie Christie, James Mason, Charles Grodin, Dyan Cannon, Buck Henry, Vincent Gardenia, and Jack Warden. The film was nominated* for nine Academy Awards®, including Best Picture, Best Director (Beatty and Henry), Best Writing, Screenplay Based on Material from Another Medium (Beatty and May), Best Actor in a Leading Role (Beatty), Best Actor in a Supporting Role (Warden), Best Actress in a Supporting Role (Cannon), and more.

Joe Pendleton (Beatty) is a Los Angeles Rams backup quarterback ready to lead the team all the way to the Super Bowl, but the afterlife has other plans. It seems an overzealous guardian angel has prematurely plucked Joe from the living. When he’s returned to Earth in the body of millionaire industrialist Leo Farnsworth, he inherits a world of challenges, including winning the love of a woman (Christie) who already hated “him.”

The Blu-ray includes the feature film in high definition and access to a Digital copy of the film.

# # #

About Paramount Home Entertainment

Paramount Home Entertainment (PHE) is part of Paramount Pictures Corporation (PPC), a global producer and distributor of filmed entertainment. PPC is a unit of ViacomCBS (NASDAQ: VIAC; VIACA), a leading content company with prominent and respected film, television and digital entertainment brands. The PHE division oversees PPC’s home entertainment and transactional digital distribution activities worldwide. The division is responsible for the sales, marketing and distribution of home entertainment content on behalf of Paramount Pictures, Paramount Animation, Paramount Television Studios, Paramount Players, MTV, Nickelodeon, Comedy Central and CBS and applicable licensing and servicing of certain DreamWorks Animation titles. PHE additionally manages global licensing of studio content and transactional distribution across worldwide digital distribution platforms including online, mobile and portable devices and emerging technologies.

Heaven Can Wait

Street Date: November 30, 2021

U.S. Rating: PG