March 18, 2013

Time to Honour our King

by Din Merican

A few days ago a few friends and I, all anak Kedah Angkatan Lima Puluhan, met for tea tarik in Taman Tun Dr Ismail, a suburb of Kuala Lumpur. It is usual on such an occasion for septuagenarians like us to talk about the good old days and the crazy things we did growing up in Alor Setar, Kedah Darul Aman.

Then suddenly, our conversation turned very serious as we talked about our Beloved Sultan of Kedah, Al-Sultan Almu’tasimu Billahi Muhibbuddin Tuanku Alhaj Abdul Halim Mu’adzam Shah Ibni Al-Marhum Sultan Badlishah.

Most of us were in Alor Setar when DYMM Tuanku succeeded his late father, DYMM Sultan Badlishah and became the 27th Sultan of Kedah in 1958. A new era began in Kedah, and our state has prospered during DYMM Tuanku’s reign.

We are naturally proud that DYMM Tuanku is our 14th King, after being the Fifth Agong in 1970. It is a rare achievement in itself. More importantly, at this time, DYMM Tuanku’s reign is a very challenging one marked by divisions within our society due to adversarial politics as GE-13 draws near. We are, however, optimistic that our future is good hands as DYMM Tuanku is very experienced and exemplary Ruler who is loved and admired by His people.

According to Tunku Sofia Jewa, a cousin to DYMM Tuanku and author of The Return, an authorised biographical rendition of the life, times and thoughts of our 14th King, as Sultan of Kedah, DYMM Tuanku “was able to perform His duties admirably, and has never yielded to anyone’s demand, nor subjected Himself to the whims and fancies, thanks to the fact that He has never been partisan on political matters, nor has He had to ask for favours from anyone, including government…” (p.152). That makes DYMM Tuanku truly special.

But because DYMM Tuanku makes no demands on the government and his subjects, we tend to forget that DYMM Tuanku as our Fifth and 14th King deserves to be honoured like his predecessors like Negri Sembilan’s DYMM Tuanku Abdul Rahman (our First King), DYMM Sultan Hishamuddin Alam Shah of Selangor (Second Agong), Perlis’ DYMM Tuanku Syed Putra Jamalullail (Third Agong), and DYMM Sultan Ismail Nasiruddin Shah of Terengganu (Fourth Agong) with major roads in Kuala Lumpur named after them.

My friends and I from Kedah, as Kedahans and Malaysians, feel that the time is right to honour our Beloved Sultan and our King in a similar fashion. It is for this reason that I undertook to make an appeal via my blog to the Mayor of Kuala Lumpur, Federal Territory Minister, and our Prime Minister, Dato’ Seri Najib Tun Razak and his Cabinet to take action so that DYMM Tuanku’s name can be on one of the major roads in Kuala Lumpur. Without being presumptuous, we think our Government should rename Jalan Ampang in His Majesty’s Honour.

I hope all my friends, associates and readers of this blog will endorse our proposal to honour DYMM Tuanku.–Din Merican