The physiology and performance of athletes are thoroughly scrutinized by many audiences, including sport and exercise scientists who are interested in the extremes of human performance, the contributions of training and genetics to sport performance, the impact of various strategies or interventions, and the potential lessons that could be inferred for the benefit of the general community. However, the sports science and sports medicine literature, from elite athletes through to sedentary individuals, has evolved over time without a common perspective or terminology to characterize the caliber and training status of a participating individual or group of individuals. Indeed, the term “elite” subjects might be one of the more overused and ill-defined terms in the exercise science literature.1 An investigation examining 91 publications, which defined their participants as either “elite” or “expert” across a range of sports, found that the range of this term encompassed athletes participating in national-level competitions up to athletes winning medals at major international competition.2 Terms such as “trained,” “highly trained,” and “well-trained” also seem to be highly subjective, with variations around the participants training load, training history, and the intent of the training commitment.3,4

There are many benefits to having a standardized framework to characterize participants based on an integrated approach to their sporting performance/achievements, biometric attributes, training exposure, and general fitness level. For example, the basic principle of the specificity of research, which states that the results of a study should be applied only to populations and/or scenarios which are similar to those involved in the research design,5 requires objective features to define the targeted individuals/groups. Comparisons across and within studies, which try to identify the similarities or differences between members of a sporting or active population, require robust definitions of the cohort. There is evidence that athletic success might be explained by different attributes, or that athletic caliber may influence the response to various interventions. For example, although targeted periodization of carbohydrate availability has been shown to enhance training adaptation and endurance performance in subjects described as “trained athletes,”6,7 these benefits have not been seen when similar interventions were implemented in “elite” and “highly trained” athletes.8–10 Similarly, beetroot juice/nitrate is considered an evidence-based performance enhancing supplement,11 based largely on studies in lower-caliber athletes, whereas elite athletes do not appear to obtain the same benefits.12,13 Whether these and other observations are robust and can be explained by innate biometric differences or by the modifying effects of training history and load are of particular interest. However, the results of existing and future studies cannot be effectively harvested unless there is uniformity around the descriptive characteristics and classification of athletic populations.

Early attempts to define an elite performer were based on time spent practicing a task, with suggestions that 10 years14 or 10,000 hours15 are required to achieve expert level. However, such a model would imply that anybody can reach the elite level with deliberate practice and intent, whereas in an elite sporting context other factors such as biological age16 and genetics17 are undoubtedly important. Additionally, time-based metrics of training are unlikely to be comparable across sports due to the nature of training; for example, a sprinter will most likely require fewer training hours compared to an endurance cyclist to reach the elite level. Furthermore, there are numerous examples of action sports athletes who have transferred skills gained in one domain to an entirely different domain18 and have surpassed the top competitors in the sport who have had >10,000 hours of training.

Specific attempts to classify the training and performance caliber of athletes have occurred. Two decades ago, Jeukendrup et al19 recognized the misclassification of training status in cyclists throughout the literature, and attempted to unify classification and terminology based on metrics of training and race status (training volume, training background, and race days per year), combined with quantitative physiological variables (measures of aerobic capacity, power output, and efficacy). More recently, 2 reviews further developed cycling-based classification protocols, terminology, and performance indicators in both male4 and female participants.3 These frameworks consist of 5 performance levels, which encompass untrained through to professional cyclists, and purposely use neutral terminology to avoid the misinterpretation of the commonly used subjective terms such as “well-trained” or “elite.” Within the cycling specific literature, these classification systems have been widely adopted and have likely facilitated better comparison and interpretation of scientific results. However, these classification systems are highly specific to a single sport and rely on extensive physiological and anthropometric data for classification to occur.

The most extensive attempt at defining the “elite” athlete was completed in 2015, following an examination of the misuse of the term in sports psychology research.2 Swann and colleagues proposed that 5 criteria should be used to assess an athlete’s ability: (1) highest performance standard, (2) level of success, (3) years of experience, (4) competitiveness of the sport within the athlete’s country, and (5) global competitiveness of the sport, with responses used in a mathematical equation to differentiate a “semi-elite” athlete from a “world-class” athlete. However, this has yet to be established within the exercise sciences/physiology domain, and the rigidity of classification does not consider the many nuances that are apparent between different sports and athletes.

The current paper builds upon this previous literature and presents a flexible framework that aims to:

1.Provide a training and performance-based classification system grounded in population statistics, meaning only a tiny proportion of participants can reach the top tiered classification level as in elite sport, with the vast majority of the population being either sedentary or recreationally active;

2.Develop a continuum whereby all participants can be classified across a spectrum of exercise backgrounds and athletic abilities, from sedentary individuals through to world-class athletes;

3.Develop a framework that can be implemented both prospectively (ie, as part of study participant recruitment to publication) and retrospectively (ie, during systematic reviews and/or meta-analyses) to classify participants;

4.Allow classification to occur without the need for extensive physiological, anthropometric, biomechanical, or skill-based testing;

5.Be a user-friendly resource, which can be implemented with research participants across the spectrum of training status/sports and across all scientific disciplines;

6.Provide a flexible framework that endures the test of time, which can eventually be adapted as sports and athletic ability inevitably evolves over time.

It is our intention that this framework should be widely implemented to systematically classify participants in research and published articles featuring exercise, sport, performance, health, and/or fitness outcomes going forward.

Chronological Age—The Junior Athlete Versus the Masters Athlete

Age plays a role in sports performance since it can interact with the biological maturity of the young athlete, training, and competition maturity across the athlete’s development pathway, and the biological decline associated with aging. However, these effects are not uniform across sports and even within sports; there are examples of extraordinary individuals who may achieve world-class status at a relatively early age, even in sports where intensive training loads commence in childhood (eg, swimming and gymnastics). Conversely, there are athletes who can remain internationally competitive in their late 30s and 40s (eg, road cycling and long-distance triathlon). Since there are complex nuances between and within sports in relation to junior athletes and masters/veteran competitors, the first iteration of the Participant Classification Framework will focus on absolute performance rankings that are untroubled by age classifications. Following feedback and experience in the implementation of the Framework, future versions should consider age categories, or at least the inclusion of broad categories such as junior and masters competition.

Conclusion

In this paper, we have presented a practical, easy to implement framework for classifying the activity level and athletic ability of an individual. We envision wide-spread use of this tool in exercise and sport science–based literature that will provide uniformity around how we describe and examine cohorts of participants hereon in. In this first iteration of the framework, we have produced guidelines for classification based on training volume/physical activity metrics, performance standards, and skill level. It should be noted that sport-specific examples produced within this manuscript should not be used as a rigid classification system; rather, these performance standards should be updated over time and evolve as the sport, and world-leading performances naturally progress. Furthermore, this framework has intentionally been created so that it can be easily adaptable to fit many different sports. We suggest authors adapt the framework to fit the cohort in question, paying particular attention to features such as the size and depth of the field of a sport, and a cohort’s nationality and gender parity within the sport. Finally, we have highlighted issues we foresee when implementing this framework, particularly around special populations like junior/masters athletes and individuals with a disability (including Paralympic athletes). We would like to see future versions of this framework be specifically developed to target these populations.