This study addresses the birth and development of gymnastics and sports associations in Spain in the nineteenth century between 1822, when the first ones appeared, and 1900. This process contributed to the institutional structure, dissemination and social legitimisation of sport. Sports associations in Spain were initially rickety but took off after 1875. The introduction of sport coincided with the Bourbon Restoration and the craze of the Royals and the aristocracy for sport and the cultural model of England, and was underpinned by Regenerationism and the Institución Libre de Enseñanza. In order to build the list of clubs that made up institutionalised sport, three processes were followed, drawing from both primary and secondary sources. Firstly, a literature review of two of the authors’ previous work was conducted. Secondly, a thorough documentary search was carried out in Spain’s main digitised databases. Finally, the resulting data were compared with the latest historiographical works on the period. This three-fold methodological procedure resulted in a list of 363 sports associations located in the most affluent and industrialised locations. Cycling was the sport with the largest number of associations. The research findings show the vigour of the institutionalisation of sport in nineteenth-century Spain and its initial popularity among the aristocracy and the bourgeoisie.

Sports played a main role as a catalyzer of the social change between the nineteenth and twentieth centuries. Historiography has mainly emphasized its connection with the unstoppable arrival of the masses. However, exclusivity, luxury and social distinction were very much embodied in some sports and reinvigorated by them. Moreover, how did elites cope with the irruption of sports as a form of sociability and social mobility? Polo provides one of the answers to this question. The definition -and exclusion- of the elites through a sport is the main topic of this article, and how social inequality boundaries sometimes depend on a subtle mixture of cultural, economic and symbolic power. The analysis is posed in an extremely complex historical period, when Spain had many similitudes with European and American societies experimenting tremendous transformations. Firstly, the article traces the development of polo in the country, its connection with the Monarch and some central characters. We then analyze the controversy that emerged within the elites because of the new -and for some negative- implications of these activities. Finally, we developed the connections between the elites and polo in the tumultuous 30s and 40s.