Nature and system of law of LALIGA

The Liga de Fútbol Profesional is a private sports federation, which, as established in accordance with the provisions of Act 39/2022 of 30 December on Sport (Official State Gazette No. 314 of 31 December - “Act on Sport”) and 23 to 28 of Royal Decree 1835/1991 of 20 December on Spanish Sports Federations (Official State Gazette no. 312 of 30 December - “Royal Decree on Federations”), consists exclusively and compulsorily of all public sports companies and first and second division clubs that participate in official professional football competitions at national level.

It is governed by the aforementioned Law 39/2022, of December 30, on sports, Royal Decree 1835/1991, of December 20, on Spanish Sports Federations, and by its Statutes and social regulations.

lt has its own legal personality and endowed with full capacity to act in order to pursue its purposes. lt is autonomous with regard to its internal organisation and the way it is run with respect of Real Federación Española de Fútbol.

Main offices: Calle Torrelaguna 60, 28043, Madrid, España.

Opening hours: mondays to thursdays, from 08:00 am to 08:00 pm and fridays, from 08:00 am to 06:00 pm.

Phone number: 91 205 50 00

e-mail: laliga@laliga.es

LALIGA Functions

LALIGA performs out the following duties and powers (article 3 of the Articles of Association):

1.- The LALIGA's duties and powers include the following:

a. To organise oficial nation-wide profesional football competitions in co-ordination with the Real Federación Española de Fútbol in keeping with the criterio the High Council for Sport may exclusively lay down to guarantee national and International commitments.

Such co-ordination shall be materialised by the parties entering into covenants, the contents of which shall be construed to form part of LALIGA’s corporate purpose for all intents and purposes. Any agreements or covenants which may be entered into with the High Council for Sport, the Association of Spanish Footballers and with private and public organisations shall likewise form part of LALIGA’s corporate purpose.

b. With regard to its associates, to perform the duties of oversight, control and supervision set forth by the prevailing Sports Act and its implementing provisions, as well as any other which may be laid down through an agreement entered into by LALIGA and its associates.

c. To exercise disciplinary powers with respect of its associates under the terms set forth under the Law, these Articles, Regulations and provisions of this nature set forth to implement them.

d. Within the scope set forth in Royal Decree 203/2010 of 26th February, to approve the Regulation for the prevention of violence, racism, xenophobia and intolerance in sports events, setting the conditions and the pace of the acquisitions, execution and financing of any equipment, works and facilities that have to be done, along with their respective conditions of maintenance and conservation once they have been finalised.

e. To exploit commercially any rights and products which are inherent to or a consequence of the competitions it organises, be it directly by LALIGA or through a partial or total assignment of such commercial exploitation to third-party natural or legal persons, or by incorporating a company with them in any legal form and with the interest established by the General Assembly, providing that the main purpose of such companies is to perform the aforementioned commercial exploitation.

Any corporate brands, logos, emblems, official mascots and others belonging to the Liga Nacional de Fútbol Profesional which are duly registered at the lntellectual Property Registry shall be products or rights subject to commercialisation, as shall the joint use thereof with all the names, coat of arms, logos and official colours of the Sports Corporations or Clubs affiliated to the Liga Nacional de Fútbol Profesional. However, in any event, the right of the Sports Corporations and Clubs to contract on an individual basis shall be respected.

Likewise, the Liga Nacional de Fútbol Profesional may jointly exploit the official statistical data of all the matches in competitions organised by LALIGA, without detriment to the rights of the Sports Corporations and Clubs to individually exploit said statistical data of the matches in which they have taken part.

f. To issue a preliminary report in cases of a disposal of facilities owned by Sports Corporations under the circumstances set forth by the prevailing Sports Act and its implementing provisions.

g. To issue a preliminary report on the draft budgets of Public Limited Sports Companies and Clubs which take part in the competitions it organises, as well as to set rules and criteria for drawing them up and, if it should deem it appropriate or necessary, to oversee fulfilment of the budget definitively approved.

h. For the purposes set forth in article 46.4 of the prevailing Sports Act, to issue a preliminary report on the amendments proposed by the Real Federación Española de Fútbol, where these are significant for the official nation-wide professional competitions LALIGA is responsible for organising.

i. To establish its own internal organisation, to manage its own economic resources independently and to lay down the regulations to implement these Articles

j. To appoint the representatives corresponding to LALIGA in any agencies or bodies.

k. In accordance with provisions set forth in Royal Decree 258/1998 of 20 February, partially amending Royal Decree 419/1991 of 27 March governing the distribution of the proceeds and prizes from Apuestas Deportivas del Estado (State Sports Betting Agency) and from any other gaming activities managed by the Organismo Nacional de Loterías y Apuestas del Estado (State National Lottery and Gaming Organisation) and with the implementing provisions thereof, to establish the formulae to distribute the amounts to be received by Sports Corporations and Clubs from the LIGA'S share in the proceeds from the State's sports betting activities. Such formulae shall reflect objective criteria.

l. To exercise the control and oversight functions, in order to enforce compliance with the limits established with respect to the share capital of Public Limited Sports Companies, which are set out in the applicable regulations at all times.

m. To commercialise jointly the audiovisual contents exploitation rights of football competitions it organises, along with any other audiovisual rights over football competitions whose commercialisation may be entrusted to or assigned to it.

2.- LALIGA’s duties and powers include the following:

To oversee the contractual relationships between Sports Corporations and Clubs and their professional footballers and any other professionals that may join them in the future.

To set the dates, times and changes thereof of professional competitions, except where the changes that occur are a consequence of a decision taken by the disciplinary bodies of the Real Federación Española de Fútbol after the total or partial suspension, cancellation or repetition of a match. Regarding the National Football League Championship, the Liga Nacional de Fútbol Profesional shall give the Real Federación Española de Fútbol notice of any changes it may authorise. The Real Federación Española de Fútbol shall hold responsibility for authorising such changes and give the Liga Nacional de Fútbol Profesional notice thereof with regard to the Spanish Championship and the Copa de S.M. el Rey (King's Cup).

To approve regulations on advertising on the uniforms used by the teams of the Corporations or Clubs which are members in accordance with the provisions laid down on such matters by lnternational Football Organisations.

To govern and check the uniforms of opposing teams, as well as static and moving advertising at matches in accordance with obligatory international regulations and with the Real Federación Española de Fútbol.

To approve regulations on the format, issuance, sale and supply of tickets to gain access to the sports stadiums of its member Corporations and Clubs, along with any other matters having to do with ticketing.

To establish the official model of match ball in accordance with lntemational Board regulations.

To set each season the maximum number of licences for each Sports Corporation or Club that make up the First and Second Divisions, as well as to set the dates and registration periods for them. These decisions may not be changed during the course of the season in question.

To process the registration in the League of footballers belonging to the Corporations and Clubs that are members of LALIGA, as well as to issue obligatory prior approval of their licences and the licences of team delegates, managers, assistant managers, physical trainers, doctors, nurses, physiotherapists, kit managers and of any other person who could sit on the team's bench during a match or take part in any way in the competition as a preliminary and necessary requirement to take part in professional activities or competitions.

To approve the economic and corporate requirements for Sports Corporations and Sports Clubs so they may join LALIGA

To set the regulations on players on team sheets at professional competitions, along with the regulations on the interrelationship between Sports Corporations or Clubs and their affiliates or subsidiaries. In any event, any regulations on such matters that may be set forth shall be sent to the Real Federación Española de Fútbol for their inclusion in Federation Regulations.

To set the conditions and number of people authorised to be on the perimeter the pitch at professional competitions and to give the Real Federación Española de Fútbol notice of any resolutions that may be adopted thereof, so that it may include them in Federation Regulations.

To set the conditions which facilities at sports stadiums must meet to hold professional competitions, as well as safety and access control regulations and any others that may be set forth.

3.- The following are LALIGA’s duties and powers, which are subject to co-ordination with the Real Federación Española de Fútbol:

To draw up and approve the competition schedule for the First and Second Divisions for the approval of the Real Federación Española de Fútbol's President, determining the conditioning factors for the draw of matches with respect of circumstances of geographic proximity or any other that may be established.

To determine the composition and number of teams that make up professional competitions, the amendment of which shall require an agreement between the Real Federación Española de Fútbol and the Liga Nacional de Fútbol Profesional.

To make proposals on how official nation-wide professional competitions are to be held, the final classification and how to determine the winning Sports Corporations or Clubs, without detriment to the Real Federación Española de Fútbol's prior agreement to carry them out.

By mutual agreement with the Real Federación Española de Fútbol, to establish the number of professional footballers who are not nationals of a Member State of the European Union or of the European Economic Area that may be signed up or registered by affiliated Sports Corporations and Clubs, along with the terms so that they may be chosen to play for them in the competitions it organises.

To agree on the criteria governing promotion and relegation between the First and Second Divisions and to give the Real Federación Española de Fútbol notice thereof. Such criteria shall be set before the start of the competition in question and may not be changed during the course thereof

In conjunction with the Real Federación Española de Fútbol, to set the criteria and number of teams to be promoted and relegated between the Second Division and the Second Division "B", which shall be set befare of the start of the competition in question and may not be changed during the course thereof

To give the Real Federación Española de Fútbol prior mandatory notice in change of residence proceedings of footballers who have joined or wish to join Sports Corporations or Clubs forming part of the Liga Nacional de Fútbol Profesional, or the affiliates or subsidiaries of any of them.

By reaching mutual agreement with the Real Federación Española de Fútbol, to set the amounts for training and promotional rights corresponding to the first professional registration of footballers in Sports Corporations and Clubs which take part in professional competitions.

Applicable regulations

National sports legislation

LALIGA is governed by the legal regime established in the Act on Sport and in the Royal Decree on Federations.

The Articles of Association, General Regulation of LALIGA and Regulation on Television Broadcasting

a) General considerations

LALIGA is regulated by its Articles of Association, the General Regulation and the Regulation on TV Broadcasting, which were approved by the highest governing body, the General Assembly, and ratified by the Executive Committee of the High Council for Sport, articles 10.2 b) and 41.3 of the Sport Act. The Articles of Association, the General Regulation and the Regulation on TV Broadcasting are available to be consulted at any time on the website (www.laliga.com).

In accordance with the provisions of Article 26 of Royal Decree 1835/1991, of December 20, the Articles of Association of the professional leagues must include at least the following points:

Specific name, corporate purposeand registered office.

Governance and representation bodies and their duties and powers, and also the system for appointing and dismissing them. The President and the Assembly are necessarily governance bodies. Holding the office of President shall be incompatible with holding a managerial position in a sports club or joint-stock company of the associates of LALIGA.

Own and delegated powers.

Procedurefor approving and reforming of its Articles of Association and Regulations.

Specific disciplinary regimefor its associates, which shall necessarily include, in a differentiated manner, the system of infringements and sanctions for its directors or administrators.

Capital, economic-financial and budgetary management regime.

Grounds for winding up or liquidation.

Rules and standards forpreparing budgets by its associates and for overseeing them.

For its part, Article 57 of the Act on Sport 39/2022 sets out the minimum content of the statutes of the professional leagues:

a)The bodies that make up its structure, among which there must be an economic control commission whose composition and obligations will be similar to those established in sports federations for this body.

b)The manner in which its members are elected and dismissed.

c)Forms of integration into the league.

d)The rights and duties of its members.

e)Own and delegated powers.

f)Such other elements as may be deemed necessary for the ordering of his or her internal life.

b) Articles of Association

Approved, using their latest wording, by the Executive Committee of the High Council for Sport in its meeting of 9 June 2023.

These Articles of Association and, in particular, Chapter II of Title I, referring to the organisational structure of LALIGA, constitute the basic foundations on which the basic legal regime of good governance of LALIGA's governance and administrative bodies is based.

c) The General Regulation

The General Regulation are part of the governance of LALIGA, and as such complement the legal framework defined by the Articles of Association regarding the development of the General Assembly and the Division Committees (Book I) and the system for the election of the President (Book II), the Vice-Presidents and members of the Executive Committee (Book III).

d) Regulation on TV Broadcasting

Approved by the Executive Committee of the High Council for Sport in its meeting on 18 July 2016 and its subsequent amendment adopted by the Extraordinary General Assembly on 21 March 2018 and later by the Executive Committee of the High Council for Sport in its meeting on 26 July 2018. It was incorporated into the General Regulation of LALIGA on 14 August 2018.

The Regulation on TV Broadcasting describes the commitments acquired by the Clubs/SADs with LALIGA in order to harmonise the image and audiovisual perception of the competitions organised by LALIGA. Thus, the Regulation: a) Specifies the facilities that Clubs/SADs are required to provide for each match, and the procedures to be adopted in the organisation of the matches and; b) Defines the concrete actions that Clubs/SADs must take to achieve the established standards and the steps that LALIGA will follow to ensure the implementation of these standards.

The Code of Good Governance

Approved by the Extraordinary General Assembly of LALIGA, on 21 July 2005. The Code was revised and adapted to the statutory and organisational reality of LALIGA and the latest legislative reforms in the field of transparency and good governance, and its latest version was adopted by the Extraordinary General Assembly of LALIGA, on 24 September 2015. Work is currently underway to adapt it to the current Act on Sport.

It is divided into six chapters and consists of fourteen articles.

Chapter I defines the rules of good governance of LALIGA, establishing the rights of members of LALIGA (article 1). It also describes the structure, operation and duties of the Executive Committee, the General Management and the Legal Department (articles 2 to 4, respectively).

Chapter II on remuneration sets out a series of prohibitions, restrictions and reporting obligations for remuneration, in articles 6 and 7. Chapter III “Control and ordinary management” (article 8) defines the content of the LALIGA’s economic transaction procedures manual, called “Purchasing and Payables Procedures Manual”together with Article 10 of Chapter IV, which establishes the criteria for action in relation to the acquisition or supply of goods or provision of services from the time the need for the service/purchase arises until payment is made. All individual purchases/services by each Department must be subject to these criteria. Article 9 of Chapter IV, “relations with third parties”, regulates the duties to provide information on relations with third parties.

Finally, Chapters V and VI, in articles 11 to 14 of the Code, deal with the duty of LALIGA to promote sports ethics and form a legal regime that covers claims related to the compliance, or failure to comply, with the Code of Good Governance. It does so by creating a specific good governance Committee chaired by the President of LALIGA.

LALIGA governance structure

Article 6 of the Articles of Association defines the governance structure of LALIGA, which can be summarised as follows:

· General Assembly;

· Division Committees;

· The Executive Committee;

· President;

· The Audiovisual Rights Management Oversight Body;

· Electoral Committee;

· The Association Disciplinary Judge;

· Economic oversight Committee;

· The Budget Validation Body;

· Licensing Committee;

· The Regulatory Compliance Body;

· Audit and Internal Control Committee

· Corporate General Management;

· The Legal Counsel;

The following is a list of the powers and duties of the different entities that currently make up LALIGA, in accordance with the system of good governance laid down in the Articles of Association, the General Regulation and the aforementioned Code of Good Governance.

GENERAL ASSEMBLY

a) Basic principles and regulatory standards

The General Assembly is LALIGA’s highest body of governance and the expression its associates' will. lts meeting may be annual or extraordinary meetings.

The legal regime of the General Assembly is provided for in Articles 8 to 21, inclusively, of the Articles of Association and in Book I, Articles 1 to 6, of the General Regulation.

In order to validly convene the Assembly, at least two-thirds of its full members, apart from the President and the Secretary, must be in attendance at the first call and in the second call, at least sixteen full members must be in attendance with at least eight members from each Division in attendance.

The call shall be in writing by the President and sent to the address appearing in LALIGA for each associate through any means of communication, including post, telex, fax, courier service, etc., with acknowledgement of receipt, and at least ten days before the date the meeting is to be held, except in pressing cases which the President has duly justified, in which case such time limit may be reduced to forty-eight hours.

The venue, date and time of the Assembly on the first and second call shall appear on the call, as shall the nature of the meeting and the Agenda.

At the moment the Assembly is called, the Legal Department shall send each full member the documents on each of the items on the Agenda which shall be addressed at the Assembly, except when for time constraints they cannot be attached, in which case such documents shall be placed at the disposal of each member at the headquarters of LALIGA before the Assembly is held.

Every full member of the General Assembly has the right to vote, and most agreements are passed by a simple majority.

b) Composition

The General Assembly shall be comprised of full members, the President of the LIGA, who shall also be the Assembly's Chairman, and by a representative of each of the teams registered by the Sports Corporations or Clubs registered in the LIGA at the moment the General Assembly is held and which have not had their right to vote suspended.

LALIGA’s Legal Counsel shall act as the Secretary and be entitled to take the floor, but not to vote.

The President of the Real Federación Española de Fútbol shall be entitled to take the floor, but not to vote.

The following may also attend Assemblies without the right to take the floor or to vote, except where the Chairman concedes them the floor:

Any persons invited by the Chairman.

A companion for each full member of the Assembly.

A representative of the Sports Corporations or Sports Clubs that are affiliates of LALIGA which have had their right to vote suspended

c) Annual General Assembly

The Annual General Assembly's powers are as follows:

To examine and approve, as appropriate, the annual report, accounts and settlement of the financial year corresponding to the season which has come to an end.

To examine and approve, as appropriate, the budget for the financial year of LALIGA corresponding to the current season.

To take resolutions on proposals on any matters lying within the competence of LALIGA brought before it by any body of LALIGA exercising the powers and/or duties assigned to it, by the President of LALIGA or by at least eleven of its members, except in cases where such power is expressly assigned to another body of LALIGA in these Articles.

To take decisions on the passing on of costs to members of LALIGA through either maintenance fees or any other kind of fees, respecting the powers expressly assigned in these Articles to the Division Committees. In such cases, the Annual General Assembly shall limit itself to determining to which and/or what amount shall be passed on the First Division members as a whole and what amount shall be passed on to Second Division Members as a whole.

To take decisions on the terms of registration in LALIGA and on the terms for taking part in each Division.

To appoint, as appropriate, LALIGA’s external auditors.

To set the caps on aid to members of LALIGA that may be laid down through regulations.

The Annual General Assembly shall meet once a year within six months following the date each financial year of LALIGA ends.

d) Extraordinary General Assembly

Extraordinary General Assembly Meetings shall be held where any of the Division Committees by simple majority, LALIGA’s President or the Executive Committee by simple majority may so resolve, or where a meeting is requested by at least eleven of its members.

The powers reserved for the Extraordinary General Assembly are as follows:

To elect of the President of LALIGA.

To approve, amend or repeal the Articles of Association and General Regulation.

To censure the President.

To authorise the undertaking of economic obligations where these exceed 15 per cent of the approved budget.

To change the registered office.

To ratify at the proposal of the Executive Committee any agreements approved by said Committee to be entered into by LALIGA with the High Council for Sport or with the Real Federación Española de Fútbol with regard to co-ordinating the organisation of professional competitions, as well as with the Association of Spanish Footballers.

To approve at the proposal of the Executive Committee the issues envisaged in items g) and i) of article 3.2 and in items b), c) and e) of article 3.3 of the Articles.

In accordance with provisions set forth in Royal Decree 258/1998 of 20 February partially amending Royal Decree 419/1991 27 March governing the distribution of the proceeds and prizes from Apuestas Deportativas del Estado (State Sports Betting Agency) and from any other gaming activities managed by the Organismo Nacional de Loterías y Apuestas del Estado (State National Lottery and Gaming Organisation) and with the implementing provisions thereof, to establish the formulae to distribute the amounts to be received by Sports Corporations and Clubs for LALIGA’s share in the proceeds from the State's sports betting. Such formulae shall reflect objective criteria.

To establish the formulae to share out the amounts obtained as revenue from betting on professional competitions involving both Divisions other than the betting mentioned in the preceding paragraph.

To elect the Association Disciplinary Judge and the Economic Oversight Committee.

To review and take a definitive resolution on the decisions taken by the Executive Committee on the approval or rejection of specific applications for admission to LALIGA.

To establish or change the formulae to share out the amounts obtained by LALIGA as a result of the payments made to it by UEFA arising from the notion of solidarity.

Regarding any other matter the competence of which has not been assigned to another body of LALIGA by these Articles.

DIVISION COMMITTEES

a) Basic principles and regulatory standards

The Division Committees are bodies of the different categories of competition. Their purpose is to examine, deliberate on and approve any competencies within the remit of each of them or expressly delegated to them by the General Assembly and which are not expressly delegated to other bodies of LALIGA or that cannot be delegated.

The legal regime of the Division Committees is provided for in Articles 22 to 26, inclusively, of the Articles of Association and in Book I, Articles 1 to 6, of the General Regulation.

Division Committee meetings shall be called and held every quarter during the course of the competitions and extraordinarily where requested by at least six of its members or where the President of LALIGA may deem it necessary.

In order to validly convene Division Committee meetings, at least two-thirds of its full members must be in attendance at the first call along with the President and the Secretary or whoever may replace them according to the Articles, and at the second call, at least one­ third of full members must be in attendance.

Each of the members of the Division Committees shall be entitled to one vote. he votes shall be secret, except where otherwise agreed by the Committee meeting Resolutions shall be adopted by a simple majority of the votes cast, other than on resolutions stated on the Articles.

b) Composition

Each Division Committee shall be comprised of the President of LALIGA, who shall chair it, and by a representative of each of the Sports Corporations or Clubs registered in the same category of competition of the National Professional League Championship at the moment the meeting is held. The Corporate General Manager shall attend and be entitled to take the floor, but not to vote. The Legal Counsel of LALIGA shall actas Secretary, but shall not be entitled to take the floor or vote.

As many Division Committees as there are categories of competition organised by LALIGA in the National League Championship shall be set up.

c) Powers

The powers of the Division Committees shall be as follows:

1.- To approve the share out of the economic funds allocated to each category of competition among the Sports Corporations and Clubs that comprise each Committee.

2.- To approve the schedule of match dates affecting their Division. Should this power be legally and solely attributed to LALIGA, the General Assembly shall hold responsibility for approving said schedule by reinforced majority.

3.- To approve the match times affecting their Division.

4.- To look into and, as appropriate, approve amendments having to do with the competition where these solely affect the Division approving such resolution.

5.- To determine the rules on the organisation and performance of corresponding Division's matches, always in accordance with the rules laid down by the competent authorities.

6.- To approve the performance of promotional and commercial exploitation activities of the competition in which they take part and which solely affect the Sports Corporations and Clubs of the same Division. Promotion and commercial exploitation shall be construed as defined in article 3, paragraph 1, item e) of these Articles.

7.- To decide on the criteria to share among its members the revenue obtained or that applies to the Division in question, including the revenue from betting on the professional competition where solely the Division in question is involved.

8.- To elect and, as appropriate, censure the representatives of each Division Committee in the Executive Committee in accordance with the provisions set forth in these Articles and in the General Regulation.

9.- To elect the first and second Vice-Presidents of LALIGA, as appropriate.

10.- To censure the first or second Vice-President of LALIGA, as appropriate.

11.- To request the calling of an Extraordinary General Assembly.

12.- To propose the commencement of disciplinary proceedings against any member of their own Division.

13.- To take decisions on how expenses shall be passed on among members of said Division through maintenance fees or any other fees.

14.- To decide on the granting of aid to the members of their own Division, always in accordance with the cap laid down by the General Assembly.

15.- To approve the matters envisaged in items b), c), d), article 3.2 of these Articles.

16.- Any other matters that solely and exclusively affect the Division which are not expressly attributed to another body of LALIGA.

THE EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE

a) Basic principles and regulatory standards

The Executive Committee is LALIGA's ordinary body of governance. Its legal regime is governed by Articles 27 to 31, inclusively, of the Articles of Association, by Book III, Articles 17 to 31 of the General Regulation and by Articles 2 and 3 of the LALIGA Code of Good Governance.

Executive Committee meetings shall be called and held on a monthly basis during the course of competitions and extraordinarily where requested by at least tour of its members or where the President of LALIGA may deem it necessary. The date, venue and Agenda shall be set by the proponents or by the President of LALIGA. The call shall state the Agenda, the venue, the date and the time of the first and second call.

Meetings shall be deemed to have been validly convened at the first call where a half plus one of its members are in attendance and at the second call whatever the number of members in attendance may be. At least half an hour shall elapse between the first and the second call

Resolutions shall be adopted by a simple majority of the votes cast, other than those resolutions concerning matters stated by the Article which shall be adopted by a qualified majority.

b) Composition

lt shall be chaired by the President of LALIGA and additionally comprised of the two Vice-Presidents and by the representatives of the Sports Corporations and Clubs elected in the way laid down in the General Regulation by the Division Committees under the following terms:

Six by the First Division Committee

Six by the Second Division Committee

The Corporate General Manager shall attend and be entitled to take the floor, but not to vote. The Legal Counsel of LALIGA shall act as the Secretary of the Executive Committee and shall be entitled to take the floor, but not to vote.

Members are elected by the Division Committees during the month following the month in which the Executive Committee has approved the liquidation of the immediately preceding financial year. Their term of office is two years and may be renewed for successive terms. The Public Limited Sports Companies and Clubs that are elected appoint their regular member (representative) and an alternate member (or proxy).

At present, the composition of the Executive Committee[1] is as follows:

Resulting composition from the electoral process carried out in July 2022 and September 2023 with respect to vacancies produced after the end of the 2022/2023 Season.

c) Powers

It is worth highlighting, among others, the following powers of the Delegate Committee:

· To request the calling of a General Assembly and to carry out any resolutions validly adopted by the General Assembly and/or the Division Committees.

· Propose the appointment, dismissal and re-election of the external auditors to the General Meeting, on a prior proposal from the Audit and Internal Control Committee.

· To negotiate and, as appropriate, approve agreements with the RFEF (Real Federación Española de Fútbol), the AFE (Spanish Footballers' Association) and public institutions subject to the Extraordinary General Assembly's ratification referred to in article 11 f) of these Articles.

· To take decisions regarding contested resolutions adopted by the Division Committees under the terms provided for in article 26.

· To decide on the approval or rejection of applications for admission to LaLiga, which may, as appropriate, be delegated to the Legal Counsel. Such delegation shall be granted by means of the majority needed to adopt resolutions on the matter referred to in this section.

· To act and exercise rights, either in the courts or out of them, in the interests of LaLiga, without detriment to the power provided for in article 33.

· To resolve urgent matters broached before it by any member regarding matters approved by a competent body, respecting in any event organisational hierarchies and the provisions set forth in the Articles and the regulations.

· To deal with any consultation broached on the interpretation of LaLiga’s Articles and Regulations.

· To propose the initiation of disciplinary proceedings

· To issue mandatory reports in accordance with prevailing legislation with the capacity, as appropriate, to delegate such power to the Legal Counsel. Such delegation shall be granted by means of the majority needed to adopt resolutions on the matter referred to in this section.

· To draw up LaLiga’s budget, as well as the Annual Report, Profit and Loss Account and the Budget Settlement.

· To recommend rules and criteria on drawing up the budgets of LaLiga members.

· Supervising and ensuring the integrity of internal financial and non-financial information systems.

· At the proposal of the Audit and Internal Control Committee, determining and supervising the internal control and risk management system.

· At the proposal of the Audit and Internal Control Committee, determining and supervising the Compliance Management System and amendments to the policies that make it up.

· Any others matters that are expressly assigned to it in these Articles or in the regulations.

· To decide on LaLiga’s functional structure and work posts at the proposal of the President and to elect two members of the SEFPSA Board of Directors pursuant to the provisions set forth in article 46 of these Articles of Association.

· Appointing the members of the Audit and Internal Control Committee, on the proposal of the President.

· At the proposal of the Audit and Internal Control Committee, selecting, appointing and dismissing the Regulatory Compliance Body Manager and, if appropriate, the internal audit functions manager.

After having conducted the relevant formalities, to declare and, as appropriate, render without effect the existence of a situation of economic difficulty suffered by a Club/Sports Corporation in accordance with the Collective Agreement entered into by LaLiga and the Association of Spanish Footballers

President

a) Basic principles and regulatory standards

The President of LaLiga shall be chosen from among the candidates who meet the requirements provided for in these Articles by means of a free, direct and secret vote by all the members of the General Assembly.

The legal regime of the President is provided for in Articles 32 to 37, inclusively, of the Articles of Association and in Book II, Articles 1 to 9, of the General Regulation. The President's term of office shall last for four years counting from the date of his/her election and the President may be re-elected for identical successive periods.

The President is the highest official of LaLiga and holds responsibility for its governance and legal representation, and is conferred with LaLiga’s executive powers. The office of President shall be remunerated and the President's remuneration shall be set through a resolution of the General Assembly.

b) Powers

The following powers have been vested on the President of LaLiga:

To ensure fulfilment of the Articles, General Regulation, circulars and other resolutions adopted by the General Assembly, the Executive Committee, the Division Committees and other bodies of LaLiga and taking the necessary decisions far such purpose.

To chair the General Assembly, the Executive Committee, the Division Committees and other bodies of LaLiga as set forth, call their meetings, set their Agendas, direct deliberations and order the voting to take place under the terms set forth in the these Articles.

To represent LaLiga before any person or organisation, public or private, within any sphere with the broadest legal powers, and thus with the necessary or suitable capacity to contract, reach agreements, file, continue with, acquiesce and abandon court, administrative and economic-administrative proceedings before agencies and courts of any jurisdiction or nature, be they Spanish or foreign, with the power to answer interrogatories and grant powers of attorney to court representatives and attorneys.

To agree on the acquisition or disposal by any title over goods or rights, works, services and supplies, except where the power is reserved for another body.

To exercise oversight of the budgets of Sports Corporations and Clubs as provided under the terms set farth in article 3.1.g) of the Articles.

To set up joint and other committees with the Real Federación Española de Fútbol, the Asociación de Futbolistas Españoles (Spanish Footballers' Association), the High Council far Sport, the Internal Revenue Service, Sports Corporations or Clubs and/or any other institutions, agencies and/or private or public legal persons or natural persons, laying down their rules and rules of procedure, as well as appointing LaLiga’s representatives in such Committees, which may even be natural persons, regardless of whether or not they have an employment relationship with LaLiga.

To raise before competent bodies proposals for the adoption of resolutions under the terms set forth in these Articles.

Any powers delegated to the President by the General Assembly, the Executive Committee, the Division Committees and other bodies of LaLiga.

Any others corresponding to the President according to the provisions set forth in these Articles or in the General Regulation.

The President may delegate any of the powers vested in him/her to the Vice-Presidents of LaLiga, the Corporate General Manager and the Legal Counsel, and must give notice of such delegation to all affiliates of LaLiga.

The President may delegate any of the powers vested in him/her to two employees of LaLiga, provided that such delegation is jointly and severally authorised by any of the afarementioned (Vice-Presidents, Corporate General Manager and Legal Counsel). Once such delegation has been made, notice thereof should be given to all LaLiga affiliates.

To propose the functional organisation of LaLiga to the Executive Committee, including the hiring, appointment, dismissal and removal of LaLiga’s employees.

To open, run and cancel current, savings and credit accounts at any credit, financial or banking institution, be they public or private, savings banks and in general terms any other kind of financial account jointly and severally with the Legal Counsel and the Corporate General Manager. Two signatures of any of the three above shall suffice for such purposes. The President may likewise issue, accept or endorse bills of exchange and other securities within the constraints set forth herein and may also administer LaLiga’s funds with broadest possible powers of administration.

In the elections held in November and December 2023, Mr. Javier Tebas Medrano was elected President of LALIGA for a fourth consecutive term.

VICE-PRESIDENTS OF THE LIGA

According to what is stated in article 38 of the Articles LaLiga has two Vice-Presidents, who shall be appointed as follows:

The candidate put forward by the First Division Corporation or Club that turns out to be elected by the First Division Committee at the election called for such purpose shall hold the office of First Vice-President.

The candidate put forward by the Second Division Corporation or Club that turns out to be elected by the Second Division Committee at the election called for such purpose shall hold the office of Second Vice-President.

The Vice-Presidents' term of office shall be of two years and they may be re-elected for successive periods.

The Vice-Presidents shall stand down from office should the Sports Corporation or Club they represent cease to take part in the Division for which they were elected and/or when they no longer represent the Club.

During the 2022/2023 Season both the First and Second Deputy Chairmen remained in office. The current First Deputy Chairman is Miguel Ángel Gil Marín, representing Club Atlético de Madrid, SAD, and the Second Deputy Chairman is Francisco Javier Catalán Vena, representing Levante Unión Deportiva, SAD.

CORPORATE GENERAL MANAGER

According to what is stated in article 44 bis of the Articles, LaLiga’s Corporate General Manager is the person appointed by the Executive Committee at the proposal of the President, under whose management the Corporate General Manager oversees the activities and duties of each of LaLiga’s divisions, departments and services in accordance with the guidelines approved by the Executive Committee. He/She also manages and oversees LaLiga’s human resources and holds responsibility for proposing the hiring of staff to the President for the Executive Committee's subsequent approval.

The following are also the Corporate General Manager's powers, which shall always be under the President's management:

Responsibility for LaLiga’s economic area, acting under the guidelines laid down by the General Assembly, the Executive Committee and the President. He/she is in charge of LaLiga’s accounts and ensures any expenses incurred are in accordance with approved budgets. Those holding responsibility for financing and/or accounting departments shall report to him/her. The Corporate General Manager is responsible for preparing the annual report, accounts, settlement for the financial year and the draft budget for it to be drawn up by the Executive Committee and subsequently approved by the General Assembly, along with issuing any reports on economic matters requested by the General Assembly or the President. He/she holds responsibility for the accounts between LaLiga and its affiliates.

Holding the highest responsibility for the economic oversight mechanism for Sports Corporations and Clubs, as governed by Book X of the General Regulation. Supervising the Economic Oversight Department referred to in said Book X also falls within his/her duties.

Holding the highest responsibility for the effective implementation and fulfilment of the rules and criteria to draw up the budgets of the entities affiliated to LaLiga Such implementation and fulfilment shall be done in accordance with the provisions set forth in the Articles of Association and with the rules and criteria approved by the Executive Committee.

Holding responsibility for managing and overseeing the Works Department with a view to adapting stadiums to legislation on the prevention of violence, racism and xenophobia in sport which may prevail from time to time, managing and overseeing this department regardless of which entity it may be placed under (LaLiga, Sociedad Española de Fútbol Profesional, S.A. or its subsidiary).

The Corporate General Manager may open, run and cancel current, savings and credit accounts at any credit, financial or banking institution, be it public or private, savings banks and in general terms any other kind of financial account jointly and severally with Legal Counsel and the President. Two signatures of any of the three above shall suffice for such purposes. The Corporate General Manager may likewise issue, accept or endorse bills of exchange and other securities within the constraints set forth herein and may also administer LaLiga’s funds with broadest possible powers of administration.

Along with Legal Counsel and the President, the Corporate General Manager is jointly and severally entitled to sign on behalf of the organisation to dispose of funds in the current, savings and credit accounts opened in LaLiga’s name at any credit institution, bank or savings bank, and in general terms in any other kind of financial account, as well as to accept bills and issue promissory notes within the limits set forth herein. Two signatures of any of the above shall suffice for such purposes.

His/her appointment shall be made by the Executive Committee at the President's proposal. The Corporate General Manager's term of office shall be linked to that of the President, so that where the President who has put forward his/her appointment should stand down from office, his/her term of office shall also come to an end automatically, without detriment to his/her removal from office at any time. Currently, LaLiga’s Corporate General Manager is José Guerra Álvarez.

Legal Counsel

The Legal Counsel of LaLiga is the person appointed by the Executive Committee at the President's proposal, whose duties are listed below:

The Legal Counsel holds responsibility for LaLiga’s legal advice and for its legal affairs.

The Legal Counsel is the Secretary of all LaLiga’s collegiate bodies and is in charge of advising them, drawing up the minutes of their meetings and issuing any certificates they may request. He/she is responsible for keeping LaLiga’s book of minutes and other official books. Asimismo, con su firma autoriza las comunicaciones, convocatorias y circulares de LaLiga.

Along with the Corporate General Manager and the President, the Legal Counsel is jointly and severally entitled to sign on behalf of the organisation to dispose of funds in the current, savings and credit accounts opened in LaLiga’s name at any credit institution, bank or savings bank, and in general terms in any other kind of financia! account, as well as to accept bills and issue promissory notes within the limits set forth herein. Two signatures of any of the above shall suffice for such purposes.

Along with the President, the Legal Counsel shall also hold the power to represent LaLiga on his/his own before any person or organisation, public or private, within any sphere with the broadest legal powers, and thus with the necessary or suitable capacity to contract, reach agreements, file, continue with, acquiesce and abandon court, administrative and economic-administrative proceedings before agencies and courts of any jurisdiction or nature, be they Spanish or foreign, with the power to answer interrogatories and grant powers of attorney to court representatives and attorneys.

The following institutional duties lie within the Legal Counsel's competence through the President's delegation and under the Executive Committee's oversight:

Relationships with the Real Federación Española de Fútbol, with the Association of Spanish Footballers or lnternational relationships with the Association of European Leagues, UEFA, FIFA, etc.

Any powers vested in the Legal Counsel through delegation by LaLiga different bodies of governance and representation and Executive Committee.

The Legal Counsel's term of office shall be of four years and may be expressly or implicitly extended for equal periods of time.

The Executive Committee may appoint at President's proposal one or several Legal Department alternates from among those responsible for LaLiga’s internal bodies. The Legal Department alternate(s) shall stand in for the Legal Counsel in the event of his/her abstention, absence or illness or where an objection is lodged against him/her or, as appropriate, in the processing of any proceedings involving the temporary suspension of certain rights of the affiliates laid down by the Articles.

OTHER LALIGA BODIES

a) Comisión Electoral

It is the body responsible for ensuring compliance with LALIGA's election procedures for the election of the Chairman and, therefore, the one that calls the elections and the competent body to resolve any complaints that may be made during the same.

Once the position in the Chairman’s Office of LALIGA becomes vacant, the Electoral Committee is formed, consisting of five members. Three members shall be appointed at random from among LALIGA affiliates competing in the First Division at the time of the vacancy and two shall be appointed at random from among LALIGA affiliates competing in the Second Division at the time of the vacancy.

The Committee shall choose a Chairman and Deputy Chairman from among its members by a simple majority.

b) Association Disciplinary Judge

The Association Disciplinary Judge is the body entrusted with initiating and resolving in a single instance any disciplinary proceedings that arise from a breach or infringement of LaLiga’s Articles and General Regulation by any of its affiliates.

The Judge shall not currently hold or have held during the last three seasons a management position or maintained an employment relationship with any Sports Corporation or Club among those affiliated to LaLiga.

A Law graduate with at least five years of professional experience shall be appointed, and he/she shall be appointed by the Assembly of LaLiga Judge's terms of office shall last far one league season and may be expressly or implicitly extended for successive periods

c) Economic Oversightcommittee

LaLiga’s Economic Oversight Committee is entrusted with verifying the appropriate fulfilment of the economic oversight rules and the rules and criteria to draw up the budgets of LaLiga’s affiliates. As appropriate, it may impose the relevant penalties pursuant to the provisions set forth in article 78 bis of the Articles of Association.

The Committee shall consist of five members, who shall not currently hold or have held during the last three seasons a management position or maintained an employment relationship with any Sports Corporation or Club among those affiliated to LaLiga Three of the appointments shall be for economists, chartered accountants or auditors and the other two appointments shall be for Law Graduates. AII its members shall have at least five years of professional experience.

The members of the Committee shall be appointed by the Assembly of LaLiga Their terms of office shall last for one league season and may be expressly or implicitly extended without a time limit.

d) Licensing Committee

LaLiga’s Licensing Committee is the body entrusted with definitively resolving any conflicts which may arise between the LaLiga’s members connected with the processing of provisional licences or their prior approval to take part in professional competitions.

The Committee shall consist of three full members and three alternate members, who shall not currently hold or have held during the last three sports seasons a management position or maintained an employment or service provision relationship with any Sports Corporation or Club among those affiliated to LaLiga.

Law Graduates shall be thus appointed. AII its members shall have at least five years of professional experience. Their terms of office shall last far two sports seasons. The members of the Committee shall be appointed by the Executive Committee of LaLiga at the proposal of the President.

e) Legal Committee

The Legal Committee is the body entrusted with adopting the resolutions corresponding under the Law to LaLiga’s collegiate governance, representation and internal bodies (Executive Committee and Division Committees) in accordance with the provisions set forth in the Articles and in the General Regulation of LaLiga in any cases where there is an abstention or objection involving more than fifty per cent (50%) of the representatives of the affiliated Clubs or Sports Corporations that comprise such bodies

The Committee shall consist of three members, who shall not currently hold or have held during the last three seasons a management position or maintained an employment relationship with any Sports Corporation or Club among those affiliated to LaLiga.

Law Graduates with at least five years of professional experience shall be appointed, and they shall be appointed by the Executive Committee of LaLiga. Their terms of office shall last far one league season and may be expressly renewed far successive periods.

f) Budget Validation Body

LaLiga’s Budget Validation Body is, by the President's delegation, entrusted with verifying affiliated Sports Corporations or Clubs' fulfilment of the rules and criteria to draw up the budgets of entities affiliated to the LIGA in accordance with the Articles of Association and the aforementioned rules and criteria. Their powers are the following:

To propose to the President of LaLiga the validation and acceptance of the budgets submitted by Sports Corporations and Clubs.

To request the relevant explanations of the information said budgets accept or upon which they are based, as well as to request adjustments to the amounts appearing therein.

To bring the relevant conclusions before the competent bodies of LaLiga for the purposes laid down in the rules and criteria to draw up the budgets of Sports Corporations and Clubs.

The Body shall be comprised of three people appointed by the President of LaLiga. Said appointments shall be ratified by the members of LaLiga’s Executive Committee and must have the votes in accordance with the Articles.

g) Regulatory Compliance Body

On 11 September 2015, the Executive Committee approved the establishment of the Regulatory Compliance Body, thus amending the Articles of Association approved by the Extraordinary General Meeting on 24 September 2015.

The aforementioned Body is responsible for managing LALIGA's Regulatory Compliance Management System and the internal self-regulation rules that form part of it, as well as for the regular assessments of compliance with these rules. It has autonomous powers of initiative and control and reports to and is directly dependent on the Audit and Internal Control Committee, without prejudice to the fact that it may also report directly to the Executive Committee.

h) Audit and Internal Control Committee.

During the 2020/2021 Season, an amendment to the articles of association was approved, first of all by the Executive Committee on 24 June 2021 and, subsequently, by the Extraordinary General Meeting on 30 June of the same year, which consisted of the inclusion of a new precept into LALIGA's Articles of Association, article 43 Sexies, regulating the constitution, set up and duties of an Audit and Internal Control Committee.

The new body is in charge of supervising the independence of the external auditor, the process for drawing up and presenting financial and non-financial information, internal control and risk management systems and internal audit and compliance duties, both for LaLiga and its subsidiary companies.

i) Audiovisual Rights Management Oversight Body

Body provided for in article 6 of the Articles of Association and article 10 of Title V of Book XI of the General Regulation. It has the following powers:

Managing the marketing and exploitation of audiovisual rights in compliance with statutory and regulatory standards.

Proposing decisions on the distribution criteria to the LaLiga governance bodies under the terms provided in prevailing laws.

Monitoring, reviewing and auditing the business management and economic results derived from the joint exploitation and marketing of audiovisual rights.

Establishing the standard for the production and execution of the audiovisual recording of nationwide professional football matches, based on a common style that promotes the integrity of the competition, compliance with the regulations in force on the holding of matches and the value of the product.

Determining the amounts that, in accordance with current legislation, each Club/SAD is entitled to receive for the exploitation and marketing of audiovisual rights.

Gathering and verifying the data necessary to assess the social implementation of the affiliate Clubs/SAD and any other that is necessary to determine the income that each Club/SAD should receive from variable items.

Before the end of the calendar year in which each season has started, publishing the criteria for the distribution of audiovisual revenues, the amounts corresponding to each participating entity and the amounts contributed in compliance with the obligations provided for prevailing laws, on the website.

Any other powers attributed by current legislation or delegated to it by the corresponding bodies of LaLiga.

The composition of the Audiovisual Rights Management Control Body will be renewed every season. It is made up of the following members: a) The two Clubs or SADs with the highest audiovisual rights revenue at national level in the last five years; b) Two first division Clubs/SADs elected by the teams in that category that were not members of the Committee, by virtue of the previous section; c) One second division Club/SAD elected by the Clubs/SADs in that category; d) The President of LaLiga, who will have the casting vote in the event of a tie.

After the electoral process carried out during the month of November 2023, the composition of the aforementioned body is as follows: for the First Division, in addition, Real Madrid and Fútbol Club Barcelona (for section a), Club Atlético de Madrid, SAD and Club Atlético Osasuna for section b); and for the Second Division, the Reial Club Deportiu Espanyol de Barcelona SAD.

The State Tax Administration Agency and the General Treasury of the Social Security, as public creditors, will also be called, and will be entitled to speak but not to vote, insofar as any of the affiliate Clubs/SADs have outstanding amounts to be paid to any of the aforementioned administrations.