Last year I had identified OrangeScape in the Techno-Pulse List of India’s leading Cloud Service Providers. For the starters, Chennai based OrangeScape is a rare breed of technology platform company founded in 2003 with a vision of simplifying business application development.

OrangeScape provides a Visual Platform-as-a-Service (PaaS) to build domain rich solutions, in the easiest and the fastest manner and can be deployed on any cloud. It’s in the Gartner’s Global Top 10 list of PaaS competitive Landscape and also has been featured in all the PaaS reports of Forrester.

OrangeScape became the first Indian company to be backed By The One Million by One Million (1M/1M) - Persistent Systems Partnership.

1M/1M - Founded in 2010 by Sramana Mitra , the One Million by One Million (1M/1M) initiative is an educational and business development program that aims to help a million entrepreneurs globally to reach $1 million in revenue and beyond, build $1 trillion in sustainable global GDP, and create 10 million jobs.

Persistent Systems – A global brand, established in 1990, (BSE & NSE: PERSISTENT) is recognized as an award-winning technology company specializing in software product development services.

What does this Mean for a Smart Developer?

One more proven platform. More Opportunities. More number of apps with less efforts. Why? Because the partnership of this kind obviously means – everything’s going right with OrangeScape PaaS – a validation from industry’s who’s who.

As a developer, I still remember my classic ASP days at the beginning of my career. At least a 100 lines of code to display a simple set of data in tabular format! Another 100 lines to achieve sorting & paging. Indeed a nightmare for beginners! Dot Net came as a savior and was a gentle breeze for those migrating from classic ASP. Dot Net though made the coding simple, yet has a lot of challenges for the developers as the customer’s expectation grew with it. I guess open source technologies (viz. JSP) still lacks the drag & drop features and the developer has to code almost everything.

The Bottom-line: With the existing development platforms/models, a smart developer (or a small team) can never think of developing an application alone – for various reasons:

A lot of mundane/repetitive work.

Software licenses – too expensive for most of us.

Even for a simple app the investment in Time & Effort required is practically too high to reach an early break-even point (if you sell your app).

With the evolution of next-gen Cloud based PaaS viz. OrangeScape – the developer needs to worry only about - the domain knowledge and the application workflow. With a little effort a developer (or a small team) can unleash the hidden entrepreneur in her/him to quickly build and market a SaaS on OrangeScape’s fast, collaborative, modeling driven, visual platform (PaaS)

Millions of small businesses (SMEs/SMBs) around the world are waiting for affordable apps… broadband & smart-phones are no longer luxury and about to reach the tipping point even in developing countries. Think about it.

What does this Mean for a Wannabe Entrepreneur?

There’s a new trend – Cloud/SaaS – the signals are too strong to ignore. Catch it before the opportunity zooms past you…

What does this Mean for an Entrepreneur?

You might need to find out more about 1M/M and leverage its strength to reach out to the new markets.

Essence of the Press Release (on February 18)

OrangeScape enters the US Market.

Competition heating-up in North American PaaS landscape.

Persistent Systems will be selling and providing implementation services for OrangeScape.

Persistent Systems will take OrangeScape to their existing customers

Persistent Systems will target two markets

Enterprises - to position a App Platform in the Cloud

ISVs - PaaS to build SaaS

Sramana Mitra will help OrangeScape in such strategic moves in the days to come.

What do They Think About the Partnership?

This deal with Persistent Systems will bring OrangeScape a cost-effective go-to-market solution through their global sales team and offshore backed enterprise implementation support through technology experts in Persistent’s Cloud Practice.

---Suresh Sambandam - Founder & CEO OrangeScape

We at Persistent are very excited to work with 1M/1M in helping entrepreneurs succeed by bringing new technologies to market, … We have been proactively investing in Cloud Computing, and believe that OrangeScape’s Platform as a Service (PaaS) product will nicely supplement our portfolio of cloud technologies to provide large enterprises an app platform in the Cloud and use PaaS for ISVs migrating to SaaS. OrangeScape, when sold through right channels, can have a significant impact in the market.

---Dr. Anand Deshpande - Chairman and Managing Director, Persistent Systems

The 1M/1M philosophy is to focus our entrepreneurs on customer acquisition and revenue without burning through a huge amount of cash in building expensive channels, … Our partnership with Persistent Systems is focused on taking promising small companies to market, efficiently. OrangeScape is one of the most promising Indian product companies we have seen so far, and we see an exciting opportunity for them to enhance the capabilities of Google’s App Engine in long tail enterprise apps. Over time, we foresee OrangeScape becoming a leader in the A-PaaS (Application PaaS) space and also a cornerstone of the Google enterprise solution portfolio.

---Sramana Mitra, founder of 1M/1M