France

Radio and television in France are considered public services even when provided by private companies. The idea of public rather than for-profit broadcasting is deeply ingrained, so when France’s Socialist government announced massive cuts in public funding last year – from €292m (£203m) in 2014 to €29m in 2017 – it caused outrage.

It is a double whammy for French public broadcasters as the government insists on maintaining a general ban on advertising after 8pm, introduced in 2009 by the previous president Nicolas Sarkozy.

In March, French public radio fell silent for 28 days when staff walked out over budget cuts.

The broadcasters cover a broad range of material, including what the French still call “popular entertainment”. Sarkozy regularly cited the BBC as an example of what he wanted in French public broadcasting.

The French state had direct control over broadcasting until 1964 and then a complete monopoly until 1982.

There are several 100% state-funded TV stations under the umbrella France Télévisions: France 2 – national; France 3 – national/regional; France 5 – society/culture/education; France Ô - overseas; France 4 – children’s/factual/drama; France 24 – equivalent of BBC World, and radio stations that come under Radio France. The state also holds stakes in certain private broadcasters such as TV5 Monde, Euronews and owns 50% of satellite channel Arte.

More than 70% of funding comes from the €136 licence fee (€89 in the overseas départments) which raises about €3.5bn; 7% is public funding, 8% advertising, and the rest is listed as “sponsorship and other”. Public funding amounts to 0.25% of GDP (compared with 0.36% in the UK). The government is considering licence fee rises, more advertising and making licences obligatory for computer owners.

Kim Willsher

Germany

In 1954 German public television was given the responsibility to “entertain, inform and enlighten”. Many would question whether it lives up to those ideals today. The most successful programme is weekly crime drama series Tatort (Scene of the Crime) which is set in a different federal state every Sunday evening. A predominance of news and political chatshows are hosted by the public channels, but quality is rarely said to match the BBC, which is often held up as the role model for German broadcasters. However, the quality of public television is still significantly better than that of commercial channels, which swim in commercials.

The public channels ZDF and Das Erste have the highest share of viewers (about 13% and 12.5% apiece), compared with the two leading commercial channels, RTL and SAT.1, which have about 10% and 8%.

Since 2013, Germans pay a per-household flat fee of €17.98 per month for all electronic devices, known as the Rundfunkbeitrag or “broadcast contribution”. The amount replaced the old GEZ radio and TV fee which was payable per device. The system used to be based on individuals taking the initiative to pay, and an army of inspectors who were allowed to do door-to-door patrols, but was replaced by an obligatory payment, so that no one can avoid it. Exemptions include low-income families and students. Disabled people can apply to pay a reduced fee of €5.99. Companies pay according to the number of employees they have, but every company, whether a bakery or a hair salon, is obliged to pay.

The fees are criticised as being among the highest in the world despite public stations carrying ads, and because of the often poor quality of German television as well as the high number of programmes bought from foreign broadcasters, particularly the US.

The annual revenue from licence fees is approximately €7.6bn, with an additional €500m raised from commercials, giving Germany one of the largest public broadcasting budgets in the world. The international success of television series from Scandinavia, the US and Britain has prompted questions about why, with its huge budget, Germany has a poor record of producing exportable formats.

Kate Connolly

Italy

Rai, Italy’s state-controlled broadcaster, has long been a force in Italian media and it is about to get a makeover. Matteo Renzi, the Italian prime minister, is hoping to finish a top-to-bottom reform of Rai this year that would turn it into one of biggest “cultural enterprises” in Europe, capable of competing with the likes of the BBC and Sky.

Rai consists primarily of three free-to-air public stations – Rai Uno, Due and Tre – and is supported through television licence fees and advertising. There is also RaiNews, a 24-hour news channel.

Renzi’s plan involves upending the stations’ traditional affiliations. Rai Uno would be transformed into a generalist channel – it has long been linked to what was the traditional Christian Democrat party – while Rai Due would be focused on innovation and Rai Tre – traditionally seen as sympathetic to the far left – would be devoted to culture.

The appearance of political interference in the management of Rai has long been a sensitive subject, particularly during the tenure of former prime minister Silvio Berlusconi, the media magnate who controls Italy’s other big broadcasters – Canale 5, Italia Uno and Rete4 – which fall under the umbrella of the mogul’s Mediaset.

Rai has also been criticised for not creating high quality programming that would be comparable to programmes created by the BBC. While there are exceptions, Italian television is still beset by variety shows and news talk shows that seem more concerned with entertaining than informing viewers.

Stephanie Kirchgaessner

Netherlands

Dutch media law requires the state broadcaster, NOS, to provide a diverse output across four areas: information, culture, education and entertainment.

From January the last of these is being removed from the remit, to distinguish NOS’s output from the commercial channels. The other main line of reform has been to simplify the Netherlands’ byzantine structure of broadcasting organisations, a legacy of the days when Dutch society was divided into denominational groups.

The 21 broadcasters are being reduced to eight through mergers and abolitions, and those that remain will pool their budgets to create a “single, strong broadcasting network” with a distinct identity. The government also wants NOS to buy in more programmes from independent production companies to encourage competition and reduce costs.

Since the licence fee was abolished in 2000, NOS has been funded directly by central government, topped up by advertising revenue. NOS is responsible for the three main TV channels, five radio stations and its news website, as well as specialist channels such as NPO Politics. There are also 13 regional broadcasting networks that receive state funding.

Although the Netherlands spends less per capita on broadcasting than almost any other European country, in 2010 the government announced measures to slash the annual subsidy by €200m, or about 22.5% of its €891m budget. (Advertising income brings in another €200m a year.) The biggest loser was the Dutch world service (Wereldomroep), whose budget was cut by about 80%. A further €100m of cuts across the board is due to be implemented by 2017.

Gordon Darroch

United States

Public broadcasting in the US is radically different from the BBC, in part because the former has to sing for its supper. While the BBC is funded by the licence fee paid by every viewer, TV and radio stations in the US cobble together budgets from a variety of sources, federal, state and private. Often, politicians and businesses giving that money on a per-project or annual basis will ask them to prove they’re creating worthwhile programming.

Chief among the public sources is the Corporation for Public Broadcasting (CPB), a tax-funded non-profit that provides between 15% and 20% of the funding for all 351 public TV stations in the US and territories and the more than 1,000 public radio stations.

Another federal funding organisation, the National Endowment for the Arts (NEA) contributes at the individual programme level. NEA dollars go to material as inoffensive as a broadcast of a concert of John Williams movie scores conducted by the Los Angeles Philharmonic’s Gustavo Dudamel, but it still gets tarred as controversial. As recently as July 2014 Arizona representative Matt Salmon was still complaining about photographer Andres Serrano’s NEA-funded Piss Christ, which was first denounced by the late Jesse Helms 25 years earlier.

“The National Endowment for the Arts is an agency that, at best, inserts government into the freedom of artistic expression from which it should remain carefully separated,” Salmon wrote.

Thus, Americans seeking to produce work with financial requirements beyond the scope of their public funds often have to get out the begging bowl. “Do you want a season two of Serial?” Sarah Koenig asked viewers at the end of her hugely popular NPR podcast (which was already sponsored by email service MailChimp). “If so, I’m going to ask you for money.” Viewers gave directly, en masse.