Arnold Schwarzenegger was born as the son of a policeman in Graz. Because he wanted to get into the local soccer team, he started to workout. Already at this time was his destiny to obtain a perfect body and muscles.

In 1965, when he joined the Austrian Army, his commanding officer withheld the pass to leave the base to take part in some stupid bodybuilding contest. Arnie deserted, won the trophy and was thrown into military jail when returning. It was only then, that the senior officers took a closer look at the trophy, which happened to be the top position of Mr. Universe junior! After that, he was officially allowed to train during his year of service.

From then on he earned one title after the other. In 1968 he won the International Powerlifting Championship and decided to move to the USA.

Arnold Schwarzenegger became Mr. Universe twice and Mr. Olympia each year from 1970-75. His body was his success. Even today, people often refer to him as the Austrian Oak. But Arnold Schwarzenegger isn’t an example for all muscles no brains. He also holds an academic Business degree and is known for his smartness concerning business and money matters.

In 1970 he was starring in his first movie, the b-picture ‘Hercules goes to New York’. In 1982 he got the lead role in ‘Conan the Barbarian’ and ‘Terminator‘, starting his career as a convincing actor in action movies. Obsessed with money Schwarzenegger obtained a business degree from the University of Wisconsin and started investing his earnings. He invested his money in real estate, making a fortune and married Maria Shriver in 1986. By this he married into an influental American family: the Kennedy family. In 1991 he acted in "Terminator 2: Judgement Day", his most successful movie ever. Arnold Schwarzeneggers is one of the most famous Austrians living in the States and his influence in Hollywood is very strong. His trademark is the frequent movie line "I’ll be back" or other comic punch lines. With films like "Twins" or "Total Recall" Schwarzenegger gained acclaim for his acting, too.

In 2003 he not only starred in "Terminator 3: Rise of the Machines" but also announced his intention to run for the elections for the office of Californian Governor. On the 8th Oktober 2003 he won those elections becoming one more successful actor turned politician of American history. He is also living proof that you do not have to speak English with a flawless accent to relive the American dream and rise from dishwasher to millionaire.