Reading on mobile? Click here to listen

Hometown: Brooklyn.

The lineup: Dan Balis (guitar, writing, production), Eugene Cho (keyboards, writing, production),Adeline Michele (lead vocals), Joy Dragland (vocals), Karlie Bruce (vocals), Angelica Allen (vocals), Mark Tewarson (guitar), Jason Kriveloff (bass), Caleb Burhans (strings), Pauline Kim (strings), Tarrah Reynolds (strings), Jon Natchez (sax), Nathan Warner (trumpet), Ryan Keberle (trombone), Ben Herson (drums), Ernesto Abreu (percussion), David Freyre (percussion).

The background: It seems fitting, in the week that Nile Rodgers is sitting at No 1 in the UK charts for the first time ever – unless you count his jobs as producer for David Bowie and Madonna, Chic's Good Times, Le Freak and I Want Your Love were, surprisingly, mere top 10 hits – that we should feature an American disco group. Escort have been around for a while but they're only now getting anything resembling a push over here, with a date this Sunday at London's Jazz Cafe and a re-reissue on iTunes on Monday for their self-titled debut album (with a full release next month).

When the album came out in the States it got rave reviews from not just Time Out and Rolling Stone but Pitchfork as well. The 17-strong band features members who have played with Beirut and Arcade Fire. Escort are, as yet, an underground thing, an outlet for hipsters, in much the same way that Hercules and Love Affair were. Give or take the odd Kylie Minogue pastiche, disco has failed to enjoy a second moment in the sun sales-wise. But this newfound cool status is weird because disco was never really for the cognoscenti, not when it broke big. It maybe was before the hits, in its Loft and Paradise Garage infancy, and following its commercial decline, with the Mutant Disco of the Ze label. But now it's got a chance to be both credible and popular, so this could be the ideal moment for Escort to capitalise on the renewed broad interest in the music provided by Daft Punk's glorious Get Lucky.

They've got their own Rodgers and Edwards in Dan Balis (guitar, writing, production) and Eugene Cho (keyboards, writing, production). Or do we mean their own August Darnell and Stony Browder Jr? Because Escort recall the sophisticated dancefloor rapture of Chic as well as the swing-evoking jazz-pop of Dr Buzzard's Original Savannah Band, which featured the aforementioned Darnell, who later became Kid Creole. It's Studio 54 by way of the Cotton Club. Album opener Caméleon Chameleon has the insouciant swagger of Dr Buzzard's chi chi swing disco and the sardonic strut of Ze. Throughout the album there is a mix of machine rhythms with proper performances on real instruments. Disco has a reputation for being robotic but it was simultaneously proto-techno, courtesy of the likes of Giorgio Moroder, and the Last Stand of Proper Played Dance Music. A Sailboat in the Moonlight is well Ze with a dash of Tom Tom Club: bright, playful funk, from a time when brightness and colour were radical gestures.

Confirming that Escort do the sequenced-beat and authentic-musician thing, Why Oh Why is disco at its most European, recalling Cerrone or Donna Summer's swooning team-ups with Moroder and Pete Bellote. Starlight starts off like one of those long-forgotten disco troupes such as Players Association, with all the requisite elements that made disco so memorable: the shivering strings, the distracted-diva vocals over the insistent rhythms. Escort may not possess the melancholy or majesty of Chic but they do tap into disco's atmosphere of hedonism undercut by despair. A Bright New Life moves forward in terms of influence, being more Hi-NRG than disco, while All Through the Night has the quirky jerkiness of Funkytown by Lipps Inc. Our favourite track is All That She Is, as Euro-sublime as Sheila and B Devotion's Spacer (one of many extracurricular products of the Chic Organisation). Escort are as much a dance band doing machine music organically as an outfit offering a tour de force of disco styles, a homage to the music that was broader than people imagine. Good times indeed.

The buzz: "The best disco you've ever heard" – Jake Shears, Scissor Sisters.

The truth: They're Studio 54 with a whiff of the Cotton Club.

Most likely to: Freak out.

Least likely to: Cherchez la femme – she's already here, on lead vocals.

What to buy: The self-titled debut album is re-released on June 17.

File next to: Chic, Change, Dr Buzzard's Original Savannah Band, Hercules and Love Affair.

Links: http://weareescort.com/