Automates graphical building of software systems and business processes; adds comprehensive C++ and CORBA modeling support

CUPERTINO, Calif. -- Sept. 6, 2006 -- Borland Software Corporation today announced a significant upgrade to its Together® 2006 for Eclipse enterprise modeling product. With new capabilities supporting architects, Java™ and C++ developers, Unified Modeling Language (UML) designers, business process analysts, and data modelers, the release enables users across the software delivery lifecycle to build and maintain high-quality software systems as well as optimize business processes through enhanced visual design.

Together 2006 for Eclipse Release 2 is based on the open source Eclipse 3.2 framework for software development, working directly within the Eclipse 3.2 shell. It supports a multitude of open industry standards and languages -- including added support for modeling C++ applications -- to promote extensibility and customization especially when working in heterogeneous environments. Additionally, the release is integrated with Borland's recently introduced Caliber® DefineIT requirements definition product, enabling users to quickly build systems from requirements by creating UML and Business Process Modeling Notation (BPMN) models.

"Providing advanced, easy-to-use UML modeling capabilities for model-driven development continues to be a key area of expertise for Borland, but our visual design capabilities have evolved to be even more than that," said David Hauck, director of product marketing, Borland. "Not only does Together support a number of common visual languages and standards to help improve communication across functional teams, it also brings the benefits of visual design to other areas of the application lifecycle like requirements definition. This is an easy way to simplify collaboration and drive productivity across IT roles and business stakeholders."

"To maximize the success of reuse programs, IT organizations are increasingly coordinating different models of the various architectures across the enterprise, [which] is fueling the integration and convergence of the markets for business process analysis (BPA), UML, and database design modeling methods and tools," said Michael J. Blechar, Research VP, Gartner, in a recent report (see Note 1).

"This gradual convergence of the methods and tools used by technical architects, business modelers, developers and database designers will enable enterprises to better leverage their staffs' interrelated and complementary expertise."

Driving Design and Development from Requirements

Together 2006 plays a key role in Borland's Requirements Definition and Management solution, which provides business analysts with a visual way to define and storyboard business and technical requirements. The integration between Together 2006 and Borland's Requirements Definition and Management products enable users to generate UML diagrams from specified requirements and then leverage these design assets to drive software implementation and track design decisions back to the original requirements. By providing a process for visualizing requirements through use case, activity, and sequence diagrams, development teams can quickly transform specified requirements into high-level system architectures and designs without the risk of ambiguity.

"We use Together to help us understand our existing code base and augment it as new requirements and features are designed," said Paul Hudgins, application architect at Ciena -- a leading network specialist and longtime Together customer. "Driving system design through models is key for us, especially as new customer requirements arise, as is leveraging Together to facilitate tighter communication between our distributed development teams. New features in this release can help companies more completely leverage models across the lifecycle, which can ultimately drive greater business value in finished applications."

In addition, this release adds complete C++ modeling support, allowing organizations to leverage the object-oriented C++ language for system development. To increase developer productivity, Together 2006 provides C++ LiveSource® to help keep models and code synchronized at all times, as well as C++ design patterns and source code metrics.

Other key capabilities of Together 2006 for Eclipse Release 2 include the following:

Expanded Productivity for Business Analysts: Business Process Modeling Notation (BPMN) support enables analysts to visually model business processes and workflows, which can then be traced to requirements and used throughout the lifecycle.

Advanced MDA Capabilities: Complete Model-Driven Architecture (MDA) support aids architects in the definition and transformation of architectures from UML-based platform-independent models, which can target multiple platforms, to platform-specific models, such as for the such as for the Microsoft® .NET or J2EE(TM) platforms.

SOA Manageability: The complex topology of service-oriented architectures (SOA) is made easier to manage with Together's UML-based view of the entire system. Architects and designers can use Together to assess how new services will affect the existing architecture and how required changes can be implemented.

Model and Code Quality Assurance: Both code- and model-level audits and metrics can give teams significant productivity gains by assisting with architectural compliance, code compliance, code complexity, and coding standards.

Modeling for the Future with Eclipse

To optimize standards-compliance and interoperability benefits for customers, Borland will continue to invest in and leverage technology developed through the Eclipse Modeling Project for future releases of Together. The project, which promotes and develops model-based technologies within the Eclipse community, is being co-led by Borland and IBM.

"The role that Borland is taking to drive modeling advancements within Eclipse will not only benefit the larger community, but also allows us to create a highly advanced, standardized foundation upon which to build our commercial products," said Richard Gronback, co-leader of the Eclipse Modeling Project and chief scientist at Borland. "We expect our use of Eclipse modeling technologies to give customers a greater degree of flexibility, usability, and richness without the risk of a proprietary platform."

For more information on Borland Application Lifecycle Management (ALM) products including Together, please go to http://www.borland.com/us/products/alm/index.html.

About Borland

Founded in 1983, Borland Software Corporation is a global leader in platform independent solutions for software delivery optimization. The company provides the software and services that align the people, process, and technology required to maximize the business value of software. To learn more about delivering quality software, on time and within budget, visit http://www.borland.com.

Borland, Together, Caliber, LiveSource and all other Borland brand and product names are service marks, trademarks or registered trademarks of Borland Software Corporation or its subsidiaries in the United States and other countries. Sun, Java, J2EE and all other Sun brand and product names are service marks, trademarks or registered trademarks of Sun Microsystems, Inc. or its subsidiaries in the United States and other countries. Microsoft and all other Microsoft brand and product names are service marks, trademarks or registered trademarks of Microsoft Corporation or its subsidiaries in the United States and other countries. All other marks are the property of their respective owners.

Safe Harbor Statement: This release contains "forward-looking statements" as defined under the U.S. Federal Securities Laws, including the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995 and is subject to the safe harbors created by such laws. Forward-looking statements may relate to, but are not limited to, the features available in, and the potential benefits to be derived from, Borland Together, Caliber, LiveSource and other Borland brand products and solutions and future release dates, plans and features of such products and solutions. Such forward-looking statements are based on current expectations that involve a number of uncertainties and risks that may cause actual events or results to differ materially. Factors that could cause actual events or results to differ materially include, among others, the following: rapid technological change that can adversely affect the demand for Borland products, shifts in customer demand, shifts in strategic relationships, delays in Borland's ability to deliver its products and services, software errors or announcements by competitors. These and other risks may be detailed from time to time in Borland periodic reports filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission, including, but not limited to, its latest Annual Report on Form 10-K and its latest Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q, copies of which may be obtained from www.sec.gov. Borland is under no obligation to (and expressly disclaims any such obligation to) update or alter its forward-looking statements whether as a result of new information, future events or otherwise. Information contained in our website is not incorporated by reference in, or made part of this press release.

Note 1: Gartner Research "BPA, Object-Oriented and Data Modeling Tools Are Converging" by Michael J. Blechar. Nov. 7, 2005