1. University of Missouri School of Law

The University of Missouri School of Law (MU) was founded in 1839. It was the first state university west of the Mississippi River. Students get involved both in the classroom and in many co-curricular activities. The MU Law curriculum combines traditional law school classes with an appreciation of the dispute resolution techniques and also includes a Certificate Program in the area of Dispute Resolution. The law school is a charter member of the AALS and is fully accredited.

University of Missouri School of Law

2. University of Missouri—Kansas City School of Law (UMKC)

The UMKC School of Law was founded in 1895. It provides academic and professional training to students seeking careers in law. It also provides a high-quality legal education in a professional and supportive environment. The faculty is outstanding scholars who have extensive practice experience. The classes are relatively small and many of the substantive courses incorporate simulations and service learning opportunities. The school provides many opportunities for interaction and development of personal relationships. UMKC is one of the only six law schools to have educated both a president of the United States and a US Supreme Court justice. The school is accredited by the ABA. It is a member of the AALS.

University of Missouri—Kansas City School of Law

3. Saint Louis University School of Law

The mission of Saint Louis University School of Law is “to advance the understanding and the development of law, and prepare students to achieve professional success and personal satisfaction through leadership and service to others.” It has an accomplished, accessible faculty and a diverse curriculum. The law school provides a challenging and collegial environment. Full-time law students benefit from the school’s unique small-section program that provides for individualized instruction and focused student interaction. The school offers a challenging part-time program through which students can earn their law degree in four years with summer attendance, or five years without summer attendance.

Saint Louis University School of Law

4. Washington University School of Law

Washington University School of Law offers an outstanding legal education in an intellectually challenging and collegial environment. The faculty members are recognized for their excellent teaching and scholarship. The curriculum blends traditional theory with opportunities to participate in a wide variety of lawyering skills courses and co-curricular activities to encourage interdisciplinary learning. Washington University law students receive the training necessary to excel in both legal reasoning and practice techniques. The School of Law offers multiple joint degree programs with other graduate schools on campus as well as a variety of advanced, post-J.D. degree programs.