bridge is back

Renée Zellweger Is Returning for a Fourth Bridget Jones Movie

Franchise stars Hugh Grant and Emma Thompson are expected to join newcomers Chiwetel Ejiofor and Leo Woodall for Bridget Jones: Mad About the Boy.

From the Magazine

Matthew Macfadyen and Succession’s Tom Wambsgans Have Nothing in Common—Really! His Friends Swear!

The unassuming British actor, already beloved for playing Mr. Darcy, has turned a craven, shape-shifting opportunist into one of the most sympathetic and vulnerable figures on TV.

Anatomy of a Category

The Limited-Series Best-Actor Emmy Race Is a Bloodbath—For Once

Andrew Garfield, Colin Firth, and Jared Leto have crashed an already crowded party.

Awards Insider First Look

In The Staircase, Colin Firth and Toni Collette Find Life in Death

The decorated stars talk playing the unthinkable—and unknowable—in HBO Max’s wild, innovative true-crime limited series.

Class Acts

Stanley Tucci on His Love Story With Colin Firth

Tucci laughs that he and Firth “should have” grown bored with each other 20 years into their friendship. “I’ve got news for you: Neither of us are that interesting.”

Court Cases

Livia and Colin Firth’s Alleged Stalker Has Been Charged

The man, with whom Livia Firth had an affair between 2015 and 2016, has been accused of stalking her after their breakup.

no more magic in the moonlight

Colin Firth Is Also Done with Woody Allen

The Magic in the Moonlight star says he’s not interested in working with the controversial director again.

Take a Chance on Me

The Mamma Mia! Movie Is Getting a Sequel in 2018

Meryl Streep, Pierce Brosnan, and the rest of the cast are expected to return for Mamma Mia: Here We Go Again!

an artist's perspective

Cristiano Ronaldo’s Statue Joins a Roster of Unfortunate Likenesses

The rendering of the footballer is not the only piece that has induced mockery and outrage.

Another One, Actually

Love Actually Is Getting a Sequel—but There’s a Twist

And no, it’s not that Andrew Lincoln was in love with Keira Knightley the whole time.

Bridget Jones’s Sequel

Bridget Jones’s Baby Already Has One Thing the First Two Movies Didn't

That would be Emma Thompson—who’s on full comic display in the movie’s latest trailer.

FROM THE MAGAZINE

Genius, the Biopic About the Editor Behind America’s Greatest Novelists

Max Perkins was Fitzgerald’s, Hemingway’s, and Wolfe’s biggest advocate. Now, a movie about his life hits the big screen—after 50 years in the making.