Share this Article:

Once again, this week’s film quiz brings questions from Quiz Town, including teasers about Mad Max and other movies with cars and motors.

Across five movies, the most outlandish thing about the Mad Max saga’s post-apocalypse is that everyone still has cars and bikes and guzzoline to be getting on with. As George Miller’s long-awaited Fury Road prequel Furiosa roars into cinemas, (read James’ review here) we’ve got motors on our minds too, plus questions on a surprising variety of other sequels and screen addresses.

Once you’ve completed all three rounds, you’ll find a link to a separate post with the correct answers at the bottom of this post. As always, this is all just for fun, but please let us know how you did in the comments (scores out of 30 this week!) and give us any other lovely feedback. You will arrive at your destination in 30 questions…

ROUND ONE – This Week In Movie History

This round is about UK cinema releases and general film history from this week in years past – we’ve given you the year at the start of each question to help out!

1. 2015 – In cinemas now, Anya Taylor Joy is Furiosa, but who plays her in Mad Max: Fury Road?

2. 1985 – … And which repeated Fury Road catchphrase is also the title of a Harrison Ford crime thriller?

3. 2021 – Which 2018 family film has a sequel subtitled The Runaway?

4. 1965 – Born this week, whose screen characters include Dr John Watson, Oliver Hardy, and Dewey Cox?

5. 2016 – In which country is Sing Street set?

6. 2000 – “Death doesn’t take no for an answer” is the tagline for which horror franchise-starter?

7. 1963 – Who plays Danny Ocean in the original version of Ocean’s 11?

8. 1999 – Which London-set romantic comedy has a W11 postcode?

9. 1972 – Also born this week, who plays Ma in the 2019 horror film Ma?

10. 1983 – Which film comes next in this sequence: Monty Python And The Holy Grail > Life Of Brian > …?

ROUND TWO – Movie Motors and Motorists

Next, put your foot down and belch “POWUHHHH” like you’re on an old Top Gear – here are 10 questions about motors and motorists at the movies…

11. “Where’s your car, dude?” Which 2000 comedy features this repeated quote?

12. Which possessed car is the subject of a Stephen King novel and a John Carpenter horror film, both released in 1983?

13. What is the full title of Disney’s latest Herbie movie to date, released in 2005 and starring Lindsay Lohan?

14. Who plays driver Baby in 2017’s Baby Driver?

15. Which comedy movie prominently features a Mutt Cutts pet grooming van customised to look like a dog?

16. What title connects a French action-comedy franchise and a 2004 remake starring Queen Latifah and Jimmy Fallon?

17. In Batman Returns, which villain remotely hijacks the Batmobile?

18. Who plays driver Stuntman Mike in Death Proof?

19. What title does 2019’s Ford V Ferrari go by in UK cinemas and on home media?

20. In Back To The Future, which US state is named on the DeLorean’s original licence plate?

ROUND THREE – Pot Luck

Let’s finish with a random selection of pot luck movie questions – these could come from any era, any genre, or any level of difficulty. Enjoy!

21. In cinemas now! Who provides the voice of Garfield in The Garfield Movie?

22. Which city goes before Story, Godfathers, and Drift in the titles of three different movies?

23. Which Mamma Mia dad was born earliest: Pierce Brosnan, Colin Firth, or Stellan Skarsgård?

24. How many Terminator movies were released in the 2010s?

25. Which future Oscar-winning action star co-stars with Jackie Chan in Police Story 3: Supercop?

26. In the news! Which legendary English character is Hugh Jackman set to play next: Robin Hood or King Arthur?

27. Who plays Austin Powers’ father Nigel Powers in Austin Powers In Goldmember?

28. Complete the title of the 2023 fantasy adventure – Dungeons & Dragons: Honour Among… what?

29. Which member of the Rolling Stones has an acting role in 1970’s Performance: Mick Jagger or Keith Richards?

30. And finally, Peter Parkedcar is a character in which animated franchise?

—

Ready for the answers?

That’s the end of this week’s film quiz – when you’re ready to check your answers, click here to get them (it’ll take you to another page) and let us know your scores in the comments below.

We’ll be back next Friday with another film quiz, but until then, check out Issue 50 of Film Stories Magazine, which features 50 all-new questions on movie songs, the films of 1974, and the number 50! You can also listen to our suitably named film quiz podcast, The Film Quiz Podcast, which features Nick Helm asking movie questions and occasionally berating contestants for getting them wrong.

—

—

Thank you for visiting! If you’d like to support our attempts to make a non-clickbaity movie website:

Follow Film Stories on Twitter here, and on Facebook here.

Buy our Film Stories and Film Junior print magazines here.

Become a Patron here.