Colin Firth is the latest addition to the cast of Amazon Prime Video’s upcoming series “Young Sherlock,” Variety has learned.

The series is inspired by Andy Lane’s “Young Sherlock Holmes” novels and was ordered to series in May with Hero Fiennes Tiffin in the lead role. Joseph Fiennes, Natascha McElhone, and Zine Tseng also star. Firth will play Sir Bucephalus Hodge, with further character details currently under wraps.

More from Variety

Paramount+, Starz and BET Are More Than Half Off With These Prime Day Deals

María José Rodríguez Steps Down as Amazon MGM Studios Head of Spanish Originals (EXCLUSIVE)

'Bosch' Renee Ballard Spinoff Casts Courtney Taylor

Firth is primarily known for his film roles, including his Oscar- and Golden Globe-winning turn in the 2010 film “The King’s Speech,” in which he played King George VI. He has also starred in films like “A Single Man,” “The English Patient,” the “Bridget Jones” films,” the “Kingsman” films, the “Mamma Mia” films, and “Tinker Tailor Soldier Spy.” In television, he had his breakout role playing Mr. Darcy in the 1995 BBC adaptation of “Pride and Prejudice.” He recently starred in the Max limited series “The Staircase.”

Firth is repped by Independent Talent, CAA, and Prosper PR.

The official description for “Young Sherlock” states, “At age 19, Sherlock Holmes is disgraced, raw, unfiltered, and unformed, when he finds himself caught up in a murder mystery at Oxford University which threatens his freedom. Diving into his first-ever case with a wild lack of discipline, Sherlock manages to unravel a globe-trotting conspiracy that will change his life forever.”

Matthew Parkhill is the writer, executive producer, and showrunner. Guy Ritchie is directing and executive producing. Simon Kelton, Ivan Atkinson, Simon Maxwell, Dhana Gilbert, Colin Wilson, and Marc Resteghini also executive produce, with Harriet Creelman co-executive producing. Motive Pictures is handling physical production.

Best of Variety

New Movies Out Now in Theaters: What to See This Week

Awards Season Calendar (2024-2025): Key Dates and Timeline for Oscars, Emmys, Golden Globes, Grammys, SAG and More

Here’s Where To Buy Retro Arcade1Up Cabinets To Re-Live Your Childhood Online