Infor, a leading provider of business application software serving more than 70,000 customers, today announced that Great Wolf Resorts, the largest family of indoor water park resorts in North America, has selected Infor Epiphany Marketing to cost-effectively gain powerful insights into their customer base, improve targeting, and drive intelligence into subsequent campaigns. Infor Epiphany Marketing will provide Great Wolf Resorts with the tools needed to help the company create personalized e-mail campaigns and continue to build ongoing relationships with its guests.

News Points

Great Wolf Resorts selected Infor Epiphany Marketing because of the application's ability to help the organization achieve its goal of improving the guest experience. In addition, the implementation was completed in less than three months, on schedule and within the budget.

At Great Wolf Resorts, Infor Epiphany Marketing was easily integrated to a third-party ESP and to the existing ERP system to provide a more complete snapshot of guest and business performance, empowering employees with consolidated data access to promote better, faster business decisions.

Infor Epiphany Marketing is also helping Great Wolf Resorts analyze customer data to create actionable strategies and manage hundreds and thousands of simultaneous communications and campaigns across multiple channels, while respecting customers' preferences by creating and implementing the appropriate business rules.

Finally, advanced closed-loop reporting and analytic functionality will provide staff with the ability to automatically track campaign histories, monitor responses, and use response data to trigger follow-up conversations through virtually any touch point.

Great Wolf Resorts Quote

"Our goal at Great Wolf Resorts is to keep our properties top of mind with our guests when they are planning their vacation and to communicate with them the way they want to be communicated with," said Nikki Donofrio, senior vice president, Brand Marketing, Great Wolf Resorts, "The Infor Epiphany Marketing system helps us spend less time on administrative tasks and instead allows us to fully focus on strategy, messaging and segmentation so that we can better communicate with our guests."

Infor Quote

"To thrive in today's competitive market, hospitality companies must provide an exceptional cross-channel customer experience before, during, and even after the actual property visit in order to gain and retain their guests for a lifetime," said Stewart Applbaum, SVP and general manager, hospitality, Infor. "Specifically, the scalability and ability of Infor CRM applications to overlay onto existing platforms, combined with a unique business-oriented user interface, gives companies like Great Wolf Resorts the tools to effectively manage a complex customer relationship strategy at all touch points."

About Great Wolf Resorts, Inc.

Great Wolf Resorts, Inc.®, Madison, Wis., is North America's largest family of indoor waterpark resorts, and, through its subsidiaries and affiliates, owns and operates its family resorts under the Great Wolf Lodge® brand. Great Wolf Resorts is a fully integrated resort company with Great Wolf Lodge locations in: Wisconsin Dells, Wis.; Sandusky, Ohio; Traverse City, Mich.; Kansas City, Kan.; Williamsburg, Va.; the Pocono Mountains, Pa.; Niagara Falls, Ontario; Mason, Ohio; Grapevine, Texas; Grand Mound, Wash.; and Concord, N.C. Great Wolf's consolidated subsidiary, Creative Kingdoms, LLC, is a developer and operator of technology-based, interactive quest adventure experiences such as MagiQuest®. Additional information may be found on the company's website at www.greatwolf.com.

About Infor