NEW YORK, NY--(Marketwired - October 08, 2015) - Infor, a leading provider of beautiful business applications specialized by industry and built for the cloud, today announced the availability of the next generation of Infor Omni-Channel Campaign Management (formerly Infor Epiphany Outbound Marketing), an integrated database marketing solution for planning, executing, and monitoring permission-based marketing campaigns across multiple touch points -- such as outbound email, direct mail, SMS, etc. Infor Omni-Channel Campaign Management will help leading organizations better manage the campaign lifecycle and find the best customers to target for a campaign with modern analysis, planning, execution, and measurement tools.

The most recent release, version 10.1, incorporates important enhancements designed to produce and manage better campaigns for marketers in retail, financial services, high tech, insurance industries and more. These include:

New Campaign Workflows. This next generation application provides powerful, drag and drop, easy to use, tools that allow the marketer to visually design multi-wave and multi-channel campaign journeys to create a personalized user experience. This campaign automation tool will help to track customers' behavior and send relevant follow-up campaigns automatically based on appropriate delay.

Hook & Loop User Interface. Version 10.1 delivers a modern user interface created by Hook & Loop, Infor's internal creative lab, and infuses beauty and simplicity into this next generation enterprise application.

Updates to the Campaign Segmentation tool.Market segmentation has always been an integral part of any company's marketing strategy. The new interface uses one-click or drag and drop technologies to enable functionality that is more intuitive to users. This tool incorporates powerful search capabilities, safe undo for adding and deleting filters, visual counts for each segment, direct display of financial KPIs, and easy to use control groups for test market campaigns.

Real-time email results. This update will allow marketing and sales managers to monitor campaign results in real-time so that they can maximize the ability to respond to changing market dynamics and create a more personalized journey for customer engagement.

Enhanced Email Content Editor. This tool is a simple yet powerful built-in browser based utility that allows marketers to easily create, edit or view the content of their email communications. This allows users to quickly engage the customer by creating relevant messages in real time using the WYSIWYG technique. (What You See Is What You Get).

More robust third party external list management., This tool delivers a 360 degree view of campaign segmentation to marketers so they can visually compare the counts for each acquisition list included within campaign as well as can add as many tabs for each acquisition list as they need.

Simplified personalization of email messagingand Inbox Preview. Now, these tools are more flexible and easy to use. With just one click, marketers can enrich customer engagement by adding demographic and transactional data in order to create personalized content for all campaign recipients.

Infor Omni-Channel Campaign Management provides the right tools to plan, execute, and monitor outbound direct marketing campaigns across every customer contact channel. With Infor Omni-channel Campaign Management, you'll be able to easily analyze your customer data to find the best offer to present to your customers.

"Marketers are overwhelmed with data, and in today's marketplace where there are more communication channels than ever to manage, investment in innovative tools to more effectively implement, manage, and track campaign strategies, is necessary," said Jason Rushforth, vice president, Infor Customer Experience. "Infor continues to invest and develop its customer relationship management solutions so our customers have leading edge technology to streamline tasks to keep their campaigns as robust and direct as possible in the marketplace."

For more information visit: www.infor.com/product-summary/cmm/omni-channel-campaign-management/

Keep Current on Infor:

Subscribe to the Infor RSS Feed

Follow Infor on Twitter

Connect with Infor on LinkedIn

Like Infor on Facebook

View Infor videos on YouTube

About Infor

Infor builds beautiful business applications with last mile functionality and scientific insights for select industries delivered as a cloud service. With 13,000 employees and customers in more than 200 countries and territories, Infor automates critical processes for industries including healthcare, manufacturing, fashion, wholesale distribution, hospitality, retail, and public sector. Infor software helps eliminate the need for costly customization through embedded deep industry domain expertise. Headquartered in New York City, Infor is also home to one of the largest creative agencies in Manhattan, Hook & Loop, focused on delivering a user experience that is fun and engaging. Infor deploys its cloud applications primarily on the Amazon Web Services cloud and open source platforms. To learn more about Infor, please visit www.infor.com.

Infor customers include:

18 of the top 20 aerospace companies

10 of the top 10 high tech companies

10 of the top 10 pharmaceutical companies

21 of the 25 largest U.S. healthcare delivery networks

18 of the 20 largest U.S. cities

20 of the top 20 automotive suppliers

17 of the top 20 industrial distributors

15 of the top 20 global retailers

4 of the top 5 brewers

21 of the top 30 global banks

6 of the 10 largest global hotel brands

6 of the top 10 global luxury brands

This announcement reflects the direction Infor may take with regard to the specific product(s) described herein, all of which is subject to change by Infor in its sole discretion, with or without notice to you. This announcement is not a commitment to you in any way and you should not rely on this document or any of its content in making any decision. Infor is not committing to develop or deliver any specified enhancement, upgrade, product or functionality, even if such is described in this announcement and even if such description is accompanied by words such as "anticipate," "believe," "expect," "intend," "may," "plan," "project," "predict," "should," "will," and/or similar expressions. Many factors can affect Infor's product development plans and the nature, content and timing of future product releases, all of which remain in the sole discretion of Infor. This announcement, in whole or in part, may not be incorporated into any contractual agreement with Infor or its subsidiaries or affiliates. Infor expressly disclaims any liability with respect to this announcement.