Infor, a leading provider of business application software serving more than 70,000 customers, today announced the availability of an updated version of Infor Epiphany Sales & Service that provides real-time data to help companies analyze, engage and communicate with customers through social media.

Intertwining customer information already available through Infor Epiphany CRM Suite with social data, the application quickly provides users with enriched information to help understand the social profile of a customer they are interacting with, such as if they are a communicator or a listener, and delivers a better idea on engagement strategy and interest for a topic - increasing productivity and improving customer satisfaction.

"Highly customer-centric organizations are always on the lookout for ways to enhance the customer experience. Having timely, relevant information from consumers enables companies to engage in more successful one-on-one interactions with their customers," said George Wright, senior vice president and general manager, CRM, Infor. "Infor is able to deliver even more enhanced social insights to our customers through metrics, measurement, sentiment and analytics reporting, and deliver the data they need in real-time to have more meaningful, engaged, and profitable interactions."

The updated Infor Epiphany Sales & Service also delivers:

Social Summary - A new Social Summary is now provided on the individual, contact and organization pages, which shows an aggregated set of metrics about the use of social media by the customer. The summary data includes the number of "on topic" posts by the customer in the last 30, 90 and 365 days, as well as if they "like" your Facebook page and how many followers they have on Twitter.

Social Posts - A new Social Posts tab has been added which shows the customer's posts by topic in the last 30 days. Posts that have been automatically identified as interactions are flagged. Users can also manually create an inbound interaction associated with a specific post directly from the tab.

Automatically Created Interactions - Finally, the application now allows for automatically created interactions for posts in those topics that have been identified as actionable and those which you want an agent to follow up on immediately - such as service requests or positive and negative experiences with your products. The goal is to monitor a customer's relevant social media actions and respond to them through the same channel on which they contacted you, thereby being more sensitive to customer needs and expanding the relationship.

This is the next step in the evolution of Infor Epiphany, helping enable companies to become social across three core areas: Social Engagement & Servicing, Social Communications and Social Commerce.

For more information please visit www.infor.com/solutions/crm/.

About Infor

Infor is the third largest provider of enterprise applications and services, helping 70,000 customers in 194 countries improve operations, drive growth and quickly adapt to changes in business demands. Infor offers deep industry-specific applications and suites, engineered for speed, using ground-breaking technology that delivers a rich user experience, and flexible deployment options that give customers a choice to run their businesses in the cloud, on-premises or both. To learn more about Infor, please visit www.infor.com.

# # #

This announcement reflects the direction Infor may take with regard to the specific product(s) described herein, all of which is subject to change by Infor in its sole discretion, with or without notice to you. This announcement is not a commitment to you in any way and you should not rely on this document or any of its content in making any decision. Infor is not committing to develop or deliver any specified enhancement, upgrade, product or functionality, even if such is described in this announcement and even if such description is accompanied by words such as "anticipate," "believe," "expect," "intend," "may," "plan," "project," "predict," "should," "will," and/or similar expressions. Many factors can affect Infor's product development plans and the nature, content and timing of future product releases, all of which remain in the sole discretion of Infor. This announcement, in whole or in part, may not be incorporated into any contractual agreement with Infor or its subsidiaries or affiliates. Infor expressly disclaims any liability with respect to this announcement.