NEW YORK, NY--(Marketwire - Oct 1, 2012) - Infor, a leading provider of business application software serving more than 70,000 customers, today announced the general availability of its Customer Interaction Hub. The Customer Interaction Hub is an enabler for the intelligent orchestration of customer dialogues and leverages the entire Infor CRM Epiphany Suite. Built specifically for the Financial Services and Telecommunications industries, this new solution offers a comprehensive infrastructure to store and present all customer interactions in an organized way, providing organizations with key information that enables them to develop long-term relationships with customers.

"For an organization to engage in effective dialogue with their customers, visibility of all interactions is key," said George Wright, senior vice president and general manager of CRM, Infor. "The Infor Customer Interaction Hub was developed to address the growing need for companies to relate to empowered customers; it connects, feeds, and controls enterprise-wide operational and analytical solution capability in order to maximize the effectiveness of current and planned interaction opportunities. This new offering is one part of our Customer Experience Management (CXM) growth strategy."

Folksam, one of Sweden's largest insurance companies, plans to gain several benefits from the Customer Interaction Hub. "The ability to strategically manage our customer interactions in a more effective and sophisticated way is a key priority," said Per Ardehed, head of sales, service and CRM, Folksam. "Infor's willingness to partner with us to develop a specialized solution, coupled with their industry-expertise, made them the clear choice to help us meet our goals. The Customer Interaction Hub provides us with reliable, instant information that generates intelligent conversation results geared toward our customer base."

Using the Customer Interaction Hub, Folksam will have better management over its leads, aligning information and messaging with the right customer in real-time via the appropriate channel. Folksam is now able to develop a more nurtured relationship with its customers and as a result has a better picture of key life events which may impact the need and amount of insurance protection and savings. It provides the perfect balance of customer-centricity by meeting the customer needs for self-service when desired, thereby allowing Folksam sales executives to focus their efforts on those customers requiring a personal touch, which maximizes each customer's experience with Folksam at each interaction.

In addition, the Infor Customer Interaction Hub enables superior customer experience management via a flexible suite which:

Delivers an infrastructure for the optimal management of interactions allowing for the real-time cultivation of customer relationships.

Provides the ability to analyze the effectiveness of customer interactions, facilitating the ability to get closer to the customer's most important events.

Conveys relevant customer dialogue effectively in combination with marketing, analytical and operational solutions.

Infor's Customer Interaction Hub is part of the family of proven Infor CRM solution sets engineered to meet the needs of today's companies challenged with making the most of each contact with customers every day and throughout the life of their relationship -- whether that is on the web, by phone, social channels, kiosks, digital or traditional mail.

About Infor

Infor is the world's third-largest supplier of enterprise applications and services, helping more than 70,000 large and mid-size companies improve operations and drive growth across numerous industry sectors. To learn more about Infor, please visit www.infor.com.

This announcement reflects the direction Infor may take with regard to the specific product(s) described herein, all of which is subject to change by Infor in its sole discretion, with or without notice to you. This announcement is not a commitment to you in any way and you should not rely on this document or any of its content in making any decision. Infor is not committing to develop or deliver any specified enhancement, upgrade, product or functionality, even if such is described in this announcement and even if such description is accompanied by words such as "anticipate," "believe," "expect," "intend," "may," "plan," "project," "predict," "should," "will," and/or similar expressions. Many factors can affect Infor's product development plans and the nature, content and timing of future product releases, all of which remain in the sole discretion of Infor. This announcement, in whole or in part, may not be incorporated into any contractual agreement with Infor or its subsidiaries or affiliates. Infor expressly disclaims any liability with respect to this announcement.