39 New Features Improve Outbound and E-mail Marketing Campaigns

Atlanta, GA--(Marketwire) - Delivering on its customer-centric approach to enterprise applications, Infor today announced an enhanced version of its Customer Relationship Management solution, Infor CRM Epiphany Outbound Marketing. Leveraging a 13 customer panel including Pier 1 for feedback, the latest version of the product contains more than 39 feature enhancements to optimize customer relationships by integrating marketing, sales, and service.

NEWS

Infor CRM Epiphany is a leading solution that helps companies run campaigns that align with customers' preferences, tightly integrate marketing across all inbound and outbound channels, increase sales productivity by providing customer insight, manage marketing and sales resources more efficiently, and turn contact centers into profit centers.

The latest version of Infor CRM Epiphany Outbound Marketing includes External Data Access, allowing users to conduct real-time campaigning, increase flexibility in creating campaigns and leverage information from across the entire organization.

Enhancements to the solution's outbound marketing functionality enable greater reusability of information to improve velocity and flexibility, providing marketers the ability to more rapidly create and execute campaigns and lists.

New functionality for e-mail marketing improves flexibility and personalization, enabling marketers to create sophisticated and relevant e-mail campaigns.

What Others Say

"Pier 1 has successfully used Infor CRM Epiphany to conduct our outbound marketing campaigns for years, but the world of campaign marketing is changing at a break-neck pace," said Brian Murphy, Customer Database Manager, Pier 1. "Infor has demonstrated its commitment to continuing to provide us with excellent customer service by involving us in the development and enhancement of the solution so that it evolves to meet our growing marketing needs."

What We Say

"The latest version of Infor CRM Epiphany Outbound Marketing with External Data Access enables marketers to include information from anywhere in the organization, effortlessly incorporate acquisition data and adhere to any applicable restrictions," said Jackie Palmer, senior product manager, CRM, Infor. "In addition, the ease of implementation provides companies a faster time to return on investment and a lower total cost of ownership."

Additional Resources

Note: registration may be required to access online content

Infor CRM Epiphany website - www.infor.com/product_summary/crm/epiphany/

Webcasts - www.infor.com/company/webcasts/crmarchive/

Online Demos

Infor CRM Epiphany Outbound Marketing - http://www.infor.com/content/demos/15320/

Infor CRM Epiphany Interaction Advisor - http://www.infor.com/company/solutiondemos/solutiondemos-crm/22172/

Podcasts - http://www.infor.com/crm-podcast/

Whitepapers - http://sn.im/infor_crm_whitepapers

At Infor, we work with a core belief. We believe in the customer. We believe that the customer is seeking a better, more collaborative relationship with its business software provider. And a new breed of business software: created for evolution, not revolution. Software that's simple to buy, easy to deploy and convenient to manage. Our 70,000 customers in more than 100 countries and 8,000+ employees stand with us. We look forward to your sharing in the results of our belief. There is a better way. For additional information, visit www.infor.com.

This announcement reflects the direction Infor may take with regard to the specific product(s) described herein, all of which is subject to change by Infor in its sole discretion, with or without notice to you. This announcement is not a commitment to you in any way and you should not rely on this document or any of its content in making any decision. Infor is not committing to develop or deliver any specified enhancement, upgrade, product or functionality, even if such is described in this announcement and even if such description is accompanied by words such as "anticipate," "believe," "expect," "intend," "may," "plan," "project," "predict," "should," "will," and/or similar expressions. Many factors can affect Infor's product development plans and the nature, content and timing of future product releases, all of which remain in the sole discretion of Infor. This announcement, in whole or in part, may not be incorporated into any contractual agreement with Infor or its subsidiaries or affiliates. Infor expressly disclaims any liability with respect to this announcement.