In 2007, when Ben Tetteh, the owner of Palm Spring Boxing Foundation returned to Ghana from a 3-year stay in the United States of America, he had a plan: A vision to become a boxing icon, recognized and respected globally like his hero Don King (renowned Boxing promoter).

Ben Tetteh was born in Accra, on the 25th of September, 1961. He attended Sempe 1 Primary School. While in school, he was a versatile sportsman. He took part in athletics and football.

Sports was good to me. I made friends from engaging in sports, one of such friends was Azumah Nelson. Myself and Azumah were team mates at Lagoon Stars, a Community Football Club.

In the words of Ben Tetteh, “We were good, we won the community league at the time we played at the John Wesley Park.

“During my time, I found out my team mate Azumah Nelson was pursuing a career in boxing. This made me interested. I begun following his career, whiles I cheered him on.”

“I continued to focus on football. In 1980, I got employed at the National Investment Bank through football at the time a bank league had started, so I worked a corporate staff while playing for their team. I working in the banking sector until 1989 when I had the opportunity to travel to the United States.”

“Before coming to work at NIB, I played for Cosmos Stars and was crowned the goal king. The award made Mr. Kofi Bruce [a football scout] recognize my potential and decided to take me to train with Accra Hearts of Oak, but the reception I received from the then team manager [Tony Thompson] was not encouraging.

“I also played for Akotess, Asamankese Millionaires and trained with the Accra Great Olympics team.”

“My road to boxing began in the USA, when I had the opportunity to under-study the managers of Wonder Tackie. I also interacted with my old boxing friends who encouraged me to purchase boxing equipments while residing in the States.

“In 2007, I established Palm Spring Boxing Foundation. The name of the club comes from a destination with the same name decorated with royal palm trees [Palm Springs].

My vision for choosing this name was to make my gym beautiful so that it will make the team and the public excited to come for training.

The first boxers who trained at the club grounds were Micheal ‘Bullet’ Ansah, Kobla John and Lartei Lartey. However, our club gained popularity through Bullet, when he fought against Offei Dodoo during the National Individual Championship in 2009. The specular bout had fans on the edge, and Azumah Nelson who sat in the audience gave each boxer a cash gift.”

“In 2019, I was invited to join the National Black Bombers coaches supporting staff, after I took part in a training program about 2 years before. Coach Ofori Asare put me in charge of regulating the time. I am very diligent with my work. Joining the team has made me learn so much. I was really proud when Takyi won bronze in Japan. Knowing I had a hand in his victory has made me confident I can achieve my dreams.”

According to Coach Ben Tetteh, Palm Spring currently has 10 professional boxers in their camp. Training at the facility starts from 3:30pm to 6:00pm.

In his own words, “I believe one of my biggest achievements is guiding one of my boxers, Ebenezer Amedoh, who is currently pursuing his career in the United Kingdom. In some years to come I hope to have a world champion.”