King Albert II of Belgium ascended the throne after the death of his brother King Baudouin in 1993.

King Baudouin and his wife Queen Fabiola weren't able to have children, which left Albert as heir. His wife, who had been styled as Princess Liège, became Queen Paola.

They had been married for 10 years when they became king and queen, and there was plenty of drama proceeding the wedding - including a change in location and a bride so nervous, she had to be comforted by a family member in the middle of the ceremony.

Let's take a look back at the 1959 wedding of King Albert II and Queen Paola.

How they met

Prince Albert met Paola Ruffo di Calabria when he travelled to Rome in November 1958 for the coronation of Pope John XIII.

It was at the reception following the ceremony that the pair first locked eyes. According to Royal Central, Albert didn't tell Paola he was a royal at first, eventually confessing he was heir to the Belgian throne.

Albert and Paola quickly fell in love, and after Paola joined the prince in Belgium the couple began planning their wedding.

It is understood the Belgian monarch was in need of a boost when the wedding took place. King Leopold III, the father of Albert and his older brother Baudouin, had hastily abdicated the throne after he surrendered to Germany during World War II without the consent of his government.

Location, location

Originally, Prince Albert and Paola had planned to marry at the Vatican, however there was a strong feeling in Belgium they should marry at home.

The couple persisted with their plans to wed in Paola's native Italy, however the Pope was pressured to decline their request, despite the fact the bride-to-be was the daughter of the late Fulco, Prince Ruffo di Calabria.

Paola's mother Luisa helped her prepare for the event.

RELATED: Eleven royal wedding mistakes you probably missed

Royal Central reports the bride wore a special memento from her father's family on the day, a lace veil first used by her Belgian-born paternal grandmother on her father's side. It was fastened with orange blossoms for the wedding celebration.

The ceremony

Prince Albert and Paola were married on 2 July, 1959, with a civil ceremony in the Empire Salon of the Royal Palace of Brussels. A religious service followed at the Cathedral of St Michael and St Gudula.

According to Vogue, the bride was so nervous during the ceremonies that she had to be comforted by her new mother-in-law, Queen Elizabeth. Paola was reportedly shaking badly and the Queen "rushed forward to comfort her in the middle of the nuptials".

The reception was held at Laeken, and the couple honeymooned in Spain afterwards.

The wedding gown

Paola wore a simple woven satin gown with three-quarter sleeves and a bow at the waist, fastened with a small brooch.

It is one of the very few wedding dresses that has never been attributed to a known designer, and to this day the people responsible for the beautiful creation haven't been named.

The dress also featured a long full skirt and a five-metre train.

Life as King Albert II and Queen Paola

Albert and Paola had been married for 10 years before King Albert II ascended the Belgian throne, and while their relationship has had all the makings of a fairy tale, it hasn't been without drama.

King Albert II ruled Belgium until 21 July, 2013, when he stepped own in favour of the couple's eldest son, Philippe.

In January 2020, the former king admitted to having fathered a child during an affair with Sybille de Selys Longchamps. Their daughter, Delphine Boel, fought for a DNA test to prove she was Albert's daughter.

Despite this recent controversy, Albert and Paola are said to be quietly enjoying retirement together.