Tues 15th April 2014.

Hi everyone,

And, the questions just kept coming. It was just starting to get this busy a few weeks ago but then the forum went deadly quiet. Now suddenly the questions are coming think and fast. Why is that? Was there a problem with the old forum that was blocking posting or is it just a strange seasonal phenomenon? Maybe Andre knows, for I do not.

Anyway, there were lots of great answers from admin, Alan, (Chris and CPhill - another twin?), Bertie, yanes27, reinout-g, SpawnofAngel, deriam2kgmailcom. I thought Kitty was there too. Thank you everyone. You all do a great job. Over the last few days I am especially thankful to you Chris. There is no way I could have coped without you.

There are a lot of new members as well but i haven't been able to keep up with you all. Welcome to the forum. This forum is in the middle of a very comprehensive overhaul. It is slowly coming together. The site's designer Andre Massow is working long hours to try and remove the bugs and polish the final product. There is still a lot to do but over the past 48 hours it has vastly improved and I am sure it will continue to do so for a while yet. The private messaging is still not working. That, I believe is his main task at present. Thank you Andre.

The main forum tab is sorted on start date for the thread. Now Andre has introduced a new tab where the most recent posts are sorted on post time. This is something that the answerers really wanted but I think it needs to display more than just one page. A page may only reflect a few hours activity.

I now have some moderator privileges. Thank you Andre. I don't really understand them yet but I can make a post invisable to the rest of the forum and I can give a green tick to indicate when a question has been well answered. If I tick a question I am not sure if it can still be added to. Plus when I do this numbers get allocated and I don't understand their significance. I have ticked a few posts and Andre has also ticked some. Anyway it will take me a while to work out how to best use these privileges and in the mean time I will continue to use many of my old techniques. Any guidance from you will be appreciated.

I am sure that there are many more things that i need to discuss but I cannot think of what they are at present.

Good night/day.

Melody.

Hi everyone,

There is no way I can go through all the questions and answers like I usually do. There are just too many. I have ticked many of the questions that I think are fully answered. I am reluctant to tick my own answers unless I think someone has checked and given me a thumbs up or written acknowledgement of my accuracy. I think that you all have the ability to give a thumbs up or a thumbs down to any answer or question.

I am also reluctant to finalise questions when the answers are over my head. Unless another trusted answerer has checked (mainly for careless mistakes)

Andre has told me that he intends to eventually show the name of the last answerer - like how it used to be. It will be easier to check answers then.

Rom is back with us again, he said he thought the forum was down, the address is different now. I am wondering if Samgelinas is absent for the same reason. Can anyone contact him?

-------------------------------------------------------------------------

At the moment these are what I see as the biggest problems. (I hope that Andre Massow is reading this)

I know that some of you would have different priorities.

**I hope that the member section and messaging system are working soon. The forum cannot function properly without these. People can contact me at melodymathforum@gmail.com

**I love having LaTex on the forum but I cannot answer to my usual standard because I cannot upload attachments. Also, when I try to use old information threads, the attachments do not display so they are useless. This is very frustrating.

*There is no preview facility.

*The input=result is not working

Thank you everyone. There are still a lot of problems but many others have already been fixed and I know that Andre Massow is continuing to work long hours to eradicate the ants and iron out the wrinkles. We just need to be patient.

Enjoy the rest of you day/evening.

Melody.

Hi everybody,

Once again we were swamped with questions. Reinout wrote me a letter yesterday and these are his words; "It seems like I'm trying to empty the sea with a bucket." I hope you don't mind me quoting you reinout. The fact is I was feeling the same way. Reinout's words helped me to formulate a strategy.

This is my view;

Members must get priority. Their questions should be answered as quickly and as comprehensively as possible. Anonymous postings should be treated much more casually. Only answer them if you have time and want to do so.

Could people please use the thumbs up and on occasion the thumbs down symbols when viewing other people's answers. I do not want to be the only one to decide if an answer is good or not. sometimes I do not even have the knowledge to do this.

Obviously all answerers are here because we like answering mathematics questions but the forum also has to be fun for us. We need to allocate time to light hearted banter and to group discussions on interesting topics. We need to be able to play with or learn from some the questions and answers that are presented to us. We can not do this if we allow routine answering to take up all our time.

Just prior to writing this wrap I posted a note saying 'All members questions have been answered' This will be my new wording for such posts.

I am sorry, I have not prepared a list of credits. There were many great answers and I thank you all.

------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

I thought you might like me to include a few posts that you may find interesting.

These were a question (posted twice) and 2 answers that appealed to me today. I want to give them both more considerations. The answers were from Rom and Chris. I think the answers are similar but I haven't really thought about them properly yet. Thanks guys.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Some people will find this one interesting

Reinout enjoyed this puzzle question. I took time out and enjoyed this puzzle as well! It is not super hard - why don't you take a look as well?

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Hopefully more of the forum features will be working soon.

Thank you all. For the Christians amoung you, Enjoy your 'Good Friday' or what is left of it. Oh, that sounds a bit prejudicial. I want everyone else to enjoy their Friday as well.

Melody,

melodymathforum@gmail.com

Hi everyone,

There were lots of great answers delivered today by Alan, CPhill, Rom, Bioschip, Admin and Bertie. There were also a couple of good answers from anonymouse people. Thank you everyone, your efforts are much appreciated.

It is nice to see that someone other than me and admin is using the thumbs up system. This is just a way for you to say that you appreciated an answer. I would really like people to make more use of this system that Andre has set in place for us.

Andre now has a basic messaging system working for us. This is great, thank you.

Andre has also changed the second tab to 'Answers'. I haven't used it yet so I can't comment on its merits. Sorry.

--------------------------------------------

I think I liked this question and answer (by CPhill alternatively known as Chris) best today.

I also want to look at this answer by Alan, The first line is obvious but after that - I have to think about it.

And lastly this question by CountryGirl333 gained a lot of attention. CountryGirl interacted with answerers and this is always appreciated. Thank you CountryGirl333 It is good when we all get to interact with each other.

I am not at home at present and my access to the internet is poor. If I am quieter than usual that is probably why. Rural Australia has poor internet access. Although I am on the coast, not inland, so there is at least some coverage.

That's it for this Easter Sunday day/night.

Melody.

The messaging system is now working in a very basic way but you can still email me at

melodymathforum@gmail.com

Hi all,

There have been a LOT of questions. All member questions have been answered. Most, but not all, of the anonymous questions have been answered - there simply has not been enough time to answer all. Members must get priority. It is easy to join up and priority answering is one of the benefits.

Great answers were given by BlindxD, CPhill, reinout-g, Alan and CreeperCosmo. Thank you all. I hope I haven't left anyone out.

Old inbox messages have now been restored; thank you Andre. Old outbox messages are not restored yet and there is no way to delete messages. I have received many messages and I have responded to very few. The messages that I have sent are not displayed to me (because there is no outbox) so I am not keen to contact people this way. I would prefer it if people continue to use my personal email address to contact me. I will add the address at the end of this post.

It is now possible to very easily search another member’s posts. But I think this has to be done by clicking on the username. I don't think that you can actually type a username anywhere to bring it up. I might be wrong, I am feeling my way the same as everyone else.

Answerer names are now included on the 'questions' tab page and the 'answers' page. This is great. Thank you Andre.

I think Andre Massow has been experimenting with the second tab 'Answers Page'. This page is not working for me. I would really like it to be displayed much more like it was before the forum got its new look. Today I found a response from a question that was first entered a few days ago. It is only lucky that I saw it. I would like one of the display tabs to be questions sorted on most recent post. To the best of my knowledge, this is what other primary answerers want as well. If anyone would like to expand or comment on this maybe you could post a @@message in the main forum. Andre and I do NEED your feedback. I hope you are reading this Andre. Maybe I shouldn't have mentioned this yet, I know that Andre is already fully occupied with higher priority issues. It is written now so I will leave it - I would like the opinion's of other members anyway.

Tonight BlindxD posted a question which Alan answered. The question became interactive with Blindxd asking for clarification. Thank you BlindxD, this is what we want in the forum. Ask lots of questions and never 'pretend' to understand.

There were a number of fun and chatty posts today. I think that this is great. I do not want the forum to be too serious. The 'I like Turtles' post turned into a fun little thread and I also rather liked this thread.

That is it I think, Enjoy what is left of your Tuesday.

Melody.

melodymathforum@gmail.com

Good day/evening everyone,

Once again there have been a lot of questions and many great answers. These were delivered by CreeperCosmo, CPhill, Kitty<3, Bertie, SpawnofAngles, Alan, Samgelinas, reinout-g, Rom, BlindxD, DavidQD, novice and unknown (do you have amnesia?) Thankyou all, it is great that we have so many members answering questions. Of course some questions are also answered by non-members.

Almost all questions have been answered and I have looked at most of those answers. I have ticked most of them as finished. I do admit that not all of those have been thoroughly checked. I have always taken the postition that the question asker must accept some responsibility for what answers they accept and what they reject. If they are puzzled they should always ask for clarification.

The fumigation has not finished - there are still many bugs but the numbers are slowly diminishing. Thank you Andre. I have been told that the links I put in the wrap, and presumably other links, don't always work. Also sometimes our member page is displayed on the list of answers. Hopefully these and other problems will be fixed soon.

Oh, I have asked a number of times how people are including images, everyone is silent - I finally worked out that they are coming straight from the net. Has anyone managed to include pictures from their home computers yet? Can anyone fill me in better on inserting pictures PLEASE?

I have been answering questions most of the day and I am afraid they have run together and I haven't noted any in particular. There was a post though that I liked because it reminded me of how non-mathematicians really do feel (sometimes) when they are facing a mathematics problem. I thought it was relevant and amusing.

That is it for tonight, enjoy the rest of your Thursday.

Melody.

Hi everyone,

It was a little quieter today. It is always quietest on Friday/Saturday's but there were still plenty of questions and Alan, CPhill and at least one anonymous person provided many great answers. Thanks guys.

Andre is slowly pulling the programming of the forum together. There are now many special characters that can be inserted. Plus, today I turned a thread into a sticky topic. This had never worked for me before. I was really pleased, because I was worried that this thread 'Information pages worth keeping or developing' and all the pages it refers to could become lost for all time. I have already made use of it.

Actually I am hoping that reinout uses this to make the puzzles easier to find. I am sure I had a reference thread for puzzles somewhere. We will have to find it.

Andre, you have never indicated whether you read this wrap but if you do there is still a problem with Alan's and my profile pages popping up in the 'Math Answers' pages. At present I am on the most recent page (856) and Alan is on page 855.

I am also very eager for the message system to work properly and I really want to be able to insert attachments from my computer. To the best of my knowledge the old attachments still do not display properly.

Still, the forum is slowly improving. Thank you Andre.

That is it for today. Enjoy what is left of your weekend.

Melody

melodymathforum@gmail.com (As a rule, I'd rather you use this email address than the message system because the message system is not working properly.)

@@ End of Day Wrap - Wednesday 30/4/14 Sydney, Australia Time 20:15

Hi everyone,

Questions were once again in abundance. Great answers were given by Alan, Professor, CPhill, Creeperface, Bertie, BluePhoenix912, Anonymous4338, and Rom. Thank you all.

Some nice recognition was also offered from BluePhoenix912, Bioschip and an anonymous person. Thank you we all appreciate it.

I used Kitty<3's 'fraction on the calculator' post 3 times this morning. It made answering so much easier. I usually have more than one forum page open at any one time so that I can post in one and refer to or copy from the others. I just copied the whole page - not just the address. It worked a treat. If anyone wants to use it is located in the sticky thread "Information pages worth keeping or developing."

Gib thinks all children should own a walrus. And s/he worked out how to insert a picture before Chris or I did. This is the post. I think Gib's walrus was the ugliest one in the pet shop!

http://web2.0calc.com/questions/what-is-0-3-like-a-ffraction

We also have an anonymous comedian, s/he has visited before I hope s/he visits often. The comedian's post along with Chris's interaction was very entertaining! I thought it was great!! Although it would have been even better without the profanity. Thanks to both of you.

Alan gave me a much needed lesson on using the Tiny Pic upload feature. I made my first upload on the new system. I also added the address to the sticky thread "Information pages worth keeping or developing. Here is a direct link for anyone in need.

That's it for this evening. Enjoy the rest of your Tuesday/Wednesday.

Melody

melodymathforum@gmail.com

@@ End of Day Wrap - Thursday 1/4/14 Sydney, Australia Time 20:06

Hi everyone,

Once again there were many great answers given by Bertie, Alan, CPhill, BluePhoenix912, jmanf729, matisonc17035, alanb1291, BrainChap21, MacGamer04 and Edison. (I am sorry if I forgot anyone) Thank you all.

I think when Andre (the site owner and developer) finally gets the members section working properly we will be astonished at how many new members we have. It is great to see that a number of these are also answering questions. We encourage everyone to answer. Obviously if you are unsure you should state this, but ultimately it is up to the question asker to decide to accept or reject an answer. I also encourage people, especially the mathematicians, to check answers, including each others, so most mistakes are detected.

If new people would like to introduce themselves to the forum in general, by way of a public post, I encourage you to do so. If you would like to introduce yourself to me privately you can do so via the forum message service or by an email to the address that I will include at the end of this wrap. I love getting mail and I am sure other members would also welcome your contact.

We passed our 10,000th question today! BluePhoenix912 bought this to my attention with this post.

Thanks BluePhoenix, but you might like to edit your post, you left out a 0!

I had some really good thread addresses on my 'information pages worth keeping or developing' sticky thread. Now most don't work. They are full of old downloads. I wanted to use my 'dealing with negative indices thread' and could not. NOT GOOD! I suppose I'll redo them if I ever get time.

I can't recall any other memorable posts. If you can think of something or some post please let me know with a message. Then i can edit this wrap or include the omitted content tomorrow.

I am having intermittant problems with the \frac command in LaTex. Sometimes it works and sometimes it doesn't.

That is it for this Wednesday/Thursday.

Take care,

Melody

melodymathforum@gmail.com

@@ End of Day Wrap - Tues 6/5/14 Sydney, Australia Time 23:15

Hi everyone,

The forum was busy today. All member questions have been answered but some guest ones have not. I hope to answer a few more after I finish the forum house keeping. Plus a couple more mathematicians usual join the forum in the next hour or so.

Great answers were today delivered by admin, BluePhoenix912, CPhill, Alan, Rom, Bertie, GoldenLeaf, reinout-g, Kitty3, bioschip, spetj200, some industrious anonymous people and definitly myself. Thank you every one.

Mathcalc also showed his appreciation. He always has great manners. Thank you mathcalc.

Reinout-g has spent time today finding and organising the puzzle posts. This is fabulous, I thought they may have been lost forever. They are the sticky topics with green emicons. I encourage everyone to join in when reinout or I (or anyone else) posts a puzzle or a challenge. Thank you reinout, your efforts are much appreciated.

We have a great many new members joining every day and you are all extremely welcome. I love it when I see new people joining in and becoming known. It is not important whether you get an answer completely correct so long as your intentions are good and you state any uncertainty that you may have. Today GoldenLeaf joined and answered a number of questions. I really like this post. It is very interesting.

http://web2.0calc.com/questions/what-are-some-of-the-patterns-in-fiboncacci-numbers

Other interest generatin posts today were:

http://web2.0calc.com/questions/two-perpendicular-chords-with-lengths-12-2-cm-and-8-8-cm-have-a-common-endpoint-what-is-the-area-of-the-circle#rr103960

http://web2.0calc.com/questions/parabola-algebra

Plus an advanced one (I am not sure if it is properly answered yet)

http://web2.0calc.com/questions/solve-for-x_4

And a general interest one - I won't normally include ones like this but I will today.

http://web2.0calc.com/questions/why-god-created-athest-people#r103922

There were a great many unpleasant post today. It is a good thing that they can now be deleted.

I am really pleased with how the forum is progressing. There are still quite a few bugs and some unfinished coding but it seems to me that almost every day some great new feature is introduced or an old feature has been improved. Thank you Andre. You are bringing it together nicely for us.

When we hover over a Math or LaTek input the coding now comes up in a box. This is great. Now we can learn how to use these by copying other people. Rom is our most competent LaTex coder. I started copying some of his more interesting code into the Latex page in the sticky notes. Unfortunately it disappeared and I'll have to do it again. My stupidity I think - not a forum error. If you add good coding when you answer a question please consider copying to the LaTex and Math Code thread. You can have your own post in there which you can add to as time progresses.

It has come to my attention that non-members can now upload pictures. This has pluses and minuses. Many of the posts that I deleted this morning were pictures. We have had very little of this type of problem in the past and it may be just a natural part of a growing forum. It is not a great cncern at present anyway.

My Wraps seem to be getting longer and longer. If anyone wants to comment on the content I will welcome your constructive comments. I want to know what people think!

Thank you everyone - I think we have a forum that we can be proud of.

Melody.

@@ End of Day Wrap - Monday 12/5/14 Sydney, Australia Time 20:45

Hi everyone,

CPhill and I rather monopolised the answering today - sorry. There were a few physics ones left for Alan and admin answered one, thank you. Never mind the week should start getting busy tomorrow and then there should be enough questions for everyone. Also, every day I see many new names. The member section is not finished yet so I can't see you all but I expect forum member and post numbers is growing very quickly.

To all those who have joined recently, welcome to web2.0calc forum. We hope you find the site helpful, interesting and fun.

There were some really nice thank you notes and thumbs up given today by RheyB, bioschip, tyeiyei and an anonymous person. Thank you, everyone likes to be appreciated!

One of our members Daniavm reported an error via a post. I forwarded the post address to admin along with some of my own observations. Daniavm’s problem should now be fixed.

My observations were mainly to do with the Android phone app. I had learned to do most things. The member section could only be accessed by the most convoluted, intriguing process imaginable. I was really proud of myself for solving the puzzle. Anyway, there is no puzzle any more. Andre Massow (site owner and developer) has ‘fixed’ it, what a pity. So, from most people’s point of view the app works much better now. Thank you Andre.

This was an interesting physics question and answer (I thought so anyway). Alan has provided all the formulas. Someone else should plug the numbers in and give us a concluding statement. http://web2.0calc.com/questions/stuck-on-problem_1#r105221

Chris added a new problem for us to ponder, it is on a new thread but I have referenced the thread in Puzzles, which is a sticky topic.

http://web2.0calc.com/questions/tricky-puzzle-problem-from-cphill-can-you-work-it-out

An anonymous poster also added this one which was intended as a puzzle so I also referenced it on the Puzzles thread. It is a good one for school level scholars.

http://web2.0calc.com/questions/does-everybody-know-1-1#rr105228

I think that is it for this Sunday/Monday.

Enjoy you new week,

Melody.

@@ End of Day Wrap - Friday 16/5/14 Sydney, Australia Time 22:15

Hi everybody,

I almost forgot to do the wrap! That doesn't happen often.

Lots of great answers today from reinout-g, heureka, zegroes, CPhill, Alan, winnie and SpawnofAngel. Thank you so much. I'd especially like to thank Chris (CPhill). Chris has been answering questions all day long. He does this regularly without complaint and I really appreciate it. There is not any appreciation expressed my most of the question askers, that is true, but there are a few who express their gratitude and they make a big difference to the moral of the answerers. Today 3 of these people were AngelAmy, zegroes and chilledz3non. We thank you very much.

Reinout-g has been looking after our brain teasers and puzzles. Notification of new ones are posted on the forum but they can always be found in with the sticky topics in the bottom right corner of the screen. There are some great puzzles in there - take a look. Thank you reinout for looking after the puzzles they are an important aspect of the forum! If other people would like to post puzzles you are free to do so. If they are good I will give them a green puzzle icon and reference them in one of the puzzle threads.

Reinout also worked out how the individual post are referenced. I might keep this till another time, there are a few more specifics that I want to work out. Again, thank you reinout.

Once again heureka has presented some great answers with very impressive LaTex. Thank you heureka!

I have been copying some of the Latex and some of the reference addresses over onto the LaTex thread which is located in the Sticky Topics. (Near the puzzles)

Lets see what posts we had today.

Difficult one

http://web2.0calc.com/questions/find-x-if-cosx-cos-180-cosinverse-0-25-cosx-6-76#r106111

Fun ones (not for the poor donkey)

http://web2.0calc.com/questions/who-keeps-removing-my-answers-questions

http://web2.0calc.com/questions/what-is-the-volume-of-the-pacific#r106319

That is it for the night. Enjoy your Friday/Saturday.

Melody.

@@ End of Day Wrap - Tuesday 20/5/14 Sydney, Australia Time 22:20

Hi everyone,

Another extremely busy day. Great answers were given by reinout-g, Zegroes, Alan, heureka, DavidQD, admin, chilledz3non, CPhill, GoldenLeaf, Kitty<3, davanshbablaq1. Thanks all.

There were also a few nice shows of gratitude but i don't have the names, sorry.

Our message centre has been redesigned from scratch. There are some features that are not properly implemented yet but some of the new ones will be really good.

We can now view our messages from oldest to newest or vice versa. Received messages and sent messages are now together in a converstion view (they are when you go into send message view anyway). Sent messages are left justified and received messages are right justified. Plus sent messages can be edited or deleted right up until they are read by the recipient. I used to love this feature (it was in the previous version of the forum) We cannot delete our messages at present but I am sure we will be able to soon. A message export system is now being developed and should be up and running in a week or two. The feature for choosing a member from a list definitely needs improvement but I think Andre Massow is repairing features and introducing new features in extremely good time. I commend him on his efforts and the results he has achieved! Thank you Andre!

There are a great many questions. Primary answerers are having a tough time getting through them all but we do do our best. I have always encouraged people to get involved and post answers were they are able. Unfortunately there are some people posting who do not have the knowledge base that they need to answer the question properly. These answers can be very misleading to the question asker which is definitely not good. They can also be time wasting for primary answerers. If you are one of these over-confident people who is posting answers outside your knowledge base please STOP! (I may start deleting point for wrong answers given by repeat offenders) If you lack confidence but you really believe you can help I do not want to discourage you. There have been some fantastic answers from casual answerers, today and everyday.

Here are just a couple of todays posts. I don't remember any really standing out.

Forum Interest Question - Web2.0calculator

http://web2.0calc.com/questions/what-do-i-make-wrong

Cassdy1 asked a fraction question and from it CPhill proved that 1=∞

http://web2.0calc.com/questions/help-me-please_5#r106844

That is it for today/tonight. Enjoy the rest of your day.

Melody.

@@ End of Day Wrap - Friday 23/5/14 Sydney, Australia Time 21:55

Hi Everyone.

I have not checked all answer to this point like I usually do. I often knock myself trying to finalise everything before i write the wrap and then a number of people come in not long after and there is very little left for them. So I think I have more or less finalised questions up to and including page 456. Some more recent ones have been done as well of course.

Great answers today from Takahiro Maeda, Alan, zegroes, reinout-g, CPhill, Kalecia, Heureka, rosala, Maddie hardage, all-them-marvel-feels and Rom.

Today we were hit by a hacker. Constant pop-ups appeared. It was definitely a nuisance but possible not much more than that. I have notified the site developer, Andre Massow. He is quite ill at present but he will be onto it as soon as he is able. I hope you are feeling better soon Andre.

Reinout-g posted a new puzzle. I have always considered the puzzles a really important part of the forum. I have no time to allocate to them. I am so glad that reinout has take such an active interest. Thank you so much reinout, I really appreciate your efforts.

http://web2.0calc.com/questions/probability-puzzles#r55

----------------------------------------------------------------------

There weren't a lot of really memorable posts today but I thought these ones may be of some interest.

Higher level question - Answer curtesy of Alan. Thanks Alan

http://web2.0calc.com/questions/arctanh-z-1-2-ln-1-z-1-z

More interesting setting out by Heureka. Thanks Heureka

http://web2.0calc.com/questions/if-you-flip-a-fair-coin-nbsp-4-nbsp-times-what-is-the-probability-that-you-will-get-exactly-nbsp-2-nbsp-tails

And some light Hearted Non-math fun (zegroes taught me what a Sayian is)

http://web2.0calc.com/questions/how-smart-is-the-website

I think that is it for this Thursday/Friday. Enjoy the rest of your day.

Melody.

@@ End of Day Wrap - Sunday 25/5/14 Sydney, Australia Time 19:50

Hi Everyone,

Today was a quiet Saturday/Sunday. It's nice to have a quiet day occasionally. Still there were some excellent answers given by Alan, reinout-g, CPhill and Bertie. Thank you.

I would like to introduce you to Rosala. Rosala has only been a member for a few days and she has already greatly impressed me. Rosala asks good questions, she is quick to say thank you, and gives 'thumbs up' generously on her own questions and also on other people's questions. She also answers questions well when she has the knowledge. Rosala is also very prepared to ask for clarification and to say when she does not understand. This is very important and something not many question askers really do. She may be a very important role model for others to follow!

Now that I have told you why Rosala has impressed me, I'd like to tell you a little about who she is. She is a 13 year old girl from Delhi, India. I don't know that we have any other regular members from India. She is very proud of her excellent Engish, it is her favourite subject. She said 'we' are lucky because we come from counties where girls can do anything. There are much less opportunities for girls in India.

Thank you Rosala and welcome to web2.0calc forum. I hope that you continue to learn lots and enjoy this site!

(Incidentally, I did ask Rosala if it would be alright before I repeated all this on the forum.)

##Here are a few posts that may be of interest to people.

This one demonstrates Rosala's great attitude.

(Note: Rosala did not give herself 5 points - they came from other people)

http://web2.0calc.com/questions/sunny-is-now-32-yrs-old-and-his-don-is-7-years-old-in-how-many-yrs-will-sunny-be-twice-as-old-as-his-son

This one had Reinout-g's and Alan's head spinning! It all looked too much for me.

http://web2.0calc.com/questions/how-many-solutions-are-there-to-the-equation-x1-x2-x3-x4-x5-21-where-xi-i-1-2-3-4-5-is-a-nonnegative-integer-such-that-a

This one was not difficult but it was a little unusual I thought.

http://web2.0calc.com/questions/how-can-i-write-a-rule-that-translates-y-x-2-into-y-x-7-2-4

That is it for today. The weather has been just beautiful in Sydney.

Enjoy what is left of your weekend.

Melody.

@@ End of Day Wrap - Thursday 29/5/14 Sydney, Australia Time 23:50 pm

Hi all,

It was a busy day today. All questions up to and including page 470, and all answers up to including page 1092 have been answered, checked, etc. This means there are still some about for people to answer and/or check.

Our great answers today were provided by Rosala, Alan, GoldenLeaf, mjohnson, admin, zegroes, zacpac2020, reinout-g, Heureka, Rom and TakahiroMaeda.

Mjohnson and Zacpac2020 both only joined up yesterday - could have been today since I am ahead of almost everyone else! Welcome to web2.0calc forum. We all hope that you enjoy yourselves here!

-------------------------------------------------------------

Now, there were lots of potentially interesting posts today and here are some of them.

Reinout-g is cracking jokes again - So what is new?

http://web2.0calc.com/questions/how-to-solve-calculus

Zegroes is going into competition with Reinout

http://web2.0calc.com/questions/why-do-we-need-to-learn-math#rr1

Alan is a magician!

http://web2.0calc.com/questions/1-i-7

More fun with complex roots

http://web2.0calc.com/questions/fun-with-square#r0

I think middle level school people might find these 2 interesting.

http://web2.0calc.com/questions/if-bc-is-twice-as-long-as-ab-which-equations-would-let-you-find-the-length-of-ac

http://web2.0calc.com/questions/what-is-the-area-of-a-regular-octagon-whose-permineter-is-equal-to-72-cm-nbsp#r0

There is a "lizard illuminati" theme going through the forum at the moment. This is the latest thread.

http://web2.0calc.com/questions/a-message-to-all-those-complaining-about-math#rr4

Scientology has also crept into the forum. (It can stay so long as people don't voice offense)

http://web2.0calc.com/questions/xenu-the-overlord-is-returning-to-earth

Yesterday a few people told me how much they liked my 'End of Day Wraps' and how much they appreciated all the effort that I put into the forum. Thank you so much. I put more hours in here than many people put into a full time job. I do it because I love teaching and I really enjoy all the camaraderie of the forum but this certainly does not mean that I appreciate your gracious compliments any less. (Incidently, I think Chris (CPhill) spends as much time here as I do, his contibution is immeasurable.) It is a team of people who make this forum work so well. Without the team we could achieve nothing! Thank you everyone.

That is it for today, good evening/day all.

Melody.

@@ End of Day Wrap - Friday 6/6/14 Sydney, Australia Time 9:20 pm

Great answers were given by reinout-g, Alan, Heureka, Zegroes, CPhill, NinjaDevo, Rom, Bertie, Sportslover, Narsin12, Kitty<3 and Rosala.

Narsin and Sportslover have join since my last wrap. Zegroes and Rosala seemed to think they are also entitled to a formal welcome. So this is for all 4 of you. Welcome to web2.0calc forum. We hope that you learn lots and that you like it here.

I didn't notice a lot of particularly interesting threads this time, maybe I wasn't looking hard enough.

I thought that this one was interesting and important for a couple of different reasons.

Please take note of what Bertie and I have said. It is important that you are interactive with your learning. Answerers do not want to feel like they are just doing someone's homework and that the only thing that the asker cares about is the answer! We want to help people learn!

I am sorry notsomathpro. Our comments were not aimed at you in particular, I am sorry that you were the one in the firing line.

The question itself is also very thought provoking. I hope i get around to looking at this question from 'behind the scenes'

http://web2.0calc.com/questions/what-formula-do-i-use-to-find-the-volume-of-a-bead-when-you-onlyhave-the-hight-like-in-the-following-problem

------------------------------------------------

You know, I was only gone 1 night and you kids think you can just move into my wrap thread and make yourselves at home. And why is it that you are giving each other lots of points when my wraps never get any points. I should go on strike!

People have been asking where I was last night. I was at 'Vivid' which is an amazing light show in Sydney where moving picture lights are projected onto many of the buildings around our harbour. (I don't think that i said that very well)

It was a rainy day which meant that the crowd numbers were way down, for a while our luck held out and the weather was good. Then it teamed and we were drowned. The tadpoles in my pockets were the only really happy ones. Not to worry. It was all pretty amazing. The best displays were snakes slithering across our museum of contempory art, and schools of fish swimming across the opera house sails, followed by a shark and some stingrays. it was really cool!

Here are some pictures but they are never anywhere near as good as the real thing. Rosala in particular wanted me to explain. The scenes i described are not depicted here. It must be different each night.

VIVID

Photos: http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-2641798/Sydney-Opera-House-famous-landmark-transforms-giant-snake-stunning-Vivid-Festival-snaps.html

Museum of Contemorary art: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=9vIPdJIMgCc

Sydney Opera House: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=IdQjtfqPNQo

I hope no one objects to me puting this stuff in my nightly wrap. I appologise if you do mind.

That is it for this Friday night in Sydney, Australia. Enjoy the rest of your day.

Melody.

@@ End of Day Wrap - Saturday 8/6/14 Sydney, Australia Time 12:25 am (really Sunday morning)

Hi everyone,

Thank you Rosala, Zegroes and Reinout-g. I really appreciate your and everyones support. It means more to me than you will ever know. I also seemed to have ended up with quite a few 'wrap' points. Thank you so much.

Rosala wanted to know how the light were projected on the buidings that I was talking about last night. They were laser lights and they were projected from large boxes, maybe 2.5metres cubed, that were unobtrusively placed behind the onlookers. One of the very large buidings had a platform in front of its box and individuals were invited up to 'conduct' the lights. The lights changed quite dramatically depending on their movements. They could also play table tennis with laser light b***s etc. a bit like how you can interact using an xbox.

Lots of great answers today from Kitty<3, CPhill, Rosala, reinout-g, Alan, Heureka, Sportslover, NinjaDevo, Bertie, Problem, zegroes, Bioschip, GoldenLeaf, and jjzamball.

#

Jjzamball became a member today. Welcome to web2.0calc forum. We hope you learn lots and like it here.

#

I really have to modify the way I care for this forum. I have spent many hours just checking everything is answered and collecting all the names. Once all the questions are answered to my satisfaction/capability collecting the names is easy enough, it is the answer checking and tidying that takes an enormous amount of time. I also collect threads for this wrap as I go. Does anyone have any suggestions on how I could do it differently or how someone else may be able to help?

#

There is a sticky thread called “Information worth keeping or Developing.”

I refer to it most days. It is full of addresses of threads that can be used over and over again.

It is not well organised and some of the older posts have info that will no longer display properly but it would be worthwhile for answerers to familiarise themselves with the newer posts. I write a little description above each reference address. You are encouraged to add your own post on the end. Once you have one post you can usually edit it to include new addresses. You do not need to make a new post every time.

Today I added two address.

1) Square root in question verses Square root introduced in the working. (Written by Melody)

http://web2.0calc.com/questions/answer-of-square-root-4-must-be-plus-minus-2

2) Surface area of a cylinder. (written by NinjaDevo)

Chris specifically asked me to include this one in tonight wrap and to include it for future reference. It is a very good one. Thank you NinjaDevo.

http://web2.0calc.com/questions/what-is-the-surface-are-of-a-cylinder-with-r-8-h-4#r2

----------------------------------------------------------------------

Now, what other posts were there?

Problems with messages. Phantom new messages.

http://web2.0calc.com/questions/attn-registered-users#r8

More criticisms and comedy.

http://web2.0calc.com/questions/need-help-asap_4#rr1

This one is still annoying me. Plus I like Chris’s last post.

http://web2.0calc.com/questions/domain-and-range-of-80n-275

Binomial expansion

http://web2.0calc.com/questions/use-the-binomial-theorem-to-expand-the-binomial-x-7y-3-and-simplyfy

I thought some people might be interested in how Chris and i answered this simple question. We could have answered better but I think it is ok.

http://web2.0calc.com/questions/is-0-5-larger-than-0-5

I liked this question - It needs to be checked.

http://web2.0calc.com/questions/from-cube-to-tetraedre

That is it for tonight. Enjoy you weekend.

Melody.

@@ End of Day Wrap - Sunday 8/6/14 Sydney, Australia Time 8:10 pm

Hi everyone,

It was a really quiet day today which is great. Core members had time just to have some fun with some of the posts. There were of course some really good answers. these were supplied by Reinout-g, CPhill, Rosala, Problem, NinjaDevo, Alan, Bertie and SquareRoot. Thank you, you are all wonderful.

Radix's status has been elevated to moderator. Congratulations Radix!

Many of you are now thinking "Who is Radix?"

Radix has never posted on our site, he posts on the German site and has now been made moderator.

This site runs the Web2 calc and forums in German, Spanish, French, English and Russian.

If you go to the bottom of any page you will see 5 two letter abbreviations. EN stands for English that is our version. DE stands for Deutsch which means German in German. Click on that and you will be transferred to the German site. That is where Radix hangs out. You will be logged out but you can log into the German site or you can came back here and log on again. Of course you can visit the other language sites as well. I used to post occasionally on the other sites but it is too busy here now. I have already voiced my congratulations on the German site and Radix has sent me a message of thanks.

There were not many posts today. I seem to have put aside the whole lot for this wrap lol.

The fun continues.

http://web2.0calc.com/questions/what-is-the-derivative-of-a-constant

you tube clip discussing huge numbers - thanks Ninja Devo

http://web2.0calc.com/questions/what-is-the-biggest-number

Well, we are in a playful mood today! - Thread provided by jmanf726 - Thank you.

http://web2.0calc.com/questions/impossible_1

Trig substitution, asin verses sin-1 and Morgan Tud revisits us.

http://web2.0calc.com/questions/in-trinomial-2sin-2x-sinx-1-0-if-i-am-to-factor-it-with-sinx-u-shouldn-t-2sin-2x-become-something-else-rather-than-u-2-if-u-is-sinx-sh

Maybe i should include one fully serious one. Thanks for the solution Problem.

http://web2.0calc.com/questions/how-do-you-factor-a-polynomial-that-has-2-variables#r2

Would anyone else like a language lesson?

http://web2.0calc.com/questions/differential-equations#r17

It is a long weekend in Australia. The holiday is in honour of the Queens Birthday. This is really weird because Queen Elizabeth II was born on 21st April. Why does the queen get 2 birthdays? I suppose this means that I, Lady Guinevere am entitled to two as well. WOW this is great! Queen Guinevere hearby proclaims that Monday 9th of June shall be her rightful celebratory day for this year of the Lord, Two Thousand and Fourteen.

She shall expect to be showered in gifts!

So we all (almost) have another weekend day. Enjoy!

Oh thankyou people for the thumbs up that my wraps were given today. They are much appreciated.

Zegroes has chastized me for using to few smilies. This must be remedied!

Is that enough Zegroes?

Lady Guinevere.

@@ End of Day Wrap - Tues 10/6/14 Sydney, Australia Time 11:40pm

hi Everyone,

A nice day on the forum I think. Not too busy. Great answers were provided by CPhill, Alan, Nicklvlup, Rosala, NinjaDevo, Zegroes, Bertie, Morgan Tud, GoldenLeaf, Kitty<3, admin and Heureka. You are all fantastic!

Nicklvlup and MorganTud have just become members. Welcome to web2.0calc forum. We hope that you enjoy yourselves here.

MorganTud, thou hath been a guest here for some time. Now that thou art a member WE shall expect thou to conduct thineself properly, with considerable restraint! Your Queen doth adore your avatar. It fit thee so well!

Your Lady, Lady Guinevere, Queen of Camelot, hath spoken!

A HUGE CONGRATULATIONS TO KITTY<3. SHE HAS HER STAR!

Kitty is a quiet achiever. Many of you wonder who she is. Well Kitty has always been my right hand girl. She was by my side when I was the only adult and certainly the only mathematician on the forum. I could not have coped without her. Her answers are always of exceptional quality and her presence on this forum is still extremely highly valued. Her star has been slow to come but it is very much deserved. Thank you Kitty!

Now, 2 days ago I sent Andre Massow, owner and developer of the Web2.0calc.com site an email. He responded almost immediately and many of the requests that I made have already been implemented. We now have an inbox and an outbox. Soon we will have a return button on our received messages. There are many other requests and improvements as well. I will just give you the link to the correspondance page that I have put together.

Communications with Admin - (there are three posts above this one that are also relevant)

http://web2.0calc.com/questions/communications-with-andre-massow-with-reply_1#r5

Now for our interesting posts;

A very nice offer from NinjaDevo

http://web2.0calc.com/questions/profile-pictures

A joke. I though it was funny

http://web2.0calc.com/questions/why-is-this-calculator-so-biased

I liked this one, it was just a little different from the standard ratio questions.

http://web2.0calc.com/questions/bob-clement-dominic-went-to-buy-a-gift-they-shared-the-cost-equally-among-themselves-however-dominic-did-not-bring-any-money-so-his-friends

That is it for this evening/day/morning whatever. some of you are very confused and do not realise that it is evening,

Enjoy what is left of your day - mine is over - midnight has passed and a new day begins.

Melody.

@@ End of Day Wrap - Thurs 12/6/14 Sydney, Australia Time 12:30pm (Really Friday morning)

Great answers today from Alan, Rosala, CPhill, Zegroes, Bertie, Geele, Heureka, reinout-g, NinjaDevo, TreefAM, Scrutinizer, Problem, Sally1 and Kitty

Rhino also posted a great puzzle. It is a recurring one but a really good one. I have given it the green puzzle icon and added it to the sticky note 'Puzzles'. Thank you Rhino.

I almost forgot. Reinout-g has put a repetitive and recursive curse on CPhill. He can adjust the pain levels as he sees fit. Of course CPhill does deserve it. Headless and now cursed. Some knights are brave but not so smart!

In the last day or so there has been some rudeness aimed at answerers. Sometimes this is verbal other times it is in the guise of subtracting points even though the answer is not incorrect. I do not think this should be tolerated. It is my position that core members should back any answerer who has reason to feel s/he has been treated rudely. An apology should be sought and if it is not forthcoming future questions should be whitened out or not answered. The question asker has three basic choices:

1) Apologise (and return points) and it is over.

2) Leave the forum altogether.

3) Rebirth with a new username. (If they do this then it would usually be an indication that they know they have crossed a line and they are likely to behave better second time around)

I can not do these things alone. If you think this is a reasonable policy then I need your help to enforce it. Let me know what you think.

----------------------------

Here are some of the more interesting posts for the day.

This is Chris's favourite for the day. It's just a little different from the norm.

http://web2.0calc.com/questions/how-do-i-find-out-the-x-and-y-intercepts-when-a-graph-is-shown

A quest for the biggest number?

http://web2.0calc.com/questions/what-is-the-biggest-number_1

Want some Coke?

http://web2.0calc.com/questions/please-help-explain-how-to-work-review-question

some complex numbers

http://web2.0calc.com/questions/z-3-z-conjugated-0

I am too tired right now to think about reinout-g's logic but it looks interesting.

http://web2.0calc.com/questions/if-you-are-going-with-hundred-twenty-lightyears-per-hour-how-many-metres-do-you-go-per-hour-asked-by-two-children-of-eleven-years-old

An old one but a good one.

http://web2.0calc.com/questions/math-question_54

So far I am both too tired and too busy to appreciate this properly - maybe some fun for my morning!

Thank you reinout.

http://web2.0calc.com/questions/begin-of-the-day-unwrap

Looks like the challange was accepted.

http://web2.0calc.com/questions/how-long-would-it-take-to-break-a-rsa2048-key-on-one-computer-that-handles-2-4-billion-instructions-per-second#r3

Questions like this always create confusion.

http://web2.0calc.com/questions/9-0#r1

That is it for today. Enjoy what is left of yours.

Melody.

@@ End of Day Wrap - Sat 14/6/14 Sydney, Australia Time 9:35pm

Good Evening all, some of you live in slow places and the sun has not yet set, but I assure you, a good evening awaits.

It was a quiet day today. I am definitely not complaining! Bring on more days like this so that I can catch my breath!

There were still lots of good answers delivered by reinout-g, NinjaDevo, Will85237, Alan, Rosala, CPhill, Bertie and Bahamo. Thanks guys, you are all much appreciated.

Bahamo is new. Welcome to web2.0calc forum. We hope you learn a lot and enjoy yourself here.

I spent a little time this evening cleaning up Sticky Notes. They are a little improved but this area definitely need more time spent on it. Some of the content is from the old forum and does not display properly. Some content needs to be deleted or updated. I did 'unstick' a couple of obsolete posts and I amalgamated a couple more but there is still much to do. Andre was 'threatening' to reduce the number of sticky topics possible. I do not like this idea but he is right, they do need to be tended properly.

Yesterday I was asked to put together a note to new question askers requesting that they be very careful about the presentation of their questions. I did that, maybe it was in my wrap yesterday, I don't remember. Anyway, I was then asked if something like this could be permanently 'stuck' to the top of the posted questions. I do not have the power to do this but I think it should go into my next letter to Andre Massow (site owner and developer) Does everyone think that this is a good idea? Can anyone offer more input. Would someone other than me like to write it? I have put up a first draft (on the forum)but I also found an old similar post in the ignored sticky topics. In some ways the old one is better than the new. They need to be amalgamated and tidied up.

I have started a sticky note information thread for new people. (It is just a start)

http://web2.0calc.com/questions/information-for-new-people

I also want to remind people of the Sticky Topic "Information Pages worth Keeping and Developing". Once again this thread needs some loving care but I add to it regularly, and I use references from it even more regularly. I think it would be beneficial if answerers familiarise themselves with its content.

These are some of the interesting post from today.

What is the value of pi

I have added this one's address to the sticky topic "Information pages worth keeping or developing"

http://web2.0calc.com/questions/what-is-the-value-of-pi

This might interest some people

http://web2.0calc.com/questions/cot-sin-1-2-3

I liked this one - a great answer from an anonymous person.

http://web2.0calc.com/questions/how-do-you-do-volume

I do believe that is it for today. Enjoy your weekend.

Melody.

@@ End of Day Wrap - Sunday 15/6/14 Sydney, Australia Time 9:20pm

Hi all,

Another beautifully quiet day. Great answers from Alan, Reinout-g, NinjaDevo, CPhill, Rosala and Zegroes and Henk1668 Thank you all.

Strider joined today. He/she started with a post complimenting the forum. Thank you Strider

http://web2.0calc.com/questions/thanks-from-a-student-who-needs-help

Hank1668 also joined today. He/she is from the Netherlands. (I was told via a message and I am assuming that it is not a secret) This was Hank1668's post. I included it in yesterday's wrap but here it is again.

http://web2.0calc.com/questions/how-do-you-do-volume

To Hank1668 and Strider. Welcome to Web2.0calc forum. We hope that you both learn a lot and enjoy yourselves here.

There was some discussion of forum issues after my wrap last night. I copied the posts over to the forum and the discussion was continued there.

http://web2.0calc.com/questions/sticky-note-information-pages-worth-keeping-and-developing-discussion

http://web2.0calc.com/questions/forum-problems-please-comment-saturday-14-6-14

It occured to me today that one of the things I always wanted for this forum was a 'club like' atmosphere. I was thinking that with the ability to post without becoming a member first that this may never happen. However, I am really pleased because I think that the forum may be headed that way now. We have a number of core users of all different ages and abilities. You are all lovely people. I have a great deal of time for each and every one of you. You are starting to communicate with each other on the forum in a very constructive and friendly way. I am really pleased that the forum is starting in this direction!

This forum is very young. I compare it to a young river gouging its way through mountains and valleys. It is intriguing to watch it grow and mature.

Here are some other interesting post for the day.

Vectors and complex numbers.

http://web2.0calc.com/questions/find-the-cross-product-of-the-following-vector-pairs-then-use-the-cross-product-to-find-the-angle-between-them-a-a-3i-2j-5k-and-b

Ratios - lengths, SA and Volume. I like questions like this one.

http://web2.0calc.com/questions/measurement-problem-1

I think that is it for today. Thank you everyone.

Melody. (The smiley is especially for Zegroes - He likes smilies)

@@ End of Day Wrap - Friday 20/6/14 Sydney, Australia Time 1:10am (Saturday morning really)

Great answers were provided to day by CPhill, Rosala, Alan, Zegroes, Reinout-g, Rom, Kitty<3, jboy314, MacGamer04 and NinjaDevo.

jboy314 only just became a member in the last day or so. CPhill and I are both really impressed with the answers that you have already given. Keep up the good work.

Welcome to web2.0calc forum jboy314. We hope you continue to write great answers. We also hope that you have fun and learn lots.

As many of you know, NinjaDevo has made an improved version of our Sticky Thread "Information Pages worth Keeping or Developing" The presentation looks fabulous. Ninja says he has included (almost) all the information that was in the old one. I have been intending to check it out properly but I can see the only way that is going to happen is if I put it up properly for people to use. Ninja has included the address of the old version on the first page so if anything is missing it can still be easily found. I used the old version of this thread quite heavily. I don't know if other people did or not. I really encourage you to see what is there and to make full use of it. If you want to add your own information/comment page that is encouraged (you only need one, you can edit it if you want to add things) Please respect the fact that it is a serious thread and treat it with respect. Thank you very much Ninja for doing this for us!

I nearly forgot to include the posts!

Lunch box unwrap - Examples of memes. (Thanks reinour-g)

http://web2.0calc.com/questions/begin-of-lunch-box-unwrap

Geometry question

http://web2.0calc.com/questions/what-is-the-measure-of-angle-adc

I really like the way Chris (CPhill) explained this one.

http://web2.0calc.com/questions/how-do-you-do-a-question-like-this-43-7-is-32-percent-of-what

This is a revolving question - But it always has appeal.

http://web2.0calc.com/questions/if-you-put-1-grain-of-rice-on-one-square-of-a-chess-board-and-2-on-the-next-then-4-then-16-ect-how-many-grains-of-rice-would-be-on-the-la

How do I remember my times tables?

http://web2.0calc.com/questions/is-there-a-fix-way-where-i-can-memorize-the-time-table-from-1-to-12-time-table

Commercial Mathemetics

http://web2.0calc.com/questions/five-years-ago-diane-secured-a-bank-loan-of-300-000-to-help-finance-the-purchase-of-a-loft-in-the-san-francisco-bay-area-the-term-of-the

Oh I have a picture especially for Chris (CPhill). He was commenting on how hot it is in Louisiana at this time of year.

That is it for the day. Enjoy what is left of yours.

Thank you,

Melody.

@@ End of Day Wrap - Sunday 22/6/14 Sydney, Australia Time 9:10am

It seems that US schools are on holidays and the children are misguided enough to think that they have better places to be than our forum. How misinformed they be. Still, there are always good questions and excellent answers follow in their wake. The answers this weekend haave been delivered by NinjaDeva, CPhill, jboy314, Heureka, Reinout-g, Rosala, Zegroes, Alan, Rom, DavidQD and MorganTud. Thank you. You are all wonderful. ♬

Ninja has posted a new version of "Information Pages worth Keeping or Developing" It can be found in the Sticky Notes. Please familiarise yourself with the threads within, some of them are excellent. I have not used the new thread much yet but the setting out is visually very appealing and i think that NinjaDevo has done a really good job. Thank you NinjaDevo. If you would like resources to be added Ninja has asked that you message your requests to him and he will see that it happens. However if you prefer, you may add a post of your own and add resources there. Please only add one post. You can then edit it or add to it as you please.

http://web2.0calc.com/questions/information-pages-worth-keeping-or-developing_1

We can never have too much maths humour! (Thank you reinout-g)

http://web2.0calc.com/questions/begin-of-lunch-box-unwrap_5

http://web2.0calc.com/questions/begin-of-early-lunch-box-unwrap

Rosala has learned how to use memes and her squirrels are cute. I also like the fact that although Rosala and Zegroes have had some fun they have not given yourselves points for it. Generally speaking I think points should mainly be kept for proper mathematics posts and just a few for the very best of the fun posts.

http://web2.0calc.com/questions/lets-end-the-day-with-a-lil-laugh

Whenever possible answers AND questions should be checked to make sure that they pass reasonableness checks. Thank you Alan for reminding us of this.

http://web2.0calc.com/questions/how-can-i-find-the-area-of-a-polygon-if-diagonals-are-35-and-its-apothem-measures-10cm#r4

3 different method to exand double bracket problems. I like Alan's method best. If I were teaching it in a class I would give a preamble on finding areas first and make sure the students could see the 'link'.

http://web2.0calc.com/questions/i-need-someone-to-explain-how-to-do-equations-like-this#r5

Fun, history and compliments.

http://web2.0calc.com/questions/which-sentence-contains-a-linking-verb-he-asked-questions-about-terms-he-did-not-understand-sarit-answered-all-of-the-questions-correctly#r12

That is it for this weekend. My weekend is just about over. Enjoy what is left of yours.

♬ ♬ MELODY ♬ ♬

@@ End of Day Wrap - Monday 23/6/14 Sydney, Australia Time 11:50pm

Hi everyone, is this a ghost town or what? I am actually enjoying brake. But is the entire forum made up of US school children? I know the core group is not, but maybe the rest are. They certainly all seem to be on holidays. I hope that they are having lots of healthy fun!

Still, there were a few good questions and these were answered by Rosala, CPhill, NinjaDevo, Rom, Alan, Reinout-g, Heureka, Bertie, and Kitty. Thank you all.

Communications with Andre Massow. (Site Owner and Developer)

On the 16th June I sent an email that listed a number of items that I asked Andre to consider, improve, or implement. Today I received a response:

# There was an error in the message centre. The inbox items were displaying properly but the outbox was displaying the incoming messages not the outgoing ones. Anyway, Andre has now fixed this problem.

# Andre has introduced a reply button on incoming messages. I have already used this, it works well.

# Messages can now be viewed from oldest to newest or newest to oldest.

# Andre has introduced an Export Button. There is a “save disk” icon at the top of each conversation. It exports in Microsoft Excel file format. I have used this, it definitely works. It appears to export so that the newest message is on the top no matter which way around the messages are displayed. The layout appears to be a little confusing if the messages are long. I’m sure that I will work it out quickly enough.

# Andre has introduced a new “To” input field in the compose message section. Before, there was just a drop down box but now you have to input something. If you input “tr” all the usernames containing “tr” anywhere in them are brought up. I entered R and no username that actually began with R was bought up – Maybe only the first 25 possibilities appear. I don’t know. It is a bit of a mystery at the moment.

# There are a few other issues that Andre is still considering.

# I just discovered that if you go into any person’s profile, there is a new button underneath the avatar. It says “All Profiles”, if you click into here you will find a comprehensive list of members. It is in alphabetical order and it gives joining date as well as number of questions asked and answered. I asked Andre for something like this but he did say that he had done it in his letter. So finding this was a nice surprise.

Once again, on behalf of all forum members, I would like to extend a very big thank you to Andre for all that he is doing to improve our forum.

23/6/14 Included in the wrap.

Communications with Andre Massow. (Site Owner and Developer)

On the 16th June I sent an email that listed a number of items that I asked Andre to consider, improve, or implement. Today I received a response:

# There was an error in the message centre. The inbox items were displaying properly but the outbox was displaying the incoming messages not the outgoing ones. Anyway, Andre has now fixed this problem.

# Andre has introduced a reply button on incoming messages. I have already used this, it works well.

# Messages can now be viewed from oldest to newest or newest to oldest.

# Andre has introduced an Export Button. There is a “save disk” icon at the top of each conversation. It exports in Microsoft Excel file format. I have used this, it definitely works. It appears to export so that the newest message is on the top no matter which way around the messages are displayed. The layout appears to be a little confusing if the messages are long. I’m sure that I will work it out quickly enough.

# Andre has introduced a new “To” input field in the compose message section. Before, there was just a drop down box but now you have to input something. If you input “tr” all the usernames containing “tr” anywhere in them are brought up. I entered R and no username that actually began with R was bought up – Maybe only the first 25 possibilities appear. I don’t know. It is a bit of a mystery at the moment.

# There are a few other issues that Andre is still considering.

# I just discovered that if you go into any person’s profile, there is a new button underneath the avatar. It says “All Profiles”, if you click into here you will find a comprehensive list of members. It is in alphabetical order and it gives joining date as well as number of questions asked and answered. I asked Andre for something like this but he did say that he had done it in his letter. So finding this was a nice surprise.

Once again, on behalf of all forum members, I would like to extend a very big thank you to Andre for all that he is doing to improve our forum. ♬

Today's Posts

Math Joke. (Courtesy of Anonymous)

http://web2.0calc.com/questions/math-joke-trigonometric-identities#r2

I liked what Chris did on this one. I'll have to try and remember this technique. Thanks Chris.

http://web2.0calc.com/questions/what-is-594750-9723

That is it for this quiet day.

♬ ♬ MELODY ♬ ♬

@@ End of Day Wrap - Wed/Thurs 3/6/14 Sydney, Australia Time 11:30am ♬

Hi all, ♬

Lots of great answers today from Rosala, Zegroes, CPhill, Jboy314, admin, Alan, SevenUP, Heureka and dragonSlayer554. Thanks everyone. ♬ ♬

Yesterday Zegroes earned his star. CONGRATULATIONS ZEGROES

Rose98 and DragonSlayer554 are both new. Welcome to web2.0calc forum. We hope that you learn lots and enjoy yourselves here. ♬

I worked out how we can duck between the different language forums without having to sign in each time.

I hae a German post in my watchlist and if i use this to gain access i can go to the german site without any hassles and then I can go back again via an English post in my watch list. It is really cool!

This is the German post that i used. I assume that it will work from there as well but I am not sure.

http://web2.0calc.com/questions/gleichung-f-r-d

If it works then a sticky topic should be written with posts from each forum so we can use it as an easy gate way! Anyone want to volunteer?

I think that it is now time for the interesting post of the days. I think there are lots of them. ♬

Rose98 only just joined and look at the introduction that she gets. No one even attempted to help her. ROFLOL.

http://web2.0calc.com/questions/i-don-t-understand-ratios

Rosala's Post. ♬

http://web2.0calc.com/questions/lets-end-the-day-with-a-laugh_1

Some probability to get us started ♬

http://web2.0calc.com/questions/airlines-often-sell-more-tickets-for-a-flight-than-there-are-seats-because-some-ticket-holders-do-not-show-up-for-the-flight-assume-that-an#rr2

Formulas look different, answers are the same. ♬

http://web2.0calc.com/questions/what-would-be-the-monthly-payment-for-20-000-at-6-9-financing-for-60-months

Advanced statistics if anyone is interested.

http://web2.0calc.com/questions/poisson

This one looks interesting - Given time I will take a much better look! ♬

http://web2.0calc.com/questions/intergration-of-x-to-the-minus-one

Another that I would like to look at properly.

http://web2.0calc.com/questions/pendulum-trigonometry

Distance formula (discussion)

http://web2.0calc.com/questions/what-is-the-distance-between-2-5-and-3-0

This is a bit of fun - maybe we could have some more solutions. Thanks anonymous.

http://web2.0calc.com/questions/same-question-as-below

This is a good question for our younger members.

http://web2.0calc.com/questions/reena-spends-rs-9800-every-month-from-her-salary-and-the-remaining-amount-she-deposits-in-abank-if-she-deposits-30-what-is-her-salary

I haven't finished with this one yet. I am quite sure all our answers are wrong. I have an idea but I haven't had time to work through it yet.

http://web2.0calc.com/questions/a-keycode-must-contain-4-letters-and-3-numbers-the-letters-may-be-any-letter-of-the-alphabet-the-numbers-should-be-any-number-from-0-to-5

That is it for this evening.

You are all wonderful.

♬ ♬ MELODY ♬ ♬

@@ End of Day Wrap : Tues-Thurs 11/7/14 Sydney, Australia Time 12:01am (Really Friday) ♬

Hi Everyone,

I am sorry it has been a couple of days since it wrote the last wrap. I am really not up to where I would like to be for this one but that does mean that there are more questions available for those people who are here. There is always a bright side!

Anyway I great answers have been provided by Jboy314, GoldenLeaf, CPhill, NinjaDevo, Alan, Heureka, Rosala, Zegroes, Snip3s, DragonSlayer554, admin, Kitty<3, Rose98, Quazars, SevenUp, Will8523. Thank you, you are all wonderful.

I would like to request that when serious questions are asked and people are trying to provide serious answers that the distracting non-related posts be put elsewhere. It can be very difficult to think a difficult problem through if the thread is full of distractions. I am not saying you can't have a related joke but please keep it to a minimum. Here is one such thread. It most certainly is not the only one.

Grizzly Bear land mines. SevenUp's post is saying exactly what I am saying. Only s/he is funnier than me.

http://web2.0calc.com/questions/grizzly-bears#r24

Now, since it has been so long I have collected up a lot of posts that you may have missed and that may interest you.

I always like these questions.

http://web2.0calc.com/questions/help-please_23

I think some of the younger ones may learn a lot from these;

http://web2.0calc.com/questions/convert-the-following-angles-to-degrees-minutes-and-seconds-0-4-and-1-6

http://web2.0calc.com/questions/if-the-vertex-angle-of-an-isosceles-triangle-has-a-measure-of-60-and-the-length-of-each-leg-is-18-find-the-length-of-the-altitude-drawn-to

http://web2.0calc.com/questions/an-apple-cost-3x-6-pesos-while-an-orange-cost-4x-5-pesos-what-is-the-total-cost-of-1-dozen-apples-and-half-dozen-of-orange

http://web2.0calc.com/questions/perimeter_1

This little problem created some interest.

http://web2.0calc.com/questions/a-problem-what-is-2-2014-2-2013-found-at-brilliant-org-problem-solving-site

http://web2.0calc.com/questions/which-expression-can-be-used-to-represent-the-number-of-strawberries-on-5-tables

I have no idea but it looks like more of an answer is desired.

http://web2.0calc.com/questions/writing-sech-inverse-4-5-sech-inverse-5-13-in-natural-logarithim-using-formula-sech-inverse-x-ln-1-sqrt-1-x-2-x

I am glad we have Alan to help us.

http://web2.0calc.com/questions/suppose-i-have-a-set-0-1-2-x-1

http://web2.0calc.com/questions/find-the-equation-of-the-locus-of-points-represented-by-complex-number-z-when-w-is-real

Spot the fallacy:

http://web2.0calc.com/questions/step-1-let-a-b

I liked the humour in these ones:

http://web2.0calc.com/questions/how-to-find-tax

http://web2.0calc.com/questions/why-is-2-10-and-2-11-the-same-thing

That is it folks, enjoy the rest of your Thursday.

♬ ♬ MELODY ♬ ♬

@@ End of Day Wrap : Fri-Sat 12/7/14 Sydney, Australia Time 2:00am (Really Sunday) ♬

I am still not completely caught up but I nearly am. There are still questions on pages 548 and 549 that have not been answered.

Anyway, we have had a great many answers provided by DragonSlayer554, Rosala, Snip3s, Rose98, NinjaDevo, CPhill, SevenUp, alan, Heureka, Will8537, GoldenLeaf, Kitty<3, Quazars, Bioschip and Anonymous4338. Thanks to all of you.

It was just mentioned to me that it is now Saturday, or Sunday for all of you and the forum is filled with young people who are having fun and learning at the same time. What a great bunch of 'kids' you are. What we now have is what I always wanted for this forum. It is a club environement. All the core members both young and old are participating and learning together. This makes me very happy. Thank you everyone!

I would really like some feedback about the interest posts. Ninja has given positive feedback. He may put some of them together into a new Sticky Topic thread. So if you just want some good quality posts on a semi-specific topic you will be able to find them there. Ninja has already organised our "sticky Topic" thread "Information Pages Worth Keeping and Developing" and he says he will do this one as well. These are time comsuming exercises and then they have to be constanly updated as time progresses. Thank you, I am very grateful to you Ninja.

Now I would like other people to comment. You can do so on the Lantern post please. (Not on this 'wrap thread')

Now for todays interesting posts. There is a lot, I got a bit carried away.

1) Rosala's post just has to go first. Thank you for sharing all this with us.

http://web2.0calc.com/questions/lets-end-the-day-with-a-laugh_3

2) This post gave me a really good laugh. Thanks DragonSlayer554

http://web2.0calc.com/questions/dragonslayer554-s-oppinion

3) I think our younger members better check this question. Many of you attempted it but I don't think any of you got it correct. Then again it could be me that got it wrong. That would be rather embarasing.

http://web2.0calc.com/questions/9-5-3z-8k-use-k-2-and-z-6_1

4) This is a good one for our younger students to think about. Don't look at the answer straight away!

http://web2.0calc.com/questions/what-is-x-in-x-7-2 (thanks Chris)

5) Really nice examples of Algebraic substitution in Quadratic equations. (Thanks Heureka)

http://web2.0calc.com/questions/solve-the-equation_1

6) Using logs to solve equations

http://web2.0calc.com/questions/find-the-solution-of-the-exponential-equation

7) Interesting point on log domains.

http://web2.0calc.com/questions/use-the-laws-of-logarithms-to-combine-the-expression

8) Finding the centre and the radius of a circle, using the equation.

http://web2.0calc.com/questions/what-is-the-center-of-a-circle-and-the-radius-of-4x-2-4x-4y-2-16y-127-0

9) Interesting problem for the younger ones and great graphics from Ninja - thank you.

http://web2.0calc.com/questions/the-minute-hand-on-a-watch-is-1-5cm-long-what-distance-does-the-tip-of-this-hand-travel-through-in-1-hour

10) Why do 2 neg multiply to a positive. I really liked Chris's explanation. Thanks Chris.

http://web2.0calc.com/questions/want-to-multiply-2-negatives

11) New terms for me. Thanks Ninja.

http://web2.0calc.com/questions/tell-if-inconsistent-or-dependent

12) Using modular arithmetic and Web2.0calc to find a remainder. Thanks Alan.

http://web2.0calc.com/questions/132-28-19-what-is-the-remainder

13) A good problem one if you want to give it a go.

http://web2.0calc.com/questions/a-block-of-steel-d-8-05g-cm3-weighs-157-4kg-how-many-whole-solid-cylindrical-pegs-with-a-radius-of-0-500in-and-a-length-of-2-00-in-can

14) A really good question for the younger students

http://web2.0calc.com/questions/whats-the-linear-measure-of-an-arc-whose-central-angle-is-80-on-a-circle-having-a-radius-of-18-meters

That is it for tonight. Thank you everyone. Enjoy the rest of your weekend.

♬ ♬ MELODY ♬ ♬

@@ End of Day Wrap : Sun 13/7/14 Sydney, Australia Time 12:45am (Really Monday) ♬

Hi Everyone,

I caught up on everything today - well almost.

Great answers were provided by Rosala, CPhill, Alan, sevenUP, DragonSlayer554, NinjaDevo, Zegroes, Rose98, Quazars, Anonymous4338, Bioschip, GoldenLeaf, and Kitty<3. Thank you. You are all wonderful.

-------------------------------------

I am going to start the wrap with a grump I am sorry.

I really was not impressed with this thread this morning. A new member, Mari379, asked a serious question.

Rosala welcomed her to the forum, that was nice, thank you Rosala.

Then Zegroes, Rosala and DragonSlayer turned the thread into a fun post. Yes it was funny, that is why I didn't just white it out but by the time sevenUP answered the actual question. The serious answer was lost amongst the sea of humour. A couple of hours later, Mari reposted and CPhill anwered. She should have been able to see her answer in the first place. You should all be a just a little bit ashamed of yourselves.

You know I don't mind you playing on the forum, in fact I really like it, BUT please do not do it on serious posts. Especially when the question is not fully answered yet.

http://web2.0calc.com/questions/can-you-please-help-anyone#r3

--------------------------------------

Now there were plenty of good posts and here are some of them.

1) Number Puzzle (already added to Puzzles thread)

http://web2.0calc.com/questions/is-it-possible-to-get-873-from-100-75-50-25-10-6

2) This one inspired some thought.

http://web2.0calc.com/questions/how-do-i-figure-out-the-right-of-a-triangle-when-ab-equals-13-and-cb-equals-12

3) This one proved to be a bit controversial.

http://web2.0calc.com/questions/how-do-i-simplify-10-000e-2-835#r14

4) I liked this question. Thanks Rose98 and Chris

http://web2.0calc.com/questions/so-i-have-two-triangles-here-but-are-they-overlapping-i-can-t-draw-i-diagram-that-fits-the-discription-p-nbsp-does-anyone-have-a-suges

5) This is an old (missed) one but I only just did it (part A anyway) I like these types of questions.

http://web2.0calc.com/questions/find-the-domain-of-the-function_2

6) Radioactive decay question. (Ninja, could you put this aside as a log sample question please)

http://web2.0calc.com/questions/a-15-g-sample-of-radioactive-iodine-decays-in-such-a-way-that-the-mass-remaining-after-nbsp-t-nbsp-days-is-given-by-nbsp

That is it for tonight. Thank you everyone.

♬ ♬ MELODY ♬ ♬

@@ End of Day Wrap : Thurs 24/7/14 Sydney, Australia Time 10:50 pm ♬

Hi everyone,

It was not that busy today but there were some great answers delivered by Rosala, alan, CPhill, Zegroes, Kitty<3, Heureka, Stu, AzizHusain and DeviikaAnand. Thank you all.

AzizHusain and DevikaAnand are new. Welcome to our web2.0calc forum. We hope that you like it here.

I thought I would talk a little about the numbering system on threads.

A thread title is allocated when the original question is asked. The first answer post has #1 written after the name. The second answer post is #2, the third is #3 etc. At least I think that is correct. Anyway if you want to refer someone to a particular post, rather than the whole thread, just click on the title of the post that you want. The address in your browser will renew, giving the address of the post. You can copy that address and post it as your reference address. I think that is all correct. I hope I have used all the correct terminology.

Today mari379 asked "How do you get points" Here I have explained my attitude to the allocation of points. CPhill and Zegroes and Rosala have also voiced opinions.

http://web2.0calc.com/questions/how-do-you-get-points

If anyone would ever like to recommend a good post to include in this "End of Day Wrap" could you please send it to me via private message. The forum is not very busy now while most of the US schools are closed for their summer break but even so I often just tick off posts without really looking at them. I could easily miss outstanding posts so please let me know if you see any really interesting or impressive ones. When the forum gets busy again this will become totally necessary for the proper running of the forum. I may provide a thread for you to place the addresses in. But for now private messaging will work fine. Thank you.

Now for some interesting posts:

1) Here Alan has employed the Taylor Series to evaluate a limit (actually, to find a derivative)

Thanks Alan and thank you Chris for recommending this thread.

http://web2.0calc.com/questions/what-is-the-derivative-of-y-4sqrt-x-using-the-first-principle

2) This looks interesting - Pretty picture too. Thanks Alan.

http://web2.0calc.com/questions/if-a-light-ray-is-incident-of-the-glass-surface-with-index-of-refraction-n-1-50-at-0-degree-anglee-what-would-be-the-angle-of-refraction-if

3) Lets end the day with a laugh. That is a great idea Rosala. Thank you.

http://web2.0calc.com/questions/lets-end-the-day-with-a-laugh_6

That is it for this Wednesday/Thursday. Goodnight

♬ ♬ MELODY ♬ ♬

@@ End of Day Wrap : Thurs 31/7/14 Sydney, Australia Time 1:00am (Really Friday morning) ♬

Hi all, ♫♪

Our great answers were today provided by CPhill, Alan, NinjaDevo, Heureka, DragonSlayer554 and AzizHusain.

My thanks to each of you.

NinjaDevo has been working on this great thread for everyone and now it is finished. It is a thread of great answers to learn from - just like the title suggests. This should be great reference material for askers and answerers but it is intended more for the askers. NinjaDevo has presented it beautifully, it will be constantly added to. Maybe now much fewer of our wonderful questions and answers will be lost. If you would like a post added please private message the address of the post to Ninja. This is Ninja's thread and he will have the final say as to which threads are included and which are not but he can not find all the good ones himself. He will need help for this. Thank you Ninja. I am very grateful to you for taking care of all our reference material.

Oh, "Great answers to learn from" and "Reference Material" are both Sticky Topics

http://web2.0calc.com/questions/great-answers-to-learn-from

NOW for the other interst threads: ♪ ♫

Some members were playing with LaTex. There is a question waiting for DragonSlayer to answer.

http://web2.0calc.com/questions/here-is-a-question-just-for-latex-beginners-like-draagonslayer#rr10

Difficult inequality solution. *Ninja I think this one would be good in your new thread.

http://web2.0calc.com/questions/how-can-i-solve-the-first-question-nbsp

This was included yesterday I think, but the discussion continued today.

http://web2.0calc.com/questions/the-difference-between-twice-a-number-and-8-is-twenty-more-than-nine-times-the-number-find-the-number

I thought I would put this one in because it is so beautifully presented. Thanks Ninja ♫♪

http://web2.0calc.com/questions/3x60-5x9-2x2

A top little puzzle. Thanks for the answer Aziz. ♫♪

http://web2.0calc.com/questions/clue-for-a-riddle

That is it for this Wed/Thurs. Enjoy the rest of your day.

♬ ♬ ♬ MELODY ♬ ♫♪

@@ End of Day Wrap : Mon 11/8/14 Sydney, Australia Time 10:20pm ♬

Hi everyone,

Another good day with some excellent answers from CPhill, Alan, admin, Stu, Rosala, AzizHusain, and Will85237. Thank you all.

The King was back from the Crusades today. He honoured us with his presence and it seems there are to be big changes in the land of Camelot.

Okay, Now I will talk in English. Mr. Massow, owner and developer of web2.0calc.com made some changes to the forum today.

He has introduced topic coding on the threads. The code will be chosen by the moderators. I think it needs some refinement but I really like the idea.

Also the look of the Questions page has changed. The answerers (and partial answers) are not displaying as they were before. I am not so keen on this.

The scores were also being played with today. They were changed then returned to their former status a couple of times today. I think it is fair to assume that a permanent change is in the air. I have not spoken to Mr. Massow about the scoring system at all but I am in agreement that the present system is not particularly good.

It may be a good idea for social posters to brace themselves. I think everyone scores are likely to be slashed but social posters will be hit the hardest. Hopefully we will all be able to live with the adjustments when they come. I would expect some tinkering of scores to happen even after this but as I said, I have not spoken to Mr Massow and I do not know what his intentions really are. Please when this happens do not take it personally. You are here because you enjoy the forum. The points that you are given should be a very secondary pleasure.

Now for the interest posts:

Interesting little 3D/algebra question.

http://web2.0calc.com/questions/in-a-rectangular-piece-of-cardboard-with-a-perimeter-20-ft-three-parallel-and-equally-spaced-creases-are-made-the-cardboard-is-then-folded

*Word Problem - Really hard, simultaneous equations (Thanks Chris)

http://web2.0calc.com/questions/a-shopkeeper-paid-9-380-for-some-shirts-and-jeans-he-bought-4-times-as-many-shirts-as-jeans-each-pair-of-jeans-cost-40-more-than-a-shirt-h

Thank you everyone.

♫♪ ♪ ♫ ♬ ♬ MELODY ♬ ♬ ♫♪ ♪ ♫

@@ End of Day Wrap : Mon 18/8/14 Sydney, Australia Time 11:15pm ♬

Hello all,

Well I am back! I have travelled 2000km (by car) in the last 5 days and attended a wedding. How about that!

I have been really lucky to have DragonSlayer (the Defender), and Bumblebee (The Queens eyes and ears) caring for camelot while I have been away. Thank you, you have done an excellent job. Thanks also to Chris and Alan, Aziz and Rosala, Ninja, Kitty and Zegroes. Plus anyone else who has helped. I really do not know who has been answering all the questions while I have been preoccupied. I've been on the forum for many hours this afternoon but I did not get very far I am sorry.

Also, now that Mr. Massow has changed the layout it is more difficult for me to collect all the answerer names.

Anyway, I will do the best I can.

If anyone writes or sees an excellent answer or post could you please let me know so that I can ask Ninja to include it in one of his threads.

Ninja, are you about. I don't remember stumbling over any of your posts recently? There are a couple of threads here I would like you to archive.

Here are a couple of threads that I put aside. I am sure there are many others. I have not seen a lot of the posts, again I am sorry.

What to do to combat pop-ups

http://web2.0calc.com/questions/non-math-help

* Statistics - Z scores

http://web2.0calc.com/questions/how-do-i-find-the-area-under-the-standard-normal-curve-over-the-interval-specified-below-between-z-44-and-z-44

* Introductory Algebra

http://web2.0calc.com/questions/5x-21-2x-what-does-x-mean

* Solving quadratic formula

http://web2.0calc.com/questions/help-me-with-solving-this-equation-please

*Linear Representation (co-ordinate geometry) of a worded problem.

http://web2.0calc.com/questions/gregory-planted-a-lemon-tree-in-hid-back-yard-when-he-planted-the-tree-it-was-2-feet-tall-he-noticed-that-it-has-been-growing-3-inches-ev

Thanks to all of you. I always wanted this forum to be like a club and I think that is the way it is going.

I am proud of it and proud of all of you.

♫♪ ♪ ♫ ♬ ♬ MELODY ♬ ♬ ♫♪ ♪ ♫

@@ End of Day Wrap : Wed 27/8/14 Sydney, Australia Time 11:55pm ♬

Hi everyone,

Lots of great answers today from Cphill, TakahiroMaeda, Alan, AzizHusain, DragonSlayer554, Rosala, Therealquestioner, zoomasd, HalleyWoodall17, Kitty

Therealquestioner, zoomasd and halleywoodall are all faily new. A big welcome to each of you, I hope that you enjoy our web2 forum and that you learn a lot as well.

We are starting to get swamped in questions but even so I want to remind people that we are trying to help people to learn. Just giving answers is sometimes the opposite of this because the asker does not have to think at all. Please do not give full answers if there is a reasonable alternative. For instance, if a calc answer is requested, tell them that the web 2 calc can be found on the home page. You can tell them what keys to press but don't actually do it for them. This is defeating the whole purpose.

Another worthwhile response might be to suggest someone googles an answer.

Another might be to send them off to a learning site like a "mathsisfun" page or a video clip where they can learn more from other resources.

Now for some interest posts:

* 1) I thought this quadratic equation was just a little different from usual

http://web2.0calc.com/questions/x-7sqrt-x-10-0

* 2) Finding a root of a negative number.

http://web2.0calc.com/questions/can-i-calculate-a-negative-number-to-the-power-of-a-fraction-ie-1-42-1-7

* 3) Vectors. (thanks Chris)

http://web2.0calc.com/questions/the-acute-angle-in-degrees-that-makes-a-with-c-when-a-4i-0j-k-c-i-j-3k

4) Comic relief for mathematicians. Despite the heading this is quadratics NOT trigonometry.

http://web2.0calc.com/questions/trigonometry_78

* 5) Anyone fancy some physics?

I am sorry, I should have included other people's physics answers in the past. I don't usually understand it. That is my excuse and my apology in one.

http://web2.0calc.com/questions/nbsp_3

* 6) logs - 2 differerent approaches

http://web2.0calc.com/questions/why-does-log-2ab-log-5-a-log10b-0

* 7) Big numbers - thanks for the reference Alan. Can you find somewhere for this Ninja? Maybe in reference?

http://web2.0calc.com/questions/how-big-is-a-googolplexian#r1

And that is it for this Tuesday/Wednesday. See Ya.

♫♪ ♪ ♫ ♫♪ ♪ ♫ ♬ ♬ MELODY ♬ ♬ ♫♪ ♪ ♫ ♫♪ ♪ ♫

@@ End of Day Wrap: Sat 30/8/14 Sydney, Australia Time 2:45am (Really Sunday morning) ♬

Hi everyone,

It's been 2 days since my last but as always there have been many questions and more than that many answers. Our illustrious answerers have been AzizHusain, NinjaDevo, Alan, DragonSlayer554, reptyGT, Rosala and CPhill. Thank you all.

reptyGT is new. Welcome to our Web2 forum. We hope that you like it here.

I ma really pleased to see that the type of answers that are being provided have changed a little. There have been less full answers and more help to get started. This includes being sent to other web sites to learn things. There are many great free sites available and we should make use of them at every oportunity.

When we tell someone to use the site calc I think it would be a good idea to add that it is on the home page.

I have put aside a lot of interest posts. It has been 2 days since my last wrap. Anyway here they are:

1) Ninja presents his full answers beautifully - just look at this equation solution !!

http://web2.0calc.com/questions/8-x-1-4x-8

* 2) Today Aziz suggested this "Learning Calculus" website. People should never forget that there are many really good information sites available on the web. Thanks Aziz.

https://www.khanacademy.org/math/differential-calculus

3) More questions here! (I included this last time too but it has been added to.)

http://web2.0calc.com/questions/quadratic-functions-derived-from-vertex-and-a-point

* 4) Minimizing question. (Calculus) We don't get many of these.

http://web2.0calc.com/questions/working-out-the-triangle-length-and-prism-length-of-a-equilateral-triangular-prism#rr1

* 5) Great Simultaneous equations - elimination method solution by Ninja

http://web2.0calc.com/questions/solve-2x-3y-7-x-y-3

* 6) A little Physics anyone? Thanks Alan

http://web2.0calc.com/questions/physics_65

7) Unanswered puzzle

http://web2.0calc.com/questions/how-do-you-get-100-with-only-the-numbers-3-4-and-4

8)Using the Desmos calculator to graph inequalities. (thanks Chris)

http://web2.0calc.com/questions/graph-the-inequality-2-y-2-2-y-4

9) Rosala's laugh. Thanks Rosala

http://web2.0calc.com/questions/let-s-end-the-day-with-a-laugh_1

10) Good fluid solution question (thanks Chris and Alan)

http://web2.0calc.com/questions/how-much-pure-acid-should-be-mixed-with-3-gallons-of-40-acid-solution-in-order-to-get-a-90-acid-solution

11) I haven't had a chance to look at this yet but it might be interesting.

http://web2.0calc.com/questions/vedic-maths-worth-looking-at

12) This advanced maths has been included before but Heureka has added to it. (Thanks Heureka)

http://web2.0calc.com/questions/trigonometry_78

That is it for this evening. Thanks everyone you are all really great.

♫♪ ♪ ♫ ♬ ♬ MELODY ♬ ♬ ♫♪ ♪ ♫

@@ End of Day Wrap: Wed 3/9/14 Sydney, Australia Time 10:45pm ♬

Good day to you,

It was very busy today. Anyone would think all the children of the world are back at school. :)

Anyway, many great answers were given by AzizHusain, Alan, LLABlackJack, Heureka, Rosala, DragonSlayer554, CPhill, Honga, Takahiromaeda, NinjaDevo,HaleyWoodall17, CoopALoop, GingerAle and DavidQD. Thank you all. Without wonderful answerers like you we would not have a forum.

LLABlackJack and CoopALoop are both new to the forum. We would like to welcome you and we hope that you like it here.

I am really pleased that external sources are being used more by answerers. I would think that Aziz is our top answerer at the present time and he is refering people to many other sites. He used this one it to demonstrate one-to-one and onto functions. Thanks Aziz.

http://www.regentsprep.org/Regents/math/algtrig/ATP5/OntoFunctions.htm

I know the forum is really busy at the moment and to make answers longer than necessary may make it impossible to get through all the questions. However,

a) Sometimes it would be good to give instructions on how to highlight web addresses, right click and choose the goto that is desired. We are dealing with children and they do not always know how to do this.

b) Tell people that the web2 calc is on the home page.

I am sure there are other little instructions like these that could be very useful.

Perhaps once in a while a stand alone post of this nature could be put on the forum rather than stating it over and over in posts. Would anyone like to do this for us sometimes? It would not be a big job.

Now for the interest posts:

* 1) Fractions - Multiplying - Great explanation from Ninja.

http://web2.0calc.com/questions/6-2-3-x-2-2-5-x-3-3-8

2) I liked this one (Thanks Takahiro)

http://web2.0calc.com/questions/hi-im-18-and-i-was-wondering-what-is-2-plus-2

3) This early calculus one made me think a little. (I liked the web page Aziz sent me to too)

http://web2.0calc.com/questions/if-f-x-is-continuous-on-an-open-interval-it-is-di

4) Now we are a chemistry forum lol (Thanks DavidQD)

http://web2.0calc.com/questions/chemistry-question-anyone-know-how-solve-it#r0

*5) Some algebra on a rectangle. (Thanks Aziz)

http://web2.0calc.com/questions/a-small-rectangular-park-is-being-desinged-the-perimeter-is-340-ft-total-the-width-is-100-ft-less-than-the-length-what-s-the-l-w

*6) I had some fun with this trigonometry question.

http://web2.0calc.com/questions/cos-sin-1-5-x

7) This one is causing some controversy. :)

http://web2.0calc.com/questions/if-pn-29cm-and-mn-13cm-then-pm

That is is for my evening. Enjoy the rest of your day.

♫♪ ♪ ♫ ♬ ♬ MELODY ♬ ♬ ♫♪ ♪ ♫

@@ End of Day Wrap: Tues 9/9/14 Sydney, Australia Time 10:45pm ♬

Hi all,

Our great answerers today were CPhill, HaleyWoodall17, AzizHusain, Lola200, Alan, DragonSlayer554, Nba2k14, Pumpkinguy, NinjaDevo, ThAnswerGuy, Kitty<3, Milkshake, Heureka and Demogorgon. I even answered a few myself LOL. Thanks, you are all great!

Our new answerers today were ThAnswerGuy, Nba2k14 and Milkshake. Artorias is new too. He/she didn't answer any questions but he/she introduced themselves on the forum in a special post. I thought that was nice so I have included this new member too. Anyway we are very pleased that you have all joined us and we hope that all your experiences here are really good ones.

Now for some interest posts. I pulled out quite a few today.

*1) Using the web 2 calc to find the equation of a quadratic through 3 given points. (Thanks Alan)

http://web2.0calc.com/questions/how-can-i-use-this-calculator-to-find-a-quadratic-equation-through-given-points

*2) Calculus - Chris has suggested a web site as a self teaching site. This should be added to our resources.

http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=O8ezDEk3qCg

http://tutorial.math.lamar.edu/Classes/CalcI/LimitsAtInfinityI.aspx (This site too)

*3) I have an unusual method for dealing with ANY rates question.

http://web2.0calc.com/questions/help-maths-question-i-don-t-get-it

*4) These average speed questions always trick people.

http://web2.0calc.com/questions/a-car-travels-50kph-from-point-a-to-b-and-travels-40kph-back-what-is-the-average#rr2

5) We need to be very careful to answer the question that is put to us. We often guess at its meaning but we must not add what is definitely not there.

http://web2.0calc.com/questions/f-x-x-x-8x-15

6) TheAnswerGuy has given us a web address where he makes "unicodeemicons" I think some people would be interested in this.

http://web2.0calc.com/questions/if-5-ducks-ate-chicken-and-2-died-from-it-how-many-would-be-left

7) Finding the lowest common multiple of a big number. (Thanks Heureka)

http://web2.0calc.com/questions/find-the-lcm-of-32-84-180

*8) Catesian to polar co-ordinates (Thanks Alan and Heureka)

http://web2.0calc.com/questions/how-to-convert-polar-to-cartesian-and-vice-versa

*9) Co-odinate geometry. Parallel line and restrictions on co-efficients. (Thanks Heureka and Demogorgon)

http://web2.0calc.com/questions/assume-that-c-doesn-t-equal-d-and-a-and-b-are-not-both-zero-show-that-ax-by-c-and-ax-by-d-are-parallel-lines-explain-why-the-restri

That is it for my Tuesday evening. Enjoy the rest of your day.

♫♪ Y ♪ ♫ ♬ ♬ MELODY ♬ ♬ ♫♪ Y ♪ ♫

@@ End of Day Wrap: Thurs 11/9/14 Sydney, Australia Time 9:00pm ♬

A good day to you all,

Today our wonderful answers were provided by DragonSlayer554, Reinout-g, CPhill, Honga, Alan, Leelee, Kitty<3, Zoomasd123, Heureka and NinjaDevo. A great bid thank you to each of you.

I have been on the site for much of today but I have not even attempted to answer every question. I have however looked at your answers and given points when appropriate. Even this may soon become too much and I do not think that all the points really get added to your totals anyway. But for now this is what I am going to try and do. The upside is that there should always be some unanswered questions around if you want to answer some. I already try to leave some simpler questions around for our "rat pack" to answer anyway.

Now for a few interest posts:

1) Dragon's wrap and a lesson on time zones.

http://web2.0calc.com/questions/end-of-day-wrap

2) Finding the area and the perimeter of a triangle given three coordinates (Thanks Chris and Heureka)

http://web2.0calc.com/questions/how-do-you-find-the-area-and-perimeter-of-a-figure-by-only-using-points#r2

3) An inequality reminder for our Rat Pack.

http://web2.0calc.com/questions/82-8-7x

4) A fantastic presentation from Ninja. You just have to put this in your questions to learn from. Please.

http://web2.0calc.com/questions/5-4-3k-12-3-2-2k-6-136

*5) A great standard deviation answer. (Thanks Honga)

http://web2.0calc.com/questions/what-is-the-standard-deviation-of-1-25-1-1-5-1-25-1

*6) The easy solution is not always the only solution LOL (Thanks Alan)

http://web2.0calc.com/questions/please-i-need-help-find-the-4th-number-in-the-sequence-1-7-0-1-7

*7) I never fail to be surprised at what the Web2 calculator can do. (Thanks Alan)

http://web2.0calc.com/questions/can-you-do-factors-on-this

And that is it for my Thursday. Cheers!

♬ ♬ MELODY ♬ ♬

@@ End of Day Wrap Wed 24/9/14 Sydney, Australia Time 10:05 pm ♬

Hi all,

I am sorry, I have not been on the forum so much over the last 3 days. But I have been on for many hours tonight and have looked at every post and given all the answerers the credit to which they are entitled.

Our wonderful answerers have been Rosala, NinjaDevo, Alan, draagonSlayer554, Heureka, Chilledz3non, Bugzy28871, CPhill, gliu1, AngelicaMarrufo, Coolkille98, Cooltjej98, Trwbox, Reaper, Landry, Red Ranger, Aoanewbie, Red11Blue22 and last but definitely not least Kitty<3. Thank you. You are all wonderful.

I would like to extend a very special thank you to CPhill. Chris, you hold this place together when I am absent, you are at my side when I am here and your descency and fantastic sense of humour gives this forum its life blood. Thank you so much Chris. I really ap