Charlie Parker, musician (1920-1955)

The musical legend, Charlie Parker jr., was born on August 29, 1920 into a difficult family life. Living in Kansas City, Charlie Parker’s father was an alcoholic, and he would constantly fight with his wife (Charlies mother), Addie. Charlie’s father left when he was still just a boy. He would grow up to barley know his own father.

At the age of fifteen, Charlie dropped out of high school to pursue his musical career. The following year, he married his high school sweetheart, Rebecca. It was also in his teenage years that Charlie developed a heroin addiction (Woideck). He lacked consistent employment due to his drug use.

With the Kansas City jazz scene in decline, Charlie Parker made the decision to take his talents to New York City at the age of twenty. The City was thriving at the time Charlie Parker entered the metropolis. World War II, although coming to an end, had brought New York City out of the Great Depression and into economic success. Bolstering the world’s largest manufacturing, financial, and sea export industries, New York had become a prime location. Additionally, most of the giant corporations held their headquarters in the city (New York After WWII). All the business lead to a major increase in discretionary income. Everyone from factory workers to financiers watched as their wallets got fatter.

The growth in discretionary income subsequently lead to an explosion in culture. With more money to spend, people often indulged themselves in the arts. As a result, jazz nightclubs sprout up across Harlem especially on 52nd street. The stage was set for new stars to arise.

The end of the war lead to thousands of U.S soldiers needing to reintegrate into American society. In the battlefield, many of the soldiers reported using amphetamine for its positive effects on morale and fatigue (A Social History of America’s Most Popular Drugs). However, veterans began to abuse the drug back in the U.S. With the new demand, a black market emerged providing illegal forms of amphetamines. Besides war veterans, users extended to many young people as heroin became more available and cheaper.

While in New York, Charlie Parker had trouble finding music gigs, so he resorted to washing dishes at a restaurant for income. Washing dishes one night, he heard a performance by pianist Art Tatum (About Charlie Parker). It is believed Parker picked up on techniques involving “playing out of key” and improvising. Charlie then met guitarist Biddy Fleet who inspired his unique melody that relied on higher cords. In 1940, Charlie had his first recording with Jay McShann’s band. In the following records, He was given the opportunity for solo acts where he gained most of his popularity. While with the band, Charlie gained the nickname “yardbird” for either being free like a bird or hitting a chicken with the tour bus.

In 1945, Charlie Parker finally lead his own group. Working with Dizzy Gillespie on the side, the duo developed a new style of Jazz called Bebop. The new style of jazz was characterized for its more intricate chord progressions, increased rhythm, and variations in key. Also unique to bebop is the opportunity for musicians to improvise. The unconventional style was particularly popular with younger generations looking for a new sound. Often preforming on 52nd street, Charlie Parker quickly became the biggest name in Jazz. His unconventional technique that involved many solos drew massive crowds.

As his popularity grew, unfortunately, so did his heroin addiction. Charlie’s drug addiction lead to his arrest in 1951 in New York. The incident caused him to be barred from preforming at New York City clubs as his cabaret card was made void. After greatly ruing his reputation, Charlie found it seemingly impossible to find work at clubs even when he received his cabaret card back. Extremely melancholy in manner, Parker tried to take his own life twice in the year 1954. Sadly, the next year he died at the age of thirty-four from pneumonia and his long standing drug abuse (Charlie Parker Biography).

In a life cut too short, Charlie Parker was able to make music that would define a generation and a city. In his work “Ornithology”, Charlie Parker shows off his unique Bebop style. Consisting of three solos, the song allows for the audience to appreciate each instrument (trumpet, alto sax, and piano). Charlie parker saw the song as a way of expressing one’s own passion and feelings through the individual acknowledgement. With New York City changing after World War II, the song was a product of changing times. The bepop style was much faster than that of classical music. The popularity of “Ornithology” shows New Yorker’s desire for faster music for dancing.

“Ornithology”

https://files.eportfolios.macaulay.cuny.edu/wp-content/uploads/sites/5736/2016/11/16132410/Charlie-Parker-Septet-Ornithology-take-1.mp3

“Yardbird Suite” was also a famous song by Charlie Parker. The song is most notable for its allowance for improvising. Most artists and songs require strict adherence to the specific beats and notes. Charlie, however, promoted improving with his works. Even when preforming “Yardbird Suite”, Charlie never played the song the same way. He would often change the tempo, notes, and chord progression. The improving caught the attention of artists and listeners alike. Both were attracted to the song’s style, for it allowed performers to add their own personal touch. “Yardbird Suite” gained popularity as people looked for more adequate ways to express themselves.

“Yardbird Suite”

https://files.eportfolios.macaulay.cuny.edu/wp-content/uploads/sites/5736/2016/11/16132410/Charlie-Bird-Parker-Yardbird-Suite.mp3

Charlie Parker also performed and composed “Billies Bounce”. With major influence from blues, the song is a combination of the known blues style with the new bebop influence. The blues were an established type of jazz that was ment to express a feeling of sorrow. Parker uses the twelve bar sequence associated with blues, but added his own twist. By including faster chord progressions and solos in the song, many argue if the song can be classified as blues. Parker was constantly looking to create new sounds never before heard. “Billies Bounce” is a great example of Parker trying to break the conventional ideas about what composes jazz.

“Billies Bounce”

https://files.eportfolios.macaulay.cuny.edu/wp-content/uploads/sites/5736/2016/11/16132409/Billies-BounceCharlie-ParkerThe-Savoy-Recordings.mp3

Parker had completely innovated the entire music industry over the course of his life. One can only imagine where music world would have been if his life was not cut short. Parker’s development of bebop and songs truly embody the changing times surrounding New York City.

Works Cited

“About Charlie Parker.” PBS. PBS, 19 Oct. 2003. Web. 08 Nov. 2016.

“Charlie Parker Biography.” Bio.com. A&E Networks Television, n.d. Web. 08 Nov. 2016.

“New York After WWII.” PBS. PBS, n.d. Web. 08 Nov. 2016.

“A Social History of America’s Most Popular Drugs.” PBS. PBS, n.d. Web. 08 Nov. 2016.