The Charlie Parker Jazz Festival, New York City’s annual salute to the eponymous late saxophonist, will return in its 31st year for a three-day celebration of live jazz in the neighborhoods near where Parker worked and lived, including Harlem’s historic Marcus Garvey Park and Tompkins Square Park in the East Village. Each year, some of the finest jazz musicians in the world are assembled who reflect “the Bird’s” musical individuality and genius, to promote appreciation for this highly influential and world-renowned artist.

Running August 23 to August 25, this year’s lineup will bring together storied, veteran players and the next generation of jazz artists including the Christian McBride Big Band and Wallace Roney Jr in partnership with Jazzmobile; Carmen Lundy, and Helen Sung with Isaiah Collier & the Chosen Few; Louis Hayes, Ekep Nkwelle, and Alexis Lombre with sounds by DJ KulturedChild aka Angelika Beener among others.

2024 CPJF Ancillary Events

Stay tuned!

To celebrate Charlie Parker’s 100th birthday in 2020, we presented an all-day digital Charlie Parker Jazz Festival as a part of our SummerStage Anywhere digital series during the annual Charlie Parker Jazz Festival weekend.

This special program featured a celebration of Charlie Parker’s life and the festival with a visit to Tompkins Square Park; a conversation with Charlie Parker Jazz Festival founder Sam Turvey, jazz performers Jason Moran and Jaleel Shaw and many more; plus archived Charlie Parker Jazz Festival performances.

Visit our YouTube to watch on demand highlights from our digital celebration.

WATCH NOW

Programming includes:

Past Charlie Parker Jazz Festival (CPJF) Recaps

SummerStage Anywhere Culture Talk with CPJF founder Sam Turvey, Jerome Jennings and Executive Artistic Director Erika Elliott

2018 CPJF – Unheard Project interview with Executive Artistic Director, Erika Elliot spoke with Immanuel Wilkins, Ross, Artistic Director of The Jazz Gallery Rio Sakairi, and jazz promoter George Wein

SummerStage Anywhere Culture Talk with Sheila Jordan / Christian McBride

SummerStage Studio: Digital Tap class with Ayodele Casel

Charlie Parker At 100: A Celebration of Parker’s Birthday and the Charlie Parker Jazz Festival

and more!

Generous private support for the Charlie Parker Jazz Festival is provided by The Thompson Family Foundation, The Charles and Lucille King Family Foundation, The Shubert Organization, J.E. & Z.B. Butler Foundation, and the NYU Community Fund. This program is supported, in part, by public funds from the New York City Department of Cultural Affairs in partnership with the City Council; the New York State Council on the Arts with the support of the Office of the Governor and the New York State Legislature; the National Endowment for the Arts; Public support is also provided by NYC Council under the leadership of Speaker Adrienne Adams, with special thanks to Council Member Carlina Rivera. Capital One is the title sponsor of Capital One City Parks Foundation SummerStage. Supporting Sponsor Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center.