In Vicky Donor, writer Juhi Chaturvedi presented a vivid, lively portrait of life in Delhi’s Lajpat Nagar, and in Piku it was her fondness for Kolkata that came through in her writing. In her latest collaboration with director Shoojit Sircar, she takes viewers to Lucknow, the city she was born and raised in. “It has hugely contributed to my thinking, my ideology and the way I have been shaped as a human being,” says Chaturvedi, who studied at Mount Carmel and Loreto Convent in the city and did her graduation from the College of Arts and Craft.

While Gulabo Sitabo, starring Amitabh Bachchan and Ayushmann Khurrana, is set in the older parts of Lucknow, Hazratganj and Chowk, Chaturvedi grew up in Mahanagar. At the time it was seen as the deserted outpost of Lucknow. “Nobody would come because it was scary and dark,” she says. But, as Chaturvedi notes, it is almost impossible to live an isolated life in Lucknow. To eat good food, one had to go to Chowk; to shop, Aminabad was the place to be. And, in her case, going to college meant going to the other side of Gomti, to Hasanganj. “The criss-cross of people going from one end to another is not unnatural,” says Chaturvedi.

advertisement

Capturing the colloquial flavour of a place or a locality is an integral part of Chaturvedi’s works. “I had a ball writing the dialogues for Gulabo Sitabo,” she says. “The language used in the movie is not something I would speak at home, but you heard it from University ke launde and it stuck.”

In the satire, the two central characters live in a dilapidated mansion, Fatima Mahal, and are always at odds with each other. One is the greedy and stingy landlord Mirza (Bachchan), and the other is his crooked and stubborn tenant Baankey (Khurrana). The film’s title is drawn from the over century-old folk puppetry tradition in Lucknow which tells the story of a rivalry between two women sharing a husband. Chaturvedi admits she didn’t know of the tradition but knew of ‘Gulabo Sitabo’ as an expression. Her aunt would use it often to describe her childhood showdowns with her cousin. It was Sircar who came to know about the storytelling format and decided to use it as a metaphor for the relationship between Mirza and Baankey. Chaturvedi agreed. “It’s witty and culturally in sync with the film,” she says. Much like the two women, the men thrive on their war of words, their disdain for each other only enlivening the proceedings.

Spaces, too, matter to Chaturvedi. In Gulabo Sitabo, the haveli itself is a significant character. “The geography of the place plays a role in the choreography of the film,” she says. The feelings that the characters have towards the spaces they occupy is essential to the narrative. The house is a safe place for Chaturvedi, and the lockdown, she adds, reaffirms the “protection” it offers. “To live a slightly better life, the house plays a very important role. That feeling of ghar to mera hai ye (this is my house). Mirza and Baankey may be characters with questionable morals, but they still have that attachment for whatever reasons,” she says. Chaturvedi had explored this idea of home before in Piku, in which Bashkor (Bachchan) and Piku (Deepika Padukone) travel to Kolkata to visit Bashkor’s childhood home, Champakunj. The ancestral property is named after Chaturvedi’s childhood home in Lucknow. “Sadly it was sold off for the exact reason as in Piku—who would maintain it and manage the tenants?” she says. “It’s a practical conversation we hear about ancestral houses.” While Chaturvedi couldn’t stop its sale in real life, the Champakunj on screen is preserved giving Chaturvedi the closure she needed. “Somewhere it is documented that it was not sold,” she adds.

Chaturvedi’s undying love for her home city also has to do with its diverse and harmonious socio-cultural fabric. That Mirza is from the minority community and Baankey from the majority is inconsequential to the narrative, but it subtly demonstrates the world she lived in, one which “was very seamless” with “no boundaries”. By normalising it, Chaturvedi makes a case for how “we have always lived together”. She says: “Lucknow aisa hi hai and it will continue to be like this only. Is hi ko Ganga Jamuni sabhyata kehte hai.”