The original J'accuse! (1919) is one of the most significant movies about World War 1. Here in 1938 Abel Gance tries to reignite his silent classic for the days of sound. It's not the cinematic revolution that the 1919 version was. The story feels diffused and the editing clumsy adding a lot of silent film from the original along with newly shot footage. Feels like anarchy on screen..... but that's why this version serves a very different purpose then it's silent companion. This time one can hear the anti-war cries.

Keep in mind that the original J'accuse! came out right after World War 1. It expressed the feelings felt during aftermath of the Great War. Here it's 1938 and everyone…

Abel Gance re-makes/re-visits his 1919 masterpiece, but the train has most definitely left the station.

The visual innovation that marked Gance's silent classics is, in the sound era, replaced by a reliance on the artistic lighting of theatrically posed actors: lovely but dull. Stripped of its imagistic dynamism, Gance's filmmaking becomes old-fashioned, made up of dull frontal compositions, an overemphasis on title cards and filmed letters, and florid silent-era emoting. Even worse is this film's use of actual material from the original picture, insuring that it would never amount to much more than a footnote. The splicing together of 1938 footage with moving images shot nearly twenty years earlier creates visual nonsense. Even its famous final 15 minutes — an…

Hooptober 5.0 - 14/33

This movie has exactly one thing to say, and it says it really well over the course of at least four different genres of movie. It takes you through a war film, a melodrama, a mad scientist film (one that doesn't even pretend to contain any science), and a horror film, hammering the same message home each time. Twenty years pass in a single, beautiful cut, and they don't even bother aging any of the actors, because their ages don't matter- only the years do. The main character basically becomes a vegetable for a few scenes so the plot can move forward without him. He's apart from it. The plot exists to bring this man from…

"I am a machine made for killing, not for talking."

From the opening credits, set to a booming march and made to look like they're carved into an impossibly tall statue, it's clear that J'Accuse is going to be a proclamatory, melodramatic picture. Melodrama has a bad reputation, but it has its place. This film is occupied, even obsessed, with the slaughter of millions brought about by modern warfare. It's a subject that deserves sensational, overwrought emotions and nothing less.

Victor Francen is stunning as the lead character, a man bearing the weight of his fallen comrades. He is a man of singular conviction, casting aside his own happiness in a decades long effort to prevent future wars. At several…

If the original version had a general tone of anger and frustration, this one has a certain somber sadness and desperation. Gance, who lived through both World Wars, also had the opportunity to make movies before and after both of them

This is sort of a remake, sort of a reboot (idk), in which most of the story beats of the original are played out again but it's updated to now be about the impending WW2. Jean Diaz goes through WW1 and has basically the same character arc but it all happens 20 years after he came back and not immediately after as in the original

So yeah this movie is kinda awesome. The 1919 version is a classic for…

This 1938 film isn't so much a remake of Abel Gance's 1919 film (as it is often misrepresented as being) but is largely a sequel; J'accuse again or I still accuse. The 1919 J'accuse is one of the few great masterpieces of silent cinema that I have never seen, seemingly a powerful work of art, one of the greatest anti war films of all time and the film that cemented Gance's reputation enabling him to make such immense and remarkable works as La Roue and of course Napoleon.

The passion is present in the 1938 J'accuse, but the movie itself is totally bonkers. Where the original film is metaphor the remake is literal creating what is essentially one of the…

Olive Blu-ray

As a thematic message this French language remake of the original silent J'accuse (also directed by Abel Gance) is extremely powerful. Especially considering WWII and Nazis were happening. But much like A Christmas Carol the rich and powerful will only ever change their ways when supernaturally forced to.

As an idea it doesn't get much more powerful than this, and I often drift more towards anti-war messages in The Great Dictator, Paths of Glory, Battleship Potemkin, Shoah, etc, than revel in the rah rah propaganda of so many war/effects of war films. As a film though the 1938 version is rather clumsy, parts of it are directed very well, mashing up war film and romance and direct to…

The triangle drama I didn't care much for, it doesn't do anything for the picture other than add a curiosity of junk. The delusion in Gance's ability to affect the masses makes this more interesting in it's potboiler, the turn to horror elements is kind of nice and places it out of place, even if he already did this. It's unhip, Gance himself was more of a fossil much faster than others, the New Wavers would make sure of that later.

Jean Diaz, near the end of WW1, survives two suicide patrols and comes home with a self-loathing survivor guilt combined with a savior fantasy-- this escalates as he tries to develop a glass armor he thinks will end all…