Heavy on the action, light on the acting, with a side of ketchup.

Hardcore Henry attempts to fully immerse the viewer with a first person camera for it’s entire run time. While it might not fully succeed, it serves as in an interesting take at the action genre.

Perhaps the slowest part in this film is the initial 5 minutes, where the film is establishing itself. Quickly you’re swept into this nonstop action sequence/plot.

The film could have benefited from some further plot development and character building. Hardcore Henry is purely based on action, relying on a goal to move the story – saving your wive.

Without any real emotional development/bonding with your wife shown, the story feels slightly lackluster.

First person video game?

The film does get credit for being able to bring the viewer into the some of the scenes. Initially I was wondering where Henry would go or what he would do in the film.

The further the film progressed, the more I was thinking as if I was playing a video game. At moments I would think to myself I need to grab this item, or, oh I should go left here, etc… Sometimes I was able to predict which direction Henry would go, but not too often.

If the film gave certain “choices”, it would immerse the viewer more. Should I grab this gun or this knife while this soldier runs at me from around the corner?

The plot thickens?

Granted the plot isn’t very developed in this film. There is one mission and you must progress forward. There is no history of your former life or relationships given to you. You awaken with no recollection of who you are, quickly swept into this mission to rescue your wife.

There is a real lack of emotional development to the characters/story which would have been beneficial. This in turn leads to a loss in interest in the film. There are some twists in the plot you don’t see coming.

As the movie goes along you can’t help but feel like you’re the person in the film, doing all these insane stunts.

Some appropriate quote:

Two parts FPS, one part platformer and a pinch of HowToBasic, director Ilya Naishuller’s Hardcore Henry is a recipe for non-stop, ludicrous fun. While the film’s actual story is nigh existent [sic], it’s sure to please gamers and action junkies alike with its inventive set pieces and mind-boggling action” and “Hardcore Henry lives up to the title with non-stop, off-the-wall action and a love for all things video games.

~Max Nicholson of IGN

Overall, if you have the time to spare, Hardcore Henry is mildly entertaining watch for a chill afternoon.

WRITTEN BY: GREENMTMAN

SOURCES

FEATURED IMAGE: http://mspoweruser.com/wp-content/uploads/2016/07/hardcorehenry_quad50-lores-1200×900.jpg

Trailer: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=96EChBYVFhU

Jump Fight: https://giphy.com/gifs/films2015-Nc1iJaswKqt68

Quote: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hardcore_Henry