Al Murray with his alter-ego, The Pub Landlord, is one of the most recognisable and successful comics in the UK. For over 20 years Al has filled arenas around the world, won numerous awards and accolades and has successfully hosted and an array of TV series which include Al Murray’s Happy Hour (ITV) and the ground breaking sitcom Time Gentlemen Please (Sky One) which has become something of a modern day cult classic.

Al’s other live TV appearances as The Pub Landlord includes three appearances on The Royal Variety Performance (ITV1) hosting Live at the Apollo (BBC1) and Live at the Palladium (ITV) to name just a few.

Swapping his comedy stage persona the Pub Landlord for himself, Al is the host of 7 Day Saturday, a topical look at the week for BBC Radio 5. He has combined his passion for film and history and filmed two specials for BBC 4; Al Murray’s Great British War Movies and Al Murray’s Great British Spy Movies. He has also hosted Al Murray’s German Adventure (BBC Four), an historical series about the art and culture of Germany (without mentioning the War) and guest edited the New Year’s Day episode of The Today Programme on BBC Radio 4. Al also presented Al Murray’s Road to Berlin, a moving 10-part documentary made for The Discovery Channel, where Al retraces every fateful step from breaking out at the Normandy beaches on D-Day to the discovery of the Nazi Death Camps whilst interviewing survivors from the War along the way.

As a writer Al has enjoyed great success with his books Book of British Common Sense, and Think Yourself British. These were followed with his ultimate pub quiz book Great British Pub Quiz Book. Watching War Films With My Dad, released in 2013 once again allowed Al the chance to combine his love for storytelling and military history, with a unique look on his childhood where his fascination with history and all things war began.

Al continues to sell-out stand-up national and international tours, which has made him one of the most popular live comedy acts in the country. His latest stand-up tour One Man, One Guvnor, has been extended into 2015. He won the Perrier Award (after a record four successive nominations) and secured Olivier Award nominations for both of his celebrated sell-out West End runs. Internationally, Al has forged an enviable reputation with numerous sell-out runs in Melbourne, Sydney, Montreal and New Zealand.

Most recently, he has taken on the leadership of the Free United Kingdom Party (FUKP) announcing his candidacy to stand for election at the general election for the hotly contested Kent constituency of South Thanet. He also released his 5th book Let’s Re-Great Britain, a 13-point

‘#commonsense action plan’ which pledges that the UK will leave Europe by 2025 and the edge of the Solar System by 2050.