Al Murray has Covid. The familiar face that appears over Zoom is doing its best to be chipper, but bears the pale aspect of a man who would probably rather be in bed.

While the illness has spared a journalist a trip to Milton Keynes, it has also thwarted The Crown Jewels, the comic play about an attempt to steal the actual Crown Jewels, in which Murray stars as Charles II, his first straight acting role. The show was in its final week, but his catching the virus meant cancelling the last few performances.

“I have done gigs feeling far worse than I do today,” he says apologetically, from an office at his home in Chiswick, where behind his head an array of guitars is visible. “But because it’s a company of players, it completely changes the complexion of things.

“It’s our last week, so the play’s come to this unhappy stuttering end. I’m annoyed that I caught it. But we’re yelling and spitting all over each other, so Covid is easily caught.”

The role meant Murray, 55, got to hang out with an enviable ensemble, including Mel Giedroyc, Carrie Hope Fletcher and Neil Morrissey. “I’ve always been all surface – as long as the audience is laughing, I don’t care,” Murray says. “So it has been amazing to see how they figure the parts out and piece them together.”

Murray’s bow was crowded before he added this latest string to it: comedian, author, drummer (he plays in a band, The Fat Cops, with former Telegraph comment editor Chris Deerin on vocals), tank enthusiast, podcaster, one-time political candidate and, increasingly, respected historian.

We’re speaking because he has filmed a new documentary series, Al Murray: Why Does Everyone Hate the British Empire? – a set of four films for Sky History in which he visits India, South Africa, Australia and Jamaica to explore the legacy of British rule. He deploys his beloved character The Pub Landlord to excellent effect, using him to frame the debate in crude and comic terms before Al Murray steps in to address the situation with more nuance.

In each episode he teams up with a local comedian from the country he is visiting. They provide a comic foil as well as a deft way around the issue of him being another posh white bloke turning up in a country they once oppressed. In India, for example, he steps off a boat and is greeted by the comedian Anuvab Pal.

“It’s just like the British would have arrived, and met a man like me, right on the docks, a small treacherous middleman,” he jokes.

Murray knows that Empire is a subject likely to provoke strong opinion. “I know when this programme comes out, my timeline will be half full of people saying you were too soft on the Empire and the other half saying why do you hate our country,” he says. “I know that’s what I’m in for, but I don’t care. Comedians are supposed to talk about difficult things.”

Those expecting polemic will be disappointed. While Murray raises difficult issues, not least the question of reparations to the descendants of slaves in Jamaica, he doesn’t come down on one side or the other. “Reparations are an interesting notion,” he says. “How you place a value on what happened I don’t know – that might be ultimately the stumbling point with it – what would be enough?

“As with so much of it, I come away agreeing with the last person I spoke to.”

All the same, he says he is glad to have taken on a subject that many would give a wide berth. “I hate all the debate around comedy,” he says. “Nobody bothers to ask comedians what they think. They don’t go to clubs and see what’s actually going on. We keep being told to be edgy or talk about difficult subjects. Then when you do, you get told to shut up. You can’t have both.

“Edgy doesn’t just mean jokes that might upset someone else. I want the word scored from the record because it’s become meaningless. Every comedian on the planet has their own ‘edge’. Michael McIntyre’s is different to Jimmy Carr’s, which is different to Tim Vine’s. If it’s cancellable you’re meant to talk about it, but you’ve got to say the right thing. I don’t know if we say the right thing or the wrong thing. I’m a fan of poking around and allowing people to draw their own conclusions.”

Plenty of entertainers have found new lives as presenters of one form or another, but most lack Murray’s genuine interest and depth of knowledge. When he broke through in the 1990s as The Pub Landlord, he looked like a classic character comedian. Born in 1968, Murray grew up in Buckinghamshire and went to Bedford School before going on to study History at Oxford. He has said he had a miserable time at boarding school, but that it taught him emotional resilience.

He came up through the Oxford Revue, performing with Stewart Lee, among others, before honing his signature act in London clubs. Murray had loved history, especially the Second World War, since he was a boy, taught by his father, who had served in the Royal Engineers. Egg-bald, red-jacketed and endlessly waving a pint around, The Pub Landlord articulated the kinds of no-nonsense reactionary views that seemed laughably out-of-date in the centre-Left Cool Britannia of the 90s.

Like another great comic creation of the Blair years, Steve Coogan’s Alan Partridge, The Pub Landlord is a man adrift – he is sure he is correct, but he lives in a world that thinks he is ridiculous. What gives him his edge is that some of what the Pub Landlord says sounds perfectly reasonable – exactly how much depends on your own views. His gift is to leave the audience ever so slightly unsure what they are laughing at.

What looked old-fashioned proved prescient, as the rise of Ukip and then Brexit proved that plenty of Pub Landlord-adjacent views were alive and well, a trend that culminated in Murray standing against Nigel Farage in Thanet in the 2015 general election, winning 318 votes.

“Oh my prophetic soul,” Murray laughs. “I ran on the idea that what the people needed was a man waving a pint around solving Britain’s problems, and that was exactly Farage’s shtick.

“I went through quite a stretch when people asked why I was still doing the character, because it wasn’t relevant and the ship had sailed. And I always thought: ‘Do you have any idea how powerful the feeling about the EU is in people’s imaginations, and how this is bubbling under and how there’s lots of things coming together all at once?’ And here we are. I’m eternally grateful to events for making me relevant.”

While The Pub Landlord has ticked along, continuing to sell out large tours around the UK – there was one last year and there will be another next year – Murray, quieter and hairier, has built a reputation as a historian. He had published books as the Pub Landlord, and then a memoir, Watching War Films With My Dad.

Then last year came Command: How the Allies Learned to Win the Second World War, a well-reviewed collection of pen portraits of wartime leaders. The Empire programmes are themselves the latest in a kind of series, following 2021’s Why Do the Brits Win Every War?

If his work life has branched out, he is busy at home, too. Murray is in the unusual position of having a five-year-old child (with his partner, the journalist Eleanor Relf), almost the same age as a grandchild. He has two grown-up daughters from an earlier relationship, Scarlett and Willow, the former of whom had a child when she was at university. Initially upset about the situation, Murray says he is now enjoying it. “It’s a delightful plot twist,” he says. “It’s brilliant, awesome, fantastic. We’re a big happy family.”

Away from family and his multi-pronged career, he is a keen supporter of causes close to his heart. In 2021, Murray’s nephew, Finley, died at the age of eight of a rare type of leukaemia. Since then, Murray has encouraged his fans to donate stem cells and support Finley’s Touch, a charity that helps parents going through something similar.

If his Empire series does attract comment, it will be nothing compared to what he endured when he dipped his finger in politics. “That was gloriously mad,” he says, thinking back to 2015. “I was told that my grandfather, who was in the Foreign Office and died when I was 14, had made sure that the comedy circuit would give me work. Then there was the conspiracy theory that I was David Cameron’s cousin, which was cited as a serious reason why I ran, rather than the obvious reason: a comedian wants to take the piss. It’s the oldest and most honourable reason of all.”

Beyond that, there is a tour to write. You imagine the Pub Landlord will have some fun with the upcoming general election. Murray says the Tories “need a lie down, at least. [The past few years] have been a fever dream. A big part of the problem is a load of them have got what they wanted, and there’s nothing worse.

“I used to envy Boris Johnson’s ability to lie,” he adds. “I wish I had that sheer brass neck. Maybe that was part of his popularity. People would see him and think it would be brilliant to do that. Obviously it leaves a trail of destruction, but wouldn’t it be amazing to have a day lying like that and it wouldn’t bother you?”

He claims not to have watched the conferences, but was struck by something the Labour leader said. “Keir Starmer said: ‘I want politics to go away.’ I think he speaks for England. People are fed up with it. The minute it goes away, I won’t be talking about it.”

Al Murray: Why Does Everyone Hate the British Empire? airs 23 October at 9.00pm on Sky History