Viewbank College is a vibrant and highly successful Year 7 to 12 co-educational college situated in the NW Metro Region. Viewbank College aims to provide quality educational opportunities that fully develop the potential of all its students. The learning growth of each child is a priority. The commitment is to ensure a caring environment in which every child has the sense of being in a ‘small inclusive school’, where there is a strong sense of belonging. Students are encouraged to be curious, adaptable, resilient and ethical members of the community.

The college utilises the Performing Arts Centre and enjoys space for dedicated music, drama, design technology, science and mathematics teaching spaces. The STEAM Precinct, the science/mathematics facilities, the art/design wing and the Maker-Space have enhanced our programs and curriculum offerings, including VCE Systems and Engineering.

The college motto, ‘Caring for Excellence’ drives all facets of college life. The college pledge reads, ‘At Viewbank College, we are committed to building respectful relationships every day. We pledge to continue to build a respectful environment that is inclusive, positive, safe and caring, promotes empowerment and strives for equity. We will honour the diversity of everyone within our community and embrace every background, experience, gender, sexuality, ability, age, culture and religion’. The Pledge reflects not only our college values, but also reinforces our commitment to Child Safe Standards compliance and provision of a child safe environment.

The college is noted for being at the forefront of educational innovation. The development of curriculum with a focus on the use of data to inform teaching and learning, embedding differentiation and inquiry-based learning, and ensuring teaching and learning experiences engage and stretch students no matter their starting point are examples of this.

Alternative pathway options to enable greater flexibility to cater for individual needs are a strength of the college. Students have access to external VET provision and a quality delivery of Vocational Pathways, which enables students to access quality tertiary placements.

The provision of well-resourced, quality ICT is also a priority. The college use of an extensive 1:1 laptop program complements the teaching and learning program.