Viewbank College is accredited under the Department of Education’s CRICOS registration (CRICOS provider name and code: Department of Education, 00861K). For more information, see: www.study.vic.gov.au

Virtual School Familiarisation Tour – Viewbank College

DET International Student Program promotional video filmed at Viewbank College and featuring ex International Student Bill Yuan (Yr 12 – 2022)

Viewbank College is committed to providing an environment where international students are safe and feel safe, and their voices are heard about decisions that affect their lives. Particular attention will be paid to the safety of international students from culturally or linguistically diverse backgrounds.

维克班中学国际留学生项目手册（中文简体）(Mandarin)

維克班中學國際留學生項目手冊 (中文繁體) (Cantonese)

Viewbank College International Student Program Brochure (English)

TRƯỜNG TRUNG HỌC VIEWBANK Chương trình Học sinh Quốc tếTiếng Việt）(Vietnamese)

วิทยาลัย VIEWBANK หลักสูตรนักเรียนนานาชาติ （แบบไทย）(Thai)

Studying in Victoria

Victorian government schools are a destination of choice for international students. Our schools provide international students with a high-quality education, excellent English language tuition, caring welfare support services, secure homestay, and pathways to higher education. To learn more about studying and living in Victoria as an international student, see: www.study.vic.gov.au

About our School

Viewbank College is a co-educational government secondary college approximately 17 kilometres from the Melbourne city centre. Located close to a range of native flora and fauna reserves with attractive school grounds, the college is close to Latrobe University, shopping centres, banking, medical and entertainment amenities. The school is serviced by regular train lines and bus routes with easy access to Melbourne.

Our College has excellent facilities including home rooms for Year 7 classes, state of the art ICT network and quality support for the 1:1 laptop program. Viewbank College has recently completed a major building project – a flexible performing arts centre which has both music and drama facilities for classroom teaching, as well as new mathematics classrooms and a total new fit-out of the mathematics/science area and the arts area which encompasses a “maker’s space” for our STEAM program. Viewbank also has outstanding facilities, including the Banyule Theatre and an impressive oval, basketball courts and soccer field, which enhance the opportunities for students to perform at their best.

Viewbank College welcomes Years 7-12 international students from across the world. At our College, we are proud of our International Student Program. Our international students contribute a great deal to the multicultural diversity we enjoy. In recent years we have hosted international students from China, Vietnam, Thailand, Singapore, Japan, South Korea, India, and South America. Families select our College for its academic standards and its reputation.

Viewbank College has a number of extra-curricular activities that assist international students to fit into a different culture and education system, as well as building up supportive relationships with both teachers and students.

To learn more about the types of subjects and supports available for international students, see: Viewbank College

To chat with our school ambassadors, see: chat with the international student coordinator Summer Guo

How to apply

Most international students must apply to the Department of Education in order to study in a Victorian government school. To learn about the application types and to apply, see: How to apply

We do have a small Homestay Program, but students under 15 years of age will only be considered if they live with a parent or a DHA approved relative.

Please note: A telephone or video interview may be conducted by our International Student Coordinator upon receiving the application.

Classes for International Students at Viewbank College are conducted face to face, unless circumstances beyond our control require online learning. Year 10 students participate in Work Experience for one week during Term 2. All students complete online workplace training instruction to assist them with workplace health and safety. Their placement is closely supervised, and staff visit their work placement to check their progress.

English Language Support

Prior to entering mainstream classes, students, where required, can study an Intensive English Language course at an English Language centre located 4 kilometres from Viewbank College.

Years 7-9

Our International Students join mainstream classes for all their studies. We have found this the best way to help them quickly improve their English and to become part of the Viewbank College community. However, students receive an additional 3 lessons per week of EAL (English as an Additional Language), where they work in small groups. Here they can work on developing their language skills and they can be assisted with classwork.

Year 7 & 8 Handbook

Year 9 Handbook

Years 10-12

From 2021, there are separate EAL English classes at Years 10, 11 and 12. In these small classes, senior students are able to develop their English language skills to a higher level.

There are also homework sessions run by teachers after school. Students can attend these sessions for help with their work in English, Humanities, Maths and Science subjects.

Senior School Handbook

Other Language Studies

We offer Japanese and German at Viewbank College, but students have the opportunity to study their first language as part of their VCE course. They can choose to enrol at the Victorian School of Languages (VSL) – www.vsl.vic.edu.au

Or we may approve study with a registered third-party provider. These classes are held outside of normal school hours.

Assessment & Reports

All International students will receive an Interim report, a Mid-year report and an End of year report. Student/Parent/Teacher conferences are held twice a year over two days, to allow parents and guardians of students to attend interviews in person with teachers. Interviews can be booked online via Compass. Assessment methods are outlined in the school handbook for all year levels.

Special Programs to note:

Access to a range of STEAM programs

Extension opportunities in Mathematics and Science

Extensive instrumental music program

ICT and media studies

Japanese and German languages

Strong English as an Additional Language support Program

Homework clubs in Mathematics/Science and English/Humanities

Student leadership program

Pastoral care and student counselling support

College Nurse

Work Experience Program

Well-developed Respectful Relationships Program

Extracurricular activities include:

Musical instrument tuition and performance

College production and drama performances

Sporting Program

Debating and public speaking

Varied Lunchtime Activities program

G’Day USA overseas trip

Sister school exchange trips to Germany and Japan

Pre Departure

All students and families are provided with a number of essential documents which outline the school policies, cost of books and uniforms, and information about living in Australia prior to arrival in Australia. It also allows communication to take place between the student and the International Student Coordinator prior to departure.

To learn more about important information before you arrive, read the Pre-departure and Homestay guide available in English, Chinese, Japanese, Korean and Khmer.

Airport Pickup

All students who require airport pickup will be met by a staff member from the International Student Program and taken to their homestay.

Orientation Program

We have an orientation session for all students as soon as they arrive. We will provide them with a package including guidelines and school rules, procedures, etc. Details about Australia, its customs and culture, the local area, and the school community are also incorporated.

Homestay Accommodation

We have a number of families offering homestay to students who have applied to come here without family. Generally, we would expect students to remain in homestay until the end of their course at Viewbank College. Homestay providers are selected carefully and go through an application process. All homestays are monitored closely and visited regularly by the International Student Coordinator and International Student Coordinator Assistant. A Homestay Responsibility Agreement is signed by both the homestay provider and the student to ensure each party is fulfilling their responsibilities. We have strict homestay regulations to ensure the safety of the students.

Families who might be interested in providing homestay for a student can email the International Student Coordinator, Summer Guo or the Assistant Keah Mizzi.

To learn more about staying with a homestay family in a Victorian government school, see:

Homestays

Homestay Provider Policy Information

Homestay Provider Enquiry Form

Some Useful Links

Living in Australia – Cultural Information

Complaints and Appeals Procedures

Cost of Living –www.study.vic.gov.au – (Cost of living tab)

Emergency and Healthcare Services: – www.study.vic.gov.au/en/living-in-victoria/health-and-safety/Pages/default.aspx (tabs for Safety Health and Emergencies)

Information about Melbourne – http://whatson.melbourne.vic.gov.au

Locality – Services Information: www.banyule.vic.gov.au – translations available

Public Transport – www.viewbank.vic.edu.au (enrolment tab/transport)

Wellbeing: www.viewbank.vic.edu.au ( student learning tab/wellbeing resources)

Student Health and Support Line available 24/7: Telephone : 1800 887 283 with interpreters

Information relating to Viewbank College: