A day after ending his least productive season since breaking into the NBA a decade ago, Nazr Mohammed made it clear he didn't want to spend another year on the Bobcats' bench.

"I want to play. If that can't be facilitated, I don't want to be back," he said in April.

Less than six months later, Mohammed and his big contract are still in Charlotte. And because of new center Tyson Chandler's ankle injury, Mohammed is temporarily a starter.

"After going through what I went through last year, it's definitely humbling," Mohammed said at training camp. "You go from a guy who wanted to start to a guy who's just happy to get on the court for preseason games. I'm just going to try to make the best out of it, go out there and help the team and show people I can still play."

He'll also try to prove again to coach Larry Brown — who has already traded him once — that he deserves to be a part of the rotation.

Brown was coaching Philadelphia in 1998 when the 76ers acquired the Kentucky player shortly after he was drafted in the first round by Utah. But the 6-foot-10 Mohammed played sparingly in parts of three seasons before the Sixers dealt him to Atlanta.

He then bounced around the league and was mostly productive, averaging 7.1 points and 6.7 rebounds in the playoffs for NBA champion San Antonio in 2005. He later started in Detroit before being traded to Charlotte in December 2007.

Then-coach Sam Vincent made Mohammed a part-time starter and he averaged 9.3 points and 6.9 rebounds for the rest of the 2007-08 season. But when Brown took over before last season, Mohammed became benchwarmer.

He played in only 39 games and averaged 2.7 points and 2 rebounds. The Bobcats even traded for another backup center, DeSagana Diop.

Brown acknowledged they tried to trade Mohammed. But his contract — he has two years and about $13.4 million still due — meant no takers.

"It's amazing no matter what you've done in the past, when you don't play people think you can't play anymore or you've quit," Mohammed said. "That's not something I want people to ever think of me. All I know is you go in and work."

So Mohammed spent the offseason doing a different training regimen. He ditched the bench pressing and curls, which he said "has no purpose on the basketball court" and worked with a track coach at the University of Louisville.

"All I know is when things don't go the way you want them, you work harder, you change something," Mohammed said.

With Chandler sitting out at least until the fifth exhibition game as he recovers from offseason ankle surgery, Mohammed has been working with the starters. A month after turning 32, Mohammed still thinks he can contribute 15 to 25 minutes a game.

"He's in much better shape," Brown said. "I think he's much further along than last year."

But Brown is far from guaranteeing him minutes, even if he did acknowledge that he didn't give Mohammed a chance last season.

"He said it to me privately and I was surprised he said it to you guys, that he wasn't really fair with me last year," Mohammed said. "I respect that. He didn't have to say that. That says a lot about him."

But Mohammed knows he'll need to produce in the exhibition season to win over the demanding Brown. The Bobcats open Tuesday in Cleveland.

"Teams are going to do what's best for the team," Mohammed said. "Hopefully it works out for the player, too."