Steve Bisley is an Australian film and television actor, who attended the National Institute of Dramatic Art (NIDA).

Previous experience

Television:Bisley's major television roles have included A Town Like Alice as well as the Australian police dramas Water Rats, Police Rescue, and Halifax f.p. He had a role in the Australian television medical drama series The Flying Doctors. He also had a regular appearance in the third and final season of the critically acclaimed Australian satirical television series Frontline. He Played Joe Byrne in The Last Outlaw TV mini series. Bisley also played Dr Henry King in the ABC-TV series G.P.

In his youth and continuing to present day he has been close friends with actor Mel Gibson, with whom he attended NIDA and starred in the movies Summer City and Mad Max. The latter role is his best-known performance, in which he played Jim Goose, the best friend and partner to Gibson's character. The Mad Max trilogy has since became a cult classic, and was the film that launched Gibson to mainstream stardom.

Bisley is also a well-known stage actor, appearing in drama productions. His stage roles include that of Banjo Paterson in the musical theatre production of The Man from Snowy River.

In July 2003, he presented a season of television documentaries on the National Geographic Channel. In 2004 he guest starred in the Australian TV drama Stingers.

Steve Bisley appeared in the first three seasons of the Australian TV drama Sea Patrol as Commander Steve Marshall.

When speaking of himself, Steve Bisley often reflects on the words of Shakespeare 'All the world is a stage and one man in his life plays many parts'. Steve will share with you the process through love, laughter, joy, passion and sometimes tears. He will show you how to connect more effectively with those around you, but more importantly, he says, you might discover a little about yourself. He is an inspirational speaker and a polished master of ceremonies, entertaining and very moving.