PROVO, Utah — The Jewish populations in the United States and Israel are about equal at 5.2 million and 5.3 million respectively, while the U.S. population of Muslims is tiny by comparison, Victor L. Ludlow, a Brigham Young University professor of ancient scriptures said during Campus Education Week.Members of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints are more like the Jews than they are like members of any of the other world religions, he said. In the United States neither group fits in the fabric of society.However, at 13. 5 million the LDS Church now outnumbers the Jewish population of 13.2 million.In contrast, the largest population of Muslims is in Indonesia, followed by India, Pakistan and Bangladesh, Ludlow said. The smallest population is in the United States.The Book of Mormon prophesies of the conversion of the Jews to Christ, and when that happens the Lord will gather them. However, in 1830 when the book was published the Jewish attitude toward Christianity was extremely negative, he said.Ludlow outlined the steps of conversion, which are to first change attitudes, then change knowledge and, finally, change belief.Since 1830 the attitude of the Jews toward Christians in most areas has softened. They are learning about Christianity, often from their rabbis. But the third step, to change beliefs, has not yet occurred, he said.Since 1830 the U.S. population of Jews has grown from 20,000 to 5.3 million.Their knowledge about Christianity has also increased."The Lord has done his part," Ludlow said, noting that the gathering has begun. "This is the pattern to look for" not with just the Jews, but also the Muslims, he said.It's important to let the Muslims know that LDS people are not the kind of Christians they understand and have experienced generally, he said. The challenge is to overcome stereotypes and misunderstandings. Fostering cooperation entails recognizing the change in attitude and understanding the change in knowledge."Compare your best with their best and not your best with their worst," he said.Building bridges also includes an appreciation for the things they hold sacred, Ludlow said.

E-mail: rodger@desnews.com