Goodfellas

Theatrical Poster

Country United States Directed by Martin Scorsese Release Date 1990 Language English

Italian Studio Warner Bros. Distributor Warner Bros.

Main Cast Character Actor James Conway Robert De Niro Henry Hill Ray Liotta Karen Hill Lorraine Bracco Tommy DeVito Joe Pesci Paul Cicero Paul Sorvino Frankie Carbone Frank Sivero Sonny Bunz Tony Darrow Frenchy Mike Starr Billy Batts Frank Vincent

Goodfellas is the 1990 feature film adaptation of the autobiography of mobster Henry Hill. Directed by Martin Scorsese, the film stars Ray Liotta as Hill and follows his life in the mob from a young teenager to his eventual apprehension and subsequent entrance into the federal witness protection program. The cast includes Robert De Niro, Paul Sorvino, Lorraine Bracco, Michael Imperioli, Samuel L. Jackson, and Joe Pesci, who won an Academy Award for his role as Tommy in the film.

The following weapons were used in the film Goodfellas:

WARNING! THIS PAGE CONTAINS SPOILERS!

Revolvers

Smith & Wesson Model 36 Snub

At the film's beginning, Jimmy Conway (Robert De Niro) is seen using a Smith & Wesson Model 36 to fire into the trunk of a car. Henry Hill (Ray Liotta) later pistol-whips Bruce (Mark Evan Jacobs) with a snub-nosed Smith & Wesson Model 36 with a square butt, which he gives to Karen (Lorraine Bracco) to hide. Tommy DeVito (Joe Pesci) keeps a Model 36 snub as his personal weapon, notably using it to beat Billy Batts (Frank Vincent) and wounding Spider (Michael Imperioli). During the poker games, both Tommy's Model 36 snub and his M1911A1 can be seen with the Model 36 snub tucked into his left waist band and the M1911A1 hanging from his right side. This is accurate as the real Tommy DeSimmone was known as "Two Gun" Tommy (for obvious reasons).

Smith & Wesson Model 66 Snub

Tommy is seen armed with a Smith & Wesson Model 66 revolver hidden in a paper bag during a truck hijacking. He later is seen firing it in the air. This revolver also appears to be the one held by Tommy at the film's end.

Smith & Wesson Model 64 Snub

Karen Hill (Lorraine Bracco) wakes Henry (Ray Liotta) up from a nap with a snub-nosed Smith & Wesson Model 64 in his face after finding out he's been cheating on her. It is clearly marked as .38 Special on the barrel. Its use is an anachronism as the scene is set before its introduction in 1981.

Smith & Wesson Model 60

In some shots of Karen Hill (Lorraine Bracco) holding the gun on Henry, it turns into a Smith & Wesson Model 60 as noted by its 5-round cylinder. Henry then takes it from her and threatens her with it.

Pistols

Colt M1911A1

Tommy DeVito (Joe Pesci) uses this M1911A1 style pistol to kill Spider (Michael Imperioli) in the bar card game scene. An M1911A1 is also used in a hit.

Colt Commander

Tommy DeVito (Joe Pesci) uses a suppressed Colt Combat Commander when entering the apartment of Stacks Edwards (Samuel L. Jackson). An unsuppressed Colt Commander is seen later in the film.

Browning Hi-Power

A Browning Hi-Power is one of the guns Henry has in the bag of weapons he takes to Jimmy.

FN Browning Hi-Power (Nickel)

A 9 mm Browning Hi-Power pistol is seen in the hands of an undercover cop who arrests Henry Hill during the 1980 drug bust. The cop seen is portrayed by Bo Dietl, who was one of the most decorated police officers in the history of the NYPD.

Heckler & Koch P9S

Henry (Ray Liotta) carries around a Heckler & Koch P9S in the gun bag during the 'Helicopter Paranoia' sequence. It is one of the guns which Jimmy (Robert De Niro) is unable to affix a suppressor onto.

Smith & Wesson Escort

A .22 caliber Smith & Wesson Escort is among the guns that Henry transports around during the helicopters scene. Jimmy is unable to fit a suppressor onto it and angrily gives it back to Henry.

Beretta Cheetah

Henry sells a Beretta Cheeta 87, which was also in his weapons bag he tried to sell to Jimmy, to his Pittsburgh connection (Paul Herman).

Iver Johnson .380

During the 1980 drug bust, Karen Hill (Lorraine Bracco) stuffs a nickel Iver Johnson .380 (a clone of Star Model DK that can be identified due to adjustable rear sight) down her panties.

Astra Constable

Henry (Ray Liotta) holds an Astra Constable while in bed with his wife after being released from jail. He later is seen holding it when Karen pulls up on the driveway crying.

Shotguns

Lupara