EXCLUSIVE: Pascal Caucheteux’s Why Not Productions is joining Alexander Rodnyansky’s AR Content to produce Beanpole helmer Kantemir Balagov’s first English-language film Butterfly Jam. Goodfellas is set to launch sales on the project in Cannes next week.

The project, which is financed by AR Content, is set to go into production later this year with casting still underway. Based on Balagov’s script and set in a tight-knit U.S. community of Circassian immigrants, Butterfly Jam portrays a complicated relationship between a father and son, in which the son imbues his father with qualities he doesn’t actually possess.

More from Deadline

Ron Perlman & Rupert Everett To Play Unlikely Couple In Romantic Dramedy 'Out Late' As WTFilms Lines-Up Cannes Market Launch

Lizzy Greene To Star In Shark Survival Thriller 'High Tide', Architect & 5X Media Launch For Cannes Market

Panorama Motion Pictures To Launch In Cannes With Slate Including Remake Of Warner Bros' Errol Flynn Classic 'The Sea Hawk'

Rodnyansky produces with Caucheteux while exec producers are Michael Kupisk for AR Content, Pauline Lamy for Why Not Productions and Livia Van der Staay from Goodfellas.

Rodnyansky is a two-time Oscar-nominee who has produced projects such as Loveless, Leviathan and Beanpole and his AR Content banner has a long history with Balagov and Goodfellas, who has handled sales on all of his films to date. Following Russia’s invasion of Ukraine, Balagov expressed dissenting views on the war and has since fled for exile in California.

The Russian filmmaker is best known for writing and directing Russian features Beanpole and Closeness both of which premiered at the Cannes Film Festival. Balagov received the Un Certain Regard award for Best Director and the FIPRESCI prize for Beanpole in Cannes. That film was later selected as Russia’s official entry for Best International Feature Film at the 92nd Academy Awards.

Rodnyansky said: “I’m thrilled to be teaming up with Pascal Caucheteux, Grégoire Sorlat and the whole Why Not Productions team after our successful production of Loveless together, and of course the Goodfellas team led by Vincent Maraval, who have been long time partners with whom I have been privileged to enjoy many successes from Loveless to Beanpole to Unclenching The Fists.

“Butterfly Jam has definitely been a labor of love for all of us. I believe deeply in the story and even more in the talent and vision of Kantemir Balagov. It’s crucial to have the right partners on such an important film and I couldn’t be happier.”

AR Content most recently announced their upcoming drama with Ryder Picture Company and Hammerstone At the Sea, starring Amy Adams and directed by Komel Mundruczó and will also begin production on Laszlo Nemes’ Orphan.

Balagov is repped by UTA, Jerome Duboz at Ithaka Media and Andres Des Rochers at Grandson Des Rochers.

Best of Deadline

Step & Repeat Gallery: The Best Red Carpet & Party Photos Of 2024

2024-25 Awards Season Calendar - Dates For Oscars, Tonys, Guilds, BAFTAs, Spirits & More

2024 Premiere Dates For New & Returning Series On Broadcast, Cable & Streaming