I’ve talked to companies that implement supply chain software as a way of triggering a digital supply chain transformation. In some cases, these companies have a hard time articulating what “digital transformation” means to them, what their “to be” supply chain will look like, or even what their company’s strategic goals are. I worry about these companies’ improvement journey.

In contrast, I talked to Shiva Esturi, the vice president of global supply chain management at Micron Technology. Micron was three years into their supply chain transformation before they even began implementing a supply planning optimization solution from Blue Yonder. Blue Yonder’s solution did significantly improve their capabilities, but their focus on a new strategy, processes, data quality, and training drove most of the improvements that Micron experienced. Micron serves as an exemplar for what a supply chain digital transformation should look like.

Micron Technology’s Supply Chain

Micron, a public company headquartered in Boise Idaho in the US, designs, develops, and manufactures memory and storage products. Micron, with revenues of just under $31 billion in their last fiscal year, is the fourth largest semiconductor company in the world. Micron’s products are hidden in plain sight. Their products are inside smart watches, Tablets, PCs, desk top computers, data centers, and even automobiles. Many consumers end up using products that rely on Micron storage or memory many times a day. With over 51,000 patents issued, the company invests to make sure that their technology remains cutting edge.

The company operates in 17 countries, has 11 internal manufacturing sites, and employs roughly 48,000 people. Micron runs a vertically integrated supply chain that starts with silicon, includes multiple manufacturing and testing steps, and ends with packaging. While Micron has deep manufacturing expertise, they also work with contract manufacturing partners to improve their ability to flex. The company has four different business groups that sell many thousands of distinct products, in diverse form factors, to hundreds of key customers.

The semiconductor industry is notoriously cyclical and swings from periods when semiconductor companies can’t keep up with demand to periods of time when they must reduce production output. When demand soars, semiconductor companies move to allocating inventory to their customers. In other words, customers can’t get all the products they want, they get a certain percentage of what is available. Further, during demand shortages shipment lead times become longer. When supply is plentiful, lead times become shorter and service levels are higher.

A New Supply Chain Strategy

The current transformation began in 2018. At that point in time, Micron ran a “push” supply chain where long term forecasts of customer demand were made, and the plants manufactured to that forecast for finished goods. “And as you might expect,” Mr. Esturi commented, “we had a higher inventory and lower service levels” because of that model.

They moved to what Micron calls an “iron triangle.” In this segmentation strategy, there is a tradeoff between lower cost products, higher service levels, and shorter lead times. “Products can be offered to the market optimizing two out of three dimensions on the iron triangle,” Mr. Esturi explained. If sales teams offer lower cost products and higher service level, for example, there are longer lead times.

Choices on the iron triangle dictate three distinct supply chains. A lower cost and higher service level supply chain is a build to order supply chain. This involves postponement. Postponement occurs when a manufacturer produces a generic product which can be modified at a later stage when the exact finished goods demand is better understood.

The quicker lead time and higher service supply chain is “build to forecast” – a finished goods forecast. In this configuration, inventory is stored closer to the customer to reduce lead times.

Finally, the build to target supply chain supports lower costs, and quicker lead times. Here, service levels for common products are pooled across different order streams. In this configuration, inventory levels are held at a water mark level; a product that sells and drops below the water mark level is replenished; other products that don’t sell will place brakes on replenishment at the water mark level. This strategy reduces inventory costs while increasing service levels for products that are commonly bought.

Market conditions affect choices. When there is too much supply in the market, Micron moves to a “no demand left behind” strategy according to Mr. Esturi, where order lead times are shorter and there are higher service levels.

Multi-echelon inventory optimization is used to support these different supply chains. The solution determines how much inventory is kept in which locations across the Micron supply chain.

Micron’s new strategy was also used to support increased agility. In addition to market conditions that can change drastically in a short period of time, the semiconductor industry has faced Covid supply disruptions and growing geo-political conflicts. The need for an agile supply chain is clear.

Vertical integration supports an increased ability to support swings in the market; for example, when demand for products in one market segment goes down while demand in other segments is increasing. The use of contract manufacturing partners helps Micron better accommodate surges in demand. Micron also engages in design for supply chain. Design for supply chain is a method of optimizing the product design to minimize the overall cost to serve customers.

Micron University

To change the strategy, Micron also needed to change hearts and minds. The company began an extensive program to educate employees across diverse disciplines of science of supply chain on what the company was trying to accomplish – a “demand driven transformation” - and how this new strategy would help Micron succeed in the market. This training and education program began in 2018 and ran through 2019. Demand driven organizations are better at avoiding the bull whip effect.

A central theory of supply chain management is the theory of constraints (TOC). This is the idea that a chain is no stronger than its weakest link. Companies are often limited in achieving their goals by a very small number of constraints. TOC uses a focusing process to identify key constraints and restructure the rest of the organization around it. For example, at Micron, manufacturing set up times were a constraint when it came to being able to flex to meet changes in demand. Employees were educated on TOC to help drive the new segmentation strategy.

Different groups in the company needed to change the way they operated. Manufacturing needed to be able to flex to support demand volatility. That meant more change overs and fewer “linear builds.” The supply chain needed to adjust to increased demand and inventory planning complexity. Sales needed to be trained to explain the new tradeoffs to customers. Procurement needed to increase multi-sourcing to support resilience. And top-down support was necessary to help drive this cultural change.

An advanced analytics group was formed to help provide rigor around new inventory policies and flex capacity. Further, supply chain personnel are not called supply chain analysts or supply chain planners. They are “industrial engineers.” Micron wanted it to be clear that there needed be a rigorous analytical underpinning to the way the supply chain worked. New hires to support the new strategy came from supply chain programs and were better prepared technically to work in the newer, more analytical Micron.

New Processes

To achieve increased cross functional alignment, the company also needed to improve their longer-term sales & operations planning (S&OP) and mid to short term sales & operations execution (S&OE) process. S&OP allows companies to balance demand with supply in a manner that helps companies achieve their strategic goals. It requires alignment between multiple functions in an organization.

Externally, Micron used the process to help align supplier capabilities with customer demand. Internally, sale’s main goal is increased revenues, business unit leaders want improved margins, and the supply chain wants to reduce the cost to serve customers. New metrics had to be established that allowed these competing goals to be balanced. Finance, procurement, and engineering also participate in the S&OP process. The S&OP process is headed by the General Managers, this helps to drive the necessary alignment.

Mr. Esturi mentioned that the consulting firm Spinnaker SCA was “an integral part of many of these activities.”

New Technology

The phrase “people, process, and technology” is used to enforce the idea that implementing new enterprise applications won’t be successful without tackling people’s natural resistance to change and embracing new processes. This is particularly true when it comes to supply planning applications. Micron continued to use a legacy supply planning application that had limitations until the people and process transformation was complete.

The people and process changes, with no new technology, drove significant improvements in customer delivery performance, days of inventory outstanding, and commit date metrics. Indeed, about 80% of Micron’s improvement on these metrics came before the new technology was implemented. But the 11-month implementation of Blue Yonder Enterprise Supply Planning (ESP) led to the last incremental 20% gain on these metrics. The new technology will make it possible to continue to make further progress on key metrics and supply chain performance. This would be very difficult to achieve without the technology.

Because the people issues and processes were aligned, the implementation went very smooth. Spinnaker SCA and Blue Yonder implemented this solution. Spinnaker SCA provided hyper care through the transition.

The Journey Continues

“Micron is committed to a resilient, responsibly sourced, and diverse global supply chain. This commitment will help drive market competitiveness, spur innovation, and advance our corporate mission. It is also the right thing to do,” Mr. Esturi said. “Micron is committed to being a resilient and transparent organization that operates efficiently, with minimal disruption. Our focus on four key areas in our supply chain network – suppliers, manufacturing, logistics and customer networks – ensures our operations run smoothly and we keep our commitments to customers.”

Micron continues to progress supply chain to enable competitive advantage to business through Quad-A Value Chain. The term “AAA Value Chain” is borrowed from The Triple-A Supply Chain by Hau L. Lee, a professor at the Stanford School of Business. Micron expanded the concept to incorporate the concept of being Accountable. Micron seeks to Align its objectives across all value chain partners. Externally this includes customers and suppliers. Internally it includes sales, business units, supply chain management, manufacturing, procurement, and engineering. Adaptable encompasses the idea that Micron can adjust to changes in market conditions, geo-political disruptions, and unpredictable external supply chain- events like port closures or hurricanes​. Agile reflects speed of decisions, planning & execution​, information quality, and material and cash flows​. Accountability encompasses the goal of being part of developing a greener planet as well as the people centric wellbeing of all value chain players.

“The new technology will enable us to scale our value chain to be more aligned, adaptable and agile while contributing to sustainability and the overall well being of our people,” Mr. Esturi concluded.