Since we are all invariably people who have ingested so much media in our lifetimes, whether we realized it or not, it becomes almost second nature to frame movies within the context of what we already know. Assuming that other people know what we are talking about (or that it is an easily googled reference), a kind of pop cultural shorthand is created that can be appreciated by all. Therefore, please humor me for a moment because I cannot look at the tale of Dusty & Me without seeing the shadings of its predecessors whether it be Starter for 10, Submarine, or even Sing Street.

Granted, as an American, those are my meager reference points for categorizing analogous coming-of-age movies from the United Kingdom; merely a few first impressions written in sand. The opening title sequences of Betsan Morris Evans‘ movie though rely on this same reality. Images and bits of pop culture filtered down through the years can lead to instant comprehension.

The Queen. Football. Fashion. Cars. The disco beats of “Best of Your Love.” It’s the manner in which a person in the present is able to sink back into the past and recall a different time – a time that they lived in – or maybe a time they heard about from their parents or grandparents.

Meeting Dusty

But again, this is only an inroad to Dusty (Luke Newberry) our wide-eyed protagonist just off on summer holiday in 1977 and waiting to get his exam scores back in preparation for college entrances. We are also provided with the voiceover of the taciturn introvert because he hardly ever talks. In that regard, it works even if it does feel a bit too introspective for its own good. But at least it gives us a suggestion of what we might be in for. Theoretically, that is.

His older brother Little Eddie (Ben Batt) picks him up on the last day of school. He’s a charismatic, if slightly shady, bloke who nevertheless gives Dusty the kind of encouragement he’s never getting from their surly father (Ian Hart). The man’s good for nothing aside from loitering around Macintosh Arms with a pint in his hand conversing about his favorite team, Leeds United. He proudly brags about his middle boy Georgie (Tom Prior) who currently plays on the squad. He’s not “a black sheep” like Dusty. Otherwise, Mr. Springfield is giving his well-meaning wife (Lesley Sharp) continual grief. You get the picture.

The Story

If we wanted to provide an inciting moment, it’s when Flapper first comes on the scene, and the dog becomes Dusty’s inadvertent wingman helping to grab the attention of a pretty girl (Genevieve Gaunt) who works at the local Fish and Chips joint. Little Eddie also does his best trying to stoke the flames of potential romance for his younger sibling. It’s all treacly cute due to the awkward chemistry between Newberry and Gaunt.

Eventually, unavoidable circumstances mean Little Eddie must take a leave of absence and with him gone goes Dusty & Me’s main source of invigorating zest. Because, make no doubt about it, this is light and inconsequential entertainment. From its opening moments, there’s an expectation of precisely that and yet even then we probably expect it to pick up a bit more than it does. But with the thin plotting, the film is all too satisfied to remain in neutral, traversing a lazy trail; ironic given the story features a greyhound finding her sprinting legs.

And if the title suggests that this story will be from the point of view of the dog, that’s not quite right either. It does feel a bit like faulty advertising. It’s set in the past but it’s not really about the era. It’s purportedly about a dog but more so it’s about a boy and even the boy goes through modest growth at best. The key is that the movie seems perfectly content as is. However, because there is a great deal of downtime Dusty & Me does showcase some delightful compositions thanks to the various color schemes in all their gaudy 70s glory. It’s one of the few pluses of placing the story in the past.

The obvious villains work under the banner of “You Dirty Rat Pest Control” with their own dingy Dumb and Dumber-type vehicle used for nefarious purposes – namely dognapping. Dusty with the urging of Chrissie looks to get Slapper up to speed to enter in a real race and so that’s just what he sets out to do. The climax is over in a matter of seconds as the dog flies around the track to the adulation of all the Springfield family and a few bars of Queen’s “Don’t Stop Me Now.” They’ve turned it into a family affair and along with Chrissie, each member makes sure the two cruddy no-goods get one final shellacking to send them off on their merry way.

Dusty & Me: Another Dog Movie

Taking account of everything, Dusty & Me is a greyhound leap ahead of Air Bud World Pup (a childhood favorite) but as dog tales go it can’t quite keep the company of Old Yeller, 101 Dalmatians, or even Homeward Bound: The Incredible Journey. It’s not quite that memorable.

The script from Rob Isted probably deals in a few too many thinly wrought stereotypes whether it be the villains or family dynamics. But that’s okay. How can you not be willingly compliant because of the cordial warmth that pervades the material? Individual aspects are readily enjoyable even if the whole production lacks cohesion – creating this loose yet affable vehicle for us to ride along with.

The last forehead slapping moment comes when Dusty’s new girlfriend agrees to a dance with the “Look of Love” on her face, pronouncing his full name one last time. Putting two and two together, I finally realized our hero is “Dusty” Springfield. Maybe that was the point of the story all along and we never knew it. The film was so Dusty could come to terms with having to share his name with a female British pop star. That must be it.

What factors make the best movies about dogs and their humans resonate with audiences? Also, what are the best ways and reasons to utilize a period setting for a movie? Tell us your thoughts in the comments below!

Dusty & Me comes to selected UK Cinemas from 28th September & will be available on Digital Download from 1st October.

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=2KxJWThkvM4