Algeciras - The Armpit of Iberia

Tuesday, April 21, 2015

Algeciras, Andalusia, Spain and Canary Islands

The western terminus of the rail line I have been following

for the last week is Algeciras on the sea at the Strait of Gibraltar . Algeciras

is one of Europe’s largest container ports and the main port for crossing the

strait to Morocco. In 2007 on my West Africa trip with Dragoman we boarded a

ferry to Ceuta, one of Spain’s two port towns in North Africa, in Algeciras. I

saw nothing of the town, though.

The rail journey from Ronda to Algeciras is a very scenic

one through mountains and valleys, all very green in late April. It looks much

more like northern Europe now than what I usually think of as the landscape in

Spain. The books say the rail line from Algeciras to Ronda was actually built

by the British in the late nineteenth century to enable the forces in Gibraltar

to access the cooler mountain regions for rest and relaxation in the sweltering

summers.

I chose to book a cheap room in a pension near the rail and

bus stations for 16 Euros/night because it made for easy transport connections

from Ronda, for a day trip to Gibraltar, and onwards to Cadiz . When I arrived I

wondered if one of the tunnels on the rail journey might have whisked me under

the Strait to Africa. Algeciras absolutely feels like a developing country

rather than part of Europe.

I’ve traveled a lot and stayed in some pretty skanky places,

so a cheap basic room in a town like Algeciras doesn’t bother me. But after all

the interesting and appealing and beautiful places I’ve travelled through over

the last five weeks, this has to be a low point. I can laugh about it because

it’s costing me next to nothing and enabling me easy access to Gibraltar, but

this is one of the saddest and ugliest towns I’ve been to in a long time. As I

walked through the streets there were a fair number of restaurants and tapas bars

and OK buildings; it’s not exactly the pit of hell but……am I still in Europe?

I like to buy some beer or wine in a shop to consume in my

room most evenings as I’m blogging away. I’m well past the age where going out

to a bar or clubbing has any appeal to me . But in Algeciras most of the small

stores are owned by members of large Muslim population from North Africa and

don’t sell alcohol. Well, if your Allah doesn’t let you sell alcohol, I’m just

going to take all my business and everything I was planning to buy to a store

that does! Fortunately, all over Spain there are Chinese-owned stores, and in

Algeciras the Chinese do sell beer and wine.

The morning bus ride to La Linea, the town on the Spanish

side of the border with Gibraltar, was gray and misty, but the whole distance

around the bay was in a very industrialized urbanization with big chemical

plants and tall smokestacks ringing the Bay of Algeciras. The Costa del Sol of

resort developments that’s Europe’s Florida may spread eastward from Gibraltar

all the way to Malaga, but the arc around the bay to Gibraltar’s west to

Algeciras is majorly industrial and not very attractive. Hey, though, places

like that are what help make the world go around; not everywhere can be perfect

and prettified.