As a gun owner, I notice guns in movies. Take the other night, while watching “Die Hard,” the original movie and first in a series: Karl, a terrorist, walks into Nakatomi Plaza and shoots a security guard with a Walther PPK (aka, Polizei Pistolen Krimminal). That got me to thinking, since I own a Walther PPK/s, about how many other movies has the PPK appeared?

Sponsored by Walther Arms

The Obvious: “Bond, James Bond”

It’s a well-known fact that James Bond shoots a Walther. Why? Because his Beretta let him down when it gets caught in his holster in “Dr. No.” Fandom reports that the gun, actually was a PP, the foundation of the PPK. They referred to it as a PPK, though, in the movie. Bond uses a Walther in almost every other movie, except “Moonraker,” (Fandom reports that Bond never actually takes a sidearm out in this movie) and “Octopussy” – where he uses a Walther P5.

According to Fandom, the PPK appears with a suppressor in six Bond films.

Other Films that Feature the Walther PPK

According to “Pew Pew Tactical,” a Walther PPK has appeared in these films, so I did a bit of digging:

“Bourne Identity”

In this 1988 film, all of the assassins from Zurich carry and shoot a Walther PPK – suppressed, of course. in fact, Mr. “Gold Glasses” appears to fire 17 shots from it! You might recall that Jason Bourne manages to get one and stop an assault on Marie.

“Zombieland”

Emma Stone, who plays Wichita in this 2009 film, uses a Walther PPK/s and points it at Woody Harrelson in a standoff.

“Zombieland: Double Tap”

Another woman uses a PPK in “Zombieland: Double Tap,” the sequel to “Zombieland,” which premiered in 2019. Little Rock (Abigail Breslin) uses it to defend herself in a field.

“Valkyrie”

This movie features a plot to kill Adolf Hitler. Several high ranking German officers, as well as Col. Claus von Stauffenberg (Tom Cruise), carry a Walther PPK.

“Inglourious Basterds”

Several actors carry the Walther PPK in this flick. British spy Lt. Archie Hicox (Michael Fassbender) carries a PPK. In a gunfight, Bridget von Hammersmark (Diane Kruger) picks up his gun and shoots it, too.

“Tinker Tailor Soldier Spy”

Alec Guiness stars in this film as a British intelligence officer, and he carries a Walther PPK (caliber unknown).

“Captain America: The First Avenger”

Actress Hayley Atwell carries one as Agent Carter. She also carries a Walther PPK/S in the series titled “Agent Carter.

Now, I’m interested in watching some of these other films.

Find a Walther PPK for your adventurous lifestyle.