Egyptian conservationists are racing to save ancient relics buried with some of Cairo's most renowned residents as bulldozers flatten parts of a vast cemetery that houses forgotten kings.

Authorities are ploughing their way through the 'City of the Dead', a 7km-long Unesco World Heritage site, to build highways as part of President Abdel Fattah El-Sisi's rampant modernisation drive.

The roads tear through a network of mausoleums dating back as far as the seventh century to link up congested central Cairo with Mr Sisi's 'New Administrative Capital', a glistening satellite city set to become Egypt's new capital.

In the rush to preserve what's left in the rubble, teams of amateur historians and volunteers have found artefacts dating back more than a thousand years.

Among the recent discoveries is an ancient Kufi Arabic engraving half encased in concrete and buried among toppled stonework. The tombstone has an inscription dating back to 836AD. It was later donated to the Ministry of Tourism and local museums.

"I'm not sure how many monuments like this have been destroyed. Every day we go, we find burials that have been removed," Mostafa El Sadek, one of the group members, told The Telegraph.

The original mausoleum was demolished in the past to build a new one, and its tombstone was used as a brick. The newer mausoleum had just been demolished when Dr El Sadek found it.

"It is known that there is an older grave under this grave, and when the bulldozer digs, these things appear," cemetery guard Amin Murad said.

Not all relics survive in the City of the Dead, however. The government claims it does not demolish antiquities registered under the Egyptian Antiquities Law, but critics say most of the City of the Dead's antiquities are unregistered.

A committee from the Armed Forces Engineering Authority, which oversees the project, has been surveying the cemeteries every couple of months, according to the grave guard. They mark the cemeteries to be demolished, but they often return to change the direction of the road.

Reem Mansour, the granddaughter of Yehia Pasha Ibrahim, the former prime minister of Egypt, who helped write the constitution of 1923, is worried about her family mausoleums because those in front of it were marked in red, meaning that they would be demolished.

“We have been told that we are not included, but we worry about any change in the future in the course of the road," she said.

Queen Farida's mausoleum set to be demolished

The mausoleum of Queen Farida, wife of Farouk II, Egypt's former king, is one of the mausoleums set to be demolished. Her remains were transferred after a plea from her family to the authorities and she was buried alongside her husband in the Al-Rifai Mosque.

"My heart sank when I visited Imam al-Shafi'i's cemetery, when I saw ruins and rubble all around, and many mausoleums had been demolished," Mostafa Sayed said. "There are tens or even hundreds of tombs that are not registered among the antiquities, but in my opinion they contain artefacts, whether in the building, structure, the tomb itself, or the tomb dome, and unfortunately, they were demolished."

The city is not only for the dead. Families live within the mausoleum rooms, with the shrine in the centre of the room and their beds beside it. They have to live in cemeteries because of Cairo's housing crisis and now they have to leave or find another mausoleum.

Despite being a cemetery, solitude is not the dominant feeling; people walk around, women and men sit at their doorsteps and children play without fear.

Egypt has spent heavily on non-revenue-generating megaprojects such as quick highways, monorails and new city infrastructure without conducting feasibility studies. The most visible is the $58 billion desert administrative capital east of Cairo.

Egypt is struggling to repay the loans that funded these projects amid a severe economic crisis that threatens default.

"No one is against development, but there are certainly solutions to preserve heritage while development is taking place," Dr El Sadek said.

President Abdel Fattah El-Sisi said that those in charge of the roadworks are careful not to damage archaeological sites or cemeteries. But he stressed that Cairo's inhabitants were suffering from traffic congestion and that his government had to act.

"Tombs registered as monuments or having a distinctive architectural character have not been touched," Abu Bakr Ahmed, head of the Islamic, Coptic, and Jewish antiquities sector at the Egyptian Ministry of Antiquities, told The Daily Telegraph.