I didn't listen to the radio much in the 70s, and I don't remember I Go Crazy, but I remember very well '65 Love Affair and Cool Night.

Here's his LA Times obituary:

http://www.latimes.com/news/obituaries/la-...1,4667138.story

<h2 style="">Paul Davis</h2>Songwriter hit top 10 with 'I Go Crazy'

Paul Davis, 60, a singer and songwriter whose soft-rock hit "I Go Crazy" stayed at the top of the charts for weeks after its release in 1977, died of a heart attack Tuesday at Rush Foundation Hospital in his native Meridian, Miss., cousin James Edwards said.

Davis' other hits included " '65 Love Affair," "Cool Night," "Ride 'Em Cowboy" and country duets with Marie Osmond, including "You're Still New To Me."

His 1977 album "Singer of Songs -- Teller of Tales" featured the ballad "I Go Crazy."

The song slowly climbed the charts, peaking at No. 7 eight months after its release, according to Billboard's website. The song stayed in the top 100 for 40 more weeks, according to Billboard.

The son of a Methodist minister, Davis was born April 21, 1948, and raised in rural Mississippi.

He started his music career in Jackson, Miss., then worked in New York, Atlanta and Nashville before returning to Meridian to retire.

I remember all three songs. I have some sort of weird association with the song "'65 Love Affair". I must have had the idea that something in the song was dirty or something, because I always get that strange adolescent spine-thrill when I hear it (I also get that when I hear "Up Where We Belong," but I know where that one comes from: I used to stay up until after my parents went to bed to watch R-rated movies on HBO. Some dumb teen-sex comedy ("My Tutor" or the like) was on one night right after "An Officer and a Gentleman", so that song has become inexorably linked with my 10-year-old excitement at the thought of seeing naked female body parts...). I actually OWN a 45 of "'65 Love Affair" which has clearly been played to the point of near death (my 45 copy of "Centerfold" by the J. Giles Band is in MUCH better condition, although my copy of "867-5309 (Jenny Jenny)" is in pretty bad shape).