Bob Corritore

Down Home Blues Revue

I’ve really been enjoying the ‘From the Vaults’ albums spearheaded by blues harmonica marvel Bob Corritore. The latest in the series, Down Home Blues Revue, features thirteen tracks of real-deal blues recorded between 1995 and 2012 in Phoenix, Arizona. The amazing roster of southern blues artists on this album had all played Corritore’s blues club The Rhythm Room, and recorded tracks with him while in town. The artists featured on this wonderful album are Robert ‘Bilbo’ Walker, Tomcat Courtney, T-Model Ford, Henry Townsend, Smokey Wilson, Honeyboy Edwards, Pecan Porter, Al Garrett, Dave Riley, and Big Jack Johnson.

I was so happy to see Robert ‘Bilbo’ Walker’s name on the credits. It was through Jeff Konkel and Roger Stolle’s docu-series MoonShine & Mojo Hands, and their film M for Mississippi where I first heard Walker, and quickly became a fan. Walker appears three times on this album with songs “Rooster Blues”, “Still a Fool”, and “Baby Baby Baby”. Another name that brought a big smile to my face was Fat Possum recording artist T-Model Ford. His renditions of Arthur Crudup’s “Mean Old Frisco and Howlin’ Wolf’s “I Asked For Water” are captivating.

Tomcat Courtney, who sadly passed away just a year ago at the age of 91, gives an extraordinary performance with “Clara Mae” a hard-edged, straight-up blues song on the evils of crystal meth. Honeyboy Edwards performs Robert Lockwood’s “Take a Little Walk With Me”, with Willie “Big Eyes” Smith on drums, and I soak every bit of it up. Corritore rips it up on harmonica as Pecan Porter takes on Canned Heat’s “Lets Work Together”. The groove on Dave Riley’s “Home in Chicago” runs deep, and sounds great. With a swaggering approach, Big Jack Johnson electrifies “Bluebird Blues” originally by Sonny Boy Williamson I. He and Corritore sound terrific together.

Fans of Mississippi delta blues will definitely want to pick up this album. It’s an absolute gem.

Phillip Smith

Philly Cheeze Blues

Buy Us a Cup of Coffee!

Join the movement in supporting Making a Scene, the premier independent resource for both emerging musicians and the dedicated fans who champion them.

We showcase this vibrant community that celebrates the raw talent and creative spirit driving the music industry forward. From insightful articles and in-depth interviews to exclusive content and insider tips, Making a Scene empowers artists to thrive and fans to discover their next favorite sound.

Together, let’s amplify the voices of independent musicians and forge unforgettable connections through the power of music

You can donate directly through Paypal!