Kid Ramos & Bob Corritore – Phoenix Blues Sessions

SWMAF – Released November 2012

Mannish Boys – Double Dynamite

Delta Groove – Released May 15, 2012

Smokin’ Joe Kubek & Bnois King – Lose To The Blues

Delta Groove – Released September 18, 2012

Mud Morganfield – Son of the Seventh Son

Severn Records – Released March 20, 2012

Bob Corritore was very proud to be asked to produce the first national release by the eldest son of Muddy Waters. Mud Morganfield carries on his father’s tradition in fine form. Bob plays harmonica on 7 of the 12 tracks, sharing harp duties with the great Harmonica Hinds who plays on the remaining 5 tracks. Other players include Rick Kreher, Billy Flynn, Barrelhouse Chuck, E.G. McDaniel, and Kenny “Beedy Eyes” Smith.

Lucius Parr – Gotta Go

PAU Label – Released February 2012

This is the third of Lucius’ CDs that Bob is a part of. Bob contributes harmonica to three tracks. Some uptown funky blues!

Tail Dragger & Bob Corritore – Longtime Friends In The Blues

Delta Groove – Released March 20, 2012

Tail Dragger was one of Bob’s first employers in the blues. He is a intensely powerful vocalist with a raw, wild style of singing. This is an album of throw-down deep Chicago Blues with no apologies!. Other players on the CD are Henry Gray, Kirk Fletcher, Chris James, Patrick Rynn, and Brian Fahey.

Various Artists – Lucerne Blues Festival 2011

LBF – Released November 1, 2011

This souvenir CD was released to honor the 17th Annual Lucerne Blues Festival held in Lucerne, Switzerland in 2011. The disc features selections from all the artists performing at the festival and includes a cut ifeaturing Bob Corritore and Henry Gray. The track “Things Have changed” as sung by Henry Gray is both produced by Bob and featuring Bob’s harmonica.

Diunna Greenleaf – Trying to Hold On

Released July 2011

Louisiana Red – Memphis Mojo

Little Victor – Boogie All Night

El Torro Records (Spain) – Released June, 2011

Various Artists – 2010 Blues Music Awards (DVD)

Released February 2011

This DVD captures highlights of the 2010 Blues Music Awards. Included is Louisiana Red and Little Victor’s Juke Joint with guests Bob Corritore and David Maxwell. Also included are performance clips of Zora Young, Eden Brent, Ediie C. Campbell, Tommy Castro, Buddy Guy, Rick Estrin, Cyril Neville, Saffire, Guy Davis, Duke Robillard, Candye Kane, Maria Muldaur, Joe Louis Walker, Debbie Davies, Johnny Rawls, Monkey Jumk, Jason Ricci, Super Chikan, and more!

Various Artists – Blues For The Gulf

VizzTone Label Group – Released December, 2010

This is a benefit compliation, with proceeds going to Voice Of The Wetlands to aid victims of the BP oil spill. All artists have donated their songs. Dave Riley & Bob Corritore have contributed their “Oil Spill Blues” which is the opening track of the CD. Other acts include Bob Margolin, Gary Allegretto, Candye Kane, Matt Hill, Laurie Morvan, Hamilton Loomis, and many others.

More Info / Order CD

Bob Corritore & Friends – Harmonica Blues

Delta Groove – Released September 17, 2010

This spectacular CD celebrates the 40th year of Bob’s harmonica playing with 14 songs recorded over a 20 year period with special guests Little Milton, Koko Taylor, Dave Riley, Nappy Brown, Robert Lockwood, Jr., Henry Gray, Big Pete Pearson, Tomcat Courtney, Eddie Clearwater, Pinetop Perkins, Honeyboy Edwards, Carol Fran, Chief Schabuttie Gilliame, Willie “Big Eyes” Smith, Bob Margolin, Chico Chism, Chris James, Patrick Rynn, Brian Fahey, Johnny Rapp, Buddy Reed, David Maxwell, Eddie Taylor, Jr., and more. This CD made it to #2 on the Living Blues Radio Charts in Sept 2010. A great reflection of Bob’s long musical career and musical associates.

Chris James & Patrick Rynn – Gonna Boogie Anyway

Earwig Music – Released May 18, 2010

This second solid release by Chris James & Patrick Rynn features Bob on 2 songs. Other guests include Henry Gray, Sam Lay, David Maxwell, Rob Stone & more! This record rose to #4 on the August 2010 Living Blues Charts!

Various Artists – 30th Blues Music Awards (DVD)

Released January 2010

This DVD captures all the performances of the 2009 Blues Music Awards and it clocks in at about 3.5 hours. the DVD opens with Chris James & Patrick Rynn featuring Bob Corritore & David Maxwell. Other performances include B.B. King, Curtis Salgado, Taj Mahal, Maria Muldaur, Marcia Ball, Steve Guyger, Elvin Bishop, Janiva Magness, Bettye LaVette, Irma Thomas. Lil’ Ed, Koko last performance (with the Mannish Boys) and much more.

Dave Riley & Bob Corritore – Lucky To Be Living

Blue Witch – Released September 8, 2009

Dave Riley and Bob Corritore’s second release provides more great down-home blues as is their specialty. The title track is one of four Frank Frost songs covered on the CD.

Big Pete Pearson – Finger In Your Eye

VizzTone Label Group – Released July 7, 2009

Big Pete Pearson’s second national release features 10 original songs. Big Pete’s powerful and expressive voice is surrounded by a top-notch group of players with the Rhythm Room All-Stars, plus special guests Pinetop Perkins, Duke Robillard, Henry Gray, Billy Flynn, Eddie Taylor, Jr., Doug James, and more!

Jimmy Rogers – Feelin’ Good

Blind Pig – Released May 19, 2009

This limited edition, high quality LP version of the classic Jimmy Rogers album Feelin’ Good includes all 9 tracks from the original album with simply great backing by Rod Piazza & The Mighty Flyers, plus 2 previously unreleased Jimmy Rogers tracks produced by Bob Corritore with a band that includes Chico Chism, Buddy Reed, S.E. Willis, Bruce Lopez, and Bob Corritore.

Big Pete Pearson & The Rhythm Room All-Stars – Live In Lahnstein 2008 (Bootleg Only)

Collectors Only Records (Germany) – Released May 2, 2009

Perhaps it is a sign that you have made it when someoneputs out a bootleg on your band. This unofficial release captures The Rhythm Room All-Stars’ rowdy performance at the Lahnstein Blues Festval in Germany on Sept 27th, 2008. It is from the soundboard mix so it is not of great recording quality.

Various Artists – Blues Music Awards 2008 (DVD)

Released January, 2009

This DVD captures many of the performances of the 2008 Blues Music Awards and includes one track with Dave Riley and Bob Corritore. A true moment in time captured.

Louisiana Red – Back To The Black Bayou

Bluestown Records – Released November, 2008

A feisty, deep blues record with a personal touch! Little Victor plays guitar on most tracks and harmonica on a few, as well as arranging a sympathetic band lineup to back Red. Special guests include Kim Wilson, David Maxwell, Bob Corritore, and others.

Tomcat Courtney – Downsville Blues

Blue Witch Records – Released May 28, 2008

Tomcat Courtney is a hidden blues jewel originally from Waco, Texas, but he has resided in San Diego since the 1970s. Bob produced and plays harmonica on this CD, which is Tomcat’s first national release.

More Info / Order CD

Chris James & Patrick Rynn – Stop and Think About It

Earwig Music – Released 2008

The CD features Chris’s great guitar work and vocals, Patrick’s solid bass playing, and their clever yet traditional songwriting collaborations. This CD means serious business, and the lineup of special guests boasts Sam Lay, David Maxwell, Julien Brunetaud, Eddie Kobek, Bob Corritore, Jonny Viau, Allen Ortiz, Johnny Rapp, and more! Chris James and Patrick Rynn are long time partners in the blues. They met in Chicago in the early 1990s and their 18 years of playing together has found them in the bands of Sam Lay, Jody Williams, Detroit Junior, Rob Stone and the C-Notes, Willie “Big Eyes” Smith, and countless others. They have played all over the world. Bob partnered with Chris and Patrick in a revised Southwest version of the Sam Lay Blues Band in the early 1990s and they have played together in The Rhythm Room All-Stars and numerous studio projects.

Nappy Brown – Long Time Coming

Blind Pig Records – Released September 25, 2007

This great CD is produced mostly by Scott Cable, with just one cut produced by Bob Corritore. This cut features Bob on harmonica with Henry Gray, Kid Ramos, Chico Chism, Johnny Rapp, and Mario Moreno. Bob’s cut was added after the fact to round out the CD with a rocker. Nappy Brown is simply one of the greatest blues singers of all time.

More Info / Order CD

Various Artists – Lucern Blues Festival 2007

Released 2007

This promotional CD was released to honor the 13th Annual Lucerne Blues Festival held in Lucerne, Switzerland. This CD contains two cuts involving Bob Corritore: Big Pete Pearson and The Rhythm Room All-Stars’ song, “My Baby Is A Jockey” and “Naptown Blues”, a cut featuring the late Robert Lockwood, Jr.; originally released on the Bob Corritore All-Star Blues Sessions CD.

Various Artists – House Rockin’ And Blues Shoutin’! Celebrating 15 Years Of The Rhythm Room

Blue Witch Records – Released September 11, 2007

Artists include The Fabulous Thunderbirds, Robert Lockwood, Jr., The Mannish Boys featuring Finis Tasby, Floyd Dixon, Louisiana Red, Big Pete Pearson and the Rhythm Room All-Stars (Featuring Bob Corritore), Henry Gray, Billy Boy Arnold, Paul Oscher, Johnny Dyer, Chief Schabuttie Gilliame, Long John Hunter, Kid Ramos, Sonny Rhodes, and more!

More Info / Order CD

Dave Riley & Bob Corritore – Travelin’ The Dirt Road

Blue Witch Records – Released September 11, 2007

This CD features the natural musical chemistry of Mississippi-born Dave Riley, together with Bob Corritore. A real down-home blues treat!

More Info / Order CD

Big Pete Pearson With The Rhythm Room All-Stars – I’m Here Baby

Blue Witch Records – Released February 21, 2007

This CD is the first national release by the amazing Big Pete Pearson. Pete’s powerhouse vocals are showcased on 12 songs with backing by the Rhythm Room All-Stars, Ike Turner, W.C. Clark (Pete’s younger cousin), Joey DeFrancesco, Kid Ramos, and more.

More Info / Order CD

Various Artists – American Music: The HighTone Records Story

HighTone Records – Released 2006

This brilliant 4 CD, 1 DVD box set reflects the 23 years of the world’s most definitive roots label. One of the 4 CDs is completely devoted to blues and includes 3 songs produced by Bob Corritore (of which one of these features Bob’s harmonica work). The Corritore produced cuts are Kim Wilson / Eyesight To The Blind, Henry Gray / How Could You Do It (with Bob On Harp) and Louisiana Red / September 11th Blues. Bob is very proud of his association with HighTone and credits this label for giving him his start as a recording artist. Thank you HighTone!

More Info / Order CD

Willie “Big Eyes” Smith – Way Back

HighTone – Released May 9, 2006

This Album features Willie blowing harp on 7 tracks, James Cotton on two and Bob Corritore on two. Other guests include Pinetop Perkins, Bob Margolin, Billy Flynn, Calvin “Fuzz” Jones, Bob Stroger, Kenny “Beedy Eyes” Smith, Little Frank, and Johnny Rapp. A solid, straight ahead Chicago Blues record!

More Info / Order CD

Pinetop Perkins – Born In The Honey

Sagebrush Productions – Released 2006

Pinetop Perkins is one of the greatest blues piano players of all time. This DVD by Sagebrush Productions profiles this great legend with interviews and performances. Bob’s music is heard in the song “Rather Quit Her”, used in the soundtrack. It is a studio track produced by Bob that features, Pine, Bob, Johnny Rapp, Paul Thomas and Chico all in a solid groove.

More Info / Order DVD

Louisiana Red – No Turn On Red

HighTone Records – Released 2005

The Legendary Louisiana Red and Bob are close friends and regularly perform together. This is the second release that Bob has produced by Red. Bob plays harmonica on 5 of the 11 tunes. Other backing musicians include Chico Chism, Johnny Rapp, Buddy Reed, Paul Thomas, Mario Moreno, Paul Fasulo, and Brian Fahey. High intensity, down home blues at its best.

More Info / Order CD

Chief Schabuttie Gilliame – Snakes Crawls At Night

Random Chance Records – Released 2004

African Born, Louisiana and Arkansas blues schooled and now based in Buckeye, Arizona, this CD presents a marvelous debut by this great blues growler. Backing musicians include Louisiana Red, Kid Ramos, Junior Watson, Rusty Zinn, Kirk “Eli” Fletcher, Richard Innes, Chico Chism, Johnny Rapp, Paul Thomas, Mario Moreno, and more. Producer Bob Corritore lends his harmonica talents to four of the 10 selections.

More Info / Order CD

R.L. Burnside – No Monkeys On This Train

HighTone Records – Released 2003

The great R.L. Burnside is clearly the most popular downhome bluesman of these modern times. Bob produced half this CD with four Live at the Rhythm Room tracks (two previously unreleased) and one studio track with Bob backing R.L Burnside on harmonica. The other half was produced by Dr. David Evans for his famous High Water record label. Bob and his friend Drew Verbis did the album compilation with supervision from the great Bruce Bromberg.

More Info / Order CD

Various Artists – American Blues

Putumayo Records – Released 2003

Putumayo put together a 14 song collection of contemporary recordings of great artists. This label is known for their wonderful collections of world and ethnic music genres. Bob is pleased that Henry Gray’s “How Could You Do It” was chosen. This cut was produced by Bob who lends some powerful harmonica work to the track. Also included in this collection are artists such as Otis Rush, Solomon Burke, Susan Tedeschi, Robert Cray, Albert Collins, Chris Thomas, Ruth Brown, Taj Mahal, Arthur Adams, B.B. King, Sugar Pie DeSanto, and Keb Mo’.

More Info / Order CD

Various Artists – Blues Greats

Released 2002

This CD is a sample of some of the artists and recordings up for W.C. Handy Awards in 2002. Bob accompanies the great Henry Gray on one selection of this album.

Various Artists – Blues Estafette 2001

Released 2001

This CD is a companion to the famous European Blues Festival of the same name. The CD features one track by each artist performing at the fest. It contains a Henry Gray cut taken from the Plays Chicago Blues CD. That cut was produced by Bob who also played harmonica on the track.

Various Artists – Rhythm Room Blues

HighTone Records – Released 2001

Bob plays harmonica on 3 cuts of this CD; two with Sam Lay, and one with Henry Gray. This CD also contains two masterful cuts by harp wizard Kim Wilson, and one by the legendary Mojo Buford. Also on his CD are R.L. Burnside, Nappy Brown, and Sonny Rhodes.

More Info / Order CD

Big Pete Pearson – One More Drink

Blue Witch Records – Released 2001

Bob plays on three numbers on this CD by Phoenix’s king of the blues. Big Pete is a powerhouse of a vocalist with great original material. Produced by Clarke Rigsby, this CD features an uptown sound with horns and Hammond organ. Bob worked in Big Pete’s band for two years in the early 80s and frequently guests with him on live appearances.

More Info / Order CD

Henry Gray – Plays Chicago Blues

HighTone Records – Released 2001

Bob produced and plays on this album which captures the sound and spirit of classic 1950’s style Chicago Blues. Henry Gray is one of the last living Chicago Blues piano legends. With Chico Chism, Bob Margolin, Kid Ramos, Johnny Rapp, Paul Thomas, and Pops McFarlane.

More Info / Order CD

Bob Corritore – All-Star Blues Sessions

HighTone Records – Released 1999

Bob’s highly acclaimed, self-produced 1999 release. With an all-star extravaganza of special guests including Bo Diddley, Jimmy Rogers, R.L. Burnside, Robert Jr. Lockwood, Nappy Brown, Kid Ramos, Henry Gray, Bob Margolin, King Karl, Rusty Zinn, Chico Chism, Lil’ Ed, Clarence Edwards, Jimmy Dotson, Dino Spells, Pinetop Perkins, and more! This CD made #19 in the Living Blues Radio Charts as well as getting great reviews in Living Blues, Blues Review, Downbeat, and Stereophile magazines.

More Info / Order CD

Lucious Parr – We Got A Problem

PAU Records – Released 1999

More modern blues from Lucius. Bob plays harmonica on three cuts.

More Info / Order CD

Lisa Otey – Gimme Some A Yo’ Sugar!

Owl’s Nest Productions – Released 1999

Bob appears as a special guest on the song “Scratch My Itch”, doing a harmonica duet with Rochelle Raya from the band Sistah Blue.

More Info / Order CD

Texas Red – What Kind Of Woman Is That!

Blue Loon Records – Released 1997

Bob plays harmonica on two tracks. Also included on this album is fine harmonica work from Mojo Buford and R.J. Mischo.

More Info / Order CD

Sarge Lintecum – Vietnam Blues

Released 1997

An unusual blues album by a Vietnam veteran who sings of his war experiences. Bob appears on two cuts, one an instrumental showcasing five harmonica players (Bob, Sarge, Dave Trippy, Hans Olson, and Bill Tarsha), each with a featured solo.

More Info / Order CD

Various Artists – Desert Blues Vol. 1

CDGB – Released 1996

Bob plays harmonica on three cuts on this compilation of Phoenix blues artists, including Dino Spells’ “Jennie Bea”, King Karl’s “Mathilda”, and Chico Chism’s “Big Fat Woman – 480 Pounds”, and plays second guitar on Chief Gilliame’s “I’m A Howlin’ Wolf”. Now out of print.

Lucius Parr – Yoakum Texas Blues

PAU Records – Released 1996

Contemporary blues and soul by Albert Collins’ cousin. Bob plays harmonica on the title track and on “Don’t Call My Name”.

More Info / Order CD

Chico Chism – Raw As Hell

Cher-Kee Records – Released 1995

Bob plays harmonica on “Big Fat Woman – 480 Pounds” and “Arizona Woman”. Other tracks include fine harmonica work by Johnny Tanner and Hans Olson (producer of the disc).

Various Artists – Blue Saguaro

Fervor Records – Released 1993

A collection of Arizona blues released in 1993 providing an overview of Arizona’s local blues talent. Includes performances by Chico Chism, Dino Spells, Buddy Reed, Big Pete Pearson, S.E. Willis, Chief Gillame, Rena Haus, Rocket 88s, Tommy Dukes, Sam Taylor, Scotty Spenner, and Hans Olson. Bob plays harmonica on Dino Spells’ “Goin’ to Chicago”, Chief Gilliame’s “Don’t Leave Me No More”, and Chico Chism’s “Mother-in-Law Blues”. Now out of print.