Bashkir State Medical University has been licensed by the Ministry of Education of the Russian Federation to train international students in the field of MBBS. At present, Bashkir State Medical University is a big scientific establishment where fundamental, applied and methodical scientific researchers are carried out on large scale and all enrolled MBBS students are encouraged to take part in all of them. In the unity of scientific, educational, and therapeutic processes seen today and the future of Bashkir State Medical University, and it is hoped that the staff of their university to cope with the tasks of training and re-training of highly qualified medical personnel in the modern world with utmost dedication. The Bashkir State Medical University has collaborated with the World Health Organization (WHO), which has allowed this university to have an extensive scientific contacts with many foreign higher educational establishments. Bashkir State Medical University is a member of the World Health Organization (WHO) and is also recognized by the National Medical Commission (NMC), formerly, Medical Council of India (MCI) India, (MMC) Malaysia, GMC UK, and others many countries. International students from 30 countries of world including Europe, Asia, Latin America have studied their MBBS from Bashkir Medical University in the past and are currently working in various countries of the world as leading doctors. Since its establishment, Bashkir State Medical University has produced over 2500 general practitioners, dentists, and pediatricians who are being practicing their medical career in various foreign countries. MBBS at Bashkir State Medical University is being taught in the English medium of instructions fully for those who are good at English with full trained and well-proficient English speaking faculty members. All the enrolled international students who have chosen to study MBBS in English medium from Bashkir State Medical University don’t have to study the Russian language. They will be admitted directly to the first course where medical subjects are taught in English.

Talking about the current scenario of Bashkir State Medical University, it has become one of the largest center for all kind of undergraduates and postgraduate courses which provides for the successful operating of postgraduate courses in 56 scientific majors and doctoral courses in 8 scientific majors. Bashkir State Medical University also offers 10 doctoral and 3 candidate dissertation councils that are responsible for defense and awarding academic degrees in 23 majors to all the local and international enrolled students. Bashkir State Medical University also offer opportunities not only to receive quality knowledge and master professional skills but also to live a bright, exciting, and active life under a safe and secure setting.

Currently, there are various local and international students who are studying MBBS at Bashkir State Medical University and are members of numerous creative teams and student associations. There are about 615 faculty teaching at MBBS at Bashkir State Medical University. Bashkir State Medical University has about 8000 Medical Students local and international students and over 500 full-time faculties at the school of General Medicine (MBBS), dentistry, Pediatrics, Nursing, Pharmacy, and Preventive Medicine. Faculty of General Medicine trains specialists in internal disease, surgery, obstetrics and gynecology, psychiatry, otorhinolaryngology, dermatology and Venereology, infectious diseases, etc. The medical faculty departments at Bashkir State Medical University is equipped with modern diagnostic facilities. All enrolled international gets the change to witness scientists and consultants who are invited to deliver lectures in the university. Bashkir University has a University hospital, 7 Buildings, out-patient clinics for medical and dental, well-equipped laboratories, Bashkir State Medical University has a university hospital, medical and dental outpatient clinics, a large library, sports facilities, five dormitories, a summer camp, and a sanatorium. Over the years the Bashkir State Medical University has trained more than 33 thousand doctors.

With 69 departments, with over 8 thousand Russian and foreign students, Bashkir State Medical University is proud to have history of educating international students from the prominent countries of the world including the UK, the USA, Portugal, Argentina, Australia, Sweden, Greece, Israel, India, Jordan, Iran, Yemen, Cameroon, Cyprus, China, Kuwait, Lebanon, Morocco, Nigeria, Palestine, Syria, Sudan, Tanzania, Tunisia, Sri Lanka, etc. The office of Foreign Students at Bashkir State Medical University perfectly coordinates the training of foreign students studying MBBS at Bashkir State Medical University and is responsible for admission, registration, and managing the Preparatory and Russian Language courses. Bashkir State Medical University enthusiastically participates in bilateral exchanges of medical students within the International Federation of Medical Students Association Program, so that students gets holistic development.

Bashkir State Medical University cooperates with many foreign universities, clinics, scientific and educational centers of Germany, China, Norway, the USA, Great Britain, and other countries. Faculty members and students teaching and studying MBBS at Bashkir State Medical University participate in various exchange programs, conferences, and workshops, perform researches together with our international partners.

At present, Bashkir State Medical University’s Clinic is a medical and scientific base of Bashkir State Medical University. All enrolled international students gets the chance to practice their medical career under the supervision of expert and skill full doctors. The Clinic set up by Bashkir State Medical University has 650 beds. Over 20 thousand patients from all around Russia get treatment, more than 8 thousand operations are performed, and about 3 thousand babies are annually delivered here. Surgeons of the BSMU Clinic perform the following high-tech surgeries: liver and pancreas resections, stomach and small intestine reconstructive surgeries, all types of thoracoscopic surgeries, brachytherapy, coronary artery stent surgeries. Various techniques of angiographic studies and manipulations on all types of vessels, bile ducts, liver chemoembolization ingrowths, and uterine artery embolization in fibromyoma arc involved in medical practice. The Clinic uses techniques of minimally invasive and transplantation surgery.

Faculties at Bashkir State Medical University

Student Life at Bashkir State Medical University

Bashkir Medical University has six hostels that can easily and comfortably accommodate about 2000 international students along with Indian medical students who decided to study MBBS in Russia from Bashkir State Medical University. The hostels offered by the University are flat type i.e. with attached kitchen, toilet, and bathroom. All hostels are well furnished and fully air conditioned for a comfortable stay for every enrolled international year. The rooms are allocated on twin or triple sharing basis of same gender. All the rooms of the hostels are equipped with best Internet facilities available in hostels. All enrolled Indian medical students can get Indian food at the canteen of the hostel and foreign TV channels (Hindi, Tamil, etc.) are also available.

All the hostels offered by the Bashkir State Medical University are well guarded with police security and are always under CCTV surveillance. Bed linen is changed once in a week and the hostel is cleaned once every day. Bashkir State Medical University also organizes various cultural programs every year in which all enrolled students from various countries of the world take part are encouraged to take part. Bashkir State Medical University also has an Indian student association for help and assist all enrolled Indian medical students who choose Bashkir State Medical University to study MBBS in Russia, celebrates all the major Indian festivals like Diwali, Holi, Baisakhi, etc. every year so that Indian students don’t miss the feeling of being homesick.

Bashkir State Medical University has provided the qualified trainers and coaches to teach students about the particular sports. Students get to participate in competitions about sports and evolve their abilities other than study too. Bashkir State Medical University also organizes various tournaments like table tennis, Football, Basketball, and Badminton, etc. and ask its students to participate in them actively. The Bashkir State Medical University’s library has more than 500000 books, 85% is special medical literature. The library has about 4 specialized reading halls with 252 seats, a local net, and an electronic catalog which makes it possible access to many databases.

City at glance

Fee Structure of MBBS For Academic Year 2022-2023