Orenburg State Medical Academy is a medical institute which was established in the year of 1944. The Paediatric department of medicine was found in the year of 1970, a laboratory for scientific-research was formed for study of mechanisms of the natural system. A Doctor’s Improvement School was established now it is known as the Department of post-graduate coaching for specialists. The university built a hostel for international students and a canteen was also built to provide food for the students living in the hostel and university students. The institute was under development in 90’s, some new departments were introducedsuch asDepartment of preventive care and the Department of upper medical care. The Orenburg State Medical Academy formed 3 new departments in the year of 2002 such as Clinical Psychology, Pharmaceutical, and Dental and became one of the best institutions with 8 departments. Currently, there are 555 scientificmembers and staff workingin the university out of which there are 93Physicians and 298 medical associates. The Orenburg State Medical Academy combines 8 departments in Paediatrics, medical specialty, psychotherapy, Department of post-graduate coaching for specialists, Preventive care, Pharmacy, 56 chairs, Dentistry, medical care and preliminary courses for preparation into the internship, Academy, four thesis committees, residency, post-graduate coaching andacademic degree, scientific and innovative centres of the clinic, analysis coordination, the laboratory of instructional simulation centre,digital instructional technologies, and different subdivisions. The theoretical classes are held in the three theoretical buildings of the academy where medical students are taught basic medical theory and recent achievements in medication.

Important Links

Duration

Intake

Documents Required

Admission Procedure

Fees Structure

Orenburg State Medical Academy at a Glance

Intake for MBBS in Orenburg State Medical Academy September Minimum Percentage for MBBS in Orenburg State Medical Academy 50% in PCB NEET Requirement Yes With Qualifying Marks IELTS / TOEFL Not Required Processing Time for MBBS Admission in Orenburg State Medical Academy 45-60 Days Fees for MBBS in Orenburg State Medical Academy 4000 USD Per Year Living Cost 160 - 250 USD Per Month Duration of MBBS in Orenburg State Medical Academy 5+1 Years Medium of Teaching English Recognition NMC and WHO Approved

About Orenburg City

Orenburg city is formerly known as Chkalov, the capital of Orenburg.5 years back there was around 570.3 thousand folks, the urban population was around 554.7 thousand folks and the rural populationwas around 15.6 thousand folks.

In 20’s the Orenburg town is one of the most inhabited towns of Russia.

It lies on the river Ural (Yaik) which is next to the Sakmarariver outlet.

Orenburg is situated 1400 km to the East region of the capital of Russia

Also, it lies in the Europe.

Total area covered by the town is 259 km²

It has a noteworthy rail junction wherever the Central Asian RR, the Samara-Orenburg line and the Trans-Caspian RR line meet.

The city became a centre for Russian trade with the Republic of central Asiaand Kazakhstan.

For 19 years, from 1938 to 1957 the city wasknown as the Chkalov.

Duration of MBBS in Orenburg State Medical Academy

Duration of under-graduate program especially MBBS in Russia is of 6 years including 1 year of apprenticeship and 5 year of classroom learning. The duration of MBBS is almost same for every medical university in Russia. Russian medical universities are providing great opportunity to work during your span of 6 years to get real-time experience exposure.

Intake for Orenburg State Medical Academy

Orenburg State Medical Academyis coming under the top medical universities in Russia in terms of quality education, practical knowledge, low-budget, multi-diversity etc. and hence is experiencing international students from Nepal, UAE, Africa, Pakistan etc. The university is having September intake with limited seats available. Join the hands with Irkutsk state medical university and become a part of their educational program. Apply soon!

Documents Required for Orenburg State Medical Academy

10th and 12th marksheets

Transfer certificate

6 Passport-size photographs

Migration certificate

Passport

Medical insurance and HIV reports by recognised hospital

Admission Procedure for Orenburg State Medical Academy

The Admission Procedure for Orenburg State Medical Academyis easy all you need to follow these simple steps :

STEP 1: Apply Online

After going through all the details of the university, choose the course. A student can fill all the details and send us the documents via email. list of the documents required for enrolling in the university

Copy of the transcripts of Grade 10

Copy of the transcripts of Grade 11

Copy of the transcripts of Grade 12

Copy of School leaving certificate

Copy of Valid Passport

STEP 2: Get the Invitation Letter

After the evolution of the documents, the student will be notified about rejection and acceptance of the application. If a student’s application form is accepted then he/she will be notified after within 1-2 working days. Also, the student will be issued the admission confirmation within the same time period.

STEP 3: Pay Enrolment Expenses

After receiving the confirmation letter, a student can pay the fees through net banking or other payment methods.

STEP 4: Apply For the Visa

After receiving the invitation letter, student need to apply for the Visa as soon as possible because the Visa process could take time. documents required for the visa:

Invitation letter issued by the university.

International passport (With minimum validity of 2 years)

Duly attested certificates of high school.

Medical certificates confirming that the student doesn’t possess HIV/Aids and other STDs.

STEP 5: Arrival at Russia

The student has to pay fees for the first year before arriving at Russia. Also, a student is supposed to send us the flight details. So, that our executive can receive and guide a student after arrival. In case, a student doesn’t inform us about the arrival then he/she could be deported back to the home country by the authorities of Immigration.

STEP 6: Commencement of Classes

It is mandatory for every student to bring a complete of original documents and payment receipts of first year. It is important for a student to register himself/herself at the college after 3 days of arriving in the country. After the completion of the registration process and admission process, a student will be allowed to attend the classes. Make sure to apply to the University before the application deadline. Once you get admission to the University you will most likely depart from your home country in the 1st week of September itself.

Climate of the City

The climate in Orenburg city is extremely fluctuating. The summersare dry and hot: the minimum temperature in the daytime is above 15 degrees for 5 months in a year.

The winter is quite cold, the maximum cover of is noticed in the month of February (23 cm).

In summers, the temperature of cityrises up to 40 degrees Celsius and sometimes it decreases to 6 degrees Celsius.

In winters, the weather changes from light frost to extremely heavy frost, there aretimes when severe frosts or light thaws goes below zero.

Postal code of the city is 460000 Dialling code +7 3532 Time zone – UTC+6:00 Minimum temperature is 10 Maximum temperature is + 40

Benefits for International Students who wish to pursue MBBS from Russia

The course fee in a Russian Medical college is considered the lowest when compared to other countries. The cost of living in Russia is also very cheap.

Russian Universities offer top notch infrastructure to students from a foreign land. All the medical campuses in Russia are well structured and they possess high end equipments which would help any medical student to practice and learn easily. The stay inside the dormitories is extremely comfortable and well equipped for both national and international students.

Universities in Russia offer various scholarship opportunities to deserving candidates, especially to international students based on their skill-set. These scholarships help in waiving off the tuition fee depending on the semesters and help low income students to still pursue their dream of becoming a doctor.

Russia has 26 cultural sites and is recognized by UNESCO (United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization) for its rich heritage. Travelling in and around Russia will give every international student the much needed cultural exposure.

Staying in Russia

The closer to the center of the city, the expensive it gets. To balance the budget, it is wiser to stay outside the city and travel to the center of the city by metro. Metro is inexpensive and easily affordable by the students.

MBBS Fees in Orenburg State Medical University 2024-25

Orenburg State Medical University Tuition Fee/Year Hostel Fee/Year Fees in USD 4000 USD 300 USD Fees in Rupees (INR) approx. 2,80,000 Rupees/yr. 21,000 Rupees/yr.

Note : Eklavya Overseas would like to remind you that fees shown in Indian Rupees may not be the exact amount and may differ from the actual price. Exchange rates are also volatile and are subject to change. Check the Exchange Rates before initiating the admission process. University reserves all the rights to change the fees anytime without any prior personal intimation to the students.

Orenburg State Medical Academy – Faculties

Medical Faculties

Obstetrics and Gynaecology

Human Anatomy

Hospital Therapy them. R.G.Mezhebovskogo

Department of Hospital Surgery

Urology

Children’s Diseases

Outpatient therapy

General Surgery

Clinical Anatomy & Surgery S.S. Mikhailova

Internal Medicine Propaedeutic

Orthopaedics & Traumatology

Endocrinology

Various Surgery

Dentistry Faculties

Department of Ophthalmology

Department of Biological Chemistry

Department of Pathological Physiology

Department of Dentistry and Maxillofacial Surgery

of Physiology

The Department of Physical Education

The Department of Surgery and Clinical Anatomy

Department of Dentistry

Faculty of Higher Nursing Department

Department of Nursing

Faculty of Pharmacy

Biology Department

Biophysics and Math Department

Pharmaceutical Technology & Pharmacognosy

Management and Economics of Pharmacy,

Chemistry & Pharmaceutical Chemistry

Hostel Facility by the University

The dormitory rooms of the university have internet access all around the hostel campus and various Orenburg State Medical University has several library catalogs and online databases. There are over 120 personal computers in the dormitory of the university. The students get free access to the internet from 10 p.m. to 6 a.m. Also, the students of the university are given free email accounts to use. The number of students studying at the university is high and there is limited space available in the university dormitories, only some students can be accommodated at the university dormitories and few students get the privilege to avail the accommodation facilities provided by the university. Also, every year, the students of Indian association celebrate festivals of Indian like Baisakhi, Holi, and Diwali etc.

Why are Hostels Safer for the International Students?

An international student should choose the university hostel since the student will be arriving in the country for the very first time and it is better to be safe and learn few things about the country before choosing outside campus accommodation. All the buildings of the hostel are under CCTV surveillance and protected by police.

Convenience: The hostel campus is close to everything you need.

Safety: 24-hour security means that an international student is safe and their parents need not worry about them.

Our Assistance for MBBS Admission in Orenburg State Medical Academy

We at Eklavya Overseas, being one of the most reliable overseas education consultants assists India medical aspirants in getting the low-cost top universities in Russia for MBBS like Orenburg State Medical Academy. We provide following supports for admission to the Orenburg State Medical Academy and prepare MBBS aspirants eligible to identify the best way to study in Russia at Orenburg State Medical Academy.

What Eklavya Overseas Do For You?

You can trust on Eklavya Overseas when it comes to reliable educational counselling MBBS in Russia at Orenburg State Medical Academy for Indian students in Russia.

We apply for Admission at Orenburg State Medical Academy on your behalf and offer admission promise in the NMC recognized medical colleges in Russia.

We help with the documentation and VISA application including Embassy stamping & Ministry approval.

We assist in translating the academic documents, and notarization. Experience zero rejection of VISA approval.

We arrange safe travel help equipped with insurance to Orenburg State Medical Academy.

We provide suitable and affordable accommodation in Russia.

We arrange safe travel help equipped with travel insurance to Universities and appropriate accommodation in Russia.

Training Centre/Coaching for FMGE or the Screening Test of NMC (Online): We have a list of the best training center or coaching institutes that can guide you about FMGE or the of NMC Screening Test after the conclusion of MBBS degree from NMC approved Medical Universities like Orenburg State Medical Academy.

We register your seats FMGE training institutes for guaranteed achievement in NMC Screening Test.

We provide authentic study notes for FMGE Test Series in order to ensure your accomplishment in the Screening Test of NMC.

Help in further counselling for overseas education when you complete your MBBS Degree in Russia at Orenburg State Medical Academy, like if you want to continue your Post-Graduation program in medicine. We make you understand the various PG Program in Medicine offered by international medical universities.

Hope we could deliver the information you seek for and capable enough to convince your search of MBBS in Russia at Orenburg State Medical Academy. Feel free to contact us to know more about MBBS courses all over the world. Eklavya Overseas could be your trustworthy companion and reliable ally for information on MBBS Programs in Russia at Orenburg State Medical Academy. We are the authorized envoy of Orenburg State Medical Academy and other NMC Approved MBBS Universities in Russia for the students hailing from upper mentioned nations for the year 2024-25.

List of Medical Schools in Russia

Kazan State Medical University Crimea Federal University Altai State Medical University Dagestan State Medical University Irkutsk State Medical University Kursk State Medical University Mari State University Orel State University Bashkir State Medical University First Moscow State Medical University Kazan Federal University Nizhny Novgorod Medical University Northern State Medical University Novosibirsk State Medical University Omsk State Medical University Orenburg State Medical University Perm State Medical University Ryazan State Medical University Saint Petersburg Medical University Smolensk State Medical University Tambov State University Belgorod State University Tver State Medical University People’s friendship University Pirogov Russian NRM University Saratov State Medical University Siberian State Medical University Syktyvkar State Medical University Volgograd State Medical University Izhevsk State Medical University Pskov State University

Why MBBS in Russia?

Russia is a well-known superpower and world’s largest country by area. Taking education in a country like Russia will knock numerous of opportunities at your doorstep. Russian medical study is famous all over the world for its research study and premier medical schools. More than 30 medical schools of Russia have got listed in International ranking of university medical study. Moreover, the universities are recognized by many international bodies like WHO, NMC, and medical council of many countries. Russia is the home for many students from India, Sri Lanka, Pakistan, Europe, who study there and participates in bringing the best out of themselves.

Benefits of Studying MBBS in Russia

Russian medical study will lend you into multiple benefits.

Premier medical school with rigorous instructional standards.

Mode of teaching is English throughout.

No donation or any other entrance examination required for admission.

Proper environment for research and development.

Presence of International diversity in medical universities.

Russian medical degree is recognized globally.

Premier institutes like NMC, UNESCO, WHO have accredited Universities of Russia for providing best medical education.

Reasonable Tuition fee and low-cost living standards.

Provides Great opportunity to work during and after MBBS in Russia.

Practical knowledge has been given more importance during the span of 6 years.

Living conditions are favorable everywhere in Russia

Why choose Eklavya Overseas for MBBS in Russia ?

We at Eklavya Overseas are one of the best record holder education consultants in India. We have a team of expert consultants who offer well-researched assistance and comprehensive counselling for you to make a bright career in the field of Medicine. Eklavya Overseas has several centers across the subcontinent, and each one follows the uniformly structured way of providing excellent results that ensure a satisfactory experience for our valuable clients. We at Eklavya Overseas have the experience and resources to ensure you get access to everything that you may require for an MBBS admission in one of the top global universities. Team Eklavya Overseas works with the applicants like a family and supports them at every step. Years of experience, a skilled and dedicated team and access to a multitude of resources have enabled us to assist hundreds of Indian students to get admission in the top medical colleges in the various European countries.

Advantages of consulting Eklavya Overseas