Are you looking for the top medical universities? Then Bashkir State Medical University is one of the leading universities of Russia. The high-quality medical education brings them great rank among the top 10 medical institutions. So, if you are looking for quality education at affordable fee then it is the ideal place. The amazing study environmentof this university helps you enhance your knowledge.The high FMGE passing percentage is another reason behind the popularity of this university. The 6 years of study duration facilitate 1 year of internship in reputed hospitals. The quality education, multi diversity are the big plus for the candidates. The teacher students’ ration of 1:15 ensures the individual care of the candidates. The excellent study environment is another factor that brings near about 7500 Indian students here every year. The unique teaching technique of skilled faculties is a major plus for them. Gradually, from the foundation day, this university achieves great success in the medical field. The university incorporates modern technologies for transplantation surgery. Besides providing learning opportunities, this university also pays attention on hostel facility.So, it is a great place for the students for gaining practical knowledge Moreover, the guidance from the skilled faculties also bebeneficial for starting your career from here, The Bashkir State Medical University is among the leading medical universities in Russia. The Bashkir State Medical University is placed among 10 best Medical Universities in Russia. The University is known for providing high quality of education at low tuition fee and having an easy process of admission. The Bashkir State Medical University has become one of the most popular medical universities among foreign students for MBBS studies. The Bashkir State Medical University has made to the list of largest medico-scientific centres in the capital city of Bashkortostan Republic i.e. UFA. The UFA is the most beautiful and largest cities in the nation. Since 1932, the Bashkir State Medical University has been training medical students.

Important Links

Duration

Intake

Documents Required

Admission Procedure

Fees Structure

Bashkir State Medical University at a Glance

Intake for MBBS in Bashkir State Medical University September Minimum Percentage for MBBS in Bashkir State Medical University 50% in PCB NEET Requirement Yes With Qualifying Marks IELTS / TOEFL Not Required Processing Time for MBBS Admission in Bashkir State Medical University 45-60 Days Fees for MBBS in Bashkir State Medical University 2,99,244 RUB Per Year Living Cost 160 – 250 USD Per Month Duration of MBBS in Bashkir State Medical University 5+1 Years Medium of Teaching English Recognition NMC and WHO Approved

The Life of Students at Bashkir State Medical University

Bashkir State Medical University (BSMU) offers a vibrant and enriching environment for its students, ensuring a well-rounded academic and personal experience.

BSMU provides high-quality education with a focus on both theoretical knowledge and practical skills. The university has a student-to-teacher ratio of 1:15, which ensures personalized attention and support for each student. This environment fosters academic excellence and helps students achieve their full potential.

Students at BSMU are encouraged to participate in various extracurricular activities such as competitions, symposiums, and research projects. These activities keep students engaged and allow them to apply their knowledge in practical settings. Additionally, BSMU hosts an annual event called the “Voice of Youth,” where students and faculty showcase their talents through theatre performances, singing, musical instruments, and choreography. This event promotes cultural exchange and creativity among the university community.

Duration of MBBS in Bashkir State Medical University

Duration of under-graduate program especially MBBS in Russia is of 6 years including 1 year of apprenticeship and 5 year of classroom learning. The duration of MBBS is almost same for every medical university in Russia. Russian medical universities are providing great opportunity to work during your span of 6 years to get real-time experience exposure.

Intake for Bashkir State Medical University

Bashkir State Medical University coming under the top medical universities in Russia in terms of quality education, practical knowledge, low-budget, multi-diversity etc. and hence is experiencing international students from Nepal, UAE, Africa, Pakistan etc. The university is having September intake with limited seats available. Join the hands with Irkutsk state medical university and become a part of their educational program. Apply soon!

Documents Required for Bashkir State Medical University

10th and 12th marksheets

Transfer certificate

6 Passport-size photographs

Migration certificate

Passport

Medical insurance and HIV reports by recognised hospital

Admission Procedure for Bashkir State Medical University

The Admission Procedure for Bashkir State Medical University is easy all you need to follow these steps :

STEP 1: Apply Online

After going through all the details of the university, choose the course. A student can fill all the details and send us the documents via email. list of the documents required for enrolling in the university

Copy of the transcripts of Grade 10

Copy of the transcripts of Grade 11

Copy of the transcripts of Grade 12

Copy of School leaving certificate

Copy of Valid Passport

STEP 2: Get the Invitation Letter

After the evolution of the documents, the student will be notified about rejection and acceptance of the application. If a student’s application form is accepted then he/she will be notified after within 1-2 working days. Also, the student will be issued the admission confirmation within the same time period.

STEP 3: Pay Enrolment Expenses

After receiving the confirmation letter, a student can pay the fees through net banking or other payment methods.

STEP 4: Apply For the Visa

After receiving the invitation letter, student need to apply for the Visa as soon as possible because the Visa process could take time. documents required for the visa:

Invitation letter issued by the university.

International passport (With minimum validity of 2 years)

Duly attested certificates of high school.

Medical certificates confirming that the student doesn’t possess HIV/Aids and other STDs.

STEP 5: Arrival at Russia

The student has to pay fees for the first year before arriving at Russia. Also, a student is supposed to send us the flight details. So, that our executive can receive and guide a student after arrival. In case, a student doesn’t inform us about the arrival then he/she could be deported back to the home country by the authorities of Immigration.

STEP 6: Commencement of Classes

It is mandatory for every student to bring a complete of original documents and payment receipts of first year. It is important for a student to register himself/herself at the college after 3 days of arriving in the country. After the completion of the registration process and admission process, a student will be allowed to attend the classes. Make sure to apply to the University before the application deadline. Once you get admission to the University you will most likely depart from your home country in the 1st week of September itself.

Staying in Russia

The closer to the centre of the city, the expensive it gets. To balance the budget, it is wiser to stay outside the city and travel to the centre of the city by metro. Metro is inexpensive and easily affordable by the students.

Faculties and Programs

General Medicine (MBBS)

Pharmacy

Engineering, Arts, Humanities, Natural Sciences, etc.

Facilities

Library at Bashkir State Medical University

Extensive Collection: Vast array of medical books, journals, and electronic resources.

Digital Resources: Access to online databases, e-books, and journals for remote study.

Study Facilities: Comfortable reading rooms, quiet study areas, and computer access.

Research Support: Assistance with literature searches, referencing, and academic resources.

Special Collections: Rare medical books and archives for historical research.

Collaborative Spaces: Group study areas with multimedia tools for presentations.

International Journals: Access to global medical journals for the latest research.

User-Friendly Services: Online catalogues, book reservations, and interlibrary loans.

Sports at Bashkir State Medical University

Comprehensive Facilities: Modern gymnasium, indoor and outdoor sports complexes.

Diverse Activities: Football, basketball, volleyball, tennis, swimming, and more.

University Teams: Opportunities to join and compete in university sports teams.

Fitness Programs: Regular fitness classes, yoga sessions, and aerobics.

Inter-University Competitions: Participation in national and international sports events.

Health and Wellness: Emphasis on promoting a healthy lifestyle among students.

Recreational Sports: Facilities for casual sports and recreational activities.

Support Services: Professional coaches and trainers available for guidance and training.

STUDENTS’ LIFE

Over 7500 Indian students enrolled annually, fostering a vibrant multicultural environment , Regularly organized international and national cultural events promote cross-cultural exchange and friendship , Opportunities for students to develop various skills through participation in extracurricular activities and events , Activities designed to help international students integrate and build friendships with peers from diverse backgrounds,Platforms provided for students to implement and enhance their academic knowledge through practical experiences,University offers support services to ensure the well-being and academic success of international students,Events facilitate networking opportunities, helping students build connections for future endeavors,Encouragement for students to engage with the local community, fostering a sense of belonging and responsibility.

Medical Programs Offered by the University

General Medicine (MBBS) Medium of instruction: Russian, English Duration of the course: 6 years (5 years + 1 year of internship) Pharmacy Medium of instruction: Russian and English Duration of the course: 5 years

MBBS Fees in Bashkir State Medical University 2024-25

Bashkir State Medical University Tuition Fee/Year Hostel Fee/Year Fees in RUB 2,99,244 RUB As Per Choices Fees in Rupees (INR) approx. 2,77,000 Rupees/yr. As Per Choices

Note : Global Rus would like to remind you that fees shown in Indian Rupees may not be the exact amount and may differ from the actual price. Exchange rates are also volatile and are subject to change. Check the Exchange Rates before initiating the admission process. University reserves all the rights to change the fees anytime without any prior personal intimation to the students.

Our Assistance for MBBS Admission in Bashkir State Medical University

We at Global Rus , being one of the most reliable overseas education consultants assists India medical aspirants in getting the low-cost top universities in Russia for MBBS like Bashkir State Medical University . We provide following supports for admission to the Bashkir State Medical University and prepare MBBS aspirants eligible to identify the best way to study in Russia at Bashkir State Medical University .

What Global Rus Do For You?

You can trust on Global Rus when it comes to reliable educational counselling MBBS in Russia at Bashkir State for Indian students in Russia.

We apply for Admission at Bashkir State Medical University on your behalf and offer admission promise in the NMC recognized medical colleges in Russia.

We help with the documentation and VISA application including Embassy stamping & Ministry approval.

We assist in translating the academic documents, and notarization. Experience zero rejection of VISA approval.

We arrange safe travel help equipped with insurance to Bashkir State Medical University .

We provide suitable and affordable accommodation in Russia.

We arrange safe travel help equipped with travel insurance to Universities and appropriate accommodation in Russia.

Training Centre/Coaching for FMGE or the Screening Test of NMC (Online): We have a list of the best training center or coaching institutes that can guide you about FMGE or the of NMC Screening Test after the conclusion of MBBS degree from NMC approved Medical Universities like Bashkir State Medical University .

We register your seats FMGE training institutes for guaranteed achievement in NMC Screening Test.

We provide authentic study notes for FMGE Test Series in order to ensure your accomplishment in the Screening Test of NMC.

Help in further counselling for overseas education when you complete your MBBS Degree in Russia at Bashkir State Medical University, like if you want to continue your Post-Graduation program in medicine. We make you understand the various PG Program in Medicine offered by international medical universities.

Hope we could deliver the information you seek for and capable enough to convince your search of MBBS in Russia at Bashkir State Medical University . Feel free to contact us to know more about MBBS courses all over the world. Global Rus could be your trustworthy companion and reliable ally for information on MBBS Programs in Russia at Bashkir State Medical University. We are the authorized envoy of Bashkir State and other NMC Approved MBBS Universities in Russia for the students hailing from upper mentioned nations for the year 2024-25.

List of Medical Schools in Russia

Kazan State Medical University Crimea Federal University Altai State Medical University Dagestan State Medical University Irkutsk State Medical University Kursk State Medical University Mari State University Orel State University Bashkir State Medical University First Moscow State Medical University Kazan Federal University Nizhny Novgorod Medical University Northern State Medical University Novosibirsk State Medical University Omsk State Medical University Orenburg State Medical University Perm State Medical University Ryazan State Medical University Saint Petersburg Medical University Smolensk State Medical University Tambov State University Belgorod State University Tver State Medical University People’s friendship University Pirogov Russian NRM University Saratov State Medical University Siberian State Medical University Syktyvkar State Medical University Volgograd State Medical University Izhevsk State Medical University Pskov State University

Why MBBS in Russia?

Russia is a well-known superpower and world’s largest country by area. Taking education in a country like Russia will knock numerous of opportunities at your doorstep.

Russian medical study is famous all over the world for its research study and premier medical schools. More than 30 medical schools of Russia have got listed in International ranking of university medical study. Moreover, the universities are recognized by many international bodies like WHO, NMC, and medical council of many countries.

Russia is the home for many students from India, Sri Lanka, Pakistan, Europe, who study there and participates in bringing the best out of themselves.

Benefits of Studying MBBS in Russia

Russian medical study will lend you into multiple benefits.

Premier medical school with rigorous instructional standards.

Mode of teaching is English throughout.

No donation or any other entrance examination required for admission.

Proper environment for research and development.

Presence of International diversity in medical universities.

Russian medical degree is recognized globally.

Premier institutes like NMC, UNESCO, WHO have accredited Universities of Russia for providing best medical education.

Reasonable Tuition fee and low-cost living standards.

Provides Great opportunity to work during and after MBBS in Russia.

Practical knowledge has been given more importance during the span of 6 years.

Living conditions are favorable everywhere in Russia

Why choose Global Rus for MBBS in Russia ?

We at Global Rus are one of the best record holder education consultants in India. We have a team of expert consultants who offer well-researched assistance and comprehensive counselling for you to make a bright career in the field of Medicine. Global Rus has several centers across the subcontinent, and each one follows the uniformly structured way of providing excellent results that ensure a satisfactory experience for our valuable clients. We at Global Rus have the experience and resources to ensure you get access to everything that you may require for an MBBS admission in one of the top global universities. Team Global Rus works with the applicants like a family and supports them at every step. Years of experience, a skilled and dedicated team and access to a multitude of resources have enabled us to assist hundreds of Indian students to get admission in the top medical colleges in the various European countries.

Advantages of consulting Global Rus