Bashkir State Medical University

Are you looking for the top medical universities? Then Bashkir State Medical University is one of the leading universities of Russia. The high-quality medical education brings them great rank among the top 10 medical institutions. So, if you are looking for quality education at affordable fee then it is the ideal place. The amazing study environmentof this universityhelps you enhance your knowledge.The high FMGE passing percentage is another reason behind the popularity of this university. The 6 years of study duration facilitate 1 year of internship in reputed hospitals. The quality education, multi diversity are the big plus for the candidates. The teacher students' ration of 1:15 ensures the individual care of the candidates. The excellent study environment is another factor that brings near about 7500 Indian students here every year. The unique teaching technique of skilled faculties is a major plus for them. Gradually, from the foundation day, this university achieves great success in the medical field. The university incorporates modern technologies for transplantation surgery. Besides providing learning opportunities, this university also pays attention on hostel facility.So, it is a great place for the students for gaining practical knowledge Moreover, the guidance from the skilled facultiesalsobebeneficial for starting your career from here, The Bashkir State Medical University is among the leading medical universities in Russia. The Bashkir State Medical University is placed among 10 best Medical Universities in Russia. The University is known for providing high quality of education at low tuition fee and having an easy process of admission. The Bashkir State Medical University has become one of the most popular medical universities among foreign students for MBBS studies. The Bashkir State Medical University has made to the list of largest medico-scientific centres in the capital city of Bashkortostan Republic i.e. UFA. The UFA is the most beautiful and largest cities in the nation. Since 1932, the Bashkir State Medical University has been training medical students.

Important Links

Duration

Intake

Documents Required

Admission Procedure

Fees Structure

Bashkir State Medical University at a Glance

Intake for MBBS in Bashkir State Medical University September Minimum Percentage for MBBS in Bashkir State Medical University 50% in PCB NEET Requirement Yes With Qualifying Marks IELTS / TOEFL Not Required Processing Time for MBBS Admission in Bashkir State Medical University 45-60 Days Fees for MBBS in Bashkir State Medical University 3500 USD Per Year Living Cost 160 - 250 USD Per Month Duration of MBBS in Bashkir State Medical University 5+1 Years Medium of Teaching English Recognition NMC and WHO Approved

About Bashkir State Medical University

The Bashkir State Medical University has attained a license from the Ministry of Education of Russian Federation to train foreign students. Today the University is a scientific establishment which carry out the methodical, fundamental and applied scientific researchers. The university hopes that the university’s staffs of the university manage with the process of re-training and training of qualified medical staff in this modern world. The Bashkir State Medical University work jointly with WHO i.e. World Health Organization, has ample contacts with many international higher educational institutions and the BSMU is also a member of WHO and accredited by the National Medical Commission, Malaysian Medical Council, General Medical Council and many other countries. Students from different 30 countries of Asia, Europe and Latin America have graduated from Bashkir Medical University. Since the university established, 2500 dentists, paediatricians and general practitioners have been taught for other countries. The course in General Medicine is instructed in English for foreign students who don’t understand Russian. Students who have selected English as medium of the MBBS course are not supposed to study the course in Russian language. The students are directly admitted to the course where subjects are instructed in English.

Duration of MBBS in Bashkir State Medical University

Duration of under-graduate program especially MBBS in Russia is of 6 years including 1 year of apprenticeship and 5 year of classroom learning. The duration of MBBS is almost same for every medical university in Russia. Russian medical universities are providing great opportunity to work during your span of 6 years to get real-time experience exposure.

Intake for Bashkir State Medical University

Bashkir State Medical University is coming under the top medical universities in Russia in terms of quality education, practical knowledge, low-budget, multi-diversity etc. and hence is experiencing international students from Nepal, UAE, Africa, Pakistan etc. The university is having September intake with limited seats available. Join the hands with Irkutsk state medical university and become a part of their educational program. Apply soon!

Documents Required for Bashkir State Medical University

10th and 12th marksheets

Transfer certificate

6 Passport-size photographs

Migration certificate

Passport

Medical insurance and HIV reports by recognised hospital

Admission Procedure for Bashkir State Medical University

The Admission Procedure for Bashkir State Medical University is easy all you need to follow these simple steps:

STEP 1: Apply Online

After going through all the details of the university, choose the course. A student can fill all the details and send us the documents via email. list of the documents required for enrolling in the university

Copy of the transcripts of Grade 10

Copy of the transcripts of Grade 11

Copy of the transcripts of Grade 12

Copy of School leaving certificate

Copy of Valid Passport

STEP 2: Get the Invitation Letter

After the evolution of the documents, the student will be notified about rejection and acceptance of the application. If a student’s application form is accepted then he/she will be notified after within 1-2 working days. Also, the student will be issued the admission confirmation within the same time period.

STEP 3: Pay Enrolment Expenses

After receiving the confirmation letter, a student can pay the fees through net banking or other payment methods.

STEP 4: Apply For the Visa

After receiving the invitation letter, student need to apply for the Visa as soon as possible because the Visa process could take time. documents required for the visa:

Invitation letter issued by the university.

International passport (With minimum validity of 2 years)

Duly attested certificates of high school.

Medical certificates confirming that the student doesn’t possess HIV/Aids and other STDs.

STEP 5: Arrival at Russia

The student has to pay fees for the first year before arriving at Russia. Also, a student is supposed to send us the flight details. So, that our executive can receive and guide a student after arrival. In case, a student doesn’t inform us about the arrival then he/she could be deported back to the home country by the authorities of Immigration.

STEP 6: Commencement of Classes

It is mandatory for every student to bring a complete of original documents and payment receipts of first year. It is important for a student to register himself/herself at the college after 3 days of arriving in the country. After the completion of the registration process and admission process, a student will be allowed to attend the classes. Make sure to apply to the University before the application deadline. Once you get admission to the University you will most likely depart from your home country in the 1st week of September itself.

Bashkir State Medical University Today

The Bashkir State Medical University is among the largest centre for postgraduate and undergraduate courses which offers operating of 8 scientific majors in doctoral courses & 56 scientific majors in postgraduate courses. There are 3 candidates and10 doctoral dissertation councils responsible for defence and awarding degrees. The Bashkir State University offers opportunities not only professional skills and high-quality knowledge, but also offers students to live an exciting, active and bright life. The students currently studying at the Bashkir State Medical University are the members of many student associations and creative teams. There are 615 faculties training students at the Bashkir State Medical University. There are over 8000 Medical Students and more than 500 faculties at the school of dentistry, Nursing, General Medicine (MBBS), Pharmacy, Preventive Medicine and Paediatrics.

The General Medical faculty trains students in, surgery, gynaecology, obstetrics, internal disease, psychiatry, dermatology, venereology, infectious diseases etc. The different departments are fully equipped with modern technologies. International consultants and scientists deliver lectures to the students at the university. The Bashkir State Medical University owns 7 Buildings, university hospital, out-patient healthcare centre for dental and medical, well-equipped laboratories, large library, five dormitories, sports facilities, a sanatorium and a summer camp. Over 33 thousand doctors have been trained at the university.

Bashkir State Medical University offers Following Programs

Faculty of General Medicine (MBBS)

Faculty of Dentistry

Faculty of Paediatrics

Faculty of Pharmacy

Faculty of Sports Medicine

Faculty of Postgraduate Studies

Faculty of Adaptive Physical Education Culture

Faculty of Clinical Psychology

Faculty for Foreign Students

Higher Education Nursing School

Faculty of Pre-University Education

Achievements of the University

Nowadays, the Bashkir State Medical Clinic is a teaching, a medical institution, scientific and medical base of the Bashkir State Medical University. The Clinic is 650 bedded. More than 20,000 patients from other cities of Russia come to get the treatment, around 3,000 babies are given birth and more than 8,000 Operations are performed here. The Surgeons in the Bashkir State Medical University’s clinic performs the following surgeries with high technology:

Liver & pancreas resections,

Thoracoscopic surgeries,

Reconstructive surgeries stomach & small intestine,

Brachytherapy,

Stent surgeries of coronary artery.

Several techniques of manipulations and angiographic studies on, bile ducts, different vessels, uterine arteries remobilization in fibromyoma arc, liver chemoembolization in growths and techniques involved in practice of medicine. The clinic of the university uses different modern techniques of transplantation surgery and minimally invasive

International Relations

The Bashkir State Medical University has trained many international students from around 69 departments, over 8,000 foreign and Russian students who belonged to the countries such as Portugal, the UK, the USA, Australia, Argentina, Sweden, Israel, Greece, India, Iran, Jordan, Yemen, Cyprus, Cameroon, Russia, Lebanon, Kuwait, Morocco, Palestine, Nigeria, Syria, Tanzania, Sudan, Sri Lanka, Tunisia, etc. The International office especially for foreign students at the university manages the training of all international students in the Bashkir State Medical University and also manages the admission, managing, registration and preparatory course in Russian Language.

The Bashkir State Medical University participates in the exchange program of medical students in the program of International Federation of Medical Students Association. The Bashkir State Medical University collaborate with many international clinics, universities, educational and scientific centres of Russia, Germany, USA, Great Britain, Norway & other countries. The Faculty and students and members of the university take part in conferences, exchange programs and workshops. They also research together with the international partners of the university.

Students Life at Bashkir State Medical University

The Bashkir State Medical University owns five hostels which have the capacity to accommodate around 2000 students. The room of the hostels are flat type attached with kitchen, bathroom and toilet. All the hostels of the university are fully air and fully furnished. The basic rule is to share one room by two or three students. Students have internet access in hostel campus. They can also eat Indian food available at the hostel campus and international TV channels in Hindi, Tamil and more languages are available by the TV operator. All the buildings of the hostel are under CCTV surveillance and protected with police. Bed linens are changed once in one week and the hostel campus is cleaned every day by the cleaners. Every year, the Bashkir State Medical University conducts different cultural programs where students from different countries of the world participate in the program. Also, every year, the association of Indian association celebrates festivals of Indian like Baisakhi, Holi, and Diwali etc.

The Bashkir State Medical University also conducts many tournaments like International tournaments of Cricket, table tennis, Basketball, Badminton and Football etc. The Bashkir State Medical University’s library has collection of more than 50,000 books, 85% of the collection is medical literature. The Library also has four reading halls with seating of 252 students, and electronic catalogue and local internet which makes easy to access to many databases.

MBBS Fees in Bashkir State Medical University 2024-25

Bashkir State Medical University Tuition Fee/Year Hostel Fee/Year Fees in USD 3500 USD 1000 USD Fees in Rupees (INR) approx. 2,45,000 Rupees/yr. 70,000 Rupees/yr.

Note : Eklavya Overseas would like to remind you that fees shown in Indian Rupees may not be the exact amount and may differ from the actual price. Exchange rates are also volatile and are subject to change. Check the Exchange Rates before initiating the admission process. University reserves all the rights to change the fees anytime without any prior personal intimation to the students.

Why MBBS in Russia?

Russia is a well-known superpower and world’s largest country by area. Taking education in a country like Russia will knock numerous of opportunities at your doorstep. Russian medical study is famous all over the world for its research study and premier medical schools. More than 30 medical schools of Russia have got listed in International ranking of university medical study. Moreover, the universities are recognized by many international bodies like WHO, NMC, and medical council of many countries. Russia is the home for many students from India, Sri Lanka, Pakistan, Europe, who study there and participates in bringing the best out of themselves.

Benefits of Studying MBBS in Russia

Russian medical study will lend you into multiple benefits

Premier medical school with rigorous instructional standards.

Mode of teaching is English throughout.

No donation or any other entrance examination required for admission.

Proper environment for research and development.

Presence of International diversity in medical universities.

Russian medical degree is recognized globally.

Premier institutes like NMC, UNESCO, WHO have accredited Universities of Russia for providing best medical education.

Reasonable Tuition fee and low-cost living standards.

Provides Great opportunity to work during and after MBBS in Russia.

Practical knowledge has been given more importance during the span of 6 years.

Living conditions are favorable everywhere in Russia

List of Medical Schools in Russia

Kazan State Medical University Crimea Federal University Altai State Medical University Dagestan State Medical University Irkutsk State Medical University Kursk State Medical University Mari State University Orel State University Bashkir State Medical University First Moscow State Medical University Kazan Federal University Nizhny Novgorod Medical University Northern State Medical University Novosibirsk State Medical University Omsk State Medical University Orenburg State Medical University Perm State Medical University Ryazan State Medical University Saint Petersburg Medical University Smolensk State Medical University Tambov State University Belgorod State University Tver State Medical University People’s friendship University Pirogov Russian NRM University Saratov State Medical University Siberian State Medical University Syktyvkar State Medical University Volgograd State Medical University Izhevsk State Medical University Pskov State University

Why choose Eklavya Overseas for MBBS in Russia?

We at Eklavya Overseas are one of the best record holder education consultants in India. We have a team of expert consultants who offer well-researched assistance and comprehensive counselling for you to make a bright career in the field of Medicine. Eklavya Overseas has several centers across the subcontinent, and each one follows the uniformly structured way of providing excellent results that ensure a satisfactory experience for our valuable clients. We at Eklavya Overseas have the experience and resources to ensure you get access to everything that you may require for an MBBS admission in one of the top global universities. Team Eklavya Overseas works with the applicants like a family and supports them at every step. Years of experience, a skilled and dedicated team and access to a multitude of resources have enabled us to assist hundreds of Indian students to get admission in the top medical colleges in the various European countries.

Advantages of consulting Eklavya Overseas