Isabella Leong (梁洛施) holds no regrets in her decision to separate from billionaire boyfriend, Richard Li (李澤楷). Although the two were never married during their four-year relationship, they still share an amicable parenting bond over their three sons. The 25-year-old actress has set aside her love life to focus on her children and career life.

When Isabella gave birth to her first son in Canada, Richard accompanied her in the delivery room and cut the umbilical cord. It was the happiest moment in her entire life. Within three years of dating Richard, Isabella gave birth to three sons, including a set of twin boys in her second pregnancy. She shared happily, “Our eldest child was planned, but the twins were a course of nature. I didn’t expect to be pregnant again so soon.”

Afraid that her sons would feel superior since their grandfather Li Ka Shing (李嘉誠) is namely the richest person in Asia, Isabella proves to be a very strict mother. She recalled, “I’m not fond of wasting food. Once, our eldest son had his plate full of food, and I was persistent in having him finish all of it. In the end, he threw up. Richard was surprised I had been so harsh.” In contrast to Isabella, Richard plays the loving role and pampers his sons.

Taking a hiatus after meeting Richard and giving birth, Isabella has now returned to the entertainment industry to advance her career. Last September, she agreed to star in Nian Nian <念念>, a film by Taiwanese director Sylvia Chang (張艾嘉). Soon after, Isabella received the opportunity to star alongside theater actor Jim Chim (詹瑞文) in the stage play, Signs of Happiness <快樂勿語>. Busy with work, there is barely time to ponder over her love life. She has returned to Hong Kong to pursue these projects, while her sons remain in Canada.

Touching on her past relationship with Richard, Isabella expressed, “When I’m in love, I love truly and deeply. When it’s time to move on, I move on. We both tried to maintain our relationship, but there was no way to continue. Things cannot be forced if we were not meant to be. I don’t regret my decision, because now our relationship as parents is better than before.” She praised Richard for being a mature, cautious, and talented individual.

Source: Sina.com