Each year Japanese authorities remove dozens of bodies found hanging in a single forest - but others can lie undiscovered for years.

The vegetation is so dense in the Aokigahara Forest, at the foot of Mount Fuji, that it is all too easy to disappear among the evergreens and never be seen again.

Where a public trail turns into a cordoned-off area, for many the point of no-return, there is a sign urging would-be suicide victims to think again.

Scroll down for video

Above contacts details for the Suicide Prevention Association, the sign reads: 'Your life is a precious gift from your parents. Please think about your parents, siblings and children. Don't keep it to yourself. Talk about your troubles.'

Exactly why so many choose to end their lives in the forest remains something of a mystery, though it has been suggested that the first among them were inspired by a novel set there.

Now the haunting site has inspired its own Hollywood horror film, The Forest, staring British Game Of Thrones Star Natalie Dormer.

The 34-year-old actress plays Sara, a young American woman who travels to the forest in search of her missing twin sister.

Despite warnings not to 'stray from the path,' Sara dares to enter the forest to discover her sister's fate, but is confronted by the angry and tormented souls of the dead.

Filming is not permitted at the forest, but Miss Dormer told the Daily Mirror she did visit the woods as part of her preparation for her first leading role.

'It does make you thoughtful – and sad because so many people in this forest go in with the firm intention of not coming out,' she said.

The Forest is not the first time the mystery of Aokigahara Forest has been explored on film.

In 2011 geologist Azusa Hayano, who has studied the forest for more than 30 years, took a film crew from Vice.com deep inside the site known as 'Jukai' - the sea of trees - to share what he has learned.

Though Mr Hayano is unable to give any definitive answer as to why so many kill themselves at Aokigahara, he has gained great insight into the behaviour of those desperate enough to venture in with no intention of coming back.

Such is the nature of his work, he is often faced with the grim task of uncovering suicide victims, or stepping in when he finds those for whom it is not too late.

He estimated at the time that he alone has stumbled across more than 100 bodies in two decades.

Police are understood to have stopped releasing figures on the number of bodies recovered from the forest.

The most recent statistics come from 2010, when police records show that 247 people made suicide attempts in the forest. Fifty-four of these people died.