Another cracking week at Pink Hope. It started with some education for many wonderful Ovarian Cancer Australia Teal nurses, about hereditary cancer risk and the information and support we provide to patients. Then a community catch up in Sydney on Friday night with women with hereditary cancer risk. On Saturday we held the last of our 2024 Information and Support days in Sydney. It was great to have provided evidence-based information (straight from the experts) to over 40 people, who will now be able to make informed decisions about managing their cancer risk. Thanks to our panel members for giving up their time to support this import event: Dr Shweta Srinivasa, Dr Jemma Gilchrist, Bernard Riley, Dr Kylie Snook, Dr Greg Gard, Dr Ceri Cashell and Dr Devora Lieberman. And because we don't do things in halves at Pink Hope, we got up bright and early this morning to take on the City to Surf with a team of over 80! Special mention to Caitlyn who organised all of her family and friends to participate. And the guy in the photo holding the camera (Glenn Nicholls). He has been supporting us with exquisite photos for years. Today, Glenn and his colleague Robert Nixon stood for hours snapping people in Pink Hope tops during the run - look out for the reel! And the last piccy is of the cake I (later regretted) eating on Saturday night before the run - who doesn't 💕 a photo of cake. While I was eating regret cake, Pink Hope CEO Sarah Powell was busy at the Human Genetics Society of Australasia - HGSA conference where she's presenting the MAGENTA study which she led. We can't do any of this without support, so thanks to everyone who made these activities successful. #informeddecisions #genetics #hereditarycancerrisk #citytosurf Charlotte Durazza Sarah Powell

Express your BRCA story through art with award-winning artist, Deborah Kelly! We’re delighted to kick off the 'Gene Expression: visualising BRCA through the arts' project series in partnership with The Royal Women's Hospital, University of Melbourne and the acclaimed artist Deborah Kelly. In this unique collaboration, Deborah will guide you in crafting a one-of-a-kind collage artwork that reflects your BRCA experience and identity. We encourage you to attend more than one workshop to get the most from the artistic process – you’re welcome to join as many as you like! For each workshop you join, you’ll receive a $100 MasterCard gift card as a thank you for your time and creativity. If you have BRCA1 or BRCA2 gene mutations and are either based in Melbourne or are open to traveling to inner Melbourne, we’d love for you to take part. Friends and family are also welcome to explore their experiences through this creative project. We will be showcasing these beautiful artworks in an exhibition, and we can't wait to see what you create! Email gene-expression@unimelb.edu.au for more details and to sign up. The Gene Expression art project series begins with this BRCA-focused initiative, and we look forward to expanding into other gene mutations in future projects. Here’s a peek into our artist, Deborah Kelly’s creative world: - Watch Deborah talk about her exhibition ‘The Gods of Tiny Things’ at ACMI: https://lnkd.in/erDc3Jrg - Explore her impactful project, “No Human Being is Illegal (In All Our Glory)”, where the piece featured in our post is now part of the Wellcome Collection in London: https://lnkd.in/eXWTvPcJ #BRCA #artproject #pinkhopeaus

Less than two weeks to go – meet our panel of experts at the Sydney Information and Support Day. If you have a strong family history of breast, ovarian and prostate cancer, have undergone (or are considering) genetic testing, you are welcome to join our educational and community event next weekend. Our panel for our Info & Support Day (10 Aug) will provide up-to-date, evidence-based, and region-specific information on crucial topics, including genetic testing, options for managing cancer risk, screening programs, mental health, menopause, IVF/PGD, and the latest research. You can also meet and connect with our team and other community members in your area at our Community Catch Up (9 Aug). Don’t miss out on this chance to get the support and resources you need: https://lnkd.in/e-pnswjb #education #community #hereditarycancer #pinkhopeaus Robyn Smith Sarah Powell Charlotte Durazza Carol Leung Jemma Gilchrist Bernard Riley Ceri Cashell Devora Lieberman Crown Princess Mary Cancer Centre Prostate Cancer Foundation of Australia Mater Hospital North Sydney North Shore Private Hospital Royal North Shore Hospital Avalon Family Medical Practice City Fertility

Robyn, our Programs and Advocacy Manager, and Charlotte, our Events and Fundraising Coordinator, attended the 2024 Essential Health Summit hosted by the Australian Primary Health Care Nurses Association (APNA) and Australasian Society of Lifestyle Medicine last week. During the three-day event, our team engaged with nurses and GPs to discuss identifying and managing patients with hereditary cancer risk. Robyn was honoured to present on this crucial topic during the ‘Early Intervention’ speed presentations session. We also enjoyed a wonderful evening at our Adelaide Community Catch Up, connecting with community members who are passionate about getting involved and supporting our advocacy and events. Next, we are preparing for our Sydney educational and community events. Don’t miss the chance to connect and stay informed with us: https://lnkd.in/e-pnswjb #advocacy #community #pinkhopeaus

Our heartfelt thank you to our community members who participated in Project Shirley; a nationwide research initiative for breast cancer patients. The survey has uncovered invaluable insights into the challenges faced by our community impacted by breast cancer. Among these challenges are the fear of recurrence, the difficulty in fully understanding the risk of recurrence and potential treatment options, and more. We also found that some respondents felt that the perception of early breast cancer as the 'good' cancer prevented them from discussing their fears and challenges openly. The study highlights an urgent need for emotional support, evidence-based resources, and services to better understand their options while living with breast cancer. We are in the process of publishing these critical insights from Project Shirley next year. If you participated in Project Shirley and are comfortable sharing your voice even further, including in the media, please DM or email us at info@pinkhope.org.au Thank you for being the #voice of #ProjectShirley. This survey was conducted by Elbow Insight and Strategy on behalf of Pink Hope and a Pharmaceutical Company. #research #study #breastcancer #advocacy #pinkhopeaus

We had an impactful weekend in Melbourne, starting with a relaxing dinner at our Community Catch Up last Friday. It was wonderful to see such a great turnout and connect with both new and familiar faces. The evening was filled with lively conversations, delicious food, all while sharing experiences and discussing the needs and challenges within our community. Then we had an insightful afternoon at our Information and Support Day on Saturday. We were privileged to hear from a brilliant panel of experts who delved into essential topics such as genetic testing, cancer risk management, screening programs, mental health, menopause, IVF/PGD, and the latest research. A special thank you to our panel and to Belinda, our community member, for sharing her powerful story and message of support. Sunday morning brought perfect weather for Run Melbourne. It was a joy to lace up our running shoes and hit the streets alongside our community member Louise in stunning sunshine. A special shoutout to Louise for her incredible fundraising efforts! We extend our heartfelt gratitude to everyone who made this weekend possible. Special thanks to AstraZeneca for supporting our educational events. Thank you to Sue and Lynette from My Breast Cancer RISK (MyBRISK) NHMRC Centre of Research Excellence for generously hosting and supporting our event. A big thanks to The Cupcake Queens for their delicious cupcake donation that fuelled our Saturday. And a special thank you to Georgia, who is undertaking a master's placement with us, for her exceptional support at our events and over the past few months. Next up, we're heading to Adelaide, Sydney, and Canberra. Don’t miss out and get your tickets here: https://lnkd.in/e-pnswjb #education #community #infoandsupportday #pinkhopeaus Sarah Powell Robyn Smith Charlotte Durazza Carol Leung Georgia Elliott Violet Kieu Orla McNally Daniel Lee Laura Forrest Lesley Stafford Anita Skandarajah Giselle Darling Jean Hailes for Women's Health Sarah L. White Ngaire Latch University of Melbourne The Royal Women's Hospital Melbourne IVF Imaging Associates Peter MacCallum Cancer Centre The Royal Melbourne Hospital