TOPSAIL BEACH, NC (WWAY) — A non-profit organization is providing some breast cancer patients and survivors with a retreat to remember. WWAY caught up with them Wednesday.

The organization making it possible is called Little Pink Houses of Hope. They provide free week-long vacations to cancer patients, survivors, and their families.

The program is made possible by those who donate their house for the week for their stay. This week, they’re in the Topsail Beach Area with more than 11 families.

The vacation includes trips to the beach, sightseeing, and various activities.

Volunteers make up a big part of the organization, they’re called “volunstars.” Natalie Hunt is one of them. She said she loves the work she does and who she does it for.

“As a volunstar with Little Pink Houses of Hope, we get to assist and participate in these retreats. We get to create an opportunity for families to come together, enjoy time, not think about their diagnoses or doctor’s appointments,” Hunt said.

Wednesday’s outing was a paddle boarding session.

Sara Dever is from Atlanta. She’s been receiving treatment for triple negative breast cancer for more than a year.

“I found a lump about this big, it was like the size of a golf ball, and I knew right then and there, it was not good,” Dever said.

But she said due to recent news, she’s thankful for more than just the opportunity to come on this retreat.

“I am happy to say that I had my recent mammogram and scan, and everything came back negative and so I am officially considered no evidence of disease,” Dever said.

Dever said these retreats are a chance to spend time with family and friends and just be without their diagnoses dictating the schedule.

Vicki Arpin is this year’s Topsail Beach Retreat Director. She shared her story of why she got involved with Little Pink Houses of Hope’s mission.

“I first found out about little Pink because my sister is a survivor, was a survivor, and she was lucky enough to receive a retreat. Her retreat was in Myrtle Beach, South Carolina,” Arpin said. “During the treat I was like, ‘I have to continue to be a part of this organization because it is so good to the families,’ and just a wonderful week of joy and worry free for the participants.”