Community-Based Organizations

The Pink Journey Foundation

The Pink Journey Foundation (TPJF) is committed to early breast cancer education and dedicated to providing tools and resources to everyone. Young or old, male or female, and ALL ethnic and racial backgrounds – TPJF wants to help you reduce your risk for breast cancer, survive breast cancer, and Thrive after breast cancer.

Cancer Support Community

Cancer Support Community offers a free programs for cancer patients, and their families and loved-ones. Their goal is to help as many cancer patients as possible recover from the physical and emotional effects of cancer to the greatest extent possible. Their psychological support and educational programs are designed to address the loss of control, hopelessness and social isolation that cancer patients and their families often experience.

109 West Torrance Boulevard • Redondo Beach, California, 90277

Phone: (310) 376-3550

Michelle’s Place

Michelle’s Place is a local resource center for women and their families dealing with breast cancer. Michelle’s Place offers all of our services free to the community. They provide free wigs, prosthesis, bras, hats, scarves and support groups. They also have a lending library and a survivor telephone support system. The survivor network provides newly diagnosed women and their families with a source to answer their questions, find comfort and provide insight into their new diagnosis.

Michelle’s Place offers free educational seminars monthly that are open to the public. These seminars offer information on nutrition, breast health, breast cancer prevention, exercise, stress relief and methods to help in the healing process. Michelle’s Place also provides free weekly exercise classes, yoga, a support group for children and temporary financial assistance to women going through treatment.

27645 Jefferson Ave., Suite 117, Temecula, CA 92590

Phone: (951) 699-5455

Khemo Buddy’s

Since July 2015, Khemo Buddy’s has graciously helped Breastlink patients through treatment. Khemo Buddy’s was founded by Kym Keyes, a breast cancer survivor who often experienced discomfort, anxiety and loneliness during chemotherapy sessions. To help patients in similar situations, Khemo Buddy’s provides gift bags containing snacks, blankets, activities and other small comforts to help breast cancer patients through their chemotherapy sessions. They have gifted many of these care packages to our patients.

909-781-3917

Pink Fund Foundation

The Pink Fund provides 90 day non-medical cost-of-living expenses to breast cancer patients in active treatment for breast cancer, so they can focus on healing, raising their families, and returning to the workplace.

Support Groups and Other Resources for Patients and Survivors

Facing Our Risk of Cancer Empowered (FORCE)

FORCE is the only national nonprofit organization devoted to hereditary breast and ovarian cancer. Their mission includes support, education, advocacy, awareness and research specific to hereditary breast and ovarian cancer. Their programs serve anyone with a BRCA mutation or a family history of cancer.

American Cancer Society

The American Cancer Society (ACS) works to save lives and create a world with less cancer and more birthdays. Together with millions of ACS supporters worldwide they are helping people stay well, helping people get well, finding cures and fighting back against cancer.

ClinicalTrials.gov

ClinicalTrials.gov is a registry and results database of publicly and privately supported clinical studies of human participants conducted around the world.

Vietnamese American Cancer Foundation

VACF is dedicated to preventing cancer, improving patient quality of life, and saving lives through cancer education, research, advocacy, and services in the Vietnamese community.

Breast Cancer Solutions

Breast Cancer Solutions serves breast cancer patients in Orange, Riverside and San Bernardino (CA) counties. Our program provides breast cancer patients with direct assistance, community referrals and compassionate support.

Breast Cancer Angels

Breast Cancer Angels provides immediate and temporary assistance with housing, food, transportation, and other services

Healing Odyssey

Cancer support programs for women including weekend retreats and therapeutic cancer recovery programs.

Cleaning for a Reason: Clean Homes for Cancer Patients

Cleaning for a Reason is a 501(c)(3) nonprofit organization that offers free home cleaning to cancer patients in the United States and Canada.

Cancer Cartel

Cancer Cartel was founded with the important mission to provide financial resources and relief to those fighting cancer.

Sharsheret: A Jewish Breast Cancer Organization

Sharsheret is a Jewish breast cancer organization that helps women and their families face breast cancer. Click here to learn more about our non-profit.

Hope Scarves | Scarves, Stories, and Research

Hope Scarves shares scarves, stories and hope with people facing cancer. Learn more about the sisterhood of the traveling scarves and how you can join us.

Living Beyond Breast Cancer (LBBC)

Living Beyond Breast Cancer (LBBC) is a nonprofit organization dedicated to providing trusted information and a community of support for those affected by breast cancer, including patients, caregivers, and healthcare professionals.

National Breast Cancer Foundation (NBCF)

The National Breast Cancer Foundation (NBCF) focuses on providing help and inspiring hope to those affected by breast cancer through early detection, education, and support services.

CancerCare

CancerCare is a national nonprofit organization that provides free, professional support services for anyone affected by cancer, including counseling, support groups, educational workshops, publications, and financial assistance.

Young Survival Coalition (YSC)

Young Survival Coalition (YSC) is a nonprofit organization focused on the critical issues unique to young women who are diagnosed with breast cancer, offering resources, connections, and outreach for young women and their families.

Cancer Financial Assistance Coalition (CFAC)

The Cancer Financial Assistance Coalition (CFAC) is a group of national organizations that provide financial help to patients, offering a searchable database of financial resources for cancer patients and their families.

Sisters Network

Sisters Network is a national African American breast cancer survivorship organization committed to increasing local and national attention to the devastating impact that breast cancer has in the African American community.