For anyone who imagines that bank notes are just money, take a last look at the Portuguese escudo before it and 11 other European currencies are subsumed into the common coin of the euro.

Printed in fine shadings of blue and green and brown, these bills are not just money but history and myth. For Portugal, a small nation that ranks as the poorest in the European Union, the bills evoke the far grander days of 500 years ago when Portuguese navigators challenged the oceans in their wooden boats, exploring the distant realms of Africa, India and the Americas.

Certainly these voyages were the precursors of colonialism and the slave trade, brutal chapters in world history. Ultimately, the policing of Portugal's overseas empire embroiled the nation in revolution at home and violent liberation conflicts in Angola and Mozambique. These were adventurers who did not wait for invitations to put ashore in distant lands and to seek riches there.

But the bank notes, with their displays of billowing sails and steely eyed heroes, either bearded or lantern-jawed, reflect only the grand venture of an ambitious monarchy on Europe's rim, the bold and rapid expansion that spread Portugal's language and people from Macao to Brazil.

Ask some Portuguese who their bank-note heroes are and they have difficulty, especially with the man on the 10,000 escudo note, Portugal's biggest bill. It shows Prince Henry the Navigator, who inspired many explorations before his death in 1460.

But other notes bring the names from history class spilling out.

Here, for a mere 1,000 escudos -- five euros, or $4.45 -- is Pedro Álvares Cabral, the navigator who sailed to Brazil in 1500. Bartolomeu Dias, the first European to round the Cape of Good Hope in what is now South Africa, in 1486, merits 2,000 escudos on a note that shows the coast of western Africa.

Thank you for your patience while we verify access. If you are in Reader mode please exit and log into your Times account, or subscribe for all of The Times.

Thank you for your patience while we verify access.

Already a subscriber? Log in.

Want all of The Times? Subscribe.