Since 1977, Blind Pig Records has been a leading light for the blues in all its many forms. The label, originally formed in Ann Arbor, Michigan and named for that city's Blind Pig Café (welcoming musical artists since 1971), has just celebrated its fortieth anniversary with a new 2-CD, 34-track compendium. Blind Pig Records: 40th Anniversary Collection boasts selections from each decade of the Blind Pig story, featuring many recognizable artists and some lesser-known lights that might just become favorites themselves.

The tale of Blind Pig Records began when Café owner Jerry Del Giudice and his friend Edward Chmelewski formed their label. The collection begins with "Gambling Blues," a song by Magic Slim (1937-2013) and The Teardrops; the late Slim recorded ten albums for the label from 1990 through 2012. The non-chronological journey through live and studio recordings then encompasses classic songs by Otis Rush ("Crosscut Saw"), Elvin Bishop ("Stomp"), Charlie Musselwhite ("Chicago Sunset"), Pinetop Perkins ("Just Keep on Drinking"), and Commander Cody ("Last Call for Alcohol") on its first disc.

The second disc welcomes a similarly impressive roster of blues artists including the legendary Muddy Waters ("Got My Mojo Working," in an archival performance from 1971), Luther Allison ("Let's Try Again"), Herbert Sumlin and James Cotton ("Sittin' on Top of the World"), Otis Clay ("When the Gates Swing Open"), and Taj Mahal, guesting with Big Bill Morganfield ("You're Gonna Miss Me").

All told, thirteen Blues Hall of Fame inductees are featured here. These songs reflect a wide swath of themes from the earthy to the spiritual, whether based on or pushing the boundaries of the 12-bar blues format. You'll hear Americana and folk, boogie-woogie, rhythm-and-blues, soul, and regional flavors from Texas to Louisiana in these tunes.

Blind Pig Records: 40th Anniversary Collection has been produced by Mike Cimicata and Shaun Sintic. Liner notes have been provided by Blues Music Magazine editor Art Tipaldi, bringing Blind Pig's history up to date with its 2015 purchase by The Orchard. The 16-page booklet also includes credits and discography for each song. This sampler of the Blind Pig oeuvre - hip, moving, passionate, and always from the gut - is available now at the links below!

Various Artists, Blind Pig Records: 40th Anniversary Collection (Blind Pig/The Orchard BPCD 5170, 2017) (Amazon U.S. / Amazon U.K. / Amazon Canada)

CD 1

Gambling Blues - Magic Slim & The Teardrops

Boom Town - Victor Wainwright & The WildRoots

No Doubt - Albert Cummings

Hey Joe - Popa Chubby

Everybody's Fishin' - Big Walter Horton

I'm a Woman - Deborah Coleman

Dust My Broom - James Cotton

Crosscut Saw (Live) - Otis Rush

Stomp (Live) - Elvin Bishop

Charmed and Dangerous - Altered Five Blues Band

Last Chance - Sena Ehrhardt

Thought I Had It All - Damon Fowler

Old Friends - Kenny Neal

Chicago Sunset - Charlie Musselwhite

Crossover - Eddy Clearwater

Just Keep On Drinking - Pinetop Perkins

Last Call for Alcohol - Commander Cody

CD 2

Got My Mojo Working (Live) - Muddy Waters

You're Gonna Miss Me - Big Bill Morganfield with Taj Mahal

Human Cannonball (Live) - Webb Wilder & The Beatnecks

It's That Time Again - Tommy Castro

In the Rain - Deanna Bogart

Baby Without You - The Cash Box Kings

Let's Try Again - Luther Allison

Diamond Eyes - Smokin' Joe Kubek and Bnois King

Raising Hell - Zac Harmon

Blue Feelin' - Studebaker John and The Hawks

Frankenbop - Rod Piazza and The Mighty Flyers

Chicken Shack Boogie - Mitch Woods and His Rocket 88s

Back Alley Cat - Billy Branch and The Sons of Blues

Shut the Front Door - Andy T - Nick Nixon Band

Southern Livin' - Southern Hospitality

Sitting on Top of the World - Herbert Sumlin with James Cotton

When the Gates Swing Open - Otis Clay

Joe Marchese

JOE MARCHESE (Editor) joined The Second Disc shortly after its launch in early 2010, and has since penned daily news and reviews about classic music of all genres. In 2015, Joe formed the Second Disc Records label. Celebrating the great songwriters, producers and artists who created the sound of American popular song, Second Disc Records, in conjunction with Real Gone Music, has released newly-curated collections produced by Joe from iconic artists such as Johnny Mathis, Bobby Darin, Laura Nyro, Melissa Manchester, Chet Atkins, and many others. He has contributed liner notes to reissues from a diverse array of artists, among them Nat "King" Cole, Paul Williams, Lesley Gore, Dusty Springfield, B.J. Thomas, The 5th Dimension, Burt Bacharach, The Mamas and the Papas, Carpenters, Perry Como, Rod McKuen, Doris Day, Jackie DeShannon, and Andy Williams, and has compiled releases for talents including Robert Goulet and Keith Allison of Paul Revere and the Raiders. Over the past two decades, Joe has also worked in a variety of capacities on and off Broadway as well as at some of the premier theatres in the U.S., including Lincoln Center Theater, George Street Playhouse, Paper Mill Playhouse, Long Wharf Theatre, and the York Theatre Company. He has felt privileged to work on productions alongside artists such as the late Jack Klugman, Eli Wallach, Arthur Laurents, Betty Comden and Adolph Green. In 2009, Joe began contributing theatre and music reviews to the print publication The Sondheim Review, and in 2012, he joined the staff of The Digital Bits as a regular contributor writing about film and television on DVD and Blu-ray. Joe currently resides in the suburbs of New York City.