08/05/2024 - 05:00 AM

SHENZHEN, China, Aug. 05, 2024 (GLOBE NEWSWIRE) -- Aurora Mobile Limited (NASDAQ: JG) ("Aurora Mobile" or the "Company"), a leading provider of customer engagement and marketing technology services in China, today announced that it has signed a strategic agreement with Bank of Zhangjiakou, an urban commercial bank in China. Leveraging its powerful customer engagement platform and marketing technology services, Aurora Mobile will fully support the bank’s digital transformation.

As the wave of digitalization sweeps the world, the banking industry is undergoing profound changes at an unprecedented pace. As a leader among urban commercial banks, Bank of Zhangjiakou is keeping pace with the times, actively espousing the national development strategy and is committed to enhancing financial service capabilities through digital transformation to better serve urban and rural residents, small and medium-sized enterprises, and the local economy. In doing so, the bank faces a diverse customer base and complex business needs. To ensure that information can be delivered to each customer in an accurate, timely, and efficient manner, Bank of Zhangjiakou has partnered with Aurora Mobile and deployed the Company's intelligent push notification solution, JPush, as its core push messaging tool.

JPush fully supports various operating systems including Android, iOS, HarmonyOS, QuickApp and Web, and is compatible with JPush channels, APNs (Apple Push Notification service), FCM (Firebase Cloud Messaging) and the system-level push messaging channels of various mobile brands such as Huawei, Xiaomi, OPPO, VIVO, Meizu and ASUS. JPush quickly integrates SDK notifications in 3 minutes and delivers messages with millisecond push speed. Based on its infrastructure with a capacity of over 10 billion daily visits, JPush provides solid support for Bank of Zhangjiakou's huge user base, ensuring the efficiency and stability of information pushing.

In the mobile Internet era, customers' demands are becoming more personalized and diversified. Bank of Zhangjiakou has proactively embraced change by leveraging technology to drive business innovation and achieve precise marketing. JPush, with its robust data analysis capabilities and intelligent push strategies, helps the bank gain a deeper understanding of customer needs and create personalized push notifications tailored to different customer segments and business scenarios. This has not only increased customer satisfaction and loyalty, but also supported the bank's rapid business growth, laying a solid foundation for building an intelligent operating system.

In response to the challenges of information security management in the digital transformation process, Bank of Zhangjiakou has established a comprehensive network security operation system with higher standards and stricter requirements. JPush has undergone six major tests during the development process, including tests of no-load traffic, no-load power consumption, online reliability, concurrency capability, service stability, and network robustness, achieving industry-leading performance and providing the bank with stable, secure, and efficient message pushing capabilities.

Going forward, Aurora Mobile will continue to leverage its suite of professional technical services and comprehensive product portfolio to support Bank of Zhangjiakou in further deepening technology-driven innovation, and jointly promote financial technology innovation and applications. As the bank thoroughly implements and executes its digital transformation strategy, the efficiency and quality of financial services will reach a higher level. As a solid pillar in this endeavor, JPush will not only provide the bank with efficient and stable message pushing solutions, but also help achieve more precise and intelligent customer outreach and marketing.

About Aurora Mobile Limited

Founded in 2011, Aurora Mobile (NASDAQ: JG) is a leading provider of customer engagement and marketing technology services in China. Since its inception, Aurora Mobile has focused on providing stable and efficient messaging services to enterprises and has grown to be a leading mobile messaging service provider with its first-mover advantage. With the increasing demand for customer reach and marketing growth, Aurora Mobile has developed forward-looking solutions such as Cloud Messaging and Cloud Marketing to help enterprises achieve omnichannel customer reach and interaction, as well as artificial intelligence and big data-driven marketing technology solutions to help enterprises' digital transformation.

For more information, please visit https://ir.jiguang.cn/.

Safe Harbor Statement

This announcement contains forward-looking statements. These statements are made under the “safe harbor” provisions of the U.S. Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995. These forward-looking statements can be identified by terminology such as “will,” “expects,” “anticipates,” “future,” “intends,” “plans,” “believes,” “estimates,” “confident” and similar statements. Among other things, the Business Outlook and quotations from management in this announcement, as well as Aurora Mobile’s strategic and operational plans, contain forward-looking statements. Aurora Mobile may also make written or oral forward-looking statements in its reports to the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission, in its annual report to shareholders, in press releases and other written materials and in oral statements made by its officers, directors or employees to third parties. Statements that are not historical facts, including but not limited to statements about Aurora Mobile’s beliefs and expectations, are forward-looking statements. Forward-looking statements involve inherent risks and uncertainties. A number of factors could cause actual results to differ materially from those contained in any forward-looking statement, including but not limited to the following: Aurora Mobile’s strategies; Aurora Mobile’s future business development, financial condition and results of operations; Aurora Mobile’s ability to attract and retain customers; its ability to develop and effectively market data solutions, and penetrate the existing market for developer services; its ability to transition to the new advertising-driven SAAS business model; its ability to maintain or enhance its brand; the competition with current or future competitors; its ability to continue to gain access to mobile data in the future; the laws and regulations relating to data privacy and protection; general economic and business conditions globally and in China and assumptions underlying or related to any of the foregoing. Further information regarding these and other risks is included in the Company’s filings with the Securities and Exchange Commission. All information provided in this press release and in the attachments is as of the date of the press release, and Aurora Mobile undertakes no duty to update such information, except as required under applicable law.

For more information, please contact:

Aurora Mobile Limited

E-mail: ir@jiguang.cn

Christensen

In China

Ms. Xiaoyan Su

Phone: +86-10-5900-1548

E-mail: Xiaoyan.Su@christensencomms.com

In US

Ms. Linda Bergkamp

Phone: +1-480-614-3004

Email: linda.bergkamp@christensencomms.com