Hopefully, Sarah Silverman’s father wanted her to be a comedian all this time. According to the comedian’s 2010 memoir The Bedwetter, David Silverman (“His Boston accent is as thick as a stack of 10 lobsters”) not so innocently fed her swear words that he knew she’d repeat when adults were least expecting it. Empowered by the attention, Silverman became addicted to compulsively ejecting the off-color or outrageous notions that came into her head, which she would evolve into the stand-up persona that’s been skirting the line between ignorance and ironic inappropriateness for two decades.

Silverman has come a long way since Saturday Night Live dropped her as a writer at the dawn of her professional career. A devotee of Steve Martin in her New Hampshire childhood, Silverman parlayed acting up in front of family and friends into public appearances by her mid-teens. She hit the comedy stages of Greenwich Village in earnest after college and became an increasingly familiar face in movies and television throughout the ’90s. But she really began to hit her stride when her 2005 concert film Jesus Is Magic brought her front-and-center in pop culture. By then, fans expected her to deliver controversial material with a mixture of innocence and malevolence, so the only question was, “How far will she go?”

Somehow, she always manages to skid close to the cliff of controversy’s edge without driving over, even if it seems like she’s only holding on by the tread of one tire. Lately, she’s addressed Texas Governor Rick Perry’s most recent public statements with blistering tweets that she later deleted, managing to avoid becoming a medium-rotation 24-hour news channel story as Alec Baldwin recently did. And as Silverman proved when she lent her voice—and persona—to the character of Vanellope von Schweetz in last year’s animated hit Wreck-It Ralph, she found out that her irrepressible inner child can be effectively channeled through an actual child character meant to entertain actual children.

Whether she lends her voice to more computer-generated Disney fare remains to be seen. Luckily, as she told Jerry Seinfeld in a recent edition of Seinfeld’s web series Comedians in Cars Getting Coffee, her mom spoke very proper English (“She did the movie recordings before there was Moviefone”), negating her father’s Beantown accent but leaving his off-color influence intact. Her approach may not have directly influenced Daniel Tosh and Amy Schumer, but she arguably paved the way for their brands of borderline inappropriateness to be worthy of prime-time television.

For now, Silverman’s ’tude can be readily accessed in web-based comedy segments of her own on Jash, a YouTube channel co-created with Michael Cera, Tim Heidecker, Eric Wareheim and Reggie Watts. (“Older men who get plastic surgery look like Nanas,” she offers in one sketch while dressed as Princess Leia.) She can also be heard this summer during the final episodes of Futurama, and was cast in Seth MacFarlane’s A Million Ways to Die in the West as Giovanni Ribisi’s prostitute girlfriend, who won’t sleep with him until they are married—which, as Silverman might say, “is so bittersweet for a Jewish girl.”