Art of Bronze is proud to offer “The Buckaroo” (29” H. Gallery Version) bronze statue after A. Phimister Proctor. This was the model size Proctor sculpted before making the 18 ft. tall monument. In 1914, Proctor was inspired to return to the cowboy theme after attending the Pendleton Round-Up annual rodeo in Oregon. Proctor created a spectacular composition of a cowboy atop a wild bucking horse with its forelegs planted firmly on the ground, its hind legs high in the air. Both rider and horse are perfectly balanced. Six years after starting the 29” H. model size, Proctor finished the 18 ft. monument version entitled “Broncho Buster” which is on permanent display at the Denver Civic Center Park in Denver, CO.

Alexander Phimister Proctor (1860- 1950) was an American sculptor contemporary of Frederic Remington and Charles Russell. He created more public, equestrian monumental statues than any other sculptor in the United States. His monuments tell a story from the Old West and are located in many major American Cities.

Each bronze sculpture is cast in the ‘lost wax’ method and hand finished to capture excellent texture and detail throughout the entire sculpture. Custom fit marble bases are attached to each sculpture. A bronze plaque with etched lettering featuring the title of the sculpture and Remington’s name is available to attach to the front or backside of the marble base.

Art of Bronze is comprised of artisans, craftsmen and dedicated professionals that will guide you through the maintenance and delivery of your new sculpture. Art of Bronze is not an overnight online operation. We specialize in custom commissions and can create any concept or idea you have into bronze. We have decades of experience working with developers, city agencies, shopping centers, art in public places and school administrations.

SCULPTURES BALANCE SPACE- bronze statues are suitable for both interior and outdoor spaces. The difference being larger size sculptures are usually more suitable for outdoor open spaces. Make your home come alive with the many different styles and designs offered throughout our website. Sculpture placement can beautiful areas such as the living room, dining room, bedrooms and bathrooms. Defining the size of each sculpture for each space can be a personal point of view.

WE PRICE MATCH! See something for less, call us and we will price match. We want your next work of art to not only be purchased at the best possible price, but from a reputable company in bronze. Experience and attention to detail does make a difference.

Call Art of Bronze today at (805) 908-5355 to learn more about our- western bronze sculpture artwork – Frederic Remington bronze statues – cowboy & Indian bronze sculptures – Roman Bronze Works statues – American West Artist & artwork.