While the post Jordan era wasn't able to replicate the franchise's golden times in the the Chicago Bulls' early-2000s generation is filled with fun and thrilling experiences.

As the team took a major transition out of its dynastic form, the Bulls featured an exciting core called “Baby Bulls” — a young, hungry collection of talents bannered by high schoolers Tyson Chandler and Eddy Curry. Their growth was supported by the franchise as Chicago added plenty of veteran presence that can help them take the next step.

But in what was planed to be a peaceful and smooth learning process and blending for two separate timelines, there was a time that both sides went at it featuring Chandler and Kendall Gill.

Power and skills on full display

Back in the 2003-04 season, both the veteran and the young gun got tangled up in a heated confrontation in an intense team practice.

Curry recalled that Chandler and Gill engaged themselves in a fight. While the center held a physical advantage with his height and frame, the veteran shockingly dominated him with the lone use of his grappling skills.

"I remember one time Tyson and Gill got into it. Gill knew mixed martial arts. They got into it one time at practice, and Gill did this weird move on Tyson, and he had him all wrapped up on the floor and twisted up. Everybody was saying let him go. Gill told Tyson, 'Tap out.' Tyson couldn't tap out because Gill had his arm in a way he couldn't touch the ground," Curry said.

A hooper and a boxer in one form

While he was a professional basketball player at that time, no one should mess up and hope for a smoke coming from Kendall, as he does possess a combat sports skill set. This can only be further confirmed in his post-hoops life, in which he pursued a boxing career after his final NBA year concluded in the 2004-05 season.

With his boxing skills and expertise, many sought Gill’s play. At one time, he was called to deliver a vengeance for Nate Robinson, who notably fell on a losing effort against YouTube sensation Jake Paul in their 2020 exhibition fight.

"I had so many NBA players contacting me, 'We know you're a boxer, we know you're 4-0, please go back and avenge Nate Robinson, ' and that's why I called him out. He should accept the challenge," Gill said of Paul.