Tyson Chandler has seen the impossible happen.

In 2003-04 his Chicago Bulls team finished 23-59. The following season it won 47 games. In 2006-07 he played for a New Orleans Hornets team that went 39-43. The next season: 56-26 and a first-place finish in the Southwest Division.

So when Chandler is asked whether a young Phoenix Suns team can do what no one expects this season and be competitive in the brutal Western Conference, he references his experience.

“I’ve seen growth in a short period of time,” Chandler said. “I expect us to get better every year. What the number of wins will be, I can’t tell you.”

Phoenix begins its 50th season Wednesday firmly committed to its youth movement. The roster includes eight players 24 or younger and six of those eight can’t legally drink alcohol in the United States.

“I’m not sure anyone has ever been as young as us,” coach Earl Watson said.

The Suns understand their youth will make it difficult to dramatically improve on last season’s 24-win total. Most projections have them again finishing near the bottom of a Western Conference that became more difficult in the offseason with the acquisition of talent such as Jimmy Butler, Paul George and Carmelo Anthony. TNT color analyst Chris Webber talked about Phoenix being in a contender in “five, six or seven seasons.”

Phoenix hopes it doesn’t take that long but it’s willing to be patient, keying on a slow growth that they believe will pay dividends down the road.

“We’re trying to build something at a high level over time,” General Manager Ryan McDonough said. “Our goal is to win a championship. We have a time frame in mind. We’re going to try to build that over the next two, three and four years.

“Obviously we’d like to win more than 23 or 24 games but we realize in the Western Conference a significant jump may be difficult given the brutality of the schedule. I think it’s important for our young guys to improve and play well and hopefully if they do that the wins will come along with it.”

The Suns believe they have two core pieces in place: shooting guard Devin Booker and rookie forward Josh Jackson. They hope that Chriss and Dragan Bender will take steps forward in their second seasons and prove they’re important future cogs. They’ll rely on veterans such as Chandler, Jared Dudley and Eric Bledsoe to nurture the young players.

One key is to avoid letting another potential long, losing season dim the spirits and the confidence of the Suns’ youth. Oh, and looking at the bright side.

“Well, it can’t get any worse (than last season),” Bledsoe said. “We got no choice but to improve. We just have to stay together, stick to what the coaches’ game plans are and the biggest thing is to have fun and not put too much pressure on yourself. As long as we do that we should be fine.”

Chandler said the season shouldn’t be measured by victories but by the progress the team makes.

“I think the biggest thing is building for the future,” Chandler said. “I consider that a success to be honest. It’s about the approach, them coming together and building a foundation for the future for when they’re in tough playoff games. It all happens now. The switch doesn’t just click on.”

It’s ironic. As the Suns celebrate their 50th season they’ll proudly point out that they still have the fourth-best winning percentage among NBA franchises.

Yet the prospect of an eighth straight season without a playoff berth isn’t causing the heartburn it might have earlier. After years of futile attempts to simultaneously win and rebuild, the Suns are all in with the idea that losing today will bear fruit tomorrow.

“They’re looking at a lottery pick again,” TNT analyst Reggie Miller said. “It’s probably going to be hard knocks for the Phoenix Suns but they do have young talent in Booker and Jackson to build around.”

Think of it this way: The Suns are turning 50 and they’re younger than they’ve ever been.

“Let’s be the first to pioneer and enjoy the journey,” Watson said. “It’s part of creating history.”