FLAGSTAFF – Tyson Chandler (17), Trevor Ariza (14) and Ryan Anderson (10) have a combined 41 years of NBA experience.

Chandler’s played for six NBA teams (Chicago, New Orleans, Charlotte, Dallas, New York and Phoenix)

Ariza’s suited up for seven (New York, Orlando, Los Angeles Lakers, Houston, New Orleans, Washington and Houston).

Anderson’s seen action in New Jersey (now Brooklyn), Orlando, New Orleans and Houston.

Safe to say they’ve been there, done that and plan to continue doing it this season in Phoenix.

Since the Suns have 14 players on its current training camp roster with five years of NBA experience or less, does this team remind Chandler, Ariza or Anderson of any previous team they played for during their lengthy careers?

Let’s go down memory lane first with Chandler, who compares the 2018-19 Suns to the 2004-05 Bulls that made the playoffs under Scott Skiles.

“Young players finally made that step and they put the right veterans around us to corral us in the right direction,” he said.

The 17-year veteran center spent his first five seasons in Chicago after the Los Angeles Clippers drafted him out of high school with the second overall pick. In that first playoff appearance (2005) in Chandler’s fourth season, Chicago had 12 players with six years of NBA experience or less with five being rookies:

(6) Lawrence Funderburke

(5) Adrian Griffin

(3) Eddy Curry, Tyson Chandler

(2) Jannero Pargo, Frank Williams

(1) Kirk Hinrich

(R) Luol Deng, Chris Duhon, Ben Gordon, Andres Nocioni, Jared Reiner

Antonio Davis, who played in the NBA Finals with Indiana, was an 11-year veteran with Eric Piatkowski (10) and Othella Harrington (8) not too far behind.

Like those 2004-05 Bulls, this year’s Phoenix team have five rookies in No. 1 overall pick Deandre Ayton, Mikal Bridges, George King, Elie Okobo and De’Anthony Melton and the three veterans in Chandler, Ariza and Anderson.

Very similar, but Chandler sees one noticeable difference.

“This team has more talent to be quite honest because at every position, it’s a challenge,” Chandler said. “We had young, bright spots, but not like this.”

As for Ariza, he remembers coming into a similar situation in 2012-13 when joining a Washington team that featured then second-year pro John Wall and rookie Bradley Beal.

Ariza was entering his ninth season.

“You have young, talented players who are trying to find their way,” Ariza said about the current Suns. “It’s all about how they come together and how fast your team meshes together to all be on the same page.”

Like Chandler’s Chicago squad, those Wizards had 12 players with six years of experience or less:

(6) Earl Barron

(4) Cartier Martin

(3) A.J. Price

(2) Trevor Booker, John Wall, Jordan Crawford, Kevin Seraphin, Garrett Temple

(1) Shelvin Mack, Chris Singleton, Jan Vesely

(R) Bradley Beal

Washington won just 29 games that season with Jason Collins, Emeka Okafor, Pargo and Nene as the veterans, but made the playoffs the next season with a 44-38 record.

Phoenix isn’t trying to wait another year for postseason play, especially after having the NBA’s worst record last season, but may mesh now well enough to make the playoffs.

Then there’s Anderson.

He landed in New Orleans in 2012-13 after a rookie year in New Jersey and three seasons in Orlando. He was one of 17 players who spent time on that roster with six years or less NBA experience.

“That group was young,” Anderson said. “We had a lot of young talent. That was my fifth season so I was still relatively young, but we had a lot of young talent we needed to build up. It was a similar scenario.”

Anthony Davis was one of the youngest players as the No. 1 overall pick in 2012 after a one-and-done national championship season in Kentucky. The others were:

(6) Lou Amundson

(5) Dominic McGuire

(4) Ryan Anderson, Eric Gordon, Robin Lopez, Jason Smith

(2) Al-Farouq Aminu, Xavier Henry, Greivis Vasquez

(1) Terrel Harris, Donald Sloan, Lance Thomas

(R) Anthony Davis, Darius Miller, Austin Rivers, Brian Roberts, Henry Sims

Roger Mason (8) and Hakeem Warrick (7) were the only two players who had played longer. The Hornets finished 27-55.

“We didn’t have older veterans,” Anderson said. “It took a while to figure out how to play around each other. It’s not going to happen overnight here, but we’re going to work at it.”

Chalk that 2012-13 season up to living and learning.

Chandler, Ariza and Anderson have been there, done that and are looking to provide the knowledge and experience to help shape and mold the youthful Suns into a playoff team.

“These guys really have a chance to build something special together and now finally we’ve got enough veterans around here and mid-level guys of experience to kind of bridge the gap from just me and a bunch of rooks,” Chandler said.

READ MORE