If you or someone you know needs mental health support, contact the national Suicide & Crisis Lifeline by dialing 988.

The Los Angeles County Sheriff's Department is investigating the deaths of one former and three current employees reported over a 24-hour period this week, all believed to be deaths by suicide.

Homicide detectives responded to the first death around 10:30 a.m. Monday in Valencia, California, the department said in a statement to USA TODAY. Detectives were then called to a second death in Lancaster, California, just before 1 p.m. and a third in Stevenson Ranch, California, at 5:40 p.m., the statement said. Detectives responded to the fourth death at 7:30 a.m. Tuesday in Pomona, California.

The department did not identify the employees or respond to questions from USA TODAY about the manner of their deaths.

However, the Los Angeles County Department of Medical Examiner identified three of the deceased and listed the cause of death as suicide. The department said information about the fourth will be available after they have been identified and next of kin notified. The Los Angeles Times and NBC News reported all four are believed to be suicides.

"We are stunned to learn of these deaths, and it has sent shockwaves of emotions throughout the department as we try and cope with the loss of not just one, but four beloved active and retired members of our department family," Los Angeles County Sheriff Robert Luna said in a statement. "During trying times like these it's important for personnel regardless of rank or position to check on the well-being of other colleagues and friends."

The LA County Sheriff's Department has been under scrutiny from local and federal authorities over violent encounters, allegations of excessive force and other misconduct. At the same time, the department has endured trauma and assault aimed at deputies. One deputy was executed in September while sitting in a patrol car.

Who were the Los Angeles County Sheriff's Department employees?

According to the Los Angeles Times, one was a commander who served a stint as chief department spokesperson during a 25-year career. Another worked as a sergeant before his retirement, the Times reported. The third worked at a jail as a custody assistant, NBC and the Santa Clarita Signal newspaper reported.

Relatives listed in public records did not respond to requests for comment from USA TODAY.

Nicole Nishida, sheriff's department spokesperson told the Times that four other employees died by suicide this year.

Law enforcement at increased risk for suicide

More than 80 law enforcement and corrections officers have died by suicide this year, according to a database compiled by First H.E.L.P, a Massachusetts-based nonprofit that collects suicide data for first responders.

Joe Willis, chief learning officer for First H.E.L.P, called suicide a "consistent threat" to the profession.

"First responders, in general, are exposed to an abnormally high rate of trauma and vicarious trauma, the secondary effects of trauma, and so consequently, they are at an increased risk of mental health concerns, among those suicide," he told USA TODAY.

The struggle behind the badge: Miami top cop's suicide attempt and the mental health stigma in policing

Police officers and firefighters are more likely to die by suicide than working in the line of duty, according to a 2022 study from the Ruderman Family Foundation, a private philanthropic organization that advocates for people with disabilities. Researchers previously told USA TODAY they have not seen sufficient programs and policies aimed at addressing the issue since the group conducted a 2018 study, which had similar findings.

Hanna Shaul Bar Nissim, a co-author of the recent study, said though the number of police officer suicides decreased from 140 in 2017 to 116 in 2020, the numbers are likely an undercount, and better data is needed. Though there has been a slight decrease, she said "the ultimate goal is not to have any suicides, so even one is too much."

"There is a movement, things are being talked about, things are being funded, but we're not in that place yet," she said.

Advocates say agencies must address suicide, offer mental health resources

In Los Angeles County, the sheriff's department said homicide detectives and the medical examiner's department are investigating all four deaths independently. The department is also offering counseling and other resources to the impacted families and employees.

Willis said workplace stigma can still make it difficult for first responders to ask for mental health help, but the perception that doing so could negatively impact one's career is "quickly fading."

He said it's important for departments to provide mental health resources to their employees not just in the immediate aftermath of a tragedy, but well in advance. Though agencies may not always know how best to respond to suicide, "not talking about it is not the right answer," Willis said.

"You've got to speak clearly about it, and you have to make resources available to the organization," he said. "Leaders should be going to where their people are and having authentic, candid conversations with them about what's happening in the department."

If you or someone you know may be struggling with suicidal thoughts, you can call, text, or chat with the national Suicide & Crisis Lifeline by dialing 988 or visit 988lifeline.org for 24/7 access to free and confidential services.

Contributing: Cady Stanton and Nada Hassanein, USA TODAY; The Associated Press