More than 30 people died during an outbreak of pneumonic plague in Los Angeles in 1924. The outbreak began in October in a mostly Latino neighborhood near downtown L.A., and lasted until mid-November.

Once the plague was identified, public health officials reacted quickly and the entire neighborhood was quarantined by force.

Among the victims were a priest administering last rights to parishioners and an ambulance driver.

Bubonic plague, known in the Middle Ages as the “black death” wiped out half the population in Europe. Bubonic plague is caused by the bite of an infected flea, but can advance and spread to the lungs, becoming the more severe and highly contagious pneumonic plague, which can spread from person to person via droplets.

In San Diego the City Board of Health began campaign to exterminate rats and other small rodents in an effort to keep the city free of the epidemic and discussed more stringent measures.

Although cases of the plague had been reported in San Francisco as early as 1900, the 1924 Los Angeles epidemic was the first time that plague had emerged in humans in Southern California, and the last major outbreak of the disease in the United States.

From The San Diego Union, Sunday, November 2, 1924:

L.A. ‘PLAGUE’ TOLL REACHES 14

60 POLICE GUARD AREA; 10 MORE ILL

Residents of Affected Section Prevented From Entering Or Leaving; Other Mourners Under Observation.

LOS ANGELES, Nov. 1 — The death list of victims of a strange malady ere, which physicians have tentatively diagnosed as pneumonic plague, late today mounted to 14, according to an announcement by Dr. Elmer R. Pascoe, acting health commissioner.

Ten others are ill of the disease, and a similar number under observation, according to the acting commissioner’s figures. He stated also that the stricken area was confined to the Mexican quarter in the northeasterly section of the city.

Following a conference of city officials, an announcement was made that a cordon of 60 policemen would be thrown about the affected area tonight, which has been placed under a strict quarantine, to prevent residents from entering or leaving.

HIGH FATALITY

While the disease, which has been declared by the health authorities from 40 to 90 percent fatal, remain uncatalogued, every effort was being made in municipal laboratories to seek relief for the suffering victim.

“We can not definitely say as to yet tonight,” Dr. Pascoe said, “that we are actually confronted with the pneumatic plague, but while analysis are being made in the laboratories and strict quarantine is being observed, we are proceeding upon the assumption that it is such.”

The first victim of the disease was Mrs. Luciano Samarano, who died on Oct. 19 last, and since that date many of those who attended her funeral have sickened and died. The majority of the deaths have occurred at the county hospital.

From the San Diego Union, Nov. 4, 1924:

PLAN CAMPAIGN OF PRECAUTION AGAINST PLAGUE

City Board of Health Takes Steps to keep San Diego Free From Epidemic.

Determined to keep San Diego absolutely free from the “pneumonic plague” which exists in the Mexican district of Los Angeles, the city board of health heald a joint conference with the mayor and city council in the mayor’s office yesterday afternoon and mapped out a campaign of precaution.

Not a single case of the disease has been discovered in San Diego it was declared, and the utmost efforts will be made to keep this city clean.

The council voted to place a fund of $2000 at the disposal of the board of health for the purpose of destroying rats in the city. Rats and ground squirrels are known to be carriers of the disease. Moreover, a campaign will be started to have hotel keepers, restaurant men and citizens see that all garbage is kept covered and frequently destroyed, thus shutting off the food of the rats and starving them to death. Poison will be used in killing the rats on a wholesale scale the heath board announced.

TO GUARD COUNTY LINE

It also was suggested that guards be placed at the county line to prevent Mexicans, to whom the disease has so far been largely confined in Los Angeles, from coming to San Diego. The health board members announced that they would consult the county supervisors on this matter. The co-operation of all citizens in killing rats and in taking other precautions will be solicited.

The board of supervisors at yesterday’s meeting gave Dr. A.M. Lesem, city and county health officer, full power to act in the emergency. He was told by the board to use any means in his discretion to prevent the disease getting into this county. the board also authorized the health officer to take steps towards exterminating all rats, ground-squirrels and other rodents which are carriers of the disease.