An In-Custody Inmate Death is defined as any inmate death that occurs in Los Angeles County Sheriff's Department Custody Services Division jail facilities, Court Services Division lockups, Patrol Operations Division station jails, or in a hospital where an inmate is receiving care. For the purposes of In-Custody Inmate Deaths, an inmate is a person incarcerated in a local detention facility (Sheriff's Station), court lockup, or Custody Operations facility.

In instances where an inmate is involved in a significant incident in-custody and their post-release death is directly related, it will be classified as an In-Custody Death. All In-Custody Deaths are reported to the Department of Justice within two business days of the Department becoming aware of the death.

Each inmate death is unique and undergoes several thorough internal and external layers of investigation, review, and analysis. Homicide Bureau, Internal Affairs Bureau, Risk Management Bureau, and the Office of the Inspector General (OIG) are notified of all In-Custody Deaths. Investigators are dispatched based on the circumstances of the death and are joined by representatives from the OIG to provide independent oversight.

Homicide Bureau is responsible for all In-Custody Death investigations. Each death is thoroughly investigated, and upon completion of an initial death investigation where criminality is suspected, the case is presented to the Los Angeles County District Attorney’s Office for prosecutorial consideration.

The County of Los Angeles Medical Examiner also investigates most in-custody deaths. Their investigation may include autopsy and pathology reports. Manner and means of death are posted on this webpage once the Los Angeles County Sheriff’s Department receives a final disposition on a cause of death from the County of Los Angeles Department of Medical Examiner.

The below information is being provided in response to the passage of California Assembly Bill 2761, which takes effect on January 1, 2023. We hope the information provided sheds light on the number of In-Custody Deaths in LASD Jail facilities and demonstrates our ongoing commitment to transparency.