This beautifully crafted, richly researched book tells a powerful story that is sure to interest a wide audience of specialists and nonspecialists alike. In a meticulously researched study that draws on a wide range of archival collections in Turkey, Armenia, Lebanon, France, the United Kingdom, the United States, and Germany as well as a substantial assembly of memoirs, newspapers and periodicals, secondary sources, and interviews, Kurt constructs a microhistory of sorts that takes Aintab as its focus and allows readers to follow the dynamics of Armenian dispossession from the 1895 massacres to the genocide carried out during World War I, and into the Turkish Republic. Kurt subscribes neither to the idea that Ottoman Christians and Muslims had been locked in age-old primordial hatreds, nor to the image of a rosy coexistence across the ages. He does ask, however, how it was that a community like Aintab, where Muslims and Christians had coexisted relatively peacefully for so long, fell victim to the genocidal momentum that had begun to engulf places with Christian communities. He explores this by following the money, so to speak. Who profited from this and how?

The provenance of a house reveals a sordid history of oppression. As a native son of Gaziantep who has explored the city’s history, I have become aware of the consequences of Armenians’ physical and material destruction at the hands of their former Muslim neighbors. Aside from offering insight into local history, my account also contributes to the broader story of the Armenian genocide. Unseen in the archived letters, telegrams and property lists are the trauma and suffering of Armenian survivors repeatedly subjected to attacks on their lives, culture, assets and social status. The base motives of their former neighbors left some of the most indelible wounds, which more than a century later remain unhealed.

While there exists an extensive body of literature addressing the Armenian genocide, certain gaps persist. The processes and events of the genocide have been unearthed and examined, but genocide is not a phenomenon set in motion by a force of nature. On the contrary, the systematic destruction of Ottoman Armenians was designed and executed by a cadre of individuals, most of whom are little known today. Kurt’s aim here is to recover the story of one such actor from a particular town, Aintab, modern-day Gaziantep—situated on the boundaries of Cilicia (today the southern part of Anatolia) and Syria, near both the Mediterranean Sea and the Gulf of Alexandretta—thereby revealing the perpetrators and their active involvement in the destruction of Armenians at the local/provincial level. Kurt’s article seeks to shed light on such a perpetrator by analysing the objective features of his background and career. Highlighting the human dimension of the genocide allows for an examination of the actors—their motives and their acts—that ultimately bore responsibility for the catastrophic loss of life. Kurt focuses on the life story of Ali Cenani (1872–1934): his background and involvement in the 1915 Armenian deportation and genocide as well as his career in post-genocide Turkey.

The literature on the Armenian Genocide has been growing steadily in recent years. We now have access to many good books and articles that shed light on the historical background of this tragedy and add to survivor and eyewitness descriptions that have been available since the deportations and killings started in 1915. None of these studies, however, pay much attention to the Armenians who chose to stay in Turkey after the genocide and through the establishment of the Turkish republic. This is not surprising, because this small and dwindling community of at most 60,000 people does not easily fit into the competing narratives of the Armenian Genocide. For those promoting the official Turkish version, the continued presence of Armenians in Turkey is a reminder not only of an earlier, much more diverse and tolerant era but also, more poignantly, of everything that happened during the closing years of the Ottoman Empire, including the deportation and murder of almost the entire Armenian population of Anatolia. For both survivors and historians of the genocide, on the other hand, it is not easy to understand why any Armenian would have chosen to stay in Turkey after 1923, knowing that this would place them under the protection of the very people who had engineered the deportation and mass murder of their communities. With her new book Lerna Ekmekçioğlu takes an important step in filling this gap. She describes how the Bolsahay (the Armenian community of Istanbul) navigated the treacherous currents of the Allied occupation and the early years of the republic to (re)make a place for themselves in a changing country and a changing world. In addition to newspapers, magazines, personal memoirs, and contemporary publications, the book relies extensively on articles that appeared in the journal Hay gin (Armenian woman), which was published in Istanbul from 1919 to 1933 by the Armenian Women's Association. Throughout her analysis Ekmekçioğlu pays special attention to the writings of a handful of feminist intellectuals—in particular