“Fubar: Balls to the Wall” has been acquired by Screen Media Films ahead of its US Premiere at SXSW, it was announced today. The sequel to Canadian cult film “Fubar,” the film will be released on VOD and home video on April 19, 2011.

Full release below.

New York, February 10, 2011 – Screen Media Films has acquired North American rights to FUBAR: BALLS TO THE WALL, Michael Dowse’s hilarious look into the lives of headbangers Dean and Terry that stars Paul J. Spence and David Lawrence, prior to its U.S. premiere at the 2011 SXSW Film Festival. The deal was announced by the company’s President, Robert Baruc, who plans to release the film on VOD and home video on April 19, 2011.

Headbanger relics, Terry (Dave Lawrence) and Dean (Paul J. Spence), are tired of trying to give’r while barely scraping by, so when their old buddy, Tron (Andrew Sparacino), hooks them up with jobs they head up North to make sweet cash working on the pipelines during the holidays. Flush with money and confidence, Terry starts dating Trish (Terra Hazelton), a local waitress, and things get serious in a hurry. Meanwhile, Dean is playing up the part of ‘cancer survivor,’ and upon hearing about the glories of Worker’s Compensation, purposely injures himself in an attempt to qualify. When Terry then moves in with Trish, Dean does his best to save his buddy from swapping the banger life for domestic captivity, but his own life starts to spiral out of control when the Workers’ Compensation Board denies his claim and his doctor shows up out of the blue with some fateful news. Completely broken by his own self-destruction, Dean must rise to take control and fight for the things that mean the most: his family, his friends, and Christmas.

“We were immediately drawn to the fun nature of the film and think Dave and Paul have created indelible characters that appeal to the headbanger in all of us,” says Screen Media president Robert Baruc. “SXSW is the perfect festival for the film as it embodies everything ‘Dean’ and ‘Terry’ stand for – good times, good beer, and good friends.”

Adds director Michael Dowse, “I am thrilled to be slapping FUBAR’s ball to American walls this spring, a partridge will be shotgunning beers in a pear tree. We couldn’t have a better partner than Screen Media to bring FUBAR: BALLS TO THE WALL out to American audiences with.”

FUBAR: BALLS TO THE WALL is directed by Michael Dowse, written by Michael Dowse, David Lawrence, and Paul J. Spence, produced by George Baptist, Shirley Vercruysse, Jennifer Wilson, Michael Dowse, David Lawrence, and Paul J. Spence, with cinematography by Bobby Shore, and editing by Reginald Harkema. The film stars David Lawrence, Paul J. Spence, Andy Sparacino, and Terra Hezelton.

The deal was negotiated by Robert Baruc and Suzanne Blech from Screen Media Films, and Bec Smith at UTA on behalf of the filmmakers.