Picking up exactly where we left off, even though the walk back to Paris was a total breeze unlike 101 Dalmatians, the kids are exhausted so instead of taking them back in the middle of the night. Thomas makes the decision to take them back to his place which is crappy, but also appears that a human also lives there. Who is this mysterious stranger? Well, we never find out.

Thomas assures the family that his place is quiet, and immediately afterwards the night is disturbed by music, as Thomas realises that Scat Cat and his gang are in town, and naturally crashing at Thomas’s place. Thomas tries to explain that the gang are not Duchess’s type and suggests they find other accommodations by explaining that they are “Swingers.”

Promoting Duchess to ask; “What is a Swinger?”

Best Line Ever!

Duchess however wants to meet the “Swingers,” as we meet Scat Cat and the Alley Cats, who are a group of multi-ethnic musicians, and I give Duchess her dues in this scene, at how much she’s changed as a character. She clearly doesn’t judge Thomas for his lifestyle and friends and is polite to all of them and pretty much throws herself into the festivities, and I do think she’s done this before.

Scat Cat is interesting since he’s voiced by Scatman Crothers, and ok he’s the only black cat in this film, apart from his son so I’m prepared to dismiss any accusation of racism because it’s a great voice. It was originally intended for Louis Armstrong, but again he wasn’t able to work with Disney, so they drafted in someone of the same stature and Crothers was also the voice of “Hong Kong Phooey” so let’s leave this alone.

Wow, they even have the same taste in bows!

Also, Jazz did exist in 1910, and was coming into the mainstream and since Scat Cat has an American accent, I just assume he brought it over with him…although why there is a hippy cat is beyond me!

We launch into “Everybody wants to be a cat,” which is a bastardisation of so many musical genres and is totally awesome. Also, I still think this scene introduces Berlioz to his biological father Scat Cat! There is a moment that is considered racist because the Chinese cat called Shun Gon plays the piano with chopsticks, but it’s one-moment and the cat is voiced by Tigger’s voice artist Paul Winchell and as it sounds like Tigger, so I’m going to let this one go.

As they party into the night, Thomas and Duchess dance and Duchess shows off her harpist skills causing all the cats in Paris to fall in love with her as they party so hard the floors collapse, and I do hope this act hurt no one.

Later on Duchess is putting the kittens to bed whilst Thomas peers in from above, and you can tell he’s totally in love with this family as he talks with Duchess about how fantastic his friends are (true), and Duchess’s opinion of him is that he’s brave (very true). You can tell Duchess is tempted of a life with Thomas, but like the canine Lady before her, she knows where she belongs as Thomas actually suggests her staying with him and letting him be a father to the kitten. Duchess sadly has to go back to her human, something that Thomas doesn’t understand but respects anyway even though the kittens have overheard this entire exchange and are clearly devastated.

This is what heart looks like, when it’s breaking.

As light across the morning breaks, Thomas escorts the family home and is impressed by the location whilst inside Edger is quaffing champagne and basking in his soon to come wealth before it’s interrupted by the kittens as Duchess is sadly saying farewell to Thomas. Roachfort has realised everything and fails trying to tell the cats to run (yes again he’s failed).

As they pass through the door, and back into their lives, Edger throws them into a sack and stuffs them in an oven…ok was he intending to cook them?

Madam has heard their cries, but Edger convinces her otherwise as the Aristocats tell Roachfort to find Thomas, who he finds in seconds and Thomas tells Roachfort to get the Alley Cats and is Thomas insane? Even Roachfort points out how stupid this idea is. But naturally, no doubt pleased he’s doing something right, heads over to find them. But of course Roachfort has his brain wiped with pure fear at seeing the Alley Cats, forgets Thomas’s name. Bloody typical! Thankfully his brain clicks into gear, and soon all the cats are heading off to help Thomas save the love of his life.

In the stables, Edger has a new Master plan. I guess turning the oven on was too dark even for him as he throws the kittens in a truck bound for Timbuktu. As plans go, it’s a bit…oh yeah Stupid!

Thankfully Thomas jumps in and what ensures is a pretty well plotted scene as the rest of the Alley Cats burst in, and Roachfort finally does something useful by breaking open the lock of the trunk. But has to yell out “Quiet,” to get a moment’s peace and for some reason Edger reacts to this…so Edger can understand the mouse…ok then!

Edger heard the Mouse talk…and Hong Kong Phooey is on his head!

Cutting it short, the cat’s escape Edger winds up in the trunk and is bound for Timbuktu…and I’m guessing will probably be dead in a few days from suffocation.

In the final scenes, everything is sorted, the family is reunited with Madam and Thomas settles down and stays with the family, so they get the father they always wanted and Duchess gets her “Little bit of rough!” who she clearly adores. And Edger, well Madam never finds out what happened to him, and never bothered contacting the Police when he suddenly disappeared with all his stuff left behind. Ok then!

Madam, because she’s Madam and a little bit nuts, has decided with no heir instead to open her home to all the Alley Cats in Paris, as the music fills the air and everyone dances as we see Roachfort on the drums, the geese have joined the party and the dogs get the last line of the film “The End.”

And thank god.

Final Thought: The thing about a Disney film is that it doesn’t need a Villain. Lady and the Tramp doesn’t. It has antagonists but not outright villains. This film could have been good, but it’s so damn weak. As a Villain, Edgar is weak, and it doesn’t help that the animation is frankly terrible, and the characters are fillers. Voice wise, the kittens are voiced by Gary Dubin, Louise English and Dean Clark as Toulouse, Marie and Berlioz. They all do well with the material, but they are not very memorable. However hearing Phil Harris as Thomas was a highlight, just like his previous role as Baloo he managed to combine humour with real sincerity and you just believed his performance. However, Duchess is voiced by Eva Gabor, now she’s not a professional voice artist, but at times especially in the first half of the film, her voice comes across as too forced, as if she’s trying to get an idea at how Duchess should speak. It only settles when she meets Thomas, as if her barrier has dropped. It’s not a bad performance, but not as strong as it should be. A weakness that is also inherited in Roddy Maude-Roxby as Edger, I know he like everyone in the cast is trying their best, but it’s too cartoonish, too weak and not what you expect from a Disney character let alone the Villain, and even of the story wasn’t ripped from 101 Dalmatians, the animation in a few scenes certainly was.

Overall, this is a weak film, with weak characters and an even weaker story and in truth a poor entry in the Disney Canon.

The Aristocats

Director: Wolfgang Reitherman

Year: 1970

This film tries to answer the big question, and that is “Can a Studio survive after its figurehead dies?” This was the last Disney film Walt personally approved, but never saw released, your mileage may vary if this was a good thing or not!

This was an attempt to catch lightning in a bottle, by combining elements of 101 Dalmatians, and Lady and the Tramp, and it failed miserably, and also unlike the rest of the films so far, (not including the “Package films.”) This is one film I have never seen before, and now I realise there is a reason for this.

It opens up, with an introduction very similar to 101 Dalmatians, but set in 1910 as we meet the eccentric, because she’s loaded and retired actress Madame Adelaide Bonfamille and her family of cats consisting of Duchess, and her kittens Berlioz, the little black one, who is the quietest of the three, yet as mentioned on Disneywiki bears a resemblance to a character we are going to meet later, Scat Cat…hummm.

We also have Marie the middle one, and is a stuck up little bint who apparently thinks because she’s the only girl she should get her own way and the youngest and the ginger one Toulouse, the eldest and Cassandra of this tale. First impressions, their all spoiled little sods especially when Toulouse’s introduction moment is to climb on the face of the Butler, Edgar Balthazar. What a great introduction, almost kill anyone in the vicinity why don’t you ginger! He also bears a strange resemblance to the also later introduced Thomas O’Malley…how strange!

As they disembark of Frou-Frou the horse and go into the mansion, we see more of the animation of this film, and ok Animation is an evolving art form, and I have always said that, but the animation in this film is terrible, the character lines change from thick to thin within seconds, and I swear I saw some animation bleeding off the lines, it’s scratchy, all over the place and I have no idea what they were thinking with the animation direction of this film.

The household is joined by Georges Hautecourt, the family lawyer who knows the law well even though he may be slightly senile as he ventures up the stairs, and almost kills Edger in the process…I am starting to feel really sorry for Edger at this moment.

After dancing to the music of Carman, Adelaide tells Georges that she is finally making her will, a moment that is overheard by Edger in his tiny attic room. She is leaving everything to the long suffering guy, straight after her cats die! So Edger will get it all after the cats die, ok that is just psychotic and Edger is the Disney Villain!

He’s an absolute moron, most people would realise that Cats don’t need money so he’ll take care of them, and then get the lot later, but for some stupid reason seems to think cats have 9 literal lives, each like a Feline Highlander and he’ll be dead before them! Wow, this is the villain ladies and gentlemen, as Edger makes the split second decision to get rid of all of them to inherit the dollars, the sign of the green actually appearing in his eyes, as someone never thought that since they live in France, maybe the Franc would have been more appropriate.

As we now see the three kittens at play, with Marie being the ultimate buzzkill and is under the impression that because she’s a “Lady,” everything should revolve around her, and cries for her mother when she can’t get her own way…what a bitch! Duchess gives this spiel that as Aristocats (title drop) shouldn’t fight as it is unbecoming. Right, I call bullshit right here about Duchess…here we have three kittens clearly from the same litter, all different colours, and since cats can give birth to kittens from different sires. So total bull Duchess, you got out one night and did the nasty with some strays, and I think alcohol may have been involved since you do not remember these guys later…a lady my ass! As a theory it does make Duchess way more interesting, doesn’t it?

But now we see how the other half play, as Toulouse paints a picture that turns out to look like and a direct quote “Old prickle puss Edger” from Berlioz. Right, so the moral of this story is apparently treat the help like shit, because you’re an Aristocats, since we later hear Marie and Berlioz playing the piano, with the song “Scales and Arpeggios.” It’s a nice enough song, since the cats know music, because you know their better than the rest of us.

Whilst this is going on and after Duchess tells her children that the comment about Edger was rude as the Butler cares for all of them, we see Edger in a lovely moment of irony preparing to put the cats to sleep (not literally of course, the film would be a lot darker if that was his intention) with a bunch of pills mixed with their food.

Serving his new dish “Crème de la Crème a ‘la Edger,” to the cats as Roquefort (isn’t that a smelly kind of cheese?) appears, since the Aristocats are too upper-class to chase mice. Voiced by Sterling Holloway, something I didn’t need to look up, it’s too obvious who shares in their meal, and since he’s a mouse is the first one to pass out.

That night under the cover of darkness, Edger with the grace of a bloody elephant slips out onto the house with the cats in their basket and heads out of the city, as we see several of the famous sights of Paris, including Notre-Dame de Paris, travelling out of the city in his motor-bike and side car, he attracts the attention of two dogs, Napoleon and Lafayette, who decide to go after him…just because.

They have no idea that he’s a villain, even if he is an inept one, for them it’s just a game so we get a five-minute filler of Edger being tormented and nearly killed by these sociopathic dogs, you know I am really starting to root for Edger right now. in the drama he loses the basket under the bridge as Duchess comes too and looks around in shock as the tries to find her kittens. Finding the last one Toulouse still in the basket, since that is the first place they should have looked, and well any excuse for Marie to bitch about something.

The children and their mother are confused as they take shelter from the storm, as at the same time in Paris Madam has a dream about the cats and finds to her distress that they are gone. Roquefort, who has now recovered from being knocked out, immediately takes to the street in an attempt to find them, whilst Madam gets in contact with Police Nationale!

In the morning, with Duchess trying to find her bearings, and the weather perfect we meet Abraham deLacey Giuseppe Casey Thomas O’Malley, aka Thomas O’Malley, who is so awesome he has his own theme song and perhaps the longest name in history! And he comes off very much like the Tramp in from Lady and the…

This scene I will give Duchess her dues, she plays it cool, doesn’t fall for his bullshit, gets him to stop his pick-up lines, with a brilliantly said put down and quickly establishes that he will be the one to get her to Paris…and then introduces her children. What a little Minx, Aristocats my ass, you’ve done this before. Toulouse is impressed that Thomas is a street cat, and since their colouring is identical gives some credence to my theory that he’s the kids biological father…I’m sticking to this theory, because it’s a good one. Naturally thinking that his seduction techniques have failed Duchess employs some brilliant reverse psychology guilt trips, as it’s clear that Thomas finds himself drawn to Toulouse of all cats, and agrees to take them. Well played Duchess, well played and I’m starting to warm to her now.

Thomas commandeers a Milk Truck, by jumping in front of it, and if Cats do have 9 lives, I think he’s just lost one! The family pile into the back, even though Marie falls out so Thomas already showing himself to be A Big Damn Hero, leaps out after her. Already there is a lot to love about Thomas; he originally intended to seduce Duchess, which is clear enough. But as soon as he finds out that she comes with some baggage, namely her three kids, he changes his attitude, is angry at himself for his original intentions and subconsciously is becoming these children’s father figure.

Cutting back to Paris, Madam is grief-stricken over the loss of her cats, and perhaps it’s just me but I’m under the impression that she had cats before Duchess…just saying.

In the stables, little Roachfort has spent the night looking for the family and of course failing as he tells his tales of woe to Frou-Frou when Edger walks on practically dancing a jig as perhaps it was a slow news day as according to wiki, these are some of the headlines in 1910

In France, Raymonde de Laroche is awarded pilot’s license becoming the first woman authorized to fly an airplane.

The ballet The Firebird by Igor Stravinsky is premiered in Paris

Scatman Crothers, American actor and musician was born; ok that is just a funny coincidence.

But on this day, for some reason the entire paper is in English (translation convention ahoy) and the missing cats have made the front page, so the Villain Edger, decides to tell his master plan to the Frou-Frou and Roachfort…seriously. I mean seriously!

Edger suddenly realises that he’s left his hat and umbrella and several other things at the scene of the crime, so decides to head back to the middle of nowhere as Roachfort decides to stowaway…but fails at that, wow the mouse cannot catch a break can he?

Back on the truck, the kittens are starving, so Thomas decides to contaminate the milk by letting them drink it, which gets the attention of the poor Milk Man, so he throws them off with a barrage of abuse as Duchess declares him a “Horrible Human.” Right you and your kids are damaging the poor guy’s livelihood and god knows how long that milk took to prepare for human consumption, but because he wasn’t worshipping Duchess, he’s a bad guy who had the audacity to call them all “Tramps.” Oh dear, what a pity.

The family decide to cross a train bridge, when because it was obvious it was going to happen the train comes, and even though Thomas rather bravely tried to get them all to hold on, Marie falls in, of course, it had to be Marie didn’t it?

Thomas naturally jumps into rescues her, and I will give this scene some dues because the score is brilliant, as Marie is pulled to safety, her brothers not being impressed because she’s the one who constantly needs to be rescued. Thomas is swept down the river, and this is the moment where we meet Abigail and Amelia Gabble, doing some research on these two it turns out they are voiced by Monica Evans and Carole Shelly, who also played sisters in the film, and TV show “The Odd Couple.” Oh, come on this is just stupid, and desperate as there is no way contemporary audiences are going to know who they are, and this type of tactic was last seen in the “Package films”, and that’s acceptable…because you know the whole WW2 thing!

The sisters decide to rescue Thomas, by correcting his technique, and almost killing him in the process as he politely (as possible for a Disney film), tells them both to piss off, the expression on his face screams “This is so not worth it!” When the Aristocats make their appearance, finally tracking the street cat down. I do appreciate that everyone in this scene is so formal, apart from Thomas, who just wants to get rid to them, especially since they find out that Thomas isn’t married to Duchess. So these prim and proper geese are just a pair of judgemental harpies as they slag him off in front of him, for not making an “Honest Woman” out of Duchess, apparently they cannot do the same to Duchess as she’s an Aristocat…got it.

In the end, however the sisters decide the join the cats into Paris, as they all begin to waddle like the geese, just because, whilst the twins discuss their Uncle Waldo, who we meet in the next scene who is completely plastered, since he’s just escaped from being eaten. And suffering the sheer indignity of almost being cooked in white wine, as since he’s British, he would have preferred Sherry, how dare they. Though personally I’d rather have my goose barbecued! End of the day these are filler characters, in a filler moment that just underlines how basic this film really is. Even though I do find along with Thomas, Uncle Waldo (Bill Thompson) is actually pretty funny and right now I envy him

Looking at the world count, this is now a two part, and in the next chapter, the resolution and the voice cast will be discussed as we find out that Cats invented Jazz!