Fig. 1

Fruit of the 'Li' variety of jujube, Ziziphus jujuba 'Li', Houston, Texas

Fig. 2 Dried jujubes

Fig. 3

Leaf habit

Fig. 7

Nodal spine

Fig. 8

Z. jujuba (Jinjolero, azufaifo), Rama joven con renuevos, cultivado, Camino de la Azarbe de Patricio, Albatera (Provincia de Alicante, España)

Fig. 9

Rama joven con espina nodal/axilar, cultivado, circa de Lo Gil, Albatera

Fig. 10

Flores en antesis, cultivado, Camino de la Azarbe de Patricio, Albatera.

Fig. 11

Z. zizyphus flores, losar de la Vera (Cáceres, España)

Fig. 13

Fruit and flowers

Fig. 14

Immature fruit

Fig. 15

Z. jujuba

Fig. 16

Fig. 17

Jujubier (Z. jujuba)

Fig. 23

Four-year-old ‘Shanxi Li’ variety trained as an open center in early March, Gainesville, FL.

Fig. 24

Mature Z. jujuba

San Diego Botanic Garden, Encinitas, CA

Fig. 25

Bark dark brown, blocky, furrowed or scaly

Fig. 26

Z. zizyphus, Tamil Nadu, India

Fig. 27

Red dates, Z. jujuba

Fig. 28

Chinese date, for sale in a marketplace, Beijing

Fig. 29

Ripe berries sun dried for pickles, India

Fig. 30

Red date latte (daechu cha)

Fig. 37

The korean musician Kim Kyeong-Ah playing a Taepyeongso, "Tanz- und Folkfestival" in Rudolstadt, Germany

Scientific name

Ziziphus jujuba Mill (formerly Z. zizyphus)

Pronunciation

ZIZ-ih-fuss jew-JEW-buh 2

Common names

English; Chinese jujube, Chinese-date, common jujube, jujube; French: jujubier commun; German: Brustbeerbaum, Chinesische Dattel, Jujube; Japanese: sanebuto natsume, natsume; Portuguese: açofeifeira; Spanish: azufaifo, azufaifo Chino, jinjolero; Swedish: kinesisk jujuber; Transcribed Chinese: zao 6

Other Common Names

Synonyms

Girtanneria jujuba (Mill.) Neck.; Jububa mediterranea Bubani; Mansana arborea J.F.Gmel.; Paliurus lucidus Carrière; Rhamnus circumcissa Russell ex Wall.; R. lucida Salisb.; R. mauritiana Soy.-Will.; R. soporifera Lour. R. vulgaris Pers.; R. zizyphus L.; Ziziphus acidojujuba C.Y.Cheng & M.J.Liu; Z. acidojujuba f. granulata C.Y.Cheng & M.J.Liu; Z. acidojujuba f. infecunda C.Y.Cheng & M.J.Liu; Z. acidojujuba f. trachysperma C.Y.Cheng & M.J.Liu; Z. chinensis Spreng.; Z. flexuosa Wall.; Z. jujuba f. allochroa C.Y.Cheng & M.J.Liu; Z. jujuba f. apyrena C.Y.Cheng & M.J.Liu; Z. jujuba f. carnosicalycis C.Y.Cheng & M.J.Liu; Z. jujuba f. heteroformis C.Y.Cheng & M.J.Liu; Ziziphus jujuba f. tortuosa C.Y.Cheng & M.J.Liu; Ziziphus melanogona Bojer; Ziziphus natsme Siebold; Z. nitida Roxb.; Z. officinarum Medik.; Z. sativa Gaertn.; Z. sinensis Lam.; Z. soporifera (Lour.) Duhamel; Z. sororia Schult.; Z. spinosa (Bunge) Hu ex F.H.Chen; Z. trinervia Roth; Z. vulgaris Lam.; Z. vulgaris var. spinosa Bunge; Z. zizyphus (L.) H.Karst.; Zizyphon jujubum (Mill.) St.-Lag. 5

Relative

Indian Jujube (Z. mauritiana), Darling plum (Reynosia septentrionalis)

Family

Rhamnaceae (buckthorn family)

Origin

Native to China North-Central, China Southeast, Inner Mongolia, Korea, Manchuria, Xinjiang 5

USDA hardiness zones

5-10; perform best in zones 6-9 1

Uses

Fruit; medicinal; landscape

Height

15-30 ft (5-9 m) 1

Spread

10-30 ft (3-9 m) 1

Crown

Round, oval; irregular; open 1

Plant habit

Upright trunks; short, angled shoots; rough bark; naturally drooping/thorny branches that grow in zigzag patterns 1,9

Growth rate

Moderate 1

Longevity

50-150 years 8

Trunk/bark/branches

Naturally droopy habit; not showy; typically one trunk ; thorns on the new growth; suckers near base 1,7,9

Pruning requirement

Needed for strong structure

Leaves

Deciduous; alternate; simple; ovate, lanceolate; less than 2 in. (5 cm), 2-4 in. (5-10 cm) 1

Flowers

Yellow; not showy; early Mar. to late Apr.1,3

Fruit

Drupe; oval/round; fleshy; crisp; green to brown; pit up to 2 seeds; size varies with cultivars; born on new growth 1,3

Season

Aug., Sept. 1

USDA Nutrient Content: Raw, Dried pdf

Light requirement

Full sun (at least 6 hrs to fruit) 1

Soil tolerances

Clay; sand; loam; slightly alkaline; acidic; well-drained 1

PH preference

4.5–8.4 1

Drought tolerance

Highly tolerant 1

Salt tolerance

Highly tolerant 1

Cold tolerance

Tolerant to -20 °F (-29 °C)

Plant spacing

10-15 ft (3-4.6 m) 13

Roots

Deep taproot; habit of suckering from the root system 1,7,12

Invasive potential *

Not a problem species

Pest/disease resistance

No pests or diseases are of major concern 1

Known hazard

Fruits can create quite a litter problem; spiny branches; sharp spines at the base of leaf

Reading Material

Jujube as a Florida Fruit Crop, University of Florida pdf

Ziziphus jujuba: Chinese Date, University of Florida pdf

Jujube, an Alternative Fruit Crop for the Southwestern United States, HortScience pdf

Jujube: Chinese Date in New Mexico, New Mexico State University pdf

Jujube, California Rare Fruit Growers

The Jujube: Ziziphus jujuba, West Australian Nut and Tree Crop Association

Kirkbride et al. ( 2006 ) proposed the name Ziziphus jujuba as the correct scientific name of the species for conservation against the para-tautonym Ziziphus zizyphus (L.) H. Karsten. 16

Origin

The Chinese jujube (Rhamnaceae; Ziziphus jujuba Mill.) is a deciduous fruit-bearing tree that is among the oldest domesticated tree crops, with evidence of cultivation going back over 7000 years. 1

Jujube, also called Chinese date, red date, or Tsao, is native to China. It originated in the middle and lower reaches of the Yellow River, and has been cultivated in China for more than 4,000 years and currently, there are 700 to 800 jujube cultivars. The plants traveled beyond Asia centuries ago and today are grown to some extent in Russia, northern Africa, southern Europe, the Middle East and the southwestern United States. Jujube seedlings, inferior to the Chinese cultivars, were introduced into Europe at the beginning of the Christian era and carried to the U. S. (North Caroline) in 1837. 4,13

Jujube was cultivated at the USDA agricultural station in Chico, Californa, in 1908, where selections were identified and distributed throughout southern states. 1

Description

Despite its limited cultivation in the United States, some cultivars of Chinese jujube have been shown to be well-adapted for production in Florida. Their rapid growth, prolific production, and resistance to abiotic stress suggest they may have at least some commercial potential, especially for small, local markets, including those that serve an Asian clientele. 1

Jujube is a deciduous ornamental fruit tree 15 to 30 ft in height with very hard, strong wood. Branches are zigzagged with paired spines (Fig. 4,8) in young trees. Depending on the cultivar, tree growth habit varies from broad spreading canopies to very narrow and upright. 3

The jujube can be easily confused with the Indian jujube (Z. mauritiana Lam), which is a tropical plant of the same genus, whereas the Chinese jujube is a cold-hardy deciduous plant. 3 It is a rugged tree, drought tolerant, has few pests, and grows well on poor soil. The jujube is a worthwhile addition to the home garden because, even when neglected, it produces heavy crops of good quality. 17

So sorry,

your browser

does not support this

video

Video: 10:24

Growing jujubes v1

Growth habit

As the growing season commences, each node of a woody branch has the possibility of producing one to ten branchlets, with older branches producing the most branchlets. Most of these branchlets are deciduous, dying in winter and falling from the plant in spring. Here and there a robust shoot might appear instead of a branchlet and this shoot becomes part of the permanent structure of the tree. Shoot of intermediate vigor are half-deciduous, losing only their distal portions at the end of the season. 9

Branching in jujube trees is complicated, with 4 types each having different functions: primary (extension), secondary (side branches), mother-bearing (MB, fruiting spur), and fruit-bearing (branchlet). There are also (principally) 2 types of buds, main and secondary, and these occur at each node in primary, secondary and MB branches. The main bud of the primary branch will keep expanding the tree canopy with primary and MB branches, while the secondary buds can produce secondary branches. In secondary branches the main bud can produce primary or MB branches, and secondary buds can form fruiting branchlets. In MB branches, the main bud can produce primary or MB branches, and secondary buds the fruiting branchlets. The MB branch grows very slowly, only 0.04-0.08 in. (1-2 mm) pa, and can produce several branchlets each season. 14

Leaves

The small, ovate or oval leaves are 1-2 inches long and a shiny bright green. In the autumn, the leaves turn bright yellow before falling. There are usually two spines at the base of each leaf. Some spines may be hooked while others are long daggers. Virtually thornless cultivars are known. As the growing season commences, each node of a woody branch produces one to ten branchlets. Most of these are deciduous, falling from the plant in autumn. 13

Fig. 4 Fig. 5 Fig. 6

Fig. 4. Z. jujuba (Jinjolero, azufaifo), Hojas de una rama muy joven; espinas nodal/axilares, Avda de La Libertad, Albatera

Fig. 6. Foliage at Ammuguda Railway Station, Hyderabad

Flowers

Flowering occurs on fruiting spurs which give rise to a cyme inflorescence bearing numerous, small yellow perfect flowers. 1

Small, inconspicuous, yellow flowers grow in clusters of one to half a dozen or more in leaf axils of the growing branchlets. Flower buds are initiated the same year the flowers open. The plants have an extended blossoming period that continues sporadically throughout the growing season, with the first blossoms to mature being those closest to the base of a branchlet. Individual flowers, however, are receptive to pollen for only a day or less. 9

Fig. 12

Fig. 12. Flores en antesis, cultivado, Camino de la Azarbe de Patricio, Albatera (Provincia de Alicante, España)

Flowering and Fruiting of Chinese Jujubes in Florida, HortScience pdf

Jujube (Ziziphus jujuba Mill.) Flowering and Fruiting in the Southwestern United States, HortScience pdf

Pollination

Jujube types may be characterized by the time of day that they flower, which falls into one of two types. One type is open between 7 a.m. and 10 a.m., the other between 2 p.m. and 5 p.m., and flowering time is acutely affected by weather, especially ambient temperature. 1

Cross-pollination always increases fruit set and improves fruit size, quality, and seed development. Some home gardeners have pollination problems in the United States. Until a thoroughly jujube fruit pollination and fruit set study has been completed, it is recommended to plant two cultivars for cross-pollination. 3

Fruit

Fruits are between a cherry and a plum in size, roundish-egg shaped like small plums (sometimes round or pear-shaped). The amount of flesh is very variable between selections. The skin is bright green and shiny when the fruit is mature — at this stage (Fig. 1) the flesh is crisp, sweet, with an apple flavour; if left on the tree, the skin begins to brown in a few spots, the brown areas coalesce to completely cover the surface, then the fruit begins to dry and wrinkle; by the time it is fully ripe the jujube is a rich red-bronze and most resembles a prune or dry date — hence the name Chinese date. The texture now is chewy and resembling a date, and the taste has improved (Fig. 2). 12

Jujube fruits have a high concentration of sugar (about thirty percent fresh, about seventy-five percent dried), and one elongated pit. 9

Fig. 18 Fig. 19 Fig. 20

Fig. 21 Fig. 22

Fig. 18. Z. jujuba (common jujube), Adana, Turkey

Fig. 19. Fruto fresco del azofaifo (Z. zizyphus), se aprecia pulpa y semilla

Fig. 21. Fruit ripening of Z. jujuba

Fig. 22. Diagram of common jujube seed (Z. zizyphus) and its internal structure

Varieties

Currently, there are 700 to 800 jujube cultivars in China, including fresh eating, drying, multipurpose (good for both drying and fresh eating), candied, and ornamental. In the U.S., jujube cultivars are very limited. They include Frank Meyer’s cultivars, cultivars recently imported from China or other jujube growing countries, those released from the USDA Chico breeding program, and a few selections from seedlings across the country. 4

Cultivars Recommended for Florida, University of Florida

Jujuba, Fruit for the Reluctant Gardener! Just Fruits And Exotics

Harvesting

Harvesting can begin as soon as the green fruits develop a few brown spots on the skin — they will then fully ripen off the tree; if you have dry conditions, then leave them on the tree to ripen and harvest them as they fall to the ground. The fruits ripen gradually (over a month or more) and not all at once, and should be picked or shaken every few days over this period. 12

In humid climates, fruits should be picked when starting to turn brownish-red and dried either in a solar dryer and/or in an oven at 115 °F (45 °C), stirring. If not picked, rain and humid weather can cause the skin to crack, and then fungi can develop in the cracks. 12

So sorry,

your browser

does not support this

video

Video: 4.27

How to grow and harvest jujubes v2

Propagation

Propagation is by seed, suckers, or grafting. Young plants transplant easily. 1

Seed propagation is fairly easy. Jujube seeds have a hard, rough, pointed outer shell which has a distinct suture line aligned from end to end. This shell needs to be removed to facilitate reliable germination; the best way is to carefully align the suture in the blades of a pair of secateurs and cut firmly — the seed usually comes out unscathed from this operation! 12

Fruiting on grafted plants starts after 2-4 years; seedlings may take 3-7 years. The first few crops do not give a true indication of eventual fruit size. Although trees are usually self-fertile, fruits are bigger and more numerous with cross pollination. 12

Jujube (Ziziphus jujuba) Grafting, New Mexico State University pdf

Climate

The trees have been described as having a low chilling requirement (<400 hours) and perform well in protected cultivation. Moreover, they have a higher heat unit requirement to break dormancy, being one of the later fruit trees to leaf out in Florida. 1

Established trees are cold tolerant to -20°F (-29°C), yet they grow well in hot, humid conditions. 1

Planting

Jujubes can grow and set fruit well in a wide range of soil conditions, from sandy to loam to clay, and from acidic to alkaline (pH 5.0-8.5). Jujubes can survive in barren soils. 4

Jujubes should be set out 10 to 15 feet apart since they require high light intensities for good production. Upon setting out new, bare root trees, top the plant to 3 or 4 feet and remove all side branches to leave only a whip. New, stronger branches will emerge from each bud just below the point where the old branches were pruned. 13

Pruning

Fruit is borne on the current season's growth, hence there is no danger of pruning off fruiting wood; pruning should concentrate on removing dead or dying wood, and keeping the tree open and well ventilated. Initially it may be wise to select a framework of 3-4 branches in a pyramid form. 12

Jujube Training and Pruning Basics, New Mexico State University pdf

Irrigation

The trees can survive extremely dry weather and will set fruit in wet years, which makes them good backyard or landscape trees. 3

Fertilization

The fertilizer rates applied to jujubes have not been formally published. It is currently unknown what nutrient requirements and timing are specific to Florida. The use of proprietary NPK plus trace element fertilizers, such as 12.4.8 plus trace elements, provides a convenient approach to fertilizing. 1

Heavy applications of quick-release nitrogen should be avoided because this can increase fruit drop. 1

Food Uses

The fresh jujube fruit is generally crisp like an apple, with similar texture, but generally not as juicy. The spongy flesh has a flavor reminiscent of apple or Asian pear with sweetness and a tangy aftertaste. The flavor and less-foamy texture improve as the tree ages. 1

The ripe fruits are eaten fresh, dried like dates, boiled with millet and rice, stewed, baked, pickled, glaceéd, or used as coffee substitute. They are also used in puddings, cakes, breads, jellies, soups, sweetmeats, etc. A popular Chinese confection known as ma tsao is made by scoring the fruits, then soaking them in honey or sugar syrup. In Korea, jujube flour is used in the preparation of Kochujang, a ferment hot pepper-soyabean paste that resembles miso. 10

Daechu-cha (대추차) is a traditional Korean tea made from jujubes (Fig. 35).

Red date is the dominant jujube product for the domestic and export markets in China. Fruits are picked when they are fully red or the fully mature stage because the more mature they are, the higher their sugar content and drying quality. ‘‘Zongzi’’ is a traditional Chinese food that is consumed just before the Dragon Boat Festival to remember the patriotic poet, Qu Yuan. 15

Storage

Jujubes may be dried, with some varieties being more amenable to dehydration than others. Dried fruit have a chewy consistency, with enhanced sweetness. Dried fruit store well at room temperature and can be stored for several years at 40 °F (4 °C). Fresh fruit may be stored for several months in sealed containers at 40 °F.

Fig. 31 Fig. 32 Fig. 33 Fig. 34

Fig. 35 Fig. 36

Fig. 31. Tak Hing Yuen Seafood restaurant steamed Chinese food Bao n Red Dates cake

Fig. 32. Z. zizyphus (syn. Z. jujuba), jujubes (= Chinese dates) from Korea, named 'Daechu'

Fig. 33. Z. jujuba, dried fruits sold as "red dates" at Li Ming's Global Market, Durham, NC, USA

Fig. 34. Korea: honey jujube tea

Fig. 35. Jujube tea near Changdeokgung Palace, Seoul

Fig. 36. Tea includes goji berries, dried jujubes, chrysanthemum flowers, and other aromatics San Jose, CA

Medicinal Properties **

In China, the dried fruit is made into cough drops, taken as a heart tonic or to relieve poisons and, with the seeds, is prescribed for anxiety, insomnia and dizziness. The bark is used to treat diarrhoea and fever. 11

Other Uses

Spirited Jujube (“Drunk Jujube”). Fruits are picked during the fully red stage and 60% 70% of the vitamin C content is preserved. Spirits of 130, 140 proof or good-quality hard liquor is used for this product. The jujube fruits are poured into the liquor and fully covered with liquor. They are then sealed in jars or zip bags and can be stored for 6 months to 1 year. They can also be sealed in small packages and sold directly in those packages several months later. 15

Jujube is a nice nectar plant with a long blooming period and jujube honey is popular in China. 15

The wood is durable and hard, used in turnery and suitable for wood floor, furniture and construction. In Korea the wood to make the body of the taepyeongso (Fig. 29), a double-reed wind instrument and for making Go bowls. 16

In Bhutan, the leaves are used as a potpourri to help keep the houses of the inhabitants smelling fresh and clean. It is also said to keep bugs and other insects out of the house and free of infestation. In the traditional Chinese wedding ceremony, jujube and walnut were often placed in the newlyweds’ bedroom as a sign of fertility. The fragrance of the flowers are said to make teenagers fall in love, consequently young men will take a flowering shoot and put it on their hats to woo the opposite sex in the Himalaya and Karakoram regions. In Japan, the natsume has given its name to a style of tea caddy used in the Japanese tea ceremony. In Abyssinia, the fruit is used to stupefy fish. 16

General

Jujubes are also known as chinese dates as a result of the similarity in appearance of dried jujube fruit and dried date (date palm, Phoenix dactylifera). Interestingly, the Chinese word for date palm (“zongzao”) literally means palm jujube as a result of its similarity to jujube. 3

"Another little fact you are never told about the tree is if you plant it then move it, the old roots, and the new roots where you plant it, will send up young shoots annually seemingly forever. You end up with a multitude of shin-high saplings puncturing your ankles." 2

The name Ziziphus is related to an Arabic word and ancient Greeks used the word ziziphon for the jujube. 15

Chinese dates are available in dried, unsmoked red form called hóng zǎo or in blacked smoked form called hēi zǎo. Smoking enhanced its flavour. In Asian groceries store in America, Europe and Australia, four types of preserved Chinese jujube are available: two shrivelled with intact skin, the dull maroon hóng zǎo (red jujube) and the black hēi zǎo (black jujube) and two scored skin sugar preserves the mi-zǎo (honey jujube) and the seedless wu-he-zǎo (pitted jujube). 16

Other Edible Ziziphus species:

Indian Jujube, Z. Mauritiana

Further Reading

Wild Ber, Zizyphus jujuba, Wild Fruits of the sub-Himalayan region

Ziziphus zizyphys: the Misspelled Jujube, Eat The Weeds

Jujube Orchards, West Australian Nut and Tree Crops Association

Intercropping with Jujube in China, Archives of the Rare Fruit Council of Australia

Jujube, Zyzyphus spp., Manual Of Tropical And Subtropical Fruits

The Jujube, Archives of the Rare Fruit Council of Australia

Chinese Jujube Botanical Art

List of Growers and Vendors