Handler said she and Harbert "didn't break up because I left him for the masseuse" after spilling details of the pair’s threesome in June

Chelsea Handler is setting the record straight about why her relationship with ex Ted Harbert ended more than a decade ago.

On Thursday’s episode of The Tonight Show Starring Jimmy Fallon, the 48-year-old comedian clarified the details behind their split, four months after she said their breakup followed a threesome with a masseuse.

“I like to tell my personal history as if it’s my only personal history,” she shared. "And I always forget there are other people involved in my stories.”

After spilling details of their ménage à trois in June, she allegedly received a message from former NBC chairman Harbert — who she called “a very dear friend of mine” — which she recalled saying, “That was not cool. Please don't do that again. Some things are better left private.”

Related: Chelsea Handler’s Threesome with Masseuse Led to Ted Harbert Romance End: ‘I Was Very Turned on By' Her

She added after receiving the “stern” response, she googled herself to remember what she had said and found headlines about the interview.

“So I really want to clarify, I want to go on the record that is not why our relationship ended,” she explained. “We did have a lot of threesomes and that while that's private, it's already out there. So I'm gonna double down on that and just say that we didn't break up because I left him for the masseuse. That didn't happen.”

“So many people came up to me, they're like, ‘Wow, that gave Ted Harbert a lot of street cred, who knew he was having threesomes,’” she joked. “So I just want to say he was.”

She concluded, “But I love Ted Harbert. I love you, if you’re watching. Hopefully not.”

Related: Chelsea Handler Clears Up Kissing Photo with Guy She Called 'My Baby' — He's a Bartender! 'So Many Drinks'

Back in June, Handler chatted with Andy Cohen on his SiruisXM radio show about a threesome she had with the couple’s masseuse — and how that was the beginning of the end of her relationship with Harbert.

When asked if she has ever dated a woman, the Chelsea Lately star revealed, “I’ve slept with a woman but I haven't dated a woman.” When Cohen pushed for more details, Handler admitted it was during a threesome.

"I was very turned on by this woman,” she said. “I ended up hooking up with her several times without the guy that I was dating. That's when I knew it was time to break up with the guy."

Cohen laughed and Handler continued.

"I don't think I ever revealed that, but I mean, hopefully, he's listening now," she said with a chuckle. "His name is Ted Harbert. He's in Portugal though. He might not have access to this ... he and his wife are building a house in Portugal."

Never miss a story — sign up for PEOPLE's free daily newsletter to stay up-to-date on the best of what PEOPLE has to offer, from juicy celebrity news to compelling human interest stories.

Handler and Harbert broke up in 2010 after dating for four years. He was the president of E! Entertainment when the Handler’s late-night show launched in 2006.

Previously, Handler suggested the reason they broke up was because he couldn't separate work from the rest of their life.

"I would come home from work, and Ted would be like, ‘Do you want to watch your show?’ and I’d be like, ‘No, I just came from my show. That’s the last thing I’d want to do,'” she said in an interview with Marie Claire in 2012. “That was the reason it didn’t work out, ultimately. I think.”

For more People news, make sure to sign up for our newsletter!