LOS ANGELES, CALIFORNIA: Comedian Chelsea Handler claims Robert De Niro is part of an "epidemic" of "horny old men" because they won't stop procreating. Handler, who is childless, attacked De Niro, Al Pacino, Alec Baldwin, and Elon Musk in an Instagram video. De Niro recently revealed that he fathered his seventh child at the age of 79, which infuriated Handler. Pacino also is celebrating the birth of his son at the age of 83. “Don’t get me started on these four horny old men who have never met a broken condom they didn’t like,” she shared with her listeners. “They cannot stop procreating. Between the four of those guys, they have 32 children.”

The 48-year-old comedian joked, "'There's an epidemic sweeping the country and, no, it's not another virus, it's worse. Horny old men who won't stop spreading their seed." When it comes to her personal life, Handler has dated a variety of men. From a billionaire to a rapper to a celebrity chef, host and comedian, let's learn more about her dating history.

Ted Harbert

Ted, then 51 years old and Chelsea, then 31 years old, got together in 2006. He was in charge of supervising E! and other cable networks at the time as the CEO of Comcast Entertainment Group. Her first E! series, The 'Chelsea Handler Show,' debuted in the same year. You might probably hazard a guess as to how the couple came to be. However, after several years of dating, they decided to call it quits in 2010 when they realized they were combining their personal and professional lives, as per reports.

Dave Salmoni

Chelsea briefly dated Animal Planet star Dave Salmoni. The couple's brief romance in 2010 only lasted a few months, but the most memorable moment may have been when Chelsea discussed their separation on her talk show. She remarked, "Up until a couple weeks ago, I was working very intimately with the Animal Planet, but unfortunately, that contract was terminated. However, I enjoyed being in bed with them and may hook up for an occasional project," as reported by Distractify.

Rapper 50 Cent

Though the match was quite unexpected, the two seemed to enjoy themselves. When their brief connection was brought up in an appearance on 'Piers Morgan Tonight,' Chelsea didn't dispute that they were romantically linked, even though none of them ever explicitly denied being in a relationship. She told Piers,"I was just sampling the atmosphere and seeing what was out there. I was newly single, and I wanted to date a bunch of different people, and I did. And I'm satiated."

In 2010, the two were seen together in public several times, and a picture of them looking very cuddly together also made rounds on social media.

Andre Balazs

For about two years, Chelsea maintained irregular relations with the former owner of the Standard Hotel chain. In a 2013 interview with Oprah Winfrey, she said that she and the hotel magnate had broken up a few times, but were still actively working to start a life together. According to Chelsea, their relationship suffered as a result of their hectic and divergent schedules, and they have now come to the realization that they must support one another equally. When Oprah inquired about her romantic status, she said, "Yes," adding that she had "found her match." Unfortunately, Chelsea revealed in 2013 that she and Andre had broken up, as reported by Distractify.

Bobby Flay

She admitted to going on a date with chef Bobby Flay, but that was all, in an interview with Power 105.1's The Breakfast Club. She said, "I did not date Bobby Flay; I went on a date with Bobby Flay one time," but did it really qualify because he didn't even prepare food for her for their date.

Jo Koy

Even though stand-up comedian Jo Koy (then 50) frequently performed on Chelsea's E! late-night program Chelsea Lately from 2007 to 2014, the two didn't start dating until much later. When the two attended a Dodgers game together in September 2021, dating allegations started to circulate around them. Chelsea uploaded a photo of her and Jo kissing on Instagram to make their romance official. The two announced their separation to their followers on July 18, 2022. Chelsea celebrated her relationship with Jo and their ongoing love for one another in a heartfelt video she shared on Instagram, as per reports.