Chelsea Handler went Instagram official with her boyfriend, Jo Koy, in a duo of snaps that were shared to her account on Monday.

In the first of the snaps, the 46-year-old comedian was seen holding her 50-year-old boyfriend closely while he took a selfie, and the happy couple was seen sharing a kiss in the second.

The television personality also wrote a brief message in her post's caption that read: 'He's on tour, I'm on tour, sometimes we tour together. #VaccinatedAndHorny #FunnyIsFunny. Coming to a city near you!'

Handler recently hinted at her relationship with Koy in the caption for a post that was shared to her Instagram account last Monday, where she wrote about how she was happy to be dating someone.

During her message, she wrote that she was 'finally in love, with the best kind of guy there is. There is hope for everyone!'

Prior to beginning a relationship with her now-boyfriend, who previously appeared on her program Chelsea Lately on multiple occasions, the comedian was linked to several other individuals.

In 2006, she began a relationship with former Comcast Entertainment Group CEO Ted Harbert, although they went their separate ways after four years of dating.

Handler also briefly dated rapper 50 Cent in 2011, although the two were never serious about their connection.

The television personality later began an on-again-off-again relationship with hotelier Andre Balazs, which lasted from 2011 until 2013.

Koy was previously married to Angie King, and the two split up after welcoming a son, although they remain on good terms.

During a recent interview with TMZ, Koy spoke about his recent public appearance with Handler when she accompanied him while he threw out a first pitch before a baseball game at Dodger Stadium in Los Angeles.

The comedian notably told the media outlet that the actress instructed him on how to properly throw a baseball and commented on her appearance.

He recalled that the comedian 'told me how to throw it, she was my coach that day.'

The performer then noted that he and Handler were very close before they started their relationship and that their connection was built on a solid attraction to each other.

'Me and Chelsea, yeah, she's amazing. I've known Chelsea for a long, long time — I mean a long time, like years ago — and we've always been great friends,' he said.

When directly asked about how he felt being with his partner, Koy played it cool and stated: 'Yeah, I don't know how to answer that.'