Chelsea Handler spotted on cozy afternoon outing with male companion nearly one year after splitting from Andre Balazs

Chelsea Handler split from hotelier Andre Balazs almost one year ago.

And in the meantime the talk show host has seemed to be very much single, spending time with female friends such as Gwyneth Paltrow, Cameron Diaz and Jennifer Aniston rather than a love interest.

On Sunday that appeared to have changed when the 39-year-old blonde was spotted enjoying a lazy afternoon with a silver fox gentleman in Santa Monica.

A new man in her life?: Chelsea Handler was seen with an unidentified male on Sunday in Santa Monica; here they are taking cell phone photos as they walk along Palisades Park which has a view of the Pacific Ocean

After their dining experience, the twosome went for a stroll in the city's lively shopping district, the Third Street Promenade.

Dressed casually but with a sexy flair, Chelsea added a plunging V-neck grey T-shirt with tight dark blue denim jeans. She wore a brown belt with a silver buckle that is very similar to the one Aniston has used for years. Grey buckled booties gave her an urban flair.

The E! personality wore her hair parted to the side and back in a ponytail with cool looking gold aviators hiding her face.

A long date: After lunch at the Blue Plate, the duo went for a walk in the shopping district of the Third Street Promenade

The unidentified man looked ruggedly handsome with light grey wavy hair and a matching light grey T-shirt with a red pocket over worn-in jeans and lace-up sneakers that seemed a bit too young for him.

The two were seen passing The Gap while Chelsea looked at her cell phone.

Later they took photos along Palisades Park which is just blocks from The Promenade. The park, which borders Ocean Boulevard, has a spectacular view of the Pacific Ocean.

She followed close behind: The 39-year-old outspoken star looked like she had too much to eat as she put one hand on her stomach after her meal

The man has a slight resemblance to her ex-boyfriend Ted Harbert, who was an executive at E! and is now at NBC. They dated from 2007 to 2010.

The outspoken TV star - who is known for relentlessly criticizing Angelina Jolie and Brad Pitt and never highlighting their altruism - has also romanced rapper 50 Cent (in 2010) and comedian David Alan Grier (in 2005),

She has also been linked to Dave Salmoni in her early days of fame.

On Monday the raunchy mouthed star posted a photo with singer Sia and made no mention of her new male friend.

In the past week Handler has been posting photos of herself naked and nearly naked.

In one shot posted Wednesday she stands in her black lingerie with her arms crossed. 'Getting ready for my final shower scene,' she wrote. 'August 26th is the one hour finale. Orange you glad I told you?'

On Thursday the New Jersey native was photographed in a locker room with nothing but a pair of beige thongs on. She sits on a bench with her legs crossed and one of her breasts is visible.

'I'm a Kardashian,' she wrote, an apparent slam on Kim Kardashian, who is known for posting risqué selfies. Kim's sister Khloe has guest hosted her show Chelsea Lately.

No longer together: The blonde E! star split with hotelier Andre Balazs (he owns West Hollywood's famous Chateau Marmont) in April 2012

She loves her female friends: Handler has made a habit of hanging out with women more famous than she is, like Jennifer Aniston, who she is spotted with here in 2011