** This can be downloaded as a PDF document by clicking here.**

InterPore Journal is an open access, peer-reviewed international journal owned and published by the Society for Porous Media (InterPore). The breadth of topics covered by this journal will be as diverse as the membership of the actual society, however one does not need to be a member of the society to submit one’s work. We look forward to receiving your contributions linked to a porous media application. Submitted research may include, but is not limited to, physical and numerical modelling, imaging techniques and analysis, theory development, big data analysis, characterization, and/or material design.

We will only consider articles for publishing if they are original work and have not been previously published elsewhere and are not being considered for publication elsewhere. Electric preprints (a pre-publication version of an author’s work that has been deposited on a preprint server or institutional website prior to undergoing peer review at a journal) are acceptable as they are not considered a previous publication. However, the author must inform the editor in the cover letter at the time of first submission should their article be available as a preprint and provide a link to this preprint along with any relevant licensing information. Should the article later be accepted for publication in InterPore Journal, then the preprint publication should also be updated to include the reference to the published article along with its URL link and DOI.

Should your article have been previously published as an abstract elsewhere, this should be mentioned in the cover letter including where and when it was published as an abstract, and if possible, a link to the published abstract.

For more information on the types of papers which we will be publishing, please see here.

For more information on the fees for publishing, please see here.

Please review the following author guidelines when preparing your work for submitting to InterPore Journal. Should any questions arise, please do not hesitate to contact the Managing Editor Laura Lenz at Laura.Lenz@InterPore.org.

Quick Check Table

For easy reference, we have prepared a Quick Check Table that provides all relevant information in a table format. This can be downloaded as a pdf document here.

Submission

All articles should be submitted via the link provided on the journal website. Once submitted, all manuscripts will first undergo an initial review by the Managing Editor for completeness and then by the Editor-in-Chief to decide of suitable for the journal. Should no issues be found, the article will then be assigned to an Editor who will then manage the entire review process.

As part of the submission process, the submitting author must agree on behalf of all authors to the following statements:

You agree to have your data collected and stored in accordance with our privacy policy/statement.

This submission is an original submission which has not been previously published, nor is it currently being considered for publication elsewhere.

All authors are listed, all authors approve of the author order, all authors agree to the submission for publication consideration, and all authors have read and approved of the final text and are willing to be held accountable for the work.

All relevant information pertaining to this submission, including conflicts of interest, have been stated in the cover letter and relevant statements and declarations to your paper.

All relevant references which pertain to your work have been included in the reference list.

When relevant, the necessary permissions have already been obtained for any items included in your paper, such as figures or tables, which originate from another source.

During the submission process you will also have the chance to suggest potential reviewers as well as the names of any reviewers that should be avoided.

Should any issues arise during the submission process, please contact the Managing Editor at Laura.Lenz@InterPore.Org.

Cover Letter / Comments for the Editor

During the submission process, either a separate cover letter should be included with your manuscript files, OR the section labelled “Comments for the Editor” should be filled out during the first step of the submission process.

Within this letter or field, any actual or perceived conflicts of interest which the authors may have, including any conflicts of interest regarding possible reviewers, should be mentioned here. If there are no conflicts of interest, then this should be stated. If there is uncertainty regarding whether or not a conflict of interest exists, then please seek the advice of the Editor-in-Chief.

For further information on what may constitute a conflict of interest please see the following resources:

ICMJE Guidelines: https://www.icmje.org/recommendations/browse/roles-and-responsibilities/author-responsibilities--conflicts-of-interest.html

Additionally, authors should indicate which review process should be used. The following options are possible:

Double anonymized: The identities of both the reviewers and the authors are not given.

Single anonymized: The identities of the authors are known; the reviewers’ identities however are not known.

Open: The identities of both the authors and reviewers are known.

Should your article be the result of cOAlition S funded research or related and/or the funder requires that your article be published under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License (CC BY 4.0) please state so in your cover letter. Unless otherwise specified, all articles will be published under the following Creative Commons license: CC BY-NC-ND 4.0.

If your article has been deposited on a preprint server or institutional website as a preprint, this should be stated here and a link to the article should be provided.

Any other relevant information which you would like to make the Editorial Office and Editors aware of should also be mentioned here. If any artificial intelligence technologies were used in the preparation of your paper or at any stage during the research process, this should be mentioned in the cover letter.

Requirements for Double Anonymized Peer Review Process

Should you prefer a double anonymized peer review process, please make sure to indicate this in your cover letter and to prepare your manuscript in such a way that the identities of all authors are concealed. No names or affiliations should be included anywhere in the manuscript or supplementary information (use in all caps the word “BLINDED” if necessary, so that this information can later be re-added). When referring to your own work, use neutral terminology. Include the Acknowledgements, Author Contributions, Conflicts of Interest, and all Author Names and Institutions in the Cover Letter. Remove any Author information from the metadata of the files to be submitted (go to Properties under the File menu in word processors and PDF readers). This is especially important with Revised work for which the setting “Track Changes”, when possible, should be activated.

File Type & Formatting and Style Considerations

All submissions should be done as a pdf file. Should your article be accepted, we will then need the original source files. We accept the following file types for the original source files: OpenOffice, Microsoft Word, LaTex, PDF or RTF document file format.

When possible, please upload one PDF or word document which contains the title page, your main text and all figures, tables, diagrams, legends, footnotes and references. Any supplementary information should be uploaded as separate documents for review purposes. Should the figure, chart, or table be too large to be viewed properly when placed in the text, then submit as a separate file. ** Please however save all original files as the original files will be required for the publication stage should your paper be accepted.

When formatting your paper, please use the following formatting guidelines:

All pages are numbered, and all lines are also numbered.

Text is 1.5 or double-spaced, uses an easy to read 12-point font.

Illustrations, figures, and tables are placed within the text at the appropriate location.

Use American English spelling, grammar, and style.

Technical terms, abbreviations and symbols are defined upon first use, jargon is avoided.

Use standard SI units and leave a space between the quantity and the unit.

When using mathematical symbols, leave a space on each side of the mathematical symbol.

Policy Regarding the Sharing of Data, Code & Protocols

To improve the transparency and reproducibility of the work published in this journal, we encourage all authors to make the data, code, and related protocols available for all at the time of publication. During the submission and review process, this material should be disclosed to the Editors at the time of submission and upon request made available.

For more information on this policy please see here.

Article Components

All articles, unless otherwise specified in the overview of article types, should include the following components:

Title page

This should include the full names, ORCID IDs if available, and institutional addresses of all authors. The institution(s) listed for each author should represent the institution where the work was done. If the author has since moved to a new institution, the current institution should also be indicated. If a collaboration group should be listed as an author, please list the group name. All individual members of a collaboration group can then be listed in the “Acknowledgements” section.

Please note that large Language Models (i.e. ChatGPT) or other artificial intelligence tools (AI) cannot be listed as an author. However, if a LLM or other AI tool was used, this should be documented in the Methods section. The corresponding author should also be indicated along with his/her contact details, including a permanent email address. Should first authorship be shared amongst two authors, please indicate this.

In order to be listed as an author, it is required that one has made substantial contributions to the work and has agreed to be held accountable for their work and its published form. If there is uncertainty as to who can be considered an author, please see the guidelines on Authorship from the International Committee of Medical Journal Editors, which are applicable for all fields. More information on this can be found here.

Abstract

The abstract should contain a brief and concise summary what was done, how it was done, what the main outcomes were and what it adds to the field. Please also feel free to submit a graphical abstract should this help in conveying the message of your work.

Abstracts are not required for Commentaries on Previously Published Articles, Letters to the Editor, and Opinion Pieces.

Keywords

Provide at least 3 and up to 5 keywords or groups of words that represent the main content of your article.

Main Text

The main text should contain the body of the article and can be broken down into (sub)sections with short and informative headings.

The following typical sessions, when relevant depending on article type, should be included: Introduction, Materials and Methods, Results, Discussion and/or Summary & Conclusions. The last section should include, when relevant, questions which could be addressed in future research and investigation.

Materials and Methods

When writing up your Materials and Methods section, please make sure to include enough information and details so that others can easily and successfully reproduce or build upon your experiment. One can choose to include a short version of the Materials and Methods with the main text of the paper, and a more detailed version of this with the Supplementary Materials. Information which can be included in the full version includes, but is not limited to, the following:

Complex procedural details

Step by step protocols that detail everything one needs to reproduce the method

A listing of all materials and equipment used. This includes microscopes, objective lenses, cameras, detectors, filter models, etc.

A listing of all software packages used, including any image acquisition and processing software along with information on any key settings or processing manipulations used.

Which artificial intelligence (AI) assisted technologies were used and how.

Legends

A brief but descriptive Legend should be provided for all Figures, Tables, and Diagrams and be numbered (i.e., Figure 1, 2, 3; Table 1, 2, 3, etc.). References within the text to figures and tables should be written in full instead of abbreviated. The actual Legend should not be included in the actual text but set apart – either right next to or following the Figure, Table, or Diagram in your document, or included all together at the end.

Figures, Tables, Diagrams, Charts

Please use color whenever possible, but keep in mind the following guidelines available on these websites when using color so that visually impaired readers will not run into issues:

https://www.datylon.com/blog/data-visualization-for-colorblind-readers

https://www.datylon.com/blog/data-visualization-for-visually-impaired-users

All figures should be provided in their original file format and with a minimum resolution of 150 DPI. Please use the following file formats: jpg, tiff, gif, png, or eps. When embedding picture files into the main text of the paper for the submission process, please also include the original file with your submission. Please also include information on all image-acquisition tools and image software packages (including version number) which were used.

When submitting digital images, please try to keep the processing of these to a minimum. Some processing is acceptable, and in many cases is unavoidable. Final images however must be an accurate representation of the original data. All unprocessed data files should be saved in case it is necessary to provide them to the reviewers during the review process or following publication should an issue arise.

The Materials and Methods section should include information on all image acquisition tools and processing software that were used, including information on any key settings and processing manipulations. Please also include information on the type of equipment and acquisition software which has been used (microscopes, objective lenses, cameras, detectors, filter models, etc.). If any manipulation has been done to an image, please also indicate what type of manipulation in the figure legend. Measured resolutions should also be indicated.

For all figures, tables, diagrams, or charts which have been borrowed or adopted from another publication, it is the authors responsibility to obtain permission from the original copyright holder(s) for re-use in an online publication, to provide us with a copy of this permission when submitting your paper, and to provide a credit line as supplied by the copyright holder.

For example: (Reprinted with permission from Lunstrum, A., Van Den Berghe, M., Bian, X., John, S., Nealson, K., West, A.J. (2023) Bacterial use of siderophores increases olivine dissolution rates by nearly an order of magnitude. Geochem. Persp. Let. 25, 51–55.).

If the borrowed work is from an Open Access article, it is still required to cite the original work.

Abbreviations and symbols

If your paper contains a large number of abbreviations or symbols, a list of all should be provided at the end of your paper for easy reference.

Equations

All equations should be numbered and referenced in the text with Eq. 1, 2, 3, etc. When used at the beginning of a sentence, then it should be spelled out. When letters are used in the equation or formula, they should be used in a manner that the capital letters can be clearly distinguished from the lowercase letters. Use an equation editor to create professional quality equations, either directly within the text or included as an image. All variables within the equation should be defined within the text directly prior to or following use unless the understanding and flow of the text is negatively impacted.

Footnotes

If your paper also includes footnotes within the text, please have these labelled with raised lower-case letters. References should not be cited as footnotes.

Statements and Declarations

The following statements and declarations are to be included at the end of your paper:

Author Contributions

Ethics Approval (and name of approving ethics committee) and Consent to Participate (only if relevant)

Conflicts of Interest

Data, Code & Protocol Availability

Funding Received

Acknowledgements

Author Contributions: We recommend that authors use the CRediT format, which is a taxonomy system that includes 14 defined roles that can be used to represent the various possible author contributions. By identifying who performed what work, one increases transparency as well as ensuring that credit and responsibility for the work are attributed to the appropriate individual(s).

When considering who can be considered an “author” we follow the guidelines set out by the International Committee of Medical Journal Editors (ICMJE) which state that in order to be considered an author, one must meet all of the below requirements (as taken from the ICMJE):

Have made substantial contributions to the conception or design of the work; or the acquisition of data for the work; and

Have been involved in drafting the work or reviewing it critically for important intellectual content; and

Given final approval of the version to be published; and

Have agreed to be accountable for all aspects of the work in ensuring that questions related to the accuracy or integrity of any part of the work are appropriately investigated and resolved.

Anyone who does not fulfill all four criteria should be listed in the acknowledgements.

If any large language models or other artificial intelligence (AI)-assisted technologies were used in the production of submitted paper or the work performed, this should be noted in the cover letter and documented in the Materials and Methods section. It is not possible to list any AI technology as an author of the paper. Any text or images which have been produced by AI should be carefully controlled and verified to be free of any plagiarism, errors, or biases.

Ethics Approval: If ethics approval was required for your study, the name of the approving national or international ethics committee/review board should be given here as well as any national or international guidelines that were followed. If the study involved human subjects, then consent to participate should also be included here.

Conflicts of Interest: It is the responsibility of the authors to provide information on all known and possible financial and non-financial conflicts of interest in relation to the paper being submitted should be stated here. A conflict of interest can be considered anything which could potentially undermine, or be perceived to undermine the objectivity, integrity, and value of the paper. If there are no conflicts of interest, then this should be stated here.

Financial interests can include any of the following: provision of salaries, equipment, and supplies by organizations that would be impacted via this publication. If a funder was involved in any way in regard to the study (study conception, design, data collection or analysis, publication decision or manuscript preparation) then this should also be described here. Financial interests can also include employment or planned employment by any organization that could be impacted by this work as well as the holding of stocks or shares in said company, patents or patent applications, or the receipt of consultation fees or other forms of renumeration.

Non-financial interests can include any personal or professional relationship, including unpaid roles, which might influence the publication process. For more information on conflicts of interest, please refer to the COPE guidelines and flowcharts: https://publicationethics.org/resources/discussion-documents/handling-competing-interests-january-2016-0

Availability of Data, Code & Protocols: The location of any data resulting from your study, code and/or protocols should be given here along with information on where it is available, any assigned DOI or other identification number, how to access, under what conditions it can be accessed, and links when available.

Funding: All sources of funding received for the study, including the name of the granting agencies, grant numbers, and a description of the funder(s) role should be included here. If the funder had no role, then this should be stated. If no funding was received, then this should also be indicated.

Acknowledgements: In this section, anyone that was important in regard to this study, such as those who do not qualify for authorship, can be thanked here.

References

InterPore Journal follows the APA reference style. For more information on how to use this style, including examples please see one of the following links:

https://apastyle.apa.org/instructional-aids/creating-reference-list.pdf

https://apastyle.apa.org/style-grammar-guidelines/references/elements-list-entry

https://www.mendeley.com/guides/apa-citation-guide/

A list of all references used should be included at the end of your paper in alphabetical order. All datasets which were used, and which have a DOI should also be included in your reference list.

Within the text of the paper, references should be referred to in the style of “Author, Year”. Official journal title abbreviations should be used when known. For papers with 10 authors or less, please list all authors, otherwise list only the first 3 authors followed by et al. When available, the DOI for each reference should also be included at the end. If the reference is from an online source, then the URL should also be given.

Please note that the following items should not be included in the reference list, and can instead be referred to within the paper and its footnotes:

Personal communications

General mentions of entire websites

The source of an epigraph as well as quotations from others

Supplementary / Supporting Information

All Supplementary or Supporting Information that the authors provide will also be published online with the paper, however it will not be edited or composed prior to publication. Should supplementary material be provided, please note that the main text of the paper must be able to stand on its own without the supplementary material, it cannot be changed following acceptance of the paper, and when referred to in the text of the paper, include the word “Supplementary” with it for the first use and thereafter abbreviate to S if referring to Figures, Tables, Charts, Diagrams or Equations. All figures, tables, charts, diagrams, and equations should also here be sequentially numbered. If a portion of your Materials and Methods is included here, sufficient information must however be included in the main text so that the reader can follow your procedures and results.