I am a researcher working in the PoreLab group at the Physics Department of the University of Oslo. My main areas of activity are within the domain of fluid mechanics, mostly focused on flow in porous media, vortex dynamics in classical fluids and hydrodynamic instabilities. I am the Principal Investigator behind the project "FlowConn: Connectivity enhancement due to thin liquid films in porous media flows" (details here), funded by the Research Council of Norway under the scheme "Researcher Project for Young Talents" (project number 324555).

You can find additional information on my personal page, Research gate profile and Google scholar profile.

Academic Interests

Fluid Mechanics and flow in porous media;

Fracture dynamics in brittle solids;

Laminar flow systems and hydrodynamic instabilities;

2D vortex dynamics in classical flows.

I am currently performing experiments on topics 1, 2 and 3. More details here.

Higher education and employment history

I have got both B.Sc. and M.Sc. degrees in Physics from the Federal University of Pernambuco, Brazil. I have received my PhD degree in Physics from the University of Oslo, Norway. I have a theoretical background in Fluid Mechanics (potential flow theory and flow in porous media). My Master's thesis entitled "Vortex motion around a circular cylinder both in an unbounded domain and near a plane boundary" can be found here and my PhD thesis entitled "Burst dynamics in quasi-2D disordered systems: experiments on porous media two-phase flows" can be found here. I am currently hired as a Researcher at PoreLab, Department of Physics, University of Oslo. I am performing experiments on capillary flows in porous media and in the propagation of fractures in brittle solids.

Other scientific activities

I am an active member of the international porous media community, being part of the Scientific Advisory Board of the InterPore Academy (InterPore is the International Society for Porous Media) and a founding member of the Norwegian Chapter of InterPore. I am the current chair of the InterPore Young Academy, a division focused on the promotion of educational activities for early career researchers from academia and industry connected to the broader topic of porous media science.

In the period 2017 - 2021 I was the chair of the Students Affairs Committee (SAC) of InterPore. The SAC aims at improving the international visibility and networking opportunities of students and early career scientists working in all fields related to porous media science and technology.

The Gallery of Porous Media Art

I have started a Gallery of Porous Media Art, where porous media researchers can display some interesting images of their work. We welcome any contributions related to porous / granular media research.

Also, check out PoreLab's virtual gallery The Art of Porous Media!

The Porous Media Tea Time Talks - PMTTT

I am part of a team of early career researchers (in Norway, Germany, Belgium, Brazil, USA and UK) who are currently organizing the Porous Media Tea Time Talks (PMTTT), an online platform for porous media students and early career scientists to showcase their work while many conferences are suspended due to the COVID-19 pandemic. In our first year of activities we had almost 40 talks and nearly 7000 views. You can check out the recorded presentations on our YouTube channel.

Awards

I have received an InterPore Rosette award "in recognition for sustained and valuable services to The International Society for Porous Media". The award was given during the 10th International Conference on Porous Media and Annual Meeting of InterPore which took place in New Orleans, USA on May 2018.

Outreach and scientific communication