Jeff along with fellow The Carpet Frogs bandmate Gerry Finn (The Rowdymen) can be seen playing acoustically at The Block Co. in Toronto on a regular basis in-between tour dates with their other bands.

The Jeff Jones Trio consists of Jeff Jones (Bass/Vocals), Michael Zweig (Guitar/Vocals) and Sean Fitzsimons (Drums/Vocals). All three are members of The Carpet Frogs/Burton Cummings Band.

Tom Cochrane with Red Rider consists of singer Tom Cochrane along with former Red Rider band mates Jeff Jones (bass) and Ken Greer (Guitars/Keyboards) along with drummer Davide Direnzo and guitarist Bill Bell. The current band lineup has been around for several years.

The Carpet Frogs are a Toronto-based rock band consisting of Nick Sinopoli, Jeff Jones, Michael Zweig, Sean Fitzsimons & Gerry Finn. . They are also known for their work performing as Burton Cummings backing band and have performed on Canada’s Walk of Fame, Juno Awards, Live 8 Canada, SOCAN Awards, and more.

Lawrence Henry Gowan is a Scottish Canadian musician, born in Glasgow. Gowan has been both a solo artist and the current lead vocalist and keyboardist of the band Styx since May 1999. His musical style is usually classified in the categories of pop and progressive rock.

Infidels formed in 1990 when Molly Johnson reunited with Norman Orenstein, her partner from the band Alta Moda. They added Washington Savage, Jeff Jones and Owen Tennyson to the lineup, and released a self-titled album in 1991 on IRS Records.

Red Rider were formed in Toronto by singer/guitarist Ken Greer, keyboardist Peter Boynton, and drummer Rob Baker in 1976. Bassist Jeff Jones soon came onboard as well, and in 1978, following a gig at Toronto’s legendary El Mocambo club, they met singer/guitarist Tom Cochrane.

Ronald Hawkins, born 1935 is an American/Canadian musician whose career has spanned more than half a century. His career began in Arkansas, where he was born and raised. He found success in Ontario, Canada, and has lived there for most of his life.

Ocean was a Canadian gospel rock band formed in 1970 in Toronto, Ontario. They are best known for their million-selling 1971 single “Put Your Hand in the Hand”, penned by Gene MacLellan. The record sold over one million copies and received a gold disc in the United States