The Carpet Frogs are a Toronto based rock band. They are best known for their work with Randy Bachman and Burton Cummings.

Band Members

Nick Sinopoli - Percussion and vocals

David Love - Guitar and vocals

Jeff Jones - Bass guitar and Vocals (Known for his work with Tom Cochrane,Ocean,Gowan and The Infidels)

Michael Zweig - Guitar and vocals

Tim Bovaconti- replaces Michael on Guitar & Vocals 2007

Sean Fitzsimons - Drums and vocals

Randy Bachman and Burton Cummings

Burton Cummings of The Guess Who and Randy Bachman of The Guess Who and Bachman-Turner Overdrive have both used The Carpet Frogs as their backing bands. The band played played Live 8 in Barrie, Ontario on July 2 2005. That performance was originally set to be The Bachman-Cummings Band but Burton Cummings had to cancel his appearance at the last moment as a result of having laryngitis. On the DVD that was released, the performance was billed as Randy Bachman and The Carpet Frogs.

While touring with Burton Cummings, they weren't highlighted at all. Tickets were sold under the name of Burton Cummings or The Burton Cummings Band.

While touring with both Randy and Burton, they were not advertised either. Tickets were sold as Bachman-Cummings and the band was introduced as The Bachman-Cummings Band.

In April 2006, CBC aired a music special titled Bachman-Cummings: First Time Around - a concert performance recorded live at the CBC studios in downtown Toronto earlier in the year. The Carpet Frogs backed up Bachman and Cummings on the TV concert special. A DVD of the First Time Around special was released in 2006.

Bachman-Cummings launched a major Canadian tour in the summer of 2006 which was billed as The First Time Around Tour.

Trivia

*Band member Michael Zweig is most widely known for co-writing and performing the theme song called The Place'll Be Rockin' 'Cause Its Saturday Night for CBC's Labatt Saturday Night, the Hockey Night In Canada pre-game show. However, most hockey fans that enjoy the song, do not have any idea that Michael Zweig performs it. This song and "who performs it?" seems to be one of the most asked questions amongst hockey fans.

The Carpet Frogs were playing last on a 3 artist bill for Cdn airlines charity gala "Christmas is for Kids" , they went on right after Burton did his Up Close & Alone show and they started accapella "Nowhere Man" ,Burton was sidestage in the dressing room and said to his road manager Sam B , I thought a band was coming on? Sam replied ,"that is the band: and Burton ran out to see them , jumped onstage and performed another 90 minutes with The Carpet Frogs , a friendship and bandmate relationship began that night and the rest is history

The Carpet Frogs were the House band at Lulu's Roadhouse in Kitchener for many years and opened up for many hundreds of todays biggest stars while working there.

The Carpet Frogs appeared on the Junos and Cdn songwriter hall of Fame induction ceremonies for Randy and Burton.

Currently for 2008 they have just completed recording of Burtons soon to be release "Above the Ground" studio Cd with engineer/ producer Joe Vanelli in LA and working a tour schedule with Bachman Cummings as well as recording their own cd of Cover tunes for release on cd n 2008

Discography

1994 - Frog Curry

1994 - Christmas All Over the World

1995 - Adult Rock No. 5

1995 - Album Network In Store Play 34

2000 - Bullseye's Compact Christmas 2000

2001 - Takin' Care of Christmas

2003 - Everything is Beautiful

2006 - Pretending To Fly

2006 - Bachman Cummings, First Time Around Dvd/cd sonybmg

2007 - Jukebox (Bachman-Cummings Band)

DVD

2005 - Live 8 Toronto

2006 - First Time Around

External links