“The Whistler” series came from the radio show that featured engaging mysteries with intriguing twists. The narrator was The Whistler, a mysterious man who lurked in the shadows and acted as the “Voice of Conscience.” It was a natural concept for the movies, and THE MARK OF THE WHISTLER is one of the best.

The plot involves a small-time “drifter” who takes advantage of a bit of good luck that he seeks to illegally manipulate into at least $100 cash (which would be worth almost $1500 when this movie was made). As the scheme unfolds, so do the potential ill-gotten rewards. … But, there is a considerable cost.

Many of these period mysteries were simply “fluff”…

The second of eight Whistler films made by Columbia Pictures, The Mark of the Whistler sees William Castle back in the director’s chair and Richard Dix’s return, only as a different character this time. The second film in the franchise, Mark further establishes the franchise in Twilight Zone-style episodic, anthology storytelling. It also succeeds in building up a much more oppressive atmosphere than that found in The Whistler, adding to its film-noir street cred.

This time around, Richard Dix plays Lee S. Nugent, a down-on-his-luck drifter who comes across a “dormant money” ad in the newspaper for someone else with the same first and last name. From the moment he starts to plot a way to take the money for himself, his…

The second film in Columbia's The Whistler series once again features Richard Dix in a different role and we also have William Castle back as director. All of the style and atmosphere of the original film is on display here but this one even has a great story and some nice suspense.

Dix plays a homeless man who pretends to be someone else so that he can get access to a dormant bank account. That's all of the plot that you need to know as Castle takes that and turns in one of the best directing jobs of his career. I was really surprised at how well the director handled the plot and he managed to build some real suspense…

Cracking film noir thriller.

A drifter poses as someone else to claim money in a dormant bank account.

Second picture in ❝The Whistler❞ series starring Richard Dix.

First half is devoted to the intricacies of the lie. All the background research, etc. And the nail-biting execution of the plan. Despite his crime, we like the guy and understand his motives; his desperation. The Whistler is a great device; the narration takes us inside the mind of the protagonist in a unique and effective way.

Second half is where all the complications arise. Now wealthy and famous, our protagonist is suddenly being chased by mysterious men. Who are they? Crooks? Cops? Are they after him? Or after the man he pretended…