Robert Alexander Mundell, CC (October 24, 1932 – April 4, 2021) was a pioneer of international macroeconomics and probably the most prominent Canadian economist. He was a Professor of Economics at Columbia University and the Chinese University of Hong Kong.

He received the Nobel Memorial Prize in Economic Sciences in 1999 “for his analysis of monetary and fiscal policy under different exchange rate regimes and his analysis of optimum currency areas.”.

His adaptation of the keynesian model to allow for perfect capital mobility in the early 1960s is known as the Mundell–Fleming model and still serves as the basis for the analysis of short run stabilization policy in open economies.

Biography in the Nobel Prize Website

Obituary for Robert Mundell in The Economist

Article on Robert Mundell by Paul Krugman

Greece and the Euro: A Mundellian Tragedy

Share this:

Like Loading...

The origins of the post-2010 Greek crisis and the pre-conditions – economic, political and institutional - for a sustained recovery of the Greek economy were examined recently by a number of prominent academics, many of whom possess extensive political experience in Greece. A selection of their contributions, first presented in a workshop at the London School of Economics, in December 2018, and a conference at the Fletcher School of Tufts University in April 2019, is collected in this e- book, edited by the organisers, George Alogoskoufis and Kevin Featherstone. With ramifications for both Greece and the Euro-Area as a whole, the contributions consider the constraints that derive from the structural linkages between the domestic and the European levels. While concerned with the core economic agenda, they place it within its political, social, and institutional contexts in order to have a more complete assessment. They ask what scope there is for recovery, the priorities that need to be set, and the prospects for their attainment. Many of the chapters have been updated to take into account developments since the Covid-19 pandemic in 2020. More details on the 2018 workshop and the 2019 conference that led to this e-book can be found in the link below.

This book from the Centre for Economic Policy Research (CEPR) deals with the implications of the exchange rate regimes and capital flows of the 1990s for government macroeconomic policy-making and EC policy co-ordination. Under the fixed exchange rates of the 1950s, economists and policy-makers had a much clearer idea of the nature of the external constraints. The commitment to defending the exchange rate is stronger in the 1990s than in the 1970s and 1980s, but at the same time international capital flows are far greater and freer than in the 1950s and 1960s, with many countries able to borrow almost indefinitely and on good terms on the Eurodollar market in order to finance their balance-of-payments deficits. This volume, derived from a conference organised jointly by CEPR and the Bank of Greece, deals with these issues in depth and includes both cross-country comparisons and case studies of individual countries.