It is with great pleasure that Building Blocks Lacrosse introduces both Tim Culloty and Dan DeMartino to our BBL North family as Directors, respectively with BBL North and BBL NorthStars. Tim will serve in the role of Co-Director of BBL North and Dan the Director of BBL NorthStars. Tim and Dan have made strong impacts in the New Jersey lacrosse community during their coaching tenures and embody and value the importance of education, culture, and fostering an experience to build strong athletes and teams. Please see both biographies below.

Meet Tim Culloty: Co-Director of BBL North Boys Program

We are excited to introduce Tim Culloty. Tim will be the point of contact for the 2032, 2031, and 2030 teams within the BBL North Boys program. Tim's passion and dedication for lacrosse will help guide our young BBL athletes toward their goals.

Tim's lacrosse journey started at Mahwah High School, where he served as a 2-time Captain, and earned 1st Team All-County recognition as a defenseman. In 2010, Tim and the Mahwah High School Boys lacrosse team won the Bergen County Championship in only their 2nd year as a varsity program by overcoming formidable opponents like Ridgewood and Bergen Catholic.

Tim continued his lacrosse career at Stevens Institute of Technology where the team was ranked as high as 3rd in the country, won an Empire 8 conference championship, and made three appearances in the NCAA tournament.

Individually, Tim earned 1st Team All-Conference LSM (Long Stick Midfielder) 3-times. Tim holds records as the top defenseman for most ground balls and the third-ranked defenseman for most caused turnovers in Stevens lacrosse history.

Tim's coaching journey started at Gill St. Bernard’s under his old coach, Brian Callanan, but he found himself back where it all began: Mahwah High School. Over the past four years, he has led the resurgence in the team's performance. With a remarkable improvement in goal differential from -75 to +65 and average loss, from 7.1 goals per game to 3.1 goals to game, all while greatly improving their strength of schedule. The 2023 season was the first positive record at Mahwah in 5 years finishing 12-8 as Coach Culloty earned the Coach of the Year Award for the Jacobson division.

In the role of director for the BBL North Boys Lacrosse program, Tim Culloty's experience, from player to coach, promises to shape our program and your son’s ability. We are excited with Tim at the helm as we expect growth, achievements, and great leadership that will help improve your family’s experience.

Meet Dan DeMartino, Director of BBL NorthStars Program:

Coach Dan DeMartino played lacrosse for Bergen Catholic High School and has been coaching lacrosse for 19 years. Coach DeMartino started his career as an Assistant Coach at Pascack Valley High School and was named the Head Coach at Ramsey High School in 2014. In Ramsey’s short tenure as a varsity program and under Coach DeMartino’s leadership, the team has accrued 83 wins, one division title, one NJ.com’s division Team of the Year award, seven top 10 Bergen County tournament finishes, and three top 10 finishes in the Bergen Record’s North Jersey team rankings. Two players in his tenure have been named Division Player of the Year by NJ.com.

Coach DeMartino is a career educator who is passionate about the growth of the game of lacrosse and player development. He is excited to take his experience to BBL and develop players in the new and exciting NorthStars program!