Last Friday, Newcastle Eagles fans, players and staff came together for a final farewell going into the summer break after the 2022-23 season with our biggest ever End of Season Supporters Night.

The sold-out annual event is the last opportunity for signatures and selfies with our BBL and WBBL teams and sees the club’s prestigious awards presented to the players and thanks to our Wings Team of incredible volunteers.

Held on the Vertu Motors Arena court for the first time with over 280 in the house, the Eagles’ record breaking season of attendances was celebrated by our loyal fans as the club’s sales and communication manager Dan Black took to the stage to thank everyone for their unrivalled support, as the best crowd in British Basketball.

Every year the mantel is handed to Eagles fans to vote on the end of season player awards which were presented by the head coaches of each team.

Noelia Cacheiro first took to the stage to crown the WBBL Team Player which went to fan-favourite Chloe Gaynor.

American guard Maggie Justinak received the award for Most Improved Player over the WBBL season after stepping into the point role after the season started and going on to become a stand-out star.

A stellar season from Spanish superstar Marina Fernandez saw her voted the WBBL Most Valuable Player.

Marc Steutel stepped up to present the BBL awards beginning with the Team Player of the Season which went to David Cohn.

Denzel Ubiaro was our fan’s pick for the title of Most Improved Player this season.

Forward Hasahn French joined the roster in December and quickly impressed on the court, finishing the season as the league’s leader in offensive rebounds, earning him the fans pick for BBL Most Valuable Player.

Following the players awards attention turned to the unsung heroes of the club as we celebrated the contribution of the Eagles’ award-winning Wings Team.

All volunteers were shouted-out in recognition for their hard work and invited up to the stage to receive a gift of thanks from the club.

Two of the most committed members of the team were presented with the most prestigious awards as the club shows its appreciation for those who have given their time and effort to support the club over the season and beyond.

The Young Volunteer Of The Year award went to new on-court announcer Kai Bachini

The David Hunter Volunteer Of The Year award was presented to two volunteers for the first time as Abbie and Luke Orwin received the recognition for their joint efforts of support to the club for for many years and in particular the development of our WBBL programme.

In a late addition there was one final presentation to be made on the night as the British Basketball League asked the club to present its highest award for volunteering to one of our own.

The BBL’s Sheila Hopkins Volunteer of the Year was presented to Eagles public announcer Howard Leighton for almost 15-years of service on the mic and around the club as well as across both the wider basketball community both regionally and nationally.

Congratulations again to all the winners and thanks to our amazing volunteers.