Synopsis

Winner of the Pierlot Prize in Contemporary History This political biography of Emile Vandervelde traces the path of European socialism at the turn of the century. Vandervelde defined democratic socialism as a compromise between orthodox and revisionist Marxism. As President of the Second International, he brought French, British, and German socialists together as comrades in a common revolutionary struggle.This history of the struggles of two generations of socialists to define and practise what Vandervelde called 'revolutionary reformism' draws attention to the Marxist origins of democratic socialism and will appeal to anyone interested in politics, comparative history or labour movements.

"synopsis" may belong to another edition of this title.

Review

“I am convinced that The Democratic Socialism of Emile Vandervelde will become a classic.” ―Jean Stengers, Emeritus Professor of Contemporary History at the University of Brussels

“Polasky's book on the Belgian socialist Emile Vandervelde is a masterpiece.” ―Andrei S. Markovits, Professor and Chair, Board of Studies in Politics, University of California, Santa Cruz

“Janet Polasky has managed to bring Vandervelde alive. This book should be used in many of the courses presently being developed to study 'the other socialism' and its history.” ―Patricia Penne Hilden, Institute of Liberal Arts, Emory University

“Janet Polasky's thorough and well-constructed reappraisal of Vandervelde is fascinating not only for the light is sheds on its main subject, but also as a case study in the evolution of European socialism. ...Polasky's model political biography is at the same time a case study of the evolution - some would say degeneration - of an ideology and a movement which hoped to change the world. It holds lessons for us all.” ―Socialist History

“...will surely come to be viewed as an important contribution to the history of democratic socialism...a work of great erudition, but eminently accessible to the general reader keen to know more of the history and influences of our international movement.” ―Socialist Affairs

“This book is an important part to the jigsaw of the development of turn of the century and early socialist movement” ―Labour History Review

“Superbly researched and gracefully written, this study casts fresh light on European socialism in the early 20th century.” ―Choice

“an important recent addition to the slow but steady strickle of historical studies focussing at least in part on the oldest industrial country on the European continent, Belgium. [...] an important building block towards an overall picture of European socialism.” ―H-German 0Review of Books