Profile sheet

Koki Yonekura is a football player who deserves his footballer Profile!

Like the website specializing in football in Cambodia, cambodianfootball.com, a real reference in the field, you are passionate about soccer. Players, coaches, staff, president ... Everything about JEF United FC First Team of your favorite club interests you.

Good thing, we need you, supporter or club member, to help us create the largest encyclopedia on Cambodian and foreign football and give greater visibility to footballers of any level.

As you can see, the football player profile of Koki Yonekura, player of JEF United FC First Team, is incomplete. If you wish, you can complete or improve the presentation of this web page.

Want to become a Cambodianfootball correspondent and send us your ideal page?

After internal reading, we will publish it on this web page.

Register now at 188bet and complete your profile to receive a free $5 bet

Discover the Bonuses and promotions offered by 1xbetcambodia

Thank you for your participation!

The cambodianfootball team

Origin Koki Yonekura

Koki Yonekura, born on (date of birth) in (city) in (country), is a footballer (international or not) (nationality) who currently plays in post (field position) with JEF United FC First Team.

Qualities Koki Yonekura

Enjoying a (quality) ball in the foot, he shows himself as capable (quality) of his team's play as of (quality) in important matches.

Career Koki Yonekura

Arrived at (club) in (season) to complete his training, Koki Yonekura Persian at (level) at post (field position). It is considered (hope).

He won the trophy for (best) player of (season).

Koki Yonekura is a football player who deserves his record!

Like us, you are passionate about football. Players, coaches, staff ... Everything interests you.

We need you to create the largest encyclopedia on football, as well as on the rules of this wonderful sport.

As you can see, the file for Koki Yonekura, player of the JEF United FC First Team, , is incomplete or simply nonexistent.

If you wish, you can become cambodianfootball correspondent and submit your ideal file to us.

After internal reading, we will publish it on this page.

*}