To address eutrophication issues, medium-long term prevention policies are the main way to achieve a gradual reduction on nutrients in surface waters. Although that, once a cyanobacteria bloom, derived from a relevant eutrophication stage, has been declared, there is a clear need to act in the short-term, applying mitigating treatments. The first challenge addressed is to ensure a correct choice of treatment and alsoeffective results of its implementation. But are also challenged to support water authorities in the implementation of urgent solutions (insitu treatments locally applicable), while leading them gradually to have an overall vision.

ENGLISH ABSTRACT: The study of climate change and its effect on the eutrophication of surface waters is a current and critically important study for the well-being of the entire planet. Within the same emission scenario various probable climate change models outcomes are possible that affect the water quality of a body of water. Voelvlei is an off-channel dam that supplies water to the city of Cape Town in the Western Cape Province of South Africa. Historically, it is a eutrophic dam and with climate change, its water quality is expected to worsen. Four statistically downscaled climate models are used to produce meteorological outputs that drive the hydrodynamic and water quality model. The times simulated were the present day (1971-1990), the intermediate future (2046-2065) and the distant future (2081-2100). The operating procedure was not expected to change for the dam and inflows and withdrawals were kept the same for each of the simulation periods. The water quality model CE-QU...

Since the year 1998, Nairobi Dam, Kenya, which used to be a scene o f recreation before, has been infested with the water hyacinth and other aquatic weeds, probably due to Eutrophication. The current research aimed at investigating and understanding the Eutrophication state o f Nairobi Dam. Possible recommendations have been made, aimed at assisting the relevant authorities to solve this problem and reverse the current condition o f the dam. In order to monitor the current Eutrophication state o f the Dam, the levels of the following nutrients were determined in water, Sediments and Plants from Nairobi Dam and surrounding tributaries during various seasons o f the year: Major nutrients ((Hydrolysable + PO4 &#39;) Phosphorous, Nitrate-Nitrogen, Total Kjeldahl-Nitrogen, Sulphate, Chloride, Sodium, Potassium, Calcium, Magnesium); Essential trace elements (Manganese, Iron, Zinc, Copper, Fluoride); Other parameters in water such as Total Dissolved Solids (TDS), Chemical Oxygen Demand (CO...

... Our understanding of eutrophication and its management has evolved from simple control of nutrient sources to recognition that it is often a cumulative effects problem that will require protection and restoration of many features of a lake&amp;#x27;s community and its catchment. ...