List of dams and reservoirs in Australia — Dams and reservoirs in Australia is a link page for any dam or reservoir in Australia. Contents 1 Australian Capital Territory 2 New South Wales 2.1 Cancelled 2.2 Weir … Wikipedia

List of dams and reservoirs — The following is a list of reservoirs and dams, arranged by continent and country. Contents 1 Africa 1.1 Botswana 1.2 Cameroon … Wikipedia

List of dams and reservoirs in the United States — This list is incomplete; you can help by expanding it. The following is a partial list of dams and reservoirs in the United States. There are an estimated 75,000 dams in the United States, impounding 600,000 mi (970,000 km) of river or about 17%… … Wikipedia

List of dams and reservoirs in Bulgaria — This is a list of reservoirs and dams in Bulgaria: Note: In Bulgaria, a dam (Bulgarian язовир) is often used to refer the body of water, rather than the structure. It signifies that the body of water is man made instead of natural. Image… … Wikipedia

List of dams and reservoirs in China — This list is incomplete; you can help by expanding it. The Bikou Dam on the Bailong River in Gansu Dams and reservoirs in China are numerous and have had a profound effect on the country s development a … Wikipedia

List of dams and reservoirs in the United Kingdom — Contents 1 England 1.1 Bedfordshire 1.2 Buckinghamshire 1.3 … Wikipedia

List of dams and reservoirs in Portugal — This is a list of dams and reservoirs in Portugal. Barragem da Caniçada, Cávado River, Braga Barragem de Vilarinho das Furnas, Homem River, Braga Barragem do Carrapatelo, Douro River, Oporto Barragem de Cretuma Lever, Douro River, Oporto Barragem … Wikipedia

List of dams and reservoirs in Romania — See also: List of lakes in Romania This is a list of dams and reservoirs in Romania. Bicaz (Izvorul Muntelui), on the Bistriţa river Cerna Drăgan, on the Valea Drăganului river Fântânele, on the Someşul Cald river Frumoasa Goleşti Gura Apelor… … Wikipedia

List of dams and reservoirs in Nigeria — Dams and reservoirs in Nigeria are used for irrigation, water supply, hydro electric power generation or some combination. They are of particular importance in the north of the country, where rainfall is low. The table below lists some of the… … Wikipedia