Duane Carter Rogers, 80, of Fort Worth, Texas, formerly of Big Spring, passed away gently on Thursday, May 9, 2024. Duane was born October 8, 1943, to William Jackson (“Dub”) and Lucy Myrlene (Camp) Rogers in Big Spring. His father was a cotton farmer, and mother was a homemaker. Following his father’s footsteps, Duane became a Freemason. While attending Big Spring High School, he met the love of his life, Dona Elizeabeth Ray-Rogers, at Prairie View Baptist Church. On January 28, 1966, the two were married at College Baptist Church in Big Spring. The couple immediately moved to Denton, where Duane attended North Texas State University (now University of North Texas) to earn a Bachelors degree and Masters degree. In 1968 the couple moved to Southlake and Duane began teaching at Eastern Hills High School in Fort Worth. Duane chose a professional career in teaching technology at Eastern Hills High School for 38 years, from 1968 to 2006. Duane excelled in his career, helping students and other teachers better themselves. He earned numerous professional awards and accolades and was regarded as one of the best in his profession.

In September of 1968, they welcomed their first child, Kerri, with son Brandon coming into the world in 1977. When the Rogers family settled in Euless, they enjoyed many friendships and watched their family grow. Their house was full of love, and their kids’ friends regarded it as “the place to be”. The Rogers house was always full of life. They made life fun, and everyone loved to be around them.

Duane and Dona became grandparents in 1989, and great grandparents in 2014. Duane and Dona decided to retire in style, bought an RV and traveled the country. They made their way all around the continental US, making lots of friends and enjoying life together. For several years they spent their summers in Ruidoso, New Mexico, and winters in Texas. After many years of back and forth, they decided to return to Texas for good and settled in Godley, near Kerri and her family.

Duane enjoyed many hobbies over the years, such as dirt bike riding, fishing, kite flying, wood working, book collecting, and traveling. Duane will always be remembered as an avid book reader, and for his love of Dr. Pepper, great food, and restaurants. Duane was a great “Papa”, leaving quite the legacy for his children, grandchildren, and great grandchildren through his endless love for each and every one of them, and will be dearly missed.

Survivors include his daughter, Kerri Brown and husband, Ron of Godley; son, W. Brandon Rogers and wife, Amanda of Magnolia; grandchildren, Mary “Kaitlyn” Street, husband Colby and great grandsons Connor Jackson and Elliot Carter of Bryan, Trenton Dale “Trent” Brown, wife Shelby and great grandsons Bowen Dale “BoBo” and Waylon Dale of Godley, Elizeabeth “Jeanette” Juanez Brown and great grandson Grayson Thomas and great granddaughter Kaylor Nikkole of Godley, Landon Dylan and Blake Parker Rogers of Magnolia.

He was preceded in death by his parents W.J. and Myrlene Rogers, wife Dona Rogers, brother Arliss Gerald Rogers, sister Juanez Broughton, and great grandson Brody Dale Brown.

Pallbearers will be Trent Brown, Colby Street, Corden Nichols, Landon Rogers, Blake Rogers, Dwayne Ray, Brent Nichols, and Richard Grimsley. Honorary Pallbearers will be Bruce Broughton and Steve Johnson.

The family will receive friends and loved ones for visitation on Friday, May 17, 2024, from 5:00 pm to 7:00 pm, at Nalley-Pickle & Welch Funeral Home.

Duane’s family would love for you to come and honor him. Funeral service will be on Saturday, May 18, 2024 at 10:00 am, at the Nalley-Pickle & Welch Rosewood Chapel (906 S Gregg St, Big Spring, TX 79720) with Dois Alan Haggard and Colby Street officiating, with procession and internment to immediately follow at Trinity Memorial Park (6900 US-87, Big Spring, TX 79720).

Arrangements are under the direction of Nalley-Pickle & Welch Funeral Home. Online condolences can be made at www.npwelch.com