Real name Joel Thomas Zimmerman (born on January 5, 1981), better known as “deadmau5” (pronounced as “dead mouse”), is a Canadian electronic musician, and producer (based in Toronto). His first album; Get Scraped, was released in 2006, followed by several others.

Deadmau5 has worked alongside other well-known DJ’s and producers, such as Rob Swire (from Pendulum), Kaskade, and Skrillex, to name a few. He is known for performing most of his shows in his titular mouse-head costume, which he originally created while learning to use a 3D modelling program.

Deadmau5 was born in Niagra Falls, Ontario. His musical career started in the 1990s, however, he didn’t release an EP til’ 2005 (titled “Project 56”, which as it suggests, is a collection of fifty-six demos). Soon after his debut album release in 2006 (“Get Scraped”), he founded his own record company (mau5trap), which, along with Ministry of Sound and Ultra Records, released his 2008 album “Random Album Title”. This saw him collaborating with Kaskade for the song “I Remember”. Since then, deadmau5 has seen three of his songs (“I Remember”, “Move For Me”, and “Ghost’s N Stuff”) reach the number-one spot on Billboard’s Hot Dance Airplay Chart, making him the only Canadian musician to achieve that status, he is also the fourth Canadian musician to reach the top of the chart (following Deborah Cox, Nelly Furtado, and Dragonette).

In 2009, deadmau5 was the top selling artist on Beatport, with more than 30,000 digital downloads on his singles “Not Exactly”, “Faxing Berlin”, and “Ghost’s N Stuff”. In the fall of 2009, deadmau5’s performances were recorded and made available for sale immediately following the concert on USB wristband flash drives.

MTV nominated deadmau5 as the house DJ for the 2010 MTV Video Music awards, and the MTV PUSH artist of the week on the 16th of August, 2010. He expressed thanks towards Lady Gaga and David Guetta for bringing dance music into the pop music scene, paving the way for him into the mainstream.

His third studio album “4×4=12” was released on the 6th of December, 2010 in the United Kingdom, and the 7th in the United States. The singles “Some Chords”, “Sofi Needs A Ladder”, and “Animal Rights” have been released and are featured on the album. An instrumental version of “Sofi Needs A Ladder” was featured in The Hangover Part II, and “Some Chords” was featured in an episode of CSI (in which deadmau5 guest starred).

Deadmau5 is a playable avater in the game DJ Hero 2, released in October 2010. Additionally, one of the revealed tracks was a mash-up between Lady Gaga’s “Just Dance”, and “Ghost’s N Stuff”.