Prince Laurent of Belgium French: Laurent Benoit Baudouin Marie, Dutch: Laurens Benedikt Boudewijn Maria; born 19 October 1963) is the second son and youngest child of King Albert II and Queen Paola, and younger brother of King Philippe. Currently, he is 13th in the Belgian line of succession. He had been as high as third in line, but the constitution was amended in 1991 to extend as equal right of succession to women, putting him behind his sister, Princess Astrid, and her descendants.

Laurent's involvement with animal welfare and the environment, together with a relative lack of interest in protocol, has caused him to be dubbed by elements of the popular Belgian press as ecolo-gaffeur (the eco-blunderer).

Early Life and Education

Prince Laurent was born on 19 October 1963 at the Belvedere Chateau in Laeken, northern Brussels. He was educated at the Royal Cadet High School and at the Royal Military Academy.

Marriage and Children

Prince Laurent and Claire Louise Coombs were married in Brussels on 12 April 2003. Coombs was also given the title of Princess of Belgium upon her marriage. The couple have three children:

Princess Louise of Belgium (born 6 February 2004)

Prince Nicolas of Belgium (born 13 December 2005)

Prince Aymeric of Belgium (born 13 December 2005)

The brothers are fifteenth and sixteenth line of succession to the throne. The family live in Villa Clementine, in Tervuren.

Prince Laurent is also a godfather to Princess Maria Carolina of Bourbon-Two Sicilies, the daughter of Prince Carlo, Duke of Castro, a current pretender to the former throne of Two Sicilies and his wife, Princess Camilla, Duchess of Castro.

Alleged Corruption Scandal

In December 2006, Prince Laurent's name surfaced in a corruption scandal in which funds of the Belgian Navy were spent on his residence (Villa Clementine) in Tervuren. Although the investigating magistrates denied that Laurent was personally implicated, some of the accused have implicated the prince in the press.

On 5 January 2007, it became known that King Albert II had signed a royal decree, making it possible for Laurent to be called up as witness in the corruption trail which was to start 8 January. One of the defendants immediately used this to subpoena the prince. During the evening of 8 January, Prince Laurent was interrogated by federal police, appearing in court the following day where he testified at the trail that he had no reason to believe the funding of his renovations could be illegal.

Media reports in March 2007 suggested that Laurent was no longer welcome at the Royal Palace, possibly due to his role in the corruption scandal.

In March 2011, the prince visited the former Belgian colony of the Congo without receiving the required permission; the report purpose of the visited was to promote awareness of deforestation. As a result, on 9 April he accepted conditions laid down by Belgian Prime minister Yves Leterme regarding his future activities; had he not done so, the matter of his annual appanage would have been in question.

Health

In March 2014, Prince Laurent was hospitalized with pneumonia and depression. He was voluntarily placed in a medically-induced coma on March 25, and was awakened on 27 March. On 4 April, Queen Paola stated in a letter that Laurent's condition was improving, and that she felt he was 'the most vulnerable' of her three children.

Title

19 October 1963-present His Royal Highness Prince Laurent of Belgium

National Honor

Belgium: Grand Cordon of the Order of Leopold

Foreign Honors

Germany: Grand Cross 1st Class of the Order of Merit of the Federal Republic of Germany

Hungary: Grand Cross of the Order of Merit of the Republic of Hungary

Sovereign Military Order of Malta: Knight Grand Cross of Honor and Devotion of the Sovereign Military Order of Malta

Luxembourg: Knight Grand Cross of the Order of Adolphe of Nassau

Netherlands: Knight Grand Cross of the Order of the Crown

Norway: Knight Grand Cross of the Order of Merit

Portugal: Grand Cross of the Order of Prince Henry

Spain: Knight Grand Cross of the Order of Civil Merit

Sweden: Knight Grand Cross of the Royal Order of the Polar Star

Dynastic Orders

Two Sicilian Royal Family: Knight Grand Cross of Justice of the Two Sicilian Royal Sacred Military Constantinian Order of Saint George

Military Ranks

1983-1986: Royal Military Academy, 123rd promotion TAW ("All Weapons" Faculty)

September 1985-September 1989: Belgian Navy, 2nd Class

Officer oath on 30 October 1985

Specialization: combat diver and helicopter pilot

Combat diver badge: 20 July 1989 in Bruges handed by his father, divisional admiral

September 1989-15 November 1994: Belgian Navy, ship-of-the-line lieutenant

helicopter pilot badge handed in 1990 by his uncle King Baudouin

15 November 1994-26 June 2004: Belgian Navy, Frigate Captain

26 June 2004-:Belgian Navy, ship-of-the-line captain