BRUSSELS, Belgium -- Prince Charles of Belgium, the uncle of King Baudouin, died Wednesday night in the coastal resort of Ostend, the Royal Palace announced. He was 79.

The prince, who ruled Belgium for almost six years after World War II -- while his brother King Leopold III was in exile -- will be given a state funeral, the palace said.

A junior son of the royal family, Charles was active in the resistance and returned to Brussels after the liberation Sept. 11, 1944. Nine days later Parliament proclaimed him prince regent of Belgium.

The prince, who never married, reigned at the court while a controversy over whether Leopold should return to the throne created the deepest rift ever in Belgium.

Opponents said Leopold was not fit to resume his reign. The main objections against the king were that, when he capitulated to Germany in May 1940, he had refused to follow his ministers into exile in France and later England.

Further divisions were caused by the visit Leopold paid in the early stages of German occupation to Hitler. His opponents reproached him for having requested the interview. His advocates said he had done so only to plead for the early release of Belgian prisoners of war by Germany.

Another important factor was that Leopold, a widower since his Swedish-born wife Queen Astrid died in a car accident in 1935 in Switzerland, married a commoner, Liliane Baels, during the occupation in 1941 and gave her the title of princess.

When American troops liberated Belgium, no majority could be found in Parliament to let Leopold to the throne. He went to live in exile in Switzerland with his family.

After serving as prince regent, Charles retired to his villa near Ostend where he lived in virtual seclusion, painting, composing and playing the piano and the organ.

Charles-Theodore-Henri-Antoine-Meinrad, was born in Brussels Oct. 10 1903, the second son of King Albert and Queen Elisabeth. In World War I his parents sent him to England where he studied at Wixenford, later at the Royal Naval College in Osborne and the Royal College in Dartmouth.

After the war he returned to Belgium as a midshipman. He later served on several British warships and attended the Royal Naval College in Portsmouth and the Royal College in Greenwich.

When in 1926 the Belgian navy was abolished he joined the crack Belgian Guides Regiment becoming colonel in 1939. During the German occupation he lived at the Brussels palace, trying to help prisoners of war and their families.

In the past 10 years he came into the news several times when he sued his financial advisers for having swindled him out of virtually his whole fortune. A few years ago he auctioned most his personal belongings at his seaside villa.