Located in the East Midlands County of Leicestershire, the city of Leicester is one of the oldest in the UK, dating back to the Iron Age. With a rich history spanning the Roman, Anglo-Saxon and Viking eras, Leicester also rose to prominence in the Industrial Revolution as a centre for textiles, footwear, and later heavy industry. More recently, the body of King Richard III, the last King of the House of York – who fought the House of Lancaster in the long-running 15th century War of the Roses – was discovered buried under a carpark in the city. He has since been moved to a more fitting resting place in Leicester Cathedral.

Today, Leicester is frequently named one of the best cities in the UK in which to live and work, beating the likes of London, nearby Birmingham, and Nottingham amongst others. Great schools, local amenities like the lively Cultural Quarter, the Highcross Shopping Complex and various theatres, museums, and entertainment venues plus the National Forest on the doorstep all attract prospective homebuyers.

The city’s location 40 odd miles northwest of Birmingham and around 28 miles south of Nottingham means that Leicester is also extremely well connected by road and rail, with London just over an hour away by train. But perhaps the biggest draw to the area is property prices.

Indeed, the average house price in Leicester over the last 12 months was a very reasonable £256,750. More affordable than the national average and Leicestershire overall at £278,681 and offering a significant saving in comparison to nearby hotspots Newtown Linford (£632,250), Swithland (£619,000) and Old Dalby (£565,430). Leicester’s ongoing Waterside development is also one to watch. Nearly 300 new homes will be created alongside a great range of leisure facilities as part of a £250 million renovation project.

Transport Links

Thanks to its central location, Leicester is easily accessible.

Drivers have the option of the M1 from London to Leeds and York, the A46 for connections to the A1 and M6, the M42 to Worcestershire and a number of other major trunk roads at their disposal. Within the city there are 3 park and ride sites with buses running every 15 minutes and there is also a secure bike park available for fans of two wheels, plus a huge range of bus services from Leicester’s two main bus stations.

Leicester’s train station offers a range of regular rail services across the East Midlands and beyond via East Midlands Railway, CrossCountry and the Midland Main Line. Birmingham can be reached in 50 minutes, Sheffield in an hour and Leeds around 2 hours. London St Pancras can be reached in just over an hour.

For international travellers, Birmingham International Airport is 45 minutes’ drive and East Midlands Airport only 30 minutes away by road or rail. Both of which fly to numerous domestic and international destinations. Leicester’s own airport offers private flight training and flying experiences for new and existing pilots.

Schools and Education

For Leicester’s younger residents, there is a high standard of education at primary and secondary level, with the vast majority of schools receiving an ‘outstanding’ or ‘good’ rating from Ofsted at their last inspection.

Highly rated primary schools in the area include Rowlatts Hill Primary Academy, Christ the King Catholic Voluntary Academy, Northfield House Primary Academy and Whitehall Primary School. Ash Field Academy, Keyham Lodge School and Millgate School all offer SEN provision and are rated ‘outstanding’.

For secondary school pupils there are plenty of popular comprehensive schools in the city, as well as a number of independent options. Babington Academy, Rushey Mead Academy, Sir Jonathan North Girls College and Soar Valley College all come highly recommended. When it comes to further education there are also a number of sixth form colleges locally alongside Leicester College, one of the largest further education colleges in the UK.

Leicester is also privy to two highly rated universities; the University of Leicester and De Montford University. Coventry University and the University of Warwick (the 9th best in the UK) are within easy reach too.

Leisure and Amenities

Residents of Leicester have a great range of amenities and leisure activities right on their doorstep.

The extensive Highcross Shopping Complex is home to around 80 high street shops, a range of eateries, a cinema, indoor climbing centre, adventure golf facilities and gym and The Lanes and Leicester’s impressive indoor and outdoor market host an exciting array of independent retailers. Foodies are spoilt for choice too. Leicester offers everything from award-winning Asian cuisine like Kayal to South American favourite Bodega Cantina, a taste of Tuscany at OGGI and quirky pubs like the Queen of Bradgate to the new Lane7 dining, bowling, ping-pong, pool and karaoke venue.

Famous for its Premier League football club Leicester City (aka The Foxes), Premiership Rugby side Leicester Tigers, and the oldest basketball club in Britain – Leicester Riders – the city has plenty of sports facilities on offer for fans and participants alike. The Leicester Outdoor Pursuits Centre for canoeing, climbing, archery, orienteering and ziplining and the Boost Trampoline Park are both popular with all ages.

Urban Leicester also has a number of parks and outdoor spaces on offer, including charming riverside Abbey Park, the tranquil Castle Gardens, 69 Acre Victoria Park and wildlife reserve Aylestone Meadows. Leicester’s proud heritage is also on show at Leicester Museum & Art Gallery, 14th century Leicester Guildhall, the Bradgate Park estate and Leicester Cathedral which dates back over 900 years.

What’s On

Multi-cultural Leicester has plenty going on year-round to appeal to its various residents.

The Leicester Diwali (festival of light) celebrations are some of the largest in the world, the long-running Comedy Festival is not to be missed and the family-friendly Riverside Festival offers plenty of live music and entertainment, street markets and a narrow boat rally each June. There are also plenty of festive favourites like the grotto, ice rink and outdoor film screenings in the run up to Christmas.

Culture vultures will enjoy an impressive selection of theatres, galleries, and live venues in the city as well. The Little Theatre hosts some big name local and international talent, the uniquely designed Curve theatre offers a fully immersive experience not to be missed, independent cinema The Phoenix offers a wide range of screenings and digital showcases and De Montford Hall is the place to be for live music and entertainment.

Crime and Safety

Crime rates in Leicester are average for cities of its size in the UK according to the latest police reports. The city falls under the Leicestershire Police, which has its own dedicated neighbourhood team in the city working in conjunction with the local council and other agencies via the Safer Leicester Partnership.

There are also several community led Neighbourhood Watch schemes in place across Leicester.

Want to know more?