Leicester is a diverse city set within the county of Leicestershire which is in the East Midlands of England. It is officially the largest city in this area with an expanding population. It is a cosmopolitan city which is rich in culture and for hundreds of years has attracted different races and nationalities. Leicester is only a little over one hundred miles from London and the nearest airport is East Midlands Airport which is only a short drive from the city. Surrounded by excellent motorway and rail links, travel to and from Leicester couldn’t be easier. Set in the midst of one of England's most attractive counties, Leicester is surrounded by pretty villages and rolling countryside.

This wonderful city dates back to pre Roman times. During the Industrial revolution, the city experienced significant growth, particularly due to the successful textile industry. The designing and manufacturing of textiles continues to be ever popular and given that in the middle of the 20th century, Leicester claimed to ‘clothe the world’ with its array of highly esteemed textiles, it does not show many signs of completely slowing down yet!

The whole area of Leicestershire is a rapidly growing business location and there are several well established and successful companies here. The county has the largest economy in the East Midlands and strong sectors include manufacturing and engineering, wholesale and retail, education, professional, logistics, creative and digital and health.

Leicester has a leading research intensive university which is committed to excellence. It is interesting to note that Leicester is the only European university founded by its community as a living memorial to those who made sacrifices in the First World War. It is ranked 26th in the Times Higher Education (UK) and is 38th in the Complete University Guide 2024, thus appealing to many top academics from all around the world.

There is so much to see and do in Leicester which include the National Space Centre, Tropical Birdland which is home to over 250 species, tranquil Abbey Park or simply enjoy some retail therapy in the many shops and countless restaurants. Perhaps take a stroll in the nearby enchanting Charnwood Forest which covers many miles or visit some of the quaint market towns that are within easy reach.

An interesting visit is to the resting place of King Richard the Third in the Visitor Centre opposite Leicester Cathedral whose remains were discovered in a car park in 2012 by a team of archaeologists and made headline news around the world. The Cathedral’s roots can be traced back to the 12th century and has played a central role in the history and cultural heritage of Leicester.

Leicester offers a blend of modern opportunities and rich historical charm and the city’s multicultural ethos creates a vibrant and diverse community which is reflected in the array of cuisines and festivals. The city boasts a strong jobs market with plenty of opportunities within various sectors. With its friendly atmosphere, affordable living costs and a good balance between urban activities and natural beauty, Leicester is a great place to build a career and to call home.