Search for

Added by 11 members

The Liquidator

(1964)

(A book in the Boysie Oakes series)

A novel by John Gardner

Awards

1964 CWA Gold Dagger (nominee)

Paris, 1944.

As the city is liberated, Sergeant Boysie Oaks kills two Germans attempting to assassinate an Intelligence Corps officer named Mostyn.

Two decades later, the suave, sadistic Mostyn has become the Second-in-Command of British Special Security.

He recruits the man he believes is a master assassin -- Boysie Oakes -- to quietly murder potential security risks.

He is 'The Liquidator'.

But is Boysie the right man for the job?

He is preparing to take Mostyn's secretary to the Cote D'Azur for a weekend of romance.

Yet what starts as a few days of seduction in the Mediterranean sun turns into a nightmare for Boysie as he becomes more and more embroiled in Operation Coronet.

Captured, the tables are turned, and the assassin becomes the target.

Boysie Oakes will need all his wits to stay alive.

'The Liquidator' is the first in the series of highly acclaimed comic novels featuring cowardly secret agent, Boysie Oakes. It was made into a film in 1965 staring Rod Taylor and Trevor Howard. It is perfect for fans of classic British spy fiction, including Ian Fleming, Len Deighton, and Desmond Bagley.

Before coming an author of fiction in the early 1960’s John Gardner was variously a stage magician, a Royal Marine officer and a journalist. In all Gardner has fifty-four novels to his credit, including Maestro, which was the New York Times book of the year. He was also invited by Ian Fleming’s literary copyright holders to write a series of continuation James Bond novels, which proved to be so successful that instead of the contracted three books he went on to publish some fourteen titles, including Licence Renewed and Icebreaker. Having lived in the Republic of Ireland, the United States and the UK, John Gardner sadly died in August of 2007 having just completed his third novel in the Moriarty trilogy, Conan Doyle’s eponymous villain of the Sherlock Holmes series.

'Cool polished story-telling with all the sexy sidelines in the best James Bond tradition' Evening Standard

Genre: Mystery

Visitors also looked at these books

Used availability for John E Gardner's The Liquidator

Search for

About Fantastic Fiction Information for Authors