Biography

Gates was born in Bremerton, WA to William Henry Gates. He was the third in his family to have the same name, his grandfather being the first William Henry Gates. After high school he enlisted in the United States Army, legally changing his name to William Gates, Jr. to avoid the appearance of elitism. He fought in World War II and was honorably discharged in November 1946. He attended the University of Washington, where he earned a B.A. in 1949 and a law degree in 1950. He practiced law until 1998. He married Mary Maxwell Gates, whom he met at UW, and who died in 1994. They had three children: Kristi (Kristianne), Bill, and Libby. In 1996 Gates married Mimi Gardner Gates, who is director of the Seattle Art Museum.

Paramount Rotary watched a video of the speech William H. Gates, Sr. gave at the Rotary International Convention in Salt Lake City last year. He was speaking to 10,000 Rotarians from all over the world, many listening with head sets to an interpreter translating his speech into their native language. As co chair of the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation, his talk focused on Rotary's quest to eradicate Polio.

In answer to the question, who am I and why am I here? He credited his parents, his basketball coach and a next door neighbor for molding his character to make him who he is and to his own hard work to explain why he was here, along with the fact that his son was a founder of Microsoft.

He challenged Rotary to use its' resources in three ways to eradicate Polio. First with our dollars, Rotary has already raised $650 million. Second use our legs to mount effective campaigns where needed. Third to use our lungs to make our voice be heard.

Although we have come a long way since the 1952 epidemic in which iron lungs were common place and we all feared the disease to not having to worry about Polio in most of the world. However, Polio remains a threat in places like India, Nigeria and Pakistan. Gates implored us to set our sights high, that our reach should exceed our grasp.