TASK: Investigate the hardships that were faced by newly arrived immigrants in Australia. Outline terms such as assimilation and discrimination,

British immigrants arriving into Australia in 1946.

What you need to do:

1. Write a report on hardships that were faced by newly arrived immigrants in Australia. Outline terms such as assimilation and discrimination.

2. Glossary - link all the key words to definitions in the Glossary

3. Study Notes- Set out the key information from this page using trigger words and colour.

4. Review Questions - Write five study questions based on the information you have presented.

5. Provide Constructive Comments on the work of other students

6. Provide References and Sources for all of your work

Marking Criteria

Criteria

Marks

A clear, detailed and well-structured explanation / account of the selected migration experience

Uses information from sources (primary and secondary including quotes, images, maps etc) as evidence to answer inquiry questions

Synthesises evidence identified from primary sources to support an argument

Presents key information that places the event or migration experience within its historical context

Presents and justifies own interpretations

Presents constructive comments on other students work

Integrates historical evidence (such as primary or secondary sources) into the explanation / discussion

Uses historical terms and concepts accurately throughout and links key terms to a glossary

Sequences events and developments within a chronological framework linking key information to a timeline

Asks thought provoking historical questions

Includes references from a wide variety of sources (books, journals, websites etc)

9 – 10 marks

Attempts to place writing within broader historical context

Uses historical terms and concepts and provides definitions in the glossary

Includes references

Asks good review questions

Makes comments on other students work

Correct spelling and grammar used throughout but with some errors

7- 8 marks

Uses some historical terms and concepts and defines these in the glossary

Includes some references

Asks factual questions

Some evidence of care for correct spelling and grammar

5 – 6 marks

A limited description of a key events or migration experience

Limited use of historical terms and concepts

A limited number of references provided

Poor spelling and grammar

Does not make comment on other students work

1-4 marks

Hungarian Refugees disembark from the Castel Felice at Port Melbourne, 1957.

The Hungarian Refugees information report.

1. What were the four immigrant waves?

2. Why did the third wave migrated?

3. What hardships did they faced?

Hardships facing the Hungarian immigrants.

Many Hungarian people migrated to Australia in four different waves as results of political and socials problems in Hungary. Although Australia wasn't the immigrants first choice a small amount of them still came.

The first wave of Hungarian immigrants was after World War one, when the Treaty of Versailles was made. In 1920 as part of the treaty, Hungary was reduced by 72%, making 6.6 Million Hungarians living in neighbouring countries. Discrimination against these Hungarians brought the first steady stream of immigrants into Australia.

800 Hungarian-Jews migrated to Australia during the mid 1930's when Germany started to threaten the Jews in Europe. Many Jewish Hungarians migrated overseas to escape the discrimination and many of the people which migrated to Australia were businessmen, doctors, architects and engineers who rapidly found their place amongst the Australian people. Although later when the first Hungarian refugees arrived to Australia they rarely mixed and socialised with them because of the restriction laws placed on the Hungarian Christians and Jews. Only 6% of the higher academic courses could contain Hungarian Jews and Christians and the Hungarian government also began to round them up and deport them.

The third wave of Hungarian immigrants faced the worse hardships and were known as the 'Displaced persons' (DP's). It started when World War 2 finished and the whole of Europe was in ruins. Hungary was taken over by the USSR, a totalitarian government which was ruthless and horrible. Australia started a mass immigration scheme which was designed to start a skilful labour force for the long term, as well as help many people in Europe. Hungarians flocked to holding camps in Austria, Germany and Italy which were run by the 'International Refugee Organisation' (IRO). Many people escaped to the west until 1948 when Hungry's boarders were closed due to the communist regime. Australia took in 15,000 stateless Hungarians between 1949 and 1952 and named them the 'Displaced Persons,' including ex-officers, tradesman and many other skilled individuals. These people were given a free voyage, payed by IRO and in return had to partake in work contracts to make them into working, taxpaying productive new settlers immediately once they'd arrived in Australia. They were placed into old army barracks converted into refugee holding areas in Victoria and New South Wales.

Eventually, the DP's were released from their two-year long work bond and then were free to live and do as they pleased. Many people fell back into the jobs which they had in Hungary and they were all willing to work hard to succeed. Many people were unable to speak the language because they knew very little English and therefore communication was hard and it took years for many to overcome the language barrier. Some Hungarians suffered racist discrimination from the Australians for being on the enemies side during the world wars. They were for a time known as 'ex enemies' but eventually Australia grew to accept them. Cultural differences was also a problem when the immigrants tried to find new jobs and new friends, they had a different way of thinking and dealing with their problems, including the post traumatic stress several immigrants faced from the world wars. Eventually the Hungarians learnt how to survive and they all learnt the Australian way of living creating and 'laying the foundations' for Hungarian community which was to come.

The fourth and final wave of immigrants began after November 1956 when the Hungarians tried to revolt against the Soviets and Russians. This increased the borders but 200,000 people managed to escape into the West. Some immigrants came to Australia for a free fare once again but this time the Australians did not make them work as there were many jobs available for all. Although many still had bad English skills, many managed to find good jobs and careers.

The third and fourth wave bonded well together and soon a large community of Hungarians evolved and started to celebrate cultural events together.

References:

'Hungarian Immigration in Australia', Attila Urmenyhazi, 2015,< http://adb.anu.edu.au/essay/13 > 21/11/15

'THE SOCIAL, ECONOMIC AND INDUSTRIAL ISSUES SPECIFIC TO MIGRANT WORKERS OVER 45 YEARS OF AGE SEEKING EMPLOYMENT, OR ESTABLISHING A BUSINESS, FOLLOWING UNEMPLOYMENT,' Dionisio Camacho 19/04/1999, < file:///Users/student/Downloads/http---www.aphref.aph.gov.au-house-committee-ewr-owk-subs-sub33%20(1).pdf > 21/11/15