Norodom Sihamoni, who replaced his father as king of Cambodia last month, joins an illustrious roster of artist-statesmen that includes Poland's Jan Paderewski (pianist and composer), the Czech Republic's Vaclav Havel (playwright), and the man King Sihamoni replaced, Norodom Sihanouk (filmmaker, composer and poet). But King Sihamoni, a choreographer and former ballet dancer, may be the only one to have performed in tights and a tunic. Here are annotated highlights from the 51-year-old ruler's artistic curriculum vitae. THOMAS CRAMPTON

EDUCATION

1967-71: National Conservatory of Prague, Czechoslovakia

1971-75: Academy of Musical Art of Prague

1975: National Academy of Cinematography, Pyongyang, North Korea

WORK EXPERIENCE

1981-2000: Taught European classical dance in Paris at the Marius Petipa Conservatory, the Gabriel Faure Conservatory and the W.A. Mozart Conservatory of the city of Paris.

1982: Starred in a 15-minute solo performance of traditional Khmer dance at the Theatre du Soleil in Paris. The "very personal" piece mixed traditional Khmer dance with some hints of classical European ballet, according to a fellow performer, Santha Leng. It played for one day to a sell-out audience made up mainly of expatriate Cambodians.

Since 1984: Dancer and Director of Ballet Group "Deva." In his recent book "The Royal House of Cambodia," Julio A. Jeldres writes that Prince Sihamoni gave important roles to men, which was unusual in traditional Khmer dance.

Since 1990: Film director and artistic director of Khemara Pictures. "He produced films for the people of Cambodia," said Santha Leng, and not for mass audiences in other countries.

1992: Starred in "My Village at Sunset," a film directed by his father about the effect of land mines on a Cambodian village.

1992: Directed "Dream," a one-hour dance film produced in North Korea that combined Balinese and Western classical dance in a story about a Chinese ballerina who dreams of an encounter with a Cambodian prince.

1993: Directed "Four Seasons," another one-hour dance film produced in North Korea. It includes a scene showing that water brings life, joy and love, according to its star Vantha Talisman.