Kirovohrad in English dictionary

Kirovohrad

Meanings and definitions of "Kirovohrad"

A city on the Inhul river in Ukraine, administrative centre of Kirovohrad province.

Kirovohrad province (oblast), in central Ukraine.

proper

A city on the Inhul river in Ukraine, administrative centre of Kirovohrad province.

proper

Kirovohrad province ( oblast), in central Ukraine.

more

Sample sentences with "Kirovohrad"

Declension Stem

A total of 21gender centres have been set up and operate in 17 oblasts, namely the Volyn, Dnipropetrovsk, Kirovohrad, Luhansk, Lviv, Mykolaiv, Odesa, Poltava, Sumy, Ternopil, Kharkiv, Kherson, Khmelnytskiy and Chernovitsi oblasts (each with one gender centre) and the Vinnytsia, Zhytomyr and Zakarpattia oblasts (each with two gender centres).

As the central departments and departments of the Ministry of Internal Affairs in 12 regions — Dnipropetrovsk, Donetsk, Ivano-Frankivsk, Kharkiv, Kirovohrad, Luhansk, Poltava, Rivne, Sumy, Ternopil and Zhytomyr provinces and the city of Kyiv — have reported, these meetings are devoted in part to issues of inter-ethnic toleration and to the prevention of manifestations of religious or ethnic intolerance.

The administrative centers of the Dnipropetrovsk Oblast and the Kirovohrad Oblast were renamed to Dnipro and Kropyvnytskyi in 2016, however as of 2017 the oblasts still officially bear the old soviet names as their change must be reflected in an amendment to the Ukrainian Constitution.

The Inhulets has its source in the Dnieper highlands near the city of Kropyvnytskyi in the Ukrainian province of Kirovohrad, about 30 km away from the Dnieper river itself, to which it flows parallel.

In particular, inspections took place in the Zakarpattia, Odesa and Kirovohrad provinces in April, June and September 2013.

Tymoshenko entered politics in 1996, when she was elected to the Verkhovna Rada (the Ukrainian parliament) in constituency No. 229, Bobrynets, Kirovohrad Oblast, winning a record 92.3% of the vote.

The central departments and departments of the Ministry of Internal Affairs in no fewer than eight provinces — Chernihiv, Dnipropetrovsk, Donetsk, Kharkiv, Kirovohrad, Luhansk, Rivne and Zhytomyr — have held briefings and press conferences, as well as placing video spots on television and comment pieces in the print media, to disseminate information on the fight against racism and xenophobia.

Another Ukrainian user from Kirovohrad, in the south of the country, was charged in 2014 with calls to overthrow authorities on social media, but received a two-year suspended sentence, having pleaded guilty and collaborated with the investigation.

In 1963, upon graduation from the Kirovohrad Pedagogical Institute, Marchuk was recruited by the KGB and steadily rose through the ranks of that organization.

Such training was carried out regularly in eight regions: the provinces of Chernivtsi, Donetsk, Kirovohrad, Lviv, Poltava, Sumy and Ternopil and the city of Kyiv.

From the beginning of the campaign name came from the phrase "Remember about the gas" and "do not buy Russian goods" probably with leaflets those were handed by unknown activists in Kirovohrad.

In contrast, in central Ukraine (comprising the capital Kiev, as well as the provinces of Zhytomyr, Cherkasy, Chernihiv, Poltava, Sumy, Vinnytsia, and Kirovohrad) attitudes towards Bandera's faction of the OUN were 3% very positive, 10% mostly positive, 24% neutral, 17% mostly negative, 21% very negative and 25% unsure.

The cities of Kirov, Kirovohrad, Kirovakan, and Kirovabad, as well as a few Kirovsks, were renamed in Kirov's honor after his assassination.

Work among businesses to ensure the implementation of the regional program of exhibitions and fairs Enterprises and entrepreneurs district participating in the exhibition "Regions Kirovohrad offer" in the Austrian Trade Mission in meetings with Polish businessmen.

Advisory councils on the prevention of trafficking in persons were set up and have met in seven provinces (Ivano-Frankivsk, Zakarpattia, Khmelnytskyi, Poltava, Chernihiv, Sumy, Kirovohrad) under the project “Support for the activities of the provincial coordination councils on the prevention of trafficking in persons with the help of the advisory councils of 17 provinces of Ukraine”, implemented with financial assistance from the International Organization for Migration (IOM).

He also participated in the Ukrainian National Youth Competition, representing DYuSSh-2 Kirovohrad.

The Vassily Sukhomlin provincial institute of postgraduate teacher training in Kirovohrad has developed and introduced a series of lectures and practical sessions on the themes: “Preventing domestic violence”, “Eliminating all forms of discrimination against women”, and “Gender culture and overcoming gender stereotypes”.

· The Ministry of Internal Affairs Office in Kirovohrad province documented the fact that xenophobic and racist leaflets were disseminated in downtown Kirovohrad by members of an extreme radical organization (14 persons involved in this act were identified).

In Chernihiv, Dnipropetrovsk, Ivano-Frankivsk, Kirovohrad, Luhansk, Lviv and Rivne provinces, Internet resources, television channels and media publications are constantly monitored for problem content touching on ethnic relations.

The city was renamed Kirovohrad on 10 January 1939.

After putting up flyers in Kirovohrad by unknown activists, several grocery stores stopped to do orders of Russian chocolate and beer "Baltika".

An epidemic was declared and nine out of 25 regions of Ukraine were put under quarantine, on November 5, 2009 Kirovohrad became the 10th.

December 2005, unknown activists in Kirovohrad handed around leaflets with the words "Remember about the gas", "Do not buy Russian goods" and the image of Gas pipe at the height of the Gas conflict between Russia and Ukraine.

Authors