The following is taken from Wikipedia which is licensed under CC-BY-SA 3.0. You can view the article it was taken from here.

Novorossiya is a historical name, used during the era of the Russian Empire for an administrative area that would later become the southern mainland of Ukraine: the region immediately north of the Black Sea and Crimea. The province fell largely within a slightly wider area known in Ukrainian as the Stepovyna and in Russian as the Stepp "Steppe Land", or Nyz "Lower Land".

The name Novorossiya, which means New Russia, entered official usage in 1764, after the Russian Empire conquered the Crimean Khanate, and annexed its territories, when Novorossiya Governorate (or Province) was founded. The territory became part of the short-lived Russian Republic for one year then in 1918, it was largely included in the Ukrainian State and in the Ukrainian Soviet Republic at the same time. In 1918–1920, it was, to varying extents, under the control of the anti-Bolshevik White movement governments of South Russia whose defeat signified the Soviet control over the territory, which became part of the Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic, within the Soviet Union in 1922.

Contrary to popular belief, the formable of Novorossiya is not solely based on the Donbass war (even if the significant amount of sources come from that time). Novorossiya as a union of southern Ukrainian states was mentioned in the 90s in the interview for Dniester Republic, where it was said to contain Crimea, Odessa oblast, and a number of other [ Ukrainian ] oblasts.[1]

Later, in may 2014, the New Russia party announced their broad conquerive plans to seize the southeastern regions of Ukraine, namely Kharkiv, Kherson, Dnipropetrovsk, Mykolaiv and Zaporizhzhya, and the project to combine breakaway regions of Ukraine into an independent, pro-Russian state known as New Russia, or Novorossiya appeared again. It was later said by the people's governor of the Donetsk region, Pavel Gubarev, that in addition to the aforementioned states, Odessa was planned to enter the new State.[2] On may 24th, People’s representatives from eight Ukrainian regions gathered for a congress in Donetsk. As a result of the congress, the south-eastern regions of Ukraine, where anti-government protests gained momentum, have announced the creation of a pro-federalization Popular Front socio-political coalition. The movement accepted a manifesto vowing self-determination and protection of people from what they called “Nazi gangs’ terror.” The coalition involved Odessa, Nikolaev, Dnepropetrovsk, Zaporozhye, Kharkov, Kherson, Donetsk and Luhansk Regions.[3]

In 2015 However, Oleg Tsarev, speaker of what separatists call the joint parliament of the self-declared Donetsk and Luhansk, announced that the activity of all Novorossiya structures had been "frozen" in apparent compliance with the Minsk peace accord aimed at ending hostilities in eastern Ukraine.[4]

Transnistria, a breakaway republic in Moldova, was mentioned as a part of the plan, as it's considered an integral part of Novorossiya by Russian Nationalists[5], and “an unsinkable aircraft carrier” on Ukraine’s Western borders, limiting the Ukrainian leadership’s strategic options, causing significant Russian interests and involvements, the aim of which would have been to establish another pro-Russian separatist republic within Ukraine to be included into the separatist, pro-Russian Novorossiya, cutting Ukraine off from the Black Sea[6].

As said by Valdai Discussion Club in 2014: If Novorossiya were to become a reality, Transnistria could join. But this is only theoretical because the prospects of creating a Novorossiya that could also incorporate the Odessa region look dim for the time being.[7]

The following is taken from Wikipedia which is licensed under CC-BY-SA 3.0. You can view the article it was taken from here.

The most widely known flag of Novorossiya, the battle flag, is based on the naval jack of the Imperial Russian Navy. Oleksandr Chalenko, who worked as a political journalist in Kyiv, described the flag and explained its symbolism in an item published by Izvestia on 20 March 2014: "It's a red flag with a blue Saint Andrew's cross. The flag of the Russian Navy. Of the Navy, which played a prominent military role in the emergence and establishment of historical Novorossiya." The flag made its first appearance on the Facebook account of Pavel Gubarev in December, months before eastern unrest[8], and the resemblance to the Confederate "Dixie" flag is said to be accidental.

Some sources claim that Pavliv had simply stumbled upon the flag online somewhere, and that the leader of the New Russia Party, Pavel Gubarev, later picked it up.[9] In August 2014, a white-yellow-black tricolor was presented on 13 August 2014 by Oleg Tsaryov as a potential flag for the confederation of the Donetsk and Luhansk People's Republics. This resembled an upside-down Romanov flag, which was the national flag of the Russian Empire from 1858 to 1883.[10] Due to Roblox's Terms of Service, the original flag of Novorossiya cannot be used due to the aforementioned resemblance to the Confederate "Dixie" flag.