Early life

Nishita Goswami was born in Guwahati, Assam in a Brahmin family to Moloya Goswami and Pradip Goswami. Nishita’s father, Pradip Goswami retired as the Chief Engineer of Assam State Electricity Board. Her mother Moloya is the first Assamese actress to win the National Film Award for Best Actress for her performance in the Assamese film Firingoti (1992). Nishita went to school at Kendriya Vidyalaya, Jagi Road, Assam and finished her bachelor's degree in Arts from Handique Girls college, Guwahati. She completed her bachelor's and master's degrees in Education (B.Ed & M.Ed) from Guwahati University and also did a diploma course in mass communication from Regional Institute of Journalism and Mass Communication (RIJAM), Assam. She is also a Sangeet Visharad in Classical music from Bhatkhande Music Institute.

Nishita married Sayan Chakravarty, a computer engineer and businessman from Shillong, in 2011.

Career

Nishita started her acting career as a child artist at the age of 6. Her first film presence was as a child artist in Sagar Sangam Sarkar's Rati Phula Phool in the year 1988. Her second film was Mon released in 2000 which was directed by Bani Das. Nishita has done several films after that including films like Kadambari, Dinabandhu, Astaraag and Mon Jaai. Some of them have won the National Award for Best Regional Fim category. In 2004, Nishta did a Bengali film Coolie, directed by Swapan Saha with Mithun Chakraborty in the lead.

Nishita is also a great Bihu dancer and has featured in a number of Bihu VCDs. She has performed in various stage plays and Indian Classical (Sattriya) dance dramas all over India. In August 2012, Nishita was invited to perform at Johannesburg, South Africa to celebrate India's Independence Day at the ‘Incredible India Utsav-2012'.

Nishita has been the brand ambassador of for companies like Boroline, G.P. Mobiles and The Allen Group. She was also the Brand Ambassador of Assam Police Public Committee and Election Commission of Assam. She is the Board Member of State level Swacch Bharat Abhiyaan Committee, an initiative by Government of India.

In 2011 Nishita founded Arohan Kids, a Montessori school facilitating early education of children between 2 to 6 years of age. The school was founded in collaboration and under the banner of Aarohan (Bhabendranath Saikia Children Welfare Trust).