LOS ANGELES, Feb. 5, 2019 /PRNewswire/ -- This April, #1 New York Times bestselling author Chelsea Handler is back with her first book in five years and her first memoir: LIFE WILL BE THE DEATH OF ME (Spiegel & Grau Hardcover, on-sale 4/9). It is next-level Chelsea Handler: disarmingly honest and riotously funny, but also emotionally true and…truly inspiring.

In support of the book, Handler will embark on a 16-city nationwide tour titled Life Will Be the Death of Me: Chelsea Handler's Sit-Down Comedy Tour. Produced by Live Nation, the events will kick off April 11 in Boston, MA and feature Chelsea in conversation, discussing stories from the new book and more. The tour will also make stops in Austin, Chicago, New York, Los Angeles and more before wrapping June 1 in San Francisco, CA. See full itinerary below. Tickets will go on sale to the general public beginning this Friday, February 8 at 10am local time at LiveNation.com. Each ticket will include a copy of the book.

In a haze of vape smoke on a rare windy night in LA in the fall of 2016, Chelsea Handler daydreams about what life will be like with a woman in the White House. And then, Donald Trump happens. In a torpor of despair, she decides that she's had enough of the privileged bubble she's lived in and that it's time to make some changes, both in her personal life and the world at large. Where have I been all my life? Is the question that guides her as she embarks on a "Year of Self-Sufficiency." She learns how to work the remote, pick up dog shit, find the toaster. She goes into therapy with an intellectually simpatico psychiatrist who makes her go deep and confront a childhood marked by love and loss. In the process, she discovers what matters most: family, friends, engaging with the world, and opening to love.

The brash candor and self-deprecating humor that fueled Chelsea's previous bestselling essays collections and wildly successful TV shows is here in spades: there's a shaman, some well-placed security cameras, an array of edibles, friends, assistants, siblings, and an overweight, emotionally withholding Chow Chow. (Chelsea knows in five years it will be politically incorrect to body shame dogs, so she's doing it now.) But LIFE WILL BE THE DEATH OF ME also gives us a side of her we haven't seen before: ugly-crying in front of her therapist (after he offers her an orange), finding her mojo as an activist, digging deep into the pain of her childhood, and finding a new way to use her voice.

What people are saying about LIFE WILL BE THE DEATH OF ME:

"You thought you knew Chelsea Handler -- and she thought she knew herself -- but in her new book, she discovers that true progress lies in the direction we haven't been." —Gloria Steinem

"I always wondered what it would be like to watch Chelsea Handler in session with her therapist. Now I know." —Ellen DeGeneres

"Brutally truthful… Handler introduces us to the family, struggles, and triumphs that have shaped her life. Her story is both personal and highly relatable, especially for anyone who has ever wondered why we're on this earth and what we can do to change it for the better. This book is hilarious and heartbreaking; I could not put it down. Chelsea is the girlfriend you want to share your stories and the woman you want with you on the front lines."

– Cecile Richards, former president of Planned Parenthood, author of Make Trouble

"This is, of course, a rollercoaster ride, since it's a Chelsea Handler book, but it's a thoughtful rollercoaster ride including not only dog poop and hallucinogenics, but a tour-de-force loop-the-loop through formative trauma and questions of how to be a grownup and what it means to go deeper into your own life, and I'm sure I mentioned funny bits."

– Rebecca Solnit, author of Men Explain Things to Me

"No other writer could move from Robert Mueller to edibles to rescue dogs in a way that makes you laugh, cry, and ponder the meaning of life. Handler's political awakening in the Trump Era serves as the hilariously insightful backdrop for this book in which she chronicles her own journey and our collective insanity with just the right mix of sincerity and snark."

–Jon Favreau, co-host of Pod Save America

"I love this book not just because it made me laugh or because I learned that I feel the same way about certain people in politics as Chelsea does. I love this book because I feel like I finally really got to know Chelsea after all these years." – Tiffany Haddish

"This will be one of your favorite books of all time. Through her intensely vulnerable, honest, and hilarious reflection, Chelsea shows us more than just her insides. She shows us ourselves." —Amy Schumer

"The Chelsea Handler I know is a take-no-prisoners activist for the causes she believes in. She brings the same fearlessness and commitment to telling her truth in this book. I'm hoping that one day, in exchange for this blurb, she will let me see the security camera footage of the dog fight in her bedroom." —Trevor Noah

Chelsea Handler is a five-time New York Times bestselling author with titles including My Horizontal Life (2005), Are You There, Vodka? It's Me, Chelsea (2008), Chelsea Chelsea Bang Bang (2010), Lies That Chelsea Handler Told Me (2011), and Uganda Be Kidding Me (2014). In 2012, Time named her one of the most influential people in the world as part of its annual "Time 100."

Life Will Be the Death of Me: Chelsea Handler's Sit-Down Comedy Tour Dates

*presales and on sale TBA

About Live Nation Entertainment

Live Nation Entertainment (NYSE: LYV) is the world's leading live entertainment company comprised of global market leaders: Ticketmaster, Live Nation Concerts, and Live Nation Sponsorship. For additional information, visit www.livenationentertainment.com.

SOURCE Live Nation Entertainment

Related Links