Chelsea Handler’s legendary sidekick Chuy Bravo died from a heart attack, it has been confirmed.

The 63-year-old, best known for his role on Chelsea Lately, died on Sunday in Mexico City just a week after he celebrated his birthday on 7 December.

Now, a rep has confirmed to TMZ that the cause of death was a heart attack following a brief hospital stint.

Chuy went into cardiac arrest at the hospital after being rushed to the emergency room on Saturday afternoon with a stomach complaint. It’s said that Chuy had suffered a gastrointestinal hemorrhage (GI Bleed) which led to complications and subsequently the fatal heart attack.

The entertainer’s funeral service took place on Monday in Mexico and his body is expected to be cremated once transported back to Los Angeles for a memorial service.

Chelsea paid tribute to her longtime friend in a lengthy Instagram post, expressing her devastation but also sharing fond memories.

‘I loved this nugget in a big way, and I took great pleasure in how many people loved him as much as I did and do,’ she wrote.

‘Chuy gave us so much laughter and I’ll never forget the sound of his laughter coming from his office into mine.

‘Or his “business calls” with his “business manager,” or his shoe rack with all his children-sized shoes. I’ll never forget him coming to Christmas with my family one year in the Florida Keys, and when my niece who was five or six at the time – saw him, she ran in the other direction saying she was scared.’

She added: ‘My sister and I were mortified and were apologising to Chuy, who told us, “It’s ok, lots of little kids get scared when they see big kids coming their way.” I love you, Chuy!’

Chuy shot to fame on Chelsea’s talk show Chelsea Lately during its run from 2007 to 2014.

In 2012, Chuy revealed that he survived prostate cancer, which was treated quickly after it was diagnosed.

He also said he was a recovering alcoholic and was nearly homeless at one point in his life.

‘I have been through a lot in my life, but I’ve overcome my struggles and now I’m finally living my life,’ he told Latina.

MORE : Strictly Come Dancing Christmas Special: First look behind-the-scenes as Gemma Atkinson dances with Gorka Marquez for the first time