Katherine Jenkins Backing Tracks – Ancora Non Sai… Bring Me To Life… Fear Of Falling… I Believe… I Vow To Thee My Country… Tell Me I’m Not Dreaming.

Katherine Maria Jenkins OBE is a Welsh lyric mezzo-soprano, singer and songwriter. She is a popular classical-crossover singer who performs across a spectrum of operatic arias, popular songs, musical theatre and hymns.

ListenSong TitleArtistGenre

BV

PriceBuy

In 2004, at the age of 23, Katherine Jenkins signed the largest record deal in UK classical recording history. It was hardly an overnight success for this mezzo-soprano from Neath. By the age of seven, Katherine’s early interest in pop had given way to a love of classical music, and she began taking piano lessons and joined the local choir.

In the decade that followed she represented Wales three times in the Choirgirl Of The Year competition, twice won the BBC Radio 2 Welsh Choirgirl Of The Year contest, and won the BET Welsh Choirgirl Of The Year. She was a member of the Royal School of Church Music Cathedral Singers and the National Youth Choir of Wakes. Katherine won a scholarship to study at the Royal Academy of Music in London and graduated with honours.

In October 2003 she sang at a mass honouring the Pope’s silver jubilee at Westminster Cathedral. The same month she supported Aled Jones on tour, before performing at the Sydney Opera House as a special guest of Max Boyce.

Released in April 2004, Katherine’s classical chart-topping debut album Premiere, is a mix of old standards including Ave Maria and The Lord Is My Shepherd, plus a smattering of traditional Welsh songs and new interpretations of classic tunes by Handel, Bach, Erik Satie and others.

Before signing to Universal Classics, Katherine had worked as a music teacher. The catalyst for her pursuit of success was the death of her father when she was just 15 years old.

Katherine became the new forces’ sweetheart, performing at the VE Day anniversary concert at Trafalgar Square, at which she was introduced by Dame Vera Lynn. She went on to perform for the troops in Iraq in December 2005 and 2006.

Following the release of Katherine’s third album, Living A Dream, in October 2005, her three albums occupied the first three positions in the classical crossover music charts, making her the first artist to achieve this. The album earned Katherine her second Classical Brit award, following her win the previous year for Second Nature.

Her fourth, Serenade, was released in 2006, followed by Rejoice in 2007 and Sacred Arias in 2008, her last recording for Universal before signing with Warner Music for allegedly the biggest classical recording deal in history. The album Believe was released in 2009.

Katherine’s high profile has led to appearances on many different platforms. She’s had a cameo role in Emmerdale; modelled on the catwalk for Naomi Campbell’s Fashion Relief charity event; appeared in The Apprentice and the Last Night Of The Proms in Hyde Park; toured with ballerina Darcey Bussell in their Viva La Diva tour; and sang alongside Rhydian Roberts in the X Factor final. In 2010, she was a mentor on the ITV show, Popstar to Operastar, and made her TV acting debut in the Doctor Who Christmas special.

Official Website

Katherine Jenkins Backing Tracks