Katherine Jenkins’ new album Cinema Paradiso has topped the UK Classical Artist Chart, and also reached No. 3 in the UK Official Album Chart, making the recording her 14th Classical No. 1 album and her highest charting album this decade.

Cinema Paradiso is a collection of 15 unforgettable iconic songs from some of the world’s best loved movie moments. The title track, by legendary film composer Ennio Morricone who passed away on 6 July aged 91, features Katherine Jenkins’ duet with Alberto Urso. Katherine tweeted, “What a gift he gave the world. Thank you for the music Maestro.”

Katherine Jenkins’ album Cinema Paradiso features classics including Moon River from Breakfast At Tiffany’s, Pinocchio’s When You Wish Upon A Star, Tonight from West Side Story as well as themes from Schindler’s List, Lord Of The Rings and Dances With Wolves. The album features duets with Alberto Urso (on Cinema Paradiso), Luke Evans (on Tonight), Sarah Allain (on Merry Christmas Mr. Lawrence) and Shaun Escoffery (on The Rose).

“I’ve always loved movie soundtracks,” said Katherine Jenkins. “I wanted to create an iconic movie moment with this record – all the best film musical themes that we know and love, all together on one album. The last few albums I’ve made have been inspired by what’s happening in my own world. This one in particular was inspired by the things that were going on around me. Having played my first movie role last year, it felt like a natural transition for me.”

Katherine Jenkins has been treating fans to Facebook Live concerts from her home during the lockdown and dedicated the success of Cinema Paradiso to “all my lockdown lovelies who’ve been spending the past sixteen weeks with me, through lockdown, through our concerts. You’ve all been amazing and I can’t thank you enough.”

Katherine Jenkins, one of Britain’s all-time favourite singers, was officially crowned The No.1 selling ‘Classical Music Artist of the Last 25 Years’ by Classic FM, and made chart history when her last album Guiding Light, became her 13th UK Classical No.1 album, further cementing Katherine’s position as the world’s most prolific artist in UK Classical chart history.

Katherine Jenkins’ new album Cinema Paradiso is out now and can be bought here.