Welsh Superstar Mezzo Soprano Katherine Jenkins OBE officially became the world's most successful classical singer after she was crowned 'The Biggest Selling Classical Artist of the Century' by Classic FM. She further cemented her title by gaining her 13th Number 1 Album - smashing the record books since signing to Universal Classics at the tender age of 23. Then a school teacher, Katherine burst onto the music scene in 2003 when she performed at Westminster Cathedral in honour of Pope John Paul II's Silver Jubilee, became the mascot for her much beloved Welsh Rugby Team, singing the anthem before important international matches & had her debut performance at the Sydney Opera House. Awards and accolades followed as well as invitations to sing for Popes, Presidents and Princes. Jenkins is a firm favourite of the British Royal Family having been invited to sing 'God Save The Queen' at Her Majesty's Diamond Jubilee, perform at The Queen's Coronation Concerts at Buckingham Palace and more recently at Her Majesty's 90th Birthday celebrations at Windsor Castle.

Born in South Wales, Katherine learned to sing as a chorister of St. David's Church choir, Neath. Her love of music was well nurtured in the Welsh Valleys, where she had the opportunity to join choral groups, perform with Welsh Male Voice Choirs as well as participate in Eisteddfods and other musical events. She has always accredited her down to earth nature to her Welsh roots and her amazing family who she lovingly calls 'The Taffia'. Sadly, Katherine's father Selwyn passed away from cancer when she was just 15 and since then his memory has been a driving force in her life every album, every award has been dedicated to him.

Within months of graduating from the Royal Academy of music, Katherine signed the 'biggest recording deal in UK classical music history' and released her debut album 'Premiere', which became her first classical number one album. 6 months later, her second album, 'Second Nature' also reached number 1 and went on to earn Katherine her first Classic BRIT Award for best album in 2005. The following year brought Katherine her second Classic BRIT award 'Album of the Year' for 'Living A Dream'.

Sold out tours followed, as did performances and recordings with Placido Domingo, Andrea Bocelli, Jose Carreras, David Foster, Dame Kiri te Kanawa, Sir Bryn Terfel, Rolando Villazon, Juan Diego Florez, Valery Gergiev & Il Divo. Not afraid of stepping outside of her comfort zone, Katherine has appeared as a mentor in ITV's 'Popstar to Operastar', played the role of Abigail in the BBC's iconic Dr Who Christmas Special, tap danced her way through 'Viva la Diva' with Prima Ballerina Darcey Bussell as well as, most notably, winning 2nd place in the U.S. hit TV show 'Dancing with the Stars' in 2012. After years as a guest performer, Katherine was delighted to officially join the BBC 'Songs of Praise' family as a regular presenter of the weekly religious programme.

Also known as the 'Forces Sweetheart', Charity work has always played an important role for Jenkins. After singing 'We'll Meet Again' with Dame Vera Lynn at the 60th Anniversary of VE Day, she travelled to Iraq, Afghanistan, Kosovo, Cyprus & Northern Ireland to entertain the troops. She was presented with an OBE by HRH Prince of Wales for services to Music and charity in 2013.

2017 saw Jenkins's debut on the West End stage playing Julie Jordan in Carousel with English National Opera at the London Coliseum, her performance earning her rave reviews from both the British and International press. In 2019, Katherine made her film role debut alongside Jonny Depp and Bill Nighy in 'Minamata', a movie scheduled for release later this year.

2020 will see new music from Katherine in the form of her 14th studio album as well as performances in Dubai, Tokyo, tours of Australia & New Zealand and a special one off performance on the Great Wall of China.