Peter Shor, the MIT mathematician whose ‘Shor’s algorithm’ sent shivers of fear through the encryption community and helped galvanize ongoing efforts to build quantum computers, has been named the 2025 winner of the IEEE Claude Shannon Award for 2025. It’s a fitting honor for Shor, coming as it does on the eve of NIST’s expected issuance of the first Post Quantum Cryptography standards sometime this summer. (Don’t miss Shor’s limerick at the end of this article – I was tempted to lead with it.)

The Shannon Award is given by the IEEE Information Theory Society and was created in reconizes 1972 “to honor consistent and profound contributions to the field of information theory. It is a prestigious prize in information theory, covering technical contributions at the intersection of mathematics, communication engineering, and theoretical computer science.”

Here’s some background on Shannon from Wikipedia: “Claude Elwood Shannon (April 30, 1916 – February 24, 2001) was an American mathematician, electrical engineer, computer scientist and cryptographer known as the “father of information theory” and as the “father of the Information Age”. Shannon was the first to describe the Boolean gates (electronic circuits) that are essential to all digital electronic circuits, and was one of the founding fathers of artificial intelligence. He is credited alongside George Boole for laying the foundations of the Information Age.”

Shor is an applied mathematician perhaps best known for his work on quantum computation. His eponymously named Shor’s algorithm was developed in 1994 and demonstrated how to use an adequately performant quantum computer to to break conventional RSA codes.

Broadly, it’s a factoring algorithm that if run on a “quantum computer with a sufficient number of qubits could operate without succumbing to quantum noise and other quantum-decoherence phenomena, then Shor’s algorithm could be used to break public-key cryptography schemes, such as: the RSA scheme; the Finite Field Diffie-Hellman key exchange; and the Elliptic Curve Diffie-Hellman key exchange.”

RSA is based on the assumption that factoring large integers is computationally intractable and this assumption is generally considered valid for classical (non-quantum) computers.

Shor is an interesting person (brief bio below) who sometimes scribbles more than math. Here’s a pair of limericks (and explanation) he has posted on his website:

“My wife and I wrote the following for a poetry contest by Science News. It didn’t win, so I posted it on my web page. (Editor’s note – he doesn’t give the submission date)

If computers that you build are quantum,

Then spies of all factions will want ’em.

Our codes will all fail,

And they’ll read our email,

Till we’ve crypto that’s quantum, and daunt ’em.

Jennifer and Peter Shor

“When he introduced me at the 1998 International Congress of Mathematicians, Prof. Volker Strassen recited my limerick, and added a reply:

To read our E-mail, how mean

of the spies and their quantum machine;

Be comforted though,

they do not yet know

how to factorize twelve or fifteen. (Volker Strassen)

Gotta love it.

Brief Shor Bio

Peter Shor is Morss Professor of Applied Mathematics since 2003. He received the B.A. in mathematics from Caltech in 1981, and the Ph.D. in applied mathematics from MIT in 1985, under the direction of Tom Leighton. Following a postdoctoral fellowship at MSRI, he joined AT&T. He was a member of its Research staff, 1986-2003. He joined the MIT faculty in applied mathematics as full professor in 2003. Professor Shor’s research interests are in theoretical computer science: currently on algorithms, quantum computing, computational geometry and combinatorics. In 1998, Peter Shor received the Nevanlinna Prize and the International Quantum Communication Award. He also received the Dickson Prize in Science from Carnegie-Mellon in 1998. He was awarded the Gödel Prize of the ACM and a MacArthur Foundation Fellowship in 1999. He received the King Faisal International Prize in Science in 2002, and was named one of Caltech’s Distinguished Alumni in 2007. He is a member of the National Academy of Science (2002), and fellow of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences (2011). In 2017, Professor Shor received the Dirac Medal of the International Centre for Theoretical Physics. He also received the 2017 IEEE Information Theory Society Paper Award, jointly with Charles Bennett, Igor Devetak, Aram Harrow, and Andreas Winter for the paper “The Quantum Reverse Shannon Theorem and Resource Tradeoffs for Simulating Quantum Channels” which appeared in the IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, vol. 60, no. 5, pp. 2926–2959, May 2014. In 2018, Shor received the IEEE Eric E. Sumner Award, for Outstanding Contributions to Communications Technology. He also received the 2018 Micius Quantum Prize in April 2019. In May 2022, Shor was named the recipient of MIT’s 2022-2023 James R. Killian Jr. Faculty Achievement Award, the highest honor the Institute faculty can bestow upon one of its members each academic year. The award citation credits Peter’s “seminal contributions that have forever shaped the foundations of quantum computing. Indeed, quantum computing exists today, in practice, because of Peter Shor.” As of 2020, Shor is a Member of the National Academy of Engineering, and in 2022 Fellow of the AMS.

Photo credit: Christopher Harting, MIT News