What BestPlaces Users Say about Lompoc

Lompoc is a small city located in California's Santa Barbara County. With a population of just over 44,000, it is known for its agricultural industry and close proximity to the Vandenberg Air Force Base. The city's climate is mild and Mediterranean, making it a desirable place to live for those who enjoy outdoor activities and a relaxed lifestyle.

Lompoc is a charming city with a small-town feel that offers a great quality of life. According to many user reviews on BestPlaces.net, the overall consensus is that Lompoc is a wonderful place to call home. One reviewer, John from Lompoc, describes it as "a hidden gem on the central coast of California." He goes on to praise the city's beautiful views and friendly community.

Another user, Sarah from Ohio, moved to Lompoc and says, "I fell in love with this city the moment I arrived." She loves the slower pace of life and the abundance of outdoor activities available. Sarah also notes that the cost of living is reasonable, making it a great option for those on a budget.

However, as with any place, there are some drawbacks to living in Lompoc. One reviewer, Jake, points out that "the city can feel isolated and lacking in certain amenities." He also mentions that the traffic can be frustrating during peak hours. Despite these challenges, Jake still recommends Lompoc as a great place to live.

Overall, the reviews for Lompoc are overwhelmingly positive, with many reviewers noting the friendly community, beautiful scenery, and affordable cost of living. As reviewer Maria puts it, "Lompoc is a warm and welcoming city that truly feels like home."

based on 27 Reviews

Get to know Lompoc with the latest comments and reviews from people who live in or have visited Lompoc

Lompoc now has gangs and shootings - 8/8/2020

I grew up as a child in Lompoc in the 1960's.

It was small town of about 18k with crime and shootings virtually unheard of. Dad sold his home on Third Street in 1995 when he noticed the neighborhood taking a turn for the worst.

Lompoc would never be a place I would relocate to anymore. Read the crime report on The Lompoc Record to fact check how bad it is. The area or town now has pockets of gang activity. I would suggest if you plan on relocating here that you look into the surrounding areas that are a bit better. What a shame and how tragic that a small town has become such a shambles. God help Read More

Start Your Review of Lompoc

BE WARNED - I lived there for 7 years TG I ESCAPED - 9/20/2019

I lived in this town for 7 years. It's a horrible trap! Over 1/3 of the town is on probation, Close to half of the town addicted to Meth, Heroin of Crack Cocaine (yes all 3 of those are rampant there), the few that aren't are military (Air Force), hospital workers, or commute to Santa Barbara (an hour south) for work, and live because that's what they can afford.

This is the most "affordable" region of Santa Barbara County - and it's also the armpit of the county.. It is 30 Years behind the times in progressiveness (there is still A LOT of racism and homophobia in this town - ESPECIALLY homophobia) The stores all close at 7pm -except for the liquor stores - and chaos ensues in parts of the city every night... Too much theft, too much drug use- definitely wouldn't want to bring up a kid Read More

Affordable Mediterranean climate - 8/22/2019

Moved here from Philly two years ago and have no regrets. You do not need air conditioning, the weather very rarely is warmer than 75 degrees. You can easily find a nice home under 400k and just about everything grows here. We have orange, lemon, peach and plum trees. The wine is cheap and good, people are friendly and walking is excellent. If you can’t find it in town, Santa Maria, Goleta and Santa Barbara are easy drive. Buellton and Santa Ynez have gourmet restaurants within 30 min drive.

Read More

Far worst then Santa Maria. - 1/22/2019

I’ve lived here almost all my life. It was okay growing up. I haven seen one review in 2018 and I can see why. Lompoc isn’t the same anymore. There’s shootings almost every night. Gets being stolen on a day to day basis, burglaries, robberies, druggies out on the streets. I’ve never seen Lompoc like this. This town is Gang infested and nothing more of a complete Ghetto. I figure starting off 2019 would be a great and fresh start. I was 100 percent wrong. So far there’s been 9 shootings in this month alone. Some days we had two shootings in one day and the majority of the shootings are happening during the day time. This town is a ghetto. People need to know that Lompoc isn’t the same and needs to take it seriously. If there was a 0 Star then I would rate it like that. Horrible town. It’s far worse then Santa Maria. Read More

It's not bad AT ALL - 11/3/2014

The issues people bring up with Lompoc (gangs/crime) are issues that are inevitable in most cities. I have lived here on and off (mostly on) for the past 37 years and have never experienced anything related to serious crime and neither have any of my family members, which I have a lot of. If you hang out with bad people then you are more likely to be a victim of crime, if you hang out with decent people then you will be fine here. It's not perfect but there are much worse places out there. There is so much to do nearby if you enjoy the outdoors (running, biking, hiking, surfing etc). If you're a mall rat then you will be bored here. If you're looking for a variety of nightlife then you might be bored here too. If you like to just go out and have a drink every now and then with regular folks then you should be ok here. I just moved back from 8 years in LA and while I have to say that I now love LA, I don't regret coming back to Lompoc to raise my kids closer to family. I love being Read More

Moving to Loving TEXAS - 6/30/2014

I do not have much to say, since I just now found this Read More

local climate - 6/28/2014

Lompoc's climate is greatly affected by the pacific ocean. generally mild and cool with almost no need for air conditioning (cooling). the summers high temperatures are usually in the 70's and 80's with a week or so of near 100's. during the summer the marine layer can blanket the city overnight and into the late mornings. the winters high temperatures are usually in the 50's and 60's. very rarely do the winter low temperatures drop below the 20's. the marine layer rarely blankets the city from fall to Read More

Cebtral Coast Living - 3/15/2013

The central coast of California is one of the best places to live in the world. The climate is great, the people are friendly, and there is plenty to do for the whole Read More

School transportation - 1/23/2013

Hello, my name is Paola, I'm a mother of six kids and a wife. We recently moved back to Lompoc and I'm not in the greatest situation money wise. The reason for this comment is to ask or somehow find out why Lompoc has no school transportation for kids in Elementary. We live on F street and my kids were asighned to attend Clarents Ruth Elementary wich is on W street, the walk alone is verry stressful for my older kids as well as for the smaler ones, we don't have the money for a car or for publick transportation and as we walk to school there are so many other children walking long distances too, I think that adding school transportation for kids that are so far from school would be a good investment in this city, we as parents want our kids to be able to get a good education and to be able to do that, they have to be able to attend to school and for the city of Lompoc not to be able to offer that to our children is verry dissapionting and it hurts all of us because our children are Read More