Small Market stations in Northwest PA is looking for a Multimedia (audio, video, digital) News Director to grow our local news commitment.

Our goal is to be the main source people go to in the community. Can you help?

Specific duties include:

Write, Produce and anchor all weekday morning newscasts on News\Talk Radio and prepare recorded newscasts for our Mainstream AC. Proactively and creatively seek out all possible news stories. Build relationships with local sources and community leaders. Update websites and social media daily using audio and video. Attend community events and meetings to stay connected and identify news opportunities. Maintain high ethical standards in news writing and reporting. Oversee part-time news staff members and stringers and oversee content gathering.

Requirements:

Bachelor's defree in Broadcast Journalism, Communications or a related field. or an equivalent combinaiton of education and work-related experience. Minimum one year experience in broadcast or digital news Excellent oral and written communication skills. Must have a valid driver's license, a good driving record and dependable vehicle with insurance. Proficiency with computers and software including MS Word and Digital Audio Software.

Send resume, writing and audio or video samples

Equal Opportunity Employer

(08-07-24)

Beasley Media Group Tampa is looking for an enthusiastic individual to lead programming and brand management for WYUU-FM ''92.5 Maxima'' including digital content, talent recruitment and coaching and multi-platform audience development and also has ''on air'' experience. The ideal candidate will be organized, strong-willed and an independent thinker. We want someone who will be a true representation of the Brand's target life group. This is a full-time position.

Qualifications & Responsibilities: · A minimum of seven years of radio programming management experience as a Program Director or Assistant Program Director (must have PPM Market experience.) · Bilingual (English and Spanish) · Winning Track record in Contemporary Spanish Radio · The ability to demonstrate strategic and tactical planning skills for winning brands. · Analytical skills combined with creativity and the instinct to win. · Proven proficiency with RCS Selector, Adobe Audition, PPM Analysis Tool and Social Media platforms. · Wide Orbit, PD Advantage and Media Monitors experience is preferred. · Team player who is willing to work closely with VP of programming, other Program Directors, Sales Managers, Account Executives, Promotions Team, Engineering, Consultants and the Corporate Management team. · Creating and directing station events, marketing programs and research projects. · Ensure all websites, apps and social media are updated daily. · Manage digital extensions of on-air talent. · Manage content distribution and local content partnerships. · Act as liaison between the corporate content team and local staff. · Create and post text, audio, and video content for the websites on a daily basis. · Proficient and able to interpret and share website data to maximize audience growth, engagement on on-air team contributions. · Ability to meet tight deadlines and schedules. · Strong presentation and communication skills. · References from former (or current) teammates who can attest to all of the above.

Send cover letter, resume and audio samples to: Rick Thomas, Tampa VP of Programming, Beasley Media Group - Tampa at tampa.jobs@bbgi.com (be sure to note the position applying for)

Last Date for Consideration: Until filled Beasley Media Group, LLC is an Equal Opportunity Employer

(07-24-24)

Here's a great opportunity for someone who loves radio and embraces associated digital media.

Priority Media is a successful, stable privately owned media company in DuBois, PA. Our radio stations are Sunny 106 WDSN (AC) and Connect FM-AM WCED (News-Talk). Our culture is positive, unique. We're a team that works hard and has fun! Could this be the right place for you?

Are you a positive, enthusiastic team player who loves radio and understands the importance of distributing content over multiple platforms?

Do you have a sense of urgency and a real willingness to learn new skills. Things can move fast around here and we're always willing to try something new. We see ''change'' as ''improvement,'' not something to avoid.

Do you love being on the air, engaging your audience, and taking the time to seriously prep your show.

Do you enjoy community service and understand its importance?

Do you have the willingness to work with sales, promotions, and production to create and implement entertaining content?

Key Responsibilities:

You'll be responsible for the successful operation of two radio stations - Sunny 106 and Connect FM - and associated platforms.

Weekday Morning air shift.

Manage audio streams.

Learn and maintain our digital library/automation system.

Coordinate local sports, advertiser, and community remote broadcasts.

Could this be the opportunity you've been looking for?

Reach out to Jay Philippone, Owner: jay@prioritymedia.net.

Please send:

Mp3 aircheck Cover letter and resume Links to your social media fan pages Salary Benefits requirements Anything else you would like us to see/hear/watch when being considered

MINIMUM QUALIFICATIONS

· High school diploma or equivalent (GED).

· Minimum 2 years of on-air and radio production experience.

· Reliable transportation with a valid state-issued Driver's License.

· Professional appearance and demeanor with the ability to deal courteously and diplomatically with the public on the phone, in person and via email.

Competitive salary and benefits package.

Priority Media is an equal-opportunity employer and does not discriminate against employees or applicants on the basis of race, color, religion, gender, age, national origin, disability, medical condition, military or veteran status, or any other characteristic protected by applicable local, state or federal law. EOE

(07-24-24)