Badichowdi is one of the best-known commercial suburbs, located in Hyderabad, Telangana, India. Badichowdi is the best clothing emporium and silverware market for women.

The commercial area of Badichowdi features a large shopping mall, as well as a vegetable market. This is the center of many tourist spots such as Salar Jung Museum, King Kothi Palace, Charminar Fort, Golconda Fort, Ntr Gardens, Nehru Zoological Park, etc.

Climate

This area features an arid climate with dry and hot days and cool and breezy nights. The highest temperature goes up to 40℃ in the month of May and the lowest temperature remains at 15℃ in the month of December. The annual rainfall is 100mm. Daytime receives intense sunlight throughout the year except on rainy days.

How to Reach

By Air

The closest international airport is Rajiv Gandhi International Airport and is around 25Km away from Badichowdi. Anyone can access the location from the airport via Srisailam Highway easily. You can take a cab accordingly and it will take 55min to reach Badichowdi. For bus transportation, one can take a bus from Airport and change the bus from the airport and change from the Lakdikapul bus stop, and then get down at Kachiguda X Road. Badichowdi is 5min walking distance away from the bus stop.

By Rail

The closest Hyderabad Deccan Railway Station is located only 2.9KM from the Badichowdi area. This junction connects Hyderabad with the other major cities like Mumbai, Bangalore, Chennai, Varanasi, Kolkata, Delhi, and other popular cities in India. So, passengers can take a cab or auto from outside the station and reach the location easily within 15min. No dbus goes there directly and if you take a bus, you will have to walk for 25 mins from the bus stop. So, a cab or auto is more convenient than bus transportation from the station.

By Road

Badichowdi is connected with the other famous locations of the state via Sultan Bazar Rd and Police Station Rd. The area is a shopping center and possesses a great transportation system throughout the city. The closest state-owned bus terminus of Badichowdi is TSRTC. This bus terminus provides smooth connectivity with all parts of Hyderabad. The road transportation system is flawless here and anyone can reach this place easily via bus transportation or simply by taking a cab or auto.

Closest Branch

The closest Branch is not greater than 7.8KM away from the Badichowdi area. You can take a cab or auto to visit the branch. It will take around 35 minutes to reach your destination. You can also take a bus from Kachiguda X Road(400m away from Badichowdi) and then get down at Ranigunj Bridge. Now you have to walk for 4min to reach your destination.

Frequently Asked Questions

Agarwal Branch Serving Badichowdi

Agarwal Packers and Movers Hyderabad

#220, 61 M.G Road, Kabra Complex,

Secunderabad, Hyderabad, Telangana 500003

9360014001

Also Serving in: