The Can-Am League schedule maker presented the Brockton Rox with an immediate test to open the season.

The Sussex Skyhawks, who won the league championship in their third year of existence last September, are serving as the opposition in a four-game series to get things going in 2009.

Two games in, the Rox have had a difficult time with the defending champions.

The Skyhawks followed Thursday night’s season-opening win with an easy 11-3 victory over the Rox at Campanelli Stadium on Friday night.

Sussex jumped to an early 4-0 lead against Brockton ace John Kelly and was in control throughout. The Skyhawks put together a 17-hit attack against the first four Rox pitchers and had four two-run innings before ending their scoring with three in the eighth.

All nine starters had at least a hit for Sussex with right fielder Maikel Jova (4-for-5, three RBI) and third baseman Jeremy Hunt (3-for-5, three RBI) leading the offense.

Kelly, who is now 24-9 since being acquired by the Rox on June 25, 2006, allowed four runs and eight hits with four strikeouts in four innings.

Reliever Fraser Robinson, making his Brockton debut, gave up four runs on four hits and three walks in 11/3 innings and Matt Zachary surrendered three runs on three hits in his one inning.

The Skyhawks jumped to a 2-0 lead in the first inning on two-out RBI singles by Jova and Hunt.

Sussex added two more two-out runs in the fourth inning to go up, 4-0, when Kyle Kmiecik doubled off the wall in left-center, scoring Jova, who had led the frame with a single to center, and Ryan Crespi delivered an RBI single to left.

Jud Thigpen got the Rox on the board with a one-out home run to left field. Thigpen set a franchise record with 17 home runs a year ago.

Kelly departed after four innings, and newcomer Robinson was touched for two runs in the fifth.

Robinson, who pitched for Ottawa last season, walked Brown and hit Jorge Moreno, the first two batters he faced. Jova doubled in a run and Hunt added an RBI single for a 6-1 lead.

The Rox inched back within 6-3 with a pair of runs as Keith Brachold led with a double to right and went to third on a Grossman single to right-center. Melvin Falu’s sacrifice fly scored one run and Dominic Ramos added a two-out RBI double down the line in left.

Sussex answered that by scoring two more runs in the sixth as Robinson walked Crespi, gave up a single to Ron Perodin and walked Chris Brown to load the bases. Moreno brought in one run with a single off the fence in right.

Reliever Brad Hertzler struck out Weston, but an infield chopper by Jova, his fourth hit in four at bats, pushed the lead to 8-3.

The Rox have scored four runs on 16 hits in the first two games. Chris Grossman (3-for-4) and Brachold (2-for-2) were the only players with multiple hits.