By JON GERAMITA

jgeramita@njherald.com

FRANKFORD -- The bright side of inconsistency showed up Sunday for the Sussex Skyhawks.

Looking nothing like the team that got embarrassed Saturday, Sussex had 17 hits in its 12-5 win against Quebec.

The Skyhawks beat perhaps the Can-Am League's best pitcher, Michel Simard (who had a 2.14 ERA coming into the game), peppering him for eight runs and 12 hits in five innings. After Quebec crept back into the game late, the Skyhawks scored four runs with two outs in the bottom of the eighth inning to finish it.

"There were lots of positive things out there," Skyhawks' manager Hal Lanier said. "Hopefully, this is something to build on because this was OK. We did things right and beat a very tough pitcher."

The win puts the Skyhawks at 14-16 and in fifth place in the league, but only five games behind first-half leader New Jersey.

The winner of the first half of the season gets an automatic playoff spot.

The Skyhawks aren't a bad team. In their two wins against Quebec this series, they combined to score 29 runs on 38 hits and batted around four times. Even in losses Friday (2-1) and Saturday (7-2), the starting pitching was decent, but the defense wasn't.

They also aren't very good -- yet.

Because the rosters in independent league baseball are so fluid, it takes a while for everything to gel in a clubhouse. When the Skyhawks' hitting evens out, the pitching gets a little bit better and the defense makes a few more plays, it is not a stretch to call the Skyhawks the best team in the league.

Until they string together a few more days in a row like Sunday, the inconsistent label will stand.

"We need to put a few of these together now," Lanier said. "It would be nice to add on to it."

"The mood in here is that if we pitch and hit together, in the same day, we can't be beat," left fielder Ryan Crespi said. "And if not, we'll have to start picking each other up. If the pitchers are having a rough day, we'll need to score some more runs, and vice versa.

"We know what we have to do," he added. "Nobody's worried. We know what we can do."

Sunday was almost a textbook example of how to win a professional baseball game.

The Skyhawks batted around in the fifth inning off Simard, scoring on consecutive hits by Chris Brown, Jorge Moreno and Maikel Jova. With two outs, Ray Serrano poked an RBI single to center and shortstop Mark Pappas took a Simard fastball the other way past first base, scoring two runs for an 8-1 lead.

After Quebec cut the lead to 8-5 in the eighth on an unearned run, the Skyhawks responded in the bottom of the frame.

Luis Soto hit a line-drive two-run homer to left. Crespi immediately followed with a triple and Brown drove him home. Jova capped the inning with an RBI single to make it 12-5.

"What I liked was the two-out hitting and the way we approached those situations," Lanier said.

After missing his last start to be with his father in Connecticut during neck surgery, Roger Lincoln threw six solid innings, giving up six hits with three runs and three strikeouts on 89 pitches.

He briefly cramped up in the sixth inning before he was pulled.

"He had long neck surgery and just being in the room, not doing anything and waiting around, I didn't get any work in. So, on Thursday me and my cousin went into the parking lot, turned on the flood light to the cars and I threw a little."

Other than having to wear a neck brace for a few months, Lincoln's father will be fine, and aims to attend a game in late August to watch his son pitch.

"It's been something on my mind for a while now and it is a big weight off my shoulders now that its over. I think that's why I had a good day today. My mind was clear and I was just pitching."

Brown was 4-for-5 with three runs and two RBI for the Skyhawks. Crespi was 3-for-5 and Serrano had another two hits, making him 8-for-17 in the series.

After a day off today, the Skyhawks host first-place New Jersey for a three-game set beginning at 7:05 p.m. Tuesday.

Skyhawks 12, Quebec 5

Q 100 002 110 -- 5 9 1

S 200 060 004 -- 12 17 3

2B: S -- Chris Brown 2, Ray Serrano, Mark Pappas. Q -- Ivan Naccarata.

3B: S -- Ryan Crespi.

HR: S -- Luis Soto, Q -- Naccarata.

WP: Roger Lincoln (2-1) LP: Michel Simard (3-3)