Tag Archives | sussex skyhawks

It’s official: Can-Am League to Sussex County in 2015

We have the official announcement of pro baseball returning to Skylands Stadium in Sussex County, N.J., as a new independent Can-Am League team will play 55 home games starting mid-May through Labor Day. (more…)

Can-Am League returning to Skylands Park

An official announcement is on the way, but there are reports the independent Can-Am League is returning to New Jersey’s Skylands Park beginning in 2015. (more…)

Skylands Park: Goodbye to baseball

With a day-care center on site, a flea market proposed for the concourse and the ballpark reconfigured for recreational uses, it doesn’t look like pro baseball will ever return to Sussex County’s Skylands Park. The ballpark was once home to the New Jersey Cardinals (short season A; NY-Penn League) and the Sussex Skyhawks (independent; Can-Am […]

Skylands Park sold; baseball still a possibility

Skylands Park, the former home to pro baseball in Sussex County, N.J., has been sold, clearing the way for pro baseball to return to the area as part of a new league focusing on players just out of college. The sale price of $950,000 was what we reported several months ago. Investor Mark Roscioli of […]

Skylands Park sale falls through

A purchase of Skylands Park has fallen through after an investor specializing in distressed properties couldn’t make the numbers work. Mark Roscioli missed a March 1 deadline to close on a purchase of the former home of the New Jersey Cardinals (short season A; NY-Penn League) and the Sussex SkyHawks (independent; Can-Am League) for $950,000. […]

Future of Skylands Park in play

The future of pro ball at Frankfort’s Skylands Park should be made a little clearer in coming days, but it could take a few years to sort out the ballpark’s ownership and operating status. The former home of the New Jersey Cardinals (short season A; NY-Penn League) and Sussex Skyhawks (independent; Can-Am League) is in […]

Skylands Park on block; baseball unlikely for 2012

Skylands Park, former home to affiliated and indy ball in New Jersey’s Sussex County, is on the block for $1.99 million, but so far a buyer has not emerged and baseball is unlikely to be played there in 2012. Skylands Park was home to the New Jersey Cardinals (short season A; NY-Penn League), who started […]

Taxes becoming huge issue for Skylands Park

Back taxes on Skylands Park, the former home of the New Jersey Cardinals (short season A; NY-Penn League) and Sussex SkyHawks (independent; Can-Am League), are a big problem for ballpark owners, who face a rough road in the near future and prepare for a year without baseball. There’s a reason you don’t see too many […]

Will baseball return to Augusta? Probably, if the price is right

The demise of the Sussex SkyHawks (independent; Can-Am League) doesn’t mean professional baseball won’t return to Skylands Park in the near future — but there needs to be some changes regarding the landlord’s financial expectations. Pro baseball has been a mixed bag in Augusta, N.J.: the original New Jersey Cardinals (short season A; NY-Penn League) […]

Can-Am League to go with eight teams in ’11

In a gutsy move, the independent Cam-Am League is going with eight teams for the 2011 season, including a Ramapo team that may or may not have a completed ballpark in time for the season and a new travel team. Joining the existing Quebec Capitales, Worcester Tornadoes, Brockton Rox, New Jersey Jackals and Pittsfield Colonials […]

SkyHawks to go dark?

A deal for Floyd Hall to sell the Sussex SkyHawks (independent; Can-Am League) has fallen through, and efforts to sell the team continues — but unless a deal can be consummated soon, the team could go dark in 2011 or play as a travel team, putting the indy circuit in a scheduling pinch. It’s a […]

Skyhawks shooting for coin-toss record

Fans at tonight’s Sussex Skyhawks (independent; Can-Am Association) game will attempt to set a Guinness World Record for simultaneous coin tosses. Each fan in attendance at tonight’s game will receive a free nickel to use during the post-game toss courtesy of the event’s sponsor, Lakeland Bank. The current record of 1,117 people was set by […]