MOST films these days carry a perfunctory, small-print disclaimer stating that the characters and events we are about to see are fictitious and any resemblance to persons living or dead is entirely coincidental.

The opening credits of ''Insignificance,'' Nicolas Roeg's ambitious, apocalyptic new farce, makes this declaration so boldly that it really comes as no surprise when we suddenly find ourselves in Albert Einstein's New York hotel room, where the professor is under siege by people who bear scarcely coincidental resemblances to Marilyn Monroe, Joe DiMaggio and Senator Joseph McCarthy.

No real names are used. They are called the Professor, the Actress, the Ballplayer and the Senator but, as played respectively by Michael Emil, Theresa Russell, Gary Busey and Tony Curtis, there's never any doubt that this is supposed to be a significant if completely fantastic conjunction of mythic figures.

The screenplay, Terry Johnson's own adaptation of his London play, takes place entirely in one night of March 1953, and begins promisingly with a riotous series of cross-cut scenes.

The Professor, barefoot, wearing baggy pants and a Princeton letter-sweater, sits on his hotel bed, nearly obscured by mounds of paper containing the calculations by which he hopes to determine the shape of the universe. When he needs a paper on the floor, he picks it up with his toes, which are as all-purpose as a monkey's.

On a street in another part of the city, the Actress, wearing a filmy white dress with a pleated skirt, stands over a subway grating. As two stagehands below the grating prepare their wind machine to blow the Actress's skirt around her ears, she remains a calm center within the movie-making confusion. Among the onlookers is the disgruntled figure of the Ballplayer. Says one of the stagehands beneath the grating, ''Did you see anything?'' The reply: ''I saw the face of God.''

Thank you for your patience while we verify access. If you are in Reader mode please exit and log into your Times account, or subscribe for all of The Times.

Thank you for your patience while we verify access.

Already a subscriber? Log in.

Want all of The Times? Subscribe.