The dreams and nightmares of the 20th century--fame, sex, relativity, and nuclear annihilation--coalesce around Albert Einstein's New York City hotel room over the course of a single night when he is visited by Joseph McCarthy, Marilyn Monroe, and Joe DiMaggio.

Nicholas Roeg is one of the few directors who composes and assembles a procession of images in a such a way that makes me feel he is performing a kind of ritual magic. His films produce an unshakeable feeling that one is communing with or being acted upon by an occult power. Not in any nefarious sense, but more in the feeling that he is cracking open the door to a new reality or way of being that we can…

The Criterion Challenge, 84/100

1985 Ranked

Nicolas Roeg’s Insignificance is a really interesting film, but one that is just as hard to pin down and make sense of it as it progresses. It is honestly one of those films that is as brilliant as it is confounding, making it a truly unique viewing experience even if its ambition often exceeds its grasp. Featuring an intersection between Albert Einstein, Marilyn Monroe, Joe DiMaggio, and Joseph McCarthy - portrayed as “The Professor” (Michael Emil), “The Actress” (Theresa Russell), “The Ballplayer” (Gary Busey), and “The Senator” (Tony Curtis) - the film has a certain timelessness and an equal obsession with time that makes it so especially compelling. Inspired by a play of a…

Director Project

Director: Nicolas Roeg (Second Film)

Insignificance is somewhat about the unlikely predetermined destiny of events; from Einstein's involvement with Szilárd and Wigner and the letter he wrote to Roosevelt and the eventual "Little Boy" atomic bombing of Hiroshima (The first, the catalyst of his supposed fears) and his theory of relativity and the connectivity of events and time. A synchronised fluidity of personalities; big personalities; mostly between two particular big names in Albert Einstein and Marilyn Monroe and the shell in which they inhabit - one synonymous with genius and the other personified by the idea that she was a "dumb blonde".

Whilst when those two characters (never actually named in the film) are together, the film is…

Criterion Collection 2022 Weekly Challenge! 🎥🎞

36. Stage to Screen: Watch a stage adaptation

Nicolas Roeg's Insignificance is an interesting and at times fun experiment. Four very familiar pop culture icons from the 50s interact and they, as well as the audience, discover something about them. The film ponders on where they're at in the cultural relevance of 1985 Americana, where they've come from, and where they would go.

The film comes alive the moment the Actress and the Professor meet in the hotel room. The energy is electric and their chemistry is quirky.

The icons in question have clearly something off about them, but it was clear to me early on that it was sort of the point. By…

CRITERION CHALLENGE 2023: Random Number Generator - Criterion Spine #566

When I agreed to do this Criterion Challenge with my sister, the last thing I expected was for my first film to star Gary Busey. What can I say except that cinema, like life, is full of surprises.

This film's high-concept premise sounds like some kind of quirky writing prompt for an undergrad screenwriting course: Imagine what might have happened had four American icons of the 1950's - Albert Einstein, Marilyn Monroe, Joe DiMaggio, and Joseph McCarthy - actually met in person one night at a NYC hotel in 1954.

It's a unique and engaging thought experiment ripe with comedic and philosophical possibilities, and results in some pretty funny and…