By of the

J.J. Redick does not expect it to be an emotional moment while facing his former Orlando Magic team for the first time Sunday.

And Tobias Harris said he is not out for revenge while going against his former Milwaukee Bucks teammates.

But the two principal figures in the trade deadline deal between the Magic and Bucks will be highly motivated in the matinee game at the BMO Harris Bradley Center.

"This game . . . to be honest with you, everything has happened so fast," Redick said after practice Saturday. "I haven't even realized it's been 3½ weeks since I've been traded. We've had 11 games. It's flown by.

"You come into this game tomorrow, and it's a must win. We're at a place where we've got to start winning some games again."

The Bucks (32-32) have dropped three straight games after winning six of their previous seven. And they need a solid stretch to have a chance at catching Atlanta, Boston or Chicago and moving up in the Eastern Conference playoff race.

Orlando will not be going to the playoffs this season, a strange feeling for a franchise that has reached the postseason in 14 of the last 19 years (and the last six years).

But the Magic's current situation is ideal for the 20-year-old Harris, who is getting plenty of playing time and recently moved into the starting lineup at power forward.

"Hearing you're a key asset to the team and part of the team's future, yeah, I was surprised," Harris said of being traded by the Bucks. "But I know it's a business. It's part of the game.

"You can't hold your head too long. And I knew the situation in Orlando was a good situation for me."

Harris has averaged 15.9 points and 7.3 rebounds with the Magic while playing 30.9 minutes per game. With the Bucks he averaged 4.9 points and 2.0 rebounds while playing 11.6 minutes.

Harris started the first 14 games of the season for Milwaukee but eventually returned to the bench when Luc Richard Mbah a Moute returned from an injury.

"Tobias is a good player," said Bucks coach Jim Boylan. "It was just a numbers thing here. We had a lot of guys in front of him and we were playing him at the 3 (small forward).

"Down there he's playing at the 4 spot (power forward). Tobias is a scorer; that's what he does."

Harris is gaining confidence as he plays a prominent role with the rebuilding Magic. He had 17 points and 15 rebounds against the Los Angeles Lakers in Dwight Howard's homecoming game in Orlando last week.

On Friday, Harris contributed 19 points and six rebounds while also taking a defensive turn against Kevin Durant in the Magic's 117-104 loss at Oklahoma City.

"It definitely is a relief," Harris said of his new role with the Magic. "But even when I wasn't playing with the Milwaukee Bucks, I always continued to work on my game.

"I was definitely frustrated. But my dad and people in my ear always told me to continue to work and use the time to get better. That's what I tried to do. Now I'm blessed to be in this position and I'm real grateful for it."

The Bucks knew what they were getting in Redick, a steady 28-year-old with playoff experience and the ability to hit big shots. He already has displayed that ability in the clutch, sinking two huge three-pointers in overtime in a one-point victory over Utah and drilling two key triples in the fourth quarter in a 103-93 victory over Golden State.

"He's a hard worker," Boylan said. "He's dedicated to his craft. He's got a high basketball IQ and he's a veteran guy.

"He came in here and hit the ground running and he's played big for us in some big games. I'd say he's fit in really nicely."

Redick has averaged 15 points and 4.1 assists in 10 games, all in a reserve role. He has averaged 28.1 minutes while shooting 46.3% from the field and 35.1% from three-point range.

He has given the Bucks a strong three-guard rotation while combining with starters Brandon Jennings and Monta Ellis. And he has provided another voice of leadership in the locker room.

The Bucks are hoping to persuade Redick, who will be an unrestricted free agent in the summer, to stay on a long-term deal.

"I don't think this team needs to put a limit on itself like making the playoffs is enough, or being the eighth seed is enough," Redick said. "There's no reason to not be greedy and try to get as many wins and try to position yourself to make a run in the playoffs, to surprise some people and advance."