Super Dave is late for his new show but his car arrives performing handbrake turns. Super attempts to open his show with a question period. Ray Charles sings "They Can't Take That Away From Me". At the Super Dave Memorial Sports Arena, the Super Dave Slam Dunkers perform acrobatic slam dunks. Fuji helps Super Dave perform the "Ultimate Slam Dunk" using a hydraulic catapult that will raise him upright and shoot him into the air where he will catch the ball and slam dunk it.

Super Dave interviews a woman in the audience who dubiously claims to have had Elvis Presley's baby, and a woman who claims to be carrying Warren Beatty's child. Jenny Jones performs standup comedy. Super Dave originally plans to play "Vehicle Tag" with Fuji, but instead shows off the new Outdoor Lip-Synching Concert Area, where he plays the piano and lip-synchs to "The Name Game" by Shirley Ellis.

At the Super Dave Confidence Training Area, Super Dave, accompanied by Donald, receives the "Man of the Year" award from the Academy of Human Performance. Robert Gruenberg juggles a chainsaw, an egg, and an apple. Kathy Walker and Bill Roberts do impersonations of Joan Rivers and Sonny Bono, rounding it off doing Sonny and Cher singing "I Got You Babe". At the Super Dave Vehicle Safety Centre, Super Dave acts as a crash test dummy and drives into a wall to demonstrate the dangers of not buckling up.

Super Dave attempts to do a comedy sketch with Cynthia Belliveau and John Hemphill entitled "Plastic Surgery to Celebrity's Pets" in which Super plays the Doctor. The Smothers Brothers Tom and Dick sing a lively Spanish tune, but Tom screws it up (accidentally?) by singing in German and Dick begins his insult rampage, which results in Super lecturing the Brothers about cussing on television. At the Heavy Metal Motorcycle Preparation Area, Super Dave attempts the "Super Ride Straight to Hell" in which he will jump a three inch wide ramp and land on another three inch wide ramp across the field.

Bernie Rothman from the International Television Video Association presents Super and Donald with a triple platinum award for his exercise tape. Super Dave gets the stuffing beat out of him by the Canadian Giant in his new "Poundacise" video. Super Dave attempts to boost ratings by having scantily clad women on the show. Ventriloquist Ronn Lucas performs a routine with Buffalo Billy the Cowboy and they finish by singing "Row Row Row Your Boat". Super Dave closes the show by lip synching "La Bamba".

A press conference at the Municipal Court House reveals that Super Dave is bringing Time magazine to court for accusing him of being a frivolous spender. A news report comes on regarding the death of a famous Elvis Impersonator, and many fellow impersonators come to pay their last respects. Comedian Rip Taylor performs prop comedy and does a tribute to Super Dave. At the Super Dave Vehicle Safety Centre, Super, with help from Fuji, attempts to explain to the public how to avoid becoming a victim of a "Bump and Rob".

Super Dave gets an audience volunteer to demonstrate a new television camera, which turns out to be a camera that's worn on the volunteer's butt. Pandemonium ensues when Super uses the camera to field questions from the audience. Liberty Silver sings "I Do Love You". At the Super Dave Animal Training Centre, Super shows off his favourite elephant Simba and several trick performing dogs, including Scepter the attack dog. Comedian Morty Pillman does standup comedy, but when he is about to rip off Gallagher and do food smashing, Super steps in and stops him.

The Super One gets hurt: He gets fiercely attacked by Scepter, but miraculously manages to come back to the studio to close the show.

At the Super Dave Confidence Training Area, Robert Gruenberg juggles three machetes. The Nylons sing "Kiss Him Goodbye". Comedian Stan Marvin performs a monologue in which he tells tall tales while onscreen subtitles roughly denounce him. It's Super Dave's birthday! He and Mike treat the audience to the tape of his famous "CN Tower jump" from BIZARRE. Several of Super's friends from previous episodes all wish him a happy birthday, then the cake is brought out while Super is treated to his favourite song, "Twist and Shout".

Super opens the show by thanking his fans for their support and shows the video from BIZARRE of him lip-synching "9 to 5" by Dolly Parton. Steve Allen wants to play the piano, but Super Dave pressures him to play "Soap Opera Mad Libs" instead with the audience. In the Super Dave Compound's vast marshland, Super Dave and Donald show off their giant Pan-Lux board which was built despite protests that it would never stay up in the swamp. Donald also shows his plans for the Super Dave Prayer Tower.

Mike Walden announces that Super Dave is going to attempt to break the tri-athalon record! Matt Fundal from the "Super Dave Hula Hoop School" performs hoop tricks. Super begins the course by swimming, while Fuji Hakayito follows in his boat with a harpoon in case of shark attack. K.D. Lang sings "Tune Into My Wave". Super, despite being injured, moves on to cycling. The Nylons sing "The Lion Sleeps Tonight". Super then attempts the running part of the triathlon and goes on to break the record!

Super plays "Meet the Audience" where he talks to audience members and asks what they do, including a humorous pair who play armpit music, and a unlikely looking woman who just became a mother. Ronnie Hawkins, the head of the "Super Dave Rock and Roll School", sings "Mary Lou" by Bob Seger. At the Super Dave Test Site, General Earl Pennington from the US Armed Forces helps Super Dave demonstrate his new invention, "Bullet Proof Paint" by having his men shoot at Super while he is in a car.

Super Dave makes a passionate stand against the colourization of old black and white films. A dance act is planned with "The Christopher Dancers", but as only one of them shows up, Super dismisses him. KD Lang sings "Angel With a Lariat". The lone Christopher Dancer returns and manages to perform a group act, to "ABC" and "The Love You Save" by the Jackson Five. On the compound, Super Dave tries to perform the "Invisible Wall" stunt, in which Fuji will sprinkle Magic Dust on the ground, and Super will drive a car with no brakes through it, and the "Invisible Wall" created by the dust will stop the car before it hits a bulldozer.

Super Dave talks to Leo Thompson, a "Kiss Doctor" who improves people's lives simply by kissing them. He tries it on audience members and it seems to work, but when he tries it on Super Dave, the Super one is less than pleased! Super Dave holds the Million Dollar Contest where a "Mystery Superstar" comes out and plays a song, and viewers have to phone in and guess the title and the artist. At the Super Dave Chapel, Super attempts to do a concentration exercise where Super will tell a joke and Fuji will keep trying to distract him.