Fraunces Tavern Museum’s mission is to preserve and interpret the history of the American Revolutionary era through public education. Inside the oldest building in Manhattan, visitors can explore galleries and exhibitions focusing on America’s War for Independence and the preservation of early American history, including the following: • The Long Room, the 18th century public dining room where General George Washington said farewell to his officers at the end of the War. • Governing the Nation from Fraunces Tavern, a depiction of the Department of Foreign Affairs, where John Jay negotiated treaties with foreign nations. • The Birch Trials at Fraunces Tavern, an exhibition on the culminating event in one of the largest emancipations of Black people prior to the American Civil War, as well as Black patriots. The collections at Fraunces Tavern Museum focus on the culture and history of Colonial America, the American Revolutionary War, and the Early Republic. The 8,000-piece object collection consists of furnishings, communication documents, personal artifacts, and art. Objects range from tables and teacups to paintings and letters. About 400 collection objects are regularly on exhibit to the public in the Museum's exhibitions and galleries. Public Programs support the exhibitions and include monthly evening lectures, seasonal walking tours, reenactments, an annual book award, and guided weekend tours of the Museum. Our School Programs have been developed to compliment the New York State curriculum for grades 4th-7th. Students participate in programs led by trained professional staff and volunteers that include interactive activities and learning exercises that promote critical thinking and encourage the awareness of different perspectives. Students achieve this through discussion, inquiry-based learning, as well as the exploration of tavern life and the lives of various people from the American Revolution.

Website

http://frauncestavernmuseum.org

External link for Fraunces Tavern® Museum

Industry

Museums, Historical Sites, and Zoos

Company size

2-10 employees

Headquarters

New York, NY 10004

Type

Nonprofit

Founded

1907

Specialties

American Revolution, Revolutionary War, George Washington, Historic Site, Colonial New York City, History Museum, Early Republic, United States Federal Government, United States Department of Foreign Affairs, United States Department of State, United States Treasury, United States Department of War, Birch Trials, Black Loyalists, Black Patriots, School Programs, Collections, Lectures, Tours, and 18th Century