School Overview

School Membership(s)School Assoc.

Religious Affiliation

Grades Offered

Grades Prekindergarten-12

Year Founded

1980

School Calendar

Student Body

Total Students

635 students

Student Body Type

Co-ed

% Students of Color

4%

State avg.: 26%

Students by Grade

Academics and Faculty

Total Classroom Teachers

52 teachers

Student : Teacher Ratio

12:1

National avg.: 13:1

% Faculty w/Advanced Degree

42%

Average Class Size

18 students

Number of AP Courses

15 courses

Advanced Courses

Business 223, College Writing 121, College Writing 122, Econ 201 Microeconomics, Econ 202 Macroeconomics, Math 111 College Algebra, Math 112 Elementary Functions, Math 243 Statistics l, Math 251 Calculus l, Math 252 Calculus ll, Psychology 201, Psychology 202, Psychology 203, Speech 111

Classroom Dress Code

Casual

Tuition and Acceptance Rate

Sports

Extracurriculars

School Notes

Our Mission:Horizon Christian School exists to glorify God through excellence in Education, Faith and Community.

Our Calling:Horizon Christian isA Place Where Everybody is Somebody and Jesus is All!

Our school is a college preparatory academic institution built on a strong foundation of faith and community where every student will be equipped for higher education andgain the skills necessary for success beyond high school. Our goal is to prepare every student in their academic and personal development for eachtransition that will take place over their educational journey. Over 90% of our graduates attend college after high school.

Whether it is in the classroom, athletic fields, playground, or in our extracurricular activities, we are committed to creating environments of spiritual growth and academic rigor. It is our privilege to offer our community academically strong, faith-based educational programs to PreKthrough 12th-grade, and International students7th through 12th grade.

Our high school has been accreditied with Cognia since 2006. Most teachers are accredited through the Teachers Standards and Practices Commission or the Association of Christian Schools International.

Frequently Asked Questions

What is the acceptance rate of Horizon Christian School?

The acceptance rate of Horizon Christian School is 99%, which is higher than the national average of 89%.

What sports does Horizon Christian School offer?

Horizon Christian School offers 6 interscholastic sports: Baseball, Basketball, Cross Country, Soccer, Track and Field and Volleyball.

What is Horizon Christian School's ranking?

Horizon Christian School ranks among the top 20% of private schools in Oregon for: Largest student body, Most AP courses offered and Most extracurriculars offered.

When is the application deadline for Horizon Christian School?

The application deadline for Horizon Christian School is rolling (applications are reviewed as they are received year-round).

In what neighborhood is Horizon Christian School located?

Horizon Christian School is located in the Sherwood Tualatin South neighborhood of Tualatin, OR. There are 3 other private schools located in Sherwood Tualatin South.

Email:

Name of parent:

Student first name:

Student last name:

Student date of birth:

Student is:

Male

Female

Currently in grade:

Seeking entry for grade:

Target start date:

Please briefly describe academic, athletic, and extracurricular interests of the student:

Home address:

City:

Country:

State:

Zip: (enter "N/A" if not applicable)

Phone:

Allow nearby private schools to send me information. Share your information with nearby schools on our site and let them send you brochures.

Save this data and create your user profile. Create your own user account so you don't have to re-type your user data each time you request information. You'll also be able to track your information requests, get reminded of application dates, and more!

Username:

Password: