WINTERSET, Iowa — Like many rural communities, the central Iowa city of Winterset has an idyllic town square, variety stores and a historic movie theater.

But Winterset also has a unique claim to fame: It’s the birthplace of John Wayne, and a new

museum is celebrating the actor’s life.

Wayne was born Marion Robert Morrison in Winterset in 1907. Although he moved to California at a young age, Winterset has been showcasing his roots for years. In addition to the new museum, the small wooden house where he was born is open for tours, and there’s a large bronze statue of the actor wearing a cowboy hat.

“One of the things that keeps a small town alive is to share its history,” said Shirley Roach, owner of a boutique in town. “John Wayne is a part of our history.”

The 6,100-square-foot museum displays his film wardrobes, a signed Andy Warhol print of the actor and his customized 1972 Pontiac Grand Safari station wagon.

Visitors can also see an ashtray from his yacht, his briefcase, his address book — with contact information for Ronald Reagan when he was the California governor — and the eye patch Wayne wore in True Grit.

Brian Downes, executive director of the

museum, said the $2.5 million facility was built because tours of Wayne’s childhood home weren’t enough to satisfy fans. Long lines at the house meant the tours “could only be 20 minutes long,” he said. “There was a frustration there.”

The museum was funded over seven years through grants and private donations, including pledges from residents of

Winterset, population 5,000.

“It was a dream for a little town to accomplish something like this,” Downes said.

Ruth Reed, a tour guide for Wayne’s birthplace, said the Duke has staying power, even though he died in 1979.

“He’s still one of the top 10 movie stars in people’s memories,” she said. “Who do we have today that has anything that you’d even care to honor?”

The museum also suggests a trail of spots near and around town linked to Wayne’s family. Organizers are packaging the museum as part of an overall experience to Madison County, where Winterset is located. Nearby are the bridges that sparked The Bridges of Madison County novel, movie and Broadway musical.