The rise of Stax Records: The tragic tale of Otis Redding and the legendary label he helped build

Two days before the crash that killed him at 26, Redding had recorded the vocals for aching ballad (Sittin’ On) The Dock of the Bay

Otis Redding was the jewel in the southern soul crown of Stax, the Memphis record label through whose doors he'd walked five years earlier as a driver and roadie, desperate to sing

Four miles outside Madison, Wisconsin, December 10, 1967, hampered by low cloud cover and cold weather, the eight-seater private plane carrying 26-year-old soul star Otis Redding hit trouble.

A Lake Monona resident heard the peculiar engine sound, so loud and low, and stepped outside to see the plane appear through the clouds and dive into the water.

Redding was the jewel in the southern soul crown of Stax, the Memphis record label through whose doors he’d walked five years earlier as a driver and roadie, desperate to sing.

Two days before the crash, he’d completed a two-week session in which he’d recorded the vocals for nearly four new albums’ worth of material, including (Sittin’ On) The Dock of the Bay, an aching ballad he believed could be a big crossover hit.

The song was almost finished when Redding left to play shows in Nashville, Cleveland and Madison.

‘Otis stuck his head in the studio before leaving,’ says guitarist Steve Cropper, ‘and said, “See ya on Monday.”’

Otis Redding's band the Bar-Kays pictured outside the former cinema that became Stax studios. Four band members died in the plane crash that also killed Redding

Of the eight on board the twin-engine Beechcraft, only trumpeter Ben Cauley of Redding’s touring band The Bar-Kays survived.

(Sittin’ On) The Dock Of The Bay went on to be a No 1 in the U.S. and No 3 in the UK, but with the death of Otis, Stax lost perhaps its brightest talent.

Between 1960 and 1975, Stax had 167 Top 100 pop hits and established the careers of Redding, Isaac Hayes, the Staple Singers, Sam & Dave, Booker T & the MG’s and Wilson Pickett.

But the story of Stax is more than a record label history.

Through the 1960s and into the ’70s, as every step toward equality seemed to bring two backward steps of repression and retraction, this small group of people in Memphis quietly revelled in racial harmony.

Throughout the American South in that period, race mixing was nothing short of an assault on the social realm. But inside Stax, whites and blacks had worked side by side since the late-1950s.

People who couldn’t publicly dine together were making beautiful music that the public – black and white – loved to hear. Then they’d step outside the studio and white police would stop to check on the whites’ safety, and to hassle the blacks.

Jim Stewart launched the label as Satellite Records from a borrowed garage in 1957, while an amateur country fiddle player working at Memphis’s First National Bank.

The plane crash that left Otis Redding dead

In 1960, Rufus Thomas and his daughter Carla walked into the company’s new studio, in a converted cinema in Memphis, and onto the national charts with the company’s first hit, ’Cause I Love You.

Booker T & The MG’s, a mixed-race group of young local musicians, became the house band, and would soon have a worldwide hit with the funky instrumental Green Onions.

And a driver from Georgia, who walked in carrying amplifiers, would become the label’s first superstar.

Redding first set foot in Stax in August 1962 as the driver for guitarist Johnny Jenkins. Jenkins’ session fizzled out, but Redding sat on the sidelines all day, insisting he could sing.

‘During the session [drummer] Al Jackson says, “The big tall guy driving Johnny, he’s been bugging me to death, wanting me to hear him sing,”’ says MG’s guitarist Steve Cropper.

With the death of Redding, Stax lost perhaps its brightest talent

Musicians had started to leave for the day when they finally gave Otis his chance. They called him down to the piano and he asked for ‘church chords’.

‘We started playing and he started singing These Arms Of Mine,’ says Cropper. ‘My hair lifted about three inches and I couldn’t believe this guy’s voice.’

‘Otis seemed to be a person with a mission,’ says MG’s organist Booker T Jones. ‘And we picked up that mission and it became all of ours.’

Sam & Dave, a Florida duo of talent-show host Sam Moore and baker Dave Prater, were Stax’s next major find, but it was Isaac Hayes, an emerging producer and songwriter – who later enjoyed fame for his role as Chef in cartoon series South Park – who gave them their style, feeding them hits such as Hold On, I’m Comin’ and Soul Man.

Having hung around the studio for years, Hayes, a worker at a meatpacking plant, had been rejected several times by Stax before being hired as a pianist and later a songwriter and producer of dozens of hits. Within a few years, he would become the label’s biggest star.

Powerful soul singers gravitated to Stax. New York club singer Wilson Pickett wasn’t getting anywhere fast when he was sent down to Stax in 1965 by the label’s New York partner Atlantic Records.

Legendary Atlantic producer Jerry Wexler saw the stealthlike beauty of Pickett on stage, and could hear in his growl the latent soul power.

‘Before Black Panthers were a political issue I used to call him the Black Panther,’ Wexler says.

Musically, Stax and Wilson Pickett was a match made in soul heaven, but Pickett was no angel

‘It was like he was made out of steel and baling wire, so handsome. And I just loved his voice.

'When James Brown used to scream, it was a scream. When Pickett screamed, it was a musical note – a great advantage.’

Armed with an existing Pickett song that featured the line ‘I can’t wait until the midnight hour’, Steve Cropper worked up a tune that met with Pickett’s approval.

In The Midnight Hour took six weeks to climb to No 1, and spent nearly three months in the chart. Musically, Stax and Pickett was a match made in soul heaven, but Pickett was no angel, and his time at Stax was to be short-lived.

‘He did have a corrosive personality with a lot of people,’ says Wexler.Adds Cropper: ‘Wilson grew up in the street, and he carried that with him.’

At a follow-up session, the band rebelled. He’d been difficult before: now Midnight Hour had made him a star. Pickett was reduced to following the musicians outside and offering them each $100 if they’d come back inside and record.

‘The guys shut that door,’ says Jim Stewart.

‘They said, “Don’t bring that asshole down here again. We don’t have to put up with that crap.”’

Although Stax had rising stars and plenty of records in the charts, they were still a provincial company in the spring of 1966.

So when the phone rang and the crackly voice on the other end said it was England calling, they wondered if it was a joke.

Their credulity was further tested when the caller identified himself as Brian Epstein, manager of The Beatles.

As their December 1965 album Rubber Soul indicated, they were grooving to the sounds of soul, and they wanted to record their next album at Stax.

Isaac Hayes in the Stax studios office in 1971. A worker at a meatpacking plant, he had been rejected several times by Stax before being hired as a pianist and later a songwriter and producer of dozens of hits

The secret quickly spread, and before long everybody in Memphis seemed to know. Soon girls were coming into the record shop, offering money for information, trying to buy the dress the secretary would wear when The Beatles came through the door.

‘They wanted to record at Stax so bad,’ says saxophonist with Stax session band the Mar-Keys, Don Nix.

‘They had the whole thing all laid out, were gonna land a helicopter on the roof. But word leaked out.’

Once fans had official confirmation of where to be on what day, The Beatles had to cancel; Beatlemania was in full swing.

The album Revolver would be recorded in London, and its songs are full of soul possibility.

The horns and vocal style on Got To Get You Into My Life are the most obvious paean to the American soul sound, but the dark funk of Taxman and the bright punch of Good Day Sunshine would also have been right at home in Memphis.

The Beatles cancelled, but artists from Elton John to Janis Joplin and The Monkees all came through. Stax was setting the bar for grit and feeling in commercial music.

Otis Redding bought 270 acres outside Macon, Georgia, and built a 12-room home for his family there. In an effort to see more of his wife and children, he bought a plane.

Carla Thomas was often dubbed the Queen of Memphis Soul

When news broke of Otis’s death, Cropper remembers, ‘We got a call from Atlantic saying, “We’ve got to rush something out. What have you got?” And I immediately said, “We need to put our hit out.”

'They hadn’t even found Otis’s body yet.’

Cropper threw himself into completing Dock Of The Bay. He added electric guitar, seagulls, and the sound of waves.

‘Trying to work on something like that, when you don’t even know where one of your closest friends is, is difficult.’

‘Everybody was walking around staring at their feet for two months after that,’ says Stax musician Marvell Thomas.

‘There was true sadness at that place. Stax was usually a happy, peppy place, there was conversations in the hallways and songwriters over here and a demo going – that all stopped.’

Stax would go on for seven more years before sliding into insolvency, but nothing in Memphis would ever be the same.

‘Respect Yourself’ by Robert Gordon is published by Bloomsbury, priced £22.95.