Rhamnus cathartica is a deciduous, large shrub/small tree with a bushy habit. Buy bare root Common buckthorn online!

Common buckthorn has glossy, dark green leaves that turn yellow in autumn. It also has small greenish yellow flowers in spring, and red berries, that ripen to black, in autumn.

This tough, resilient plant grows well in full sun to partial shade in most, moist, well-draining soils. It reaches a mature height of 6m.

A great choice for a difficult situation, the Common buckthorn forms a dense, impenetrable, thorny thicket which can provide a home/shelter to a range of wildlife.

Buy bare root Common buckthorn plants online and at our tree nursery in Essex from November to March. Please select the size and quantity of your plants below.

Bare Root plants are available from early November to late March. We can take Pre-orders before this time and dispatch the plants as soon as they are available.

Bare Root Pack SizePriceQuantity 25 Plants£32.50

Common buckthorn - Rhamnus cathartica (Bare Root Plants) 40-60cm quantity

50 Plants£65.00

Common buckthorn - Rhamnus cathartica (Bare Root Plants) 40-60cm quantity

100 Plants£125.00

Common buckthorn - Rhamnus cathartica (Bare Root Plants) 40-60cm quantity

250 Plants£300.00

Common buckthorn - Rhamnus cathartica (Bare Root Plants) 40-60cm quantity

500 Plants£600.00

Common buckthorn - Rhamnus cathartica (Bare Root Plants) 40-60cm quantity

750 Plants£900.00

Common buckthorn - Rhamnus cathartica (Bare Root Plants) 40-60cm quantity

1000 Plants£1,100.00

Common buckthorn - Rhamnus cathartica (Bare Root Plants) 40-60cm quantity

How do I order from King & Co?

Order online

Your order may be placed via our Online Shop, which is fast simple and secure.

After your Online Shop order has been placed we will send an order confirmation email to the email address provided. This will provide you with details of your order, including the order number, which you should check and retain for your records. If there is an error in your order requirement, please contact us as soon as possible quoting your order number, so that we can rectify prior to dispatch.

Phone us

We will take your credit or debit card payment over the phone. Simply call us on 01376 340469 and one of our experienced team are always available to discuss your order.

From our Nursery

Collect your trees or shrubs from our Nursery in Rayne.

Payment

We accept all major credit cards including: Maestro, MasterCard, Visa Credit, Visa Electron and Visa Debit.

How can I expect delivery from King & Co?

Overnight to your door

We can delivery to you anywhere in England and Wales via an overnight courier service (two days for Scotland & Ireland).

Via Online Shop

Orders placed via our Online shop if placed by 10am Monday –Thursday can be delivered to you the very next day. If placed on a Friday – Sunday delivery would be on Tuesday.

We deliver by national overnight courier service.

Should you require a specific delivery date, let us know in advance and we will arrange for your delivery to arrive on your required date.

Every tree and plant is packed to ensure your order arrives safely.

For large trees or quantities of trees and plants

Please phone us to discuss, we are usually able to deliver to you via a dedicated vehicle.

For local deliveries

We will deliver to you in our local area and we will be pleased to arrange this with you whilst you are visiting our Nursery or via the phone. We also provide a planting service.

Planting service

We have our own installation teams to carry out planting in Southern & Eastern England. Please call us to discuss, we are always happy to provide you a quotation.