Zizyphus mauritiana Lam., Encycl. 3: 319 319 . (Syn. Rhamnus jujuba L.; Ziziphus jujuba (L.) Gaertn. (ambiguous synonym); Ziziphus jujuba (L.) Lam. (ambiguous synonym); Ziziphus mauritiana var. muratiana (Maire) A. Chev.; Ziziphus mauritiana var. orthacantha (DC.) A. Chev.; Ziziphus muratiana Maire; Ziziphus orthacantha DC.; Ziziphus rotunda DC.) as per Catalogue of Life;

.

China (Yunnan, Sichuan, Guangdong, Guangxi, Fujian (I)), Taiwan (I), Sri Lanka, India (throughout), Jammu & Kashmir, Sri Lanka, Nepal, Laos, Vietnam, Myanmar [Burma], Bhutan, Pakistan (Sind, Baluchistan, N.W.Frontier Prov., Pakistani Punjab), peninsular Malaysia, Indonesia, Lakshadweep Isl.(Laccadives), Mauritania, Guinea-Bissau, Guinea, Central African Republic, Benin, Chad, Sudan, South Sudan, Burkina Faso, Senegal, Togo, Ethiopia, Madagascar (I), Mozambique (I), Zambia (I), Zimbabwe (I), Sao Tome (I), Morocco, Algeria, Iran (I), Afghanistan (c), Andamans (Middle Andamans, South Andamans), Mexico (I), Guatemala (I), Honduras (I), Belize (I), El Salvador (I), Nicaragua (I), Costa Rica (I), Panama (I), Venezuela (I), USA (I) (California (I), Florida (I)), Bahamas (I), Cayman Isl. (I), Cuba (I), Hispaniola (I), Jamaica (I), Puerto Rico (I), Virgin Isl. (I) (St. Croix (I)), Lesser Antilles (I) (Anguilla (I), Antigua (I), Barbados (I), Desirade (I), Dominica (I), Grenada (I), Guadeloupe (I), Martinique (I), Montserrat (I), St. Barthelemy (I), St. Lucia (I), St. Martin (I)), Brazil (I), Colombia (I), Trinidad & Tobago (I) as per Catalogue of Life;

.

.

Native to: south Asia (mainly India)

.

Z. mauritiana is Indian jujube or Indian plum is mainly a species of warmer climates, leaves tomentose beneath, longer stipular spine 5-7 mm long, petiole 5-15 mm long and tomentose. It has two varieties the cultivated var.mauritiana a tree with 6-9 cm long leaves and ovoid 2.5-3.5 cm long fruit and var. spontanea (Edgew.) R.R. Stewart ex Qaiser & Nazim, a wild shrub with 2-3 cm long leaves and globose 1-1.5 cm long fruits.

Z. jujuba Mill. is Chinese jujube or Chinese date, mainly a temperate species, with leaves glabrous beneath, longer stipular spine up to 3 cm long, petiole shorter than 5 mm and glabrous, fruit ovoid or oblong 2-3.5 cm long

.

Flora of Ranga Reddi District: Andhra Pradesh, India By Thammineni Pullaiah, M. Silar Mohammed (Keys- Z. glabrata, mauritiana, oenoplia & xylopyrus & Description- 2000)

.

Flora of Guntur District: Andhra Pradesh, India (Keys- Z. glabrata, mauritiana, nummularia, oenoplia, rugosa & xylopyrus & Description- 2000)

.

Flora of Eastern Ghats: Hill Ranges of South East India, Volume 1 By Thammineni Pullaiah, D. Muralidhara Rao, K. Sri Ramamurthy (Keys- Z. glabrata, horrida, mauritiana, nummularia, oenoplia, rugosa & xylopyrus & Description- 2002);

.

Flora of Panipat: Ziziphus mauritiana (Ber) from Sodhapur Panipat:

A wild medium size tree

Ziziphus mauritiana (Ber)

from Sodhapur Panipat

There are 2 species in this thread and your message says only Ziziphus mauritiana (Ber).

Ziziphus tree for ID :: Jammu :: May2018 MK002 : 9 posts by 3 authors. Attachments (6)

Please help me identifying this edible Ziziphus tree. The fruits are devoured by birds and its eaten by humans too, owing to fleshy-crunchy mesocarp. Could this be Z.jujube?

Fruit: 5 cm long

Habitat: roadside

Alt.: 310 m asl

Date: 21.01.2018

Place: Jammu (outskirts, rural), J & K

Is there a possibility of this being a variety of Z.mauritiana? because the larger leaves and oblong fruits make me think that this is not the common Z.mauritiana.

Quite possible.

Looks matching as suggested.

Now accepted name is Ziziphus jujuba Mill.

Correct name of our plant is Zizyphus mauritiana Lam., Encycl. 3: 319 319 . (Syn. Ziziphus jujuba Lam. (non Mill, 1768));

Please one time check the plant list now accepted name is Ziziphus jujuba Mill

Pl. check discussions at Tree ID for SeasonWatch needed..One of two species sending..

The same tree in the same location with flowers.

Attachments (4)

Jujube or Indian date (Indian plum) tree is a larval food plant of some Pierrot (Tarucus sp.) butterflies. Found some butterflies today basking under such a jujube tree.

Species :

Plant : Ziziphus ziziphus (syn. Ziziphus jujuba)

Bengali name : KUL(KOOL) GACH

Butterfly : Tarucus sp. (possibly Tarucus extricatus)

Date : 21/03/2012, 9.45 a.m.

Place : Gobra (Hooghly), WB

Ziziphus ziziphus can’t be a correct name as it is a tautonym. The Indian Ber is more commonly named as Z. mauritiana Lamk. (syn: Z. jujuba (L.) Lamk.) distinct from Z. jujuba Mill.

Thank you Sir for throwing lights on the correct scientific name of the Indian Ber tree. I am wondering if we have the Z. jujuba Mill. here. How do i differentiate one from the other?

Z. jujuba Mill. is Chinese jujube or Chinese date, mainly a temperate species, with leaves glabrous beneath, longer stipular spine up to 3 cm long, petiole shorter than 5 mm and glabrous, fruit ovoid or oblong 2-3.5 cm long

Z. mauritiana is Indian jujube or Indian plum is mainly a species of warmer climates, leaves tomentose beneath, longer stipular spine 5-7 mm long, petiole 5-15 mm long and tomentose. It has two varieties the cultivated var.mauritiana a tree with 6-9 cm long leaves and ovoid 2.5-3.5 cm long fruit and var. spontanea (Edgew.) R.R. Stewart ex Qaiser & Nazim, a wild shrub with 2-3 cm long leaves and globose 1-1.5 cm long fruits.

Tussar Silk Moths on an Indian Jujube tree:

Thought this might be interesting…..

Was at my property at Shahapur [north of Bombay] last Sunday. These photographs were taken on a Ziziphus mauritiana [Bor] tree.

Tussar Silk Moths belong to the group of Emperor Moths which feature some of the larger moths including the largest – the Atlas Moth, my photographs of which are available at this link

Here a female Tussar Silk Moth [the largest of the 3 seen in the photographs] has recently emerged from her cocoon loaded with unfertilised eggs. To attract males to fertilise her eggs, she secretes pheromones which the males detect with their sensitive feathery antennae from even a few kilometers away. Two males have arrived to mate with her.

Also seen is the nest of a Scaly-breasted Munia.

Zizyphus for ID : Mumbai : 250912 : AK-1:

Pictures taken on 14 November,2011 in Maharashtra Nature Park, Mumbai.

A medium sized tree with small round green fruits.

Id please.

Ziziphus mauritiana Lam. Syn: Ziziphus jujuba Lam.

SYMBIOSIS : 146:

Attaching an image of Fulvous Pied Flat butterfly on the flowers of Ziziphus mauritiana. This tree is commonly known as Indian Jujube ( BER in Hindi and KUL in Bangla ).

SYMBIOSIS : 252:

Attaching an image of a Redbase Jezebel butterfly on the flowers of Ziziphus mauritiana. It is interesting to note that I have recorded 30 distinct species of butterflies on this insignificant flower.

Fruit Trees of Bangalore – RA – Ziziphus Mauritiana – Indian Jujube Tree – Elandai: …………..

During My stays in Nagpur, Chitrakoot and Maihar, we have seen more than 2 dozen types of Ber whose range of habitat starts from a small bush to large trees. All are called as Ber locally. However i know well Z nummularia. Can any member through more light on the matter whether these shrubs/ trees are all Z .mauritiana are different sp. Many of these Ber differs remarkably in taste and size as well

Boiled Ber with little salt and Sugar tastes too good. Yesterday i had it in the evening.

Your post once again reminded me of that good taste.

Ziziphus for ID : Oman : 130213 : AK-3:

Seen these Ber fruits at a farm here.

Large fruit, not like the smaller ones we see generally.

These sold as fruits in the market too.

Kindly id the species.

Why not Ziziphus jujuba Mill. ?

Thanks for a possible id.

These are the fruits you get in the Indian market too.

Although the farm is here, it belongs to an Indian. So all the tree planted are those found in India.

efi site link: Ziziphus mauritiana Lam. (Syn. Ziziphus jujuba Lam. (non Mill, 1768));

Looks like Zizyphus mauritiana

Thanks for a possible id.

In Maharashtra, I have seen these sold near toll nakas, when a vehicle stops to pay toll. Also in the fruit & vegetable market.

.

Query :: specific epithet (based on geographical name) :: mauritian : 18 posts by 6 authors.

While compiling names of Ipomoea mauritiana Jacq. and Ziziphus mauritiana Lam.

– want to make sure that mauritiana is of or from: Mauritania (country in w Africa) AND not to be confused with Mauritius (island in Indian Ocean)

Ipomoea mauritiana has:

1) one name – Mauritanian convolvulus … NPGS / GRIN

2) its origins … uncertain, but it has been recorded in West Africa, including in Gambia and the riparian forests of Benin … Wikipedia

Both Gambia and Benin are neighbouring countries of Mauritania.

BUT when looking up for Ziziphus mauritiana, do not find it pertaining in any way to Mauritania (nor Mauritius).

Can someone help me ?

By the way, this query arose on finding some of the sites and reference books relating mauritiana to Mauritius.

Mauritius was under French rule during the period when this fruit was described by Lamarck who was also French. Hence Ziziphus mauritiana Lam. should be based on Mauritius.

Ipomoea mauritiana was described by Jacquin who again was a French and worked in South Africa too. I assume both name comes from Mauritius.

Logically Mauritania should have been changed to latin as Mauritaniana!!

… many thanks your thoughts; it helped me know mauritiana is based on Mauritius.

“Logically Mauritania should have been changed to latin as Mauritaniana” … is the logic true in case of Mauritius? 🙂

What I found:

This species was first described by the French biologist J. B. Lamarck, from a specimen in a botanical garden in Paris, but he did not state why he decided to name it after Mauritius Island. … Wildflowers of Israel.

Ipomoea mauritiana has following names:

1) Mauritanian convolvulus … NPGS / GRIN

2) Mauritiana Morning Glory … Plantilus … though Mauritiana here is just the epithet, not name of any place in world.

and,

mauritiana => refers to ancient Mauritania … V I R B O G A

however,

Type Specimens

T: ; ; Cultivated in Vienna from material collected in Mauritius … Tropicos

Thanks once again … taking it as based on Mauritius.

Sir Lamarck didnt colelct all plants from wild. People colelcted from different parts of the world and were transfered to Paris during French rule. Same as Linnaeus who never came to India but described plants from India. And same as Jacquin.

Dont mind my collect please. I am trying to find the second protologue !!! cant find anywhere…….

indeed some authors described plants far from where the plants were found.

The gist of my query is knowing the place(s) on which the epithet mauritiana is based.

While I was attempting to find it on the internet, I got mixed results and got confused.

Now your thoughts helped me somewhat convinced that the epithet is based on Mauritius.

It actually doesnt state anything from where it went to Lamarck. Interestingly the first sentence says, Isle of France…. I imagine which Island it point towards!!!

Many many thanks dear …

At least mention of “isle” of France.

While Mauritius is, Mauritania is not.

I hope we have similar clarification for Ipomoea mauritiana.

You may dig only during leisure.

http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mauritius

Please check this. It mentions that “In 1598 a Dutch squadron under AdmiralWybrand Van Warwyck landed at Grand Port and named the island Mauritius, in honour of Prince Maurice van Nassau, stadhouder of the

Dutch Republic. Later the island became a French colony and was renamed Isle de France.”

WOW …. Excellent search. Thank you very very much. Thus epithet of Ziziphus mauritiana is very well confirmed to be based on Mauritius.

A check on epithet of Ipomoea mauritiana to have some relation to Mauritius would be fantastic. Please help at your leisure.

It is interesting to read the discussions. Some unknown facts emerge….

Have attached a relevant paper by the French botanist Louis Bouton (1799 – 1878) who worked extensively in Mauritius. It was published in William Jackson Hooker’s Journal of Botany, vol. I, in 1834. In his concluding remarks on the last page, he inferred that the name mauritiana is incorrect because no plant of the genus Ziziphus is indigenous to Mauritius.

Thanks for sharing the article.

Just because a plant is not originally from a place on which the name is described, as in this case, Z. mauritiana not being originally from Mauritius, doesnt make the species epithet incorrect according to

ICBN, now called as ICN. Yes the only thing incorrect is the interpretation that it is indigenous to Mauritius. Same thing goes to all species named as indica or chinensis doesnt mean that it is indigenous to India or China. The species epithet just means that the plant was described from Mauritius or India or China.

Supporting to … on the issue of specific epithet. Some times, it make no sense, as in the case of Thunbergia frangrans (it doesnt has fragrant flowers). Mauritiana also one of such mistakes!!

Thanks … for adding more clarifications to this query.

Hoping we get to know how the epithet fits in case of Ipomoea mauritiana whose origin / nativity is obscure (ref: Flora of China) … note in Wikipedia says: Its origins are uncertain, but it has been recorded in West Africa, including in Gambia and the riparian forests of Benin.

Requesting ID of this Ziziphus plant – Almora :17072013 : ARK-03 : November 2012 : Attachments (3). 3 posts by 2 authors.

Requesting to please ID this Ziziphus plant captured in Almora, Uttarakhand in November 2012.

May be it is the Ziziphus mauritana of Rhamnaceae. Common names are Indian jujuba, Indian plum, Ber and Eelantha pazham in Tamil.

Thank you … for ID…

Hooghly Today : Ziziphus oenopolia (L.) Mill. : Attachments (6). 10 posts by 6 authors.

“Bengal Plants” describes six Ziziphus species. This one seems to be the Ziziphus oenopolia (L.) Mill. or SHIAKUL (SHEKUL) in Bengali.

Thank you very much, i remember in my schooldays i often ate them in tiffin breaks and vendors used to sell at 10 paise for a few fruits.

This may not be Ziziphus oenopolia (L.) Mill, as I identified earlier because of the field guide I have (authored by certain Dr.) which informs Ziziphus oenopolia (L.) Mill has single axillary flower, growing in to single axillary fruit.

Ziziphus species in efi with Keys.

Can be Ziziphus mauritiana.

Good morning Sir and thank you very much for the probable id. The problem is petiole is shorter than what has been recorded in FoP or FoC, but then there are many cultivars.

… ID seems to be correct. I do not think it is Ziziphus mauritiana

This looks like Ber [Z. mauritiana] to me. Sending some of my photographs of Z. oenoplia for comparison.

This is getting very complicated.

I have a recent post, that looks like the photographs attached by …, and it has been identified as Z. oenopolia (L.) Miller – efi thread. Illustrations can also be found at – http://www.plantillustrations.org/species.php?id_species=1083172 and supporting –

The plant in this thread doesn’t look like the one in the above or in the attached pics by … But, does look like – Wikimedia commons image !!!

And also –

The most varied illustrations are of Z. jujuba Miller –

SYMBIOSIS :423 : Attachments (1). 2 posts by 2 authors.

Attaching an image of a Lesser Grass Blue butterfly on the flowers of Ziziphus jujuba.

SYMBIOSIS : 424 : Attachments (1). 1 post by 1 author.

Attaching an image of a male Striped Albatross butterfly on the flowers of Ziziphus jujuba.

SYMBIOSIS : 425 : Attachments (1). 2 posts by 2 authors.

Attaching an image of a Lime Butterfly on the flowers of Ziziphus jujuba.

SYMBIOSIS : 435 : Attachments (1). 1 post by 1 author.

Attaching an image of a Grey Pansy butterfly on the flowers of Ziziphus jujube.

SYMBIOSIS : 438 : Attachments (1). 1 post by 1 author.

Attaching an image of a Peacock Pansy butterfly on the flowers of Ziziphus jujube.

Zizyphus mauritiana Lam. from Kamrup district (Metro), Assam : Attachments (8). 2 posts by 2 authors.

Attached images are Zizyphus mauritiana Lam.

Date :02.10. 2013

Location: Kamrup district(Metro)

Family : Rhamnaceae

Genus & species :Zizyphus mauritiana Lam.

Habitat: Grows wild on hilly area

Habit : Tree

Hooghly – two Ziziphus plants : Attachments (12). 3 posts by 2 authors.

I upload two sets of photograph in this thread. All recorded on 25/09/13, at the same place. Two plants are growing 2 ft apart. One, in the first set, prefixed as “plant1” (5 pics in total) is about 2 ft high and the other, “plant2″ (7 pics) is about 7 ft high.

Plant1 doesn’t bear any flower, while few flowers can be seen in Plant2.

The leaves of “plant1” is completely glabrous on both side / the leaves of “plant2” is silky pubescent underside

flowers of “plant2” are not peduncled

both the plants have two types of spines

I think both the plants are same, the younger one having glabrous leaves on both side, and the older one having pubescence on underside.

Key, based on petiole length and spine length, in efi thread and in http://www.efloras.org/florataxon.aspx?flora_id=2&taxon_id=135333#KEY-1-6 suggests this is Z. jujulba Mill. But these flowers have 10-lobed disk (pic – plant2__P1060498).

What would be the species id of this wild Ziziphus

efi page on Ziziphus mauritiana Lam. (Syn. Ziziphus jujuba Lam. (non Mill, 1768));

SYMBIOSIS : 156 : Attachments (1). 1 post by 1 author.

Image of a Common Crow butterfly is on Ziziphus jujuba.

Hooghly – Ziziphus xylopyrus Willd.??? : Attachments (10 + 4). 3 posts by 2 authors.

Recorded today, a roadside small tree (10 ft)

efi page on Ziziphus xylopyrus

Attached photographs are of immature fruit of this plant, recorded on 23/11/13.

I think that the idetity is hundred percent correct. I encountered this common plant in Goa.

Thank you very much for the id of this rather uncommon Ziziphus.

This is Ziziphus mauritiana only, it is a cultivated variety will produce fleshy oval shaped fruit (3-4 x 2 cm)

Ziziphus Species For ID : Oman : 280114 : AK-28 : 5 posts by 3 authors. Attachments (6).

Ziziphus tree seen on 5/11/13 with flowers in Muscat.

Id please.

The three species that we find here are Ziziphus mauritiana, the cultivated one.

The native species are Ziziphus spina-christi & Ziziphus hajarensis, found in the Hajar Mountains.

This may be some other introduced species to there???

As I know this is Ziziphus mauritiana/ arabic sidar.

This is the local tree of Oman and we cultivate mostly in dry /desert areas. Growing well with this climate.

Giving good fruit also.

But now a days most of the areas grafted varieties are planted for production.

SYMBIOSIS : 511 : Attachments (1). 1 post by 1 author.

Attaching an image of a Red vented Bulbul on the fruits of Ziziphus jujuba.

20042014Al19 Shrub for ID : 2 posts by 2 authors. Attachments (1).

Ziziphus jujuba Mill. (= Z. mauritiana Lam), Wild ber fruit

Requesting ID of this Ziziphus species – Panshet – May 2014 :: 07MAY2014 :: ARK-05 : 4 posts by 3 authors. Attachments (8).

Requesting to please ID this Ziziphus species growing wild by the roadside on the way to Panshet dam, Pune in May 2014.

Is this the common Ziziphus mauritiana? The leaves were only around 1 cm across.

Probably Z. rugosa.

This is the common Bora tree [Ziziphus mauritiana]. Some of my photographs of this are available at this link :

Google Groups

Ziziphus jujuba Mill.SN Sep 37 . : 2 posts by 2 authors. Attachments (3).

Ziziphus jujuba Mill. (= Ziziphus mauritiana Lam.), cultivated variety of Ber near Chennai

Thanks, …, for all the wonderful uploads.

It should be Ziziphus mauritiana (Syn. Ziziphus jujuba Lam. (non Mill, 1768));

SYMBIOSIS : 647 : 1 post by 1 author. Attachments (1).

Attaching an image of a Chestnut Bob butterfly on the flowers of Ziziphus jujuba.

SYMBIOSIS : 648 : 1 post by 1 author. Attachments (1).

Attaching an image of a Rice Swift butterfly on the flowers of Ziziphus jujuba.

SYMBIOSIS : 649 : 1 post by 1 author. Attachments (1).

Attaching an image of a Striped Tiger on the flowers of Ziziphus jujuba.

Ziziphus (apple ber) fruits SN 15Jan 28 : 3 posts by 2 authors. Attachments (2)

Ziziphus mauritiana hybrid fruits (tai apple, apple ber- cultivated) from Manbad bajar of Nashik dt, Maharashtra.

nice. how big are they?

They are 4-5 cm dia, just like sapota

SYMBIOSIS : 803 : 1 post by 1 author. Attachments (1)

Attaching an image of a Red-base Jezebel butterfly visiting flowers of Ziziphus jujube.

SYMBIOSIS : 804 : 1 post by 1 author. Attachments (1)

Attaching an image of a Tailed Jay visiting flowers of Ziziphus jujube.

Names of Plants in India :: Ziziphus mauritiana Lam. : 5 posts by 3 authors. 1 image.

via Species‎ > ‎Z‎ > Ziziphus mauritiana Lam. … family: Rhamnaceae

SK754 25 SEP-2017:ID : 5 posts by 2 authors. Attachments (6)

Location: New Town Eco Park

Kolkata, India

Date: 10 September 2017

Elevation : 25 ft.

Ziziphus species.

Yes … but need specific ID !

Pl. check efi site for Ziziphus mauritiana

Thank you …! Zizyphus mauritiana Lam.

Nepali Names : बयर Bayar / ठुलो बयर Thulo Bayar

ID please : 4 posts by 3 authors. Attachments (2)

please find attached photos for identification, associated with ber plant Ziziphus mauritiana any infection or parasitic plant ? help please. rounded balls.

These are galls commonly seen in Ziziphus sp. formed due to the infection by mites.

ID tree AR02 070318 : 3 posts by 3 authors. Attachments (3)

7th march 2018

Narela, Delhi

Nearby guava orchard.

Has single spine.

Most probably – Ziziphus mauritiana.

Please wait for comments.

Fwd: SYMBIOSIS : 1077 : 3 posts by 1 author. Attachments (1)

In the attached collage Red Vented Bulbul is feeding on the fruits of Jizyphus jujuba (BER/ KUL)

Correct name is Ziziphus mauritiana as per details herein.

Thank you … I will correct.

Fruit and Vegetable Week- Ziziphus mauritiana from Panipat:

Ziziphus mauritiana from IOCL Refinery area Panipat

NATIVE, WILD, CULTIVATED :: Rhamnaceae (buckthorn family) » Zizyphus mauritiana … also spelt: Zizyphus

ZIZ-ih-fuss– an ancient Greek name derived from the Persian word zizafun

maw-rih-tee-AY-nuh– of or from Mauritiana, a north African area

commonly known as: Chinese apple, Chinese date, cottony jujube, Indian jujube, Indian plum, sour jujube, Yunnan jujube, Yunnan spiny jujube • Hindi: बदर badar, बेर ber, कुबल kubal, फेनिल phenil, पिच्छल picchal • Kashmiri: bari, konkamber, phitni • Konkani: बॉर्र boaarr • Manipuri: boroi • Marathi: बोर bor, सौबरी saubari • Punjabi: amlai, barari, simli, singli • Sanskrit: बदर badar, बद्री badri, सौवीर sauvir • Tamil: எளந்தை elandhai • Telugu: రేగు regu

Native to: south Asia (mainly India)

-This is called “topa Kul” in Bengali found mainly growing in the spring months in Bengal.

-If you notice properly in the first pic of …, you can see that in one flower all anthers are pointed upwards where as in othertwo the anthers are pointed downwards and backwards.There are phenomena in plants called HERKOGAMY [Herkogamy is a commonstrategy employed by hermaphroditic angiosperms to reduce sexual

interference between male (anthers) and female (stigma) function. ] and DICHOGAMY [Dichogamy, also known as sequential hermaphrodism, is the separation in time of gender expression in a hermaphroditic organism. In the context of the plant sexuality of flowering plants (angiosperms), there are two forms of dichogamy: protogyny—female function precedes male function—and protandry— male function precedes female function.] .

Zizyphus had protoandrous flowers, i.e., androecium develops to maturity first and after sometime gynoecium attains maturity, in simple words, there is a distinct delineation of male and female phase in the same flower as both anther and stigma dont mature at one time hence inhibiting self pollination.

In the flower above, the anthers mature first (during erect position as in the picture, which has white pollens on the anthers] but stigma remains immature, hence the insect will come collect pollens from the erect anthers but pollens wont be able to get deposited on the stigma of the same plant because the stigma will not be mature enough to let the pollen stick to it. Hence if and when the insect will visit another flower which has mature stigma, pollen gets deposited. In other words, pollen from one flower is avoided from getting deposited on the stigma of the same flower.

There are some other terms here which are useful: Geitonogamy: In this pollination of a flower with the pollen from another flower on the same flowering plant.

Xenogamy: In this pollination of a flower takes place by pollens from a different plant .

Read following links for more knowledge:

http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Herkogamy

http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dichogamy

– I am sending some photos of the tree, flower and unripe fruits.

Place : Dombivli

Date : 31.12.2010

Habitat : Cultivated

Fruits & Vegetables Week: Ziziphus mauritiana, Indian Jujube:

Ziziphus mauritiana, Indian Jujube, Common jujube, fruits are eaten fresh, dried, candied or stewed.

Local names:

Hindi: Baer, ber

Beng: Kool, ber, borol

Mar: Bor, bera

Guj: Bor, bordi

Tel: Reegu, gangareegu

Tam: Elandai

-Just out of curiosity. What is the bigger oval one avaialble in the market called ?

-I think in Marathi they are called “Damaru” ???? There is another variety of Bor, and the fruits are much smaller and round.

Tree ID for SeasonWatch needed..One of two species sending..:

could you please help me to identify this tree for seasonwatch?

Its very twiggy at base and leaves cover only the top. But it seems to be a

native variety, and birds love it in fruiting season..

to me it look like Z. mauritiana

It is Ziziphus mauritiana (= Z. jujuba) of Rhamnaceae family. Called as ‘ilandhai’ இலந்தை in Tamil.

The fruits are edible (but beware of large, stone-like seed :).

Ziziphus jujuba Mill is not synonym of Ziziphus mauritiana as per theplantlist.org

pls see http://www.theplantlist.org/tpl/record/kew-2470699

To me this tree is BER

Ziziphus jujuba

During our Pre Commissioned Training in OTA Kamptee (Nagpur) its fruits were the only thing available to us to eat during short breaks. More than 10 varities of BER were there. These were the main food of Monkeys and Langoors residing there.

Perheps attached key from eflora.org may help

But I meant Ziziphus mauritiana Lam. for which *Z. jujuba* (L.) Gaertn. is a synonym, as per GRIN.

Please check http://www.ars-grin.gov/cgi-bin/npgs/html/taxon.pl?42285

Here are some contrdictions in theplantlist and GRIN

Does the plant has thorns? If the tree is unarmed (no thorns) then it is Z. glabrata and if the tree is armed then it is Z. mauritiana (Syn. jujuba). ( We have to clarify the contradiction on the synonym). I couldnt see thorns

in the branch close up picture hence I reached a conclusion that it could be Z. glabrata (Z. trinervia). Please see the attachment.

According to the plant list there are 2 genus; Zyzyphus and Ziziphus (http://www.theplantlist.org/browse/A/Rhamnaceae/) in Rhamnacae family jujuba kept under Ziziphus whereas, mauritiana kept under Zizyphus. Both are accepted as well. Any one has any clarification on this?

Let us not banish ‘The Plant List’ like that. It is for the first time we have complete list of all plant species with accepted names and synonyms. Agreed, there are still a large list of unresolved names and few controversial conclusions, but I think trained taxonomists can sort these out, and moreover, the list is being continuous improved and we may have improved version soon.

I agree … that we shouldn’t completely depend on the plant list. But, as … pointed out that is a great effort and we cannot totally ignore the same. I had gone through what ever literature available in our library and got to know that Z. mauritiana has stipular thorns whereas, Z. glabrata doesn’t have hence I reached my conclusion.

To clarify, the contradiction on synonym I referred the same flora books from our library and most of the flora says Z. jujuba is a synonym of Z.mauritiana (Flowering Plants; Biodiversity Documentation for Kerala,

Sasidharan KFRI, 2004 & Flowering Plants of Kerala, India, Nayar, T S et al (TBGRI), 2006 ).

I had mentioned the link for The plant list because that is the* *best source available online now ( I proudly make a statement that when we compile our data ours would be certainly become the best source of flora reference online). The plant list is compiling by a group of taxonomists who are working from leading botanical gardens in different parts of the world, including Kew Botanical Garden where herbaria from world around is kept and well maintained for a long time, I believe. Further, I beleive that they are updating the database with several new publications.

If we feel that there are contradictions or corrections let us write them.

Ziziphus jujuba is a classical example of later homonymy often cited in the text books.

The common Indian Ber plant, Chinese-date or Indian jujube was first described by Linnaeus under the name Rhamnus jujuba a species with leaves glabrous above and velvety beneath. Linnaeus also described Rhamnus ziziphus a species with leaves having glabrous under surface, As it turned out to be Millers (1768) gave the name Ziziphus jujuba for this species, so that when Gaertn. (1788) or Lamarck (1789) made the combination Ziziphus jujuba based on Rhamnus jujuba of Linnaeus, it turned out to be a later homonym of a different species Z. jujuba Mill. The name Z. jujuba (L.) Gaertn. or (L.) Lam. for Indian Jujube had to be rejected and next available name Z. mauritiana Lam., continued to be used for this species.

Agreed The Plant List does not list Z. mauritiana but lists both Rhamnus ziziphus L. as well as Rhamnus jujuba L. as synonyms of Ziziphus jujuba Mill., implying that latest (2010) taxonomic judgement treats the two species as synonyms. We may like it or not the whole World is going to follow this List, and I think we have no choice.

Thank you sir for the detailed clarification.

But the plant list have listed Z. mauritiana in the list, but as I have mentioned earlier the spelling is different for the genus ( http://www.theplantlist.org/tpl/record/tro-50137113) here it is Zizyphus and then they mention that Zizyphus mauritiana doesn’t have any synonym. Further, there is yet another genus with a spelling Ziziphus in which they have included jujuba as Ziziphus jujuba with R. jujuba and R. zizyphus as synonym (http://www.theplantlist.org/tpl/record/kew-2470699).

Zizyphus is perhaps biggest goof up by The Plant List. Ziziphus and Zizyphus are same genus with correct spellings as Ziziphus now. Perhaps we will have to write to them about these mistakes.

The bark of this tree has irregular cracks on almost black trunk. After seeing this mail I read the account of Zizyphus/Ziziphus jujuba. it says jujuba has irregular cracks on almos black trunk.

I never said that ignore The Plant List, no doubt they are doing the best they can do for the biodiversity of the plants of the world. I like the statement by .. written few days back that get the correct knowledge

from wherever you get.

I just wanted all of us to refer the literature and herbariums too, instead just depending on The Plant List.

I also feel that there should be some Indian Taxonomists Group on The Plant List group to deal with Indian Plants.

Thanks Dear … for sharing yr views. What i understand is that there are two things, one is the plant list and second one is the regional flora.

I would like to share one of my observation w.r.t. Ehretia sp..

While we were discussing Ehretia sp. posted by …, …. has mentioned that “Kew Plant List treats E. aspera as synonym of E. laevis“.

Where as “Flora of Bombay– T.Cooke” treats these 2 differently, Ehretia laevis as E.laevis Roxb. and Ehretia aspera as E.aspera Roxb. Flora has also provided the keys for both.

So my understanding is, along with plant list, regional floras should also be reffered and it becomes all the more necessay when we are reffereing to some endemic sp.

Early flowering and fruiting of Ziziphus mauritiana was noticed during Oct. and November, from NBNP Garden, Anaikatti, Coimbatore.

Usual season will be during summer (March to June). Any thought about the unusual flowering?

Is this Zizyphus mauritiana:

Is this Zizyphus mauritiana or different variety? Pl confirm

Fruits will be like this.

Wikitionary

.

Affirmative. This is Bor / Ber [Z. mauritiana] often seen with Tussar Silk moth cocoons.

efloraofindia:”For Id 24072012MR1’’ shrub with thorns at Pune:

July 2012 at Pune Kothrud

Kindly help Id this shrub ht about 4 feet, growing along the fence of a private society. I do not know if wild/planted. Thorns seen, flowers pale green to cream approx 4-5 mm and buds green approx 3mm in size, no fruits seen. Sorry I could not get pics of the plant as a whole

It is Ziziphus species, most probably Z. mauritiana.

Yes, it is Ziziphus mauritiana

Sunday Special : Common Pierrot Butterfly on Ziziphus sp.:

I was musing over an idea of starting a new series – “Sunday Special”. This can be anything and everything. We can share our views, ideas, experience…. whatever you and i would like to share. Here i go…

Yesterday i was on my way to school, as usual, left home at 8.30, boarded the train at 8.45, got down at the next station in order to catch another train that would take me 25 km more. As i was about to move to another platform, using a overbridge, i found a number of wild climbers beside the platform. And there was some other herbs, seedlings of shrubs, even trees too. This is monsoon, a few drops here and there, as you know rain is eluding us this year. But those few drops are enough to create excitements in seeds and saplings. What the Rhinos said in the “Ice Age”? “Tender shoot”?

Well, here i go to catch another train, the train will be coming in within a minute…………… B U T…. W H A T… I S… T H A T ? A Common Pierrot !!!… and on Ziziphus sp. !!! Laying !!! Egg !!! Resting !!!

Well, friends, i missed the train, waited for another 15 minutes to catch the next train.

Any idea ? : 6 posts by 3 authors. Attachments (2) – 2 mb each.

Gwalior Fort, january 2020, wild ? Calophyllum, Garcinia ?

Ziziphus only …, Check with Z.mauritania,

Thank you ! I had seen the Ziziphus sp. but i did not have a precise enough image.

Z.mauritania seems to fit.

Was it a tree ?

Rather shrub.

I think a big one, from the image.

.

SYMBIOSIS : 1476: 1 image.

Attaching a collage of wasp visiting flowers of Ziziphus jujuba.

symbiosis : 1477: 1 image.

Attaching a collage of Hornet visiting flowers of Ziziphus jujuba.

May be Ziziphus mauritania

Not Ziziphus jujuba subsp. jujuba

.

.

SYMBIOSIS : 1507: 1 image.

Attaching a collage of Common Emigrant (female), visiting flowers of Zizyphus jujuba.

.

SYNBIOSIS : 1508: 1 image.

Attaching a collage of Lime Butterfly visiting flowers of Ziziphus jujuba.

Ziziphus mauritiana

.

SYMBIOSIS : 1514: 1 image.

Attaching a collage of Common Crow butterfly visiting flowers of Ziziphus Jujuba.

Thanks, … But not Z.jujuba L.

Thank You … I am really confused about Ziziphus species.

It is Ziziphus mauritiana

.

SYMBIOSIS : 1515: 1 image.

Attaching a collage of Peacock Pansy butterfly visiting flowers of Ziziphus species.

It is Ziziphus mauritiana

.

SYMBIOSIS : 1516:

Attaching a collage of Grey Pansy, visiting flowers of Ziziphus jujuba.

Not Ziziphus jujuba.

.

SYMBIOSIS : 1516: 1 image.

Attaching a collage of Grey Pansy butterfly visiting flowers of Ziziphus jujuba.

May be Ziziphus mauritiana

.

SYMBIOSIS : 1516: 1 image.

Attaching a collage of Grey Pansy visiting flowers of Ziziphus jujuba.

It is Ziziphus mauritiana

.

SK 3253 23 December 2021: 9 very high res. images.

Location: Surkhet, West Nepal

Altitude: 702m.

Date: 27 August 2021

Habit : Wild

Ziziphus mauritiana Lam. ??

Yes, it’s

.

MS,Jan.,2022/07 Ziziphus sp. for id.: 2 images.

Location : Marpara, Mizoram

Altitude : ca. 80 m.

Date : 05-03-2020

Habit : Small to medium-sized tree

Habitat : Wild/ Cultivated

Ziziphus jujuba

I think Ziziphus mauritiana. Not Ziziphus jujuba subsp. jujuba

.

Ziziphus Species For ID : Nasik : 11MAY22 : AK – 04: 2 images.

Ziziphus Species seen in Nasik in Dec, 2020.

For Species id please.

Was it a tree or shrub?

Please check comparative images at https://efloraofindia.com/2011/04/06/ziziphus/

It was a big tree.

Than check Z.mauritiana.

It is Ziziphus mauritiana….. Indian ber.

.

Ziziphus mauritiana Lam.: 6 very high res. image.

Location: Bhadrapur, Jhapa, East Nepal

Date: 02 January 2023

Elevation: 60 m.

Habitat: Cultivated

Nepali Name : अगुजे बयर Aguje Bayar / बयर Bayar

As per mine, this is another sp. or variety, its not original Z Mauritania

Can you advise the ID?

Thanks very much, …, for the Nepali names of this plant.

Nepali names ok for Z. mauritania, but the ID of this sp. need to be confirmed according to …

For me the id is Ok as per images at

https://efloraofindia.com/2011/04/06/ziziphus-mauitiana/

There may be variations as it is being cultivated and improved for market sales.

.

Ziziphus mauritiana Lam. :: Waghbil, Thane :: Oct 27, 2007 · JUN23 DV325: 3 images.

Ziziphus mauritiana Lam.

Waghbil, Thane :: Oct 27, 2007 · 1:24 PM IST :: about 3 m (10 ft) asl

.

Rhamnaceae: Ziziphus mauritiana Lam.: 3 images- 1 high res.

synonyms: Ziziphus jujuba (L.) Lam., Rhamnus jujuba L., Ziziphus jujuba (L.) Gaertn.

location/date: (jp1, jp3) road from Semadoh to Chikaldara, Melghat Wildlife Sanctuary, Amravati Distr., Maharashtra, November 1994; (jp2: foliage & flowers) Barha, Jabalpur Distr., Madhya Pradesh, October 1994

.

References: