Overview: Limenarchis pullata is a moth in the family Gelechiidae. It was described by John David Bradley in 1961. It is found on Guadalcanal in the Solomon Islands.

Overview: Lanceopenna pseudogaleotis is a moth in the family Gelechiidae. It was described by Anthonie Johannes Theodorus Janse in 1950. It is found in the South African province of Gauteng.

Overview: Symmetrischema inexpectatum is a moth in the family Gelechiidae. It was described by Povolný in 1967. It is found in North America, where it has been recorded from Texas.

Overview: Locharcha is a genus of moths in the family Gelechiidae. It contains the species Locharcha emicans, which is found in Peru.

Overview: Metabolaea is a genus of moth in the family Gelechiidae. It contains the species Metabolaea chlorophthalma, which is found in Brazil.

Overview: Protoparachronistis policapitis is a moth in the family Gelechiidae. It was described by Omelko in 1986. It is found in Russia and Japan.

Overview: Zizyphia zizyphella is a moth in the family Gelechiidae. It was described by Hans Georg Amsel in 1935 and is found in Palestine.

Overview: Zizyphia cleodorella is a moth in the family Gelechiidae. It was described by Pierre Chrétien in 1908. It is found in Algeria.

Overview: Trichembola unimaculata is a moth in the family Gelechiidae. It was described by Mikhail Mikhailovich Omelko and Natalia Viktorovna Omelko in 1993. It is found in Korea and the Russian Far East.

Overview: Trichembola palynata is a moth in the family Gelechiidae. It was described by Jean Ghesquière in 1940. It is found in the area of the former province Équateur in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

Overview: Trichembola oreia is a moth in the family Gelechiidae. It was described by Jean Ghesquière in 1940. It is found in North Kivu in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

Overview: Trichembola idiarcha is a moth in the family Gelechiidae. It was described by Edward Meyrick in 1931. It is found in Brazil.

Overview: Trichembola segnis is a moth in the family Gelechiidae. It was described by Edward Meyrick in 1918. It is found in southern India and Assam.

Overview: Trichembola opisthopa is a moth in the family Gelechiidae. It was described by Edward Meyrick in 1918. It is found in southern India.

Overview: Trichembola fuscata is a moth in the family Gelechiidae. It was described by Edward Meyrick in 1918. It is found in Sri Lanka.