Frederick W. “Fritz” Mussmann, age 70, of Bryant, Iowa died on Friday, October 12, 2012 at the Clarissa C. Cook Hospice House, Bettendorf, Iowa. A funeral service will be held at 10:30 a.m., Tuesday, October 16, 2012 at the Miller-Law-Jones Funeral Home, Preston, Iowa. Burial will take place in St. Joseph Catholic Cemetery, Preston. A visitation will be held from 4:00-7:00 p.m., Monday, October 15, 2012 at the Miller-Law-Jones Funeral Home, Preston. A memorial fund has been established in Fritz’s memory. Online condolences and tributes may be shared with the family at www.lawjonesfuneralhome.com. Fritz was born on August 24, 1942, the son of Harold and Adala (Schmidt) Mussmann in Bryant. He attended school in Goose Lake, Iowa and later attended community college. Fritz married Sharon Yoerger on September 7, 1963 in the St. Joseph Catholic Church, Bellevue. Fritz owned and operated Fritz’s Standard Station in Preston for several years. He also worked for Nelson’s Cashway in Clinton, Iowa and was a volunteer fireman in Preston. Fritz was a “Jack of all Trades” and could fix or do anything. He was a mechanic and built a home for his wife of forty-nine years in Bryant, Iowa in 2003. Fritz enjoyed helping others and donated over sixteen gallons of blood in his lifetime. He loved the outdoors, especially gardening and fishing. Fritz will be dearly missed by his wife, Sharon of Bryant; son, Allan (Lois) Mussmann of Bellevue, Iowa; daughter, Karla (Paul) Andersen of Morrison, Illinois; five grandchildren, Stephanie (Kendal) McDearmon of San Bernardino, California, Amber Mussmann of Dubuque, Iowa, Heather (Seth) Bush of Ludington, Michigan and Brady and Candace Mussmann of Bellevue; nine brothers and sisters, Lois McCluskey of Clinton, Frieda Lundin of Clinton, Mary Ellen (David) Seeser of Clinton, Judy (Norman) Pease of Sabula, Jean Durkup of Monmouth, Iowa, Beverly (James) Galloway of Low Moor, Iowa, Thomas Mussmann of Clinton, Robert Mussmann of Low Moor and Jane (John) VanHorn of Clinton; three sisters-in-law, Mary Carol Mussmann of Bellevue, Linda Mussmann of Teeds Grove, Iowa and Barb Mussmann of Springbrook, Iowa. He was preceded in death by his parents; one grandchild, one great grandchild; four brothers, Marvin, Leighton, Arnold and James “Moose” Mussmann; three brothers-in-law, William McCluskey, William Lundin and Duane Durkup; and one sister-in-law, Edith. Death date: Oct. 12, 2012