Katy Perry is one of the best artists in the pop and rock world. The singer has also been ranked severally as one of the highest-paid entertainers.

Katy Perry is an American singer, songwriter, and television judge. During her teenage, she sang gospel songs before shifting into secular music as a young adult. Her fame has grown steadily over the years from being a chorister to a globally celebrated female musician.

Katy Perry profile summary

Full name: Katheryn Elizabeth Hudson

Celebrated name: Katy Perry

Date of birth: 25th October 1984

Place of birth: Santa Barbara, California, United States

Katy Perry age: 35 years

Katy Perry birthday: 25th October

Birth sign: Scorpio

Nationality: American

Ethnicity: Mixed

Religion: Christianity

Height: 5 feet 8 inches

Weight: 61 kg

Body measurements: 25-36-35

Eye color: Blue

Hair color: Blonde

Profession: Singer, songwriter, TV personality

Net worth: $330 million

Biography

Katheryn Elizabeth Hudson, popularly known as Kate Perry, was born on 25th October 1984 in Santa Barbara, California, in the United States of America. She is the daughter of Pastor Maurice Keith Hudson and Pastor Mary Christine. She has two siblings Angela and David.

Katy attended two elementary schools, Santa Barbara Christian School and Paradise Valley School. She joined Dos Pueblos High School. Her passion for music led her to join the Music Academy of the West in Santa Barbara to undertake Italian opera.

When growing up, she was only allowed to listen to gospel music.

Katy Perry husband

Katy Perry was initially married to Russell Brand, a British Comedian from 2010 to 2012. The duo tied the knot on 23rd October 2010 in a traditional Hindu ceremony that took place near Ranthambhore Tiger Sanctuary in Rajasthan India.

The couple separated on 31st December 2011. The court finalized the divorce ruling on 16th July 2012. The marriage hadn’t borne any kids at the time of the separation. Here is one of Katy Perry photos together with her husband.

READ ALSO: Cardi B bio: net worth, child, songs, age, is she married?

Affairs

Before marrying Russell Brand, Perry has dated several other men. Here are some of them:

2016 to 2017: Orlando Bloom

2012 to 2015: John Mayer

2009: James Valentine

2007-2009: Travie McCoy

A year after her separation with Orlando, the duo got back together in 2018. On 14th February, they got engaged and now we are all eager to see her walk down the aisle.

Career

Katy's career revolves around music and acting. Here is a breakdown of her career:

Music

Katy was passionate about singing, and at the age of nine years, she would perform in church. It contributed to building her confidence. She joined Red Hill Records, and at the age of 15 years, she released a debut gospel record album under the name Katy Hudson.

Katy’s music breakthrough occurred in 2007 after being signed by Capitol Records. She wrote the songs Hot n Cold, and I Kissed a Girl. The two songs were from her second album, One of the Boys. The collection and some of the songs in it reached on top of Billboard 200 and Billboard 100 despite raising lots of controversies with some religious and LGBT groups.

Perry released her third album Teenage Dream between 2010 and 2012 after she appeared as a guest on The X Factor UK and American Idol. This album debuted to the first position on Billboard 200, while some of its songs made it to position one in Billboard Hot 100.

Some of Katy Perry songs are:

California Gurls

Teenage Dream

Fireworks

Last Friday Night

Bigger Than Me

Chained to the Rhythm

Choose Your Battles

Cozy Little Christmas

Circle the Drain

Dark Horse

Every Day is a Holiday

Fingerprints

International Smile

Legendary Lovers

Not Like the Movies

Some of Katy Perry albums include:

One of the Boys

Teenage Dreams

Prism

Witness

Acting

Apart from singing, she is a very talented actress who has featured in several films such as:

2011: The Smurfs

2012: Katy Perry: Part of Me

2013: The Smurfs 2

2015: Brand: A Second Coming

2016: Zoolander 2

READ ALSO: Yeng Constantino bio: age, net worth, height, is she married?

Katy Perry net worth

As of 2020, her net worth stands at $330 million. The money is not only acquired through singing and acting but from several other deals. Katy Perry American Idol judging role earns her a salary of $25 million.

Is Katy Perry pregnant?

Yes, she is pregnant. Katy decided to slow things at the moment as she gets the chance to enjoy her pregnancy. She even opted to cancel her wedding to have the baby first.

Social media

Katy has an active social media life like a majority of the celebrities. Here are the links to some of her accounts.

Katy Perry Instagram: @katyperry with 91.9 million followers

Katy Perry Twitter: @katyperry with 108.4 million followers

Katy Perry Facebook: @katyperry with 62 million followers

Katy Perry has risen to stardom over the years through her skilful and talented singing. She has evolved through the pop entertainment industry, making her a renowned creator of masterpiece pop singles.

READ ALSO: Kitchie Nadal bio: age, net worth, husband, does she have a child?

Source: KAMI.com.gh