• Victoria Prince is the second official wife of Kevin Federline and has two daughters with him.

• Her father and grandfather both served in the military, and she played soccer, volleyball and basketball in high school.

• She was a professional volleyball player before marrying Kevin and later worked as a school teacher.

• She and Kevin officially announced their relationship in 2008, and married in a private ceremony in 201•

• She donates her hair to “Lock Of Love” and is a stay-at-home mom while Kevin covers all of the payments in their family of six.

﻿ ﻿﻿﻿﻿﻿﻿

Victoria Prince is a former volleyball player, who is mostly famous for being the second official wife of American entertainer Kevin Federline, and Britney Spears’ ex-husband. Victoria and Kevin have two daughters, Jordan and Peyton.

Early life and family

Victoria Prince was born on 2 December 1982, in Richland, Washington State USA – her zodiac sign is Sagittarius, and she holds American nationality. Her mother’s name is Brenda; her father’s name was Michael – he served in Marine Corps during the war in Vietnam, and thereafter loved playing golf, but died in March 2018 due to severe addiction to alcohol. Victoria later shared on her Instagram account that she watched her father struggling with alcoholism her entire life, including several rehabs, and when he was sober, he wrote letters to his addiction, trying to explain the reason for his disease and asking it to go away from his life: ‘It was heartbreaking to read the way he was feeling and the way the disease slowly ate away everything he cared about.

I wish that he felt like he could have spoken to me about those feelings’, Victoria wrote in her Instagram post. She also added she would give anything to go back and to let her father know she was caring about what he felt, and was eager to understand what he was going through.

Similar to her father, Victoria’s grandfather and cousin were also in the military. Her grandfather served in the army and fought in the World War II and in Vietnam; his picture is located in the WWII Memorial in Washington DC. Victoria’s cousin, Billy, has been serving in the US Navy for almost 20 years. Victoria has two older brothers: Mike, who is a fan of pheasant hunting, and Jason, who is a professional surfer.

Educational background

Victoria matriculated from her local high school in Richland in 2000.

During her school years she was into sports, and played a lot of soccer, volleyball and basketball. Victoria graduated from the University of Hawaii, located at Manoa, with a BA in speech in 2006. She also played volleyball there after transferring from Washington State University’s team.

Career

Before marrying Kevin Federline, Victoria was a professional volleyball player, and later worked as a school teacher for a short period of time. Little is known about her sports achievements, though it is known that she quit her sports career after she started her relationship with Kevin in 2008. After giving birth to their first daughter, Jordan, Victoria became a housewife.

Personal life, husband Kevin Federline aka K-Fed

Even though Victoria and Kevin officially announced their relationship in 2008, the rumors about their affair circulated before the divorce process between Kevin and Britney Spears was finished.

On 15 August 2011 Victoria gave birth to their elder daughter, Jordan Kay, who is gently called Jordy Bear by the members of her family. On 10 August 2013 Kevin and Victoria married in a private ceremony in Hard Rock Hotel and Casino, Las Vegas. On 7 April 2014 Victoria gave birth to their second daughter, Peyton Marie, making Kevin a father for the sixth time – Victoria had become a step-mother to the sons of Kevin and Britney, as Kevin has full custody on both of them while Britney is recovering from her addiction issues. She is also a step-mother for Kevin’s elder children, Kori Madison (born on 31 July 2002) and Kaleb Michael (born on 20 July 2004), from his civil union with actress Shar Jackson.

Who is Kevin Federline?

Kevin Earl Federline was born on 21 March 1978, in Fresno, California USA – his parents are Mike Federline, a car mechanic, and Julie Story, a bank worker.

Even though his parents were ordinary working people, Kevin always dreamt of a Hollywood career, admiring Michael Jackson, Prince and David Bowie. His older brother, Chris, supported Kevin in his endeavor to become a dancer, and took him to several auditions, while Kevin lacked self-confidence at that time. He underwent hard times moving with his father at the age of 11, when his parents separated and eventually divorced, so dancing helped him to relieve the inner pain.

Kevin quit school after the ninth grade to start working as a professional dancer. His career developed, and he danced in the shows of Michael Jackson, just as he dreamt, and was then part of the dancing cast at the concerts of Destiny’s Child, Pink and Justin Timberlake.

Kevin became engaged to his girlfriend, singer and actress Sharisse “Shar” Jackson in 2001; she is now also famous for winning the show “Celebrity Rap Superstar” in 2007. On 31 July 2002 Sharisse gave birth to their first child, Kori Madison, however, the relationship between the couple became tense, and even though Sharisse was pregnant with their second child, the couple split in 2004, as Kevin started his relationship with Britney Spears – Kevin was massively bullied in the media for leaving his pregnant wife to marry the world’s most famous pop-singer. Britney’s fans were also angry at Kevin, as they accused him of ruining the last chance of Britney and Justin Timberlake’s reunion; Kevin was often called a gold-digger, because Britney promoted him to various dancing and singing projects, developing his career by using her fame and connections.

Kevin’s second child, Kaleb Michael Jackson Federline, was born on 20 July 2004, when Britney and Kevin had already announced their engagement. In 2007 Kevin officially divorced from Britney. As of 2020, he holds full custody on Sean Preston and Jayden James, their sons.

Daughters, Peyton Marie and Jordan Kay

Victoria’s elder daughter, Jordan Kay, is studying in the third grade of her primary school. She takes dancing classes, and prefers hip-hop to all other dancing genres. Jordan likes cupcakes; her favorite colors are pink and blue; her favorite school subject is PE. She dreams of joining Los Angeles SWAT when she grows up.

Victoria’s younger daughter, Peyton Marie, takes gymnastics classes; she also dances ballet and acts in her primary school theatre.

https://www.instagram.com/p/BdtbMFVA8RO/

Her favorite color is purple. She likes everything related to unicorns, so Victoria often buys her clothes with unicorn prints. Victoria spends all the time with her children, as she takes care not only of her daughters, but of Britney Spears’ sons, who live at Victoria and Kevin’s house.

Hobbies, favorite things and interesting facts

Victoria’s favorite series of all times is “90210”; Andrea Zuckerman was one of her favorite characters in the show. She likes swimming, running and does some yoga. Victoria shares her birthday with her husband’s ex-wife, Britney, both born on 2 December.

Charity

Victoria does a lot of charity, as she is very into issues around mothers, children, health and education. Thus, she donated her hair three times to the foundation “Lock Of Love”, cutting 14ins off her blonde braid.

“Locks Of Love” helps children with medical hair loss to achieve crucial self-esteem and confidence, so Victoria encouraged her followers to donate their hair, or at least money to help young kids to have their chance at least to ‘look normal’.

Appearance, clothing style

Victoria has long blonde hair and grey eyes. She is 6ft (1.83m) tall, weighs around 147lbs (67kgs), and her vital statistics are 38-28-37. Victoria has a tattoo on her right shoulder which says: ‘I am enough for me’.

Net worth and salary

As of 2020, Victoria doesn’t have a personal net worth, or income, as she stays at home with her kids. She left her work at Fox Sports many years ago, so her husband is fully responsible for all payments in their family of six (adding to their four children Kevin also covers a half of the payments his ex-partner, Sharisse Jackson has, for their kids, Kori and Kaleb). Kevin Federline is reported to have a net worth of over $6 million. He also gets monthly alimonies from his ex-wife, Britney Spears, who owns around $215 million, as of 2020.

, Wikipedia

ncG1vNJzZmilkae%2FqrHDm6Con6KWvanFjaipoGeknbJuwc2tpqWcXam%2FtsDHZqafZZuaw6q6jJ%2BcnZ2iobavsdJmrqKelWLDqq%2FTqKmimV2lv6q6wp5m