Navigation

Interviews

Busy times and new starting points for Manisha

Manisha Koirala, who is now busy working for Bengali filmmaker Rituparno Ghosh's "Khela", is thankful that good directors did not forget her despite a nearly two-year-long sabbatical.

Manisha, who took time off after doing some 60 odd films in various Indian languages, including Bollywood flicks, is one of the few mainstream film stars to have ventured into non-Hindi movies.

"I was bored with the roles offered to me and was waiting for the right offer all this while. I started shooting again in August. Thank god, good directors did not forget me while I was away!" she said.

Akbar Khan's "Taj Mahal: A Love Story" would be the first release in months for the actress.

"I utilised the time to do things I wanted to do apart from acting. I learnt moviemaking and indulged in other activities. I even made a short film at New York University," Manisha, who has been associated with films for almost two decades, told IANS in an interview. So, is she now equipped to make a full-length movie? "Not really. I will need to attend a few more classes to learn more about other streams of filmmaking like, say, camerawork," she explained. Read More

Bollywood Stars

Manisha Quotes and Trivia

"Im basically tired of doing what I have been doing for the last 10 years. My interest level was dipping. I was doing a fairly good job, when compared to others. The standards I have set for myself are higher.

When I watched the Broadway show Miss Saigon, I was ashamed of being called an actress. The leading lady's performance was outstanding. I was ashamed that I am in the same profession but could not touch those heights." Read More

Manisha Koirala Galleries

Interview

'When I see some of my films, I am ashamed'

Few actresses in our industry are fortunate enough to work with the best of directors. Manisha Koirala is one of them. Be it Mani Ratnam, Sanjay Leela Bansali or Subhash Ghai, she has worked with them all. Besides, Manisha has always had very strong roles in most of her films.

The only person who has not favoured her is Lady Luck. Each of her hit films have been followed by a multiple flops. Yet, Manisha's prowess as an actress has never been unchallenged.

Controversy inevitably follows Manisha, both in the professional and personal spheres. As a result, she has continued to remain in the news, despite her temporary ban on the media. One reason could be the fact that she is one of rare few who speaks her mind and is candid about her life.

Sharmila Taliculam caught up with the beautiful and forthright actress on the sets of Mehbooba, where she was shooting with Sanjay Dutt. What ensued was a forthright conversation about, among other things, the future of Manisha Koirala. Read More