FORMER backup dancer, Kevin Federline, became a household name due to his whirlwind relationship with Britney Spears.

Following their divorce in 2007, Federline remarried Victoria Prince.

Who is Kevin Federline's wife?

Kevin Federline has been married to Victoria Prince since 2013.

Prince, who was born on December 2, 1982, in Richland, Washington, is known for her volleyball career.

After high school, she played collegially at Washington State University but ultimately transferred to the University of Hawaii at Manoa, where she obtained a bachelor of arts degree in speech, according to PEOPLE.

Over the years, her skills have been well documented, and she even competed against Olympians Misty May-Treanor and Kerri Walsh. Outside of volleyball, she is known for her career as a special education teacher.

How did Kevin and Victoria meet?

Federline's previous relationships revolved around celebrities, causing many fans to wonder how he ended up with a small-town girl like Prince.

Well, like Prince's origins, their dating history actually began at a small-town bowling league.

According to PEOPLE, the two met in a bowling league back in 2008

At the time, a source told the media outlet that Federline “always pays” after their games and that they are "definitely a couple."

"I have seen them kiss, but they both seem focused on the bowling," the source added.

After that, the two were spotted on several dates that ranged from bowling to grabbing drinks from Starbucks and partying at nightclubs in Las Vegas.

Do Kevin and Victoria have any children together?

Since the couple started dating, Federline and Prince have welcomed two children together, Jordan Kay and Peyton Marie.

At this time, it is unclear if the pair have any plans to welcome more children.

Federline, however, is also the father of four additional children.

He also shares sons, Kori Madison and Kaleb Michael, with actress and singer, Shar Jackson.

During Federline's previous marriage to Spears, he welcomed Sean Preston, 17, and Jayden James, 16.

On May 16, 2023, TMZ reported that his two sons, whom he shares with Spears, want to move to Hawaii with him and leave Los Angeles behind.

Sources told the outlet, Federline's attorney, Mark Vincent Kaplan, has sent Britney's lawyer, Mathew Rosengart, a letter asking if the popstar would be open to having her Jayden and Sean relocate to Hawaii full-time by July.

It is unclear if Spears will go through with the move or what her reaction to the news has been.