The Ex-husband of Britney Spears, Kevin Federline, reportedly plans to move her two sons to Hawaii. Reports say Federline had his lawyer send Spears a letter, asking if she would be okay with her sons' relocation. It is also reported that Federline's lawyer expects to hear back from the pop star's representation within the week. It's said that if Spears disagrees with the decision to move the children, the case will be taken to court. Federline would then have to ask a judge to grant permission. Sources say they don't believe the case will get to that point.

A source also told TMZ that the reason for the family's move is a job offer that Federline's wife, Victoria Prince, received in the area. Sources add that their decision to move is influenced by Federline's ability to DJ in Hawaii, while the children live a more quiet life. It was added that Spears' and Federline's son, Jayden, would complete schoolwork online while their other son will have graduated.

Spears Faces Another Battle

Singer Britney Spears performs during the Now! 99.7 Triple Ho Show 7.0 at SAP Center on December 3, 2016 in San Jose, California. (Photo by C Flanigan/FilmMagic)

Ahead of TMZ's documentary, Britney Spears: The Price of Freedom, rumors circulated of trouble in her marriage to Sam Asghari. Sources told TMZ that Spears has gotten physical with him before, adding that screaming between the couple is common. They also claim that depite the couple's June wedding, Asghari doesn't stay in the same house as Spears' very often. The trailer for the documentary fueled the rumors, as it claimed that after her conservatorship ending, Spears was dealing with "big problems." A clip of TMZ’s editor Fabian Garcia claiming that she got physical with her husband can also be heard in the trailer.

Further concerns surrounding Spears' well-being were shared in the trailer. One concern included the suggestion from TMZ executive producer Charles Latibeaudiere to, "keep knives away from her." Despite the rumors, another source said that Spears' marriage to Asghari is doing fine. The source claimed that "All is good," adding, "Sam is working on a project and [Britney] is on a vacation."