Kevin Federline seems to be enjoying his life in paradise in his new home of Hawaii.

The ex-husband of Britney Spears and his current wife, Victoria Prince, were photographed taking a romantic walk on the beach in their first sighting since moving their family from California.

The lovebirds packed on the PDA as they strolled along the shore while smiling, chatting, hugging and kissing.

Federline, 45, paired black board shorts with a matching graphic T-shirt that showed support for the city of Lahaina, which was left devastated after last month’s wildfires scorched the island of Maui.

The former backup dancer finished up his casual look by pulling his long locks back into a low bun.

Meanwhile, Prince showed off her fit physique in a light blue triangle bikini top and black bottoms.

The former professional volleyball player, 40, styled her dark blond hair in a low braid, which she kept under a black baseball cap that read, “Be Here Now.”

She accessorized her sporty ensemble with oversize sunglasses.

Though Federline, Prince and their children were not directly affected by the deadly fires, his attorney previously told Page Six that they were all “very sad” to see the natural disaster unfold within their first few weeks of living in Hawaii.

“There’s people in the area that are dying and having their homes destroyed, so it’s very traumatic,” Mark Vincent Kaplan shared with us shortly after the family relocated, making sure to note that they were all still “very happy to be there.”

Federline and Prince made their big move with their daughters — Jordan Kay, 12, and Peyton Marie, 9 — as well as his sons from his marriage to Spears — Sean Preston, 18, and Jayden James, 17 — on Aug. 1 after the athlete landed a new job.

Federline’s attorney previously told us his sons, specifically, were adjusting quite well by “building a future in a new environment, making new friends and exploring new opportunities” — despite all the drama surrounding their relocation.

For more Page Six you love…

Listen to our weekly “We Hear” podcast

Shop our exclusive merch

Amid the various rumors circulating earlier this year, Spears assured us via her lawyer that she was OK with their boys leaving their home state.

Initially, the pop star’s fans speculated that Federline wanted to move his family to Hawaii as a last-ditch effort to extend child support, given that the law there requires payments for kids up to the age of 23 if they are enrolled full-time in college or a trade school.

However, the father of six — who also shares daughter Kori Madison, 21, and son Kaleb Michael Jackson, 19, with his ex-fiancée, Shar Jackson — quickly denied the allegation, saying, “A lot of people say a lot of stupid things.”

Moreover, a revised statute notes that jurisdiction remains in the state where child support was initially granted; in California, payments typically stop after a kid turns 18 and graduates high school.

Earlier this month, reports surfaced that Federline was contemplating going to court to ask for an increase in his child support payments from Spears, 41.

TMZ claimed the amount of money he was receiving — $20,000 for each child — was predicated on each parent having the kids 50 percent of the time.

But Preston and Jayden have been living solely with their father for the past several years.

The former couple’s eldest turned 18 on Sept. 14, so the “Toxic” singer’s child support payments for him ended that day.

Meanwhile, sources told the outlet that payments for the youngest are expected to remain intact until he graduates high school in June 2025 — unless Federline is able to prove he needs more money for 100 percent of Jayden’s care.

In response, a source close to Spears told DailyMail.com, “There is no basis for it, and it would be ridiculous. Kevin has been paid exorbitant monies, and one would think if he needed more money, he would, at last, obtain a job.”

Their reps did not immediately respond to Page Six’s requests for comment.