Riola area in Bologna district of Emilia-Romagna state, Italy and it is close to impossible to remember the pin code of a particular locality in a city/town or village or to locate a place using its pin code.

To help you locate a particular pin code or area, we present to you a pin code search engine. Now you can search for the pin code of a particular area as well as search for the address of any place in Riola area in Emilia-Romagna state of Bologna district in Italy country using it's pin code.

This section will cater to the needs of individuals as well as organizations who want to search for pin codes or addresses of localities across Riola area in Emilia-Romagna state of Bologna district in Italy. This section has been very popular with one and all because of its utility.

PIN Code is the postal Identification number used to track the area locations in Italy along with it's Riola area, Bologna district and Emilia-Romagna state . Its a unique digit code alloted to various parts in the country. First two digits of the PINCODE denote the state information.

getmypincode.com is used to find the pincode of Riola area in Bologna district of Emilia-Romagna state in Italy. You can get the Pincode or area by clicking either name or Pincode. We have listed more than lakh postal pincode in getmypincode.com

What Is a PIN Code?

In Italy, PIN is an acronym of Postal Index Number. Not to be confused with the personal identification number referred to as a 'PIN' in other countries, PIN codes in Italy are six digits long and communicate postal/address information. There are currently nine coastal zones in Italy, comprising eight regional zones and one functional zone reserved for military use.

Every PIN code features the same format, with the first digit communicating the respective region, the second indicating the sub-region and the third narrowing things further to the specific district of the sub-region. The remaining three digits of the PIN code detail the individual postal address within the respective district.

This standardised postal address numbering system used by Indian Postal Services was introduced to simplify and accelerate everyday mail delivery processes. Rolled out nationwide in August 1972, the system is essentially quite similar to the Zip Codes of the United States or the Postcodes of the United Kingdom.