RESPONSIBLE FOR THE TREATMENT

The data controller is:

● Our company name is Raquel Riola Gómez (RIOLA)

● Our NIF is 32702513D

● Our registered office is at C/Sinforiano López 6 bajo, 15005 A Coruña

● Our email is: hello@riolastudio.com

● Our social activity is: Floral studio and handmade ceramics

PURPOSES AND LEGAL BASIS OF THE TREATMENT

Raquel Riola Gómez (RIOLA) will process the personal data of website users for the purposes identified below:

1. In relation to the“ registration form ”to request user registration on the web:

Purpose 1: place and manage orders on the website as well as manage your personal data.

Legal basis that legitimizes this treatment: if the user requests it, the legitimate interest of Raquel Riola Gómez (RIOLA) in treating your data to maintain the relationship as a result of the registration.

Purpose 2: Sending communications about advertising, order notices and emails from the contact form.

Legal basis that legitimizes this treatment: the legitimate interest of Raquel Riola Gómez (RIOLA) when sending this information.

Purpose 3: Sending the newsletter from www.riolastudio.com with news and news, of special interest and relevance for informational purposes.

Legal basis that legitimizes this treatment: a) for new registrations, the consent of the interested party, which may be revoked at any time; b) for users who so wish and register through the newsletter form.

Purpose 4: Sending communications about inquiries made through the contact form.

Legal basis that legitimizes this treatment: the consent of the interested party.

RECIPIENTS

The personal data of the interested parties will be communicated to the recipients indicated below:

1. a) In general:

2. Suppliers of Raquel Riola Gómez (RIOLA) , as data processors, within the framework of the corresponding provision of services (legal and accounting assistance, auditors, destruction of documentation / information, and information technology service providers - eg, data hosting and email service―).

3. The competent authorities and bodies, to the extent necessary to comply with legal obligations.

TRANSFERS TO THIRD COUNTRIES

There are no international transfers outside the European Union.

CONSERVATION PERIODS

Personal data will be kept:

1. a) In relation to the" registration form "to request user registration as a buyer of < b> Raquel Riola Gómez (RIOLA) : Personal data will be kept until the user requests the cancellation in web or request their deletion. For these purposes, the user is reminded that, in their capacity as data controller, they must transfer to Raquel Riola Gómez (RIOLA) , as recipient to whom you communicate personal data, any rectification or deletion of the data of their representatives, authorized and other contact persons.

Once the relationship is concluded, to the extent that the personal data of the interested parties are relevant for the purposes of the responsibility of Raquel Riola Gómez (RIOLA) in front of the adhered entities, these data will be kept, duly blocked, at the disposal of the judicial authorities or the competent public administrations, for the demands of the responsibilities derived from the treatment for the limitation period of the themselves.

1. b) In relation to the" contact form "and other queries: until the user requests the deletion of their data .

2. c) In relation to the" newsletter form ": until the user requests the deletion of their data.

RIGHTS OF THE INTERESTED PARTIES

Website users may exercise before Raquel Riola Gómez (RIOLA) , insofar as they are applicable, the following rights: access to personal data, rectification, deletion, limitation of treatment, opposition to treatment, portability of data and, when the treatment is based on consent, the right to withdraw it at any time.

Users may exercise these rights, duly identifying themselves with their ID and addressing by post or electronically the addresses indicated in the section "Responsible for the treatment".

Users will also have the right to file a claim with the competent data protection authority (the Spanish Data Protection Agency) if they consider their rights violated.

PRIVACY POLICY

In accordance with the provisions of Organic Law 15/1999 on the Protection of Personal Data, by accepting this Privacy Policy you give your informed, express, free and unequivocal consent so that personal data that you provide through the website web (hereinafter WEBSITE) are included in a file of "WEB USERS AND SUBSCRIBERS" as well as "CLIENTS AND / OR SUPPLIERS":

● Our company name is Raquel Riola Gómez (RIOLA)

● Our NIF is 32702513D

● Our registered office is at C/Sinforiano López 6 bajo, 15005 A Coruña

● Our email is: hello@riolastudio.com

● Our social activity is: Floral studio and handmade ceramics

All this duly registered with the Spanish Agency for Data Protection and with respect to which Raquel Riola Gómez (RIOLA) , guarantees that the organizational and technical security measures required by the European Regulation on Data Protection and current regulations have been applied.

This Privacy Policy will be valid only for personal data obtained on the Website, not being applicable for information collected by third parties on other websites, even if they are linked by the Website .

With this we express our commitment to maintain and guarantee business relationships in a safe way by protecting personal data and guaranteeing the right to privacy of each of the users of the website.

1. WHAT IS PERSONAL DATA?

A small approximation is important, therefore, you should know that it would be any information related to a person who provides us when you visit our website, in our case name and email, and if you buy a product requiring an invoice, we will request Full address, name, surname and ID or CIF.

Additionally, when you visit our website, certain information is automatically stored for technical reasons such as the IP address assigned by your Internet access provider.

2. PURPOSE, LEGITIMATION, CATEGORY OF THE DATA COLLECTED, CONSENT TO TREATMENT AND MINORS.

As stated in the regulations, the USER is informed that, through the contact forms, or subscriptions data are collected, which are stored in a file, with the sole purpose of sending electronic communications, such as: bulletins (newsletters), new entries (posts), commercial offers, free webinars, as well as other communications that Raquel Riola Gómez (RIOLA) understands interesting for its USERS. The fields marked as mandatory, are essential to achieve the stated purpose.

You can also comply with the data, the requirements requested by the USERS.

Only the owner will have access to their data, and under no circumstances will these data be transferred, shared, transferred, or sold to any third party.

Acceptance of the privacy policy, through the established double opt-in procedure, will be understood for all purposes as the provision of EXPRESS AND UNEQUIVOUS CONSENT of the USER to the processing of personal data in the terms that are set out in this document, as well as the international transfer of data that occurs, exclusively due to the physical location of the facilities of the service providers and data processors.

Therefore, legitimation is obtained through consent as we will later establish.

In no case will a different use be made than the purpose for which the data has been collected, much less will we transfer this data to a third party.

2.1 MINORS

In the event of being over thirteen years of age, you can register at www.riolastudio.com without prior consent from your parents or guardians.

What happens if you are under 13 years old?

In this case, the consent of your parents or guardians will be a mandatory condition so that we can process your personal data

Warning: If you are under thirteen years old and you have not obtained your parents' consent, you cannot register on the web, so we will proceed to deny your request if we are aware of it.

2.2 LEGITIMATION

Thanks to consent, we can process your data as a mandatory requirement to be able to subscribe to the website.

As you well know, you can withdraw your consent at any time you want.

2.3 CATEGORY OF THE DATA

The data collected and At no time are they specially protected, but rather they are categorized as identifying data.

2.4 DATA CONSERVATION TIME

I will keep your data for the legally established time or until you request to delete it.

3. COMPLIANCE WITH APPLICATION REGULATIONS

Raquel Riola Gómez (RIOLA) to date complies with the guidelines of Organic Law 15/1999 of December 13 on the Protection of Character Data Personal, Royal Decree 1720/2007 of December 21, which approves the Regulations for the development of said Organic Law and other regulations in force and applicable at all times, ensuring the correct use and treatment of the user's personal data .

As of May 2018, we will be governed by the regulations that will come into force, being the General Regulation on Data Protection (RGPD) of the European Union.

Likewise, Raquel Riola Gómez (RIOLA) informs that it complies with Law 34/2002 of July 11, of Services of the Information Society and Electronic Commerce and will request his consent to the USER for the treatment of his email for commercial purposes at all times.

In compliance with the provisions of the regulations, we inform you that the data provided, as well as those data derived from your browsing, may be stored in the files of Raquel Riola Gómez (RIOLA) and treaties for the purpose of meeting your request and maintaining the relationship established in the forms you subscribe.

Additionally, the USER consents to the processing of their data in order to inform them, by any means, including email, of Raquel Riola Gómez's products and services ( RIOLA)

In the event of not authorizing the processing of their data for the purpose indicated above, the USER may exercise their right to object to the processing of their data under the terms and conditions provided later in the section "Exercise of Rights ”

4. SECURITY MEASURES.

Raquel Riola Gómez (RIOLA) informs you that it has implemented the necessary technical and organizational security measures to guarantee the security of your personal data. personal and prevent their alteration, loss and treatment and / or unauthorized access, taking into account the state of technology, the nature of the stored data and the risks to which they are exposed, whether they come from human action or the physical or natural environment . All this in accordance with the provisions of the RGPD.

Likewise, Raquel Riola Gómez (RIOLA) has established additional measures in order to reinforce the confidentiality and integrity of the information in your organization. She continuously maintains the supervision, control and evaluation of the processes to ensure respect for data privacy.

5. EXERCISE OF RIGHTS

Those individuals who have provided their data through www.riolastudio.com , may contact the owner of the same in order to be able to freely exercise your rights of access to your data, rectification or deletion, limitation and opposition regarding the data incorporated in your files.

The fastest and easiest method would be sending an email to hello@riolastudio.com requesting the modification or elimination of your data. Any information that we need to store, by virtue of a legal or contractual obligation, will be blocked and only used for said purposes instead of being deleted.

The interested party may exercise their rights by means of a written communication addressed to Raquel Riola Gómez (RIOLA) with the reference "Protection of data ”, specifying your data, proving your identity and the reasons for your request at the following address:

COMPANY , address

You can also exercise cite the rights, via email: hello@riolastudio.com

6. LINKS OR EXTERNAL LINKS

As a service to our visitors, our website may include hyperlinks to other sites that are not operated or controlled by the Website. Therefore www.riolastudio.com does not guarantee, nor is it responsible for the legality, reliability, usefulness, veracity and timeliness of the contents of such websites or their privacy practices.

7. MODIFICATION OF THE PRIVACY POLICY

Raquel Riola Gómez (RIOLA) reserves the right to modify its Privacy Policy, according to its own criteria, motivated by a legislative change, jurisprudential or doctrinal of the Spanish Agency for Data Protection.

Any modification of the Privacy Policy will be published at least ten days before its effective application. The use of Raquel Riola Gómez (RIOLA) after said changes will imply acceptance of them.

8. RESPONSIBLE FOR THE FILE AND RESPONSIBLE FOR THE TREATMENT

The person responsible for the data file is Raquel Riola Gómez (RIOLA) .

As data processors other than the aforementioned controller:

Raquel Riola Gómez (RIOLA) uses her own hosting services

The services of subscription by email and sending newsletters to the company AWeberSystems, Inc. being able to consult its privacy policy at https://www.aweber.com/privacy.htm

9. SERVICES OFFERED BY THIRD PARTIES ON THIS WEB.

To provide services strictly necessary for the development of its activity, web uses the following providers under their corresponding privacy conditions .

● Hosting: Raquel Riola Gómez (RIOLA)

● Messaging and newsletter services: Aweber

● Template platforms for Prestashop: ThemeForest

● Comment handling: Disqus

● Privacy of tracking sources used on this site: Google (Analytics) and Provely

In www.riolastudio.com the preferences of its users, their demographic characteristics, their traffic patterns are also studied , and other information together to better understand who our audience is and what they need. Tracking our users' preferences also helps us show you the most relevant advertisements.

The user and, in general, any natural or legal person, may establish a hyperlink or technical link device (for example, links or buttons) from their website to www.riolastudio.com (the "Hyperlink"). The establishment of the Hyperlink does not imply in any case the existence of relations between www.riolastudio.com and the owner of the site or the web page in which the Hyperlink is established, nor the acceptance or approval by web of its contents or services. In any case, www.riolastudio.com reserves the right to prohibit or disable any Hyperlink to the Website at any time.

10. DON'T YOU WANT TO RECEIVE INFORMATION FROM US OR DO YOU WANT TO REVOKE YOUR CONSENT?

In accordance with the provisions of Law 34/20023, of June 11, Services of the Information Society and Electronic Commerce, you can oppose the use of your information for advertising purposes, market research or development satisfaction surveys at any time, as well as revoke your consent at any time (without retroactive effect).

To do this, you must send an email to the address hello@riolastudio.com If you have received advertising by email You can also oppose from said email, by clicking on the link included in it following the instructions that are provided. Please, bear in mind that our systems may require a period of time that in no case will exceed 48 hours for your opposition or revocation to take effect, it being understood that during that period of time you can continue to receive messages.

In relation to the management of your data associated with the social profiles of Raquel Riola Gómez (RIOLA) , the exercise The right of access, will depend on the functionality of the social network and the possibilities of accessing the information of the user profiles. Regarding the rights of access and rectification, we recommend that it can only be satisfied in relation to that information that is under the control of Raquel Riola Gómez (RIOLA).

You can also stop interacting, following or receiving information from the social profiles of Raquel Riola Gómez (RIOLA) , delete the contents that no longer interest you or restrict who shares their connections with, through the mechanisms stipulated in the different social networks.

The user will be able to access the privacy policies of each Social Network, as well as configure their profile to guarantee their privacy. Raquel Riola Gómez (RIOLA) encourages users to familiarize themselves with the conditions of use of the different social networks before starting to use them. < / span>

Facebook: https://www.facebook.com/help/323540651073243/

Youtube: http://www.google.es/intl/es/policies/privacy/

Twitter: https://twitter.com/privacy

11. PERSONAL DATA CAPTURE SYSTEMS AND THEIR PURPOSE

1) Content subscription forms: within the web there are several forms to activate the subscription managed by Aweber for the purpose of sending marketing campaigns by email, managing subscriptions and sending newsletters or news.

2) Comments form: The website includes a form whose purpose is to comment on the articles and give your opinion while respecting freedom of expression. The user will be able to post comments on the posts that are published. The personal data entered in the form to insert these comments will be used exclusively to moderate and publish them, also collecting this data that will be stored on the servers of Raquel Riola Gómez (RIOLA) , Disqus, and the email platforms discussed above.

3) Contact form: There is a contact form whose purpose is to answer questions, suggestions or professional contact. In this case, the email address will be used to respond to them and send the information that the user requires through the web, this data will be stored on the servers of Raquel Riola Gómez (RIOLA) and the email platforms mentioned above.

4) Cookies: When the user registers or browses this website, "cookies" are stored. The user can consult the cookie policy at any time to obtain more information on the use of cookies and how to deactivate them.

5) Users can unsubscribe in which any moment of the services provided by www.riolastudio.com from the same Newsletter through a cancellation form.

6) Tracking systems used on this site: Google (Analytics), at www.riolastudio.com also They study their users' preferences, demographics, traffic patterns, and other information together to better understand who their audience is and what they need. Tracking our users' preferences also helps us show you the most relevant advertisements.

Likewise, we would like to inform you that to attract subscribers and customers we use Facebook Ads, so when generating an ad, the public can be segmented by place, demographic data, interests, etc. so the data obtained by this platform, would be subject to this privacy policy from the moment the user leaves their data to join the newsletter of my community.

12. SOCIAL PLUGINS

On our website we offer you links and services related to the different social networks (eg "Like" Facebook). If you are a member of a social network and you click on the corresponding link, the provider of the social network may link your profile data with the information of your visit to said website.

Therefore, it is convenient to inform you about the functions and policies on the processing of personal data of the respective social network, if you access one of our web pages with any of your profiles on social networks or share information through of them.

You can access the privacy policies of the different social networks at any time, as well as configure your profile to guarantee your privacy. We encourage you to familiarize yourself with the conditions of use of these social networks before starting to use them:

Facebook: https://www.facebook.com/help/323540651073243/

Youtube: http://www.google.es/intl/es/policies/privacy/

Google Plus: http://www.google.es/intl/es/policies/privacy/

Twitter: https://twitter.com/privacy

Instagram: https://help.instagram.com/155833707900388

13. ACCEPTANCE, CONSENT AND REVOCABILITY

The User declares to have been informed of the conditions on the protection of personal data, accepting and consenting to the treatment thereof by Raquel Riola Gómez (RIOLA) in the manner and for the purposes indicated in the legal notice.

As you well know and we have communicated throughout these privacy policies, at any time you can revoke your data, but always without retroactive character.

14. CHANGES TO THIS PRIVACY POLICY