Pierce Brosnan’s wife Keely Shaye Smith has paid tribute to her husband, as they celebrate 23 years of marriage.

The couple tied the knot at Ashford Castle, County Mayo on 4 August 2001, and share two sons together, Dylan and Paris.

Former model Keely Shaye Smith shared a beautiful message on Instagram, marking the date and venue that she and Brosnan got married.

“Here’s to the next 23 years” – Keely Shaye Smith

Taking to Instagram, Keely Shaye Smith wrote the following message.

“’You are the finest, loveliest, tenderest person I have ever known”, she said. “Happy Anniversary my love @piercebrosnanofficial. Here’s to the next 23 years together”.

“May they continue to be creative, adventurous, loving, inspiring, and joyful. Time flies on love’s wings”.

This post from Smith includes three photos, with the first image showing Brosnan dressed in a tuxedo, silver tie and white waistcoat. It also shows Smith in a white gown, with lace sleeves and a long veil. Check out the post in full here.

Pierce Brosnan was previously married to Australian actress Cassandra Harris, who died from ovarian cancer in 1991. They had one son together, Sean.

Brosnan also adopted Harris’ children Charlotte and Chris after marrying their mother. Sadly, Charlotte also died from ovarian cancer in 2013.

Brosnan Pleads Guilty To Trespassing Charge

Back in March, Pierce Brosnan apologised for trespassing at Yellowstone National Park, having pleaded guilty to the charge.

Having originally pleaded not guilty, the actor said that he deeply regretted walking off trail in the national park, and getting too close to one of the delicate thermal areas.

He pleaded guilty and was fined $500, and asked to pay a $1,000 community service payment.

Insisting that he had “the utmost respect for and love of our natural world”, Brosnan also added: “However, I made an impulsive mistake – one that I do not take lightly – when entering a thermal area covered in snow in Yellowstone National Park to take a photograph. I did not see a No Trespassing sign posted that warned of danger nor did I hike in the immediate area”.

“I deeply regret my transgression and offer my heartfelt apologies to all for trespassing in this sensitive area. Yellowstone and all our National Parks are to be cared for and preserved for all to enjoy”.