Dufftown distillery information

The Dufftown distillery is located in the city from which it takes its name; Dufftown, Banffshire, in the Speyside whisky region. The distillery itself was established by Peter Mackenzie and Richard Stackpole using the name Dufftown-Glenlivet Distillery Co. in 1895, in an old mill converted to a distillery. The land the distillery was on was owned by a gentleman by the name of John Symon, who also owned the Pittyvaich farm nearby. Mackenzie and Stackpole made a deal with Stynos, and thus he became a founder as well. By 1896, the conversion of the mill into a distillery was completed, and barley from the Pittyvaich farm was put to use for making whisky. The following year, 1897, P. Mackenzie & Co. (Who also owned Blair Athol at the time) took over ownership of the distillery, who started venturing into new markets (including the USA).

In 1933, Arthur Bell & Sons Ltd., blenders from Perth purchased the distillery. To this day, their Bells’ blend uses significant amounts of Dufftown’s whisky. During World War 2, the distillery was forced to close due to a shortage in Barley. That was actually the only point in time that the distillery was silent. In 1967, 2 additional stills were added, doubling the capacity. In 1979, a stainless steel Full-Lauter mash tun was installed, and 2 additional stills were fitted, thus raising the total to 6.

In 1985, Arthur Bells & Sons was acquired by Guinness, who eventually shifted ownership of Dufftown to United Distillers & Vintners (UDV, nowadays Diageo).

Dufftown whisky

97% of the whisky distilled at Dufftown is used in blends (particularly Bells). Single Malt Whisky produced at the distillery is sold under the name of Singleton of Dufftown. The Singleton is also the name used for spirit from Glendullan and Glen Ord, wand as used earlier to indicate whisky from Auchroisk, but that ceased in 2001. What’s interesting about the production process at Dufftown is that the spirit stills are bigger than the wash stills.

Singleton of Dufftown currently is available in the following core range:

12 Year Old; matured mostly in European oak

Tailfire; matured in European ex-Sherry casks

Sunray; matured in American Bourbon casks

15 Year Old; matured in American and European oak

18 Year Old

Distillery info:

NameDufftown RegionSpeyside Logo StatusActive Founded1895 Water sourceJock's Well Owned byDiageo Address

Dufftown Glenlivet Distiller

Dufftown

Keith, Banffshire

AB55 4BR

United Kingdom

+44 (0) 1340 820224

Visitor centreNo Websitehttp://www.malts.com/index.php/en_gb/Our-Whiskies/The-Singleton-of-Dufftown/Introduction TwitterN/A FacebookN/A CommunityN/A Map

Distillery Setup: