Pekin ducks are one of the most popular duck breeds kept in the USA. The selective breeding process used to create this breed allows them to produce extra-large eggs and more meat than the vast majority of duck breeds.

HISTORY

The Pekin duck has been domesticated for over 2,000 years, the exact origin of the breed is not totally known, Pekin ducks were imported to England in the 1800s, possibly from Asia. They came to the United States soon after they arrived in England and have become the most sought-after duck breed in America.

SIZE

Adult drakes (males) weigh around 9 pounds. Hens weigh about 8 pounds.

There is a jumbo Pekin duck that can weigh up to 12 pounds.

CHARACTERISTICS

All Pekins are pure white with orange shanks (thighs and legs) and bills, ducklings are all yellow with the shanks staying the same color throughout their life. Some ducklings' bills may look pink.

Our drakes have darker orange bills than the hens.

EGG PRODUCTION

A hen will lay between 200-300, 3-ounce extra-large white eggs a year (A chicken rated as a good layer may lay less than 200 eggs in a year.) Our hens have been laying close to an egg a day consistently since they laid their first egg. Pekins will continue to lay through the winter. Hens don't make the best sitters and if you would like to raise ducklings you will have to either get an incubator or find a chicken hen who will sit.

MEAT

Pekin duck meat is said to be free of the greasy taste and texture common to other duck meat. A six-week-old Pekin will weigh around 6 pounds and is at a good age and weight to butcher. This breed has a rapid weight gain and for that reason is commonly kept as a meat bird.

LIFESPAN

The average life span of a Pekin is around 8-12 years.

WEATER RESISTANCE

Pekin ducks are highly regarded for their environmentally hardy nature even in places that have long, cold hard winters. These ducks love rain and are not bothered by heat or cold. Pekins go crazy over any water! They will find a

puddle and spend the day playing in it.

TEMPERMENT

Pekins enjoy being near people and knowing where you are and what you are doing.

Pekins get along very well with other animals; they are non-aggressive but if you want to be able to pet them as adults it's very important to hold them frequently as babies. Most ducks preferer to have their feet on the ground and may not enjoy being picked up but can learn to tolerate it! They can also learn to come when called and follow you if you have food.

Pekins hens can get very loud when they see you or if you delay feeding. The drakes can't quack but do make a quiet honking sound.