A Launchpad for New Business Ideas

The Innovation & Entrepreneurship Center's Business Plan Competition was started in 1998 by Professor Emerita Dr. Harriet Stephenson, a Seattle University faculty member who began teaching in 1967. When asked what the impetus was in starting it, she said, "Building credibility. We wanted to be part of the leadership pack in developing entrepreneurship programs on the West Coast."

The Harriet Stephenson Business Plan Competition (HSBPC) is designed to help students and alumni in launching new business ventures, including for-profit businesses, not-for-profit businesses, corporate entrepreneurship, and social enterprise. Participants enhance their Seattle University learning experience, gain feedback on ideas, develop networks, and expose their ideas to potential investors.

The competition has become a testing ground for a wide range of Seattle University business ideas, from automated sunscreen dispensers to a nonprofit school for children with autism. It has given away over $400,000 in prize money and started numerous former contestants on their first entrepreneurial journeys.

Teams led by Seattle University students and alumni advance through three rounds of judging and feedback to see who will take home the $20,000 Grand Prize.

The HSBPC is a public event and draws hundreds of investors, advisors, business leaders, community members, students, alumni, and faculty as audience members.

Cash Prizes

The Innovation & Entrepreneurship Center is grateful for the continued support of our generous prize sponsors who make this competition possible.

Grand Prize: $20,000

The Herbert B. Jones Foundation and The Madeline Haydon Award for Entrepreneurship

2nd Place Prize: $10,000

John Meisenbach and The Madeline Haydon Award for Entrepreneurship

3rd Place Prize: $3,000

In Memory of Don Leuthold and Friends of the IEC

4th Place Prize: $2,000

Lindsey McGrew, '19 MBA

John Castle Award for Grit & Resilience: $2,000

John Castle Family and Ro Health

Social Innovation Award: $,1000

Elaine Baylor and Friends of the IEC

Pitch Judge Award: $500

Kurt Wedgwood

Tradeshow Judge Award: $250

Friends of the IEC

Semi-Finals Audience Choice Award: $250

Friends of the IEC

Confidentiality

The Seattle University Business Plan Competition considers all submitted business plans as confidential and treats all team matters accordingly. But due to the nature of the event, we cannot guarantee complete confidentiality for proprietary matters.

Seattle University, the Innovation & Entrepreneurship Center, the Albers School of Business and Economics, and the organizers of the competition are not responsible for any proprietary information and/or intellectual property included in a submitted business plan.

Ultimately, protection of sensitive materials such as intellectual property, copyright, or patent confidentiality is the sole responsibility of the individual or team participating in the competition. Non-Disclosure Agreements will not be signed by judges, mentors, or any SU staff associated with the business plan competition.