Our vision

How We began,

The Nia (Purpose) Foundation is the non-profit entity of the former Educational Concepts Group. Educational Concepts relaunched and rebranded as The Nia Foundation in order to focus on community-based services for the inner-cities of Southern California. This re-emergence allowed us to best serve our goal of individualizing our support for schools in supporting the uniqueness of all exceptional scholars.

Our team is proficient in providing virtual services:

(DIS) Service provision

Interactive Bitmoji Classroom Instruction

Valid and reliable Virtual Assessments, Resource Specialist Provider (RSP), Psychology, Speech, and Language

We are proud to be able to say our team has over 100 years of educational service expertise.

Our contractual agreements are personalized to fulfill the individual needs of each school.

Aden R. Tucker

CEO and UDL Intervention Specialist of the Year

Aden brings his expertise as a consummate behaviorist, case manager, and intervention specialist to Nia Foundation; a valued skill set that led to his promotion to Chief Executive Officer. He fulfills his leadership role inside and outside of the school setting by volunteering his services to his most needy families during school vacations to ensure students will maintain their acquired skill levels. Mr. Tucker also adds humanity to his role in Nia by providing clothing and provisions to further support families in transition.

Victoria Franklin-Sanchez

Speech Pathologist Of The Year

Victoria brings over 35 years of experience to Nia as a Speech Pathologist. In addition to being Speech Pathologist of the Year, she embodies Nia’s mission of individualized programming by going above and beyond the scope of her job duties. This year alone, she organized a fundraiser for a family who lost their 5-year old and offered them continued support throughout their trials.

Celine Kerepetian-Brundage

Teacher Of The Year

One of the most adaptable members of our team, Celine is just one example of Nia teachers who work to generate a successful academic environment for both our students and schools. She designed and implemented an Academic Enrichment and Business Leadership Intervention class at one of our charter schools while adjusting to life as a newlywed. Mrs. Kerepatian-Brundage has led the way in our transition from brick and mortar to virtual-distance learning without missing a step.