The Reef is a horror adventure film directed and written by Andrew Traucki. The film follows Luke and his friends as they sets out on a sailing trip to Indonesia. However, their journey takes a terrifying turn when their boat overturns. The movie originally premiered on May 13, 2010, at the Cannes Festival.

Here’s how you can watch and stream The Reef via streaming services such as Amazon Prime Video.

Is The Reef available to watch via streaming?

Yes, The Reef is available to watch via streaming on Amazon Prime Video.

Luke and his friends sets out sailing for Indonesia to deliver a yacht to a customer. However, on second day of their journey the yacht strikes a reef and overturns. The boat soon starts flooding with water. Luke and his three friends decide to swim to the nearest island twelve miles away. As the group struggle to reach the island, they are soon stalked by a large white shark.

The cast members include Damian Walshe-Howling as Luke, Zoe Naylor as Kate, Adrienne Pickering as Suzie, Gyton Grantley as Matt, Kieran Darcy-Smith as Warren, and more.

Watch The Reef streaming via Amazon Prime Video

The Reef is available to watch on Amazon Prime Video.

Amazon Prime Video subscription plan grants viewers access to popular television shows and movies such as Chase Street, Primeval: New World, Billions, Endless, Being Human, The Paradise, Hazbin Hotel, Expats, and so on.

You can watch via Amazon Prime Video by following these steps:

Go to Amazon Prime Video

Select ‘Sign in’ and ‘Create your Amazon account’

Sign up for a Prime Video membership:

$14.99 per month or $139 per year with an Amazon Prime membership

$8.99 per month for a standalone Prime Video membership

Amazon Prime is the online retailer’s paid service that provides fast shipping and exclusive sales on products, so the membership that includes both this service and Prime Video is the company’s most popular offering. However, you can also opt to subscribe to Prime Video separately.

The Reef synopsis is as follows:

“A great white shark hunts the crew of a capsized sailboat along the Great Barrier Reef.”

NOTE: The streaming services listed above are subject to change. The information provided was correct at the time of writing.

Twister 4K UHD & Digital Release Date Set for Original Movie Warner Bros. Discovery announced the Twister 4K UHD & Digital release date, when the original 1996 film will be available… Movies Anthony Nash 9 hours ago X-Men MCU Movie Sets Writer Marvel Studios’ X-Men film is officially picking up steam, with Deadline reporting that Michael Lesslie has been tapped to write… Movies Anthony Nash 9 hours ago Boy Kills World Sets Digital Release Date The Bill Skarsgård-led action comedy Boy Kills World is heading to Digital at home on Tuesday, May 28, following its… Movies Ryan Louis Mantilla 9 hours ago Terminator: Salvation Remains a Frustrating Sequel 15 Years Later How do you follow up a classic like James Cameron’s Terminator 2: Judgment Day? Well, you don’t even try and… Movies Jeff Ames 9 hours ago