Scarface: The World Is Yours is a 2006 adaptation of the 1983 gangster film released for PlayStation 2, Xbox, and PC. Created by Radical Entertainment, the game was one of many trying to capitalize on a wave of open-world crime games brought about by megahits like the original Mafia and Grand Theft Auto III. New footage of a canceled sequel popped up online, giving curious gamers a closer look at what a second gaming adventure for Tony Montana might have looked like.

RELATED: Call of Duty and Terminator Crossover Announced

The story for the sequel continues from The World is Yours‘ controversial decision to see Tony live after the events of the source material. Dubbed Scarface: Empire, this new game would have seen Montana flee Miami and set up shop in Las Vegas, reportedly establishing his newly constructed casino while running a drug business in the back and taking out mafia enforcers encroaching on his turf.

Mafia Game Videos’ video showcases Tony shooting his way through the streets of Vegas and evading cops on the highway. There are also various animation tests showcasing lighting from a night and day system and different scenarios for a “second chance” mechanic that kicks in with Tony taking one too many shots in the chest. The footage also states that it is from June 6, 2008, which is about a year before Prototype came out.

This comes just a month after Mafia Game Videos tweeted and posted a video showcasing some concept art from the title. These screen shots were reportedly on various Art Station pages over the years, but didn’t seem to garner much attention. They all show Radical’s Las Vegas that never got to see the light of day.

MORE: Tony Hawk: Activision Canceled a Pro Skater 3 + 4 Remake

Radical Entertainment was reportedly deep in production on Scarface: Empire, but the development came to a halt when the company became a part of Activision. According to Mafia Game Videos’ source, the publisher had too many open-world games in development at the time and didn’t see a future in the Scarface series.

Outside of some special crossovers, Montana hasn’t shown up again in the world of games, but the door is probably still open if some nostalgia-driven developer pitches the right people.