Aishwarya Rai and Abhishek Bachchan have been married for over 15 years and have often given us #CoupleGoals with their on-screen and off-screen chemistry. However, as per the talk of the town, all may not be well between the couple, and they might be heading for a separation soon.

Scroll down to find out if these rumours are true:

Recently, at the NMACC launch hosted by the Ambanis, Aishwarya and her daughter, Aaradhya, made an appearance sans Abhishek. This is in stark contrast to the couple’s habit of arriving at important events together. This fuelled the couple’s separation rumours, and netizens assumed that their marriage had hit a rough patch.

Since the gossip mills never stop churning in B-town, another rumour claimed that Aishwarya is living separately with her daughter due to issues with her in-laws. According to the rumour, Aish is said to be estranged from her mother-in-law, Jaya Bachchan, and sister-in-law, Shweta Bachchan. This apparently caused a schism between the couple, prompting her to leave the Bachchan home and live separately.

ADVERTISEMENT

However, Abhishek has put all the conjecture to rest! Recently, a Twitter user posted a picture of Aish and Aaradhya from the NMACC event with the caption, “My fav people.” Junior Bachchan replied to this tweet by saying, “Mine too.”

His response was certainly a relief for many Aish and Abhishek fans, as well as for hopeless romantics like myself, whose faith in love would have been shattered.

When Aish Spoke About Her Fights With Abhishek

Previously, Aishwarya had said candidly in an interview that fights with her husband happen “every day.” Abhishek, however, had clarified, “But they’re more like disagreements, not fights. They’re not serious, they’re healthy. It’d be really boring otherwise.” Now won’t couples everywhere relate with that?

Abhishek also added, “But we have a rule—we don’t sleep on a fight. And in defense of all men, I want to tell you, half the time the reason we give in and say sorry is because we’re just so sleepy and want to go to bed! Besides, women are the superior race, and they’re always right. The sooner men accept that, the better. It doesn’t matter what you say, even if you have concrete proof, in their world, it’s futile, it makes no sense.”

ADVERTISEMENT

Aishwarya Rai and Abhishek Bachchan are one of those Bollywood couples who will be remembered for having the cutest love story and the most stable marriage. Their separation would break many people’s hearts. But we’re relieved that everything is fine between the two. Here’s wishing the Bachchans nothing but happiness!

Feature Image: Instagram