Abhishek Bachchan and Aishwarya Rai married on April 20, 2007, in a lavish wedding ceremony. Bollywood's power-couple celebrate their 10th wedding anniversary.

Bollywood’s golden couple Abhishek Bachchan and Aishwarya Rai Bachchan is celebrating their 10th wedding anniversary on 20th April, 2017. It has been 10 years since Bachchan Jr married the ‘world’s most beautiful woman’ and made her the Bachchan Bahu in 2007. The sight of a delighted Abhishek riding the ghodi and breaking into subtle dance steps is still etched in our memories, in the presence of his superstar parents, Amitabh Bachchan and Jaya Bachchan. The media was stationed outside the Bachchan house Prateeksha for days before and after the wedding. But do you remember that one name which grabbed footage all day on primetime television along with Aishwarya and Abhishek? Jhanvi Kapoor, it was! No, not Sridevi and Boney Kapoor’s elder daughter but a small-time model and dancer. Jhanvi Kapoor claimed to be Abhishek’s wife and slit her wrist in a suicide attempt, accusing Aishwarya of stealing Abhishek from her! Aishwarya Rai and Abhishek Bachchan complete 10 years of marriage: 13 unseen pictures of the couple on wedding anniversary.

Abhishek and Aishwarya’s wedding was certainly the grandest of weddings seen in B-town for a long time. The couple who was given a cute moniker – AbhiAsh – was all set for their wedding day amidst media frenzy. All eyes were on this lavish wedding, which unsurprisingly courted its fair share of controversies. From the debatable wedding guest list to Aishwarya’s alleged wedding with a tree before she married Abhishek, as she was said to be manglik! But a Bollywood starlet of little fame made for the biggest headline and for all the wrong reasons.

On the wedding day of Abhishek and Aishwarya, model-cum-actress Jhanvi Kapoor attempted suicide outside Prateeksha in Juhu. Her actual claim to fame was not that she was Abhishek’s wife, but that she was one of the dancers in the song Dus Bahane from Abhishek’s 2005 film Dus. In the most dramatic and cliché Bollywood story, Jhanvi accused Aishwarya of stealing an already married Abhishek! Jhanvi claimed that Abhishek had married her “in front of some friends”. Aishwarya Rai Bachchan and Abhishek Bachchan 10th wedding anniversary: A look at their love story.

Jhanvi told mediapersons that Abhishek had been dating her for the last two years, and they were meeting regularly in Juhu. “We exchanged phone numbers and used to interact regularly through e-mails,” said a completely broken and hurt Kapoor. Adding more to her tall claims, she said that Abhishek put sindoor on her forehead in 2006, and married her in the presence of some friends.

On being asked to produce a photograph or any other proof of the said wedding, Jhanvi Kapoor blatantly refused to provide it and said, “When you love someone, you don’t need proof.” She also did not reveal the identities of the friends present during her alleged marriage to Abhishek Bachchan.

After failing to stop Abhishek Bachchan’s wedding to Aishwarya Rai with her suicide attempt, Jhanvi tried to file a complaint against the actor with the Juhu police, but the complaint was not registered. As a matter of fact, Jhanvi was arrested for attempting to commit suicide. Later, the court granted her bail against a surety of Rs 10,000.

Jhanvi Kapoor has vanished and not been in the limelight ever since. Although we came across a Twitter handle @JhanviBachchan, which was last active in 2012, we cannot confirm its authenticity whether it belongs to the notorious model-actress.

Abhishek Bachchan married his gorgeous ladylove Aishwarya Rai as per plans on April 20, 2007. It has been 10 years since their beautiful unison and they are blessed with a beautiful daughter, Aaradhya Bachchan. We wish the handsome couple a happy 10th wedding anniversary!