Aishwarya Rai Bachchan and Abhishek Bachchan are one of the most well-known power couples in Bollywood. They got married in a private ceremony in Mumbai in 2007. The couple has always been in the spotlight since then. Even after 15 years of togetherness, fans are still smitten by them and eager to learn more about them. In interviews, the couple has also discussed their relationship, marriage, and bond. In an interview with Filmfare, Aishwarya revealed what she thought was unique about her husband Abhishek.

Aishwarya told Filmfare that Abhishek is special because he is himself. She also mentioned that he brings his lineage and upbringing. “He’s special because he’s himself. He’s a normal guy. When he walks into a room, he carries his lineage and his upbringing. It’s all out there in the obvious and yet you know he’s a guy in the room you can have a conversation with, you can hang out with, you can have fun with, you can have an intense conversation with. He’s someone who’ll have a straight face even as he jokes with you. He was born into showbiz and he has a lineage to carry. Despite all that, there’s nothing showbiz about him. That’s the nicest part. He’s relatable and engaging as a person. And he’s my man, the father of my child.”

Aishwarya and Abhishek have appeared in a total of eight films together so far. Guru, Dhoom 2, Umrao Jaan, Kuch Naa Kaho, Sarkar Raj, and many other films have featured the couple. They were most recently seen together in Mani Ratnam's 2010 film Raavan. Their fans have been waiting for them to appear on screen together ever since.

Aishwarya opened up about working with her husband in a recent interview with ETimes, saying,"It should happen." She also hopes that a dream project materialises for her and Abhishek. Meanwhile, Abhishek discussed working with his wife and stated that he would 'love' to work with her again on-screen. "It has to be the right script at the right time. Until we don’t find that, we can’t do a film together. But we both love to work together," Abhishek stated.