Facebook

Twitter

Copy link

Ranked By

61.1K votes

6.1K voters

2 reranks

Voting Rules

Vote for your favorite Shahrukh Khan movies, regardless of critical reviews or how big the role was.

Discovering the best Shahrukh Khan movies is an engrossing journey, as each film displays the actor's talent and charm. This compilation offers a glimpse into his career and the cinematic gems that have established him as one of Bollywood's biggest stars.

This list highlights not only the actor's performances, but also the creative storytelling and filmmaking that contribute to their success. Each movie featuring Shahrukh Khan reveals a distinctive facet of the actor, as he brings his characters to life through unforgettable expressions, dialogues, and dance sequences. In short: his magnetism and charisma always shine through.

The classic Dilwale Dulhania Le Jayenge is a prime example of romantic cinema, demonstrating Shahrukh Khan's ability to make hearts flutter as he portrays the lovable character Raj. Similarly, Kuch Kuch Hota Hai and Kabhi Khushi Kabhie Gham exemplify his versatility and range as he delivers performances that resonate with viewers from all walks of life.

In conclusion, the best SRK films testify to his talent, dedication, and passion for his craft and for the Indian film industry as a whole.

Most divisive: Silsiilay

Over 6.1K Ranker voters have come together to rank this list of The Best Shahrukh Khan Movies, Ranked

Shah Rukh Khan, Kajol, Anupam Kher

2,387 votes

Released : 1995

Directed by : Aditya Chopra

Dilwale Dulhania Le Jayenge, also known as DDLJ, is a 1995 Indian romantic drama film. It was written and directed by Aditya Chopra, produced by Yash Chopra, and stars Shah Rukh Khan and Kajol. The film tells the story of a young non-resident Indian couple, Raj and Simran, who fall in love during a European vacation, and relates how Raj attempts to win over the Simran's family, so that the couple can marry, despite Simran's father having long ago promised her for his friend's son. It was filmed in India, London and Switzerland. Earning over 1.06 billion in India and 160 million overseas, it became the highest grossing Bollywood film of the year, and one of the biggest hits of all time in India. It won 10 Filmfare Awards, the most for a single film at that time, and won the National Film Award for Best Popular Film Providing Wholesome Entertainment. The film's soundtrack was one of the biggest sellers of the 1990s, and songs from it are still popular at weddings. The film was able to connect with different segments of society by simultaneously promoting strong family values, and the following of one's own heart.

2

Kuch Kuch Hota Hai

Shah Rukh Khan, Salman Khan, Kajol

2,047 votes

Released : 1998

Directed by : Karan Johar

Kuch Kuch Hota Hai (English: Something... Something Happens) also known as KKHH, is a 1998 Indian Hindi-language romantic drama film, released in India and the United Kingdom on 16 October 1998. It was written and directed by Karan Johar, and starred the popular on-screen pair of Shah Rukh Khan and Kajol in their fourth film together. Rani Mukerji featured in a supporting role, while Salman Khan also had an extended-cameo appearance. Sana Saeed, who was featured in a supporting role, made her debut in this film. The plot combines two love triangles set years apart. The first half covers friends on a college campus, while the second tells the story of a widower's young daughter who tries to reunite her dad with his old friend. Filmed in India, Mauritius, and Scotland, this was Johar's directorial debut. One of his goals for the film was to set a new level for style in Hindi cinema. The music was composed by Jatin-Lalit, was the biggest seller of the year. Kuch Kuch Hota Hai received a positive reception from critics, with special praise directed to Kajol's performance. The film was successful in India and abroad, becoming the highest-grossing Indian film of the year and the third highest-grossing Indian film at that time behind Hum Aapke Hain Koun..! (1994) at number 1 and also Shah Rukh Khan and Kajol starrer Dilwale Dulhania Le Jayenge (1995) at number 2. Outside India, the film was the highest grossing Hindi film ever until its record was broken by Karan's next directorial, Kabhi Khushi Kabhie Gham... (2001). The film received numerous accolades, including the National Film Award for Best Popular Film Providing Wholesome Entertainment and awards in the "Best Film" category at the Filmfare Awards, Zee Cine Awards, Screen Awards, and Bollywood Movie Awards. The film won 8 Filmfare Awards and is the only film to win all four acting awards at the ceremony, namely Best Actor, Best Actress, Best Supporting Actor and Best Supporting Actress.

Shah Rukh Khan, Amitabh Bachchan, Hrithik Roshan

1,877 votes

Released : 2001

Directed by : Karan Johar

Kabhi Khushi Kabhie Gham..., also known as K3G, is a 2001 Indian drama film written and directed by Karan Johar and produced by his father, Yash Johar. Written specifically to evoke nostalgia among the expatriate Indian audiences, the film stars Amitabh Bachchan, Jaya Bachchan, Shah Rukh Khan, Kajol, Hrithik Roshan and Kareena Kapoor in leading roles, with Rani Mukerji appearing in an extended cameo appearance. The music was composed by Jatin Lalit, Sandesh Shandilya and Aadesh Shrivastava, with lyrics penned by Sameer and Anil Pandey. The background score was composed by Babloo Chakravarty. The film tells the story of an Indian family, which faces troubles and misunderstandings over their adopted son's marriage to a girl belonging to a lower socio-economic group than them. Development of the film began in 1998, soon after the release of Karan's debut film Kuch Kuch Hota Hai. Principal photography began on 16 October 2000 in Mumbai and continued in London and Egypt. Initially scheduled to release during the Diwali festivities of 2001, the film eventually released in India, United Kingdom and North America on 14 December 2001.

Shah Rukh Khan, Kajol, Zarina Wahab

1,844 votes

Released : 2010

Directed by : Karan Johar

My Name Is Khan (aka MNIK) is a 2010 Indian Hindi drama film directed by Karan Johar. An Indian Muslim man who suffers from the Asperger's syndrome, a form of autism that impacts social interaction abilities is arrested mistakenly as a suspected terrorist in post-9/11 Los Angeles.

Shah Rukh Khan, Amitabh Bachchan, Hema Malini

1,691 votes

Released : 2004

Directed by : Yash Chopra

Veer-Zaara is a 2004 Indian romantic drama film directed by Yash Chopra under the Yash Raj Films banner. The film stars Shah Rukh Khan and Preity Zinta in the leading roles, with Rani Mukerji, Manoj Bajpayee, Kirron Kher, Divya Dutta and Anupam Kher in supporting roles. Veteran actors Amitabh Bachchan and Hema Malini make a special appearances in the film. The film's story and dialogues were written by Aditya Chopra. Set against the backdrop of conflict between India and Pakistan, this star-crossed romance follows the unfortunate love story of an Indian Air Force pilot, Squadron Leader Veer Pratap Singh and a Pakistani woman hailing from a rich political family of Lahore, Zaara Hayat Khan, who are separated for 22 years. Saamiya Siddiqui, a Pakistani lawyer, finds Veer in prison and upon listening to his story, tries to get him freed. Highly anticipated pre-release, the film eventually became the top-grossing Bollywood film of the year at both the Indian and the international box office, earning over 942.2 million worldwide, in addition to being showcased at numerous prominent film festivals around the world.

Shah Rukh Khan, Preity Zinta, Kajol

2,155 votes

Released : 2003

Directed by : Nikhil Advani, Ron Reid Jr.

Kal Ho Naa Ho, abbreviated as KHNH, is a 2003 Indian romantic comedy-drama film, directed by debutante director Nikhil Advani. The film was written by Niranjan Iyengar and Karan Johar and produced by Yash Johar and Karan Johar under the Dharma Productions banner. The music of the film was composed by Shankar-Ehsaan-Loy, with lyrics written by Javed Akhtar. The film features, Shahrukh Khan as Aman Mathur, Saif Ali Khan as Rohit Patel, and Preity Zinta as Naina Catherine Kapur. It also features Jaya Bachchan, Lilette Dubey, Reema Lagoo, Sushma Seth, Wyatt Button and Delnaaz Paul in supporting roles.