Shah Rukh Khan films are an event. Months before their release and years after them too, people like to comment, appreciate and criticize them. They earn money and attention right through. Seldom does a movie featuring SRK go under the radar. It hasn’t happened since 2005 for sure. But until that point, there were a few gems that evaded the eye of the fans and the detractors. These films may have made noise but they definitely weren’t consumed or released like a mainstream movie. We’re talking niche here, hidden gems like SRK’s appearance on the Wagle Ki Duniya episode. These films are that rare. Here’s the Shah Rukh Khan films you’ve probably heard about but have not seen...

"/>

In Which Annie Gives It Those Ones (1989)

You’ve probably heard a lot about the verbosely titled In Which Annie Gives It Those Ones, but don’t know where to catch a glimpse of it. The highlight of this film was the fact that popular writer Arundhati Roy wrote the screenplay for it back in 1988. Apart from that, Shah Rukh Khan’s brief appearance in the movie as an aloof college student has also brought this TV movie a lot of attention. The story deals with an architecture college student and his run-ins with the Principal and other faculty and students. SRK though has a brief role; the main USP here is to see him actually looking like a nerdy college kid.

Idiot (1992)

Mani Kaul’s Idiot recently became quite popular thanks to its screening at the MAMI Film Festival under the rechristened title Ahamaq. Like most of Mani Kaul’s works, this movie was made as a TV series for Doordarshan. It was first aired on TV in 1991, after which it made news at international film festivals too. The premise deals with dark humour where a man’s epilepsy is mistaken for idiotic behaviour. The protagonists’ simplicity becomes his weakness.

Maya Memsaab (1993)

Infamous now for featuring some raunchy scenes between Shah Rukh Khan and Deepa Sahi, Ketan Mehta’s Maya Memsaab was always part of headlines. Sadly, that never translated into a wide release. Chances are you’ve probably seen the risqué love making scenes on YouTube or forwarded videos, but watch the entire film and you’ll discover that this slow but enchanting film is a decent look at being a romantic woman in the big bad man’s world.

Chaahat (1996)

Chances are you’ve heard the song that gave Chaahat its popularity back in the mid-nineties. The song featured Anupam Kher and Shah Rukh Khan with the catchy lyrics, Oh daddy cool cool cool... mera beta fool fool fool... This hilariously campy number was the stand out feature of this movie. Even though the music was a hit, Chaahat didn’t quite emulate the success of father daughter duo Mahesh and Pooja Bhatt like Daddy (1989) from few years ago.

Dushman Duniya Ka (1996)

You deserve a gold plated trophy the size of the Cricket World Cup if you’re the select few who have watched and / or heard about Dushman Duniya Ka. This absolutely random film from the mid-nineties was sold with Salman Khan and Shah Rukh Khan on the poster. Sadly, both actors have just campy cameos in the film. SRK features in a moustached, Mehmood type avatar.

Ye Lamhe Judaai Ke (2004)

For those of you who wished for Shah Rukh Khan and Raveena Tandon to work together in the 90s and couldn’t see that materialise, the makers of Ye Lamhe Judaai Ke took their film out of oblivion and released it in 2004, 10 years after it was originally shot. This lacklustre romance featuring SRK and Raveena failed to ignite any passion at the box-office and sank back into obscurity.

Kucch Meetha Ho Jaya (2005)

Long before his famous Chak De! India monologue, Shah Rukh Khan had another lengthy dialogue spree in a rather forgettable movie. Kucch Meetha Ho Jaya featured SRK as himself. His big reveal happens right at the end, when a mysterious figure continuously asleep on a bench at an obscure airport turns out to be SRK. His words of wisdom inspire Arshad Warsi’s and Rohit Roy’s characters into saving the day. If you know about this film or you’ve seen it, you deserve to be invited to King Khan’s birthday bash.