Shah Rukh Khan is currently on a super-tight schedule, as after taking a break of almost four years, he is all set to return to the silver screen with not one but three movies in 2023. After Pathan and Dunki, the actor will soon announce his third film, which is a collaboration with South filmmaker, Atlee.

But we got some inside information about the film’s unrevealed title and what role SRK is going to play in the film.

Shah Rukh Khan’s upcoming action-packed film’s title

Credit: Instagram/iamsrk

A close source revealed the title of the film to media publication Bollywood Hungama. "After discussing and considering at least 25 titles, Shah Rukh Khan and Atlee have decided to title their next as Jawan," the source said, while adding the duo will release the film’s teaser in a couple of days.

Further sharing some details about the teaser, the source said, "It's one minute 34 seconds of absolute swag for the fans of Shah Rukh Khan. It has SRK in his massiest avatar till date and the fans will be blown away by this minute and a half glimpse of the superstar, Shah Rukh Khan."

The film is expected to release in 2023, and will also star Nayanthara, Sanya Malhotra, Sunil Grover and others in pivotal roles.

SRK to play double role in ‘Jawan’

Credit: Instagram/iamsrk

Recent reports of Pinkvilla have claimed that we’ll see SRK in a double role in the film. He’ll play a son who’s a gangster for the first role, while the second one would be of a father who’s a senior RAW officer. The actor is expected to use prosthetics for playing both the roles.

It’s rumoured that SRK will wrap up the movie’s shoot in one straight schedule and then start working on Rajkumar Hirani’s Dunki, also starring Taapsee Pannu alongside him.

Jawan will be Shah Rukh’s second action-packed film in 2023 after Pathan, featuring Deepika Padukone and John Abraham, which is set to release on 25th January.

Social and lead image credit: Instagram/iamsrk

Read iDiva for the latest in Bollywood, fashion looks, beauty and lifestyle news.