Shah Rukh Khan's Jawan is an all out entertainer that should only be enjoyed with whistles, claps and among friends and family. The film sets you up for an enjoyable experience with the much loved elements of South India movies and gives the right amount of action and emotional dosage throughout the 169 minutes of run time. While this marks Atlee aka Arun Kumar's seventh film and first Bollywood movie, Jawan leaves no moment of disappointment long after you have stepped out of the theater.

SEE ALSO: The Nun 2 Review: Cinematic Subtext, VFX And Minimum Story- All Things Horror

Jawan begins with South film's usual back story format and kicks off the film on a high note. The story continues to pull the right strings as our leading star Shah Rukh Khan is introduced as a cop working with women and surrounded by many other women. The film also introduces much of the plot in the first fifteen minutes and relaxes into the unfolding mode. There isn't much one has to watch out for in the film except for slow motion and many call backs to SRK previous characters.

The film is filled with cheer worthy moments for different characters whether it is SRK, Vijay Sethupathi, Nayanthara or others. Shah Rukh Khan without a doubt gets all the big moments on screen but the makers also give the same importance to supporting characters like Priyamani, Riddhi Dogra, Sanya Malhotra, Sanjeeta Bhattacharya, Girija Oak and others. Sunil Grover who has the least amount of screen time also has a lasting impact.

The screenplay pays attention to every little detail of the plot making sure no moment goes to waste as every scene comes back to a full circle. Whether is Sethupathi's Kaalie Gaikwad or Shah Rukh Khan's Vikram Rathore, they all get justice in the end. Many of the main dialogues and punchlines have been released in the trailer but the wait and excitement of hearing each in a different moment is more than enough to keep you hooked.

At the risk of giving away some spoilers, SRK every look and every version comes off strong and even surprises in moments. With different personalities on screen, SRK manages to grasp the emotional bits rights off the bat and easily makes the audience laugh in the next moment. Atlee however, needs to be credited for the emotional highs of the film that comes with moments that have nothing to do with the leading actor. The film also ends with a message for its audience, another trait that is often seen in South Indian films and used to be seen in serious drama in 2000s Bollywood movies. While the message is subtle and easy to consume with the supporting character's backstories it gets a little on the nose with the end. However, the moments shading the current situation in India and the governmental stand of the same makes it worthwhile.

On the other hand, Nayanthara receives the Lady superstar treatment but unfortunately its only lasts for the first 20 minutes of the film and is soon taken over by Vijay Sethupathi and SRK. The two go head-to-head in a number of scenes and they makes for great visual spectacles. The action sequences with Nayanthara, Sanya Malhotra, Priyamani are just as exciting to watch and makes you hope for more female action stars. However, at the end of the day without the theatrics Vijay Sethupathi has the best screen presence with a comic timing that matches SRK.

SEE ALSO: Jawan: What Does SRK And Atlee's Successful Collaboration Mean For Pan India Films

The film also comes with a message, comeback to other robinhood movies and a lot of fan service for the ones who love SRK, Vijay Sethupathi, Nayanthara, as well as Bollywood and South Indian movies. The film has apt action and hero moments that are worth even a rewatch and special cameos that make you want to know about their characters. The film does have a few moments that don't sync well with the dialogues or cuts in the action that feel forced or with wonky CGI, but all of it is missable with a blink of an eye. And doesn't really take away from the SRK experience.

Overall, Jawan is an action entertainer that comes with a subtext about local gangs and politicians for the Indian audience to enjoy, comment and shade but even without it SRK's film makes for a great watch. Meanwhile, SRK's big moments are enough to overshadow its political stance and not make the audience uncomfortable. A well packaged massy movie for the fans.