Shah Rukh Khan, or SRK as fans lovingly call him, isn’t just the King of Bollywood because of his acting chops and charming smile. He’s also known for being one heck of a down-to-earth dude! In fact, we all know how he’s like the neighbour you’d borrow sugar from and end up chatting with for hours. But hey, did you know that ‘Baadshah’ has also been caught up in some ‘problematic’ stuff that needs a closer look?

Hold up, what’s the deal? And why has it been kept under wraps for so long? No, it’s not some hidden secret, it’s been out there as long as you’ve known this star. So let’s dive right in. As the ‘X’ user, @CriipticGirl pointed out:

Cannibalism

Are you kidding? No. Don’t you know how SRK has ‘eaten’ up all your favourite movie stars with those killing eyes and acting? He ‘devoured’ them all and left no crumbs behind.

Check this out to confirm:

Murder

If there were a crime for being too good-looking, SRK would be guilty as charged. Watch him in any movie, from ‘Kuch Kuch Hota Hai’ to his recent one ‘Jawan’, SRK has aged like fine wine and continues to slay with his killer looks.

Recklessness

The way he masters the art of cinema at every turn of the movie and acts like it’s no big deal, SRK – you deserve an award for being this daring.

Robbery

As if you didn’t already know how he’s been stealing hearts…

Lying

He said he can’t dance. Oh come on, SRK, stop kidding yourself. We’ve seen you set the stage on fire. And let’s not even talk about your younger days; the way you’ve been shaking a leg at 58 in ‘Jhoome Jo Pathaan,’ can anyone else pull that off?

Broken Bones

SRK, are you hurt from carrying the weight of best acting and everything on your shoulders? You’d probably have broken your bones, but it doesn’t seem like it because we know you’ve got the guts and strength, let it be.

Bullying

Just when everybody thought you were the ‘King of Romance,’ you flipped the script with those killer action scenes, running everywhere, fighting off villains without breaking a sweat. You sure showed those action heroes who’s boss.

Also Read: SRK Talking About His Carefree Attitude in Old Video Has Desis Realising, ‘Slowly Becoming Him’

So, as the viral thread suggests, SRK is ‘unknowingly’ responsible for all this, but are we blaming him? Well, that’s for you to decide. After all, he just wanted to be an actor but ended up becoming the ‘Baap’ of it all.