The journey to display the best high school football uniforms in the United States enters our eighth installment. Last week, we looked at Drew White’s alma mater, the alma mater of Manti Te’o, and perhaps the best gold helmets in the business.

Our Countdown So Far:

#27 Vanden HS, California

#26 McKay HS, Oregon

#25 Bishop Gorman, Nevada

#24 Orange HS, Ohio

#23 Mountain View HS, Idaho

#22 St. Vincent-St. Mary, Ohio

#21 Long Beach Poly, California

#20 Chaparral HS, Arizona

#19 Duncanville HS, Texas

#18 Manasquan HS, New Jersey

#17 Fenwick HS, Illinois

#16 Carroll HS, Texas

#15 Jonathan Law HS, Connecticut

#14 Gonzaga, D.C.

#13 Bixby HS, Oklahoma

#12 Zachary HS, Louisiana

#11 Northwestern HS, Florida

#10 Trinity HS, Texas

#9 St. Thomas Aquinas, Florida

#8 Punahou School, Hawaii

#7 Muskegon Catholic, Michigan

As always, we welcome your ratings in the comment sections, plus any submissions especially if they are from small schools not well known throughout the country. On today’s countdown we travel to the campus of Notre Dame’s top 2023 recruit, a familiar school in Cincinnati, and the alma mater of Brady Quinn.

#6 Berkeley Preparatory School

Location: Tampa, Florida

Mascot: Buccaneers

Enrollment: 1,401 (Episcopalian, co-ed)

Our 6th best uniform comes from Berkeley Prep in the northwest Tampa suburbs near the Golfwood Estates neighborhood. This is the school that Notre Dame felt they had a good shot signing 5-star receiver Nelson Agholor back in the 2012 class. It’s also the home of current 2023 commit Keon Keeley who is a 5-star and the top edge rusher in his class.

You know how the baby blue and dark blue works wonders for me. These uniforms don’t put a foot wrong. They pull off one of my favorite tricks in that the template is the same but with different color combinations the uniforms have a nice variation to them. I particularly like the all white uniform. Check out the skull and crossbones sticker above their helmet bumper, too.

#5 St. Xavier High School

Location: Cincinnati, Ohio

Mascot: Bombers

Enrollment: 1,514 (Catholic, all-male)

I know the Cincinnati area is well represented for Notre Dame alums and our readers, as well. There must be a few of you reading this today who went to St. Xavier and are pumped about a top 5 finish in our rankings. Notre Dame has grabbed some good players from this school through the years, like Rocky Boiman, although in more recent times it’s the place where Luke Kuechly played and didn’t get a strong enough look from the Irish.

Well, I’m looking at these uniforms and I like what I see. There are very strong Air Force vibes. In the past, the school had slightly more weird Adidas uniforms with dog tags on the left chest for some reason. Now with Under Armour, they have one of the cleanest looks in the nation. Including that very different script across the chest.

#4 Dublin Coffman High School

Location: Dublin, Ohio

Mascot: Shamrocks

Enrollment: 1,913 (public)

Our no. 4 school came into the Notre Dame spotlight during the 2003 recruiting cycle when a pair of Dublin Coffman athletes signed for the Irish, including quarterback Brady Quinn. The school is in the northwest suburbs of Columbus and uses the shortened “Rocks” for Shamrocks in one of the coolest mascot decisions in American high school.

For me, this uniform is carried largely by the helmet. The jersey, pants, and color combinations have a touch of Marshall to them. That may seem like a slight but Marshall has nice uniforms! It’s tough to beat the chrome green and black script on the helmet as the shamrock stickers add a nice touch, too.

Up next: The series concludes with programs in Georgia, California, and New York.