PHILADELPHIA -- Nelson Agholor has played at Raymond James Stadium before. So when the Philadelphia Eagles wide receiver returns to his hometown of Tampa, Fla., on Sunday, it won't be anything new for him.

But the last time Agholor suited up at the home of the Tampa Bay Buccaneers, he was playing little league football at age 11 or 12, he said earlier this week. His team won the championship.

Much has changed since then. Agholor has embarked on a winding career path that has featured the highs of high school and college stardom and the lows of a disastrous second year in the NFL. He returns home at 25 a redeemed NFL player and perhaps the top wide receiver on the reigning Super Bowl winners.

"Tampa's a grind," Agholor said Thursday. "That's my community. A lot of great people there that poured into me. My high school football coach, he definitely helped me become the man I am today, and some of the things he taught me are actually some of the characteristics I use to make sure I'm on my feet every day here as a pro."

Agholor said there should be some friends and family at Sunday's game, including his parents and his high school coach at Berkeley Prep, Dominick Ciao. It was under Ciao that Agholor blossomed. As a junior at Berkeley Prep -- the school's mascot is also the Buccaneers -- Agholor rushed for 1,494 yards and 19 touchdowns, according to MaxPreps. He followed it up with 1,983 yards and 28 touchdowns as a senior. Berkeley Prep didn't lose until the state semifinals.

Now, Agholor is back home with a Super Bowl ring in tow. With wide receiver Alshon Jeffery sidelined by his shoulder injury, Agholor returns as the team's top receiver, and he had eight catches for 33 yards against the Atlanta Falcons in the season opener.

In 2017, he established himself as a dangerous NFL wideout, with 62 catches for 768 yards and eight touchdowns. Those stats from his third season dwarfed the combined stats of his first two years in the NFL.

It's all been part of a journey that began when Agholor moved to the United States from Nigeria when he was young. It was "culture shock," Agholor said, but football helped him assimilate.

"It was very important because I have some really close friends from my little league time, and then even at the high school level, I even got closer friends," Agholor said. "And then also my high school football coach, who's like a father to me, somebody I'm very close with and somebody truly close in my heart, a guy I call almost every day. Just the game of football brought so many people in my life."

When he was growing up in Tampa, Agholor said he looked up to some of the classic Bucs of the 2000s. Keenan McCardell and Reidel Anthony were among the wide receivers that Agholor watched. And then there was cornerback Ronde Barber -- a Buccaneer who lives in the nightmares of some Eagles fans -- who Agholor said was one of his favorites. Barber, along with his twin brother, Tiki, will be on the Fox broadcast crew for Sunday's game."

"All-time," Agholor said. "He's just a class act and a great guy."

Despite moving from Tampa to Los Angeles and then from the West Coast to Philadelphia, Agholor has remained active in his hometown. He runs football camps for young players and generally tries to remain a presence in Florida.

He knows that there might be some kids from his camps in the stands at Raymond James Stadium on Sunday. There might even be some young Bucs fans wearing his No. 13 in midnight green.

And Agholor knows what he wants to show them.

"I think for the kids that are there, I just want to see them have fun, most importantly," Agholor said. "A lot of kids in Tampa love the game of football, and I hope they get a chance to tune in, and if it's a kid that's been at my camp, I hope he gets to see me have fun with my guys."

--