Information[]

"Dynasty" is the third industry album released by Two Steps From Hell, and the third overall. It was released in 2007 and featured mainly songs of the epic genre. Thus far, nine tracks from this album have been released on public albums Invincible, Archangel, Halloween, Classics Volume One and Classics Volume Two. Tyrianis would also go on to be remixed for the industry album Burn.

Description #1 (Taken from the TSFH website)[]

Two Steps From Hell Dynasty released in 2007. One year after forming Two Steps, Nick and Thomas released their first purely epic album: Dynasty. Recorded by Capellen orchestra in Czech and Los Angeles, Dynasty has some classic, epic trailer music. The Angeles Chorale was brought in to sing the choir parts.

Description #2 (Taken from the TSFH YouTube channel)[]

On Feb. 28 2007, Two Steps From Hell released DYNASTY, an epic explosion from Thomas Bergersen and Nick Phoenix, featuring The Angeles Chorale and The Capellen Philharmonic Orchestra. DYNASTY features 52 tracks on 2 cds and alternate versions and non-choral versions available on disk 3, for a total of 99 tracks. With DYNASTY, Two Steps From Hell has succeeded in raising the bar considerably, providing original material of extremely high production quality, using state of the art technology. A year in the making, this amazing collection of trailer music features the talents of well over 100 musicians from around the world, including great voice talents, ethnic instrumentalists and reknown orchestras. The 'Spiderman 3' TV Spot featured 30 seconds of DYNASTY track: "Heaven and Earth". Check out the credits page for more movie credits and our very own promo trailer.

Description #3 (Taken from the TSFH app)[]

Dynasty was the 3rd album by Two Steps From Hell and marked the beginning of a new epic style.

Track List:[]

Vol. 1 Action[]

Armada by Thomas Bergersen (later released on Classics Volume One)

Elementum by Thomas Bergersen

1000 Ships of the Underworld by Nick Phoenix (alternate version later released on Invincible)

Tyrianis by Thomas Bergersen (later remixed on Burn)

Bleeding by Nick Phoenix

Heaven & Earth by Thomas Bergersen (later released on Classics Volume Two)

Blast the Gates by Thomas Bergersen

King's Legion by Thomas Bergersen

Cavaliere by Nick Phoenix

Flameheart by Thomas Bergersen (later released on Classics Volume Two)

Dragon Rider by Thomas Bergersen (later released on Archangel)

Spirit of Champions by Thomas Bergersen

Black Assassin by Thomas Bergersen (later released on Halloween)

Conquerors by Nick Phoenix

Blade Fighter by Nick Phoenix

The Vendetta Conspiracy by Thomas Bergersen

Sentius by Nick Phoenix

Chariots of Blood by Thomas Bergersen

House of Fire by Nick Phoenix

Breaking by Nick Phoenix

Racketeers by Troels Folmann (possibly)

Kingdom Skies by Thomas Bergersen (alternate version originally released on Epic Adventure 2 as Line of Fire)

One Against All by Nick Phoenix

Timebomb by Thomas Bergersen

Instruments of War by Thomas Bergersen

Web of Lies by Thomas Bergersen

The Brave & Mighty by Thomas Bergersen

Deep Voyage by Thomas Bergersen

Glory & Honor by Thomas Bergersen

Red Army by Thomas Bergersen

Diplomatic Immunity by Nick Phoenix

Coup D'Etat by Nick Phoenix

Magika by Thomas Bergersen (later released on Classics Volume Two)

The Truth Unravels II by Thomas Bergersen

Sun Goddess by Thomas Bergersen; feat. Francesca Genco (possibly)

Procession by Thomas Bergersen; feat. Merethe Soltvedt

Vol. 2 Epic Drama[]

Dynasty by Nick Phoenix

Fight the Darkness by Nick Phoenix

Breath of Ran Gor by Nick Phoenix (later released on Invincible)

Demon Rider by Nick Phoenix

Thermopolis by Nick Phoenix; feat. Merethe Soltvedt

Chopperhead by Thomas Bergersen

False Flag OP by Nick Phoenix

Pax by Nick Phoenix; feat. Francesca Genco (possibly)

Racketeers (Rock) by Troels Folmann (possibly)

Sentius Remix by Nick Phoenix

The Fly From China by Nick Phoenix

Never Winter by Nick Phoenix; feat. Aya Peard

Ocean by Nick Phoenix; feat Aya Peard

Hero by Nick Phoenix

Love and Loss by Thomas Bergersen (later released on Archangel)

Zen Killer by Nick Phoenix

Epilogue by Thomas Bergersen

Trivia:[]

This is the first album to feature songs composed by someone other than Thomas Bergersen and Nick Phoenix, as Troels Folmann contributed an undisclosed amount of songs to this album.

"1000 Ships of the Underworld" was used in trailers for Priest, The Incredible Hulk, Aliens vs. Predator: Requiem, Miracle at St. Anna and The Twilight Saga: Eclipse, and promotional material for Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows: Part 2.

Love & Loss was used in the trailer for The Twilight Saga: Breaking Dawn – Part 1, in a trailer for Mass Effect 3, and for a mid-season premiere trailer of the Walking Dead. It was also used in a trailer for the Disneynature documentary film, Earth. Swiss artistic gymnast Giulia Steingruber used this song as her floor music in 2013.

Heaven & Earth was used in a TV Spot for Spiderman 3.

This album features the first sequel to a song, specifically The Truth Unravels from Volume One.

This is the first album to feature a song that shares its title name with the album.

Tyrianis was later remixed and re-released on Burn.

This is the first album to have Aya Peard as a vocalist.