"Dynasty" is a song by MIIA. It was released on July 21, 2014, re-released on September 22, 2015, and re-released again on January 29, 2016.

Background

The song was written by MIIA and Hillary Bernstein and produced by MIIA's uncle Joachim "J Ryggs" Rygg. According to MIIA in a comment on YouTube, this song is about Hillary Bernstein's and MIIA's uncle Joachim "J Ryggs" Rygg's breakup.[1].

"One of u was wondering what this song meant to me, and I just wanted to say that it means a lot. Its about a breakup, that didn't happen to me, but to two people I love very, very much. I wrote it with one of them, and the other person produced the song. So now u know.."

MIIA has stated in an interview with Musicbed that it took a while for them to get the song out after recording it[2].

"I actually recorded ‘Dynasty’ a year and a half ago. It was a long process to get it out, but the song means so much to me — to all of us. When I first heard the song, I knew it was the kind of music I want to be doing. Something in the middle of Sia, Lana Del Rey, and Adele where there is still a bit of empty room, you know? I want to fill it. Do my own thing."

After the song reached more than a 100 million streams on Spotify, MIIA went to Instagram and made a series of four posts thanking her fans for listening to the song.[3][4][5][6]

The four posts said the following:

Post 1

"So. Dynasty has long since passed a hundred million streams and I still haven’t made a post about it. My uncle said it was about time I did it and I almost always take his advice, so here we go! Dynasty has 114,234,511 streams on Spotify and it just keeps on growing😳 I’ll have to say that is a lot to take in or grasp. And I can say «it’s just numbers» as much as I want, but of course it is more than that! There are actual people all over the world who have been listening for years, some almost a decade. I am just so grateful that people are listening. Feeling the words and telling me about it. Waiting for more. Sending me messages of encouregment and, so many of you, begging me to release new music. I can only hope and have faith in that the new music will resonate as deeply with you all. At least what they have in common with Dynasty is that they come from a real and totally honest place. As some of you know I made Dynasty together with my aunt and my uncle/producer, and the song is about their breakup. The three of us were a team, bestfriends. It was the biggest heartbreak for them and the closest that I had gotten to one. But we made something beautiful out of it❤️ And that is what I’ve tried to do with these new songs, to take the painful feelings and turn them into something meaningful. Thank you for showing me how to do that, Hill, Joachim. And thank you for believing in me from the very beginning, when I was only 14 years old. Ten years (!) later and I finally feel ready to unfold the next chapter. But first I think I owe it to everyone who was involved in making Dynasty happen - and to the ones who have been listening - to give a little tribute to the song that has made it possible for me to do what I love. I thank you all, from the bottom of my heart✨ xx Miia"

Post 2

"The summer of 2014 I was 16 years old and in Paris for the first time with my boyfriend. Dynasty was soon about to be released and we had to spontaneously take a couple of pics for the cover. A very rainy July day we found an old church door for the very simple «photoshoot». A year later and it was on Billboard, for the premiere of Dynasty. It feels like a loooong time ago, but at the same time I still feel so much like that 16 year old girl. I’ll forever carry her and these moments with me"

Post 3

"And then there was the music video🎥 This first picture is from the time I met Mark, the director of the Dynasty video, in his office in L.A. As you might notice I was pretty damn excited, haha. Mark reached out to us after he had heard the song saying he wanted to make a music video for it simply because it resonated with him so deeply🥺 Mark was so kind in every way possible, he respected me - and my wishes - as an artist and let me have my say in the video. Thank you Mark💜 And thanks to everyone else involved!! I met some amazing people and learned a lot from this experience, and without it I might not have started making my own videoes (which I am doing now for the new music). I can’t wait to show you all what’s to come🤫"

Post 4

"October 2015, at early dawn, filming the music video for Dynasty🤍✨🎬 It was super cold, but so amazing! One of the best days of my life for sure. So thankful"

Theme

"“Dynasty” is a heart-felt piece, passionate and raw, using minimal melody to allow her haunting voice to capture heartache and loss with eloquence."[7]

Reception

Billboard reviewed this song as it was about to come out.

"The powerful heartbreak anthem, which the singer wrote following a break-up, features striking multi-octave vocals, that create a unique yet familiar sound that is part Adele, part Demi Lovato, and paired with the edge of Tove Lo and Imogen Heap. For fans of all four, you're going to want to keep an eye on this young crossover talent."[8]

Lyrics

Videos

Music video credits

Name Role Mark Pellington Director Matt Roe Director of photography Dana Marshall Producer Bethany Gould Executive producer Ben Redmond Editor Beau Leon Colorist Wondros Production company

Behind the scenes

The behind the scenes gallery can be found here.

Gallery

Official versions

Single version: 3:45

Instrumental version: 3:45

Original release: 3:46

Radio Edit: ?

Elephante remix: 3:50

Instrumental version: 3:50

Elephante club remix: 3:21

Instrumental version: 3:21

Acoustic: 3:42

Trivia

This song was remixed by Elephante twice. The remixes can be heard here and here.

MIIA played an acoustic version of this on a Nova Nedstrippa radio interview[9].

The cover art was done by Andreas Kristensen.

It was shot in Paris, France[10].

This is to date MIIA's most streamed song. It has 62 million streams on Spotify[11].

The music video was filmed in Angels National Forest in Los Angeles on October 31, 2015[12].

The official instrumentals leaked through Position Music's website.

The song was used in a commercial by UNICEF[13].

After having trouble with releasing the song, MIIA ended up releasing it through Epic Amsterdam[14].

On April 9, 2021, MIIA played a this song on her Instagram story after a fan asked her to during an AMA.

It can be heard here.

When the song was originally released in 2014, it was roughly 1 second longer.

The original release is preserved in the audio upload by MIIA on her YouTube channel, proving there are no changes to the song itself.

References

Navigation