Dynasty is not too bad at all.

As a long time KISS fan, I always liked the album. It's not my favorite, but it has a special place for me. Probably because it was the first album I got, when I was a kid, and became a fan, due to the exposure of their #1 hit I Was Made.... I was 9 years old, and completely swept off my feet...forever.

For a long time Kiss was my all-time-favorite band, until I got really into Led Zeppelin. But that's another story.

In hindsight, Dynasty is the album where it became clear that the individual Kiss members were drifting apart.

The whole story couldn't be better told than on the excellent website kissfaq.com.

The link to the story of Dynasty is

http://www.kissfaq.com/KissFAQ-wiki/index.php?title=Kiss_Album_Focus_-_Dynasty

The thing I like about this album is it's recorded at the time Ace was getting really into it, flexing himself into a more prominent role he rightly deserved, on the Kiss albums. He already contributed great songs on the previous albums, but only sang his first lead vocal in 1977 with "Shock Me" on the Love Gun album.

I know, Kiss is a sum total, for me in particular, the sum of the 4 original band members, the so-called classic line-up, with the classic albums from 1974 up until 1980. Gene was, and still is, some kind of hero to me, and Paul I regard as one of the better classic rock lead vocalists and front men ever. Peter in his pre-drug days was a great drummer.

But Ace... With his sound, his custom Gibson Les Pauls, his Marshall sound into overdrive, with lots! of feedback, his solo's and way of playing, the phrasing of his playing...Ace, for me, is the man who gives me the goosebumps, even still today, with his sound, and his solos.

So, on Dynasty, after his superb solo album from 1978, he gets to contribute some great songs, which overshadows Gene's contribution to the album totally, in my opinion. I mean, "Hard Times" was the B-side to "I Was Made...", but that song is way better than the hit-single. Even now, when I think about it, it gives me the chills how great that song is, with that mean, lean guitar solo. "Save Your Love" is also a great song, and a fine album closer. His solo on the Peter track "Dirty Livin'" is also just so damn...perfect.

The remaster from 1997 is a fine and cheap choice to get yourself reaquainted with the album.

I agree. I have no problems with their re-master series. I gave Dynasty a second chance recently because I had not listened to it for about 20 years. I bought the re-master for cheap. I never had it in my collection. I remember when it came out and my brother bought the vinyl. One listened to I Was Made For Lovin' You and that was it and turned me against Kiss for a number of years. I actually still hate the song. I'm still an unabashed fan though and agree Dynasty isn't bad at all.