I have often joked, tonge in cheek, about the Isle of Wight living in the 1970’s.

However, we’re spending a few days here just now and today drove past this sign....

Last time I saw one of these I was wearing flares and driving a bronze Mk1 Escort with wide wheels.

Any other places in the UK that time seems to have passed by?

It’s actually been put up prematurely - they have been secretly shipped around the country but are supposed to be embargoed until March 30, when we all go back to living in the 1970s. Your new flared trousers will arrive shortly afterwards together with a book to paste your Green Shield stamps into. Your car will be shipped to the continent and replaced by a MK1 Escort or equivalent in due course - there will be a delay while the DVLA computers are adapted to use punched cards and magnetic tape storage.

Rural Lincolnshire is unchanged since I was in short trousers. For better or worse. It's one reason why quite a few celebs live there in their later years - for the price of a luxury flat in London you can buy a farmhouse with outbuildings and land far enough away from conurbations that burglars can't find it. A good number of musicians buy places out in the sticks like this and set up recording studios in a barn or similar. Bags of room for the musicians, miles from neighbours so no noise issues, convert outbuildings to holiday cottage type accommodation so people have places to stay in between recording sessions. Try that in Surbiton.

I thought the Isle of Wight was closed to outsiders between the day after August Bank Holiday and Good Friday. How did you manage to sneak on.

Quite a lot of it is actually closed until Easter.

Getting on the island was quite easy, but we’re a bit worried about being allowed off again. They appear to be building a wicker man in the field opposite

They are a subsidiary of BP these days, and the 'National' branding was mostly phased out in the 90s (I thought was earlier). Apparently several outlets on the Isle of Wight and Shetland are still branded National.

See Wikipedia: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/National_Benzole

Quite a lot of it is actually closed until Easter.

Getting on the island was quite easy, but we’re a bit worried about being allowed off again. They appear to be building a wicker man in the field opposite

I made that mistake many years ago when we went the weekend before Easter. Very little open especially to eat in the evenings.