English chemist George Fownes who died Today in 1849 was famous for, amongst other things, the discovery of Benzoline in 1845 later used as a motor spirit, a petroleum spirit, marketed under various trade names such as National Benzole Mixture and Regent Benzole Mixture. (1)

Benzol(e) in the UK was crude Benzene derived from coal tar products mainly from Benzene and Toluene and was said to increase motor performance.

Fownes worked in his father’s glove business up to 1837 before studying science with Thomas Everitt and lecturing in chemistry at Middlesex Hospital.

Dying young from consumption (TB) he was to do his major work between 1842-6 when he isolated two new organic bases in 1845 by preparing Furfural by the action of Sulfuric Acid on Bran, and isolating Benzoline (hydro-benzamide from oil of bitter almonds.(2)

National Benzole was founded in February 1919 in a room next to the boiler house of the Gas, Light and Coke Company Ltd in Horseferry Road, London.

It was found to be useful in propelling shells in WWI and post war there was a ‘Benzole Lake’ which Samuel Henshaw, Chairman of Staffordshire Chemical Company saw there was money to be made from the surplus.

However by the 1950s Benzole was determined a health hazard and its ‘anti-knocking’ properties were superseded by lead petrol additives (another health hazard) and from the 1960s, the now re-branded National Company only sold petrol after being bought by BP, only to become defunct in early 1990s.

NOTES:

Benzoline also known as Petroleum Ether was a Petroleum Fraction consisted of Aliphatic (non-aromatic) Hydro-Carbon with a Boiling Point netween 35-60 (c) is now used as a laboratory solvent. It is not classed as an Ether but described thus owing to its lightness and volatility.

Confusingly in many countries Benzoline has many alternative names.

(1) He became Thomas Graham’s assistant at London University and also discovered Farfurine.

(2) In 1839 he accurately determined the equivalent weight of carbon by means of combustion of Naphthaline. In 1844 he discovered the presence of Phosphate in igneous rocks, the original source of Phosphates in clay and soil.

References/Pics.

Motor Sport Magazine Pics.

encyclopedia.com/science.

amazon.co.uk.

educalingo.com.

Graces Guide.

Alamy Stock Photos.

PicClick.uk.1950s.