DSP. Unique C. 1920's Porcelain Sign from National Benzole, a United Kingdom based Petroleum Company. Sign features a unique Mercury head graphic on each side with excellent script & colors. CONDITION

A National Benzole aluminium sign, A National Benzole aluminium sign, c.1960s, of diamond form, 100.5cm wide 78.5cm high Condition Report: Marks and wear throughout. In need of a clean.

Vintage Porcelain Sign, National Federation of Business and Professional Women's Clubs30 inch round sign, single sided image featuring the winged Nike figure and crest of the NFBPWC organization found

Lot of 3 Modern Railroad Signs including Brass Penn RR Emblem, Porcelain Canadian National Railways Sign, and Porcelain Canadian Pacific Sign. Largest measures 10" tall x 8" wide. All invoices must be

13" x 15.5" Single sided shield sign in excellent condition with high gloss and bright colors. Department of the interior fish and wildlife service. PLEASE READ AND UNDERSTAND THE PAYMENT AND SHIPPING

Single sided 12" T x 7 1/4" W some minor dings to perimeter some rust mostly on back

DSP. It has very good color and gloss. It shows small chips and minor flaws mainly along the edge. It displays very well and would look great hanging from a bracket. Measures: 45.5"x45.5" Rating: 8.5

SSP. A seldom seen sign from Canadian National Express Service. Sign is in excellent condition, showing excellent color & gloss throughout the field with no chipping and only a minimal amount of surfa

Venture into the heart of American conservation with this highly rare 8-inch porcelain sign, a conceptual piece for the U.S. National Forests that never saw mass production. This sign presents a uniqu

Ande Rooney Reproductions. 7-3/4" to 11-1/2" high x 9" to 11" wide. IMPORTANT: Before bidding, please read the terms and conditions. When you registered for the auction you agreed to these terms and w

DSP. Seldom seen CA. 1940's Porcelain Sign for National Commercial Travelers Association showing United States of America graphic throughout each side. CONDITION: Side one presents very well with exce