AUSTIN, Texas — April 26, 2016 — Spiceworks, the professional network for IT, today announced the results of a new survey exploring the prevalence and challenges of the “Internet of Things” (IoT) in the workplace and the steps IT professionals are taking to prepare for the impact. The study “2016 IoT Trends: The Devices have Landed” found that a majority of IT professionals (53 percent) believewearables are most likely to be the source of a security breach among IoT devices connected to their network, followed by video equipment at 50 percent, physical security at 46 percent, and appliances at 45 percent. The independent study was sponsored by Cox Business, a facilities-based provider of voice, video and data solutions.

The results show while nearly 90 percent of IT professionals believe the influx of connected “things” creates security and privacy issues in the workplace, only one in three organizations is actively preparing for the impact IoT could have on their business.

“The Internet of Things includes everything from smart appliances and wearables to industry-specific devices such as connected medical technologies and sensors in server rooms,” said Matt Olan, IT professional at Pharmacare Specialty Pharmacy. “The problem is that many of these devices have little to no security, and in many cases, they’re even more vulnerable to attacks and misuse than your typical PC. We allow certain IoT devices on our network, but security is always taken into account when planning an IoT deployment.”

Security concerns grow as more devices are connected

Since Spiceworks’ 2014 IoT report “The Devices are Coming,” organizations connecting wearables to their network have nearly doubled, increasing from 13 to 24 percent. IT professionals surveyed acknowledged the presence of connected video equipment, electronic peripherals, sensors, and appliances has also increased.

However, as more devices are connecting to corporate networks, the results shows IT professionals are facing a different mix of challenges. Two years ago, insufficient bandwidth was the number one barrier to keeping users connected to corporate networks and the data they need, but security concerns are now the top barrier at 65 percent, followed by equipment issues at 42 percent. The challenge of insufficient bandwidth was listed third, decreasing from 45 percent to 37 percent in the last two years.

IT professionals were also asked to reveal their biggest security concerns about IoT devices in the workplace. Eighty-four percent said more entry points into the network was most concerning while 70 percent said some IoT manufacturers are not implementing sufficient security measures. Additionally, 68 percent of IT professionals said default passwords and 66 percent said the lack of IoT standards was concerning.

Few organizations are preparing for the impact of IoT

Despite security concerns, a majority of organizations are not actively preparing for the impact of IoT in the workplace. In terms of the top reasons IT professionals are not preparing, 47 percent said the value of monitoring IoT devices is still unclear, 38 percent said they lack the time and staffing resources, and 37 percent said they lack budget.

However, among organizations that are preparing to support IoT, 68 percent are educating end users about risks, 47 percent are investing in security solutions, and 43 percent are investing in infrastructure. While only 12 percent of organizations are investing in new management tools for IoT devices today, nearly 50 percent plan to in the next 12 months.

CIOs and IT lead the IoT discussion in organizations

When asked to reveal who decides whether or not to support IoT devices, 50 percent of respondents said the CIO and IT department lead the discussion and six percent said the CTO, senior tech leaders, and development. However, 31 percent of IT professionals said adding IoT devices isn’t led by one individual or group.

IT professionals were also asked to indicate how the IT department handles the connectivity requirements of internet-enabled “things.” Forty-one percent of organizations have a separate network for IoT devices, but 39 percent are putting them on their corporate network. Notably, 11 percent of organizations don’t allow any IoT devices on their network.

“As the demand to put more IoT devices on corporate networks increases, IT professionals’ security concerns are increasing in tandem,” said Sanjay Castelino, VP of Marketing at Spiceworks. “IT pros are well aware that more end points into the network puts their organization more at risk, but many businesses still aren’t equipped to manage IoT devices and identify potential threats.”

Methodology

The survey was conducted in March 2016 and included 440 respondents from North America and EMEA. Respondents are among the millions of IT professionals in Spiceworks and represent a variety of company sizes including small-to-medium-sized businesses and enterprises. Respondents come from a variety of industries including manufacturing, healthcare, non-profits, education, government, and finance. For more information and a complete list of survey results, visithttp://www.spiceworks.com/marketing/iot-trends/report/.

About Spiceworks Voice of IT

Spiceworks’ Voice of IT shares statistics, trends, and opinions collected from millions of IT professionals on the global technology issues that are important to them.

About Spiceworks

Spiceworks is the professional network millions of IT professionals use to connect with one another and thousands of technology brands. The company simplifies how IT professionals discover, buy and manage an estimated $600 billion in technology products and services each year. Headquartered in Austin, Texas, Spiceworks is backed by Adams Street Partners, Austin Ventures, Institutional Venture Partners (IVP), Goldman Sachs, Shasta Ventures and Tenaya Capital. For more information visithttp://www.spiceworks.com.

Follow Spiceworks on Twitter: http://twitter.com/spiceworks and connect with Spiceworks on Facebook: http://www.facebook.com/Spiceworks.

AUSTIN, Texas — April 28, 2016 — Spiceworks, the professional network for IT, today announced IT professionals can deploy and manage its cloud-based help desk solution on smartphones and tablets via the Spiceworks Help Desk mobile app. Today’s announcement also includes new features to the cloud-based help desk, including service level agreement (SLA) ticket alerting, an IT Knowledge Base, and Spiceworks App Center integration. Collectively, Spiceworks provides a feature-rich help desk solution that can be deployed and managed in a way that works best for the IT professional.

“The IT professionals in my department are often running around the office supporting employees so it’s historically been difficult to address urgent user requests when we’re not at our desks,” said Brad Everts, IT supervisor at TW Garner Food Company. “The mobile app for Spiceworks’ cloud-based help desk gives us the flexibility to open, respond to, and close tickets from wherever we may be.”

Mobile support for Spiceworks’ cloud-based help desk builds on existing capabilities for the on-premises version and provides the same capabilities IT professionals need to support their growing businesses, including unlimited admin and end-user seats, no hosting or storage costs, ongoing updates, and free support. With the mobile app, IT professionals can also receive push notifications on their mobile devices to stay on top of help desk tickets while on the go.

In addition to the push notifications, new features for the cloud-based help desk solution include:

SLA ticket alerting allows IT professionals to create rules that will notify them when tickets are not responded to in a timely manner or closed in a pre-determined amount of time.

User portal updates include Active Directory integration to automatically add end users, authenticate users in the portal, and tag them to tickets.

IT Knowledge Base integration with the Spiceworks Community will be available soon for the cloud-based help desk, enabling IT professionals to easily access and share critical how-tos and tech tips with their colleagues.

Spiceworks App Center integration enables IT professionals to customize and extend their help desk with more than 150 third-party apps to add new features and functionality.

“We’re focused on helping IT professionals become more efficient by enabling them to run their help desk entirely from their phones or tablets,” said Sanjay Castelino, VP of Marketing at Spiceworks. “With a tool that’s easy to deploy and use on the go, IT professionals can now support their growing business in a way that works best for them.”

The Spiceworks Help Desk mobile app is available for download today on iOS- and Android-based smartphones and tablets.

###

About Spiceworks

Spiceworks is the professional network millions of IT professionals use to connect with one another and thousands of technology brands. The company simplifies how IT professionals discover, buy, and manage an estimated $600 billion in technology products and services each year. Headquartered in Austin, Texas, Spiceworks is backed by Adams Street Partners, Austin Ventures, Institutional Venture Partners (IVP), Goldman Sachs, Shasta Ventures and Tenaya Capital. For more information, visit http://www.spiceworks.com.

Follow Spiceworks on Twitter: http://twitter.com/spiceworks and connect with Spiceworks on Facebook:http://www.facebook.com/Spiceworks.

Spiceworks is a registered trademark of Spiceworks, Inc. All other names may be trademarks or registered trademarks of their respective owners.

RIDGEFIELD PARK, NJ – April 27, 2016 – The Polaroid LED camera/camcorder video lighting line is notably powerful and versatile, shining bright where photographers and videographers need it the most. Supporting a number of camera and camcorder models from top brands including Canon, JVC, Nikon, Olympus, Panasonic, Pentax, Samsung and Sony, Polaroid now has the following lighting solutions available for professionals and enthusiasts alike:

Polaroid 350 ultra high-powered super bright LED camera/camcorder video light with barn doors

The Polaroid 350 LED light features an optional diffusion screen to gently soften light and barn doors to direct the light source. The high-powered 350 dual-color LED beam offers variable brightness controls (from 10% to 100% flicker-free) and color temperature controls (between 3200K and 5600K), usable both indoors and outdoors. It can be powered by lithium-ion batteries or through its own power receptacle, making it a versatile lighting solution for photographers and videographers.

Polaroid ultra high-powered super bright LED camera/camcorder video light in 312 and 144 LED options

The Polaroid ultra high-powered super bright LED camera/camcorder video light also comes in both a 312 and a 144 dual-color LED arrangement. Both options include variable brightness controls between 10% and 100% and color temperature controls between 3200K and 5600K and are a dimmable, cool-running source ideal for photographers and videographers both indoors and outdoors. The LED lights can be powered via lithium-ion battery or by its own power receptacle. Each model can be attached to a tripod and comes with a diffusion screen for light softening, a built-in camera hot shoe mount and a swivel head adapter. The 312 LED light comes with an additional handgrip for extended shooting options.

Polaroid 102 LED dimmable camera/camcorder video light

Designed for use with a flash, the Polaroid 102 LED dimmable light has a 102 LED arrangement with variable brightness control from 10% to 100%. It is a pro-grade, high-powered light that offers a cool-running source for photographers and videographers and is suitable for both indoor and outdoor use. It includes four filters for additional creativity – clear diffuser, white, warming and magenta. The flexible Velcro mount system supports most flash models.

Pricing and Availability

The Polaroid 350 LED camera/camcorder video light is available now from Amazon for $159.99 USD and ships with a 350 LED light head, 2 lithium-ion batteries, a dual battery charger, a swivel head mounting adapter, a barn door set, a diffusion filter, a carry case, an AC and DC adapter, a UK and EU plug adapter and a manual.

The Polaroid 312 LED camera/camcorder video light is available now from Amazon for $139.95 USD and ships with a 312 LED light, two lithium-ion batteries, a battery charger, a swivel head mounting adapter, a handgrip for off-camera use, a diffusion filter, a carry case, a UK and EU adapter and a manual. For a full list of Polaroid 312 LED light model options, please visithttp://www.amazon.com/s/ref=nb_sb_noss?url=search-alias%3Dphoto&field-keywords=Polaroid+LED+312&rh=i%3Aphoto%2Ck%3APolaroid+LED+312.

The Polaroid 144 LED camera/camcorder video light is now available from Amazon for $99.99 USD and ships with a 144 LED light, two lithium-ion batteries, a battery charger, a swivel head mounting adapter, a diffusion filter, a carry case, a UK and EU adapter and a manual. For a full list ofPolaroid 144 Led light model options, please visit http://www.amazon.com/s/ref=nb_sb_noss?url=search-alias%3Dphoto&field-keywords=Polaroid+LED+144&rh=i%3Aphoto%2Ck%3APolaroid+LED+144.

The Polaroid 102 LED dimmable camera/camcorder video light is now available from Amazon for $39.99 USD and ships with a 102 LED light, a swivel head shoe mount and four filters.

Request a Media Review Kit

Members of the media are invited to review the Polaroid LED camera/camcorder video lighting solutions. To request a media review kit sample, please contact Mariah Stein atmariah@zazilmediagroup.com.

The Polaroid Brand

Polaroid is one of the most trusted, well-respected and recognizable brands with a rich 75-year history beginning with Polaroid instant film. Our range of products include instant and digital still cameras, high-definition and mountable sports video cameras, tablets and flat-screen TVs that deliver the fun, instant gratification and value for which the brand has long stood. Today, thePolaroid Classic Border Logo rooted in our beginnings of instant photo sharing serves to designate genuine Polaroid branded products. For more information, visit http://www.Polaroid.com.

Polaroid, Polaroid & Pixel, Polaroid Color Spectrum and Polaroid Classic Border Logo are trademarks of PLR IP Holdings, LLC, used under license.

April 19, 2016 – IK Multimedia, creators of the first sample-based virtual instrument, is proud to announce the latest version of SampleTank 3 CS, the free version of SampleTank 3. Now SampleTank 3 CS removes all limitations by unlocking the full software functionality including unlimited editing and import features. SampleTank 3 CS is a standalone player and plug-in that can be expanded with IK’s Instrument Collections that are available at any time from the integrated Custom Shop: Everything from rare pianos to signature artist drums to the new Miroslav Philharmonik 2 CE collection. Legacy VIs, libraries and user samples can also now be imported without restriction. SampleTank 3 CS comes loaded with 30 free instruments, 1.8 GB of sounds, 81 MIDI patterns and 2 loop kits.

Full Sound Editing

SampleTank 3 CS gives users the ability to edit factory and user instruments to meet the needs of every production. Although it was previously only available in the full version of SampleTank 3, now every user can edit any instrument down to the finest detail absolutely free. SampleTank 3 provides a full arsenal of classic and modern filters that can be modulated by LFOs and envelopes that secures its place among the world’s best virtual instruments. From the classic transistor ladder lowpass to the cutting-edge phaser filter, SampleTank 3 CS has it all. With coveted features such as the STRETCH™ Engine and an arsenal of 55 studio-quality plug-in effects processors, SampleTank 3 CS is a powerhouse for the modern music maker.

Harness the full potential of an expanding universe of sounds

SampleTank 3 CS comes with a core collection of sounds that represent every category to get users started. With over 1.8 GB of sample content and 30 different instruments including an audiophile stereo grand piano, the included set makes a strong foundation for music creation. But it doesn’t stop there. Users can expand SampleTank 3 CS with titles from IK’s diverse range of SampleTank 3 Instrument Collections like the American Acoustic, Neil Peart Drums, Cinematic Percussion, Miroslav Philharmonik 2 and much more available as additional purchases that get directly installed into the user’s customizable SampleTank 3 library. Musicians may also import third party samples and their own sounds.

Utilize the best of the past… without being stuck in it

SampleTank 3 CS now provides the ability to import and play instruments from legacy, 32-bit VIs such as SampleMoog, Sonik Synth 2 and SampleTron into SampleTank 3’s contemporary 64-bit architecture. Legacy libraries such as the Xpansion Tank series are also easily imported. This welcome feature now lets users incorporate their legacy sounds into their modern production workflow while providing full editing and effects manipulation for further creative sound design and exploration.

Pricing and availability

SampleTank 3 CS is available now for every musician and studio as a free download from the IK Multimedia web site. SampleTank 3 CS operates as a standalone virtual instrument workstation and player and as a DAW plug-in compatible with all major DAWs for Mac/PC.

For more information, please visit:

www.ikmultimedia.com/sampletankcs

For information about the full version of SampleTank 3, please visit:

www.ikmultimedia.com/sampletank3

RONKONKOMA, NY – April 19, 2016 – Sigma Corporation of America, a leading DSLR lens, camera, flash and accessory manufacturer, today announced it has received three awards from theTechnical Image Press Association (TIPA). Sigma was awarded with the honors of Best DSLR Telephoto Zoom Lens for the Sigma 50-100mm F1.8 DC HSM Art Lens, Best DSLR Wide Angle Zoom Lens for the Sigma 24-35mm F2 DG HSM Art Lens, and Best Professional DSLR Lens for the Sigma 20mm F1.4 DG HSM Art Lens.

The annual TIPA Awards honor the best photo and imaging products introduced during 2015 through 2016. Renowned in professional photo markets across the world, TIPA awards are among the highest accolades photo and imaging products can receive. The TIPA organization has a worldwide membership of 27 photo and imaging magazines from 16 countries across five continents.

“We are once again honored to have the Sigma 50-100mm F1.8 DC HSM Art Lens, the 24-35mm F2 DG HSM Art Lens and the 20mm F1.4 DG HSM Art Lens selected by TIPA for their outstanding quality and impact on the industry. The thorough judging criteria take into account not only the innovation, but also the use of leading-edge technology, design and ergonomics, ease of use as well as the price/performance ratio. We are incredibly proud to have Sigma lenses meet these high standards,” comments Mark Amir-Hamzeh, president of Sigma Corporation of America. “We pride ourselves on designing and manufacturing the very best lenses using today’s most cutting-edge optical technology. I want to thank the Sigma design and manufacturing team for their commitment to engineering excellence and look forward to seeing the inspiring images Sigma fans will create using our lenses.”

To see a full list of this year’s TIPA Award winners, please visit the official TIPA website.

About the Sigma 50-100mm F1.8 DC HSM Art Lens

The newest addition to the Global Vision Art lens line, the Sigma 50-100 F1.8 (75-150mm on 35mm format) mid-range zoom lens delivers outstanding prime lens-like results. Factoring in the APS-C image circle of 1.5x, the 50-100mm F1.8 covers three popular short tele prime focal lengths: 85mm, 105mm and 135mm. It maintains a constant F1.8 aperture, yielding exceptional brightness and resolution throughout the zoom while simultaneously maintaining focus as the lens is zoomed, ideal for videographers.

About the Sigma 24-35mm F2 DG HSM Art Lens

The 24-35mm F2 DG HSM Art is the world’s first full-frame F2 zoom lens, designed with the versatility of a zoom lens married with incredible performance. With premium FLD glass and seven SLD glass elements, it allows for sharp, beautiful image quality. Its large diameter aspherical lens also provides a stunning level of brightness, even ideal at the widest of apertures. Its quick, accurate autofocusing makes it perfect for capturing movement without blurring.

About the Sigma 20mm F1.4 DG HSM Art Lens

The state-of-the-art 20mm F1.4 DG HSM Art is a wide-angle prime lens designed for use with full-frame cameras with additional APS-C sensor support. It is Sigma’s widest large aperture art lens yet and was designed with careful attention on edge-to-edge performance. It includes both FLD glass and five SLD glasses in a 15-element, 11-group design to minimize spherical aberration, axial chromatic aberration and field curvature for incredible image quality. Tested using the proprietary “A1” measuring system, it is ensured with the highest standard of operation for professionals. This lens is perfect for videography, astrophotography, landscape, low-light/indoor and event photography.

About Sigma Corporation

Since 1961, Sigma has worked toward a single, simple goal: To imagine and develop photographic technologies that push the envelope, empower photographers and produce unparalleled imagery. We’ve honored this commitment by maintaining control of our design, research and development, and manufacturing processes in our own Aizu Factory. Our products are built with premium materials and are known worldwide for quality and performance. Our family-owned organization is the largest, independent SLR lens manufacturer in the world, producing more than 45 lenses that are compatible with most manufacturers, including Sigma, Canon, Sony, Nikon, Olympus, Panasonic and Pentax. Sigma Corporation also produces digital SLR cameras and high-definition digital compact cameras. The company is headquartered in Japan, with offices strategically located throughout Europe, Asia and North America. Photography is all we do, and it’s all we’ve ever done.

For information about Sigma, please visit www.sigmaphoto.com or follow the company onTwitter, Instagram and Facebook.

3Pod Monopod (3PVM4A)

3Pod T1 Tilt Head with Quick Release (3PSHT1)

3Pod Monopod with Tilt Head Bundle

Adorama

$59.95 Monopod only

$32.00 Tilt Head with Quick Release

$79.95 with Tilt Head with Quick Release Bundle ($12.00 savings)

If you’ve searched high low for a monopod that you can use in just about any situation, stop looking, this is it. The 3PVM4A Monopod by 3Pod, sold by Adorama is one fine piece of photographic machinery. And for under, a lot under, $100, it’s the best I’ve seen. At a whopping 65.5 inches high (max), it’s comfortable for taller photographers to use, without having to crouch or bend down. I should know; I’m one of those taller photographers. This one also quickly adjusts from two feet high (23.5 inches, to be exact) to any height in between. The fluid base allows you to make smooth panning movements when the feet are down. Without the feet in the down and locked position, you have a standard monopod featuring three fast open/close flip locks for quick and easy height adjustments.

Joseph Butler and I review the 3Pod Monopod with Tilt Head.

The best feature of all. Wait for it. Look at the picture and see if you can figure it out. That’s right! It can stand on its own. At the very bottom of the monopod, you can fold down three locking legs to steady the monopod while you walk away to get yourself on camera, have an interview, or just to check focus. Sure, you can use it like a standard monopod, but those three little legs make this the bringer of the best of both worlds. Frankly, since receiving this, I haven’t used a traditional tripod again. Which in part is some of my excuse for the delay in posting this review.

I suggest purchasing the bundle. You save $12.00 by buying the Tilt Head with Quick Release, so why not make a frugal choice? For $79.95, you get the Monopod, the 3PSHT1, bag, and adjusting wrench. Even if you decide to buy another monopod head, this one will serve you well.

If you’re worried about camera weight on the monopod, let me put your fears to rest. It has held a Canon 60D with 18-135 zoom lens and a shotgun microphone without any issues.

What I really love about this setup is that it’s built for the run-n-gun photo/videographer who also might need to jump in front of the camera to narrate or to introduce a guest. You can walk away with confidence that you’re not going to end up with a smashed camera in the process. For photographers and videographers on the move, the monopod has a large padded handle that’s easy on your hands, plus it’s non-slip feature keeps your equipment safe while you’re running for the shot. The three quick-release height adjustments allow you to keep moving while you adjust the height of the monopod too. And if you don’t want to run with the monopod feet in the down position, they have “step-on” releases so that you can pick up and run without hesitation.

The Tilt Head with Quick Release is a ‘must have’ item because you can remove your camera from the monopod without disturbing the monopod’s position with just a snap of the silver lever you see at the right of the quick release mount. You can also come back and place your camera on the monopod without twisting, turning, or fussing with a ‘pod screw mount. Just place your camera back onto the monopod and turn the lever to secure the quick release mount and start your scene. It is literally a one-two movement and you’re back in business. Plus the Tilt Head stays gravity-centered for vertical shots.

I love the 3Pod monopod. It is the perfect ‘pod for me. It’s not bulky and cumbersome like a tripod, nor is it awkward and always in hand like a traditional monopod. It’s also not a pain to setup and adjust like most tripods are. To me, it’s the best of both worlds. It is the monopod that I wish I’d invented, but for $80, who needs the headache of prototyping, crowdfunding, begging for supporters, and wasting a bunch of energy when 3Pod has created the perfect ‘pod.

Technical Specifications:

Material: Aluminum

Max Height: 65.5 inches

Collapsed Height: 23.5 inches

Weight: 2.2 lb

Max load: 18 lb

MountingReversible: 3/8 and 1/4-20

Leg Lock Type: Flip lock

Leg Sections: 4

Tilt Head Tripod mount: 3/8

Tilt Head Camera mount: Standard ¼-20

Tilt Head Movement: 180° tilt on a single axis

Tilt Head Weight: 9.4 oz

Tilt Head Max Load: 11 lb

Why it’s Frugal: If it isn’t already obvious, the 3Pod monopod-tilt head with quick release is extremely frugal. First, you can buy the pair and save $12.00 (frugal). Second, you don’t have to carry a tripod and a monopod everywhere you go and fumble around with them–you have a monopod that can stand alone (frugal). And third, you don’t have to have another person with you to handle the camera while you go stand in front for an introduction, an interview, or a focus (frugal). It’s the best $80 you’ll ever spend on photography equipment.

As you can see in the video, Joseph and I both love the monopod. We fight over it and it’s hard to pry it from our grubby hands once one of us has it in possession. Seriously, it’s that good. For serious photographers and videographers at any level, this monopod beats any that I’ve ever used or seen. And yes, I’ve used the one that you’ve heard of (Sounds like a character from Lord of the Rings) and this one beats it many times over. The build quality is excellent. The quick release latches are easy to use and quick to adjust. No slips, no tips, and no lost cameras.

Rating: 9.5/10

Recommendation: Buy the bundle, save a small bundle, and enjoy your new favorite and essential accessory.