Our hardware recycling rack is constantly full. Many of the workstations are too good to just toss. We also currently have a number of UPSs with AVR that are ready for their second battery replacement. Soon we will be disposing of a number of 1u and 2u 3 - 7 year old rack mount servers. We tried the route of giving equipment to non-technical employees but some of them expected lifetime support. We are looking for options near our Chicago, Milwaukee, and St. Louis locations.

While in Austin, TX for Spiceworld 2012, we stumbled across a great computer recycling program run by Goodwill. (austingoodwill.org / 512-637-7100) The facility is just a few miles from the conference venue next to the Walmart. They sell used computers with a monitor, keyboard, and mouse for about $100. They also have hundreds of used drives, piles of notebook batteries, and all sorts of miscellaneous parts. They run a small free computer technology museum. The program seems to be a success but Goodwill apparently runs only a couple of these programs across the country. Apparently, none where we are located. The Austin Goodwill is willing to help others to start a similar program.

Again, any ideas in the Chicago, Milwaukee, or St. Louis metropolitan areas? Please post other good programs that you have found anywhere in the country so others may recycle and re-use.

We did explain to our employees that the computers did not come with support. However, a few would sneak questions to our support team as they would cross paths. You know the “I just have one little question” kind of stuff. My team handled it well.

I’d love to find a donation center with a purpose, an organization that could put the equipment to good use, or even help someone in the Spiceworks community who is trying to build a lab environment to improve their skills.

check with local NFP’s.

the one i work for is located next to Peoria IL (about 1/2 between Chicago and StL) and we accept donations of hardware that we can put into use quickly (our last ‘big’ donation was 30+ IBM G40 laptops which are being phased in to replace IBM i1300’s.

I also second Goodwill as a place to give hardware to, i usually stick a bootable *nix (Ubuntu mostly) disk in each computer.

In the Western New York Area - www.edtechday.org - The Educational Technology Foundation of WNY

I’ve been volunteering for over 5 years now (3 on the board). We are always looking for desktops to refurbish and put back into schools, community centers, non-profits etc. With all that’s going on in the economy I’ve noticed companies don’t refresh desktops like they used too so it’s caused a shortage of donated equipment for us. If anyone in our area has as equipment to donate please send me a message and we’ll be happy to pick it up!

I do the same as others have listed - return the system to “as new” as far as OS is concerned, then donate to local charity of choice. If there’s anything useful I can strip out to use as spares for other systems I’m still using then I just take them to Best Buy to recycle (since they’re likely not usable anymore as incomplete systems). I’ve got a handful of old G2 / G3 servers in my basement I’m working on cleaning up now to donate. They’re not anything special, but if they can help some organization in need then all the better.