Venture Capital Deals

Spiceworks, an Austin, Texas-based provider of a social IT management application, has raised $57 million in Series E funding. Goldman Sachs led the round, and was joined by return backers Adams Street Partners, Tenaya Capital, Austin Ventures, Institutional Venture Partners and Shasta Ventures. The company now has raised around $111 million in total VC funding. www.spiceworks.com

Elementum, a Mountain View, Calif.-based Flextronics spinout focused on supply chain management information solutions for the mobile workforce, has raised $44 million in Series B funding fromLightspeed Venture Partners and Flextronics (Nasdaa: FLEX). www.elementum.com

AtTask, a Silicon Slopes, Utah-based provider of SaaS enterprise work management solutions, has raised $38 million in Series D funding. JMI Equity led the round, and was joined by return backers GreenSpring Associates, Escalate Capital and University Venture Fund. www.attask.com

Localytics, a Boston-based analytics and marketing platform for mobile and web apps, has raised $16 million in Series C funding. Foundation Capital led the round, and was joined by return backer Polaris Partners. www.localytics.com

Remind101, a way for teachers to text message students and keep in touch with parents, has raised $15 million in Series B funding. Kleiner Perkins Caulfield & Byers led the round, and was joined by return backers First Round Capital and Social+Capital Partnership. www.remind101.com

TeamSnap, a Boulder, Colo.-based mobile and web service for managing ongoing activities, has raised $7.5 million in Series B funding led by Foundry Group. www.teamsnap.comNewsCrafted, a Los Angeles-based provider of newsletter production solutions for elementary and middle-schools, has raised $1.25 million in VC funding from Broadmark Capital and individual angels. www.newscrafted.com

BaseKit, a UK-based website building platform, has raised £4.5 million in new VC funding. AngelCoFund led the round, and was joined by return backers Eden Ventures, NESTA and Nauta Capital.www.basekit.com

PillPack, a Manchester, N.H.-based pharmacy focused on simplifying medication management, has raised $4 million in VC funding from Atlas Venture, Founder Collective and individual angels.www.pillpack.com

Pichit Me, a Swedish crowdsourced photo marketplace, has raised $3 million in new VC funding led byAlmi Invest. www.pichit.me

Wisembly, a France-based provider of collaborative solutions for corporate meetings, has raised $2 million in VC funding from Alven Capital. www.wisembly.com

Confide, the New York-based app that provides “off the record” messaging solutions for professionals, has raised $1.9 million in seed funding. WGI Group led the round, and was joined by Google Ventures, First Round Capital, SV Angel, Lerer Ventures, CrunchFund, Lakestar, Marker, BoxGroup, Jeremy Stoppelman (CEO of Yelp), Doug Ellin (Creator of Entourage) and Billy Bush. www.getconfide.com

DataRank, a Fayetteville, Ark.-based social media analytics dashboard for brands, has raised $1.4 million in seed funding. New Road Ventures led the round, and was joined by FundersClub and individual angels. www.datarank.com

Private Equity Deals

Aurora Capital Group, via its Aurora Resurgence affiliate, has acquired Arc International Cookware, a maker of multi-material cookware products, from France’s Arc International Group. No financial terms were disclosed. The company will be renamed International Cookware. www.arc-intl.com

Dude Solutions Inc., a Cary, N.C.-based provider of facility management SaaS solutions to school districts and other types of clients, has secured an equity commitment of up to $100 million fromWarburg Pincus. www.schooldude.com

The Gores Group has agreed to acquire German roofing products distributors Melle Dachbaustoffe GmbH and SIG Deutsche Dachbaustoffe GmbH from SIG PLC (LSE: SHI). No financial terms were disclosed, except that Gores transacted the deals via its small-cap fund. www.gores.com

GSO Capital Partners, an affiliate of The Blackstone Group, has committed $200 million of equity capital to Lobo Leasing Ltd., a Dublin, Ireland-based helicopter leasing company.www.loboleasing.com

Kohlberg Kravis Roberts & Co. has completed its previously-announced $160 million investment intoWMI Holdings, a Honolulu-based group that manages the legacy reinsurance business of Washington Mutual Inc. The deal included $150 million of subordinated PIK notes, plus $10.55 million of convertible preferred stock. www.kkr.com

Lindsay Goldberg LLC has agreed to buy the 50% stake it does not already hold in an asphalt joint venture (NuStar Asphalt) from NuStar Energy LP (NYSE: NS). No financial terms were disclosed. The JV has a refinery in Paulsboro, N.J. and a terminal in Savannah, Georgia. www.lindsaygoldbergllc.com

McGraw-Hill Education, a portfolio company of Apollo Global Management, has agreed to acquireEngrade, a Santa Monica, Calif.-based district-level K-12 education platform. No financial terms were disclosed. Engrade had raised $8 million in VC funding from Javelin Venture Partners, Samsung Venture Investment Corp., Kapor Capital and Rethink Education. www.engrade.com

Pamlico Capital has acquired a majority stake in Valued Relationships Inc., a Franklin, Ohio-based provider of tele-health monitoring, monitored medication adherence solutions and medical alert systems. No financial terms were disclosed. www.monitoringcare.com

Ridgemont Equity Partners has sponsored the formation of Pintail Oil and Gas LLC, to be led by former EnergyQuest exec Jory Pacht. The new company will focus on oil and gas properties along the onshore Gulf Coast, and is being supported by a $50 million equity commitment from Ridgemont and company management. www.pintailoil.com

The Riverside Co. has acquired Be Green Packaging, a Santa Barbara, Calif.-based maker of environmentally-friendly products and packaging for the consumer packaged goods and foodservice industries. No financial terms were disclosed, except that Medley Capital provided financing. www.riversidecompany.com

IPO’s

Concert Pharmaceuticals Inc., a Lexington, Mass.-based developer of drugs for spasticity and diabetic kidney disease, has set its IPO terms to 5 million shares being offered at between $12 and $14 per share. It would have an initial market cap of approximately $211 million, were it to price in the middle of its range. The company plans to trade on the Nasdaq under ticker symbol CNCE, with UBS and Wells Fargo serving as lead underwriters. It reports a $141,000 net loss on around $24 million in revenue for the first nine months of 2013. Shareholders include Three Arch Partners (12.8% pre-IPO stake), TVM Capital (12.4%), GlaxoSmithKline (11.8%), Brookside Capital (10.2%), Skyline Ventures (9.4%), Fidelity Investments (6.6%), Greylock Partners (6.3%) and Flagship Ventures (5.9%).www.concertpharma.com

OTHER DEALS

Entegris Inc. (Nasdaq:ENTG) has agreed to acquire ATMI (Nasdaq: ATMI), a Danbury, Conn.-based provider of materials, materials packaging, and materials delivery systems for use in the manufacture of microelectronics devices. The deal is valued at approximately $1.15 billion ($850m net of cash), of $34 per share (26.3% premium to yesterday’s closing price). www.atmi.com

Valeant Pharmaceuticals International Inc. (NYSE: VRX) has agreed to acquire PreCision Dermatology Inc., a Cumberland, R.I.-based provider of dermatology products. The deal is valued at upwards of $500 million, including a $475 million up-front cash payment. PreCision had raised around $48 million in VC funding from such firms as Aisling Capital, NovaQuest Capital Management, Essex Woodlands, MidCap Financial, Frazier Healthcare and Boston Millennia Partners. www.precisionderm.com

Nestle is considering a sale of its Davigel frozen foods business for approximately €300 million, according to Reuters. www.nestle.com

Accel-KKR has completed its previously-announced $514 million cash sale of KANA Software Inc., a Sunnyvale, Calif.–based provider of on-premises and cloud-based customer service solutions, to Verint Systems Inc. (Nasdaq: VRNT). Accel-KKR had paid $41 million to acquire KANA back in 2009.www.kana.com

Discovery Communications (Nasdaq: DISC) and Liberty Global (Nasdaq: LBTY) have jointly approached CVC Capital Partners about acquiring a 49% stake in Formula One, according to the Telegraph. A deal could value the auto racing company north of 6.5 billion. CVC holds a 35% stake in Formula One, and the report did not specify where the other 14% would come from.www.formulaone.com

Francisco Partners has agreed to sell EF Johnson Technologies Inc., an Irving, Texas-based maker of two-way radios and other communications solutions, to JVC KENWOOD Corp. (Tokyo: 6632). No financial terms were disclosed. www.efji.com

McWane Inc., a Birmingham, Ala.-based diversified manufacturing company, has acquired Zinwave Ltd., a UK–based provider of in-building wireless coverage solutions. No financial terms were disclosed. Zinwave had raised over $23 million in VC funding from SEB Venture Capital, Atlas Venture and Scottish Equity Partners. www.zinwave.com

Tribune Co. has completed its previously-announced $170 million cash purchase of Gracenote, an Emeryville, Calif.-based provider of music and video content and technologies, from Sony Corp.Gracenote backers had included Bessemer Venture Partners and Se