Steve Carell wife, is best known to many of her fans as Nancy Carell, a popular American actress, a comedian as well as a writer. She is best remembered for her contributions to The Daily Show, the Saturday Night Live, and The Office. She also appeared as co-creator of the TBS comedy series Angie Tribeca with her husband back in 2016.

Nancy Ellen Carell who is also popularly known as née Walls, is a renowned writer and actress in showbiz. She has starred in a number of popular films over the years. She continues to be an impressive achiever, wife and family woman.

Profile summary

Name: Nancy Carell/ Nancy Walls

Date of birth:19 July 1966

Age: 54 years as of 2020

Place of birth: Cohasset, Massachusetts, United States

Profession: Writer and actress

Spouse: Steve Carell

Kids: Elisabeth Anne Carell, John Carell

Nancy Carell height: 1.73 M

Who is Steve Carell's wife? Nancy Carell biography

Nancy Ellen Carell was born to Robert ad Carol Walls. She has a sibling by the name Tish Vivado. The actress is a well known and respected actress whose years of performance have put her on the mark. She attended Boston College and is an alumnus of the Second City Improv Company.

Career

As an accomplished actress, Nancy's journey on TV began in the late-night variety TV show Saturday Night Live back in the mid-1990s. She later began making appearances on the satire TV program The Daily Show where she stayed for about 3 years, featuring in more 90 episodes from 1999 to 2002.

Moving on, she appeared on her first film in 2003, when she played a minor role as a flight attendant in the comedy movie Anger Management. In later years, she was part of the sex comedy film The 40-Year-Old Virgin.

Was Nancy Carell in The Office? Yes, she was. She was part of The Office, a popular American sitcom. Is Carol from the Office Michael's wife? Yes, she is. Nancy played the recurring role of Carol Stills between 2005 and 2013.

READ ALSO: Christine Taylor: 10 quick facts to know about Ben Stiller's wife

This popular show mimicked people's daily lives as seen through the lives of employees in one of the branches of a fictional Dunder Mifflin Paper Company. The series was well received and appreciated as its popularity grew over the seasons. It even went on to win five Emmy Awards and tones of different other awards and nominations.

Nancy's also featured in a 2009 animated series where she voiced one of the main characters in The Goode Family. This is a comical series that looks at the contemporary society, struggles through the eyes of the family as they try to fit in with the modern social and environmental responsibilities.

By 2011, she was part of the comedy film Bridesmaids, by Paul Feig. In 2012, she appeared in yet another film, Seeking a Friend for the End of the World. In 2017, she featured in 2 episodes of the comedy series, Angie Tribeca.

Nancy Carell films and TV appearances

Nancy has featured in numerous productions. Below are some of her popular appearances so far.

Angie Tribeca - 2006

The Office - 2015 to 2013

Georgia - 2012

Seeking a Friend for the End of the World - 2012

Bridesmaids - 2011

The Goode Family - 2009

The Naked Trucker and T-Bones Show - 2007

The 40-Year-Old Virgin - 2005

Anger Management - 2003

Random Play - 1999

LateLine - 1998

Saturday Night Live - 1995 to 1996

Is Nancy married?

Yes, she is married. Nancy Carell is married to Steve Carell, an actor of great repute. The two first met when Nancy attended Steve's improv class in the Second City comedy troupe in Chicago. She could double as a bar attendant across the street when not in class, and Steve would pop in for a chat.

They exchange a lot of jokes since none of them was bold enough to make the first move at first. In an interview with Ellen in 2015, Steve revealed the kind of exchanges between the couple. They teased each other for weeks until they finally went out when Steve asked Nancy out.

When did Steve Carell get married? The two dated for a while and finally tied the knot on 5 August 1995. How long have Steve and Nancy Carell been married? They have now been married for over 2 decades, 25 years to be precise. They have been blessed with 2 kids. The couple has found a way to balance each other's lives which explains their happy marital life, several years down the line.

Steve Carell family consists of his wife and two children; one boy and one girl. Steve Carell kids are; Elisabeth Anne Carell, a girl, who was born in May 25, 2001. Their second child, a son, John Carell was born in June 2004.

Nancy Carell net worth

According to Celebrity Net Worth, Nancy Carell is worth $80 million. This amount has accumulated over the years from her roles as an actress, writer, and comedian. Her net worth is a combined value of her own net worth and that of her husband Steve Carell.

The couple paid $6 million for their home in LA's Toluca Lake suburb back in 2010. They purchased it from the late actor Jonathan Winters estate. Afterwards, they tore down their existing home to build a 6,600 square-foot mansion. They then sold their former Toluca Lake home in 2012 for a value of $5.1 million.

Steve Carell wife, Nancy Carell is one of the most admirable actresses worth emulating. She has steadily grown her career over the years, and still managed to build a solid relationship with her husband, to grow a strong family.

In other news, Tuko.co.ke published a story about Goldie Hawn. Goldie is one of the old actresses whose value cannot be underestimated. She has been in the industry long enough to be appreciated for her skills considering that she debuted in 1964 as Juliet.

READ ALSO:

Kai Havertz bio: Girlfriend, age, height, stats, Chelsea

Tyler Herro bio: Girlfriend, age, stats, height

Thomas Sanders sexuality, net worth, background, songs

Source: TUKO.co.ke