Steve Carell married his wife, Nancy, in 1995.

Steve and Nancy first met in the famous Chicago improv theater group Second City.

Steve Carell may have left nearly a decade ago, but that certainly doesn’t mean his comedy days are over. In his latest venture, the actor plays General Naird in the Netflix series Space Force.

The new show, which premiered this past May, was created by Steve himself and The Office creator Greg Daniels. That said, we wouldn't be surprised if Steve's wife, Nancy Carell, also helped inspire the series in some way. After all, she is a comedian and has starred alongside Steve before on TV.

In fact, Nancy once appeared as Michael Scott (Steve's Office character)’s girlfriend Carol Stills. Carol was the real estate agent who sold Michael his beloved condominium during season 2. Over the course of eight years (from 2005-2013), Nancy appeared on seven episodes of The Office.

Even now, after 25 years of marriage, some Office fans can't get over how they didn't put the pieces together sooner.

One of the real-life couple’s most memorable moments as a fictional couple happened when Michael proposed to Carol on their ninth date in "Diwali." But Michael and Carol's romance came to an end when Michael Photoshopped his face over Carol's ex-husband’s and then sent it out as a Christmas card of their “family."

“I don’t know how to deal with this thing, and the proposal, and I don’t think things are gonna work out with us,” Carol told Michael in the episode "Benihana Christmas."

Nancy and Steve on The Office in 2006.

Luckily for the Carells, art didn’t imitate life. The couple — who first met in the famous Chicago improv theater group Second City — have the most adorable love story. Here’s what Steve told Ellen DeGeneres in 2015 about how he and Nancy got together in the '90s:

“We were terrible. I worked at Second City, she was taking classes there, but she worked as a bartender across the street, and I used to go in after shows and try to strike up a conversation. We were both very, very timid, sort of nervous, shy people, around each other. And the conversation would go something like, ‘Hey, you know, if I were ever to ask a woman out, it would be someone like you, exactly like you.’ And she’d say, ‘If a guy like you were ever to ask a woman like me out, I would definitely do that.”

He said this went on for weeks before they eventually figured it out and started dating. "I was immediately attracted to my wife. She's beautiful, intelligent, and really funny," Steve told The Guardian in 2013. "She kind of checked all the boxes in my head, but I thought she hated me because she was very quiet around me. I thought she for sure knew that I was full of it, and I later found out that she was just as nervous as I was and trying to act cool."

And when the couple decided to tie the knot, Steve was just as excited about their future together. "I knew early on she was the right one," he said to the outlet. "I'll never forget standing at the altar and I saw her coming down the aisle — immediately a sense of calm came over me. There was an ethereal sense of how right it all was and more than anything it was very empowering knowing that person was going to be my partner and have my back."

They were married in 1995, and they both went on to work as correspondents on The Daily Show With Jon Stewart starting in 1999. During their tenure on The Daily Show, Steve and Nancy welcomed their now-19-year old daughter, Elisabeth. Nancy left the show in 2002, and the couple had their now-15-year-old son, John, in 2004.

Despite Steve's long list of comedy credits, he says Nancy is "way funnier than I am." Three years later, he echoed the same sentiment while chatting with Entertainment Tonight in 2016: "She makes me laugh more than anybody."

Steve, John, Elisabeth, and Nancy Carell in October 2018.

Nancy’s also had supporting roles in (she played Helen’s tennis partner in the hilarious match versus Kristen Wiig), and as the health clinic counselor in . Her first big break, however, was a 17-episode stint on Saturday Night Live from 1995-1996. The couple also got together to create the show , starring fellow Office alum Rashida Jones.

While Nancy and Steve may not have had the best on-screen chemistry in The Office (purposefully, of course), we can't get enough of their off-screen love and support for each other. So what keeps the magic alive after over two decades together?

"There's no secret," Steve said in 2013. "I think you get lucky."

Awww.