See other formats

"-f/f/? v*' sr^:Orin^-t^ mm^'^Mm. ^^%\v ■.^-^ M^m^"^'^ "rC-r^:r^: %#:■ 'y, -» ^ -». ^r^^^^:.!// ^^^ r^'^r^^r<.^k 'mr/im. -^VV^v- :'y^^^^^^^^: 'mfy^% x^fr^.^rN' %jSf^^m •^/ff/^^-^ .^/^ /^/f^/1/!/W'y.-:^^^^.^-; n^(>>^-: "'■' v^ Mnh^^ ^i^ . r^^\^^ ^e .^^'(^^^ .r^J^^^^f^, ^ .Ai i^<hf^^^^nJ '■ wm ij^^r. l"<^#A-Vn- V ^VWfM ./j^'1!>1' 'i*^^ >i7^ ,n 1 NOVITATES ZOOLOGIGAE. Vol. YII., 1900. NOVITATES ZOOLOGICAE H Jouvnal of Eooloi3\> IN CONNECTION WITH THE TRING MUSKl'M. KDITED BY The Hon. WALTEE EOTHSCHILD, Ph.D., EENST HAETEET, and Dr. K. JOEDAN. Vol. VII., 1900. (WITH TWELVE PLATES.) Issued at the Zoological Museum, Thing. TRIKTED BY HAZELL, W.iTSO>'. >t VINEY, Ld., LOSDOS" AND AYLES^BURY. 1900. CONTENTS OF VOLUME VII. GENERAL SUBJECTS. (Cf. pp. 1, 12, 25, 54, 55, 244.) MAMMALIA. PAGES 1. On a New Race of Ibex. Walter Rothschild. (Plate II.) .... 277 2. On a New Species of Monkey (Cercocehm chri/soijaster). R. Lydekker. (Plate III.) 279 3. The Red Flying Sijuirrel of the Natuna Islands. Oldfield Tikjmas . . 592 4. On two Mangaljey-like Monkeys. R. Ltdekker 593 — 59() AVES. 1. The Birds of Ruk in the Central Carolines. Ekx.st IIarteut . . 1 — 11 2. The Birds of Dammer Lslaud in the Banda Sea. Ernst Hartekt . . 12 24 3. Another small Contribution to African Ornithology. Ernst IIarteht . 25 53 ( vi ) PAGES 4. The Birds of Biiiu. Ernst Harteht. (rh.lelV.) 2:iG— 242 5. On Turacus chalcolophiis Neumann. Ernst Uartert. (Plato I.) . 278—270 C. On the Diids of Southern Arabui. W. K. Ooilvie-Grast. (Pkle X.) . 213—273 7 Additions to tho List of Ijirds of Southern Arabia. W. K. Ogilvie-Grant . 591 8. Miscellaneous Notes on Palaearctic Birds. Ernst IIartert , . . 325—534 9. Ueber die Gattung Polioptila. C. E. Hellmatr 535—538 10. On the Genus Scaeorhijachas. Ernst Hartert 548 11. List of a, Colleetion of Bii-ds from the Lingga Islands. Ernst Hartert. 549 — 550 12. The Birds of the Banda Islands. Ernst Hartert 551 — 554 LEPIDOPTERA. 1. Description of (he hitherto unknown Female of (Joielus mlrahilis. Walter ROTHSCUILD 24 2. Description of New Species of Butterflies from Milne Bay, British New Guinea. 11. Grose-S.mitii 86 — 89 3. New (ienera and Species of 'I'hyrididae and Geometrukie from Africii. W. Warren 90-97 4. New Genera and Species of Drcpamdldac, Thyrldidae, Epiplemid<ie and Geo- melridae from the Indo- Australian and Palaearctic Regions. W. Warren 98-110 5. New Genera and Species of American Drepanulidae, Tltyrididue, Epipleinidae and Geometridae. W. Warren ........ 117 — 225 G. On some New or recently described Lepidoptera. Walter Botiischild. (Plate V.) 274—276 ( vii ) PAGES 7. A Monograph of Charaxi>s ami the Allied Prionopterous Genera. (Plates VI., VII., \in., XI , XII.) (Continued from Vol. VI.) . . . 281—524 8. De.scriptions of New African Species of Aa-aeinae. II. Grose-Ssiitii . . 544 — 547 9. The Lepidoptera of Burn. W. J. Holland: — Part I. Rhopalocora 54 — 85 Part II. Hetei-ocera 555—591 SIPHONAPTERA. 1. Notes on Pulex avium. N. C. PlOthschild. (Plate IX.) . . . 5.39 — 543 LIST OF PLATES IN VOLUME VII. Plate T. Tiinicus c/iakohphns Neum. (African Plaintainoater. ITand-coloured plate from one of the typical specimens by J. G. Keulemans ) ., II. Cap-a sibirica li/dekkeri riotliscli. (1 land-coloured plate from the type specimen by J. Smit.) III. Cercoceliux chri/sogaster Lyd. (A new mangabey-like Monkey. Hand- colonred plate from the typo by J. Smit.) I^'. Hand-coloured plate by 3. G. Kculimans of three Birds, from the typo specimens : }[ij-,omela tdhl.yu.la Hart. J from Ecssel I. (cf. Nov. Zool. VI., p. 79); Knjthrmw/ias huruensis Hart. ^, and OeocicMa diimasi Eothsch. (J, from Burn. (The iinder-surface of the Erijlln-diiii/ias is, thi'ongh a fault of the <olourist, too yellowi>h in some copies of the plate!) ,, V. Seven species of J.epidoplera. (See explan.ation of Plate V. Hand-coloured plate by W. Piirkiss.) „ VI. . '-Photocraphie plates of Cluirayes. (See explanation opposite to plates.) „ VJI. J ,. VIII. Genital armature of various forms of Clifi-mxes. K. Jordan del. (See explanation.) „ IX. Morphological details of various species of Ceratophyllus. K. Jordan del. (See explanation.) ,, X. Lithographic map of Southern Araliia, showing tho routes taken by the Pereival-Dodson expedition. ,, ^^ I. I Colour-typo plates of various I'/iuraxes. By Karl Jlcntschcl. (Photo- „ XII. J graphed from nature.) NOVITATES ZOOLOGICAE. Vol. Vn. MAECH, 1900. No. 1. THE BIRDS OF EUK IN THE CENTRAL CAROLINES. ERRATA. Page 26, line 18, /w " Corythaeala " read Corythaeola. 35, line 7 from the top, for " Melitta " read MeUttophagiis. 41, line 3 from the bottom, /or " Lagonostica " read Lagonosticta. 339, line 3 from the top, fm- " Copsychus salamis " read Copsychus saularis. 357, line Vi, for " Philagnoma " read Fhiloguoma. 534, line 1 4, for " Lyons " read Lyon. 541, line 3 from the bottom, for " Columba oeneas " read Coloiuba oenas. spoudent, Mr. Alan Owstou, in Yokohama, who collected so successfully on Guam and Saipan in the Marianne Islands,* proceeded to Rnk and' sent a large collection to Tring. The most important feature of this collection is the new Tephras (No. 3), and the very fine series of nests and eggs of nearly all the species inhabiting the island. The notes on the colours of the soft parts are all given from Ridgway's Nomenclature of Colours, and we may say that we have found them most accurate. The nests and eggs were also labelled with the greatest care and accuracy. Out of many hundreds of nests and eggs in the two collections we could not trace one error, and had only one doubtful egg of a Tern, which is not mentioned in either list. To enable a reader of this article to inform himself of the entire bibliography on the species, I have to all the species added the no. and jtage of Wiglesworth's * Cf. Nov. ZooL. V. p. 51. 1 (2) most accurate and useful work Acea Polf/ncsiae, in AUiamll. (f- lierii-hte Aftis. Dresden 1891. The literature on the birds of Enk Island is tlins briefly summarized :— 1853 : Hombron and Jacquinot in V„!/. POle Su<l. Alla.^, Jacquinot & Paoh, Zonl. v. III. 1880 : Finsoh, P. Z. .S. pp. 574-77 (Birds of Ruk). 1891 : Wiglesworth, Avea Pnhjnesiae p. VII. (List of Caroline Birds). 1897 : Hartcrt, BnU. B. O. Club VII. p. 5 {Tephro.-: riil.i). 1899 : Nehrkorn, Kalalog d. Elers. (Descr. of some Eggs). 1. Myzomela rubratra (Less.) (Wiglesworth No. 131, ]). :il). Evidently very nnmerons on Ruk Island. Its native name is " yite/mfjal." " Bill black (PI. II. fis. 1, Ridgway's Xo/nencl. Col.) ; iris bnrnt umber (Ridgway III. 8) ; legs and toes slate-grey (II. 5) ; claws black." Nov. ZooL. V. p. ■>■), I have said thut females differ from the /mi/es not (inly ill size, but also in having olive-brown wings and greenish olive edges to the remiges. I find now, however, that these are characters of immature femoles only, and that the fully adult female differs from the male only in its smaller size, and generally in a somewhat more restricted extent of the red on the back iuid abdomen. Many nests were found from the end of Jlay to Jnly, and (inc in JIarc.h. The nests and eggs are described in Nov. Zool. V. p. 56. On (inam they were collected in January, Febrnary, and March. ~. Zosterops semperi owstoni subsp. nov. (Wiglesworth No. 183, p. :iT, /w/-^m I). The greenish Zosterops of Ruk, hitherto united with typical Z. semperi from the Pelew Islands, is, in fact, different. As all the land-birds of Ruk, except the widespread Mi/zomela riibrata, are more or less different from those of the Pelew Islands, this is not at all remarkable. The differences, however, are so slight, that I prefer to regard them as representative forms of one species, and to designate the Ruk form as above, as a compliment to Mr. Alan Owston, of Yokohama, who organized the collecting expedition to the Marianne nnd Cavoliiie Islands tor Mr. Rothschild. Z. semperi owstoni differs from Z. semperi semperi in the following characters : The colonration of the upperside is less yellowish, but more green. The ear-coverts are more olive-greenish than in Z. semperi semperi, where they are paler and more yellowish. The spot on the lores and under the fore part of the eye, which is indistinct and dnsky, is pnre black and more distinct. The whitish edge on the inner web of the outer rectrices is less developed. The ujiper bill, which is horn-brown in Z. semperi semperi, is black. We have received a large series from Ruk, which I have compared with three Pelew specimens, kindly lent by the authorities of the Liverpool Museum, and two in the Tring Museum, collected by the late Mr. Kubary. The collectors have marked the up])er bill as " pure black, iris raw-sienna (Ridgway V. 2) ; feet pale slate colour." The native name is " Nikikitebu." Nests with single eggs were found from May to July. They were j)laced in various heights, bnt generally between four and eight feet high, in various bushes and trees. They are very neatly woven of fine halms and fibres, and outside nicely ornamented with cobwebs and white cocoons or wool. Some lianu: in ihi' fork of a (3) twig, exactly like an Oriole's nest. The eggs are pale blue, like all Zosterops eggs, and measure : 17-.5 : 12-8, 17-7 : 12-5, 18 : 12, 16-5 : 12, 170 : 13, 17 : 12-3 mm. Zosterops conspicillata of Guam lays generally two and even three eggs. The fact that so many Passeres on the Pacific Islands lay only one egg is com- mented on by Wiglesworth in " Aves Polynesiae " p. V., where this noticeable fact is explained as a " remarkable preventative of a too rapid multiplication." 3. Tephras ruki Hart. {Bull. B.O. Club v. VII. p. ."), October 1807). Entirely sepia-brown, a shade darker on the crown, the outer edges of the inner webs of the remiges and the under wiug-coverts paler, the former inclining to whitish ; the primaries darker, almost black, their outer webs bordered with the colour of the back. No complete white ring, bnt a narrow semi-ring round the eye, only visible in well-skinned specimens. Bill black, legs and feet light orange-rufous ; claws brown, iris poppy-red. Total length about 135 — 148 mm. ; wing 78 — 83, tail o2 — 53, bill 15—17, culmen from forehead 21, metatarsus 21. The sexes do not seem to differ, unless ih.e female is a little smaller than the male. The native name is " Nikildon." Only eight specimens were obtained in November and December. It is most peculiar that the late J. Kubary, who was an excellent collector, and who spent more than fourteen months on link, did not obtain this bird. It is probably not numerous, and occurs only on a certain secluded spot not visited by Kubary. I have provisionally accepted Hartlanb's generic term Tephras, because I think this group may with advantage be separated from the host of Zosterops. T. Jinschi, the type of Tephras, and T. ruki agree and differ from typical Zosterops in the following characters : — the first primary, which in typical Zosterops is quite reduced and not visible from below, is well developed and visible from below (7 mm. in T. Jin.ichi, 10 — 11 in T. ruki), the bill is longer, the feet (especially in T. ruki) very strong, the colouration almost uniform brown. I do not know if Zosterops cinerea and Z. poiuipensis belong to this same group, bnt I doubt it, because (judging from the figures) they have the typical Zosteropine bill, although in the style of colouration they are like Tephras. T. Jinschi differs from T. ruki in its much smaller size and lighter under- surface. 4. Acrocephalus (Tatare of many authors') syrinx (Kittl.). (Wiglesworth No. 209, p. 41). We have received a large number of specimens. Females do not differ from males, except in being slightly smaller : wings of males average 80 — 81 mm., of females 76 — 77 mm. Young birds do not differ from adults, except in being somewhat lighter and more yellowish. In November, especially in the latter half of this month, a good many were in moult. " Iris mars-brown (Ridgway III. 13) ; upper bill brownish slate-colour, lower cream-colour. Legs and toes dark grey. Length in the flesh about 6-7 inches." Many nests, most of them containing one fresh egg, some two, were found from the end of May to the beginning of July. They stand on bread-fruit, cocoanut-palm, and ivory-palm trees, and in bushes, in a lieight from about 7 to 20 feet. The nests are strongly woven together and constructed of dry grass, fibres of cocoannt palms and other fibres, dry leaves and similar material. (4) and form a very deep cnp, like nests of other Heed-warblers. They are, however, evidently Dot hanging up on reeds or twigs, like those of onr Acrocephali. The eggs are white, covered with darker and lighter brown patches and smaller spots, and underlying ashy grey or lavender-grey spots. These spots are generally thicker near the broad end, sometimes forming a loose ring, and they are some- times eqnallv spread over the whole surface. Four dozens measure: 24:15-7, 23:16, 25-2": 18, 21-5: 10-2, 22o : lo-9, 21-5: 16-2, 2]-5:10-l, 21-o : 15-7, 24:15, 22-5: 16-4, 23:16, 22:15-1, 22-5:15-7, 22:16, 23:16, 225 : 16-5, 22-5:16-6, 22-5: 15-5, 22:16, 205:17, 21:161, 22:16-1, 20-7:161, 23:15-6, 22:21-5, 23 : 16, 21-6 : 16.3 mm., and so on. Nehrkorn, Kat. Eiersamml., p. 33, gives 21 — 23 : 15 mm., and mentions the whitish (instead of greenish) ground-colour. 5. Metabolus rugensis Hombr. & Jacq. (Wiglesworth No. 71, p. 19 ; Cat. B. Brit. Mus. IV. p. 238 ; Finsch, P.Z.S. 1880 p. 575.) The extraordinary sexual dimorphism in the colouration of this bird, and the colour of their young has not been fully understood. In the Catalogue of Birds (IV. p. 238), the adult 7nale is correctly described as white with black throat and forehead, and partly blackish shafts to the rectrices and remiges. The adult female, however, is not correctly described in that work. What is described there as the adult female is evidently a young female changing to the adult dress. The admixture of white on the abdomen and under tail-coverts in that description is somewhat peculiar, but the description is made from Hombron and .Jacquinot's figure, in which the white is accidental or an addition of the artist. The aAwM female is quite sooty black all over. This was evidently known to Dr. Finsch, for {P.Z.S. 1880 p. 575) he says : " Young females change from the cinnamon into the black garb." This same author, however, was of opinion that the adult male changes into a sooty black plumage in August, while in July they are still in full white dress. He says, after describing the adult male : " In August the same birds are of a uniform dull sooty black." Such is not the case, but the black birds are the adult females only, while young birds are of a cinnamon colour, paler and almost white below. E.Kamples changing from the cinnamon dress to both the white of the adult male and the black of the adult female, were obtained in December, bnt some also in November and January, and one in June. The plumages of this bird may thus be briefly diagnosed : White with black throat and forehead : cj ad. Uniform sooty black : ? ad. Cinnamon : S and ? juv. Mixed cinnamon and white : S hab. trans. Mixed cinnamon and black : ? hab. trans. The birds in transitional plumages are remarkable in many ways. Although they are, of course, passing through a moult, there are males in evidently cleanly moulted jilnmage with a great amount of cinnamon to the feathers, especially their tips and outer webs. The question now arises, and cannot be settled by me at present, whether these individuals retain this cinnamon colour until the next moult, or whether it is lost before— in the latter case we would have to accept a change of colouration without moult. I may remark that the usual abrasion cannot produce this change, as there is too much cinnamon in the plumage. In ( 5 ) an evident young female (though not sexed) the tail consists of some abraded old cinnamon feathers, and of the fresh sprouting feathers some are black, others side by side with the black, cinnamon, and some mixed black and cinnamon. This same specimen has mixed feathers on many parts of its body and wings, while sprouting remiges are sooty black. Some of the adult males have the black tips to the wings more extended ^ while in others they are nearly quite absent. Two adult females have single tail-feathers pure white or irregularly marked with white, and one has a quite white chin, while most examples have only three to sis tiny chin-feathers white. The adult male and female have the bill and feet slaty grey, the iris clove- brown. The young have the base of the lower bill yellowish. The local name is "Ouaf" or " Uaf," and from the natives having the same name for all the plumages it is evident that they are aware of their history. The species is apparently only to be found on Ruk Island. Its song is strong and pleasant. Two nests were found on June 1st and 4th, both twenty feet high, on bread- fruit trees. A third was taken on June 12th on a " Chiiya" tree. The nests are built of dry palms, of fibres and grass, with a few decomposed leaves and rootlets, and each contains one single egg only. According to Finsch (Proc. Zool. Soc, 1880, p. 57.5) Kubary found either one or two eggs. The eggs are cream-coloured, speckled with brownish red, more frequently and often very thickly on the large end, and with some deeper lying pale purplish grey patches, and one has some very fine black lines on the large end. The eggs measure : 256 : 18-4, 26-5 : 18-6, and 26-i3 : 10-.5 mm. The shape is that of shrikes' eggs. A very good figure of the egg is given on pi. I., fig. 5, in Nehrkorn's " Kataloij der Eiersammluny ^'' (j. Myiagra oceanica Jacq. & Pach. (AViglesworth No. 101 p. 2:5.) (Nehrkoru, Kat. Eiersamml. p. 30, Egg I) Very numerous on Ruk Island. The female difi"ers from the adult incile in having the crown not steel-blue, but dark grey, with a faint steel-blue gloss, and in being very little smaller — the wing perhaps two or tliree millimetres shorter. " The iris is seal-brown (Ridgway pi. III. 1) ; the upper bill blue-black, with a pale plnmbeous streak near the cutting-edge ; lower bOl dark plumbeous ; legs and toes blackish slate-colour." Native name on Ruk " Koi-Koi." A good many nests were found from March to July, but chiefly in June. They contained all one egg only, but one had two, of which, however, one was broken by the finder. The nests are neatly and strongly woven, beautifully round and somewhat flat. The bottom is thick, but the walls thiu. They are composed of fibres and rootlets, and outside are more or less ornamented, with pale greyish green lichens and cobwebs, some very beautifully. They are placed on l)read-frnit and other trees, about seven to twenty feet from the ground. The eggs are pale greenish or brownish white, not much pointed, generally marked with a wide belt round the middle, closely resembling many shrikes' eggs. The spotting is generally reddish brown, but sometimes of a paler brown, often spread all over the egg, and there is nearly always some lavender-grey or ashy grey colour in the form ot underlying patches and spots. Some eggs are white with only a few small brown ( 6 ) spots. The eggs measure: 21:16, •>! : 15-8, 21:10, 21-5 : 15-G, 22-1 : 163, 21 : 16, 20 : 15, 2(Jo : 150, 20 : 15, 21 : 15-5, 21 : 16, 21 : 16-1, 20 : 15-6, 20 : 15-1, 21-5 : 10-1. 2(i-r) : 101, 20-5 : 14-8, 20 : 10-2. 2I>1 : 14"), 20 : 15-5, 21 : 10 mm. T. Aplonis kittlitzi Fiuscli & Hartl. (Cf. Nov. ZoOL. V. p. 58.) (Wiglesworth No. 239 p. 44.) Common. " Iris deep yellow ; bill aud feet black." The natives seem to believe that the striped, immature birds are belonging to a different species, aa they call — according to onr collectors — the uniform glossy black birds " Aga," the striped ones " Boei." Numerous nests were found from May to July and one in March, all in holes of trees, in various heights from four to nearly twenty feet. The clutches consisted of one, two, and three eggs. The eggs vary much in size and shape, but are always similar to other spotted Starlings' eggs. Most of them are light bine, marked witli rufous brown and lavender-grey or purplish grey. One is very pale, almost white, aud is at the same time the smallest, measuring only 28'3 : 20-3 mm. The two largest eggs from Ruk measure: 31-5:22 and 33-5:22 mm. 8. Erjrthrura trichroa (Kittl.). Fringilla trichroa, Kittlitz in Mem. Acad. Petersb. 1835. 8 pi. 10 ; Salvadori, Oni. Papvas. e Moluc. n. p. 442 (1881) (parlim !) ; Sharpe, Cat. B. Brit. Mus. XUI. p. 385 (^partim !) ; Wiglesworth No. 220 p. 42 (Carolines only !). Erythrura glauca (sjiec. ix spirit !), Finsch in J. M. Godeffroy 1876, XII. p. 35. We have received a large series from Kuk Island. The local name is "Lugopal." "Iris seal-brown (Ridgway III. 1); bill black; legs and toes wood- brown ; claws paler brown." Specimens shot in November are mostly in moult. The somewhat remarkable distribution attributed to Enjthrura trichroa— •<r\z., Carolines, Northern Moluccas, New Guinea, and Solomon Islands— led Mr. Rothschild and me to study this species more closely, and wc found that it is separable into a number of geographical forms : a. Erythrura trichroa trichroa (Kittl.). Carolines : Kushai, Ponape, and Ruk. Wc have not been able to examine skins from Kushai, but those from Ponape aud Ruk are perfectly alike, aud the description and figure of the types from Kushai agree entirely with them. These birds are of a dark green, the under wing-coverts are generally washed with greyish-brown, the wing does not exceed 60 mm. in length, being 56 — 60 mm. long. h. Erythrura trichroa modesta Wall. Wallace in Froc. Zool. Soc. Loyid. 1802 p. 351. Moluccas : Batjan, Ternate, Halmahera. Specimens from the three islands iu the Tring Museum. Generally of a less deep and more yellowish green, especially on the underside. The under wing-coverts are clear buff, without the greyish wash so frequent in E. trichroa trichroa. The wing is always over 60 mm. long, reaching from 62 — 05 mm. (7) c. Erythrura trichroa papuana subsp. nov. Differs chiefly in its larger size. The beak is mach thicker than in the allied forms, the wing iu one male from Arfak is fnlly 07 mm. long. The colour is of a deep green. The bine on the head in the one male before us occupies practically the entire crown of the head, while in forms a and b it does not reach beyond the hinder margin of the eyelids in the middle of the crown. Salvadori, Oni. Papuas. c Mol. II. p. 442, has already mentioned the large size of an Arfak specimen, and the less intensely green colour of the Moluccan skins. tl. Erythrura trichroa woodfordi subsp. nov. Solomon Islands: iVola, on Guadalcanar. Sharpe (Cat. B. Biit. Mas. XIII. p. 380) has remarked that the bine frontal band is narrower, and that they are " otherwise identical with those from Ternate." They are indeed as yellowish green as Ternate ones, and the bill is not as thick as in those from Arfak. The wing of two females in the Tring Museum is 03—64 mm. long. This form is certainly not our form c, bnt very near to form h, from which it seems merely to difier in a narrower frontal band, and perhaps a somewhat longer wing. e. Erythrura trichroa cyanifrons E. L. Layard. Ann. and Mag. Xat. Hist. (5), I. p. 374 (l.s78) ; Wiglesworth No. 216 p. 42. New Hebrides : Tauna, Erromango. Differs in its much smaller size from forms a, b, c, d. In colouration it is like a ; wing 54 — 55 mm. Kr. trichroa was frequently found nesting on Ruk Island in March, May, iiud June. The nests are large and very loose structures with a big opening on the side, so that the eggs are easily seen in the nest. The nests are placed on banana-trees and bushes. The eggs are three to five in number, of a glossless white, and measure : 17 : 13, 17-6 : 13, 15o : 12, 16-3 : 12-2, 16 : 13-5, 16-8 : 12-3, 10"1:12-1, 161 : 13-5 mm., and so on. Nehrkorn, Kat. Eiersammlitng, gives 17 : 13 mm. 0. Urodynamis taitiensis (Sparrm.) (Wiglesworth No. 47, p. 11). Ruk, 1. 7. Is90. Local name: " Nikiyap." Only this one specimen was obtained. 10. Ptilinopus ponapensis Finsch. (Wiglesworth No. 261, p. 50). Very common. Local name : " Ute-ute." " Colour of bill light apple-green ; iris between cadmium yellow and chrome yellow (Ridgway PI. VI. figures 6 and 8) ; feet light chrome-yellow ; claws blackish slate." The sexes of the adult bird are perfectly alike, only the female has the wing generally 2 or 3 mm. shorter. In the first plumage of the young bird the feathers of the upper and underside, and especially those of the wing-coverts, are tipped with yellow; head and neck uniform dark green. In the next stage the plumage is like that of the adult bird, except that the crown is still green and the hind-neck more greenish. I have not seen sufficient material from Ponape to say with certainty that ( 8 ) l)irds from Ruk and Ponap6 are entirely tlie suuu', but Finsch ami other antliorities inform us that they are the same. Open nests on boughs of large trees were found in May and June. They contained two eggs, measuring 33 : ^3, 33-5 : 23-5, 33 : 23, 33-3 : 22, 33 : 232 mm- They are all remarkably pointed on one end, the narrowed point being very short. 1 1 . Carpophaga oceanica (Less.). (Wiglesworth No. 206 p. .52 ; (jlobicera oceanica, Salvailori, (''at. B. Brit. Mas. XXI. p. 170). Common on Rnk. Local name: " Muranoniloy." "Colour of bill blackish slate-colour ; iris carmine ; feet light rose-red, claws black." This species differs widely from C. pacijica in its chestnut abdomen and thighs. One specimen (adnlt male) has a wide light chestnut bar to the tip of the tail, and most of the feathers of the uj)perside tipped or edged or overspread with chestnut, some others show the same peculiarity in a lesser degree. A young bird {fcmaU) has the crown and hind-neck much darker than the adult ones, and the abdomen washed and spotted with blackish brown. 12. Phlegoenas kubaryi Finsch. (Wiglesworth No. 28-1 p. .55.) ■\Vhile we received a great number of the Ptili7ioptis, only eight of this fine pigeon were sent. The: female is a little smaller than the male. " Colour of bill blackish slate-colour ; iris seal-brown ; legs and toes dark ]>ink ; claws mouse- grey."' The local name is " Sleep." I have no Ponapfi specimens to compare, but specimens fiom Rnk and Ponape are said to be alike. Phlegoenas hiharyi differs at a glance from P. xanthonura (= pampiisan = tirgo, cf. Nov. Zool. V. p. CO) in having a slate-coloured hind-neck and posterior part of the crown, but, as young P. xanthonura also have a slaty brown hind-neck and posterior part of crown, the young of P. xanthonura is very near to a dull kubaryi, and the two forms might perhaps better be considered to be subspecies only. 13. Numenius phaeopus variegatus (Scop.). (Wiglesworth No. 333 p. 06.) One pair shot ou Jlay 5th. {N. phaeopus of Finsch in Proc. Zool. Soc. 1880 p. 570.) 14. Limosa lapponica novaezealandiae (Gray). (Wiglesworth No. 332 p. 06). One male, October 18th. 15. Totanus incanus (Gm.) (Wiglesworth No. 32'J p. 65). Obtained in February and October. One adnlt female shot June 15th, 18'J5, with a wing fully 181 mm. in length. Hi. Heteropygia acuminata (Horsf) (Wiglesworth No. 327 p. 64.) Not rare in February and early in March. Local name : •' Klyn." ( 9) IT. Charadrius Mvus (Gm.) (Wiglesworth No. 322 p. (33). Common on February Otli. 18. Aegialitis mongolus (Pall.). One female, February 8th, 18iHi. Local name: " Klyn." Not mentioned by Wiglesworth and Finsch. 19. Squatarola squatarola (L.) One /email', Rnk, January 20th, 1890. Not mentioned by Wiglesworth and Finsch. 20. Strepsilas interpres (L.) (Wiglesworth No. 320 p. G3.) Common in February and March. 21. Poliolimnas cinereus (Vieill.) (Wiglesworth No. 312 p. 01.) Five specimens sent from Rnk. The local name is " Iliilinebon." (Nov- ZoOL. V. J). 64). Two nests were found on the swampy ground among the reeds, one con- taining four, the other three eggs. The eggs are pale buff, or cream-colour, .speckled all over with brownish rufous, more frequently near the broad end. In some eggs these spots are larger, in others minute, and there are often some underlying pale purplish grey spots. If held against the light the eggs shine through very pale greenish yellow. They measure : 32 :22-8, 3M : 23.1, 33:23.5, 30-3 : 22-4, 30-2 : 235, 31 : 233 mm. 22. Micranous leucocapillus (Gould). (Wiglesworth No. 3T0 p. 77, sub nomine sinous melanogenys .) Haifa dozen specimens were shot in November. Local name, " Pohlicki." 23. Anous stolidus pileatus (Scop.) (.1. stolklus, Wiglesworth No. 375, p. 76). Lepetit Fouquet des Philqqiiiies, Sonnerat, Voyage a hi Nouv. Guinee p. 125, pi. 85 (1776). Stemct pileaki, Scopoli, Dtl. Faiiii. el Flor. Insuhr. II. p. 92, no. 73, ex Sonnerat (178G). Stermi philippina, Latham, Iiul. Oni. II. p. 805, ex Sonnerat (1790). Annus rotis'ieaui, Hartl. Beitr. Oni, Madagoiicar, p. 8*i (1861). Amuxfmtei; Cones in Pmc. Acad. Philad. 1862 p. 558 (South Pacific). Anous stolidus rousscaui, Ridgway in Proc. U.S. Nat. Mns. XIX. pp. 645, 646. Messrs. Cones and llidgway are perfectly correct in separating the Noddy of the Pacific from that of the Atlantic Ocean. The tail of A. s. pileatus is longer and more graduated than that of .1. 3. stolidus, the pileum more greyish and never so whitish, the general colouration more sooty and not so brown, the wing generally longer. There is, however, no donbt that Sterna pileata is the oldest term for this form, and that also Sterna pldlippina applies to it. Both these names are based on the ^' Petit Fouquet des Philippines" of Sonnerat, who distinctly describes (and figures rather badly) a white-crowned Noddy. The facts, that only Anous stolidus and not Micranous leucocapillus is known to frequent the Philippines, and that Sonnerat describes the size of his bird as twice that ( 10 ) of Sterna anaetheta, and that he calls the bill curved, force ns to accept his name for the Pacific form of the Anons atolidns. For waut of better knowledge 1 follow Kidgway iu uniting the form from Madagascar and the southern Indian Ocean with the Pacific one, but I agree with Ridgway that a furtlier subdivision may in fntnre be necessary, and I think specially that it is likely that the Red Sea bird {Anoiia plumbeigularis of Sharpe) may be found to differ, if a large series is studied. Oar collectors found Anotis stolidm pileatus frequent on Rnk Island. Local name, " Pohlicki." Nests, containing one egg each, were found from March to July 1st " on ' Tako " trees, or on the roots of Mangrove bashes." The " Tako " is described as a " tall tree resembling the cocoanut palm." 24. Sterna bergii Licht. (Wiglesworth No. 304 p. 74). Ruk, December 5th, 1895, and May 7th, 1896. Local name " Nipawalne " or "Nipowalne." 25. Sterna melanauchen Temm. (Wiglesworth No. 367 p. 74). One specimen (? ?) was obtained on February 1890. It agrees fairly well with Saunders' description of the immature bird iu Cat. B. Brit. Mus. XXV. p. 128, but the wing-coverts are nearly white, the four outer pairs of rectrices are marked with black on the outer webs. 26. Gygis alba kittlitzi Hart. {Gygis alba Wiglesworth No. 381 p. 78). Frequent and breeding on Ruk Island. Cf. Nov. ZooL. V. p. 67. Local name : " Arakal " and " Alakal," also " Ekigah." The single egg was found in June iu the fork of branches and on the bare ground. 27. Phaethon lepturus Daud. (Wiglesworth No. 361 p. 73). J ad. 14. 0. 1896. Local name : " Uhk." 28. Puffinus obscurus obscurus (Gm.) (Wiglesworth No. 3bS p. 79). Three males and one of doubtful sex were obtained on June 15th and 16th. Their local name is " Niffolo." " The colour of the bill is blackish : the iris seal-brown." The outer toe is blackish in skin, the inner and middle toe of a light colour. See Nov. Zool. V. p. 194, where the subspecies of this species are dis- criminated. A single egg, laid on a small heap of dry leaves, was found on June 16th in a hole about four feet deep on the side of a cliff. It is white, and measures 42 : 35-5 mm. 29. Nycticorax caledonicus (Gm.) (Wiglesworth No. 134 p. 68). One male was shot on May 25th, 1896. Its local name is given as " Kao-Kao." It has a rather dark back and somewhat darker wings than other specimens of this species liefore me. ( 11 ) 30. Demiegretta sacra (Gm.) (Wiglesworth No. 337 p. 07). Rather common. Local uame " Soppu " and " Kao-Kao." There are slate- coloured and white individuals, and many two-coloured ones. These do not change from a slate-coloured to a white or from a white to a slate-coloured dress, but have white and slaty feathers at the same time and get them again by moult. 31. Ardetta sinensis (Gm.) (VViglesworth No. 339 p. 68). Rather common on Ruk Island (Cf. Nov. Zool. V. p. 65). Local name " Lioh." The nests, containing one and two eggs, were found in May and June, among reeds. The eggs are of the palest green, almost white, and measure 336 : 26, 38 : 24-8, 38-5 : 34-3, 308 : 245, 31 : 24-2, 35-5 : 25-5, 35 : 245, 34-3 : 24-3 mm. Finsch, in his list of Ruk birds in the Froc. Zool. Soc. Lond., 1880, pp. 574-77, enumerates twenty-nine species, of which he had examined specimens of fifteen species, the others being inserted on the authority of Kubary. The following are uot in my list. 32. CoUocalia vanicorensis (= faciphaga Cat. B. Brit. Mas. XVI., p. 500). It is strange that our collectors did not come across this bird. 33. Phaethon rubricauda (Bodd.) 34. Tachypetes aquila (= Fregata aquila). 35. Dysporus sula (= Sula sula). Thus we know thirty-five species of birds to occur on Ruk. We may with certainty suppose that no more land-birds are to be discovered, bnt that sea-birds will occasionally visit the islands, which were not hitherto observed. The only fact of first-rate interest yet to be discovered, is the breeding and the eggs of Tephras ruki, which were uot found this time. Poor as the ornis of Ruk is, the land-birds are of great interest. The beautiful Metabolus ruyensis, Myiagra oceanica, and Tephras ruki, are, as far as we know at present, only found on Ruk Island. The absence of all Alcer/inic/cir, of which species are found on all the neigh- bouring groups of islands, the Pelew and Marianne Islands, and on the other Carolines, of hawks, owls and of Rhipiditrae on Rnk is remarkable. ( 12 ) THE BIRDS OF DAMMER ISLAND IN THE BANDA SEA. By ERNST IIARTERT. DA3IMER, Dammar or Damiua, is a volcanic island in the Banda Sea, north of the line of the so-called '■ Serwatty Islands," which extend in an east-north- easteru direction from Timor. It is about half-way between Timor and Timorlaut. It is less than ten miles in length and about live miles wide. The island is one of the prettiest in the Eastern Archipelago, and almost entirely covered with dense forest and vegetation: only the top of the volcanic peak in the north, which is often emitting a stream of white smoke, and which rises to abont 4000 feet, is bare of forest growth. The forest is so dense, that it is very difficult to penetrate it for any distance. Many boiling hot springs and streamlets are found, which are utilized by the natives for cooking. The island is scantily inhabited by two races of Papuan and Malay type, who live in separate villages. They are all friendly and well disposed towards foreigners. They keep some pigs and fowls, and are most expert iishermen. Sago and cocoa-nut palms, enormous mango trees, jack-frnit (Artocarpus) and bread-fruit are found in abundance, as well as bananas and tobacco. Birds, lepidoptera and coleoptera are numerous. Messrs. J. AValker and Bassett-Smith, who visited Dammer on H.M. surveying ship Penguin in 1891, brought home one species of mammals (a form of Cuscns maciilatiis), ten species* of birds, unTaely M/iipidura ele.gantula, Rhipidura biittikoferi, Graucalus melanops, Zosterops bassetti, Stigmatops squatnata, Hirundo (jutturalis, Psitteiiteles euteles, Ptilinopus xantJiogaster, Carpophuqa rosacea and concinna, five species of reptiles, namely, Gecko ceiiicillatus, Calofes cristateUus, l.ijyosom'i striolatiim and fuscum, Ablepkarus boutonii furcata, ten mollusca, one hundred species of coleoptera, thirty of other insects and one freshwater crustacean. Besides this interesting, but fragmentary collection from Dammer, I am only aware that A. B. Meyer enumerates three species of birds : — Urospizias torqiiatus = Astur polionoUis (No. 27). Pitta brachyura = Pitta vigorsi (No. 20) and Carpopliaga concinna, which were sent to him by Mr. Riedel.t The entire ornithological literature relating to Dammer Island is therefore : — 1884, A. B. Meyer, in Ahl>. " 7.*/.s," Dresden, p. 7 (three species). 1894, R. B. Sharpe, in Ami. <)• Mag. Nat. Hist., ser. (>, v. XIV. pp. 56-58 (ten species). In connection with this last-named article a very interesting account of a visit to Dammer Island is given by Mr. .J. Walker, from which most of the foregoing notes are taken. In 1899 our esteemed correspondent Heinrich K-iihn, to whom we owe already several other valuable collections from the Eastern Archipelago, made a trip to Dammer and sent us a large collection of birds and lepidoptera. Here follows the list of the birds collected by him. They are mostly collected at a place called Woeloer, some at Bebber and Hi. • Mr. Walker says his party collected only nine, bnt Sharpe enumerates ten. t Care must be taken not to mistake Dammer Island in the Banda Sea for the island south of Halmahera which is variously spelt D.ama. Damme, Dammar or Dammer. It is this latter island where Bernstein collected a few birtls (cf. Stigmatops Moris. Mi/zovi'la simjilex and others), not the Diimmer visited by Kiihn. ( 13 ) 1. Geocichla peronii audacis Hart. {Bull B. 0. Club V. VIII. No. LXII., p. 43, April 1899). This fine Thrush differs from 0. ]ieronii of Timor in having the upperside more uniform and of a much deeper chestnut-rufous colour. The chest and sides of the bod_v are much darker and more chestnut-rufous. The wing is shorter. " Iris brown, feet pale flesh-colour, bill pale greyish-brown, paler below." Wing 10 — 104 mm. (at least 110 in G. peronii peronii), tail about 75, tarsus 32—33, bill 19 mm. This bird is named in honour of Mr. Kilhn {Imhn in German = audax in Latin). 2. Rhipidura elegantula Sharpe. Sharpe in Notes Leydai Mus. 1879 p. 23 ; Biittikofer in Nutes Leyden Mus. 1893 (v. XV.) p. 76 ; Sharpe in Ann. Mag. Nat. Hist. 1894, ser. 6, v. 14, p. 56. Five specimens from Dammer seem to agree in ever}- respect with Rh. elegan- tula, described from a single specimen from Lettie. The comparison of a series from Lettie would be desirable. " Iris very dark brown ; feet plumbeous black ; bill black." 3. Rhipidura setosa buttikoferi Sharpe. Sharpe in Btdl B.O. Club v. 1, No. 4, p. 18 (1892) ; Ann. & Hay. Nat. Hist. 1894, ser. 6, v. 14, p. 56. This interesting form belongs doubtless to the group oi Rk. .setosa. From typical setosa it differs in being much deeper brown above, in having sharply marked white spots on the chest, and in having much more white on the outer rectrices. The chest is marked with longitudinal narrow white shaft-stripes. In this respect it resembles Rh. setosa isura, but the spots are narrower and sharper, the chest and upper surface darker. Rh. hoeclti from Lettie is evidently very closely allied, but more greyish above. We know thus (cf. Nov. Zool. V. p. 625) : Rh. setosa setosa, New Ireland and New Britain. Rh. setosa gidaris. New Guinea. Rh. setosa nigromentalis, Louisiade Islands. Rh. setosa hoedti, Lettie. Rh. setosa biittikoferi, Dammer. Rh. setosa isura, Australia. Rh. setosa assimilis. Key Islands. More to come ! " The iris of Rh. s. biittikoferi is deep brown, bill and feet blackish." This form is common on Dammer Island. 4. Myiagra rufigula Wall. Woeloer, Bebber and Hi on Dammer. Only a few specimens received. 5. Monarcha trivirgata (Temm.). A good series from Woeloer. ( 14 ) »'i. Monarcha inomatus kisserensis A. B. Meyer. All thn specimens from Woeloer agree with Dr. Meyer's from Kisser (Sitzber. <f- Ab/t. " Iris," Dresden, 1884, p. 22) in;beiug very light whitish grey. The study of a sufficiently large material will probably enable ns to separate several more local forms. Specimens from the Snla Islands are almost equally pale as those from Dammer, while J/, inor/iati/g commutntm from Sangi is a darker form. T. Heteranax mundus (Scl.). (For synonymy see Salvadori, Orn. Papnas. e Molucc. Ayginn'e II., p. 75.) We have received a good series from Dammer, and we cannot find any differences from specimens of Timorlant. Only the adult male seems to be described. Tlie adult female does not differ from the adult male, except that it is a trifle smaller, the wings of the males measuring 80 to 85 mm., those of the females 77 to 78 mm. The 3-oung, in both sexes, differs considerably. It is above earthy brown, forehead whitish, cansed by the white bases to the feathers. Remiges deep brown, margined outwardly with rufous brown, inwardly with whitish. Rectriccs blackisli brown, margined with brown, the three outer pairs with wide buff tips, largest on the outer- most pair. Lores, sides of head and neck, and throat white, breast and abdomen cinnamon-buff, thighs grey. Under wing-coverts whitish buff. Adult: '' Iris dark brown. Feet slaty-grey. Bill bright ash-grey with blackish tip and whitish cutting- edges." 8. Dammeria henrici Harf. In Bull. B. 0. dull, V. VIII., jip. LVII., LVIIL, I described this interesting flycatcher about as follows: — Dammeria gen. uov. Muscicapidaram. Remarkable for its strong, high, and arched beak, with large nostrils plainly to be seen in front of the stiff, short, frontal plumes, which are continued on the beak to the nostril. In the well-developed wing the fifth primary is the longest, the first a little more than half the length of the second. Tail composed of twelve feathers, rather more than two-thirds of the length of the wing; rectrices about equal in length, slightly pointed. Metatarsus long, longer than the middle toe with claw, covered in front with a lamina, which shows some two or three divisions near the toes. Sexes dissimilar in colouration. Dammeria hetirici, 3 ad. Above dark slaty blue, lores and feathers of the forehead darker, nearly black. Above the lores, from eye to middle of forehead, a line of pure white feathers, similar to that found in many species of Brachi/ptcryx. Underside dark slaty blue, chin darker, almost black ; in the middle of the throat a white, sometimes concealed patch. Feathers of chest and breast with narrower or wider longitudinal white spots near the tips, those of the belly and sides of the rump tipped with white, under tail-coverts nearly black, with wliite patches. Remiges slaty black, brownish grey towards the bases of the inner webs ; under wing-coverts slate-colonr, partly tipped with white. " Iris brown, bill black, feet blackish plumbeous." Total length about 130 mm., wing 68 — fiO, tail 50, metatarsus 20, culmen about 15, bill from end of nostril to tip 7 mm. ? ad. Above olive-brown with a slaty wash, upper tail-coverts slaty-brown: ( 15 ) a buff superciliary line from the forehead to above the eye. Remiges olive-brown, outer webs edged with rusty brown, pale brown towards the base of the inner webs. Ear-coverts with pale shaft-lines. Under surface rnsty buff, brighter on the throat and chest, and washed with olive on the sides and flanks; feathers of the chest with olive patches, producing a somewhat striped appearance. Feet pale flesh-colonr. Wing 64 — 0.5 mm. (? immat. Resembles the adult female, bnt with the upper surface darker and the feathers with ferruginous tips, chest more streaked, superciliary stripe less developed. Mr. Heinrich Kilhn sent nine specimens of this most interesting bird. The bird is named in commemoration of Mr. Kiihn's Christian name, Heinrich = Henricus. 9. Gerygone ktihni sp. uov. J ad. Above rufous-brown, the head paler and more ashy brown. Sides of head pale ashy brown, lores with a whitish spot. Remiges dark sepia-brown, ont- wardly margined with olive-rnfous-brown, the inner secondaries with the colonr of the back, inwardly with whitish grey. Rectrices deep sepia, with a wide blackish bar and an ill-defined whitish auteapical patch on the margin of the inner webs. Chin, throat, chest, middle of breast and abdomen white, sides of breast and flanks rufous brown, almost chestnut, a little brighter than the back, and having very little white in the middle of the abdomen. Under wing- and under tail-coverts white with a rusty wash. " Iris burnt-sienna-red, feet plumbeous, bill black." Wing 5.5 — .57, tail about 43, tarsus 21, bill 11 mm. ? ad. Like the adult male, only a little smaller; wing 53 mm. Jnv. underside snlphur-yellow instead of white. Named in honour of its discoverer. This form is apparently nearest to G. keijensis Biittik ; described from a young bird in the Leyden Museum {Notes Leyden Miis. v. XV. 1893, p. 258), but it is much more rufous above and on the flanks, also smaller. It differs from (j. inormita and G. everetti in the markings of the tail, and the colour of the upperside. It seems to agree very nearly with G. kissercnsis Finsch {Notes Leyden Mas. v. XX., p. 133, 1898) in the markings of the tail, but it is not at all olive-brown, but rufous-brown on the upperside. No doubt several of these forms will in future be treated merely as subspecies, but at present a satisfactory review cannot be given from the material in the Tring Museum. 10. Edoliosoma dispar Salvad. A fine series from Dammer. Cumparing them with a series from Key and Banda, I found no constant difl"erences. The size is rather variable. S ad. : " Iris dark brown, feet and bill black." ? ad. : " Iris dark brown, bill brownish black, feet slaty grey." 11. Dicaeum salvadorii A. B. Meyer. One single male from Woeloer, Dammcr, agrees fully with Dr. Meyer's descrip- tion of D. salmdoiii from a single male from Bebber. It diff'ers from I), mackloti in having a larger and wider bill, the red of the throat being more extended towards ( 10 ) the breast ami a shade less bright, and the abdomen not pure white but buffy. "Its iris is dark brown, bill and feet black." Comparison of a good series both from Bobber and Dammer would be of interest. 12. Anthus gustavi Swinh. cJ, Woeloer, 9. 12. 1898. " Iris dark brown, feet pale flesh-colonr." 13. Motacilla boanila melanope Fall. Common in November and December. 14. Zosterops bassetti Sharpe. In Ann. f Mag. Kat. Hist. 1894, ser. 6, vol. 14, p. 57, Dr. Sharpe described this form as follows :—" Similis Z. albivenfri, sed panllo major, loris et gatture aurantiacis nee sulphnreis, et corporis lateribus cinerascenti-brunneis nee isabellinis distiugnenda. Long. tot. 5-0 poll., culm. I>G, alae 2"4o, candae 1-75, tarsi 0-75." There is no donbt that this diagnosis refers to this Zosterops, of which I have before me eight skins sent by Mr. Ktihn from Dammer, even if I had not compared the typo; bnt I do not consider the comparison with Z. albirentris from the Torres Straits a very lucky one. In my opinion the nearest ally is Z. citrinella from the Timor group, from which Z. bassetti differs in having a larger beak, in being less yellowish and more olive above, in being much more brownish on the sides of the breast and flanks, and in having a longer wing. From Z. qrai/i of Key it differs in being much less bright yellowish, especially ou the wings and upper tail-coverts, and in being brownish, not ashy grey on the sides. Mr. Kiihn describes the iris as " brown, feet ash-grey, bill dull greyish brown." The sexes do not differ, except that the female is perhaps a trifle smaller. There is no doubt that Z. i-itrinclla, bassetti, grayi, and others will ultimately be classified as subspecies of one form, bnt without an elaborate study of the whole group this is not to be done, and I should at present even hesitate to say how the species should be named. Therefore I leave this to a future time. Zo.sterops lett/ensis Finsch in J^otes Lei/r/en Mits. v. XX. p. 13G (1898) seems fully to agree with Z. bassetti, except that it is slightly smaller. The comparison of a series from Lettie is desirable. 15. Stigmatops squamata Salvad. A good series from Dammer. " Iris yellowish grey, sometimes more brownish, bill black, feet dark grey." Dr. Sharpe {A)i)t. Mag. Mat. Uist. 1804, ser. (J, v. 14, p. 57) identifies the bird from Dammer with St. kebirensis A. B. Meyer, bat it is squamata. Mr. Rothschild and I have carefully compared eight adult Dammer skins with ten adult specimens from Khoor (or Koer), also collected by Herr Kiihn, and wo found them quite alike. Sharpe's Dammer bird is immature, and that is the reason for the less extended scaling on the under surface. We have no specimens from Bebber (or Kebir), but — unless all those examined from the latter island are immature — they seem to differ in several points, and to be similar to young squamata. Sharpe {I.e.) says that ( 1' ) he fails to see tlie characters for separating Sf. salcadorii from Tirunrlant from St. squamata, but St. snlvadoiii is apparently a distinct form, being very much smaller, the wings abont 1 cm. shorter. We have fonr Timorlaut birds for comparison. The female of St. squamata is a little smaller than the male; the young bird has the area behind and below the eye, which in the adult birds is covered with short scaly deep black feathers with silvery white tips, quite bare and of a light flesh-colour, and the breast is pale greenish grey without scales. Sharps {I.e. p. 57) questions the correctness of the occurrence of St. ckloris on Dammer, mentioned by Salvadori (Ora. Pap. II. p. 32G), but it is Dammer in the Moluccas, not our Dammer, where Bernstein collected this and other birds. The nest of St. squamata is a neat structure, ornamented on the outside with white little cobwebs and wool and cotton, with a "tail" hanging down from the bottom, and an entrance hole on the side, which is sometimes overhung by a protecting leaf and with a little porch-like roof. The eggs (two in number) are white, finely speckled and punctated with a light-brownish red or bright brick-red. They measure : 17-5 : 13-2, 17-7 : 14, 18-5 : 12-9, and 18-6 : 12-5 mm. 16. Pachycephala melauura dammeriana subsp. nov. I have no doubt, that P. nirlnmirii, clio, burueiisis, iiiacrorhj/ncha, obiennix, everetti and several others will be treated as subspecies of one form, and I therefore do not hesitate to call the new form also merely a subspecies of inelanura. In the distribution of colours it agrees with the other forms. Chin and throat pure white, surrounded by a 5 to 10 mm. wide black collar. The yellow collar above well defined. The wing-coverts are olive-green with small black bases. Primary-coverts and bastard-wing black with olive-grey borders. Onter webs of remiges edged with greenish olive-grey. Bectrices black, outwardly edged with yellowish olive-green, broader towards base, very narrow near tip. All the rectrices tipjjed with olive for about 4 mm. The back is olive-green, less yellowish than in P. m. clio, breast and abdomen yellow, less bright and golden than in clio. This latter form is perhaps the most similar one to dammeriana, differing, however, in the much more extended black bases to the upper wing-coverts, uniform black primary-coverts, more golden upperside, deeper yellow underside, and an almost pure black tail with almost imperceptibly narrow olive tips. The female of P. m. dammeriana, of which, however, only one is received, seems not to differ from that of clio. The size is about that of clio. 17. Pachycephala arctitorquis Scl. A series from Dammer agrees with Timorlaut specimens in the British and Tring Museums. 18. Calornis circumscripta A. B. Meyer. Caloniis gidaris (errore, non Gray), Cut. B. Brit. Mux. XIII. p. 141 ; C. circumscripta. A. B. Meyer in Sitzungsher. u. Ahh. Ges. Jsis 1884, 1 p. 49 (Timorlaut) ; C. cirmmscrijHa, Salvadori, Agy. II. Orn. Pap. e Mol. p. 141. A series from Dammer (Woeloer) agrees so well with typical circumscripta from Timorlaut, that I cannot separate them. In some, but not in all, the bill is less high. The iris of C. circumscripta is vermilion, feet and bill black. The name of gularis cannot be used for this species, because the bird from Morty is not distinguishable from C. metallica. 2 ( 18 ) I'l. Erythrura tricolor forbesi Sharpe. I Lave compared a series from Uamraer with the single type of K. foiliesi in the British Mnsenm, and did not notice an\- ditiVreucos. The comparison of a series would, of course, he desirable. /-'. tricolor of Timor is, of course, closely allied, differing merely in the blue colour of the crown being spread over the mantle. " Iris dark brown, feet pale flesh-colour, bill black.'" The eggs are white, rather pointed on the narrow end, and measnro ITo : l:i, 17-0 : 13:2 and 17-8 : 13 mm. 20. Pitta vigorsi (iuuld. A series from Dammer agrees iu every respect with a series from Buuda. '• The iris is brown, feet flesh-colour, bill black." This beautiful Pitta inhabits Banda, Dammer and Timorlaut, whili' on Flores it is represented by the black-throated conciiuid (ionld, with a bi-culoured super- ciliary stripe, on Alor and Lomblen by the j)erfectly similar eceretti Hart., with a longer beak, on Timor by irena Temm., with a uniform superciliary stripe, on Sula Mangoli by the perfectly similar crassirostrix Wall., with a larger bill, on Djampea by virijinalis Hart., with a much broader stripe, on .Suraba by murin Hart., without black on the abdomen and with a narrow imiform supcreiliary line, iti North Queensland by the larger simillima Gould, with nearly the whole crown brown, in other parts of Australia by the still larger strepitans Temm. There can be no doubt that all these forms, representing each other on the various islands and agreeing in the pattern and general colouration as well as in structure, are all best treated as subspecies of one species, only the last two are more specialized and might be kept specifically distinct from the rest. Also Pitta hertue Salvad., which represents this type iu Borneo, is allied to this group, while moluccensis P. L. 8. Mull, stands much more apart, and occurs together with P. hertac on Borneo and on other islands of the Archipelago. 'i\. Collocalia neglecta Gray. Five specimens from Woeloer. " Iris of the darkest brown, feet and bill black." This swiftlet differs from (.'. esculenta only in being smaller, duller and less glossy above, and by some of the feathers of the mmj) and some of the npj)er tail- coverts having narrow whitish edges. The expression used in the Catalogue of Birds (v. Ifi, p. .310), "back, rump, and wing-coverts dark j)lumbeons grey," is far too strong, but I had then only four old skins, which were indeed very jiale, and might very well be called "dark plumbeous." 22. Eurystomus orientalis australis Swain.s. Not rare on Dammer. Young individuals have a brownish black bill and no blue ou the throat. ( ly ) 23. Eos recticulata (S. Miill.). Two adult ««/fA-, Bebbor, Dammcr, 3(». 12. 189S. " Iris with an outer bnrnt- sienna ring, followed by a sepia-coloured and an inner narrow yellowish grey ring. Feet black. Bill blood-red." This species is only known from Timorlaut or Tenimber, but Mr. Kiibu has also sent us one shot on Little Key Island. 24. Psitteuteles euteles (Temm.) (? subsp.). We have a good series of this bird from Dammer. Only one of them approaches typical euteles from Timor, while most of them have the head much more greenish, the abdomen shaded with green. As, however, immature eutele-n from Timor are similar, I must leave it to future research whether such yellow- headed individuals as on Timor are ever found on Dammer. If the characters stated above — which are those of immature birds on Timor — serve to distingnish the Dammer form subspeciKcally, then the Wetter-bird (judging from one example received in exchange from the Lej'den Museum) might belong to it, and those from Alor and Pantar would seem to be intermediate. '-The iris in the Dammer birds is orange, feet olive-grey, bill yellowish vermilion." I have no doubt that Triclioglossus (dorensi.i, described as a new species from Alor by Finscli (yotes Lojdeii Museum, XX., p. 220), is the young of euteles. The differences given are the characteristics of the immature birds. The only peculiarity of them is the dark brown bill. As our immature individuals have a brown tip to the bill, I must believe that the very young birds have totally brown bills. It is most unlikely that two so closely allied species of Psitteuteles inhabit the small island of Alor. 25. Halcyon australasiae dammeriana subsp. nov. Tlie specimens from Dammer, from where I have nine skins before me, differ from those from Timor, Lombok and Sumba, collected by Everett and Doherty, in having the crown of the head dark cinnamon with a dusky green i)atch in the middle, and some dusky green stripes on the forehead, wjiile the entiri' crown is green in //. a. australasiae, only striped with cinnamon on the forehead. One of the specimens from Dammer closely approaches the typical form, bnt there is still more cinnamon on the anterior part of the crown. The specimens with the greatest iimouut of cinnamon are females. In typical australasiae I find no difference in the sexes with regard to the extent of cinnamon on the crown. The young bird has cinnamon edges to thr upper wing-coverts, blackish ones to the feathers of the underside. The iris of 7/. a. t/ammeriana is dark brown ; bill black, lower bill whitish with <lusky tip ; feet pale brownish black. Another subsjiefies of //. australasiae, the minor of A. B. Meyer, inhabits Timorlaut. 20. Halcyon chloris (Bodd.) (? subsp.). In the series from Dammer all the males are remarkably blue, the females more greenish. The ear-coverts are black with a bluish wash. I do not believe that they can ultimately be classed with typical chloris, but at present the time and C 20 ) material at my disposal are too limited to solve the (juestioii. I cauiiot think that .Shavpe is riglit in separating //. fitimii as a species, nor am I able to recognize all his races, bnt 1 do not either believe that ail the forms can finally be united as one race. One of the Dammer birds has the bill ciuiousiy Hat and nptnnud, very mnch like a Todirhamphii.i, and mnch like Shar]je's meyeri from Togian, whicli, however, is also an individual aberration. 27. Astur polionotus Salvud. Three /ema^e.'? of a hawk from Dammer seem to be Salvadori's .1. /tolioxotus, described from Timorjaut. These birds are above of a Cdnsiderably darker grey than .1. albirentris from the Key Islands, and the rnfous collar is more developed than in most -1. albicentris. All the females {males are not in the collection) have very distinct cross-bars on the breast and abdomen, while the chest is miiform rufons. This rnfons colour is darker than in most albicentris. The throat is very jiale, wliitish rnfons, under wing-coverts white with narrow rosy-rnfons cross-bars, thighs of a pale rufous, with or without faint cross-bars. '-The iris is ochreous, feet ochreous, bill black." Wing (?) 240—24.5 mm. A series from Great Banda seems to belong to the same form, but tlie thighs are quite white (as they seem to be in the type of A. poUonotitx); only owe female has a faint red tinge and the faintest indication of cross-bars on the thighs. The male from Banda has a broad and distinct rufous collar, and the underside is uniform, only on the abdomen are faint indications of liars. 28. Baza subcristata reinwardti (Mill!. & Schleg.) Four skins of B(i:<i from Dammer differ enormously from each other in the colouration of the underside, two having dark rnfons, one ashy brown, one (a young example) narrow rufous brown zigzag bars. I almost doubt the jiossibility of separating Daza subcristata and reinwardti even subspecifically ! The only diiference is in fact, as already shown by Salvadori, in his great " Ornithologia Papiiasia," the smaller size of B. reinwardti, the difierences in colouration, which Sharpe {Cat. B. v. I.) and others thought to be of specific value, being individual variations. While recognizing the generally smaller size of reinwardti, I find individuals (Djampea, Fergusson), which differ not from some Australian skins in size. If, however, reinwardti can be separated subspecifically (a specific separation is impossible), then 7>'. subcristata .mbcristata should be restricted to Australia, the birds from the Moluccas, Lesser Suuda Islands and New Guinea being all reinwardti. Baza subcristata riifa from Batjan, Halmahera and Obi Major is a mere rufous closely allied form. B. subcristata yurneyi from the Solomons seems to be fairly distinct, but B. subcristata hismarcki from New Britain and New Hanover does not seem to differ from gurneyi, except in having a longer bill. B. subcristata timorhioen.iis from Timorlant is somewhnt doubtful, being based on a young binl, the adult of which is not yet known. 20. Cuculus canorus intermedius Yahl. ?, Kuwray, Dammei' Island, Novemlier 11th, l;?'.tis. f 21 ) 30. Chrysococcyx rufomerus sp. nov. The tiilult male diiFers from Chri/sococcijx malayanus as follows : — The crown of the head is not brownish or purplish brown, but deep metallic green with steel-blue and bronze reflections ; the back is darker ; the entire underside is widely barred with deep ,!j;reenish bronze, these bars bcinu' of a much deeper colour than in C malayanus ; the tail has no rufous colour whatever ; some of tbe greater upper wing-coverts have some edges and bars of white. The wings have very pale or no rufous colouration to the inner webs. "Iris dark vermilion, feet and bill blackish." The adult female seems to have a well-marked uniform white patch in the middle of the abdomen. The iris of the female is described on the label as " ochreous grey." Wing 05 — 99 mm. The young of both sexes is above pale greyish bronze, below greyish brown, with more or less dark brownish bars on the flanks; the iris is " reddish grey." This new form is perfectly distinct from (\ inahiyamis, and all the other species of the genus known to me. It is probable that this and several others should only be treated as subspecies, but as yet their history and distribution are too little known to advance theories about their relationship. Future investigations will show, whether C. rufomerus is only found on Dammer Island, or also on other islands. 31. Ptilinopus xanthogaster (Wagl). Not rare in different parts of the island, at Batoe Merah and AVulur. " Iris orange, feet greenish grey, bill sulphureous." All the specimens from Dammer have the neck more or less washed with green, the green of the upi)erside somewhat yellowish, the foreneck rather greenish. In this they agree with specimens from Banda. Some specimens from the Key Islands are perfectly similar to those from Dammer, while the perfectly adult Key birds have the neck beautifully greyish-white, the breast and abdomen very bright, the back pure green. As, however, our Key series is selected from a larger collection, and shot at diflerent times of the year, while our six or eight birds from Banda and Dammer were all shot at the same time of the year, and as we know that the greenish neck is a sign of immaturity, I am not able to say that the Key birds are really different, and I am inclined to think that eiiually adult liirds from all the islands are perfectly alike. Meyer has separated the Timorlaut race as P.Jlavocirescens, but Salvadori seems to think that his characters are based on immature individuals. We have, at present, not suflScient material to decide this question. 32. Ptilinopus lettiensis Schleg. A fine series from Dammer agrees with an adult male from Bebber (April 1898), received in exchange from the Leyden Museum. The yellow on the neck is, however, deeper in the Bebber specimen than in the eight from Dammer, but the depth of the yellow colour on the neck is not constantly alike in those from Dammer, which were all shot in November. Until, therefore, a large series from Lettie and Bebber are compared, the Dammer bird must stand as 1'. lettiensis. The iris of the Dammer birds is " burnt-sienna red, the bill yellow, slaty-green at base, feet bluish carmine." ( 22 ) 33. Carpophaga rosacea (Tomm.) October and November. " Iris carmine. Bill dark grey with carminft no.strils. Feet bright carmine." 34. Carpophaga concinna Wall. One male and two females were shut in November. Their iris was orange. They are typical cowiinia, and not a bit like C cowinna aepniata from the Key Islands. :'>."i. Columba metallica Temm. Fonud frequently in November and December. The specimens fnlly agree with those from Timor. The breast, neck, and mantle vary somewhat, the metallic gloss being sometimes beautifully i)urplish red, sometimes almost pure green. A yonng bird has the head and neck dull brown, the breast rufous brow-n. Adnlt birds have the "iris" orange, f<'et carmine, bill bright carmine, tip yellowish white. "The yotmg birds have the '■ iris pale brown, feet brown, bill brownish black." oCp. Chalcophaps chrysochlora (Wagl.) Both sexes and young were shot in December. 37. Eallina tricolor Gray. One female, 'Woeliier, 1. VI. 1898. "Iris brownish red, feet brown : bill light green. Eyelid ochreous." This specimen-is rather small, measuring only as follows : wing 138, tarsus 43, bill 22 mm. Being somewhat out of its generally known area of distribution, it is quite possible that it belongs to a smaller subspecies, but it is not possibli' to decide about tliis from a single specimen. 38. Amauromis phoenicura (Furst. ) (? leucomelaena). One (apparently adnlt) specimen. In this the sides of the head and iieck are lierfectly slat}--black, and there is no white on the forehead I This bird — a similar one is before me from Sumba— differs very much from young -I. phoenu-ura from India. I am therefore inelined to think that tliere is after all a Timorese s])ecies or subspecies, to be cviXXqA leucomelaena. (Cf. Sharpe, Cat. B. Brit. Mus. v. XXIII. p. 159, Mey. & Wigl., Birr/s of Celebes v. II. p. 708, Hart., Nov. ZooL. V. p. 47.% no. 74.) 39. Charadrius fulvus Gm. 9 Hi. If,. 11. is'.is. 40. Numenius phaeopus variegatus (Scop.) 9 Woeloer, 9. 12. 1898. ( 23 ) 41. Limosa lapponica novaezealandiae a my. Wocloer, 0. 12. 1808. 4,'. Heteractitis bi-evipes (Vieill.) Woeloer, November auJ December. 43. Tringoides hypoleucus (L.) Not rare in December. 44. Glottis nebularius (Gunu.) ? Woeloer, Dammer, 9. 12. 1898. 45. Tringa crassirostris Temm. 6 juv. Kiimur, Dammer, 14. 11. 1898. 40. Bubulcus coromandus (Bodd.) <?, Woeloer, 12. 11. 1898. 47. Demiegretta sacra (Gm.) <?, Woeloer, i». 12. 1898. Pare white, with a few small slaty-black spots ou the neck and wiug-coverts. 48. Sula sula (L.) Oue adult bird, .se.x doubtful, Woeloer, Dammer, 5. 11. 1898. 49. Megapodius duperreyi Less, et Garn. Common on Dammer Island. " Iris burnt-sienna rcl, feet yellowish vermilion, bill dirty yellow." Thus Mr. Kiihn sent forty-nine species, of which ten were previously known to occur on Dammer, although three were not quite correctly identified before. Two birds mentioned by Dr. Sharpe were not procured by Kiihn: '' Graucalus melanops " and " Hirundo gutturalis.'" Of these the Hirundo is only a winter visitor, and might not be of regnlar and frequent occurrence, but it is strange that the very conspicuous and large Gvaid-alas was not obtained. As Dammer is quite within its range, 1 have no right to doubt its occurrence there, but it should be noticed that Sharpe names ten species of birds from Dammer, while AValker says nine only were collected. It is remarkable that Dr. ISbarpe from the scauty material before him drew correct conclusions about the zoogeographical relations of Dammer, which he said were with Timorlaut on the one hand, and with Timor on the other, " while some species may be found peculiar to the Damma, Lettie, and Wetter groups of islands." From our larger material it is evident that the relations with Timorlaut are very obvious (cf Ileteranax tniuidi(s, Faclnjcepluila arctitorquis, Eos reticaluta). Some forms are exactly the same as those found on the so-called Serwatty Islands (Lettie, Moa, Bebber, etc.), and those that are hitherto only known as Timor ( 24 ) species will probably all be found to occur ou the Serwatty group as well, which is by no. means sufficiently oxploreil. It is remarkable that some forms are common to Timorlanf, Banila and Daramer, and apparently not to be found elsewhere (cf. Pitta cigorsi, Ast'ir jioUonotus). The butterflies of Dammer seem to show a close relationship to those of Timorlaut. The number of birds at present only known from Dammer is small, and we do not doubt that many of them may ultimately be found ou the Serwatty group of islands. One might therefore suppose that Dammer is not a very ancient island; and Mr. Dolierty, who visited me when I had just written this note, tells me that, on a hurried visit to Dammer some years ago, he had the impression that Dammer was such a recent volcanic island, that it would not be worth while for him to sacrifice time and money for a long stay to collect lepidoptera. Until the Serwatty Islands are thoroughly explored, all these theories, however, are mere suppositions. DESCRIPTION OF THE HITHERTO UNKNOWN FEMALE OF OENETUS MIEABILIS ROTHSCH. By HON. WALTER ROTHSCHILD, Ph.D. ? Wings, upperside : Ground colour of forewiug gamboge yellow, completely covered with a network of dull apple-green; the meshes of the network are hexagonal in shape, and at each point of the hexagon is a thickened spot, and in the centre of each mesh is an irregular spot or dash of the same green colour. On the costal area are a number of chocolate brown patches, first a small one, then three large ones reaching to, and sometimes beyond, the subcostal veins. These three large sjjots are followed by one or more smaller ones. The forewiug is crossed transversely by a band of chocolate brown almost parallel to the outer margin and about one-third from the ajiex. This baud is forked from the costal margin to SC, and is traversed for its whole length by a chain of dull purple spots. Between this band and the outer margin is an irregular row of dull purple and brown spots each standing on the edge of a hexagon. Half way between the main transverse band and the base of the wing is another irregular and broken baud of spots, some chocolate and others dull purple. Between the nervures at outer margin is a row of dull purple spots. Basal half of hindwing a most delicate salmon pink, outer half chrome ycljow, more or less reticulated with pink spots standing mostly along the nervures. Undcrsidi' of I'oth wings chrome yellow, heavily washed with pink ou basal half, while outer half is spotted with pink; ou the costal margins of both wings is a row of pinkish brown patches. Head, tliorax, end of abdomen and legs greenish wax yellow, metathorax and basal two-thirds of nj)perside of abdomen greenish pink. Underside of abdomen pinkish white. Length of forewiug : 52 to 80 mm. Breadth of forewiug : 25 to 38 mm. Described from several hied females from Townsville,iNorth Queensland, where the collector obtained also a number of nmles. (25 ) ANOTHER SMALL CONTRIBUTION TO AFRICAN ORNITHOLOGY. By ERNST HARTEET. THE following article is based on collections made by Dr. W. J. Ansorge during his third stay in the African Continent. A list of the birds collected during his second stay in Africa is given by me in the ApiJendix to Dr. Ansorge's book " Under the African Sun," to which I have sometimes to refer in the following pages. Occasionally birds from other collections, specially some collected by Dr. Felix Roth at Warri, in the Niger Coast Protectorate, have been discussed. Dr. Ansorge has this time crossed Africa from east to west, taking from Uganda about the same route as Mr. A. B. Lloyd. Most of the localities mentioned are therefore to be found in Lloyd's book " Li Dwarf Land and Cannibal Country " (London, J. Fisher Unwin, 1899). From Mombasa Dr. Ansorge travelled to Uganda, collecting very interesting birds in the sandy plain of the Athi River and at Nairobe. From Uganda proper he marched westwards to Toro (or Torn, as Ansorge spells it), where a good number of birds were procured. Toro is the country east of Mount Ruweuzori, and a description and a map, showing some of the places where Ansorge collected, is given in Lloyd's book, p. 159. At Fort George, on Lake Albert Edward, the collector seems to have stayed for some time, then proceeded to " Karimia in Ussongora,* Congo Free State," hence northwards to Fort Mb(5ni, or Beni, on the lower course of the Semliki, or, as it is here called, Kakibi River ; then, entering the " Great African Forest," i.e., the enormous primeval forest, inhabited by a Pygmy race, he travelled in a north-westerly direction to the Ituri River, which at its lower portion is called the Aruwinii, and sailing down the Aruwimi and Congo, reached the west coast, where he found a Belgian steamer ready to sail. He thus accomplished the journey in the marvellously short time of seventy-nine days from Fort George to London. The collections that conld.be made on snch a record journey are of course very fragmentary, but they contain some highly interesting specimens. A box with probably some very good birds from East Africa is unfortunately lost, and has not been traced. A longer stay in the Great Forest would doubtlessly have yielded many wonderful things. On pp. 299—302 Mr. Lloyd has given some notes on the " animal life in the forest," but he is not a naturalist, and his description cannot be accurate, since " many species of gazelles, chimpanzee and gorilla " do not live there, or have not yet been identified, and we do not believe in hyaenas in the middle of the forest, although Mr. Lloyd mentions " leopards, panthers, wild cats, civets, hyaenas, and reptiles." Of bird-life in the Great Forest Mr. Lloyd says : " Birds of every description and varied hue abound, parrots undoubtedly predominating, paraquets, swifts, owls, guinea-fowl, kingfishers, fish eagles, divers, kites, hornbills in great variety ; pigeons, doves, honej'-birds, and all kinds of night-birds. In the daytime it is delightful to sit and listen to the singing of the birds, their songs being so different from the bird-songs of Europe ; some with deep musical sounds like the tolling of a • Spelt Ussogara by Dr. Ansorge, but on the maps I find Ussongora. This place must of course not be mistaken for the country of Usagara, in German East Africa. Ansorge's Karimia is the Karimi on the Isango, a continuation of the Semliki- Kakibi River, on Mr. Lloyd's and other maps. ( 26) he]]. The black-;ui<l-wbite wagtail is so tame that ho will sit within a few yards and pour forth his beautiful notes. The tin}- honey-bird darts here, there, and everywhere, like streaks of light, issuing forth its twit, twit, as it lights npon some honey-bedewed blossom. Overhead the ungainly hornbill jdoiiglis its way above the tree-tops, calling to its mate, and the screaming of the parrots as in great flocks they make their flight along the river banks, or throngli the tangled mass of vege- tation overhead, is almost deafening. By the little streams are countless numbers of wonderful butterflies, some as large as swifts, and all (x/'r I) most gorgeously coloured. The insect life baffles description. . . ." E.xaggerati'd as this statement may perhaps be, it is of interest to hear it, since it seems to contradict tlie reports of the scarcity of bird-life in the Great Forest. The birds collected by Dr. Ansorge belong to throe more or less faunistically different countries. In the Athi Plain and at Nairobe ho collected in the southern parts of the North-East African desert and steppe fauna, which reaches south at least to Masailand (cf Drepanoplectes jacksoni, MiraJ'ra africana o.tM, Pf/s.'ie/- difumis gongonensis and others); then the so-called East African fauna was touched; while soon afterwards, without a very sharp line of demarkation, the West African area was entered (cf Corythaeala cristntn, Cohonba nnicincla, and many others). It may here be remarked that at present a general account of the birds of Africa is one of the greatest, if not the greatest, desideratum of ornithologists. The publications on African birds are so numerous, and especially in small contributions —often descriptions of one or two species or subspecies — and nearly all nations, as German, British, French, Swedish, Portuguese, Italian, American, Austrian, partake of the ornithological work in Africa, that it is most difficult, I think more difficult than in any other country, to be informed about all the literatni-e. It is therefore to be hoped that the works of Professor ISeichenow and ( 'aptain 8helley will soon appear.* I am obliged to my friends Professor Reichenow, Dr. Sharpe, and Mr. Grant for comiJaring some of the specimens with the types and other examples in their collections, and thank them for their kindness. 1. Phalacrocorax africanus (Gm.) S ?. Ituri ]{iver, twenty-second day from Fort Mbeni, '20. h. 18'J9. " Iris golden-brown. Feet black. Upper jaw dark grey with yellow edge, lower yellow." 2. Fodiceps cristatus L. Lake Varangot, Fort Gerry, Torn, 13. 4. 1899. 3. Nettapus auritus (Bodd.) ? ad. Near Ripou Falls, Somerset Nile, 10. 3. 1899. " Iris dark brown. Feet greenish black. Upper bill greenish grey with a greenish yellow patch on each side near the base. Lower bill pinkish grey with orange-yellow skin between rami." 4. Nettion capense (Gm.) ? ad. Lake Varangot, Torn, Uganda Protectorate, 10. 4. 1899. " Iris dark brown. Feet slate-blue ; bill slate-blnc witli dark central greenish grey streak." * While this jaesed through the press Part I. of Vol. II. of Shelley's work hiis actually been issued. (27 ) 5. Oedicnemus vermiculatus Cab. 5 ad. Fort George, Lake Albert Edward, Tom, 26. 4. 18f»0. 0. Hoplopterus spinosus (L.) c? ?. Fort George, Lake Albert ; Edward, 26. 4. 1899, ?, Salt lake Kikorongo, one day's march from Lake Albert Edward, 25. 4. 1899. " Iris blood-red ; bill and feet black." 7. Chettusia melanoptera (Cretzscbm.) <? ?. Nairobe, British East Africa, 28. 1. 1809. " Iris lemou-yellow ; red ring of bare skin round eyes, more developed in the male. Feet brownish-red, lighter on the thighs. Bill black." 8. Chettusia inornata (Swains.) ? ad. Lake Kikorongo, salt lake one day's march from Lake Albert Edward 2.'). 4. 1899. " Iris lemon-yellow, inwardly shaded with greeuisli ; bill and feet black." 9. Ochthodromus asiaticus (Pall.) ? ?. Athi Plain, British East Africa, 2.j. 1. 1899. One of these shows beginning of moult on chest, the other not. 10. Glareola pratincola (L.) Five males. Salt lake Kikorongo, Torn, 2.j. 4. 1899. Only one has the throat qnite unspotted, and in that specimen it is rather deej) rusty buff. It would be interesting to investigate whether the Pratincole is really, as it is supposed to be, merely a migrant in Africa, or if a special darker race is resident in the Dark Continent. 11. Gralaclirysea nuchalis (Gray). <? ad. Enguatuara on the Ituri River, 31. 5. 1899. " Iris dark brown. Feet copper red. Bill black with red base." Tliis bird has the inner (not outer) webs of the secondaries white at base, its wing measures 6 inches I Cf Cat. B. Brit. Mus., v. XXIV. p. 64. Is G. emi/ii a different species ? 12. Otis melanogaster RUpp. <S ad. Nakabimba in Toru, Uganda Protectorate, 2. 4. 1899. "Iris brown ; feet yellowish grey, becoming brownish grey below the knee, dark grey on the toes, especially the middle one. Bill : upper jaw dark grey with yellowish grey edges, lower yellowish grey." 13. Fulica cristata Gm. Lake Varangot ;(Toru), Uganda Protectorate, 16. 4. 1899. " Iris blood-red ; feet slate-colour, darker on the joints and orange-red patches above the knees. Bill pale grey with a bluish tmge. Bare patch on forehead greyish white, terminating in two dark brown-red protuberances with orange-red tips." (28) U. Grallinula chloropus (1^.) <??. in nuptial plnmage, Lake Varangot in .Torn, Uganda Protectorate, 13. 4. 1899. IT). Limnocorax niger ((iiu.) (f. Lake Varangot, Torn, 13. 4. 1S99. Ki. Pterocles exustus Temm. cJ?. Campi-ya-Simba, British East Africa, 14. 1. 1^99. "In both sexes iris dark brown : feet bluish grey ; bill greyish white." Temminck described his P. exusttts from West Africa and North-East Africa. The African Birds were therefore the " typical " ones, which means that they must be called /'. exustus exustus, if subspecies are distinguished, and there is no doubt, in my opinion, that this can be done. I have not been able to compare a series of Abyssinian skins, but as several writers have declared that they are like those from North-Eastern Africa, and in view of the close relationship of the fauna of North-Eastern Africa and Senegambia, I must take their similarity for granted at present. The North-East African birds (Abyssinia, Egypt) and those from Eastern Tropical Africa (Kilimanjaro, Machakos, Campi-ya-Simba) do not seem to differ and are above rather dark olive-brown, while the greater wing-coverts are much more yellow, especially on the tips. This is evidently pigment, and not at all due to staining. Bogdanow's name P. ellioti {Bull. Ac. Sci. Petersb. v. XXVII., p. 167, 1881) is based on one (!) Abyssinian example collected nearly seventy years ago by Riippell. The differences lie mentions are evidently dne to the faded condition of this old veteran of a mounted specimen, and the white patch he describes is found in all adult males. P. ellioti is therefore, for the present, to be regarded as a synonym of P. exustus. The wing of Central African adult males measures about 185 inm. From this form differs the bird inhabiting the deserts of Somaliland, in being smaller, paler and more sandy isabelline on the upperside, chest and breast. The under tail-coverts in the one male at Tring are unspotted. The female is less thickly spotted on the foreneck, less blackish and more reddish on the upperside. The wings of two adult males and two females measure about 170 mm. This form might be termed Pterocles exustus somalicus subsp. nov. (Type Donaldson (Smith coll. Milmil, 30. T. 1894.) A third distinct form is the Indian bird, which is lighter above than P. exustus exustus, not so dark olive-brown, but not so bright yellowish isabelline as P. exusttts somalicus. The larger wing-coverts are paler and not so yellowish. The females show the same differences. This form might be named P. exustus orientalis snbsp. nov. We have thus, for the present : — P. exustus exustus : West and N.E. Africa generally, south to the Masai- steppes, Kilimanjaro and Arnsha. P. exustus somalicus : Somaliland. P. exustus orientalis : India. ( 20 ) IT. Pterocles gutturalis saturatior subsp. uov. (Type : Campi-ya-Simba, Britisli E. Africa, 23. 4. 189s.) ? ?. Athi Plain, British East Africa, 24. 1. 1899. " Iris chocolate-browii ; feet bluish grey ; bill bluish grey." Males of P. gutturalis from British East Africa, the Kilimanjaro district and Bogosland have the rust-coloured extremities to the greater series of wing-coverts of a much deeper rufous colour, while those from Transvaal, Nyassaland and the Zambesi have them paler and somewhat more yellowish. The back and rump in the nortliern birds is also darker brown than in those from Southern Africa. The southern form being first described, the northern one requires a new subspecific name : P. gutturalis sataratior. The females of the two forms are perhaps not distinguishable, unless those of P. gutturalis saturatior are more blackish above. 18. Hagedashia hagedash (Lath.) ? . Bomili on the Ituri River, Congo Free State, 30. 5. 1899. " Iris blood-red ; feet black with brick-red down the front of the toes and lower Iialf of metatarsus ; bill black with reddish brown tip, basal half of culmen bright red." I think that the colour of the iris is given wrong, probably, the blood having broken out into the eyes, for the Hagedash has not red eyes. I am inclined to believe that there are two subspecies of Hagedash, birds from N.E. and Eastern Africa being smaller and paler than those from the West African region, which have longer bills and darker breasts. Our material, however, is not sufficient to settle this question. 19. Phoyx purpurea (L.) ?. Yanga on the Ituri River, Congo Free State, 29. 5. 1899. " Iris lemon yellow." 211. Bubulcus ibis (L.) ? ad., twentieth day from Fort Beni in Great African Forest, 24. 5. 1899. " Iris lemon yellow ; bill lemon yellow." 21. Columba unicincta Cass. An adult ? of this rare pigeon was shot at Diapanda, a Suaheli settlement in the Great African Forest, on the sixth day's march from Fort Bi^ni. " The iris is blood-red ; feet slate-blue ; bill slaty blue, with paler tip : each eyelid with narrow crimson ring, followed by a fleshy brown area, and finally a crimson outer patch." Columba unicincta is described from Gaboon (Agobai), and recorded also from Liberia by Biittikofer, who figured it in the Notes of the Leyden Museum v. VIL pi. 6. The specimen from the Great African Forest agrees perfectly with the original description as well as with Biittikofer's figure. Dr. Ansorge says these pigeons are very shy and diflicult to approach. ( 30 ) 22. Tnrtur semitorquatus (nuiip.)- Nairobe, 5. 2. 1809. 2?. Chalcopelia afra (T..). Dwaiigiri (Singo), Uganda, 28. 3. 1800. 24. Tympanistria tympanistria (Temm.). cJ ? Kikanja, Tom, 3. 4. 1899. "Iris brown : feet purple-red ; bill black with jinri)le tinge ; gape purple-red." These specimens are darker on the back and smaller (wing S 11.5, ? llii) than Sonth African examples. There are probably two races. 2."). Vinago calva nudirostris (Swains.). Kiclinehn, Torn, Ti. 4. 1899. 2f). Pternistes cranchi (Leach). Specimens of both sexes from the Mokia River in Torn agree jierfectly with typical y. craiiclii. Young birds have a good deal of white on the abdomen. An adult male from Ngombe on the Congo has the rufous-brown edges to the feathers of the abdomen deeper rnfons, but both Professor Reichenow and Mr. Grant are of opinion that this is not a subspecific character. 27. Numida reichenowi Grant. c? ad. ('ampi-ya-Simba, British East Africa, 13. 1. 1898. "Iris dark grey; feet black ; upper jaw of bill dark grey-brown, lower bluish grey ; wattles blood- red, and a patch of similar colour on lower bill near the base, extendiuu' round the nostrils and over two-thirds of the helmet ; sides of throat bright blue, with black mottlings over the throat and neck." 28. Numida ptilorhyncha LicUt. ? Nakabimba, Torn, 2. 4. 1x00. " Iris golden brown : feet pale chocolate, brown scaling in front ; upper jaw red-brown, lower yellowish brown ; upper rim of nostrils, and a double carnncular ridge between them, orange-red : skin of chin and throat pale lilac ; the bine wattles have no speck of red ; skin round eyes lilac-blaok." P Mokia River, Torn, 24. 4. 1809. " Iris dark brown : feet dark brown ; bill reddish brown, but horn-grey towards tip ; wattles very pale blue ; two whitish blue spots en upper eyelid ; all the blue marks are whitish blue or white ; throat greyish black ; neck black ; no red spot on wattles ; bristly wart between nostrils reddish brown." <^? IIolulu River, tributary of Semliki River, Congo Free (State, C. 5. 1899. " Iris dark brown ; feet chocolate brown ; upper jaw dnll red-brown near base, rest of bill dull greenish grey; the bine marlsings are a mottling of dark and light blue : wattles with a dark edge." (31 ) All tbcse specimens heave very sbort bristly tufts between the nostrils, and in the last-mentioned ? these tufts are entirely absent, although it doubtless belongs to this species. Probably all these Central African birds belong to an unnamed subspecies. 0. Neumann has separated several races of iV. ptilor/ii/iic/ni, but it must be said that Jesse's x\byssinian skins in the British Museum do not bear out Neumann's character of the long tufts in the Abyssinian form, as they have the bristly bunches rather short. The markings on the outer webs of the primaries .seem to vary considerably. 29. Buteo augur Rupp. (S 6 ad. Fort Gerry and Lake Varangot (U hour from Fort Gerry), Torn. Uganda Protectorate, 12. and Ui. 4. 1699. "Iris dark brown ; feet lemon-yellow : cere lemon-yellow ; bill dark grey with bluish tinge near base of mandible ; skin round eyes greenish yellow." 30. Milvus aegyptius (Gm.). c? ad. Nairobe, British East Africa, 'Z. 2. 1899. " Bill lemun yellow." 31. Falco cuvieri Smith. <$ ad. Nairobe, 31. 1. 1899. "Iris dark brown; feet and cere lemon-yellow; bill dark grey, shading off into greenish grey near base." 32. Poeocephalus aubryanus Souance. ? ad. Sukarumbi, one day from Fort Mbeui, Congo Free .State, 5. o. 1899. " Iris orange ; feet covered with small black scales with white edges ; upper jaw of bill horn-grey with black tip, lower black." 33. Turacus hartlaubi (Fischer & Reichen.) (S ad. Nairobe, British East Africa, 5. 2. 1899. " Iris dark brown ; feet Idue- black ; bill reddish brown."' 34. Corythaeola cristata (Vieill.). ?. Great African Forest, tn-entieth day from Fort Mbeni. 35. Colius leucotis berlepschi Hart. Specimens from Fort George on Lake Albert Edward and Kitagwetoa in Torn (April), as well as from Buaia (Bnsori), Uganda (March 1899), are all referable to C. I. berlepschi, as separated from C. leucotis leucof/s and ('. /. njlnis in Apjiendi.x p. 333 to Ausorge's " Under the African Sou " (London, 1899). 36. Coccystes afer (Licht.). i ?. Karimia, Ussongora, Congo Free State, 1. 5. 1899. A uniform blue eg^^, cat out of the female's body, measures 20 by 20-5 mm. ( 32 ) 37. Centropus superciliosus (lleiniir. & Elnb.). cf . Karimia, Ussongora, 1. 5. 1899. " Iris blood-red." 38. Chrysococcyx cupreus (Bodd.) ? ! An evidently yonng ? was .shot on the second day's march from Fort Mbfini. " Its iris was pinkish-brown ; the feet yellowish-green ; bill black." It differs from young of C. cupreus in the very narrow barring of the underside, each feather having fonr or five distinct i)ale whitish bnff and bronzy green bars. I am inclined to think that this bird is the yonng of an uudescribed form of Chrysococcyx nearest to cupreus. 39. Indicator indicator (Gm.). Wemi River, Torn, 21. 4. 1899. "Iris ochre. The song of this bird is a constant ' wit-purr, wit-purr.' " 40. Tricholaema lachrymosum Cab. (J ad. Kitagwetoa (Torn), 6. 4. 1899. " Iris orange-gold ; feet greenish grey; bill black." The spots on the sides of this male are round, not ovate as in the/emale recorded from Masongoleni in British East Africa (Ausorge's " Under the African Snn," p. 335). 41. Melanobucco bidentatus aequatorialis HheW. ¥ ad. Kichuchn, Torn, 5. 4. 1899. " Iris brown, bare ; skin around the eyes greenish yellow." 42. Barbatula subsulphurea (Fras.). ? . Kitima, Government station on the Ituri River, twenty-first day's march in Great African Forest from Fort Beni. " Iris brown ; feet deep grey ; bill black.j^ 43. Melanobucco leucocephalus (Defil.). <J ad. Kikanja, Torn, 3. 4. 1899. " Iris brown." 44. lynx pectoralis Vig. Nairobe, British East Africa, 5. 2. and 27. 1. 1899. 45. Thripias namaquus (Licht.) (Pan snbsp.). A 7nale from Ussongora, collected 17. 11. 1889 by Emin Pasha, has the wing longer than fonr South African males. The wing in the Ussongora bird is fully 5'5 in. long. In the Cat. B. Brit. Mas. v. XVIII. p. 307, 52 is given as the length of the wing, those before me measure 52 to 53 inches. The bars on the underside seem also to be narrower in the Ussongora bird. ( 33 ) 4(5. Thripias namaquus schoensis (Hiiiip). K female shot at Nairobe, 3. 1. 1899 by Dr. Ansorge. "Iris blood-red ; feet and bill greenish grey." 47. Dendropicus poecilolaemus Rchw. ?. Kinyomozi (Torn), 4. 4. 1S09. " Iris red-lirnwn ; fpft eireenish-grpy ; bill greenish alato." 48. Dendropicus tropicalis Rchw. ?. Kichnchu (Torn), 5. 4. 1899. "Iris red." ? Ngombe, Congo, Angnst Bohndorff coll. 49. Dendromus permistus Rchw. cJ ? jnv. Sakarnmbi, one day's march from Fort B(5ni, 5. ;">. 1899. " Iris dark brown ; feet pale green ; bill grey with greenish bine tinge." TiO. lyngipicus obsoletus iugens snbsp. nov. One adnlt male from Xairobe ditiers from specimens from Senegambia and Gambaga in being considerably larger and darker brown. Not having specimens from N.E. Africa for comparison, I sent the bird to Prof Reichenow, who kindly writes : " Das Exemplar ist wesentlioh dnnkler im Ton derbrannen Gefiederfiirbnng, als Stiicke von Nordostafrika, auch grosser." Therefore, although I am not generally inclined to describe subspecies from the evidence of single specimens, I do not hesitate to separate tliis gigantic specimen under the name of ingois. The measurements of the type are : wing 90 mm. (3ii.j inches) ; tail 46 ; metatarsus 14: cnlmen 21 mm. " The iris is red-brown, feet greenish grey ; bill slate grey." 51. Coracias caudatus L. (?. Nairolie, British East Africa, 2. '-i. 1899. Onter rectrices sjironting. .02. Eurystomus afer (Lath.). S ad. Kilgnrma (Bneknlla), Uganda, 29. 3. 1899. r)3. Eurystomus gularis (Vieiil.). ? ad. Kitima, Government station on tlie Itnri River, twenty-iirst day from Fort B6ni in Great African Forest. 54. Lophocerus erythrorhynchus (Temm.). cJ ad. Kinani, British East Africa, 2. o. 1898. " Iris light yellow." 55. Lophocerus melanoleucus (Licht.). S ad. Kibwezi, Ukamba, British East Africa, 28. 4. 1898. " Iris wliitish yellow ; feet black ; bill red." ( :;i 1 •"'. Lophocerus fasciatus (Sliaw). TambiiL', (i(ivcrijiiient statimi uii the Itiiri River, twenty-second day from Fort Hi'-ni, in (ireat African Forest. " Iris dark brown ; feet pnrplisli black ; bill straw- yellow, with deep red tip, line on npper jaw and nnder surface of lower jaw." This specimen is marked cf, bnt according; to tlie Catalogue of Birrh it is a ?. ",. Halcyon chelicuti (Stanley). Kaboa (Bnckulla), I'ganda and Ilolnhi Kiver (tribntary to the Semliki). Congo Free State. (ilanciug over onr series of //. rlnlicuti, it seems to be evident that Sontli African Birds (Transvaal and Natal) are larger and have longer bills, while being generally somewhat ])aler. Tlieir wings measure s-.^, s4, s."), sd, 87. sT mm. Specimens from Sencgambia and SoiualilaiKl are mncli smaller, the wings measuring only 7<'i. ?(!. T'.i. Ml mm., and their bills ;ire smaller. The former WduM be //. chrliciifi (li(ii>'iirii.tix Sfrickl., the hitter //. rlirUi-nti iheUoiti (Stanl.) Is:j4. The difficulty in separating these two forms is presented by the examples from Tropical Africa, ^^'est Africa to East Africa, which are intermediate, their wings measuring 7."i. 7il, 7^, sn. So, ,sl. s2, 83, S3, 83, 84, iso mm., but they have always much smaller bills. Thus it would seem, that all the forms from North-East Africa and Seuegambia to about the Zambesi cannot be separated at present, those from South Africa, however, being iV. chelicuti (lamirensi». ■■>s. Alcedo quadribrachys guentheri Sharpe. S. I'anga, on the Aruwimi Kiver, 1. 6. 1809. "Iris dark brown ; bill black : feet coral red." This form, although easily distinguisliable from true quadnhmrluj!^. can hardly be hioked upon more than a subspecies of the latter, being only smaller and of a lighter green on the back, which is more like cobalt. ."^ifi. Merops persicus Pull. S ad. Kasesi (Torn), 2-2. 4. 1890. 110. Merops apiaster li Xakabinibii (Torn), ■.'. 4. IsO'.i. 111. Melittophagus gularis australis lichw. ? ad. Kitinia, Government station on ilie Ituii liiver, twenty-first day fmni Fort Belli, in (Jrent .\frican ]''iirest, '2."i. -y l>0'.i. •■ Iris lilood-red, feet dark ]iurple- Mn, k : bill lihiek; This specimen agrees in evc^ry respect wil;h another ( 'ongn skin, and both differ from twenty skins from Liberia, Sierra Leone, and (iold Coast in the following (•ll;lracter^ : — • There are less bine featlu^rs on the forehead. The snpereiliaiy [i.ile cobalt-bine snp<'rciliary streak is ipiite indistinct, and no trace of it is cnutinned beyond the eyes, 'riiecobalt-l.lni' longirndinal spots on the breast are smaller, .-md the bliienn the rnm]i is generally darker. .1/. //(//</)•(.? '•('^?^-«//.-! is therefore a very distinct sulis]ieeies. (Cf .lotini.f. i>ni. I^s;"), ]i. 22-2 : C'lt. II. rUit. .\f„.i. v. XVII. p. .■>!.) ( 3.i ) li-.'. Melittophagus cyauostictus (( 'alj.j. Mubende (Bneknlla), Uganda, Nakabimba (Torn) and Fort George on Lake Albert Edward. This Bee-eater lias been somewhat unfortunate with regard to its name. Cabanis first described it under the name of Merops cyanostictaa, as a donbtful variety of "Mcrops enjthropterus" in 1800 in v. d. Decken's Reisen in Ost-Afriha, v. 3, ji. 34, and elevated it to specific rank as Melitta cyanostictus in 1875, in Jonrn. f. (>ni. v. 2k, p. 340. There is not the slightest doubt from the description and distribution (Natal, Loango, and East Africa), given b}- Cabauis, that liis Af. cijnnostictKS is the bird which has been mixed up with M. minutu&=enjthroptenis=pusHlus by Finsoh and Hartlaub {y'dg. Osf-Aj'ril:as, pp. 1S8-91), Dresser (Moiwf/r. Mernp. p. Ill) and otliers, while SJiarpe (Cat. B. Jhit. Mii.'^. v. XVII. p. 43, 1802), who must have misunderstood ( 'abanis" description, renamed it M. mrr/i/ionalts, applying attlie same time the name ^f. cyanost ictus to a bird found in Shoa, Somaliland and the coast districts of East Africa to Mombasa, Dar-es-Salaam, Lamu, and Melindi southwards. This spi'iies, whicli is charafterized by a broad bine frontal band, connected with an I'Unally broad blue superciliary stripe, has apjiarcntly no name, and I linvc named it <i '• Melittophagus sharpei, in honour of our friend Dr. 81iarpc, who worked nut the Mi'iapidae for vol. XVII. of the Cdtnlocim of Birds (Type: S w\. The Hand, Somaliland, 'VI. T. I'^'.U, Donaldson >Smith coll.). Witii regard to tlie synonymy of the MrliltOjihiKjux meiidionalis in tlie CdtiihHjKi- of Birch (recte : J/, cyanosticus Cab.), I may add that Mrrops nnyolrnsis (ex Brisson, (iw'picr (rAnfiola) is rightly quoted with a ? as a synonym, the description being (prite obscure. On the other iiand, Merops corieijafiis, Finsch and Hartlaub, Viiq. Ost-Afrif(/x, p. 191 , is not correctly quoted under this species, the description leaving no doubt that the autliors really described the true ^f. rririrf/cifi/s Vieillot's, wliile they mixed .]f. jinsilliis and eyavosf ictus Cab. under their JA. minntii.t. 'i4. Irrisor jacksoni iShariie. ? ad. Xairobe (B. K. A.). 2'.i. 1. l.s'.iii. "Iris dark brown, feet dark copper- red, bill blood-red, eyelid red." The adult female dift'ers fioni tlie adult male only in the shorter and straighter bill (J 411, ¥ 3.3 mm.), and considerably smaller feet. The greater extension of the green on the head is not a character of the female sex, but jirobably due to immaturity, ((^f. '.'at. B. Brit. Mns. v. XVI. p. ;21). Another specimen, adult J, was shot on the second day in the (ireat African Forest from Fort Mbeui, on May 0th, 189U. It agrees in every detail with i. Irrisor jacksoni, except that the bill is much higher at the base and 45 mm. long. It would be rash to establish a new subspecies without further evidence, but I hardly think that this is typical I. jucksoni. *■);■). Hirundo senegalensis L. ? ad. Kabuka (Singo), Uganda, '-'T. 3. 1809. " Iris dark brown." ? ad. Great African Forest, fourth day from Fort Beui, 8. 5, 1899. $ ad. Itnri iJiver, twentieth dav from Fort Beni, 24. 5. 1899. ( :i'i ) It wtiuld 111' woith wliile to measure a series oi' Senogambiiiu skins and others, in ordei' to (iiul nut it' tliere are several snlispccies. AVe Lave only one bird from Moshi (Wagndngn) from those regions. This has a wing of 1m mm., althongh it is a ? Oar other e.xamples measure : ? Kabnka wing 141, ? African Forest 140, 6 Itm-i River 141, J Unyoro 141, ? Unyoro 145 mm. It also seem