by KSSS Club 30 Nov 2023 07:06 PST

Gotland Runt, the world's largest annual offshore race, will make a temporary return to its historical roots in Sandhamn in 2024.

The start, which has been in central Stockholm in recent years, is moved to the iconic Sandhamn where sailors, spectators, and partners will be offered a unique opportunity to relive classic memories and create new ones.

Gotland Runt is a sailing celebration that annually attracts more than 1500 sailors on 200 boats, ranging from leisure sailors to some of the best professional teams from northern Europe. The race, covering approximately 350 nautical miles (643 km), challenges participants against the forces of nature, and with the 2024 edition, the aim is to celebrate our fantastic arena, the sea, and the archipelago.

From 1963 to 2010, Sandhamn was the starting point for Gotland Runt, before moving to Stockholm from 2011 to 2023. The move to central Stockholm meant that more people could follow the competition up close. The Royal Swedish Yacht Club's (KSSS) ambition is to continue making the sport more accessible to a wider audience, and therefore, it is natural to strive to start the race in Stockholm. However, while waiting to find a sustainable harbor solution in Stockholm, where all participating boats and crews can fit, KSSS has chosen Sandhamn as the starting point for 2024. The club will thus offer a new-old experience for sailors, visitors, and partners.

With the aim of making the race more accessible than before when the start was in Sandhamn, KSSS wants to offer more opportunities for people to follow the race from spectator boats, islands, and through live broadcasts. For this reason, the start is moved to Gråskärsfjärden south of Sandön, where the water is calmer for spectator boats wanting to watch the beginning of the race. The racecourse then goes north along the outer archipelago to Svenska Högarna, the easternmost part of the Stockholm archipelago, before the boats sail south on open water to round Gotland.

"It will be incredibly exciting to offer a 'Gotland Runt goes Classic 2024' after many successful starting years in Stockholm. We hope and believe that it will be a very memorable experience that will attract new and old sailors," says Stefan Rahm, club director, KSSS.

KSSS sees Gotland Runt as a tribute to the sea, and this fantastic event gives us a unique opportunity to highlight the importance of caring for our seas and nature. We welcome everyone, participants and spectators, to be part of the sailing celebration Gotland Runt 2024.

Registration for Gotland Runt 2024 opens on 10th of December 2023, and the start is on 30th of June, 2024.