Friday 15th August

Today was the last sail of this trip. The first leg of the journey home was for Aimee and I to sail Aurora to Furusund, ready for haul out and the drive home.

We decided to use this sunny morning to get some good pictures of the four of us in Aurora. After three weeks in the archipelago, with Trev and I both keen photographers, we had still not achieved this. I gave Trev my camera, and with Stefan driving the power boat, he took some fantastic pictures. The breeze was light but Aimee filled all three sails nicely. I’m very pleased with the results; thanks Trev!

Having put Alice and Niki on the

power boat, Aimee and I sailed on, round the East of Svartlöga through the winding course of bouys which leads through the “minefield”. In the bright sun, light breeze and downwind course it was lovely and hot- swimming costume only!

It seems compulsory, when we are in the narrowest part of the channel, for a high speed power boat to pass us. Accordingly, as we passed into the channel, I could see the ferry “Sjögull” coming. We knew from last time we passed through this channel that the skipper takes no prisoners and I took the chance to sail in some safe water out pc the channel, as he powered past at about 20kts.

Our course took us dead downwind from Svartlöga to Blidö and we passed close to the shore of pretty Söderöra, an island which we had not managed to visit.

Aimee asked for a swim, so I anchored at Blacke for her. There was a pleasing symmetry to this, a this is where we had anchored for lunch when Aimee and I had made this journey together in reverse at the start of the trip.

We did not stop long and were soon on our way again. I took I the sakis and made ready for harbour as we rounded the tip of Yxlan. Aimee took us past the car ferry and into Furusunds Gasthamn. We picked up the stern buoy and Aimee confidently took Auroras nose up to the jetty; I stepped off, made her fast and that was it- the last sail of the trip complete.

Furusund was much quieter this week. A week ago, we took the last spot when we visited; today there were only three visiting boats.

The staff were very friendly and we secured a discount for being Cruising Association members, even though I had lost the discount card. We enjoyed a lovely ice cream and free wifi and watched the world go by for a bit.

Dinner was a mystery meal, consisting of some bits and pieces from the recesses of the cupboard (tinned ham, noodles, garlic, the remains of the herbs from our garden)augmented with some fresh veg I was able to find at a local petrol station (an onion, some carrots). Tinned ham in a tomato and vegetable sauce with spinach noodles sounds nicer than it was…

Today, I did several things I haven’t done for three weeks- connected to mains electricity, used a flushing toilet and had a shower.

Thursday 14th August

We awoke on our anchorage at Storskär to a morning in complete contrast to the evening before. The water was glassy smooth and there was not a breath of wind.

We had a leisurely breakfast of the bread bought on Rödlöga two days previously. This loaf had criticised for its dark colour and heavy texture (Caroline dubbed it “Dwarf Bread”- Terry Pratchett readers will understand this reference). However, it turned out to be really nice, with an almost aniseed flavour.

After another walk to the beach of “princess stones” (as Alice dubbed it) there was a ghost of a breeze. We slipped our warps and set off for Svartlöga. Even though the sea was glassy, there was a faint breeze and being on the beam, we made two knots. There was an eerie quiet over the water; we could hear wavelets lapping on rocks some distance away and people talking on yachts a mile away.

Aimee gave Alice a lunchtime cooking lesson and the girls had an eclectic meal of noodles, baked beans and hot dog sausages. Niki and I had more dwarf bread.

By this time our breeze had stopped breathing and so the girls opted for a swim. When that was over, there was nothing for it but to fire up Henry Honda and motor the rest of the way back to Svartlöga.

Wednesday 13th August

Today we set out on the final family voyage of this Baltic cruise. The wind had dropped from yesterday’s challenging conditions, but was forecast to rise again in the afternoon. Accordingly, we chose a nearby island to visit.

One of the few island groups in this part of the archipelago that we had not visited yet was the Rödlöga Skärgård, the group of small islands to the East of Rödlöga itself.

The wind was forecast to stay in the south and/or west, so the tiny natural harbour of Lilla Anskäret seemed to be a good target. We covered the 6.5nm in an hour and a half, giving us a spirited sail on mainsail and staysail. We were easily able to weave between the rocks, altering course between a fetch, a reach and a run.

We had some excitement as we reached the harbour mouth at speed and rounded up to the wind right over the top of a shallow rock. We were none the wiser until we looked at our track on the gps!

Further excitement was had by Niki, who had an unplanned swim: the rock is particularly steep here and though it was easy to place Aurora’s bow am inch or two from the rock, our diminutive size meant a steep scramble up the rock. Niki jumped with a warp and simply slid into the water. Sympathy from the children consisted mostly of laughter and imitations of her surprised shriek. Apparently the water is colder today…

When we were moored safely, we had lunch and Alice had a swim (though she could not persuade any of the rest of us to join her). We then explored the island. Anskäret has a character of its own with heathland in its centre, though sadly we were anchored on the wrong side of the bay to walk there. We did watch the waves crash on the outer shore, as the wind had risen as forecast. Watching other boats out in the sound, we were glad to be moored securely in the lee of the rock. We also observed large bands of pinkish red in the granite bedrock, which gives this island group its name.

The rain cover got only its second outing this trip; just after our bracing swim, there were some rumbles of thunder, though the rain did not amount to much.

Tuesday 12th August

Supplies were needed from the shop on Rödlöga, the neighbouring island and the girls were keen to come (I think it might have been the lure of the ice cream!). They both wanted to have jobs to do, so I suggested they should sail Aurora between them and I would navigate only.

It was a fine morning for a sail, but the forecast was for the wind to fill in and get much stronger later. We set off with Aimee at the helm and Alice attending to the sheets; it was a dead run to Rödlöga. Aimee handled the helm with sensitivity and we made good progress, the girls gybing nicely across the sound on main sail and staysail.

We entered the harbour through the wide Northern entrance and made a textbook approach to the empty dock, Aimee still at the helm. With the bowsprit up, we were able to bring the bow to within inches of the quay, so stepping off and on Aurora was easy.

Stocks in the shop were running down, but the important items were available and the girls were soon enjoying their well-earned ice creams. Having obtained a new gas cylinder for our host’s fridge, some lemons for the G&Ts and a few other fresh provisions, we retired to the cockpit for lunch.

The girls asked for a swim, so we moved to the guest buoy in the middle of the harbour, whilst I got things ship shape for the return trip.

The breeze had stiffened in the time we had been ashore, so I enticed the girls out of the water with a hot chocolate and we motored down the shallow channel, to enter the sound as far south as possible. We found a sheltered spot to raise the reefed main and then poked our nose out to sea.

It was indeed quite lively, but Aimee kept good boat speed as we sailed close hauled back to Svartlöga. With the wind in the west, a swell was building, though aurora cut through it confidently. As we progressed toward home, the wind built even more, so I used the outboard to augment the sails. Aimee has invented a new term for this- “smailing”; she is indifferent to the fact that the term motor-sailing already exists!

We saved ourselves a few tacks and got ourselves further to windward with the engine and were soon ready to drop sails to enter our little harbour. Aimee confidently wove Aurora between the bouys, which saved me going onto the foredeck while we were in the swell. She completed her impressive helming with a smooth sweep onto our berth.

I’m so pleased the girls enjoyed taking control of Aurora and it gives me confidence that Aimee is able to take the helm, even in more challenging conditions.

Sunday 10th August

After a noisy night in Högmarsö, to the sound of partying late into the night, we were surprised to find a definite “end of season” feeling, with the bars and shops being boarded up for the winter. The local ICA supermarket was open today for the last day, offering free cinnamon buns and reduced rates to clear the stock. We took on provisions and enjoyed a leisurely cockpit breakfast in the sun.

A visiting boat came in and on chatting to the lone occupant, he told me that it had been very windy outside the islands and he had been forced to leave his anchorage rather early. We had been planning to go that way, but changed our plans to sail South down the sound between Yxlan and the mainland. We expected this to be pretty much a reach on the expected westerly, but ended up being a beat. We called into play our dinghy-on-a-reservoir experience, as the wind shifted and bent between the islets.

We made quite slow progress, but it was a very pleasant day to be on the water. The channel is very deep and is part of the fairway which leads into Stockholm and we saw some interesting traffic, including two huge ferries, which ply the routes between Sweden and the other Baltic countries.

The girls had a couple of goes at their new sport- swimming behind the boat. We trail a fender on a long warp and the girls jump off the boat, hang on the rope and swim up and down the boat. It started on one occasion when it was hot and Aurora was nearly becalmed, but now there are frequent requests to stop the boat for a swim. It works best when downwind and the boat can be sailed on staysail only or with scandalised mainsail (lazy jacks up and gaff peak down).

We finally arrived a a tiny sheltered island group called Idskären (literally Carp Islands), most of which is nature reserve with no landing until the end of July. We enjoyed chicken, cooked with tomatoes, onions and herbs, served with bulgur wheat, prepared by Niki in the thermal cooker.

Tonight was a full moon (in fact a “super moon”!) and I found a spot where I could see both the setting sun and the rising moon. Sadly, the mon was obscured by cloud, but the sunset was quite spectacular.

Monday 11th August

We have been using the weather forecast on yr.no whilst in the Baltic and have found it to be very accurate. We have had very little rain on this trip, but the forecast was for heavy rain by 11am. Accordingly, we set an alarm for an earlier-than-usual reveille. Despite the forecast, it was a peaceful and sunny morning. I had got up during the night to be greeted by such a peaceful scene- the water was like glass, with the islands reflected almost perfectly in the light of the full moon. Nevertheless, we set off for Svartlöga. The wind was contrary and what had been forecast as a run turned into a spirited beat. We began comfortably on Yankee, staysail and main, but soon were forced to reduce sail to main and staysail.

True to the forecast, we could see clouds piling in from the South East a d the wind grew blustery. More or less on the stroke of 11 the first drops of rain fell and soon we were driven by a wind risen from a f2 to a f5 in pouring rain. The waters around Svartlöga are quite tricky, with many rocks to negotiate. They can be pretty hard to spot and the Navionics chart is a great reassurance. On one hand, when the weather is calm, they can often be identified by the cluster of cormorants drying their wings (see photo). On the other hand, when the weather is rougher, waves can be seen braking on them. They cannot always be easily seen though and it needs sharp eyes and careful monitoring of chart.

Alice and I were undeterred by the wind and rain and we were soon abeam of the village on Svartlöga. Sails were furled and warps prepared and soon we were welcomed back into harbour by helping hands to dry out whilst the squally weather blew through. We have now logged more than 200nm on our Baltic cruise and feel that we have had flavour of this part of the archipelago, though I know we have barely scratched the surface. Still, there’s time for at least one more foray before it’s time to haul out….

Saturday

Today did not promise much of a sail. Although the weather was hot and sunny, the sea was glassy calm and there was not a breath of wind in the harbour.

Nonetheless, a family sailing trip was called for, so provisions were loaded and off we set. I was lovely to have us all together on a trip and, turning west along the South side of Svartlöga we found a gentle breeze to waft us along. There was plenty of wildlife to see, the highlight being another sea eagle.

Pace was very slow and the girls were feeling very hot, so I trailed a fender on a warp behind the boat and the girls (including Niki) jumped in and swam along behind the boat (or hung on the rope), which was a pleasant diversion until the breeze filled in and the boat speed picked up.

Having crossed from Svartlöga to the bottom end of Blidö, we turned North up the sound between that island and Yxlan. One aim of this trip was to identify a slipway from which to recover Aurora at the end of the trip. Trevor had mentioned that he had seen a slip somewhere up the sound; we found it, but preferred the slipway a Furusund.

Rounding the northern tip of Yxlan, we turned South again and, pausing to give way to the chain ferry (!), we moored up in Furusund harbour. This was the first time we have used a stern buoy to moor bow-to on a pontoon. Between all of us, we made a pretty good job of it and were soon exploring what Furusund had to offer (primary objectives: slipway and ice creams). We found both; I was pleased to find a (free!) concrete slipway and the girls enjoyed some good ice creams.

We decided not to stay on, and moved to Högmarsö for a free pontoon berth and a supermarket for provisions. Sadly the supermarket was closed by the time we got there, so we had to content ourselves with a dinner from Aurora’s stores (chilli and rice, followed by hot chocolate and biscuits).

Friday

I had expected the long trip to the Svenska Högarna to take at least two nights, but we had skimmed across in just three hours. Having had a good look around the main island again after passing a peaceful night tucked in the sheltered little harbour, it seemed a shame to waste the SW breeze and not reach back towards Svartlöga. The main routes are either North or West into the main channels, and this is the way that all the other yachts went. The disadvantages for us would be much further than a direct NW route and would also involve a beat for at least part of the journey.

Why were we hesitating to take the direct route? Well, that would be because of the several island groups with their associated skerries in between! We have been using Navionics on the ipad as our main navigation aid and I had noticed how accurate the charts were; once can zoom in to a scale of a hundred feet and pick an accurate course through the rocks. The best advice the local sailors ha e given me on this trip was “stay in the white parts of the chart” and this works well, as it’s very unlikely to encounter an uncharted rock in those bits.

So, the strategy we decided on was to sail right through the island groups in our path, altering course as needed to avoid the rocks. This strategy worked a treat, and we seldom dropped below 5kts, even though we had only staysail and main all through the islands. Being on a reach, it was easy to harden up or bear away when required and so shape a course to thread through the numerous rocks and shoals.

The journey first covered the 5nm of open sea to the first island group, Fredlarna, and we wove our way between the islands. These small and rather remote islands nevertheless had a smattering of summer houses and a sheltered little harbour. After a brief anchor stop for lunch, we passed away from the northern end of this group and were soon passing through the In-Fredel group. So far, this was along a recommended track, but after In-Fredel, the track turned North. We maintained our reach and had an exciting high-speed reach through the Ängskär group.

Once we were clear of this last group of islands, we unfurled the Yankee and I pointed Aurora’s bowsprit directly towards the harbour. We made fantastic time again, covering the 17.5nm in a little over four hours.

Thursday

When I was planning this trip, the Svenska Högarna was a place I had definitely wanted to go. It is the most Easterly outpost of the Stockholm archipelago and with its attractive 19th century lighthouse and a 5-mile gap between it and the rest of the inner islands seemed like an excellent target.

However, the wind had conspired to prevent us from setting out on several occasions. It is to the SE of Svartlöga, and much of the wind had been from that direction so far. Being so far out, it also needs settled weather to make the journey. In addition, the direct route is not in a main channel and passes through many groups of small rocks, which look pretty off-putting on the chart.

However, now I have gained confidence in the accuracy of the electronic charts, with settled weather and most of all, a nice sou’westerly breeze, today seemed the day for this trip. Sadly, Trevor and I could not interest any of the children in this adventure, so just the two of us set out with enough provisions for a two-night trip.

The brisk breeze whisked us along on a lovely three-sail reach and we quickly passed between Ängskär and Kalskär, shortening sail to main and staysail only. The wind gradually shifted to put us on a training run and we contemplated reefing, but Aurora seemed happy to fly- we did not dip below 5kt on the whole run.

It was interesting passing beyond the penultimate island group, Fredlana, into open sea. For the first time, I felt the sea swell and we had an empty horizon ahead of us. I could make out a couple of masts poking above the horizon and, as we drew closer, the islands themselves rose up out of the sea. I don’t know if its because it was windy, but this place had more of an outpost feel as we arrived at Storön- the name means “big island”.

The anchorage was very snug, with a narrow and well sheltered channel between the main island and it’s neighbour. The channel was only about 20m wide and was crammed with boats. Not for the first time, we were glad that Aurora finds herself suited to a different type of mooring than most local boats; we found a nice low-lying section over which her bow sip can hang; being much shallower draught gives us access to spots most yachts cannot use.

There were many offers of help, but we were soon secured to convenient rings in the rock, though I was not so happy with the holding of the stern anchor. Still, it was very easy to get on and off Aurora here. The topology is so different to what I am used to, with such steep rock that a boat may anchor close enough to the shore to simply step off.

The landmark feature (literally!) is the lighthouse. It was completed in 1875, is made of cast iron and is of an interesting design, different to any I had seen before. To my amazement, one may just climb up to the top to admire the view. Trev and I reached the top to find a family drinking wine and enjoying the amazing view. It turned out that they knew the neighbours on Svartlöga well.

The lamp for the lighthouse is only a 40W filament bulb and yet it casts its warning across many miles of sea. At first it seems quite dim, as the lamp turns on just after sunset. However, when the sky darkens, the light seems very bright. The views are staggering- to the South, East and North almost all sea, but to the west, the island groups of the archipelago are all laid out.

There were also two “labyrinths”- mazes made of stones laid out on a flat rock. These are 3000 years old, or made by the lighthouse keeper’s daughter, depending on whom you listen to! The maze itself consists of just one branch- one leads quickly to the middle and the other winds tortuously to the middle. Perhaps this is a metaphor for choosing a path and sticking to it, or perhaps that all paths eventually lead to the same end…?

The final act of the day was to admire the sun set into the sea, leaving a lovely texture to the darkening sky. As night fell, many toads came swaggering out of their daytime hideyholes. At times, care was needed not to tread on them! Like many of the islands, one can see wildlife at close quarters.

Wednesday

We needed some supplies and decided to use the trip to visit a new island. Trevor wanted to see the Norrapada archipelago, so we decided to go first to Rödloga for supplies and then sail on the Norrapada. Today’s crew were myself and Niki, along with Alice and Trevor. It was a glorious morning and there was a lovely breeze, which took us into Rödloga on a fetch. We motored carefully into the harbour through the narrow channel and moored on the jetty- it was much quieter than our previous visit.

The shop on Rödloga is the only one in this part of the archipelago and stocks a wide variety of stores from fresh fruit and veg, deli goods and take away food -the takeaway burger was a do-it-yourself affair- help yourself to the barbecue to cook it!- to petrol and gas cylinders. We needed one of the latter, and Alice was very happy to heft the empty one, as it was made of fibreglass.

The shop had a timeless sort of feel to it, set among the old but well maintained summer houses. One or two small yachts tied up to the jetty and a few passengers turned up. Soon the mood changed, as the ferry arrived and disgorged a crowd of visitors, who swarmed to the shop for picnic lunches. As has frequently happened, Aurora got a lot of attention, with us being asked several times if we had sailed all the way from the uk.

Our own shopping done, we cast off and continued to Norrapada. This skerry of islands is described as one of the most lush in the archipelago, but it is not on one of the main channels, nor are any natural harbours mentioned in the guide book. We were therefore expecting it to be quite quiet- how wrong we were! Having picked our way past all the rocks- visible, awash and submerged, we arrived to find we were certainly not alone.

Much of the main island had steep-sloping rocks, so we had to raise the bowsprit to moor up. It did not take much searching to find a quiet spot with some conveniently-placed rocks to tie our warps to (though we did need a double length for one warp). Alice was soon diving into the water, and we were all glad to cool off from the heat of the day.

It is tempting to suggest that all the islands in the archipelago are about the same- a few rocks sticking with some vegetation clinging to the granite- but this is not true. Each island has its own character. Norrapada is indeed lush-feeling, with thick vegetation at the waters edge, due to the many shallow inlets, which have filled with soil over time. It is also a fairly high island, with many steep rock walls and some high places from which to admire the view.

Norrapada consists of many small islands, islets and rocks, crammed together. This creates numerous narrows sounds and passages and looks very impressive from the vantage points offered by the hills. It really put the archipelago in context to see the island group we were on, as well as other places we had already visited in the distance.

After an explore and another swim, it was time to return to Svartlöga and although the wind had shifted and the expected training run was almost a beat, we did have a lovely sunset into which to sail. The round trip was 15.4nm.