With the Portland Trail Blazers season wrapped, we evaluate the roster player-by-player, giving the fans the power of who should stay and who should go.

STEVE BLAKE

Position: PG Height/Weight: 6-3/170 NBA experience: 12 seasons 2014-15 salary: $2.07 million Contract status: Blake has a $2.17 million player option in his contract he can exercise for 2015-16.

2014-15 season notables: Played in 81 games, averaging 4.3 points (37.3 FG%, 35.2 3-PT%, 70.7 FT%), 3.6 assists in 18.1 minutes ... Scored a season-high 14 points on 5 of 8 shooting (4 of 7 three-pointers) in the final game of the regular season on April 15 against Dallas ... Recorded a season-high eight assists on two separate occasions (at Philadelphia on Nov. 24 and at Memphis Jan. 17). ...Only played more than 30-minutes in two games all season. ...Shot a perfect 5-for-5 from the field against Denver on Dec. 2, finishing with 13 points, three assists and three rebounds. ...He had twice as many games in which he went scoreless (14) as he had double-figure scoring games (7).

In Steve Blake's third stint in Portland he was billed as a veteran presence who would quietly make the Trail Blazers better. He did just that, helping Portland's reserve unit become one of the more efficient in the league without posting his own gaudy individual statistics.

Blake, 35, signed a two-year $4.2 million contract for the full amount of the biannual exception last July. He chose the Blazers over potentially more lucrative offers because he wanted to play for a winning team and keep his family close.

"This was definitely a family decision," Blake said after signing his contract in July. "My wife was very involved with the process, making the decision. So we talked about it a lot last night and this morning, and we both felt this was the best place for me and my family."

What Blake delivered was a steady guard off the bench capable of running the point and giving All-Star point guard Damian Lillard a chance to play stretches off the ball. Blake became one of the key anchors for the Blazers' much improved reserve unit, which grew into one of the most efficient benches in the NBA.

He averaged the second-fewest points of his career and his three-point percentage dipped to his lowest since the 2006-07 season, but Blake's role in Portland wasn't predicated on scoring outbursts.

"I'm not necessarily going to have a big scoring night because that's not my job," Blake said after his Blazers re-debut in October. "My job is to facilitate the offense, create shots for my teammates, be a playmaker, play good defense."

If not flashy, Blake was consistent. He appeared in 81 games - only sitting out the second to last game of the season - and played double-digit minutes in all but two of those games. His signature highlight came in November when 'Shake and Blake' emerged to destroy Celtics' wing Evan Turner's ankles ... twice.

The highlight plays against Turner perfectly encapsulate Blake's season in Portland: A little bit of veteran craftiness, a little bit of outside shooting and a lot of passing to Chris Kaman.

Blake and Kaman developed obvious on-court chemistry this season and their ability to play off one another in the two man game gave Portland a much needed offensive boost when the starters rested. More than 13 percent of all of Blake's passes went to Kaman, and 19.3 percent of passes to Blake came from Kaman. The duo's ability to play together cemented them as veteran mainstays in Blazers coach Terry Stotts' rotation.

In February, Blake honored former Blazers great Jerome Kersey by changing his number from 25 to 5 as a way to pay tribute to Kersey, who passed away from complications of a blood cot on Feb. 18.

"I just wanted to do that for him,'' said Blake, who made the request to change numbers the day after Kersey passed. "Hopefully the fans will understand it.''

Down the stretch of the season Blake's playing time diminished slightly as the addition of Arron Afflalo and emergence of CJ McCollum made for fewer available backcourt minutes off the bench. He averaged over 20 minutes a game for the first three months of the season before his playing time dipped to a season-low 13.8 minutes per game in March.

While his playing time slightly decreased, Blake's production didn't take a hit. He had his best shooting months in February and March while playing fewer minutes. But he struggled in April and his shooting woes carried over into an underwhelming postseason performance.

Blake didn't make a field goal in the first four games of the first-round playoff series against the Memphis Grizzlies. His playoffs stuggles were highlighted in Game 2 of the series when he failed to record a single statistic in nine minutes of action.

Whether Blake returns to Portland is completely his decision. He has $2.17 million player option in his contract that he can exercise for next season and he has previously stated he plans to return for another year with the Blazers.

You decide: Is Blake a reliable back up point guard option or should the Blazers hope he opts out so they can search for an upgrade? How do you evaluate his third stint in Rip City?