Herbert Hoover

National Historic Site

The birthplace, Friends Meetinghouse, and boyhood neighborhood of the 31st President, the grave site of President and Mrs. Hoover, and the Hoover Presidential Library and Museum are within the park. A replica of a typical blacksmith shop, similar to the one operated by Herbert Hoover's father, is located near the Birthplace Cottage. Next to it is the oldest schoolhouse in West Branch. Four of the historic buildings, including the Birthplace Cottage, are open to the public. A 76-acre restored tall grass prairie is located on the southern and western sides of the park. The Library-Museum is administered by the National Archives and Records Administration. The site was authorized August 12, 1965, and comprises 186.6 acres.

Visitation:

The Historic Site is open daily, 9:00a.m. to 5:00p.m.; closed Thanksgiving Day, December 25, and January 1. Highest visitation is June through August; lowest in January. Summers are sunny, hot, and humid; winters are cold. Suggested attire is confortable sportswear and walking shoes.

A stay of one and one-half - two hours is generally sufficient for visiting the historic buildings and Library- Museum. May require up to three-four hours if attending special events, hiking prairie trails, or visiting adjacent West Branch.

Contact us at:

Herbert Hoover National Historic Site

P.O. Box 607

West Branch, IA 52358

(319)643-2541

For e:mail contact HEHO Interpretation

Directions:

Visitors travelling East-West on I-80: Exit 254 for West Branch, travel .4 mile north to Visitor Center. West Branch is a 15 minute drive east of Iowa City.

Transportation:

Access to the Park is by Interstate Highway 80 and state roads including the Herbert Hoover Highway.. Shuttle van service is available on 24-hour prior notice from Cedar Rapids Airport. Taxi service is available from Iowa City. Within thePark use a personal vehicle. All park facilities are within reasonable walking distance.

Fees, Costs, Rates:

A $2.00 per adult (age 16 -61), $1.00 per adult age 62 or over with a Golden Age Pass, children age 15 and under--free, fee admits the Visitor to the Historic Site and the Presidential Library-Museum.

Facilities and Opportunities:

Visitor Center/Exhibits:

Contact stations are located at the NPS Visitor Center, Birthplace Cottage (April- November), and Presidential Library-Museum. Exhibits in the NPS Visitor Center and Library-Museum depict Herbert Hoover's life and times. Special temporary exhibits are located in both facilities.

Programs/Activities:

Scheduled public guided tours are available hourly June-August. Special group tours available with two weeks' prior notice.

Trails, Roads:

The NPS Visitor Center, Library-Museum, and Presidential grave site are accessible by park roads, boardwalks or paved paths.

Lodging and camping facilities:

There are none in park. A variety of hotels, motels, and camping sites are available within one-half hour drive.

Food/Supplies/Concessions:

Restaurants and food stores are available locally and in Iowa City.

Publications are available at the Visitor Center through the non-profit Eastern National Parks and Monuments Association. A complete gift shop is located within the Hoover Library-Museum. Two picnic shelters are available to groups by reservation.

Accessibility:

With the exception of the Schoolhouse and interior prairie trails, each of the major sites within the park is largely wheelchair accessible. Wheelchairs are available at the NPS Visitor Center and the Hoover Library-Museum.

Bus parking is available near the NPS Visitor Center. Other visitor parking is available at the NPS Visitor Center, Library- Museum, Grave Site, and picnic shelters.

Recommended Activities/Park Use:

Visitation to the historic buildings and Library-Museum; hiking in the prairie; attendance at special events; bird watching; and picnicing.

Reservations/Permits:

Reservations for school groups or other educational groups should be made at least two weeks prior to the visit. For conducted tours from late April through the first week of June, and from mid-September through October, requests should be made at least two months in advance. Reservations can be made by calling (319)643-5301.

Special Events & Programs:

Hooverfest, the first weekend in August, celebrates the President's birthday with craft demonstrations, other special activities, and spectacular fireworks (Saturday night). Christmas Past, the first weekend in December, features horse-drawn wagon rides through the park and West Branch, bonfires and open- house activities in historic West Branch shops. The Hoover Library-Museum features several major temporary exhibits throughout the year. For more information on specific dates, times, and activities, call either the park headquarters at (319) 643-2541 or the Hoover Library-Museum at (319) 643-5301.

This park is featured in a lesson plan created by Teaching with Historic Places, a program of the National Park Service that helps teachers and students understand how parks and other historic places embody America's historical experiences and cultural expressions.

Adjacent Visitor Attractions:

The town of West Branch, immediately adjacent to the park, has 16 buildings listed on the National Register of Historic Places. Several antique and craft stores and restaurants are located within easy walking distance of the park.

. .

______________________________

The Herbert Hoover Presidential Library Association

Eastern Iowa Tourism