CLERKS II (2006)

Directed by Kevin Smith

Written by Kevin Smith

Starring Brian O'Halloran, Jess Anderson, Rosario Dawson, Jason Mewes, Kevin Smith and Trevor Fehrman

Kevin Smith's debut film Clerks. (1994) was an extremely low-budget, grainy, black and white film dealing with a day in the life of New Jersey convenience store worker Dante Hicks (O'Halloran) and his best friend Randal Graves (Anderson), who works in the neighbouring video store. Over ten years later, very little has changed except that Randal accidentally burned down the store by leaving the coffee pot on. The two are now working at Mooby's, a local fast food restaurant, where Dante still dreams of escape, while Randal still spends most of his time endlessly debating anything to do with sex or movies, and insulting or abusing anyone he comes into contact with, usually customers or nerdy nineteen year old co-worker Elias (Fehrman). However Dante is now engaged to rich girl Emma (Jennifer Schwalbach, Kevin Smith's wife) and is about to move with her to Florida. The film is set on Dante's last day at work before the move, as he tries to deal with the usual frustrations, as well as his true feelings for the sexy manager, Becky (Dawson). Also hanging around are drug dealers Jay (Mewes) and Silent Bob (Smith) fresh out of rehab.

From Clerks. onwards Kevin Smith has specialised in comedies that take place in his inter-connected "Askewniverse" (from Smith's View Askew Productions). The others being Mallrats (1995), Chasing Amy (1997), Dogma (1999) and Jay and Silent Bob Strike Back (2001). Smith had intended to ditch the Askewniverse comedies in favour of more "serious" work, but his first attempt, Jersey Girl (2003), was unsuccessful. He had also made a promise to his friend Jason Mewes to bring back recurring characters Jay and Silent Bob if Mewes managed to stay off drugs. The film deals with characters who are going nowhere, as Dante and Randal have to deal with the fact that while doing nothing but discussing sex and Star Wars constantly may be fine when you're in your twenties, when you get to your thirties it might be time to actually do something with your life. Like most Kevin Smith films this film is very foul-mouthed but very funny. Filled with references to movies such as when Randal argues the merits of Star Wars with two Lord of the Rings fans ("There's only one Return and it ain't of the King, it's of the Jedi!"), as well as whether or not Transformers are blasphemous ("The Transformers are a gift from God, Randal!") Smith regulars Ben Affleck and Jason Lee have cameos, as does Smith's daughter Harley Quinn. This is an extremely funny film. Well worth seeing.

Seven out of ten