Talk to Brian O'Halloran long enough and it's bound to come up, the exasperated catchphrase his character, Dante Hicks, turned into his motto in 1994's "Clerks":

"I'm not even supposed to be here today!"

"I'll probably have that put on my tombstone after I leave this world," says O'Halloran, on the phone earlier this week from his home in the Pocono Mountains in Pennsylvania.

He thankfully doesn't hear it from fans every day, he says. But he'll definitely hear it this weekend when he appears as part of the Astronomicon pop culture convention, Friday-Sunday at Livonia's Burton Manor.

He'll be there along with a host of notables from writer-director Kevin Smith's world of films, affectionately known as the View Askewniverse, including Jason Lee, Jason Mewes, Joey Lauren Adams, Jeff Anderson, Ethan Suplee, Trevor Fehrman, Austin Zajur, Harley Quinn Smith and the maestro himself, Kevin Smith. Pro wrestlers, hip-hop stars and horror movie personalities will also be a part of the sixth annual event.

In a sense, "Clerks" helped pave the way for events like Astronomicon. It was a breakout hit and a defining film in the independent film boom of the 1990s, and Smith used it as a springboard for a series of loosely connected films whose characters all share the same working class, pop culture-obsessed ethos. Smith's players were waxing about nerd culture and comic books way before Hollywood was overtaken by superheroes.

In the original "Clerks," O'Halloran took Dante's "I'm not even supposed to be here today" line — his character came in to the convenience store where he worked on an off-day, and then everything turned upside down — and turned it into a Gen-X rallying cry, a way to describe the way life dumps on you even on the one day you were supposed to be free from its little inconveniences.

He's been saying the expression will carry him into the afterlife for so long that in "Clerks III" — spoiler alert for those who have not yet seen the 2022 movie — it does, which he thinks may be a self-fulfilling in-joke Smith worked into the script just for him.

"Clerks III" — which was released in the fall, 16 years after "Clerks 2" — is the heaviest entry in Smith's "Clerks" trilogy, and it plays with themes of life, death, depression, grief, nostalgia and the past in ways you might not expect from the "Snootchie Bootchies" guy.

O'Halloran says the original script for "Clerks III" — which he Jeff Anderson, the Robin to O'Halloran's Batman in the "Clerks" films, were presented with back in 2014 — was even heavier.

"It was a dark turn where even me and Jeff were like, where is this coming from? For a 'Clerks' movie, really?" he says.

Anderson opted out of the movie and the script was shelved, until Smith surfaced with a new script for the film, which was written after (and heavily inspired by) the writer-director's 2018 heart attack.

O'Halloran says once things were in place he was down to suit up again and had no hesitation returning to the "Clerks" world.

"I'm always on board with anything with these characters," says the Bronx-raised actor, 53. "I enjoy the banter that goes back and forth with Dante and Randall and Jay and Bob and the customers. I'm always ready to go. Kevin knows that for the most part, unless there's some kind of horrendous weirdness about it, I'm going to be on board with it."

"Clerks III" routes its characters through an emotional gauntlet and has them recreating moments from the first film, which was a trip for O'Halloran, both for his portrayal of his character and for himself as an actor.

"As Brian, watching this character go through this, but also going through this time machine because Brian, having done this film, having gone to Sundance and seen the response worldwide ever since, it was fun and weird at the same time," O'Halloran says. "If you came up to Brian in the spring of 1993 and said, 'You're going to be right back in this building saying these exact words again in 28 years,' I'd be like, 'wow, slit my throat now. You mean I haven't developed at all as an actor?'"

O'Halloran is now a regular on the convention circuit — this weekend marks his third Astronomicon — and he says it's always a joy hanging with his View Askew cohorts.

"It's a loving family," he says. "We also keep an eye on one another — we don't need anyone winding up on TMZ."

The actor is a fan at heart, he says; at one convention, Ewan McGregor was a guest, too, and O'Halloran brought two light sabers with him so they could take a picture together, posed back-to-back.

"I love it," says the self-described nerd, of the con world. "When I see the fans freaking out, you can't help but get a little chuckle about it. Because I'm just an ordinary dude who happened to get a really good break, and I don't let it get to my head."

agraham@detroitnews.com

@grahamorama

Astronomicon

5-10 p.m. Friday, 11 a.m.-7 p.m. Saturday, 11 a.m.-5 p.m. Sunday

Burton Manor, 27777 Schoolcraft, Livonia

Tickets $70 for weekend pass, $30-$40 daily, $220 for weekend VIP

Astronomicon.com