The church as a whole is realigning in North America. Baptists, Methodists, Lutherans, Presbyterians, Anglicans, Episcopalians and other historic denominations are reorganizing into three distinct groups that can be designated Group A, Group B and Group C.

These three groups are forming around shared theological convictions and their approach to our current missiological context. As this reorganization happens, these three groups are beginning to work and interrelate with one another, some for the first time.

My experience in working with nearly 100 different regional or national denominational bodies over the last 13 years has shown me smaller, more theologically and missiologically cohesive associations of churches are more effective in their particular mission and the broader mission of the gospel.

Three new alignments

Group A is drawn to a more complementarian approach to male and female roles in leadership and to a historic or orthodox approach to human sexuality.

Group B is drawn to a more mutualist or egalitarian approach to male and female roles in leadership—or they see gender roles as a disputable matter—and to a historic or orthodox approach to human sexuality.

Group C is drawn to a more mutualist or egalitarian approach to female and male—and perhaps even nonbinary—roles and to a more progressive or contemporary approach to human sexuality. Some in Group C consider human sexuality a disputable matter while others consider it something fundamental.

While some suggest the reorganizing is more like a chess game in which multiple pieces are moving in multiple directions at the same time, my experience is friends in each of these groups are moving in a manner similar enough to be cohesive with one another on a range of issues.

Among those stemming from the historic SBC, the Cooperative Baptist Fellowship is moving into a Group C position, and the SBC keeps doubling down on its Group A position. Centrist evangelical Baptists in both Texas and Virginia long have carried a more Group B disposition, and their number is growing throughout North America.

New possibilities for Baptists

As Baptists realign, what might an SBC-affiliated church do in this moment?

There are some—perhaps many—who will wait for the SBC to take some action against them. There are others looking to be more proactive and to find a missional and theological fit for their congregations and their cooperation in the gospel.

Whether a church waits or is proactive, there are good options for those Baptist churches who want to cooperate with like-minded churches. The following seven options—listed alphabetically—currently appear to be among the best fits.

1. Ascent Movement

Originating from discussion among Baptist leaders from Texas and Virginia, Ascent is a movement of like-minded churches centered on the mission of engaging the world—particularly North America—with the gospel, with a bent toward the post-Christian realities in which we find ourselves.

Ascent is not another denomination, but a new kind of “connectionalism,” nor is it exclusively Baptist. Ascent is “Baptist based but not Baptist bound.” In addition to Baptists, Ascent includes evangelical Methodist, Church of God, Mennonite, Anabaptist, Pentecostal and nondenominational church leaders. Ascent firmly supports women in leadership.

Ascent’s convictions are captured in the Cape Town Commitment of the 3rd Lausanne Congress on World Evangelization. Ascent might be a place to look if you believe “denominations” are not the future, but something new—galvanized around mission, yet still maintaining some of the best qualities of our denominational heritage—is.

2. Converge Worldwide (formerly the Baptist General Conference)

One of the most effective denominational bodies today is the former Baptist General Conference.

This national denomination has grown through a fierce commitment to church planting and through a commitment to engage leaders of color at all levels of its leadership. Converge Worldwide also makes space for women in leadership at all levels.

They are a good fit for those looking for a smaller, well-organized and largely conservative Baptist family.

3. Ecclesia Network

Ecclesia is a free church network of congregations started around 2010 primarily as a network of church plants. Today, it has roughly 30 congregations scattered around the United States. These congregations range from house church networks to multi-site congregations of various sizes.

Ecclesia is fundamentally a relational network that stands in sympathy with the Cape Town Commitment and fully supports women in leadership. Almost every Ecclesia congregation has female pastors, leaders or elders.

4. The Evangelical Congregational Church

The Evangelical Congregational Church is a small denomination, largely present in the Rust Belt states of Pennsylvania through Illinois. They are historically Wesleyan/Arminian with a long-maintained congregational polity.

They tend to be more conservative culturally and might be a great fit for an SBC church unsettled with increasing Calvinistic influence in the SBC. They also make space for the licensing of female leaders as deacons.

5. The Evangelical Free Church of America

Though not Baptist, this free church denomination is theologically similar to the SBC. Like the SBC, they have become increasingly Calvinist in the last few years. However, they are largely without the influence of the political version of conservative Christianity among their leaders that seems present in the SBC.

While they do not recognize the ordination of women denominationally, they do stress local church autonomy on this matter. Within the Evangelical Free Church, you will find a few churches with women leading as elders, through preaching and in other roles.

6. The North American Baptist Conference

Emerging from its German heritage, the North American Baptist Conference is approximately 400 churches scattered across the United States and Canada, with larger concentrations in the western regions of the two countries and across their shared border.

While the NABC reserves the role of senior pastor for men, they support the role of women in other pastoral and ministry leadership positions within the church.

7. Transformation Ministries

Transformation Ministries is the new name of the Pacific Southwest Region that left the American Baptist Churches USA when that denomination wrestled with human sexuality in the 2000s.

Though largely based in Southern California and Arizona, they have grown across the country through church planting. They still have many of the features you might expect a historic denomination to have. They also support women in leadership.

Connectionalism’s new importance

While some bemoan the fracturing of the church over these important matters, I see a new kind of unity emerging.

Instead of being organized for mission together by categories largely important in centuries past, the church is being reorganized according to what it believes is faithful to the gospel now.

This new unity will mean greater cohesion and possibly greater effectiveness for all groups, provided they maintain a high Christology and a call to lead people toward discipleship to Jesus Christ.