DAVID SHANKLE GROUP BIOGRAPHY

David Shankle doesn’t require any introduction in the metal scene. Everybody will remember him as the legendary guitarist of the loudest band on earth, Manowar, in which he was a member from 1988 to 1995. During those years, David’s virtuosic high-speed guitar playing and breathtaking solos thrilled Manowar fans around the world. Furthermore, it was David who co-wrote with Joey DeMaio a song that has since become one of the biggest Manowar classics—“Master Of The Wind”—released on the gold-awarded album The Triumph Of Steel. David Shankle and Manowar formed an excellent liaison, and it is not surprising that leaving Manowar was one of the hardest decisions in David’s life. Contrary to many of his competitors in the music scene, however, David felt there was more to achieve, more to learn, so he went to Roosevelt Music University in Chicago to study jazz and classical guitar. Now, he is regarded as one of the best guitarists in his field, and has more than a hundred students.

A hot project needs the right timing and the perfect combination of people—this became the case when David Shankle formed his new band, the David Shankle Group (DSG). One of the most important partners for David in this new venture was his long-time friend Trace Edward Zaber. In David’s eyes, Trace was the only vocalist he would consider for the project, the only singer whose voice could withstand the demanding vocal lines of these blistering tracks. David and Trace have known each other for many years and collaborated on numerous projects. But it was only when the David Shankle Group came to life that they knew this was truly the project for which both of them had been waiting. Ashes to Ashes, DSG’s brilliant debut album (due to be released in June, 2003), gives proof to how astonishingly Trace’s vocals add to the music—it simply is the perfect combination.

The other members of DSG are Brian Gordon on bass, who played in renowned classical and jazz festivals in Europe and North America before his 20th birthday; Eddy “Shreddy” Bethishou, a true genius on keyboards, hitting the keys in breathtaking speed and competing with David on playing the fastest riffs; and Eddie Foltz, who, as legend tells us, was born with drumsticks firmly in hand.

Together, these five individuals truly rock the house and bring down the walls. The album features a broad mix of exceptional heavy metal songs, speedy instrumentals, and epic ballads in true heavy-metal fashion. And in all of this, you will also find a touch of jazz and classical music. The variety of music on the album has proven a huge advantage, since David was reluctant to stick to only one musical style, but wanted to experiment with all the styles he loves. Additionally, all of the band members proved willing to walk on new paths, which proved vital.

The result is the stunning debut album Ashes to Ashes, a work that will not only fascinate every metal fan, but will also capture the attention of every demanding musician, who will raise their eyebrows in respect. It’s not only David’s incredibly fast riffs, it’s not only the grand musical epics, but the flawless presentation of the extraordinary skills the musicians have in common, as on the uptempo opener “Ashes to Ashes.” The ballad “Calling All Heroes” is a true masterpiece of composition, with valid chances of becoming a smash hit on all rock-oriented radio stations.

DAVID SHANKLE GROUP GENRES

Heavy/Power/Shred

DAVID SHANKLE GROUP LYRICAL THEMES

War, Freedom, Glory, Honor, Heavy Metal

DAVID SHANKLE GROUP ORIGIN

United States of America (Chicago, Illinois), formed in 2002

DAVID SHANKLE GROUP CURRENT RECORD LABEL

Magic Circle Music

DAVID SHANKLE GROUP STATUS

Active

DAVID SHANKLE GROUP CURRENT LINE-UP

Dennis Hirschauer - Vocals (Bias Authority)

David Shankle - Guitars (ex-Manowar)

Jeff Kylloe - Bass

Brad Sabathne - Drums (Sacred Dawn, Lying in Ashes)

DAVID SHANKLE GROUP PREVIOUS LINE-UP