Location

Uitikon is home to approximately 4,000 inhabitants; it is a very desirable, low-tax community that has grown in perfect harmony with the surrounding landscape on the western slope of Mt. Üetliberg. Its historic town center is of regional significance that is worthy of protection.

Public transportation

Just under 10 minutes by car will get you into Zurich City when traffic is flowing properly. The local bus line travels at half-hour intervals and to a schedule coordinated with the Üetlibergbahn SZU (a network of local railway services), which travels to Zurich Central Station within 13 minutes. You can also get to the A3 autobahn heading to Basel or Sargans in just 7 minutes by car.

Shopping

Uitikon provides its residents with a fine and small selection of retail services. A redesigned town center is ready to greet you, including the butcher and baker, a wine store, Volg convenience store, the bank and post office, and an array of service providers such as the chemical cleaning service, a travel agency, cosmetology institute, hair stylists, a car service station, and more.

Schools

Uitikon possesses a comprehensive range of schools, with kindergartens and elementary and secondary schooling at three campuses. When the schools close their doors, then the child daycare centers, play groups and school lunch programs take over. The closest gymnasiums (college prep schools) are located in Urdorf and Zurich.

Recreation

With its network of trails, the Üetliberg, the nearby Türlersee Lake, an indoor swimming pool with a beach volleyball court, curling sheets, tennis and football (soccer) club and its several clubs and associations, Uitikon provides a splendid selection of leisure and recreational activities. “Initiative organizations” organize social and cultural events. The school for adult continuing education (Fortbildungsschule) offers language courses, fitness training, courses in yoga, sewing, cooking, homeopathy, chess, computers, the Internet, and much more.

Hotels/restaurants

Approximately ten restaurants with diverse gastronomic services are available to the townsfolk of Uitikon. One spot in particular where you can indulge yourself and your guests is the “Uto Kulm” restaurant at its eponymous hotel located on the town’s home mountain, the Üetliberg, with its breath-taking view over Zurich and the lake basin: a truly exquisite space in which to dine.

Sights/places of interest

The local art museum and the observatory are popular attractions in Uitikon.

Top picks

Eduard Gut-Strasse, Haldenstrasse, Lättenstrasse