Students can rest easy knowing they have our help with the Hackley School boarding admissions process.

The Hackley School is a private, coeducational, college preparatory boarding school located in Tarrytown, NY. It offers a rigorous curriculum that is focused on critical thinking, creativity, and experiential learning. It is well known for its strong athletics program including basketball, baseball, cross country, field hockey, football, lacrosse, soccer, swimming, tennis, and track and field. Overall, it is a highly respected institution because of its successful college preparatory program. Many families seek admission making the process very competitive. Our educational consultants at Cardinal Education offer personalized academic strategies and techniques for students to have the ability to submit the best application possible. The services we offer to aid in this process include interview preparation, academic coaching, tutoring and academic coaching, test prep, SSAT practice tests, ISEE practice tests, and editing services for essays, parent statements, student statements, and recommendation letters. Students can rest easy knowing that they have a team of support throughout the entire Hackley School admissions process.

CARDINAL EDUCATION

Please leave this field empty.

Let our admissions consultants help you and contact us today!

(888) 521-5243

Address: 293 Benedict Avenue, Tarrytown, NY 10591

Hackley School Admissions Website: https://www.hackleyschool.org/admissions

Student Population: 840

Grade 5-8: 240 | Grade 9-12: 398

Average Class Size: 16

Student-Teacher Ratio: 7:1

Open House and Event Dates: Information Sessions and Campus Tours

Information Sessions begin at 9:30 am and campus tours immediately follow.

Apr 13, 14, 19, 21, 25, and 26, 2023

Application Deadline: 11/28/ 2022

Testing Policy: Applicants are required to submit ISEE or SSAT scores.

Essay Questions: Information is not available.

Interview Importance: High

Hackley School College Counseling Department: https://www.hackleyschool.org/upper-school/college-counseling/college-counseling-overview