Update 16:43 GMT from Team Buzz

Buzz is on his way home from New Zealand, accompanied by Mission Director Christina Korp!

Update from Buzz Aldrin

19:19 GMT Sunday 4th December 2016

STATEMENT FROM BUZZ ALDRIN ENTERPRISES

18:30 GMT Saturday 3rd December 2016.

Buzz Aldrin is resting in hospital in Christchurch, New Zealand. He still has some congestion in his lungs so has been advised not to take the long flight home to the States and to rest in New Zealand while it clears up.

Having been cleared by doctors previously, Buzz took the trip to Antarctica to add to his exploration achievements after having spacewalked in orbit during the Gemini 12 mission in 1966, having walked on the Moon during the Apollo 11 mission in 1969, traveled down to see the Titanic in 1996 and to the North Pole in 1998. The trip to the South Pole is the capstone of his personal exploration achievements.

But his primary interest in coming to Antarctica was to experience and study conditions akin to Mars that are more similar there than any other place on earth.

“I’m extremely grateful to the National Science Foundation (NSF) for their swift response and help in evacuating me from the Admunsen-Scott Science Station to McMurdo Station and on to New Zealand. I had been having a great time with the group at White Desert’s camp before we ventured further south. I really enjoyed the time I spent talking with the Science Station’s staff too,” said Aldrin from his hospital room.

“I started to feel a bit short of breath so the staff decided to check my vitals. After some examination they noticed congestion in my lungs and that my oxygen levels were low which indicated symptoms of altitude sickness. This prompted them to get me out on the next flight to McMurdo and once I was at sea level I began to feel much better. I didn’t get as much time to spend with the scientists as I would have liked to discuss the research they’re doing in relation to Mars. My visit was cut short and I had to leave after a couple of hours. I really enjoyed my short time in Antarctica and seeing what life could be like on Mars.”

“Finally, thanks to everyone from around the world for their well wishes and support. I’m being very well looked after in Christchurch. I’m looking forward to getting home soon to spend Christmas with my family and to continue my quest for Cycling Pathways and a permanent settlement on Mars. You ain’t seen nothing yet!”, concluded Aldrin.

Christina Korp

Manager & Mission Control Director to

Dr. BUZZ ALDRIN

Astronaut, Gemini 12 & Apollo XI

Buzz Aldrin Enterprises, Inc

@buzzs_xtina

@therealbuzz

Update from our Mission Director Christina Korp – Friday December2nd 1730 UTC

Update from Buzz Aldrin – Friday December2nd 1303 UTC

Update from our Mission Director Christina Korp – Friday 2nd 0135 UTC

EVACUATION TO CHRISTCHURCH NEW ZEALAND – 1915 UTC Thursday 1st December.

The evacuation flight for Buzz Aldrin has successfully landed at Christchurch, New Zealand and he has been transferred to hospital for examination. He is currently has fluid in his lungs but is responding well to antibiotics and being kept in overnight for observation. His condition is stable and his manager, who is currently with him, described him being in good spirits.

We would like to offer our sincere thanks to the team at the American National Science Foundation for accommodating Buzz and his manager on one of their flights from the South Pole to New Zealand via McMurdo.

There will be further updates when additional information is available.

ORIGINAL HOLDING STATEMENT FROM WHITE DESERT ABOUT SOUTH POLE MEDICAL EVACUATION

Buzz Aldrin has been evacuated from the South Pole. He was visiting the Pole as part of a tourist group operated by White Desert and while there his condition deteriorated. As a precaution, following discussion between White Desert’s doctor and the US Antarctic Program doctor, Buzz, accompanied by his manager, was evacuated on the first available flight out of the South Pole to McMurdo with the USAP under the care of a USAP doctor. His condition was described as stable on hand-over to the USAP medical team.

This flight is still in progress and there will be further updates when additional information is available.