Astronaut Buzz Aldrin says he “never saw a UFO” and recent claims he passed a lie detector test proving he encountered alien life are “fabricated.”

Reports earlier this week suggested that interviews by Aldrin, the second man on the moon, and four other astronauts in which they mention seeing “unidentified objects” were examined under strict lab conditions – and proved they were all telling the truth.

But when Sun Online reached out to Aldrin, his spokeswoman revealed the claims were a “fabrication.”

“We don’t know where this story came from,” Aldrin’s spokewoman said.

“Buzz did not take a lie detector test.”

“He has never said he saw a UFO.”

“This story has been a fabrication for the sake of headlines and is not true as far as Buzz Aldrin is concerned.”

As previously reported, the original story reports that Aldrin along with Al Worden, Edgar Mitchell and Gordon Cooper all took part in the study – in which their accounts of space travel were analyzed by the Institute of BioAcoustic Biology in Albany, Ohio.

Experts examined a TV interview he gave in which he said: “There was something out there that was close enough to be observed … sort of L-shaped.”

The tests, reportedly more reliable than standard lie detector tests, showed he was telling the truth, the Daily Star reported.

However it turns out that Aldrin, 88, was telling the truth about seeing something in the skies as he travelled to the moon – but as he later clarified in a Q & A with fans – it was most probably light reflecting off one of the panels that had come off the rocket – not alien life.

“On Apollo 11 in route to the Moon, I observed a light out the window that appeared to be moving alongside us,” Aldrin said on Reddit.

“There were many explanations of what that could be, other than another spacecraft from another country or another world – it was either the rocket we had separated from, or the 4 panels that moved away when we extracted the lander from the rocket and we were nose to nose with the two spacecraft.”

“So in the close vicinity, moving away, were 4 panels. And i feel absolutely convinced that we were looking at the sun reflected off of one of these panels. Which one? I don’t know. So technically, the definition could be ‘unidentified.’”

He added: “When we returned, we debriefed and explained exactly what we had observed.”

“And I felt that this had been distributed to the outside world, the outside audience, and apparently it wasn’t, and so many years later, I had the time in an interview to disclose these observations, on another country’s television network.”

“And the UFO people in the United States were very very angry with me, that I had not given them the information. It was not an alien.”

He added: “There may be aliens in our Milky Way galaxy, and there are billions of other galaxies. The probability is almost certain that there is life somewhere in space.”

“It was not that remarkable, that special, that unusual, that life here on earth evolved gradually, slowly, to where we are today.”

Apollo 15 pilot Worden, 85, and Apollo 14’s Mitchel also claimed to have seen UFOs while Cooper says he actually tried to chase a cluster of objects.

Tests analyzing their voice patterns suggested they were also telling the truth about their strange encounters.

Yet UFO expert Nick Pope disputed the study – saying he believed it was misleading and used “pseudoscience.”

He told Sun Online: “The suggestion that Buzz passed a lie detector test about this, as part of a wider study is misleading to say the least.”

“What seems to have happened is that a decidedly New Age-sounding ‘institute’ looked at some old astronaut interviews – probably just pulled off YouTube – and ran them through a CVSA (computer voice stress analysis) program.”

“CVSA – and voice stress analysis more generally – is widely regarded as being pseudoscience.”

“It’s misleading for anyone to suggest the astronauts participated in a study, and indeed some of the interviews analyzed are from astronauts who died. I hope nobody is trying to use the good name and reputation of heroes like Buzz Aldrin to promote their own beliefs.”

Sun Online has reached out to the Institute of BioAcoustic Biology for comment.