Westport Arts Center’s final Jazz Thursday of the season will honor the late Max Wilk on Thursday, June 9, 7 p.m. to 9 p.m., in the WAC Gallery, 51 Riverside Ave., Westport. Wilk was the producer of WAC’s jazz series for decades up until 2009, and the major force behind establishing jazz as a viable program for WAC. Tickets are $10; free to WAC members, musicians and youth under 18. Due to the anticipated popularity of this event, reservations are requested in advance by phone at (203) 222-7070.

Max Wilk had a remarkable knowledge of and access to composers, lyricists, musicians and singers. As the producer of WAC’s jazz series, he brought an array of American musical talent – Bucky and John Pizzarelli, Bill Charlap, Fred Hersch, Margaret Whiting, Harry Allen, Larry Coryell, Dena Derose, and Daryl Sherman, among many others. Most of the jazz concerts were presented on Sunday afternoons at the Pequot Library in Southport. Wilk also wrote books (Schmucks with Underwoods: Conversations with America's Classic Screenwriters; They're Playing Our Song: The Truth Behind the Words and Music of Three Generations; Yellow Submarine; and Don't Raise the Bridge, Lower the River) as well as plays (Mr. Williams and Miss Wood; and Cloud Seven).

“The June 9th jam session honors and builds on the legacy of Max Wilk, a man who was responsible for so much exceptional music programming at the Westport Arts Center,” said Brian Torff, WAC’s artistic director for jazz. “We wish to pay tribute to a great man, writer, and promoter of art and music. We are lucky in life to have people such as Max Wilk who so enrich our communities.” The Fairfield University Jazz Ensemble will perform two special songs during the evening as a tribute to Wilk: “ Lullabye of Birdland” and “Soulful Sarah.”

WAC’s Jazz Thursday series, which began last January, is sponsored by WAC Board members Drs. Arthur and Bonnie Ashman. “We are uniquely bringing jazz, blues and swing back to Westport so people can listen to fabulous live music and, if one wishes, participate,” said Dr. Arthur Ashman. “Our objective is to create a sustainable program that will bring together people of all ages and backgrounds for the sole purpose of enjoying a night of music and each other. We’d like to feature professional musicians as well as amateurs, and we’ve had local high school and college students involved, too.”

Reflecting on WAC’s monthly jazz jam evolution over the past few months, Torff noted, “The jam sessions have been successful beyond my expectations. Every session has seen the number of musicians grow, as well as the audience. It has been a chance to build a musical community and the wonderful Westport audiences have supported this.”

Torff acknowledged that it’s gratifying for him to meet young musicians and get a chance to play with them. “It’s an essential part of developing as a musician and I remember how important it was to me when I was in my early years of performing,” he stated. “We will continue Jazz Thursdays in the fall, thanks to Bonnie and Arthur Ashman’s support,” Torff added.

The Westport Arts Center is a visual and performing arts organization dedicated to creating arts experiences that enrich the lives of area residents and the entire community. The Westport Arts Center is supported with funds from the Arthur and Heida Hermanns Holde Foundation, Inc., Connecticut Commission on Culture and Tourism, 4th Row Films, Thomas and Jeanne Elmezzi Private Foundation, Fairfield County Bank, Fairfield County Community Foundation, Gault, Inc., GWAY Marketing Gymnasium, Independent Film Channel, Melissa and Doug, Moffly Media, New Alliance Bank, Pepperidge Farm, Inc., U.S. Trust, Bank of America Private Wealth Management, Westport Resources, Westport Sunrise Rotary, Young Voices Program, Xerox Foundation, and WSHU Public Radio Group.

For reservations and information contact Westport Arts Center at 203-222-7070 or go to the website at www.westportartscenter.org. Gallery hours are M-F, 10 a.m. to 4 p.m., Sat., 10 a.m. to 5 p.m., and Sun. from noon to 4 p.m., at 51 Riverside Avenue, Westport.

# # #