Bruce Willis has been married to his wife Emma Heming Willis since 2009, but to those who loved him with Demi Moore, his now wife says, me too!

Bruce, Demi and Emma have always been open about the close bond they have and their blended family, and frequently share photos together with all of the actor's five daughters.

The Die Hard lead was married to Demi from 1987 to 2000, and together they had daughters, Rumer, 34 –who is about to have her own child, her first, soon – Scout, 31, and Tallulah, 29. With Emma he shares daughters, Mabel Rae, 11, and Evelyn Penn, nine.

MORE: Bruce Willis and Emma Heming Willis' relationship timeline

On Tuesday, after she noticed a fan had shared a slew of photos of Bruce through the years in honor of his 68th birthday, on March 15, Emma reposted the sweet tribute to her Instagram Stories, specifically sharing a black and white photo of Bruce and Demi.

The snapshot appears to have been taken while the two were on set, and in it the St. Elmo's Fire actress is sporting bangs and layered, short hair, quite unlike her current long, straight hair, while Bruce is sporting a thick goatee.

MORE: Bruce Willis is beaming in unseen video with his daughter Mabel despite health condition

After fans in the comments shared what all of their favorite Bruce Willis moments were, plus comments such as: "Love how they created such a supportive blended family after divorce and remarriage, too," and: "I am so glad the entire extended/blended family is such a pillar of support for Bruce," Emma couldn't help but agree.

She wrote on her Instagram Stories: "Yeah. Me too. I liked them together as well," along with an emoji of a smiling face with little red hearts around it.

MORE: Bruce Willis' young children make rare appearance alongside actor following dementia diagnosis – watch

MORE: Bruce Willis' $9.8m mansion is a sanctuary for star amid dementia diagnosis

Since Bruce's announcement that he would be retiring from acting – his family first revealed he had been diagnosed with aphasia in April 2022, though they have since shared that he really has frontotemporal dementia – Emma has been outspoken about having the difficult role of being his caregiver amid his devastating diagnosis.

Shortly after news of his new diagnosis, the mother-of-two shared that she has been spending time educating herself about the disease and equipping herself with the tools she needs to navigate Bruce's condition.

Posting a photo on Instagram of herself with dementia care and education specialist Teepa Snow, Emma wrote: "I'm grateful I had the opportunity to work with @teepasnows_pac who has helped me add to my dementia care toolbox. She's a loving, compassionate and skilled leader in this space who navigates herself with pure empathy. She's a gift."

Read more HELLO! US stories here