Meeting in Infinity

John Kessel. Arkham House Publishers, $24.95 (309pp) ISBN 978-0-87054-164-3

Kessel is hardly prolific--since 1980 he has produced perhaps two dozen short stories, written one novel ( Good News from Outer Space ) and coauthored another ( Freedom Beach , with James Patrick Kelly)--but his work always has a powerful emotional kick and a sharp postmodern edge. This first collection of his stories showcases his talents in wildly diverse forms. ``The Big Dream'' neatly critiques the disturbing subtexts of hard-boiled detective fiction by presenting a bitter, frustrated Raymond Chandler who imposes his fevered visions on the people around him. ``The Pure Product'' features thoroughly amoral time-travelers from the future who are seeking thrills in the present day. A young stockbroker finds himself inexplicably transported into Moby-Dick , as a deckhand on Ahab's Pequod, in the Nebula Award-winning ``Another Orphan.'' The brief but powerful ``Mrs. Shummel Exits a Winner'' suggests that sometimes dreams are better not attained. The final tale, ``Buffalo,'' best epitomizes Kessel's grace and sensitivity: in it he tells of his father's meeting with H. G. Wells, ``which never took place,'' and along the way illuminates the complex moral forces that affect working men like his father. Witty, daring and intelligent, Kessel produces some of the best science fiction in the genre. (Aug.)

close

Details

Reviewed on: 08/03/1992

Genre: Fiction

Amazon

Apple Books

Barnes & Noble

Bookshop

Share

Tweet

Copy Link

Print

More By and About this Authorchevron_right

John Kessel

This nuanced mostly reprint collection, the first in a decade from Nebula winner Kessel (Good News from Outer Space), plays on the theme of a hapless, down-on-his-luck man thrown into extraordinary Continue reading »

John Kessel

Kessel's ( Freedom Beach ) latest novel, a black comedy of pre-millenial hysteria set a decade in the future, is an outstandingly original work. George Eberhart, recently resuscitated from a Continue reading »

John Kessel

In the mid-21st century, time travel is as common as air travel is today, and so is the wholesale looting of the past for people and artifacts. The eponymous Owen Vannice, a billionaire Continue reading »

John Kessel

Among the 16 stories--plus two poems and a play--that Kessel (Corrupting Dr. Nice) includes in this volume are hardboiled detective yarns (albeit with time machines), literary satires and inventive Continue reading »

John Kessel

From the cover by Nebula-winning artist Michael Whelan to the very last page, this remarkable anthology is filled with the very best of the SF and fantasy published in 2010. In addition to Continue reading »

John Kessel

Kessel’s latest is thoughtful, slow-churning social science fiction mashing together what might be seen at first as near-utopias to reveal the underbellies and clashes of dissatisfaction and Continue reading »

John Kessel

Kessel (The Moon and the Other) makes an ambitious attempt to cross Jane Austen’s Pride and Prejudice with Mary Shelley’s Frankenstein, but this expansion of his Continue reading »

Lucius Shepard

A lethargic Louisiana backwater with roots sunk deep in supernatural legend provides an atmospheric backdrop for this sultry tale of bayou hoodoo and doomed love. Every 20 years, in obeisance to a Continue reading »

Dominick Cancilla

Cancilla's haphazardly plotted first novel reads like an extract from a larger, more coherent work. Coalchester, Calif., has a dark secret: more than a century before, the leader of a wagon Continue reading »

Bradley Denton

When a videotape catches meek college teacher Danny Clayton uncontrollably laughing after a terrorist massacre in Denton's provocative new novel, Danny becomes a reviled celebrity: Continue reading »

Tim Powers

In this taut, eerie novella from Powers (Three Days to Never ), used-book hunter George Sydney finds he can summon a beautiful poet when he discovers a signed Continue reading »

Connie Willis

Some high school kids would do anything to be an IASA space cadet, but not Theodora Baumgarten in Willis's cheerfully tongue-in-cheek SF novella. "There's no air, you're squashed Continue reading »

James P. Blaylock

Long recognized as a master of steampunk fiction, Blaylock (The Man in the Moon ) collects four short stories and two novels featuring indefatigable and Continue reading »

Kage Baker

This steampunk novella, set in 1844 London, follows the exploits of the harlots of the exclusive establishment known as Nell Gwynne’s, where they gather intelligence for the shadowy Continue reading »

James P. Blaylock

Explorer-scientist Langdon St. Ives and narrator Jack Owlesby (familiar from 2008'sThe Adventures of Langdon St. Ives ) embark upon a new steampunk Continue reading »

James P. Blaylock

Blaylock ( The Paper Grail ) returns to the Victorian setting of his award-winning novel Homunculus in this tale of obsessive grief, time travel, mad scientists and gentlemanly adventure. The first Continue reading »

Alexander Jablokov

These 10 short stories by Jablokov ( Carve the Sky ) won't be new to most SF devotees, since versions of each have appeared in Isaac Asimov's Science Fiction Magazine over the past nine years. But Continue reading »

Robert Silverberg and Lucius Shepard headline this above-average anthology of five short fantasy stories. Silverberg's ""The Prisoner"" is an effective exploration of Twilight Zone themes; his Continue reading »

Poppy Z. Brite, Popy Z. Brite

Like the aging Elvis who succumbs to self-destructive indulgences in the title tale, the 12 stories in this collection of transgressive fictions are adrift in a sea of excess. Cannibal zombies, Continue reading »

Dennis Etchison

HThis collection of a dozen short stories explores the disturbingDand usually urban, Southern CalifornianDterrain of what really scares us: not serial killers and vampires, but loss of identity, the Continue reading »

Clive Barker

Published last year in Britain as three paperback originals, these short narratives garnered impressive reviews. This edition, Barker's first hardcover appearance in America, gathers together 16 Continue reading »

Ramsey Campbell

Etchison is one of our best horror short story writers, achieving his chilling effects by weaving together almost disparate sinister elements: a barely heard sound, the look of a street, a memory. Continue reading »

Ramsey Campbell

The marrow-chilling tales in this comprehensive, chronologically arranged collection, selected from Campbell's 30-year career, demonstrate the ways this sophisticated British writer inspires fear Continue reading »

Kage Baker, Kathleen Bartholomew

Even a month-long seaside holiday can’t keep the spy-mistresses of the exclusive Nell Gwynne brothel away from trouble in this comic steampunk novella. This time trouble arrives in the form of Continue reading »

Tim Powers

A rare book dealer and a forgotten beat poet save the world in this charming time-travel tale from liminal fantasist Powers (Hide Me Among the Graves). As far as Richard Blanzac is concerned, the Continue reading »

James P. Blaylock

Blaylock’s usual steampunk hero, Langdon St. Ives (last seen in The Aylesford Skull), plays only a minor role in a Caribbean expedition led by Gilbert Frobisher to retrieve a fortune’s worth Continue reading »

Tim Powers

Powers builds on his 1983 novel The Anubis Gates with this novella of Victorian ghosts and vengeance. Harriet is beset by her dead husband’s ghost, which is trying to kill her. She’s rescued Continue reading »

James P. Blaylock

Steampunk pioneer Blaylock returns to Victorian England with this compendium of five novellas (three previously published) starring his titular scientist-adventurer and detailing St. Ives’s battles Continue reading »

PW EDITORS’ PICKS FOR

THE BEST NEW BOOKS

PW EDITORS’ PICKS FOR THE BEST NEW BOOKS