Birthday Parties

Host an unforgettable kids birthday party at Bryn Mawr Film Institute! Watch your child’s favorite movie in a private theater with all of your guests. After the lights go up, enjoy a post-movie bash in our on-site party space. This unique birthday experience will stay with your child—and their friends—long after the credits roll. (And it’s enjoyable for parents, too!)

You provide the movie on Blu-ray, DVD, or streaming service, with all the food and fixings for your party. We provide the giant screen, cozy seats, movie magic, post-screen party venue, and fresh popcorn for all of your guests. Party packages are for kids 2-12 years old and start at $500.

Request a birthday party with this form, or email Rentals@BrynMawrFilm.org for more information and availability.

About Birthday Parties

The Kids Birthday Party rental package is available on weekend mornings for a base rate of $500.

The rental includes a movie screening in the theater from 11:00 am – 1:00 pm, free popcorn, and use of the Multimedia Room for up to two hours after the film.

Maximum attendance for birthday party rentals is 50 people.

Renters may provide the film on DVD/Blu-ray or a streaming service such as Disney+, Netflix, etc. Physical media or login credentials must be shared with BMFI at least one week prior to the event to ensure proper projection. MOVIE SELECTION MUST BE UNDER 2 HOURS LONG!

The rental party may enter the rental space at 10 am. Movies begin promptly at 11 am in the theater.

Refreshments from the concessions stand may be eaten in the theater. All other party food must be consumed in the reception space only. Party food may be delivered, but it must be arranged in advance by the rental party.

The rental is not confirmed until a signed contract is received along with the full rental payment. An additional $250 will be temporarily authorized for 30 days on your credit card as a security deposit. Should there be damages to the premises as a result of your event this security deposit, or some portion of it, will become a permanent charge. Additional charges beyond the initial $250 authorization may occur should the extent of any damages warrant them.

The rental party is responsible for trash removal and a fee of $25 per bag will be deducted from the security deposit if trash is left behind.

Contracts must be submitted FOUR WEEKS PRIOR to the event.

Rates are subject to change based on additional services that BMFI provides.

Helium balloons, glitter, feathers, and noisemakers are prohibited.

Included Equipment

BMFI can provide the rental party with up to 10 six-foot tables and 50 chairs.

BMFI can provide the rental party use of our red carpet for an additional charge of $50.

Cancellation and Rescheduling

If an event is cancelled after the contract has been signed, BMFI reserves the right to keep 50% of the rental fee.

There can be no refunds for interruptions or cancellation of events/rentals due to acts of “nature” or forces beyond our control (such as electric company or water company failures).

Health and Safety Precautions

BMFI has established plans, protocols, and precautions to ensure the health and safety of both staff and patrons. Please review the health and safety precautions we’ve implemented at BMFI for you and our staff, and don’t hesitate to let us know if you have any questions..

Request a Birthday Party

Please fill out this form with as many details as possible. Once you have submitted this form, you will hear from us shortly.

Your submission of this form does not confirm your event or date. Your event/date is only confirmed after you have signed an agreement and we have received your deposit.