THE BIRTHDAY PARTY, by Laurent Mauvignier | Translated by Daniel Levin Becker

If I start by calling Laurent Mauvignier’s “The Birthday Party” a psychological thriller, understand that this means what you probably think it means, but also something else. It means a nail-biter plot, but also a focus on characters’ interior worlds so detailed that at times I forgot there was a plot at all. It is psychological, on the one hand, and a thriller, on the other, as if the book were two books at once.

I’m reminded of the opening 10 pages of Christine Montalbetti’s “Western” (2005), which proceed in such telescopic detail that you could easily fail to notice that what is being described is a cowboy sitting on a porch. Or Robert Pinget’s “The Inquisitory” (1962), a 400-page whodunit in which it’s never made clear what the “who” even did. Though otherwise quite different from one another, these books share Virginia Woolf’s belief that life is as much a matter of small things as big things, that life exists as much in its “myriad impressions” as in its major events, and that literature ought to as well. It is precisely because genres like westerns, mysteries or thrillers traditionally rely on high drama and plot twists that filling them up with small things — the mundane details of a moment, the minutiae of human consciousness — can be so evocative and strange.

“The Birthday Party” is more serious about its genre than these other novels: not an ironic thriller, but one that truly thrills. But it is equally interested in how the sensational and the mundane confront each other, in literature and in life. The story is set in a tiny French hamlet with the desolate name Three Lone Girls Stead, where a middle-aged farmer, Patrice, lives with his wife, Marion, and their young daughter, Ida. Next door lives Christine, a 69-year-old artist who long ago escaped Paris and the art world to live as a hermit with her dog, Rajah, and who now acts as something like an aunt to Patrice, and a great-aunt to Ida. There is also, in the hamlet, a vacant house, a barn and an old stone church. The mood is more grim than bucolic. The isolation seems creepy. As the novel begins, everyone’s preparing for Marion’s 40th birthday, unaware that strangers are going to arrive, and a dark past will violently intrude upon their insulated world. The suspenseful plotline that emerges relies on surprising turns and the revelation of characters’ secrets, which is why I won’t say any more about it.

Long before that plotline begins, “The Birthday Party” announces itself as a book of characters and, most remarkably, of sentences. Mauvignier writes wonderfully winding sentences — meticulously translated by Daniel Levin Becker — that zoom in on his characters’ thoughts and feelings in painstaking detail, like busy organisms digging into a moment in time. The prose wanders, gathers up perceptions, then returns 10 or 20 or 50 clauses later with more of the world in tow.

There are people who know, but me, she thinks as she enters the stable, where she’s greeted by the cool air and the earthy, grassy odor of cows and hay, by the smell of milk too and of the animals themselves, their excrement and the flies it attracts, with their formidable lowings that seem multiplied by the ceiling and the cinderblock walls, but me, I don’t know.

Thank you for your patience while we verify access. If you are in Reader mode please exit and log into your Times account, or subscribe for all of The Times.

Thank you for your patience while we verify access.

Already a subscriber? Log in.

Want all of The Times? Subscribe.