DNV considers good corporate governance to be fundamental for securing trust in the company and a cornerstone for achieving sustainable value creation in the best interests of DNV’s customers, employees, owner and other stakeholders.

Governance at DNV

DNV Group AS is owned 100% by Det Norske Veritas Holding AS (“DNV Holding”). DNV Holding is a private limited company registered in Norway and is fully owned by Stiftelsen Det Norske Veritas. Stiftelsen Det Norske Veritas issues a separate annual corporate governance report available on www.detnorskeveritas.com.

The group management company of the DNV group of companies is DNV Group AS ("DNV Group" or the "Company"), registered in Norway and governed by the Norwegian Private Limited Liability Companies Act. The Company was established as the group management company for the DNV group of companies ("DNV" or the "group") from September 2013.

For more details on ownership and accountability, please see our Corporate Governance Report (downloads as PDF).

Ethical framework and compliance policy

DNV is committed to the highest standards of integrity and ethical business conduct. Our Code of Conduct provides the framework for what we consider ethical, responsible and sustainable behaviour. It applies to everyone involved in DNV’s business. Along with our Purpose, Vision and Values, it provides the foundation of our business ambition and all activities.

We expect our customers to conduct business in a fair, ethical and lawful manner and have ensured this by stating this in our general terms and conditions.

Human rights

In addition, our suppliers have to accept our Supplier Code of Conduct which states our expectations for suppliers in the areas of human rights and labour standards, anti-corruption, and environmental performance. We also reflect this approach in our statement in accordance with section 54(1) of the United Kingdom’s Modern Slavery Act 2015, which we publish for every financial year.

DNV’s Gender Equality Statement describes how we work to promote equality and prevent discrimination in Norway.

Our annual due diligence disclosure is published in our DNV’s Human Rights Report 2023, describing DNV’s approach to managing human rights risks in our operations and supply chain. Read more about our approach on Human rights.