Here are some of the highlights featured in the video above from our 160-year history:

1864

DNV (Det Norske Veritas) is founded as a membership organization in Oslo, Norway by mutual marine insurance clubs. We establish a uniform set of rules and procedures to assess the condition and seaworthiness of vessels, so that risk can be managed and the right insurance premium set for both ships and their cargo.

1867

Three years later in Hamburg, Germany, a group of 600 ship owners, shipbuilders and insurers gather to found Germanischer Lloyd (GL). (In 2013, DNV and GL merge, and the company changed name to DNV GL, but was renamed to DNV in 2021).

1888

Our first surveyor is posted in China. Ten years later we open our first office in the US and we expand our presence to ports across the globe.

1914

We’re at the first meeting of what was to become the International Treaty on the Safety of Life at Sea held as a result of the sinking of the Titanic.

1953

We establish a research department and start pioneering an analytical and scientific approach to ship building. A scientific approach that has become ingrained in how we work with innovation and risk management to provide impartial assurance and advise on safety, quality, efficiency, and sustainability.

1969

We buy the largest computer in Norway and develop the first software solution for design and optimization of ships and offshore structures.

1970

Oil and gas is discovered in the North Sea, and our knowledge about waves, materials and structural integrity, becomes even more valuable. We use our experience and technological competence to develop verification, inspection and risk management services and we are assigned most of the building supervision and inspection on the Norwegian continental shelf.

1976

The world’s first pipeline rules are published by DNV. By 2008, 65% of all offshore pipelines in the world are built to our standards.

1977

Wind energy is introduced as a new business segment. This, and other climate-friendly service areas grow from a strong, research-driven technology base. New rules for wind turbine design are developed. By 2007, 70% of all offshore wind farms are certified by DNV.

1987

The ISO 9000 quality management standards are introduced, and we become one of the leading companies to certify corporations’ quality and environmental management systems. This takes us into a wide range of industries, and we expand our global footprint.

1994

We start certifying medical devices in the EU.

2008

We become the first to break a near monopoly in the US by being authorized to certify quality standards in US hospitals and help them improve patient care. Today, we have certified around 6,000 healthcare organizations.

2010

More than 6,000 food and beverage companies are certified by us. That has grown to 11,000 today.

2012

Electrification of industry and society is really accelerating. We acquire KEMA and become a globally leading advisor and certifier of cleaner energy, power generation, transmission and distribution.

2013

We join forces with Germanischer Lloyd (GL) and become the world’s leading classification society. At this point, 1 in 4 classed ships are built to our technical rules and standards. The merger also makes us the number one global provider of certification and advisory services to energy sector.

2017

We launch Veracity in 2017, an independent platform and marketplace for industry data. Also, at this point, more than a million people use our wide range of industrial software solutions. 2020 In response to the COVID pandemic, we scale up our digital services, remote audits, drone inspections, and AI capabilities.

2023

We become one of the fastest-growing providers of cyber security services in Europe.