Independent venture capital firm Energy Ventures has been announced as the strategic partner and new largest shareholder in the pipeline inspection company HalfWave.

Energy Ventures, which has an office in Aberdeen and funds high-growth oil and gas technology companies, will invest 70 million Norwegian Krone – in the region of £7.6miliion for a 56% stake in Halfwave, taking an active role in commercialising the unique Acoustic Resonance Technology (ART) that is developed and patented by DNV (Det Norske Veritas). Halfwave, with headquarters in Norway and a UK office in Portland, develops and markets innovative inspection solutions within the oil and gas industry.

The asset integrity and inspection market is expected to grow rapidly over the next years. DNV and its partners have over the past 20 years invested a significant amount of capital, time and resources to develop the ART-technology. Today, HalfWave has a game changing technology which enables the company to secure a potentially leading position within this growth segment.

Greg Herrera, partner at Energy Ventures based in Aberdeen says, “Energy Ventures is impressed by the success and progress HalfWave has had as part of DNV, and we are excited to have the opportunity to develop the company further, and help commercialise its potential.”

HalfWave, as a subsidiary of DNV, has developed a state of the art gas pipeline inspection tool for the oil and gas industry. The company offers an inspection technology based on acoustic half-wave resonance principles. The new tool will measure actual pipeline wall thickness and works equally well with gas or liquids between the measuring transducers and the pipeline wall. This enables far more accurate and cost effective integrity management of oil and gas pipelines. The method will also imply reduced cost for pipeline inspection work related to reduced impact on the gas transmission rate during the inspection.

The development of the gas pipeline inspection tool has taken place in close cooperation with Gassco which has contributed with competence and R&D funding. Gassco is the operator of all major gas pipelines on the Norwegian Continental shelf, including export pipelines from Norway to the UK and continental Europe. HalfWave has acquired Gassco’s rights in the ART pipeline inspection tool technology. Gassco will contribute with its expertise in the finalization of the technology qualification program. The gas pipeline inspection tool is now approaching final technology development and qualification. A series of test runs is planned to start fall 2012 and is planned to be completed during Q2 2013.

President and CEO of Gassco Brian Bjordal says, “Gassco welcomes HalfWave’s effort in commercializing the ART pipeline inspection tool, and is looking forward to get access to the ART inspection tool in the market.”