Italian postcard. B.F.F. Edit., No. 2572. Series Cines-Pittaluga.

Gianfranco Giachetti (Florence, September 17, 1888 - Rome, November 29, 1936) was an Italian actor of the stage and the screen.

Giachetti was born in Florence, but artistically trained in Venice where he moved with his family as a boy. From a very young age he climbed on the stage of various amateur drama companies until, in 1914, he began to act in the company of Ferruccio Benini, and at the end of a conflict with the company he stepped over to that of Giovan Battista Bosio, where he began to be appreciated in works by Goldoni.

In 1920 Giachetti founded his own company - Ars Veneta - in which important actors such as Cesco Baseggio, Carlo Micheluzzi, Emilio Baldanello, Primo Piovesan and the brothers Gino and Gianni Cavalieri entered and trained. He continued his career successfully interpreting works by Goldoni, Giacinto Gallina and Gino Rocca. Gifted with refined intelligence and culture, Giachetti managed to show the darker and less sentimental sides that lie behind their pathetic and apparently harmless characters. He was Buganza, the failed composer who aspires to glory in Nina, non far la stupida by Arturo Rossato and Gian Capo. He is considered the true progenitor of a generation of Venetian actors who worked with him and who continued, even many years after his premature death, in staging works from the Venetian theater tradition; among these, in addition to those already mentioned, Cesare Polacco and Margherita Seglin.

With the advent of sound he began working for the cinema making his debut in 1931 in Figaro e la sua gran giornata by Mario Camerini and continues, until his premature death in 1936, to be the protagonist of several films even if he cannot be considered, in all respects, a real film actor. He had supporting parts in comedies with Elsa Merlini, among which a few shot at Berlin film studios in 1933-1934 such as Paprika and Lisetta, both dating 1933 and directed by Carl Boese. However, Giachetti also took part in the Risorgimento-set drama 1860 (1934) by Alessandro Blasetti - who would also direct him in Vecchia guardia (1934) and Aldebaran (1936). Giachetti's last part was in the Franco-Italian co-production Amore (Carlo Ludovico Bragaglia., 1935), with Edwige Feuillère and Gino Cervi. Curiously, almost two decades after his death Giachetti appeared in the film C'era una volta Angelo Musco (1953), a film reminiscent of the life and career of the great Sicilian actor and composed of old film clips reassembled for the occasion.

Sources: Italian Wikipedia, IMDB.