Spoetzl Brewery is where Shiner Beer has been made for more than one hundred years. The brewery was founded by Czech and German immigrants in 1909.

Current Shiner brewmaster Jimmy Mauric started working at the brewery when he was 17 years old.

When he started working, the brewery was producing about 30,000 barrels of beer a year. Now, they make about 550,000 barrels each year, so he is someone that has seen the Shiner brand grow firsthand.

"It's a mixture of the old and the new. Looking at the old building, you get the history part of Mr. Spoetzl when he built it in the '30s. Then you see these massive buildings now where the new brew house and bottle shop is. Really the automation that's in this little plant here in the middle of nowhere-- It's amazing to see what's all going on here," explained Mauric.

What they call the "tour tube" gives visitors a bird's eye view of the production room where they can fill 1,200 bottles of beer a minute.

"Being kind of a Texas icon, yeah, Shiner Bock, but to actually come here and actually see how we do things, people, I think, usually have a better appreciation for our beers," said Mauric.

You've got to finish up the tour with a cold one, but don't leave Shiner without a taste of some local fried chicken.

"We don't have a lot of fast foods in Shiner, so I said, 'Man we need a good place where people can come and congregate and eat and drink coffee', so I said a fried chicken place would be the perfect thing," explained Vic Patek, owner of Friday's Fried Chicken.

Mr. Patek started with fried chicken, but over the years, they've added a salad bar, sweets, burgers, and more.

"One thing that a lot of the big eaters love is a thing called the Cock n' Bull. It's a hamburger meat with a chicken fried chicken filet and pepper jack cheese, lettuce, tomatoes, pickles," said Patek.

There's a reason the fried chicken is a favorite and Friday's hospitality is second to none.

"Well, I hope they leave here nice and full first off but that they'll say, 'Man, that was a great place, I want to go back again,'" said Patek.

For more information on Shiner, visit the websites under the related links section of this story.