Robert Rodriguez, who dated Rose McGowan from 2006 to 2009, says he cast the actress in his 2007 film “Grindhouse” to spite its executive producer Harvey Weinstein, who she has accused of sexual assault.

Rodriguez explained in an essay for Variety that McGowan, 44, revealed the alleged assault to him in 2005 and it inspired him to write McGowan’s “Grindhouse: Planet Terror” character, Cherry Darling, to showcase her strength at the expense of the Weinstein Company, which was set to distribute the project.

“I revealed to Rose … that I was about to start writing a movie with Quentin Tarantino, a double feature throwback to 70’s exploitation movies, and that if she was interested, I would write her a BAD ASS character and make her one of the leads,” Rodriguez wrote. “I wanted her to have a starring role in a big movie to take her OFF the blacklist, and the best part is that we would have Harvey’s new Weinstein Company pay for the whole damn thing.”

The director recalled that as he was discussing the role with McGowan, Weinstein, 65, came to the table.

“I said, ‘Hey Harvey, this is Rose McGowan. I think she’s amazing and really talented and I’m going to cast her in my next movie,'” Rodriguez recalled. “Harvey then dribbled all over himself in the most over the top performance I’d ever seen as he gushed, ‘Oh she’s wonderful, oh she’s amazing, oh she’s fantastic, oh she’s so talented … You two should definitely work together.’ And then he skittered off. I knew right then that every word Rose told me was true, you could see it all over his face … Casting Rose in a leading role in my next movie felt like the right move to make at the time – to literally make him pay.”

McGowan previously hinted at Rodriguez’s plan, tweeting in 2016, “My ex sold our movie to my rapist for distribution.”

Rodriguez claimed that Weinstein took revenge of his own on the then-couple by ensuring it would be a commercial disappointment.

“To our horror, Harvey buried our movie anyway, and because we did not want to risk getting sued, we never spoke publicly about the matter,” Rodriguez wrote, citing McGowan having signed a non-disclosure agreement with Weinstein. “It would have been much easier on both of us if we could have just revealed why we were doing it.”