Directors Quentin Tarantino (Pulp Fiction, Kill Bill) and Robert Rodriguez (Spy Kids, Sin City), with their inspired yet twisted mix of gritty glamour complete with guns, gore, and plenty of sex, have collaborated on the double feature "Grindhouse"—a moniker for the run-down movie palaces that screened B exploitation films in America throughout the 70s. In the days before monster multiplexes and $14 tickets, these "grindhouse" pictures would traverse the country. And by the time they reached the drive-ins and dollar cinemas, the films were often badly scratched, with entire scenes missing. Sticking to the true nature of the genre, Tarantino and Rodriguez have created two separate features replete with missing scenes and scratches. In Rodriguez's Planet Terror, a small town gets ravaged by an unidentifiable plague. Rose McGowan plays Cherry, a down-on-her-luck go-go dancer who uses a machine gun as a leg because her own was bitten off by a zombie. Dr. Dakota Block (Marley Shelton) is the horny, doe-eyed M.D. on the graveyard shift at the hospital when the bodies begin to pile up. Tarantino's Death Proof, which follows an intermission of fake trailers, features Stuntman Mike (Kurt Russell), a serial killer whose supercharged muscle car goes on a heart-pounding, mile-a-minute rampage of death. Rosario Dawson co-stars as Abernathy, a makeup artist who tangles with danger-loving hotheads Zoe (Zoe Bell) and Kim (Tracie Thoms). The rest of the hottie cast includes Mary Elizabeth Winstead as the cheerleading starlet, Sydney Tamiia Poitier as Jungle Julia, and Jordan Ladd as gal pal Shanna, a hard-partying ex–beauty queen. Vanessa Ferlito is Arlene, their ex–best friend, a tough city girl who returns home to make amends. There's enough sex and violence here to make even the most hardened moviegoer blush; the prudish and the queasy should take a seat near the exit.

Also on VF.com: video from the "Grindhouse" girls photo shoot.

Krista Smith is *Vanity Fair'*s senior West Coast editor.

Wellness

Did Clean Beauty Go Too Far?

Amid lawsuits, mold controversies, and inconsistent guidelines, cosmetic chemists sure think so.

Celebrity

Robert Pattinson Is Fully Unbothered By Suki Waterhouse Singing About Her Exes

Just because she loves him, though, doesn't mean he's immune to angry songs. “You can find things to be pissed about.”

Hollywood

Here: Robert Zemeckis’s New Movie Spans a Century, but the Camera Never Moves

Tom Hanks and Robin Wright reunite the Forrest Gump team for a drama set entirely in one household’s living room.

Television

House of the Dragon’s Ser Simon Strong Is “The Only Gentleman in an Ungentlemanly World”

As violence abounds in Westeros, Rhaenyra arranges a secret meeting with Alicent and tries to broker some kind of peace. Plus, Simon Russell Beale drops by Still Watching to discuss the introduction of his new character, the Lord of Harrenhal.