Post by Fourever Charmed on

I've got a couple of articles on Paige's new relationship with Robert Rodriguez (Grindhouse) that some of you may find interesting. I'm not sure who the source for the first one is, because it was posted in the Mod section of a board I moderate at, but here it is:

PRODUCTION of "Grindhouse," the much-hyped Quentin Tarantino-Robert Rodriguez movie opening Friday, ground to a halt last year when Rodriguez fell for his leading lady, Rose McGowan, and his wife found out.

Rodriguez and his spouse of 16 years, Elizabeth Avellan, raised five kids and worked together, with Elizabeth serving as his co-producer on "Grindhouse," "Sin City," "From Dusk Till Dawn," "Desperado" and "Spy Kids."

But the marriage exploded last April when Page Six reported that Rodriguez, 38, had begun a torrid romance with McGowan, the raven-haired, French-Irish minx once engaged to shock rocker Marilyn Manson and previously linked with Kip Pardue, Ahmet Zappa and Men's Health stud Dave Zinczenko.

"It was the worst-kept secret on the set. They were going off to his trailer, having meals together," our source said. "Rose thought some of the crew were treating her differently, and the attitude was, like, well what do you expect when you're [bleeping] the director?"

In "Grindhouse," Rodriguez's homage to the cheesy sex-and-violence movies of the 1970s, McGowan plays a stripper who loses her leg and replaces it with a machine gun to battle flesh-eating zombies.

She and Rodriguez first met at Cannes in 2005. But until now the consequences of their shenanigans weren't fully known. When the director "fell in love with his femme-fatale star . . . he broke up his marriage of 16 years . . . The production had to shut down for a month while he recovered," Variety reports.

A source told Page Six, "When Elizabeth found out, there was an eruption of emotions - an emotional volcano."

A Dimension Films spokeswoman would only comment: "The hiatus had nothing to do with Robert's personal life."

In the meantime, Rodriguez and McGowan are keeping an ultra-low profile. "They arrived in the same limo for the L.A. premiere, but they got out separately several minutes apart to avoid being seen together," a spy told Page Six.

Rodriguez and Avellan insist that their separation is amicable and that they plan to raise their four boys, Rebel, Rocket, Rogue and Racer, and daughter, Rhiannon, together and continue their partnership in Troublemaker Studios.

The second one was the headline on AOL's entertainment news a few days ago:

Steamy Love Triangle On 'Grindhouse' Set

news.aol.com/entertainment/movies/articles/_a/steamy-love-triangle-on-grindhouse-set/20070403085009990002

Post by silverlily on

I'd read some parts of the first article, I believe the source is Page Six.

I was shocked when I first heard it, just because I had no idea that that was going on ... at all.

rosemcogowanonline.com reported the following:

The other story hitting the tabloid trash is allegations that an alleged relationship between Rose and, Grindhouse director, Robert Rodriguez had been the catalist that ended his marriage to, Grindhouse producer, Elizabeth Avellan and that this had also shut down production of Planet Terror for a month. The following statement has been released by Troublemaker Studios:

"Elizabeth Avellan and Robert Rodriguez were separated long before the 'Grindhouse' production began. Their separation and subsequent divorce were very amicable and they opted to continue as planned, and to produce the film together -- a decision they informed Bob and Harvey Weinstein [co-chairmen of The Weinstein Company, distributor of 'Grindhouse'] about prior to the start of production on 'Grindhouse.'

Robert and Elizabeth plan to produce 'Sin City 2' together -- with Robert directing -- for Dimension Films in the coming months. The hiatus during the production of 'Grindhouse' had nothing to do with Robert's personal life. On April 10th, 2006, after shooting for 5 weeks, Robert completed principal photography of the first phase of his segment of 'Grindhouse.' He took a hiatus from shooting to assemble the footage he had already shot and determine his next steps in the production, which is the same successful approach he utilized with 'Sin City' when he shot the film in two parts."

I just hope that what they're saying, about Rodriguez and Avellan being separated long before the production started, is true. I really wouldn't wanna see Rose being the woman who breaks up a family.