In her "tell-it-like-it-is" book "Brave," Rose McGowan details her volatile relationship with Robert Rodriguez, accusing the director of forcing her to take a lie detector test to prove she wasn't in love with Quentin Tarantino.

Though she only refers to him as "RR" in the book, it's no secret who she's talking about. He's described as the cowboy hat-wearing, Texan director of "Planet Terror," who was married when they started dating. Rodriguez and wife Elizabeth Avellán -- who was also a producer on their "Grindhouse" film -- split after he started dating McGowan.

Getty

Rose McGowan Bashes Alyssa Milano, But Praises Meryl Streep's Response to That Mean Tweet

View Story

In the chapter of her book titled "Destruction," McGowan said Rodriguez was "so amazing to me at the beginning." And while he was "wildly jealous," she thought it was "flattering" at first.

"By the time RR revealed his true identity, I was so deeply in love that I couldn't adjust to what was going on," she added. "He was so amazing to me at the beginning, such a gentleman, that I figured it must have been my fault, that I must have done something wrong, for him to turn cruel, to stop respecting me. No. It was his plan all along, conscious or subconscious."

The two started working together on "Planet Terror," a title she said, "in retrospect is the perfect title for a lot of my life with him."

CBS

Rose McGowan Fires Back at Press for Calling Stephen Colbert Interview 'Bizarre'

View Story

As their relationship wore on, McGowan said it became a "steady cycle of being accused of imaginary sins and me putting out fires so he wouldn't blow up at me." His jealously, according to McGowan, led to Rodriguez shaving his facial hair just like her co-star Freddy Rodriguez, so he could stand-in for the actor during a kissing scene. She also said he would berate her about her weight and threatened to have Jessica Alba take over her role in the movie.

She writes that he threatened to fire her from the project multiple times, but one time really stood out.

"This time he declared he was going to fire me because I was secretly in love with Quentin, wanted to sleep with Quentin. That was as far from reality as it got," she said. "RR stormed out of my trailer, saying he'd be back with a lie detector machine to see if I really did love Quentin."

She said she then began asking people on set if they had a Valium she could take before he returned, because she started having a "full-on panic attack."

E!

Rose McGowan Fears She'll Be Killed and 9 More 'Citizen Rose' Revelations

View Story

"My door got thrown open and there he stood holding a cruel-looking yellow machine with electrode-like wire things. I thought I was going to pass out from fear," she described. "I shrank back against the wall and started to cry. He told me to sit; I sat. He attached the machine to me, turned it on, and started in, each question feeling like a bullet. I thought I was going to throw up, my stomach tight and clenched. I could barely breathe I was so afraid. The questions were all along the lines of, 'Did you f-ck Quentin?' It was laughable, but in the moment, the situation was no laughing matter. The crew probably thought we were having sex in there, but no, I was being terrorized. The lie detector said the answers were unclear. RR ripped the wire off me and stormed out of the trailer and back tot he set."

According to McGowan, she had to get right back to work after that, filming the movie for another six hours. "If they gave out Oscars for pain and suffering," she said, "I'd have been a shoo-in."

Getty Composite

Robert Rodriguez Fires Back at Vanity Fair's 'Disappointing' Rose McGowan Story for 'Key Factual Errors'

View Story

A publicist for Rodriguez wasn't immediately available for comment Thursday, but previously referred TooFab to an earlier statement when excerpts of McGowan's book were released.

"As one of the first victims to come forward with stories of sexual assault by Harvey Weinstein, Rose McGowan is a very brave woman who I applaud for speaking out about Weinstein's repulsive behavior," he said in October. "Today over 50 remarkable women have come forward to detail the horrors they endured. This saga has been a watershed moment in our country, and now because of the courage of Rose and others, countless women who previously were unable to stand up and speak out against sexual abuse can do so without fear."

He previously addressed some "inaccuracies" from early excerpts as well, but added, "I agree with what Rose is trying to do overall, which is continue to push for change both in our industry and beyond."