Mayor: Simo Salapura

Zrenjanin is a city and the administrative centre of the Central Banat District in the autonomous province of Vojvodina. The city covers 190.9 km² and has a population of 74,459 (2016) inhabitants.

Address: Trg slobode 10, Zrenjanin

Tel: +381 23 315 0111

E-mail: gradska.uprava@zrenjanin.rs

Website: www.zrenjanin.org.rs

Information is not up-to-date? Please send us suggestion via email with a subject 'Directory'.

Articles

Business News

Linglong Acquires Stake in Serbia’s Belt and Road Institute

Linglong International Europe, a tire manufacturer based in Zrenjanin, Serbia, has recently acquired a five percent stake in the Belt and Road Institute, marking...

Culture

Zrenjanin Crowned Serbia’s Cultural Capital for 2025

In a ceremony held at the Serbian government, Zrenjanin was officially designated as Serbia's Cultural Capital for 2025. The contract was signed by Deputy...

Business News

Metito To Secure Sustainable Solution For Water Supply Challenges In Zrenjanin

The Contract for realization of a water treatment project in Zrenjanin has been signed in the Government of the Republic of Serbia between the...

Sector in Focus

Zoran Ljubotina, Director of the Tourist Organisation of Zrenjanin

We Can Offer a Lot

This year’s Beer Days event exceeded the expectations of both hosts and guests. More than half a million people passed through Zrenjanin, hotels were...

Business

Čedomir Janjić, Mayor of the City of Zrenjanin

Banat Is Now the Heart of Serbia

In the presence of top officials of the Republic of Serbia, representatives of the Embassy of the People's Republic of China, senior management of...

Business News

Shandong Linglong most important investment in Vojvodina

The Serbian President Aleksandar Vučić laid the foundation stone with the representatives of the Shandong Linglong Tyre factory, which marked the beginning of the...

Business News

Zrenjaninsko beer again available to Zrenjaniners

After more than 15 years, first bottles of Zrenjaninsko beer, the favourite beverage of the Zrenjaniners, have been produced in the Čelarevo brewery. The project...

News

Carlsberg launches production of Zrenjanin beer

Mayor of Zrenjanin Čedomir Janjić and Carlsberg Serbia CEO Vladimir Vava presented a revival of one of the symbols of the city on Begej,...