PropertyOfZack Senior Writer Jesse Richman sat down with We Butter The Bread With Butter at SXSW a month ago. We chatted with the band about SXSW, their recent US tour, their new album, pushing into the US, and more. Check out the full interview below!

POZ: Can I get your names and what you do in the band?

MN: My name is Marcel [Neumann], I am the guitar player and songwriter of the band We Butter The Bread With Butter.

PB: My name is Paul [Barztsch], and I am the singer.

POZ: So is this you guys’ first time at SXSW?

MN: Yeah, the first time. We’ve played our own show [in Austin previously], but this is the first time.

POZ: When did you get into town?

MN: Just today, in the morning. We walked around, tried to get a look at everything.

POZ: Did you get a chance to see any bands? Or will you while you’re here?

MN: Maybe after we load in. Right now we’re just walking around, seeing all the exotic stuff.

POZ: It’s kind of crazy here!

POZ: So you guys are just at the very tail end of a tour with Lions Lions and Honour Crest. How’s that been going?

MN: Very good. The beginning was quite hard because we hit all the blizzards on the eastern side [of the US]. We cancelled a show in, I think, Iowa, because our bus couldn’t move.

POZ: I live in New York, it’s been one hell of a winter.

MN: But since we’ve been on the west coast everything is awesome. The shows have been great.

POZ: How has the audience been? Have the fans reacted well? Just because I know you guys are kind of different from what Lions Lions and Honour Crest do.

MN: Yes. This is our goal, to be different from anyone else. But their audience was awesome. Seeing them try to sing our songs in German. I don’t know why but they really get into the language. It’s fun.

POZ: Do you find that you guys have a lot of fans of your own over here? Or is it more winning over the other bands’ fans at this point.

MN: I mean, this is our headliner tour.

POZ: Well, yeah. That’s fair.

MN: So most of the fans have been there for us.

POZ: I guess I just ask because you really haven’t toured the US much.

MN: This is our second tour [here]. It’s very interesting because the audience is very different from Germany, but it’s great to see people come out so far away from our home. They knew our music for six or seven years. This is very amazing. Awesome.

POZ: Ok, so the album [Goldkinder] came out last August I believe? Was that a worldwide release? I know you did it independently.

MN: It was a worldwide release, with some day’s difference – the 9th in Germany, the 10th in…

POZ: So, pretty close. So it’s been out for a while, are you happy with how it’s been received at this point?

MN: Oh yeah, because we knew that this record was going in another direction than we did before, and we knew that a lot of people wouldn’t like it. But we also tried to reach out to a very different kind of audience, and somehow, it started working. The audience is different. They’re more into music, and not just into seeing another scene metalcore band. It’s more about being real fans of one band’s music. It was a very risky step, but it was worth it.

PB: The crowd changed really hard. The first time we played here, we had a lot of “mosh kids” and hardcore kids. This time, [the crowds are] full of party people. They want to party with us. It’s really cool.

MN: Full of “rock and roll people”.

POZ: Was that something you were conscious of when you were writing the album, that you wanted to take that turn? Or is it just how it came out.

MN: It was totally… Like, we didn’t want to do something that does not express ourselves. Just doing the same stuff we did on the last two records wouldn’t satisfy us as musicians, so we just did what we really wanted to do. Yeah! That was kind of the writing process, yeah.

PB: This music is 100% us.

MN: I think it’s more We Butter than ever before. It’s really what we love to do, and we don’t care what others think about it.

POZ: So I know, as I mentioned, this album was released independently, you guys did it yourselves, as well as the EP that came before [2012’s Projekt Herz]. Your first two albums were on a label [2008’s Das Monster aus dem Schrank and 2010’s Der Tag an dem die Welt unterging, both on Redfield]. What went into the decision to go independent?

MN: I think one of the biggest things was that we want to be independent by our selves – not just our music. We want to decide about our music, our lives, our touring stuff, on our own. And we don’t like the music industry that much. I mean, they’re fucking up with artists all the time. You just pay other people… ahh, fuck. To get drunk and stuff. So we just decided to do it on our own because we don’t want to be part of this fake stuff.

POZ: Do you enjoy doing the business side of things, or is it just a burden you’re willing to take on to make sure things are done right?

MN: Exactly, it’s just a burden you have to take. But it’s better to have control of it on your own. You can decide which people you want to talk to.

POZ: Now alongside releasing independently, that was kind of when you made your first push into the US. Was all part of that same mindset? Were you feeling like you had to focus on Germany and Europe before, and now you could go anywhere?

MN: We didn’t think that much about what was happening after the release. We knew that a lot of people had been listening to us [in the US] before this. We got a lot of messages and feedback on Facebook and stuff. Somehow, the interest became so big that we are now here for the second time. But we didn’t force it, it just happened.

POZ: How do you think people were finding you over here?

MN: I think it’s just modern social stuff. YouTube, Facebook. It’s great to have it. It’s just easier. You can put your song on YouTube, and get everybody’s opinion about it.

PB: It’s the easiest way for bands.

MN: Most stuff has happened online so far.

POZ: Do you see America as a priority for yourselves? Do you target specific areas of the world? Or are you just going wherever you can? What’s the master plan?

MN: Personally, I’d love to go wherever I can – I just want to cover the world with my music. But I think that the American market became very, very interesting for us. We have thought about moving here to play more shows here, or recording a record here. We get really into this American touring thing, and I hope it happens much more now. We’re trying to focus more on this now.

POZ: What have been your favorite cities, or your favorite shows, so far?

PB: Hard question.

MN: I really love the Hollywood stuff. I just like it.

POZ: You’re a fan of LA.

MN: I really am!

PB: Las Vegas is awesome. San Francisco, we love San Francisco.

MN: Oh yeah, San Francisco is a great city.

PB: San Diego…

POZ: So all of the west coast!

POZ: What’s the plan in terms of writing and recording new stuff?

MN: We never stop recording. We have a lot of songs finished right now. We are writing music here on the bus. We never stop because we have so many ideas. It’s just hard to keep them, and catch them. Also, there are a lot of songs left that didn’t make it on the last record because it was just too much. We have a lot of new material, a lot of things on our minds.

POZ: Do you find it easy to write on the road? I know a lot of bands have a hard time with that.

MN: I don’t care about the atmosphere around you. If you have an idea, just take your laptop, your guitar, and catch it. I don’t care where and when.

POZ: Do you have any plan to hit the studio? Any particular time you’re shooting for?

MN: I think things will get serious with recording when we finish this tour. We head back to Germany and I think we will start really recording the new stuff.

POZ: Are you going to be working with a producer?

MN: Oh no, we always do it on our own. Because I just think, as a musician, that what you want to give to the people should be 100% by yourself. Getting a producer often leads to you sounding like someone else. We don’t like it. We like the special stuff we do. Even if it’s not perfect on record, it’s unique. And this is what we’re looking for.

POZ: So I take it, along those lines, you’re not particularly interested in collaborating with other writers or working with other folks?

MN: I mean, I would like to have some features. It’s interesting to get other singers for our music.

POZ: Does touring over here change the way your write?

MN: Yeah, it does. When you see how people react in another part of the world, it really makes you think about the music. Even if you’re just looking at all the bands over here, it’s very different, very, very different from what we’ve known before?

POZ: What is the scene like in Germany compared to here? I mean, I’ve read things, but you’ve experienced it.

MN: They are more serious. They don’t open themselves to have fun at the concert. It’s hard to get them into the concert; they just stand around. They’re too cool. But it also changed our minds, to use some English lyrics in our music now. We really like playing concerts here. We try to get more into it, and maybe having one or two English songs would be cool for people to sing along to, and understand everything.

POZ: Do you worry about how your German fans will receive that?

MN: No, because we will always stick to our German origins. The sound will not change. The heavy German industrial metal sound, that will not change. We will never do a complete English album or something.

PB: Well, never say never!

MN: Never say never.

POZ: So you said you’re probably going to go back to Germany after this and start recording right away. Do you have more tour plans lined up?

MN: Yeah, we’re doing some festivals in Europe. I don’t know, but I think we just started working on another US tour. The cool thing is, it’s like a new beginning in a new country. This is very interesting. So we’ll try to get back as soon as we can.

POZ: Any thoughts on headliners versus doing a support tour?

MN: A support tour would be great! It’s a cool opportunity to get new people to your music. But I think it’s quite hard to get a band that fits to us. We are not into what everyone is doing, this particular thing, we don’t care about it. But there are some great bands…

POZ: What bands do you enjoy right now? Who are you listening to?

MN: Oh, a lot…

PB: Metallica.

MN: Metallica. Muse.

PB: Rammstein.

MN: Linkin Park.

POZ: What period Metallica? Because that makes a big difference!

MN: Oh, just the early ones. The last few records… I don’t get it.

PB: Yeah, just the old stuff.

MN: But we want to tour with a band that is doing more than the standard metalcore stuff. We like to have a show, an entertainment aspect. Sometimes we get compared to the dark side of Lady Gaga’s stuff – very artistic and dark. You have to see us live. I like Motionless In White. Or Marilyn Manson’s stuff. We get really into the live aspect.

POZ: So since you mentioned that it’s hard to find bands you fit in with, how did you end up connecting with Lions Lions and Honour Crest.

MN: Oh… I don’t know! Some booking agent politics, I don’t know. But it’s been cool to meet them, they’re very awesome guys and it’s been fun to tour with them. I didn’t know them before, but it’s cool to have them on tour.

POZ: I guess my only other question is, what else do people need to know about you and what should they be on the lookout for?

PB: I’m not sure I understand the question.

POZ: What do people need to know that they don’t know already? Especially, maybe, an American audience that’s just learning about you.

PB: The important thing is…

MN: Don’t care about the name! Look to the music!

PB: And they have to see us live.

MN: See us live, and then make a picture of us.

POZ: Do you worry about the name turning people off? Or at this point is it just too late?

PB: Sometimes.

MN: Sometimes I don’t care, but sometimes it’s like… if people get an opinion before they listen to the music, then it’s not cool.

POZ: But you’re stuck with it at this point.

MN: It’s ok, because the name is also so interesting that, on many festivals, people just want to see what’s behind the name. Then they see some serious, heavy music, and they get into it, like “ahh, this is quite interesting!”

POZ: So when should people be looking for new music? Do you have a guess when you’re shooting to have stuff out?

MN: I think the beginning of next year. We’ll be working on it, trying to make it happen.