We Butter The Bread With Butter

We Butter the Bread with Butter is a German deathcore band from Lübben noted for their heavy use of electronic music characteristics. Thegroup was founded in 2007 by Marcel Neumann and is currently signed to Redfield Records and have released two albums through the label.Their debut album Das Monster aus dem Schrank was released on November 21,2008.Their second album, Der Tag an dem die Welt untergingwas released May 14, 2010.We Butter the Bread with Butter originally started as duo, but during the summer of 2010, three members wereinducted into the ensemble, assuming the requirements of a fu ...read more

We Butter the Bread with Butter is a German deathcore band from Lübben noted for their heavy use of electronic music characteristics. Thegroup was founded in 2007 by Marcel Neumann and is currently signed to Redfield Records and have released two albums through the label.Their debut album Das Monster aus dem Schrank was released on November 21,2008.Their second album, Der Tag an dem die Welt untergingwas released May 14, 2010.We Butter the Bread with Butter originally started as duo, but during the summer of 2010, three members wereinducted into the ensemble, assuming the requirements of a full band.We Butter the Bread with Butter was founded in 2007 by Marcel Neumann, who was originally the guitarist for Martin Kesici's band, andTobias Schultka. The band was originally meant as a joke, but progressed into being a more serious musical duo. The name for the band hasno particular meaning, although its origins were suggested from when the two original members were driving in a car operated by MarcelNeumann and an accident almost occurred. Neumann found Schultka "so funny that he briefly lost control of the vehicle." A tribute band ICan't Believe It's Not We Butter The Bread With Butter was founded later in2007.On the "Infiziert-Tour 2008" (German: 'Infected-Tour 2008') they performed together with the German metalcore band Callejon and the post-hardcore band, The Parachutes in major cities in Germany such as Berlin, Frankfurt, Hamburg, Cologne and Stuttgart and furthermore openedfor A Day to Remember multiple times. After that, both members turned to the production of their second full-length album, Der Tag an demdie Welt unterging, which was released on May 14, 2010 in Germany, the USA and Japan. During the production of the album, three newmusicians joined WBTBWB with Kenneth Iain Duncan now being the second guitarist, Maximilian Pauly Saux playing the bass and CanÖzgünsür as drummer.Tobias Schultka, vocalist and founding member of We Butter the Bread with Butter when the group was a duo, parted wayswiththe band inJune 2010. The reason stated was because he wanted to focus into being an application developer for AppleInc.Schultka is found on multiplewebsites and is known for his company and production of his iPhone game, Happy ChewingGum.Schultka has since been replaced by PaulBartzsch.On June 28, 2012, Kenneth Duncan announced his departure from theband via his personal Facebook page, citing creativeandpersonal differences. « hide