Table of Biography

Savannah Guthrie is a well-known Australian-born American television journalist and attorney. Savannah Guthrie has been the principal co-anchor of the “NBC News morning program Today” since July 2012. Since 2012, Guthrie has hosted the annual Macy’s Thanksgiving Day Parade.

Early Life and Childhood

Savannah Guthrie was born in Melbourne, Victoria, Australia on December 27, 1971. As of the year 2021, her age is 50 years old. Savannah Clark Guthrie is her given name.

Her nationality is American-Australian. Similarly, she is of Australian and American ancestry. Her astrological sign is Capricorn.

Charles Guthrie (father) and Nancy Guthrie (mother) gave birth to her. Camron Guthrie and Annie Guthrie are her two siblings. Her family returned to the United States after her birth, having been in Australia for her father’s business.

Moreover, she was reared with her siblings in Tucson, Arizona. She attended Amphitheater High School for her education. As she grew older, she developed an interest in journalism and chose to pursue a journalism career.

Following her choice, she enrolled at the University of Arizona, where she earned a B.A. in journalism in 1993. She joined the Arizona Alpha Chapter of Pi Beta Phi while still a student at the institution.

Social Media

Similarly, she is active on social media including Instagram, Facebook, and Twitter. She has gained more than 1 million followers on Instagram under the username @savannahguthrie.

She has gained more than 974.9k followers on Twitter under the username @SavannahGuthrie. Her Facebook account has gained more than 378k followers under the username @SavannahGuthrie.

Moreover, she has opened up a YouTube channel named Savannah Guthrie and has gained 16 subscribers.

Professional Life

Savannah Guthrie began her professional journalism career in 1993 when she joined ABC station KMIZ in Columbia, Missouri. After two years at the firm, she decided to leave in 1995.

In 1995, she began working for NBC station KVOA. She was there for five years. She began working for WRC-TV in Washington, D.C. in 2000.

Similarly, she covered numerous big events while there, including the September 11, 2001, attack on the Pentagon and the 2001 anthrax assaults. Along with her schooling, she continued her profession.

She went on to get a Juris Doctorate from Georgetown University Law Center, where she graduated with honors in 2002. Savannah Guthrie began her professional career as a journalist in 1993 when she joined ABC station KMIZ in Columbia, Missouri.

Likewise, she quit the firm after two years in 1995. In 1995, she began working with NBC station KVOA. She has been there for five years. She started working for WRC-TV in Washington, D.C. in 2000.

Additionally, she covered numerous big events while there, including the September 11, 2001, attack on The Pentagon and the 2001 anthrax assaults. Along with her schooling, she pursued a profession.

She then earned a Juris Doctorate from Georgetown University Law Center, where she graduated magna cum laude in 2002.

Guthrie made her debut appearance on the show as a co-host on July 9, 2012, with Matt Lauer. She also spoke with Donald Trump, who revealed his part in the Barack Obama “birther” debate.

Matt Leur departed the show on November 29, 2017, and since then, she has been the principal co-anchor of the show. Since 2012, she has also hosted the Macy’s Thanksgiving Day Parade.

She has also starred in the 2015 film “Sharknando 3: Oh Hell No!” in addition to presenting. She is now presenting a chat program on NBC.

On October 15, 2020, she interviewed the 45th and current US President, Donald Trump, during a town hall, making the conversation one of Trump’s most hostile interviews.

Personal Life

Savannah Guthrie has a husband. She is married to Michael Feldman at the moment. Feldman works as a political and communications consultant for the Democratic Party. The pair began dating in 2009, and they married on March 15, 2014.

The couple is the proud parents of two children. Vale Guthrie Feldman, their first daughter, was born on August 13, 2014, and Charles Max Feldman, their second son, was born on December 8, 2016. She is currently enjoying a lovely life with her family.

She was formerly married to BBC News journalist Mark Orchard, whom she married in December 2005. In 2009, they divorced.

In addition, in November 2019, she suffered an eye injury after her kid inadvertently hurled his toy train into her right eye. She was, however, well-treated and healed rapidly from her injuries.

Savannah Guthrie – Awards

She has won many awards including Emmy Awards for Outstanding Live Coverage of a Current News Story and the International Academy of Trial Lawyer’s Student Advocacy Award for her contribution to the moralities of domestic violence.

Savannah Guthrie has amassed a sizable fortune as a result of her professional career as a writer. Her NBC position pays her a yearly compensation of $8 million.

Her career began in 1993 when she joined ABC station KMIZ, and she has since risen to prominence as a co-host of the “NBC News morning program Today”.

Savannah Guthrie – Net Worth 2023

Guthrie’s net worth is believed to be approximately $30 million based on her earnings.

Body Measurements

Savannah is a stunning woman in her late forties. She has a healthy, average physical shape. She has a height of 5ft 10 inches and a body weight of roughly 60kg.

Moreover, she has light skin, blonde hair, and blue eyes. Her measurements are 34-27-32 inches. She wears a size 9 shoe (US).

More Journalist

Savannah Guthrie Fans Also Viewed

ncG1vNJzZmieoprAqbHRqaasrF6YvK570pqtmqaelrVus9Stn6uhlWQ%3D

Share!