Savannah Guthrie Biography And Wiki

Savannah Guthrie is a famous and multi-skilled Australian-born American broadcast journalist and former attorney born in 1971. Furthermore, she currently serves at NBC News as a co-anchor of TODAY. Additionally, Guthrie also works at the station as a Chief Legal Correspondent. Nevertheless, she has been serving in the position since 2011 June. Before, that, Savannah also worked as an NBC News White House Correspondent (2008-2011). Nevertheless, she has been working at NBC News since she joined in the year 2007 September. Moreover, she has also served on other networks including RC-TV, the NBC affiliate in Washington, D.C. United States.

Savannah Guthrie Age | Birthday

How old is Savannah Guthrie? Savannah was born in Sandringham, Victoria, Australia in the year 1971 December 27. Therefore, she is currently 53 years old. In addition, she celebrates her birthday every year on December 27th. RELATED: Kelly Saberi

Savannah Guthrie’s Nationality | Ethnicity

She holds Australian-American nationality and citizenship. Additionally, she is of Australian-American ethnicity/heritage/ancestry.

Savannah Guthrie’s Education Background

Nevertheless, she enrolled at Amphitheater High School public high school, located in northwest Tucson, Arizona. Later, after her High School education, she enrolled at the University of Arizona. Later, in the year 1993, she graduated from the University with a Bachelor of Arts degree in broadcast journalism. Moreover, she also attended Georgetown University Law Center where she earned her Juris Doctor.

Savannah Guthrie NBC News | Today Shows

Where is Savannah Guthrie today? Savannah is currently working as a co-anchor of NBC News’ TODAY. In addition, she also works at the station as a Chief Legal Correspondent. Nonetheless, she also served as a White House Correspondent from the year 2008 to 2011 June. Additionally, during that time she contributed to all NBC News properties, moreover, this includes TODAY, NBC Nightly News with Brian Williams, and MSNBC.

Nevertheless, since she became part of the station, Savannah has conducted several news-making interviews for the program. Nonetheless, I spent a day in the life with Secretary of State Hillary Clinton in the year 2011 October. Moreover, she covered the 2008 presidential elections. Nonetheless, she has also journeyed with Sarah Palin’s campaign and was part of the NBC team that ultimately won a 2009 Emmy for their coverage on election night.

READ ALSO: Alan Longstreet Bio, Weather, Age, Fox2, Net Worth, Salary, Family, Wife, Divorce, Height, Wedding,

Guthrie started her journalism career at KTVM, the NBC affiliate in Butte, Montana. However, she has also served on other networks including WRC-TV, the NBC affiliate in Washington, D.C. In addition, during her time there, she managed to cover the September 11 attacks on the Pentagon and anthrax mailings.

Savannah Guthrie Leaving Tody Shows

Is Savannah Guthrie leaving the Today show? Guthrie is currently working as a co-anchor of NBC News’ TODAY. However, details of her leaving the station are currently unavailable.

Savannah Guthrie’s Net Worth

Guthrie is a hardworking and experienced broadcast journalist and former attorney. Nonetheless, she has a net worth of $25 million. Additionally, her main source of income is from her broadcasting career and a lawyer.

Savannah Guthrie Salary

How much does Savannah Guthrie make? Guthrie is currently working as a co-anchor of NBC News’ TODAY. Moreover, she has been working at the station since she joined in the year 2007. Nonetheless, she earns a salary of $8 million yearly.

Savannah Guthrie’s Family | Parents

Savannah was born in Sandringham, Victoria, Australia in the year 1971 to a loving and caring mother and father. Savannah was raised as the daughter of Charles Guthrie (father) and Nancy Guthrie (mother). Charles’s work was stationed in Australia but he was later moved to Tucson Arizona, by then, Savannah was two years old. Nonetheless, she was raised alongside her siblings Cmaron and Annie. However, details regarding her siblings are currently under research.

Savannah Guthrie Husband | Wedding

Who is Savannah Guthrie’s husband? Savannah is currently in a happy marriage with her loving and caring husband Michael Feldman. In addition, Michael is a public relations and communications consultant and a former Democratic political adviser born in the year 1968. Nonetheless, the two engaged in the year 2013. Moreover, the couple tied the knot through a private wedding ceremony that was held in Tucson, Arizona in the year 2014 on March 14th.

Savannah Guthrie’s First Husband

She was married to Mark Orchard who is an English-born BBC News presenter. In addition, they met while covering the trial of Michael Jackson. Nonetheless, the two got married in the year 2005 December and divorced in 2009.

READ ALSO: Joumanna Bercetche Bio, Wikipedia, Age, Parents, Husband, Measurements, Children, Legs, Bloomberg

Savannah Guthrie Children | Kids

Does Savannah have a child? She is a mother of two adorable. In addition, their firstborn was born in 2014 and their secondborn was born in 2016. However, further details regarding their kids are currently under review.

Savannah Guthrie Height | Feet

How tall is Savannah Guthrie? She stands at an average height of 5 feet 10 inches (1.78m) tall. Additionally, she has an hourglass body shape. Nonetheless, her body weighs 60 kilograms (132 pounds). Savannah’s body measurements are 34,26, and 35 inches respectively.

Savannah Guthrie Religion

What religion is Savannah Guthrie? Christian.

Savannah Guthrie Books | New Book

Mostly What God Does (2025)

Mostly What God Does (2024)

Princesses Save the World (2018)

Princesses Wear Pants (2017)

Why is Savannah Guthrie famous?

She was recognized in the year 2007 when she was a legal analyst, White House correspondent, and anchor for NBC News

How old is Savannah Guthrie’s husband?

Michael is a public relations and communications consultant and a former Democratic political adviser born in the year 1968.