THE INTERNATIONAL BESTSELLING CLASSIC NOVEL OF FIRST CONTACT

The Pulitzer Prize-winning author of Cosmos and renowned astronomer Carl Sagan's bestselling novel about the discovery of an advanced civilization in the depths of space remains the 'greatest adventure of all time' (Associated Press).

WE ARE NOT ALONE . . .

At first it seemed impossible - a radio signal that came not from Earth but from far beyond the nearest stars. But then the signal was translated, and what had been impossible became terrifying.

For the signal contains the information to build a Machine that can travel to the stars. A Machine that can take a human to meet those that sent the message.

They are eager to meet us: they have been watching and waiting for a long time.

And now they will judge.

***Also a major motion picture starring Jodie Foster and Matthew McConaughey***

'Stunning and satisfying' Los Angeles Times

'An astonishingly exciting, precise and involved book' Sydney Sunday Telegraph

'The range and depth of ideas is quite uncommon' New York Times Book Review

'It is pleasurable and reassuring to read a popular author in whom the observable and scientifically imagined universe inspires excitement, humour, love, awe' Newsday

'Sagan's informed and dramatically enacted speculations into the mysteries of the universe... make Contact an exciting adventure' Publishers Weekly

'Like a good mystery, Contact keeps us curious to the end . . . Ingenious and satisfying' Newsweek

'A splendid story whose appeal is universal' Yorkshire Post

Dazzling...Contact becomes the greatest adventure of all time. * ASSOCIATED PRESS *

Imaginative flair...The Sagan wit on full display...Contact jabs at commericalism, nationalism, sexism ... THE WALL STREET JOURNAL

Contact [deals] with issues... worth pondering... The range and depth of ideas is quite uncommon * The New York Times Book Review *

A masterly piece of work blending adroit characterisation and flights of scientific fancy that spring from today's fact * Belfast Telegraph *

A feast of marvels * San Francisco Chronicle *

Who could be better qualified than the author of the highly successful Cosmos to turn the possibility of extra-terrestrial intelligence, and humankind's first contact with it, into imaginative reality? This is precisely what Sagan does in this eagerly awaited and, as it turns out, engrossing first novel... Sagan's informed and dramatically enacted speculations into the mysteries of the universe... make Contact an exciting adventure * Publishers Weekly *

Like a good mystery, Contact keeps us curious to the end... Ingenious and satisfying * Newsweek *

A splendid story whose appeal is universal * Yorkshire Post *

Sagan's continuing compelling plea that we do not destroy the ineffable loveliness of life on this planet is present in every scene and phrase of Contact... It is pleasurable and reassuring to read a popular author in whom the observable and scientifically imagined universe inspires excitement, humour, love, awe * Newsday *

If there is a God and He isn't hiding, He will have left an unambiguous message. What will the message look like? Sagan's answer is stunning and satisfying * Los Angeles Times *

Grand and vivid... a lot of fun * The Village Voice *

One of the best science fiction stories about contact with intelligent beings ever written. Sagan calls on his scientific knowledge to garnish realistically a devastatingly credible account of how contact could be made * Sydney Daily Telegraph *

An astonishingly exciting, precise and involved book * Sydney Sunday Telegraph *