This article is about the Finnish power metal band. For the Italian stringed instrument, see Stradivarius.

Stratovarius is a Finnish power metal band. Formed in 1984, they have released sixteen studio albums, five DVDs and six live albums. The band's line-up has changed many times, and after guitarist Timo Tolkki's departure in 2008, no founding members remain.[1] Currently, the longest standing member is singer Timo Kotipelto, who joined in 1994.

Quick Facts Background information, Origin ...

Close

The first incarnation of the band had the name Black Water, founded in August 1984 by singer and drummer Tuomo Lassila, guitarist Staffan Stråhlman and bassist John Vihervä. In the summer of 1984, Tuomo and Staffan changed their name to Stratovarius and the band was formalized.

After reforming as Stratovarius, line-up changes started to occur. Timo Tolkki replaced Black Water member Stråhlman in 1985, becoming the singer as well, and the band expanded into a quartet with the arrival of keyboardist Antti Ikonen the following year. With this line-up, the band released its first album Fright Night in 1989, with Tolkki as the only songwriter. While going through many bassists, the band released the albums Twilight Time in 1992 and Dreamspace in 1994. In 1994, Tolkki decided to stop acting as lead vocalist, with Kotipelto joining the band. After the release of Fourth Dimension in 1995, Ikonen and the last Black Water member, Lassila, left the band and were replaced by Jens Johansson and Jörg Michael respectively.

This line-up consisting of Kotipelto, Tolkki, bassist Jari Kainulainen, Johansson and Michael, now recognized as the "classic line-up" of Stratovarius, became the most enduring in its history (1995—2005). With this line-up, the band released eight albums including most of their popular works (releasing an album with the same line-up as its predecessor for the first time) until the release of a self-titled album in 2005, after which Kainulainen departed and was replaced by Lauri Porra.

In 2008, guitarist, sole founder, composer and main lyricist Timo Tolkki, highly critical of their last album and tired of the tensions between the members, decided to disband Stratovarius. However, at the demand of the rest of the band, he let them continue as Stratovarius while leaving the band. He subsequently regretted his decision, stating that the current band had nothing to do with Stratovarius, which he considered mainly his own work.