FRISCO, Texas (February 2, 2024) – North Texas SC has announced the signing of defender Nico Gordon from English side Birmingham City F.C. for the 2024 season with a club option for the 2025 season, pending receipt of his P-1 Visa and International Transfer Certificate (ITC).

Gordon, 21, joined Birmingham City’s Academy in 2014. Ahead of the 2019-20 season, Gordon captained Birmingham’s U-18 side, leading the Blues to a Round of 16 FA Youth Cup run. On June 26, 2020, Gordon signed his first professional with Birmingham City F.C.

“We are bringing a young player with fantastic experience at both club and senior international level already,” said North Texas SC Head Coach John Gall. “Nico has played alongside and against seasoned veterans which we know is invaluable for him and his new teammates here at North Texas. He’s a physical, athletic defender and comfortable on the ball in possession. We cannot wait to get him here and welcome him to his new home.”

The Birmingham, England native made his professional debut in Birmingham’s EFL Championship match against Hull City on June 27, 2020. He registered his first start for Birmingham on July 12, 2020, against Stoke City. Gordon appeared in 15 matches total and logged 1,169 minutes for Birmingham in the Championship. His lone goal came against Bristol City in a 2-1 win on March 5, 2022. He registered an appearance in the Carabao Cup for the Blues during the first round of the 2021-22 season against Colchester United.

“This is a great addition for the club and shows our intent to bring in top quality players that we can help develop,” said North Texas SC General Manager Matt Denny. “As MLSNP, grows it is becoming a real avenue for young talented players seeking the opportunity to progress in their career. NTSC has shown that in our short history we are a club that can help players take the next step. With the squad we have built, 2024 is going to be a really exciting season to watch.”

Gordon represents Montserrat at the international level. He earned his first senior cap with the Montserrat Men’s National Team on September 9, 2023, against Barbados for Concacaf Nations League play in group B of League B. He has a total of six caps for the Emerald Boys with 540 minutes played. He is eligible to represent Montserrat via his mother.

With the signing of Gordon, North Texas SC now has 14 players under contract heading into preseason:

Goalkeepers (2): Michael Collodi, Victor Darub

Defenders (3):Nico Gordon, Malachi Molina, Tyshawn Rose

Midfielders (6): Diego García, Dylan Lacy, Leonardo Orejarena, Pedrinho, Carl Sainté, Abdoul Zanne

Forwards (3):Leonard Londe, Diego Pepi, Lautaro Taboada