EASTENDERS star Hannah Waterman has married an actor from the Bill in a sweet ceremony in Australia.

The actress, 47, who is the daughter of Dennis Waterman and second wife Patricia Maynard, said I Do to Huw Higginson just five months after her father's sad passing.

Huw posted a celebratory shot showing their special day as they posed with their son Jack, 11, on a boat in Sydney.

The Bill actor gushed in his caption: "Got married to my love yesterday. We had the best of days."

Hannah, who played Ian Beale's third wife Laura in the BBC soap, could be seen gazing lovingly at her spouse as they celebrated their special day.

She wore a patterned, long-sleeve blue frock - perhaps as her something blue - complete with gold strappy sandals and a navy pashmina.

She clutched a bouquet of cream flowers and accessorised with a pair of sunglasses.

The happy couple made the move to Australia in 2014.

It came after Hannah married fellow EastEnders star Ricky Groves in 2006.

The pair separated in 2010 and divorced in 2014.

The same year as the couple separated, Hannah began seeing Huw.

Huw is most notable for his ten-year role in The Bill as PC George Garfield.

He also appeared in EastEnders in 2001 as Mr Davis.

Since moving Down Under, Huw has appeared in Home And Away, as

Dr Matthews, as well as playing Gavin Thompson in Wentworth Prison.

Huw also stars as Peter Solomon in Aussie TV series Total Control.

Meanwhile, after leaving EastEnders, Hannah went on to star in a variety of shows, films and theatre shows.

Between 2006 and 2010 she starred in New Tricks with her father Dennis Waterman.

Yet Hannah's marriage celebration will no doubt have been bittersweet after her Minder-star dad died in May, aged 74.

He died at his Spanish home with his wife by his side.

Tributes poured in for the star as his family confirmed his death.

A family statement said today: "We are deeply saddened to announce that our beloved Dennis, passed away very peacefully at his home in Spain, on Saturday evening, with Pam by his side.

"The family kindly ask that our privacy is respected at this very difficult time."