UK soapie star Ricky Groves has told how his actress wife left him for another man after she became obsessed with fitness and lost a dramatic amount of weight.

Ricky Groves, who plays a car mechanic in the British soap EastEnders, was quoted by UK media as saying his wife Hannah Waterman became heartless and cruel as she shed 17.2kg to go from a size 16 to 6 in just five months.

Waterman, who used to star alongside Groves in EastEnders until she quit the show to do more theatre work, lost the weight while starring in a fitness DVD called Hannah Waterman's Body Blitz.

"Immediately Hannah changed ... the people behind the project were very pushy, very controlling," Groves told the Daily Mail newspaper.

"They'd say, 'This is your target weight for this time period and if you reach it, you'll get another [$17,000].'"

Waterman grew obsessed with her weight, installing four scales in different rooms and weighing herself constantly, Groves said.

As the excess kilos fell off Waterman's confidence grew, with the actress even stripping off on stage for her role in Calendar Girls.

But at the same time Waterman began to reject her husband.

"Her whole attitude changed, she got a new life, a new personality. She used me as a dog caretaker while she did her own thing. We were growing apart...I wish she had never done it."

Groves said the change in Waterman's personality became startlingly obvious when she refused to film a good luck message for his appearance on Britain's version of Dancing with the Stars, Strictly Come Dancing.

"Getting that show was a godsend for me but Hannah told the producers she wouldn't do the taped message because she wasn't getting paid. I remember thinking, 'Cheers! After all we've been through, couldn't you even do that for me?" Groves said.

Waterman eventually told Groves she did not want to be with him and confessed that she had cheated on him with another man.

The couple split up over Christmas after four years of marriage.

"I was heartbroken when she told me it was over. I still am. I took my marriage vows very seriously and I thought that I would be married forever. She had not thought twice about it," Groves said.