Ricky Groves has revealed he believes his estranged wife Hannah Waterman slept with Huw Higginson while he was still married to her.

The 43-year-old star was left stunned when Higginson's wife rung him to inform him Waterman was pregnant with Higginson's baby, and now believes Waterman may have been unfaithful with The Bill star during their marriage.

Groves, whose marriage was rocked in December 2009 when Waterman told him she had cheated, also said he had been hoping to rekindle his relationship with Waterman before he heard she was pregnant.

He said: 'I'm trying not to be angry or bitter. But Huw is the man who hs finally made me realise my marriage is finished once and for all.'

Hannah never told me the name of the man who she'd cheated with and I never asked who he was or any details - I didn't want it to be true.

'Then when I got that call from Huw's wife it was like putting the final piece into a jigsaw puzzle. Now I think that other man could have been Huw. It all falls into place.

'They had been touring together in a couple of plays just before she told me she'd cheated. She once called him 'her rock' when they worked together.'

Groves, who previously said Waterman's drastic diet and exercise regime put a strain on their marriage, said he went to see Waterman and Higginson when they were in a play together in 2009, but had no idea anything may have been going on.

And, just four months later, the couple announced their marriage was over.

Groves told the News of the World: 'Hannah didn't care about me any more but I was in denial, hoping it would be OK. I don't know if she had feelings for Huw then.

'I like to think nothing went on back then, that they grew close by nothing physical happened - it was mental cheating.

'I'm trying not to get angry - I don't want to give myself a heart attack. I was an easy life. But Hannah has never said sorry to me for what she has done.'

Speaking earlier this month, Waterman, who is six months pregnant, confirmed Higginson is the father of her baby.

She said: 'We’ve kept things quiet because we’re both quite private people. We wanted to give our relationship time to grow away from the public eye.

Walkies! Pregnant Waterman takes her bump and her black labrador for a walk in the spring sunshine earlier this month

'I’ve been friends with Huw on and off for 10 years. We first met when he played my pervy landlord in EastEnders, but since then we’ve been in two plays together.'

And Waterman admitted the fact that things moved so fast in their relationship took them both by surprise.

She said: 'Last year, Huw came a bit unstuck in his personal life and I was on tour with Calendar Girls, so he stayed at my house for a while.

'He moved in in June, and things progressed quite quickly from there!

'We spoke early on in our relationship about the fact that we’d like a family. I’m 35 and I didn’t want to wait around because, as everyone knows, it can be harder to conceive as you get older. But we didn’t expect it to happen so quickly!

'Because I’d been through the mill at the beginning of 2010, I didn’t want everyone picking over my personal life again, so we just told close family.'