Biljana Srbljanović

Biljana Srbljanović, playwright and associate professor at Belgrade’s Faculty of Drama Arts. She has created the television series “Otvorena vrata”, which is now celebrating its twentieth anniversary. She has written approximately ten dramas, which have been awarded with prizes in Serbia and abroad. Among other prizes, she has received six Sterija awards for the best drama text, awards Ernst Toller, Slobodan Selenić, Joakim Vujić, Premio Europa, Osvajanje slobode, and so on. She holds the French knight medal of merit in art and literature, and she is an activist in the field of human rights and animal rights. She started her PhD course at the State University of Arts in the field of film studies, and she is a guest lecturer at Universities in Vienna, Milan and New York. Furthermore, she is a published author “online” as well. Everything the readers can find out about her in tabloids, speaks about themselves.

Végel Lászl

Laszlo Vegel (Hungarian Végel László; Srbobran, 1st of February 1941) is a novelist, essay writer, playwright, and theatre critic. He writes his works in Hungarian, which is his mother tongue, but, according to critics, he equally belongs to Serbian and Hungarian literature. In Budapest in 2009 he received the greatest Hungarian prize for literary work – the Lajos Kossuth Award. His greatest works are the novels “Memoari jednog makroa” (1967), “Dupla ekspozicija” (1983), “Pareneza” (1987), “Velika istočno-srednjo-evropska Gozba stupa u Pikarski roman” (1996), and “Exterritorium” (2002), then the book of essays “Vitgenštajnov razboj” (1993), and dramas “Judita i druge drame” (2005). For “Vitgenštajnov razboj” he received a regional Pulitzer award for Hungary. His works have been translated into a number of European languages. Together with the Swedish writer Osa Lind he opened the 55th International Book Fair in Belgrade on 25th of October 2010.

Janja Beč-Neumann

Janja Beč-Neumann, was born in Zemun, at the house on the Danube. She graduated from Belgrade’s Faculty of Technology, and she completed her PhD studies at Zagreb’s Faculty of Philosophy, University in Cambridge, Cambridge, UK I ILO-International Labour Organization, Geneve, Switzerland. PhD. Her work “Employees’ sick leave as a form of industrial conflict” was done within interdisciplinary project JAZU - Yugoslav Academy of Sciences and Arts (1985 - 1991) on a specimen of 50.000 employees in Slavonija and Baranja, Croatia. During the period 1945 - 1991 in former Yugoslavia, two PhD theses were defended on the topic of industrial conflicts: Neca Jovanov, professor of Novi Sad’s University, Nosi Sad, Vojvodina (Ljubljana University, 1974), and Janja Beč (Zagreb University, 1991). From 1991 she has been an anti - war campaign, and from 1994 anti - genocide activist, researcher, writer and professor. She has published several hundreds of scientific works on the topic of industrial conflicts (1985 - 1991), and war crime and genocide (from 1995). Nobel Peace Prize – nomination, 2005. Honorary citizen of the city Ključ, Bosnia - Herzegovina, 2005. State award for peace FR Germany – nomination, 2014. Author and co-director of MA course ERMA – European regional post-graduate course in human rights and democracy in Eastern Europe. Bologna University, Italy (2002 - 2007), Sarajevo University (2002 - 2008), Hamburg University (2005 - 2006), and IUC, Dubrovnik Inter University Center (2003 - 2008). She was a guest lecturer with this course at Vienna University, Austria; University Jochanes Kaepler - Linz, Austria; University Castellon, Castellon, Spain; School Sophie Scoll – “Mi nećemo da ćutimo”, Žene u crnom, Belgrade, Serbia; Trondheim University, Trondheim, Norway; Padua University, Padua, Italy; Max Planck Institut - Halle, FR Germany; Novi Sad University, Faculty of Philosophy, Novi Sad, Vojvodina, and Manitoba University, Winnipeg, Canada. So far, this has been the first and only MA course with this topic in post – war and post – genocide region of the former Yugoslavia.

Vladimir Kecmanović

Vladimir Kecmanović was born in Sarajevo in 1972, and there he completed his primary and secondary studies. In 1997 he graduated from Belgrade’s Faculty of Philology, Department of General Literature with Literary Theory. In 1990 his “Histerija” won the Ivo Andrić Award at the Yugoslav competition for the best short story, organized by “Oslobođenje” magazine. He made a selection of works published by Dušan Radović and Dušan Petričić for the purpose of the book entitled “Duškova kuća”, which was proclaimed the book of the year at Belgrade Book Fair in 2004. So far, he has published the following novels: “Poslednja Šansa” (1999), “Sadržaj Šupljine” (2001), “Feliks” (2007), “Top je bio vreo” (2008), “Sibir” (2011), and a collection of stories “Zidovi koji se ruše” (2012). Together with the historian Predrag Marković he authored the book “Tito, pogovor” (2012). For his novel “Feliks”, which was short – listed for the NIN Award for the novel of the year, he was granted the prize Branko Ćopić, by the Serbian Academy of Sciences and Arts. For the draft of the novel “Top je bio vreo” he received a scholarship by the Foundation “Borislav Pekić” for a novel which is a work in progress. After it had been published, the novel “Top je bio vreo” entered the short – list selection for the NIN Award, and was granted the Meša Selimović Award. Filming of the movie with the same name, according to the novel, has just been completed. Kecmanović’s prose works have been translated into English, French, German, Ukrainian and Romanian. He lives and works in Belgrade. He is the owner and editor of the VIA publishing house, and a columnist for the “Politika” daily newspaper. From time to time, he writes for a number of media in Serbia and in neighbouring countries. He is a member of the group P 70, and member of the Serbian Literary Society.

Tanja Stupar Trifunović

Tanja Stupar – Trifunović was born in Zadar, on 20th of August 1977. She graduated from Banjaluka’s Faculty of Philology, Department of the Serbian Language and Literature. So far, she has published four books of poetry, a book comprised of stories, and a novel. Her works have been translated into English, German, Polish, Czech, Slovenian, Macedonian, Danish and French. Her book “O čemu misle varvari dok doručkuju” was granted with the UniCredit Bank Award for the best book published in Bosnia – Herzegovina in 07 / 08, and was in the short – list selection for a literary award for Eastern and South East Europe (CEE Literature Award). Her book of poetry “Glavni junak je čovjek koji se zaljubljuje u nesreću” was awarded with a literary award “Fra Grgo Martić” for the best book of poetry, in 2009. Her novel “Satovi u majčinoj sobi” entered the short – list selection for the NIN Award for the best novel published in 2014, as well as the short – list selection for the Biljana Jovanović Award, for the best novel published in 2014, too. Her works are included in a number of anthologies and selections of poetry and prose, in her native country and abroad. She is the editor of “Putevi”, a magazine devoted to literature, art and culture. She is employed at National and University Library of the Republic of Srpska.

Lasko Blašković

Laslo Blašković (Novi Sad, 1966), a poet, novelist, prose writer, an essayist. His books of poems include: “Gledaš” (1986), “Zlatno doba” (1987), “Crvene brigade” (1989), “Ritam – mašina” (1991), “Životi bacača kocke” (1997), “Jutarnja daljina” (2002), “Žene pisaca” (2006). He also published a book comprised of stories, with the title “Priča o malaksalosti” (2010). His book of poetic prose is entitled “Imenjak” (1994). He also published a book of essays: “Kraj citata” (2007). His novels include: “Svadbeni marš” (1997), “Mrtva priroda sa satom” (2000), “Madonin nakit” (2003), “Adamova jabučica” (2005), “Turnir grbavaca” (2007), “Posmrtna maska” (2012), “Razbrajalica” (2014). He was granted the award by the Vojvodina Literary Society for the book of the year, the Foundation “Borislav Pekić” Award, the Serbian Academy of Sciences and Arts Award from the Foundation “Branko Ćopić” for the best book of the year, Stevan Sremac Award for the best prose book of the year. Blašković’s novel “Madonin nakit” was selected among ten best Serbian novels written after the fall of the Berlin Wall, and was included in the anthology edition “Sto slovenskih romana“. Laslo Blašković’s prose and poetry have been translated into English, French, German, Hungarian, Polish, Russian, Romanian, Slovak, Ukrainian, Macedonian, Bulgarian and Slovenian.

Muharem Bazdulj

Muharem Bazdulj (Travnik, 1977) is a writer, journalist and translator. He has published approximately ten books, including collection of stories “Druga knjiga” and “Čarolija”, and novels “Sjetva soli” and “April na Vlašiću”. His books have been translated into English, German and Polish, whereas his stories have been featured in prestigious international anthologies, such as “Best European Fiction” and “The Wall in My Head”. He works as a journalist for a weekly “Vreme”, and regularly writes columns for Sarajevo’s “Oslobođenje” and Belgrade’s “Politika”. He was granted the award for the journalist of the year in Bosnia – Herzegovina in 2013, and the awards Stanislav Staša Marinković and Bogdan Tirnanić in 2014. Among other works, he translated from English books written by William Butler Yeats, Paul Auster and Mark Thompson. He lives in Belgrade.

Aleksandar Gatalica

He was born in Belgrade in 1964. He graduated from the Department of World Literature in 1989. He is a writer, translator from ancient Greek, and music critic. As a writer, he emerged on the Serbian literary scene in 1993, and so far he has published eleven books. Aleksandar Gatalica’s prose works have been translated into ten European languages. As a translator, for the first time he translated four ancient dramas into Serbian (“Alkestida”, “Bahantkinje” and “Ifigenija u Aulidi” by Euripides, and “Edip na Kolonu” by Sophocles), as well as poetry by poets whose works had not been fully translated (Mimnermus, Solon, Sappho). As a music critic, he wrote critiques for daily newpapers “Glas javnosti” (2000 - 2002) and “Večernje novosti“ (2002 - 2008). Aleksandar Gatalica is married and a father of one.

Aleksandar Ilić

Aleksandar Ilić (1981), prose writer. He is the co-author of the novel “Srpski psiho“ (2007, Laguna) – edition in the Polish language “Serbski psycho“ (2011, Krakow). “PR“ is his first independent novel, translated into Macedonian and published by the publishing house “Ars Lamina” (2015, Skoplje).

Berislav Blagojević

Berislav Blagojević was born in Slavonski Brod in 1979. He possesses a master’s degree in geographical sciences. So far, he has published five print books and one audio book. He has been publishing his poesy and prose in a number of magazines (“Koraci“, “Književni magazin“, “Letopis Matice srpske“, “Putevi“, “Beogradski književni časopis“, “Sent“, “Riječ“, “Blesok“...), whereas his works have also been included in several collections (“Lapis Histriae“, Umag, “Sea of words“, Barcelona, “Skariggi“, Malta, “Art Attack“, Zagreb, “Četvrtasto mesto“, Belgrade...). He has been awarded with a number of prizes, the most important ones being a scholarship by the foundation “Borislav Pekić“ (2012), the first prize for a short story at the literature competition “Susjedi”, organized by the Goethe Institute and the French Institute in Bosnia-Herzegovina (2010), and the first prize for the best short story in the region in 2011, at the competition organized by the magazine “Avlija” from Montenegro. His first novel “Tiši od vode“ entered the short-list selection for the NIN prize in 2013. He has also participated at literature festivals “Bibliobus“ (2012) and “Kikinda Short“ (2013). In organization by the Serbian Literary Society, he participated in the International Literature Colony “Tršić“ in 2014. By giving a speech, he solemnly opened XVIII International Book Fair in Banjaluka in 2013. His works have been translated into English, Polish, Spanish, Maltese, German and Macedonian. Since 2015 he has been a member of the Serbian Literary Society. He resides in Banjaluka.

Denis Kuljiš

Denis Kuljiš was born in Split in 1951. He attended studies in general linguistics and sociology at Zagreb’s Faculty of Philosophy. On a regular basis, he was a newspaper writer from 1972, he was employed in 1979 in “Polet”, and in 1980 in “Vjesnik”. As an editor and journalist, he worked for “Start”, “Danas” and “Studio”. Together with his partners, in 1989 he founded the company “Media Press”, which participated in launching of a privately owned, independent, political weekly “Globus”. He worked for five years as its editor-in-chief, and during that period the company grew to become “Europapress Holding”, the biggest news and publishing house in Croatia. He has never been awarded with any award, prize or medal. His published works include: “Majmuni, gangsteri i heroji, novinski tekstovi i feljtoni” (Zagreb, 2001; Belgrade, 2002). – “Dva pamfleta protiv Tuđmana” (Naklada Jesenski i Turk, Zagreb, 2005. ) – “Majmuni, gangsteri,heroji, geniji, lupeži & papci; satirične biografije poznatih Hrvata”; Zagreb 2005. – “Ad hominem”, 2006.

Ekrem Dupanović

I started to volunteered at Radio Sarajevo in 1971. I was good at it, I had always some new ideas, it all went smoothly for me. A year later, I accidently come across magazin Privredna propaganda, which edited Žozef Lončar. I heard for him for the first time. Magazin was excellent and it could be same today. After browsed it I said to myself : „That's it. I want to do advertising.“ I travelled to Niš , at 3rd Congress of Yugoslavian Marketing Association just to meet Žozef Lončar. Three days I sat at the congress, but I didn't have courage to meet him. Here I am again, in the train, but in a opposite direction, with the same wish - I want to be in a advertising business...

Zoran Ćirić

(Niš, 1962.) serbian storyteller, novelist, essayist and poet Winner of the most prestigeous award in sebian literature - NIN award, which is given for the best novel of the year. He received this award for he novel „Hobo“ (2001.). His nove „Prisluškivanje“ (1999.) was in the close selection for the same award. Year 2000. Adelle Mazolla translated it in italian language. He is also winner of the National Serbian Library Award for the most read book 2002., as well as awards „Branko Radičević“ and „Borislav Pekić“. He is included in many literature selections, chrestomathies, antologies of serbina poetry. His stories, poems and novel fragments are translated in german, italian, polish, hungarian, english, bulgarian, macedonian, slovakian, catalonian and spanish language. „Antology of contemporary Serbian story“ in german language, for wich Angela Richter selected and translated one Ćirić's story, appeared regarding Leipzig Fair. Ćirić was included in project „21 for 21 - Antology of Serbian story from the beginning of new century“. Ćirić's novel „Hobo“ appeared 2012. in Chech Republic (translation of Jan Doležal) and in Russia (translation of Larisa Saveljeva). Year 2013. the story book „Telesna straža“ published in Bulgaria (translation of Darina Dončeva).

Zoran Knežević

Born in Sombor 1958., and spent childhood in Bački Brestovac, where he finished primary school, and after that, high school in Sombor. He didn't graduated Faculty of law neither in Belgrade nor in Novi Sad. After few years of soul-searching, he started to work at the documentary programme at TV Novi Sad. But that didn't last long. Year 1995. he moved to Slovenia, where he lives today. There, he did various jobs, mostly in construction business, lost job during economics crisis and today he works as a security at shopping mall. From the early childhood he read a lot, watched movies and listened to the music. Ten years ago he felt the need to write something for himself. Then he did - short stories. He was given some awards. Year 2014 Cankarjeva založba published his book of short stories „Dvoživke umirajo dvakrat“. At the Book Fair in Ljubljana this book was awarded as the best first novel.

Dušan Babac

Dušan Babac, rođen 1969. godine u Beogradu, potiče iz porodice sa vojnom tradicijom i od najranijeg detinjstva pokazuje interes za vojnu istoriju i uniforme. Dugogodišnji je saradnik Istorijskog muzeja Srbije i Vojnog muzeja. Od 1995. godine do danas objavio veći broj naučnih i popularnih članaka u Glasniku Istorijskog muzeja Srbije, Vesniku Vojnog muzeja i specijalizovanim časopisima u Srbiji (Vojska, Odbrana). Republici Srpskoj (Aero Glas), Sloveniji (Obramba), Francuskoj (Militaria Magazine, Gazette des Uniformes, Steel Masters, Ligne de front, Aero-Journal), Italiji (Uniformi e Armi), Rusiji (Zeughaus, od 20014. godine član uređivačkog saveta časopisa), Nemačkoj (Deutsche Militarzeitschrift), Japanu (Air World). Takođe je objavio knjige: Armies in the Balkans 1914–18, Osprey Publishing, 2001; Specijalne jedinice Jugoslovenske vojske u Aprilskom ratu, Evoluta, 2006; sa Čedomirom Vasićem i Miladinom Markovićem - Crnogorska vojska 1896–1916, Evoluta, 2007; Elitni vidovi Jugoslovenske vojske u Aprilskom ratu, Evoluta, 2008; sa Čedomirom Vasićem - Garda u Srbiji 1829–1945, Zavod za udžbenike, 2009; Srpski husar, Zavod za udžbenike, 2010; sa Zoranom Vesićem - Vojska Srbije, Medija centar „Odbrana”, 2011; Srpska vojska u ratu za nezavisnost 1876-1878, Medija centar „Odbrana”, 2011; Srbi i revolucija 1848-49, Evro-Giunti, 2013; Srpska vojska u Velikom ratu 1914-1918, Medija centar „Odbrana”, 2013; Vojne oznake u Srbiji 1845-1945, Službeni glasnik 2014; Srbija i Rusija u Velikom ratu, Evro-Giunti, 2014; The Serbian Army in the Wars for Independence against Turkey 1876-1878, Helion & Company, 2015. Kao priređivač: Kralj Petar II Karađorđević: Moj život – memoari, Evro Giunti, 2013. Jedan je od četiri autora izložbe i kataloga Službeno odelo u Srbiji u 19. i 20. veku, održane 2001. godine u galeriji SANU. Član je krunskog veća prestolonaslednika Aleksandra Karađorđevića i nosilac je kraljevskog ordena Belog orla Prvog stepena. Kao konsultant za uniforme učestvovao u realizaciji više igranih filmova, TV drama i pozorišnih predstava i to: Naša engleskinja (1997, TV drama), režija Slobodan Radović, kostimograf Mira Čohadžić; Nož (1999, igrani film), režija Miroslav Lekić, kostimograf Ljiljana Petrović; Velika Drama (premijera 22. februara 2002. Narodno Pozorište Beograd), režija Siniša Kovačević, kostimograf Marina Vukasović–Medenica; Rat i mir (premijera 9. decembra 2005. Boljšoi Teatar Moskva), režija Ivan Popovski, kostimograf Angelina Atlagić; Turneja (2008, igrani film), režija Goran Marković, kostimograf Ljiljana Petrović; Sveti Georgije ubiva aždahu (2009, igrani film), režija Srđan Dragojević, kostimograf Marina Vukasović–Medenica; Besa (2010, igrani film), režija Srđan Karanović, kostimograf Saša Kuljača; Kako su me ukrali Nemci (2011, igrani film), režija Miloš–Miša Radivojević, kostimograf Gordana Angelovska; Kad svane dan (2012, igrani film), režija Goran Paskaljević, kostimograf Marina Vukasović–Medenica; Ravna gora (2012, igrana serija), režija Radoš Bajić, kostimograf Vesna Pantelić, Čizmaši (2015, igrana serija), režija Dejan Zečević, kostimograf Jelena Đorđević.

Ante Tomić

Ante Tomić is a Croatian writer and journalist, born on 22nd of April 1970 in Split. He completed his primary education in the village of Proložec near Imotski, where he lived until the age of fourteen. After that, he was a cadet at the Military High School in Zagreb. He graduated from Zadar’s Faculty of Philosophy, Department of Philosophy and Sociology. As a writer, he first published his works in “Torpedo” magazine, where later he worked as a member of the editorial team. His first collection of stories “Zaboravio sam gdje sam parkirao” was published in 1997, and its extended version in 2001. His first novel “Što je muškarac bez brkova” came out in 2000. This novel was a huge success, and so far it has been published seven times. In 2001, he published the book of feuilletons “Smotra folklora”. Together with Ivica Ivanišević, he wrote a drama “Krovna udruga”. Adapted by Aida Bukvić, Zagreb’s HNK presented a novel “Što je muškarac bez brkova”. At the festival Marulićevi dani, this performance won the award for the best performance in total. In 2003, he published the novel “Ništa nas ne smije iznenaditi”, then in 2004 the book of feuilletons “Klasa optimist”, and in 2005 the novel “Ljubav, struja, voda i telefon”. Tomić works as a journalist for “Jutarnji list”. He was granted the award by Croatian Journalists’ Association for the best reportage (1996) and newspaper column (2005).

Vedrana Rudan

Vedrana Rudan is a Croatian writer and columnist for newspaper “Nacional”, where she writes the column entitled “Zloće i povrće“. She is an activist in the field of women’s rights. She graduated from Rijeka’s Pedagogical Academy – as she claims the “Serbian or Croatian” and the German language. Before she became a person known to the public, she had worked as a teacher, tourist guide, ice-cream maker, journalist for a number of Croatian newspapers, editor of a radio programme… She is well-known for her unbiased and juicy vocabulary, and due to this in 1991 she was fired. By a court decision, in 1993 she returned to work, but she was not enabled to work, so therefore she herself quit. In 2003, she made a decision to become a writer. In January 2009, due to her anti-Semitism statement given on the Holocaust Remembrance Day, she was fired from “Nova TV”. Her writing style involves short, sharp, direct and humoristic sentences. She provides protection for those who are left redundant, the poor, women in disgrace, common people. She aims at tycoons, ruling powers, bankers, hypocrisy in the Church, privatization, Croatia joining the NATO-Alliance, and many other issues. She is a member of the Croatian Literary Society, whereas her books have been translated into English, German, Polish, Slovenian, Russian, Macedonian, Hungarian. According to her book “Uho, grlo, nož“, theatre performances were created, and performed in the Croatian Theatre “101” and Serbian “Atelje 212”.

Jelena Trivan

Jelena Trivan is a Serbian politician and deputy at the Republic of Serbia National Assembly. Trivan was a Vice – President, and member of the Executive and Governing Board of the Democratic Party. She resigned to the Vice – President position on the 7th of September 2012. She was born on the 4th of April 1973 in Kosovska Mitrovica. She grew up and attended the primary school in Priština. Later she lived in Kragujevac and completed her high school education there. Following her high school graduation, she enrolled at the Faculty of Philology in Belgrade, and graduated in 1996. In Brussels she completed her specialist academic studies “European institutions and structure in the EU”. As a literature professor she worked until spring of 2000, when she was fired because of her political engagement. She is one of founders of the Union of workers in education. From 2000 until 2006 she held the position of Deputy Minister at the Ministry of Human and Minority Rights. During her mandate as a Deputy Minister, she was the chief of the negotiation team of Serbia and Montenegro for closing the deal regarding national minorities with neighbouring countries, and the agreement on readmission with the EU countries. She was a co-president of inter-state commissions for protection of national minorities, involving Croatia, Hungary and Romania. From 2004 she has been Serbia’s representative at the Human Rights Committee in the European Council. From 2006 until 2010 she was the spokesperson for the Democratic Party. Since 2007, she has been a deputy at the Serbian National Assembly. She is a member of the Board for European integrations, the Council for Culture and Information, and president of a friendship group with the Netherlands. At the session of the Democratic Party’s Governing Board on the 2nd of October 2010, she was elected member of Presidential Board in the Democratic Party, whereas on XIV congress of the Democratic Party held on the 18th of December 2010 she was elected Vice – President of the Democratic Party. Since the 27th of January 2015, she has been acting in capacity of the director of “Official Gazette” (“Službeni glasnik”).

Mirjana Đurđević

Mirjana Đurđević (1956), possesses a PhD in technical sciences. She is a professor at the College for Civil Engineering and Geodesy in Belgrade. She has written a series of seven parodies to crime novels with her detective Harijeta as the main heroine: ”Ubistvo u akademiji nauka“, Žagor, 2002, Agora, 2007; “Parking svetog Savatija“, Samizdat, 2003, Agora, 2008; “Deda Rankove riblje teorije“, Čigoja štampa, 2004, Laguna 2010 – was granted the award “Žensko pero” for 2004; “Leš u fundusu“, Laguna 2012; “Jacuzzi u liftu“, Čigoja štampa, 2005; “Prvi drugi, treći čovek – srpske legende“, Agora, 2006, 2007; “Čim preživim ovaj roman“, Agora 2008, 2009. Furthermore, her works include “Čas anatomije na Građevinskom fakultetu“, Viktor, 2001, non-fiction; novels “Treći sektor ili sama žena u tranziciji“, Žagor, 2001, Agora, 2006, and “Aždajin osmeh“, Čigoja štampa, 2004; historical meta - fiction “Čuvari svetinje“, Agora, 2007, 2008; “Kaja, Beograd i dobri Amerikanac“, Agora 2009, Laguna 2010, 2011. – regional award “Meša Selimović“ for the best novel published in Serbia, Croatia, Bosnia - Herzegovina, and Montenegro in 2009, and “Bremasoni“, Laguna 2011, 2012. She lives and writes in Belgrade, Serbia.

Ivana Šojat

She was born in Osijek in 1971. She is a writer, occasional poet, literature translator (so far, she has translated approximately sixty works from French and English), editor of theatre publications in HNK in Osijek. She used to be also the alt at the opera of the same national theatre house. But, above all, she is the mother of three gorgeous children. Together with her husband and children, in her family there are also their dog Sparky, tortoise Korny, and a canary Diego. In her youth, she used to be a chronical rocker, and as such she sang in bands “Enola Gay”, “Saratoga” and “Glad”. It happens even nowadays that she sings in public and shocks those who are present. So far, she has published a collection of poetry “Hiperbole” (Hrašće, Drenovci, 2000), novel “Šamšiel”, (Matica Hrvatska, Osijek, 2002), which on the festival Kozarčevi dani in Vinkovci in 2002 was awarded with a Prize for success; collection of poetry “Uznesenja” (Triler and DHK - branch Rijeka, 2003.), collection of poetry “Utvare” (Solidarnost, Zagreb, 2005), award Bl. Ivan Merz, collection of stories “Kao pas” (DHK - branch Rijeka, 2006), collection of essays “I past će sve maske” (Alfa, Zagreb, 2006), collection of stories “Mjesečari” (Fraktura, Zaprešić, 2009), collection of poetry “Sofija plaštevima mete samoću” (VBZ, Zagreb, 2009), novel Unterstadt (Fraktura, 2009), which was awarded with prizes “Vladimir Nazor”, “Gjalski”, “Fran Galović”, and “Josip i Ivan Kozarac”, collection of stories “Ruke Azazelove” (Fraktura, 2011), novel “Ničiji sinovi” (Fraktura, 2012), novel “Jom Kipur” (Fraktura, 2014). So far, her works have been translated into German, Italian, Bulgarian, Macedonian and English. Her novel “Unterstadt” was dramatized in 2012, and transformed to the performance bearing the same name, directed by Zlatko Sviben. It also received numerous prizes, including primarily the award ”Vladimir Nazor”, and the award by the Croatian Acting Association for direction and the best performance as a whole. In spite of all, Ivana still lives and works in Osijek.

Jovana Gligorijević

Jovana Gligorijević (1983) from 2002 has worked as a journalist for “Vreme” weekly, where she covers a wide range of topics, including new media and freedom of speech on the Internet. In “Vreme” she edits certain sections of the Web site www.vreme.com, and holds the position of a community manager on social networks. From 2008 until 2010 she was editor of the section devoted to European integrations on the Web site b92.net/Srbija2020. Furthermore, she is the assistant editor in “CorD” business magazine, the only such edition published in Serbia in the English language. Since March 2014 she has been a member of the Executive Board of Serbian Journalists’ Association. Since 2012 she has been one of alumni of INTAJOUR Academy for journalism in the digital world, where she specializes in Web journalism and multimedia. She enrolled in this programme as one of 36 students from around the world with scholarship by Bertelsman Foundation. She has been cooperating with media such as BIRN (Balkan Investigative Reporting Network), “Elle”, Croatian “Forum Tjedni Magazin” and 24sata.hr, “Danas”, and so on. As a journalist-researcher, or co-author, she has worked on several documentary films produced by “Vreme Film” and Media Center Belgrade.

Zvonko Maković

Zvonko Maković (1947) graduated in art history and comparative literature from Zagreb’s Faculty in Philosophy in 1973. Since 1975 he has worked as an assistant, docent, associate and regular professor at the Department of art history. He led the Department of modern art and visual communications, and art of 19th and 20th century, until his retirement on the 1st of October 2012. In 2001 at Venice Biennale he represented his country and organized an exhibition of Julio Knifer. From 2005 until 2009 he was President of the Croatian P.E.N. Centre, and after 2009 its Vice President. Since 2014 he has been President of Croatian Art Historians’ Association. From 2009 until 2013 he is a freelance deputy at Zagreb’s City Assembly, and President of the Board for Culture.

Vladimir Gvozden

Vladimir Gvozden, literature historian, literature critic and theoretician, translator, employed at Novi Sad’s Faculty of Philosophy. He was a guest lecturer at Regensburg University, he held lectures at Universities in Bamberg, Giesen, Prague, Szeged and London, he was a guest researcher at Universities in Toronto, Innsbruck and Brno, lector at Poznan’s University. His works have been translated into Hungarian, Macedonian, Bulgarian, Spanish, Polish and German. His published works include: “Jovan Dučić putopisac: ogled iz književne imagologije” (2003), “Činovi prisvajanja: od teorije ka pragmatici teksta” (2005); “Srpska putopisna kultura 1914 - 1940” (2011); “Književnost, kultura, utopija” (2011); “Pregledni rečnik komparatističke terminologije u književnosti i kulturi”, editors Bojana Stojanović Pantović, Miodrag Radović, Vladimir Gvozden (2011); “Nine Serbian Poets: Anthology of Contemporary Serbian Poetry / Devet srpskih pesnika: Antologija novije srpske poezije” (2012); “Gordost” (group of authors), Novi Sad, 2014. Member of editorial crew of the magazines “Zlatna greda” i “Zbornik za jezik i književnost” at Novi Sad’s Faculty of Philosophy. Awarded with a prize by Vojvodina’s Literary Society for translation of the year (2005), Prize “Laza Kostić“ (2012) and prize by Vojvodina’s Literary Society for the book of the year (2012).

Lejla Kalamujić

Lejla Kalamujić is a writer from Sarajevo. She was born on August, 16th 1980. So far, she has published a collection of short stories “Anatomija osmijeha”. Her second collection of short stories “Povratak među zvijezde“, is a work in progress. She publishes short stories, essays and critiques in Bosnia-Herzegovina and around the region.

Žarko Jokanović

Žarko Jokanović was born on May, 7th 1967 in the town of Užice, where he grew up together with his mother Slobodanka and grandmother Jela Ðurđić. In his hometown, he completed primary and secondary education, and went on to study psychology at Belgrade’s Faculty of Philosophy. As a boy, he starred in the film “Užička republika”, where he was memorized by a famous sentence which he uttered: “Čiko, je l' sav ovaj lebac tvoj?” For a while, he was active in politics. He worked as a screenplay writer for a number of television projects: “Oralno doba”, “Zvezde pevaju za njih”, “Večera kod Laneta” and others, and he is also the author of screenplays for television series, such as: “Džet set”, “Tajna narandžaste kuće”, “Mileusnići” and “Scene na sceni”. He wrote several dramas, and some of them were performed in theatres across Serbia: “Zgazi me”, “Kokoške”, “Igra istine”, “Čija je moja koža?”, among others. He is also well-known for his newspaper columns: “On“, “Glas“, “Objektiv“, “Blic“, ”Politika“ and others. Furthermore, he is the author of the first, and so far the only monograph about the great Serbian screenplay writer Siniša Pavić: “Siniša Pavić, s. r.”, Belgrade 2009. He is married to the actress Milica Milša, and together they have a son named Antonije.

Sava Damjanov

Rođen je 1956. godine u Novom Sadu, gde se i školovao. Diplomirao je na Filozofskom fakultetu (1980. godine, grupa za jugoslovenske književnosti i srpskohrvatski jezik), magistrirao (1986) i doktorirao (1996) na istom fakultetu (mentor mu je bio akademik Milorad Pavić). Radi na Filozofskom fakultetu u Novom Sadu kao redovni profesor na Odseku za srpsku književnost: predaje Srpsku književnost 19. veka i Kreativno pisanje, a na doktorskim studijama Kulturu postmodernizma. Od školske 2003/4. do školske 2006/7. bio je rukovodilac je magistarskih studija na Odseku za srpsku književnost.U okviru doktorskih studija angažovan je kao predavač ili mentor na domaćim i stranim univerzitetima (Beograd, Niš, Nikšić, Ljubljana, Zagreb, Lisabon, Bordo, Venecija, Krakov, Segedin, Melburn). Piše prozu, književnokritičke i književnoistorijske radove. Njegova naučna istraživanja usmerena su pre svega ka fantastičkoj književnosti, erotskim i jezičko-eksperimentalnim slojevima u srpskoj tradiciji, teoriji recepcije, postmodernizmu, kao i ka komparativistici. Priređivao je za štampu tekstove srpskih pisaca 18, 19. i 20. veka. Tokom devedesetih godina uređivao je časopis za svetsku književnost «Pismo» i «Sveti Dunav» - magazin posvećen srednjoevropskoj kulturi. Urednik je «Biblioteke srpske fantastike», edicije «Novosadski manuskript» (izdavač Gradska biblioteka Novog Sada), kao i antologijske biblioteke „Deset vekova srpske književnosti“ kod Izdavačkog centra Matice srpske (od 2009). Bio je član žirija Brankove nagrade Matice srpske od 1987. do 2004 ( i njegov predsednik od 1992. godine). Osnivač međunarodnog književnog festivala „Prozefest“ (u Novom Sadu, 2007.godine) i nagrade „Milovan Vidaković“ (od 2008) koja se na njemu dodeljuje za životno delo. Bio je predsednik Upravnog odbora Gradske biblioteke u Novom Sadu (2005-2008), član Upravnog odbora Srpskog književnog društva (2010-2012) i član Upravnog odbora Matice srpske (2008-2015); predsednik je Upravnog odbora Sterijinog pozorja (od 2012). Govori, nemački, engleski i ruski jezik.

Oto Oltvanji

Oto Oltvanji was born 1971, brought up in Subotica and lives in Belgrade. He is the author of novels „Crne cipele“ (2005), „Kičma noći“ (2010) and „Iver“ (2015). From the early 90s, he published around 40 stories in magazines such as „Znak“, „sagite“, „Gradina“, „Koraci“, „Severni bunker“ and „Politikin zabavnik“, as well as in antologies such as „Tamni vilajet“, „Beli šum“, „Gradske priče“, „Nova srpska pripovetka“ and „Četvrtasto mesto“. He translated book „This Is Serbia Calling“ (Matthew Collin) from english and novels „Zlatna Krv“ (Lucius Shepard), „Kiša kao metak“ (David Schow) and „Prestonica nasilja“ (George Pelekanos), as well as three Jonathan Letthem's titles: „Sva siročad Bruklina“, „Ne voliš me još“ and „Tvrđava samoće“. He also translated comic books „Rip Kirby“ and „Wolverine“.

Žana Poliakov

Academy of Dramatic Arts. Internet pioneer, she works on digital age issues, copies and originals, consumer society and new age philosophy from 1996, when she began professional career. She developed personal concept of visual communication in wich artist overcomes rigid frames and, using personal knowledge and skills, and going through media, becomes some sort of pop star. She exhibited at numerous solo and group installations in the world, although she prefers to perform to exhibit. Actually, it depends of the her mood. She is an exhibitionist and exhibition herself. In a recent years, she's been experimenting with 3D real-place-barbie-doll ambiental installations twisting, pranking, overlapping and playing relations between sense and sensuality, private and public, personal and emotional.

Veton Surroi

Veton Surroi is a writer. In 1990 he founded the independent weekly KOHA and later the daily KOHA Ditore (1997), still the leading Kosovo daily newspaper. In 2000 he founded KTV, the leading independent national TV broadcaster. In 1999 he was chosen as one of the Global Leaders of Tomorrow of the World Economic Forum in Davos. During the 1990’s he was a leading figure in civil society and politics in Kosovo. He graduated at the Faculty of Philosophy and Letters at the National Autonomous University of Mexico (UNAM) in 1982. He has been a Senior Member of the Kosovo Negotiations Unity Team in the Vienna Negotiations (2005-2007) preceeding the independence of Kosovo. He was a Member of Parliament of Kosovo as president of the ORA Reformist party (2005-2008). He was a signatory of the Rambouillet accords for Kosovo at the negotations in 1999. In 1990 he founded the independent weekly KOHA and later the daily KOHA Ditore (1997), still the leading Kosovo daily newspaper. In 2000 he founded KTV, the leading independent national TV broadcaster.

Veran Matić

Veran Matić, Editor-in-Chief of Information programme & Chairman of B92 Management Board. Since 1984 he has been involved in alternative and youth media in Belgrade, Zagreb and Ljubljana. He began his career at NTV Studio B, and in May 1989 he founded Radio B92, the first independent radio station in Serbia. Under his lead, over the past 25 years, this station has developed numerous activities, the most significant being the three media – radio, television and Web page. He founded the Association of Independent Electronic Media – ANEM, and he has advocated freedom of media and freedom of public speech. During the past 25 years, he has been granted many awards. For full ten years, he was Chairman of ANEM, which currently gathers approximately fifty independent local radio and TV stations from across the country. He is the Chairman of B92 Management Board, Vice President of the Serbian Association of Managers, member of the Telenor Foundation Management Board, member of the Management Board of the Centre for Integration of Youths, member of the Management Board of the Serbian Chamber of Commerce, SEEMO coordinator for Serbia, member of the Management Board of UEPS – Serbian Association for Market Communications. He was born in 1962 in Šabac, Serbia. He studied world literature at Belgrade University, Faculty of Philology. Social responsibility has always been the core of B92. Therefore Veran Matić has developed B92 as a socially responsible mmedia house, and initiated a number of big humanitarian and socially important activities.

Teofil Pančić

He was born in Skopje in 1965. He works as a columnist and critic for “Vreme” weekly, and since 1999 he has been a commentator for “Radio Slobodna Evropa”. He has published his critical and analytical texts in many magazines and newspapers from Serbia and ex – Yugoslavia (including "Naša Borba", "Republika", "Feral Tribune", "Globus", "Dani", "Sarajevske sveske", "Dnevnik", "Nezavisni", "Vojvodina", "Pobjeda", "Monitor", and so on), as well as in publications from the USA, Russia and several European countries. His published works include: "Urbani Bušmani", "Čuvari bengalske vatre", "Na hartijskom zadatku", "Osobeni znaci", "Famoznih 400 kilometara" and "Karma koma". He lives in Zemun and Novi Sad. Among other awards, in 2010 Pančić was granted the award "Dušan Bogavac" for ethics and courage. To support his nomination, Serbian Independent Journalists’ Association praised his adherence to progressive, democratic and anti – fascist beliefs.

Branko Rosić

Branko Rosić was born in Belgrade. He played within the legendary punk band “Urbana gerila”, and later in the electro group “Berliner strasse”. He was an associate for the book “Leksikon Yu mitologije”. He published his texts in magazines “Playboy”, “Cosmopolitan”, “Max”, “National geographic”, B92 online, “Fame” and daily newspaper the “Press”. He possesses a degree in mechanical engineering. He is one of the first Serbian musicians ever to give an interview for the famous English newspaper “New Musical Express”, and the first Serbian journalist who got the interview from the legendary English musician Morrissey. He is a deputy of the editor-in-chief for “Nedeljnik” magazine.

Olja Bećković

Olja Bećković is a Serbian actress, journalist and television hostess. Until 2014, she hosted the TV show “Utisak nedelje” on TV B92. She graduated from Belgrade’s Faculty of Drama Arts in 1985. In 1991 she started her career as a journalist on TV Studio B, being the author of the show “Utisak nedelje”. In 1996 she left Studio B, and joined to the production group “Mreža“. From 2002 until 2014 she hosted her show “Utisak nedelje” on TV B92. In 2001 Olja was awarded with the award “Osvajanje slobode”, granted by the Foundation “Maja Tasić Maršićević”, whereas in 2007 she was granted the award “Dušan Duda Timotijević” by “TV Novosti” magazine. She has also received a League of honour knight award. [2] Her parents are the writer Matija Bećković and Vera Pavladoljska.

Nenad Šaponja

Nenad Šaponja was born on the 13th of April 1964 in Novi Sad, the city he lives in today. He engaged in different professions and worked as a doctor, psychiatrist, television author, freelance critic and secretary at a writers’ association. In 2002 he founded the publishing house “Agora” in Zrenjanin, where as an editor and a publisher he signed more than 2000 titles. According to the critics, he is one of the most hermetic modern Serbian poets. For several years (1996 – 2005) he worked as a literary critic for Belgrade’s daily the “Politika”, and also worked as a promoter of post – modern poetics in Serbia, as well as exercising a unique interpretative approach to the work in question, which implies “to live” the literature. Ever since he started to publish modern Serbian prose as an editor, he quit writing about it, because he believes that these positions editor / critic should not be united. He writes poetry, essays and prose. He is married to a cardiologist named Dragoslava, and together they have two sons, Stefan and FIlip.

Vule Žurić

Vule Žurić was born in Sarajevo in 1969. So far, he has published the following books comprised of stories: “Umri muški”, 1991, “Dvije godine hladnoće”, 1995, “U krevetu sa Madonom”,1998, “Valceri i snošaji”, 2001, and “Mulijin ruž”, 2003, novels: “Blagi dani zatim prođu”, 2001, “Rinfuz”, 2003, “Tigrero”, 2005, “Crne ćurke” and the second book of “Crne ćurke”, 2006, “Mrtve brave”, 2008, and “Narodnjakova smrt”, 2009. He is the author of the following radio – dramas: “Omča od hartije”, devoted to life and death of Bora Stanković, “Čovek bez peripetija”, devoted to Milan Rakić, “Ostrvo Uskoković”, devote to Milutin Uskoković, “Crni glas za belu hartiju”, devoted to Emanuil Janković, and “Branin orfeum u zunzarinoj palate”, devoted to Brana Cvetković. The dramas are produced by Radio Belgrade Drama programme, broadcast at radio – waves of the Public Service. He is the co – author of screenplay for a graduation movie by Miloš Ajdinović “Mrtav čovek ne štuca”. His stories have been translated into German, English, Greek, Spanish, Portuguese, Polish, Italian, French, Hungarian and Slovenian. He resides in Pančevo.

Nihad Hasanović

Nihad Hasanović was born in Bihać in 1974. He published the dramas “Podigni visoko baklju” (1996) and “Zaista?” (2000), collection of short stories “Kad su narodi nestali” (2003), and novels “O roštilju i raznim smetnjama” (2008), and “Čovjek iz podruma” (2013). He also published poems, stories, essays and translations (mostly from French, and some from English and Spanish) in literary magazines, print or on - line. From time to time, he writes for informative media (BH Dani, Slobodna Bosna, portals Buka and e-novine). He translated the novel written by Kenizé Mourad “Vrt u Badalpuru” (2001), diaries by E. M. Cioran “Sveska iz Talamanke”, as well as “Duh terorizma” by Jean Baudrillard. He resides in Sarajevo.

Dejan Stojiljković

Dejan Stojiljković (1976) is a prose writer, playwright and comics screenplay writer. He published prose collections “Leva strana druma“ (2007) and „Low Life“ (2008), as well as novels “Konstantinovo raskršće“ (2009, awards “Miloš Crnjanski“, “Zlatni hit-liber RTS-a“ and “Svetosavski pečat“, the final short – list selection for the NIN prize and “Isidora Sekulić“ award, the most read book in Serbian public libraries in 2010, nominations for international awards “Impak Dablin“ and „Balkanika“), and “Duge noći i crne zastave“ (2012, award “Zlatni Hit-liber RTS-a“). He is the author of several comics screenplays, and of an experiment book about comics “Kiselo & Slatko“ (2011). He is the first laureate of the prize for comics theory “Nikola Mitrović Kokan“. Within the edition “Srbija i komentari“ by the “Official Gazette”, edited by an academic Goran Petrović in 2012, Stojiljković’s book “Živi pokojnik“ was published (together with an ethnologist Vesna Marjanović). He is also the author of a historical drama “Konstantin”, directed by Jug Radivojević (co – production between Belgrade’s National Theatre and Niš’s National Theatre, season 2012 / 2013). Since 2012 he has been an exclusive author for the publishing house “Blooming Twig Books“ from New York. His prose has been translated into English, Russian, Macedonian and Greek. He is a member of the Serbian Literary Society and literature group P - 70.

Vera Kopicl

She graduated from Novi Sad’s Faculty of Philosophy, the Department of Yugoslav and general literature. She defended her master’s thesis at the same Department, and completed her specialist studies at Novi Sad University ACIMSI. She is a founder, a long – term editor and director of the International Festival of Women’s Video – Art “VideoMedeja”, and also the author, co – author and curator of exhibitions by Novi Sad’s female painters “Ogledalo anime”, magazine “Žena”, video – works of multimedia exhibition entitled “Dnevna soba”. She organized a collection of texts regarding video – art “VideoMedeja” and “Ženska čitanka”, selection of literary and critique texts regarding Serbian female literature. Her works have been published in magazines, such as “Kultura”, “Interkuluralnost”, “Art centrala”, “ProFemina”, “Korzo portal”...

Liljana Dirjan

She was born in 1953 in Skopje. She graduated from the Faculty of Philology, the Department of Yugoslav literature and the Macedonian language. She visited Paris as part of her studies, having a scholarship by the French government and the Armenian Foundation “Gubelkijan”. Her works include: “Prirodna pojava” (Misla, Skopje, 1980, award for the best first book of poetry “Studenstski zbor”), “Živa mera” (Naša Kniga, Skopje,1985, National poetry award “Braća Miladinovi” for the best book of poetry at “Struške večeri poezije”), “Pelin pole” (Misla, Skopje, 1989), “Shamp d ´abisinthe” (in French, Est-Quest Internationales, Paris, 1996, translation by Harita Wybrands), “Teška svila” (Matica Makedonska, Skopje, Melbourne, 1997), “Cocoons“ (in English, Tennessee, USA, 1999, translation by Peter H. Liott), “Tiger Im Diagram” (in German, bibliophil edition Corvinus Presse, Berlin, 2000, translation by Sabine Fahl), “Schwere Seide” (in German, Corvinus Presse, Berlin, 2000, translation by Sabine Fahl), “Privatni svetovi” (Nezavisni pisateli na Makedonija, Skopje, 2007, Macedonian nomination for the award “Balkanika”, by the Bulgarian Foundation “Balkanika”, Sofia), “Svetot moj brat” (Selected poems, NID “Mikena”, Bitola, 2008, edition 130 toma na makedonskata kniževnost, tom 73.), “Privatni svjetovi” (in Montenegrin, OKF, 2009, translation by Nenad Vujadinović and Marina Markovska), “Heavy silk” (Selected poems, in English, French, German, bibliothek Pleadi, Struški večeri na poezija, 2010), “So nevidliv sokol na ramoto” (Selection of poetry in the Bulgarian language, Blgarski pisatel, Sofia, translation by Petar Karaangov, Sofia, 2011), “Sneg za dvajca” (prose and poetic prose, Nezavisni pisateli na Makedonija, 2011), “The world, my brother” (Selected poems in English, St Climent of Ohrid, National and University library - Skopje, tom 76, translation by Ljubica Arsovska and Patrisha Stefanovska, 2011), “Snjeg za dvoje” (in Montenegrin, OKF, 2013, translation by Nenad Vujadinović). She has also published a book of columns and travel stories: “Sagje vrz snegot” (Nezavisni pisateli na Makedonija, 2007). She is a member and one of founders of the Association of Independent Writers of Macedonia, 1992. She lives in Skopje.

Damiri Uzunović

Damir Uzunović rođen je 1965. godine u Sarajevu. Do sada objavio tri knjige pjesama: «Brod sa talismanom» izdavač Veselin Masleša, 1992., «Mađioničar», izdavač Svjetlost, 1995., "Ljudi i ptice", izdavač Space production, 2005., i knjigu priča: «Kesten» izdavač Dani, 1996. Uvršten je u bosanskohrecegovačku antologiju proze „Pod pritiskom“ i poezije „Ovdje živi Konan“ i „Zašto tone Venecija“. Pjesme i priče prevođene su mu na više jezika. Direktor je sarajevske knjižare i izdavačke kuće Buybook. Uposlen je kao urednik u istoj izdavačkoj kući.

Mirana Likar Bajželj

Mirana Likar Bajželj rođena je 1961. godine u Novom Mestu. Diplomirala je bibliotekarstvo i slovenački jezik i književnost na Filozofskom fakultetu u Ljubljani. Živi u Ljubljani, gde predaje slovenački jezik. Kratke priče objavljuje od 2006. godine. Iste godine nagrađena je Nagradom Onino pero, koju joj je podlistak Ona dnevnika Delo dodelio za kratku priču. Godine 2007. pobedila je na festivalu mlade književnosti Urška. Njena prva zbirka kratkih priča Subotnje priče (Sobotne zgodbe, Cankarjeva založba, 2009.) nominovana je za prvenac godine i ušla je dva puta u uži izbor za Nagradu Fabula. Drugu zbirku priča Mirane Likar Bajželj, Sedam reči (Sedem besed, LUD Literatura, 2012.), kulturna redakcija dnevnika Delo uvrstila je među pet knjiga koje su obeležile tekuću godinu u Sloveniji. Priča Nadin stolnjak (Nadin prt) iz iste knjige uvrštena je u američku antologiju Best European Fiction 2013 (Dalkey Arhive Press), koju je uređivao Aleksandar Hemon. Ove godine je nagrađena nagradom Lapis Histriae, koju dodeljuje istarski Forum Tomizza.

Adisa Bašić

Pjesnikinja i novinarka Adisa Bašić rođena je 1979. u Sarajevu. Diplomirala je komparativnu književnost i bibliotekarstvo, magistrirala ljudska prava i demokraciju. Objavila je četiri zbirke pjesama, Havine rečenice (1999.), Trauma market (2004.), Promotivni spot za moju domovinu (2011.) i Motel neznanih junaka (2014.). Njena poezija uvrštena je u sve novije izbore bh. pjesništva. Radi na Odsjeku za komparativnu književnost i bibliotekarstvo Filozofskog fakulteta u Sarajevu, kao asistentica na predmetima Poezija i Kreativno pisanje. Godinama piše za bh. sedmičnik Slobodna Bosna u kojem ima i redovnu rubriku književne kritike.

Luka Mičeta

Luka Mičeta (Beograd, 1959). Završio Prvu beogradsku gimnaziju. Studirao ekonomiju na Beogradskom univerzitetu. Novinarstvom se bavi od 1980. godine. Bio komentator i urednik lista Student; komentator i urednik NIN-a; generalni direktor Tanjuga. Objavio je knjige Srbi i demokratija (Vidici i Dosije, Beograd, 1992), Sudbina Bošnjaka (NIN, 19971; Tersit, Beograd, 19992), Panorama pogleda, pojmova i mišljenja Adila Zulfikarpašića (Tersit, Beograd, 2001), Vane Ivanović između Tita i Draže – Post scriptum jednog Jugoslavena (Čigoja štampa i Otkrovenje, Beograd, 2010), Sulejman, Hurem i Srbi (Laguna, Beograd, 2012), Povratak kralja – sudbina Karađorđevića u egzilu (Laguna, Beograd, 2013), Stefan Nemanja – nastanak evropske Srbije (Laguna, Beograd, 2013), Stefan Dečanski – biografija najnesrećenijeg srpskog kralja (Laguna, Beograd, 2014), Duh pobune – odabrani intervjui (Laguna, Beograd, 2015), Stefan Prvovenčani – biografija prvog srpskog kralja (Laguna, Beograd, 2015), Krik strasti i marševi trijumfa – Dr Aleksandar Obradović, impresario Crvene zvezde (Danas, Beograd, 2015).

Svetlana Slapšak

Born in Belgrade 1948. She achieved PhD title in ancient studies, also in Belgrade. She was one of three editors of satirical magazine „Frontisterion“ (Belgrade Faculty of Phylosophy), wich was forbiden after the first issue, 1970. Her passport was taken away in three intervals - 1968 - 1973, 1975 - 1976 and 1988 - 1989. Mrs Slapšek was tracked, examined and beaten up by the Police and secret services. She was president of Committee Freedom of Expression (Literacy Association of Serbia) 1986 - 1989. Group of 1000 women nominated her for the Nobel Peace Prize in 2005. Mrs Slapšak lectured at numerous yugoslavian, europian and american universities. She was a professor of antropology of ancient worlds, gender studies and balkanology, dean at ISH in Ljubljana from 2003 to 2013. From 1994. she has been editor ih chief of magazine ProFemina in Belgrade. Also, mrs. Slapšak was director of Serbian Centre of Culture „Danilo Kiš“ in Ljubljana (2009 - 2013); director of Institute for balkanic and mediteranian studies and culture in Ljubljana from 2009. Awards: „Miloš Crnjanski“ for book of essays, 1990; American PEN Freedom of Expression Award, 1993; Helsinki Watch Award, 2000; Helen Award, Montreal, 2001. Mrs. Slapšak published over 50 books and collections, over 300 studies (linguistics, ancient studies, balkanology, gender studies), over 1500 essays, one novel, translations from greek and modern greek language, latin, french, english and slovakian language. Among newest books there are: Franc Kavčić in antika: pogled iz antropologije antičnih svetov. Ljubljana: Narodna galerija, 2011; Mikra theatrika: antropološki pogled na antično in sodobno gledišče, (Knjižnica Mestnega gledališča ljubljanskega, zv. 156), Ljubljana 2012; Zelje in spolnost: iz zgodovinske antropologije hrane, Beletrina, Ljubljana, 2013; Antička miturgija: žene, XX vek, Beograd, 2013; Leteći pilav, XX vek, Beograd, 2014.