Nikola Majdak, pioneer of Serbian animation, passed away on May 4, 2013 at the age of 86. Born in Valjevo in the former Yugoslavia on November 30, 1927, his fascination with cinema spanned 6 generations.

At the age of 16 young Nikola began work in a laboratory, graduating to the projection booth and finally to camera operator. After graduating from the Art History Department of Belgrade University he went on to a career as a director of photography working on over 200 documentary, feature films, and animations, many of which won major awards worldwide.

Nikola served as the long-time president of ASIFA (Association Internationale du Film d’ Animation) Serbia, representing his chapter on the ASIFA International Board. He also served on numerous juries at such prestigious festivals as Annecy, Hiroshima, and Espinho.

Majdak was head of the Department of Film and Television Camera at the Faculty of Dramatic Arts in Belgrade and also headed the Animation Department of the “Dunav Film” film school. His animated films The Soloist and The Chalk-Man (1963) were the first cartoon films made in Belgrade. Nikola inspired generations of young animators. Noted Serbian animator and graphic designer Rastko ?iri? says “He (Majdak) inspired me to enter animation in 1980 along with other important Serbian animators such as Borislav Sajtinac who now lives in Paris, Dusan Petricic who has lived in Canada for 20 years, and a large number of other young artists”.

Nikola’s spirit will live on in the Balkanima Festival which he found 9 years ago. Rastko also wrote me that “We all hoped that Nikola would be present for the 10th anniversary of his Balkanima Festival this year, but he went away too early”.

As befits his life, Nikola wanted his funeral to be a celebration of his life and he left a request that at his memorial a lively song by the popular Serbian songwriter Bajaga be performed. The song lyrics speak about friends who are scattered all around the world and cheers for health and happiness, for good wine and good women, as life is short and goes quickly. These words express Majdak’s spirit and love of life.

?iri? sums up Nikola as “a man of huge energy, pioneer of Serbian animation, founder of many animation schools and a great festival”.

He is survived by his wife, Marina and his son Nikola Majdak Junior, who is also a successful animator. His film Rabbitland won the 2013 Crystal Bear at the Berlin Film Festival. He will also always be remembered and missed by his legion of cinephile friends all around the world.

I would like to thank Božidar Ze?evi?, President of ASIFA Serbia and Serbian animator and graphic designer Rastko ?iri? for their help in collecting information on Nikola Majdak’s life and work.