#1

Нобелевский диплом.jpg

The Nobel Diploma of Bunin I.A.

#5

On November 10, 1933, it was announced that Ivan Bunin became the first Russian writer to be awarded the Nobel prize. Bunin received the news of him being awarded when he was at the cinema. The phone call from Stockholm was responded by his wife VEra NikolAyevna MUromtseva. Many literary critics, and even Bunin himself, initially believed that the award was granted to Bunin for his novel ‘ArsEniev’s Life’, which was published in Paris in 1930. The novel has so many coincidences with the life of Bunin that many consider it to be the autobiography of Ivan AleksEevich. But in fact, Bunin was awarded the Nobel prize for all the books he had written, because the official message of the Nobel Committee said: “By the decision of the Swedish Academy as of November 10, 1933, Ivan Bunin was awarded the Nobel prize in literature for his rigorous artistic talent which he used to describe the typical Russian character in literary prose”.

There is another translation of this phrase, made much later by VladImir PrechIssky, the Chairman of “Bunin Heritage” Association from the original in Swedish language: “for the artistic skill with which he continued traditions of the Russian classics in lyrical prose.” Ivan Bunin received the Nobel prize on December 10, 1933 from the hands of Swedish King Gustav V. The Nobel Committee had to think hard on how to determine the status of the prize winner who was an emigrant without citizenship. The result was the following: “No nationality, lives in France.” Bunin’s status was the reason why the organizers had to abandon the usual method of decorating the stage of the Concert Hall in Stockholm with the flags of the home countries of the prize winners. It was, of course, impossible to use the Soviet flag, just as it was impossible to use the flag of the Russian Empire. Therefore, in order not to offend hurt the feelings of Ivan AleksEevich, it was decided to use only the flags of Sweden.

‘For the first time since the Nobel prize was established, you’ve awarded it to the exile. Otherwise, who am I? An exile who enjoys the hospitality of France, for which I, too, will always retain my gratitude. Gentlemen, let me, leaving aside myself and my works, tell you how beautiful your gesture is in itself. There must be areas of complete independence in the world. Undoubtedly, around this table there are representatives of all opinions, all philosophical and religious beliefs. But there is something inviolable that unites us all: freedom of thought and conscience, what we owe to civilization. For a writer, this freedom is especially necessary — it is a dogma, an axiom for him, ” Bunin said in his ‘Nobel speech’.

The prize winners were also entitled to receive a large monetary reward — 170,331 SEK. Ivan Bunin quickly spent this wealth. He began to receive letters from Russian emigrants with requests for financial assistance, and the writer helped them without any questions. He quickly spent 120,000 SEK for donations and lavish feasts, and invested the rest in some ‘win-win business’. So by the end of his life the great writer was down and out.

#6

Yelets Local History Museum

read morehide