Portsmouth have continued to revamp their squad by recruiting Sonny Bradley and Danny East while later signing Romain Padovani and Yassin Moutaouakil.

Bradley and East arrived on two-year deals following Wednesday's signings of Patrick Agyemang and Phil Smith.

Defender Bradley, 21, was a free agent after leaving Hull, while East, also 21, also left the Tigers after a loan spell at Northampton and Gillingham.

Padovani, 23, and Moutaouakil, 26, have also agreed deals.

French midfielder Padovani was a free agent after leaving Monaco and has signed for two years..

Compatriot Moutaouakil made 19 appearances for the Blues last season while on a short-term deal after arriving from Hayes & Yeading in January. and has signed a one-year extension.

"We all know what has happened here recently, but this is a big club and some big players have been here over the past few years," Bradley told the Pompey website., external

"This looks like a club that are ready to start moving forwards again."

East added: "This is a massive club who shouldn't really be at this level - now I've got the opportunity to help them rebuild."

And new Portsmouth manager Guy Whittingham said he was delighted with his latest arrivals.

"Sonny Bradley is a big centre half, and knows what the league is about," Whittingham told BBC Radio Solent. "He is left footed, you have to balance in your squad and he can play out from the back and that will be important for us."

On East, he added: "He is more of a versatile player but is very athletic.

"In the league we are going into you need people who can run, people who can head and people who can score goals and he is a runner as well as a decent footballer."

Whittingham added to the official website:, external "We were alerted to Romain by Yassin's agent. He came over to train with us and we could immediately see he was a decent player.

"He's hungry and that's the most important thing - he wants to come here and be successful.

"He's come through the Monaco system, so that tells you that he has to be a good player.

"Yassin got better as the season progressed and when he was playing at his best there weren't many who could get past him."