Amnon Lipkin-Shahak Origin/Culture/Country: Jewish

Amnon Lipkin-Shahak: is a former Chief of Staff of the Israel Defense Forces, Member of the Knesset and Minister of Transportation and Tourism.In 1999 Lipkin-Shahak joined the new Center Party, headed by Yitzhak Mordechai. On this party ticket he was elected to the 15th Knesset, when Ehud Barak was elected as Prime Minister. Lipkin-Shahak joined Barak's government as Minister of Tourism and later on also as Minister of Transport following Mordechai's resignation.

Amnon Rubinstein Origin/Culture/Country: Jewish

Amnon Rubinstein: is an Israeli law scholar, politician, and columnist. A member of the Knesset between 1977 and 2002, he served in several ministerial positions. He is currently dean of the Interdisciplinary Center (IDC) in Herzliya and a patron of Liberal International.

Amnon Dankner Origin/Culture/Country: Jewish

Amnon Dankner: is an Israeli newspaper editor and author. He was the editor of the mass-circulation daily Maariv for six years.In the 1970s, Dankner was the spokesman of the Israeli Ministry of Education and the Jewish Agency. He was a reporter for Haaretz, the Washington correspondent for Davar, a columnist for Hadashot and the editor-in-chief of Maariv.

Amnon Jackont Origin/Culture/Country: Jewish

Amnon Jackont: is an Israeli author of thrillers, an historian and a literary editor.Jackont was allowed to postpone his military service for law studies at the Hebrew University of Jerusalem. During the summer breaks he would serve in the military, but was injured and became disabled. He stopped his studies and became a successful businessman, active in real estate, investements and insurance.

Amnon Lord Origin/Culture/Country: Jewish

Amnon Lord: is a journalist with the weekly newspaper, Makor Rishon. His articles and essays about media, film and politics have been published in The Jerusalem Post, Nativ, Azure (journal) and Achshav. Lord wrote and anchored a TV series about the beginnings of Israeli cinema. His publications include, The Israeli Left: From Socialism to Nihilism, a political and historical analysis of the Israeli Left from a personal perspective. (It is scheduled for publication (English) in the US, in 2003.)