Hi!

Good morning you all!

Well, let us begin.

You surely know the January 14th Georgia will choose a choice for them among these 5 entries:

(Ordered by running order)

1. Eter Beriashvili – If Someone

2. Edvard Meison – We Are Free

3. Niutone – Run Away

4. Nina Sublatti – Warrior

5. Misha Sulukhia – One And Only

Do you see?

If you click there, you will go to a YouTube video where is the song you click.

Now, I have to tell you one sad thing. The final will be at 14:00 CET.

Maybe you wonder why, but it is because in Georgia it’s gonna be at 17:00, so they are fine.

Now we are talking about Georgia in Eurovision, let’s see its history!

2007: Sopho Khalvashi – Visionary Dream

(SF: 8th / F: 12th)

2008: Diana Gurtskaya – Peace Will Come

(SF: 5th / F: 11th)

2009: Stephane & 3G – We Don’t Wanna Put In

(SF: * / F: *)

2010: Sopho Nizharadze – Shine

(SF: 3rd / F: 9th)

2011: Eldrine – One More Day

(SF: 6th / F: 9th)

2012: Anri Jokhadze – I’m A Joker

(SF: 14th / F: Non-qualified)

2013: Sopho Gelovani & Nodi Tatishvili – Waterfall

(SF: 10th / F: 15th)

2014: The Shin & Mariko – Three Minutes To Earth

(SF: 15th / F: Non-qualified)

*Georgia was going to participate in 2009, but EBU did not accept Georgian song, because the lyrics contained a political message -《We don’t wanna put in》looked like 《We don’t wanna Putin》, as a protest of South Osetia’s war.

Well, this is all!

Bye!

Made by me.

The Sunday we could know the Albanian representant for Eurovision Song Contest 2015, and the winner was Elhaida Dani with the song Diell.

Do you remember?

Well, only 3 days later, I have the lyrics!

Here you are!

Unë jam një det ku ti lundron

Një anije kujtimesh mbushur plot

Me copëza jete, ngjyra vjeshte të vonë

Ti je ai, tek unë ti jeton

Mendime, ethe dhe zjarr si diell

Si llavë e nxehtë në trup më përshkron

Më flet me gjuhën e zemrës

Dhe atë çast kur në sytë e mi mungon

Unë të kërkoj dhe lart fluturoj

Një aromë pa fund dhe ëndërr pa mbarim

Ti je për mua, je një dritë

Dhe botë e çoj

Unë të kërkoj

Një jetë me ty të jetoj

Përballë me ty lart fluturoj

Në krahët e tu marr forcë e s’të lëshoj

Ti qiell i pastë që dimrin tek unë e frikëson

Ty të kam diell dhe kurrë mos më lësho

Mendime, ethe dhe zjarr si diell

Si llavë e nxehtë në trup më përshkron

Më flet me gjuhën e zemrës

Dhe atë çast kur në sytë e mi mungon

Unë të kërkoj dhe lart fluturoj

Një aromë pa fund dhe ëndërr pa mbarim

Ti je për mua, je një dritë

Dhe botë e çoj, unë të kërkoj

Një jetë me ty të jetoj

Këndon dhe hëna

Kur ti të jesh i marrë

Dy zemra bashkë stuhinë kthejnë në varkë

Se unë jetoj në trupin tënd tani

Ne jemi një port

Gjithçka unë dhe ti

Ne jemi 1!

Gjithçka tek ty unë kërkoj dhe lart fluturoj

Një aromë pa fund dhe ëndërr pa mbarim

Ti je për mua, je një dritë

Dhe botën e shoh

Unë të kërkoj

Një jetë me ty do jetoj

Gjithçka tek ty unë kërkoj

Great!

You must know that the official YouTube video is this one.

Yes, follow me in Twitter.

Of course, @MarAntGonPren.

Byeeeeeeeeeeee!

Today, 30th December 2014, I’ve chosen the first daily song.

It is Kreisiraadio – Leto Svet (Estonia 2008)

Watch here.

Do you remember it?

A few information about the Estonian group Kreisiraadio.

Kreisiraadio (Crazy Radio in Estonian) was formed in 1993 for Hannes Võrno, Peeter Oja and Tarmo Leinatamm.

They became very acquaintances in the radio and the TV by their absurd, acid and provocative humor, always politically correct with their and parodies and sketches, where they created characters, e.g. Alev Ström an arrogant Swedish immigrant in Estonia that uses wide-brimmed hat and speech, or the “sports” section of stoneball launch of stones), etcetera.

They began in the radio station Kuku Raadio, whose motto is “Radio to make people think”.

Later they jumped to the public channel ETV in 2001.

Their popularity made them win with an overwhelming majority the Eesti Laul 2008 with more than the 50 per cent of the votes. Nevertheless, their performance in Belgrade with Leto Svet, song that mixed senseless phrases in Serbian composed by topics of the dictionaries of trip for tourists, with German and Finnish and ending with an 18th place in the 1st semifinal, disabling them to qualify for the final of Eurovision Song Contest 2008.

Since Eurovision their activities like trio have been very sporadic, continuing with their respective individual careers.

Listen to the song!

It is in Estonian, German and Finnish.

Follow me in Twitter: @MarAntGonPren.