Sybase 365, a subsidiary of Sybase, Inc., has announced that it has processed more than one trillion inter-operator messages since the company launched the first SMS interoperability messaging hub in 2001. One trillion messages is equivalent to processing approximately 32,000 messages per second for every second of one year.

With the phenomenal global growth of mobile messaging, Sybase 365 has reached a paramount milestone, and is rapidly accelerating beyond it by currently processing more than 1.5 billion messages per day. According to Sybase, although it took 8 years to get to one trillion messages, based on current and expected traffic growth, Sybase 365 should hit the next trillion messages in 2012.

"No other communication medium has the ability to reach more people than SMS - truly unprecedented in its scope," states Marty Beard, president, Sybase 365. "What started primarily as a consumer phenomenon has now moved squarely into the enterprise. Financial Institutions, retailers, consumer packaged goods companies and many other enterprises are increasingly leveraging mobile messaging for marketing, customer relationship management, payments and mobile commerce. This trend will only accelerate."

In addition to providing messaging between 900 mobile operators on the industry's most extensive, private, operator-grade network, Sybase 365 offers innovative value-added services. These include the Sybase 365 Intelligent Routeback solution, in which, on behalf of operator customers, Sybase 365 selects the most cost effective and high quality SMS routes, via hub or bilateral delivery, to an SMS interworking roaming partner destination, anywhere in the world; Sybase IPX 365, a comprehensive suite of IP services and connectivity options that provide global data roaming (GRX), voice transport (both on-net and off-net), SS7 signaling transport, MMS, and SMS; Sybase Operator Analytics 365, which leverages the Sybase IQ technology to offer a solution that allows operators to quickly and easily analyze information on their messaging traffic; and mobile marketing and mCRM services that help enterprises engage with their customers at every point in the customer lifecycle. In addition, end-to-end mobile commerce solutions introduce a new channel in both developed and emerging markets, to interact with customers and introduce new service offerings such as micropayments, bill pay, mobile banking, payments for goods and services, mobile money transfer, and mobile airtime top-up.