Sybase 365, a subsidiary of mobile messaging company Sybase, says it has identified the call centre industry as a key market for the companys SMS messaging services. As part of its strategic move into the industry, Sybase 365 has formed a partnership with Datasquirt, a New Zealand company specialising in mobile solutions and multi-channel contact management, with offices in Australia, North America, the UK and Germany. Targeting contact centres worldwide, the partnership will bring together Sybase 365s expertise in mobile messaging delivery and Datasquirts hosted software solution for contact management, CONTACT.

“Text messaging has become the preferred form of communication for many consumers, and more and more enterprises are beginning to embrace mobile services as an effective tool to improve customer satisfaction in the face of changing consumer attitudes,” says Howard Stevens, Senior Vice President, International Operations at Sybase 365. “Our partnership with Datasquirt is a milestone in our strategy to offer messaging solutions to the global call centre industry. It is a testament to Sybase 365s commitment to strengthen its foothold in this industry, and is the first of other application partnerships to come.”

The bundled solution will enable call centres to utilise SMS as a two-way real-time communications channel, to improve both inbound and outbound customer interactions. Datasquirts platform complements existing ACD (Automatic Call Distribution) systems, with the distribution of text messages to pre-defined segments of a corporate customer base, and management of customer enquiries and feedback through the SMS channel.

“Text messaging has become a central part of peoples lifestyles, and contact centres cant afford to be left behind and ignore changes in consumer behaviour when executing their customer service and marketing campaigns,” says Datasquirt CEO, Aaron Ridgway. “We see great potential for our solution, and are excited to partner with Sybase 365 to deliver reliable SMS functionality to call centres worldwide.”