Sybase 365, a subsidiary of Sybase, Inc., a global leader in mobile messaging and mobile commerce services, announced recently that it has processed more than one trillion inter-operator messages since the company launched the first SMS interoperability messaging hub in 2001.

One trillion messages is equivalent to processing approximately 32,000 messages per second for every second in one year.

With the phenomenal global growth of mobile messaging, Sybase 365 has reached a paramount milestone, and is rapidly accelerating beyond it by currently processing more than 1.5 billion messages per day and reaching 4.5 billion subscribers around the world. While it took eight years to get to one trillion messages, based on current and expected traffic growth, Sybase 365 should hit the next trillion messages in 2012.

Consumer appetite and enterprise adoption of the mobile channel is fuelling this growth in volume, availability and sophistication of mobile services. According to the Sybase 365 Global Consumer Acceptance and Usage Report 2010, 70 percent of consumers were interested in additional mobile services.

“No other communication medium has the ability to reach more people than SMS - truly unprecedented in its scope,” said Marty Beard, President, Sybase 365. “What started primarily as a consumer phenomenon has now moved squarely into the enterprise. Financial institutions, retailers, consumer packaged goods companies and many other enterprises are increasingly leveraging mobile messaging for marketing, customer relationship management, payments and mobile commerce. This trend will only accelerate."

As mobile messaging volumes grow, having a reliable, scalable messaging backbone to deliver mobile services is vital, and Sybase 365 continues to provide greater levels of service and functionality to its customers, helping them maximize and expand service offerings to their subscribers and consumers, and to increase revenue and margins.

In addition to providing unrivalled messaging between 900 mobile operators on the industry’s most extensive, private, operator-grade network, Sybase 365 offers innovative value-added services including: