The Washington portion of the state funeral for former President Gerald R. Ford was held Dec. 30.

More than 500 military members supported the California portion of the state funeral for the former president.

The military is providing ceremonial service, security and logistical support to honor and pay tribute to the 38th commander-in-chief and the Ford family.

Personnel from the Armed Forces Honor Guard, based in Washington D.C., served as members of the guard of honor and as body bearers during the arrival ceremony at St. Margaret's Episcopal Church Dec. 29.

"This is very somber time for all of us in the color guard," said Marine Pfc. Trae Shelton of the Armed Forces Honor Guard. "We conduct ourselves with the highest reverence, professionalism and honor to pay our respects to former President Ford and his family."

"It was a way for me to salute the former president and his legacy," said Airman 1st Class Lyle Carter, also from the Armed Forces Honor Guard.

Participation in the state funeral impacted all branches of the armed services at many levels.

"As part of the Old Guard, we are proud to represent the Army as a whole," said Spc. John Tilley, of the 3rd U.S. Infantry Regiment from Fort Myer, Va. "This is our chance to show our respect for the passing of the former president."

The Marine Corps Air Ground Combat Center Band from Twentynine Palms, Calif., provided musical honors and hymns for the ceremony.

"I am honored to be here paying homage and tribute to President Ford," said bandmaster, Master Sgt. Grady May. "Every time the casket is moved, we render presidential honors, as well as play various hymns selected by the Ford family."

Nearly 350 Marines from Marine Corps Air Ground Task Force Training Command Twentynine Palms are providing security and host support for this phase of the state funeral. The Marine contingent is augmented with nearly 200 Soldiers, Sailors, Airmen, Coast Guardsmen and Defense Department civilians.

"The team (has) done a phenomenal job of organizing and executing this phase of the state funeral," said Navy Capt. Mike Tillotson, deputy commander of Joint Task Force National Capital Region. "Their professionalism and pride is evident in every phase of honoring the 38th president and former commander-in-chief."

Former President Ford died in Rancho Mirage, Calif., on Dec. 26 at the age of 93.

After the departure ceremony at Palm Springs International Airport Dec. 30, the remains of President Ford were flown to Andrews Air Force Base, Md., for the Washington portion of the state funeral.