MKB Veszprém KC - HCM Constanta 31:21 (14:11)

MKB Veszprém KC: Alilovic (goalkeeper) - Gulyás, Iváncsik G. 2 (goals), Schuch, Császár 9 (2), Iváncsik T. 4 (2), Laluska 1, Nagy 3, Jamali 6, Ugalde, Chema 1, Oneto, Terzic 1, Sulic 4, Pesic.

HCM Constanta: Stanescu, Popescu (goalkeepers)- Dragicevic 1 (goal), Humet 3, Val 3, Simucu 2, Toma 2, Sadoveac 2, Cutura 4, Angelovski 1, Adzic, Sabou, Csepreghi 1, Critescu, Buricea 1 Criciotoiu 1.

Penalties: 5/4 and 1/0

Suspensions: 6 and 6 minutes

Antonio Carlos Ortega: I am satisfied with our performance. We provided good performance in defence mainly; we have to improve a lot of things in attacks. Thanks to those players who step onto the field despite of their injuries; Terzic, Jamali, Oneto and László Nagy. After the World Cup we need time to win our form back, the cohesion between the players work again; respectively the players who played in the World Cup need more time to relax. We will do everything in our remaining 2 matches in order to win our group. We travel to Kiel with the hope of victory, but we have to proceed step by step, so firstly we have to concentrate on the match against Orosháza now.

Gábor Császár: We played a good game, congratulations to Constanta for it. Today’s match we had to win ourselves because it is not easy to switch over to the club work. The match has served the aim which is to order our rows. Series of load starts so we have to pay attention, but we got a proper opening push in order to do our work aright. I wish good luck to Constanta in the future.

Zvonko Shudovski: First of all, congratulations to the team of Veszprém. We knew before the game that they are much stronger than us, because they defeated us on home court. Our aim was to provide better performance today against them, but we could not achieve our expectations mostly in attack. For this reason, I am disappointed a little bit, but congratulations to Veszprém once again.

Laurentiu Toma: First of all congratulations to Veszprém. We made too much mistakes in attacks and in defense too. We are ahead of a very important match against Celje. We try to play much better against them. This match was a good preparation for that encounter.