One of the most important thing in my live is sport. I play handball. I was 10 years old, when I first learned how to play handball. Now I play in a handball team, in Mór. (Mór is near Székesfehérvár) I’m a play – maker like a point guard in basketball. There are 14 girls in our team and we have a trainer. We have training twice a week and at the weekend we usually have a match. We play in a lower championship. This championship is unprofessional.

My favourite handball teams are MKB Veszprém and Győri Audi ETO KC. MKB Veszprém is a Hungarian handball club from Veszprém. Veszprém have won the Hungarian Championship a record 19 times and took the Hungarian Cup title an unprecedented 20 occasions. They are one of the three Hungarian clubs that have ever won a major European trophy, most recently in 2008, when they overcame Rhein – Neckar – Löwen and were crowned as the EHF – Cup – Winner’s Cup champions. Győri ETO KC is a Hungarian women’s handball club from Győr. Győr reached the final of the EHF Cup Winner’s Cup in 2006 and the final of the Champions League in 2009.

Language: We speak in the team Hungarian, but sometimes we use English.

Identity: I study International Studies at Pazmany Peter Catholic University. I’m in the third year of international studies course at the university. If I graduate, I want to work and travel in the world.

Language: At the university my lectures are Hungarian, but we study English and German.

Identity: The most important thing in my life is my family. I live with my family in Székesfehérvár near Budapest. I have two younger brothers, they are twins, but they aren’t similar to each other, because they are fraternal twins. My brothers play football, but they don’t play in the same team. Matyi is a goalkeeper and plays in Videoton, Csabi is a defender and plays in Puskas Ferenc Football Academy. I always visit their matches with my parents. I have a boyfriend, who is a soccer coach, so I always go to his matches too with my family. 🙂 We are a real sport family. I have a very close relationship with my parents and my brothers too. We spend a lot of time together, we are a cohesive family. 🙂

Language: We speak at home Hungarian and sometimes I speak with my brothers German. My parents learned Russian and English.