jr smith trey vs. hawks/kyle korver

J.R. Smith hit a 3-pointer that gave the Cavaliers the lead to stay Monday night at The Q, while Kyle Korver (26) managed just one official shot while largely being guarded by Smith and LeBron James.

(Joshua Gunter, cleveland.com)

CLEVELAND, Ohio - Kyle Korver ran and ran, but had nowhere to go on Monday in Game 1 of the Eastern Conference semifinals against the Cleveland Cavaliers.

When the Atlanta Hawks sharpshooter sprinted around multiple screens and when he changed directions, an unshakable defender was always glued to his back hip, eliminating any clean looks at the basket.

That tireless defender was J.R. Smith, and he took out the Hawks' home run hitter, resulting in the Cavaliers' 1-0 series lead after a 104-93 victory at Quicken Loans Arena.

Korver is the Hawks' most dangerous deep-ball threat. Cleveland is of the belief that if he's limited, the twos from the likes of Paul Millsap and Al Horford are something they'll tolerate. At the rate the Cavaliers are shooting the three-ball, the Hawks won't be able to score enough. If Korver finds a rhythm, it opens up so many other opportunities for his teammates.

But those opportunities were closed.

"We want to make sure we lock into Korver, but we've still got to have our help because they have great players," said Cavs coach Tyronn Lue. "You've got to show your help, you've got to get back to him, but if we take him out of the game, they have a tough time scoring. ... He's a big part of what they do and we've got to lock into him and try to take him out of the series."

For all his continuous movement in 37 minutes of play, Korver only had one 3-point attempt, and that was a miss. He was removed from the game without physically being removed from the game.

Afterward, a dejected Korver spoke about what he's up against.

"They do a great job of locking in," Korver told cleveland.com. "If I come off a screen, there's always someone there to hedge out or to help. If they see someone is beat, they just switch it. But I think there's ways for us to take advantage of that too. I've got to be better. I've got to try to find some more space and be more aggressive."

Korver never mentioned Smith's name. He suggested it was more of a team scheme that prevented him from getting his looks. In part, he's accurate. Players who depend on screens to free them up have to account for the help defense, for guys who may sag off their assignment to show on the shooters.

Smith didn't need much assistance on this evening, although James seemed to have the responsibility to track Korver when Smith was on the bench. Smith fought through and around screens in order to stay attached to his assignment. He didn't trail much, and it allowed for the Cavaliers to stay home on defense.

"It's really just about effort at that point," Smith told cleveland.com. "I know they're going to set screens for him, I know they're going to try to look for him and get him open. So, just try to run, get through the screens and try to stay close to him as much as possible, especially in transition."

Smith still had enough energy to splash in four threes.

Of all the heroics of James, Kyrie Irving and Tristan Thompson during that contest, Smith's valiant effort shouldn't go unnoticed. If for some reason Korver required a hip replacement after the game, the surgeon would have had to remove Smith before beginning the procedure.

He was quietly the most impactful Cavalier that night. And if you're not buying it, check out how he appears to be in Korver's head.

"I've just got to try to see the game in new ways, keep on trying, man," Korver told cleveland.com. "Maybe being a little more aggressive, maybe doing a better job of setting some screens. But at the end of the day, I've just got to be better."