Xanth Books In Publication Order

A Spell for Chameleon (1977)

The Source of Magic (1978)

Castle Roogna (1979)

Centaur Aisle (1981)

Ogre, Ogre (1982)

Night Mare (1982)

Dragon on a Pedestal (1983)

Crewel Lye (1984)

Golem in the Gears (1986)

Vale of the Vole (1987)

Heaven Cent (1988)

Man from Mundania (1989)

Isle of View (1990)

Question Quest (1991)

The Color of Her Panties (1992)

Demons Don’t Dream (1992)

Harpy Thyme (1993)

Geis of the Gargoyle (1994)

Roc and a Hard Place (1995)

Yon Ill Wind (1996)

Faun & Games (1997)

Zombie Lover (1998)

Xone of Contention (1999)

The Dastard (2000)

Swell Foop (2001)

Up in a Heaval (2002)

Cube Route (2003)

Currant Events (2004)

Pet Peeve (2005)

Stork Naked (2006)

Air Apparent (2007)

Two to the Fifth (2008)

Jumper Cable (2009)

Knot Gneiss (2010)

Well-Tempered Clavicle (2011)

Luck of the Draw (2012)

Esrever Doom (2013)

Board Stiff (2013)

Five Portraits (2014)

Isis Orb (2016)

Ghost Writer in the Sky (2017)

Fire Sail (2019)

Jest Right (2020)

Skeleton Key (2021)

A Tryst of Fate (2021)

Xanth Graphic Novel Books In Publication Order

Return to Centaur (1990)

Xanth Book Covers

Xanth Graphic Novel Book Covers

Xanth Books Overview

A Spell for Chameleon

Xanth was the enchanted land where magic ruled where every citizen had a special spell only he could cast. That is, except for Bink of North Village. He was sure he possessed no magic, and knew that if he didn’t find some soon, he would be exiled. According to the Good Magician Humpfrey, the charts said that Bink was as powerful as the King or even the Evil Magician Trent. Unfortunately, no one could determine its form. Meanwhile, Bink was in despair. If he didn’t find his magic soon, he would be forced to leave…

.

The Source of Magic

Ordered by King Trent to determine the source of Xanth’s magic, Bink and his companions were harried by an unseen enemy determined to thwart them. When even their protector turned against them, Blink still managed to reach his goal and carry out the King’s orders…

but the king did not expect Blink’s next act to destroy utterly the magic of Xanth!

Castle Roogna

Millie, a ghost for 800 years wants only one man Jonathan, and he’s a zombie. To prove himself, Magician Dor volunteers to get the potion that can restore Jonathan to full life. But he has to go back through time to do it, to a peril haunted, ancient Xanth, where danger lurks at every turn…

.

Centaur Aisle

Dor was having trouble growing up to be the next Magician King of the Land of Xanth. He wanted no part in running the Kingdom. But now Good King Trent was leaving on a trade mission to the non magical Mundania, home of such unlikely beasts as horses and bears, so Dor had to take over for a week. After three weeks, King Trent still hadn’t returned. Surely something terrible had happened to him? Dor was left with the burden of ruling and with Irene, who was entirely too willing to be his Queen!His only hope was to enter Mundania and find King Trent. Bravely He started forth, together with Irene, a golem, a centaur, and a young ogre, heading for the far south of Xanth. The entrance to Mundania, of course, lay to the north…

Ogre, Ogre

Smash, himself, was part ogre. Although ogres were considered so stupid they coud hardly speak, and spent their time eating young girls, seven assorted females had suddenly turned to him for guidance and saftety? In Xanth, one visit to the Good Magician Humfrey worked wonders…

.

Night Mare

Although the Nextwave of barbarian warriors was invading Xanth, Mare Imbrium discovered that ever since she had gained the half soul, the Night Mare had begun to mishandle her job of delivering bad dreams. Exiled to the day world with a message for King Trent, Mare met the relentless, unforgiving Horseman. For the Night Mare, it began to be all a horrible nightmare!

Dragon on a Pedestal

There is trouble in Xanth again. The Gap Dragon had escaped and was ravaging across the land, the forget spell was causing mass amnesia, three year old Ivy was headed right for a hungry dragon. Could things get any worse? Probably…

.

Crewel Lye

Jordan was a ghost in Castle Roogna now. Although once he had been the most valorus of knights that is, until he was betrayed by two wily magicians and the woman he loves. Now, if he only can remember how he was killed, he’ll be able to reassemble his body. And he is getting impatient…

.

Golem in the Gears

Grundy Golem got no respect. So, to prove himself, he volunteered for a quest to find the long lost dragon, Stanley Steamer. On the way, he somehow manages to free a damsel in distress but not without incurring the wrath of the Sea Hag in the process. And when it comes to avenging herself on Grundy, the Sea Hag will never give up…

.

Vale of the Vole

When Esk, a young ogre nymph human, began his pilgrimage to the Good Magician Humfrey to rid himself of a seductive demoness, little did he know it would become a mission of mercy. A running river paradise and its harmless inhabitants were perishing in the wrathful wake of a greedy demon horde. Now it is up to Esk and his companions a beautiful winged centaur named Chex and a brave burrower Called Volney to search Xanth’s treacherous reaches, gathering together a mind boggling company of creatures to defend the precious Vale of the Vole.

Heaven Cent

In the mind of Xanth’s precious shapeshifting Prince Dolph, the perfect was to see the world is to search for the missing sorcerer, Humfrey. Setting off with his faithfuls companion, Marrow, an enchanted skeleton, Dolph will penetrate an island of illusion, escape a goblin kingdom, outwit a husband hungry mermaid, save marrow from bone starved harpies, and find romance with a slinky snake princess all on his way to discovering a magic coin with all the answers!

Man from Mundania

For a bored, young princess of Xanth, there’s nothing more exciting than a Quest. Especially when all you do is sit around Castle Roogna. But when Ivy uses the Heaven Cent, it takes her not to the top of Mount Rushmost, where the winged monsters gather, not to the sea where the merfolk swim but to Mundania, a world much like out own that is, boring. It is here that she meets a young college student so dull that he doesn’t even believe in magic, or princesses, or Xanth!Does he have a lot to learn. The thrilling climax to the trilogy started in Vale of the Vole and continued in Heaven Cent.

Isle of View

LovelornLoveworn Love LostPerplexed Prince Dolph, Xanth’s precocious shapeshifter, should be in love but isn’t. Nonetheless, he must chose between two fianc es Nada the uninterested and Electra the uninteresting or all three of them will suffer the most dire consequences. Luckily a convenient catastrophe has popped up to distract Dolph form his dilemma the foal napping of young Che Centaur by goblins. And the only one who knows where Che is is a nice but remarkably naive elflike gir named Jenny from the World of Two Moons. If anyone can save the missing centaur…

she sure can’t.

Question Quest

Youth is Wasted on the Young Being grown up is a drag…

or so thinks Lacuna, one of the michievous Castle Zombie twins. So she makes the Good Magician Grey an an offer he can’t refuse. Thirsty for a taste of the Elixir of Youth, she’ll help him outwit the evil Com Pewter if he’ll send her to Hell in a handbasket, no less to find Humphrey, the missing sorcerer. And while there, she’ll learn the True History of Xanth simplified and help rescue a blushing Rose from the demon XA/N…

with the help of a gorgon or two.

The Color of Her Panties

We See England, We See Xanth, We See Mels’s Underpanth In fact, Gwenny Goblin, Che Centaur and Jenny Elf are just about the only creatures on Xanth who have been spared the sight of Mela Merwoman’s undergarment preoccupied as they are with helping Gwenny beat out her awful half brother Gobble for chiefship of the goblin horde. But first they must master space and thyme…

and find the fabulous egg that sits between the Roc and the hard place. While Mela who would gladly relinquish her oft viewed undies for a new husband joins the Adult Conspiracy…

and quickly discovers the power of a perfect pair of panties!

Demons Don’t Dream

Beloved by millions of readers around the world, Piers Anthony’s Xanth novels are among the most popular fantasy adventures ever published. Demons Don’t Dream begins a thrilling new Xanth sequence, as a pair of young adventurers play for the highest stakes of all: the future of Xanth and of Earth as well!Drawn into Xanth by a harmless looking computer game, two young people find themselves competing for a precious prize: Dug, who is beguiled by a beautiful serpent princess, and Kim, who discovers her favorite fantasy realm has suddenly become frighteningly real. In a desperate race against time, dug and Kim battle their way across the wondrous, perilous land of Xanth, testing their courage against dozens of fearsome obstacles and their wits against a host of outrageous puns! But when treachery, danger, and deceit place Xanth itself in peril, Dug and Kim learn that some things are more important than winning or losing.A breathtaking, madcap quest filled with fearsome monsters and far fetched fun, Demons Don’t Dream is vintage Xanth, an unforgettable escapade from fantasy’s most imaginative storyteller.

Harpy Thyme

Gloha is the only creature of her kind in all the world of Xanth, the beautiful offspring of a chance mating between a harpy and a goblin. As she grew to womanhood, she wondered where where she would find the one true love with whom she could share her life. So, naturally, she sets off to find the Good Magician Humfrey to ask him for an Answer to the riddle of her heart’s desire. But hUmfrey, for mysterious reason of his own, propels her instead on a perilous quest in search of truth, friendship, and, just possibly, happiness.

Geis of the Gargoyle

Since Xanth began, the gargoyles of that magical place have been under a magical compulsion to protect the purity of the Swan Knee River which flows in to Xanth from dreary Mundania. But recently the pollution from the outside world has grown ever greater, and young Gary Gar, latest in a long line of gargoyle guardians, is finding it ever more difficult to fulfill his responsibilities. So Gary does what any sensible Xanth resident with a dire dilemma would do. He goes to see the Good Magician Humfrey, who sends him on a peculiar quest to transform himself into human shape, tutor a precocious child with more than her share of wild magical talents, and find a philter which can restore the river to its previous pristine state.

Roc and a Hard Place

Seeking a solution to a perplexing personal problem, the delectable Demoness Metria asks for help from the wise Magician Humfrey. But before he will help her, she must perform a perilous mission: Rove the length and breadth of Xanth in search of a suitable jury for the trial of Roxanne Roc a notably noble and virtuous bird charged with a most improbable offense. Exciting, exhilarating, and brim*ming with hilarious high jinks, Roc and a Hard Place is Xanth at its most enchanting.

Yon Ill Wind

An All New Xanth AdventureFirst Paperback Edition!A fickle flux in the fabric of space has allowed a horrendous hurricane to blast into Xanth, stirring up mischief and madness wherever she goes. Trapped in a preposterous form by a cosmic wager, the Demon XA/Nth must join forces with a vexatious vixen named Chlorine to save Xanth from this terrifying and tempestuous threat. Their companions on this haphazard quest are a hapless human family Jim and Karen Baldwin and their two teenaged sons, David and Sean gusted into Xanth from the mundane world beyond. Together they encounters a host of turbulent misadventures as they struggle to keep Xanth from being blown off the map forever.A brisk and breezy adventure in the grand Xanth tradition, Yon Ill Wind is sure to bring gales of laughter and excitement to Piers Anthony’s legion of loyal readers.

Faun & Games

Piers Anthony’s most exceptional Xanth adventure ever reveals wnodrous new worlds of mirth and magic!The miraculous and mirth filled land of Xanth holds many marvels. But now an extraordinary new aspect of this remarkable realm unfolds as young Forrest Faun’s quest takes him to a tiny planet hidden in the heart of Xanth. There, with a delightful ‘day mare’ as his constant companion, Forrest will find more marvels then he ever dreamed of. Packed with magic, mystery, and mirth, Faun & Games is the freshest and most exciting Xanth adventure in a month of Pundays!

Zombie Lover

Horrors and Hilarity Collide as a Vivacious Young Visitor to Xanth Faces a Fate Far Worse than Death. Breanna, a beautiful young newcomer to the enchanted land of Zanth, must deal with a distressing dilemma. She has unwittingly attracted the affections of King Xeth, ruler of Xanth’s Zombies, who yearns to make her Queen of the Undead! Her quest to preserve her innocence, and find her destiny, takes her on an exhilarating excursion packed with perils, puzzles, and piles of puns. Zombie Lover will provide a profusion of macabre merriment for Xanth’s many fans.

Xone of Contention

New York Times bestselling author of Zombie LoverA wild and wonderful new magical adventure that leads from Xanth to Earth and back again!A cataclysmic cloud hangs over the enchanted land of land of Xanth. Three courageous couples must venture into the O Xone, a cybernetic interface between Xanth and our own world, to rescue the enchanted realm from destruction.A xany new fantasy xaga from the Master of Merriment, Xone of Contention is chock filled with danger, excitement and xillions of laughs!After a year filled with harrowing adventures, all Breanna of the Black Wave and her newfound love Justin Tree want is a little time to get to know each other better, and explore the wonders of the enchanted land of Xanth. But their incipient idyll is soon shattered by a stunning discovery. A climatic catastrophe is causing a massive meltdown that threatens to inundate the ancient forests of Xanth. The only way to avert this dire disaster is to undertake a voyage into the distant mists of the past, to find the moment when this ghastly greenhouse effect began. And the only people who can safely make that journey are those unaffected by Xanth’s magic normal, ordinary humans from our own world. So Breanna and Justin turn for help to the Demon XA/Nth a.k.a. Nimby and his lovely consort Chlorine. Together, they devise a daring plan. Making use of the O Xone, a magical computer network that links the worlds of Xanth and Earth, Nimby and Chlorine make contact with Pia and Edsel, a young couple from Earth who are working on a Xanth game, and arrange to exchange bodies with them. But an unexpected surprise awaits them on their arrival. The Demon Earth has challenged the Demon Xanth to a deadly duel for the highest possible stakes dominion over both worlds. While Pia and Edsel range through the farthest reaches of time and space to save Xanth from destruction, Nimby must learn to live by the strange rules of our world, and defeat his ancient enemy without the benefit of his own awesome powers. Brim*ming with magic, merriment, laughter and love, Xone of Contention is a rousing new fantasy saga in the grand Xanth tradition.

The Dastard

Many malevolent menaces have imperiled the magical land of Xanth in its long and storied history. But none has been as despicably dangerous as The Dastard a craven miscreant who sold his soul to a detestable demon for the power to erase events. Now the entire future of Xanth is at the mercy of his every whim. Only a young dragon girl named Becka has the power to stop his devious deeds!Becka is a crossbreed the daughter of Draco Dragon and a lovely human woman who met, by chance, at a Love Spring. Now fourteen, Becka is beginning to wonder where in Xanth she belongs on the ground with her mother’s people, or flying the skies with her father’s kind. So she journeys to the Good Magician Humfrey to discover her True Purpose in life. Much to her astonishment and surprise, the Magician tells her that that a great Destiny awaits her one that will affect the future of all of Xanth.

Swell Foop

Someone or some thing has kidnapped the dreaded Demon Earth. If he isn’t found, the very fabric of our world will unravel, removing the Earth’s gravitational field, and, incidentally, that of the magical land of Xanth as well! To combat this dastardly deed, six bold adventurers must locate the mysterious object known as the Swell Foop, and wield it in a deadly cosmic contest against an awesome enemy. The twenty fifth exhilarating episode in Piers Anthony’s fabulous saga of Xanth, Swell Foop blends laughter and romance, wonder and danger, in one of the most intricate and intriguing tales in the history of the series. Swell Foop, the twenty fifth volume in Piers Anthony’s bestselling Xanth fantasy adventures, is one of the most intricate and intriguing tales in the history of the series.

Up in a Heaval

A Spot of Trouble

An innocent piece of Mundane Snail Mail has provoked the dreaded Demon Jupiter to hurl his Red Spot at the magical land of Xanth. As the dire Dot draws closer, the unwelcome ordeal of saving the enchanted realm falls to Umlaut, an unlikely lad with an unknown past and an uncertain future. With a handful of colorful companions at his side, Umlaut must unravel a high stakes intergalactic puzzle, uncover the secret of his mysterious past, and learn to understand the urgings of his own heart.

It might have been the merest chance that brought Umlaut to Castle Zombie that morning and launched him on a harrowing adventure. But in the magical land of Xanth, things are seldom left to chance, and adventures lurk around every corner.

An unassuming young man with a uncanny knack for attracting lovely young ladies and an uncommon talent for emulating anyone he wished, Umlaut was forced to flee a flock of overly friendly females by disguising himself as a Zombie girl. In his haste to find a hiding place, he found himself face to face with a dreadful dragon and feared he would soon meet his end. But in Xanth, things are seldom exactly as they seem, and he soon discovered that the dragon was really a sinuous female sea serpent named Sesame, with a gift similar to his own, who had become accidentally entrapped in the Castle’s dungeon.

When the two happen upon a packet of mail from Earth delivered by mischance to the Zombie King, they inadvertently set in motion a sinister scheme that could spell the end of Xanth. A letter they forward to the Demon Jupiter unexpectedly enrages him, causing him to send his own Red Spot hurtling toward Xanth. Soon everything is Up in a Heaval, for no one knows how to avert this interplanetary peril. Even the Good Magician Humfrey is baffled, for some strange force has obscured the future. In desperation, he instructs Umlaut and Sesame to deliver the remaining letters to their far flung recipients, in the faint hope that this may somehow stop the Spot.

As they set out on their appointed rounds, Umlaut and Sesame are soon joined by two feline friends, Jenny Elf’s companion, Sammy Cat, and a lovely, prescient creature named Claire Voyant who can sometimes see the future. Beguiled and bedeviled by the delicious Demoness Metria, who uses her shapely assets to distract him from his goal, Umlaut leads his allies on an unforgettable odyssey to the farthest reaches of the enchanted realm, from the submicroscopic Nth Moon of Ida, and the home of all dreams and nightmares, to the unmagical land of Euphoria, where he meets a sweet and sprightly young girl named Surprise who captures his heart. But before Umlaut can complete his quest and return to his beloved, he must unravel the unfathomable puzzle of his own existence, which is somehow inextricably entwined with the fate of Xanth.

A satisfyingly suspenseful tale filled with mystery, magic, and merriment, Up in a Heaval is exciting and entertaining fantasy adventure from the pen of a master storyteller.

Cube Route

When Clio, the Muse of History, sat down to pen the twenty eighth volume in the Chronicles of Xanth, she was stunned to discover it was already there! And, what was worse, it was totally unreadable, for the words on its pages were fuzzed beyond comprehension.

Vexed and bewildered, and more than a little concerned, Clio resolved to leave the quiet comfort of her study on the slopes of Mount Parnassus, and ask her old friend, the Good Magician Humfrey, to search a solution to her problem in his Book of Answers.

But, much to her consternation, Humfrey required her to perform a magical Service before she could acquire her Answer: to rescue Xanth’s dragons from the verge of extinction before the delicate balance of its wildlife was permanently thrown out of whack.

Her momentous mission lead her to a dangerous Dragon World hidden amongst the Moons of Ida, across a perilous landscape filled with wonder and danger, in search of the fabled Currant, a very rare red berry that might hold the secret she sought.

Along the way she acquired a fellowship of companions, including the brave and beautiful Becka Dragongirl, a pair of pocket dragons named Drew and Drusie, a charming young child called Ciriana whose destiny was somehow entwined with hers, and Sherlock, a sweet but homely man from Mundania who might just be a master magician himself.

Together they gradually began to unravel the momentous mystery of Xanth’s missing history. And Clio began to realize that Sherlock’s enchantments had begun to work their way into her heart.

Currant Events

When Clio, the Muse of History, sat down to pen the twenty eighth volume in the Chronicles of Xanth, she was stunned to discover it was already there! And, what was worse, it was totally unreadable, for the words on its pages were fuzzed beyond comprehension.

Vexed and bewildered, and more than a little concerned, Clio resolved to leave the quiet comfort of her study on the slopes of Mount Parnassus, and ask her old friend, the Good Magician Humfrey, to search a solution to her problem in his Book of Answers.

But, much to her consternation, Humfrey required her to perform a magical Service before she could acquire her Answer: to rescue Xanth’s dragons from the verge of extinction before the delicate balance of its wildlife was permanently thrown out of whack.

Her momentous mission lead her to a dangerous Dragon World hidden amongst the Moons of Ida, across a perilous landscape filled with wonder and danger, in search of the fabled Currant, a very rare red berry that might hold the secret she sought.

Along the way she acquired a fellowship of companions, including the brave and beautiful Becka Dragongirl, a pair of pocket dragons named Drew and Drusie, a charming young child called Ciriana whose destiny was somehow entwined with hers, and Sherlock, a sweet but homely man from Mundania who might just be a master magician himself.

Together they gradually began to unravel the momentous mystery of Xanth’s missing history. And Clio began to realize that Sherlock’s enchantments had begun to work their way into her heart.

Pet Peeve

A relentless horde of renegade robots has plunged the fate of Xanth in dire peril. All that stands between the enchanted land and destruction is a most unlikely hero, a moody, mild mannered Goblin named Goody, who must summon all of his courage and determination to overcome this abominable army of automatons.

Brim*ming with heart stopping adventure and heart warming delight, overflowing with wicked wit and wanton wordplay, Pet Peeve is Piers Anthony in rare form, an exceptional new chapter in the continuing chronicles of Xanth.

Stork Naked

In his 30th rollicking chronicle of the enchanted land of Xanth, Piers Anthony reveals unexplored new dimensions of his magical realm. Stork Naked tells the tale of Surprise Golem, an expectant mother who has just lost her brand new baby!For in Xanth, little ones are actually delivered by storks! And the Stork assigned to deliver Surprise’s eagerly awaited Bundle of Joy has inexplicably refused to surrender it, flying off instead through a hole in the fabric of reality. Now, to track down her offspring, Surprise must lead an ill assorted assemblage of confederates on a desperate quest through dozens of different Xanths. But sinister, unseen forces are determined to stop her. And in order to find her child, Surprise may have to lose her heart.

Air Apparent

When the Good Magician Humfrey’s son Hugo suddenly vanishes, his disappearance sets in motion a series of madcap misadventures that send a collection of colorful characters on a perilous pair of parallel quests. Among them are Debra, a pretty young girl beset by an obnoxious curse; Hugo’s beloved wife Wira, whose sightlessness is balanced by a talent for sensitivity, Happy and Fray, a pair of sprightly storm spirits; Nimbus, the Demon Xanth’s own son; and the mysterious outlaw known as the Random Factor. As they travel through some of the magical realm’s most astonishing locales, these unwitting adventurers discover they are key players in a grand drama whose origins reach back to the origins of time itself. Filled with exhilaration and excitement, ribaldry and romance, Air Apparent is a fabulous new fantasy saga from the lively imagination of master storyteller Piers Anthony.

Two to the Fifth

The future of Xanth is in frightful peril. A powerful magical bird named Ragna Roc has embarked on a campaign to become absolute ruler of that mystical realm. Those who swear loyalty to him are spared. The rest have simply disappeared.

So powerful are Ragna’s sorceries that even the Good Magician Humfrey dares not confront him directly. Instead he enlists Cyrus the Cyborg, a handsome half human playwright with little knowledge of the world, in a stealthy subterfuge. Cyrus must assemble a troupe of traveling players to attract Ragna s interest. And hidden in disguise among the bevy of beautiful young actresses are the young princesses, Melody, Harmony, and Rhythm, whose magics might just be a match for the evil bird.

But Ragna has planted a spy in the midst of the troupe, one who knows their deepest secrets, including the true nature of Cyrus s forbidden love for one of the young princesses. Only a mysterious child called Kadence, and a cryptic clue Two to the Fifth‘ may give the companions the edge they need to defeat Ragna s dictatorial dreams.

Brim*ming with passion and merriment, drama and deception, Piers Anthony s thirty second Xanth fantasy is a pun packed performance sure to provoke applause and ovations from the series myriad fans.

Jumper Cable

In the thirty third thrilling escapade in Piers Anthony’s rousing Xanth fantasy series, an adventurous arachnid named Jumper must assume human form to save the enchanted realm from a cosmic peril.

A cataclysmic battle between two all powerful Demons has severed a mystical connection that joins Xanth to our own world. The key to restoring it is hidden within a cryptic prophecy that Jumper discovers when he is suddenly transformed from spider to man. As he sets out to discern the prophecy’s meaning, he gathers about him a half dozen alluring damsels who do their best to help him solve the riddle while vying for his attentions.

But a seductive siren and her demonic consort have determined to use their wiles to lure Jumper and his lovely companions away from their urgent mission. In a madcap adventure that is alternately harrowing and hilarious, they soon discover that danger, deception, and even true love may be found where they least expect it.

In Jumper Cable, master storyteller Piers Anthony spins a wild and witty web of wonder that is sure to captivate fans of fantastic adventure everywhere!

Knot Gneiss

In the thirty third thrilling escapade in Piers Anthony’s rousing Xanth fantasy series, an adventurous arachnid named Jumper must assume human form to save the enchanted realm from a cosmic peril.

A cataclysmic battle between two all powerful Demons has severed a mystical connection that joins Xanth to our own world. The key to restoring it is hidden within a cryptic prophecy that Jumper discovers when he is suddenly transformed from spider to man. As he sets out to discern the prophecy’s meaning, he gathers about him a half dozen alluring damsels who do their best to help him solve the riddle while vying for his attentions.

But a seductive siren and her demonic consort have determined to use their wiles to lure Jumper and his lovely companions away from their urgent mission. In a madcap adventure that is alternately harrowing and hilarious, they soon discover that danger, deception, and even true love may be found where they least expect it.

In Jumper Cable, master storyteller Piers Anthony spins a wild and witty web of wonder that is sure to captivate fans of fantastic adventure everywhere!

Well-Tempered Clavicle

Picka Bones and his sister Joy nt are off in search of adventure with three creatures newly arrived from Mundania and not the sort of creatures you might expect! Join them in a madcap quest, in this 35th tale of the land of Xanth. Here we go ‘Adventuring’ in Xanth once more, meeting a horde of the familiar characters while running the gauntlet of a multitide of sins. Xanth remains a land of happy endings, however, and readers can expect the usual amount of enjoyment from this thirty fourth Xanth tale. Booklist on Knot Gneiss