Maya, a newborn honeybee, brims with curiosity about the world around her. From the time she is born, she is brought up to be a worker bee, but it is difficult for her to understand and follow the strict rules of the hive because of her individuality and strong desire for independence.

Having collected all the honey around the honeycomb, Maya decides to set out on an adventure to find a flower garden in order to collect more honey for the hive. Her intentions are noble, but because she leaves the hive without permission the Queen sends Maya's friend Willy to search for the little troublemaker. Willy joins Maya in her quest, and together, beyond the familiar hive, the two friends marvel at the sheer beauty that nature has to offer.

Through many experiences—sometimes enjoyable, sometimes terrible or sad—and encounters with various insects, Maya matures into a strong and wise honeybee.

(Source: Nippon Animation)

Based on the famous tale from The Thousand and One Arabian Nights, this story takes place more than 1200 years ago. The story's hero is the impish Sindbad, a mischievous boy full of curiosity, who one night sneaks into the royal palace to watch the acrobatic performances and learns that a wide world awaits beyond Baghdad.

Hearing of the travels of his uncle Captain Ali, Sindbad decides to become a sailor and travel around the world. Leaving behind a note to his father, young Sindbad boards Captain Ali`s ship and-accompanied by a myna called Sheila-sets out for the greatest adventure of his life.

(Source: AniDB)

Duke Fleed is a survivor of the Fleed Planet who is escaped to the Earth, onboard a mysterious "spaceship", where is raised by Dr. Umon as his adoptive son, and known as Daisuke Umon. Years after his arrival, he's faced with the threat of King Vega and his army, who want to conquer the Earth. With his friends Koji and Hikaru (and later his younger sister Maria Grace), Duke decides to fight back using his best weapon - the almighty Grendizer.

Nello Tarth is a poor but happy orphan who lives with his grandfather Jehan in a little village nearby Antwerp. Nello has a talent for drawing pictures and has been fascinated by it since he saw one of Rubens (a famous artist) pictures as a little boy. Helping Jehan with the daily milk delivery to Antwerp, Nello one day discovers Patrash, a working dog who has been mistreated and abandoned by his former owner. He treats the exhausted animal and after a little while a close and dependable friendship develops.

Alois Cojez, the daughter of the richest and hence most influential man in Blacken Village, is Nellos best friend. When Nello decides to become an artist he has to experience firsthand the ignorance and cruelty of the villagers. Especially Alois father thinks of him as a slacker who cannot earn his living by drawing pictures. Nontheless Nello perseveres and never gives up to achieve his dream and to win their appreciation and respect while strenuously struggling with his poverty.

(Source: Anime News Network)

After a slumber of 12 millennia, the Demon Empire returns to seize control of the Earth. Reideen, the giant robot-like protector of the lost continent of Mu, senses the evil presence and awakens within its golden pyramid, revealing to young Japanese boy Akira Hibiki that he is the one descendant of the ancient Mu people who must help Reideen save Earth.

He was assisted by his friends, token girl Mari Sakurano (daughter of a scientist fighting the Demon Empire) and several members of his high school soccer team.

(Source: AniDB)

Dr. Kieta, the inventor of a time-travel machine, is lost on a test run of his machine to the prehistoric past. When the time-space craft returns to the present, his young assistants are surprised to find only a parrot in the cockpit. In their hurry to find the missing scientist before it is too late, the youngsters set out on a time-space hunt without any clear destination.

(Source: Official Site)

Hiroshi Shiba is an outstanding car racer whose father is assassinated upon the discovery of the Bronze Bell from an ancient civilization. This Bronze Bell is coveted by Queen Himika who comes from that ancient era; the Yamatai Kingdom, and whose ambitions are to seize the Bell and dominate earth.

Hiroshi is left with a few items from his father which would enable him to morph into a full sized mecha warrior, the Steel Jeeg. With these abilities and the help of his father's brain implanted in a computer and his assistance Miwa "Micchi" Uzuki, they set out to neutralize Himika's plans of world dominion.

(Source: MAL)

The story is set in Paris, on the night before the France Revolution. The civilians have been suffering under the tyrannical rule of Louis, the sixteenth. In order to release the people from their suffering, Simone, a young girl whose parents were killed by the aristocrats, decides to challenge the corrupted aristocrats. Covering her face with a red mask and leaving a red carnation as a mark of her presence, Simone is La Seine no Hoshi.

(Source: Anime News Network)

Takes place after the final defeat of the Dinosaur Empire and the death of Musashi Tomoe in the original Getter Robo series.

Dr. Saotome, creator of Getter Robo, fears that the peace the Getter Robo team has won will be short lived and that an even greater enemies would appear. Dr. Saotome's fears are justified when the militaristic Hyakki (or "Hundred demons") Empire appears, but Dr. Saotome is prepared with the creation of an even more powerful Getter Robo, Getter Robo G and a new Getter Robo base. Also with Musashi Tomoe dead, Dr. Saotome needs a third pilot which he finds in baseball player Benkei Kuruma.

(Source: Wikipedia)

Tekkaman is just an average bright boy in his everyday life. However, modern science can turn him into a mighty space warrior. This becomes a reality when aggressive aliens come from space to invade our planet. Armed with a space lance, Tekkaman gallantly goes into action against the grotesque space creatures. During his battles he encounters a mysterious young man from another planet who helps him out whenever he is in danger.

(Source: Absoluteanime)

This is the tale of Kum Kum, a kind of prehistoric "Dennis the Menace" who lived long ago. He and his family and friends belonged to a tribe of Mountain People who lived and hunted and farmed high in the hills near the Fire Mountain.

This is a comedy series earmarked by infectious chibi-cuteness mixed with the pathos of every-day prehistoric life. The storylines revolves around the adventures of Kum Kum (pronounced coom-coom) and his young friends. Kum Kum has a real knack for getting himself (and the other kids) in trouble and that's what makes the series fun!

(Source: kumkum.8thman.com)

The series presents the adventures of Zoum, a white dolphin and his friends, two children who live with their sailor uncle. The cast includes several animals including a mynah bird (who understands the dolphin language in addition to the language of the other animals and the humans on the island and acts as a translator), a koala, and a sloth.

During their adventures, Zoum meets a beautiful female dolphin, called Za-za-zoom in the English version, with whom he has a baby.

(Source: Wikipedia)

Barbapapa and his family can turn into anything they want. Each member of the family has his or her own personality. Very good show for the youngest children as each episode deals with another problem they will recognise in a way that is 'morally correct'.

(Source: Anime News Network)

Marina, the most beautiful mermaid in the royal Merman family, is curious about the human world. One day, she sees a handsome prince on a boat. Suddenly, a storm comes up, throwing him into the sea. Marina saves her handsome prince and guides him to the shore. Marina falls deeply in love and desperately wants to become a human. Despite the hazards, she is willing to risk it all for love.

(Source: Anime News Network)

The pilot movie of Grendizer. It is about Duke Fleed, a fugitive of the planet fleed, who was kicked out of his planet by the Armies of Vega. Fleed and the daughter of the king of Vega were in love before the war between their planets. The armies of Vega continue their fight with Duke Fleed.

(Source: Anime News Network)

UFOs and aliens from beyond the stars are common themes in media, entertainment, and other forms of science fiction; however, many individuals have sworn they have seen UFOs and have been abducted in real life! Sit back and watch as the makers of Mazinger take you on a journey through the history of UFO lore. Could it be that UFOs are real and that aliens watch us from afar? [from anime-planet]

In Crayon Angel, Tanaami recalls his childhood memories of wartime Japan during the Second World War. The animation mixes wartime footage, family photographs and pop imagery, much of which is seen through fusuma-like grids that cut apart the image and distance it from the viewer. The soundtrack includes a haunting heartbeat, sounds of sirens and Robert Plant’s moans. The title refers to a campaign ran during the war by a confectionary company that asked children to submit crayon drawings of their brand icon, an angel, which had a profound emotional impact on Tanaami as a child.

(Source: Collaborative Cataloging Japan)

Psychedelic –and at times sinister– music by Shinpei Kikuchi accompanies a disorienting display of reproduced imagery taken from magazines and posters of sunny beaches and bikini models. Tanaami made positive and negative reprographic prints of these images onto transparent cel sheets, placed them on top of one another, and twisted them in different directions to create a moiré effect. Speaking on the work, Tanaami explained his paradise only exists in the world of reproduction.

(Source: Collaborative Cataloging Japan)