This article is about the Japanese anime series. For the CGI series, see Maya the Bee (TV series). For the novel (and the character), see Maya the Bee.

Maya the Honey BeeFile:Maya the Honey Bee.jpg

Japanese DVD cover.

みつばちマーヤの冒険

(Mitsubachi Māya no Bōken)GenreComedy, Adventure Anime television seriesDirected byMasahiro Endō

Hiroshi SaitōProduced byYoshihiro ŌbaWritten byNiisan TakahashiMusic byTakashi Ogaki, Karel Svoboda (title song)StudioNippon AnimationOriginal networkNET (now TV Asahi)English network

SABC

Original run 1 April 1975 – 20 April 1976Episodes52 Anime television seriesThe New Adventures of Maya the Honey BeeProduced bySōjirō MasukoStudioWako Productions, Apollo Film WienOriginal networkZDF, TV Osaka, TV TokyoOriginal run 1 September 1979 – 13 September 1980Episodes52

Maya the Honey Bee (Japanese: みつばちマーヤの冒険 Hepburn: Mitsubachi Māya no Bōken lit. "The Adventures of Maya the Honey Bee", German: Die Biene Maja, Spanish: La abeja Maya, French: Maya L'abeille, Italian: L'ape Maia) is an anime television series produced first by Zuiyo Enterprises[5] (which later became Nippon Animation) and Asahi Broadcasting Corporation of Osaka. The series consisted of 52 episodes and was originally telecast from April 1, 1975 to April 20, 1976 on the NET (now TV Asahi) network, with which ABC (not to be confused with the Tokyo-based TV Asahi) is affiliated. Based on the classic children's book The Adventures of Maya the Bee by Waldemar Bonsels, the anime series has become extremely popular in Europe and has been rebroadcast in countries and languages all around the world since its premiere. A film edited from the first few episodes was released on December 15, 1977.[6]

Two English-dubbed versions of the series exist, a South African version produced by Sonovision for the South African Broadcasting Corporation (SABC),[7] using a translated version of the theme tune used for the German dub, and featuring English South African accents for the characters; and a United States version with an entirely new theme tune, and a Canadian voice cast, produced by Saban Entertainment, which was broadcast from January 1, 1990 to December 31, 1992 on the children's television channel Nickelodeon. Maya the Bee aired alongside other juvenile-targeted anime such as Adventures of the Little Koala, Noozles and The Littl' Bits as part of Nickelodeon's Nick Jr. block of programming for young children. 65 episodes were dubbed.[8]

A second Maya the Bee series, Shin Mitsubachi Māya no Bōken (新みつばちマーヤの冒険, The New Adventures of Maya the Honey Bee), was a co-production made in 1979 by Wako Productions and Austrian/German Apollo Film, Wien. The second series first premiered in Germany (ZDF) from September 1979 to September 1980. The very different and cartoon-like second series, which lasted for 52 episodes, was not very popular and did not premiere in Japan until 12 October 1982, on TV Osaka, and aired through 27 September 1983.[9]

Story[]

The story centres on Maya, an inquisitive, adventurous and somewhat flighty young honeybee, and her adventures in the forest around her. Maya is born in a bee hive during internal unrest: the hive is dividing itself into two new colonies. Maya is raised by her teacher, Mrs. Cassandra. Despite Mrs. Cassandra's warnings, Maya wants to explore the wide world and commits the unforgivable crime of leaving the hive. During her adventures, Maya, now in exile, befriends other insects and braves dangers with them.

In the last two episodes of the first series, Maya is taken prisoner by hornets, the bees' sworn enemies. Prisoner of the hornets, Maya learns of a hornet plan to attack her native hive. Maya is faced with the decision to either return to hive and suffer her due punishment, saving the hive, or leaving the plan unannounced, saving herself but destroying the hive. As may be expected, Maya, after severe pondering, makes the decision to return. In the hive, she announces the coming attack and is, totally unexpectedly, pardoned. The forewarned bees triumph over the hornet attack force. Maya, now a heroine of the hive, becomes a teacher, like Mrs. Cassandra and shares her experiences and wisdom with the future generation.

Characters[]

Maya (マーヤ, Māya)

Voiced by: Michiko Nomura (1975), Runa Akiyama (1982) (Japanese), Linda Stewart (South Africa),[10] Pauline Little (Saban) (English)

The main character of the story, an inquisitive, adventurous and somewhat flighty young honeybee.

Willy (ウイリー, Uirī)

Voiced by: Masako Nozawa (1975 and 1982 versions) (Japanese), Richard Dumont (Saban) (English)

A young drone (male bee) who is Maya's best friend. He is always tired, hungry, skeptical, also somewhat of a coward but generally good-natured. Prone to jealousy when Maya's attentions turn to others. Often reluctantly dragged into adventures by Maya. He is an original character in the anime.

Flip (フィリップ, Firippu, also "Philip")

Voiced by: Ichiro Nagai (1975), Ritsuo Sawa (1982) (Japanese), A.J. Henderson (Saban) (English)

A wise, top-hatted grasshopper, a good friend of Maya and Willy.

Miss Cassandra (カッサンドラ先生, Kassandora-sensei)

Voiced by: Miyoko Asō (1975), Reiko Yamada (1982) (Japanese), Jane Woods (Saban) (English)

Maya's teacher and chief authority figure (mostly in the first animated series).

Staff[]

Japanese version[]

Production: Zuiyo Eizo then Nippon Animation

Executive producer: Kōichi Motohashi

Series directors: Hiroshi Saitō, Mitsuo Kaminashi, Seiji Endō

Script: Hikaru Sasa, Hitoshi Kanazawa

Screenplay: Fumi Takahashi

Character Designs: Susumu Shiraume

Animation Directors: Susumu Shiraume, Takao Ogawa, Hayao Nobe

Sound: Yasuhiro Koyama

Theme songs (performed by Chīta and the Honey Bee Choir, words and music by Seizō Ise):

OP -

"Mitsubachi Māya no Bōken" (みつばちマーヤの冒険, "The Adventures of Maya the Honey Bee")

ED

"Oyasumi Māya" (おやすみマーヤ, "Good Night, Maya")

"Shinju-iro no Warutsu" (真珠色のワルツ, "The Pearl-Colored Waltz") performed by Yōko Maekawa

American version[]

Executive producer: Haim Saban

Supervising producer: Winston Richard

Writer: Tim Reid

Voice Direction: Tim Reid, Kathleen Fee

Associate producer: Eric S. Rollman

Executive in charge of production: Jerald E. Bergh

Music by: Haim Saban and Shuki Levy

Different languages[]

Maya the Honey Bee was 104 episodes TV show. Originally aired on Japanese TV in 1975, the anime has been dubbed into other 10,000 different languages[11] and screened on television in various territories, including China, South Korea, North Korea, Australia, Austria, Germany, Ireland, the United States, South Africa, Peru, Brazil, Portugal, Canada, Quebec, Belgium, the Netherlands, the United Kingdom, Iceland, Indonesia, Malaysia, Saudi Arabia, France, Croatia, Chile, Estonia, Israel, Italy, Thailand, Vietnam, Pakistan, Nepal, Sri Lanka, Latvia, Lithuania, India, Greece, Denmark, Norway, Belarus, Catalonia, Scotland, Wales, Japan, Albania, Bulgaria, Czech Republic, Slovenia, North Macedonia, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Slovakia, Spain, Fiji, Jordan, Barbados, Serbia, Finland, Sweden, Poland, Ecuador, Hungary, Romania, Russia, Turkey, Faroe Islands, Kazakhstan, Turkmenistan, Alaska, Kirbati, Solomon Islands, Georgia, Armenia, Azerbaijan, Tajikistan, Malta, Abkhazia, Kurdistan, New Zealand, Kenya, Egypt, Nigeria, Argentina, Mexico, Latin America, Hawaii, Alaska, East Turkestan, Kyrgyzstan, Bangladesh, Basque Country, Iraq, Cambodia, Chad, Tunisia, Zimbabwe, Guatemala, Afghanistan, Algeria, Switzerland, Luxembourg, Liechtenstein, Papua New Guinea, Nauru, Marshall Islands, Guam, Cape Verde, Burundi, Angola, Republic of the Congo, Camaros, Federated States of Micronesia, Djibouti, Gabon, Eswatini, Lesotho, Cameroon, Mozambique, Guinea-Bissau, Equatorial Guinea, Burkina Faso, Gabon, Haiti, Ivory Coast, Mali, Niger, Rwanda, Senegal, Seychelles, Togo, Guinea, Central African Republic, Costa Rica, Panama, Paraguay, Nicaragua, Honduras, Cuba, El Salvador, Puerto Rico, Gibraltar, Vatican City, San Marino, Mauritania, Mauritius, Zanzibar, Somaliland, United Arab Emirates, Qatar, Brunei, Bahrain, Benin, Botswana, Philippines, East Timor, Madagascar, Yemen, Moldova, Montenegro, Cyprus, Taiwan, Singapore, Maldives, Bhutan, Bolivia, Oman, Anguilla, Aruba, Bahamas, Belize, Bermuda, Democratic Republic of the Congo, Zambia, Tanzania, Antigua and Barbuda, Samoa, Tonga, Vanuatu, Palau, Laos, Myanmar (Burma), Uruguay, Colombia, Ethiopia, Swabia, Syria, Morocco, Macau, Hong Kong, Somalia, Karakalpakstan, Tatarstan, Crimea, Bashkortostan, North Ossetia–Alania, Chechnya, Kabardino-Balkaria, Ingushetia, Dagestan, Adygea, Karelia, Kalmykia, Chuvashia, Buryatia, Altai, Khakassia, Tuva, Udmurtia, Mordovia, Komi, Sakha, Mari El, Karachay-Cherkessia, Greenland, Kosovo, Vojvodina, Brittany, Cornwall, São Tomé and Príncipe, Ukraine, Uzbekistan, Mongolia, Eritrea, Lebanon (as Zena) and Iran (as Nikoo (نیکو)). Maya the Bee in 10,000 languages, including English, German, Latin Spanish, European Spanish, European French, Quebec French, Italian, Brazilian Portuguese, European Portuguese, Polish, Japanese, Chinese, Korean, Russian, Bulgarian, Czech, Slovak, Slovenian, Hungarian, Dutch, Croatian, Serbian, Uyghur, Manx, Danish, Norwegian, Finnish, Swedish, Indonesian, Malay, Catalan, Basque, Macedonian, Thai, Turkish, Hindi, Icelandic, Greek, Estonian, Latvian, Lithuanian, Zulu, Xhosa, Azerbaijani, Asturian, Sardinian, Flemish, Valencian, Urdu, Cantonese, Arabic, Persian, Hebrew, Kara-Kalpak, Bengali, Gujarati, Kannada, Malayalam, Oriya, Punjabi, Tamil, Telugu, Marathi, Nepali, Newari, Sanskrit, Egyptian Arabic, Santali, Manipuri, Yoruba, Yiddish, Ukrainian, Vietnamese, Romanian, Albanian, Putonghua, Cantonese, Amharic, Tibetan, Sinhala, Swiss German, Khmer, Lao, Burmese, Ido, Interlingua, Esperanto, Kongo, Inuktitut, Inupiaq, Argentinian Spanish, Welsh, Scottish Gaelic, Breton, Bavarian, Bosnian, Norfuk / Pitkern, Lak, Church Slavic, Fijian, Hmong, Belarusian, Belarusian (Taraškievica), Corsican, Gagauz, Ingush, Aramaic, Syriac, Swahili, Haitian Creole, Kyrgyz, Kazakh, Turkmen, Crimean Tatar, Quechua, Colognian, Balinese, Kikuyu, Gilaki, Divehi, Neapolitan, Novial, Lojban and many others. The Japanese TV series was preceded by Tokyo Kodomo Club's musical play based on the short story, presented as Mitsubachi Māya ("Maya the Honey Bee"), distributed on a LP album.

Home video[]

Maya the Bee home video releases various territories. Maya the Bee from South African dub home videos for VHS, DVDs, Blu-rays, Laserdiscs, Betamax, VCDs and CEDs releases by United States, United Kingdom, Canada, Ireland, Australia and New Zealand. Several episodes of Saban's dub were released on VHS by Video Treasures in the United States and HGV Video Productions in Canada under the Saban Video label.[12][13][14]

References[]

[]

Maya the Bee - Nippon Animation Official Site

Maya the Bee (anime) at Anime News Network's Encyclopedia

Maya the Honey Bee at the Internet Movie Database

Template:Maya the Bee Template:Nippon Animation