Maya the Bee (Die Biene Maja) is a 1975 anime by Nippon Animation that is an animated adaptation of the German children's story The Adventures of Maya the Bee by Waldemar Bonsels. The anime focuses on a friendly female bee who learns about life in the meadow and other facts about insects. In the late 1980s, an American-Canadian dub was created by Saban Productions and aired on Nick Jr., which is Nickelodeon's morning-afternoon children's block.

The dub also had three VHS releases, which were issued by Video Treasures in the United States and HGV Video Productions in Canada under the Saban Video label.[1][2][3]

The Saban dub is notable for having a brand new music score and theme song for the anime compared to the European and Japanese versions of the anime.

However, the show stopped airing on Nick Jr. in 1992. The Saban dub only dubbed 65 out of 104 episodes of the entire series. Today only a few episodes of the Saban Dub can be found online since most of the episodes were recorded during the shows run on Nick Jr. in the early '90s. Saban's license for the dub expired on December 30th, 1999.[4]

As of 2013, the only notable English dub of the series that is easier to be found actually predates the Saban dub since the characters were voiced by unknown South African voice actors and came out in the 1980s.

On May 16, 2022, the second VHS tape, "Ants, Ants and More Ants!" was uploaded to Internet Archive. This tape contained the episodes "Maya and the Ants", "The Ant Hill", and "An Ant for a Day".[5] On June 24th, 2022, "An Ant for a Day" along with an additional 51 episodes of the dub were uploaded onto the Internet Archive. However, some episodes are incomplete, those being "Something's Burning", "Max the Earthworm", "Maya the Giantess", "Mouse in a Bottle", and "A Windy Adventure".[6] While some like "Mouse in a Bottle" and "A Windy Adventure" are only missing small portions, other episodes like "Something's Burning" only exist in such small portions, this one only surviving in the form of a 3-minute clip.

Gallery