It's been more than 13 years since iconic romance movie Love Actually hit the screens and the cast have reunited for a Comic Relief sketch.

64-year-old Liam Neeson, [Daniel] was pictured with his onscreen stepson Thomas Brodie-Sangster [Sam], who is now 26, filming in London's Southbank in a bid to help raise money for the charity.

Love Actually follows the lives of eight very different couples in dealing with their love lives in various loosely interrelated tales all set during a frantic month before Christmas in London.

Scroll down for video

It has a star-studded cast list with the likes of Keira Knightley, Andrew Lincoln, Emma Thompson, Bill Nighy, January Jones, Colin Firth and Kris Marshall all involved.

In the heartwarming tale, Thomas's character Sam runs through the airport to tell his schoolgirl crush he loves her during the film's big finale.

His character, grieving the loss of his mother, broke hearts in that famous bench scene when he reveals he is suffering from the 'total agony of being in love' with Joanna, [Olivia Olsen], following the death of his mother.

Thomas, now 26, now looks worlds apart from his former self, while Liam appeared to not have aged a day. Sporting a moustache and a bomber jacket, Thomas had a big smile on his face as the pair got to work.

The star is now well known for playing Jojen Reed in Game Of Thrones - he had a recurring role in the HBO series, as a young heir tasked with helping to protect Bran Stark.

He also stars in the hit sci-fi adaptation Maze Runner, the third and final instalment of which is due to hit cinemas in 2018.

Meanwhile, Neeson was tragically haunted by his role as a widower in Love Actually when his wife Natasha Richardson passed away after a freak ski accident in 2009 aged just 45.

In the movie, his character was left widowed was left devastated after losing his wife prematurely and being left to bring up his young stepson, Sam.

Similarly to Daniel, Neeson was left as a single parent, bringing up his two sons with Natasha, Micheál, 21, and Daniel.

Speaking about his late wife's death, he described the moment he turned off Natasha's life support to Anderson Cooper on 60 Minutes.

He said: 'She was on life support. I went in to her and I told her I loved her, said "Sweetie, you're not coming back from this, you've banged your head.

'She and I had made a pact. If any of us got into a vegetative state we’d pull the plug. So when I saw her and saw all these tubes and stuff that was my immediate thought, "OK, these tubes have to go. She’s gone".'

In 2014, Neeson added in an interview with Loaded magazine: 'Her death was never real. It still kind of isn't.

'There's periods now when I hear the door opening, especially the first couple of years... anytime I hear that door opening, I still think I'm going to hear her.

'It hits you. It’s like a wave. You just get this profound feeling of instability. The earth isn’t stable any more and then it passes and it becomes more infrequent, but I still get it sometimes.'

Meanwhile, Olivia was 11 when she starred as the adorable schoolgirl Joanna, who stole her classmate Sam's heart - and stunned viewers with her powerful rendition of Mariah Carey's All I Want for Christmas is You.

Now 24, the LA-based actress and singer is part of the cast behind two animated series - the Cartoon Network's Adventure Time, in which she voices Marceline the Vampire Queen, and Disney's Phineas and Ferb, in which she voices Vanessa Doofenshmirtz.

Olivia also regularly posts her own music on her YouTube channel, which has over 20,000 subscribers, and in 2013 she released her debut EP entitled Beauty Is Chaos.

Richard Curtis' partner, the original film's screenwriter Emma Freud has been busy tweeting updates from the set as well as asking fans for their plot suggestions.

'Script for #rednosedayactually still being written. Any story developments you'd like to see? ideas welcome. won't air til @rednoseday,' she tweeted on Wednesday, with hundreds of fans sending the writer their ideas.

Many were keen to see a tribute to the late actor Alan Rickman, who died last year. The acclaimed actor played Emma Thompson's husband Harry in the film, who soon had his eye on his secretary Mia.

The sighting comes after director Richard Curtis has revealed he was penning a sequel of the charming romantic comedy especially for Comic Relief.

The original tale will revisit the characters from the hit British movie and Richard revealed that he thoroughly enjoyed working on the script.

He said: 'Over the years, I've enjoyed doing Red Nose Day specials of TV things I've worked on - Blackadder, The Vicar of Dibley and Mr Bean.

'It seemed like a fun idea this year to do a special sketch based one of my films, since Red Nose Day is now in both the UK and America.

'I would never have dreamt of writing a sequel to Love Actually, but I thought it might be fun to do 10 minutes to see what everyone is now up to.

'Who has aged best? - I guess that's the big question... or is it so obviously Liam?'

Richard added that he was thrilled that so many of the big stars from the movie were available to shoot the mini-movie.

He added: 'We've been delighted and grateful that so many of the cast are around and able to take part - and it'll certainly be a nostalgic moment getting back together and recreating their characters 14 years later.

'We hope to make something that'll be fun...

'...Very much in the spirit of the original film and of Red Nose Day - and which we hope will help bring lots of viewers and cash to the Red Nose Day shows.'

Curtis spoke to the Daily Beast in 2013 about why he felt the film had done so well.

He said: 'The film has grown in popularity. I don’t remember feeling it was that beloved when it came out! There was a muddle of motivations.

I certainly knew what I was doing in the romance department by the time I did the Bridget Jones films and Notting Hill. Because I was so well versed in those, I started to think of other stories—the Colin Firth one and the Hugh Grant one, which I conceived as two separate whole films I could write.

'Then I decided I didn’t want to do that, and realized that a huge number of films I loved were multi-story films, like Short Cuts, Nashville, Smoke, and a lot of Woody Allen’s movies during his middle-period that have a lot of different storylines.

Red Nose Day Actually will air as a part of BBC One's Red Nose Day coverage on March 24 and on March 25 in the US on NBC