Liam Neeson "fell in love" during his time in Australia recently, but it wasn't to be.

The Love Actually actor, 68, resided in Melbourne for several months back in 2020, while filming the action movie Blacklight.

Liam - who lost his wife Natasha Richardson in 2009 - has alluded to a mysterious romantic entanglement taking place, despite the city being in stage-four Covid lockdown at the time.

Sunrise hosts David 'Kochie' Koch and Natalie Barr on Monday, this Irish star said: "I loved Melbourne. I loved our Australian crew, they are fantastic workers."

"Every department was superb. They were their own people, do you know what I mean? They had a great sense of humour."

Cracking a cheeky smile, the dad-of-two confessed: "I made a couple of pals... I fell in love, but she was taken."

Picking up on Liam's revealing comment about his private life, TV presenters David and Natalie were clearly "intrigued".

Seven Network's breakfast television hosts even asked viewers for help identifying the mystery woman who caught Liam's eye.

"If you know the lady involved, go to the Facebook page. Give us some hints!" David told those watching at home on Monday.

Liam has yet to embark on a serious or public relationship since the death of his late wife, Natashia Richardson.

In 2009, The Parent Trap actress sadly passed away at the age of 45 from an epidural hematoma (bleeding around the brain) two days after hitting her head during a beginner's skiing lesson in Quebec, Canada.

Speaking during an an interview five years on from her death, Liam opened up about life without his late wife.

"Her death was never real. It still kind of isn't," he heartbreaking admitted to Loaded magazine.

"There's periods now when I hear the door opening, especially the first couple of years... anytime I hear that door opening, I still think I'm going to hear her."

Liam and Natasha while performing in a revival of the play Anna Christie on Broadway in 1993.

The happy couple tied the knot the following year and went on to welcome sons Micheál and Daniel into the world.

Since the mum-of-two's heartbreaking death, Liam has kept a relatively low profile when it comes to new romances.

The Batman Begins actor was said to have enjoyed a relationship with PR executive Freya St Johnston, but their romance reportedly came to an end in 2014.

In 2016, during an interview with the Irish Sunday Independent, Liam opened up about a budding relationship with an "incredibly famous" woman.

Shielding her identify over fears he'd "embarrass her", the Hollywood star discussed their upcoming Valentine's Day plans.

"I'll have to do my best for her. It's amazing how far a simple bunch of freshly picked flowers will go in a lady's life," he confessed to the publication.

Do you have a story to sell? Get in touch with us at webcelebs@trinitymirror.com or call us direct 0207 29 33033.