In order to save their four-year marriage, Leon Lai (黎明) reportedly lavished his wife, Gaile Lok (樂基兒) with a $1.30 million HKD yacht on her 32nd birthday. At a promotional event, Gaile admitted the extravagant gift but replied coldly, “The beginning of autumn is rather cold. I like swimming and yachting but I have not been out to sea lately.”

Leon and Gaile’s marriage is speculated to be shaky after Gaile filed for immigration papers for her beloved dog, leading to suspicions that she intends to reside in the United States. Subsequently, Leon also resigned as the Director from the couple’s joint company.

Despite their thirteen-year gap, Gaile and Leon got married four years ago at the height of the passion in their relationship. It was understood that their relationship has recently lost its spark, in which Gaile found it to be lacking freshness.

Leon Lai Tries to Salvage Marriage?

During winter, Gaile has a habit of taking a break from work to visit her family in the United States. This year, Gaile advanced her vacation time to travel with her family for a few months. Leon reportedly had called Gaile long distance to mend their relationship.

To please his wife, Leon allegedly spent $3.65 million on a luxurious car and a yacht, wishing to spring a surprise on Gaile when she was back from her vacation. However, Gaile allegedly ignored the gifts.

Last month, Leon set aside time with Gaile to try out the new yacht. After waiting for an hour, there was still no sign of Gaile. An inside source revealed, “Leon spent a lot of money on the yacht and hoped to win Gaile back. However, Gaile was indifferent about it. When the new yacht arrived, Leon asked Gaile out and wanted to surprise her, but she did not turn up. She did not even inform him by calling!”

Leon reportedly headed to the sea with his assistant after Gaile did not appear. According to the source, Leon had also asked Gaile out several times, but was always given the cold shoulder.

This article is written by Stella for JayneStars.com.

Note: This article is written for JayneStars.com. DO NOT re-post this article on any other websites. No part of this article may be copied, reproduced, rearranged, redistributed, modified by any means or in any form whatsoever without prior written permission. You may use the content online and for your non-commercial, personal use only. Copying these materials for anything other than your personal use is a violation of copyright laws.

Should you wish to share this article, we recommend that you: (i) link directly to the article at JayneStars.com on your website; or (ii) share this article link via social media sites such as Facebook and Twitter.