Leon Lai (黎明) and Gaile Lok (樂基兒) officially announced the end of their marriage on October 3. After seven years together, including four years of marriage, the couple’s once passionate relationship fizzled. The couple’s joint statement cited “differences in their philosophy in life” as the reason for separation. Leon Lai’s manager denied that there was the presence of a third party leading to the couple’s divorce.

In 2005, Leon Lai fell passionately in love with model, Gaile Lok, despite his reserved personality and her lively disposition. In 2008, the pair got secretly got married in Las Vegas, in which their marriage was exposed by the Hong Kong media one year later. Since July 2011, divorce rumors were rampant. In April 2012, Leon reportedly attempted to salvage their four-year marriage by bestowing $100 million HKD in gifts to Gaile.

With the media’s speculations continuing over the reason for the couple’s fizzled relationship, including citing Gaile falling for another man, 45-year-old Leon and 32-year-old Gaile issued a joint statement on October 3 clarifying the reason for the end of their marriage.

Below are the full contents of their press statement:

Paciwood Music & Entertainment Limited, on behalf of our artists, Ms. Gaile Lok and Mr. Leon Lai, announce to the public that although they have spent a lot of beautiful moments together and still care for each other, they have serious differences in their philosophies of life. After careful consideration, both parties decided to officially break up. During this difficult time for the two of them, hopefully the public will give them some personal space, allowing them to quickly adapt to their new lives and remain focused on work. On behalf of Ms. Lok and Mr. Lai, we express our heartfelt thanks to the media for their support and love.

Source: ihktv.com

Note: This article is written for JayneStars.com. DO NOT re-post this article on any other websites. No part of this article may be copied, reproduced, rearranged, redistributed, modified by any means or in any form whatsoever without prior written permission. You may use the content online and for your non-commercial, personal use only. Copying these materials for anything other than your personal use is a violation of copyright laws.

Should you wish to share this article, we recommend that you: (i) link directly to the article at JayneStars.com on your website; or (ii) share this article link via social media sites such as Facebook and Twitter.