Norma Fox Mazer

There are, and have been, many great authors. One of my favorite authors is Norma Fox Mazer. I have had a few teachers recommend this author to me, so I decided to read her books. They are entertaining. I like Norma's books because she writes about things that happen in people's lives, such as divorce and boy/girl problems. Her books are exciting, and make you want to keep reading. I have read a couple of books by Norma, including Good Night, Maman. It is historical fiction, and about a Jewish girl who is taken from her mother, and travels to Fort Ontario in Oswego, New York. It is an excellent book because it is fun to read about Oswego's past. Another book I am reading is A, My Name is Ami, which is enjoyable so far. Norma is a great author, and writes about realistic, but exciting subjects.

Norma Fox Mazer is an interesting person. She was born on May 15, 1931 in New York City. Her family was Jewish, but as an adult she does not follow the Jewish religion. Norma grew up in Glen Falls, New York, and lived at the foothills of the Adirondack Mountains. Norma had a good childhood; she went to school, loved to read, and played the violin, then the bass fiddle, and finally the clarinet. She also had a very vivid imagination.

Norma's family life was supportive. She had a mother, Jean (Garlen) Fox, a father, Michael Fox, and three sisters. Norma was the middle child. Norma's dad was a route deliverer, delivering milk, bread, and other household items. Her mom was a saleslady. Farther up the family tree were Norma's grandparents. They were Jewish immigrants from Poland, and owned a bakery. Norma remembers doing many things with her family, such as going to the candy store, the family listening to their mother tell stories, the rhubarb that the family grew outside, and the cold winters with King of the Hill and skating. Norma's family lived in many different apartments, but all the moving did not ruin her education.

Norma Fox, which was her maiden name, had a good education. As a child, she went to elementary school.