Synopsis

In preparation for this publication, author Arthea J.S. Reed spent time with Norma Fox Mazer, the widely acclaimed young adult novelist, who works with not only her husband, but her daughter as well. The book explores the facets of Mazer's works which mirror her own life.

In Norma Fox Mazer: A Writer's World, Reed chronicles her discovery that, although her husband and his work are thoroughly intertwined with and complimentary to her own, Norma Fox Mazer "is fiercely independent―a feminist." Reed was fortunate enough to be able to include Mazer's voice in this work as a compliment to her own thorough autobiographical and critical articles. Written primarily for those who are looking to garner a true understanding and appreciation of the craftsmanship behind Mazer's work, readers will also discern where the author stands in the context of the history of young adult literature. Reed provides a chronology of Mazer's twenty books and several awards, a selected bibliography, and a helpful index. The seven chapters of the book are titled: The Roots of Realism, Missing Pieces and Outsiders, Star-Crossed Love, Norma and Harry: Relationship, Romance and Writing, Writing for Young Readers, Fantasy and Suspense, and From Excellence to Mastery.

"synopsis" may belong to another edition of this title.

From School Library Journal

Reed has provided a good working text to continue that done by Sally Holmes Holtze in Presenting Norma Fox Mazer (Twayne, 1987; o.p.), but aimed at an older, more academic audience. Quoting heavily from the author herself and published reviews of her work, the author provides a chronology of major events in Mazer's life and then goes into deeper detail about her subject's childhood and adolescence and how her upbringing played a vital role in her novels and partnership with her husband, Harry Mazer. Several works are comprehensively analyzed, notably Silver, Missing Pieces, Downtown, Babyface, and Dear Bill, Remember Me? Several works are discussed at length due to their complexity and impact on literature: Up in Seth's Room, When We First Met, Taking Terri Mueller, Out of Control, the devastating When She Was Good, and the insightful After the Rain. Reed delves into several themes common to Mazer's work, such as her use of themes of three and the growing emotional strength of her female characters. A useful addition to professional collections and higher-education facilities.

Susan Riley, Greenburgh Public Library, Elmsford, NY

Copyright 2001 Cahners Business Information, Inc.