Education labels- labels for schools, colleges and universities. School labels can be specifically created for fundraising use, booster clubs, school events, or to raise school spirit.

School stickers are ideal for promoting school teams, events, talent shows, plays and social groups. Boost self-esteem and confidence of students with personalized Achievement stickers. You can also customize stickers for attendance awards with beautiful gold or silver foil labels. Use them as reminders for parents and students to attend field trips or events. Labels for shipping and mailing are also available.

Needless to say, kids stickers are always a popular item. School stickers and labels like these can be handed out individually, on rolls, or on sheets. We can customize each sheet with different shapes. Sheets can be sized at whatever size is most convenient.

Labels For Schools And Fundraising Stickers:

So how can students use school stickers to support the school? Fundraising stickers! Schools need Multiple streams of income, and a big part of that is fundraising drives.

There is no more cost-effective vehicle for fundraising than stickers. The trick is making it fun for the students and staff to raise money, and stickers can help with that. Communities love to support their local schools. Place them on phones, laptops, lockers, bikes, cars, skateboards, and around town. Hand fundraising stickers out to prospective donors.

We also print labels for schools with variable content, such as sequential numbering or consecutive numbering, so that each label is unique. As such, they can be used to place on student IDs for validation purposes.

As an example, we’ve printed many jobs for Columbia University’s Teachers College. The school labels we print for them are one color, which change by the semester. They are printed on white semi gloss paper w/ gloss UV writeable varnish, so they can be written on with a pen. The yearly information is featured on the labels, and changes yearly.

All Types Of School Stickers:

Bumper Stickers

Foil Hot Stamps

Labels that are embossed

Labels For Water Bottles

Accreditation Seals

Participation Stickers

Achievement Stickers

Decals For Windows

Shipping Labels

Sheets Of Stickers

Parking Permit Labels

Visitor Pass Labels

Some of our clientele…