Fujitsu Limited

Tokyo, October 6, 2023

Fujitsu today announced that its Numazu Plant (located in Numazu City, Shizuoka Prefecture, Japan) has been certified as a “Shizen Kyosei Site” (1) by the Japanese Ministry of the Environment.

As part of its 30by30 (2) action plan, the Japanese government has designated specific areas where biodiversity is being preserved through initiatives in the private sector as “Shizen Kyosei Sites.” Certified areas are registered in the international database as "OECMs (3)," (Other Effective area-based Conservation Measures) – geographically defined areas other than protected areas.

Fujitsu has been actively promoting the greening of the grounds of its Numazu Plant since the opening in 1976. The site consists of managed lawn gardens, tea plantations, a natural biotope, as well as natural woodland and other green spaces to continuously maintain the natural environment. Fujitsu further opened up a wide area of the site to local residents as a place for leisure. Fujitsu also holds seasonal events, including a tea harvest festival and a nature experience walking event, and leverages the green spaces to promote community exchange in the region. Fujitsu is further actively engaged in biodiversity conservation, including weeding by grazing goats, removal of certain harmful invasive species, and cultivation of the ancient "Japanese rice fish" species in biotopes. Fujitsu’s Numazu Plant has been certified as a “Shizen Kyosei Site” in recognition of its continued greening efforts.

Fujitsu will continue to promote activities to contribute to the achievement of the “Kunming-Montreal Biodiversity Framework” (4), an international agreement to protect biodiversity to realize nature positivity. In addition, Fujitsu will implement disclosure in line with the TNFD (5) framework.

[1]

[2]

[3]

[4]

[5]

Related Links

Fujitsu - Living in Harmony with Nature (Conservation of Biodiversity)“Vision and Short- to Mid-term Targets”

Fujitsu - Living in Harmony with Nature (Conservation of Biodiversity)"Management Approach"

Fujitsu’s Numazu Plant awarded with Japanese Prime Minister's Award for achievement of greening promotion in 2023 (Press Release, April 17, 2023) (in Japanese)

Fujitsu’s Commitment to the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs)

About Fujitsu

Fujitsu’s purpose is to make the world more sustainable by building trust in society through innovation. As the digital transformation partner of choice for customers in over 100 countries, our 124,000 employees work to resolve some of the greatest challenges facing humanity. Our range of services and solutions draw on five key technologies: Computing, Networks, AI, Data & Security, and Converging Technologies, which we bring together to deliver sustainability transformation. Fujitsu Limited (TSE:6702) reported consolidated revenues of 3.7 trillion yen (US$28 billion) for the fiscal year ended March 31, 2023 and remains the top digital services company in Japan by market share. Find out more: www.fujitsu.com.

Press Contacts

Fujitsu Limited

Public and Investor Relations Division

Inquiries

All company or product names mentioned herein are trademarks or registered trademarks of their respective owners. Information provided in this press release is accurate at time of publication and is subject to change without advance notice.

Date: 6 October, 2023

City: Tokyo, Japan

Company: Fujitsu Limited