On April 7, 2017, MOHAN Foundation was invited by Dr. Deepti (Manager, Aon Global Insurance Brokers Pvt. Ltd.) to conduct an awareness session for the staff of Fujitsu Consulting India located at Noida. Aon provides medical insurance to Fujitsu and also organizes health related CSR activities at Fujitsu. Mr. Samar Ayub Khan, Employment Engagement Team from Fujitsu coordinated the session.

Fujitsu on an average conducts 3 online and 3 on ground activities relating to health, culture and sports in a month and organ donation session was part of health activity. Dr Muneet Kaur Sahi, Programme Manager, MOHAN Foundation was the resource person for the talk. She was accompanied by Ms. Jyoti Sharma, Transplant Coordinator MF.

Fujitsu is the leading Japanese information and communication technology company, offering a full range of technology products, solutions, services, experience and the power of ICT to shape the future of society and customers. Approximately 156,000 Fujitsu people support customers in more than 100 countries.

Dr. Muneet began by interacting with participants to set in motion the session. She enquired from the participants if they had heard about organ donation. Many people raised their hands in affirmative. Which organs can be donated after death, the answers came thick and fast like eyes, kidneys, liver and heart. When can you donate organs, after death when the heart stops, a participant replied. Can you donate solid organs after cardiac death, there was complete silence except one person who raised his hand and replied that solid organs can be donated in a state of ‘brain death’.

Dr. Muneet then took them through the presentation that covered basic concepts of organ donation and transplantation, concluding it with a 4-minute movie on ‘brain death’.

Organs cannot be stored but can be preserved for a short time for the purpose of transportation was the reply given to a query raised by a participant as to whether organs can be stored. Who gets the organ and is there any sharing registry in place were some of the other queries clarified by Dr. Muneet.

There were 35 participants and 30 donor cards were picked up. Many participants picked up cards for their family members too.

Source-Ms. Jyoti Sharma