Escuintla

Learn about small village of Escuintla through its pictures, maps and population statistics.

All the information about this town of 125 inhabitants of the State of Chiapas

You may know it as Nuevo Potiojá.

The town of Escuintla belongs to the municipality of Palenque (State of Chiapas). There are 125 inhabitants and it is 136 meters altitude. The Magical Town of Palenque is 40 minutes away by car (32 km). It is the most populated town in the position #152 of the whole municipality.

You may know this town as Nuevo Potiojá, because this was its former name. The inhabitants of this community decided to change its name in 2011.

Last Update: 29.05.2024

Data: In Escuintla, 10% of the inhabitants are catholic and 6% of the housings are equipped with a washing machine. At the bottom of this page you will find more information.

To locate this beautiful town inside the municipality, you must know that Escuintla is located at 19.3 kilometers (in direction East) from the locality of Palenque, which is the one that has more inhabitants inside the municipality. With our webpage and with our satelital map that you can find below, you can know where is and visit the surroundings of Escuintla.

#1 Where is Escuintla? How to go? Map

Online map of Escuintla (Chiapas) to be able to get to and make trips around this town. With the zoom controls you can zoom in (+) or out (-) to locate the village.

MORE MAPS OF ESCUINTLA - PICTURES OF ESCUINTLA

Meet all the magical towns of the Chiapas State and discover their cultural essence

#2 The population of Escuintla (Chiapas) is 125 inhabitants

Population data in EscuintlaYearFemale InhabitantsMale inhabitantsTotal population20205966125201062641262005504999

Evolution of the population in Escuintla: Total Men Women Comparison of percentages of indigenous population in the town of Escuintla, compared with its municipality, with the percentage in the State of Chiapas, and in the country as a whole.

Find out more interesting facts about all the towns in the Municipality of Palenque (statistics, pictures, maps, restaurants...) at this link.

Comparison of percentages of single persons in Escuintla (over 12 years), comparing the same percentage with the municipality, with the State of Chiapas, and with the total for the country.

#3 Satellite photo of Escuintla

Amazing satellite GPS maps of Escuintla, to see from space this beautiful village, as well as the surroundings of the municipality of Palenque. You can search free satellite map (2024) of Escuintla.

#4 Hotels and Accommodation near Escuintla

It seems that there are no accommodations in the town of Escuintla, but we have a record of the closest hotels and motels to Escuintla so you can contact them:

HOTEL NUTUTUN PALENQUE: 25 km away, direction West (19 minutes by car)

HOTEL MISION PALENQUE: 24 km away, direction West (19 minutes by car)

HOTEL MIRADOR CASA BLANCA: 26 km away, direction West (18 minutes by car)

HOTEL CASTILLO DEL REY: 25 km away, direction West (21 minutes by car)

#5 What to do in Escuintla

A weekend in Escuintla and looking for tourist attractions? Tourism in Escuintla and surroundings to find the best destinations.

Mountains in Escuintla for hiking and trails:

La Vaca (404 meters): 16.1 km walk (224 minutes), heading Southeast.

Magical Towns to visit when in Escuintla:

Palenque (Chiapas): Don't miss "Bonampak", 40 km, heading West (32 minutes by car)

Other towns near Escuintla:

La Nueva Fortuna (29 inhabitants): Located 1 km to the West (1 minutes by car)

Lote 53 (46 inhabitants): Located 2 km to the Southwest (2 minutes by car)

20 de Febrero (85 inhabitants): Located 4 km to the Southeast (4 minutes by car)

Monte Olivo (113 inhabitants): Located 4 km to the Southeast (5 minutes by car)

This information is based on geographical data. Distances may vary depending on terrain, driving style or walking conditions.

#6 Population pyramid of Escuintla (Chiapas)

We have compiled data on number of inhabitants of Escuintla by age and gender, to show you the following population pyramid of the town, from the year 2005. You can check how the percentages of children and adults are distributed, in addition to women and men. With this data you can analyze the demographic structure, and know if in Escuintla there is a generational replacement.

Data of the age pyramid of the town Escuintla (inhabitants year 2020)Age rangeNumber of womenNumber of menTotal populationInfants (0-5 years)538Youth (6-14 years)112031Adults (15-59 years)363672Elderly (60+ years)7714

#7 Pictures of Escuintla

In order for you to enjoy nature around Escuintla, we have compiled a collection of sightseeing and monument pictures of the town and its surroundings. Access a completely free online image gallery of Escuintla, so you can even use it as a wallpaper to always remember this beautiful town.

Enjoy pictures of Escuintla at this link

#8 Vote for Escuintla as the most beautiful town in Mexico

Do you like Escuintla or don't you like it very much? Now you can vote for Escuintla to let everyone know about it. Use these stars ("0" you don't like it much, "5" you like it a lot) to rate it with your opinion.

In the following links you can check the list of the best (and most beautiful) towns in Mexico and the State of Chiapas, by popular vote:

- The best towns in Mexico

- The most beautiful towns in Chiapas

#9 Comments and opinions about Escuintla

#10 Schools in Escuintla

Schools in Escuintla

>>> Map with all the towns inside the municipality of Palenque

>>> Click here to see more towns in the State of Chiapas (statistics, pictures, maps, restaurants, hotels,...) <<<

#11 Other towns in the Municipality of Palenque