Media Contact:

Brenna Moore/Visit Albuquerque

Office: (505) 222-4349

Moore@VisitABQ.org

Visit Albuquerque Receives 2023 Smart Meetings Platinum Choice Award

ALBUQUERQUE, N.M. – (Dec. 1, 2023) – Visit Albuquerque, the city’s official destination marketing organization (DMO), has been named a recipient of the 2023 Smart Meetings Platinum Choice Award. These awards recognize top-rated hotels, venues and DMOs in the hospitality industry that exhibit the highest standards of service and amenities.

“These premier hotels, venues and destinations demonstrate their commitment to excellence and continue to raise the bar to an even higher standard. We commend their dedication to serving their customers and the entire meeting professional community,” said Marin Bright, Smart Meetings founder and CEO. “The Platinum Choice winners represent the crème de la crème in today’s hospitality industry, and we encourage our audience of planning professionals to consider these remarkable supplier partners for meeting destinations in the coming year.”

Throughout the year the organization has continued its commitment to providing a high level of service and experience as the meetings industry continues to evolve. Visit Albuquerque has also actively engaged with the local community, collaborating on initiatives that not only enhance the overall event experience but also contribute to the economic development of the city.

“At the heart of our organization is an unwavering dedication to the hospitality and meetings industry,” said Tania Armenta, President & CEO of Visit Albuquerque. “We are committed to partnering with meeting planners to ensure that every event is carefully crafted to not only meet but surpass expectations.”

To determine the awardees, industry professionals and Smart Meetings readers cast votes, and each nomination undergoes a thorough review by the Smart Meetings editorial team, which selects the final honorees.

“Visit Albuquerque is honored to receive this recognition from our peers in the meetings industry,” said Scott Craighead, the organization’s Vice President of Sales, Services & Sports. “This recognition is a testament to our team’s dedication to provide an exceptional level of service to meeting planners and leave a lasting experience for their attendees.”

Visit Albuquerque is a repeat recipient of this award, demonstrating the organization’s long-standing commitment to a high level of service and support for the hospitality and meetings industry.

Platinum Choice winners are featured in the December issue of Smart Meetings and are showcased on the SmartMeetings.com website.­

About Visit Albuquerque

Visit Albuquerque is an accredited destination marketing organization (DMO), and a private, not-for-profit organization [501(c)(6)]. The mission of Visit Albuquerque is to stimulate economic growth by marketing Albuquerque as a convention, sports and visitor destination. For more information, go to www.VisitABQ.org.

###