Victoria Atencio cited for her leadership qualities

FARMINGTON — Victoria Atencio’s career as an emergency room nurse at the San Juan Regional Medical Center has been full of surprises so far.

But none of those surprises have been bigger than the once she received on April 15, when she was named the winner of the Nightingale Award at the New Mexico Nursing Excellence Awards in Albuquerque. The award is presented to registered nurses in the first 18 months of their career who display outstanding and caring leadership as a beginning practitioner, according to a news release from the San Juan Regional Medical Center.

Atencio said she knew she was one of 12 nominees for the award when she attended the ceremony, but she had no expectation of winning. She found herself sitting next to Maranda Herrera, who had nominated her for the honor at the ceremony. When the event host began introducing the winner by reading aloud the essay Herrera had written about Atencio in her nomination, Herrera turned to Atencio with an excited look on her face, realizing her nominee was about to have her name called.

Atencio recalled her reaction to winning as a jangle of nerves, excitement and surprise. She said she never expected to receive such an honor so early in her career, especially after beginning her work under the enormous challenges posed by the COVID-19 pandemic.

More: Navajo nation mask mandate lifted with four exceptions

“I started working at the hospital in October 2021, and I was very naïve,” she said. “I had no idea what I was up again, especially in ER nursing.”

By all accounts, Atencio has adjusted to those challenges very well.

“Victoria is a shining star and role model to her nursing profession,” Kammie Monarch, the hospital’s chief nursing officer, said about her in the news release. “She aligns her principles of care to reflect the core values of our hospital. She understands that patients and families need active involvement in their care to truly heal.”

Herrera, who was the hospital’s ER education director when she nominated Atencio and now serves as the nurse residency coordinator and vascular access coordinator, cited the intangibles the young nurse brings to the job.

“Victoria has a gentle kindness and positive energy that radiates throughout the emergency department,” Herrera stated in the press release. “Her quick wit and diversity build cohesiveness within the department. Not only is she hard working and helpful, but she makes the day fun and rewarding.”

Robert Middleton, president of the board of directors for the new Mexico Center for Nursing Excellence, said his organization was thrilled to honor Atencio.

More: US Rep. Teresa Leger Fernandez, San Juan College officials tout on-campus health center

“This incredible nurse from San Juan Regional Medical Center is helping her community every single day,” he stated in the news release. “The Nursing Excellence Awards were created by nurses for nurses, making this statewide recognition especially meaningful and prestigious within the nursing profession.”

Atencio, who graduated from Cibola High School in Albuquerque, moved to Farmington in 2019 to rekindle her relationship with her father, who lived here. She said she always had intended to make nursing a career, but life got in the way of those plans after high school, and it wasn’t until she came to the Four Corners that she began to pursue that dream.

She enrolled at San Juan College that fall and began getting her prerequisites out of the way, then was accepted into the nursing program that next year — just as the COVID-19 pandemic began.

“I completed my entire program at home online,” she said. “That was not anticipated.”

Atencio wound up graduating from the University of New Mexico with a bachelor’s degree in nursing and accepted a position in the ER at San Juan Regional just as the pandemic reaching its peak in San Juan County. She said it was only in the last few weeks of her 20-week orientation program that she finally began to feel like she had a grasp on what she was doing.

“I was in my 16th week, and I was still thinking, ‘Oh, no, what did I get myself into?’” she said. “The patients were so sick. All the other nurses were telling me, ‘This is not what nursing is like.’ Even now, I would like to think about what nursing was like pre-pandemic, but I probably will never know that.”

Atencio found herself trying to make her way in a new career in a time when the health care field was being stressed to its breaking point. Waves of critically ill patients were coming in the door every day, while many health care professionals were getting burned out and quitting or retiring, leaving some facilities shorthanded or even overwhelmed.

More: Shiprock conference to focus on fighting Fentanyl, meth

“It was hard,” Atencio said. “I still think about every patient I encountered during the pandemic. … I didn’t know what to say to them when they asked me, ‘Am I going to wake up from this?’ What can you tell them? And then you’d see their obit in The Daily Times. That sticks with me. It humbles me.”

Atencio dealt with those challenges by summoning resources within herself she didn’t know she possessed. A self-described introvert, she took it upon herself to become what hospital officials call a health literacy advocate, someone who takes extra time to communicate with patients and their families, making sure they understand their diagnosis and care plan, according to the hospital’s news release.

“I wouldn’t call myself a people person, but I’ve learned so much about my interactions with people,” she said. “They’ve changed me.”

The odd thing is, Atencio said, she now feels as if she connects with people in the hospital more easily than she does those in normal life.

“I think I have found my niche at being able to communicate and bond with patients … ,” she said.

Mike Easterling can be reached at 505-564-4610 or measterling@daily-times.com.

Support local journalism with a digital subscription: http://bit.ly/2I6TU0e.

Other are reading: