Monday, December 29, 2008 5:00 PM

ALBUQUERQUE, NM – For the 12th year in a row, the Visit Albuquerque (Visit Albuquerque) was recognized with a Gold Service Award by Meetings & Conventions magazine. This prestigious award commends Visit Albuquerque’s Convention Services staff for the outstanding service and professionalism they deliver to meeting planner clients on a daily basis.

M&C Magazine Publisher Bernard W. Schraer honored the Visit Albuquerque Convention Services staff for achieving 12 consecutive Gold Service Awards, earning the Visit Albuquerque a first-time Gold Service Hall of Fame induction.

“I am delighted to honor Visit Albuquerque with their 12th consecutive Meetings and Conventions Gold Service Award, therefore officially inducting Albuquerque into the Gold Service Hall of Fame. Visit Albuquerque is among the best of the best in the world and has consistently provided meeting clients with exceptional service,” said Schraer.

Visit Albuquerque is one of eight destination marketing organizations to be inducted into the 2008 Hall of Fame. Other destination marketing organizations to receive this award include Austin, Columbus, Indianapolis, Louisville, Minneapolis, Palm Beach and Portland, Oregon.

According to the magazine, the M&C Hall of Fame members strive to be identified only with the highest level of excellence. Having received a Gold Service Award consistently for 12 or more years, meeting planners have come to depend on these respected members to maintain their high standards while still being flexible to the ever-changing needs of clients.

Now in its 22nd year, the Gold Service Award Program honors Convention & Visitors Bureaus that have excelled in professionalism and dedication in their service to meeting professionals. This is the 12th time Visit Albuquerque has been recognized with the Gold Service Award. The Visit Albuquerque was one of 77 domestic and 13 international CVBs to be honored with the recognition this year. The Gold Service Awards Program allows subscribers, who are corporate and association meeting/convention planners, to vote for the top convention and visitors bureaus throughout the world. This award selection is based on strict criteria including: professionalism of staff; support on hotel and site inspections; assistance with ground transportation planning; guidance on local attractions; and liaison with local vendors and services.