Eugenio López Alonso (Mexico City, 1967)

PRESIDENT

Eugenio López Alonso has been a pioneer in the realm of contemporary art collecting in Mexico. Over the past twenty five years, he has focused his efforts on circulating information about contemporary art practice and on fostering its development. In 2001 he formally established himself as an art promoter with the creation of the Fundación Jumex Arte Contemporáneo, of which he is president. This not-for-profit institution receives support from Grupo Jumex, a company founded by his father, Eugenio López Rodea.

López’s philanthropic work has been recognized through his continual support of different museums in Mexico in their programming of educational activities, publications related to the visual arts, and through the grants that Fundación Jumex awards every year to curators and artists for postgraduate studies abroad. The creation of the Museo Jumex in 2013 has further established López’s influence in the international cultural landscape. This exhibition space is his legacy to Mexico.

López is currently a member of the board of trustees of other institutions in Mexico like the Museo Tamayo Arte Contemporáneo, the Museo de Arte Moderno and the Patronato de Arte Contemporáneo (PAC). In the US, López is on the board of trustees of the New Museum of Contemporary Art in New York and of the Museum of Contemporary Art, Los Angeles (MOCA). It is thanks to his interest in contemporary Latin American art that the MOCA established the JUMEX FUND. He has also supported the making of exhibitions and publications at the Metropolitan Museum of Art and the Museum of Modern Art in New York, The Moore Space, Miami, and the Los Angeles County Museum of Art (LACMA) and the Hammer Museum in Los Angeles.

Eugenio López Alonso has received various awards and acknowledgments during his career as a collector, patron of the arts and philanthropist:

2003 Tribute from the New Museum of Contemporary Art, New York

2005 International Collector’s Award, Feria de Arte Internacional ARCO, Madrid

2006 Collector of the Year Award, Fundación Olga y Rufino Tamayo, Mexico City

2007 Sorolla Medal, The Hispanic Society of America, New York

2008 International Patron of the Arts Award, Montblanc Cultural Foundation, Mexico City.

Museo Universitario de Arte Contemporáneo (MUAC, UNAM) named one of its galleries after him to acknowledge his funding of the building’s construction.

2011 Premio Visionario, Empresa Televisa & Jalisco State Government

2014 “My Hero” award from the Aid for Aids organization for his contribution to the fight against this illness

2016 International Philanthropy Award, UN Women for Peace Association, New York