Eugenio López Alonso the sole heir to the Jumex fruit-juice fortune, is the President of Fundación Jumex Arte Contemporáneo and a contemporary art collector.

He has worked in the realm of contemporary art collecting in Mexico since the late 1990s, focusing on the promotion of contemporary art practice and on fostering its development. In 2001 he created Fundación Jumex, a not-for-profit institution that receives support from Grupo Jumex, a company founded by his father, Eugenio López Rodea. The creation of Museo Jumex in 2013 has further established López’s influence in the international cultural landscape.

His work has been recognized through his continual support of different museums in Mexico in their programming of educational activities, publications related to the visual arts, and through the grants and scholarships that Fundación Jumex awards every year to curators and artists for postgraduate studies abroad.

Eugenio López is currently a member of the board of trustees of other institutions in Mexico like Museo Tamayo Arte Contemporáneo, Museo de Arte Moderno and Patronato de Arte Contemporáneo (PAC). In the US, López is on the board of trustees of the New Museum of Contemporary Art in New York and of Museum of Contemporary Art, Los Angeles (MOCA). It is thanks to his interest in contemporary Latin American art that the MOCA established the JUMEX FUND. He has also supported the making of exhibitions and publications at Metropolitan Museum of Art and Museum of Modern Art in New York, The Moore Space, Miami, and Los Angeles County Museum of Art (LACMA) and the Hammer Museum in Los Angeles.

He has received various awards and acknowledgments during his career as a collector, patron of the arts and philanthropist:

2003 - Tribute from the New Museum of Contemporary Art, New York

2005 - International Collector’s Award, Feria de Arte Internacional ARCO, Madrid

2006 - Collector of the Year Award, Fundación Olga y Rufino Tamayo, Mexico City

2007 - Sorolla Medal, The Hispanic Society of America, New York

2008 - International Patron of the Arts Award, Montblanc Cultural Foundation, Mexico City

Museo Universitario de Arte Contemporáneo (MUAC, UNAM) named one of its galleries after him to acknowledge his funding of the building’s construction.

2011 - Premio Visionario, Empresa Televisa & Jalisco State Government

2014 - My Hero award from the Aid for Aids organization for his contribution to the fight against this illness

2016 - International Philanthropy Award, UN Women for Peace Association, New York