The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen was founded upon approval by the Ministry of Education in 2014 and in accordance with the Regulations of the People’s Republic of China on Chinese-Foreign Cooperation in Running Schools.

The University was established with the mission to explore a new path for higher education that bridges China and the world. It seeks to cultivate innovative talents with a global perspective, Chinese cultural traditions and social responsibilities.

Currently, more than 9,000 students are studying at The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen.

Over the past eight years, the University has established six schools, namely the School of Management and Economics, the School of Science and Engineering, the School of Humanities and Social Sciences, the School of Data Science, the School of Music, and the School of Medicine. These six schools, together with the Graduate School, offer 25 undergraduate programmes and 31 postgraduate programmes.

CUHK-Shenzhen encourages international experiences and seeks to nurture global awareness. As of September 2022, it has signed agreements with over 127 renowned universities in 29 countries across the globe, offering around 220 international programmes of different types. Over 60% of undergraduates have participated in overseas academic exchange programs.

The University’s global recruiting has gathered the world’s leading scholars and scientists here at CUHK-Shenzhen. By September 2022, nearly 520 distinguished scholars have joined our faculty team, each of which has had teaching or research experiences overseas, including 4 Nobel laureates, 2 Turing Award laureates, 1 Fields Medal winner. Together with their knowledge and expertise, they bring to CUHK-Shenzhen their vision, creativity, passion and dedication for education.

Rising up to the challenges and opportunities of the Greater Bay Area and modern China at large, CUHK-Shenzhen is strengthening its research teams of experts and professionals in big data and data science, future intelligent network, bioinformatics, new materials and energy, finance and logistics, robotics and intelligent manufacturing, drug discovery and precise medicine, and other areas of sci-tech innovation.

At CUHK-Shenzhen, we re-examine past wisdom, question existing knowledge structure, and voice new discoveries. Upholding our initial aspirations, CUHK-Shenzhen shall strive for higher excellence in education and research, with the mission to cultivate future leaders of the country and the world.

Mission & Vision

To advance the creation, preservation, application and dissemination of knowledge through the pursuit of excellence in teaching, research and public service in a diverse range of disciplines, thereby serving the needs and enhancing the well-being of the citizens of the Guangdong-Hong Kong-Macao Greater Bay Area, China as a whole, and the wider world community.

To be acknowledged regionally, nationally and internationally as a first-class research university whose bilingual and global dimensions of teaching and learning, scholarly output and contribution to the community consistently meet standards of excellence.