The Chinese University of Hong Kong Shenzhen

The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen

The Chinese University of Hong Kong Shenzhen is a university approved by the Ministry of Education of the People’s Republic of China and established in accordance with the regulations on Chinese-foreign cooperative education. The University is committed to building a first-class research university in China and facing the world, and to cultivating innovative high-level talents with international vision, Chinese tradition and social responsibility. The University is characterized by an international atmosphere, a Chinese-English teaching environment, the tradition of the academy system, liberal arts education, new cross-disciplinary settings and a student-centered philosophy of education.

At present, more than 7,000 outstanding students from all over the world are studying at the University of Hong Kong Shenzhen. After seven years of development, the University has gradually improved its discipline construction, with seven colleges and one graduate school, namely, College of Economics and Management, College of Science and Technology, College of Humanities and Social Sciences, College of Life and Health Sciences and College of Data Science, College of Medicine and College of Music, offering 22 undergraduate majors and 24 graduate majors.

The University focuses on international exchanges and the cultivation of students’ international perspectives. As of March 2021, the University of Hong Kong (Shenzhen) has conducted substantive exchanges and cooperation with 110 partners of prestigious overseas universities in 29 countries and regions around the world, with nearly 200 international cooperation projects of various kinds. The proportion of current students with overseas study experience exceeds 60%, which is among the highest among domestic universities.

As of the end of March 2021, the University has introduced nearly 400 world-renowned teachers, including 5 Nobel Prize winners, 2 Turing Award winners, 1 Fields Award winner, 17 domestic and foreign academicians, 19 IEEE members, 56 national experts and talents, and more than 260 selected candidates for various high-level talent projects in the provincial and urban areas. More than 260 people. At present, 100% of the teachers introduced have teaching or research experience in international top universities, and are a group of excellent teachers with international vision, innovative spirit and enthusiasm for teaching and educating people.

Since its establishment, The Chinese University of Hong Kong (Shenzhen) has been guided by innovation drive and the needs of Guangdong, Hong Kong and Macao Greater Bay Area. Its research areas fit the national strategic development needs and cover the direction of local emerging industries and future industrial development, including artificial intelligence and robotics, big data and data science, signal and information processing, brain-like research, biomedicine, bioinformatics, advanced materials, new electronic components, intelligent power grid, new network, finance and logistics, etc.

The Chinese University of Hong Kong (Shenzhen) will continue to pursue excellence in teaching and research, cultivate international innovative leaders for China, and develop into a world-renowned Chinese university.

Mission and Vision

The mission of the University is to contribute to society for the benefit of humanity through quality teaching and research in a wide range of disciplines and service to society at large, dedicated to the creation, transmission and application of human knowledge to meet the needs of society and to promote the development of the Guangdong-Hong Kong-Macao Greater Bay Area, the whole of China and the world.

The University will strive to become a first-class research university recognized regionally, nationally and internationally for excellence in teaching and learning, scholarship and social contributions in both Chinese and English and with a global perspective.