The partnership with this institution has been discontinued.

The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen

Location:

Shenzhen, China

Introduction:

The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen ("University") is established in accordance with the Regulations of the People's Republic of China on Chinese-foreign Cooperation in Running Schools upon approval of the Ministry of Education. It inherits the educational philosophy and academic systems of The Chinese University of Hong Kong. It is intended to evolve into a world class research university with strong Chinese cultural influence. It is committed to nurturing high end talent with global perspective, Chinese tradition and social responsibility.

At present, the University has programmes in science, engineering, economic management, and humanities and social science. Its long term goal is to recruit 11,000 domestic and international students, 7,500 of whom will be undergraduate students and 3,500 Masters or PhD students. The University is located at 2001, Longxiang Boulevard, Longgang District, Shenzhen, to the south of the Dayun Park and to the north of Longxiang Boulevard, occupying about one million square meters.

The President is responsible for the management of the University under the leadership of the Governing Board, a system that is in line with international practice. This is a positive step towards a modern university system with Chinese features. The University hires first class teaching staff from around the world and those teachers that have been employed are mostly renowned professors and scholars from world class universities, including several Nobel Prize laureates and academicians.

The University is featured with an international learning environment, a bilingual teaching pedagogy, a collegiate system, general education courses, multidisciplinary programmes and a student-centered educational philosophy.

The University stresses the importance of academic links and global perspective. Currently we have concluded agreements with more than 70 prestigious universities to jointly nurture undergraduate and post-graduate students.

In response to the call of the nation and the Pearl River Delta region for emerging and strategic industries, the University is planning to form a world class expert team and to forge a platform for international technology innovation in robotics and intelligent manufacturing, big data, new energy, and finance and logistics. Up to now, more than 4,500 undergraduate and postgraduate students are studying at The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen.

Academic Areas of Expertise/Focus:

Business and Management, Finance and Logistics, Robotics and Intelligent Manufacturing, Big Data

Level:

BCom or MBA

Available Spots:

4 semester spots/academic year

Special Admission Requirements:

n/a

Approximate Term Dates:

Semester 1: September - mid December

Semester 2: January - mid May

Summer Program Option:

CUHK-Shenzhen International Summer Program (ISP)

Academics

Full-time Course Load: Minimum: 9 units; Maximum: 18 units

Language(s) of Instruction: English (except for Chinese cultural courses

Course Restrictions: Exchange students are permitted to take non-business courses from other faculties

Links

General Information for Exchange Students

Course Options

Housing Information

Services

CUHK Services On-Campus Student Residences: ✓ Off-Campus Housing Assistance: ✕ Buddy Program: ✓ Pre-Semester Orientation Program: ✓ Language Courses: ✓ Airport Pick-up Service: ✓ Mandatory Insurance Program: ✕ Internship Placement Program: ✕ Host Family/Home Stay Program: ✕

Special Funding:

n/a

Student Feedback:

Past Participant Reports (requires login with UofA CCID)

Destination Overview:

There are currently no reviews available for this destination.

Comments: