https://www.moweryfs.com/obituaries/Arthur-Wagner-4/#!/TributeWall

October 17, 1948 - July 25, 2023

Arthur “Art” Francis Wagner was born on October 17, 1948, in Hays, Kansas, to Arthur A. Wagner and Hedwig (Werth) Wagner. He passed from this life on Tuesday, July 25, 2023, in Owasso, Oklahoma, at the age of 74 years.

Art was reared and educated in Victoria, Kansas, and graduated with the Victoria High School Class of 1966. He furthered his education at Fort Hays Kansas State College in Hays and graduated in 1970 with a bachelor of science degree in business.

Art married Joyce (Rohr) Wagner on August 30, 1969, in Vincent, Kansas.

He spent most of his working life as a corporate tax specialist with Cities Service, later known as Occidental Petroleum, before his retirement after 40-plus years.

Art was a longtime faithful member of St. Henry Catholic Church in Owasso, Oklahoma, where he was active with the Men’s Club. In his spare time, he enjoyed a variety of pastimes such as hunting, fishing, bowling, reading, and watching St. Louis Cardinals baseball games, but most of all he loved spending time with his family.

Survivors include his loving wife of over 53 years, Joyce Wagner; three sons, Todd Wagner and wife Vicki, Bryan Wagner and wife Belinda, Jason Wagner and wife Christine; seven grandchildren, Ethan Wagner, Camdyn Wagner, Mason Mathis, Maddie Mathis, Maizy Wagner, Sydney Wagner, and Ryan Mathis; three siblings, Ron Wagner, Jeanette Pfannenstiel, and Gary Wagner

He was preceded in death by his parents, Arthur and Hedwig, two brothers, Arthur Anthony, Jr., and Gene, and his sister, Nellie.

A rosary with be held 7:00 p.m. Sunday, August 6,2023 at St. Henry Catholic Church in Owasso. A funeral mass will be held 10:00 a.m. on Monday, August 7, 2023, at St. Henry Catholic Church in Owasso with Father Matt LaChance officiating. Final resting place will be at St. Therese Cemetery Columbarium in Collinsville.

In lieu of flowers the family requests donations be made to Catholic Charities Development Office, P.O. Box 580460 Tulsa, Oklahoma 74158.

Arrangements and services were entrusted to Mowery Funeral Service of Owasso at www.moweryfs.com.