If a play was opening anywhere around San Diego over the past few decades, chances were good you’d find Arthur Wagner and his wife, Molli, taking their seats among the eager first-nighters.

But Wagner, founding chairman of UC San Diego’s acclaimed Department of Theatre and Dance, also had a permanent place in the hearts and minds of legions of students and stage artists here.

Wagner, a longtime UC San Diego educator turned benefactor and a major figure in local theater, died of cancer early Monday morning in University City. He was 92.

Known for his seemingly inexhaustible energy and fierce curiosity, Wagner was also a key force in the partnership between the university and the nationally renowned La Jolla Playhouse, for which he was a longtime board member.

“He was incredibly generous and a great enthusiast,” said Des McAnuff, the Broadway director (“Jersey Boys”) who became the first artistic chief of the revived Playhouse in 1983.

“And he took his students very seriously. If I ran into him anywhere, the first 10 minutes were always about what was happening with the graduating class. He was practically an agent for his students.

“It’s very hard to imagine San Diego theater without him, as it was when we lost Craig Noel (the Old Globe’s founding director, who died in 2010). There are certain personalities that are really giant on the landscape, and Arthur is certainly one of them.”

Born in the Bronx, N.Y., on May 11, 1923, Wagner earned a bachelor’s degree in philosophy from Indiana’s Earlham College in 1946, and a master’s in theater arts from Smith College in Massachusetts.

Originally an actor, Wagner (who at one time supported himself as a shoe salesman) became an artistic director before turning to theater education in the 1950s.

He served stints at several educational institutions and earned a doctorate in drama from Stanford, founding actor-training programs at Tulane, Ohio and Temple universities.

When he arrived at UC San Diego in 1972, Wagner recalled in a 2012 Union-Tribune interview, speculation was that the number of faculty “maybe would grow to seven. We had four that year. Of course, we’re over 30 full-time faculty now.”

In his two decades at the university, Wagner taught and mentored legions of students (such subsequent Broadway stars as Jefferson Mays, Danny Burstein and onetime Playhouse artistic chief Michael Greif among them), while also directing and occasionally acting around town.

His time there saw the rise of the program to become one of the highest-rated in the nation.

Wagner’s son, Wayne, said one of his father’s signal achievements was the development of an acting technique based on transactional analysis.

Even after his 1991 retirement, Wagner continued to serve as mentor and inspiration to UC San Diego students and local theater artists.

“He was absolutely furious when he had to retire,” said current department chairman and longtime friend Jim Carmody, noting that a mandatory retirement age was in effect then. “I think he would’ve gone on forever.”

Together, the Wagners provided crucial financial support to the program and the university over the years. They are honored in the names of two performance spaces on campus: The Arthur Wagner Theatre, and the Molli and Arthur Wagner Dance Building.

The Wagner New Play Festival, an annual showcase for playwrights in the department’s MFA program, also pays tribute to the couple.

In 2013, the pair received the Chancellor’s Medal, which the university describes as “the highest honor given by the campus to recognize exceptional service in support of UC San Diego’s mission.”

Wagner was on a skiing vacation in Idaho in the 1950s when he met Molli, then a flight attendant.

What first attracted her to Arthur, she said, was “his sense of humor. That’s very important in a person.”

And while Molli didn’t at first share the same theatrical passion, “I developed it over 59 years of marriage.”

Playhouse artistic director Christopher Ashley said that “when I think about love, I think about Arthur and Molli. His arm was always curled around her, and her smile was looking for his.

“They were always the two who looked as though they were having the most fun.”

For Ashley, Arthur Wagner was “a mentor and an inspiration; he was the guy whose opinion you wanted first when the curtain came down. Such incredible passion about acting, and delight in important theater, and insistence that everyone make the boldest possible choices.”

Even with his frail health, Wagner had continued attending plays until very recently; his son noted that the last production his parents attended together was the world-premiere Playhouse musical “Up Here,” which opened in August.

Ashley told of visiting Wagner just a week ago in the hospital.

“I asked him how he was doing, and he said, ‘Not good — but let’s talk about the theater!’”

Arthur Wagner is survived by his wife, Molli; their son, Wayne Wagner; daughter-in-law, Mary Kies Wagner; and granddaughter Kendra Wagner.

A memorial is being planned for Oct. 12 at La Jolla Playhouse’s Mandell Weiss Theatre, with reception to follow at the Molli and Arthur Wagner Dance Building.