Spectrasonics “Keyscape Creative” Library

Cutting edge collection of over 1200 Omnisphere patches for users who also have Keyscape

Spectrasonics has released the new “Keyscape Creative” library, a cutting-edge collection of over 1200 Omnisphere 2 patches specially designed for users who also have Keyscape. The vast new library was produced by Spectrasonics’ Founder, Eric Persing, and features a tremendous variety of patches created by the company’s renowned Sound Development team, to showcase the power of combining Keyscape and Omnisphere 2. Keyscape’s richly detailed keyboard sounds can be dramatically transformed using Omnisphere 2’s deep synthesis capabilities. The recently expanded team spent over a year to develop these unique sounds. The new patches offer an extremely wide variety of incredible sounds for modern music producers and are available now as a free update.

Read More »

Spectrasonics’ New Delivery Platforms

USB Drive & Download Editions Now Available for All Customers

Spectrasonics today announced a major change in their delivery platforms and has eliminated all DVD-ROM discs in its virtual instrument product line – replacing them with modern Download and Drive Editions. The company is now using high quality USB drives in their in-store packaging for all three of their award-winning virtual instruments, Omnisphere 2, Trilian and Stylus RMX Xpanded – making physical installation dramatically faster, easier, and more reliable. The company is also announcing that it is now selling full download editions of each of the three instruments, which has been a top customer request. The packaged drive editions are available exclusively through Spectrasonics’ worldwide reseller network, while the download editions are sold exclusively from Spectrasonics’ website: www.spectrasonics.net

Read More »

Omnisphere v2.1Released

Spectrasonics’ Power Synth adds simplified user sound sharing and Library Publishing for third-party development

Spectrasonics has released Omnisphere 2.1 with a streamlined ‘Sharing’ feature for sharing user sounds and a new Library Publishing capability. Version 2.1 is an update to the company’s recent v2 upgrade of its flagship software synth. In May, Omnisphere Version 2.0 was released with vastly expanded new synthesis and creative capabilities for sound design, along with significant user interface innovations, and thousands of new sounds. The new v2.1 update, a free download to Omnisphere version 2 users, includes refined patch and project sharing features for easily exchanging custom sounds between end-users directly or over social media, a Library Publishing feature allowing third-party sound developers to create easily installable sound sets for Omnisphere 2 users, as well as a much improved boot time for the plugin itself. Both the Sound Sharing and Publishing features can contain ‘User Audio,’ offering new horizons in patch creation and simplified collaboration.

Read More »

Spectrasonics AAX for Pro Tools 11

64-bit Omnisphere, Trilian and Stylus RMX Virtual Instruments Updated to ‘AAX’ plug-in platform for Pro Tools 11 Compatibility

Spectrasonics today released an ‘AAX Public Beta’ version of the company’s three popular virtual instruments Omnisphere, Trilian and Stylus RMX for Avid’s new Pro Tools(tm) 11. Registered users of the Spectrasonics instruments can log into their user accounts to download the Public Beta versions. The new versions are available at no charge to registered users to test with the new 64-bit version of Pro Tools. Omnisphere, Trilian and Stylus RMX are all native 64-bit software instruments designed to work with Pro Tools 11 on both OS X and Windows. Read More »

‘Bob Moog Birthday’ Patches

Spectrasonics Release New Sounds for the Bob Moog Tribute Library from Sound Designer Eric Persing

To celebrate the anniversary of Bob Moog’s 78th birthday, Spectrasonics have released 78 brand new Omnisphere patches for the Bob Moog Tribute Library! With the addition of the new ‘birthday’ patches created by Producer Eric Persing, the library now features over 800 stunning sounds for Omnisphere, the company’s flagship synthesizer.

The new patches are a continuation of the tribute to honor the legacy of synthesizer pioneer Dr. Robert Moog and support the ongoing work of the Bob Moog Foundation. In 2011 Spectrasonics produced the Tribute library with the generosity and creative talents of many renowned synthesizer artists, and has been a huge success in benefiting the Foundation allowing them to expand their educational outreach programs. 100% of the proceeds from the “Bob Moog Tribute Library” go to benefit the Bob Moog Foundation.

Read More »

Adam Young of “Owl City”

Adam Young of “Owl City” Mixes on Focal Monitors

New chart-topping artist chooses Focal Twin6 Be monitors on breakout album ‘Ocean Eyes’

With a growing fan-base and a world tour that continues throughout 2010, Adam Young, the creative force behind the band “Owl City,” is taking off. His first independent release in 2008, ‘Maybe I’m Dreaming,’ received much praise and made Young into a phenomenon, with over 16 million profile views and over 80 million plays on MySpace, all stemming from posting a few songs from the year before.

That’s led to Owl City’s newest CD – ‘Ocean Eyes’ – released in 2009 by Universal Republic Records. The album has sold over 1 million copies in the U.S. alone, while the first single “Fireflies” hit #1 in 23 countries. During the making of the ‘Ocean Eyes’ album Young discovered Focal Twin6 Be monitors, then got himself a pair. “I absolutely love the Focals. I had mixed with other brands over the years, but it was always a bit deceiving. Other monitors seemed somewhat overly polished, bass heavy and even ‘clubby.’ The Focal Twin 6s are so transparent, but still easy to listen to and work with: they really help my mixes translate to anything I play them back on,” states Young.

Read More »