We have a whole collection of electric toothbrushes that are all in different keys.” – Eric Persing

A quote like that is what makes me love Eric Persing. Eric is the founder of Spectrasonics, a company specializing in developing World Class software ‘virtual instruments’ since 1994.

He has produced dozens of the sampling industry’s top selling titles and gone on to create the award-winning Omnisphere, Stylus RMX, Trilian, Atmosphere and Trilogy software virtual instruments. Eric’s ground-breaking instruments and sound libraries are the best selling and most widely used in the world. Spectrasonics products are in constant use on thousands of major film, television, music, game and multimedia productions.

In this conversation we talk about sound design, the building of Spectrasonics, staying inspired, and so much more. Eric and I were on a Skype call and he shows us some of his instruments at the top of the interview. I apologize you won’t be able to see those instruments here on this audio podcast. You’ll just have to imagine the awesomeness.

Enjoy!

Click to Listen

Show Sponsor

Today’s podcast is brought to you by Learn Worship Keys, an online course to help you improvise, innovate, and play worship music on the keys in 3 months or less.

Learn Worship Keys is a membership site with over 30 videos, expert interviews, and incredible bonuses.

If you’ve always wanted to play keys or learned classical music but always wanted to improv, this is for you.

Or if you’ve been looking for a resource to equip your keyboard players on how to play simply, navigate the software world, and make beautiful music, you need to check out Learn Worship Keys.

We already have dozens and dozens of students kicking the excuses and learning how to play. Will you be next? CLICK HERE to check out Learn Worship Keys.

“One of our biggest secrets is that we don’t use everything we create.” – Eric Persing

In this Episode You’ll Learn More About:

How Eric uses electric toothbrushes for his sound samples.

How Eric got started in music.

Why curiosity is so important to creativity.

When Eric knew synthesizers were what he loved.

When sound designing hit the scene and you went from being a synthesist to a sound designer.

How to be continuously inspired.

Eric’s work with Abe Laboriel, Marcus Miller, & John Patitucci on the Bass Legends software.

Why you need to keep creating and not hold your ideas precious.

The process of how Spectrasonics takes a sampled sound from recording to software.

A sample Eric created as a joke that became a worldwide dance music favorite – “The Hoover”.

The unbelievable story behind the Omnisphere sample “Burning Piano”.

The early days of Spectrasonics up until present day.

The shift in the music industry and how Eric’s work was ahead of its time.

Resources Mentioned in this Episode:

Show Sponsor: Learn Worship Keys

Spectrasonics

Omnisphere

Trillian

Stylus RMX

Bob Moog Tribute Library

Bass Legends

Omni TR app

Offertory by Eric Persing

Moog 55 Modular Synth

Roland Jupiter 8

Wasp Deluxe

Twitter: @ericpersing

Subscription Links

Subscribe via iTunes

Subscribe via Stitcher

Subscribe via RSS

Thanks For Listening!

If you enjoyed this episode, please share it using the social media buttons you see at the bottom of the post. So helpful!

If you have an idea for a podcast you would like to see, a special guest you’d like to hear from, or a question for an upcoming episode, please email me. If you enjoyed the show, I would be so appreciative if you would rate it on iTunes and write a brief review. That helps me so much! Thanks.

And thanks to Eric for sharing with us!

Question: What’s your biggest takeaway from this interview with Eric? Always love to hear from you! You can leave a comment by clicking here.

[ois skin=”Beyond Sunday 2″]