Interview with Eric Persing by Chris Halaby for KVR Audio.

Every industry needs champions. These are individuals and companies who propel the market forward and continue to set the bar higher for everyone else to aspire to. Spectrasonics' Founder and Creative Director, Eric Persing, is such a person for the sound design and software plug-ins industry.

Like many of us in the musical products industry, Eric's career began in a music store, but shortly afterwards he started working for Roland Corporation at the birth of MIDI in the early 80s. It was there that he was discovered by Tom Beckmen, who was then president of Roland Corp US and became a shareholder in Opcode Systems. (Tom has since retired and is living the hard life making wine).

Though I didn't know it at the time, I first encountered Eric when I bought a Roland D-50, because he had developed its well-known sounds and had created the sounds for many classic Roland instruments. Since then I have bought just about every product he has developed. In addition to their flagship plug-in, Omnisphere, my personal 'go to' products include Trilian and Stylus RMX. If you haven't tried them you are really missing something.

Let's talk about how you got started with Roland.

Do you still stay in touch with Mr. K? (Ikutaro Kakehashi – founder of Roland and another industry pioneer).

Tell me about the history of Spectrasonics. What drove you to start your own company?

In the early 90s, I was really busy as a session musician/producer/arranger in Los Angeles and also with Roland Japan - recording and developing their extensive sample libraries. It started to become clear to me that both of these worlds were going through some dramatic changes.

In the music world, artists and producers I worked with were starting to work more on their own, instead of hiring a lot of people and bringing them together in the same room to produce music. In Japan, I came to realize that Roland's philosophy did not really embrace the idea that anything "virtual" could be a very strong product on its own. For them, the sounds we created were just an accessory to the hardware they made. Their focus is to keep their factories running and you don't need a factory to create a virtual product.

At the same time, I was hearing about this little thing that was starting called the "Internet"... (laughs)

Yes, that changed things a bit....

Meanwhile, these worlds started to collide for me around the time I worked on the JV-1080 synthesizer - since it was cheaper for a music producer to buy a Roland synth that came with 500 of my sounds than it was to hire me for a day to create a few custom sounds for them...I realized I was actually putting myself out of work.

Oops....

So the beginning of Spectrasonics was purely about creating sounds for hardware samplers?

Yes. We were blessed to work with Hans Zimmer and some other great people right at the beginning, so even though in reality we were just a tiny home business with five phone lines in our kitchen, from the beginning we had a high-profile professional image to the public. It started as a very small idea to sell a few sounds and then has grown into what it is today.

Spectrasonics was one of the first companies to introduce large-scale, virtual instrument plug-ins. How did you make the transition from sound developer to a full software development company?

Everything is developed in-house now?

If you could describe Spectrasonics development philosophy in two words, what would it be?

"Powerfully Simple". That's always been our guiding design principle, to make complex and powerful tools that are really easy and inspiring to use.

Did you have any formal music training?

Can you imagine that happening at Guitar Center now?

(laughs) No, but I was there all day and it kind of altered my DNA forever. That was my first time playing a synthesizer and it was pretty much all I thought about after that.

What do you like to listen to and has that had any impact on the products you create?

I love her as well, especially what she did with Guy Sigsworth in Frou Frou. Of all of the Moog music you've heard over the years, what pieces were the most important to you?

You have always been very concerned about how your customers interact with your products. How do you think the user experience has changed over the years with technology products. What's good and not so good?

I wonder what this will do to the industry. It's like a land grab right now. You have all of these companies, whether it's a bigger company like NI or tiny companies you've never heard of. As long as it's new and it's novel, customers are going to buy everything and try it out.

I do think that it'll slow down. I think we've already reached a saturation point and it happened really quick.

Do you think that the price will eventually go back up as the products become more involved? I don't know how long it took you to develop Omni-TR, but it had to be longer than a few weeks.

It's funny, I feel exactly the same. Why would anyone else do an iPad recording application after this?

How do you think "touch" relates to virtual instrument design?

Lately we've been getting people contacting us saying that they want to get rid of their instruments because they are no longer making music. To me that's just like "wait, what? You're not making music anymore?" The idea that you're making music for a while and then you're not making it anymore… To me that's a real danger sign for the music software world. It means that people aren't having a soul connection with their instruments.

So one of the things that the iPad allows is that when you touch the instrument something happens and creates a stronger connection like you have with a physical instrument. It's hard to have that feeling with only a mouse.

The world of music production is easier than ever, but it can often feel like there are too many choices. You have 10,000 channels but you don't care about any of them. That's one of the reasons why we just focus on a few, very powerful products.

The DX7 had 32 patch slots, 64 if you bought the expansion cartridge. Do you think being overwhelmed by choices could be turning people away?

So you think all musicians need to "love" their instruments?

Right! I think it helps people to understand that we love these instruments too and want to see them grow. It's not just a business thing. At $500, in today's world, we're at the high end of the scale. We're working really hard to remain that way. We want people to feel that this is a great value and you would be crazy not to get it. And it's a price that, for a lot of hobbyists, is a stretch. We've got to give them a lot of reasons to make that commitment. And if you're a pro that used to pay thousands of dollars for every piece of gear in your studio, it's like "Of course!".

Let's talk about the Bob Moog Foundation and the Bob Moog Tribute library you produced, a noble thing and obviously very important to you for many reasons.

I already bought the library myself and I've got to believe it's doing really well.

Last question: What's your favorite desert island piece of gear?

Like his hero Bob Moog, Eric Persing wants to create products that inspire creativity and most people would say he's achieving this goal in a big way. Check out Spectrasonics' Omnisphere and the Bob Moog Tribute library for further examples of his work.

Many thanks to Paul de Benedictis for the help with this post.