Hockey has inherited deviations reaching right back into the prehistoric times and cultures. It is a sport in which two teams play in opposition to each other by attempting to move a ball into the challenger's goal with a hockey stick. There are many types of hockey for instance bandy, field hockey, ice hockey etc.

Different types of Hockey

Following are the different types of Hockey:

Bandy: Bandy is played with a ball on a football pitch-sized ice stadium, in general outdoors and with a lot of rules similar to group football. It is played professionally in Russia and Sweden and it is considered as a national sport in Russia.

Field Hockey: Field hockey is played on rock-strewn, natural grass, or sand-based or water-based artificial grass. It is played with a little, hard ball around 73 mm (2.9 in) in diameter. The game is popular among both males and females in a lot of parts of the world. The game is played between single-sex sides, even though they can be unisex. Men's field hockey has been played at every Summer Olympic Games since 1908 apart from 1912 and 1924, while women's field hockey has been played at the Summer Olympic Games since 1980.

Ice Hockey: Ice hockey is played between two teams of skaters on a big flat part of ice, using a three-inch-diameter (76.2 mm) rubber disc called a puck. The game is played all over North America, Europe and to varying extents in many other countries around the world.

Roller Hockey: Roller hockey is also famous as rink hockey or quad hockey, international-style ball hockey. Two five-man teams attempt to drive the ball with their sticks into the opponents' goal. The ball can only be place in movement by a stick, not the skate. Otherwise a foul will be stated. The game has two 25-minute halves with the clock stopping when the ball becomes dead. Every team has a one-minute timeout in each part. Each team has a minimum of six players and a greatest of ten.

Sledge Hockey: Sledge hockey is designed for players with physical disabilities affecting their lower bodies. Players sit on double-bladed sledges and use two sticks. Each stick has a blade at one end and small picks at the other. Players apply the sticks to pass, stickhandle and shoot the puck and to push their sledges.

Floorball Hockey: Floorball is a variety of floor hockey with five players and a goalkeeper in every team. Men and women play indoors with 96 to115.5 centimetre long sticks and a 22 to 23 centimetre plastic ball with holes. Matches are played in three twenty-minute periods.

Underwater Hockey: Underwater Hockey, also famous as ‘Octopush’ is an internationally played sport in which two teams participate to move a puck from corner to corner the bottom of a swimming pool into the opposing team's goal by impelling it with a hockey stick.

Beach Hockey: Beach hockey is a type of street hockey. It is a general view on Southern California beaches. Beach hockey tournament in the whole Asia was held in Goa.

Ball Hockey: Ball hockey game is played in a gym using sticks and a ball, often with a tennis ball.

Broomball: Broomball is played on an ice hockey rink, but with a ball in its place of a puck and a "broom" in place of the ice hockey stick. Instead of skates special shoes are used which have very soft rubbery soles to make the most of hold while running roughly.

Mini Hockey: Mini hockey or knee-hockey is also known as "mini-sticks". Players kneel down and use a small plastic stick which is typically about 15 inches long.

Skater Hockey: Roller hockey is a type of hockey played on a dried out plane using wheeled skates. Joint roller hockey is played in almost 60 countries.