“The Chorus” film, is about a teacher who has great taste in music. The teacher teaches his students, inmates in a juvenile reformatory, the gift of music.

The film gives a brief explanation of the education they get used to coming up with violence, repression and rituals. Shortly humanist for students in an institution. It gives notice as the director has the leadership to impose rules by simply saying; “Action-Reaction” and give them to know their teachers and students.

My personal opinion is, that caused outrage me how to be the director but admiration for the way of being the teacher, constructivist pedagogical rules leave me an example of performance and wants to expose his students and the world.

DEVELOPMENT

The film follows a type of informal organization, ie, a predominantly uncontrolled authority and a lack of communication between students, teachers, parents and especially the director. Young people and children who are in the juvenile prison, as indicated by the film, have behavior problems, and they reflect a low self-esteem and above all, motivation for life.

The analysis that I write about the informal organization of the film, is because detailed traditions, values, lifestyles in society, that happened or are still happening in some schools or institutions of urbanized and rural communities inside and outside the Mexican country.

I can say that with the kind of informal organization that transmits the film, the management model that involves defining, is that educational quality of the institution that guides training of the child or young person, with or without intellectual powers is violated, psychological and social. The management model is exposed, is the problem of a director who is in the same situation as students, shows an unbalanced behavior towards young people with obsolete and not a vocation for the work you do preparation. Later the teachers are in the same act that involves the rules of the director. There was someone to raise his voice and say what the teacher (musician) gave to know their students, that is, attention, motivation and learning what they knew to do.

This is where I can say that the management process I found was that the musician teacher achievement training, student learning, with the only recourse was to call the attention and respect of his students through music. Very independent that has fired the director and sometimes grotesque comments devalued by expressing it. The spark that involved the students was being friendly, to smile, give them attention, play with them, introduced a new and comprehensive process to return them to the light and let what they did daily management. Just by simply observing the behavior of young people every day.

As the functions they had to do every person who was in the institution including students, were not valued by nobody. Everyone did a job for a power accorded to them. At first glance, the power of command that had the administrative director and students is reflected.

Likewise, the only values ​​that are involved are manifesting the master (musician) to students, teaching them to respect, joining with their peers, motivation, excellence, tolerance and courtesy. And it is based on the way of being and behaving of each student. Besides all the scenario that reflects the film with students, parents, principal and cleaning people.

That would be the main components throughout the course of the film, where the parent is a father who cares for his children for the work and well explained by the example that exposes the mother who is said to be prostituted to feeding her son but in the end, the boy who had lived forgives the example that gives the present giving voice teacher had. But also, the director ends up going crazy for everything he had seen the attitude he had with his peers. In conclusion he had no communication with anyone except the musician teacher, who was the hero of the story. Only the will made them speak and live with what they present.

Which, with the above mentioned, the film leaves a concept of life, of a teacher who fights not just to have a job with what they do, if not, that fight because others excel in what they do.

Reference

Christhope Barratier, (2004), France, Spain. Les Choristes.