Lightning strikes twice for vid artists Jason Archer and Paul Beck; plus Helen Lee, Kier-La Janisse, and Lunafest.

Lightning Redux Dept.: Who says lightning doesn't strike twice? Certainly not local video artisans Jason Archer and Paul Beck, who nabbed an MTV Video Music Awards Latino America award for their work on south-of-the-border hip-hop rocksters Molotov's single "Frijolero" last Thursday evening. The Video of the Year Award comes nipping at the heels of their recent Latin Grammy win for the same track. Sadly, the logistics of the event forced Archer and Beck to once again jet down to the global epicenter of dull nightlife, Miami Beach, where they endured not only the sheer agony of winning "another damn award," but also had to sit through performances by the likes of Iggy Pop, the Mars Volta, and share breathing room with former Rage Against the Machiner Zach de la Rocha at Miami's Jackie Gleason Theatre, where the ceremony was held. After that, the Waking Life animators took in a post-awards party jam-packed with "gorgeous supermodels" and, um, the guys from Sum 41. It's a dog's life, guys. Back in Austin, Archer & Company spent last Saturday evening at a "surprise" fete held at "Best of Austin" winner the Escapist Bookstore on South First, where the assembled throng noshed on the requisite booze 'n' food while Archer held court and promised another win within the week. (Feel free to hold your breath on that one: The pair recently completed a video for emerging Latin sensation Juanes, who perhaps not coincidentally won Artist of the Year at the MTV event. So who says lightning can't strike three times?)... Congratulations to University of Texas film phenom Helen Lee, whose short "Sophie" picked up a Priddy Bros. Productions Triumph Award at the recent 2003 Angelus Awards Student Film Festival in Hollywood. The Angelus award betters Archer and Beck's by a cool $5,000 cash prize. Not too shabby all around... It's Halloween, which if you're like me means you've spent the past four nights at the Alamo Drafthouse Downtown, where new programmer-babe-in-town Kier-La Janisse has been running her CineMuerte International Fantastic Film Festival all week long. Tonight (Friday) is the last evening, but you still have time to catch the final midnight screening of Night Warning, featuring Kill Bill's Bo Svenson... And as if that weren't enough, film festivalwise, Thursday, Nov. 6, is the Reel Women-sponsored Lunafest. The single-evening fest features six short films "by, for, and about women," and benefits the Breast Cancer Fund. More online at www.reelwomen.org... Is it that time of year or what? Two major Austin-lensed films are currently experiencing growing pains. First, the Farrelly Brothers-produced The Ringer, starring yahooligan Johnny Knoxville, is on "hiatus" for an unknown amount of time. Local crew were called over the weekend and told not to bother showing up for work on Monday, and although studio scuttlebutt is predictably tight-lipped, a source close to the production office says various key positions are being reshuffled. The other production to hit something of a skid is no less than The Alamo, which has been bumped from its slated holiday season opening to April, ostensibly because the now-three-hour-long film still needs various editing and post-production tweakings. This comes on the heels of a spate of downright awful reviews on Ain't-It-Cool-News.com, which pegged the film as disastrously overlong and "emotionally uninvolving." Disney honcho Dick Cook was quoted in Wednesday's Variety as saying the decision "was made at the request of the filmmakers, who felt they needed additional time to complete this great movie." A tip from those who have seen the film's trailer: Don't mess with the astonishing audio mix on those cannonballs, guys. We thank you in advance... If you've been wondering what's up with The Show With No Name's scheduling of late -- or lack thereof -- host Charlie Sotelo sends word that they're back on the air and featuring an extended, 90-minute time slot this weekend so that they can grace us with Robert Frank's genius documentary on the Rolling Stones' 1972 world tour, Cocksucker Blues. Rarely seen because Mick and the boys banned its release and obtained a court injunction against its distribution due to the many scenes of drug-fueled mayhem and wayward groupie groping, the film is one of those cult gems that you've got to see to believe, and this might well be your only chance. The episode airs Sunday, Nov. 2, 10pm, on cable access Channel 10.