Scottish developer, formed in 1996. Since its inception, Vis has worked with major publishers, gaining an international reputation, and has grown from 8 to over 110 employees. Vis develops games software for major console platforms and PCs and provides interactive content for the converging technology, media and telecommunications (TMT) sectors, particularly in Interactive Digital Television ("iDTV") and broadband telecommunications. The company is headed up by Chris van der Kuyl, CEO.

The company you are trying to view is not available on IndieDB. Only publishers and developers which have games, mods and other content released on IndieDB are listed. View VIS Entertainment on ModDB.

Continue browsing the company list, to find the profile you are after.

HTC

1 member Developer

Founded in 1997, HTC built its reputation as the behind-the-scenes designer and manufacturer of many of the most popular OEM-branded mobile devices on...

uSens

No members Developer

uSens Inc. is a Silicon Valley start-up, founded in 2013 in San Jose, California. Our core team has extensive experience in the research and development...

YoYo Games

2 members Developer

GameMaker Studio caters to entry-level novices and seasoned game development professionals equally, allowing them to create cross-platform games in record...

Refinery Games

1 member Developer

At Refinery we create gaming experiences rich with nostalgia, paying homage to the golden era of games design.

Ulpo Media

2 members Developer

We are a chilean indie developers group, we look to create a place in the complicated internet world. We want to make videogames of any type, always giving...

Supergiant Games

1 member Developer

Supergiant Games is a small developer with big ambitions: to make games that spark your imagination like the games you played as a kid, and let you share...

Gamieon, Inc.

1 member Developer

Gamieon is a one-developer part-time studio focused on creating video games for the desktop and mobile platforms. Since 2010 Gamieon has developed and...

New Star Games Ltd

1 member Developer

Based in Oxford, UK, New Star Games are a small independent company with a passion for sport.

Wildgrass

5 members Developer

Our small team at Wildgrass strives upon the ideal of creating a wide variety of compact experiences that are packed with memorable moments and respect...

Yakiniku Banzai!

1 member Developer

Yakiniku Banzai is a Japanese two-man developer group best known for their “Human Tanks, Charge!” game series. The first game in the series, War of...

Team Jolly Roger

9 members Developer

A jolly good dev team, deep in the heart of Finland. Also the creators of Interplanetary.

Interstellar Game Studios

1 member Developer

Behind Interstellar Game Studios stands Reinhard Zach, single-handedly responsible for design and development. After working the last couple of years...

No groups were found matching the criteria specified. We suggest you try the group list with no filter applied, to browse all available. Join now to share your own content, we welcome creators and consumers alike and look forward to your comments.