Taxonomy classes are used to classify organisms based on their characteristics. The classes are then placed on a phylogenetic tree directly beneath a phylum (animal) or division (plant). One such class is the Magnoliopsida class; a class of flowering plants.

Magnoliopsida is the botanical name for a class of flowering plants. This class, by definition, includes the family of Magnoliaceae, yet it will vary, being more inclusive or less inclusive depending on the system of classification that is being used.

In both the Cronquist system and the Takhtajan system, the name Magnoliopsida was used for a group known as Dicotyledons.

The Cronquist system, developed by Arthur Cronquist, classifies flowering plants into two classes: Magnoliopsida (dicotyledons) and Liliopsida (monocotyledons). These classes are then grouped into subclasses. Examples of these subclasses are: Magnoliidae, Caryophylliae, Dilleniidae, Asteridae, Rosidae, and Hamamelidae.

The Takhtajan is a system of plant taxonomy. Published by Armen Takhtajan, multiple versions from the 1950s have been created. This system is often compared to the Cronquist system. The Takhtajan system is composed of classes, subclasses, super orders, orders, and families.

The Dahlgren system and the Thorne system (1992) had used the name Magnoliopsida for angiosperms (flowering plants). This system uses the class Magnoliopsida and contains the subclasses Magnoliidae and Liliidae.

The Dahlgren system was created by Rolf Dahlgren and later overseen by his wife Gertrud Dahlgren who continued his system of classification after his death. As one of the modern systems of plant taxonomy, this system's classifications is used by other systems as well. The Reveal system provides an extensive listing of Dahlgren's classification.

The Thorne system (1992) was created by botanist Robert F. Thorne. This system, however, was replaced in 2000 with a new system. Earlier versions of this system used the suffix -florae for superorders. The Thorne System of 1992 counted a total of 440 families and 69 orders.

The Reveal system uses the name Magnoliopsida for a group of primitive dicotyledons. This group corresponds to roughly half of the plants in the magnoliids. The class contains superorders within such as: Magnolianae and Lauranae.

This system was created in the 20th-century as a system of plant classification by botanist J.L. Reveal. This system is continuously updated with the last update of the system being made in 1999. Later, this system joined the Angiosperm Phylogeny Group and contributed to the APG II system.