Insider sources suggest Marvel Studios is overhauling its leadership to tackle activist staffers keen to project their views onto plotlines.

But Lucasfilm - the studio behind Star Wars - is said to be continuing to let progressive workers rule the roost. Both Marvel and Lucasfilm are owned by Disney, but operate separate studios and have their own creative teams.

Film Threat founder and acclaimed writer Chris Gore made the claims about Marvel during an appearance on The Critical Drinker's podcast on Friday.

'I do know people who work at Marvel – they have cleaned house. They quietly, months ago, fired all the producers that could be labeled 'activist,'' said Gore.

Gore explained that president of Marvel studios, Kevin Feige recognized that going woke didn't work for them, revealing that '[Feige] said he tried it, it didn't work.'

'He's talking about Phase 4,' continued the noted film critic. 'That's it. Tried it, didn't work. No Kang, none of these side characters that don't have the legacy of classic characters.

'And if Deadpool & Wolverine proves anything…you've heard that phrase 'male and pale is stale'? That was spoken aloud across studios. But if you look at box office this year, I would say 'male and pale is money'. And that's the phrase that I think people should more adopt.'

In contrast, Gore said the rival studio, also owned by Disney, Lucasfilm, 'is lost.'

'They are doubling down on all the nonsense. You will never get anything good out of Lucasfilm and Star Wars. That's it,' said Gore.

Gore predicted a return to success for the Marvel franchise as they release the remaining 'woke' movies in the can, before focusing solely on entertaining viewers, rather than preaching to them.

'I think we're gonna get a year of bad Marvel stuff,' said Gore, referring to the upcoming television series Agatha All Along and Ironheart as well as the soon-to-be-released Captain America: Brave New World, Thunderbolts, and Fantastic Four.

Recently, Marvel sent shockwaves through their fanbase when they unveiled Robert Downey Jr., who played Iron Man, would return to the Marvel Universe as villain Doctor Doom in the upcoming Avengers: Doomsday and Avengers: Secret Wars duology - a possible attempt at reconciling their audience.

Marvel fans had eagerly anticipated the introduction of Dr. Doom, a quintessential villain, and a potential Iron Man return by Robert Downey Jr.

However, the recent announcement that Downey Jr. would portray Dr. Doom has left them stunned.

'We'll see how Robert Downey Jr. will be used,' said Gore, intrigued by the studio's decision to bring back an actor who 'Is he a variant of Tony Stark? Is he just an actor playing a different character? So, whatever it is, I think it's interesting.'

Avengers: Doomsday is expected to be released in 2025.

Claims of woke movie-making have rocked other Hollywood studios - including a third Disney entity, Pixar. Buzz Lightyear prequel Lightyear sparked controversy over a lesbian kiss, with one Disney executive caught on camera vowing to crowbar in as many 'queer' storylines as possible.

Disney CEO Bob Iger has since reversed course and insists the entertainment giant is putting its storylines before activism.