Greece’s Rock Overdose caught up with Lacuna Coil vocalist Andrea Ferro to talk about the band’s new album Delirium and also about the rumors of Axl Rose taking Brian Johnson’s place in AC/DC as Ferro is a big AC/DC fan.

His opinion of AC/DC possibly performing with Rose: “I don’t know. I think he has that type of voice that could fit in, but I think that he would have been better a few years back. Nowadays, I don’t know. I think nowadays, you expect AC/DC with Brian Johnson and that’s it. He’s been with the band for so many years that it’s hard to replace him. At the same time they should probably consider the possibility that it might be time to quit. I love AC/DC, they’re one of my favorite bands. Maybe the first rock/metal t-shirt I bought was an AC/DC one, with Angus posing on it. I’m very connected to this band. My first vinyl was Let There Be Rock. I love the band. It’s just that, I think that when you can’t do it anymore, maybe it’s time to stop.”

Lacuna Coil have released a lyric video for “The House Of Shame”, a track from their 8th studio album, Delirium, which is set for a worldwide release on May 27th via Century Media Records. Find the new video below.

Marco "Maki" Coti-Zelati created the artwork for 'Delirium' which is based on an atmospheric session captured by Italian photographer Alessandro Olgiati.

Delirium tracklisting:

“The House Of Shame”

“Broken Things”

“Delirium”

“Blood, Tears, Dust”

“Downfall”

“Take Me Home”

“You Love Me 'Cause I Hate You”

“Ghost In The Mist”

“My Demons”

“Claustrophobia”

“Ultima Ratio”

“The House Of Shame” lyric video:

Lacuna Coil will be making their return to North America as part of the Delirium Worldwide tour starting in San Francisco on May 7th. This will be their first US run in support of Delirium. The first leg of the tour will feature Butcher Babies as direct support with 9Electric and Painted Wives rounding out the package. The second leg will be announced in the coming weeks and will have a different band as direct support, while the rest of the touring package remains intact.

Cristina Scabbia (vocals) states: "Everything feels different this time in the Lacuna Coil camp. It's something I can hear it and something I can breath. A new wave of confidence, a renewed essence and pure drops of energy sweating out of our pores. I can't wait to show it to all my friends and welcome you all once again in our family. Trust me, this is a ‘Delirium’ you will feel the NEED to be part of."

Andrea Ferro (vocals) further adds: "Delirium is not the beginning of a new chapter in Lacuna Coil's life; it is the beginning of a new book! We're really excited about starting this touring cycle with such a fresh vibe, meeting old and new friends around the US and get such great touring companions. We're just writing the first page of this book and it is already a crazy one."

Marco Coti-Zelati (studio guitars, live bass) continues: "We’re all super excited to finally be coming back to the US and we’re ready to kick some asses with the greatest album that we’ve ever made! New lineup, new sound, a new vibe and new emotions. I can’t wait to see the reactions from the audiences when they hear the Delirium songs played for the first time. Fresh, dark and powerful emotions all at the same time. The strength and heavy approach of thrash metal from the ‘90s - in a modern style. To me, this is the album that I think will be exciting to both of our older AND newer fans. I’m excited, and ready to have some fun on stage, while we spread the Delirium to the people."

Ryan Blake Folden (drums) adds: "For me, I am truly excited to get on the road and play some new material. This is the first record I got to be a part of with the band and I can’t wait to finally see people reactions to songs that I have been really excited about for over a year now. Not to mention, I’ll finally be expressing myself on stage in a way that I haven't been able to do in some time, having up until this point performed music that predated my arrival to the band. With the manifestation of the theme, costumes and artwork, along with the music, the band creatively and passionately poured itself into making this something special."

Tour dates:

May

7 - San Francisco, CA - Social Hall *

8 - Los Angeles, CA - The Roxy

9 - Phoenix, AZ - The Marquee

10 - El Paso, TX - Tricky Falls

12 - Dallas, TX - Trees

14 - Cherokee, NC - Cherokee Event Center (Halestorm)

15 - Richmond, VA - The National (Halestorm)

17 - Davenport, IA - Adler Theater (Halestorm)

18 - Madison, WI - Majestic Theatre *

20 - Traverse City, MI - Ground Zero *

21 - Flint, MI - The Machine Shop

25 - Brooklyn, NY - Saint Vitus ^^

26 - Uncasville, CT - Mohegan Sun Wolf Den ^^

* no Butcher Babies

^^ no support

Festival dates:

April

30 - Quezon City, Philipines - Pulp Summer Slam Festival

May

2 - Pudong Sanjia Port Suzhou, China - MIDI E-Festival

June

24 - Parabiago (MI), Italy - Rugby Sound Festival

July

1 - Piazzola Sul Brenta (PD), Italy - Postpay Sound

9 - Les Remparts De Longwy, France - Rock’n’Roll Train Festival

22 - Vinci (FI), Italy - Festa Dell’Unicorno

August

13 - Graz, Austria - Metal On The Hill Festival

(Photo - Allessandro Olgiati)