After getting about as poppy as they could on past releases it's a pleasant surprise to reconnect with Lacuna Coil and discover that they've been getting heavier, parts of 2016's Delirium having a spooky deathcore vibe very much at odds with the post-Korn rock that they have been playing since 2009's Shallow Life. And Black Anima continues to show off this heavier side of the Italians, something like a more straightforward Paradise Lost. Despite the Korn influence still being felt, it's incorporated far better into the band's sound, which even includes guitar solos now. The songwriting is very strong too, with no real downpoints apart from intro Anima Nera being skippable, mainly Cristina Scabbia witchily chanting over a piano and electronic backing. Yet the first track proper Sword of Anger is about the heaviest thing the band have ever done, Andrea Ferro's initial growl of "we are the enemy!" kicking off the first of many downtuned chugging riffs, a more melodic undertone contrasting well and matching the vocalists' beauty and the beast routine.

The formula is at its best on single Reckless, led by Cristina's always wonderful voice and counterpointed by Andrea, culminating in the catchiest Lacuna Coil chorus since Our Truth. Little touches like bursts of electronica actually work terrifically, distracting you from the at times rather simplistic rhythm section, and the guitar soloing here and on other tracks is impossible to fault, courtesy of new man Diego Cavallotti. And the band throw in enough variety to keep things interesting, such as the sped-up, almost djenty crunch of Layers of Time, which allows Cristina to stretch her range impressively, and contrasts well with the following slower, more atmospheric Apocalypse. The gothic darkness that had been absent from the band for so long is back with a vengeance, the darker, edgier vibe refreshing on the likes of Now or Never, which rides that Paradise Lost influence hard and is all the better for it (although the brief shrieky rap section could have been left out!) and there's even a touch of operatic metal to parts of Veneficium, Cristina again showing her range. And although Andrea Ferro's clean singing still isn't as good as his growl, he especially enhances The End is All I Can See, like a woozy return to Unleashed Memories territory (still their best album).