TOPEKA – Today, Paul Davis, a lifelong Kansan, son of two public school teachers, and proud husband and father, officially announced his campaign for Congress in the 2nd Congressional District of Kansas. After visiting all 25 counties in the district, Davis concluded a four-month listening tour in Topeka today to formally announce his candidacy. Additional stops are planned today in Pittsburg, Leavenworth, and Lawrence.

“In the past few months, I’ve visited all 25 counties in the 2nd District, speaking with farmers, veterans, and small business owners – and I kept hearing the same stories of fear, frustration and disappointment,” Davis said. “Kansans no longer see our values reflected in many of the leaders we have sent to Washington. So today I’ve got a pretty simple message: I hear you. And I’m ready to fight for you.”

At his event in Topeka, Davis was introduced by his wife, Stephanie, who is a psychologist working with military veterans to prevent suicide. He was also joined by a special guest in each community, including Sen. Laura Kelly in Topeka, Sheriff David Groves in Pittsburg, Mayor Nancy Bauder in Leavenworth, and former Insurance Commissioner Sandy Praeger in Lawrence.

A lifelong resident of the 2nd Congressional District, Davis received his undergraduate degree from the University of Kansas and a law degree Washburn University in Topeka. He also served in the Kansas House of Representatives for more than a decade, where he:

Helped engineer the passage of a state budget that cut $1.2 billion in state spending;

Shepherded through the passage of a 10-year transportation plan to create 175,000 Kansas jobs during the Great Recession;

Supported over 100 responsible, commonsense tax cuts while combating the reckless tax experiment of Gov. Sam Brownback;

Championed Kansas public schools, working tirelessly to restore unprecedented funding cuts made to classrooms since 2011.

Davis hopes to utilize his experience as a bipartisan consensus builder in the Kansas House of Representatives to help affect change in Congress. He wants to build relationships with other leaders of any political ideology who agree that the system is fundamentally broken and share his passion for fixing it.

“Unprecedented amounts of money have corrupted our government and our elections in recent years, and it has paralyzed Washington,” Davis said. “Changing the system is the key to giving the people back their voice and restoring accountability to Congress. It is the gateway to action on every other issue that keeps Kansas families up at night, like affordable health care, fair taxes, and good paying jobs.”

“I’ve got a record of results in Kansas, and now I want to go to Congress, roll up my sleeves, and get my hands dirty. I want to contribute to the American story in a way that honors the selfless work of the Kansans who came before us, and in a way that will inspire those who will follow in our footsteps,” Davis said. “I want to make you proud because I love Kansas and I love America.”

For more information, please visit www.davisforkansas.com or follow the campaign on social media at facebook.com/PaulDavisKS or @PaulDavisKS.