National Assembly Chairman Nguyen Sinh Hung expressed his hope for continued development in relationships between the European Union (EU) and Vietnam during his meeting with the European Council (EC) President Herman Van Rompuy in Brussels on Dec. 7.

At the meeting, Hung informed the EC President of his productive meeting with members of the European Parliament and asked for his continued support in boosting relations between Vietnam and the EU in socio-economic development, poverty reduction and environmental protection. EC President Van Rompuy recognised Vietnam ’s socio-economic progress and was delighted at the completion of the Partnership and Cooperation Agreement. He also supported both sides' pushing ahead for negotiations of the Free Trade Agreement. Earlier, Hung co-chaired the Vietnam-Belgium Business Forum with Belgium Secretary of State Mark Eyskens which attracted more than 200 businesses. Speaking at the forum, Hung said that after 25 years of economic renovation policy, the country has achieved remarkable progress in poverty reduction and maintained a consistent average growth rate of 6-7 percent. The country has also implemented effective measures to curb inflation and maintain social and macroeconomic stability, he added. Hung called on businesses from Belgium and the EU to increase investment in Vietnam and stressed that the country will always provide preferable policies for foreign investors, along with a young and dynamic labour workforce. Eyskens agreed that businesses from both countries can further cooperate in technological advancement, environmental protection, and dealing with climate change. Belgium businesses have always considered Vietnam to have a promising and stable investment environment, he said. During this visit, Hung also met with EU Trade Commissioner, Karen De Gucht, President of the Belgian Senate, Sabine de Bethune and Minister-President of Flanders , Kris Peeters. On Dec. 7, National Assembly Chairman Hung and his delegation left Brussels , wrapping up his official visit to the European Parliament and Belgium. /.

VNplus