Indiana Quick Quiz

Which U.S. President grew up in Spencer County, Indiana?

What brand of tomato catsup has corporate headquarters in Elwood, Indiana?

In the movie "Breaking Away," the term "cutters" refers to workers in what Indiana industry?

Which Indiana governor later became president of a baseball team?

Answers Below

For more activities in IN * https://www.visitindiana.com/

July 28,1945 Jim Davis American cartoonist and creator of the comic strips "Garfield" and "U.S. Acres", born in Marion, Indiana.

July 29, 1946 Neal Doughty, American rock piano, Hammond organ, and Moog synthesizer player (REO Speedwagon - "Can't Fight This Feeling"'; "One Lonely Night"), born in Evansville, Indiana.

July 29, 1869 Booth Tarkington, American novelist (17, The Magnificent Ambersons), born in Indianapolis, Indiana.

July 30, 1964 Vivica A. Fox, American actress (Kill Bill: Vol. 1), born in South Bend, Indiana.

August 3, 1900 Ernie Pyle, American journalist and war correspondent during WW II (Pulitzer Prize, 1944), born in Dana, Indiana.

Our Where in Indiana? from last week was taken of Gene Stratton-Porter's darkroom in her Cabin at Wildflower Woods on Sylvan Lake in Rome City, Indiana.

Where in Indiana?

Do you know where this photograph was taken?

Visit us on Instagram to submit your answer.

Follow us on Instagram: @instatehousetouroffice

If we wuz all as well behaved as a farmer's dog when he comes t' town this would be some world.

Abe Martin....written by Frank "Kin" Hubbard one of Jim's favorite Indiana humorists.

Abe Martin was published from 1904 - 1937 in the Indianapolis News.

Please send your favorite Hoosier quote to: RegEdwards@idoa.in.gov

Indiana Woodland Mushrooms

Answers: 1. Abraham Lincoln 2. Red Gold 3. The limestone industry 4. Joe Kernan

Follow this link to subscribe to Hoosier History Highlights and to view archived editions

Indiana Statehouse Tour Office | Indiana Department of Administration

Guided tours of the Indiana Statehouse are offered Monday through Saturday. For more information, please contact the tour office.

(317) 233-5293

touroffice@idoa.in.gov

Take an "Armchair Tour" of the Indiana Statehouse!