By Gordon Engelhardt

Island-hopping on a Caribbean tour was a fun but exhausting experience for REO Speedwagon.

For Evansville native and REO keyboardist Neal Doughty, there's no place like home. Returning to the United States, REO will play Assembly Hall in Champaign, Ill., on Friday and The Centre in Evansville at 8 p.m. on Saturday.

Although English was a second language for the Latin American audiences, they sang along boisterously to REO's hits, Doughty said by phone last Saturday before a gig in San Juan, Puerto Rico.

"I still love to play the songs. What we get paid for is the travel."

Born in Evansville, Doughty lived here until he was 12. He then moved with his parents to Belleville, Ill., although several relatives still live in the Evansville area.

His hard-partying a thing of the past, Doughty hopes to continue the family's history of longevity.

"I'm 62 now, and you can't party on the road at that age and stay alive," he said.

As a student at the University of Illinois in 1967, Doughty realized he liked playing rock 'n' roll more than majoring in electrical engineering and became a founding member of REO. His virtuoso soloing is the centerpiece of "157 Riverside Avenue," the oldest song in the band's current live repertoire.

After their self-titled debut album was released, personalities clashed and singer Terry Luttrell left the band. Enter singer-rhythm guitarist Kevin Cronin.

"Kevin put an ad in a Chicago paper for bands seeking a lead singer, which was a scam because the ad was for Kevin himself," Doughty recalled with a laugh.

"He came down to Champaign and played for us, and we were as impressed by his songwriting as his voice."

With Cronin on vocals, the band released "R.E.O. T.W.O." considered a Midwestern hard-rock classic. Problems surfaced, however, on their third album, "Ridin' the Storm Out."

"The producer thought Kevin's vocals were weak," Doughty said. "Something didn't click."

Michael Murphy joined the sessions, replacing Cronin. But his vocal style didn't mesh with the band, which had a sizable live audience, but struggled to find its niche in the studio.

"After three albums, we called Kevin and said, 'How's your voice,'" Doughty said. "He said, 'It's fine. I'm playing Chicago clubs."

Cronin rejoined the band in 1975. Their self-produced live album, "Live: You Get What You Play For," eventually went platinum, as did their second studio album back with Cronin, "You Can Tune a Piano, But You Can't Tuna Fish," which borrowed an old Groucho Marx line for the title.

REO reached its commercial peak on 1980's "Hi Infidelity," which spawned a No. 1 and No. 5 hit with the power ballads "Keep on Loving You" and "Take It on the Run."

But creative differences were brewing between Cronin and flashy lead guitarist Gary Richrath.

Cronin's pop sensibilities clashed with Richrath, who had a more hard-rock approach.

"There was a lot of friction," Doughty said. "Kevin began to take musical control, and Gary didn't like that."

Richrath and drummer Alan Gratzer left in the late 1980s, leaving Doughty as the lone original member.

After all the hits in the late 1970s and early 1980s, REO had a thrill of another sort when President Bill Clinton featured their 1996 album "Building the Bridge" during his re-election campaign.

Doughty said the band was in the Chicago suburbs when they received a call from the Secret Service about meeting the president.

"No matter what your politics are, he's the most charming guy," Doughty said. "He was running for re-election, and he just wanted to hang out with a rock 'n' roll band for 20 minutes. The neat thing about him was he was more excited about meeting us than we were about meeting him."