M

Maija (DiGiorgio). This powerhouse of comedy has taken the world by storm, with two wildly popular Amazon Prime specials (“Maija Pinion” and “Maija! Maija! Maija!”) and the Dry Bar Comedy special that’s up to a staggering 10 MILLION views. In her first year of stand-up, Maija filmed five national TV appearances, flipping booing crowd at the Apollo Theater into a standing ovation then making a legendary mark on HBO’s Def Comedy Jam. She’s been hailed as “fantastic” by Dave Chappelle and a “f**king star!” by Bill Burr.

Maija has had numerous appearances from headlining on the Las Vegas strip to appearances at the Netflix is a Joke Festival, Essence Fest, NBC Comics Unleashed, three BET Comic Views, Sex and the City, Hot 97 Radio, Prime Video’s Discontinued, Soapstone Comedy in the Meta Verse and more.

Maija’s comedy can bridge any divide. With a multicultural and multidimensional energy fueled by her roots in music, theater, and film, Maija commands the crowd like few others can. She’s a triple threat.

Maija has developed her reputation as an enthralling comedic performer and outside of standup, she is a notably well-rounded entertainer. Influenced by her mother Sylvia Copeland—renowned concert vocalist and piano prodigy—and Uncle Henry Le Tang—Tony Award Winning choreographer—Maija has always channeled her work through a variety of artistic mediums. Her one-woman, Shakespearean play “RATS!.” 6 modernized Shakespeares wrapping in Music, humor and tap.. She directed the critically acclaimed film “Bitter Jester,” which received rave reviews from Variety and The New York Times, and she had established herself as a radio personality co-hosting the number station Hip Hop’s legendary Hot 97’s “The Morning Show

with Ed and Maija”.

In her comedy, she examines the complexities of what it means to be a mixed race, multicultural woman through her wry observations on many topics such as dating, family, friendships, and day-to-day life. Through her witty nature and playful charisma, she is able to dissect a wide variety of subjects in a way that is both entertaining and thought-provoking, so that everyone can understand and relate to her life experience.

DiGiorgio has developed a reputation as an extremely talented comedic performer because, in addition to stand-up, she is also a well-rounded entertainer. Influenced by her mother Sylvia Copeland—a renowned concert vocalist and piano prodigy—and her uncle Henry Le Tang—a Tony Award-winning choreographer—she has always channeled her work through a variety of artistic mediums. DiGiorgio has incorporated her Meisner acting training, along with her vocal and dance training (including tap dancing) into her performances. In addition to her stand-up comedy, she has performed her one-woman, Shakespearean play, “RATS!,” from New York to California. She also directed the film “Bitter Jester,” which received rave reviews from “Variety” and “The New York Times.” Additionally, she established herself as a radio personality when she co-hosted Hot 97’s “The Morning Show with Ed and Maija” in New York City.

Whether DiGiorgio is telling jokes, acting in plays, making movies, working as a radio host, or singing jazz songs, it is clear that she is a gifted performer who truly entertains–and amuses– every audience that she encounters.