3. Remove traces of your submission

If you are a high-risk source and the computer you prepared your submission on, or uploaded it from, could subsequently be audited in an investigation, we recommend that you format and dispose of the computer hard drive and any other storage media you used.

In particular, hard drives retain data after formatting which may be visible to a digital forensics team and flash media (USB sticks, memory cards and SSD drives) retain data even after a secure erasure. If you used flash media to store sensitive data, it is important to destroy the media.

If you do this and are a high-risk source you should make sure there are no traces of the clean-up, since such traces themselves may draw suspicion.

4. If you face legal action

If a legal action is brought against you as a result of your submission, there are organisations that may help you. The Courage Foundation is an international organisation dedicated to the protection of journalistic sources. You can find more details at https://www.couragefound.org.

The Global Intelligence Files

On Monday February 27th, 2012, WikiLeaks began publishing The Global Intelligence Files, over five million e-mails from the Texas headquartered "global intelligence" company Stratfor. The e-mails date between July 2004 and late December 2011. They reveal the inner workings of a company that fronts as an intelligence publisher, but provides confidential intelligence services to large corporations, such as Bhopal's Dow Chemical Co., Lockheed Martin, Northrop Grumman, Raytheon and government agencies, including the US Department of Homeland Security, the US Marines and the US Defence Intelligence Agency. The emails show Stratfor's web of informers, pay-off structure, payment laundering techniques and psychological methods.

RUSSIA/FORMER SOVIET UNION-New Moscow TV Channel Starts 24 Hour Broadcasting

Released on 2013-05-29 00:00 GMT

Email-ID 2565745 Date 2011-09-06 12:35:14 From dialogbot@smtp.stratfor.com To dialog-list@stratfor.com

RUSSIA/FORMER SOVIET UNION-New Moscow TV Channel Starts 24 Hour Broadcasting

New Moscow TV Channel Starts 24 Hour Broadcasting - Interfax

Monday September 5, 2011 21:26:23 GMT

Text of report by corporate-owned Russian news agency Interfax

Moscow, 5 September: The Moskva 24 (Moscow 24) TV channel, which is the

Moscow city government's new project and which has been created with the

participation of the All-Russia State TV and Radio Company (VGTRK) on the

basis of the Stolitsa (Capital) TV channel, is starting broadcasting at

2000 Moscow time (1600 gmt) on Monday (5 September).

"The channel's aim is to provide information about all the events that

happen in the capital in as detailed and timely a manner as possible. The

'Megapolis' information programme containing main news of Moscow and

Moscow Region will be coming on air on the TV channel every hour,"

Interfax has been told at the press service of the VGTRK.

The press service noted that "a large number of direct link-ups covering

most varied events from the city's life ranging from the activities of the

city authorities and prefectures to news from Moscow's concert and

exhibition halls will become the Moskva 24 TV channel's distinctive

feature".

"Apart from that, TV viewers will be able to obtain operational

information about weather and the transport situation in the city every 15

minutes," the representative of the press service said.

More than 4.5m households in Moscow and the nearest areas of Moscow Region

will be able to receive the Moskva 24 TV channel's signal. Moskva 24 is

available on the 10th TV channel of the cable networks of the OAO (open

joint-stock company) Mostelekom (OAO NKS), OAO Komkor (AKADO), OAO

Tsentralnyy Telegraf, OAO Investelektrosvyaz, OAO Komstar-OTS and other

telecom operators.

Answering a question from Interfax as to the way Moskva 24 wi ll differ

from Stolitsa, the head of the project, Igor Shestakov, for his part, told

the agency the following: "The Moskva 24 channel has been created and

programmed not as a general federal channel, but as an exclusively local

and specialized city channels. This is an information and news channel

about the life not of the whole country, but that of 10 districts of

Moscow. In creating this channel we primarily count on the active Moscow

audience."

(Description of Source: Moscow Interfax in Russian -- Nonofficial

information agency known for its extensive and detailed reporting on

domestic and international issues)

Material in the World News Connection is generally copyrighted by the

source cited. Permission for use must be obtained from the copyright

holder. Inquiries regarding use may be directed to NTIS, US Dept. of

Commerce.