Halo Sky Blue Violet is the tiny little bloomer you didn't know you needed. Its tiny 1-inch flowers have the most incredible coloring of any other Violet. A delicate blue circles the outside of all the petals, highlighting a white and yellow center. But don't let the delicate coloring fool you; this is one tough-as-nails perennial that blooms very early and late in the gardening year, providing beneficial pollinators of all types with precious nectar.

Halo Sky Blue Violet is a sunny, cheerful addition to any of your mixed seasonal containers or an excellent choice for a low, creeping groundcover. It is hardy enough to be perennial in USDA zones 4-9 and can be divided regularly to keep its spread under control. Naturalizing Halo Sky Blue is easy, allowing it to be planted in low-traffic areas as part of a turf-free meadow lawn. As the summer heats up, Viola cornuta will take a break and go semi-dormant until the weather cools later in the fall, spurring another flush of foliage.

Halo Sky Blue Violet Care

Violets multiply by spreading stems and self-seeding but can be easily controlled with annual dividing and replanting. Violets grow well in full sun or dappled shade and require very little maintenance after planting them. Choose a location where the soil drains well year-round and is reasonably fertile. Mulch the soil in the spring with organic compost, or add shredded arborist chips or leaves in the fall. As the organic material in the mulch breaks down, it will replenish nutrients in the soil. Water newly planted Violets well through the first summer to ensure well-established root systems.

Pruning is only required once during a growing season for Violets. In most growing zones, the Violets will die back entirely for the winter, although in zones 8 and 9, the plants will remain evergreen. When the plants begin to die back in the summer, cut the growth back by half. This allows the plant to invest energy into the root system without having to support top growth. Container-grown plants can be deadheaded to keep the growth compact and tidy. These plants also respond well to cutting back at midsummer in preparation for the late-summer growth.

Halo Blue Sky Violet Spacing

Violets planted in the ground as a groundcover should be spaced 10 inches apart on the center to provide quick, weed-suppressing cover. Container-grown Violets can be planted at three plants per 10-inch hanging basket or pot.

Halo Sky Blue Violet Information