Description

Sunny Hair Extensions Human Hair | Easiest To Fit and Weave

Sunny Hair Extensions Human Hair Golden Blonde Highlight

Made from 100% Real human hair

Silky and smooth

Flow Natural

8A Grade Salon Quality

No Tangle and no shedding

Halo Hair Extension

Sunny Halo Hair Extension is designed to be affordable. It is the easiest hair extension to fit and remove. without need for glue or weaving.

In order to better fix the halo hair and keep it more secure during wearing, we sew some clips on the weft. If you don’t need those clips, you could remove them and just use the wire when you wear it.

Hair Details

Material: 100% real Human Hair

Length: 12inch-20inch

Color: Dark Ash Blonde Mixed Blonde

Texture: Straight. Please note that hair becomes a little wavy after washing or improper packaging, this is normal.

Weight: 80g/pack

How to Apply Sunny Hair Extensions

1. Place the hair extension with the wire sitting behind the line. Gently push down to fit over the ears and sit the base of the skull

2. Pull the side of your hair out in front of the hair band to blend in with your natural hair.

3. Finishing the look, release all the hair to hide the wire and blend in with hair extension.

4. Enjoy beautiful, longer and fuller hair in just minutes.

How to Care

1. Wash and condition hair regularly.

2. Hackle hair gently before washing. Do not rub or twist hair.

3. Add mild shampoo to cool water and wash hair till clean.

4. Blot out excess water with towel and allow hair to dry naturally. Do not expose to sun.

5. Comb curly hair gently with your fingers. Do not brush.

6. Crush straight hair in a downward motion straight with the ends. Work your way up to the roots.

7. Hair may tangled if general care directions are not followed properly.

Features of Sunny Hair Extensions

People choose Sunny Hair Extensions for their promised features :

Easy to put or take out

Stable and Secure

Customizable according to your head size

Color Matching

Fast shipping

And most of all, it is graded Salon Quality while affordable at factory prices.

Easy to Put or Take out & Lighter

No glue, with hidden wire, can blend perfectly with your hair color. Our halo hair extensions are perfect choice for instant hair beauty transformation without waiting long hair growth time for adding volume and length.

Double Fixed with Wire and Clips & More Stable and Secure

We put one more elastic wire and two clips in the package. If you don’t need those clips, you could remove them and just use the wire when you wear halo hair.

Meet Your Customization Needs

12″-18″: 80g,

20″: 100g.

Halo weft width: 10 inch.

Wire width: 10.5 inch. The length and weight of the halo hair and width of the wire can be customized according to your head size.

Color Matching & Fast Shipment

Please note that Sunny Hair will provide you with professional color matching services. You can send us your hair photos directly. Most halo hair extensions have Amazon warehouse inventory. Parcels can be received in 2-5 business days.

Salon Quality & Factory Price

100% real halo human hair.

NO mixed animal or synthetic hair.

Silky softness, durable, reusable.

Can be straightened, curled, washed, restyled and be dyed-only to darker color.

The temperature is better under 180℃ when heating, make your hair look natural.

Order Now | Sunny Hair Halo Hair Extensions 12″

Have this “Sunny Hair Extensions | 12″ Human Hair Golden Blonde ” delivered to you

30 Days Return Policy | FREE Shipping for order over $25 | Secure Purchase

You may also be interested in the following

Ecowish Dress | Elegant Ruffles Cap Sleeves Summer A-Line Midi Dress

Miusol Dress | Casual Flare Floral Contrast Evening Party Mini Dress – Empowering Women to feel stylish always