Hi, guys! I hope you all are well and have had a good 2018 so far! I’ve been really inspired the last couple of weeks to do this look. I received Kat Von D’s Everlasting Liquid Lipstick in Lolita as an early Christmas gift and I’ve worn it pretty much every day since receiving it. I was wearing it the day my Play! by Sephora box arrived. In the box, I received the most vibrant magenta lipstick from Make Up For Ever. I immediately wanted to put it on. So I put it on the center of the lips just to see how it looked and actually fell in love with the combo! Ever since then I’ve wanted to do this look of matching halo eyes/lip. I was going to do it for NYE (still think this look would be awesome for parties!) but I was a bit under the weather so I waited till now to do it. I have to say I really love the look! It might not be for everyone but I’ll definitely rock this lip/look again. I hope you guys like it as much as I do!

Tutorial:

EYES:

Step one: Prime the lids and skin. Set with a loose powder.

Step two: Apply a matte taupe/brown into the crease and blend well. Do not go up to the brow bone. Apply a matte brown to the inner and outer corner. Avoid placing shadow in the middle of the lid, but don’t worry if you accidentally do.

Step three: Apply a matte brown based red to the outer and inner corner, over the brown. Blend well and avoid the center of the lid. I blended two colors together to create a similar shade to Lolita, but they have a Lolita eyeshadow you could use instead.

Step four: Apply concealer to the middle of the lid. Blend well, keep isolated to the center of the lid.

Step five: Apply a matte magenta eyeshadow over the concealer.

Step six: Blend well. Make sure the pink and the chestnut are blended together at the edges. Blend the crease well. Clean up any eyeshadow fall out.

Step seven: Apply black eyeliner and black mascara. Also, repeate the eyeshadows on the lower lash line, blend outward.

LIPS:

Step one: Apply Lolita (a chestnut rose Everlasting Liquid Lipstick by Kat Von D) to the lips. Overline if desired (I did.).

Step two: Let dry. Apply C207 to the middle of the lips (a fuchsia pink Artist Rouge Lipstick by Make Up For Ever.).

Step three: Blend the two together at the edges, go over the Lolita at the edges if necessary.

Finished look:

Products used:

SKIN CARE:

Cleanser: Purpose – Gentle Cleansing Wash.

Moisturizer and primer: First Aid Beauty – Hello FAB Coconut Skin Smoothie Priming Moisturizer.

Serum: Caudalie – Vinosource S.O.S Thirst Quenching Serum.

Eye cream: Caudalie – Vine[Activ] Energizing and Smoothing Eye Cream.

FACE:

Foundation: Lancôme – Teint Idole Ultra Long Wear Foundation in 215 Buff N.

Concealer: NYX Professional Makeup – Color Correcting Concealer I used shade yellow for correcting a discoloration. tarte – Double Duty Beauty Shape Tape Contour Concealer in Light for under eyes and center of the lid.

Setting Spray: Urban Decay – All Nighter Long-Lasting Makeup Setting Spray.

Powder: Kat Von D – Lock-It Setting Powder.

EYES:

Primer: L’Oréal – Infallible Pro Glow Concealer in 01 Classic Ivory.

Lid: Coastal Scents – Hot Pot in Barista and Danger from Makeup Revolution – Soph X Ultra 24 Eyeshadow Palette.

Crease: Tiramisu from Makeup Revolution – Soph X Ultra 24 Eyeshadow Palette.

Center of lid: Coastal Scents – Hot Pot in Magenta and Strawberry Sweets from Makeup Revolution – Soph X Ultra 24 Eyeshadow Palette.

Eyebrows: Benefit Cosmetics – Precisely, My Brow Pencil Ultra Fine Shape & Define in 03 and Essence – Make Me Brow Eyebrow Gel Mascara in 02.

Eyeliner: CLINIQUE – Pretty Easy Liquid Eyelining Pen.

Mascara: Marc Jacobs Beauty – Velvet Noir Major Volume Mascara (top lashes) and tarte – Lights, Camera, Lashes™ 4-in-1 Mascara (bottom lashes).

LIP:

Lipsticks: Kat Von D – Everlasting Liquid Lipstick in Lolita and MAKE UP FOR EVER – Artist Rouge Lipstick in C207.

CHEEKS:

Bronzer: Benefit Cosmetics – Hoola Matte Bronzer.

Contour: Wet n Wild – MegaGlo Contouring Palette in Dulce De Leche.

Blush: Essence – Satin Touch Blush in Satin Love 20.

Highlight: Makeup Revolution – Soph X Highlighter Palette in 02.

Want to learn more about halo eyes? Check out this post: Beauty Basics 102: Halo Eye

Let’s get social!

Instagram: emilyburnsmua

Twitter: emilyburnsmua

Pinterest: emilyburnsmua

Bloglovin’: Here