THOMAS Brodie-Sangster found international fame as the youngster who took up drumming to win over his first crush in the iconic film Love Actually in 2003.

Since then, he has gone on to star in some of the biggest films and TV shows and he is even engaged.

Who is Thomas Brodie-Sangster?

Thomas Brodie-Sangster was born on May 16, 1990.

The English actor has already left his mark on a number of world-famous movies and TV shows - most notably Love Actually.

Thomas played adorable drummer Sam, who was madly in love with his classmate at school, an American schoolgirl called Joanna.

The London-based star has acting in his blood.

His mum Anastasia "Tasha" Bertram has starred in London's Burning, Stig Of The Dump, and Marple.

Dad Mark Sangster is an editor who has worked on TV shows Goodnight Sweetheart, My Hero, and Taskmaster.

Thomas is also linked to one of his Love Actually co-stars, Hugh Grant, who is his second cousin, once removed.

As well as being a talented actor, Thomas plays guitar, learning to play left-handed to play the role of Paul McCartney in Nowhere Boy.

Who was Thomas Brodie-Sangster in Love Actually?

Thomas played the role of Sam, Liam Neeson’s on-screen son who was desperately trying to win the affections of a girl in his class at school.

His character poignantly learns to play the drums to impress her after his mother died.

At the end of the film, he chases her through the airport on Christmas Eve to declare his love before she moves back to America and manages to bag himself a kiss on the cheek as a reward.

There were also some tear-jerking moments between Sam and father Daniel, as the pair struggle to come to terms with the loss of Sam’s mother.

He made a return in 2017 for Red Nose Day Actually, a brand new, ten-minute sequel to Love Actually, created by original writer and director Richard Curtis for Comic Relief.

Most of the original cast signed up to reprise their roles in Red Nose Day Actually.

They included Hugh Grant, Martine McCutcheon, Keira Knightley, Liam Neeson, Colin Firth, Andrew Lincoln, Bill Nighy, Rowan Atkinson, Marcus Brigstocke, and Olivia Olson.

The Love Actually sequel was shown as part of Red Nose Day 2017 on BBC One.

Who did Thomas Brodie-Sangster play in Game Of Thrones?

The actor has gone on to star in some major on-screen hits, including Game Of Thrones.

He played recurring character Jojen Reed in the third and fourth seasons.

His character has prophetic dreams and helps the character of Bran Stark manage his own dreams.

In season four Jojen met his demise after being stabbed by one of the fearsome Wights.

Who does Thomas Brodie-Sangster play in BBC's Wolf Hall: The Mirror and the Light?

Thomas will be reprising the role of Rafe Sadler in BBC’s Wolf Hall series which began in 2015.

Sadler was the ward of Thomas Cromwell, who later became his secretary.

He will star alongside Harriet Walter, Timothy Spall and Harry Melling in The Mirror And The Light.

Mark Rylance, Damian Lewis, Jonathan Pryce, Kate Phillips and Lilit Lesser will all return for the six-part series, which was filmed across England and Wales.

What else has Thomas Brodie-Sangster been in?

After Love Actually, Thomas starred as Simon Brown in Nanny McPhee in 2005.

He played young Tristan in 2006 film Tristan + Isolde, and was Donald Clarke in Death Of A Superhero in 2011.

In 2009, he appeared in director Jane Campion's Bright Star, a romantic tale depicting the relationship between poet John Keats and his beloved Fanny Brawne.

The same year he was hailed for his portrayal of Paul McCartney in Nowhere Boy, a cinematic exploration of John Lennon's adolescence directed by the acclaimed artist Sam Taylor-Wood.

He also played Newt in the Maze Runner franchise and has also been an officer in Star Wars: The Force Awakens.

His role in Maze Runner: The Scorch Trails won him a Teen Choice Award for Choice Movie: Chemistry, which he shared with Dylan O’Brien.

In 2017, Thomas took on the role of Whitey Winn in the Netflix western drama miniseries Godless, crafted by Scott Frank.

He continued his collaboration with Frank by starring as chess player Benny Watts in the subsequent Netflix miniseries The Queen's Gambit (2020).

Both productions received high praise from critics, with The Queen's Gambit going on to become Netflix's most-viewed scripted miniseries.

In 2023, Thomas played Jack "Artful Dodger" Dawkins in the Disney+ miniseries The Artful Dodger.

Who is Thomas Brodie-Sangster fiancée Talulah Riley?

Talulah Jane Riley-Milburn is an English actress who has appeared in a number of popular movies.

She was born on September 26, 1985.

Talulah played Mary Bennet in the 2005 adaptation of Pride And Prejudice and Marianne in the 2009 film The Boat That Rocked.

She featured in both the 2007 movie St Trinian's and its 2009 follow-up, St Trinian's: The Legend Of Fritton's Gold.

She had a brief cameo in Christopher Nolan’s epic 2020 film Inception and played greeter Angela in the sci-fi series Westworld.

Sensationally the Hertfordshire-born star twice married billionaire Elon Musk.

They began dating in 2008 and married for the first time in 2010.

In July 2013, the couple remarried and stated they were living with Musk's five children from his first marriage to writer Justine Musk.

The divorce was finalised in October 2016.

Reports suggest that Talulah and Thomas have been dating since July 2022, having met while collaborating on the set of Pistol.

It was announced in July 2023 that the pair were engaged.

What is Thomas Brodie-Sangster's net worth?

According to entertainment site Just Jared, Thomas has a net worth of $3million (£2.4million).

The star established Brodie Films in 2006 with his mother Tasha, "to create opportunities in the film industry for new British talent; innovative writers, actors and directors".

However, the company was dissolved in May 2013.

Why did people think he was Prince Harry?

Following Prince Harry's engagement to US actress Meghan Markle, people began drawing comparisons online between the couple and Sam and Joanna in the 2003 hit.

Twitter users noticed several similarities between the real life and fictional couples including Sam's red hair and Joanna's passion for the performing arts - shared by Suits actress Meghan.