Excitement over the return of Love Actually is reaching fever pitch.

And fans of the movie will no doubt be ever more thrilled as Rowan Atkinson has reprised his role as Rufus, the pushy and overly-devoted salesman, for the Comic Relief special, which he was filming in London on Thursday.

The 62-year-old comedy legend's character was instantly recognisable as he stood behind the till to throw himself into some gift-wrapping, as with his famous scene in the 2003 movie.

Scroll down for video

It's been more than 13 years since iconic romance movie Love Actually hit the screens and the cast have reunited for a Comic Relief sketch.

Last week, fans were delighted to see Liam Neeson reunite with his onscreen stepson Thomas Brodie-Sangster, to shoot scenes in a London park as they played out their devastating and heartwarming tale from the story.

Further adding to the excitement of the reunion was the appearance of Rowan in the West London supermarket while he shot scenes as Rufus.

His initial turn in the franchise was one of the most iconic as he starred opposite the late Alan Rickman who played Harry, the husband of Emma Thompson's character Karen, who goes on to cheat on her.

As he plots his affair with his secretary, he goes to Rufus' department store to buy a necklace for his potential mistress although he is in the same building as his wife.

While trying to hurry the purchase along, he comes across Rowan's character who lavishly, arduously and hilariously goes through an elaborate wrapping process.

As he boxed up the necklace, he placed the item in a bag before scattering sequins, placing a cinnamon stick and tying a huge bow - in a process many fans will instantly recognise.

Rowan was spotted carrying out the same act on Thursday, although this time he was wrapping up Red Noses rather than a necklace.

While shooting was taking place, the movie's writer Emma Freud was snapping images from on-set in which her husband and co-writer Richard Curtis was seen chatting to the iconic actor.

Shortly before shooting, Martine McCutcheon, who starred as the Prime Minister's secretary, touched upon Emma's decision not to take part, due to fan favourite actor Alan tragically passing away last year.

She explained: ‘Emma Thompson said she’d prefer not to as it wouldn’t be the same without Alan Rickman.'

This comes after director Richard Curtis revealed the eagerly anticipated special will not feature a tribute to the late star after he tragically passed away in January 2016 from secret battle with cancer.

'You know dealing with Alan is very complicated so not really,' the flick's spearhead revealed to the Press Association about Rickman.

Love Actually follows the lives of eight very different couples dealing with their love lives in loosely interrelated tales, all set in the month before Christmas.

'We’re not doing everyone. 'We’re doing about two thirds of people,' Richard continued explaining the lack of tribute for Rickman.