“Would you like it… gift wrapped?” It’s a simple question, but when it comes out of this character’s mouth it’s almost a nightmare.

Of course, it’s Rowan Atkinson’s small role in Love Actually and it causes a pretty stressful situation for Alan Rickman’s character, Harry.

Easily one of the most popular British Christmas watches, the 2003 film follows the tangled-up and complicated love lives of a number of couples during the festive season in London.

And the comedian’s part as Rufus in the department store gets in the mix with Harry and Karen (Emma Thompson).

This iconic gift wrapping scene is just one of two appearances from Atkinson in the film but they’re both pretty important moments.

Plus, there’s a big meaning behind his character and his little acts of kindness – depending on whose viewpoint you’re looking from mind.

While Harry’s out shopping, Rufus gives a massively irritating yet hilarious moment as he elaborately wraps up the man’s purchase.

Probably everyone’s least favourite character in Love Actually, he’s decided to buy a fancy necklace for his mistress, while his wife is in the shop at the same time.

And much to his inconvenience, Rufus takes f**king forever to wrap it up, bringing out various boxes and decorations for such a long time that Harry actually tells him to ‘leave it’.

In a little slice of Love Actually trivia, it turns out this scene wasn’t just for comedic purposes.

In fact, neither was his second appearance towards the end of the film.

Rufus provides another infuriating yet heart-warming act at the airport.

When little Sam (Thomas Brodie-Sangster) rushes to say goodbye to his crush Joanna, Rufus holds up the queue.

He makes an airport ticket agent hold all of his coats in a pile, allowing for the sweet little moment between the kids.

Script Editor of the Richard Curtis film, Emma Freud revealed the real reason why he makes these two little appearances.

“Originally Rowan’s character over-wrapped the gift on purpose to stop Alan Rickman being able to buy the necklace,” she wrote on X.

“Because he was an angel.”

Yep, turns out Rufus was meant to be an ‘angel’ in an earlier draft of the script and was potentially supposed to have completely stopped Harry’s affair from happening.

Love Actually fans reacted to this, as they said he just ‘had to be an Angel’.

Another wrote: “OMG I KNEW IT!!!!! My husband and my family never believe me when I say he was a Christmas angel!!!!!!! Rowan Atkinson FTW!”

And one said: “Watched Love Actually AGAIN and seen Rowan Atkinson in a new light. Everything makes sense now. He’s a total angel.”