Rowan Atkinson

Rowan Sebastian Atkinson CBE (born 6 January 1955) is an English actor, comedian and writer. He is best known for his work on the sitcoms Blackadder (1983–1989) and Mr. Bean (1990–1995). Atkinson first came to prominence in the BBC's sketch comedy show 'Not the Nine O'Clock News' (1979–1982), receiving the 1981 BAFTA for Best Entertainment Performance, and via his participation in 'The Secret Policeman's Ball' (1979). His other work includes the James Bond film 'Never Say Never Again' (1983), playing a bumbling vicar in 'Four Weddings and a Funeral' (1994), voicing the red-billed hornbill Zazu in 'The Lion King' (1994), and playing jewellery salesman Rufus in 'Love Actually' (2003). Atkinson was listed in The Observer as one of the 50 funniest actors in British comedy in 2007, and among the top 50 comedians ever, in a 2005 poll of fellow comedians.

Atkinson was born in Consett, County Durham, England, on 6 January 1955. The youngest of four brothers, his parents were Eric Atkinson, a farmer and company director, and Ella May (née Bainbridge), who married on 29 June 1945. Atkinson was brought up Anglican, and was educated at Durham Choristers School, a preparatory school. After receiving top-grades in science A levels, he secured a place at Newcastle University, where he received a degree in Electrical and Electronic Engineering. In 1975, he continued for the degree of MSc in Electrical Engineering at The Queen's College, Oxford, the same college where his father matriculated in 1935, and which made Atkinson an Honorary Fellow in 2006. His MSc thesis, published in 1978, considered the application of self-tuning control. Atkinson briefly embarked in doctoral work before devoting his full attention to acting. More about Atkinson

Dolph Lundgren

Hans Lundgren (born 3 November 1957),better known as Dolph Lundgren is a Swedish actor, filmmaker, martial artist and chemical engineer. Lundgren's breakthrough came in 1985, when he starred in Rocky IV as the imposing Soviet Union boxer Ivan Drago. Since then, he has starred in more than 40 films, almost all of them in the action genre.

Lundgren received a degree in chemical engineering from the Royal Institute of Technology in the early 1980s and a master's degree in chemical engineering from the University of Sydney in 1982. He holds the rank of 4th dan black belt in Kyokushin karate and was European champion in 1980–81. While in Sydney, he became a bodyguard for Jamaican singer Grace Jones and began a relationship with her. He received a Fulbright scholarship to MIT and moved to Boston. Jones convinced him to leave the university and move to New York City to be with her and begin acting, where, after a short stint as a model and bouncer at the Manhattan nightclub The Limelight, Lundgren got a small debut role as a KGB henchman in the James Bond film A View to a Kill. More about Lundgren

Liam Neeson

Liam John Neeson OBE (born 7 June 1952) is an actor from Northern Ireland. He has been nominated for a number of awards, including an Academy Award for Best Actor, a BAFTA Award for Best Actor in a Leading Role, and three Golden Globe Awards for Best Actor in a Motion Picture Drama. Empire magazine ranked Neeson among both the "100 Sexiest Stars in Film History" and "The Top 100 Movie Stars of All Time". He is one of the highest grossing actors of all time.

At age nine, Neeson began boxing lessons at the All Saints Youth Club, going on to win a number of regional titles before discontinuing at age 17. He acted in school productions during his teens. Neeson's interest in acting and decision to become an actor were also influenced by Ian Paisley, founder of the Democratic Unionist Party (DUP), into whose Free Presbyterian Church of Ulster Neeson would sneak. Neeson has said of Paisley, "He had a magnificent presence and it was incredible to watch him just Bible-thumping away... it was acting, but it was also great acting and stirring too." In 1971, Neeson was enrolled as a physics and computer science student at Queen's University Belfast, before leaving to work for the Guinness Brewery. At Queen's, he discovered a talent for football and was spotted by Seán Thomas at Bohemian FC. There was a club trial in Dublin, and Neeson played one game as a substitute against Shamrock Rovers FC but was not offered a contract. More about Neeson

Ashton Kutcher

Christopher Ashton Kutcher (born February 7, 1978) is an American actor, producer, and entrepreneur. He began his acting career portraying Michael Kelso in sitcom 'That '70s Show' (1998–2006). He made his film debut in the romantic comedy 'Coming Soon' (1999), followed by the comedy film 'Dude', "Where's My Car?" (2000), which was a box office hit. In 2003, Kutcher moved into romantic comedies, appearing in that year's 'Just Married' and "My Boss's Daughter". In 2003, he created and produced the television series "Punk'd", also serving as host for the first eight of its ten seasons. In 2004, Kutcher starred in the lead role of the psychological film The Butterfly Effect.

Kutcher is a big investor in tech startups and has sunk some of his Hollywood fortune into companies such as Airbnb, Spotify, Foursquare, and Uber. Mr Mila Kunis first learned to code while studying Biochemical Engineering at the university, and went on to play Steve Jobs in the 2013 film, Jobs. Kutcher was hired as a product engineer for the Beijing based tech company, Lenovo, and is also an ambassador for the 'Hour of Code', an organisation that aims to introduce computer science to students all over the world. More about Kutcher

Chris Vance

George Christopher Vance (born 30 December 1971) is an English actor who is known for his television roles as Jack Gallagher in the Fox series 'Mental' (2009), and James Whistler in 'Prison Break' (2007–2008). He played Frank Martin (in TNT's Transporter: The Series) and has recurred on 'Burn Notice' (as Mason Gilroy), 'Dexter', the love interest of Angie Harmon's character on 'Rizzoli & Isles', Non on the CBS show 'Supergirl', and as Commander Harry Langford on 'Hawaii Five-0'.

Vance was born in Paddington, central London, one of four children of Irish parents. He attended St Bede's Secondary School in Lawrence Weston, Bristol, and played youth football for West Bromwich Albion and Bristol Rovers. He then attended Newcastle University, graduating with an honours degree in civil engineering. More about Vance