Cape Verde is a country defined by the ocean around it.

Located 350 miles off the coast of Senegal, the island nation is at once the epitome of a distant, exotic land and an altogether familiar experience for anyone who has enjoyed a helping of cachupa or jagacida in one of Southeastern Massachusetts' many Cape Verdean enclaves.

From Brockton to Cape Cod, local ties to the West African country are extraordinarily strong.

“My primary impression was I felt like I was home,” Vasco Pires of East Falmouth said recently about his first visit to the volcanic islands in the eastern Atlantic Ocean in 2004.

Pires has been back several times since that first trip to the country his grandparents emigrated from in 1909. They were never able to go back, he said.

Evidence of local connections to Cape Verde abound in Falmouth's Cape Verdean Club, the Zion Union Heritage Museum in Hyannis and a deep-rooted history bonding Harwich and other parts of Cape Cod to the rocky islands more than 3,000 miles away off Africa's west coast. The highlight for the region is the annual Cape Verdean festival in Onset.

Pires and other locals with Cape Verdean roots have sought to reinvigorate these links to their ancestral home, parlaying trips there into assistance for a country that, despite advances, still faces a host of challenges. In the process, they have returned to Cape Cod with a better understanding of the language, music and art of Cape Verde, they said.

Pires, 70, can remember as a young boy visiting with his grandmother's friends at homes along Sandwich Road, he said. Most of them came from Fogo, located in the country's leeward, or sotavento, islands and dominated by a 9,281-foot-high active volcano.

“It's just an unbelievable feeling to know where your roots are,” he said of visiting Cape Verde.

“It is really true that once you go there you feel like you need to go back.”

Nowhere on Cape Verde are ties to Cape Cod more powerful than on Fogo and Brava, the country's southernmost islands.

With its smoking core, Fogo is the most obvious embodiment of Cape Verde's own roots deep below the earth's crust. The island's active volcano, Pico de Fogo, sits inside the blown out crater of an older, much larger cone, offering views from its summit on a clear day of the country's largest island of Santiago.

In the opposite direction, across a short stretch of tumultuous sea, the archipelago's smallest island of Brava is seemingly within reach from the cobblestone street in front of the Cape Cod International Restaurante, located in Fogo's main city of São Filipe.

“I love Cape Cod especially in the summertime,” owner Gabriel Pires said during an interview this past November as he leaned against the restaurant's bar.

The 51-year-old restaurateur was born on Fogo and came to Massachusetts when he was 10. Like so many others who leave Cape Verde, he eventually returned to his island home, where he bought the restaurant, which already bore a familiar name.

The island's always-present mixture of Cape Verdean and American culture permeated the building. Bottles of Cape Verdean pontche, Strela beer and sumo or juice competed for space above the bar with Coca Cola, gin and whiskey sent from the U.S.

Seated in the restaurant eating a plate of cachupa – a traditional Cape Verdean corn dish – Louis “Zeca” Vega, 24, said he was visiting from his home in Brockton.

“I came to see the island, visit family, go to the beach,” he said.

Sublime paintings of American landscapes and a 3-D image of the twin towers at the World Trade Center before the Sept. 11, 2001, terrorist attacks hung on the walls nearby.

For Thanksgiving, a large dinner for expatriates was held at the restaurant, complete with turkey, dressing and cranberry sauce from Massachusetts-based company Ocean Spray.

The event's organizer, Jackie Lopes, 66, was born and raised in New Bedford but lived in California for half of her life, she said.

Although three of her four grandparents came from Cape Verde, Lopes was unaware of her ethnic background until a co-worker convinced her to investigate, she said.

“She said, ‘You're blessed because you can trace your roots,'” Lopes said.

She first traveled to the islands on vacation in 2004 and returned to live temporarily on Fogo after retiring in 2007.

“It's definitely tranquil, less stress for sure,” she said.

Not that Lopes has spent her time lazing on the island's black sand beaches.

She taught English at a local school, used prisoners to clean up the ribeiras, or dry river beds, that act as uncovered landfills, and created a nonprofit called Fogo Limpo to continue similar work.

Lopes is one of many Americans with Cape Verdean ties who have helped the country address ongoing challenges that range from waste disposal, to spotty electricity and scarce water supplies.

Her reason for returning to the U.S. this year – to ensure access to quality medical care – is another area where Cape Verde is benefiting from its diaspora.

At a hospital in the mountain town of Assomoda on Santiago, a group of interpreters, urologists and a gastroenterologist from Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center in Boston spent a week in November providing services that would be unavailable to most Cape Verdeans. The country's nine inhabited islands with a population of 500,000 have only one urologist, a Russian woman named Olga.

The American medical mission was organized by the interpreters and Michael Kearney, director of the Boston hospital's urology center.

In 2010, they consulted on more than 100 cases and performed five surgeries, Kearney said.

During November's visit, the group consulted on about 250 cases, performed about 20 surgeries and did 25 other procedures.

“It's minor for us in the U.S.,” said Maria DaSilva, a former Cape Verdean congresswoman. “For here, it's major.”

Interpreter Ernestina DaMoura-Moreira said she remembers growing up in Cape Verde and seeing older men dying because of easy-to-solve medical problems.

At the hospital, a long line of patients – mostly men – waited in an outside courtyard for their turn with the doctors. Inside the examining rooms, doctors and interpreters addressed a variety of problems, wading through paperwork and struggling at times to draw out basic information from their patients.

“What is your name?” urologist Peter Chang asked an 80-year-old man. “How can we help you?”

The group hopes to return this year with between five and 10 different specialists, bring Cape Verdean doctors back to the U.S. for training and eventually provide services across the entire country, DaMoura-Moreira said.

“Right now, I'm getting a lot of calls from different hospitals throughout the islands,” she said.

Vasco Pires, who wrote a book about tracing his Cape Verdean roots, is part of a recently formed think-tank that tackles policy issues there.

“The first time I went, I went because a friend of mine was working on a project to help poor families in Cape Verde,” Pires said.

In 2005 Pires was back, helping to establish an office for the project and delivering assistance directly to the families in need, he said.

Despite its position as a developing nation, poverty is rampant throughout Cape Verde.

Although there have been many improvements since he started visiting, there is still a stark contrast between the haves and have-nots, Pires said.

Despite this, the country is stable and there have not been any major disasters since the country gained independence from Portugal in 1975, he said.

In many ways the connection between Cape Cod and Cape Verde is a natural, Pires said, adding that both are unique places to live and visit.

“There's really no place like Cape Cod. It's kind of like being in Cape Verde,” he said.

“Except we have the cold season.”

-The population of Cape Verde is 500,000, which roughly equals the number of people of Cape Verdean ancestry who live in the United States. -Cape Verde is moving ahead with plans to generate 50 percent of its electricity from renewable resources, including land-based wind turbines, such as already exist on the islands of Santiago and Santo Antão. Renewable resources already provide 3.2 percent of the country's electricity. -Cape Verde's land mass of 1,557 square miles is slightly larger than the total size of Rhode Island, including water. -The country's most famous performer, Cesária Évora, died in December at the age of 70. The Grammy award-winning singer was known as the "Barefoot Diva" because she performed without shoes to show solidarity with the poor people of Cape Verde. Source: U.S. Department of State

Cape Verde fast facts