A few weeks ago, I wrote a column lamenting the fact that most Cape Verdean literature is written in Portuguese or in Crioulo. I also mentioned how frustrating it is to me that I can't read either of these languages and most of the works are not translated into English. However, I recently discovered that "The Last Will and Testament of Senhor da Silva Araujo" by Germano Almeida has been translated into English. Finally! I haven't been able to put the book down since I bought it at Baker Books earlier this week.

For those of you who don't know, Germano Almeida is considered by some to be the greatest living Cape Verdean writer. Born on the island of Boa Vista in 1945, he studied law in Lisbon and is an attorney on the island of Sao Vicente, where he also lives. In 1989, he founded the publishing house Ilheu Editora. "The Last Will and Testament," -- known as The Testament of Sir Napomuceno da Silva Araujo in Portuguese -- published in 1989 is his most well-known work.

The book has been translated into German, French, Spanish, Dutch, Norwegian, Swedish and Italian. It was made into a feature film, "Testamento," released in the United States in 1998. I remember going to Cinema 140 with my parents, brother and sister to see the movie. It was a real family outing. My father enjoyed the music. My mother enjoyed the story and we all were captivated by the beauty of the Islands. A couple of years ago, the film was shown at UMass Dartmouth as part of its free International Film Series. I was surprised at how much I enjoyed the movie a second time. Now, I get to read Almeida's words -- well, sort of. The book was translated from the Portuguese by Sheila Faria Glaser, not the author.

Almeida has written several other novels, including "My Poet" (1992), "Fantastic Island" (1994), "Two Brothers" (1994) and "Tales from the House" (1996). He also is active in the literary life of Cape Verde and has become known as a cultural promoter. Almeida worked with Rui Figueiredo and Leao Lopes to produce and publish a magazine, Point & Comma, from March 1983 to December 1987. He is co-owner and director of a periodical and is a contributor to the daily Public Portuguese newspaper.

The book is published by New Directions, an independent publisher for 60 years, which is interested in issuing influential foreign writers in translation. New Directions has helped promote in the U.S. the works of Rilke, Kafka, Montale, Lorca and Nabokov, as well as the 1990 Nobel Prize laureate Octavio Paz. To be included in this list is a great honor, and I am proud that a Cape Verdean author has been added. (If you go the publisher's Web site, www.wwnorton.com/nd/welcome.htm, you will see Germano Almeida as the featured author.)

Obviously, the book is about Senhor da Silva Araujo and the reading of his will. Described as a successful entrepreneur and owner of the first car on the island, he is known to be a serious, upright and self-made businessman. According to the book jacket summary, Senhor da Silva Araujo was the local success story. Orphaned at birth, he never married, he never splurged -- one good suit was good enough for him -- and he never wandered from the straight and narrow. Or so everyone thought. Until they read his 387-page will, and let's just say a few surprises are uncovered.

That's as far as I'll go with the plot description. The book is funny but also sad in some parts. It's definitely entertaining and I think it's a great way to end the summer. It's only 152 pages, shorter than Senhor da Silva Araulo's will, and I think you will enjoy it very much.

As I say, I got my copy at Baker Books, and I want to tip my hat to them for making the effort to sell books by and about Cape Verdeans. The book was published in June this year and it's already on their shelves. In fairness, you also can buy the book online. However, I haven't seen it in any other local bookstore.

Here's hoping that more U.S. publishers discover the wonderful voices of Cape Verdean writers and translate more of their work from Portuguese into English. After all, the Germans and the French have been translating some of these works for years. I think it's time the United States caught up.

Ann Marie Lopes can be reached at

This story appeared on Page A9 of The Standard-Times on August 29, 2004.