Pedro Pires and Carlos Veiga will face each other again in the race for Cape Verde's presidency.

Considered the two favorites in a five-man race, Mr. Pires and Mr. Veiga dominated at the polls yesterday, but neither managed to break the 50 percent mark.

Election law sends such races to a run-off between the two top vote-getters, which means it will be Pires and Veiga again -- this time without any distractions.

Unofficial election results from the Cape Verde consul general office in Boston showed Mr. Veiga with 47 percent of the vote, while Mr. Pires brought in 45 percent.

The race could be even closer than that, as those numbers do not include polling places in the United States, where Mr. Pires appeared to have won big.

In New Bedford, 122 voters chose Mr. Pires, with 21 choosing Mr. Veiga. Similar results came out of most U.S. cities. In Portugal, Mr. Pires took about 60 percent of the vote.

At New Bedford's Cape Verdean Veterans Memorial Hall yesterday, voters and poll workers said they were looking for a new president who will focus on issues facing Cape Verdean immigrants.

"I want a president who will come and talk to us with confidence," said Augusto Gomes, a West End resident. "We need to stop the drugs and the crime. We more jobs and better education."

Richard A. Lobban Jr., a Rhode Island College professor and an expert in Cape Verdean politics, said Cape Verdeans living in the United States think Mr. Pires can do just that.

He said many immigrants also feel Mr. Veiga, who served two terms as prime minister, has not addressed their needs.

"I think they are thinking, 'We've had 10 years under Veiga and have only got these types of problems drugs, unemployment, and attention to emigrants has fallen off,'" he said.

The African Party for the Independence of Cape Verde -- or PAICV -- took control of the National Assembly recently and has backed Mr. Pires.

Because the position of president is largely symbolic, Mr. Lobban said, a president without parliamentary support is significantly weakened.

But others might be worried about consolidating too much power with the PAICV, which ruled Cape Verde from 1975 to 1990 as a single-party state.

That could make Mr. Veiga, who took the prime minister seat in 1990 in the country's first multi-party election, a more attractive candidate.

Whoever wins will need the support of Cape Verdean immigrants, said New Bedford resident Orlando Medina.

"We know how important it is to vote," he said. "There are more people living outside Cape Verde than living on the island itself -- almost two times more."