We believe that the long-term, holistic care of your trees and shrubs will provide a return on your investment and your health. Our company’s main focus is on customer service and upholding the highest ethical standards in the green industry.

In 2024 Front Range Arborists joined the Timberline One Family of Companies under the leadership of owner, Timothy Emick, with a shared goal of providing better places to live, work, and play for residents of the Colorado Front Range.

Our reliability and quality of work are second to none.

We are proud to provide services to:

Residential

Commercial

Municipal institutions

Front Range Arborists’ Mission Statement

“We at Front Range Arborists strive to provide quality tree, shrub, and turf care in a safe, professional manner. It is important to provide service beyond our client’s expectations while enhancing and preserving their valuable trees and shrubs. We strongly promote educational opportunities for our employees to further their growth both within our company, as well as in their personal lives.”

Our professional staff looks forward to serving the Pikes Peak Region for many years to come.

Front Range Arborists Office Staff

Tom Flynn – Business Development & Certified Arborist

Greg Shields – Operations Manager

Charity Pacheco – Office Manager

Ronnie Blankenship – Business Development

Tim Emick – Chairman & Owner

Judd Bryarly– CEO

Craig Nesbit – CFO

Stephanie Early – CSO

Interested in career opportunities at Front Range Arborists? Let us know, submit an application today!

Contact Front Range Arborists in Colorado Springs, CO

Based in Colorado Springs, CO, Front Range Arborists offers arborist services including pest control and beetle prevention, fire mitigation, tree removal, tree trimming, and more tree services. Serving Colorado Springs, Woodland Park, Fountain, Monument, Black Forest, Manitou Springs, and other surrounding areas. Call Front Range Arborists at (719) 635-7459 or use our online form for your free estimate today!

The TimberlineOne Companies include: