Space, SIMPLIFIED

PRIVATE OFFICES, FLEXIBLE WORKPLACES and FREE COFFEE IN Colorado Springs.

WHY Front range Co-working?

If you are tired of working from home, but you don’t want to enter a long-term lease, Front Range Co-Working is your solution. Our professional and comfortable environment is just what your need to increase your productivity.



Professional Design

Our design projects that modern look you need to impress your customers.



Fast Internet

We like speed just as much as you do. You will never be waiting for your pages to load.



Conference and Meeting Rooms

You can conduct meetings with clients, customers or prospects in our well-furnished meeting rooms.



Multiple Kitchens

We have two kitchen/breakrooms, with refrigerators, microwaves, a dishwasher and plenty of seating.



Free Coffee and Tea

We offer free coffee, tea and filtered water for you and your guests.



24/7 Access

Night-owl? Early Riser? We have your covered. As a member, you can access your space whenever you need.



Free Parking

There is ample, free parking on site.



Mailbox Services

Use a real street address for your business.



White Noise

Our space has white noise throughout to keep your conversations private.



Gym Access

Access to the building Fitness Room included with your private office.



Outdoor Spaces

Back Patio with beautiful views of Monument Creek.



Convenient Location

Close to Woodmen and I-25, with restaurants and hotels in walking distance.

A VARIETY of PLANS TO FIT YOUR NEEDS:

Business Address

Secure mail and packages

$79/mo

Use our street address for your business

Mail and packages are delivered to your own locked mailbox

Get FedEx, UPS and Amazon packages delivered to us

Come in and pick up your mail any time during business hours

Shared Workspace

Drop in and use a desk

$99/mo

One low fee membership for unlimited desk access

Unlimited daily access during open hours

No deposit or fixed term

Discounts on conference rooms and day offices

Rate discounts available for 12-month agreements

Private Office

Dedicated space for you

$499+/mo

Seating for 1-5 people

Your own fully furnished private office

24/7 access

Wi-Fi and Ethernet

Secure, lockable space

2 hours a month of conference room space

Access to the Fitness Room included

Business address plan included

Month-to-Month and longer terms available.

Professional Plan

Our professional plan combines our popular Business Address and Shared Workspace Plans. Work in our space and pick up your mail.

$179/mo

Front Range Co-Working

7222 Commerce Center Dr.

sUITE #220

Colorado Springs, CO 80919

Front Range Co-Working

7222 Commerce Center Dr.

Suite #220

Colorado Springs, CO 80919

Contact US or Request a TOUR

Our team will be happy to show your around our space, and answer any questions you may have.