Alexandre Grothendieck was born in 1928 in Berlin.

Hitler rose in 1933 and as a consequence, little Alexandre - aged 5 - and his parents - a jewish couple - fled Germany to France and then Spain, where they joined the civil war and the republican's camp. The boy will stay in Spain until the end of the civil war, and join his parents in Nîmes (France). Not long after, his father dies in Auschwitz and he is sent together with his mother to the Rieucros concentration camp, where he discovers the relationship between the circle and the diameter, approximating pi on his own.

He finishes high school and enrolls in Montpellier University to obtain a BS in Maths. He doesn't care to get good grades, but is remarked by his professors for finding Henri Lebesgues' method to compute complex volumes, also on his own.

He goes to Paris to work under Laurent Schwartz and Jean Dieudonné's supervision.

They submit him 14 unanswered mathematical questions and he gives back 14 answers in a few months.

At age 20, he has already achieved the equivalent of 6 PhD thesis.

He has no nationality and doesn't want one. He is officially a ONU refugee. No possibility to work in the post-war french establishment.

However, a swiss industrial convinces him to join a new research institute, with absolute freedom to pursue mathematical research. There, for almost 20 years, he will build his masterwork : the theory of algebraic geometry, fostering a huge mathematical production.

His ability to "connect dots" and open new research leads is astounding. In a world dominated by abstraction, he knows better how to generalize and synthetize.

He receives the Fields medal in 1966 but doesn't accept any honours. No receptions, no pens.

In 1968, he is violently attacked by the student movement in Paris. Shocked, he gradually leaves the academic world and, with a few colleagues, starts a radical ecologist movement. From 1972 he will work as a maths professor at the Montpellier University, but will not pursue any research.

He continues to refuse recognition and honours.

He retires in 1990 to Lasserre (France), where he lived recluded.

Alexandre Grothendieck died yesterday. A great man.