CARACAS, Venezuela -- The city was quiet after the country learned President Hugo Chávez, the bombastic anti-American socialist who was a hero to the country's poor, died Tuesday.

People gathered in front of the military hospital in Bolivar Plaza where he was said to have died at 4:25 p.m. Some held photos of the president, tears in their eyes.

As night fell, hundreds could be seen holding a march on a downtown street. Banners called Chávez, "Our liberator."

Chávez, 58, died from cancer, though it was never publicly known what kind. Vice President Nicolas Maduro's voice broke and tears ran down his face as he appeared on national television to announce that Chavez died after a two-year illness.

Foreign Minister Elias Jaua declared that elections would be called in 30 days. He said Maduro would be the candidate for the government, and the vice president would serve as interim president.

The Associated Press reported that an elaborate funeral is planned for Friday.

Just a few hours earlier, Maduro gave a speech against enemies he claimed were trying to undermine Venezuela's government. He said he ordered an American Air Force attache at the U.S. embassy expelled for spying, and some in the regime blamed America for Chavez's death.

Chávez loyalists and his regime leaders face the dilemma of inheriting a government whose strength is due largely to love for Chávez, not the regime. Now that Chávez is dead after 14 years in office, Maduro will have to convince Chávez's supporters that he is capable of carrying Chavismo beyond its personality cult foundation.

The country's opposition movement led by former governor Henrique Capriles Radonski, who lost to Chávez in October, has said any attempt by Maduro to take over would be unconstitutional. Capriles has said he does not think Chávez's regime can survive the death of its leader.

"I have my doubts about Chavismo without Chávez,'' Capriles said in an interview with El Universal newspaper. "Any leadership without Chávez appears to me to be profoundly vulnerable."

Chávez won power democratically 14 years ago after failing to take it by force, then turned the country into an anti-American state that attempted to export and support leftist socialism throughout Latin America.

In doing so, he seized private companies such as banks and the oil industry, packed them with confidantes and cohorts and soaked them for cash he sometimes spent on housing projects and food giveaways in impoverished villages and barrios.

He practically gave away Venezuela's oil to Cuba, which he saw as a model, and to a charitable company created by former Democratic U.S. representative Joseph Patrick Kennedy II for goodwill in the United States.

Though his crony capitalism and nepotism damaged the country's ability to pay its debts, sell food or invest in the future, the poor backed him all the way.

"This is a very hard, hard time for Venezuela,¨said Nelson Merentes, president of Venezuela´s Central Bank. "But we will get through this."

President Obama released a statement expressing support for the Venezuelan people.

"As Venezuela begins a new chapter in its history, the United States remains committed to policies that promote democratic principles, the rule of law and respect for human rights," Obama said.

Diplomatic relations between the United States and Venezuela broke off in 2008 under President George W. Bush, whom Chavez reviled. Relations were reestablished in June 2009 under Obama, but Chavez did not draw back from his anti-American views.

Kennedy said Chavez cared deeply about the poor of Venezuela and other nations around the world. Kennedy has been criticized as being used by a dictator in need of good publicity.

"There are close to two million people in the United States who received free heating assistance, thanks to President Chavez's leadership," Kennedy said.

But many Venezuelans said life under Chavez was a nightmare and it may get worse under his followers.

"I am sorry he died just because he´s a human being but that´s it," said Pablo Perez, 42, an information systems specialist. " He armed a lot of his supporters, and many of them are thugs, common criminals. He is responsible for the deaths of thousands."

In 2012, Venezuela, a country of about 30 million, had more than 20,000 murders. The United States, with 315 million people, had about 12,000 murders.

Still, the country's poor felt they had an ally in Chavez, and worry what the future will bring.

In El Junquito, an impoverished slum overlooking Caracas, people stood in stunned silence, many crying.

"Who will take care of us now?" said Maria Alvarez, a 27-year-old housewife. "Chávez cared for the people, not like the other presidents."

Sirleni Sosa, 50, said she could not believe the president is dead.

"The people love him," she said. "He's done so much for the country. But God has called him."

Julio Alegresi was in a supermarket in Caracas when the announcement was made by Vice President Nicolas Maduro, Chavez's pick to succeed him.

"I was almost alone and within minutes the market was overflowing with people, rushing to buy goods. People were buying anything in sight, as if they were panicking," he said.

Jaua declared seven days of national mourning, fighting back tears as he made the announcement.

"Long live Chavez forever," he said.