This image is one of over 108,000 from the AMICA Library (formerly The Art Museum Image Consortium Library- The AMICO Library™), a growing online collection of high-quality, digital art images from over 20 museums around the world. www.davidrumsey.com/amica offers subscriptions to this collection, the finest art image database available on the internet. EVERY image has full curatorial text and can be studied in depth by zooming into the smallest details from within the Image Workspace.

Preview the AMICA Library™ Public Collection in Luna Browser Now

Cultures and time periods represented range from contemporary art, to ancient Greek, Roman, and Egyptian works.

Types of works include paintings, drawings, watercolors, sculptures, costumes, jewelry, furniture, prints, photographs, textiles, decorative art, books and manuscripts.

Gain access to this incredible resource through either a monthly or a yearly subscription and search the entire collection from your desktop, compare multiple images side by side and zoom into the minute details of the images. Visit www.davidrumsey.com/amica for more information on the collection, click on the link below the revolving thumbnail to the right, or email us at amica@luna-img.com .

Creator Name: Mi, Fu

Creator Nationality: Asian; Far East Asian; Chinese

Creator Dates/Places: Chinese, 1052-1107

Creator Name-CRT: Mi Fu

Title: Poem Written in a Boat on the Wu River

View: Full View

Creation Start Date: 1080

Creation End Date: 1107

Creation Date: Northern Song dynasty (960-1127), ca. 1100

Object Type: Paintings

Classification Term: Calligraphy

Materials and Techniques: handscroll; ink on paper

Dimensions: 12 1/4 in. x 18 ft. 3 1/4 in. (31.1 x 557 cm)

AMICA Contributor: The Metropolitan Museum of Art

Owner Location: New York, New York, USA

ID Number: 1984.174

Credit Line: Gift of John M. Crawford Jr., in honor of Professor Wen Fong, 1984

Rights: http://www.metmuseum.org/

Context:

Sun Guoting (648?-703?) stated in his Manual on Calligraphy that calligraphy reveals the character and expresses the emotions of the writer. Few works demonstrate this principle as clearly as this handscroll by Mi Fu, the leading late Northern Song calligrapher. Mi wrote Poem Written on the Wu River with a suspended arm, working from the elbow rather than the wrist. The brush moves lightly, changing pressure within each stroke; the size of the individual characters, the thickness of the brushstrokes, and the amount of ink used vary dramatically from column to column. His aim was not to form perfect individual characters; instead he entrusted his writing to the force of the brush-giving full reign to idiosyncratic movements, collapsing and distorting the forms of the characters for the sake of expressiveness. Su Shi (1036-1101) described Mi's writing style as a 'sailboat in a gust of wind or a war-horse charging into battle.'

AMICA ID: MMA_.1984.174

AMICA Library Year: 2000

Media Metadata Rights: Copyright The Metropolitan Museum of Art

AMICA PUBLIC RIGHTS: a) Access to the materials is granted for personal and non-commercial use. b) A full educational license for non-commercial use is available from Cartography Associates at www.davidrumsey.com/amica/institution_subscribe.html c) Licensed users may continue their examination of additional materials provided by Cartography Associates, and d) commercial rights are available from the rights holder.