Looking across Unter den Linden at Friedrichstraße showing the extensive postwar damage and me at the site in 2020. Three blocks east of the parallel Wilhelmstraße, Friedrichstraße was badly damaged during the war and only partly rebuilt during the division of Berlin. During the Cold War and its division, Friedrichstraße underground station, despite being located in East Berlin, was utilised by two intersecting West Berlin S-Bahn lines and the West Berlin subway line U6. The station served as a transfer point for these lines, and trains stopped there, although all other stations on these lines in East Berlin were sealed-off ghost stations (Geisterbahnhof), where trains passed through under guard without stopping. At Friedrichstraße station, West Berlin passengers could transfer from one platform to another but could not leave the station without the appropriate papers. The section of the station open to West Berlin lines was heavily guarded and was sealed off from the smaller part of it serving as a terminus of the East Berlin S-Bahn and as a station for long-distance trains. The section in West Berlin was partly rebuilt as a residential street; in the late 1960s, the remains of the former Belle-Alliance-Platz at the end of the Friedrichstraße, renamed Mehringplatz, were completely demolished and replaced with a concrete housing and office development designed by Hans Scharoun. Despite its central location, this area remains relatively poor.

Bahnhof Friedrichstraße from Berlin in Bildern, published in 1938, and during my 2020 Bavarian International School history trip.

At the end of January, between 40,ooo and 5o,ooo refugees were arriving in Berlin each day, mainly by train. The capital of the Reich did not welcome its victims. `The Friedrichstrasse Bahnhof has become the transit point of Germany's fate,' an eyewitness wrote. `Each new train that comes in unloads a mass of amorphous suffering on to the platform.' In their misery, they may not have noticed the sign there which proclaimed, `Dogs and Jews are not allowed to use the escalator!' Soon energetic measures were taken by the German Red Cross to push refugees on from the Anhalter Bahnhof as quickly as possible, or to force trains to go round Berlin. The authorities were afraid of `infectious diseases such as typhus' and an epidemic in the capital. Other illnesses that they feared the refugees would spread were dysentery, paratyphus, diphtheria and scarlet fever.

Beevor (48-49) The Fall of Berlin 1945

During our 2017 school trip and the same scene immediately after the war; only the two round roofs of the station offer a direct point of comparison. Kershaw writes how Friedrichstraße station had housed, according to Ursula von Kardorff, a young journalist, an ‘underworld’ almost exclusively inhabited by foreigners, including ‘Poles with glances of hatred’, and a ‘mix of peoples such as was probably never to be seen in a German city’. Any outsider was looked at with suspicion, she wrote. The foreign workers were reputedly ‘excellently organised’, with their own agents, weapons and radio equipment. ‘There are 12 million foreign workers in Germany,’ she said in a telling exaggeration perhaps reflecting her own inner concern, ‘an army in itself. Some are calling it the Trojan Horse of the current war.’

The very young soldier wearing the Luftwaffe camouflage jacket in the photo at right can also be seen in the main photo at far left, beside the half track’s front wheel. His body has been turned over by the Russians and it lays on a MG42 with its breech opened, dislodging a length of spent ammo belt. Beside lays a Volkskopie of Hitler’s Mein Kampf, probably placed there by Soviet TASS press agency photographer Mark Redkin. The other corpses were most likely Swedish ϟϟ volunteers. A chess/checkers board can be discerned discarded amidst the rubble and corpses.

Another photograph taken with my 2020 cohort on the corner of Friedrichstrasse and Johanisstrasse. The van above right is a bright red Bergmann Deutsche Reichspost vehicle, which had initially been suggested to be a Mercedes-Benz L1500 which had been the vehicle of choice for the German infantry troops, eventually produced in nearly five thousand units between 1941 and 1943. However thanks to Javier de Luelmo it has been identified. This photo shows the scene out of view beside the postal van above revealing the bodies of ten combatants. A further two more can be just made out on the rubble in front of the van in the upper photo. A lack of dust and debris on the bodies by the van in addition to the gravity-defying posture shown in the rigor mortis in several of them suggests they were not killed here but rather had been gathered to be taken away by the postal van for burial despite the van's flat front tyre. In other words, the van is likely a later arrival, whilst the number of killed near this intersection remains difficult to estimate.

s

My students from the Bavarian International School in front of the eagle in the middle of Weidendammer bridge, shown then and now. The crown has been returned just as the imperial palace is being rebuilt. The bridge has played a role in literature several times, as in rich Kästner's Pünktchen and Anton in which “Pünktchen”, the little girl from a wealthy family, begs in torn clothes on the Weidendammer Bridge (in the middle of the entertainment district of the 1920s) and sells matches; across the street, her friend Anton sells shoelaces.

It was over this bridge that Hitler's private secretary and successor as Nazi Party Minister

Bormann carried the last copy of Hitler's testament, and he evidently hoped to use it to justify his claim to a position in Donitz's government when he reached Schleswig-Holstein. Another attack over the bridge was made soon afterwards, using a self-propelled 3omm quadruple flak gun and a half-track. This too was largely a failure. A third attempt was made at around 1 a.m., and a fourth an hour later. Bormann, Stumpfegger, Schwaegermann and Axmann kept together for a time. They followed the railway line to the Lehrterstrasse Bahnhof. There they split up. Bormann and Stumpfegger turned north-eastwards towards the Stettiner Bahnhof. Axmann went the other way, but ran into a Soviet patrol. He turned back and followed Bormann's route. Not long afterwards he came across two bodies. He identified them as Bormann and Stumpfegger, but he did not have time to discover how they had died. Martin Bormann, although not of his own volition, was the only major Nazi Party leader to have faced the bullets of the Bolshevik enemy. All the others - Hitler, Goebbels, Himmler and Goring - took their own lives.

Beevor (382-383) Berlin

Friedrichstadt Palast around the turn of the century when it served as a military barracks dating from the 1760s and today. During the Nazi era the theatre was renamed the Theater des Volkes. The dome hanging pins were cut off as they were seen as degenerate art. and late-bourgeois operettas were performed. The theatre was at this time also under the name Palace of 5000 and under the private management Spadonis Marion and Nicola Lupo.The building suffered most in March 1945 due to repeated air attacks. Damage caused the plays to be removed from March until August 1945. Now, led the artists Spadoni and Lupo the house as a palace of the 3000/Theater of 3000 or Palace at the Friedrichstrasse station and Palace Variety.In 1949 the owners abandoned the theatre and the city of Berlin took over the facility, the original name Friedrichstadtpalast got back. The first director was following the expropriation of Gottfried Hermann, he was succeeded in 1961, Wolfgang E. Struck.

When taking school groups I'd previously used Baxpax hostel around the corner at Ziegelstrasse 28. Named after Felix Yurievich Ziegel, Soviet researcher, Doctor of Science and docent of Cosmology at the Moscow Aviation Institute and generally regarded as a founder of Russian ufology, like many streets reflecting the military connections around the area- Artillerienstrasse, Dragonerstrasse, Grenadierstrasse- its original name had been purged and replaced by worthy left-wingers by the East German regime.

when he saw the fabulous decoration that he coveted, the diamond-studded Collar of the Annunziata, bestowed at the Italian embassy upon his smirking rival [Ribbentrop]. He took it as a deliberate slight and raised hell at every level up to the king of Italy, being mollified only by the award, twelve months later, of the identical Collar in consolation.

The Japanese embassy on the left also maintains its symbols of fascist ideology a reminder of the man-made tsunami it had launched upon humanity beginning in 1931 which required two atomic bombs and countless allied lives and suffering to put an end to. On November 24, 1937 Hitler attended a reception here, given by the Japanese Ambassador Mushakoji in Berlin on the anniversary of the Anti-Comintern Pact. The building itself had been built between 1938–1942 according to plans by Ludwig Moshamer under the supervision of Albert Speer but expected to meet the expectations of the German leadership, resulting in a comparatively sterile classic building style. Above all, the building was to impress with its size; the pillars at the main entrance were a defining style element. Above the cornice , a half-storey attic above the main entrance forms the visual end of the building. In the central visual axis there is a golden chrysanthemum as a symbol of the imperial family. Although the German builder furnished the building with a lot of luxury inside, in fact a large part of the administration took place in bunkers and other air raids during the war.

At that time, part of the Japanese embassy was relocated to the north of the city to the existing estate of the Jewish family Zwillenberg, who had been forced to sell their property. As early as 1943, an aerial bomb destroyed the side wing. Badly damaged, the building was empty for several decades. In the mid-1980s, Germans and Japanese agreed to set up a German-Japanese cultural centre in the dilapidated building. The German monument protection authorities pushed for the historic building to be preserved, but the Japanese found it in a state that could no longer be saved. In order to keep the agreements with the Germans as close as possible, Japan had it rebuilt as identically as possible by Kishō Kurokawa and Tajii Yamaguchi. For its new use as an embassy building, it underwent extensive renovations and additions by the architect Ryohei Amemiya between 1998 and 2000. A complete office wing was newly built and a Japanese garden was laid out. The main entrance was also relocated from Tiergartenstrasse to Hiroshimastrasse, which branches off from it. A golden chrysanthemum, the imperial seal, is still emblazoned above the former main entrance, which is now the entrance to the ambassador's residence. Both architecturally and historically, the Japanese embassy is very similar to the Italian embassy directly opposite.