Day 1: Arrival in Berlin

Day 2: Berlin – Oranienburg | Oranienburg - Eberswalde, 26 mi. (42 km)

Day 3: Eberswalde - Schwedt | Hoensaaten – Schwedt, 20 or 40 mi. (32 or 64 km)

Day 4: Schwedt – Mescherin | Mescherin - Szczecin, 19 mi. (30 km)

Day 5: Szczecin – Wolgast

Day 6: Wolgast – Peenemünde | Peenemünde - Lauterbach, 9-16 mi. (15-25 km)

Day 7: Lauterbach – Stralsund, 30 mi. (48 km)

Day 8: Departure from Stralsund

*All distances are approximate. The itinerary is subject to change, even on very short notice, due to changing wind and weather conditions and other unforeseen circumstances having to do with mooring requirements, docking location changes, lock repairs, etc. Parts in italics are undertaken by ship.

Day 1: Arrival in Berlin

Individual arrival in Berlin. Embarkation begins at 4:00 PM. It is possible to bring your luggage on board as early as 2 pm but your cabin will not be ready for check-in. You might find that one day is simply not enough in this city that defies definition. Once Berlin's symbol of wealth and prosperity, Kurfürstendamm is still a bustling boulevard, a great place to take a walk and get the feel of the city. The Nikolai quarter is the oldest residential area of Berlin and must be added to your sightseeing list. With its medieval alleys and numerous restaurants and bars, it is a favorite destination among tourists. The Brandenburg Gate is the trademark of Berlin. It is the main entrance to the city and was surrounded by the famous Berlin Wall for thirty years. The wall was known throughout the world as a symbol of the division of the city.

Day 2: Berlin – Oranienburg | Oranienburg - Eberswalde, 26 mi. (42 km)

The well-marked bike route meanders northward through the Ruppin Sea area to Oranienburg. A visit to the Baroque castle with its park, museum, and orangery is recommended. Once you arrive in Oranienburg, the ship will be waiting to then navigate to Eberswalde. In the Finow Canal, located in the heart of the city, you'll see the oldest working lock in Germany.

Day 3: Eberswalde - Schwedt | Hoensaaten – Schwedt, 20 or 40 mi. (32 or 64 km)

Today's route leads on the Treidel bike route along the Finow Canal, passing through forests, through glades, and over small hills in the direction of Niederfinow (boat lift – a tour is always an option) to Hohensaaten. Here you will board and sail to Schwedt or if you would like to continue to cycle, you can do so all the way to Schwedt which will add 32 km to your route.

Day 4: Schwedt – Mescherin | Mescherin - Szczecin, 19 mi. (30 km)

Today you will bike through a part of a unique, cross-border nature reserve, the “Lower Oder Valley National Park”, then on to Gartz and Mescherin, where you will get back on the boat. Then you will sail to Szczecin, the green city on the mouth of the Oder and one of the largest ports on the Baltic Sea. The reconstructed castle of the Dukes of Pomerania situated in the city’s historic center is worth seeing.

Day 5: Szczecin – Wolgast; Rest day

Today you will spend all day on board. After one last narrow passage, the boat will arrive in the expansive waters of the Bay of Szczecin (Oder Lagoon). After the crossing, you will reach Wolgast, the "Gateway to Usedom Island". The Medieval historic center with its town hall and the Church of St. Petri are interesting sights and definitely worth a visit.

Day 6: Wolgast – Peenemünde | Peenemünde - Lauterbach, 9-16 mi. (15-25 km)

There are three cycling routes to choose from on the Island Usedom. In the morning you will bike through Zecherin and Karlshagen Harbor to Peenemünde. Recommended is a stop at the historical/technical museum in the former power plant. If the weather is conducive, you may feel like cycling the “beach-route” via Trassenheide and Zinnowitz alternatively. In Peenemünde you will get back on board and at about 6 pm you sail to Lauterbach in the southeast of Rügen Island (arrival around 9 pm).

Day 7: Lauterbach – Stralsund, 30 mi. (48 km)

Today you should not miss a visit to the nearby city of Putbus (about 2 km) with its well-known circus. Classical buildings line this circular “square”, where all the streets converge. Your bike tour today will take you through Putbus, Garz, Poseritz, and Gustow with its well-known village church over the Rügen Dam to Stralsund, where the boat will meet you. As a city with an important past, a stroll through the historic center, which is situated on an island, will take you past numerous exceptional sights. Overnight in Stralsund.

Day 8: Departure from Stralsund

After breakfast, disembarkation at 9:00 am and individual trip home.

Day 1: Arrival in Stralsund

Day 2: Stralsund – Lauterbach | Lauterbach - Peenemünde, 30 mi. (48 km)

Day 3: Peenemünde – Wolgast, bike tour, 9 or 16 mi. (15 or 25 km)

Day 4: Wolgast – Szczecin; rest day on board

Day 5: Szczecin – Mescherin | Mescherin - Gartz – Schwedt, 17 mi. (28 km)

Day 6: Schwedt – Hohensaaten | Hohensaaten - Niederfinow - Eberswalde, 20 mi. (32 km)

Day 7: Eberswalde – Oranienburg | Oranienburg – Berlin, 26 mi. (42 km)

Day 8: Departure from Berlin

Day 1: Arrival in Stralsund

Individual arrival in Stralsund. Embarkation begins at 4:00 PM. It is possible to bring your luggage on board as early as 2 pm but your cabin will not be ready for check-in If time permits, take a stroll through Stralsund’s historic center, which is situated on a small island. As a city with an important past, you will see numerous exceptional sights. Overnight in Stralsund.

Day 2: Stralsund – Lauterbach | Lauterbach - Peenemünde, 30 mi. (48 km)

Your bike tour on this day will take you through Stralsund over the Rügen Dam to Gustow with its well-known village church, then past Gustow, Poseritz, Garz to Putbus (tip: Don’t miss the famous circus. Classical buildings line this circular “square”, where all the streets converge). Then it’s off to Lauterbach in the southeast of Rügen Island. You will board the boat here. Around 6.30 pm departure to Usedom

Day 3: Peenemünde – Wolgast, bike tour, 9 or 16 mi. (15 or 25 km)

There are three cycle routes to choose from. Today you have plenty of time to explore the Usedom Island. Visit the historical/technical museum in the former power plant or alternatively, you can choose the “beach-route” via Trassenheide and Zinnowitz. Afterward, bike past Karlshagen Harbour and Zecherin to Wolgast, also known as the “Gateway to Usedom Island. The Medieval historic center with its town hall and the Church of St. Petri are interesting sights.

Day 4: Wolgast – Szczecin; rest day on board

Today you will spend all day on board. You will cross the expansive waters of the Bay of Szczecin (Oder Lagoon) and reach Szczecin, the green city on the mouth of the Oder and one of the largest ports on the Baltic Sea. The reconstructed castle of the dukes of Pomerania situated in the city’s historic center is worth seeing. Recommended is an optional guided tour of Szczecin. Overnight in Szczecin.

Day 5: Szczecin – Mescherin | Mescherin - Gartz – Schwedt, 17 mi. (28 km)

In the morning you will sail from Szczecin to Mescherin. Biking past Gartz you will arrive at “Lower Oder Valley National Park” and bike through a part of a unique, cross-border nature reserve. Your final destination today is Schwedt.

Day 6: Schwedt – Hohensaaten | Hohensaaten - Niederfinow - Eberswalde, 20 mi. (32 km)

In the morning you will sail from Schwedt to Hohensaaten. Then by bicycle, ride in the direction of Niederfinow through the splendid landscape, passing by small hills, glades, and forests. The last section will be on the Treidel bike route along the Finow Canal to Eberswalde. In the heart of the city, the Finow Canal is the oldest working lock in Germany, which has been a technical monument since 1978. Overnight in Eberswalde.

Day 7: Eberswalde – Oranienburg | Oranienburg – Berlin, 26 mi. (42 km)

Your last bike tour will first take you to Oranienburg. Plan to visit the Baroque castle with its park, museum, and orangery. Then, the well-marked bike route will take you southwards through the Ruppin Sea area to Berlin, where you spend the night.

Day 8: Departure from Berlin

After breakfast, disembarkation by 9:00 am and individual trip home. You are asked to vacate the cabins by 9 am.

Skill Level — Easy

This self-guided bike and boat tour is rated easy. You will bike on paths and dirt roads, with a few short sections on federal highways. The routes are mostly flat with some hilly parts, although there will be a few steep inclines and downgrades.

Airport Info

Fly to Berlin-Brandenburg (BER).

Local Travel

Tour starts Berlin:

Mooring location of the ship: Berlin-Tegel, Am Tegeler Hafen, Greenwichpromenade. Berlin-Brandenburg BER is approx. 30 km from the docking location. Airport Express and regional trains run together four times an hour from station T1-2 to Berlin Central Station. Continuation by tram to Berlin-Tegel station is possible.

At the end of your tour in Stralsund, to return to Berlin, you can take a train to the central station in Berlin and then onward to the airport by bus or extend your stay in Berlin.

Tour starts Stralsund:

From TXL, your first must take a taxi or bus to the main train station in Berlin (Hauptbahnhof) and then travel onward by train to Stralsund to the Triebseer Dam Station. The distance between the train station and the pier (Hafeninsel, Hafenstraße) is 2 km. A taxi from here will cost approx. €10. At the end of your tour, to return to Berlin by train is about 3 hours travel time and will cost between €20 and €45 depending on the type of train and departure time.

Climate

Please check local conditions before your arrival. There are many good websites to visit to explore regional weather information such as average high/low temperatures, average rainfall, and more weather-related facts.

Day of Rest

Any day can be used as a day of rest by remaining on board.

Recommended

It is advised that you bring your own well-fitted helmet with you. You can purchase a helmet onboard the Princess for €40 per helmet (only a limited number available). This can only be purchased on site.

Remarks

The minimum number of participants to confirm a departure is 70 people which must be reached 21 days prior to tour date.

Important to know

Excursions:

Optional guided city tours

The optional guided city tours in Szczecin and Wolgast can be booked on board only. You will find a short description in the boarding information. Depending on the number of participants the excursion could be carried out in 2 languages (German/ English).

Travel Documents:

It is each traveler's responsibility to research your country's travel requirements and to ensure that you are in compliance. This includes and is not limited to passport validity, blank visa pages required for your destination (s), and any other requirement.

Non-EU Citizens: Please research the requirements of your prospective country of residency for international travel.

US citizens: A good website to research the requirements of the Schengen Agreement and other countries, and to read about passport validity requirements, visa requirements, as well as blank pages necessary for entry into each country is travel.state.gov.

EU-citizens: (without special situations like dual citizenship, main residence abroad or a limited-validity passport) are required to have a valid passport or ID-card, not expiring within six (6) months from the end of your tour.

*Important note: Please check on the European Travel Information and Authorization System (ETIAS) status as once implemented, this will be required to visit any of the 26 Schengen-member countries for tourism, business, medical, or transit. This is an additional check on security rather than a visa.

Tour Operator