SHE’S been romanced by Hollywood greats Richard Burton and Laurence Olivier, rejected Elvis Presley and enjoyed a glamorous life and glittering 57-year career.

And now, at the age of 78, award-winning actress Claire Bloom is to appear on Doctor Who – as the Time Lord’s mother.

The British actress was discovered at the age of 21 by Charlie Chaplin, who chose her to be his leading lady – a suicidal young ballerina – in the 1952 film Limelight.

Bloom quickly rose to stardom, winning a Bafta for “best newcomer”.

She is perhaps best known for her role as Blanche Dubois in A Streetcar Named Desire and earned success in the West End and Broadway, as well as British cinema and Hollywood.

Bloom counted Richard Burton,Yul Brynner and Anthony Quinn and Laurence Olivier among her lovers. But all three of her marriages failed.

She had a turbulent first marriage to the Oscar-winning Hollywood star Rod Steiger. Her second husband, the Broadway producer Hillard Elkins, pocketed most of his wife’s star salary and ultimately cheated on her.

Her third husband, American novelist Philip Roth, forced her to sign a pre-nuptial agreement, drove her daughter by Steiger from the house, manoeuvred his wife out of both marital homes and bombarded her with menacing faxes.

After their divorce, he exacted a final literary revenge with an unflattering portrayal of her in a novel.

The actress now lives alone in a flat in Fulham, south-west London.

She was born in Finchley, north London, on February 15, 1931 to Eddie and Elizabeth. Her grandparents were Jewish immigrants from Eastern Europe.

Her father was an inveterate cards player and lost so many jobs that the family had to move home frequently.

When Claire was 16, he emigrated, divorced Elizabeth and remarried.

His daughter later blamed him for much of the emotional turmoil in her life.

It was only when she became a star five years later that Bloom’s estranged father returned to London with his new wife and came to visit her, but she rejected him. Three days later, he died of a serious heart condition. Bloom believed her behaviour had killed him.

Aged 18, Bloom met the 23-year-old Richard Burton, who was then still married to his first wife, Sybil.

Four years later, when she was playing Ophelia to his Hamlet at the Old Vic, he became her first lover.

Their on-off affair continued for five years, during which time they co-starred in the 1958 screen version of John Osborne’s Look Back In Anger.

But she ended the relationship after finding out he had cheated on her with the American actress Susan Strasberg.

Six years later, they appeared together for the final time in the film The Spy Who Came In From The Cold.

By that time, Burton was married to Elizabeth Taylor.

When Laurence Olivier invited the young actress to co-star with him in his film of Richard III, Bloom said that acting alongside him was “like being caught in an electric current”. They began an affair, while he was still married to Vivien Leigh.

Bloom claims to have dodged the sexual advances of Elvis Presley when she was 27, before beginning an affair with Yul Brynner, her co-star in The Brothers Karamazov.

In 1959, she starred opposite Hollywood icon Rod Steiger on Broadway.

They began an affair and when they returned from a holiday in Sicily, she discovered she was two months pregnant with their daughter, Anna Steiger, who is now an internationally acclaimed opera singer.

Bloom’s 10-year marriage to Steiger was troubled, largely due to his battle with depression. Bloom’s last film with Steiger, Three Into Two Won’t Go, in 1969, was the story of a marriage that had reached the end of the road, as theirs had.

Shortly after they divorced, Bloom married the 40-year-old Broadway producer Hillard Elkins.

They divorced in 1974, after she discovered he had been having an affair with a married woman.

Bloom was awarded a string of accolades in the Eighties, including an Emmy nomination for Brideshead Revisited, a Bafta for Shadowlands and a Bafta nomination for Intimate Contact.

After a five-year marriage to Philip Roth, Bloom wrote her memoir, Leaving A Doll’s House, which gave details of her marriages and affairs.

In a career spanning five decades, she has worked with some of the most feted actors and directors in the business.

In the 1960s she began to play more contemporary roles, including an unhinged housewife in The Chapman Report, a psychologist in the Oscar-winning film Charly, and Theodora in The Haunting.

She also appeared in the Woody Allen film Crimes and Misdemeanors in 1989. Her most recent appearance in a Hollywood film was in the 1996 Sylvester Stallone film Daylight.

She has also appeared in high profile New York-based crime drama Law & Order: Criminal Intent.

From 1991 to 1993, she portrayed villainess Orlena Grimaldi on the daytime drama As the World Turns.

She also had major roles in several of the BBC Shakespeare Play television presentations and has led workshops on Shakespearean performance practices.