Braille alphabet used for writing Dzongkha

Dzongkha Braille

Bhutanese Braille

Script type

Alphabet

Print basis

Tibetan alphabetLanguagesDzongkhaRelated scripts

Parent systems

Braille

English Braille

Dzongkha Braille

Dzongkha Braille or Bhutanese Braille, is the braille alphabet for writing Dzongkha, the national language of Bhutan. It is based on English braille, with some extensions from international usage. As in print, the vowel a is not written.

Despite Dzongkha and Tibetan using nearly the same alphabet in print, the braille alphabets differ radically, with Tibetan Braille closer to German conventions and assigned letter values according to different sound correspondences.

Alphabet

[1]

Consonant ka kha ga nga ca cha ja nya Print ཀ ཁ ག ང ཅ ཆ ཇ ཉ Braille

Consonant ta tha da na pa pha ba ma Print ཏ ཐ ད ན པ ཕ བ མ Braille

Consonant tsa tsha dza wa zha za 'a ya Print ཙ ཚ ཛ ཝ ཞ ཟ འ ཡ Braille

Consonant ra la sha sa ha a Print ར ལ ཤ ས ཧ ཨ Braille

The reversed letters used in Sanskrit loanwords are indicated with the diacritic ⠐:

ཊ ⠐⠞, ཋ ⠐⠹, ཌ ⠐⠮, ཎ ⠐⠝, ཥ ⠐⠩.

The vowel "a" is inherent in a consonant letter, and is not written explicitly. Other vowels are written after a consonant as in English Braille. When a vowel occurs at the beginning of a word, the vowel letter is carried by a null consonant ཨ ⟨⠁⟩:

Vowels a i u e o Print

(on ཨ ) ཨ ཨི ཨུ ཨེ ཨོ Braille ka ki ku ke ko Print

(on ཀ ) ཀ ཀི ཀུ ཀེ ཀོ Braille

Sanskrit vowel-marking includes:

⠁⠸⠪ ཨཿ aḥ, ⠁⠰⠳ ཨྃ aṃ,

as in ཀིཿ ⠅⠊⠸⠪ kiḥ, ཀོྃ ⠅⠕⠰⠳ koṃ.

It's not clear how conjuncts are indicated. However, the conjunct ཀྵ ⠅⠘⠐⠩ kṣa in Sanskrit loans suggests that the 45 points ⠘ conjoin two consonants.

Punctuation

Digits are as in English Braille. Native punctuation (syllable divider, comma, stop) is:

Print ་ ། ༎ Braille

Roman punctuation differs from that of English Braille. The question and exclamation marks, for example, are prefixed by a point 6, ⠠⠦ and ⠠⠖.

Print , ? ! ; : . ... - / * Braille

Print “ ... ” ( ... ) [ ... ] { ... } Braille ... ... ... ...