Osteichthyes is a classification that contains all bony fishes. Osteichthyes are cold-blooded vertebrates, like other fishes, which breathe through gills and even swim with the help of their flippers or fins. There are various characteristics that characterise bony fishes, including a bone skeleton, scales, paired fins, one set of gill openings, a pair of nostrils, and one pair of jaws.There are more than 28,000 species of Osteichthyes, making it the scientific class with the greatest amount of live species among all scientific classes of vertebrates.

In total, osteichthyes comprise around 96 percent of all fish species in the world. The Chondrichthyes (sharks with their cousins), the Myxini (hagfishes), as well as the Cephalaspidomorphi are the only groups of fish which is not classified in the Osteichthyes (the group of fishes that include sharks) (lamprey).

‘Iformes’ is the suffix that is used to denote all orders of bonefish.Science recognises over 500 unique bony fish families, despite the fact that there is disagreement about how specific species of fish should be categorised. The suffix “dae” appears at the end of the names of all bony fish families.Bony fishes are thought to number more than 28,000 different species, according to research. More species, along with some deep-sea species, are likely to have been discovered that have not yet been discovered and identified.

Osteichthyes

The term “bony fish” refers to any member of the superclass Osteichthyes, which is comprised of the classifications Sarcopterygii (lobe-finned fishes) as well as Actinopterygii (ray-finned fishes) in the subfamily Vertebrata or even includes the overwhelming bulk of alive fishes as well as nearly all of the worlds largest athletic as well as marketing fishes. This category of fishes is sometimes referred to by the scientific designation Pisces. Osteichthyes eliminates the jawless fishes of the category Agnatha (hagfishes and lampreys) as well as the cartilaginous fishes of the category Chondrichthyes (sharks, skates, and rays), but it contains the 29,000 organisms and much more over 400 families of advanced bony fishes (infraclass Teleostei) found around the planet, plus various primitive forms. Bony fishes have a skeleton that is at least partially formed of genuine bone, which is their key distinguishing property. Some other characteristics involve the existence of a swim bladder (an air-filled sac that provides buoyancy), gills coverings that enclose the gill chamber, bony platelike scales, a skull having sutures, as well as the ability to fertilise eggs externally in most forms.

Osteichthyes Examples

Bony fishes include a variety of species that are well-known throughout the world.

Fishes with ray-finned fins

Bony fishes found in the ocean

The hippocampus is a structure in the brain that plays a role in memory and learning (Sea horse)

It is known as Exocetus in Greek and Roman literature (Flying fish)

Lophius is a Latin name that means “Lord of the Flies” (Angler fish)

Freshwater bony fishes are a type of bony fish.

rohita labeo rohita (Rohu)

Labeo catla is a type of catla (Katla)

Bony fishes for aquariums include Clarias (Walking catfish or Magur), Mystus (Catfish), and other species.

Betta splendens is a magnificent flower (Fighting fish)

Pterophyllum is a type of plant (Angelfish)

Fish with lobe-finned fins or Lungfishes

Distinguish between chondrichthyes and osteichthyes

Conclusion

Osteichthyes are a group of vertebrates that includes bony fish.Fishermen classify fish in this category as having a skeleton made of bone. This is in contrast to the cartilaginous support network used by fish in the Chondrichthyes classification, such as sharks and rays.In addition to oceans and estuaries, those bony fish can also be found in rivers and lakes.Osteichthyes have eyes that are quite similar to human eyes in that they contain a lens and a retina, among other things. Some kinds of reef fish are capable of detecting ultraviolet light. This assists in the search for food and companions. Depending on the fish’s environment and ecological role, the positioning and size of its eyes can differ. Fish that seem to be normally prey have eyes which are located on the sides of their heads, whereas aggressive fish have eyes which are more front pointing. In order to optimise the amount of light that they can perceive, deep water fish may have bigger eyes.Some other characteristics involve the existence of a swim bladder (an air-filled sac that provides buoyancy), gills coverings that enclose the gill chamber, bony platelike scales, a skull having sutures, as well as the ability to fertilise eggs externally in most forms.