Ivan Reitman and Dan Aykroyd introduced the iconic and beloved Ghostbuster with the 1984 film. Starring Aykroyd alongside Bill Murray, Harold Ramis, and Ernie Hudson, the movie soon became a cultural phenomenon, which has since developed into several sequences and TV series. And the franchise continues to do so with its upcoming film Ghostbusters: Frozen Empire, which is set to hit the theatres in March next year.

Advertisement

The screenwriter and actor, known for portraying the role of Ray Stantz in Ghostbusters, has shared that he would love to explore the mythical creatures of Scotland in the potential future sequels to the film series.

Read More: “I don’t think they batted an eye”: Bill Murray’s Ghostbusters Co-Star Sends Tone-Deaf Apology for Racist Blackface Portrayal

Advertisement

Dan Aykroyd Teases Ideas For Ghostbusters Sequel Set in Abroad

Ghostbusters is coming back with a new installment titled Frozen Empire, which is a sequel to the 2021 film Ghostbusters: Afterlife. Some scenes from the upcoming movie were reportedly filmed in the United Kingdom, and Dan Aykroyd is now toying with an idea to set the next movie in Great Britain.

During an interview with Daily Mail, he said that he loved working with the British crew and shared his idea to make a movie set in the UK. “The studios are state of the art and vie with anything we have in Hollywood. And I have an idea for a sequel I would set here in the UK,” he said.

He shared that he visited several places in Scotland, including “Skye, to the Glencoe valley, Edinburgh, Glasgow,” and he loved all of them. The Saturday Night Live alum further stated that he would love to explore “ghosts and mythical creatures in Scotland.”

Advertisement

Scottish mythology has several legends and mythical creatures that can add a captivating supernatural dimension to Ghostbusters’ adventures. And it seems Dan Aykroyd already has some plans for the future of the film series. However, nothing is confirmed yet.

Read More: Ghostbusters (1984): The Film’s OG Characters Ranked

Ghostbusters: Frozen Empire Unites The Ghostbusters Cast

The upcoming film in the supernatural comedy film series, Ghostbusters: Frozen Empire is a sequel to the 2012 film, which introduced Carrie Coon, Finn Wolfhard, Mckenna Grace, and Paul Rudd as the new lead cast. While actors from the 1984 film did appear in the movie, it seemed more like a cameo.

Advertisement

However, the new and old teams appear to be working together in the recently released trailer of Frozen Empire. The movie follows the Spengler family as they return to the iconic New York City firehouse and work with the original Ghostbusters to take down an evil force. Along with bringing back the characters from earlier films, the film also features Kumail Nanjiani and Patton Oswalt in undisclosed roles.

Ghostbusters: Frozen Empire is set to release on March 29, 2024.

Read More: Ghostbusters Actor’s Presence of Mind Saved Him From a Serious On-Set Injury on Bill Murray’s 1984 Film