Bill Murray had a sweet reunion with his original Ghostbuster costars Dan Aykroyd and Ernie Hudson on Thursday.

The three veteran actors joined the younger generation of stars for the Ghostbusters: Frozen Empire world premiere at the AMC Lincoln Square in New York City.

The new supernatural comedy, a sequel to Ghostbusters: Afterlife (2021) and is the fifth in the film franchise, sees Murray, Aykroyd and Hudson joining forces with Paul Rudd and their youthful costars to lay a new set of ghosts to rest for good.

Bill Murray, who led the cast of the smash hit original Ghostbusters (1984), had a boyish green on his face when he made his way to the red carpet for an arm-in-arm snuggle with his Frozen Empire counterpart, Paul Rudd.

The three original Ghostbusters figures led the 1984 Ghostbusters and its 1989 sequel with the late Harold Ramis, who died in 2014 at age 69.

Although Bill and Dan have had some creative tensions over the years, particularly after the Groundhog Day star blocked a third Ghostbusters film due to his dissatisfaction with the script Aykroyd had written, they had maintained a strong friendship over the years.

They stayed on either side of the cast in group photos so as to let the younger stars have their moment in the spotlight, but Dan and Ernie joined up to pose together.

Bill looked casual–cool in blue pants, a matching Polo-style shirt, a dark brown blazer, and black boots.

He stars as Dr. Peter Venkman in four of the five movies in the franchise, and he appeared to be in a grand mood as he smiled and laughed with his colleagues at the premiere.

He seemed to step up the smiles and laughter when he was greeted by Rudd, who has been at the top of the Ghostbusters marquee for Afterlife and the brand new Frozen Empire.

On this day, Murray stepped out to the festive event with his gray hair cut short, while sporting a closely cropped beard and mustache.

Aykroyd wore a bright red down jacket with black trim and a patch with his character Ray Stantz's last name.

He paired it with an all-black outfit and a black Ghostbusters cap.

Ernie looked dashing in a gray–blue suit with peaked lapels and a blue tie.

He and Dan also caught up with original Ghostbusters actress Annie Potts, who played the receptionist for the supernatural hunters.

She looked youthful in black plunging jacket with a fringed skirt and sleek black pants.

At a certain point, Murray and Rudd met face-to-face and the two men proceeded to put on a show of their own, with the film's leading man grabbing his co-star back behind the neck as he came in for a closer look.

Rudd, 54, looked handsome in a dark blue suit with a light blue dress shirt, dark blue tie and black dress shoes.

Like his friend and colleague, the Ant-Man star also went with a full beard and mustache for the big premiere event in Manhattan.

The newest sequel starts years after again stopping the apocalyptic deity Gozer The Gozerian in Summerville, Oklahoma, as the veteran Ghostbusters must join forces with their new recruits to save the world in New York City from a powerful death-chilling adversary who seeks to build a spectral army, according to Wikipedia.

Rudd, Murray, Carrie Coon, Finn Wolfhard, Mckenna Grace, Celeste O'Connor and Logan Kim are among the actors to reprise their roles from Ghostbusters: Afterlife (2021), which was a hit with moviegoers, grossing $204.3 million at the worldwide box office against a $75 million budget.

Also making an appearance from the original films was William Atherton, who played an overzealous EPA inspector.

The new movie is directed by Gil Kenan, who co-wrote the screenplay with Jason Reitman, who just happens to be the son of the late Ivan Reitman, the director of the original hit Ghostbusters (1984) film that was written by Aykroyd and the late Harold Ramis.

Kumail Nanjiani and Patton Oswalt are among those who are newcomers to the cast of characters over the course of the franchise that dates back to the original, which became somewhat of a cultural phenomenon, earning $295.2 million while working from a budget of just $25-30 million. That translates, with inflation from 1984, to nearly $882 million.

The sequel Ghostbusters II (1989), which brought back original stars Bill Murray, Dan Aykroyd, Sigourney Weaver, Harold Ramis, Rick Moranis, Ernie Hudson and Annie Potts, was another hit with fans, raking in $215.4 million while spending $30-40 million on the production.

The reboot of the franchise, Ghostbusters (2016), or otherwise known as Ghostbusters: Answer The Call, starring Melissa McCarthy, Kristen Wiig, Kate McKinnon, Leslie Jones, Charles Dance, Michael K. Williams and Chris Hemsworth, wasn't as big of a hit with fans, but still made $229.1 million against a much larger budget of $144 million.

Ghostbusters: Frozen Empire is scheduled to make its widespread premiere in theaters on March 22.