The General Assembly considered several measures impacting local governments in 2024, including bills that limit the actions of home owners’ associations, modify certain taxing mechanisms, and affect local government regulatory authority.

This memorandum provides information on Colorado's construction defect laws and the various issues surrounding construction defects in Colorado. It also provides data on housing trends in the state and offers a comparative view of construction defect civil laws in Arizona, California, Colorado,...

This memorandum provides an overview of the statewide ballot measure process; a summary of the measures approved or rejected by Colorado voters between 1880 and 2023; and links to additional resources at the offices of the Colorado Legislative Council Staff and the Colorado Secretary of State....

This handbook is intended to serve as a resource guide on the role and responsibilities of local governments, including counties, municipalities, special districts, and school districts.

The General Assembly considered several measures related to local government during the 2023 legislative session, including bills regarding local government operations, metropolitan districts, public employees, electric vehicles, and safety.

The General Assembly considered several measures related to housing during the 2023 legislative session, including bills regarding landlords and tenants, housing transactions, local governments, and land use.

The 2023 Colorado General Assembly considered a range of election bills related to the funding and administration of elections, recalls and vacancies, and voting systems.

This memorandum provides an overview of the process to fill vacancies in various elected offices at the federal, state, and local levels. A vacancy in an elected office occurs when an office holder resigns or dies during his or her elected term. A vacancy may also occur when an elected...

This memorandum provides an overview of the statewide ballot measure process; a summary of the measures approved or rejected by Colorado voters between 1880 and 2022; and links to additional resources at the offices of the Colorado Legislative Council Staff and the Colorado Secretary of State....