Overview: Sweet Land is a 2005 American independent period drama film written and directed by Ali Selim. It is an adaptation of the 1989 short story "A Gravestone Made of Wheat" by Will Weaver. The film stars E ...

Release date: 21 October 2005

Genre: Drama, Romance

Director: Ali Selim

In 1920, Inge, a German national, travels from Norway to rural Minnesota for her arranged marriage to Olaf, a Norwegian farmer; bureaucracy and prejudice ...

Overview: In Treatment is an American drama television series for HBO, produced and developed by Rodrigo Garcia, about a psychotherapist, 50-something Paul Weston, and his weekly sessions with patients, as well ...

Release date: 28 January 2008

Genre: Drama

A psychotherapist questions his abilities and gets help by reuniting with his old therapist, whom he has not seen for ten years.

Overview: The Calling is an American crime procedural drama television series created by David E. Kelley for Peacock. It is adapted from Dror Mishani's 2011 novel The Missing File. All 8 episodes of the first season ...

Overview: The Wrecking Crew is a 2008 American documentary film directed by Denny Tedesco, son of guitarist Tommy Tedesco. It covers the story of the Los Angeles–based group of session musicians known as the W ...

Release date: 11 March 2008

Genre: Documentary, Music

Director: Denny Tedesco

A celebration of the musical work of a group of session musicians known as "The Wrecking Crew", a band that provided back-up instrumentals to ...

Overview: Secret Invasion is an upcoming American television miniseries created by Kyle Bradstreet for the streaming service Disney+, based on the Marvel Comics storyline of the same name. It is intended to be the ...

Overview: Gracepoint is an American crime drama television series created by Chris Chibnall. It is a remake of Chibnall's UK drama series Broadchurch, and stars that series' lead, David Tennant, along with Anna ...

Genre: Mystery, Crime

When a young boy is found dead on an idyllic beach, a major police investigation gets underway in the small California seaside town where the tragedy ...

Overview: Hand of God is an American drama web television series created by Ben Watkins. The premiere episode is one of two drama pilots that Amazon streamed online in August 2014, along with Hysteria. Viewers were ...

Genre: Drama, Crime

A morally-corrupt judge suffers a breakdown and believes God is compelling him onto a path of vigilante justice.

Overview: The Looming Tower is an American television miniseries, based on Lawrence Wright's 2006 book of the same name, which premiered on Hulu on February 28, 2018. The 10-episode drama series was created and ...