The movie "Sweet Land" centers on the idea of a homeland, and whenever co-producer Robin Engstrom Selim thinks of her own, Duluth comes to mind.

Selim, 48, grew up in Duluth's East End. She and her husband, Ali, have created a film about how a young German woman finds a new life with a Norwegian farmer in Minnesota in the 1920s.

The story is one that speaks to most American families, Selim said.

"Everybody comes from someplace, so everyone has a 'Sweet Land' story," she said.

Selim grew up near East High School. After attending Cobb and Chester Park elementary schools and Woodland Junior High, her family moved to the Iron Range. She graduated from Eveleth High School in 1976 and moved to Minneapolis where she met Ali. They married in 1985 and began producing television commercials for small businesses and regional hospitals.

In 1990, the couple began thinking about how to put together a film based on a short story by Will Weaver of Bemidji titled "A Gravestone Made of Wheat." It chronicles the relationship between Olaf Torvik, a Norwegian farmer, and his German mail-order bride named Inge. In the aftermath of World War I, Inge's German heritage and lack of official immigration papers makes her an object of suspicion, and the local pastor refuses to marry them. Inge perseveres and the couple falls in love with each other -- and the land.

Over the years, the Selims slowly pulled together a script while continuing to produce commercials and raise a family. In 2004, they found a location near Montevideo, Minn., that was free of power lines and other signs of modern times. Residents gladly accommodated the crew, Selim said, and some even dragged out old farm equipment from their garages for the filming.

The film's cast includes Elizabeth Reaser as Inge, Tom Guinee as Olaf, Alan Cumming as Olaf's friend, Frandsen, and Alex Kingston as Frandsen's wife, Brownie. John Heard plays the pastor while Ned Beatty is the local banker.

The movie, which has been shown at film festivals around the country, premiered Oct. 12 in St. Paul. It opens Friday at the Duluth 10 and theaters in Rochester and St. Cloud.