Wondering where to watch The Uninvited? You’ve come to the right place, as we have all the streaming details for you. The Uninvited is a psychological horror film that revolves around the story of a young girl named Anna, who is admitted to a psychiatric hospital due to her mother’s suicide. After her return, she vows to dig into the murky past of her mother and the supernatural disturbances in their house. The movie was directed by Charles and Thomas Guard and released by Paramount Pictures in May 2009.

Here’s how you can watch and stream The Uninvited via streaming services such as Amazon Prime Video.

Is The Uninvited available to watch via streaming?

Yes, The Uninvited is available to watch via streaming on Amazon Prime Video.

The movie is a retelling of the South Korean film A Tale of Two Sisters by Kim Jee-won. In the movie, the protagonist, Anna, comes back from the mental hospital after a brief treatment, only to not remember anything from the time of her mother’s death. Despite having no help, she decides to explore the past of her father’s girlfriend, mother, and stay-at-home nanny.

The cast of The Uninvited includes Emily Browning as Anna Ivers, Elizabeth Banks as Rachel Summers, Arielle Kebbel as Alex Ivers, and David Strathairn as Steven Ivers. Additionally, it features Jesse Moss as Matt, Kevin McNulty as Sheriff Emery, Don S. Davis as Mr. Henson, Heather Doerksen as Mildred Kemp, and Maya Massar as Mom.

Watch The Uninvited streaming via Amazon Prime Video

The Uninvited is available to watch on Amazon Prime Video. It is an American subscription-based streaming platform and rental service that distributes TV series and movies produced by or licensed to Amazon and also hosts video content from third-party content providers that can be watched on smartphones, laptops, tablets, and other streaming devices.

You can watch the movie via Amazon Prime Video by following these steps:

Go to Amazon Prime Video

Select ‘Sign in’ and ‘Create your Amazon account’

Sign up for a Prime Video membership:

$14.99 per month or $139 per year with an Amazon Prime membership

$8.99 per month for a standalone Prime Video membership

Amazon Prime is the online retailer’s paid service that provides fast shipping and exclusive sales on products, so the membership that includes both this service and Prime Video is the company’s most popular offering. However, you can also opt to subscribe to Prime Video separately.

The Uninvited synopsis is as follows:

“Anna returns home after a stint in a mental hospital, but her recovery is jeopardized by her cruel stepmother and ghastly visions of her dead mother.”

NOTE: The streaming services listed above are subject to change. The information provided was correct at the time of writing.

Arcane Season 2 Release Date Window Given by Netflix

To kick off today’s Geeked Week showcase, Netflix has revealed the Arcane Season 2 release date window for the animated…

TV Spencer Legacy 5 mins ago

The Incredible Hulk Director Defends Edward Norton’s Push for ‘Seriousness’ of Early MCU Movie

2008’s The Incredible Hulk featured a more serious take on the character of Bruce Banner, something that director Louis Leterrier…

Movies Anthony Nash 5 mins ago

Euphoria’s Hunter Schafer on Playing Zelda in Live-Action Movie: ‘That Would Be So Cool’

Euphoria’s Hunter Schafer says it would be “so cool” to play Zelda in the upcoming live-action movie announced by Nintendo.

Movies Brandon Schreur 33 mins ago

The Super Mario Bros. Movie Sets Netflix Release Date After Successful Box Office Run

According to Deadline, Universal Pictures‘ hit animated fantasy movie The Super Mario Bros. Movie will soon be available for streaming…

Movies Maggie Dela Paz 40 mins ago