Aston Villa can achieve history on Sunday when they travel to Crystal Palace for their final Premier League game.

Unai Emery has catapulted Aston Villa to a campaign that will go down in history. The Villans celebrated long into the night after cementing their place in next season’s Champions League on Tuesday.

Villa have also reached a European semi-final, and despite losing to Olympiacos, supporters are still pleased at how much their club have improved under Emery.

The Midlands giants have set numerous records on their way to clinching a top-four place, with Ollie Watkins becoming the first player since Dwight Yorke in 1995/96 to score 25+ goals in a campaign.

The Englishman has enjoyed a phenomenal scoring season in B6 and as they look to end their season on a high against Crystal Palace, the 28-year-old can help his side set another record.

The Premier League record Aston Villa can set vs Crystal Palace

Watkins is currently on 19 top-flight goals this term and if he scores against the Eagles, he will become the first player in Villa’s history to reach the 20-goal mark in a single Premier League campaign.

Villa are also looking to do the double over Palace for the first time in the competition, having last done so in any capacity in the 1980/81 season, when they won 1-0 at Palace before being 2-1 victors at home.

MORE VILLA STORIES

Those aren’t the only two records the visitors are eyeing up Selhurst Park. According to Aston Villa Statto, a draw or win for Emery’s side in this fixture will see them set a record for most points accrued in London.

The record is 16 points, which Villa is tied with alongside Arsenal in 2022-23 and Liverpool in 2020-21.

Aston Villa will face a tough Crystal Palace test

Crystal Palace are currently in the form of their lives. Under the tutelage of Oliver Glasner, the Eagles have won five of their last six games, including a 4-0 hammering of Manchester United.

With a firing forward trio of Aston Villa-linked Michael Olise, Eberechi Eze and Jean-Philippe Mateta, the hosts can cause any teams in the Premier League problems.

Villa, of course, would love to end their season on a high by achieving a league double over Palace and recording the most points of any side in London.

But following celebrations at their end-of-season awards night and the temptation to unleash some youngsters, it will be interesting to see how they approach the contest.

Whatever happens in the final game, it’s been an incredible campaign for everyone involved and breaking another record would put the icing on top of the cake.