Brian Zimmer, Senior Architect, Orbitz

Brian Zimmer is the lead of the Architecture and Infrastructure group at Orbitz Worldwide (NYSE: OWW) in Chicago, IL, USA.

Brian joined Orbitz LLC in 2002 and is responsible for directing the development of the company's distributed infrastructure, reviewing technical designs for adherence to architectural principles and overseeing the creation of domain models and service APIs.

Orbitz Worldwide includes Orbitz, CheapTickets and the Away Network in the Americas; ebookers in Europe; and HotelClub and RatestoGo, based in Sydney Australia, with operations globally.

Prior to joining Orbitz LLC, Brian was a senior software developer for divine, inc. in Chicago, IL, where he worked on MindAlign, a secure, real-time collaboration tool.

The design work included designing and implementing core infrastructure components for a Web Services Platform enabled with SOAP. Prior to divine, Brian was also a senior software developer for Ignite Sports Media and as well as Intercap Systems, both in Chicago, IL.

Prior to Intercap Systems, Brian was an Associate Director for Warburg Dillon Read (now UBS) in Chicago, IL, where he was a lead developer for their global interest rates trading system.

Brian is active in the open source community and a former maintainer of Jython (www.jython.org). He is a member of the Python Software Foundation and the recipient of its inaugural Python Software Foundation grant.

Brian is a graduate of University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, with a B.S. in Finance. He currently resides on Bainbridge Island, WA with his wife, daughter and dog.

Randy Shoup, eBay, Inc.

Randy Shoup is a Distinguished Architect in the eBay Marketplace Architecture group. Since 2004, he has been the primary architect for eBay's search infrastructure.

Prior to eBay, Randy was Chief Architect at Tumbleweed Communications, and has also held a variety of software development and architecture roles at Oracle and Informatica. He received a BS in Mathematical and Computational Science, and an AB in Political Science, from Stanford University.

Cameron Purdy, founder & president of Tangosol, Oracle

Cameron Purdy is a Vice President of Development in Oracle's Fusion Middleware group. He was the founder, president and CEO of Tangosol and has over ten years of experience with Java and Java-related technology. Since 2000, his leadership, vision, and commitment to exceptional product quality and customer satisfaction have made Tangosol Coherence, now Oracle Coherence, the market leading in-memory caching and data grid solution to companies building and running mission critical Enterprise Java and .NET applications. Tangosol was acquired by Oracle in April 2007.

As a software visionary and industry leader, Mr. Purdy is a frequent presenter at industry conferences and has received a number of awards in recognition of his contribution to the Java community. He regularly participates in industry standards development and is the specification lead for JSR 107 (jCache)

Ari Zilka, Founder, Terracotta

Prior to founding Terracotta in 2003, Ari was an Entrepreneur-in-Residence at Accel Partners. Before joining Accel, Ari was the Chief Architect at Walmart.com, where he led the innovation and development of the company's new engineering initiatives. At Walmart.com, he built and led a team of core engineers focused on performance management, and operations cost-saving measures.

Prior to Walmart.com, Ari worked as a consultant at Sapient and before that at PriceWaterhouseCoopers. During these years, he managed development and advised businesses on high technology strategy and deployment. His accomplishments at Sapient include the successful launch of Walmart.com, as well as successful engagements with Gap.com and Nike.com. At PriceWaterhouseCoopers, he worked with Harrod's of London, Siemens, Intel, Compaq, Barnes & Noble, and others.

Ari's career started as a software engineer for a subsidiary of Motorola, where he wrote groundbreaking wireless paging software. Since then, his software development accomplishments also include projects revolving around statistical analysis and data warehousing. In the mid 1990's, Ari invented a new object relational database that still exceeds the capabilities and performance of database technology today.

Ari holds a B.S. in Electrical Engineering Computer Science as well as in Mechanical Engineering from University of California, Berkeley.

Nati Shalom, Gigaspaces, Founder and Chief Technology Officer

Nati is the CTO and Founder of GigaSpaces. He is responsible for defining the technology roadmap and the direction of GigaSpaces' products as they relate to standards adaptations, architecture, and product design. Nati is also the Head of the Israeli Grid consortium.

He has 10 years of experience with distributed technology and architecture namely CORBA, Jini, J2EE, Grid and SOA. As a software visionary and industry leader, Mr. Shalom is a frequent presenter at industry conferences and is actively involved in evangelizing Space Based Architecture and Data Grid patterns.

Blog: http://www.gigaspacesblog.com/

Peter Nickolov, President, COO and CTO, 3Tera

Peter is a recognized expert in scalable infrastructure technologies including operating systems, networks and storage. One of the 3Tera founders, he has unique experience in delivering successfully new types of products in a fast-paced startup environment. Peter is the architect of the core technology behind 3Tera's award winning AppLogic grid operating system that enables utility computing for SaaS and Web 2.0 services. He is a serial entrepreneur who has founded four technology companies.

Prior to 3Tera, he founded Z-force, a storage networking company that pioneered file switching and NAS aggregation and was named one of Network World's "Top 10 Startups to Watch"; and Object Dynamics, a software company providing network infrastructure software.

In the last 20 years Peter has authored 24 patents and has over 30 innovations in the areas of operating systems, multithreading, kernel mode and real-time software, network protocols, file systems and computing resource aggregation.