from DSSResources.com

GridWorld in Washington D.C., September 11-15, 2006

Industry leaders AMD, HP, IBM, Intel, Oracle, Sun Microsystems and others to highlight the commercial benefits of grid computing

FRAMINGHAM, Mass., Sept. 7, 2006--IDG World Expo, the leading producer of world-class tradeshows, conferences and events for technology markets, in collaboration with the Open Grid Forum (OGF) and GlobusWORLD today provided a preview of next week's GridWorld(TM), taking place September 11-15, 2006 at the Washington Convention Center, Washington D.C. Event highlights include conference tracks and group sessions detailing the commercial benefits of grid computing, keynotes from industry leaders, numerous networking opportunities and a showcase of the leading companies in the industry. This year's conference theme is "Achieving Agility, Efficiency and Innovation in the Enterprise."

GridWorld is a B2B conference focused on the commercial benefits of grid computing for Enterprise IT strategists worldwide. GridWorld also brings together the international grid community for in-depth working sessions on user requirements, best practices and interoperable software standards.

Exhibitors, Sponsors and Associations

The GridWorld Sponsor Showcase, open on Tuesday, September 12th and Wednesday September 13th, provides attendees with a unique environment to interact with the industry's leading companies and learn about the latest products, services and solutions in grid computing. Exhibitors and sponsors include: ADVA Optical Networking, AMD, Appistry, Application Development Trends, Aspeed Software, Cisco Systems, Cluster Resources, Data Synapse, Dell, DMTF, EMC2, Enterprise Systems, eXludus Technologies, GemStone, GigaSpaces, GridsWatch, GRIDtoday, HP, HPCwire, IBM, Mellanox Technologies, Oracle, PBS Professional, Platform, SAP, SAS, Sun Microsystems, Sys Admin, Tangosol, United Devices, Univa, Unix Review.com and Voltaire.

Conference

This year's event introduces two new programs to support and address the adoption of grid in the commercial marketplace. The Solutions Program will focus on the business case for grid, strategic business solutions and value for Senior IT Management. This is an intensive two-day program with enterprise oriented content for vertical markets including Finance, Life Sciences Manufacturing, Design, Oil & Gas, Telecommunications, Government and eScience. Some of the companies who are presenting in the Solutions Program include American Express, BBC Northern Ireland, Cisco Systems, Duke University, Pfizer, Wachovia, Wyeth and several others. The Technology Program is a four-day program that will explain the "how-to's" of grid deployment with technically oriented content across all platforms, proprietary and open source, for IT Architects, Technology Innovators, Developers, System Administrators, IT Managers, Integrators and Architects. Presenters include representatives from Penguin Computing, CapGemini, Argonne National Lab, IBM, Tangosol and many more.

GridWorld will also host the Community and Standards Program which meets three times each year to discuss grid specifications and requirements and to communicate new ideas and best practices - bringing together grid researchers, practitioners, developers and implementers from around the world. Group sessions will focus on the continued development of shared approaches, grid specifications and best practices for grids.

Keynotes

During the GridWorld keynote addresses, industry executives will discuss the commercial benefits of integrating grid computing technologies, products, and solutions into core IT operations. The GGF 18 opening keynote on September 11th at 9:00 a.m. will be delivered by Daniel Atkins, Director of the NSF Office of Cyber-infrastructure, and is entitled "Vision For 21st Century Discovery." Monday evening at 6:00 p.m., the GlobusWORLD(TM) opening keynote will feature Ian Foster of Globus Alliance, Argonne National Laboratory and University of Chicago, who will deliver a keynote entitled, "Globus: State of the Union." Additional keynotes include:

-- "Enterprise Grid Computing at eBay" by Paul Strong, Distinguished Research Scientist at eBay.

-- Panel: "The Impact Of Grid on Business Today," moderated by Patrick Thibodeau of Computerworld, with panelists Ken King, VP of Grid Computing for IBM, Ian Baird, Global General Manager, Grid and Utility Computing for EMC Corp., Stuart Wells, Executive Vice President, Utility Computing at Sun Microsystems, Inc. and Chris Purpura, VP of Strategic Alliances and New Ventures, Platform Computing.

-- Panel: "Internal Deployments of Grid," moderated by Addison Snell, Research Director, High Performance Computing, IDC, with panelists Elwood R. Coslett, Director, I.T. Strategic Capabilities, Intel., Mike Lowe, Director, Silicon Design Engineering, AMD. and Bob Shimp, VP of the Global Technology Business Unit, Oracle Corporation.

-- "OGF/Globus: Looking Ahead," by Mark Linesch, Chairperson, Open Grid Forum and Steve Tuecke, CTO, Univa Corporation.

In addition to keynotes and conference sessions, GridWorld attendees will also have the opportunity to network with their peers and obtain valuable education during these special networking opportunities:

Globus 10th Birthday Reception: Join fellow grid enthusiasts on Monday, September 11th from 7:00 - 9:00 p.m. in celebration of all things Globus over the past decade. This celebration takes place Monday evening immediately following Ian Foster's Globus State of the Union Keynote.

OGF Launch Reception, Sponsored by the Open Grid Forum: On Tuesday September 12, OGF will host a reception open to all GridWorld attendees from 6:00-8:00 PM. Hear Mark Linesch, OGF President, welcome all attendees; meet with OGF representatives at the OGF booth on the reception floor; pick up OGF launch collateral and free gift; and network with OGF leadership, fellow OGF members and other GridWorld attendees.

GridWorld Industry Leadership Awards: Come see the recipients of the first annual GridWorld Industry Leadership Awards on Tuesday, September 12th at 1:00 p.m. These awards will recognize both an individual and an organization for building grid awareness by providing technical and business leadership in bringing the technology of Grid and Service-Oriented IT solutions to the market.

Sun Gridathon: Sun Microsystems will run interactive hands-on technical presentations and seminars that provide attendees with information on how to port, architect, and deploy applications to a grid environment. This technical seminar, staffed by engineers and architects from the Sun Grid team, will review the Sun Grid Compute Utility architecture and summarize the requirements for deployment.

For more information or to register for the event, visit http://www.gridworldhome.com.

About GridWorld

GridWorld is the premier B2B trade event for both enterprise IT strategists and IT vendors exclusively focused on the commercial benefits of integrating grid computing technologies, products, and solutions into core IT operations. For more information or to register for the event, visit the GridWorld Web site at www.gridworld.com. For sponsorship opportunities, please contact Giovanni Stein at 508-424-4864, or by email at giovanni_stein@idg.com.

About IDG World Expo

IDG World Expo (www.idgworldexpo.com) produces technology-focused tradeshows, conferences and events for professionals seeking world-class education, peer-to-peer networking and one-stop comparison shopping. As the leading technology event management company, IDG World Expo leverages its experience and knowledge of technology-focused events and conferences, enabling technology companies to capture the attention and loyalty of influential buyers. IDG World Expo's portfolio of conferences and events includes Macworld Conference & Expo(R), LinuxWorld Conference & Expo(R), LinuxWorld(R) OpenSolutions(TM) Summit, OSBC(R), Digital ID World(R), Wireless Sensing Solutions(TM), GridWorld(TM), Syndicate(TM), SaaScon(TM), RoboBusiness and RoboNexus. IDG World Expo is a business unit of IDG, the world's leading technology media, research and event company.

About International Data Group (IDG)

International Data Group (IDG) is the world's leading technology media, events, and research company. IDG publishes more than 300 magazines and newspapers in 85 countries including CIO, CSO, Computerworld, GamePro, InfoWorld, Macworld, Network World, and PC World. IDG's online network includes more than 400 Web sites spanning business technology, consumer technology, digital entertainment, and gaming worldwide. IDG is a leading producer of more than 170 technology-related events including LinuxWorld Conference & Expo, Macworld Conference & Expo, DEMO, and IDC Directions. IDC, a subsidiary of IDG, is the premier global provider of market intelligence, advisory services, and events. Over 850 IDC analysts in 50 countries provide global, regional, and local expertise on technology and industry opportunities and trends. Additional information about IDG, a privately-held company, is available at http://www.idg.com.

All product and company names are trademarks of their respective companies.

Contacts IDG World Expo Charlotte McCormack, 1-508-424-4837 charlotte_mccormack@idg.com