Introduction

France V. Scholes, Marc Simmons, and José Antonio Esquibel

From Merchant Family to Frontier Soldiers, 1625–1658

Juan Domínguez de Mendoza is worthy of an honored place in the ranks of Spanish soldiers and settlers who helped defend the borderlands province of New Mexico in the seventeenth century. He was born in Mexico City in 1627, receiving the sacrament of baptism on May 30 of that year, with Hernán Vásquez and María de Villegas as his godparents.¹

Juan’s father, Tomé Domínguez, in 1625 was a merchant in Mexico City in partnership with his brother Juan Matheo, who was mentioned shortly afterward as vending wine in the Calle de Tacuba.² It is perhaps a safe guess that Juan Domínguez de Mendoza was named for his uncle Juan. One source of evidence points to the father, Tomé, as being about forty-six years of age in 1633.

Juan’s mother, Elena de la Cruz, also known as Elena Ramírez de Mendoza, came from a good family, resident in the port of Veracruz on the Mexico Gulf Coast. Her parents, Benito de París and Leonor Francisca de Mendoza, at an unknown date left their native Spain and immigrated to New Spain. In 1625 Elena received formal certification as to her limpieza de sangre, that is, that her ancestry was untainted by non-Christian blood, an important qualification for her sons should they ever aspire to high government or ecclesiastical posts. That document was issued nine years after her marriage to Tomé Domínguez, which occurred on August 29, 1616.³

Ultimately, the couple had fourteen children, the first born near Puebla, and the remainder in Mexico City, where they moved by 1623. At least three of the sons—Tomé Jr. (usually called el mozo, meaning the younger), Juan, and Francisco—would relocate in New Mexico with their parents, as did four of the daughters, Damiana, Leonor, Francisca, and Elena, the last one named for her mother.⁴

During the decade 1620–1630, New Mexico affairs were receiving widespread attention in the viceregal capital, especially the rapid progress of the Franciscan doctrinas within numerous Pueblo communities, including the building of conventos and churches. Merchant Tomé Domínguez apparently became interested in trade with that province, and what followed would change the course of his family history.

By the early 1630s, Tomé established a close relationship with veteran New Mexican missionary fray Estéban de Perea, who had first gone to the Upper Rio Grande in 1610. The Spanish-born friar became the first head (custos) of the Franciscan order in New Mexico in 1617, serving a five-year term. The years 1627–1628 found him in Mexico City, purchasing and assembling provisions for shipment north on the next Franciscan supply caravan. It is thought that Tomé Domínguez may have initially made Perea’s acquaintance at that time, but if he sold him wine or other supplies, the specific records that might confirm this have not yet been found.⁵

Since the royal treasury was funding New Mexico’s booming evangelization program and expending large sums on food, clothing, hardware, medicines, books, paper, and ecclesiastical furnishings, as well as on wagons and draft animals, opportunities were plentiful for enterprising businessmen to become involved and reap profits. Not only could they expect to make large sales to purchasing agents, such as Perea, but they could also attach their own wagon loads of merchandise to the Franciscans’ northbound caravans, which were protected by a military escort.

That is what Tomé Domínguez did in 1631. So far as we know, it was his first venture into the New Mexico market, and he found the commercial possibilities attractive. When he returned home in the second half of that year, he carried a packet (pliego) of official dispatches consigned to his care by Father Perea and destined for the Holy Office of the Inquisition. Perea was the agent for the Inquisition in New Mexico. Tomé’s role as a messenger can be interpreted as a measure of the confidence placed in him by the Franciscan priest. Indeed, in a letter, Perea identified him as a trustworthy resident of Mexico City.⁶ By 1633, Domínguez was back in New Mexico, where he spent several months before joining the return caravan. Once more Father Perea placed important documents in his hands for delivery to the Inquisition. Their friendship, now firmly established, was no doubt mutually advantageous.⁷

Tomé Domínguez had fallen into debt, however, and being unable to satisfy as many as four of his creditors, among them the estate of one Pedro de Ibarra, to which he owed 1,100 pesos, he was arrested and imprisoned in Mexico City on June 27, 1634. By late the following year, he had been released and was heading back to New Mexico, apparently making his third trip to that distant land.⁸

By now, it was clear that Domínguez had gained prestige and influence in the local New Mexican power structure. He was in the Villa de Santa Fe in October 1636 when he auctioned eight oxen from the estate of Francisco Gómez de Torres.⁹ A couple of months later, as the Franciscan supply caravan assembled at the Indian pueblo of Socorro in preparation for its return home to Mexico City during mid-December 1636, Tomé Domínguez, by order of the provisional governor Francisco Martínez de Baeza, was commissioned as captain and cabo de despacho (special-duties officer) of the military escort guarding the wagon train on the months-long journey to the viceregal capital of New Spain. Further, Governor Martínez de Baeza placed him in charge of his personal shipment of local products that he was sending out of the province to be sold.¹⁰

By June 1637 creditors in Mexico City once again sought justice in the failure of Tomé Domínguez to pay his debts. The estate of Hernán Delgado, a deceased surgeon, represented by Juan Gutiérrez and his wife, Francisca Delgado, the daughter of Hernán, petitioned officials for the settlement of Domínguez’s outstanding obligations.¹¹ In time Domínguez resolved his financial difficulties well enough to avoid further imprisonment. His commercial connection to New Mexico apparently offered the attractive prospect of improving his financial and social standing, and this connection set the course for the future legacy of his family.

Domínguez took up permanent residence in New Mexico, although he may have kept a home in Mexico City, since for the next few years he continued to shuttle back and forth in handling his trading ventures. On his trip north in 1642, he sponsored two families willing to settle on the frontier, and subsequently he brought others. His descendants would claim that Tomé had been one of the first conquerors and settlers of New Mexico, which he entered with thirty families whom he took at his own expense.¹²

It would seem that Tomé Domínguez, having become a citizen of the New Mexican kingdom more than forty years after its founding by Juan de Oñate in 1598, could in no way claim the accolades attached to the title of a first conqueror and settler. Furthermore, had he actually introduced thirty families at one time, this would have been an event of such magnitude as to leave a blazing mark on the historical record. Clearly, his sponsorship of several smaller parties, over a number of years, became condensed in the minds of his progeny, emerging as a single grand colonizing effort.

When Tomé brought his family members to the raw New Mexico frontier, he settled them upon an estancia situated two leagues north of Sandia Pueblo. Estancias were mixed farming and stock-raising operations, with the latter activity usually predominating. The Domínguez estate was in the center of a highly fertile area of the Middle Rio Grande Valley. Its adobe house was sufficiently large enough to accommodate the many people, including three priests, who assembled there in February 1660 for the marriage of eldest daughter Damiana to Álvaro de Paredes, a native of Mexico City.¹³

The question arises as to why Tomé Domínguez decided to leave Mexico City, the center of commerce, finance, and government, to relocate in the undeveloped and dangerous kingdom of New Mexico, a place at the end of the earth and lacking in all civilized amenities. Of conditions there in 1639, Governor Martínez de Baeza painted a bleak picture. It is a land that is very cold in the winter and very hot in summer, he wrote in a report to the viceregal government.¹⁴ Two hundred leagues of empty desert separated the Pueblo of Senecú in the Socorro Valley from the mining town of San José del Parral, the northernmost community in the neighboring kingdom of Nueva Vizcaya. The isolation was crippling to the economy.

Between Senecú and Santa Fe, a distance of fifty leagues, could be found only ten or twelve Spanish farms. The land along the Rio Grande was exceedingly productive, the few settlers irrigating and growing wheat and corn. They also raise cattle and sheep as in Spain, added the governor. But that positive note was offset by the perennial problem of raiding Apaches, who kept the country in turmoil. They were warlike and, as barbarians, make unexpected attacks on the Pueblo Indians, asserted Martínez de Baeza. He further lamented that only two hundred settlers were available who could bear arms, yet they did a good job of punishing the marauders during campaigns.¹⁵

The administrative center of the colony, the capital of the Villa de Santa Fe, had no more than fifty households; thus, it rated only as a moderate settlement, in the governor’s words. Except for the Indian pueblos, New Mexico held no other communities.¹⁶ So what was the attraction for Tomé Domínguez?

The answer is not readily available. The little wealth in New Mexico, in the form of local products such as hides, salt, piñon nuts, rough textiles, and livestock on the hoof, while perhaps making an occasional trading expedition there worthwhile, could scarcely have justified a successful merchant giving up his business in a metropolis like Mexico City and withdrawing to the thoroughly unpromising domain of the Rio Grande, on the outer margins of the viceroyalty.

Records of the period, however, indicate that Domínguez’s commercial dealings had soured, no doubt because of his serious debts. That being the case, poor beleaguered New Mexico, with which he had become familiar in recent years, and where he had valuable contacts, might have seemed like a good place to escape his creditors and get a new start.

Moreover, he may have reckoned that the kingdom of New Mexico was bound to turn around, grow, and prosper, and that by his being in on the ground floor his own fortunes would advance. As one of a crowd of merchants in Mexico City, Tomé was a very small fish in an enormous pond, but in New Mexican society, as he discovered on his previous business trips, he was automatically ranked as a big fish. His instincts, if those are what were guiding him, were right on target, for in the last decade and a half of his life on the Rio Grande, he saw improvement in his personal finances, and marriages of his children into prominent families of the local gentry, and two of his sons began their rise to positions of leadership in the kingdom.

Sometime in the 1650s, one of the sons, Tomé el Mozo, moved south with his family and established a prosperous estancia four leagues below the Isleta Pueblo church, in the vicinity of today’s village of Tomé.¹⁷ His father, Tomé el Viejo (the elder), died during 1660 or the early months of 1661, and his mother soon afterward. Tomé Domínguez de Mendoza, and his wife, Catalina López Mederos, had five sons, Tomé III, Juan, Diego, Francisco, and Antonio, along with one daughter, Juana. While building his flourishing estate in the Isleta jurisdiction, Tomé served in various public offices, both civil and military. Among his appointments, on at least two occasions, was that of acting governor.¹⁸

Juan Domínguez de Mendoza, at some undetermined date, developed his own estancia, located three leagues below the Tiwa pueblo of Alameda and five leagues above Isleta. Juan’s property, which he called the Hacienda de Atrisco, was on the west bank of the Rio Grande, evidently within the present boundaries of the city of Albuquerque.¹⁹ According to available records, after Tomé went down to Isleta, he and Juan took opposite sides in the festering Church–state conflict, a bitterly fought episode that will be described shortly. Whether the brothers’ partisanship had a serious impact upon their personal relations is unknown.²⁰

The date of Juan Domínguez de Mendoza’s marriage to the prominent doña Isabel Durán y Chaves, also known as doña Isabel Chaves de Bohórquez, has not surfaced. She was the daughter of don Pedro Durán y Chaves by a first wife whose name is not known from surviving records, but whose second wife was doña Elena Domínguez de Mendoza, a sister of Juan and Tomé.²¹ The estate of don Pedro Durán y Chaves was located south of the pueblo of Sandia, and her uncle, don Fernando Durán y Chaves, maintained an estate at El Tunque, north of the pueblo of Sandia in the same area as several members of the Domínguez de Mendoza family.²²

Doña Isabel was also a first cousin of Cristóbal Durán y Chaves, who married Juan Domínguez de Mendoza’s niece, doña Catalina Domínguez de Mendoza y López Mederos, daughter of Tomé Domínguez de Mendoza. Suffice it to say that this complicated matrimonial picture cemented the firm alliance between the influential Domínguez de Mendoza and Durán y Chaves families, a union that often, although not invariably, led to cooperation in matters of politics and business.²³

Juan Domínguez de Mendoza and doña Isabel Durán y Chaves, as best as can be determined, had four children. Their eldest son, Baltasar, was born about 1659, and a younger son named Juan was born about 1664. In addition, the couple had at least two daughters, María, who wed Diego Lucero de Godoy, and a second daughter, name unknown, but who became the wife of Diego de Hinojos.²⁴

The large, even baronial, Hacienda de Atrisco, with its orchard and garden, and including its surrounding pastureland, served as the residence for Juan Domínguez de Mendoza’s immediate family and his retainers. At the time of the 1680 Pueblo Revolt, the substantial house at Atrisco briefly became a refuge for survivors, whom Domínguez de Mendoza sheltered and fed before the general flight southward. As soon as the structure was abandoned, Indian rebels moved in to sack and burn it, as happened to estates throughout the Upper Rio Grande Valley.²⁵

Almost from the time of his arrival in New Mexico in the early 1640s, down to the catastrophe of the Pueblo Revolt, Juan Domínguez de Mendoza was regularly engaged in exploring expeditions and punitive campaigns against hostile Indians, prompting historians John L. Kessell and Rick Hendricks to characterize him as the colony of New Mexico’s most experienced military veteran.²⁶ As a result, details contained in his personal service record reveal valuable information on the mechanics and structure involved in defending the province during the seventeenth century.

Prior to the revolt, there were no standing troops in New Mexico. Rather, all able-bodied men, Spaniards and Pueblo Indians, were required to serve as temporary militia, at their own cost, whenever called up for duty. When poor citizens and Indians lacked food and horses for a campaign, the governors were in the habit of making levies upon the Franciscan conventos to furnish both, as a contribution to the protection and welfare of the realm and as a service to the Crown. Companies of militia draftees were formed at the beginning of each campaign and disbanded at its conclusion. The only recompense the men might receive was a share of any spoils seized.²⁷

Military officers were drawn from the small provincial upper class and received their appointments directly from the governor. The ranks, beginning with alférez (ensign), extended upward through teniente, capitán, sargento mayor, maestre de campo (field marshal), lieutenant general, and general. Upon the organization of a campaign, the governor at Santa Fe summoned the officers-to-be and handed over their commissions, which had the words de campaña after the rank, indicating that the appointment was valid only for the duration of the mission at hand. Once it was completed, the officer received a formal discharge, surrendering his commissioned rank, returning to his current military rank or back to civilian status if not a career soldier.²⁸

The officer of highest rank for any particular operation became the troop commander. Beside his commission, he was issued a set of campaign instructions that outlined the objectives and the procedures to be followed. When his assignment was complete, he obtained, along with his discharge of commission, a formal certification to that effect, which could include recognition of his success, or alternatively a reprimand for any dereliction of duty. A positive certification was highly coveted by men like the ambitious Juan Domínguez de Mendoza, since it could be used in seeking favors from the king, such as preferment for political office.²⁹

Another category of officership, beyond that of campaign officer, also existed. A new governor, upon assuming his executive chair, was permitted to commission a small cadre of staff officers who held their position until the end of the governor’s term, or upon dismissal by the same governor. They assisted him in a variety of ceremonial and administrative functions. The alférez real, or royal standard bearer, for instance, was an honorific rank and title bestowed upon the keeper and raiser of His Majesty’s flag. It was a highly visible and sought-after post. Both Juan Domínguez de Mendoza and his son Baltasar submitted papers claiming to have been awarded the office and rank of alférez real in their youth.³⁰ The authenticity of their documents, however, remains questionable.

In the course of his long career, through the administrations of fifteen different governors, Domínguez de Mendoza held practically every military rank available, multiple times (see Table 2 for an account of his appointments and ranks). As a staff officer, usually with a commission of maestre de campo, but sometimes with that of a lieutenant general, he served as provincial royal inspector (visitador), as inspector of the Franciscan supply caravan, and four times as lieutenant governor of New Mexico. The one thing that he most craved that eluded him to the end of his life was the governorship, which normally carried with it the superior military rank of captain general.³¹

In the service records of Juan Domínguez de Mendoza is a series of documents dating 1643 to 1653 in the form of commissions and certifications, which purport to show several staff and field (campaign) ranks granted him by governors of the period. They begin with alférez real and include captain of infantry, captain of cavalry, maestre de campo, and lieutenant governor. The records makes reference to military expeditions that Domínguez de Mendoza led against Apaches, Navajos, the Zuñi, and finally the rebellious Mansos in the El Paso del Río del Norte district. Apart from the fact that he would have been in only his teens and early twenties during that decade, we find significant internal evidence that the documents were forged at a much later date. The nature and purpose of the supposed forgeries have already been discussed in the preface to this study.³²

TABLE 2

CHRONOLOGICAL SEQUENCE OF COMMISSIONS/TITLES OF JUAN DOMÍNGUEZ DE MENDOZA, 1643–1686

The dubious character of this part of the documentary record leaves us in considerable doubt as to the young Domínguez de Mendoza’s official activities during his first years or so in New Mexico. From later genuine documents, it appears likely that his actual rank in that early period was seldom, if ever, higher than alférez, or ensign, which is sometimes described as a sub-lieutenancy. In any case, the first episode of an exploratory or military nature involving Juan Domínguez de Mendoza and for which we possess supporting documentation is the expedition of don Diego de Guadalajara to Texas in 1654.

That enterprise had its origins in the work of an earlier party sent to the same area in 1650 by Governor Hernando de Ugarte y la Concha at the orders of the viceroy of New Spain.³³ It was headed by a pair of captains, Hernán Martín Serrano and Diego del Castillo, who commanded a small troop of about twenty-nine soldiers and an uncertain number of Indian auxiliaries.³⁴ From Santa Fe, they traveled southeast four hundred to five hundred miles, to the nation of the friendly Jumano Indians in south central Texas. On the Río de las Nueces, they found a Jumano encampment where they remained for six months. Much time was passed gathering shells from the river and burning them to recover freshwater pearls.

The little company also explored south and east, reaching the limits of the populous Caddoan-speaking Tejas. Upon the party’s return to Santa Fe, a full report, along with a quantity of pearls, was delivered to the governor. Ugarte y la Concha, using Juan Domínguez de Mendoza as a messenger, sent both to the viceroy in Mexico City, who was so impressed that he ordered a follow-up expedition.³⁵

That undertaking was organized by the new governor in Santa Fe, Juan de Samaniego y Jaca, in whose company Domínguez de Mendoza returned from Mexico City. In due course, Samaniego y Jaca appointed Sargento Mayor don Diego de Guadalajara, a native of Oaxaca, who owned a prosperous estancia downriver from the Pueblo of Isleta, as commander of the expedition in 1654, with the commission as lieutenant governor.³⁶ His force of thirty soldiers and two hundred Christian Indians marched approximately over the same route that the Martín Serrano–Castillo expedition had used four years earlier. Like his predecessors, Guadalajara encountered the Jumanos on the Nueces River, only now they complained of being hard-pressed by their enemies, the Cuitaos (possibly Tonkawas), who dwelled along their eastern flank. Guadalajara went into the camp on the river and promptly dispatched Captain Andrés López with a dozen soldiers to accompany a small army of Jumanos to seek out the Cuitaos.³⁷

When the tribe was found, it made a hostile demonstration and quickly sent runners to summon its allies, the neighboring Escanjaques and Aijados. A fierce battle followed, lasting a full day. The Spaniards and the Jumanos emerged victorious, and López’s men took back to their camp two hundred prisoners and bales of deerskins and buffalo hides. Now that warring tribes blocked any further advance eastward, Guadalajara cut short his stay and returned to Santa Fe with the prisoners and booty captured from the Cuitaos.

The principal details surrounding this expedition and the one that preceded it derived from a narrative report, known as the Informe, written by fray Alonso de Posada in March 1686 while he was in Mexico City. Posada specifically referred to Juan Domínguez de Mendoza as a participant in the expedition, and Posada twice mentioned that Domínguez de Mendoza was in Mexico City in 1686.³⁸ Jack D. Forbes indicates that Posada may have obtained his information about the thirty-year-old Guadalajara episode from Domínguez de Mendoza, who probably served in the capacity of an alférez.³⁹

Be that as it may, Domínguez de Mendoza much later would produce a Certification of Services, allegedly issued to him by Governor Samaniego y Jaca at Santa Fe, January 12, 1653. In that document, the newly arrived governor speaks of Domínguez de Mendoza accompanying him on his trip from Mexico City, the New Mexican being there on messenger service, having brought to the viceroy the pearls and the report of the expedition to the Jumanos. That part appears to be true, but not what follows.⁴⁰

According to Samaniego y Jaca, after reaching Santa Fe he sent Juan Domínguez de Mendoza at the head of a new expedition to obtain more pearls from the Río de la Nueces, during which he fought and defeated the Escanjaques and Aijados in a three-day battle. The Cuitaos are not mentioned. Thereafter, Domínguez de Mendoza marched back to Santa Fe, escorting sixteen hundred prisoners and 125 Christian Indians that he had liberated from captivity. All this service was performed at his own expense, as had been the 1650 expedition, which he also led and which resulted in his new discovery of the kingdom of Texas.⁴¹

In this forged document, Domínguez de Mendoza clearly usurped credit for leadership of the don Diego de Guadalajara expedition and, for good measure, that of the Martín Serrano–Castillo expedition as well. The dates in this contrived certification are badly askew, while details of his supposed fight with the Escanjaques and Aijados are considerably at odds with those given by Posada in his Informe. At this point, all we can accept is that Juan Domínguez de Mendoza was a member of the Guadalajara party, in a quite junior status, and the same thing may, or may not, have been true with regard to the Martín Serrano–Castillo venture. It should be noted that thirty years later, when he was preparing to embark upon a major expedition from El Paso del Río del Norte to the Jumanos on the Río de la Nueces, Domínguez de Mendoza cited his earlier experience with that tribe as one of his qualification for command. None of his contemporaries seem to have disputed him on that point.⁴²

A Tempestuous Decade, 1659–1669

In July 1659, don Bernardo López de Mendizábal arrived in the Villa de Santa Fe to assume the governorship, replacing his predecessor, don Juan Manso de Contreras. López de Mendizábal quickly observed that New Mexico’s foremost problem was posed by the Apaches, who waged unremitting warfare upon Spaniards and Pueblo Indians, for the purpose of seizing booty and taking Christian captives to be used or traded as slaves.

Within two weeks of taking office, the new governor sent out a reconnaissance party of ten Spaniards and thirty Pueblos under Captain Luis Martín Serrano to assess the situation. The officer soon returned with two Apache prisoners, who revealed under interrogation that their tribe was fully committed to continuation of its thievery and murders. This information, according to López de Mendizábal, led him to field a punitive expedition composed of forty mounted harquebusiers and eight hundred Christian Indians. Their orders were to inflict punishment upon the enemy Apaches wherever they could be found. Juan Domínguez de Mendoza received the governor’s nod as leader of the undertaking.⁴³

No campaign diary or itinerary has been located, but Governor López de Mendizábal afterward stated that a brilliant victory had been achieved. This he credited to Juan Domínguez de Mendoza, whose enthusiasm, courage, and leadership ability produced the desired result. As reward, he appointed him alcalde mayor over the jurisdictions of Sandia and Isleta and commissioned him lieutenant captain general in the Río Abajo, that is, military commander of the lower half of the province.⁴⁴

A radically different picture of the purpose and effects of this military episode is furnished by fray Juan Ramírez, the Franciscan custos, headquartered at Santo Domingo Pueblo. Domínguez de Mendoza departed with his men on September 4, 1659, and four days later Ramírez composed a letter, endorsed by his fellow clerics, to be sent to authorities of the Inquisition and which contained a litany of charges against Bernardo López de Mendizábal.

One of the first complaints concerned the expedition then in the field. Although acknowledging that the Apaches posed a serious threat to the conventos and Pueblo people, the friar objected to López de Mendizábal’s dispatching such a large body of troops to the interior, inasmuch as it left the settlements exposed to attack and possible destruction. Ramírez further declared that the army had gone forth precisely when crops were maturing, so that 840 cornfields faced ruin without anyone to harvest them. The loss would merely add to the food shortage in New Mexico, already critical.

The entire campaign, Ramírez charged, was a pretext for acquiring Apache captives, both men and women, that Governor López de Mendizábal could send south to the mines at San José del Parral in Nueva Vizcaya to be sold into slavery. The accusation of illegal slave trafficking by the governor, in fact, would be leveled against him repeatedly during his three years in office.⁴⁵

In that interval, Juan Domínguez de Mendoza remained a staunch ally, and some would say a lackey, of the wily López de Mendizábal. Simple opportunism—a reaching for profit and power—seemingly prompted him to cast his fortunes with a man whose reckless behavior should have sounded a clear warning. Ambitiously, Domínguez de Mendoza sought favors from representatives of the royal Crown, namely, the governors, with whom he often shared a common political ideology. However, his partisanship in favor of the López de Mendizábal faction very nearly landed him in the clutches of the Inquisition, as actually happened with four other New Mexican supporters of the governor. Indeed, it was Governor López de Mendizábal’s own fierce anticlericalism that eventually brought him to a prison cell of the Inquisition.

In the first decades of the seventeenth century, an evil tradition of rivalry and conflict developed between civil and religious authorities within New Mexico. Petty quarrels over jurisdictional issues grew into bitter feuds that split the fabric of New Mexican society into warring camps. In early 1642, shortly after leaving office, ex-governor Luis de Rosas was murdered in the night by a band of masked men. Although he had been guilty of brutally beating two clergymen, the Church did not appear to be directly implicated in his assassination. The Franciscan custos, however, refused permission for Rosas to be buried in consecrated ground, and most of the men involved in the murder were political supporters of the Franciscans.⁴⁶

The scandalous episode forced a lull in the church–state conflict that lasted until López de Mendizábal arrived on the scene in 1659. His penchant for pomposity and determination to establish his authority over matters that the clergy considered to be within their domain at once led to a resurgence of the old animosities. For personal reasons, Juan Domínguez de Mendoza chose to side with the governor against the churchmen.

As a petty official in central New Spain, López de Mendizábal had demonstrated his disdain for the clergy. But upon rising to the lofty status of a governor in New Mexico, he discovered new ways to persecute those in the Church who might oppose his policies and conduct. One early bone of contention was his open encouragement of the catzina (kachina) dances performed by the Pueblo Indians, which were a central feature of the Native religion. Since the days of earliest settlement, the Franciscan friars labored, with little success, to stamp out these masked dances dedicated to rain-making and promotion of fertility. They considered them evidence of devil-worship and found the sexual gestures associated with the rituals to be particularly offensive.

Notwithstanding, Governor López de Mendizábal declared that he saw nothing diabolical in this. Rather, the catzina performance appeared quite harmless, not unlike the colorful folk dances that one observed in Spain. He said that as long as he was governor, the catzina dances could continue. He even ordered some of the Pueblo towns to resume the custom where it had been successfully halted by the friars.⁴⁷

In November 1660, the governor paid an official visit to Isleta Pueblo, accompanied by a retinue that included Juan Domínguez de Mendoza. As it happened, Juan’s brother Tomé was by chance in the village when the party arrived and afterward gave a formal deposition as to what occurred. Tomé Domínguez de Mendoza, unlike his sibling, was a staunch supporter of the proclerical faction, and his serious disagreements earlier with López de Mendizábal had led the governor to remove him from the office of alcalde ordinario of the Villa de Santa Fe.

Tomé Domínguez de Mendoza in his deposition would charge the governor with granting the Isletans permission to hold a catzina dance, which he himself attended along with his escort. Tomé protested the superstitious spectacle, among whose participants was one dancer in an ugly costume, like a devil, with horns on the head and a bear skin . . . a horrible thing.⁴⁸ His remonstrance was ignored by the chief executive.

As his term progressed, López de Mendizábal became increasingly belligerent in his assaults upon the religious and in his mistreatment of those settlers like Tomé Domínguez de Mendoza who rallied to the defense of the Franciscans. He selected as his right hand a mestizo of dubious reputation, Captain Nicolás de Aguilar, for the express purpose of tyrannizing his Franciscan foes, believing that this individual could cause them the most harm. But the day of reckoning for New Mexico’s governor was fast approaching.

Both the viceroy and officers of the Holy Office of the Inquisition at Mexico City received disturbing reports regarding the behavior of López de Mendizábal. The Franciscan order in late 1660 selected fray Alonso de Posada as the new custos for New Mexico, whereupon the Inquisition seized the opportunity to appoint him also as their special agent with broad powers to investigate affairs on the Upper Rio Grande. At the same time, the viceroy removed López de Mendizábal from office and named as replacement don Diego de Peñalosa y Briceño.

Father Posada arrived in New Mexico from the viceregal capital on April 29,1661, and immediately orchestrated a massive investigation, taking depositions from friars and numerous residents. One of the first to testify was Tomé Domínguez de Mendoza, who presented lengthy statements regarding every aspect of the López de Mendizábal administration based on personal observations. Posada in addition directed the friars to collect and burn all the catzina masks they could find, as the best means to end the dances permanently. Some sixteen hundred masks consequently were destroyed, an act that must have traumatized the Pueblo Indians.⁴⁹

Ultimately, Posada brought a series of charges against the ex-governor, among them heresy, practicing Judaism, suspicion of witchcraft, and illicit relations with Apache women servants, all religious crimes. Another accused the defendant of selling the office of lieutenant captain general to Juan Domínguez de Mendoza for three hundred pesos. At the beginning of October 1662, López de Mendizábal left Santa Fe under arrest and in chains, bound for trial before the tribunal of the Holy Office. Before his case could be completed, however, he died in the dungeons of the Inquisition on September 16, 1664.⁵⁰

When López de Mendizábal was first arrested in New Mexico, four of his leading accomplices were also seized and enchained: Nicolás de Aguilar, Francisco Gómez Robledo, Diego Romero, and Cristóbal de Anaya Almazán. With the ex-governor and his wife, doña Teresa de Aguilera y Roche, who had also been arrested, they were transported down the Camino Real to face the tribunal of the Inquisition in Mexico.

Strangely, Juan Domínguez de Mendoza was not among them. Although implicated in testimony following the arrest of his brother-in-law, Cristóbal de Anaya Almazán, the most that the friars could come up with against Domínguez de Mendoza was a charge made by his comadre, doña Ana Moreno de Lara, who several years earlier had confided to fray Tomás de Alvarado about amorous advances toward her on the part of Domínguez de Mendoza. Alvarado revealed this information in May 1662 in an attempt to formulate a case against Domínguez de Mendoza for submission to the tribunal of the Inquisition, which also included complaints of disrespect for the clergy.⁵¹

Domínguez de Mendoza was not easily intimidated by the threat of arrest by the Inquisition. Upon hearing of the arrests of his fellow supporters of López de Mendizábal, Domínguez de Mendoza grabbed weapons and fled his house, declaring that should officials next come for him, he would resist to the death before being taken. Moreover, he pronounced the four already in custody to be cowards for not avoiding arrest.

Posada’s secretary and notary, fray Salvador de Guerra, who reported on Domínguez de Mendoza’s reaction, described him as a man conspicuously inimical to the ecclesiastics who persecuted them by his writings, prevented them from administering the holy sacraments, and who beat the Indians in the churches . . . to prevent them from serving their spiritual pastors. Although Domínguez de Mendoza came under fire from other sources as well, he escaped indictment. The accusations were not substantial enough to bring about any formal charges of heresy against him. C. L. Sonnichsen has remarked, Obviously the Inquisition could have finished Domínguez . . . , but it didn’t, perhaps because he was next to indispensable in the harried province.⁵² His military acumen, wealth, and social and political influence make that a plausible explanation.

In 1662, Juan Domínguez de Mendoza and his elder brother Francisco traveled down the Camino Real to Mexico City, bearing dispatches addressed to authorities of the Office of the Inquisition and royal officials of the Real Audiencia de Nueva España. Owing to delays, they did not reach the viceregal capital until late 1663. Shortly, the two were summoned to appear before the tribunal of the Inquisition and presented testimony regarding the recent tumultuous events in New Mexico. On June 20, 1663, Juan Domínguez de Mendoza declared he was thirty-four years of age and that he was staying in Mexico City on the Calle de Santa Catarina Martir in the house of a mestizo named Francisco. He affirmed that he was a vecino of the Río del Norte in the provinces of New Mexico in the jurisdiction of the Pueblo de la Isleta.⁵³

Domínguez de Mendoza used the occasion to mount a vigorous defense of former governor don Bernardo López de Mendizábal, his recent benefactor who was then incarcerated, and at the same time he rebuked New Mexico’s Franciscan friars for their behavior, thereby demonstrating his strong anticlerical bent. He reserved the bitterest words for his critic, the secretary fray Salvador de Guerra, whom he condemned for allegedly beating a Hopi Indian and then trampling him to death with a horse, and for living with various women in a state of concubinage.⁵⁴

The Domínguez de Mendoza brothers made the long journey back to New Mexico, arriving there by early October 1663. At once Juan received an appointment as visitor-general of New Mexico by Governor don Diego de Peñalosa y Briceño.⁵⁵ The governor also named him as escudero (stand-in or trustee) for the encomienda of Sargento Mayor Francisco Gómez Robledo, one of the four jailed associates of López de Mendizábal.⁵⁶ Peñalosa y Briceño, for reasons of his own, backdated the appointment by almost a year and a half to disguise the fact that he had been collecting the revenues of the encomienda for himself since that time.⁵⁷ The governor may have favored Dominguez de Mendoza in this instance, with the hope that it would appease one of his own sharpest critics. Peñalosa y Briceño, whose term was ending, now faced an investigation of his own corrupt administration.

The Spanish institution of the encomienda, introduced in New Mexico by founder Juan de Oñate early in the seventeenth century, was based on the Crown’s power to collect tribute from the Indians, on the assumption that as vassals or wards of the government they owed a small annual payment symbolic of their status. Ordinarily, royal treasury officials received this revenue on behalf of the sovereign, but in some instances His Majesty entrusted or commended a parcel of Indians to an encomendero, who was allowed to collect the tribute for his own use.

The grant of encomienda carried with it the obligation on the part of the holder to answer the call for military service whenever needed. In New Mexico, the purpose of the grant of tribute, as Peñalosa y Briceño noted pointedly in his 1662 Appointment as Escudero, was to provide the wages or stipend for the thirty-five designated encomenderos who enjoyed through assignment the tributes from the Pueblo Indians. The encomenderos formed, in effect, a small body of semiprofessional soldiers, serving as the core of the provincial militia.⁵⁸

Beyond their military commitment, encomienda holders were also required to look to the general welfare of their tributary Indians, including assisting them in any litigation that they might initiate. And further, encomenderos in New Mexico were required to establish formal citizenship in the Villa de Santa Fe, maintaining a residence there in addition to the one on their estancias. The purpose was to ensure a pool of competent candidates—men of stature and influence—who could run for the various municipal offices associated with the city council, or cabildo.⁵⁹

The prized grant of encomienda could be passed on to an heir, additionally for two lives, meaning to a son and grandson, before it reverted to the Crown. If the new holder was a minor son who could not personally meet the military obligations and other duties, then the governor designated an escudero to fulfill them. The escudero received a percentage of the tribute as recompense, while the remainder collected from the Pueblo Indians went to the heir.⁶⁰

Juan Domínguez de Mendoza’s appointment as escudero in 1662, on behalf of Francisco Gómez Robledo, was made owing to the imprisonment of the latter. After Gómez Robledo was acquitted by the Inquisition in 1664, his encomienda rights were restored. As an encomendero, Gómez Robledo held rights to the tributes of the following Pueblo communities in whole or in part: all of Tesuque, most of Pecos, half of Acoma, half of Sandia, half of Abó, half of Shongopavi (in Hopi territory), and two and a half parts of Taos. The fractional distribution of Pueblo tributaries to Spanish grantees was commonplace in New Mexico.⁶¹ Fray Salvador de Guerra, reviewing the status of the trusteeship (September 22, 1662), reported that some leading men of the province held as many as ten different shares in encomiendas.⁶²

Sometime during 1659–1661, Juan Domínguez de Mendoza was granted the encomienda of the pueblo of Jemez by Governor don Bernardo López de Mendizábal, formerly in the possession of the López de Ocanto family.⁶³ So far as is known, Domínguez de Mendoza was the first and only member of his family to be so favored, a seemingly strange circumstance given the many services to the Crown rendered by his father and older brothers. The chief explanation may lie in the fact that an encomienda only rarely became vacant and subject to reassignment. Vacancies occurred, for example, upon death of an encomendero who left no son as heir, or upon forfeiture by a holder who failed to meet his military obligation to the government. Juan González Bernal lost his one-third of the encomienda and tributes at Jumanas (or Humanas) pueblo (today’s Gran Quivira) by neglecting to appear for an army muster at the Villa de Santa Fe in late 1668. That share was the one assigned to Juan Domínguez de Mendoza the following May 1 by Governor don Juan de Medrano.⁶⁴

Domínguez de Mendoza, however, was not destined to enjoy the income from these sources for long. On September 3, 1670, the Siete Rios Apaches from southeastern New Mexico attacked Jumanos in force, slaying eleven persons, capturing thirty-one, and profaning, then destroying, the church with all of its contents. The entire pueblo was sacked. Governor Medrano, labeling the act an atrocity, bestowed the campaign title of maestre de campo on Domínguez de Mendoza and ordered him to undertake a retaliatory expedition. It met with considerable success but failed to prevent abandonment of Jumanos by 1671.⁶⁵

Domínguez de Mendoza’s third grant of encomienda, conferred upon him by Governor don Antonio de Otermín on November 26, 1678, was for an undisclosed share of the Pueblo of Isleta. It had belonged to Maestre de Campo Francisco de Valencia, who died without an heir. As happened with his Jumanos encomienda, Juan Domínguez de Mendoza lost the revenue from this grant very shortly. In the turmoil of the 1680 revolt, all tribute payments ceased, and the encomienda system was never reestablished in New Mexico.⁶⁶

In addition to receiving the economic and social benefits as an encomendero, Juan Domínguez de Mendoza capitalized on important political connections, being elected as alcalde ordinario of the Villa de Santa Fe in January 1664.⁶⁷ Governor Peñalosa y Briceño also granted him the military rank of lieutenant captain general of the kingdom, as well as the political title of lieutenant governor, whose duty was to administer the Río Abajo jurisdiction, or the lower half of New Mexico. Among his duties of office, Domínguez de Mendoza monitored the security of that region and attended to judicial matters.

During March 1666, he and a small troop of eleven soldiers went on patrol, scouting for hostile Apaches in the vicinity of Acoma Pueblo. While there, two delegations of Indians from that pueblo approached him to denounce their resident priests, fray Nicolás de Freitas and fray Diego de Santander. They charged the pair with grave mistreatment, including flogging a fellow tribesman for assorted offenses.⁶⁸

Domínguez de Mendoza decided that the accusations were serious enough to deserve further investigation, since it seemed to be a case worthy of review by the Inquisition. Hence, he went to Acoma to learn more from the people there, among them the caciques, or headmen. Afterward, he instructed the Indians not to obey the friars any longer. Subsequently, he submitted a formal report of the matter to both the governor and the custodian of the Franciscan order in New Mexico, who was fray Juan de Paz.

The two Acoma priests were outraged over the action taken against them by the lieutenant governor. They wasted no time in preparing a counter denunciation of Domínguez de Mendoza, depicting themselves as innocent victims of slander and attempting to draw into question his standing as a Catholic.

With a legal investigation and the collection of testimonies in full swing by May 1666, Freitas and Santander leveled serious charges of their own against Domínguez de Mendoza, accusing him of long-standing hostility toward the clergy and of encouraging the Pueblos in years past to perform their catzina dances. Father Nicolás de Freitas wrote that his behavior was so notorious that the public kept asking, How is it that the Holy Office has not arrested Juan Domínguez?⁶⁹

The denunciation of Domínguez de Mendoza, upon being forwarded in 1667 to the Inquisition tribunal at Mexico City, was rejected, freeing him for the time being from the threat of formal charges and arrest. This drawn-out incident demonstrates that the lingering animosities from the López de Mendizábal–Peñalosa y Briceño era continued to negatively impact provincial life in New Mexico.

FIGURE 1 Acoma Pueblo looking east, ca. 1880–1890. Denver Public Library, Western History Collection, Ben Wittick (1845–1903), Z-1915.

Through the end of the 1660s, Juan Domínguez de Mendoza remained antagonistic toward the Franciscan friars. He continued to stir their ire with his disrespect for their authority, no doubt bolstered by his previous vindication stemming from charges filed with the Inquisition. Feeling powerless against him, the Franciscan leaders again sought recourse by means of the Inquisition. The next Franciscan commissary in New Mexico, fray Juan Bernal, collected testimony against Domínguez de Mendoza and sent his findings in a letter dated March 15, 1669, to the tribunal of the Inquisition in Mexico City.⁷⁰

A response by Inquisition officials dated October 25, 1669, acknowledged receipt of the letter and chastised fray Juan Bernal for overstepping the bounds of his authority as commissary.⁷¹ They informed Bernal that he inappropriately utilized inquisitional authority in dealing with an issue of enmity and disrespect toward the religious, which was not an offense warranting review and investigation by the tribunal. Bernal was informed with scolding words that his actions were detrimental to the Office of the Inquisition. Once again, the Franciscans sought and failed to entangle Domínguez de Mendoza in a formal investigation by the Inquisition, hoping to damage his social and political standing in retribution for his outright and persistent disrespect for the religious. Instead, Domínguez de Mendoza continued to be a respected and trustworthy military leader favored by the governors of New Mexico, as well as a generous civic benefactor.

Domínguez de Mendoza’s troubles with the friars did not hamper his sponsorship of the celebration of the royal oath and acclamation of the new king, Carlos II, which was publicly acknowledged in the Villa de Santa Fe on October 27, 1669. Upon the death of his father, Felipe IV, Carlos II acceded to the throne in 1665 at age four, with his mother, doña Mariana of Austria, as regent. Serving as alcalde of the Villa de Santa Fe in 1669, Domínguez de Mendoza paid many ducats to organize the royal fiestas in honor of Carlos II. As part of the celebration, he brought out the boy who played the part of the king with all splendor in a triumphal car on the afternoon of the royal oath and the night of the masquerade.⁷² Surrounded by the hardship and dangers of frontier life, and beleaguered by political strife, the citizens of New Mexico still managed to take simple pleasure in public festivities that lightened their spirits.

In Defense of the Kingdom, 1670–1678

Problems for New Mexico as a whole intensified in the years 1667 to 1672, as severe drought caused crop failures and famine. The adverse weather conditions also affected the food sources of the Apaches, leading them to increase the frequency and violence of their raids. Punitive expeditions sent forth to stem the tide were no more than marginally successful.

In early September 1670, Apaches from the mountains of Los Sietes Ríos, the modern-day Sacramento Mountains of southeast New Mexico, raided the Humanas Pueblo in the Salinas jurisdiction, ransacked the church, took as many as thirty-one captives, and left eleven people dead. Juan Domínguez de Mendoza accepted the appointment from Governor Juan de Medrano as maestre de campo of a force consisting of thirty Spanish soldiers and three hundred Christian Indians to chase after the marauders and rescue the captives.⁷³ In the end only six of the captives were rescued.

As Governor Medrano’s term of office was ending in early summer 1671, he appointed Juan Domínguez de Mendoza to be Sargento mayor of this kingdom and provinces, in response to an attack by Apaches on the incoming governor, don Juan de Miranda, and his retinue at the Paraje del Muerto in southern New Mexico. In the incident three people were killed and the mules of three wagons driven away. This appointment placed Domínguez de Mendoza as the third-highest regular military officer in New Mexico. Medrano noted that Domínguez de Mendoza had presented him with the documents in his service record that established him as a man of merits and quality. ⁷⁴

Soon afterward, don Juan de Miranda reached the Villa de Santa Fe and replaced Medrano in the governor’s chair. He promptly promoted Juan Domínguez de Mendoza in July 1671 to the superior rank of maestre de campo of the kingdom, that is, supreme commander of military forces, subject only to the governor. In the certificate of promotion, Governor Miranda summarized Domínguez de Mendoza’s extensive military career and mentioned that he had been acting governor for an interval during the term (1665–1668) of Governor Fernando de Villanueva. His praise for the newly elevated maestre de campo can only be described as extravagant.⁷⁵ On August 5, 1671, Domínguez de Mendoza received an appointment as lieutenant governor and captain general of New Mexico, to act in the capacity as governor while Miranda was away from the Villa de Santa Fe leading a campaign against the Gila Apaches and Siete Rios Apache in southern New Mexico.⁷⁶

That appears curious, to say the least, given Miranda’s earlier experience as governor of New Mexico (1664–1665). During that first term, an anti-Miranda faction led by Tomé Domínguez de Mendoza filed grave charges against him, resulting in the governor’s arrest, brief imprisonment at Santa Fe, and seizure of his property. Returning to Mexico City, Miranda appealed on the grounds of injustice and was exonerated. Subsequently, his property was returned and he accepted reappointment to the governorship of New Mexico.⁷⁷

Even though he received final vindication, one would think that Miranda might harbor resentment against anyone bearing the Domínguez de Mendoza name. Perhaps, Juan, militarily speaking, really was indispensable, and so the governor, personal feelings aside, promoted him out of necessity. In that case, we could expect him to temper his encomiums.

The decade of the 1670s saw Juan Domínguez de Mendoza campaigning relentlessly against all of the Apache divisions, but none more so than the Apache de Nabajú, who by the following century would be known simply as the Navajo. These Indians then inhabited a rugged country in northwestern New Mexico, south of the San Juan River, or Río Grande as the Spaniards first called it. North of the river lay the beginning of the Ute homeland.

Between the canyons containing tributaries of the San Juan (Río Grande) rose steep-walled heights that the Spanish soldiers referred to as the Casa Fuerte, meaning the stronghold of the enemy. Ordinarily, the Navajo resided and farmed on the canyon floors, but in the event they were pursued by troops, in the wake of their own inroads against the pueblo communities and Spanish estancias, they could withdraw to the vast and highly defensible area of the Casa Fuerte. The surrounding ranges were identified in contemporary Spanish sources as the Navajo Mountains.⁷⁸

By his own claim, Domínguez de Mendoza in his younger days participated in two expeditions of reprisal into the heart of this isolated Navajo domain.⁷⁹ Thus, when it came time for him to coordinate a series of large-scale campaigns, beginning in 1675, he was well versed in the geography of those hostile precincts.

Governor don Juan Francisco Treviño (1675–1677) on September 24, 1675, dispatched Juan Domínguez de Mendoza with forty Spaniards and three hundred Pueblo Indian auxiliaries to the Navajo country below the San Juan River. He designated Zía Pueblo as the plaza de armas, or assembly and mustering point for the troops. The expedition in its sweep killed and captured numbers of the enemy, liberated Spanish and Pueblo captives, burned milpas (cornfields) and stored grain, and destroyed other possessions.⁸⁰

Although Treviño asserted that his action led to a reduction in Navajo incursions, by the time his successor, don Antonio de Otermín, took office in 1677, hostilities resumed as fiercely as ever. Indeed, the new governor was profoundly dismayed to find the capital itself under assault, noting that Apaches de Nabajú had committed many killings and robberies in it. ⁸¹

Otermín, on July 12, 1678, provided for a new military expedition against the Navajos of the Casa Fuerte, placing Juan Domínguez de Mendoza in command, with the field rank of lieutenant captain general, leading a contingent of fifty soldiers and four hundred Pueblo Indians. This campaign, too, was launched from Zía, and like its predecessor inflicted considerable destruction on the raiders’ camp.⁸² Otermín specifically instructed Domínguez de Mendoza to set out to the mountain range of the Piedra Alumbre and march through that territory, where I understand the main part of the said enemies gathered to commit robberies and damages in the jurisdiction of La Cañada, and, finding them, you will punish them.⁸³

In addition, friendly overtures by two leaders of the Ute Indians led to an alliance in which Ute warriors would accompany Domínguez de Mendoza. Otermín provided specific instructions to treat these new allies with all loving kindness so that they may give themselves more fully to intercourse and friendship with us. Lastly, Domínguez de Mendoza and his force were to attempt to locate the bones of Captain Alonso Fernández and Captain Juan de Herrera, who both died at the hands of the said enemies.

There is no evidence that Domínguez de Mendoza found the remains of the two captains, which the governor had hoped to recover for ecclesiastical burial. However, Otermín commended Domínguez de Mendoza for his successful reprisal against the Navajo, lauding him as a very honorable soldier and deserving that His Majesty and his royal ministers in his royal name may honor him, rewarding him in accordance with his services. He was credited with rescuing two captive women, destroying fields of corn, taking thirteen horses, and engaging the enemy in battle, resulting in thirty captives. The official discharge, dated August 23, 1678, indicated that the campaign lasted some five weeks.

Notwithstanding, a follow-up expedition became necessary later in the year, after a Navajo war party attacked Acoma Pueblo, apparently with the aim of destroying it. Governor Otermín was so incensed by their audacity that he initially proposed to head a pursuit of the offenders himself. But when he fell ill and was confined to bed, the task once again devolved upon Juan Domínguez de Mendoza, commanding fifty soldiers and four hundred Christian Indian allies. Meeting with another success, his discharge papers indicated that he had burned the settlement of the Indians and won many spoils.⁸⁴

Finally, Domínguez de Mendoza served as co-commander of one last military effort to crush the Navajos of northwestern New Mexico. In August 1679 Otermín sent him to Zía with a large force on the now familiar route to the Casa Fuerte. In developing his strategy, the governor also ordered the secretary of government and war, Francisco Xavier, to lead a second body of troops from Taos, westward to San Juan, with the intention of catching the foe between double hammer blows. The specific outcome of the campaign is not shown in the records available, but no doubt enthusiastic claims of success, similar to those in the earlier venture, were made.⁸⁵

In all of these campaigns against the Navajos, the Spanish armies suffered few casualties. Although their string of victories caused heavy damage to the Indians, they failed to deter depredations. Less than a year after Domínguez de Mendoza’s last foray to the San Juan country, the Pueblo Revolt completely transformed the history of European–Indian relations in the region.

Catastrophe and Ruin, 1679–1682

In 1676, fray Francisco de Ayeta, head of the Franciscan order in New Mexico, successfully petitioned the Spanish king for new military and material aid, becoming, in the words of John L. Kessell, an apt begger. ⁸⁶ His request, intended to meet the Apache threat, resulted in approval by royal officials of fifty soldiers who were recruited in Mexico City, many of whom had been convicted of crimes and were sentenced to serve as paid soldiers on the frontier. The new reinforcements reached New Mexico in late 1677, by which time Apache assaults had caused partial or complete abandonment of six pueblos. In May 1679 Father Ayeta appealed for an additional fifty men. The Apaches, in fact, grew bolder and intensified attacks on Pueblo communities, conventos, churches, and Spanish estancias. If the situation continued unchecked, he warned, a conflagration . . . might burn and lay waste to the missionary program.⁸⁷

Ayeta observed that the allied Apaches outnumbered the combined population of Pueblo Indians and Spanish citizens. As he informed His Majesty, New Mexico’s Pueblos totaled seventeen thousand, of whom six thousand were warriors. The Spaniards, including people of mixed blood, could muster only 170 fighting men to protect their own settlements and to assist Pueblo communities. These men were so widely scattered across the province on isolated farms and ranches that it was impossible to unite even a small group of them with any celerity to pursue the raiders and retrieve stolen livestock and rescue captives. In addition to petitioning the royal Crown for the additional fifty soldiers, Ayeta urged the establishment of a presidio in the Villa de