Warren G. Harding's ascent from small-town Ohio businessman to president of the United States is truly the prototypical American story.

Though Harding's life is not free from scandals and controversy, it is certainly one of accomplishment.

"With Warren Harding, he is exactly as he seems," said Sherry Hall, site manager for the Warren G. Harding Presidential Sites in Marion, who has conducted exhaustive research into the daily life of the 29th President of the United States.

More: Harding vs. Cox: Two Ohio newspapermen vied for presidency in 1920

More: McCurdy: 100 years ago, Marion at center of politics, sports

So extensive is Hall's research, that when she speaks of Harding, it's not as an observer some 100 years removed from his era. Quite the opposite, Hall shares stories about the man and his life and times as if the events are occurring in the here and now, sounding very much like a family member or a close friend.

"He's a small business man. He is somebody who genuinely cares about people," Hall explained. "He's somebody who can relate to their problems because he's had them himself. In those early days, when he was starting (The Marion Daily Star newspaper), he didn't know where his next penny was going to come from. He's been through it.

"And so, I think his experience really spoke to people. At the same time, though, he's a gentile man," she added. "He's somebody that you can respect. Somebody that believes wholeheartedly in the Golden Rule, as simple as that sounds. Those basic values are things people can related to."

Hall said Harding's famous "front porch campaign" was carefully crafted with a twofold purpose in mind: to showcase his hometown that Harding loved so dearly and to give the country a closer look at Harding the man.

"He wants people to come to this town and in that way come to know what he's all about," Hall said. "Most people are just starting to move to the metropolitan areas in 1920 from the farms and the small towns, but many Americans are going to recognize this town because it looks like their town. Their courthouse is going to look like our courthouse. They have a Main Street, we have a Main Street.

"They're going to feel at home in Marion and he's counting on that because this town is what he's all about."

While he was already a veteran of the political scene heading into the 1920 election, Harding employed a populist strategy, wanting Americans to buy into the notion that he was just a regular guy, one of them, a true man of the people.

"Even though he'd been in politics for 20 years by the time we get to the front porch campaign, that small-town experience is such a large part of him that he has no desire to leave it behind, but he wants people to know that Marion is what molded him into that candidate they see on the front porch," Hall noted.

"He's not a big-town guy and he doesn't want to pretend that he is. He's extremely proud of Marion, extremely proud of where he came from. That's what he's trying to show the country, that he's just an ordinary person," she added.

And the strategy worked to perfection.

Harding won the 1920 presidential election by a landslide, crushing fellow Ohioan and media mogul Gov. James M. Cox in both the electoral college and popular vote. Harding secured 404 electoral votes to Cox's 127. The popular vote tilted Harding's way with 16,144,093 Americans casting ballots for him. Cox secured 9,139,661 votes.

Gov. Mike DeWine appreciates both the historical significance and legacy of the Harding presidency and what it means to Marion and the state of Ohio.

“It was a fascinating election for Ohio because it was two Ohioans, two newspaper men; one a United States senator, one a governor,” the governor said following a press conference conducted Oct. 8 on the front porch of the Harding Home. “The spotlight of the world had to be on Ohio that summer and fall. I just find it to be very exciting and very interesting.”

Harding's front porch campaign served as an enormous boost for the economy of Marion and surrounding areas, though that part was not by design, Hall said. Crowds numbering at times in the tens of thousands poured into Marion during the campaign.

"I think that the economic windfall that Marion experienced was just a nice byproduct of it," Hall said. "I don't think he had thought about (the economic impact) when he decided to have the front porch campaign. But certainly that was a wonderful result of the front porch campaign."

Hall noted that the campaign coupled with Harding's victory showcased to visitors and the nation the deep civic pride that Marionites of that era had in their community.

"That was the number one asset from the campaign for Marionites; they're going to be on the map forever because a president is from this town," Hall said. "The town made the front porch campaign, because it would not have worked without the support of the community. It would not have worked. As organized and as much money as the Republicans had, it still isn't going to work without the community providing that mechanism for it."

Marion's business and civic leaders provided the structure and local residents joined in to help the effort become a success, Hall said.

"A lot of it was due to Daniel Crissinger, who was head of the Civic Association, the precursor to the chamber of commerce," Hall explained. "He really organized it all and they created all these committees to do all these different things. A beautification committee which encouraged people to clean up their property. From the time (Harding) decided to (conduct the front porch campaign) they had roughly six weeks tops until the campaign opened. There was a lot that had to go on in that time."

Marion was featured on newsreels that were shown in theaters across the nation throughout the three-month campaign. People from all across the country saw the huge crowds that poured into the city to see and hear from the future president.

"I think it made him a stronger candidate. Think of that confidence that he would've had," Hall said. "He could say, 'Yeah, this is my town, these are my people.'"

Harding's untimely death on Aug. 2, 1920, while on his cross-country "Voyage of Understanding" combined with the death of Florence Harding about a year later basically left no one close to the man to tell his story save for historians and biographers. Deeply mourned both at home and abroad at first, Harding was later belittled.

Writers mainly focused on the controversies of his life: the Teapot Dome, Justice Department, and Veterans Bureau scandals as well as his extramarital indiscretions.

Through her research over the years, Hall has sought to tell the full story about Harding.

"I think now, and what we've experienced here at the site over the last 15 years or so, authors and historians and just the general public are really getting to know him," Hall said. "I think people in general are more interested now in learning who these presidents were as human beings, as opposed to the time when we learned history and it was just a list of dates. But human beings are extremely complicated, and a lot of times we do things that don't make sense. All of the presidents are the exact same way.

"I think people now are more willing to look at someone as a multi-dimensional being. People are more accepting and understanding that there's good and bad in every presidency," she said. "Now we look at things and ask, 'What do we value in a president? What are my priorities in a leader?' And there's going to be different answers for every person in the country, and that's okay."

eacarter@marionstar.com

@AndrewACCarter