Word spread through San Francisco 95 years ago, faster than if a rum runner loaded to the gunnels with Canadian rye had just snuck through the Golden Gate. Warren G. Harding, the 29th president of the United States, was dead in a suite at the opulent Palace Hotel.

The president. Dead. Just like that.

Anniversaries of Harding’s death — at the time the sixth U.S. chief executive to die in office — tend to pass with little attention. Relegated to the far back benches of American history, he’s mostly known for an administration rife with corruption, such as the Teapot Dome bribery scandal involving oil leases on federal land. Similar scandals plagued the Veterans Affairs, Justice and other departments in his cabinet.

“He was one of the very few complete failures as president,” said San Francisco State History Professor Robert Cherny. “He may not be the absolute worst. He’s probably tied with Ulysses S. Grant.”

But there’s one thing about Harding that remains as fascinating and probably unanswerable nearly a century later: Was he murdered?

Conventional history says no. A 1930 book that created a brief national sensation claiming First Lady Florence Harding offed the president has been dismissed and forgotten. “I don’t think anyone believes that anymore,” said Cherny.

Richard Sharon would beg to differ.

Nearly a century after Harding’s death, Sharon — a descendant of the once politically prominent family that founded the Palace Hotel in 1875 and owned it into the 1950s — decided it was time to tell the public about a long-held family secret.

Warren Harding, Sharon said recently, “belongs on a list of assassinated presidents.”

To understand why he believes that you have to understand how Harding died.

The president had been on a nationwide tour he dubbed the “Voyage of Understanding.” He even became the first President to visit Alaska. But he arrived in San Francisco fatigued and ill, complaining of pains, his breath often short.

Then chaos gripped the Palace on the evening of Aug. 2, 1923. As the story at the time goes, the first lady had been reading to the president from a Saturday Evening Post profile of him as he lay in bed. “Oh, that’s good,” he said about a passage. “Go on.”

Then suddenly, he shuddered and was gone. She screamed for doctors. Harding’s entourage, led by Treasury Secretary Herbert Hoover, raced to the presidential suite. Reporters flooded the hotel. Telephone and telegraph lines were soon rushing the news eastward.

Vice-president Calvin Coolidge was awakened while on vacation in Vermont and quickly sworn in. Americans awoke to stunning headlines. They couldn’t even legally raise a glass to their dead leader – prohibition ruled the land.

But the president’s exact cause of death has remained mysterious. A team of doctors first said a blood vessel in his brain burst. Then they said it was a stroke. Then a heart attack. Or pneumonia. Maybe his gallbladder contributed.

Harding’s favorite doctor was a homeopath described as a quack. He’d been urging the president to drink concoctions he called “purgatives” to regain his health. It’s unknown what they actually were.

It didn’t help that Florence Harding insisted that no autopsy be performed. She ordered that the president be embalmed immediately. His body was soon aboard a train to Washington and then his burial place in Ohio.

Then there was the poisoning theory.

Some suspected Florence Harding slipped her notoriously philandering husband – he once said he liked sex so much that if he was a woman he’d always be pregnant – a slow poison as they traveled the country. She also knew a storm of scandals would break within weeks and tarnish her husband’s legacy.

The poisoning theory exploded across the country in a 1930 book, ‘The Strange Death of President Harding,’ written by Gaston Means. He was a private detective once hired by Florence Harding to do surveillance of her husband and his mistress. The book, largely based on conjecture and conspiracy theories, made the case Harding was poisoned.

But Florence Harding had died in 1924, and Means’ theories quickly faded into history’s dustbin.

But Sharon says his oft-told family legend backs the theory Harding didn’t die of natural causes.

When Palace staff were approached for a story, questions were referred to Sharon, a retired chef, who often visits the hotel. He said he’s long contemplated making the secret public: Members of the Sharon family have always believed that the president’s death in their hotel likely involved foul play.

It all revolves around Janet Johnston, the granddaughter of the hotel’s founder, U.S. Senator William Sharon, a Nevada Republican. By 1923 Johnston was the Palace’s president and its major shareholder, unique positions for a woman at the time.

Suddenly on a summer night she had a dead U.S. president in her hotel.

Florence Harding had sent for Johnston. When she arrived at the presidential suite the first lady flew into a rage, Richard Sharon said, recounting a story passed down by Johnston.

Food the hotel had served Harding had killed him, Florence Harding screamed.

Johnston called the claim ludicrous. She said she’d summon everyone who’d eaten at the hotel in recent days to show none of them suffered a food-borne illness.

That did nothing to assuage the dead president’s wife.

Florence Harding was yelling that she was going to sue, that she’d own the place.

Johnston wouldn’t back down. She would not let her hotel be tarnished. As the women faced off, Johnston noticed a half-filled glass near the president’s bed. She picked it up and found it had a strongly noxious odor.

Johnston suspected whatever was in the glass had something to do with Warren Harding’s death.

She told Florence Harding said she intended to have the contents of the glass analyzed. The president’s widow looked stricken, according to the legend.

But before Johnston could leave the suite, Florence Harding stepped toward her, snatched the glass away and managed to pour whatever was in it down a drain.

She turned to Johnston and said “there will be no lawsuit.”

Johnston kept the story “in the family,” Richard Sharon said, not wanting to insinuate Florence Harding was involved in a plot to kill the president without any evidence. But she eventually told the story to a relative who was the Palace’s lawyer, who in turn passed it on to Richard Sharon.

The lawyer’s daughter, Carolyn Sharon Heyder, of Mill Valley, said she heard her father tell the same story about Johnston, who she called “cousin Janet.”

The overwhelming consensus on Harding’s death, though, remains that he suffered a heart attack, said Sherry Hall, the site manager of the Harding Home and Memorial in Ohio.

Doctor’s notes and records of the president’s vital signs point toward cardiac issues plaguing him during his travels. Hall said, especially as he left Alaska and traveled through Seattle to San Francisco.

His complaints included indigestion, insomnia and pain down his left arm, symptoms now commonly associated with heart disease. “He was a ticking time bomb.”

Hall said she hadn’t heard of the Sharon family’s story, but said there was “a lot of confusion” in the hours after Harding’s death and there was no firm list of who entered the presidential suite. Harding had not been eating much, she said, but was drinking glasses of warm milk.

But given Richard Sharon’s new information, could history eventually be changed once again?

“Is it possible? I suppose,” Cherny said.

Richard Sharon said he’s convinced. “I adamantly believe this was a premeditated murder.”