Thomas Leo Kieffer, 85, of Mt. Carmel, Illinois, passed away Monday, January 9, 2023, at the Villas of Hollybrook in Mt. Carmel, Illinois.

He was born the oldest child of Leo and Agnes (Tougaw) Kieffer in Gibson County, Indiana, December 22, 1937. Thomas graduated from Mt. Carmel High School. He proudly served his country in the U.S. Army. On August 22, 1959, Thomas married JoAnn Peters at St. Mary’s Catholic Church in Mt. Carmel, Illinois.

Thomas was a member of St. Mary’s Catholic Church. He was an usher many years, greeting everyone with a smile at Saturday evening mass. He worked at Pacific Press and Shear, Flintkote, was a logger, and after 18 years of service, he retired from his Evansville Courier bundle route. His passion was farming. Thomas enjoyed deer hunting and fishing. His love was his family; especially being grandpa to his grandchildren.

Left to cherish Thomas’ memory are his wife JoAnn of 63 years; children Anthony (Gloria) Kieffer of Mt. Carmel, Jeff (Goldie) Kieffer of Allendale, Illinois, Paul (Misty) Kieffer of Mt. Carmel and Joe (Christy) Kieffer of Browns, Illinois; eight grandchildren; and nine great-grandchildren.

Thomas was preceded in death by his parents and sisters Carol Merriel and Ann Kight Miller.

A visitation for Thomas will be held Thursday, January 12, 2023, from 5:00 until 7:00 p.m. at Short-Cunningham Funeral Home, 527 N. Mulberry Street, Mt. Carmel, Illinois, with Rosary at 4:30 p.m. A funeral mass will be Friday, January 13, 2023, at 10:00 a.m. at St. Mary’s Catholic Church, 125 W. 5th Street, Mt. Carmel, Illinois. Burial will follow at St. Mary’s Catholic Cemetery, Mt. Carmel.

Condolences may be made online at www.short-cunninghamfh.com

In lieu of flowers, the family has requested donations be made to St. Mary’s Catholic Church or St. Mary’s Catholic School, 125 W. 5th Street, Mt. Carmel, Illinois 62863. The funeral home will also have envelopes available.

Short-Cunningham Funeral Home is honored to serve Thomas’ family.