MINNEAPOLIS - Gerald Green got his wish Thursday, with the Minnesota Timberwolves trading the 2007 slam dunk champion to the Houston Rockets for guard Kirk Snyder, a second-round draft pick in 2001, and cash considerations.

Minnesota Timberwolves' Gerald Green (15) soars to the basket after taking a pass from Timberwolves teammate Rashad McCants (1) during the basketball slam dunk contest Saturday, Feb. 16, 2008, at the NBA All-Star Weekend in New Orleans. [Agencies]

Green, part of the package Minnesota received from the Boston Celtics for Kevin Garnett during the offseason, was concerned about his lack of playing time entering free agency following this season.

"If I had another year left guaranteed, I wouldn't be as concerned about this year," Green said shortly before learning of the trade. "But as a free agent, and I'm not playing, it's tough for me because I know this could be my last year. I didn't want it to go like this."

Green, a Houston native, was selected in the first round of the 2005 draft by Boston out of high school. He averaged 22 minutes for the Celtics last season, but that dropped to 12:18 per night in 29 games for the Timberwolves. He averaged just 5.1 points, 2.1 rebounds and 1.0 assists.

"We had kind of a logjam with the same type of player," coach Randy Wittman said. "With (Randy) Foye coming back into the mix, we didn't have a lot of time there to play all those guys."

Wolves vice president of basketball operations Kevin McHale said he still likes Green's game, but he was "probably the furthest away from readiness to play in NBA games" of all of Minnesota's young talent. Although Green was disappointed about his role, McHale praised his professionalism in his short tenure with the club.

"I really liked the way he handled everything when he was here," McHale said. "He was frustrated with not playing, but he practiced hard and is really a good young man. I wish him well."

Snyder, a first-round selection by the Utah Jazz in 2004, averaged a career-low 9 minutes per game in just nine games played this season. He has played just once since Dec. 23 and has been on the inactive list 22 times. Snyder will be a free agent after the season.