Dame Antonia Fraser's affair with Harold Pinter was so destructive that his first wife, Vivien Merchant, became a “Lady Macbeth” figure who predicted that he would “never write another play”.

That is the verdict of Merchant’s friend, the theatre critic Peter Lewis, who has written a searing account of the celebrated playwright’s betrayal in a book to be published this summer.

Merchant, an actress, who appeared on stage and in films including Alfie, was left stranded in their five-storey house near Regent’s Park, in London, as Pinter’s career took off.

Lewis suggests that the writer of such plays as The Birthday Party and The Homecoming, had a momentary flash of jealousy one evening when he found him sitting on the white carpet in the drawing room one day, interviewing Merchant.

Around the same time, Pinter had his coup de foudre with Dame Antonia, the daughter of the 7th Earl of Longford. She was married to Sir Hugh Fraser, the late Conservative minister.

Merchant, shattered, forgot her lines in a production of Hamlet at the Old Vic in Bristol and was sacked. She rang Lewis to pour her heart out. He returned to her house in Hanover Square to find the place “changed as if by black magic – lights were dim, curtains half-drawn, nothing put away”.

He writes: “Alone with the mirrors, like the Lady of Shalott, Vivien looked back at herself with staring, sleep-deprived eyes. Bottles of white wine, nothing else, stood on the kitchen counter. Nightly she walked the house unsleeping, the house of mirrors where there was no one at home on the upper floors. She wore an almost nun-like brown robe and her hair was openly greying.”

In his memoirs, A Rogues’ Gallery, to be published by Quartet, Lewis says Merchant told him that she had asked her doctor: “Have you got a bottle of pills marked Husband?”

Of the distinguished historian Dame Antonia, Merchant said: “I am uneducated, she writes books. They probably spend happy hours talking about books. But I’ll tell you one thing: he’ll never write another play.”

Pinter had two earlier affairs, with Baroness Bakewell, which inspired his 1978 play Betrayal, and with an American socialite, believed to be the New York socialite Barbara Stanton, whom he nicknamed “Cleopatra”.

Merchant, who suffered from depression and alcoholism as her marriage ended, died in 1982, aged 53, two years after her divorce.

Pinter continued to write plays, but they were possibly not the same. “She was right about one thing,” Lewis concludes. “He never wrote another play as good as the ones he wrote for her.”

Pinter died on Christmas Eve 2008, at the age of 78.