A while back there was a bibliography of Linear Logic, started, I believe in Amsterdam for Anne Troelstra's book "Lectures on Linear Logic" (CSLI Lecture Notes No. 29, Center for the Study of Language and Information, 1992) by Harold Schellinx, but then moved to Carnegie Mellon where Iliano Cervesato and Carsten Schürmann looked after it, for a while. But the last update was in 1998, apparently. So when someone I didn't know asked in the LOGICA-L mailing list why no one worked in Linear Logic, what was happening in Linear Logic, I didn't know what to reply.

Just as well that Carlos Olarte, my co-author in some recent work on implementing a benchmark of sorts for Linear Logic, was quick to answer. Carlos showed some recent work on Linear Logic, particularly from Brazilians and particularly in the applications that he's interested in.

Here's his list:

[1] Vivek Nigam, CarlosOlarte, Elaine Pimentel: On subexponentials, focusing and modalities in concurrent systems. Theor. Comput. Sci. 693: 35-58 (2017)

[2] Elaine Pimentel, CarlosOlarte, Vivek Nigam: A Proof Theoretic Study of Soft Concurrent Constraint Programming. TPLP 14(4-5): 649-663 (2014)

[3] Vivek Nigam, Dale Miller: A Framework for Proof Systems. J. Autom. Reasoning 45(2): 157-188 (2010)

[4] Dale Miller, Elaine Pimentel: A formal framework for specifying sequent calculus proof systems. Theor. Comput. Sci. 474: 98-116 (2013)

[5] CarlosOlarte, Elaine Pimentel: On concurrent behaviors and focusing in linear logic. Theor. Comput. Sci. 685: 46-64 (2017)

[6] Vivek Nigam, Dale Miller: Algorithmic specifications in linear logic with subexponentials. PPDP 2009: 129-140

[7] CarlosOlarte, Elaine Pimentel, Camilo Rueda: A concurrent constraint programming interpretation of access permissions. TPLP 18(2): 252-295 (2018)

[8] Joëlle Despeyroux, CarlosOlarte, Elaine Pimentel: Hybrid and Subexponential Linear Logics. Electr. Notes Theor. Comput. Sci. 332: 95-111 (2017)

[9] Timo Lang, CarlosOlarte, Elaine Pimentel, Christian G. Fermüller: A Game Model for Proofs with Costs. TABLEAUX 2019: 241-258

[10] CarlosOlarte, Valeria de Paiva, Elaine Pimentel, Giselle Reis: The ILLTP Library for Intuitionistic Linear Logic. Linearity-TLLA@FLoC 2018: 118-132

[11] Kaustuv Chaudhuri, Leonardo Lima, Giselle Reis: Formalized meta-theory of sequent calculi for linear logics. Theor. Comput. Sci. 781: 24-38 (2019)

[12] Bruno Xavier, CarlosOlarte, Giselle Reis, Vivek Nigam: Mechanizing Focused Linear Logic in Coq. Electr. Notes Theor. Comput. Sci. 338: 219-236 (2018)

[13] Vivek Nigam, Elaine Pimentel, Giselle Reis: Specifying Proof Systems in Linear Logic with Subexponentials. Electr. Notes Theor. Comput. Sci. 269: 109-123 (2011)

[14] Vivek Nigam, Giselle Reis, Leonardo Lima: Quati: An Automated Tool for Proving Permutation Lemmas. IJCAR 2014: 255-261

[15] Jean-Yves Girard, Paul Taylor, Yves Lafont, Proofs and Types. Cambridge University Press.

[16] Anne Sjerp Troelstra, Helmut Schwichtenberg: Basic proof theory, Second Edition. Cambridge tracts in theoretical computer science 43, Cambridge University Press 2000, ISBN 978-0-521-77911-1, pp. I-XII, 1-417

[17] Jean-Yves Girard: Linear Logic. Theor. Comput. Sci. 50: 1-102 (1987).

Lots of interesting papers in this list, for sure. But I was left with a feeling that I should be able to list all the areas of applications (both the ones I like and the ones I am not very fond of) and that a reasonably updated bibliography was missing. So I thought I would start a GitHub repo for that, using Google Scholar and looking through the citations of Girard's original paper "Linear Logic. Theor. Comput. Sci. 50: 1-102 (1987)".

This doesn't even have my own papers in it, yet.

But one has to start somewhere.

The lovely boy in the picture is Alan Turing, in case you didn't recognize him. Courtesy of Charles Ortiz Jr.

This is not the picture used in the blog about the Invited Talk, in which I look really bad.

This one is not great, but it's from the same day and I don't think it is too ugly. Besides, it has Jacqueline too, which is definitely a good thing!

Here I am just posting the write-up about the talk, written by the IMPA Communications journalist, Karine Rodrigues, which I liked very much (Thanks, Karine!). Ok, the write-up did make me ten years older than I am, but still, it gets (most of) the mathematics and why I like it, RIGHT and this is the main thing.

(Here's a Google translation of her text, adapted)

With the experience of those who built an enviable trajectory in more than three decades in research, with traffic in the academy and in Silicon Valley, the Brazilian Valeria de Paiva considers that the situation of women in Science, Technology, Engineering and Mathematics (STEM) is still "o fim da picada" (in colloquial Portuguese, "the pits").

Invited to give one of the special lectures of the Brazilian Meeting of Mathematical Women, held this weekend at IMPA, in Rio de Janeiro, the mathematician gave an interview to IMPA and talked about gender issues in science. Citing data from a survey conducted by the American Association of University Women (AAUW), Valeria notes that in the United States, the proportion of women employed in both areas fell between 1990 and 2013: from 35% to 26%. In Engineering, the movement was at least growth, but it was very shy, going from 9% to 12%.

"In the United States, at least, and I believe the statistics here in Brazil are not very different, the situation has worsened, if we consider, for example, Mathematics and Computation," emphasizes the researcher, who also began to devote herself to discussions. of gender in science in the last decade.

In the lecture that opened the programming of the second and last day of the event, “From Pure Algebra to Applied Category Theory: a personal journey”, Valeria spoke briefly about her trajectory between the Bachelor of Mathematics at PUC Rio in the early-1980s, and the current work at Samsung Research America where she helps create new products using Artificial Intelligence.

Before moving to Silicon Valley, she was a researcher at Cambridge University and Birmingham University in the United Kingdom. In Cambridge, having been supervised by Martin Hyland in her "Dialectica Categories" thesis, the researcher has as her academic great-grandfather none other than Alan Turing (1912-1954), considered the father of computing.

A specialist in Category Theory, an area that deals abstractly with mathematical structures and the relationships between them, Valeria explained, for example, how pure mathematics guides computation through the Curry-Howard Correspondence -- in programming language theory.

This is the direct relationship between computer programs and mathematical proofs, mediated by algebra/category theory.

"What I do is to use Category Theory, which is considered one of the purest areas of mathematics, in database computing applications, quantum computing, natural language semantics, and all of those things that seem very different from each other, but are actually deeply related," she joked. According to her, "this correspondence between such structures is a hidden gem of Mathematics, which relates logic to algebra and computing in a very surprising way."

I took this picture before the beginning of the Encontro de Mulheres Matematicas, in IMPA, Rio de Janeiro, 27 July 2019. The excitement is palpable, we're all ready to go, all eager to show that Mathematics -- in all its diversity-- is our passion.

I had a wonderful time and made several new friends. I was also in awe of the ability of my new friends, they are so competent, so able to communicate their mathematics, I felt a tad jealous. I wish I was that competent at their age. This was a great way to close this Summer.

I think it was even worth missing Eric's graduation for it. He promised me that there will be another graduation soon enough. For the time being I only have the photos and the short video that Richard took. The pictures of Cornwall are lovely!

Meanwhile this is a picture of the end of the meeting on Women Mathematicians. It was a huge success, people came from everywhere in Brazil for the meeting.

One girl had to go 24 hours by boat, to get to Manaus and then fly in!! This is dedication beyond the call of duty.

Now I just read the column of Marcelo Viana, director of IMPA after the meeting, "What women want after all" is a rough translation. Amazing the level of lack of understanding of some mathematicians. To be absolutely clear, I don't mean lack of understanding on Viana's part, but of the people he quoted. Goodness me.

We had Women in Logic 2019 in Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada.

There are some photos in FB's group Women in Logic.

It was a neck-breaking speedy trip, I was in Vancouver for one night only, but well worth it.

The meeting was smaller than the one in Oxford last year, as expected. FLoC does encourage lots of people to come, who wouldn't otherwise.

But the meeting was very productive with decisions taken, committees organized, bold plans for 2020. Also a general feeling that we can do this together and it will be just fine! Very grateful for that. I was worried about (not) missing my plane back home (I almost missed it going out), so didn't have much time to enjoy the brewery, but had plenty of good conversations over sushi at lunchtime.

Another lesson learned is that for a short workshop is very important to plan the social events in advance. It worked well for us, we found good restaurants close by, but it should've been announced earlier on. We almost missed Ana Sokolova!

But all's well that ends well, we were all seated for beer eventually.

This year has, so far, being complicated with a somewhat traumatic job move, from Nuance to Samsung Research America. I started in Samsung in March 2019 and hence have not had the time to grieve properly over the departure of Prof Anne Troelstra in March 2019, after a brief illness. The Institute for Logic, Language and Computation of the University of Amsterdam has an obituary for him and several condolence messages. Personally I knew and admired Prof Troelstra very much. I was invited once by him to Amsterdam to discuss logic and, yes, he could be very intimidating, but once you got over that, he was a very generous mathematician. Someone you could ask questions and trust the answers. Someone who, over a blackboard, would treat you as if you were a colleague, instead of a mere phd student starting to think about things. Someone willing to entertain very different ideas, at least for the time of the discussion.

Rest in power, Anne!

Together with Grigori Mints, Solomon Feferman, Danny Bobrow and Aurelio Carboni, another mentor lost.

Any excuse to have Sherlock on the blog is good, I say. This time I want to record the fact that there is an open source voice assistant, called Mycroft, code available from GitHub, originating from Kansas City, MO, they say. Mycroft, like Alexa and Bixby, has skills contributed by the community of users. I wanted to buy Mycroft Mark 2, but this seems to be out of stock right now.

The other open source voice assistant is called snips. They have a different storyline in mind and Jarvis is the module that creates a voice assistant for free, in different languages. Then one can deploy the assistant to a Raspberry Pi, an Android or a Linux device. This will run completely on-device, keeping data safe and private!

The Snips Platform is a software solution powering Private-by-Design voice assistants. Businesses or individuals, anyone can set up the Snips Platform on a single board computer (for example a Raspberry Pi 3, an i.MX8M board, an Android or an iOS device), and install a voice assistant on it.

Alexa has by now apparently 70K skills and I don't know how many `tasks' in Google Home Assistant market place. I wonder if anyone has written a comparison of all these voice frameworks.

Nice things in the past? Nah! Building my brand? I wish!

Anyways, this post is about situations where people said nice things about my work.

So, I am very proud of my Wikipediapage,

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/ Valeria_de_Paiva. A `friend' suggested that, if I had created my own page, at least I had the grace of not getting caught. With friends like this, who needs enemies, right?

When I was still at Xerox PARC, the MAA did this piece https://www.maa.org/careers/ career-profiles/academia- teaching/valeria-de-paiva. After I left PARC, I was invited to come back and give a PARC Forum, something I was never invited to do during the nine years I spent there. I think the talk and the poster (reduced image below) turned out quite well. The video was on the PARC website, at https://www.parc.com/parc-forum/adventures-in-searchland/, but it's now gone. After all, this was nine years ago. (I think I still have the DVD of the talk, I should try to convert it to digital. update: I did, the talk is now at youtube.)

After many years, when I was at Nuance, AMS's Math Awareness Month did this interview with me http://www.mathaware.org/mam/ 2015/highlighted/MAM%202015% 20profile_dePaiva.pdf (this seems to have disappeared from the live web, wayback machine to the rescue) and I was delighted. But the most amazing was to discover, when searching the Web for something else, this pretty cartoon done by the guys at Karisma.org, from Colombia, within the blog post https://karisma.org.co/que- pasaria-sin-el-aporte-de-las- mujeres-a-la-ciencia-en-el- mundo/.

Sadly the profile that the Samsung comms did about me was only internal and I don't know if I have a copy somewhere. I will add it here if I find it. But recently there was also this report on this (self-referential) blog which was very cool!

The old poster from MAM (Mathematical Awareness Month) is below, thanks to the Wisconsin Dept of Public Instruction.

Yesterday I talked at BACAT (Bay Area Categories And Types) and it was a lot of fun. When I searched for my old slides I thought that I hadn't spoken at BACAT for a long while, since 2014. But this was only because I cannot find anything on my computer. In reality, I had talked in Sept 2017 about temporal logic. Still, this was a long time ago and the old building where Computer Science had classes has been demolished.

But the campus is now looking lovely and I wish I had taken pictures.

The slides for the talk are here. I liked my title "Going Without: a modality and its role" because the ambiguity works on my favour, for once. The slides are a bit rough, as BACAT talks are fun because you can afford to be tongue-in-cheek and outrageous, if you so wish.

Organizing talks is an art, and as such, it can be lots of hard work, as well as plenty of fun. But since it happens bit by bit you can only see how hard you've worked with hindsight. I've organized six years of talks at Nuance Sunnyvale Lab, 202 talks, in total, I believe.

Sure, lots of other people helped too, but I think most of the work was actually mine. There were times that I thought it was a waste of time and thought I'd stop doing it. But I really enjoy listening to engaging talks, and I do have plenty of very engaging friends, so I usually went back to organizing it. Most of the talks were academic and about stuff already published. I do not have the abstracts or slides for most of the talks, so I hope none of the presenters will be offended that in the attachment there is simply a spreadsheet with their name and the titles of the talks.