About Blackfriars Station

Located next to the Blackfriars Bridge that spans the River Thames, Blackfriars Station isn't the biggest in London by a long stretch, but even though it's not one of the major train stations of the UK capital, it's still an important and useful part of London's transportation infrastructure.

Both a surface railway station for the Thameslink line and a stop on the Circle and District lines of the London Underground, Blackfriars is key to people moving in and around London. It's also the only train station in London which spans the river, with platforms on both sides of the Thames.

Blackfriars provides a gateway to central London for people in outlying towns and also has excellent connections with other London train stations and airports. So if you find yourself in the area, Blackfriars can be a convenient entry point to everything this fabulous world city has to offer.

Can you store luggage at Blackfriars station?

There are no luggage facilities at the station itself. However, it's not hard to find safe luggage storage facilities in this part of town. Luggage storage companies like Bounce allow you to store luggage wherever you are. Our left luggage services provide luggage storage options for any size of bags and are available almost everywhere.

Which stations in London have luggage storage?

Blackfriars does not offer luggage storage services, but you can usually find luggage storage locations at the major train stations. King's Cross, Paddington, St Pancras, and Euston, among others, provide a luggage storage service where you can leave your things behind. However, the luggage lockers at these locations often fill up, so you may be better off using our left luggage facilities that can store any size of bags for as long as you want and can be booked in advance online.

Does Victoria Station have luggage storage?

Yes, there is a left luggage facility at Victoria Station and at nearby Victoria Coach Station. It can be hard to find luggage storage in London, but Bounce provides affordable luggage storage wherever you are.

How long can I store my luggage near Blackfriars Station?

Bounce partners with local businesses including shops, restaurants, and hotels, to provide luggage storage locations near you. These locations can store any size of bags for as long as you like, whether it's a few hours or for days at a time. Simply use our app to find left luggage storage facilities near you, then book your space for as long as you need.

Things to do near Blackfriars Station

Tate Modern

One of the foremost galleries of modern art not only in the UK but in the whole world, the Tate Modern lies on the south bank of the River Thames and is a must-visit for any art lover in this area of London.

Located in a redeveloped former power station, the gallery hosts artwork and installations by some of the greatest names in modern and contemporary art. It features work by famous names in 20th-century art like Monet and Picasso, but part of the joy of visiting here is discovering something new. The exhibitions are forever changing, with several major themed exhibitions taking place throughout the year, so it's a place you can visit many times and still be confident of seeing something new.

Perhaps best of all, at least for those traveling on a budget, this world-leading gallery is completely free to visit.

Tate Modern bag policy

At the Tate Modern, all bags are checked for security reasons. Bags are not allowed in the galleries, but you can store small bags in the on-site cloakroom. Bags bigger than cabin bag size are not allowed, so take advantage of Bounce luggage storage services to look after your things while you enjoy the arts.

National Theatre

There's no disputing that London is one of the world's great theater cities. From the exciting buzz of the West End to the major historic theaters of the British capital, you can see everything here, from lavish musicals that have toured the world to the latest in cutting-edge performance art.

The National Theatre was opened by Lawrence Olivier in 1963, and since then, it has hosted some of the biggest names in the theater world. This is actually three theaters in one, with the Olivier Theater seating 1100 people and hosting some of the most prestigious shows in the country. The Lyttelton Theater holds 890 people, enough to host a popular show but still be somewhat intimate. Meanwhile, the Dorfman Theater holds only 400 people, making for some incredibly intimate shows. This theater often hosts more experimental work, helping the National Theatre appeal to theater fans of all tastes.

London Mithraeum

Given London's rich and complex history, it's easy to forget that at one point, this was an outpost of the Roman Empire. Although Roman remains in this ever-changing city are few and far between, you can explore the ancient religious life of London at the London Mithraeum.

Technically known as the London Mithraeum Bloomberg SPACE, this unique attraction lets you explore a 2000-year-old temple to the Persian soldier god Mithras who was hugely popular in the Roman Empire, and once rivaled Christianity. Artifacts from the archaeological excavation are on display that will help you understand the practices of this mystery cult and get an insight into what life was like in Roman London.

Additionally, the Bloomberg SPACE houses contemporary art commissions that explore how this ancient history connects to the modern city. That makes this an exceptionally interesting place to go for any lover of history and art.

London Mithraeum bag policy

Large bags are not permitted at this site, and there is nowhere to store luggage once you're there. Use Bounce to help you find cheap luggage storage in London so you can leave your things behind without worrying about them.

The Clink Prison Museum

London is packed with so many great museums that it can be hard to choose which ones to visit. However, if you like your history on the darker side, don't miss out on the opportunity to visit The Clink.

This historic prison dates back to 1144, making it one of the oldest in the country. On a guided tour, you will hear the blood-chilling stories of former inmates and learn more about crime and punishment through the ages.

The Clink bag policy

Large bags are not allowed inside the museum, and storage space is extremely limited. Use left luggage facilities in the area to leave your bags behind.

Airport travel from Blackfriars Station

Gatwick Airport to Blackfriars Station

Blackfriars Station provides an easy link between busy Gatwick International Airport and central London. The Thameslink train runs from the airport station directly to Blackfriars, taking just over half an hour to make the journey. It costs around £16 one way, so it's not cheap, but it is one of the best ways to get from central London to this popular airport.

Heathrow Airport to Blackfriars Station

Heathrow Airport is significantly closer to central London than Gatwick, but that doesn't mean it's any quicker to get to Blackfriars from there.

The Elizabeth Line of the London Underground runs from Heathrow terminals 2 and 3 to Farringdon station. It's less than a mile from that station to Blackfriars, so it's easy to walk, especially when you've dropped off your bags at one of our luggage storage locations. The cost to reach Blackfriars from Heathrow is comparable to Gatwick, costing around £12.

Getting around London from Blackfriars Station

Houses of Parliament

One of the most famous buildings not just in London but in the world, the Houses of Parliament have a long history as the seat of English, then British power. The stunning building located on the north bank of the River Thames is a can't-miss attraction in London, and it's easy to reach from Blackfriars station. Just hop on the District line to Westminster station, and you'll be there in about 15 minutes at a cost of £2.70.

London Eye

This gigantic Ferris wheel offers unrivaled views of some of London's top attractions. Booking in advance is strongly recommended for this popular attraction. From Blackfriars Station, it's just a 15-minute ride on the District line to reach the London Eye.

Luggage storage near Blackfriars Station

It may not be one of the biggest or most famous train stations in London, but Blackfriars is a great place to begin exploring the city, thanks in part to its location close to many of the top attractions the city has to offer.