From Westminster Tube Station to London Blackfriars station

Live information from the Transport for London (TfL) datafeed.

First departure

Leave at 17:23 and arrive at 17:27

Journey time 04 mins

Catch the: Circle line to Blackfriars

Disruptions: Blackfriars Underground Station: Mini ramps are available at this station. They are designed to cover the small remaining step / or gap between the platform and the train on step-free to train platforms. They make it easier for customers people to get on and off the train, in particular for people whose mobility aids have small or swivel wheels. The ramps are quick and easy to use. Staff are trained to use them and will be happy to provide one for you to use. If you would like to use a mini ramp, please ask for help from staff or press the information button on a help point.

Second departure

Leave at 17:26 and arrive at 17:30

Journey time 04 mins

Catch the: District line to Blackfriars

Disruptions: Blackfriars Underground Station: Mini ramps are available at this station. They are designed to cover the small remaining step / or gap between the platform and the train on step-free to train platforms. They make it easier for customers people to get on and off the train, in particular for people whose mobility aids have small or swivel wheels. The ramps are quick and easy to use. Staff are trained to use them and will be happy to provide one for you to use. If you would like to use a mini ramp, please ask for help from staff or press the information button on a help point.

Third departure

Leave at 17:29 and arrive at 17:34

Journey time 05 mins

Catch the: District line to Blackfriars

Disruptions: Blackfriars Underground Station: Mini ramps are available at this station. They are designed to cover the small remaining step / or gap between the platform and the train on step-free to train platforms. They make it easier for customers people to get on and off the train, in particular for people whose mobility aids have small or swivel wheels. The ramps are quick and easy to use. Staff are trained to use them and will be happy to provide one for you to use. If you would like to use a mini ramp, please ask for help from staff or press the information button on a help point.

Fourth departure

Leave at 17:22 and arrive at 17:52

Journey time 30 mins

Catch the: Walk to Blackfriars Station