Tribute

Ken Gibbs passed away on Friday morning, October 1st at the Victoria General Hospital.

He leaves behind his wife of 22 years Mary (Pickel). He was predeceased by his first wife Roberta (Murray) in 1988.

Son Barry Gibbs (Terry Goulet), ex-wife Judi (McWilliam), grandchildren Ian (Jamie McClimans), Braden (Sheena Anderson), Nathan and great-grandsons Charlie, Jagger and Phoenix.

Daughter Betty Parker, grandchildren Tyler (Lindy Adamkowski) and Tessa (Micheal Perry). Predeceased by his son in law Spencer Parker.

Ken was born on the farm near Dalzell, Saskatchewan. He is predeceased by his parents Lionel and Winifred (Philpot) and his five brothers Robert (Alice), Edward (Betty), Reginald (Dulcie), Walter (Doris) and Denys (June) and survived by numerous nieces and nephews.

His first career from 1945 till 1975 was banking. He worked for the Bank of Montreal, the Bank of London & Montreal and the Bank of British Columbia. Ken worked in every province in Canada except PEI. A highlight being a 3-year posting to Port of Spain, Trinidad in 1961. His second career, owning his own business, started with the purchase of Ross Bay Link Hardware in Oak Bay BC. His career in the hardware business stretched from 1975 until 2000. A highlight being his term on the National Board of Home Hardware, where he was Chairman.

Ken was the Treasurer for the United Service Masonic Lodge #24 for many years. He received the Award of Merit in 2004 for 50 years service. He was also a Member of the Scottish Rite.

Ken loved his family and had fun with them, often telling childhood stories of his rural upbringing. Ken loved reading and walking, as well as feeling the sun’s warmth on his back, viewing the garden and hummingbirds.

Ken and Mary enjoyed travelling, camping, renovating and attending Chemainus Theatre performances. They were blessed to be two of the original six Directors of Mill Bay Baptist Fellowship in 2011.

Special thanks are extended to all Ken’s nursing, doctoring and pastoral care.

In lieu of flowers, donations can be made to the Heart & Stroke Foundation of Canada, Chemainus Theatre Festival and the Mill Bay Baptist Fellowship, in Memory of Kenneth Gibbs.

A Celebration of Life will be held at 1:30 p.m. on Saturday, November 6th, 2021 at the Mill Bay Baptist Church, 2095 Dickson Road. A Zoom link to this service will be made available on the church’s website.

Interment will be held June, 2022 in Lyleton, Manitoba.