Here's a fun looking trailer for a film set in the 1980's that some of you might find entertaining. The movie is called Take Me Home Tonight. It was directed by Michael Dowse (Goon, Fubar, It’s All Gone Pete Tong), and it has a fun cast of stars that includes Topher Grace, Anna Faris, Dan Fogler, Teresa Palmer, Michelle Trachtenberg, Michael Biehn, Chris Pratt, Lucy Punch, Michael Ian Black, and Demetri Martin.

The movie was actually shot back in late 2006, and was originally titled Kids in America. Where has it been this whole time? Sitting on a shelf of course. I enjoy movies that tell a story which takes place over the course of one night.

Here's the film's Synopsis:

As the summer of 1988 winds down, three friends on the verge of adulthood attend an out-of-control party in celebration of their last night of unbridled youth. Starring Topher Grace, Anna Faris, Dan Fogler and Teresa Palmer, Take Me Home Tonight is a raunchy, romantic and ultimately touching blast from the past set to an awesome soundtrack of timeless rock and hip-hop hits. Recent MIT grad Matt Franklin (Topher Grace) should be working for a Fortune 500 company and starting his upward climb to full-fledged yuppie-hood. Instead, the directionless 23-year-old confounds family and friends by taking a part-time job behind the counter of a video store at the Sherman Oaks Galleria. But Matt's silent protest against maturity comes to a screeching halt once his unrequited high school crush, Tori Frederking (Teresa Palmer), walks into the store. When she invites him to an epic, end-of-summer party, Matt thinks he finally might have a chance with the girl of his dreams. With his cynical twin sister Wendy (Anna Faris) and best friend Barry (Dan Fogler), Matt embarks on a once-in-a-lifetime evening. From stealing a car to a marriage proposal to an indescribable, no-holds-barred dance-off, these friends share experiences that will change the course of their lives on one unforgettable night in the Go-Go '80s.

The movie is finally going to be released on March 4th, 2011. Watch the trailer below and tell us what you think.