What is Golden Globe Awards?

The Golden Globe Awards is conferred by Hollywood Foreign Press Association (HFPA) to personalities in the film and television industry for their outstanding work.

It is usually held every January and is a major part of the film industry's awards season, which ends with the Academy Awards. The 78th Golden Globe Awards were held on February 28, 2021.

Golden Globe Awards History

Earlier, the award was conferred to a person for excellence in filmmaking. In 1950, the foundation created a special honourary award for outstanding contributions to the entertainment industry as well and was presented to director Cecil B. DeMille. Since then, the official name for the award became the Cecil B. DeMille Award.

The revenues generated from the ceremony are donated to entertainment-related charities and help fund creative scholarships for artists.

After the Oscars and the Grammy Awards, it is the third most-watched show, telecast in 167 countries.

In 2008, the 65th Golden Globes ceremony was cancelled due to the ongoing Writers Guild of America strike, and replaced by a press conference to announce the winners.

Under the Best Director category, Elia Kazan holds the most with four wins, followed by Clint Eastwood, Oliver Stone, Milos Forman, David Lean, and Martin Scorsese, whereas Steven Spielberg holds the record for most nominations with twelve as of 2017.

In acting, Meryl Streep holds the record for the most wins with eight along with the most nominations with 31.

Golden Globe Awards eligibility and rules

The movie must be at least 70 minutes long and released for a seven-day run in the Greater Los Angeles area, while a TV programme must air in the US between the prime time hours of 8 p.m. and 11 p.m. The reality and non-scripted shows are not eligible.

The actors in a TV series must appear in at least six episodes and actors in a TV film or mini-series must appear in at least five per cent of the time in that.

According to the rules, HFPA members need to be invited to an official screening of each eligible film directly. For TV shows, they must be available to be seen by the members.

The qualifying period for all nominations is from January 1 through December 31.

Golden Globe Awards Categories

FILM

Best Motion Picture – Drama

Best Motion Picture – Musical or Comedy

Best Motion Picture – Foreign Language

Best Motion Picture – Animated

Best Director – Motion Picture

Best Actor in a Motion Picture – Drama

Best Actor in a Motion Picture – Musical or Comedy

Best Actress in a Motion Picture – Drama

Best Actress in a Motion Picture – Musical or Comedy

Best Supporting Actor – Motion Picture

Best Supporting Actress – Motion Picture

Best Screenplay – Motion Picture

Best Original Score – Motion Picture

Best Original Song – Motion Picture

Cecil B. DeMille Award for Lifetime Achievement in Motion Pictures

TELEVISION

Best Television Series – Drama

Best Television Series – Musical or Comedy

Best Miniseries or Motion Picture – Television

Best Actor in a Television Series – Drama

Best Actor in a Television Series – Musical or Comedy

Best Actor in a Miniseries or Motion Picture – Television

Best Actress in a Television Series – Drama

Best Actress in a Television Series – Musical or Comedy

Best Actress in a Miniseries or Motion Picture – Television

Best Supporting Actor in a Series, Miniseries or Motion Picture – Television

Best Supporting Actress in a Series, Miniseries or Motion Picture – Television

Carol Burnett Award for Lifetime Achievement in Television (since 2019)

Golden Globe Awards 2021: List of the winners

Best performance by an actress ( film drama)

Andra Day, The United States Vs. Billie Holiday, Hulu (Disney)

Best performance by an actor — musical film or comedy

Sacha Baron Cohen, Borat Subsequent Moviefilm, Amazon Studios

Best motion picture — musical or comedy

Borat Subsequent Moviefilm, Amazon Studios

Best director — motion picture

Chloe Zhao, Nomadland, Searchlight (Disney)

Best performance by an actor — film drama

Chadwick Boseman, Ma Rainey’s Black Bottom, Netflix

Best limited series or TV movie

The Queen’s Gambit, Netflix

Best actress in a limited series or TV movie

Anya Taylor-Joy, The Queen’s Gambit, Netflix

Best supporting actress in a series, limited series or TV movie

Gillian Anderson, The Crown, Netflix

Best supporting actress — motion picture

Jodie Foster, The Mauritanian, STXFilms

Best TV series — drama

The Crown, Netflix

Best motion picture — foreign language

Minari, (USA) A24

Best actor in a TV series — drama

Josh O’Connor, The Crown, Netflix

Best performance by an actress — musical film or comedy

Rosamund Pike, I Care A Lot, Netflix

Best TV series — musical or comedy

Schitt’s Creek, Pop TV

Best actor in a TV series, musical or comedy

Jason Sudeikis, Ted Lasso ,” Apple TV+

Best original score — motion picture

Trent Reznor, Atticus Ross, Jon Batiste, Soul, Walt Disney Pictures

Best original song — motion picture

Io Si (Seen), The Life Ahead, Netflix

Best actress in TV drama series

Emma Corrin, The Crown, Netflix

Best screenplay — motion picture

Aaron Sorkin, The Trial of the Chicago 7, Netflix

Best actor in a limited series or TV movie

Mark Ruffalo, I Know This Much Is True, HBO

Best motion picture — animated

Soul, Disney

Best actress in a TV series, musical or comedy

Catherine O’Hara, Schitt’s Creek, Pop TV

Best supporting actor in a series, limited series or TV movie

John Boyega, Small Axe, Amazon.com

Latest Updates on Golden Globe Awards

Golden Globes 2024 winners: Oppenheimer takes home 5 awards; full list here

Oppenheimer, Succession, and The Bear take home the most number of awards at the 2024 Golden Globes. Full list of Golden Globe winners here

Updated On : 08 Jan 2024 | 12:25 PM IST

Golden Globes 2024: Barbie and Oppenheimer dominate 81st Award night

The 81st Golden Globe Awards took place today, January 8, 2024. The Awards night was dominated by Oppenheimer and Barbie. Here's all you need to know about it

Updated On : 08 Jan 2024 | 12:10 PM IST

Nolan's 'Oppenheimer' dominates Golden Globes; Cillian Murphy best actor

Oppenheimer also won best director for Nolan, best drama actor for Cillian Murphy, best supporting actor for Robert Downey Jr. and for Ludwig Goransson's score

Updated On : 09 Jan 2024 | 12:02 AM IST

Barbie wins inaugural Cinematic & Box Office Achievement at Golden Globes

'Barbie' was the dominant force heading into the evening, landing a leading 10 nominations across all categories, including nods in the musical or comedy categories of best feature film

Updated On : 08 Jan 2024 | 10:46 AM IST

Christopher Nolan's 'Oppenheimer' wins Best Picture-Drama at Golden Globes

Earlier in the ceremony, actor Robert Downey Jr won the Best Supporting Male Actor -Motion Picture, Christopher Nolan bagged Best Director- Motion Picture, Cillian Murphy clinched the Best Male Actor

Updated On : 08 Jan 2024 | 10:41 AM IST

Golden Globe Awards 2024: Barbenheimer receives the most nominations

The nomination list for the most prestigious award, Golden Globes, has been released. To celebrate some of the best movies released in 2023. Check the complete nomination list below

Updated On : 12 Dec 2023 | 12:27 PM IST

Golden Globes find new broadcast home at CBS after years of scandal

\The 81st Golden Globes will air live on CBS and stream on Paramount+ on Sunday, January 7, CBS and the Globes announced Friday. The show will also be available on the CBS app

Updated On : 18 Nov 2023 | 1:05 PM IST

Golden Globe Awards sold, Hollywood Foreign Press group shut down

After a series of ethics, finance and diversity scandals, the embattled awards show will continue but the group that was behind it for decades will not

Updated On : 13 Jun 2023 | 11:36 PM IST

SS Rajamouli says 'Mera Bharat Mahan' on 28th Critics Choice Award stage

S.S. Rajamouli has made India proud once again after winning the Best Original Song and Best Foreign Language Film at the 28th Critics' Choice Awards

Updated On : 16 Jan 2023 | 10:17 AM IST

RRR and the chances of an Oscar after a Golden Globe for Naatu Naatu

Though it is not India's official entry, RRR has a lot going for it, despite Directors Guild of America's miss

Updated On : 13 Jan 2023 | 12:28 AM IST

'RRR' bags first Golden Globe with 'Naatu Naatu' winning best original song

"Naatu Naatu", the irrepressible, fun number from the blockbuster "RRR", danced its way to a Golden Globe as the 'best original song-motion picture' -- and to Indian showbiz history -- at a star spangled awards ceremony here.

Updated On : 12 Jan 2023 | 12:11 AM IST

Honour has made every Indian very proud: PM on 'RRR' Golden Globe win

The song from the blockbuster film bagged the 'best original song-motion picture' award. It is the first Indian production to win a Golden Globe

Updated On : 11 Jan 2023 | 1:11 PM IST

Ex-vice prez, film personalities greet team 'RRR' over Golden Globes win

Ex- Vice Prez M Venkaiah Naidu and several other celebrities on Wednesday congratulated musician M M Keeravani and other team members of the blockbuster movie 'RRR' for clinching the Golden

Updated On : 11 Jan 2023 | 1:13 PM IST

'Euphoria' star Zendaya bags best actress award but skips Golden Globes

Zendaya's performance in HBO's Euphoria earned her the title of best actress in a TV drama series at the 2023 Golden Globes

Updated On : 11 Jan 2023 | 12:31 PM IST

Golden Globe 2023: Mike White's 'The White Lotus' wins Best Limited Series

'The White Lotus' follows the guests and employees of the fictional White Lotus resort chain whose stay is affected by their various psychosocial dysfunctions

Updated On : 11 Jan 2023 | 11:14 AM IST

Golden Globes 2023: Brunson gets Best Actress award for 'Abbott Elementary'

Brunson was chosen over fellow nominees Kaley Cuoco ('The Flight Attendant'), Selena Gomez ('Only Murders in the Building'), Jenna Ortega ('Wednesday')

Updated On : 11 Jan 2023 | 10:39 AM IST

India bags its first Golden Globe for 'Natu Natu': Here's a list of winners

From 'Argentina 1985', to Steven Spielberg's 'The Fabelmans', here is a list of winners at the 80th Golden Globe Awards of 2023

Updated On : 11 Jan 2023 | 10:38 AM IST

'What more can an actor ask for?': NTR Jr on the Globes red carpet

RRR may have lost the Golden Globe for Best Motion Picture (Non-English), but the 'RRR' team still has much to celebrate. And celebrate NTR Jr will.

Updated On : 11 Jan 2023 | 10:34 AM IST

Golden Globes 2023: 'The Banshees of Inisherin' wins Best Screenplay

The film was competing in the category against 'Tar', 'Everything Everywhere All at Once', 'Women Talking' and 'The Fabelmans'

Updated On : 11 Jan 2023 | 10:34 AM IST

Golden Globe Awards 2023: Michelle Yeoh wins trophy for 'Best Actress'

Malaysian actor Michelle Yeoh has won the 2023 Golden Globe Award in the Best Actress - Motion Picture, Musical or Comedy category for 'Everything Everywhere All at Once'

Updated On : 11 Jan 2023 | 10:14 AM IST