The Hollywood Foreign Press Association, the organization behind the Golden Globes, announced today that eight-time Golden Globe winner and fifteen-time nominee Tom Hanks will be honored with the Cecil B. DeMille Award at the 77th Annual Golden Globe Awards in Beverly Hills on Jan. 5.

The star of such films as "Big," "Forrest Gump," "Saving Private Ryan," "Cast Away'' and the upcoming "A Beautiful Day in the Neighborhood" will accept the honor at the forthcoming Golden Globes awards.

"The Hollywood Foreign Press Association is proud to bestow the 2020 Cecil B. deMille Award to Tom Hanks," said HFPA President Lorenzo Soria. "For more than three decades, he's captivated audiences with rich and playful characters that we've grown to love and admire. As compelling as he is on the silver screen, he's equally so behind the camera as a writer, producer and director. We're honored to include Mr. Hanks with such luminaries as Oprah Winfrey, George Clooney, Meryl Streep, Martin Scorsese, and Barbra Streisand to name a few."

Chosen by the HFPA Board of Directors, the Cecil B. deMille Award is given annually to a talented individual who has made a lasting impact on the film industry. Honorees over the decades include Jeff Bridges, Robert De Niro, Audrey Hepburn, Harrison Ford, Jodie Foster, Sophia Loren, Sidney Poitier, Steven Spielberg, Denzel Washington, Robin Williams, and many more.

Hanks' complex and moving performances have earned him the honor of being one of only two actors in history to win back-to-back Best Actor Academy Awards.

He won his first Oscar in 1994 for his moving portrayal of AIDS-stricken lawyer Andrew Beckett in Jonathan Demme's "Philadelphia."

The following year, he took home his second Oscar for his unforgettable performance in the title role of Robert Zemeckis' "Forrest Gump."

He also won the Golden Globe Award for both films, as well as a Screen Actors Guild (SAG) Award for the latter. In 2013, Hanks starred in the Golden Globe nominated film "Captain Phillips," for which he received Golden Globe, SAG and BAFTA nominations.

Hanks was most recently seen alongside Streep in Spielberg's Golden Globe and Oscar nominated film "The Post," for which he was nominated for a Golden Globe and won Best Actor with the National Board of Review.

He will next be seen portraying Fred Rodgers in the upcoming biopic "A Beautiful Day in the Neighborhood."

Additional upcoming projects include the WWII drama "Greyhound," which he also wrote.

The Golden Globes will be presented at the Beverly Hilton in Beverly Hills on Jan. 5 and will air live from 5-8 p.m. Pacific Time on NBC.