After an exceptional run by Northwestern State in 2013-14, assistant coach Kasondra Foreman returns for her second season with the Lady Demons.

Foreman was a part of the run NSU put together in 2013-14 that led the Lady Demons to the NCAA Tournament after a 20-win season, both firsts in a decade for the program. It was the first time since 2008 that the Lady Demons had a winning record and first time since 2011 NSU held a winning conference record.

“Kasondra was highly recommended to us by former Lady Demon Angela Ortega. She displayed tenacity on the court as a player and an unmatched energy off the court,” said Brooke Stoehr. “She has a lively personality and an ability to relate to anyone. These qualities benefit our program greatly on the recruiting trail and in the community.”

Foreman played basketball at North Texas from 2010-2012 and won newcomer of the year her first season with the Mean Green. She earned her bachelor’s degree in kinesiology with a minor in communication in August 2012.

North Texas Hall of Famer and all-time career scoring leader, Jalie Mitchell, recruited Foreman to join the Mean Green family. Not only was Foreman recruited by perhaps the greatest player to ever suit up at North Texas, she had the opportunity to play under head coach Karen Aston, who is now the head coach for Texas, with Mitchell along her side.

While at North Texas, Foreman was a member of the Student-Athlete Advisory Committee and helped run summer camps for future collegiate athletes.

“She is able to relate to our current players, having competed at the Division I level while being a successful student athlete,” said Stoehr.

Before UNT, Foreman played basketball at Weatherford College for coach Bob McKinley, the winningest active two-year college coach in the nation. The conference has named McKinley its Coach of the Year more than 10 times, including Foreman’s freshman and sophomore years at Weatherford College.

Foreman not only led the Coyotes to a conference title as a freshman, but as a sophomore she led the conference in both points and assists per game. By the end of her sophomore season, she was awarded all-conference honors. She was also named to the Dean’s List in 2009-10.