Vancouver Foundation celebrates its diverse staff

Qani Queiroz-Mckay is happy to be working for Vancouver Foundation (VF), an organization that supports not only her Indigenous identity but also the fact that they are a trans employee (Queiroz-Mckay uses both she and they pronouns).

Heiltsuk on her father’s side and Nisga’a on her mother’s, she is VF’s coordinator of Indigenous priorities. Their job entails managing the Thriving Indigenous Systems Fund, the organization’s multi-million-dollar grant earmarked for land-based First Nations and their non-profits.

“What that looks like,” says Queiroz-Mckay, who is based in Bella Bella, “is supporting our Indigenous priorities advisory council, which is made up of community members from the more than 200 First Nations throughout the province, and helping to inform them about our grant processes and outcomes, and then administering the grants. It’s great having a team that I can see myself reflected in.”

According to the mission statement of Vancouver Foundation, created in 1943, its role is to “harness the gifts of energy, ideas, time and money to make meaningful and lasting impacts in communities.” It grants up to $75 million a year to B.C. organizations.

As a trans person, Queiroz-Mckay is also delighted by VF’s recent shift to health insurance that provides aspects of gender-affirming care not covered by B.C.’s Provincial Health Services Authority – 80 per cent of the cost up to $10,000 a year and $40,000 in one’s lifetime.

“It means a lot to have my employer make a decision of changing our health benefits to be more aligned with the things that we say we’re doing, like justice, equity, diversity and inclusion,” she adds. “This is somewhere I want to keep working; I believe that it will not just attract but also retain more trans people like me.”

VF’s employee assistance plans provide access to Indigenous Elders and Knowledge Keepers to support mental health “in a culturally safe way,” she points out.

“I think that’s a positive step in remedying some of the difficulties for Indigenous people in accessing health care, so I’m happy that it’s available for the growing Indigenous staff at Vancouver Foundation.”

For Hilary Statton, director of people, culture and engagement, the decision to go with a new health-insurance plan springs from one of the organization’s core values. “We’re really striving for a trust-based approach to culture and employment, reflecting the fact that we have a very diverse team of individuals whose needs and wants are different,” she says.

“We want to provide them with as much agency as possible in how they approach their work and how they’re engaged with us as an employer.”

VF’s insurance, she notes, also covers costs related to fertility treatment, adoption and surrogacy for individuals struggling or unable to conceive children. And the organization provides up to a $2,500 reimbursement per family member for mental health support, plus a $1,000 reimbursement per family member for paramedical practitioners each year.

Statton says VF’s approach to employee well-being is “holistic,” including meditation and physical fitness apps.

All those benefits are “grounded in having work that has purpose and meaning for people, providing opportunities where we can to impact areas of equity and help, such as our ‘Youth Policy Program’ or our BIPOC (Black, Indigenous and People of Colour) granting,” adds Statton.

“These are things that our people can connect with personally and that give them a real sense of purpose in their day-to-day work, beyond the fact that we’re trying to create a good environment with good benefits and wages. I think that’s a really meaningful thing.”