Yes. BCCHF’s door-to-door program has been running for several years and has been a valuable way of engaging with our communities across British Columbia. Door-to-door fundraising is one of the most effective and personal ways we connect with our community—to listen, answer questions, and share real stories about the impact that donations make for families across the province. You can identify our passionate door-to-door canvassers as they will be wearing recognizable vests, hats, and identification badges with the BC Children’s Hospital Foundation logo. They will be carrying iPads and/or reports to guide you through your conversation.

If you have any feedback about a recent experience or would like to confirm the authorization of a door-to-door canvasser, we encourage you to contact our office. The safety and security of our donors continue to be top priority, and we appreciate your support to ensure a positive experience for everyone.

Great question. The government funds all the essentials for a hospital—things like health care provider salaries and operational costs. But it’s just not possible for public funding to cover everything that can make health care outstanding. Technologies are changing faster than ever, new and promising research is constantly emerging, and the cost of recruiting the brightest medical minds adds up. The government does everything it can, but it’ll take all of us to give kids the best health care imaginable.

Wigs for kids BC is currently accepting hair donations by mail only. Please contact us for information on where to mail your hair and any monetary donations you have collected.

You can still support this program by making an online donation, or creating a personal fundraising page in support of Wigs for Kids BC. Funds raised will continue to support the cost of providing wigs for kids in BC suffering from hair loss due to their illness as well as supporting families with medication and feeding supplies not covered by MSP. Now, more than ever, this is so important due to the uncertain financial situation many families are facing. Thank you for your support.

If you have any questions about updating or cancelling a monthly donation, confirming the validity of a call, or updating your credit card information, it’s best to call or email us.

We’re open Monday to Friday from 9 a.m. to 5 p.m. Just give us a call at 604.449.6333, or connect with us through our Contact Us page. If you’re updating financial information, a phone call is best to ensure safety and security. We ask that you please call with any updates at least seven days before your next donation date so that we can process your changes in time.

Tax receipts for our monthly donors are sent out in February. For one-time donations made online, tax receipts are sent by email following the completion of your transaction. For donations made by mail, phone or dropped off directly to our offices, please allow up to four weeks from the time we receive your donation for your tax receipt to arrive.

If you have an issue with your tax receipt, please contact us or call 604.449.6333 and we can help fix it. To send out a new tax receipt, we will either need the incorrect receipt returned to us or we will need you to sign a letter allowing us to cancel the incorrect receipt. Once we’ve received the old receipt or a signed copy of the receipt cancellation letter we can issue a new receipt.

There are two main reasons. For one, it’s a great way for us to show you the impact your donations have made on improving children’s health care. As an organization that fundraises for child health, it’s also one method we use to reach out to the community for support.

If you would like to be removed from any mailings or would prefer to receive them by email, please visit our contact us page or call 604.449.6333 to update your preferences. Please include your name, address and email address to help us locate your account.