Our three offices are currently closed to the public. To contact us by mail, please use our Vancouver address.

We have reduced access to letter mail, so we may be slow to reply.

Please mail donations to our Vancouver address. To receive a tax receipt immediately, please make your gift online

Vancouver (head office)

340 – 1122 Mainland Street

Vancouver, BC V6B 5L1

Phone 604-732-4228

or toll free at 1-800-453-1533

Our Vancouver office is on the traditional unceded Indigenous territories of the xʷməθkʷəy̓əm (Musqueam), Sḵwx̱wú7mesh (Squamish) and səlilwətaɬ (Tsleil-Waututh) First Nations.

Toronto office

102 – 179 John Street

Toronto, ON M5T 1X4

Phone 416-348-9885

Please mail all donations to our Vancouver office.

Our Toronto office is located on the traditional Indigenous territories of the Wendat, Anishinabek Nation, the Haudenosaunee Confederacy and the Mississaugas of the Credit First Nations. This territory is covered by the Dish With One Spoon Wampum Belt Covenant, an agreement between the Haudenosaunee and the Ojibwe and allied nations to peaceably share and care for the lands and resources around the Great Lakes.

Montreal office

540 – 50, rue Sainte-Catherine Ouest

Montreal QC H2X 3V4

Phone 514-871-4932

Our Montreal office is located on the traditional territories of the Kanien’kehá:ka (Mohawk) Nation and has been a land of passage and exchange for many other First Nations.

Donations

Contact communitygiving@davidsuzuki.org to

• edit your donation

• update your personal or credit details

• edit your letter mail or email subscription

• ask questions about greeting cards or seed purchases/mail-outs

Please note that our Donor Relations team now has reduced access to letter mail. If you are sending a donation by mail, there may be a delay in processing and recognizing your gift. If you are able to, please consider making a gift online instead or by phone at 1-800-453-1533.

Contacter dons@davidsuzuki.org les mêmes options d’enquête que ci-dessus, mais pour nos supporters francophones.

Emails from the David Suzuki Foundation

Contact subscribers@davidsuzuki.org to report any technical or content issues. To unsubscribe, visit our unsubscribe page.

Website support

Contact webteam@davidsuzuki.org to report any errors on our website. Include your device type (mobile, tablet, laptop or desktop), browser version and operating system (Mac, Windows, iPhone, Android, etc.). Please detail the source page where the issue or broken link is found.

General inquiries

Contact contact@davidsuzuki.org for any other inquiries that are not mentioned above. We will not be able to return phone calls at the moment, so please ensure emails are clear and concise, so that we can help you effectively.

Media requests

Visit the media contacts page.

Contacting Dr. David Suzuki

To request David Suzuki’s speakership at an event/e-event or interview, or for any personal inquiry that is not for the Foundation (David Suzuki and the Foundation are separate entities), please write by letter to the postal address below. Note: David Suzuki does not communicate by email, but if you include your email address in your letter, his assistant Deanna may be able to respond via email. You cannot reach David Suzuki via the above “contact” address at the Foundation.

Attn: Executive Assistant, Ms. D. Bayne, 1122 Mainland Street, Suite 340 Vancouver BC V6B 5L1