We are preparing for one of our most interesting and exciting Open House and User Conferences in 2019.

Continuous change shapes our information technology world. That change comes from both the progress in technology but equally from a change in the business environment. Businesses are faced with the fact that the demands on security and privacy, a switch to mobile technology, augmentation of human skills and continuous availability in time and space have exploded. Further changes in the use, location and skill of the workforce and the dynamics of economy and regulation have made planning for information technology a massive challenge.

It has become of utmost importance to employ a strategy that will give the business both the necessary stability and security in their transaction processing and record keeping while providing a substantial upgrade in flexibility and adaptability in user and customer interaction. The biggest issue for most businesses has been to achieve that level of integration.

We will demonstrate and explain how all the industry-leading content and process services of the Papyrus Platform are integrated within both ACM and Papyrus Converse, providing state-of-the-art user front-ends on PC, browser and Mobile. We will show how machine learning capabilites of the User-Trained Agent provides the utmost in flexibility and process optimisation. Learn how unstructured incoming content or messages can trigger the right process for the right organisation while extracting essential data.

But we also agree with the findings of the most recent Madisions Advisors Study: ‘While technology continues to move toward digital- only interactions, PRINT is still a vital component of customer communications management (CCM) and plays an important role in an Omni-channel strategy.‘

As you can see the ISIS Papyrus OpenHouse and User Conference should not be missed to stay on the forefront of technology. Our Management Circle Seminars provide essential knowledge sharing on an executive level. Our hands-on labs allow the technical experts to check out the functionality in detail. It is always a gathering of experts and visionary minds.

We want to invite you to join us and be part of this great event.