The International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) and its director general Mohamed El Baradei received the 2005 Nobel Peace Prize at a ceremony in Oslo on Saturday for their efforts to halt the spread of nuclear weapons.

Just over 60 years after the world's first atomic attack, Mr El Baradei and the United Nations nuclear watchdog agency, represented by the chairman of its board of governors, Yukiya Amano, were honoured for "their efforts to prevent nuclear energy from being used for military purposes".

They received the prestigious prize, consisting of a Nobel diploma, a gold medal and 10 million Swedish kronor ($A1.67 million) to be split between them, from chairman of the Nobel Committee Ole Mjoes at a formal ceremony in Oslo's City Hall.

The UN agency and Mr El Baradei received their distinction 60 years after the United States dropped two atomic bombs on Hiroshima and Nagasaki in Japan on August 6 and 9, 1945, the world's only nuclear attacks.

"At a time when the threat of nuclear arms is again increasing, the Norwegian Nobel Committee wishes to underline that this threat must be met through the broadest possible international cooperation," Mr Mjoes said.

"This principle finds its clearest expression today in the work of the IAEA and its director general," he added.

The IAEA was founded in 1957 to promote civilian use of nuclear energy and at the same time work to eliminate the proliferation of nuclear weapons.

"At a time when disarmament efforts appear deadlocked, when there is a danger that nuclear arms will spread both to states and to terrorist groups, and when nuclear power again appears to be playing an increasingly significant role, this work is of incalculable importance," Mr Mjoes said.

The agency and its chief have most recently been instrumental in thorny nuclear negotiations with Iran, threatening to take the country before the UN Security Council for violating nuclear non-proliferation rules.

Mr El Baradei on Friday said the international community was losing patience with Iran over its nuclear program, which Tehran insists is merely designed to meet domestic energy needs, but cautioned against using military action.