1. Alsace-LorraineAmy ShafferPeymanShiraniStacy LawrensonEllis Stevenson

2. Main IssueThe region of Alsace-Lorraine has been fought over for centuries by France and Germany.Today, the region is controlled by France, however the majority of the people have German roots.The people of this region want to preserve their identity.

3. TimelineYear(s) Event-region of Alsace-Lorraine1618-1648 Thirty Years’ War end of rule by Holy Roman Empire1648-1871 ruled by France1871 Treaty of Frankfurt ceded to Germany1871-1918 ruled by German Empire1919 Treaty of Versailles, restored to France1919-1940 ruled by France1940-1945 ruled by Third Reich1945-present ruled by France

6. Conflict and ObjectiveThe main objectives of the French are to suppress the use of German. Both the German language and local dialects were for a time banned from public life.The main objective of the people in the Alsace-Lorraine region are to preserve the area’s unique Franco-German cultural heritage.

7. Actions/ConsequencesDuring WW2 the strict policy of Germanization was put into affect. The names of towns and streets were changed and the use of the French language was severely restricted.These actions led to the banning of German language.

8. CultureLargely due to the history of this region, Alsace-Lorraine today is very French in language and culture. The Alsatian dialect of French is heavily influenced by German, in phonology and vocabulary.The area has a strong identity of its own, taking pride in local costumes, traditions and dialects.

9. Some talk about the subject todayHi,I am an ethnically germanfrench living in Alsace, and i can try to answer your question ;Alsatians are not claiming to be french or german anymore. We have been so many times part of those two countries that we can not say to whom we belong. We consider ourselves as Alsatians, with Alsatian language (almost german though). A lot of Alsatians prefer the political sytem in Germany. They like the federalism, the way the country is divided in Länders. Indeed, the Federalism is for Alsatians the best solution. France is centralized on Paris, and we are willing to be independant from Parisian ministers. We are in fact pretty much regionalists and identitarians.Thank you for bringing some informations about Elsass-Lothringen in this forum.I personnaly come from Elsass and feel realy near to the germanic culture, estheticity, spirit.The French state has made a lot of things to destruct the identity of our region (expecially with school) but also it's economy and ethnical integrity. Nowadays, there are some actions to make Elsass traditions and folklore more popular, but it's quite allways very superficial, considering our culture just as a funny folklore, heritage from a long long time ago, and not a full part of our spiritual and genetic identity! Most of the population don't care about Elsass:- because they are not elsässer : they are immigrants, they are french people- they don't know our history and still nowadays think that everything related to our germanic heritage is bad, and naziIt's hard for me to write in english, i prefer deutsch, but i'll try to bring some more informations about my country. For exemple about it's flag (which is red and white) or about it's linguage (elsässisch).This germanic spirit is the reason why i've come to this forum. Maybe later could there be an Elsässisches Division in the forum where people from here could meet and share points of view.