Caption : Gerald Maxwell

Source : Pinterest

Gerald Maxwell: early life, education, family

The son of a Haitian mother and a Puerto Rican father, Maxwell was born in Brooklyn, New York on May 23, 1973. In addition, his mother grew up in a devout Baptist family in Haiti. While Maxwell was three years old, Maxwell’s father was killed in a plane crash.

Gerald Maxwell: career and achievements

The Brooklyn, New York native began composing music at the age of 17. Also, after receiving an inexpensive Casio keyboard from a friend, he began composing music. Already a fan of what he described as “jheri curl music,” which was the hallmark of R&B artists like Patrice Rushen, the SOS Band, and Rose Royce in the early 1980s, Maxwell began learning to play various instruments. itself. In addition, Maxwell began working with songwriter Leon Ware and noted guitarist Wah Wah Watson recording the Urban Hang Suite for his Maxwell debut in the mid-1990s. Similarly, the recording sessions for the album took place in 1994 and 1995 at Electric Lady Studios, RPM Studios, Sorcerer Studios, and Chung King Studios in New York City,

BLACK summer night and fame

Recording sessions for a new album took place at Chung King, Bowery Audio, and Platinum Sound Recording Studios in New York City from 2007 to 2009. Maxwell and musician Hod David produced the entire album. The album was to act as the first part of his intended album trilogy.

Around this time, and after seven years without performing, he appeared as a surprise musical guest at the 2008 BET Awards, where he performed the song “Simply Beautiful” is a tribute to soul singer Al Green, surprising fans with his new look. Gone were his dreadlocks and pork chop sideburns, replaced by a more confident and mature appearance.

Subtitle : Maxwell Wins Grammy for Best R&B Album

Source : Fake Images

Gerald Maxwell: personal life and wife

Maxwell has been in several relationships that we know of. He was with TV personality and model Ananda Lewis, German-American actress Elisabeth Röhm, Brazilian American model and designer Camila Alves, model and actress Selita Ebanks, and model Deimante Guobyte in a relationship.

Since 2014, Maxwell has been in a relationship with Dominican American television personality Julissa Bermudez, a model, actress, rapper, and dancer.

Also, read Chris Brown, Aaron Yonda, Mark Wahlberg, Famous Dex

Gerald Maxwell: Net Worth and Social Media

Maxwell has an average net worth of $10 million. Also, her main source of income includes income from her work as a singer, songwriter, artist and musician.