Chiang Rai United coach Alexandre Gama insists that his team's 6-5 shoot-out victory over Buriram United in the Thailand Champions Cup on Friday night should not be seen as harbinger of success in Thai League 1 this year.

The match at Bangkok's Supachalasai Stadium, in which the Video Assistant Referee (VAR) system made its Thai debut, ended in a 2-2 stalemate after Thai League 1 champions Buriram squandered a two-goal advantage.

The VAR system was only called into action once in the last five minutes of the match, which pitted the top flight winners against the FA Cup champions.

Buriram's Brazilian striker Diogo Luis Santo was caught on TV elbowing Chiang Rai defender Piyaphol Phanitchakun after match referee Sivakorn Pu-udom had sought the VAR's help.

Diogo was red-carded, reducing Buriram to 10 men.

Gama, a former Buriram coach, later commented: "This is our first title this year and will help build up the confidence of the team.

"We have to face Bali United in the AFC Champions League play-offs. We believe that we can get through it, but we must not underestimate them.

"As for Thai League 1, it is a title that we have never won and we would love to see our name among the winners.

"It won't be easy though. We would have to work very hard throughout the year."

The Thunder Castle started off well when their new Brazilian striker Edgar Bruno da Silva put them ahead in the sixth minute.

They had another opportunity to score but national team player Jakkraphan Kaewprom was denied by Chiang Rai United goalkeeper Chatchai Butprom.

Buriram doubled their lead in the 34th minute when Diogo found the net.

Buriram continued attacking their opponents and Diogo forced Chatchai into making another splendid save late in the first half.

A few minutes before half-time, Chiang Rai defender Arthit Daosawang was sent off for fouling Supachok Sarachart to pick up his second yellow card.

Former Muang Thong striker Cleiton Silva set up Sivakorn Tiatrakul to rifle the ball past Buriram goalkeeper Siwarak Tedsungnoen to make it 2-1 just for Chiang Rai before the break.

Chatchai bailed out Chiang Rai once again in the second half, warding off a header by Edgar.

Chiang Rai wrested control and their efforts paid off after the hour mark when Victor Cardozo headed in the equaliser for the Beetles.

The penalty shoot-out was contested using the new ABBA format, with the first team's opening penalty being followed by two from their opponents and one again by the first side before the routine was repeated.

Chiang Rai United edged Buriram United 6-5 in the shoot-out.