This handbook offers an overview of the main issues regarding the political, economic, social, religious, intellectual and artistic history of the Iberian Peninsula during the period of Muslim rule (eighth–fifteenth centuries). A comprehensive list of primary and secondary sources attests the vitality of the academic study of al-Andalus (= Muslim Iberia) and its place in present-day discussions about the past and the present.

The contributors are all specialists with diverse backgrounds providing different perspectives and approaches. The volume includes chapters dealing with the destiny of the Muslim population after the Christian conquest and with the posterity of al-Andalus in art, literature and different historiographical traditions. The chapters are organised in the following sections:

Political history, concentrating on rulers and armies

Social, religious and economic groups

Intellectual and cultural developments

Legacy and memory of al-Andalus

Offering a synthetic and updated academic treatment of the history and society of Muslim Iberia, this comprehensive and up-to-date collection provides an authoritative and interdisciplinary guide. It is a valuable resource for both specialists and the general public interested in the history of the Iberian Peninsula, Islamic and Medieval studies.

Introduction. Maribel Fierro

PART I. Rulers

1. The Iberian Peninsula before the Muslim conquest. Iñaki Martín Viso

2. The conquerors and the formation of al-Andalus. Jesús Lorenzo

3. Centralization and consolidation. The Cordoban Umayyads and the Amirids. Xavier Ballestin

4. Replication and fragmentation. The Taifa kingdoms. Alejandro García Sanjuán

5. Berber rule and Abbasid legitimacy. The Almoravids. Camilo Gomez-Rivas

6. Berber rule and the Maghribi caliphate. The Almohads. Pascal Buresi

7. Resistance and adaptation. The Nasrids. Francisco Vidal-Castro

8. The coins of al-Andalus. Ideological evolution and historical context. Tawfiq Ibrahim and Ruth Pliego

PART 2. Society

9. Arabs, Berbers, and local converts. Jessica Coope

10. Christians, Jews, and the dhimma status. David J. Wasserstein

11. Women and slaves. Manuela Marin

12. Traders and peasants. Pierre Guichard

13. Secretaries and the running of government. Bruna Soravia

14. Scholars, jurists, and the legal system. Maribel Fierro

15. Ascetics and Sufis. José Bellver

PART 3. Culture

16. Poetry and literature. Teresa Garulo

17. Religious sciences. Camilla Adang

18. Historiography and geography. Víctor de Castro León

19. Philosophy. Sarah Stroumsa

20. Sciences and technology. Mònica Rius-Piniés

21. Art and architecture. Susana Calvo Capilla

22. Material culture. José C. Carvajal López

23. Daily life and popular culture. Alejandro García Sanjuán

PART 4. The aftermath of al-Andalus

24. Living as Muslims under Christian rule. The Mudejars. Filomena Barros

25. The forced conversions and the Moriscos. Mayte Green-Mercado

26. The integration of al-Andalus in Islamic historiography. The view from the Maghrib and the Mashriq. Luis Molina

27. The memory of al-Andalus in early modern Spain. Fernando Rodríguez Mediano

28. Writing on al-Andalus in the modern Islamic world. Christina Civantos

29. Writing the history of al-Andalus. Spain and the West. Alejandro García Sanjuán

30. The Alhambra around the world. Images and constructions of an aesthetic paradigm of modernity. José Miguel Puerta Vílchez

31. The politics and aesthetics of Convivencia. Manuela Ceballos

Biography

Maribel Fierro is a research professor at the Consejo Superior de Investigaciones Científicas (Instituto de Lenguas y Culturas del Mediterráneo-CSIC), Spain. Her research focuses on the political, religious and intellectual history of al-Andalus and the Maghreb, Islamic law, the construction of orthodoxy and the persecution of heresies, and violence and its representation in Medieval Arabic sources. Among her publications: The Almohad Revolution. Politics and religion in the Islamic West during the twelfth–thirteenth centuries (2012), and Abd al-Rahman III: The first Cordoban caliph (2005). She has been the recipient of the Anneliese Maier Award 2014 of the Alexander von Humboldt Foundation.