Gerald Green

Boston Celtics forward Gerald Green warms up before an NBA basketball game Tuesday, Dec. 20, 2016, in Memphis, Tenn. (AP Photo/Brandon Dill)

(Brandon Dill)

BOSTON -- When Gerald Green left the floor on Tuesday in the Boston Celtics' win over the Memphis Grizzlies, a victory was anything but certain. The Celtics were leading by five, and despite a couple of momentum-changing plays just moments before, the game still hung in the balance.

Still, even with the uncertainty, Green was treated to something he said he had never experienced before in Boston.

"I never had a standing ovation before, I don't think," he said, smiling. "For me to have one at this day and age in my career man, it's special."

It was well deserved. Without Green, the Celtics might very well have struggled to hold off a Grizzlies team that refused to stop charging back.

"He just brought more intensity," Celtics guard Marcus Smart -- who brings plenty of intensity of his own -- said. "Things got sluggish, and he came in, and you could tell the intensity changed when he stepped on the floor."

Intensity hasn't always been Green's calling card. The athletic wing is better known for his massive dunks and his ability to heat up in a hurry.

Green displayed the latter on Tuesday. Off the bench in the second quarter, he immediately squared up a mid-range jumper and drained it. A three and another mid-range jumper later, he pulled down an offensive rebound, dribbled it back to the 3-point line, and unleashed a difficult trey that swished through.

Then, in the second half, Green cashed out two more triples -- one in the third and one in the fourth quarter. Midway through the fourth, Green drove baseline, absorbed contact, and finished a difficult double-clutch layup that pushed Boston's lead back up from a precarious four to a slightly-less-precarious six.

So yes, when Green checked out at the 3:44 mark with 19 points on 7-for-10 shooting, it was to a well-deserved standing ovation -- not just from the fans, but also from his teammates, who rose to congratulate him.

After all, they were just reciprocating what Green did for them.

"The one thing that I've really been impressed with with Gerald," Brad Stevens said before the game, "through the ups and downs of injuries and not playing, he's very consistent in his support of his team. He's not only there and quiet in the locker room, but he's also loud on the bench, active on the bench. And I knew that coming in. I had watched that pretty close in Miami last year. Things tend to work out when you've got that kind of spirit about you."

After receiving opportunities in two consecutive games -- and taking advantage of both -- Green just seemed relieved to be back on the court.

"I think (Stevens) just knows I'll be ready," Green said. "I'm always kind of talking to the team. ... I'm just trying to stay ready. I know it's a tough time, because there's a lot of people on this team that can play. It's always going to be someone that's unhappy, so you just have to use other ways to try to stay locked in."

"He got the opportunity and he knew what to do," Avery Bradley added. "He's been here before. ... He's really helping our second unit a lot."

So is it time for more opportunities for Green? That will be a tough decision -- Green's time on the court comes at the expense of Jaylen Brown, who played just four uneventful minutes. Stunting Brown's development is certainly not what the team wants to do. On the other hand, Green can add a scoring punch to the second unit that has been missing.

"It only takes one shot for (Green) to feel like he is on fire," Isaiah Thomas said, smiling.

For his part, Green is glad the decision isn't his to make.

"That's coach's decision," Green said. "I'm glad I'm the player and he's the coach. The most important thing is that we're winning games. Whatever rotation that he throws out there, as long as we keep winning and get better as a unit, keep getting better as a team, that's the most important thing."