Gerald Green has proven he is worthy of more playing time

The Boston Celtics dished a 10 point loss to the Memphis Grizzlies on Wednesday night as they maintained a lead throughout the game.

One important detail to take away from the game is the astounding fact that Gerald Green dropped 19 points coming off of the bench. So far the season hadn’t gone in the veteran guard’s favor; however, his latest performances have proven otherwise.

Dec 27, 2016; Boston, MA, USA; Boston Celtics forward Gerald Green (30) controls the ball during the second half against the Memphis Grizzlies at TD Garden. Mandatory Credit: Bob DeChiara-USA TODAY Sports

Green went 7-for-10 on his shots throughout the entire game against the Grizzlies, helping the Celtics gain the edge over Memphis.

It looks as if Green is beginning to turn his season around once given the right duration of playing time. So far for the season, Terry Rozier has had his ups and downs serving as the backup point guard to Isaiah Thomas, which is why head coach Brad Stevens should make some adjustments to the lineup.

Given the fact that this year is only Rozier’s second in the NBA, he still needs more time to develop into a true role player. Putting Marcus Smart as the backup point guard over Rozier would open up the opportunity for Green to serve a larger role for the Celtics.

Having a more experienced player coming off of the bench serves the purpose of improved ball movement and chemistry.

When acquiring Green in free-agency, Brad Stevens made it clear that he preferred Green’s talent of scoring spurts of points in a short time. Green has proven that he is capable of doing so after putting up 10 points off of 4-for-6 field goals in the first half against Memphis.

It is no secret that Brad Stevens knows how to take players who have been struggling, and turn their careers around for the better. Green’s latest performances show that Stevens may have worked his magic yet again.

Gerald has made it clear that he is dedicated and happy to be back in Boston, which makes him a strong contributor for this team that is on the rise.

If Green continues to play this way, he may even find himself staying in Boston longer than the one year he was signed on for.

More from Hardwood Houdini

This article originally appeared on