By LYNN WORTHY

Sun Staff

BOSTON — Last night it officially entered the ugly realm for Celtics fans. It had been heading in that direction for some time, but the combination of injuries and the Memphis Grizzlies brought it to its tipping point.

It appears head coach Doc Rivers may have turned a corner last night as well. Before the game he made it clear in no uncertain terms that he wasn’t going to settle for any excuses.

Memphis 98, Boston 96

After the game he didn’t hold back, saying of their final possession, “Actually, the play was for Gerald (Green), and he was wide the hell open.”

While Rivers frustration was direct towards the teams play and energy, it also can’t be ignored that the opponent was the lowly Memphis Grizzlies.

Memphis limped into the TD Banknorth Garden while the franchise has a FOR SALE sign on it, their best player sits on the inactive list, and with their tales between their legs as the owners of the worst record in the NBA. Still, they came out on top of the Celtics, 98-96, despite a 17-point Boston comeback.

The list of Celtics unavailable at the start of last night’s game included second-leading scorer Wally Szczerbiak as well as Celtic big men Kendrick Perkins, Michael Olowokandi, and Theo Ratliff.

Even with the shortage of bodies, Rivers said before the game that he warned players against complacency, making sure to point out that Memphis entered last night’s game with problems of its own.

“I told them I don’t want any of that feel sorry for yourself crap,” Rivers said.

The Grizzlies have been without Pau Gasol, the 7-foot Spaniard who averaged 20 points per game last season, every game this season as he recovers from a fractured metatarsal bone in his left foot.

The Celtics looked poised early on to pound the Grizzlies into submission as they got out to a 13-point lead in the first quarter, but by the half that lead was a two-point deficit.

The Celtics decided to celebrate the holidays early, gift-wrapping 28 points for the Grizzlies on 21 turnovers.

Memphis’ lead reached 17 points in the fourth quarter.

Just when it looked like the only hope for salvaging the Celtics season was going to be booking more post-game concerts, a lone bright spot appeared in the form of last year’s top draft pick, Gerald Green.

Green, who finished with 21 points and was 7 of 10 from the field, led the comeback. He scored 16 of his points during that fourth quarter.

“A lot of times I’m pretty hesitant,” Green said. “Doc, coach, is always gets on me. He’s always saying be aggressive, try to score within the offense. He was telling me that today in practice. That’s just everything I’ve been doing.”

After last night’s performance, Rivers said Green was going to see more playing time. He earned the minutes and other players are just going to have a seat, Rivers said.

With the Celtics dropping to 5-12 at the bottom of the NBA’s Atlantic Division (or, as it becoming known, “the Titanic”) and the Phoenix Suns coming into town tomorrow night, they’ll need something positive to focus on.