BOSTON – His second stint as a member of the Celtics has included a lot of sitting and watching during the first two months.

Gerald Green has appeared in just 15 of the team’s opening 32 games, averaging just five points in his limited role.

It was not the homecoming the Celtics’ first-round pick in 2005 was hoping for when he signed a one-year contract to return last summer.

Green missed a good chunk of training camp due to a hip injury and struggled as he played catchup once the regular season got going.

The DNPs piled up, with Green appearing in just three games (18 total minutes) over an 18-game span from Nov. 19 to Dec. 23 following a 2-for-11 outing against the Golden State Warriors.

But on Christmas Day, coach Brad Stevens elected to turn to Green in a bid to get some offense from the bench, and he responded with eight points in 12 minutes against the New York Knicks.

Then, on Tuesday night, before a capacity crowd at the TD Garden, Green lived up to his billing of scoring in bunches.

He delivered a season-best 19 points in 18:48, including nine in the fourth quarter, to help the Celtics get past the shorthanded Memphis Grizzlies, 113-103, to improve to 19-13.

“It only helps us,’’ said Isaiah Thomas, who had 21 points and seven assists. “He’s one of the best scorers I’ve seen in the NBA. Whether it be practice or games, all it takes is one shot for him to feel like he’s on fire.

“He can help us. Coach is pointing in his direction and he’s taken advantage. What he did today, that’s what he does. He comes off the bench and gives a spark and gives us energy.’’

Green had 10 points in just 3:09 during the second quarter and helped the Celtics hold off the Grizzlies, who were without Mike Conley, in the fourth quarter.

After being an observer for much of this season, Green jumped on his chance to play quality minutes.

“I’m just trying to stay ready at all times, that’s all,’’ said Green, who entered the game with just 56 points this season. “It’s all about being a professional.

“I think (Stevens) kind of knows I’m ready. I know it’s a tough time. There’s a lot of people on this team that can play. There’s always going to be somebody that’s unhappy. You’ve got to use other ways to stay motivated and stay ready.’’

Stevens recognized that Green is the type of player who, once he gets going, can be a volume scorer.

“He had some injury issues and then you’re trying to play a fast-paced game while learning a new system on the fly, basically without any practice time,’’ said Stevens, whose team has won six of seven games. “That’s hard. I think he’s more comfortable in how we’re trying to play on both ends of the court.

“He brought great energy and then obviously we needed every one of his 19 points tonight. He’s a guy that when he gets into a rhythm, you have to be wary of if you’re the opponent. I felt that way when we were coaching against him.’’

Green’s move into the rotation the past two games meant two straight DNPs for Terry Rozier while rookie Jaylen Brown has had his minutes cut.

Stevens is likely to keep turning to Green, looking to add scoring punch to the second unit.

“I’m the player and he’s the coach,’’ said Green. “Right now the most important thing is we’re winning games.’’