Isaiah Thomas can attest to the power of the sometimes dormant volcano that is Gerald Green.

The Celtics guard reaches back to their brief time together in Phoenix when he says that Green is the best practice player he has ever seen. Then comes a game like the Celtics’ 113-103 win against Memphis last night, when the great practice player converts his flair into something tangible.

“He’s one of the best scorers I’ve seen in the NBA. Whether it be practice or games, it only takes one shot for him to feel like he’s on fire,” Thomas said. “He can help us, really. Coach is pointing in his direction, and he took advantage of his opportunity the last few games that he’s played. What he did today, that’s what he does. I mean, he comes off the bench and gives a spark and he gives us energy.”

As it turns out, Green’s eight-point, 12-minute stint during Sunday’s win in New York was a tremor. The real event was last night, when the swingman came off the bench to score 19 points on 7-for-10 shooting, including three 3-pointers.

Green’s performance, which included 10 points in the first 3:27 of the second quarter and a dagger-like 3 with 6:14 left in the fourth quarter, staked the Celtics to a lead the Grizzlies could never quite erase.

Not that Memphis caved, though, despite the injury-related absences of point guard Mike Conley and forward Chandler Parsons. Once Amir Johnson picked up his fifth foul early in the fourth quarter, and Brad Stevens attempted to buy time with a frontcourt of Tyler Zeller and Kelly Olynyk, the Grizzlies went big with a power tandem of center Marc Gasol and power forward Zach Randolph.

Starting with a Randolph put-back on the first basket of the fourth quarter, the pair combined for 17 of Memphis’ first 19 points of the quarter, much of it out of the post.

“They were monsters down there,” said Marcus Smart, last night’s efficiency leader at plus-16. “Our bigs can tell you, they kept fighting and our guards did a good job of covering up those guys, especially when the ball went up, and guards came down to clean up.”

The Celtics also started throwing the ball away under what everyone knew would come — increased Grizzlies pressure with Tony Allen at the tip of the spear. The Celtics ultimately broke a streak of 20 straight games of 15 or fewer turnovers — a league-high this season — with 18 last night.

But the Celtics also had 30 assists on 41 baskets. Led by seven assists from Thomas and another six from Smart off the bench, the offense never went completely dry.

Avery Bradley, on his way to 23 points off a lengthy series of back-cuts, and Thomas (21) kept the offense stoked early, along with a 17-point, 6-for-9 performance from Jae Crowder.

Though Memphis cut the Celtics lead to two points (88-86) on a Gasol three-point play early in the fourth, and to three points four other times during the next 4:40, the Celtics were answering every Memphis shot.

This certainly wasn’t perfection. The Celtics turned the ball over four times in the last six minutes. But last night they out-grinded a team that plays in an arena known as the Grindhouse.

“Shows us a lot. But credit to them as well. They had some guys out and they still played hard, and we played harder,” Bradley said. “We knew this was going to be a tough game for us. We knew they were going to come out and be physical. It was our job to make sure we executed while being physical the entire game.”