(Nee Kieffer) Passed away peacefully on September 8, 2019. Kathy was born on a farm in Mauston, Wisconsin to Katherine and Robert Kieffer. The second oldest of six children, she had four brothers, Carl, Leo, Bernard, Kearn and a sister Marie. The family eventually moved from the farm into the town of Mauston.

Kathy moved to Milwaukee and attended Spencerian Business College where she studied secretarial skills. She lived with her sister Marie, whom she considered one of her best friends. After graduation, Kathy worked at American Motors where she met her future husband, Paul. They were married on November 9, 1946. The newlyweds lived in a duplex that they shared with Paul’s mother, she and Kathy were very close. On August 18, 1949, Kathy and Paul welcomed their only child, Steve. Kathy was a stay-at-home mom for many years, and developed a love for nature and a passion for gardening. She also enjoyed doing needlework, crocheting, and knitting, and was always proud to show off her work.

Steve married Cindy in May of 1971, and the two welcomed two daughters, Amy and Emily. One of the greatest joys in her life was when she became a grandmother, and a great-grandmother to her four great-grandchildren: Hannah, Madelyn, Lauren, and Will. All of her grandchildren brought her great job and she was always so proud of them and their accomplishments.

Sadly, Paul died suddenly in 1975, and Kathy was widowed at age 50. She started a new life for herself and got a job with the Milwaukee Public Schools as a secretary at Central Office. She loved working and met some wonderful colleagues who became dear friends. Traveling became a passion for Kathy, and one of her favorite trips was to Germany with her sister Marie.

Kathy joined a Widow and Widowers group where she met her second husband, Ray Ranta. The two loved to go dancing and enjoyed many fantastic vacations including white water rafting, horseback riding out west, and a very special Alaskan Cruise.

After Ray passed away, Kathy continued to live in her home of 40 years, before moving to a lovely apartment at Hart Park Square where she spent the last years of her life meeting new people and enjoying community life.

Private Services were held.