LEO J. LABINSKI Leo J. Labinski, age 78, formerly of 1125 S. 26th St., Manitowoc, presently residing at the North Ridge Medical and Rehabilitation Center, died early Wednesday morning, February 12, 1997, at the Center. Funeral Services will be held at 8 p.m. Thursday evening, February 13, 1997, at the Pfeffer Funeral Home. Officiating at the service will be Rev. Roman Zbieranski O.F.M. with entombment to follow at Calvary Mausoleum, Manitowoc. He was born July 7, 1918, in Manitowoc, son of the late John and Josephine Mrozinski Labinski. He was a graduate of Lincoln High School class of 1937. Leo served with the United States Army during World War II in the European Theatre. He married the former Lou Ann Piaskowski November 4, 1953, in Manitowoc. She preceded him in death July 17, 1976. Leo had been employed by the Manitowoc Public School System as a custodian for many years until his retirement in 1974. Survivors include two daughters and a son-in-law, Lynn Bartelme, Kay and Michael Cayemberg, all of Manitowoc; three sons, John Labinski, Manitowoc, James Labinski, Charlottesville, Va., Jerry Labinski, Manitowoc; five grandchildren; nieces, nephews, other relatives and friends also survive. He was also preceded in death by a daughter, Ann Zahn, and two brothers, Joseph and Andrew. Friends may call from 5-8 p.m. Thursday at Pfeffer Funeral Home, Manitowoc. The family wishes to extend their gratitude to North Ridge Medical and Rehabilitation Center and Holy Family Memorial Medical Center for their excellent care and compassion. Herald Times Reporter, February 12, 1997 P. A2 ******** (LABINSKI Leo J. 7/7/1918 2/12/1997 Phase I Chapel NE Tier B Crypt 4)

LOU ANN H. LABINSKI Mrs. Leo J. Labinski, 42, of 1223 S. 17th St., Manitowoc, died late Saturday evening at St. Mary Hospital, Rochester, Minn. Funeral services will be at 9:30 a.m. Wednesday at Pfeffer Funeral Home and 10 a.m. at St. Mary Catholic Church, Manitowoc. The Rev. Joseph Mattern will officiate with burial in Calvary Cemetery, Manitowoc. Mrs. Labinski, nee Lou Ann Piaskowski, was born April 30, 1934, at Manitowoc, daughter of the late John Piaskoski and Mrs. Serena Ziarnik Piaskowski. She was graduated from Lincoln High School with the Class of 1951 and was married to Leo J. Labinski Nov. 4, 1953, at Manitowoc. Mrs. Labinski had been employed as a bookkeeper at Aluminum Workers Credit Union until her recent illness and was a member of St. Mary Rosary Society. Survivors include her husband, three sons, John, James and Jerry, at home; three daughters, Mrs. Harry (Ann) Zahn, of Michigan City, Ind., and Lynn and Kay, at home; her mother, Mrs. Serena Piaskowski, and a brother, Gerald, of Manitowoc. Friends may call at Pfeffer Funeral Home from 3 to 9 p.m. Tuesday where the Rosary will be recited at 3:30 p.m. by St. Mary Rosary Society and a prayer service will be at 7:30 p.m. by friends and members of the parish. Herald Times Reporter, July 19, 1976 P. 3 ******** (LABINSKI Lou Ann 4/30/1934 7/17/1976 Phase I Chapel NE Tier B Crypt 4)

JOSEPH V. LABINSKY Joseph V. Labinsky, 54, of 1231A S. 17th St., Manitowoc, died Wednesday. Funeral services will be at 11 a.m. Friday at Pfeffer Funeral Home, Manitowoc. The Rev. Thaddeus J. Koszarek will officiate and burial will be in Calvary Cemetery, Manitowoc. Military graveside services will be conducted by the Veterans of Foreign Wars. Mr. Labinsky was born Nov. 25, 1916, at Manitowoc, son of the late John Labinsky and Mrs. Josephine Mrozinski Labinsky. He was a veteran of World War II, serving as a sergeant in Company E of the 127 Infantry, 32nd Division, from Oct. 15, 1940 to Nov. 29, 1944. He also served oversees in New Guinea. Mr. Labinsky owned and operated a tavern at Newton until 1960 when he moved to Manitowoc where he was presently employed at Red Arrow Products Corp. Survivors include his mother, Mrs. Josephine Libinsky, of Manitowoc, two brothers, Leo, of Manitowoc and Andrew, of Milwaukee and nieces and nephews. Friends may call at the funeral home after 3 p.m. Thursday. Manitowoc Herald Times, Manitowoc, Wis. July 28, 1971

AGNES P. LADWIG Agnes Pauline Ladwig, 54, of 1112 Washington St., Manitowoc, died Friday, January 18, at St. Mary Hospital, Milwaukee. Cremation took place. A memorial Mass will be 10 a.m. Thursday at Sacred Heart Catholic Church, Manitowoc. The Rev. William Zimmer will officiate. Mrs. Ladwig, nee Agnes Pauline Van Deurzen, was born July 16, 1925, at Combined Locks, Wis., daughter of the late John and Anna Van Dalen Van Deurzen. She was married to Harold W. Ladwig Sept. 1, 1961, at Manitowoc. She had been the owner and operator of the former Cozy Kitchen of Manitowoc. Survivors include her husband, Harold and a son, James Ladwig of Manitowoc; four brothers, James, Robert, Eugene and Paul Van Deurzen, of Kaukauna and Combined Locks area; a sister, Mrs. Raymond (Marilyn) Staudt Jr., of Manitowoc and a grandson, Jameson. Relatives and friends may meet with the family at Sacred Heart Catholic Church after 9:30 a.m. Thursday until the time of service. The family requests memorials to the Heart Fund of Manitowoc. Pfeffer Funeral Home, Manitowoc is in charge of arrangements. Herald Times Reporter, January 19, 1981 P. 3 ******** AGNES LADWIG 16 Jul 1925 Jan 1981/SSDI

EDWARD J. LADWIG Edward Ladwig, Veteran Police Officer: Is Dead 62 Year Old Night Chief Dies While Riding In Bus Last Evening Assistant Police Chief Edward J. Ladwig, member of the department for 28 years, died suddenly of a heat attack early Tuesday evening in a city bus while en-route to the police station to take charge of the night force. He was 62. The assistant chief, who boarded the bus at Wisconsin avenue and North 13th street shortly before 5:30 o’clock, collapsed suddenly in his seat in sight of a number of passengers on the bus. Ivan Schroeder, the driver, stopped the bus at Waldo boulevard and 18th street and Dr. F. E. Turgasen and the city ambulance were summoned. The doctor pronounced Mr. Ladwig dead after a brief examination. Death of Assistant Chief Ladwig occurred within three days of the 29th anniversary of joining the police department. This week Mr. Ladwig and his wife were stopping at the home of Mr. and Mrs. Walter Schuette, 933 North 13th street, during their absence from the city. Mrs. Ladwig and Mrs. Schuette are sisters. He left the Schuette residence at the usual hour to catch a bus in order to reach the police station when the night officers reported for duty. Funeral Saturday Funeral services for Assistant Chief Ladwig will be held Saturday at 9:30 a.m. from the home, 1319 South 12th street, and at 10 am. from the St. Boniface church. Interment will be at Calvary cemetery. The deceased was born in this city in 1872 and at an early age moved with his parent to Mishicot. Later he returned to this city and took a position as field superintendent for a canning company. On June 14, 1907 he was named a member of the police department and was assigned to night duty. On April 1, 1918 he was named assistant police chief, which position he continued to fill until his death. Except for periods when he was acting chief during the absence from the city of Police Chief Trochoell, Assistant Chief Ladwig served as head of the night force of the department. In addition to membership in the Wisconsin Police Protective association he was also a member of the St. Boniface society and the St. Boniface congregation. Married in 1904 In 1904 the deceased was married at Nordheim, this county, to Josephine Gretz. Survivors are his widow; a son Stanley, city; a daughter, Armela, city; two brothers, Henry, city and August, Milwaukee; a sister, Mrs. Christ Hendries, city; and four grandchildren. The body will be removed to the home on South 12th street Thursday morning from the Pfeffer Funeral home. Fellow members on the police department will act as pallbearers at the funeral services Saturday. They are Walter Herman, William Lasch, William Christiansen, Matthew Dufeck, Con Healy and George Tulsch. Manitowoc Herald-Times, Manitowoc, Wisconsin, Wednesday, June 12, 1935 (sent in by researcher/see contributors page)

HAROLD W. LADWIG Harold Ladwig, age 76, of 4200 Calumet Ave., Manitowoc, died Tuesday, October 29, 1996, at the Manitowoc Health Care Center. Friends may call from 3-4 p.m. on Saturday, November 2, 1996, at the Jens Funeral Home, Manitowoc. Burial will take place at Calvary Cemetery. He was born October 1, 1920, in Manitowoc, son of the late William and Anna Boeckman Ladwig. He married Agnes VanDeurzen in 1951, in Manitowoc. She preceded him in death in 1981. He was a member of the Manitowoc Eagles Aerie #706. Survivors include one son, James Ladwig, Francis Creek; other relatives and friends also survive. The Jens Funeral Home, Manitowoc, is assisting the family with funeral arrangements. Herald Times Reporter, October 31, 1996 P. A2

JOSEPHINE LADWIG Mrs. Edward Ladwig, 1319 South 12th street, died this morning at Holy Family hospital following a two weeks’ illness. She was 61 years of age. Mrs. Ladwig, nee Josephine Gretz, was born Nov. 1, 1880 at Newton, and 38 years ago was married to Edward Ladwig, who died in 1935. At the time of his death Mr. Ladwig was assistant chief of the police department. Funeral services will be held Monday morning at 8:30 o’clock from the Pfeffer funeral home, and at 9 o’clock from St. Boniface Catholic church with burial in Calvary cemetery. Survivors are one daughter, Miss Armelia, at home, one son, Stanley of Grand Rapids, Mich.; two brothers, Stanley and Edward Gretz, both of this city; four sisters, Mrs. Paul P. Jankowski, Mrs. Sylvesteter Koszewski and Miss Theresa of Milwaukee and Mrs. Walter Schuette of Manitowoc. Mrs. Ladwig was a member of the St. Anne-CMA society which she served as president and secretary for many years, the Catholic Women’s club and the Order of St. Francis of Milwaukee. Members of the St. Anne-CMA society will recite the rosary at the funeral home Sunday at 7 p.m. Manitowoc Herald Times, August 28, 1942 P. 2

KENNETH K. LADWIG Kenneth K. Ladwig, age 86, of Monona, died on Tuesday, April 5, 2005, at Meriter Hospital, after a brief illness. He was born on Aug. 17, 1918, in Manitowoc, the son of Henry and Minnie (Schmidt) Ladwig. Ken graduated from Lincoln High School, Manitowoc in 1936. He married Rita Mohr on July 15, 1950, at Holy Innocents Church, Manitowoc. Ken worked as an accountant for the state of Wisconsin for more than 25 years prior to retiring from the Department of Justice in 1982. He enjoyed golfing and tennis, and was an avid sports fan. Ken also enjoyed his frequent trips to the Monona Library to e-mail his friends and grandchildren. He is survived by his wife of 54 years, Rita Ladwig; a daughter, Mary (Dan) Barber, and their two children, Geoffrey Barber of Minneapolis, Minn., and Emily Barber of Eau Claire; and a son, Michael (Peggy) Ladwig of Monona. Ken was preceded in death by his parents. Funeral services will be held at GUNDERSON EAST FUNERAL HOME, 5203 Monona Drive, at 11 a.m. on Saturday, April 9, 2005, with Father John Meinholz presiding. Private burial will be at Calvary Cemetery, Manitowoc. Visitation will be at the funeral home from 10 a.m. until the time of the service on Saturday. Herald Times Reporter April 2005

MARGARET D. LADWIG Mrs. Margaret Delores Joan Ladwig, 68, of 2937 Saturn Dr., Lake Orion, Mich., a former Manitowoc resident, died unexpectedly Friday afternoon at her residence. Funeral services will be at 10:30 a.m. Tuesday at Urbanek and Schlei Funeral Home and 11 a.m. at Sacred Heart Catholic Church, Manitowoc. The Rev. Donald Schneider will officiate with burial in Calvary Cemetery, Manitowoc. Mrs. Ladwig, nee Margaret Meyer, was born Aug. 24, 1907, at Shoto, daughter of the late Henry and Mary McCullough Meyer. She was educated in Manitowoc and was graduated from Lincoln High School in 1926. She was married to Stanley J. Ladwig Sept. 19, 1929, at Sacred Heart Catholic Church. He preceded her in death in 1973. She was a member of St. Agatha Catholic Church, Reford, Mich. Survivors include four sons, Thomas and Gerald, of Grand Rapids, Mich., Michael of Detroit, Mich., and Bro. Stanley, CSSR, of Edgerton; four daughters, Miss Margaret D. Ladwig, of Redford Township, Mich., Mrs. Mary Zobro and Mrs. Catherine Pospiech, of Grand Rapids and Mrs. Patricia Tuohy, of Lake Orion; two sisters, Mrs. Gladys Boucher, of Manitowoc and Mrs. John (Mary Jane) Faga, of Milwaukee and 16 grandchildren. A brother, Pat and a sister, Betty, preceded her in death. Friends may call at Urbanek and Schlei Funeral Home from 5 to 9 o’clock this Monday evening, and Tuesday until the time of service. A prayer service will be at 7:30 o’clock this Monday evening. Herald Times Reporter, April 19, 1976 P. 16

STANLEY LADWIG Stanley J. Ladwig, 63, of Detroit, Mich., a former salesman for Mirro Aluminum Co., Manitowoc, died Wednesday at a Grand Rapids, Mich. hospital. Graveside services will be at 10 a.m. Saturday at Calvary Cemetery, Manitowoc, with the Rev. John Hephner officiating. Herald Times Reporter, Manitowoc-Two Rivers, Wis., March 22, 1973

MARTHA M. LAFOND Mrs. Martha M. LaFond, 91, a lifelong Manitowoc resident, who resided at St. Mary Home, Manitowoc, died early Wednesday morning, March 4, 1987 at Holy Family Medical Center, Manitowoc. Funeral services will be 10:30 am Friday at Pfeffer Funeral Home and 11 am at St. Mary Catholic Church, Manitowoc. The Rev. Harold Berryman will officiate at the Mass of Christian Burial and burial will be in Calvary Cemetery, Manitowoc. Mrs. LaFond, nee Martha Mary Mrotek was born September 28, 1895 at Manitowoc, daughter of the late John and Katherine Niespodzany Mrotek. She was married to Roland J. LaFond July 12, 1920 at St. Philomena Catholic Church, Cleveland, Ohio. They moved to Manitowoc after their marriage and celebrated their Golden Wedding Anniversary in 1970. Her husband preceded her in death January 16, 1978. Mrs. LaFond was a member of Senior Citizens of Manitowoc, St. Mary Parish and Rosary Society of the parish. Survivors include three sons and daughters-in-law, Roland and Iola LaFond of Manitowoc, John and Carole LaFond of Waukesha and James and Rita LaFond of Manitowoc; nine grandchildren and six great grandchildren. She was preceded in death by a daughter-in-law, Jannette; a grandson, Michael; a brother and four sisters. Friends may call at Pfeffer Funeral Home, Manitowoc, 3 pm to 9 pm Thursday. A rosary will be recited by the Rosary Society at 3:30 pm and a prayer service will be held at 6:30 pm led by Father Harold Berryman. Manitowoc Herald Times - Wed, March 4, 1987 - page 18 ******** (28 Sept. 1895/Mar. 1987/SSDI)

ROLAND J. LAFOND Roland J. LaFond, 86, of 1601, Madison St., Manitowoc, died Monday evening in Holy Family Hospital, Manitowoc. Funeral services will be 9:30 a.m. Thursday in Pfeffer Funeral Home and 10 a.m. in St. Mary Catholic Church, Manitowoc. The Rev. Joseph Mattern will officiate and burial will be in Calvary Cemetery, Manitowoc. Mr. LaFond was born February 17, 1891 in Two Rivers, son of the late Edward and Delia St. Pierre LaFond. He was a veteran during World War I and married Martha Mrotek July 12, 1920 in St. Philomene Catholic Church, Cleveland, Ohio. Mr. and Mrs. LaFond celebrated their golden wedding anniversary July 12, 1970. Mr. LaFond had been employed at Great Lakes Dredge and Dock Co. and also with Wisconsin Malting Co. from which he retired in 1957 after 35 years of service. He was a member of Brewers and Maltsters Union of Manitowoc. Survivors include his wife, Martha; three sons and daughters-in-law, Roland F. and Jeanette LaFond, James and Rita LaFond of Manitowoc and John and Carole LaFond of West Bend, Wis. and eight grandchildren. Friends may call in Pfeffer Funeral Home, 4 p.m. to 9 p.m. Wednesday where a prayer service will be at 7:30 p.m. Manitowoc Herald Times - Tuesday, Jan. 17, 1978 - page 3 ******** (17 Feb. 1891/Jan. 1978/SSDI)

EMIL LAKATOS (d. 1929) DEATH CLAIMS BRANCH CHEESE MAN IN CITY Emil Lakatos, life long resident of the county and for years cheesemaker and superintendent of a factory at Branch, died at the Holy Family hospital early today from complications after an illness of some time. Funeral services will be held Saturday at 8:15 from the home at Five Corners and at 9:30 from St. Boniface church in this city, the Rev. Kersten officiating. Burial will be at Calvary. Mr. Lakatos was a native of this city, born here March 24, 1897 and was 32 at his death. He had been located at Branch for some time and was well and favorably known. Married November 11, 1924 to Helen Herman, this city, he is survived by his wife and one child, a son Emil, Jr., aged three and one-half years. A brother Joseph at Branch and two sisters, Mrs. Walter Rohrer, this city and Othelia Lakatos, Branch, also survive. The body will be at the Pfeffer undertaking rooms from 7 to 9 this evening and will then be taken to the home at Five Corners to await funeral services. Manitowoc Herald News, Thursday, April 4, 1929 P.5

EMIL LAKATOS (d. 1945) Offer Mass For Emil J. Lakatos A memorial requiem high mass will be offered at 8 o'clock Wednesay morning, Oct. 31, at St. Boniface church by the Rev. Alfred Pritzl for Emil Joseph Lakatos, machinist's mate third class, USNR., who lost his life as a result of the sinking of the U.S.S. Indianapolis in the early morning hours of last July 30. Lakatos, only son of Mrs. Helen Lakatos, 1020 Madison street, and the late Emil Lakatos, was aboard the ship which was enroute to the Philippines from Guam after a run which set a new speed record from San Francisco, and after delivery of an atomic bomb. She was approximately 450 miles from Leyte when two heavy underwater explosions occurred on the (photo) starboard side. The ship filled rapidly with water through gaping holes in her underwater body caused by the explosion and sank within 15 minutes. The exact manner in which Lakotas met his death is not known, wrote the commanding officer of the ship to Mrs. Lakatos, but it is believed he went down with his ship. Emil enlisted in the navy at the age of 17 years after graduating from Lincoln high school. He was stationed at Great Lakes, Ill., for five months for training, and was assistant buglemaster. Credited with participating in seven battles, young Lakatos came home on a 22-day leave on June 8 and rejoined the ship in California July 16, just two weeks prior to the sinking. His shipmate and buddy, Robert Cavil, son of Mr. and Mrs. Ralph Cavil of West DePere, also lost his life in the tragedy. Survivors besides the mother, are his grandparents, Mr. and Mrs. George J. Herman of this city and his fiancee, Miss Arlene Dunisch of Fond du Lac. Young Lakatos was a member of the Holy Name society of St. Boniface congregation. Manitowoc Herald Times, Saturday, October 27, 1945 P.2 ******** Lakatos Missing Is Navy Report Emil J. Lakatos, machinist mate third class, USNR, son of Mrs. Helen Lakatos, 1020 Madison street, is reported missing in action by naval authorities. According to a telegram received Sunday evening he has been missing since July 30. Lakatos was aboard a heavy cruiser which pounded the Japanese at Okinawa late this spring. He was home on 22 day leave last June 2. Lakatos was one of eight Lincoln high school graduates who worked at the Manitowoc Shipbuilding company for seven months in 1943 prior to his enlistment in the navy. He took his initial indoctrination at Great Lakes, Ill. He is the fiance of Miss Arlene Dunesch of Fond du Lac, who arrived here this morning. Manitowoc Herald Times, Monday, August 13, 1945 p.2 ********** Missing - Emil Lakatos, machinist mate third class, USNR was a member of the crew of the cruiser Indianapolis, sunk by a Japanese submarine off Leyte on July 30. His mother, Mrs. Helen Lakatos, 1020 Madison street was informed by the navy Sunday night that her son is listed as missing. Manitowoc Herald Times, Thursday, August 16, 1945 p.2

HELEN LAKATOS Helen C. Lakatos, 78, of 1020? Madison St., Manitowoc, died Friday evening, August 7, at Mount Carmel Care Center, Burlington, WI, where she lived for the past month. Funeral services will be 10:30 a.m. Monday at St. Boniface Catholic Church, Manitowoc. Burial will be in Calvary Cemetery, Mantowoc. Mr. Lakatos was born Feb. 20, 1903, at Manitowoc. She was a lifelong resident of Manitowoc. She was married to Emil Lakatos, in 1923, at Manitowoc. He preceded her in death in 1929. Mrs. Lakatos was a member of Gold Star Mothers. She was employed as a sales clerk at J.C. Penney Company until her retirement. Survivors include a sister, Sylvia Lindquist of Elkhorn, WI, and a niece, Maria Walbrandt of Elkhorn. Betts Funeral Home, Elkhorn, is in charge of funeral arrangements. Herald Times Reporter, August 9, 1981 P. 3

JOSEPH E. LAKATOS Joseph E. Lakatos, 65, of 1614 Green St., Manitowoc, died early Monday morning, March 12, 1989 at Holy Family Medical Center, Manitowoc. Funeral services will be 9:30 am Wednesday at Pfeffer Funeral Home and 10 am at St. Andrew Catholic Church, Manitowoc. Presiding at the Mass of Christian Burial will be Rev. James Stamborski and entombment will be in Calvary Mausoleum, Manitowoc. Military rites will be accorded by V.F.W. Kubale-O’Connell Post. Mr. Lakatos was born October 13, 1923 in the Town of Manitowoc Rapids, son of the late Joseph S. and Clara Stradal Lakatos. He was a graduate of Lincoln High School with the Class of 1941. He married Alice Morris, August 28, 1948 at St. Andrew Catholic Church, Manitowoc. Mr. Lakatos was employed with the County of Manitowoc as a Heavy Equipment Operator for 42 years until retiring in 1985. He was a member of Knights of Columbus Council No. 710 of Manitowoc, V.F.W. Kubale-O’Connell Post of Cato, Wisconsin and a member of Wisconsin Retired Public Employees Association. Mr. Lakatos served in the United States Army during World War II from February of 1944 until May of 1946. Survivors include his wife, Alice M. of Manitowoc; a son and daughter-in-law, Joseph R. and Ann T. Lakatos of Appleton; three daughters and two sons-in-law, Sarah K. and Leon P. Gospodarek of Niagara, Wisconsin, MaryJo M. and Steven R. Matthies of Manitowoc and Katie L. Lakatos of Green Bay; a brother and sister-in-law, Melvin and Jerry Lakatos of Manitowoc; three sisters and brothers-in-law, Sylvia and Ted Blashka of Manitowoc, Edith and Dan Reidy of West Allis and Donna and LeRoy Zipperer of Whitelaw; seven grandchildren, Heidi Aderman, Holly Gospodarek, Laura Gospodarek, Jeff Matthies, Ben Matthies, Lisa Lakatos ande Joey Lakatos; a great grandchild, Michael Aderman; his mother-in-law, Minnie Morris of Manitowoc; a sister-in-law and her husband, Kathryn J. and coke Koukalik of Manitowoc; nieces, nephews, other relatives and friends. He was preceded in death by his father-in-law, Stephen A. Morris. Friends may call at Pfeffer Funeral Home, Manitowoc, 4 pm to 9 am Tuesday, where a prayer service will be at 6:30 pm by Rev. James Stamborski. Manitowoc Herald Times - Mon., Mar. 13, 1989 - page B6

WILLIAM G. LALKO William G. Lalko, age 76, of 1304 S. 21st St., Manitowoc, died Saturday morning, March 22, 1997, at Holy Family Memorial Medical Center, Manitowoc. Funeral Services will be held at 10 a.m. Tuesday, March 25, 1997, at the Pfeffer Funeral Home, Manitowoc. Officiating at the service will be Rev. Roman Ziberanski, O.F.M. with entombment at Calvary Mausoleum, Manitowoc. He was born June 10, 1920, in Two Rivers, son of the late Martin and Stephani Jakowich Lalko. On August 18, 1941, he married the former Mary Jane Ploerderl, at St. Andrew Catholic Church, Manitowoc. Bill was employed with ADM Malting Co., formerly Kurth Malting Company, Manitowoc for many years until his retirement in 1982. Survivors include his wife, Mary Jane Lalko, Manitowoc; three daughters and two sons-in-law, Sharon and Lee Evenson, Valders, Connie Herman, Houston, Texas, Kathy and Carl Wagner, McCall, Idaho; two sisters and one brother-in-law, Ada Tolksdorf, Two Rivers, Ange and Edwin Jagodsinky, Two Rivers; four grandchildren, Jeff, Randy, Bret, and Rhonda; two great-grandchildren, Kailey and Joshua; one sister-in-law, Irene Lalko, Two Rivers. Also surviving are nieces, nephews, other relatives and friends. He was preceded in death by a brother, Jule Lalko, and a sister Mel Scheeler. Friends may call at the Pfeffer Funeral Home from 9 a.m. Tuesday until the time of service. There will be no Monday evening visitation. Herald Times Reporter, March 25, 1997 P. A2 ******** (LALKO William G. 1920 1997 Phase III Cor D Tier B Crypt 25)

BEATRICE M. LALLENSACK Beatrice M. Lallensack, age 89, a resident of St. Mary’s Home, Manitowoc, diedSunday morning, October 6, 2013 at the home, after a courageous battle with Alzheimer’s Disease. She was born on January 24, 1924 in Manitowoc, daughter of the late Frank J. and Mary (Dirkman) Lallensack. Beatrice was a graduate of Manitowoc Lincoln High School, Class of 1942. She was employed for 33 years at the Great A & P Tea Company in the dairy division and retired from Holy Family Memorial Medical Center in 1989 as manager of the volunteer services. Beatrice was a lifetime member of the Daughters of Isabella serving as State Regent, State Vice Regent and State Trustee. She was also a member of the Manitowoc County Historical Society. Beatrice was also a 50 year member of the St. Andrew mixed choir and served two terms on the Parish Council and was also an active retreat promoter for Monte Alverno Retreat Center in Appleton. Survivors include three sisters-in-law: Lorraine Lallensack, Manitowoc, Lucille Lallensack, Newton, and Angie Lallensack, Manitowoc. Also surviving are many nieces and nephews, great nieces and great nephews, other cousins and friends. She was also preceded in death by three sisters and brothers-in-law: Eleanore & Marvin Schmelzle, Clara & Arden Koehler, Delphine & Herbert Schiesl; five brothers and two sisters-in-law: William Lallensack, Francis & Gladys Lallensack, Edward & Rose Lallensack, Victor Lallensack, George Lallensack; three niece; Marie (Schiesl) Hynek, Mary Lallensack, Marie Clare Schmelzle; and two nephews: Gerald (Jerr) Schiesl and Paul Koehler. Funeral Services will be held at 6 p.m. Wednesday, October 9, 2013 at St. Francis of Assisi on Grand, Manitowoc. Officiating at the Mass of Christian Burial will be the Rev. Dave Pleier with burial on Thursday morning at Calvary Cemetery, Manitowoc. The family will greet relatives and friends at St. Francis of Assisi on Grand, Manitowoc, from 3:00 p.m. Wednesday, October 9, 2013 until 5:45 p.m. Expressions of sympathy may be sent to the family by visitingwww.pfefferfuneralhome.com The Pfeffer Funeral Home, Manitowoc, is assisting the family with funeral arrangements. Memorials would be appreciated to the Monte Alverno Retreat Center of Appleton or Manitowoc Historical Society. The family wishes to extend a special thanks to the staff of St. Mary’s Home for the excellent and compassionate care given to Bea over the past five years. Herald Times Reporter Monday, October 7, 2013

CATHERINE LALLENSACK STROKE BRINGS DEATH TO MRS. J. LALLENSACK Death claims Mrs. Joseph Lallensack on the Lallensack homestead, Manitowoc. Home 3 years today, a sudden stroke bringing an end to seventy three years of life. She is survived by her husband, three daughters, Mrs. John VanLishaut of New Franklin, Mrs. Nic Lambries of Manitowoc Rapids, Mrs. George H. Fischer of Niles, Michigan, one son Frank of this city and one sister, Mrs. Margaret Neuman at the home. Mrs. Lallensack, nee Neuman, was born September 22, 1852 at Coblenz, Germany and came to this country at the age of nineteen. After a few years in Milwaukee, Mrs. Lallensack removed to this county where she was married to Joseph Lallensack, October 13, 1979. Funeral services will be held Thursday, August 25 from the homestead at 8 o'clock and at 9 from the St. Boniface church, the Rev. Father Peil officiating at the rites. The body will be interred at Calvary. Friends are ??? flowers. Manitowoc Herald News Tuesday, August 24, 1926 pg. 2

FRANCIS J. LALLENSACK Francis J. Lallensack, age 83, of 1812 S. 23rd St., Manitowoc, died Sunday, December 5, 1999, at his residence. Funeral Services will be held at 9:30 a.m. Thursday, December 9, 1999, at Pfeffer Funeral Home, and 10 a.m. at St. Mary Catholic Church, Manitowoc. Officiating at the Mass of Christian Burial will be Rev. Roman Zbieranski, O.F.M., with burial to follow at Calvary Cemetery, Manitowoc. He was born January 16, 1916, in Manitowoc, son of the late Frank and Mary Dirkman Lallensack. Francis attended St. Andrew Parochial school and was a graduate of Manitowoc Lincoln High School, class of 1934. On October 25, 1941, he married the former Gladys E. Keil, at St. Paul Catholic Church, Manitowoc. He was a veteran of World War II serving from 1945 through 1946. Francis served in Okinawa as an investigator of Japan Prisoner of War Camps. Mr. Lallensack joined the Manitowoc Police Department in July 1942, starting as a Patrolman, then Detective Lt. and final Inspector of Police, retiring in December of 1972. He attended numerous schools for police officers and juvenile enforcement. Mr. Lallensack was elected to the Wisconsin State Assembly in November 1972, and held that office for four consecutive terms retiring in 1981. He served as a chairman of the Military and Veterans Affairs Committee. He also served on the Highway, and the State Natural Resources Committee, and was chairman of the Manitowoc County Veterans Service Commission for 24 years, and also a member of the Manitowoc Plan Commission for nine years. Survivors include his wife, Gladys Lallensack, Manitowoc, one daughter, Nancy Lallensack, Oak Park, Ill.; three sons and two daughters-in-law, John and Jean Lallenack, Brookfield, Larry and Margaret Lallensack, Grayslake, Ill., Paul Lallensack, Sydney, Australia; three grandchildren, Thad Lallensack, Lindsey and Kelsey Lallensack; three brothers and four sisters-in-law, Edward and Rose Lallensack, Belgium, Wis., Victor and Angeline Lallensack, Manitowoc, George and Lucille Lallensack, Town of Meeme, Lorraine Lallensack, Manitowoc; two sisters and two brothers-in-law, Eleanor Schmelzle, Manitowoc, Beatrice Lallensack, Manitowoc, Arden Kolehler (sic), Kewaunee, Herbert Schiesl, Manitowoc. Also surviving are nieces, nephews, other relatives and many friends. He was preceded in death by one brother, William; two sisters, Clara and Delphine; and a brother-in-law, Marvin Schmelzle. The family will greet relatives and friends at the Pfeffer Funeral Home, Manitowoc from 4-8 p.m. Wednesday, where a prayer service will be held at 7:30 p.m. by Deacon Robert Drobka. Memorials would be appreciated by V.F. W. Otto Oas Post #659, Disabled Veterans of America or American Legion Post #88. Herald Times Reporter, December 7, 1999

FRANK J. LALLENSACK Frank Joe Lallensack, 80, of 2404 S. 23rd St., Manitowoc, died Wednesday evening at home after a short illness. Funeral services will be at 9 a.m. Saturday at Pfeffer Funeral Home, Manitowoc, and at 9:30 a.m. at St. Andrew Catholic Church, the Rev. D.L. Krembs officiating at the requiem Mass. Burial will be in Calvary Cemetery. Mr. Lallensack was born Oct. 27, 1883, at Manitowoc, son of the late Joseph and Catherine Neumann Lallensack. He was a graduate of St. Boniface Parochial School. Mr. Lallensack and the former Mary Dirkmann were married June 7, 1910, and observed their golden wedding anniversary in 1960. Mr. Lallensack served the City of Manitowoc as alderman of the old Seventh Ward from 1935 to 1937. He was a member and past president of the Brewers and Malsters Local 297, member of St. Andrew Church Holy Name Society and a consultor and charter member of the parish. He was employed by Wisconsin Malting Co. until 1942 when he retired. He was a foreman at the time of retirement. Surviving are the widow, five sons, William of Rt. 3, Manitowoc, Francis Jr., of Manitowoc, Edward of Rt. 1, Port Washington, Victor J. of Rt. 4, Manitowoc, and George of Rt. 1, Newton; four daughters, Mrs. Marvin Schmelzle of Rt. 3, Manitowoc, Mrs. Arden Koehler of Rt. 1, Kewaunee, and Mrs. Herbet Schiesl and Miss Beatrice Lallensack of Manitowoc and 42 grandchildren. Three sisters preceded him in death. Friends may call at the funeral home after 3 p.m. Friday where the Rosary will be recited at 7 p.m. by members of the parish and Holy Name Society and at 8 p.m. by the Mystical Rose Circle, Daughters of Isabella. Manitowoc Herald Times, Manitowoc, Wis. January 9, 1964 P. 12

GLADYS E. LALLENSACK Gladys E. Lallensack, age 90, a resident of St. Mary's Home, Manitowoc, died Monday afternoon, April 9, 2007, at the home. She was born March 4, 1917, in Manitowoc, daughter of the late Elmer and Clara (Lambries) Keil. Gladys attended school in the Manitowoc Rapids area. On Oct. 25, 1941, she married Francis Lallensack at St. Paul Catholic Church, Manitowoc. He preceded her in death Dec. 5, 1999. Gladys was a member of the VFW Ladies Auxiliary 659 and enjoyed shopping, playing cards and baking. Survivors include a daughter: Nancy Lallensack and Christine Germond, Oak Park, Ill.; three sons and two daughters-in-law: John and Jean Lallensack, Tucson, Ariz.; Larry and Margaret Lallensack, Grayslake, Ill.; Paul Lallensack, Sydney, Australia; three grandchildren: Thad Lallensack, Lindsey and Kelsey Lallensack; one brother and sister-in-law: Gerald and Betty Keil, Manitowoc; and two sisters-in-law: Mary Keil and Gladys Keil, both of Manitowoc; nieces, nephews, other relatives and friends also survive. She was also preceded in death by six brothers: Elmer, Eugene, Donald, Roland, Robert and Ralph Keil; and a sister: Lorraine Witczak. Funeral services will be held at 11:30 a.m. Monday, April 16, 2007, at St. Francis of Assisi on Marshall, Manitowoc. Officiating at the Mass of Christian Burial will be the Rev. Monsignor James Vanden Hogen, with burial at Calvary Cemetery, Manitowoc. The family will greet relatives and friends at St. Francis of Assisi on Marshall, Manitowoc, from 9 a.m. Monday, April 16, 2007, until the time of service at 11:30 a.m. Memorials may be directed to the Alzheimer's Association in Glady's name. The Pfeffer Funeral Home & Cremation Care Center, Manitowoc, is assisting the family with funeral arrangements. Manitowoc Herald Times Friday, April 13, 2007 pg. A3

GEORGE F. LALLENSACK George F. Lallensack, age 82, of 12430 Point Creek Road, Newton, died Friday, Jan. 21, 2005 at Holy Family Memorial Medical Center, Manitowoc. George was born Feb. 26, 1922, in Manitowoc, son of the late Frank and Mary (Dirkman) Lallensack. George was a veteran of WWII serving in the U.S. Army in the 180th Infantry Division (the Thunderbirds) in Germany. On April 17, 1948, he married the former Lucille Leist at St. Boniface Catholic Church. They celebrated 56 years together. He was employed as a journeyman machinist at Kelvinator Commercial Products, and owned and operated a dairy farm in Newton until his retirement in 1984. He was a member of Holy Trinity Catholic Church, School Hill. George enjoyed vacationing in Arizona and restoring old tractors. George is survived by his wife Lucille Lallensack, Newton; their 10 children: David (Eileen) Lallensack, Newton; Mary Lallensack, Sheboygan; Michael (Debbie) Lallensack, Manitowoc; Linda (Don) Hornbeck, Tempe, Ariz.; Cathy (Dallas) Anderkin, Sheboygan; Karen (Tom) Seifert, Scottsdale, Ariz.; Margie (Jon) Curry, Menom-onee Falls; Dale (Stella) Lallensack, Elkhart Lake; Donald (Jean) Lallensack, Kiel; Lisa (Darin) Campbell, Menomonee Falls; 19 grandchildren, five great-grandchildren, one sister (Beatrice Lallensack) and one brother and sister-in-law Victor (Angie) Lallensack. He was preceded in death by three brothers and three sisters. In accordance with his request, private family memorial services were held on Tuesday at Calvary Chapel Mausoleum, Manitowoc. Rev. Gregory Coulthard, S.D.S. officiated with military rites accorded by the American Legion Drews-Bleser Post #88. His service was as he wished with a celebration of his life and many wonderful memories shared. Herald Times Reporter ******** (LALLENSACK George F. 1922 2005 Phase V Cor 107 W Tier D Niche 3)

JOSEPH LALLENSACK RESIDENT OF CITY 50 YEARS DIES LAST NITE A lingering illness from cancer which caused him to be bed ridden for the past 10 days shortly after 9 o'clock last night claimed the life of Joseph Lallensack, pioneer ship carpenter of the city and for over 50 years a resident of the city of Manitowoc. During the past 25 years, Lallensack has conducted a truck farm at the western end of Dewey street. Born in Milwaukee on August 9, 1858, he would have been 72 years of age on his next birthday anniversary. Shortly after he was married in the spring of 1879, he and his wife moved to Manitowoc where the family has since resided. For many years he was employed as a carpenter at the Burger shipyards, retiring to his small farm a quarter of a century ago. His wife preceded him in death four years ago. He is survived by three daughters, Mrs. John VanLishaut, New Franken, Brown county; Mrs. Nic Lambries, Manitowoc Rapids, Mrs. George Fischer, Niles, Michigan, one son, Frank J., Manitowoc, one brother, Henry at Milwaukee, 23 grandchildren and one great grandchild. Of a retiring disposition and interested primarily in his occupation and in his home, he belonged to no fraternal organizations other than the St. Boniface society. Funeral services will be held at the home at 8:30 o'clock and at 9 o'clock from the St. Andrew's church Thursday morning with Father Letz officiating. Interment will take place at Calvary. Manitowoc Herald News, Tuesday, March 18, 1930 P.2

LORRAINE E. LALLENSACK Lorraine E. Lallensack, age 100, a Manitowoc resident, died on Monday morning, November 25, 2013 at St. Vincent Hospital, Green Bay. She was born on May 26, 1913 in Manitowoc, daughter of the late Oscar and Emma (Kirschkofski) Wiesner. Lorraine was a graduate of Manitowoc Lincoln High School with the class of 1931. On June 10, 1941 she married William Lallensack at St. Paul Catholic Church, Manitowoc. He preceded her in death on August 12, 1999. Lorraine lived in Manitowoc her entire life. She was a member of the St. Theresa Society at St. Andrew Catholic Church, Manitowoc. Lorraine enjoyed many activities including: Flower gardening, crosswords and reading. She loved to spend time with her family. Lorraine was very active and was canning pears at home just two weeks ago. Survivors include four daughter and three sons-in-law: Judy and Vern Kaminski, Mercer, Jean Lallensack, Las Vegas, NV, Betty and Fred Draxton, Cottage Grove, MN, Barb and Dick Schuh, Plymouth, MN; two sons and daughters-in-law: Al and Carol Lallensack, Manitowoc, Mark and Judy Lallensack, Green Bay; 12 grandchildren: Craig (Sara) Kaminski, Oshkosh, Kevin Kaminski, Hartland, Lori (Joshua) Schmidt, Maplewood, MN, Faye (Mike) Wolynec, Leesburg, VA, Paul (Katherine) Schuh, Maple Grove, MN, Kathy Schuh, Minneapolis, MN, Matthew (Laura) Schuh, St. Louis Park, MN, Chad Lallensack, Sheboygan, Eric Lallensack, Sheboygan, Ryan (Sara) Lallensack, Manitowoc, Lisa (Fiance: AJ Lorrigan), Manitowoc, and Patrick Lallensack, Green Bay; five great-grandchildren: Anna and Megan Kaminski, Oshkosh, Brayden and Ethan Lallensack, Manitowoc, Evangeline Schmidt, Maplewood,, MN; one sister, Marion Gossen, Manitowoc; one brother and sister-in-law: Ray and Delores Wiesner, Woodbury, MN; two sisters-in-law: Angie Lallensack Manitowoc, and Lucille Lallensack, Osman, Nieces, nephews, other relatives and friends also survive. She was also preceded in death by one granddaughter: Jolene Draxton; one sister and three brothers-in-law: Grace and Roman Vetter, Lloyd Gossen, Walter Levendusfky; one brother and sisters-in-law: Harold (Agnes, Marion, Elinor) Wiesner; four sisters-in-law and three brothers-in-law: Eleanore and Marvin Schmelzle, Clara and Arden Koehler, Beatrice Lallensack, Delphine and Herbert Schiesel; four brothers-in-law and two sisters-in-law; Francis and Gladys Lallensack, Edward and Rose Lallensack, Victor Lallensack, George Lallensack. Funeral services will be held at 11:00 a.m. on Saturday, November 30, 2013 at St. Francis of Assisi on Grand, 1416 Grand Ave., Manitowoc. Officiating at the Mass of Christian Burial will be the Rev. David Beaudry with entombment to follow at Calvary Chapel Mausoleum, Manitowoc. The family will greet relatives and friends from 9:00 AM until 10:45 AM on Saturday, November 30, 2013 at St. Francis of Assisi on Grand, 1416 Grand Ave., Manitowoc. Expressions of Sympathy may be sent to the family by visitingwww.pfefferfuneralhome.com The Pfeffer Funeral Home, Manitowoc is ssisting the family with funeral arrangements. The family wishes to extend a special thank you to the staff of St. Vincent’s Hospital for the excellent and compassion care given to Lorraine and her family. Herald Times Reporter

MARY LALLENSACK Mrs. Mary Lallensack, 89, of 2402 S. 23rd St., Manitowoc, died Friday morning at Holy Family Hospital, Manitowoc. Funeral services will be at 10:30 a.m. Monday at Pfeffer Funeral Home and at 11 a.m. at St. Andrew Catholic Church, Manitowoc. The Rev. James R. DeWitt will officiate and burial will be in Calvary Cemetery, Manitowoc. Mrs. Lallensack, nee Mary Dirkman, was born July 12, 1885, in the Town of Kossuth, daughter of the late Valentine and Elizabeth Hausher Dirkman. She was married to Frank J. Lallensack June 7, 1910, at St. Anne Catholic Church, Francis Creek, residing at Manitowoc after their marriage. They celebrated their golden wedding anniversary in 1960. Mr. Lallensack preceded her in death Jan. 8, 1964. She was a charter member of St. Andrew Parish and Women's Council. Survivors include five sons, William and Francis J., of Manitowoc, Edward, of Rt. 1, Port Washington, Victor J., of Rt. 5, Manitowoc, and George of Rt. 1, Newton; four daughters, Mrs. Marvin (Eleanore) Schmelzle, Mrs. Herbert (Delphine) Schiesel and Miss Beatrice Lallensack, of Manitowoc and Mrs. Arden (Clara) Koehler, of Rt. 1, Kewaunee; a sister, Sister Valentia Dirkman, of St. Andrew Convent, Manitowoc; 42 grandchildren and 25 great grandchildren. Four brothers, four sisters and a grandson preceded her in death. Friends may call at Pfeffer Funeral Home from 3 to 9 p.m. Sunday, where a wake service will be held at 7:30 p.m. Memorials may be made to St. Andrew Parish. Herald Times Reporter, Friday, October 11, 1974 P.3 ******** (12 Jul 1885/Oct 1974/SSDI)

MARY E. LALLENSACK (d. 2010) Mary E. Lallensack, age 60, a Sheboygan resident, died on Sunday morning, Feb. 7, 2010, at Sharon S. Richardson Hospice Community, Sheboygan Falls, Wis. She was born on Jan. 5, 1950, in Manitowoc, daughter of Lucille (Leist) Lallensack and the late George Lallensack. Mary was a graduate of Kiel High School, class of 1968. She was employed at RCS doing assembly work. An accomplished artist, Mary's artwork titled Light and Darker received an Honorable Mention Award at the 2009 VSA Arts (Vision, Strength, Access) of Wisconsin annual art exhibit in Madison. Survivors include her mother: Lucille Lallensack, Newton; four brothers and sisters-in-law: David and Eileen Lallensack, Newton, Michael and Debbie Lallensack, Whitelaw, Dale and Stella Lallensack, Elkhart Lake, Donald and Jean Lallensack, Kiel; five sisters and brothers-in-law: Linda and Don Hornbeck, Tempe, Ariz., Cathy and J. Dallas Anderkin, Sheboygan, Karen and Tom Seifert, Scottsdale, Ariz., Margie and Jon Curry, Menominee Falls, and Lisa and Darin Campbell, Germantown. Nieces, nephews, other relatives and friends also survive. She was preceded in death by her father: George F. Lallensack. Private family funeral services were held Feb. 12, 2010, at The Pfeffer Funeral Home, Manitowoc. Officiating at the service was Deacon Al Boeldt. Cremation has occurred at All-Care Cremation Center, Manitowoc, with entombment at Calvary Mausoleum, Manitowoc. A memorial fund has been established at the Sharon S. Richardson Community Hospice in Mary's name. The family wishes to extend a thank you and grateful appreciation to Dr. T. Scott Derse and the entire staff of the Sharon S. Richardson Community Hospice of Sheboygan Falls for their compassionate care given to Mary. The Pfeffer Funeral Home & All-Care Cremation Center, Manitowoc, assisted the Lallensack family with funeral arrangements. Herald Times Reporter February 13, 2010

VICTOR J. LALLENSACK Victor J. Lallensack, age 88, of 4217 Hecker Road, Manitowoc, died Saturday morning, Jan. 17, 2009, at Holy Family Memorial Medical Center, Manitowoc. Victor was born in Manitowoc on Oct. 11, 1920, son of the late Frank J. and Mary (Dirkman) Lallensack. He graduated from Manitowoc Lincoln High School, class of 1939. Victor served our country during World War II in the United States Army 9th Armored Division. He served in the European Theatre from 1942 to 1945. He participated in the Battle of the Bulge and the Battle over the Remagen Bridge at the Rhine River under the command of General Patton. On Sept. 20, 1958, he married the former Angeline Brunner at St. Ambrose Catholic Church, St. Nazianz. The couple celebrated their 50th wedding anniversary on Sept. 20, 2008, with all of the original wedding party in attendance. Victor was a heavy equipment operator from 1946 to 1979 at the Medusa Portland Cement Company until his retirement. Following his retirement, Victor was active on the family farm, where he enjoyed raising beef cattle and cash crops until 1986. He loved the farm life where he "entertained people" with his personality and watched wildlife. Victor was an avid deer hunter, ice fisherman, and Packers fan. He was also a member of St. Francis of Assisi Parish and the Manitowoc Eagles Aerie 706 for over 60 years. (Survivors omitted for privacy.) Victor is preceded in death by four brothers and two sisters-in-law: William, Francis and Gladys, Ed and Rose, and George; and three sisters and two brothers-in-law: Delphine and Herb Scisel, Clara Koehler, and Eleanor and Marvin Schmelzle. Funeral services for Victor will be held at 11 a.m. on Wednesday, Jan. 21, 2009, at St. Francis of Assisi on Grand. Officiating at the Mass of Christian Burial will be the Rev. Richard Klingeisen, with entombment to follow at Calvary Mausoleum. Military rites will be accorded by the VFW Otto Oas Post 659 of Manitowoc. The family will greet relatives and friends at the Pfeffer Funeral Home on Tuesday night, Jan. 20, 2009, from 4 until 7 p.m. The visitation at the funeral home will conclude with a prayer service at 7 p.m. The visitation will continue at St. Francis of Assisi on Grand on Wednesday morning, Jan. 21, 2009 from 9 a.m. until the time of the service at 11 a.m. The Pfeffer Funeral Home & Cremation Care Center, Manitowoc, is assisting the family with funeral arrangements. The family wishes to give a special thank you to the doctors and nurses at Holy Family Memorial Medical Center CCU unit for their compassionate care shown the family. In lieu of flowers, donations may be directed to the Eagles Club #706 or the V.F.W. Otto Oas Post # 659. Herald Times Reporter, Jan. 19, 2009

WILLIAM W. LALLENSACK William W. Lallensack, age 87, formerly of 3421 S. 15th St., Manitowoc, died Thursday morning, August 12, 1999, at Holy Family Memorial Medical Center, Manitowoc. Funeral Services will be held at 9:30 a.m. on Saturday, August 14, 1999, at the Pfeffer Funeral Home, Manitowoc and 10 a.m. at St. Andrew Catholic Church, Manitowoc. Officiating at the Mass of Christian Burial will be Rev. Richard Klingeisen with entombment to follow at Calvary Mausoleum, Manitowoc, where Military Graveside Rites will be accorded by the V.F.W. Otto Oas Post #659. William was born December 11, 1911, in Manitowoc, son of the late Frank and Mary Dirkman Lallensack. He served in the United States Army during World War II from April of 1943 through October 1945, serving in the Rhineland and central Europe with the rank of Tech. 5. On June 10, 1941, he married the former Lorraine Wiesner at St. Paul Catholic Church, Manitowoc. William was employed at the former Kurth Malting Co. as a cleaning operator for 42 years, retiring in 1975. He was a lifelong member of St. Andrew parish and was also a member of Eagles Aerie #706 of Manitowoc. Survivors include his wife, Lorraine Lallensack, Manitowoc; four daughters and three sons-in-law, Judy and Vern Kaminski, Butler, Jean Lallensack, Las Vegas, Nev., Betty and Fred Draxton, Cottage Grove, Minn., Barb and Dick Schuh, Maple Grove, Minn.; two sons and daughters-in-law, Al and Carol Lallensack, Manitowoc, Mark and Judy Lallensack, Green Bay; 12 grandchildren, Craig (Sara) Kaminski, Oshkosh, Kevin Kaminski, Hartland, Wis., Lori and Faye Draxton, Cottage Grove, Minn., Paul, Kathy and Matt Schuh, Maple Grove, Minn., Chad Lallensack, Sheboygan, Eric and Ryan Lallensack, Manitowoc, Lisa and Patrick Lallensack, Green Bay; one great granddaughter, Anna Kaminski, Oshkoh; three sisters and one brother-in-law, Eleanore Schmelzle, Manitowoc, Clara and Arden Koehler, Kewaunee, Beatrice Lallensack, Manitowoc; four brothers and sisters-in-law, Francis and Gladys Lallensack, Manitowoc, Edward and Rose Lallensack, Port Washington, Victor and Angie Lallensack, Manitowoc, George and Lucille Lallensack, Manitowoc; a brother-in-law, Herbert Schiesl, Manitowoc; niece, nephews, other relatives and friends also survive. He was preceded in death by one granddaughter, Joleen Draxton; one sister, Delphine Schiesl and one brother-in-law, Marvin Schmelzle. The family will greet relatives and friends at the Pfeffer Funeral Home from 4-8 p.m. Friday (TONIGHT), where a prayer service will be held at 7:30 p.m. led by Rev. Richard Klingeisen. Herald Times Reporter, August 13, 1999 P. A2 ******** (LALLENSACK William W. 12/11/1911 8/12/1999 Phase III Alc B Tier D Crypt 310)

BERNADETTE K. LAMBERT Bernadette (Bunnie) Lambert, age 54, of 1409 Lee Circle, Manitowoc, died Tuesday, Dec. 23, 2003, at Froedtert Memorial Lutheran Hospital, Milwaukee, surrounded by her loving family. Funeral services will be held at 11 a.m. Monday, Dec. 29, 2003, at Holy Innocents Catholic Church, Manitowoc. Officiating at the Mass of Christian Burial will be the Rev. Gerald Foley with burial at Calvary Cemetery, Manitowoc. She was born Jan. 12, 1949, in Manitowoc, daughter of the late Victor and Agnes Dewane Krejcie. Bernadette was a graduate of Manitowoc Lincoln High School with the Class of 1967 and then attended Accredited School of Cosmetology in Appleton. She continued her studies, obtaining her managers license. On June 7, 1969, she married Richard Lambert at Holy Innocents Catholic Church, Manitowoc. Survivors include her husband: Richard Lambert, Manitowoc; a daughter and son-in-law: Jessica and Michael M. Barta, Manitowoc; a son: Timothy J. Lambert and his fiancee, Alicia Mattes, Milwaukee; a brother and sister-in-law: Robert and Evelyn Krejcie, Manitowoc; two sisters and a brother-in-law: Virginia and Kenneth Bureau, Fridley, Minn., Marjorie LaBrecque, Manitowoc; aunts: Grace Krejcie Ambrogio, Mani-towoc, Valeria Dewane, Valders; her mother-in-law: Joyce Lambert, Manitowoc; brothers-in-law and sister-in-law: David and Diane Lambert, Jeff Lambert, Gregory Lambert, all of Manitowoc and sisters-in-law and brothers-in-law: Anne and Roger Ray, Manitowoc and Julie and Rick Rathe, Green Bay. Also surviving are nieces, nephews, other relatives and friends. She was also preceded in death by her father-in-law: Gerald Lambert; two brothers-in-law: John LaBrecque, William Humble; a sister-in-law: Karleen Lambert and a niece: Laura Humble Bureau. The family will greet relatives and friends at The Pfeffer Funeral Home & Cremation Care Center, Manitowoc, from 5 to 8 p.m. Sunday where a prayer service will be held at 7:30 p.m. led by Deacon Ken Nelesen. Friends may also call Monday morning at Holy Innocents Catholic Church from 10 a.m. until the time of service at 11 a.m. Manitowoc Herald Times Reporter Friday, December 26, 2003 pg. A3

GERALD J. LAMBERT Gerald J. Lambert, age 72, of 4760 Vista Road, Manitowoc, passed away Wednesday afternoon, September 7, 1994, at Holy Family Memorial Medical Center, Manitowoc. Funeral Services will be held at 10:30 a.m. Saturday, September 10, 1994, at Pfeffer Funeral Home and 11 a.m. at St. Boniface Catholic Church, Manitowoc. Officiating at the Mass of Christian Burial will be the Rev. Gerald Prusakowski O.F.M. with burial to follow in the Calvary Cemetery, Manitowoc. Gerald was born March 27, 1922, in Two Creeks, Wis., son of the late Joseph and Hildegarde Blattler Lambert. He was a graduate of Mishicot High School graduating with the class of 1940 and then attended Milwaukee School of Engineering. He married the former Joyce A. Peltier on June 21, 1944, at Holy Cross Catholic Church, Mishicot. Mr. Lambert was employed at Manitowoc Shipbuilding during World War II on the construction of Naval Submarines. He then owned and operated a partnership with the late Don Zinda, Lambert and Zinda Implement Company for 30 years. He then was employed with Eis Implement of Mishicot for 12 years until his retirement. Survivors include his wife, Joyce Lambert; four sons and two daughters-in-law, David and Diane Lambert, Richard and Bernadette Lambert, Jeffrey Lambert, Gregory Lambert and special friend, Karleen Herdina; two daughters and one son-in-law, Anne and Roger Ray, Julie Lambert; one sister, Lorraine Zinda, all of Manitowoc; nine grandchildren, Mark, Michael, Jessica, Timothy, Taryn, Alicia, Ashley, Amber Lambert and Kristin Ray; two brothers-in-law and sisters-in-law, Marvin and Laverne Peltier, Mishicot, Dale and Janice Meineke, Manitowoc; nieces, nephews, other relatives and friends also survive. Friends may call at the Pfeffer Funeral Home from 5-8 p.m. Friday, September 9, 1994, where a prayer service will be held at 7:30 p.m. by Father Jerry. Herald Times Reporter, September 8, 1994 P. A2

HILDAGARD LAMBERT Mrs. Joseph F. Lambert, 56, of Rt. 2, Two Rivers, in the Village of Shoto, died Monday noon at Memorial Hospital, Manitowoc, after suffering a heart attack. She had driven her car to the hospital in the morning and was undergoing a series of tests ----illegible----patient when the attack occurred. Funeral services will be 8:30 a.m. Friday at the Urbanek & Schlei Funeral Home, Manitowoc and at 9 a.m. at Holy Innocents Catholic Church, the Rev. E.A. Radey officiating. Burial will be in Calvary Cemetery. She was born Hildegarde Blattler in Two Rivers, January 6, 1901, daughter of the late John and Anna Mahnke Blattler. She was educated in Two Rivers schools and June 19, 1919 was married to Joseph Lambert at Manitowoc. The couple settled in Two Creeks where Mr. Lambert owned and operated the garage and farm implement store for seven years. Then they moved to Kellnersville, where they operated a similar business for nine years and then moved to Mishicot where they continued the same type of business for 10 years. In 1945, they moved to Manitowoc and established a firm known now as Lambert & Zinda. They later built a home on the banks of the West Twin River at Shoto and made it their permanent residence. Survivors are the husband; a son, Gerald of Manitowoc; daughter, Mrs. Don Zinda of Manitowoc; brother, Frederick Blattler of Mishicot; three sisters, Mrs. Albert Shimon of Rt. 1, Whitelaw, Mrs. Lloyd Koeser of Two Rivers and Mrs. Ross Wright of Washington D.C. and eight grandchildren. Friends may call after noon Thursday at the funeral home where the Rosary will be recited at 8 p.m. Manitowoc Herald times - Tuesday, May 28, 1957 - page 17

JOSEPH LAMBERT Jos F. Lambert, 76, of 3732 Mary St., Manitowoc, died unexpectedly Monday at home. Funeral services will be at 9:30 a.m. Thursday at Urbanek and Schlei Funeral Home and at 10 a.m. at St. Mary Catholic Church, Manitowoc. The Rev. Anthony Betley will officiate and burial will be in Calvary Cemetery, Manitowoc. Mr. Lambert was born Nov. 5, 1896, at Tisch Mills, son of the late Louis and Mary Miller Lambert. He married Hildegarde Blattler June 19, 1919, at Manitowoc. He owned and operated the Jos Lambert Implement Co. at Two Creeks for seven years, at Kellnersville for nine years and at Mishicot for ten years, retiring and coming to Manitowoc in 1945. Mrs. Lambert preceded him in death May 27, 1957. (Survivors omitted for privacy.) Two brothers and a sister preceded him in death. Friends may call at the funeral home from 4 to 9 p.m. Wednesday until the hour of service Thursday. Prayer service will be at 7:30 p.m. Wednesday at the funeral home. Herald Times Reporter, Manitowoc-Two Rivers, Wis., February 13, 1973 ******** (05 Nov 1896/Feb 1973/SSDI)

JOYCE A. LAMBERT Joyce A. Lambert, age 92, a resident of Shady Lane Nursing Care Center, Manitowoc, died Friday morning, April 8, 2016 at Shady Lane. Joyce was born on January 19, 1924 in Mishicot, daughter of the late Archie and Julia (Stransky) Peltier. She was a graduate of Mishicot High School with the class of 1942. On June 21, 1944 she married Gerald J. Lambert at Holy Cross Catholic Church in Mishicot. He preceded her in death on September 7, 1994. Survivors include four sons: David Lambert, Richard Lambert, Jeffrey Lambert, and Gregory Lambert, all of Manitowoc; two daughters: Anne Ray, Manitowoc, and Julie Raethe, Green Bay; one daughter-in-law: Diane Lambert, Manitowoc; ten grandchildren: Mark, Michael, Timothy, Taryn, Ashley and Amber Lambert, Jessica (Michael) Barta, Kristin (Jason) Ray-Sprenger, Alicia (Jeff) Gintner and Marshal Raethe; ten great grandchildren; one sister-in-law: Laverne Peltier, Mishicot. Nieces, nephews, other relatives and friends also survive. She was also preceded in death by two daughters-in-law: Bernadette Lambert and Karleen Lambert; one son-in-law: Roger Ray; one sister and brother-in-law: Janice and Dale Meineke; one brother: Marvin Peltier; and one sister-in-law and brother-in-law: Lorraine and Don Zinda. Funeral Services will be held at 12:00 p.m. on Friday, April 15, 2016 at St. Francis of Assisi on Marshall (1114 South 21st Street), Manitowoc. Officiating at the Mass of Christian Burial will be the Rev. Dave Pleier with burial to follow at Calvary Cemetery, Manitowoc. The family will greet relatives and friends on Friday, April 15, 2016 at St. Francis of Assisi on Marshall, Manitowoc, from 10:00 a.m. until 11:45 a.m. Expressions of sympathy may be sent to the family by visiting www.pfefferfuneralhome.com. The Pfeffer Funeral Home, Manitowoc, is assisting the family with funeral arrangements. Joyce was a loving wife, mother, grandmother and great grandmother. She enjoyed spending time with her family, gardening and volunteering her time at St. Vincent de Paul. Joyce was a member of the Manitowoc Senior Center, Red Hatters, St. Anne's Society of St. Boniface Catholic Church and the Holy Rosary Society. She will sadly missed by all. Manitowoc Herald Times Reporter Apr. 10, 2016

KARLEEN D. LAMBERT Mrs. Greg (Karleen) Lambert, age 49, of 2234 S. 10th St., Manitowoc, died Wednesday afternoon, Sept. 25, 2002 at the Aurora Medical Center, Two Rivers. Funeral services will be held at 11 a.m. Saturday, Sept. 28, 2002 at the Jens Family Funeral Home and Crematory. The Rev. Ronald Reimer will officiate with burial of her cremated remains to take place later at Calvary Cemetery, Manitowoc. Karleen was born April 15, 1953 in Manitowoc, daughter of Barbara Paprocki Krish and the late Donald Krish. Karleen was a 1972 graduate of Lincoln High School, Manitowoc. She worked at St. Mary's Home from 1983 to 1989 and she worked for Northern Labs from 1989 until April of this year retiring due to illness. On Dec. 21, 2001 she was married to Gregory Lambert in Manitowoc. Karleen enjoyed crafting, sewing and spending time at her cottage in the Northwoods that was decorated throughout with a moose theme. Karleen was always full of energy and never lost any hope during her illness. Survivors include her husband: Greg, Manitowoc; two sons: Robert Herdina Jr., Two Rivers, and Randy Herdina, Manitowoc, and his special friend Andrea Petersohn: her mother: Barbara Krish, Newton; her mother-in-law: Joyce Lambert, Manitowoc; three step daughters: Alicia, Ashley and Amber Lambert, Two Rivers; three brothers and sisters-in-law: Keith Krish and Anna Mae Maresch, Manitowoc, and their children Kelilyn and Jamie McKay: Kurt (JoAnne) Krish, Manitowoc: and their children Josh and Rachel Krish; Ken (Cheryl) Krish, Manitowoc, and their son Aaron Krish; two sisters and brothers-in-law: Karen (Doug) Witczak, Fond du Lac, and their children Pam and Jeremy Steiner and Jason Witczak; Kim Skattebo and Joe Braun, Valders; her uncle and aunt: Harvey and Grace Krish, Manitowoc; her great aunt: Molly Krish, Manitowoc; her five brothers-in-law and sisters-in-law: Dave (Diane) Lambert, Manitowoc, and their children Mike and Becky Lambert and Mark and Christine Lambert; Dick (Bernadette) Lambert, Manitowoc, and their children Jessica and Mike Banta and Tim Lambert; Anne (Roger) Ray, Manitowoc, and their daughter Kristin Ray: Jeff Lambert and Tanya Mrotek, Manitowoc, and their daughter Taryn Lambert; Julie Lambert and Rick Rathe, Manitowoc; great nieces, great nephews, other relatives and many friends survive. She was preceded in death by her father, Donald Krish, and her father-in-law, Gerald Lambert. Relatives and friends may call at the Jens Family Funeral Home and Crematory on Saturday from 9 a.m. until the time of services at 11 a.m. Karleen's family would like to thank Dr. Yetter and the caring staff and nurses of the Intensive Care Unit of the Aurora Medical Center for their compassion and all they did for Karleen. Manitowoc Herald Times Reporter Friday, September 27, 2002 pg. A3

MAMIE L. LAMBERT Mamie Lambert, 84, a Manitowoc resident, who resided at Shady Lane Home, Manitowoc, died Saturday morning, March 25, 1989 at Shady Lane. A memorial service will be 11 a.m. Monday at Pfeffer Funeral Home, Manitowoc. A family friend, Father Alexis will preside. Burial of the cremated remains will follow at Calvary Cemetery, Manitowoc. Mamie Lang was born August 16, 1904, at Clintonville, Wisconsin, daughter of the late Carl and Julia Miller Lang. She married Reine Lambert on June 28, 1922, at Tisch Mills. He preceded her in death on October 31, 1957. Survivors include two sons and daughters-in-law, James and Carol Lambert of New London and Thomas and Theresa Lambert of Manitowoc; a daughter and son-in-law, Helen and Dale Zagrodnik of New Holstein; 11 grandchildren and 5 great grandchildren. Friends may meet with the family at 10 a.m. Monday at Pfeiffer Funeral Home. Herald Times Reporter ******** *Note: Tombstone birth year appears to be in error. ******** Miss Maie Lang, daughter of Mr. and Mrs. Charles Lang of the Town of Two Rivers and Ranie Lambert of Manitowoc were married at 9 o'clock Wednesday morning at Judge Chloupek's office at the court house, Judge Chloupek officiating at the ceremony. Only the necessary witnesses were present. A celebration was held at the home of the bride's parents. Mr. and Mrs. Lambert will make their home in Manitowoc where the groom holds a position as an engineer. The Reporter - Fri., June 30, 1922 ******** (16 Aug 1904/25 Mar 1989/SSDI)

RANIE L. LAMBERT Ranie Lambert, 65, veteran in the construction field and a lifelong Manitowoc County resident, died Thursday morning at Holy Family Hospital, Manitowoc, where he had been confined a month. He resided on Rt. 1, Manitowoc. Funeral services will be at 9:30 a.m. Saturday at Pfeffer Funeral Home, Manitowoc and 10 a.m. at St. Joseph Catholic Church, Silver Lake. The Rev. D.F. Hurley will officiate and burial will be in Calvary Cemetery, Manitowoc. Mr. Lambert was born at Tisch Mills Nov. 16, 1892, son of the late Mr. and Mrs. Louis Lambert. He married Mamie Lang June 28, 1922 and the couple moved to Rt. 1, Manitowoc eight years ago. Before his retirement a year ago, he had been employed 42 years by Bahr Construction Co. of which currently he was a general superintendent and vice president. Survivors are his wife; a daughter, Miss Helen Mae Lambert of Chicago; two sons, James and Thomas of Rt. 1, Manitowoc; four brothers, John of Tisch Mills, Joe of Manitowoc, Charles of Kellnersville and Otto of Iron Mountain, Mich.; two sisters, Mrs. Lucille Barta of Kellnersville and Mrs. Mamie Ihlenfeld of Rt. 4, Manitowoc and six grandchildren. Friends may call at the funeral home after 4 p.m. where a Rosary will be recited at 8 p.m. Manitowoc Herald times - Thursday, Oct. 31, 1957 - page 22

ROBERT J. LAMBERT Robert J. (Bob) Lambert, 60, of 842 N. 2th Street, Manitowoc, died Wednesday morning, June 26, 1991, after a courageous battle with cancer at Holy Family Memorial Medical Center, Manitowoc. Funeral services will be 10 a.m. Saturday at Pfeffer Funeral Home and 10:30 a.m. at Holy Innocents Catholic Church, Manitowoc. Concelebrating the Mass of Christian Burial will be Rev. Leo Schmidt, Rev. Roman Zbieranski O.F.M., and Rev. Harold Berryman with entombment at Calvary Mausoleum, Manitowoc. He was born December 20, 1930, in Manitowoc, Wis., son of the late Walter and Josephine Rebitz Lambert. He married the former Rose Mary Kochan on October 6, 1951, at St. Anne Catholic Church, Francis Creek. He was a graduate of Mishicot High School Class of 1948. Bob was employed as a maintenance man with St. Mary’s Parish and School for many years. He was a member of Holy Innocents Catholic Church, and Fraternal Order of Eagles Aeries No. 706. Bob was active in the Manitowoc County Burial Softball League for many years as a player and later as an umpire. Bob was a member of 22nd Division of The National Guard and then was transferred to the U.S. Army Reserve 84th Division, receiving honorable discharge as a Captain. Survivors include his wife, Rose Mary Lambert of Manitowoc; three sons and daughters-in-law, David and Darla Lambert of Conyers, Ga., Donald and Ann Lambert of Glendale, Wis., Mark and Kay Lambert of Manitowoc; two daughters and sons-in-law, Cheryl and Arnold Herzog of Hamlin, N.Y., Michelle and Jeffrey Christensen of Elkhorn, Wis.; a sister and brother-in-law, Betty and James Foreman of Manitowoc ;six grandchildren, Christopher, Brandon and Elizabeth Lambert, Paul, Lisa, and Chad Herzog; nieces, nephews and other relatives and friends survive. Friends may call at Pfeffer Funeral Home, 4 p.m. to 8 p.m. Friday. An Eagle Service will be held at 7:30 p.m. followed by a prayer service conducted by a Deacon Don Schneider. Herald Times Reporter, June 27, 1991 P. B10 ******** Funeral services for Robert J, (Bob) Lambert, 60, of Manitowoc, who died Wednesday mornIng, June 26, 1991, after a courageous battle with cancer at Holy Family Memorial Medical Center, Manitowoc, will be 10 a.m. Saturday at Pfeffer Funeral Home and 10:30 a.m. at Holy Innocents Catholic Church, Manitowoc. Concelebrating the Mass of Christian Burial will be Rev. Leo Schmitt, Rev. Roman Zbieranski O.F.M., and Rev. Harold Berryman with entombment at Calvary Mausoleum, Manitowoc. Friends may call at Pfeffer Funeral Home, 4 p.m. to 8p.m. Friday. An Eagle Service will be held at 7:30 p.m. followed by a prayer service conducted by Deacon Don Schneider. ******** (LAMBERT Robert J. 12/20/1930 6/26/1991 Phase II Patio A Tier C Crypt 3)

ADAM LAMBRIES Adam Lambries, 75, died Monday night at the home, 1123 South 11th street. He had been ill over two years. Funeral services will be held Friday at 8:30 a.m., from the Shimek and Schwartz funeral home and at 9 o'clock from the St. Boniface church. Burial will be at Calvary cemetery. Mr. Lambries was born in 1862 at Port Washington, Wis. He came to this city with his parents when a boy. He married Miss Elizabeth Holzer in 1886. The couple observed their golden wedding anniversary last October. Survivors are his widow; two daughters, Mrs. Elmer Keil, Manitowoc Rapids, Mrs. Edward Wickert, city; four sons, John, Los Angeles, Calif., Adam Jr., Lawrence and Albert, all of this city; two brothers, George, city, Nic, Manitowoc Rapids; a sister, Mrs. Nick Zimmer, Manitowoc Rapids; 26 grandchildren and seven great-grandchildren. The body may be viewed at the funeral home Wednesday evening. The rosary will be recited Thursday at 7 p.m. at the funeral home. Manitowoc Herald Times, Tuesday, May 25, 1937 P.11 ******** Note: The following is an article about his son Johnnie. Notes from Manitowoc Rapids: Johnnie Lambries, while at play with other boys around a feed cutter, had his hand caught in the rollers and he thereby lost a little finger. Manitowoc Pilot, April 13, 1905, p.8 ******** (1900 Manitowoc Rapids census: Adam Lambries age 34; wife Elizabet 34; Mathias 13; Clara 9; Johan 8; Adam 2)

ADAM JOHN LAMBRIES Adam John Lambries, 82, of 1901 Waldo Blvd., Manitowoc, died early Wednesday morning, April 9, at Skilled Nursing Facility, Holy Family Hospital, Manitowoc. Funeral services will be 9:30 a.m. Friday at Pfeffer Funeral Home and 10 a.m. at Holy Innocents Catholic Church, Manitowoc. The Rev. Leo Schmitt will officiate and burial will be in Calvary Cemetery, Manitowoc. Mr. Lambries was born June 27, 1897, at Manitowoc, son of the late Adam and Elizabeth Holzer Lambries. He attended schools in Manitowoc. He married Agnes Wagner Oct. 30, 1954, at St. Gregory Catholic Church, St. Nazianz. After their marriage, the couple resided at St. Nazianz until 1974 when they moved to Manitowoc. Mr. Lambries was employed at Salvaorian Publishing of St. Nazianz and later at Salvatorian Center, New Holstein from which he retired in 1962. He was a veteran serving in the United States Army in World War I and World War II. He was a member of American Legion Post of St. Nazianz. Survivors include his wife, Agnes; two sisters, Mrs. Clara Keil and Mrs. Grace Wickert of Manitowoc, and nieces and nephews. He was preceded in death by four brothers, Lawrence, Matthew, John and Albert. Friends may call at Pfeffer Funeral Home from 4 p.m. to 9 p.m. Thursday where a prayer service will be at 7:30 p.m. Herald Times Reporter, April 9, 1980 P.3

AGNES M. LAMBRIES Agnes M. Lambries, age 93, a resident of St. Mary’s Home, Manitowoc, died Tuesday morning, Dec. 24, 2002 at St. Mary’s Home. Funeral services will be held at 11 a.m. Saturday, Dec. 28, 2002 at Holy Innocents Catholic Church, Manitowoc. Officiating at the Mass of Christian Burial will be Rev. Gerald Foley with entombment at Calvary Mausoleum, Manitowoc. She was born Oct. 29, 1909 in Sparta, daughter of the late Peter and Susan Steinborn Wagner. Agnes attended St. Patrick Catholic School graduating in 1928, then moving to St. Nazianz in 1931. On Oct. 30, 1954, she married Adam Lambries at St. Gregory Catholic Church, St. Nazianz. Agnes was employed with the United States Postal Service in St. Nazianz for 30 years, retiring in 1961. The couple moved to Manitowoc in 1974. He preceded her in death April 9, 1980. She was a member of the Christian Women of Holy Innocents Catholic Church and the American Legion Auxiliary of St. Nazianz. Survivors include nephews and nieces, Eleanor Shea, St. Nazianz, Francis (Delores) Shea, New Holstein, Maureen Shea, Manitowoc and Terry Shea, Madison. Also surviving are other nieces, nephews and friends. She was preceded in death by one sister and seven brothers. The family will greet relatives and friends at Holy Innocents Catholic Church, Manitowoc from 10 a.m. Saturday until the time of service at 11 a.m. The Pfeffer Funeral Home & Cremation Care Center, Manitowoc, is assisting the family with funeral arrangements. Manitowoc Herald Times Reporter Wednesday, December 25, 2002 pg. A3

ANNA C. LAMBRIES Anna G. (sic) Lambries, age 94, of 2511 Division St., Manitowoc, died Wednesday morning, June 16, 2004 at St. Mary's Home, Manitowoc. Funeral services will be held at 11 a.m. on Saturday, June 19, 2004 at St. Mary Catholic Church, Manitowoc. Officiating at the Mass of Christian Burial will be the Rev. Tom Wojciechowski, O.F.M. with burial to follow at Calvary Cemetery. Anna was born on May 31, 1910 in Manitowoc, daughter of the late Michael and Josephine (Niespodziany) Nitka. She married Matthew P. Lambries on Sept. 12, 1931 in Zion City, Ill. Anna was employed at Aluminum Goods Mfg. Company and Normington's Laundry. Anna was a member of St. Mary's Catholic Church. Survivors include her husband: Matthew P. Lambries, Manitowoc; one son: Eugene Lambries, Manitowoc; two daughters and sons-in-law: Delores and Donald Haag, Manitowoc; Marlene and Donald Mertens, Manitowoc; 10 grandchildren: William (Gail) Lambries, Laurie Trost, Matthew (Renee) Lambries, Michael Lambries, Mary (Michael) Schaus, Julie (William) Jindra, Robert Haag, Michael (Jill) Mertens, James (Peggy) Mertens and Lynn Fricke; 17 great-grandchildren; three great-great-grandchildren; one brother-in-law: Louis Lambries, Manitowoc; four sisters-in-law: Esther Sittman, Manitowoc; Lee Lampada, Kenosha; Violet Wester, Manitowoc; Bette Schram and her husband, Louis, Manitowoc. Nieces, nephews, other relatives and friends also survive. Anna was also preceded in death by numerous brothers and sisters and their spouses. The family will greet relatives and friends from 10 a.m. until the time of Mass at 11 a.m. on Saturday, June 19, 2004 at St. Mary Catholic Church, Manitowoc. The Pfeffer Funeral Home, Manitowoc, is assisting the family with funeral arrangements. Herald Times Reporter June 2004 ******* Funeral services for Anna G. Lambries, age 94, of 2511 Division St., Manitowoc, who died Wednesday morning, June 16, 2004 at St. Mary's Home, Manitowoc, will be held at 11 a.m. on Saturday, June 19, 2004 at St. Mary Catholic Church, Manitowoc. Officiating at the Mass of Christian Burial will be the Rev. Tom Wojciechowski, O.F.M. with burial to follow at Calvary Cemetery. The family will greet relatives and friends from 10 a.m. until the time of Mass at 11 a.m. on Saturday, June 19, 2004 at St. Mary Catholic Church, Manitowoc. The Pfeffer Funeral Home, Manitowoc, is assisting the family with funeral arrangements. Herald Times Reporter June 2004

CECILIA LAMBRIES Cecilia K. Lambries, age 92, a Shady Lane Nursing Care Center resident, died early Thursday morning, November 7, 1996, at the home. Funeral Services will be held Monday, November 11, 1996, at 10 a.m. at St. Mary Catholic Church, Manitowoc. Rev. Roman Zbieranski O.F.M. will officiate at the Mass of Christian Burial with burial at Calvary Cemetery. She was born November 10, 103, in Manitowoc, daughter of the late Frank and Katherine Powalisz Sobieszczyk. She married Lawrence Lambries November 15, 1921, at St. Mary Catholic Church, Manitowoc. He preceded her in death May 11, 1947. Cecilia had been employed at Park Lawn Home for many years until her retirement. She is a member of St. Mary Catholic Church. Survivors include three daughters and a son-in-law, Elaine O’Neil, Dolores and Richard Melichar, Betty Musial, all of Manitowoc; three daughters-in-law, Bernice Lambries, Kate Lambries, both of Manitowoc, Sally Lambries, South Carolina; 16 grandchildren; six great-grandchildren; three great-great-grandchildren; nieces, nephews, other relatives and friends also survive. She was also preceded in death by four sons, Lawrence Jr., Alvin, Noran and John Lambries, two brothers and two sisters. Friends may call at St. Mary Catholic Church from 8:30 a.m. Monday until the time of service. There will be no visitation. Pfeffer Funeral Home, Manitowoc, is assisting the family with funeral arrangements. Herald Times Reporter, November 8, 1996 P. A2

DANNY L. LAMBRIES Manitowoc Boy Drowns in River MANITOWOC—City and county authorities Tuesday afternoon recovered the body of a 12 year old Manitowoc boy who drowned in the Manitowoc River near the old mill at the Manitowoc Rapids dam. The boy was identified by authorities as Dan Lambries, son of Mr. and Mrs. Louis S. Lambries, of 3617 Custer St. The Lambries boy was swimming with a companion, Jim Pike, 953 S. 35th St., according to authorities. Manitowoc Herald Times, August 6, 1968 P. 1 ******** Boy Drowns While Playing; Non-Swimmer MANITOWOC—After searching for about two hours, a scuba diver from the Manitowoc Sheriff’ Dept. recovered the body of 12-year-old Daniel Louis Lambries of 3617 Custer St., Manitowoc, Tuesday from the Manitowoc River in 25 feet of water about 50 reet below the dam. The son of Mr. and Mrs. Louis S. Lambries had been playing with James Pike of 953 S. 35th St., Manitowoc, above the dam in the river. The Lambries boy, who was unable to swim, was using a board which was carried over the dam by the water. According to a police report, the Pike boy said the board caught on the bottom portion of the dam. Lambries attempted to retrieve the board when he panicked in the water below the dam, a short distance off the north bank. Loses Hold Pike said he attempted to pull Lambries out of the water but lost hold of the boy who disappeared in the water. Pike then swam across the river, ran to a house and police were called. Scuba divers Eugene Springstube and Jack Spevacek were at the scene. Springstube, who is a jailer for the County Sheriff’s Dept., recovered the body. The Lambries boy was pronounced dead at the scene by the Manitowoc County coroner, Dr. Theodore Teitgen. The Manitowoc Fire Dept. stayed on the scene for two and one-half hours and during this time administered 100 pounds of oxygen to the victim’s father who passed out during the search for his son’s body. Representatives from the City Police and County Traffic Depts. were also at the scene. Born in 1956 Daniel was born March 23, 1956, at Manitowoc, son of Louis S. and Sally M. Wollard Lambries and would have been a seventh grader at Washington Junior High School this fall. Besides his parents, he is survived by six sisters (names omitted for privacy). Funeral services will be at 10:30 a.m. Thursday at Pfeffer Funeral Home and at 11 a.m. at St. Boniface Catholic Church, Manitowoc. The Very Rev. Msgr. Alfred Schneider will officiate and burial will be in Calvary Cemetery, Manitowoc. Friends may call at the funeral home this Wednesday evening where at 8 o’clock the Rosary will be recited. Manitowoc Herald Times, August 7, 1968 P. 12

ELIZABETH LAMBRIES Mrs. Elizabeth Lambries, 71, died this morning at the home, 1123 South 11th street. She had been ill six months. Funeral services will be held Saturday at 8:30 a.m. from the Shimek and Schwartz funeral home and at nine o’clock from the St. Boniface church. Interment will be in Calvary cemetery. Mr. Lambries, nee Elizabeth Holzer, was born in Germany and came to Manitowoc at the age of 18. She was married to Adam Lambries in this city and always resided here. Mr. Lambries died in May, 1937. Survivors are two daughters, Mrs. Elmer Kiel, Manitowoc Rapids, Mrs. Edward Wickert, city; four sons, John, Los Angeles, Adam, Jr., Lawrence and Albert, city; 25 grandchildren and six great grandchildren. The body may be viewed at the funeral home after 2 p.m. Thursday. Manitowoc Herald Times, September 22, 1937 P. 2

EUGENE LAMBRIES Eugene “Bud” Lambries, age 79, of 1209 New York Ave., Manitowoc, died earlyon Friday morning, April 29, 2011, at Rivers Bend Health & Rehabilitation Center, Manitowoc. Bud was born Dec. 16, 1931, in Manitowoc, son of the late Matthew P. and Anna (Nitka) Lambries. He attended Lincoln High School and then served as a paratrooper with the United States Army Rangers 187th Airborne Combat Infantry Division in the Korean War. He married Gail Haucke on June 27, 1953. From 1963 until the time of his death, Bud owned and operated Bud’s Bar: Bud was a member of various veterans groups and other organizations. He also enjoyed traveling to warmer climates. Survivors include his children William (Gail) Lambries, Las Vegas, Nev., Laurie (Scott) Musial, Manitowoc, Matthew L. (Renee) Lambries, Manitowoc and Michael Lambries and special friend, Kathy Gabriel, Manitowoc; eight grandchildren: Stacey Lambries, Angela Lambries-Lopez, Laura Oliveria, Heather Labries, Tanya Lambries-Panos, Kari Lambries, Matt Trost and Carter Trost; seven great-grandchildren: Christian Fellmann, Dylan Lambries, Jessie Lambries, Avery Lopez, Kayla Oliveria, Eliza Oliveria and Jack Panos. Bud is further survived by two sisters: Marleene (Don) Mertens and Delores (Don) Haag, all off Manitowoc. Graveside committal services will be held at 11 a.m. Saturday, May 7, 2011, at Calvary Cemetery, Manitowoc. Officiating at the service will be Deacon Paul Gleichner. Deja & Martin Funeral Chapels, 1506 18th St., Two Rivers, is assisting the family with arrangements. “RAKKASAN” Herald Times Reporter, May 3, 2011

EVELYN LAMBRIES From Der Nord Westen, 11 May 1899: Death Mon. of an 11-mo. old daughter of George Lambries here. The funeral was held yesterday at the Catholic Cemetery. ******* TO THE WORLD BEYOND. LAMBRIES. The Angel of Death visited the home of Mr. and Mrs. George Lambries late yesterday afternoon and robbed it of a treasure, their infant daughter. The child was eleven months old and had never been very strong. The funeral will be held to-morrow morning and interment will be at the Catholic Cemetery. Mr. and Mrs. Lambries have the sympathy of the entire community in the hour of their affliction. Manitowoc Daily Herald, May 9, 1899 P.1 ******** The funeral of the infant daughter of Mr. and Mrs. George Lambries, who died Monday afternoon, was held Thursday afternoon. Six little girls acted as pall-bearers and the services were conducted by the Rev. Father Piel. Interment was at Evergreen cemetery. [Calvary] Manitowoc Daily Herald, Manitowoc, Wis. Friday, May 12, 1899 P.4 ******** Card of Thanks. Mr. and Mrs. George Lambries wish to express their thanks to their many friends for the sympathy and assistance extended during their recent bereavement and for the beautiful floral offerings. Also to the little girls who acted as pallbearers at the funeral. Manitowoc Daily Herald, Manitowoc, Wis. Friday, May 12, 1899 P.1 ******** Emaline Lambries birth: 14 June 1898 Wis. death: 8 May 1899 Manitowoc, Manitowoc Co., Wisconsin residence: 1899 Manitowoc father: George Lambries mother: Minnie Wisconsin, Deaths and Burials, 1835-1968

GEORGE LAMBRIES SR. (d. 1944) George Lambries, Sr., 78, of 1716 Western avenue, former sheriff, active in Republican party politics in the city and county for years and operator of a tavern in the city, died this morning at his home. Mr. Lambries, while not in the best of health in recent months, has been able to be about his place of business until yesterday. Funeral services will be held at 8:30 a.m. Monday at the Lambries home and at 9 o'clock at the St. Boniface church the Rev. Alfred Pritzl officiating. Burial will be in Calvary cemetery. Members of the Eagles lodge will be pallbearers. Mr. Lambries was born in Port Washington in 1866 and when a boy accompanied his parents to Manitowoc. In the earlier years he operated a tavern opposite the courthouse and acted as manager of the Marine band and later with Frank Rosenfelder, now deceased, operated the Rathskeller tavern in the basement of the old Savings bank building. For the past 10 years he has operated a tavern on Western avenue. Active in Republican party affairs, Mr. Lambries was elected sheriff in 1907, serving two years. He was a charter member of the Eagles and a member of the Holy Name society. He married Miss Minnie Winkelman in 1888, who died a number of years ago. Ten years ago he married Mrs. Anna Schulze. Survivors are his wife; daughter, Mrs. Kenneth Bellin of this city; three sons, George, Jr., Lester and Edward of this city; brother Nicholas of Manitowoc Rapids, sister, Mrs. Anna Zimmer of Manitowoc Rapids; and nine grandchildren. The body will be moved to the Lambries home Saturday afternoon from the Pfeffer funeral home. The rosary will be recited at 7 o'clock Sunday evening. Manitowoc Herald Times, Manitowoc, Wis. Friday, December 1, 1944 P.2 ******** SCHULZE-LAMBRIES WEDDING AT ST. BONIFACE CHURCH In the presence of relatives and friends at St. Boniface church at 6 this morning the nuptial mass for marriage of Mrs. Anna Schulze and George Lambries was said by the Rev. Kersten. Mr. and Mrs. Joseph Boelter attended the couple at the ceremony. Following a wedding breakfast a reception was held at the home at 1716 Western Ave., and this evening at 6 there will be a wedding dinner at Silver Lake at the Winkelman hall. Mr. and Mrs. Lambries will make their home at 1716 Western avenue and will be at home to friends after July 1. Both are well know, the bride having formerly been in charge of the dry cleaning department at the Normington plant. Mr. Lambries is a former sheriff of the county who has been retired of late years. Manitowoc Herald News, Wednesday, June 10, 1931 P. 8

GEORGE J. LAMBRIES (d. 1977) Geroge J. Lambries, 80, of 717 Flambeau St., Manitowoc, died Saturday morning at Holy Family Hospital, Manitowoc. Funeral services will be at 10:30 a.m. Monday at Pfeffer Funeral Home and at 11 a.m. at St. Andrew Catholic Church, Manitowoc. The Rev. James Stamborski will officiate with burial in Calvary Cemetery, Manitowoc. Mr. Lambries was born Feb. 23, 1897, at Manitowoc, son of the late George and Minnie Winkelman Lambries Sr. He worked at Mirro Aluminum Co., Manitowoc, for 50 years and retired in 1963 as traffic manager. He married Rose Pleckinger Sept. 10, 1923, at Wausaukee. Mr. Lambries was an honorary member of the Manitowoc-Two Rivers Traffic Club, and a 55 year member of American Legion-Drews Bleser Post N. 88, of Manitowoc. He was a veteran of World War I serving with the U.S. Army. Survivors include his wife, a brother, Lester, of Manitowoc and nieces and nephews. He was preceded in death by a brother, Edward, and a sister, Evelyn. Friends may call at Pfeffer Funeral Home from 5 to 9 p.m. Sunday where a prayer service will be conducted at 7 p.m. Herald Times Reporter, Manitowoc, March 5, 1977 P. 8

GERTRUDE LAMBRIES LAMBRIES, Mrs. Gertrude—Forty-eight. Died of complications at home at Manitowoc Rapids early Sunday. Maiden name Van Leishout. Born in this city but resided at Rapids for last 26 years. Wife of Nicholas. Survived by widower, 3 children, 2 sisters, one brother, one grandchild. Body at Pfeffer’s. Funeral there Tuesday 8:30, St. Paul’s church 9 o’clock. Burial at Calvary. Manitowoc Herald Times, September 18, 1933 P. 13

JOSEPH D. LAMBRIES Joseph D. Lambries, age 83, of 554 S. 32nd St., Manitowoc, died Wednesday, January 17, 1996, at Holy Family Memorial Medical Center. Funeral Services will be held at 10 a.m. Monday, January 22, 1996, at St. Paul’s Catholic Church, Manitowoc. Officiating at the Mass of Christian Burial will be Rev. Ronald Reimer with burial at Calvary Cemetery, Manitowoc. He was born February 20, 1912, in Manitowoc, son of the late Nicholas and Gertrude Lallensack Lambries. Mr. Lambries was a veteran of the United States Army serving in the Air Corps. He married the former Oral Inabnitt June 8, 1946, at Kentucky. Mr. Lambries was employed at Manitowoc Shipbuilding for 40 years until his retirement. He was a member of St. Paul’s Catholic Church. Survivors include his wife, Ora A. Lambries, Manitowoc; one brother and sister-in-law, Nicklaus and LaVerne Lambries, Manitowoc; a sister, Mrs. Gertrude Boldt, Sturgeon Bay; a nephew, Tom Lambries and his wife, Cathy; a niece, LaVerne Olsen and her husband, John; a niece-in-law, Belvia Witte and her husband, Jerome, Two Rivers; two special friends, Judy Vnuk and Roland Krepline. Also surviving are other relatives and friends. Friends may call at St. Paul’s Catholic Church from 9 a.m. Monday until the time of service at 10 a.m. There will be no Sunday evening visitation. The Pfeffer Funeral Home, Manitowoc, is assisting the family with funeral arrangements. Herald Times Reporter, January 19, 1996 P. A2

LAWRENCE LAMBRIES (d. 1921) Forty friends and fellow workers tendered Lawrence Lampries and Miss Celia Sobieck a surprise party at the Dick Bros. bakery Saturday evenning (sic), the occasion being in honor of the approaching marriage of the pair. The couple was presented with a beautiful gift and after spending the evening in dancing the guests enjoyed a chicken supper. A delightful time is reported. Manitowoc Herald News, Monday, November 14, 1921 P.5 ******** (NOTE: I don't have a marriage date for them and I'm reasonably sure this is where the notice goes.)

LAWRENCE E. LAMBRIES (d. 1987) Lawrence E. (Sam) Lambries, 62, of ?? S. 24th Street, Manitowoc, died Monday, February 2, 1987 at Holy Family Medical Center, Manitowoc. Funeral services will be 9:30 am Thursday at Pfeffer Funeral Home and 10 am at St. Mary Catholic Church, Manitowoc. The Mass of Christian Burial will be celebrated by Rev. Harold Berryman and burial will be in Calvary Cemetery, Manitowoc. Mr. Lambries was born October 9, 1924 at Manitowoc, son of Cecilia Sobieszczyk Lambries and the late Lawrence D. Lambries. Mr. Lambries was a graduate of Lincoln High School Class of 1943. He married the former Kathryn F. Marlborough on August 20, 1949 at St. Mary Catholic Church, Clarks Mills. Mr. Lambries was Plant Superintendent at Dick Brothers Bakery in Manitowoc, retiring in 1986. Survivors include his wife, Kathryn; his mother, Mrs. Cecilia Lambries of Manitowoc; three sons and daughters-in-law, Lawrence J. and Cathy Lambries of Whitelaw, Thomas and Debbie Lambries of Milwaukee and Terrence and Debra Lambries of Manitowoc; a daughter, Kathryn Lambries of Manitowoc; two brothers and a sister-in-law, Norman Lambries of Columbia, South Carolina and Alvin and Bernice Lambries of Manitowoc; three sisters and a brother-in-law, Mrs. Elaine O’Neil, Mrs. Elizabeth Musial and Delores and Richard Melichar, all of Manitowoc; five grandchildren, Andy, Ben, Craig, Andrea and Crystal and other relatives and friends. Friends may call at Pfeffer Funeral Home, Manitowoc, 4 pm to 9 pm Wednesday where a prayer service will be at 7:30 pm. Manitowoc Herald Times - Tues., Feb. 3, 1987 - page 13

LESTER LAMBRIES Lester G. Lambries Sr., 78, of 554 South 32nd St., Manitowoc, died Friday morning in Holy Family Hospital, Manitowoc. Funeral services will be 11 am Monday in St. Paul Catholic Church, Manitowoc. The Rev. Philip Hoffmann will officiate and burial will be in Calvary Cemetery, Manitowoc. Mr. Lambries was born Aug. 25, 1900 in Manitowoc, son of the late George and Minnie Winkleman Lambries. He was a lifelong resident of Manitowoc and had been employed with Kaufman Manufacturing Company for many years. He married Margaret Krause in 1930 and she preceded him in death in 1951. He married Ruth J. Griffin Oct. 11, 1955 in Manitowoc. Survivors include his wife, Ruth; two sons, Lester Jr. of Manitowoc and Russell of Omaha, Neb. , and grandchildren. Two brothers, George and Edward, preceded him in death. There will be Sunday visitation. Pfeffer Funeral Home, Manitowoc, is in charge of funeral arrangements. Manitowoc Herald times - Sunday, Oct. 22, 1978 - page 3

LOUIS JOSEPH LAMBRIES Louis Joseph Lambries, age 95, a Manitowoc resident, died peacefully in the arms of his children on Sunday, November 29, 2015 at Holy Family Memorial Medical Center, Manitowoc. Louis was born on September 26, 1920 in Newton, Wisconsin, son of the late Mathias and Elsie (Frosch) Lambries. On November 12, 1947 he married the former Sally Mae Woolard at Sacred Heart Church in Manitowoc, Wisconsin. To this union seven children were born. Louis lived a long and beautiful life of love, faith and humor. As a young man he attended St. Boniface parochial school and later attended the Manitowoc Vocational School where he studied drafting and cabinet making. He was a tumbler in the Billy Schulz circus and worked at ABC Grocery. Louis served his country in World War II with the U.S. Army during the China-India-Burma Theatre. He was later employed with The Spindler Co. and the Cher-Make Sausage Co. of Manitowoc. Louis loved woodworking, drawing, wildlife, the Packer's and watching wrestling. He had several collections that were dear to his heart including collections of elephants, model cars and cartoon characters. The most important part of his life was his family. Louis is survived by his six beautiful, and loving daughters and four sons-in-law: Marion and Roger Hahn, Manitowoc, Kay and Barry Wood, Cato, Deborah and Joe Clarke, Vernal, UT, Dawn Miller, Norfork, NE, April Day, Green Bay, Rachele and Jim Rank, Colorado Springs, CO. His legacy also includes his grandchildren: Brian Hahn and special friend Sheila, Heather (Mark) Swanson, Heidi Wood, Angela (Tom) Gunsolley, Dr. Lindsay (Dr. Matt) Northam, Mason Miller, Shane (Emily) Lambries, Selene Day, Melanie Day and Adelle Rank; and his eight great grandchildren: Molly, Christian, Britta, Micah, Alex, Noah, Zachary, Abigail, Ronnie and Harrison. He is also survived by one sister: Violet Wester, Manitowoc. His unending love was also shared with his nieces, nephews, cousins, aunts, uncles and nearly a century's worth of friends, coworkers and acquaintances. Waiting for him at Heaven's gate is his wife: Sally Mae; and beloved son: Danny. He is also joined in the arms of the Lord by two sons-in-law: Harold Ronald Miller and Donald Earl Day; two sisters: Eleanor (Lee) and Esther; three brothers: Matt, Henry "Hank" and William; two step-sisters: Betty and Evelyn; and one step-brother: Howard. Funeral Services will be held at 11:00 a.m. on Friday, December 4, 2015 at St. Francis of Assisi on Marshall (1114 South 21st Street), Manitowoc. Officiating at the Mass of Christian Burial will be the Rev. Dave Pleier with burial to follow at Calvary Cemetery, Manitowoc. Graveside Military Rites will be accorded by the V.F.W. Otto Oas Post #659. The family will greet relatives and friends on Friday, December 4, 2015 at St. Francis of Assisi on Marshall, Manitowoc, from 9:30 a.m. until 10:45 a.m. Expressions of sympathy may be sent to the family by visiting www.pfefferfuneralhome.com. The Pfeffer Funeral Home, Manitowoc, is assisting the family with funeral arrangements. Louis was known to those who loved him best as Daddy, Grandpa and Fritz. He will be forever missed and loved eternally. Manitowoc Herald Times Reporter Dec. 1, 2015

MARGARET LAMBRIES Mr. Lester Lambries, 43, of A ___Custerdale, Manitowoc, died Sunday evening at Holy Family hospital, Manitowoc, following a lingering illness. Funeral services will be held at 8:30 a.m. Thursday at the Pfeffer Funeral Home, Manitowoc, and at 9 o’clock at St. Paul’s Catholic Church, Manitowoc. The Rev. Clement Kern will officiate with burial in Calvary Cemetery. Mrs. Lambries, nee Margaret Krause, was born in 1908 and came to Manitowoc in 1916. She was married to Mr. Lambries in 1930. Survivors are the husband; father, Edward Krause Jr. of Marshfield; daughter, Mrs. Marvin R. Dorst of Madison; three sons, Lester Jr. and Russell D., at home, and Douglas F., with the Army in Korea; two brothers, Adolph and Edward Jr. of Marshfield; two sisters, Mrs. William Callan of Duran, Wis., and Mrs. Leighton Herrick of Marshfield; one grandchild. Friends may call at the Pfeffer Funeral Home after 2 p.m. Wednesday and the rosary will be recited at 8 p.m. Wednesday. Manitowoc Herald Times, October 9, 1951 P. 2

MATHIAS LAMBRIES MATT LAMBRIES DIES AT HOSPITAL Matthew Lambries, an employe at Silver lake resorts for several years, and who made his home at Quarry during the past few months, died at the Holy Family hospital this morning after a brief illness following an operation for intestinal troubles. He was born in this city January 21, 1888, and had made his home here most of the time. Besides his wife and five children, the eldest being twelve years, he leaves his parents, Mr. and Mrs. Adam Lambries of this city, four brothers and two sisters. The brothers are John, at Denver, Lawrence, Adam and Albert of this city, Mrs. Elmer Keil at Rapids and Miss Grace Lambries here at home. The funeral will take place from the undertaking parlors of Urbanek and Wattawa, at nine o'clock Monday morning, with services at St. Boniface and burial at Calvary. Manitowoc Herald News, Saturday, August 7, 1920 p.8 ******** Matthew Lambries, and employee at Silver Lake Resorts for several years and who made his home at Quarry during the past few months, died at Holy Family hospital Saturday after a brief illness following an operation for intestinal troubles. He was born in this city and was 32 years of age. Besides his wife and five children, the eldest being twelve years, he leaves his parents, Mr. and Mrs. Adam Lambries of this city, four brothers and two sisters. The brothers are John of Denver, Lawrence, Adam and Albert of this city, Mrs. Elmer Keil at Rapids and Miss Grace Lambries here at home. The funeral took place Monday morning from St Boniface Church. Interment was in Calvary Cemetery. Manitowoc Pilot, August 12, 1920 ******** Matthew Lambries, aged 19 and Elsa Frosch, 17, were the first couple to wed in the new court house, Judge Chloupek officiating Friday. the two are residents of Rapids and the bride's parents witnessed the ceremony. Manitowoc Daily Herald - Sat., Oct. 19, 1907

MATTHEW P. LAMBRIES Matthew P. Lambries, age 96, of 2511 Division St., Manitowoc, died on Sunday evening, Jan. 18, 2009, at River's Bend Health & Rehabilitation Center, Manitowoc. He was born on Oct. 22, 1912, in Manitowoc, son of the late Mathias and Elsie (Frosch) Lambries. On Sept. 12, 1931, he married the former Anna Nitka in Waukegan, Ill. She preceded him in death on June 16, 2004. He was employed with Manitowoc Shipbuilding until his retirement in 1977. (Survivors omitted for privacy.) Matthew was also preceded in death by numerous brothers and sisters and their spouses. Funeral services will be held at noon on Wednesday, Jan. 21, 2009, at St. Francis of Assisi on Marshall, Manitowoc. Officiating at the Mass of Christian Burial will be the Rev. Dan Felton, with burial at Calvary Cemetery, Manitowoc. The family will greet relatives and friends on Wednesday, Jan. 21, 2009, at St. Francis of Assisi on Marshall from 11 a.m. until the time of service at noon. The Pfeffer Funeral Home and Cremation Care Center, Manitowoc, is assisting the family with funeral arrangements. The family wishes to send a special thank you to Dr. DeBruyn, Aurora Medical Center, and River's Bend Health and Rehabilitation Center for their compassionate care and support given to Matthew and his family. Herald Times Reporter, Jan. 20, 2009

MINNIE LAMBRIES DEATH CLAIMS MRS. G. LAMBRIES AT HOME TODAY Death, which came suddenly, closed the life of Mrs. Minnie Lambries, wife of ex-sheriff Geroge Lambries, today, news of her demise coming as a shock, for though she had been in failing health for a long time, the end came suddenly from an attack of heart failure. Her death occurred at the family home, 1618 Clark street this morning. Mrs. Lambries, nee Winkleman, was born at Alverno January 23, 1871, being 59 at her death. She was married to Mr. Lambries forty-two years ago and is survived by her husband and three sons, George Jr., Lester and Edward, all residents here. One brother Henry Winkleman, Silver Lake and a sister, Mrs. Emil Bergman of Milwaukee, also survive. Funeral services will be held Friday morning from St. Boniface church at 9 o'clock. Manitowoc Herald News, Wis. Wednesday, April 23, 1930 P. 2

NICK LAMBRIES Nick Lambries, 88, oldest living resident of Manitowoc Rapids, died at noon Thursday at Holy Family Hospital, Manitowoc, following a lingering illness. Funeral services will be at 8:30 .m. Saturday at the Pfeffer Funeral Home, Manitowoc and at 9 a.m. At St. Paul Catholic Church, Manitowoc. The Rev. Clement Kern