There are several public transportations in Matsudo city: trains, buses, and taxies. The train is used to connect between cities and buses and taxies are used to transport inside cities or surrounding cities.

There are 3 trains arrive or pass by in Matsudo City: (1) Joban Line, (2) Joban line connected to Chiyoda line, and (3) Shin-Keisei line. If you want to go to Tokyo or travel from Tokyo, please use the Joban line or Chiyoda line. If you go to or travel from Chiba, please use the Shin-Keisei line.

The train ticket can be purchased in the ticket machine, but for the buses, you can pay directly on the bus (but you have to speak Japanese with the driver), or, there is a simple way, use Pasmo or Suica card (will be explained later).

How to Buy Train ticket

In the train station, before you enter the gate, you will find a ticket corner. There is a big board with a connecting line map above the ticket machine. please make sure that you see the right map, because a map only provide information of one train company. for example of the image below, it is only information for JR line trains. If you want to take the Shin-Keisei line, please go to the Shin-Keisei line ticket corner and you will find another connecting line map.

On the map, you will see the different colors of the routes. one color shows one train name. If you want to go to a place with no direct route, you have to follow the map to change at the changing stations on the map. Please note that not all maps provided in Romanji or English names. It is more often written in Kanji’s character.

But with the advancement of technology, you don’t really need to understand this map, you can use the direction feature in your Google Map. It is the most convenient way to get you anywhere, so please always bring your smartphone with internet connection. The things to note are the train line names (Joban line, Yamanote line, Shin-Kensei line, etc.) and the last stop destination.

However, we will still guide you through the map, in case of an emergency. Let’s have a look at the map below.

The recent station is marked with RED ARROW. Let’s say, if you want to go from Matsudo 松戸 to Ueno 上野, it shows that you have to take 2 kinds of train, Joban line (dark green color) from Matsudo station to Nippori 日暮里 and then change to Yamanote line (bright-green color) to Ueno. It means that Nippori is the transfer station and you have to get off at Nippori station and change to Yamanote line to Ueno. Please see the number below Ueno, it is written 310. That is the cost you have to pay and to buy in the ticket machine.

The image below is the ticket machine.

Please touch the screen. You can change the language to English. You will find many ticket costs on the screen. To go to Ueno, please push 310 and put 310 yen to the machine. and you will get the ticket. Please insert the ticket to the ticket gate while you pass through the gate.

How to buy PASMO/SUICA Card (IC card)

PASMO or SUICA CARD is a cash card that can be used to pay trains, busses, or even convenience stores [link]

If you arrive at Haneda or Narita Airports, you can buy the Pasmo or Suica card on the ticket machine. Here is the way to buy a Suica card.

Please go to the ticket machine. On the machine’s screen, for your convenience, you can change the language at the top right >> ENGLISH button

Please select “Purchase new SUICA”

On the options, please select SUICA. If you want to put your name, please select My Suica, but it needs your phone number in Japan. If you still do not have a phone number, please select SUICA (with no name).

Please insert 2000 yen. The 500 yen is the deposit to make the card and 1500 yen will be added to your Suica card.

Your card will come out of the machine. Your card is ready to be used!

How to Re-Charge your PASMO/SUICA card

Go to Pasmo/Suica ticket machine

Please insert your Pasmo/Suica card. The screen will appear options of the amount of money without you press anything

Please press the button of the amount you want to charge

Please insert the amount of money to the money tray (there are different places for coins and paper)

Your Suica/Pasmo card will come out from the machine and ready to be used

How to Ride Train

The train ticket is bought before entering the gate. Please take your ticket or charge your Suica/Pasmo card before entering the gate. Please be sure that you enter the right train gate company you want to ride. For example, if you want to go by JR train, DO NOT enter other gates (such as Toyo metro’s, Keisei’s or others’ gates).

The picture below shows the gate (JR gate as an example). Please enter the gate with green arrows, not a “stop” sign. Please enter the ticket to the yellow slot and take it again on the other side. If you use the Suica/Pasmo card, just put the card to the tab sensor. do it by walking through the gate.

After passing the gate, please look at the train time table. The time table is provided in Japanese and English. On the time table, there is information of the time, destination, and platform number. Please go to the platform that is suitable with your destination on time table.

On the platform, please wait behind the yellow line. Usually, there are some trains with different destinations on one platform. Please be sure that you enter the right train by reading the destination name written on train’s board before you enter the train.

Please enter the train carefully and do not rush. Don’t forget to always prioritize the passengers that get off the train.