Shipping and Returns

Europe, UK: Wednesday, Aug 21 ~

USA: Monday, Aug 19 ~

Australia: Tuesday, Aug 20 ~

Asia: Monday, Aug 19

UAE: Tuesday, Aug 20

Order within 3 Hours 2 mins with Scheduled Delivery. If you place an order within this time, We will ship on Monday, Aug 19 2024 This delivery time is calculated by DHL and FedEx. You can check the exact delivery date on checkout page.

Buyer Protection

Full refund if not genuine. Full or partial refund, if the new item is not as described.

Customer Reviews (0 rating)

Write a review!

No reviews on this item...

Description (1,737 characters)

~ Tradition inherited and creation of new value ~ Keisei 3100 series commercialized !!

1/150 scale, N gauge size Painted and assembled Keisei Electric Railway 3100 series and Shin-Keisei Electric Railway 80000 series are new models jointly developed by both companies. [Keisei Electric Railway Type 3100] Completed in July 2019, and as of September, we are conducting trial runs for commercial operation. The car body is designed based on orange, which is the guide color of Narita Sky Access, and is drawn on the car body with the image illustrations of the airplane and various places along the railway line, which are the symbols of airport access, as accents. [Shin-Keisei Electric Railway Type 80000] As of September 2019, it is being manufactured by a vehicle manufacturer. The coloring is a gentle pink corporate color that has been adopted since 2014, and is designed to be colored on the waist and upper part. Tomytec has been designing and developing railway collections in collaboration with business operators even before the appearance of actual vehicles. We have deciphered the characteristics of the actual vehicle and scaled it down to 1/150! By using the separately sold power unit and N gauge running parts, it can be run as an N gauge model railroad. We recommend 18m class A TM-06R for the power unit, TT-04R (gray) for the traveling parts, and [0246] PT-7113-D for the pantograph. * Exhibition pedestal is not included. * The model railroad is a system that supplies power from rails. Batteries are not used even when running, emitting light, or lighting. Batteries are not included in this product. * No fuel is used for this product. This product does not contain fuel.

Tags:

Rail transport Train Rail transport modelling Transport トミー テック 鉄道コレクション Keisei Electric Railway Keisei Narita Skyaccess Tomytec Keisei Electric Railway Series 3100 Unit 3151 Narita Sky Access 10th Anniversary 8 Cars Set 鉄道コレクション 京成電鉄3100形「成田スカイアクセス」増結4両セット 【303107】

FAQ

Previous

Next

Answer Question

Success!

Question:

Write your answer:

Report

This content contains profanity.

This content contains inappropriate media.

This content is poor quality or spam.

This content contains medical advice.

This content contains rewards code or promo code.

Other:

Ask a question

Success!

Category:

Write your question:

I understand that posting references to Rewards or promotional codes may result in the suspension or forfeiture of any Rewards accrued.

Answers to your question