Landsbankinn, an ever-smarter bank aims to simplify life for customers by offering more accessible, secure and also personal banking services.

This is achieved by taking advantage of technology, continuous development, sound operation and a success-driven corporate culture.

The Bank’s activities and performance has a positive impact on the community.

Trust is the Bank’s core value, a common thread that runs through the entire operation, connecting customer relations and external partners to internal and general activities. Customers can trust that we are there for them and that the Bank is confidently managed.

Landsbankinn is a part of its environment, Icelandic society. We are focused on being a positive and dynamic force throughout Iceland and on promoting future welfare for the country and its inhabitants. The Bank’s positive impact is measured in participation in the community, dividend payments and successful work on sustainability.

This pillar is about simplifying life for customers and also relates to the personal aspect of Landsbankinn’s service. We always find a way to do even better and successfully respond to challenges. This involves initiative and the mindset behind Landsbankinn, an ever-smarter bank. We put customer satisfaction first and aim to offer accessible and secure banking anywhere and anytime.

Robust and stable operations along with a strong balance sheet form the foundation for the progress that allows us to grow ever smarter. Technical innovations are not only a factor in developing customer service but also in solidifying the Bank’s operation and ensuring stability in financial services. Stable operation relies largely on what’s under the hood; unseen, yet nevertheless the foundation for further development. This includes ambition and a positive attitude towards change. Success is achieved by a dynamic team of employees who are involved in important aspects of operation, efficiency, development, quality, funding, financial settlement, supervision and other indispensable functions.

The workplace should be an environment that sets both customers and employees up for success. Passion for success refers to personal success but also joint success achieved by a positive and solution-oriented team that works across departments to provide exceptional service. Our corporate culture is success-driven, guided by the interests of our customers, the community, colleagues and owners.