UR Seafood (Útgerðarfélag Reykjavíkur hf.) is the first company to receive Landsbankinn’s Sustainable Financing Label. The company receives the label for its MSC certified sustainable seafood.

Companies applying for loans at Landsbankinn can now request to be issued the Bank’s Sustainable Financing Label. To receive this label, the financed project must meet the sustainability criteria of the Bank’s Sustainable Finance Framework and fall into one of the project categories in the framework. Projects which fall under the scope of the framework include switching public transport to renewable energy, renewable energy production, certified sustainable fisheries, eco-friendly buildings and social development projects.

Árni Thór Thorbjörnsson, Managing Director of Landsbankinn Corporate Banking:

“The Sustainable Financing Label lets our customers show that they have consideration for the environment and society in their operation. UR Seafood has long worked towards sustainability in its operation, and successfully so. We are pleased to issue UR Seafood the Bank’s Sustainable Financing Label for MSC certified sustainable seafood. The aim of our Sustainable Financing Label is to support customers on their sustainability journey, which is profitable for business in the long term. We at Landsbankinn are no less eager to do our bit for the climate and can be most effective through our lending and investment activity.”

Runólfur V. Guðmundsson, CEO of UR Seafood:

“We at UR Seafood are extremely proud to have achieved Landsbankinn’s Sustainable Financing Label for our funding. This achievement is even more meaningful in light of the mutual respect and trust that has characterised our business with the Bank throughout the years and encourages us to continue working towards meaningful goals.”

More about sustainable finance

You may also be interested in

19 July 2024

Information regarding service disruption

Last night and early this morning, the Bank experienced disruptions to several of its services. These disruptions were related to issues that have affected companies around the world.

15 July 2024

Nine entries awarded grants from the Pride Parade Fund

The panel of judges of the Pride Parade Fund of Reykjavík Pride and Landsbankinn have awarded grants to nine entries in this year’s Pride Parade.

12 July 2024

Even easier to start using Landsbankinn’s app

Signing up for Landsbankinn’s app has never been easier – now everyone can try the app without any commitment. This step opens access to Landsbankinn’s services even further.

5 July 2024

Corporate Finance advises the Ministry of Finance on the sale of the State’s shareholding in Íslandsbanki

The Ministry of Finance and Economic Affairs has retained Landsbankinn Corporate Finance as independent financial advisor for the management and supervision of the public offering or offerings of the State’s remaining shareholding in Íslandsbanki hf.

4 July 2024

Björn Auðunn Ólafsson hired to Landsbankinn

Björn Auðunn Ólafsson is the newest addition to Landsbankinn Corporate Finance and has already joined the team.

3 July 2024

More information in Polish on landsbankinn.pl

We have now launched a Polish version of our website, in addition to Icelandic and English. The Polish site contains information about our app, payment cards, currency exchange rates, supplementary pension savings, electronic ID, the Auðkenni app and more.

2 July 2024

Even tighter security in Landsbankinn’s app

We have now added settings to Landsbankinn’s app that further enhance security in card transactions and banking. These settings allow you to easily deactivate certain payment card functions in the app and to reactivate them just as easily at your convenience. If necessary, you can activate emergency closure that suspends the function of all of your cards and shuts down access to the app and online banking.

14 June 2024

The Auðkenni app can be used to log in

Landsbankinn’s customers can use the Auðkenni app to log in and to authenticate in online banking and the app. Before long, it will also be possible to use the Auðkenni app for valid electronic signatures. This is particularly useful where there is an Internet connection but no phone connection, and for those who have non-Icelandic phone numbers.

12 June 2024

Amaroq Minerals Capital Markets Day

Amaroq Minerals Capital Markets Day will be hosted in Landsbankinn‘s headquarters at Reykjastræti 6, Thursday, June 13th, from 2:00 pm to 4:00 pm Icelandic time, GMT. The doors open at 1:30 pm and light refreshments will be served after the meeting.

10 June 2024

Warning against phishing attempts

We warn against emails that are currently being sent, ostensibly in Landsbankinn’s name. The email states that the recipient’s bank account with Landsbankinn has been closed and asks people to click on a link to log in. This is an attempt to get people to enter their login information on a fraudulent site.

Landsbankinn hf.

Reykjastræti 6, 101 Reykjavík

Reg. No. 471008-0280

Swift/BIC: NBIIISRE

Tel: +354 410 4000

landsbankinn@landsbankinn.is

Legal notice