Landsbankinn’s Annual and ESG Report for 2020 reviews the Bank’s operation and services in an accessible manner. In 2020, we continued to improve digital services for companies and individuals, responded to unexpected challenges with agility and took important steps toward sustainability.

The Annual Report provides an accessible overview of highlights in the Bank's operation in 2019. The report contains information about Landsbankinn’s services for individuals and companies, innovative digital services, social responsibility, human resources and gender equality. It also reviews strategy and governance and key points from the annual financial statement, about the Bank’s funding and risk management.

The Annual Report provides an accessible overview of highlights in the Bank's operation in 2018. Seldom if ever before have there been such significant changes to Landsbankinn’s services as in 2018. The Bank launched 20 new digital solutions for individuals and companies. Various transactions that formerly necessitated a physical bank visit can now be taken care of at the customer’s leisure. The Annual Report includes an overview of these new solutions, such as Landsbankinn’s app, the Bank’s card app which allows customers to make payment with their mobiles, and a digital credit assessment and loan application process.

The Annual Report provides an overview of highlights in the Bank's 2017 operation. The Annual Report includes information on new emphases in the Bank's strategy, developments in banking operations and services, responsible investment, social responsibility, human resources, equality issues, the Bank's varied support for the community and diverse partnerships, not to mention finances and risk management.

The Annual Report provides an overview of highlights in the Bank's 2016 operation. The annual report reviews important aspects of the Bank's foreign financing in 2016, its services to private individuals, companies and institutional investors throughout Iceland, and changes in banking. It contains a detailed discussion of the Bank's operation and strategy, its main activities in 2016, human resources policy and support for the community.

Landsbankinn's operating performance was positive by just over ISK 14.3 bn in 2009, the Bank's first full operational year. There is no realistic basis for comparison with prior years, as this was the Bank's first full year of operation.