Who is José María Aznar?

José María Aznar is a Spanish politician who was the fourth Prime Minister of Spain since the advent of democracy and was in office for eight years, from 1996 to 2004.

What can you expect from a conference with José María Aznar?

Following the success story of the revival of the Spanish economy, in his conferences José María Aznar shares the strategies needed to revive declining economies, with an emphasis on businesses and how to make a profit in the current situation. Aznar also shares with the audience the power and purpose of globalization and trade relations, particularly highlighting its ramifications in developing countries.

What has been his professional career? How has he contributed to society?

In an era characterized by high unemployment and low growth, José María Aznar took on the challenge of revitalizing the Spanish economy. Through industry privatization policies and market liberalization reforms, Spain managed to position itself as the eighth strongest economy in the world.

He was previously president of the Autonomous Community of Castilla y León, until 1989, when he ran as the Popular Party's candidate for the presidency of the government, thus becoming the leader of the opposition in parliament until 1996 when the party won the general elections. Previously he was a civil servant in the Treasury of State as a State Finance Inspector from 1976 up until 1989.

José María Aznar holds a law degree from the Complutense University of Madrid.

Publications and collaborations

He has written and collaborated in many books, including his autobiographical book Memorias I.

Distinctions

José María Aznar is Doctor Honoris Causa at universities in several countries around the world and has been awarded several prizes such as the Franz Joseph Strauss Award by the Hanns Seidel Foundation in 1998, the World Statesman Award by the Appeal of Conscience Foundation in 2003, or the Voices Against Terrorism Award by the Association of Victims "Verde Esperanza".

He has also received numerous awards and Gold Medals from the Organization of Ibero-American States for Education, Science and Culture in 2003, Georgetown University in 2004 and the Queen Sophia Spanish Institute in 2005, among others.