Former Spanish Prime Minister José María Aznar will give the keynote address at the International Construction Economic Forum (ICEF), which takes place in Amsterdam, the Netherlands, from 20 to 22 November.

Mr Aznar, who was in office from 1996 to 2004, will speak about the challenges of globalisation and free trade, and how they relate to the international construction sector.

As well as exploring the power and purpose of globalisation, highlighting the ramifications for underdeveloped countries, Mr Aznar will focus on building stability and encouraging development in Latin America, where Spain has many links.

At ICEF he will explore the importance of infrastructure investment within the context of globalisation and the need for innovative finance models at a time of government austerity.

Mr Aznar, 60, sits on the board of directors of News Corporation, is senior advisor to the Global Board of DLA Piper, a member of the International Advisory Board of Barrick Gold Corporation, a member of the International Advisory Board of the Atlantic Council of the United States and co-chairman of the Atlantic Council’s Trans-Atlantic Task Force on Latin America as well as an executive president of the Foundation for Social Studies and Analysis.

ICEF details

ICEF will take place at the Hotel Okura in Amsterdam, the Netherlands. The conference, networking event and awards dinner will focus on core themes of trends and forecasts in the global construction industry, project finance, successful project management and delivery, equipment technology and asset management.

The programme is designed to appeal to a broad range of executives and senior managers throughout the construction industry from disciplines such as contracting, equipment manufacture, materials production, equipment rental, finance, project management and consultancy.

The evening of 21 November will also see a gala dinner and the award of prizes in nine categories for outstanding performance in the construction industry. The most sought-after is expected to be the International Construction Project of the Year award, which will recognise a scheme worth US$ 100 million or more, of international significance.

Click here to book a ticket for ICEF and take advantage of the early bird delegate offer, which is available for a limited period.

Click here for more information about the ICEF awards, including the downloadable entry form.