Share This Page

Movie poster for ''Broad Minded'', with Joe E. Brown, 1931 Portable Battery Charger

$49.00

This product is currently out of stock.

Size

Orientation

Image Size

Warning

The image is near the edges of the product but doesn't cover the entire product. Some of the background color may appear around the outside edges of the image.

Background Color

R(124) G(124) B(77)

Default: R(124) G(124) B(77)

Show More Colors

Show Basic Colors

Product Details

You'll never run out of power again! If the battery on your smartphone or tablet is running low... no problem. Just plug your device into the USB port on the top of this portable battery charger, and then continue to use your device while it gets recharged.

With a recharge capacity of 5200 mAh, this charger will give you 1.5 full recharges of your smartphone or recharge your tablet to 50% capacity.

When the battery charger runs out of power, just plug it into the wall using the supplied cable (included), and it will recharge itself for your next use.

Design Details

A vintage movie poster reprint of ''Broad Minded'', a 1931 American pre-Code comedy film directed by Mervyn LeRoy and starring Joe E. Brown. It is... more

Dimensions

1.80" W x 3.875" H x 0.90" D

Ships Within

1 - 2 business days

A vintage movie poster reprint of ''Broad Minded'', a 1931 American pre-Code comedy film directed by Mervyn LeRoy and starring Joe E. Brown. It is known for its humor and slapstick comedy typical of the early sound era of Hollywood. Here is a description of the film:

Plot:

"Broadminded" is a zany and fast-paced comedy that revolves around the misadventures of Joe Holt (played by Joe E. Brown), a bumbling, naive, and good-hearted insurance salesman who finds himself in a series of comical predicaments.

The story begins with Joe Holt being tricked into an arranged marriage with a mysterious woman, Anna (played by Ona Munson). However, he soon discovers that Anna has a secret life as a speakeasy singer and is involved with gangsters and bootleggers. Unwillingly caught up in the criminal activities, Joe becomes a reluctant accomplice in a bootlegging operation.

As Joe tries to navigate the dangerous world of gangsters, he encounters a colorful cast of characters, i...

Welcome to Movie World Posters your premier destination for timeless movie poster reproductions and vintage-inspired artwork! At Movie World Posters, we specialize in bringing the golden age of cinema and music to life through meticulously crafted reproductions of classic movie posters, hand-painted by their original artists. With a passion for preserving the artistry and nostalgia of yesteryears, we also curate collections celebrating top movie directors, captivating collages of various themes, and our latest addition: retro music posters from the era of Rock and Roll. (Note: we are also known as Retro Art Studios and Stars on Art.) Our journey began with a simple mission: to honor the legacy of iconic films and music through visually...

Shop with Confidence

Our return policy is very simple:

If you're not happy with a purchase that you made on PixelsMerch.com, for any reason, you can return it to us within 30 days of the order date. As soon as it arrives, we'll issue a full refund for the entire purchase price. Please note - Pixels Merch does not reimburse the outgoing or return shipping charges unless the return is due to a defect in quality.

Pixels Merch sells thousands of pieces of artwork each month - all with a 100% money-back guarantee. We take great pride in the fact that hundreds of thousands of artists have chosen Pixels Merch to fulfill their orders, and we look forward to helping you select your next piece!