From today, Xero app partners in Australia, United Kingdom and New Zealand will have access to a suite of new subscription and billing APIs (Xero App Store Subscriptions) that will enable them to offer Xero customers the ability to trial, purchase and manage their app from the Xero App Store.

“Today’s milestone is exciting because better connecting Xero’s platform to external apps — whether it’s to manage inventory, receipts or their customer relationships — is a powerful enabler for small businesses looking to grow, manage their workflows or digitally transform their business. With these improvements, we can better connect small businesses and developers to each other, in smarter and more seamless ways.”

Xero’s recent research report The Job Ahead: Small businesses and the global economic recovery, showed firms in Australia, New Zealand and the UK that used five or more business apps performed better than those with no apps. They grew their sales by 4.3% in the year to December 2020, while those without apps saw a decline of 3.4%. These small businesses also returned to near net job growth across 2020, with a year on year decline of 1.8% - compared to firms who had no apps connected, which experienced job losses of 5.1% year on year.

The Xero App Store also introduces clearer and more consistent terms for app partners and a referral revenue share of 15% (excluding fees) on subscriptions for new customers, who sign up through the Xero App Store. App partners can continue to sell their apps to Xero customers via other channels, with the referral revenue share only applying to sales generated via the Xero App Store.

The new terms will apply to apps available within the Xero App Store on a phased basis. Any new app joining the Xero App Store will join on the new terms from today, while existing apps will have until 4 August 2022. Xero's Executive General Manager of Ecosystem, Nick Houldsworth, said Xero recognized early on the benefits of being an open platform, which is why it opened its APIs to developers in 2009 to encourage innovation and extend its platform capability.

“We’ve been building towards the Xero App Store launch over the past 18 months and are excited to see the impact of this enhanced experience for our customers and app partners. The Xero App Store now provides strong foundations for encouraging greater digital transformation, while democratising access to technology for small businesses. As Xero scales globally, this is reflected in the caliber of services offered by our app partners in the Xero App Store,” Houldsworth said.