Ari Shine and Adrienne Pierce, collectively known as The Royal Oui, launched their new collaborative effort this week with a show at the Biltmore Cabaret.

The husband and wife duo have signed with the Vancouver label File Under Music (Blackie and The Rodeo Kings, Dan Magnan) and released a seven-inch/EP Oct. 8, Forecast, featuring "When You Lose Your Mind" on the A side and "Actual Size" on the B. A full-length album will follow in Feb. 11, 2014. Go to theroyaloui.com for more news and updated tour information.

Also out this week is the latest from experimental sound artist Tim Hecker - Virgins on Kranky Records was "recorded during three periods in 2012, mostly in Reykjavik, Montreal and Seattle, using ensembles in live performance."

Up to now primarily an electronic musician, the Vancouver-born, Montrealbased Hecker, recorded his new compositions with live ensembles and mixed these sessions with composer Valgeir Sigurðsson, whose engineering and producing credits include fellow Icelanders Björk and Sigur Rós. For more on Hecker go to sunblind.net.

Two new debut albums mark the emergence of talented artists who also happen to be making their live debuts in Vancouver this month: Haim (sisters Este, Danielle and Alana Haim with drummer Dash Hutton), are all over indie pop radio with several tracks from their new release Days Are Gone. They play a sold-out show at the Commodore Ballroom on Oct. 24. And Earl Sweatshirt, fulfilling the early promise of his Odd Future forays, will perform material from his brilliant Doris at an all-ages gig at the Vogue Theatre on Oct. 31.

New and noteworthy CD releases

Oct. 8 Anna Calvi - One Breath; Alex Chilton - Electricity by Candelight; Cage the Elephant - Melophobia; Sleigh Bells - Bitter Rivals; Patty Griffin - Silver Bell (Unreleased album recorded in 2000).

Oct. 15 Cass McCombs - Big Wheel And Others; Tim Hecker - Virgins; The Avett Brothers - Magpie And The Dandelion; Linda Thompson - Won't Be Long Now; Paul McCartney - New; Shad - Flying Colours; Pearl Jam - Lightning Bolt.

Oct. 22 Best Coast - Fade Away; Katy Perry - Prism. Oct. 29 Juana Molina - Wed 21; Julie Roberts - Good Wine And Bad Decisions; Kelly Clarkson - Wrapped in Red; The Arcade Fire - Reflektor; Sky Ferreira - Night Time, My Time; Unknown Mortal Orchestra - Blue Record; Yamantaka //Sonic Titan - UZU.

Nov. 5 Bryce Dessner & Kronos Quartet - Aheym; Cut Copy - Free Your Mind; James Blunt - Moon Landing; The Thing - Boot! Nov. 12 Susanna Hoffs And Matthew Sweet - Under The Covers, Vol. 3.