EL SEGUNDO – Steve Blake is the ultimate team player … and a good point guard, too.

He doesn’t mind playing behind a future Hall of Famer or sharing back-up duties with Jordan Farmar. Or anyone else for that matter.

He says he’s more interested in winning games than individual awards, staying healthy over racking up minutes and running the offense than generating controversy. Blake is such a model player, in fact, that Coach Mike D’Antoni regularly uses him as an example in practice.

“He knows how to play,” D’Antoni said. “His effort is off the charts and he’s a good basketball player. At age 32 or 33, he hasn’t slowed down a bit.”

Blake returns this season rested and healthy. He was sidelined for more than two months last season and having surgery to repair a torn abdominal muscle and additional treatment for groin pain.

“I feel great. I took the summer to get a lot of rest, heal up and then slowly progress to the point of where I am now, which is feeling 100 percent,” Blake said after Tuesday’s early practice.

Blake also returned this season to find what many would see as competition for minutes. He and Farmar are expected to share minutes backing up Steve Nash, but there won’t be any heated battles.

“We’re teammates,” Blake said. “It’s the coach’s decision. I’ve always, whenever there’s been other point guards playing for playing time, I’ve always looked at it as those guys are my teammates and I’m here to help them. And hopefully they would help me as well.”

Farmar returned to the Lakers after two seasons with New Jersey and two seasons overseas. He was a member of the Lakers’ 2009 and 2010 championship teams.

“This is my 11th year,” he added, “and there always been those situations where there’s a point guard in front of you or in back of you. It’s nothing new. It doesn’t bother me at all.”

A FITTING END?

It was just a one-word message from Kobe Bryant on Twitter. It read “12th” – a reference to ESPN.com’s prediction of where the Lakers will finish in the Western Conference.

The preseason predictions came out six weeks ago. Bryant sent his message Tuesday.

Bryant is not practicing while he continues to rehab his left Achilles tendon, giving him plenty of time to stew about the forecast. It was Bryant’s second reference to ranking; the first read “12th I see…” back in August.

The Lakers, beset with injuries, finished seventh in the West a year ago, so 12th place would be a significant slide.

D’Antoni said the rest of the team saw the rankings, but haven’t given it much thought since.

“They know what we have to prove and what we are trying to battle,” D’Antoni said. “But it was a fodder for a half hour and then we (went) on.”

KOBE VS. M.J. AGAIN

Bryant has been compared numerous times to Michael Jordan, but this time the former Chicago Bulls great was the one doing the talking.

He said that he routinely imagines playing one-on-one against NBA legends in their prime, such as Elgin Baylor and Jerry West, and current players LeBron James, Dwyane Wade and Bryant.

Jordan said he would be all but one – Bryant.

“I don’t think I’d lose other than Kobe Bryant because he steals all my moves.” Jordan said while promoting the video game, NBA2K14.

Bryant responded on Twitter, saying, “Domino effect. I stole some of his … this generation stole some of mine.”

CHANGE IN STORE

The NBA is expected to change its Finals schedule, ending the 2-3-2 format and returning to the 2-2-1-1-1 game rotation used in all other playoff rounds. The change is expected to be adopted this month and could be implemented for the 2014 Finals.

D’Antoni said he hasn’t given much thought to the pending format change, but hopes to be asked about it again.

“I hope we get there so I can understand it,” D’Antoni said. “It’s been done both ways and been effective both ways. They’ve done a study in last 20 years that the format didn’t change anything, so now it’s a matter of what’s best for the teams.”