The Detroit Pistons have traded Spencer Dinwiddie to the Chicago Bulls for Cameron Bairstow, according to a Pistons press release on Friday.

Bairstow was a 2nd round pick of the Chicago Bulls in 2014, 49th overall. Bairstow is from Australia, but he went to College at New Mexico. He was a 4 year player at New Mexico, and had a breakout year as a senior where he averaged 20 points per game. Bairstow is 6'9" and weighs 250 pounds.

Him and Dinwiddie both have non-guaranteed contracts for a little under $1 million. This a neutral move salary-wise, and Bairstow is expected to compete for the 3rd center spot that is currently manned by Joel Anthony. He would be a cheaper option than Anthony, who has a team option for $2.5 million for next season.

Spencer Dinwiddie's days have looked numbered after he struggled in Summer League last season. He was supposed to step up and fill up the backup point guard spot while Brandon Jennings recovered from his torn Achilles. His struggles resulted in the Pistons acquiring Steve Blake. After Brandon Jennings was traded, the backup job was given to Steve Blake again. Dinwiddie played in the D-League, but did not really dominate as an NBA rotation player should.

This now give the Pistons two Australian players on the roster (maybe they will sign Matthew Dellavadova and make it three?). It could also point to the Pistons targeting a point guard with their first round pick. They now need a new point guard to develop with Dinwiddie gone.

We will have some more analysis on what Cameron Bairstow brings to the table, later.

What are your thoughts DBB? It is a minor move, but trader Stan has pulled off another trade during the Finals. Last year during the Finals, the Pistons acquired Ersan Ilyasova from the Milwaukee Bucks.

Here is the Press Release from the Pistons:

DETROIT PISTONS ACQUIRE FORWARD CAMERON BAIRSTOW FROM THE CHICAGO BULLS

Team Sends Guard Spencer Dinwiddie to Chicago

AUBURN HILLS, Mich. – The Detroit Pistons announced today that the team has acquired forward Cameron Bairstow from the Chicago Bulls in exchange for guard Spencer Dinwiddie.

Bairstow, 25, appeared in 18 games (two starts) with Chicago last season, averaging 1.9 points, 1.6 rebounds and 5.7 minutes. The two-year NBA pro was drafted out of the University of New Mexico with the 49th overall pick in the 2014 NBA Draft. As a senior for the Lobos, he averaged a Mountain West Conference-high 20.4 points, 7.4 rebounds and 32.9 minutes in 34 games (all starts). A native of Brisbane, Australia, Bairstow holds career averages of 1.2 points, 1.0 rebounds and 4.6 minutes in 36 NBA games (three starts) all with the Bulls.

Dinwiddie, 23, completed his second NBA season with averages of 4.8 points, 1.8 assists, 1.4 rebounds and 13.3 minutes in 12 games. Drafted by the Pistons with the 38th overall selection in the 2014 NBA Draft out of the University of Colorado, Dinwiddie owns career averages of 4.4 points, 2.7 assists, 1.4 rebounds and 13.3 minutes in NBA 46 games (one start).

For in-depth analysis by website editor Keith Langlois and special inside-access videos, visit www.pistons.com, the official source for news and features on the Detroit Pistons.

-pistons.com-