Wits are tested and deviousness reigns as Great Lakes Theater (GLT) successfully presents the Shakespearean comedy, THE MERRY WIVES OF WINDSOR. In this offering, a fantastic cast romps through this 2-hour and 30-minute play of silly schemes with entertaining ease.

Directed by Terri McMahon, THE MERRY WIVES OF WINDSOR is touted on GLT’s website as such:

“Meet the rotund rascal Sir John Falstaff and the wise wives of Windsor in one of Shakespeare’s most raucous comedies. With an ego as big as his voracious appetite, Falstaff conspires to woo the two wealthiest married ladies in town and pocket their riches. However, Mistress Ford and Mistress Page devise a scheme of their own to teach him a well-deserved lesson in Wooing 101. Join us and feast on a hilariously magnificent treat of monogamously artful deceit.”

THE MERRY WIVES OF WINDSOR is full of classic Shakespearean plot points: mistaken identities, misunderstandings, disguises, and joyful conspiracies amidst foes, friends, and lovers.

We begin the show with Sir John Falstaff (played by Daniel T. Parker) and his crew of Pistol (Jerrell Williams), Bardolph (Anthony Michael Martinez), Nym (Malik Bilbrew), and his page Robin (Calvin Carvagnaro) as they roar the rules from the theater aisles and stage. Their bellowing voices and plethora of spittle set the tone of the high energy that continues throughout the production.

The opening scene is an animated dance lesson (thank you Movement Director Jaclyn Miller) that whirls the audience into Windsor, near London. We meet Falstaff and find him boisterous, bored, and broke – a combination worthy of mischief. With no shame and much guile, he zeros in on two local (wealthy) married ladies: Mrs. Ford (Jessie Cope Miller) and Mrs. Page (Jodi Dominick). He writes two identical letters of overture, sending one to each, and waiting to see which of them will agree to dally with him away from their husbands.

What Falstaff doesn’t know is that Mrs. Ford and Mrs. Page not only know each other, but they have discovered that each has received the same, exact suggestive communication from him. What better way to teach this bold Falstaff a lesson than to make mischief of their own!

Everything works well together in this timing-driven comedy. These are standout performances by the exuberant Parker as his cunning is paired against the playfulness of Miller and Dominick. The Falstaff versus Mrs. Page/Mrs. Ford push and pull is “game on” from the first moment. “Let’s be revenged on him,” the ladies decide – and how sweet it is!

Surrounded by a stage full of talented players, the show is a delight featuring a slap fight, awkward “sword” play, leaps, chases, tons of physical clowning, and a myriad of well-delivered accents.

Need more? Enjoy the maneuvering of Anne Page (played by Kechanté) with her parents as they try to marry her off to different suitors (neither of whom are her true love). And get ready for a finale of ghosts, strange lights, and living trees! All company members are up to the task of creating a world filled with vitality, intrigue, and excitement. Forsooth! THE MERRY WIVES OF WINDSOR is a merry production, indeed!

From here, there’s a stage full of scheming, misdirection, extravagant conniving, as well as perfectly-timed dialogue and action. The staging is fast-paced and well placed around a moving set (which is comprised of 4 green, large rolling structures) and various furniture pieces. Some of the most notable gags take place around a laundry bin, and over a fierce bear rug.

Scenic Designer Jeff Hermann’s lovely visuals are crowned with Lighting Designer Rick Martin’s beautifully lit atmosphere, and enrobed in Sound Designer / Composer Matthew Webb’s ambient soundscape. Special kudos to Costume Designer Daniele Tyler Mathews and Wig/Hair Designer Iran Michael Leon for their stunning clothing and luxurious wigs.

All-in-all the show is worth seeing, whether you are a seasoned Shakespearian or a first-time watcher who is “Shakespeare-curious.” The show runs at the Hanna Theatre at Playhouse Square now through April 7, 2024. Tickets are $15 to $70 and can be purchased by visiting http://www.greatlakestheater.org.

Photos from Great Lakes Theater website.