Girish Mahajan

(Editor)

Im a travel junky who loves to gain knowledge coz u know knowledge is power

Conjure One (album)

Share on FacebookTweet on TwitterShare on LinkedInShare on Reddit

Sign in

Released

17 September 2002

Label

Nettwerk

Recorded

1997—2001

Producer

Rhys Fulber

Genre

Worldbeat Electronica Ambient

Length

54:37 65:59 (with bonus tracks)

Conjure One is the self-titled debut album by Canadian electronic music project Conjure One, headed by Rhys Fulber. The album was released in September 2002 (see 2002 in music).

Contents

Track listing

Bonus tracks

iTunes Music Store bonus tracks

Bonus discs

North America

Europe

Singles

Redemption 2001

Sleep 2002

Tears from the Moon 2002

Center of the Sun 2003

Personnel

Charts

Trivia

References

Track listing

All tracks written by Rhys Fulber, except where noted.

"Damascus" (Fulber, Chemda Khalili) – 2:02

vocals by Chemda.

"Center of the Sun" (Fulber, Poe) – 5:00

vocals by Poe.

"Tears from the Moon" (Rick Nowels, Billy Steinberg, Kyoko Baertsoen) – 4:17

vocals by Sinéad O'Connor.

"Tidal Pool" (Fulber) – 6:50

vocals by Chemda.

"Manic Star" (Fulber, Steinberg, Marie-Claire D'Ubaldo) – 5:23

vocals by Marie-Claire D'Ubaldo.

additional vocals by Joanna Stevens (of Solar Twins).

"Redemption" (Fulber, Khalili) – 6:59

vocals by Chemda (singing in Syrian Arabic)

"Years" (Fulber, Chris Elliott) – 6:21

vocals by Chemda.

"Make a Wish" (Fulber, Poe) – 4:32

vocals by Poe.

"Pandora" (Fulber) – 5:02

additional vocals by Mel Garside.

"Sleep" (Steinberg, Nowels, D'Ubaldo) – 5:00

vocals by Marie-Claire D'Ubaldo.

"Premonition (Reprise)" (Fulber, Elliott) – 3:02

vocals by Joanna Stevens.

Bonus tracks

Nettwerk released the album in Canada and Europe (outside of the UK) with two additional tracks.

"Sleep (Serenity Remix by Carmen Rizzo)" – 5:34

"Premonition" (vocals by Jeff Martin of The Tea Party, additional vocals by Joanna Stevens) – 5:44

iTunes Music Store bonus tracks

The iTunes edition of the album included live performances instead, recorded from the 2003 Delerium tour which co-headlined Conjure One.

"Sleep" (live in Montreal)

"Tears from the Moon" (live in Montreal)

"Redemption" (live in San Diego)

Bonus discs

Limited edition releases of the album included a second disc. The contents of the disc vary with region.

North America

"Tears from the Moon" (Hybrid's Twisted on the Terrace mix)

"Redemption" (Max Graham's Dead Sea mix)

"Sleep" (Ian Van Dahl mix)

"Tears from the Moon" (Robbie Rivera mix)

Europe

"Tears from the Moon" (Hybrid's Twisted on the Terrace mix)

"Redemption" (Max Graham's Dead Sea mix)

"Sleep" (Ian Van Dahl mix)

"Tears from the Moon" (Tiësto's In Search of Sunrise mix)

"Sleep" (Solar Stone Afterhours mix)

Singles

Each single was released in 12" and/or CD formats, and included a number of remixes, listed here in no particular order.

"Redemption" (2001)

12" single only.

Max Graham's Dead Sea mix

Album version (early mix)

"Sleep" (2002)

12" and CD singles.

Album version

Max Graham mix

Ian Van Dahl mix

Angel Alanis & Smitty mix

Solar Stone's Afterhours mix

"Tears from the Moon" (2002)

12" and CD singles.

Album version

Tiësto's In Search of Sunrise mix

Hybrid's Twisted on the Terrace mix

Hybrid's Twisted on the Terrace dub

Hybrid's Twisted on the Terrace V2

Robbie Rivera mix

Carmen Rizzo Stateside West Chillout mix

"Sleep" and "Tears from the Moon" were also released as double A-sides. "Tears from the Moon" was featured in the television show Charmed, and the "Carmen Rizzo Stateside West Chillout Mix" was featured on the soundtrack of the Lara Croft Tomb Raider: The Cradle of Life soundtrack.

"Center of the Sun" (2003)

"Center of the Sun" is featured in the film X Men 2.

12" and CD singles.

Pete Lorimer - 29 Palms Remix (Edit)

Album Version

Junkie XL Remix

Pete Lorimer - 29 Palms Remix

Solarstone's Chilled-Out Remix

Personnel

Alex "Condor" Aligizakis – Digital Editing

Sean Ashby – Pedal Steel

Curt Bisquera – Percussion

Zach Blackstone – Assistant Engineer

Blair Calibaba – Engineer

Greg Collins – Digital Editing

Marie Claire D'Ubaldo – Vocals

Chris Elliott – Piano, Conductor, String Arrangements, Piano (Grand)

Rhys Fulber – Programming, Producer

Chris Garcia – Engineer

Melanie Garside – Vocals, Title

Olaf Heine – Photography

Ted Jensen – Mastering

Mark Jowett – A&R

Junkie XL – Guitar, Keyboards, Programming, Producer, Engineer, Mixing

Mike Landolt – Engineer

Jeff Martin – Vocals, Guitar (Acoustic), Guitar (Bowed), Esraj

Ralph Morrison – Violin

Jamie Muhoberac – Keyboards, Vocals

Rick Nowels – Guitar (Acoustic), Guitar (Electric), Keyboards, *Producer, Chamberlin

Sinéad O'Connor – Vocals

Tim Pierce – Guitar

Mike Plotnikoff – Engineer, Mixing

Greg Reely – Mixing

Brian Reeves – Mixing

Carmen Rizzo – Programming, Digital Editing, Mixing

John Rummen – Cover Design

Paul Silveira – Digital Editing

Ashwin Sood – Percussion, Drums

Joanna Stevens – Vocals

Graeme Stewart – Engineer

Vancouver Symphony Orchestra – Strings

Randy Wine – Engineer

Charts

Singles - Billboard (North America)

Trivia

Sandra Cretu did a version of "Sleep" called, "Casino Royale" and can be found on her latest album The Art Of Love.

Polish singer Edyta Górniak also recorded a version of "Sleep".

"Tears from the Moon" was heard as the opening song in an episode of Charmed.

"Tears From The Moon" is used in two TV adverts for Dorna Mineral Water in Romania and Slovakia.

References

Conjure One (album) Wikipedia

(Text) CC BY-SA

Similar Topics