I trust by your choices you mean the subject line literally, I.e. singers

of German lieder. Certainly there are a raft of great singers of art songs

(Tourel, Simoneau, Schipa, Valletti, Dolukhanova, Pears, Lisitsian, de los

Angeles, Bernac, Souzay, Gramm, Curtin, de Gaetani, etc.) who are

principally associated with another repertory, though some of them

programmed some lieder with great success as well.

What about Elly Ameling? Aksel Schiotz? Arleen Auger? And I heard a Schreier

Beethoven/Schumann recital in San Jose CA (!) that remains among my greatest

of all concert experiences.

Three of the most influential touring recitalists in the early part of the

century were Marcella Sembrich (one of the first opera singers to do what we

would call "serious" lieder programs), David Bispham and Julia Culp. To my

mind they deserve higher honors than that archfraud Elena Gerhardt, though

her disastrous influence is undeniable. To me she is a self-mythologizing

High Priestess figure on the order of Wanda Landowska and Nina Koshetz, and

while I get some pleasure from certain of their records, I get none at all

from Gerhardt's, and wonder if anyone else would had they not been told by

generations of Walter Legges that she was A (The?) Great Lieder Singer.

Nice to think about this repertory, which I love.

David Shengold

----------

In article <FEM5w...@oswego.Oswego.EDU>, sg...@news.oswego.edu (Celia A.



> Add Janet Baker. Victoria De Los Angeles.....

Well here we get into the usual apples/oranges discussion of whether one is

moved by one singer over another. I think Janet Baker is one of the great

artists of all time. Her Gluck, Monteverdi, Mahler and Elgar are just

sublime. I just have never felt that she is at her best in recital

repertoire with piano... I always get the feeling of an opera/concert singer

taking a day off by doing some lieder and chansons..... I just don't put her

in the same class as Lehmann or Dieskau or Hotter in terms of the total

investment in the poetry and the stylistic "rightness" for lieder. I also

find her French chanson singing mannered.... very musical and every note in

place, but just not "right" somehow... And again, I adore her... I just think

she's untouchable in early music and English song and not in the same leagues

as the ones mentioned.

de los Angeles in Spanish song is perfectly charming. Her lieder and chanson

work has always been marred by her imperfect technique and her poor ear for

German, IMHO. I winced when I heard her sing a lieder recital in Vienna, and

she only JUST redeemed herself by singing Falla, Turina and Granados at the

end.

When Lehmann sings, you can literally visualize the story she's telling, with

Dieskau, one gets exquisite musicianship and virtually flawless technique,

and Hotter... well you get Hotter.... not the best voice or technique, but it

all falls together somehow.... especially in music with tragic or nostalgic

themes, he's well nigh unbeatable.

One could argue that they couldn't hold their own in Spanish against de los

Angeles or against Baker in Elijah, and I would concede the point. But if

we're strictly talking about German lieder, I don't think either artist is in

the top 20, though they are admirable in many ways... there's just too much

competition!

>To your list, which I think is absolutely correct, I would add Peter

>Schreier. His Liederabends in Europe were a hot ticket for years, especially

>when he sang Schumann or Schubert.

Guten Tag!

WELL, of course you are right, but as you know there always music lovers who

don`t like some singers for different reasons. I have to confess that Schreier

was/is a singer who(m?) I`m always found boaring, really boaring always.Maybe

to the backgound of finding him soooooooo boaring belongs his very naive way of

singing the Lieder of Schumann and Schubert like many adults did it to/for

their children with German Volkslieder after WW II. I am part of that second

genaration after the war who never trust that "naivity" of my parents

generation any more.(and Schreier) Another singer (who was the most popular

Lieder singer in Germany, much more popular then DFD, was Hermann Prey). I am

not the only one who had problems with his way of singing too, because his

priority was emotion in singing Lieder. Like "naivity" this seemed to me too

"onesided". (for my taste too "schmaltzy". Dieskau was the RIGHT one, he was

able to differenciate in many ways BUT "he couldn`t stop singing. His later

"Winterreise" with Barenboim and Murray Perrahia" were too late. After he left,

there are suddenly a whole dozen of wonderfull German Lieder singer.

>>

>> Given all the interest in end-of-the-century list-making, I propose a list

>> of the great Lieder singers of the 20th century, by which I mean those who

>> had the greatest impact on the art form, whether I happen to enjoy

>> listening to them or not. BTW, the order of the list is more chronological

>> than anything else.

>>

>> Elena Gerhardt

>> Lotte Lehmann

>> Alexander Kipnis

>> Gerhard Huesch

>> Karl Erb

>> Elisabeth Schumann

>> Heinrich Schlusnus

>> Hans Hotter

>> Elisabeth Schwarzkopf

>> Dietrich Fischer-Dieskau

>>

>> Comments are welcome, of course. <<

Wonderfull choice, I agree totally.

My favorits are also Kathleen Ferrier, and Julius Patzak. Baker, Ludwig and

Gerard Souzay following behind them only a liitle bit.

"Liebeslieder Walzer" by Brahms from the Edinghburgh Festival with

Ferrier/Patzak and Bruno Walter at (on?) the piano is the very best I ever

heard. I have to mention two tenors from England and Denmark whose

"Dichterliebe" are the very BEST, Axel Schiotz and Peter Pears. Especially

Schiotz has to be in my TOP TEN .

Last not least I would like to mention Mathias Goerne of the younger Generation

because I was impressed by his Winterreise more then by Dieskaus, Prey`s

Wunderlich`s and Pear`s

(heard them all LIVE with "Winterreise")

Last not least I wanne suggest to hear Henry Plunket Green with "Leiermann"

from 1937, at the age of 69. It`s greatt irony that an older

irish singer sang the most touching

"Hurdy-gurdy man" in English (EMI 5661502

(2 CD Lieder on Record 1898-1952, SCHUBERT, vol I )

Best.................wolf(j)

Celia A. Sgroi wrote in message ...

>Given all the interest in end-of-the-century list-making, I propose a list

>of the great Lieder singers of the 20th century, by which I mean those who

>had the greatest impact on the art form, whether I happen to enjoy

>listening to them or not. BTW, the order of the list is more chronological

>than anything else.

>

> Elena Gerhardt

> Lotte Lehmann

> Alexander Kipnis

> Gerhard Huesch

> Karl Erb

> Elisabeth Schumann

> Heinrich Schlusnus

> Hans Hotter

> Elisabeth Schwarzkopf

> Dietrich Fischer-Dieskau

>

>Comments are welcome, of course.

>

>Celia A. Sgroi

Historically I think it should begin with two great pioniers: the Polish

soprano Marcella Sembrich (1858-1935) and the Dutch baritone Johan

Messchaert (1857-1922)

Sembrich was probably the first famous opera singer who gave Lieder

recitals everywhere. Sometimes she acompanied herself on the piano. She left

a few Lieder recordings.

Messchaert didn't make recordings (as far as I know), but there are

several reports about his performances and DFD considered him as his great

predecessor. About ten years ago I made a study of the musical life in

Amsterdam in the 1880's and 1890's and read a lot of reviews of Messchaert's

recitals, which gave a good idea about how revolutionary Liederrecitals were

at that time ("Messchaert amazed the audience singing all the twenty songs

of Schubert's Die Schoene Muellerin..." "It were especially `Morgengruss',

`Mein' and `Der Jaeger' which received much applause...", etc.

Another famous Dutch Lieder in the first quarter of the century was Julia

Culp (1880-1970). She made a large number of aucoustical and some electrical

recordings (Frauenliebe und -lebe, alas). Purely vocally she was a better

singer than Gerhardt, and paid more attention to te music and less to the

words than her contemporary.

Other singers who might be included as having rather much impact on the

history of Lieder singing are Gerard Souzay, Peter Schreier and perhaps

Brigitte Fassbaender. It's difficult to make a choice from the new

generations: there are very good Lieder singers (Baer, Quasthoff, Goerne,

Holzmaier, etc.,etc.) but I don't think any of them is meeting the standards

to be included on the list.

Benjo Maso