High on a hill above the medieval city of Veliko Tarnovo, sits an old fortress where the tale of this enchanting city begins. As the capital of the Second Bulgarian Empire, Veliko Tarnovo, is one of the oldest communities in Bulgaria. From exploring the hilltop fortress to wandering the historic city streets, we can see why it is called Bulgaria’s prettiest city.

Throughout the 150 years of Byzantine rule, the Bulgarian spirit was never far from the surface. Its people always wanted to regain their independence. In 1185 the Asen brothers led a Bulgarian revolution that defeated the Byzantines resulting in the Second Bulgarian Empire. This new Bulgaria continued to be led by the Asen family, and under Tsar Ivan Asen II (1218–41), the empire reached its pinnacle. With the capital of this new empire established in Tarnovo, Bulgaria became a powerhouse and ruled much of the Baltics. In the latter part of this reign, they became cultured and put literature and art as a high priority.

Today that city is called Veliko Tarnovo and it is spread across three hills: Tsarevets, Trapezitsa, and Sveta Gora. This hilly location gives this old capital a a unique look and adds to its beauty.

On the top of Tsarevets hill, is one of the best features of the city. Built on the site of Thracian, Roman and Byzantine fortresses, Tsarevets Fortress gives you a fantastic glimpse into Bulgaria’s Second Empire. The original draw bridge is long gone, but in its place a cobblestone path with two old gates provides the perfect view of the fairytale castle above. The fall colours added even more beauty to the scene.

Thick stone walls still wrap around Tsarevets Hill letting us know how large the fortress used to be. In the Southeast corner is Baldwin’s Battle Tower which would have given full views of attackers coming up the valley.

The fortress was home to 22 Bulgarian kings. At its largest, the fortified city had a palace, a large patriarchal complex, 400 houses, about 20 churches and four monasteries. Unfortunately almost none of those buildings have survived. We were only able to find a few ruined walls below the hilltop church.

On the very top of the hill is The Patriarchal Church “Ascension of Christ” which is the building that gives the castle its fairytale like appearance. Built in the 11th century, the church served as the seat for the Bulgarian Patriarch until the 1300s. Its has a rounded chapel, domed roof and pointy bell tower.

From the outside the rebuilt church looks very authentic, similar to other medieval Orthodox churches we’ve seen. Inside however, is a different story. Modern artwork has completely ruined the authentic feel of the church. The paintings were done in the 1980s when the country was still communist and atheist. The paintings are supposed to represent Bulgaria’s struggles throughout history, but all we could make out were unusual Bible depictions.

Its hilltop location gives it one of the most picturesque locations for a castle that we’ve seen in a while. That is especially true at night when the castle is illuminated.

Entrance Fee -10 BGN ($5.50 USD) Opening Hours – 9am to 4 pm

Across from Tsarevets Hill is the second of the three hills with another historic fortress on its top. Trapezitsa Fortress though, is in much worse condition and we only admired it from a distance.

Below the castle is the community called Asenov Quarter. It is the oldest part of city. Most of its houses and medieval churches, have been rebuilt so are historic in name only. From this area though we had a nice view of the castle above.

Across the stream in Asenov’s Quarter is an important large, stone church. St. Demetrius Church is where Ivan and Peter Asen announced their rebellion against the Byzantines in 1185. The result of that successful rebellion was the formation of the Second Bulgarian Empire.

During its time as capital Veliko Tarnovo became an important trading city. It was very wealthy with merchants and traders arriving from across the country as well as internationally. Just over 200 years later however, the Ottoman captured the city and most of the historic buildings from that time were lost.

A few hundred years later, the city gained a new importance. It became a centre where rumblings of independence began to gain ground and was the site of two failed uprisings against the Ottoman rulers. Veliko Tarnovo was even appointed capital of the newly independent Bulgaria in the 19th century.

The resurgence in the Bulgarian spirit during the Ottoman reign resulted in the development of a uniquely Bulgarian style of home called Bulgarian Revival architecture. We stepped out of our guesthouse and were suddenly immersed in the 19th century. The city’s main street was our first view of the revival architecture in this pretty city and it makes a great first impression.

You can see a lot more of this style in our post Bulgarian Revival Architecture.

From the elegant buildings on main street you can walk up the hill or down toward the river to find less elegant, but equally charming heritage buildings. No matter which direction you chose you will be surrounded by Bulgarian Revival buildings.

Running above Yantra River is Gurko Street. Its two hundred year old homes appear as rather plain two -story homes from street level, but they are actually 5 floors high. Since they were built on the riverbank only two stories can be seen from the street.

The third hill, Sveta Gora is on the other side of Yantra River. Near the river there is a large park with walking and biking trails. From the river bank we found the Monument to the Asen Dynasty commemorating their triumph over the Byzantines. Even better through was a the view of the Bulgarian revival homes on Gurko Street. From the this side of the river we could see their 5 stories.

Throughout Old Town there are more than just homes. There are also many rebuilt medieval churches. Most of the churches in the city were destroyed either by Ottoman forces or an earthquake in 1913. The most prominent, St Mary’s Nativity, looks impressive from many points in the city, but up close was quite plain. St. Nikolay Church is quite pretty with a beautiful entrance composed of painted wood.

Where to stay and eat in Veliko Tarnovo

Since most of the sites in the city’s historic district are within walking distance, you can stay in one of the many hotels or apartments in Old Town. Parking is difficult however, so if you have a car make sure a parking spot is included.

The main street also has many restaurants to chose from. After having a great traditional Bulgarian meal in Sofia, we made sure to visit our favourite Bulgarian Restaurant, Shtastliveca which has location in the historic centre.

How to get to Veliko Tarnovo

There is an international airport just outside of the city, but it is easy to reach by car or train from Sofia. The two or three freeways in the country are in excellent condition, but most smaller highways are in much worse shape, often riddled with potholes. To reach Veliko Tarnovo we drove through the mountains. Even though the mountains don’t look very high, the highways have many sharp corners and switchbacks as they climb up and down the mountain passes. Here’s a screenshot of our map showing the curvy road that was coming up.

Tip – There is not a lot of English spoken in Bulgaria and they use the Cyrillic Alphabet. It would be wise to have your destinations written in Cyrillic before leaving your hotel. Google Lens is very helpful to translate written material such as menus.

To read more of our adventures in Bulgaria click here.

Coming Next – Bulgarian Revival Architecture

For pictures from other blogs go to Gallery at monkeystale.ca

To read about more of our adventures go to Destinations.