Prayer (Namaz / Salah) Time Today in Boalkhali, Chattagam, Bangladesh are Fajar Time 4:09 AM, Dhuhur Time 11:59 AM, Asr Time 3:22 PM, Maghrib Time 6:31 PM and Isha Time 7:47 PM.

Sehri and Iftar Time today in Boalkhali, Chattagam, Bangladesh

Fajr time in Boalkhali, Chattagam, Bangladesh (dawn) - 4:09 AM

Fajr begins at subh saadiq ie, true dawn or the beginning of twilight, when the morning light appears across the full width of the sky and ends at sunrise.

Dhuhr Prayer time in Boalkhali, Chattagam, Bangladesh (midday) - 11:59 AM

The time of Dhuhr prayer starts after the sun passes its zenith and lasts until 20 min (approx) and before the call for the Asr prayer is to be given. There is thus a long period of time within which this prayer can be offered, but people usually make their prayer within two hours after the Azan has been announced from Mosque. This prayer needs to be given in the middle of the work-day, and people normally make their prayers during their lunch break.

Asr Prayer time in Boalkhali, Chattagam, Bangladesh(afternoon) - 3:22 PM

The Asr prayer starts when the shadow of an object is the same length as the object itself (or, according to Hanafi fiqh[citation needed] , twice its length) plus the shadow length at Dhuhr, and lasts till sunset. Asr can be split into two sections; the preferred time is before the sun starts to turn orange, while the time of necessity is from when the sun turns orange until sunset.

Maghrib Prayer time in Boalkhali, Chattagam, Bangladesh(sunset) - 6:31 PM

The Maghrib prayer begins when the sun sets, and lasts until the red light has left the sky in the west. It usually lasts for about 18 to 20 minutes from the start of Maghrib Time.

Isha Prayer time in Boalkhali, Chattagam, Bangladesh(night) - 7:47 PM

The Isha'a or isha prayer starts when the red light is gone from the western sky, and lasts until the rise of the "white light" (fajr sadiq) in the east. The preferred time for Isha is before midnight, meaning halfway between sunset and sunrise.

Jumu'ah Prayer time in Boalkhali, Chattagam, Bangladesh (friday prayer) - 11:59 AM

Jumu'ah prayer in Boalkhali, Chattagam, Bangladesh is performed in the afternoon every Friday instead of Duhr prayer. Juma prayer is obligatory for every Muslim man and women are also allowed to participate in it.

If you are a woman you can pray Dhuhr instead of Jumuah prayer, then it is not obligatory for you to go to mosque, so you pray Dhuhr. If you are a male and have a valid reason for not going to the mosque, you will also pray Dhuhr, so if you go to a mosque you will pray Jumu'ah, if you do not pray Dhuhr, there must be a valid reason for it. If you are not a woman, do not pray Jumu'ah and do not pray Dhuhr. E.g. If you are traveling or you are sick

Qibla Direction

Qibla is the fixed direction towards the Ka'bah in the Musjidul Haram located in Makkah, Saudi Arabia. It's the direction which all Muslims face when performing their prayers, wherever they are in the world.

You can easily find the Qibla direction of all countries and cities of the world with Subqo Islamic Center. Easily get qibla direction of countries, states and cities and qibla angle from here with us.

Qibla Direction in Boalkhali, Chattagam, Bangladesh

Qibla Direction in Boalkhali, Chattagam, Bangladesh is 279.28° a clockwise direction from the north . Thus, you can perform your prayers towards that direction. Remember that the qibla direction is measured according to the true north.

We use the location of Kaaba (Latitde: 21.4224779 Longitude 39.8251832) for calculating Qibla Direction

Qibla Direction Finder works with your device’s compass. To make sure that the direction is as accurate as possible, we recommend calibrating your compass before using.