Four people were killed in clashes over the 5th phase of union parishad (UP) elections in Chattogram, Bogura and Chandpur districts on Wednesday, reports United News of Bangladesh.

In Chattogram, a man was killed in a clash between the supporters of two member candidates at Chatori union in Anwara upazila.

The deceased was identified as Omkar Dutta, 32, a supporter of member candidate Dhananjoy Biswas contesting the polls with ‘Tubewell’ symbol.

Police said the clash broke out around 1:30pm at Singhora of Chatori between the supporters of independent candidate Nazim Uddin and another candidate Dhananjoy Biswas, leaving one dead on the spot and several others injured.

Didarul Islam, officer-in-charge (OC) of Anwara Police Station, said the situation is under control now.

In Boalkhali upazila, a local Awami League leader was seriously injured in an attack by his rival party men early Wednesday at Shikdarpara in Ahla Koroldenga union.

The injured was identified as Abdullah Al Harun Ripon, 32, general secretary of union unit AL.

He was sent to Chattogram Medical College and Hospital in a critical condition, said Abdul Karim, officer-in-charge of Boalkhali Police Station.

In Bogura, a man was killed in a clash between the supporters of two UP member candidates at Rameshwarpur union in Gabtoli upazila on Wednesday.

The deceased was identified as Zakir Hossain, 36, supporter of independent member candidate Saidul Islam.

The clash began around 2:30pm at Jaiguli Govt High School ground in Rameshwarpur between the supporters of independent candidate Saidul Islam and another candidate Ferdous Hossain Mithu, leaving Zakir seriously injured.

Later, he was taken to Shaheed Ziaur Rahman Medical College and Hospital (SZMCH) where doctors declared him dead.

Zia Rafikul Islam, officer-in-charge (OC) of Gabtoli Model Thana, said police brought the situation under control.

In Chandpur, two people were killed in separate incidents at Kachua and Haimchar upazila in violence during the UP elections.

One of the deceased, identified as Sharif Hossain, 18, was stabbed to death during the clash outside Hatirbandh Kendra at Sachar Union of Kachua Upazila, said additional superintendent of police Sudip Roy.

Another unidentified man, said to be in his early 40s, was killed at Ishanbala Ward-6 of Nilkamal Union in Haimchar Upazila, said Mahbubur Rahman Mollah, officer-in-charge (OC) of Haimchar Police Station.

In the fifth phase, union parishad elections took place in 29 unions of Chandpur where 162 candidates contested the polls for the post of chairman and 1,412 for the posts of general members and reserved members.