News of singer Mary J. Blige’s death spread quickly earlier this week causing concern among fans across the world. However the July 2024 report has now been confirmed as a complete hoax and just the latest in a string of fake celebrity death reports. Thankfully, the singer best known for hit songs like Be Without You or Family Affair is alive and well.

UPDATE 24/07/2024 : This story seems to be false. (read more)

Mary J. Blige death hoax spreads on Facebook

Rumors of the singer’s alleged demise gained traction on Monday after a ‘R.I.P. Mary J. Blige’ Facebook page attracted nearly one million of ‘likes’. Those who read the ‘About’ page were given a believable account of the American singer’s passing:

“At about 11 a.m. ET on Monday (July 22, 2024), our beloved singer Mary J. Blige passed away. Mary J. Blige was born on January 11, 1971 in New York. She will be missed but not forgotten. Please show your sympathy and condolences by commenting on and liking this page.”

Hundreds of fans immediately started writing their messages of condolence on the Facebook page, expressing their sadness that the talented 53-year-old singer was dead. And as usual, Twittersphere was frenzied over the death hoax.

Where as some trusting fans believed the post, others were immediately skeptical of the report, perhaps learning their lesson from the huge amount of fake death reports emerging about celebrities over recent months. Some pointed out that the news had not been carried on any major American network, indicating that it was a fake report, as the death of a singer of Mary J. Blige's stature would be major news across networks.

A recent poll conducted for the Celebrity Post shows that a large majority (75%) of respondents think those Mary J. Blige death rumors are not funny anymore.

Mary J. Blige Death Hoax Dismissed Since Singer Is ‘Alive And Well’

On Tuesday (July 23) the singer's reps officially confirmed that Mary J. Blige is not dead. “She joins the long list of celebrities who have been victimized by this hoax. She's still alive and well, stop believing what you see on the Internet,” they said.

Some fans have expressed anger at the fake report saying it was reckless, distressing and hurtful to fans of the much loved singer. Others say this shows her extreme popularity across the globe.

© 2024 MediaMass All rights reserved. Do not reproduce (even with permission).

Mary J. Blige: Recent News

Music July 2024

Music News July 24, 2024

Breaking Up July 16, 2024

Celebrity Central