CLEVELAND, Ohio -- The Cleveland Cavaliers don't need Carmelo Anthony.

For a moment, put aside the ridiculous trade speculation centering on a swap involving Kevin Love, Cleveland's third All-Star, NBA champion and double-double machine who has finally grown comfortable in his role after two years of on-court soul searching and dodging LeBron James' subtweets behind the scenes.

Ignore that it would be an epic blunder to make that particular deal.

After all, Love is younger (28 compared to 32) and has a better contract (Anthony is the ninth-highest paid player in the league). Love's also a better rebounder, passer, defender and perhaps a more efficient scorer, as he tallies two fewer points per game while attempting about four fewer shots than Anthony.

Love is a better fit, a term at the core of the Cavaliers' decision making.

But even with his floor spacing and outside shooting prowess, it has taken time, playoff battles, adversity and a coaching change for the Cavs -- and Love -- to get to this point, having a season that harkens back to his Minnesota days.

Initially, Love had to get acclimated to a new role, no longer the offensive focal point. He had to be integrated into the system, pulled away from the elbow and the post for the betterment of the Cavs' spaced-out offense. The coaches still had to figure out how to best maximize his ability, blend those unique gifts and keep from turning him solely into a standstill 3-point shooter.

Finally, here the Cavs are -- with Love fitting great and with him and James in a groove (35 percent of Love's made shots this season have come directly off passes from James).

That's why, beyond everything else, a trade for Anthony, even if it doesn't involve Love, would be destructive.

It would mean substantial change. For Anthony. For the Cavaliers. For the coaching staff. For everyone.

Back in 2014, despite being loaded with talent, the Cavaliers experienced their own share of hardships, stumbling early. It took the Miami Heat -- James, Dwyane Wade and Chris Bosh -- a good amount of time to figure out how to best work together. Bosh, who had to learn a different role, even discussed his challenges in a Bleacher Report interview, warning Love about a similar transformation. This year, Golden State, while piling up wins thanks to an excess of talent, is still working out the kinks after adding Kevin Durant.

At this point of the year, the Cavs wouldn't have what all those teams had: full training camp, preseason games and the early portion of the regular season to build the requisite chemistry.

They would be trying to make the Anthony transition on the fly, with a jam-packed schedule and limited practice sessions.

It's been hard enough getting Kyle Korver up to speed. Just imagine the difficulties that would come with Anthony.

This team's chemistry wasn't built overnight. Despite James' friendship and their time together on Team USA, it wouldn't happen in a blink with Anthony either. Going from alpha dog to third wheel isn't simple, something the Cavs have already learned.

If that switch led to complaints and discomfort for Love, how effective would Anthony -- a ball-dominant player -- be as the third option when he's no longer getting 19 shots per game? When he doesn't know where his shots will be coming from each game?

Players, as Bosh and Love have said, need to go through it in order to truly understand the sacrifice.

A triple-threat player, blessed with one of the elite inside-outside games, Anthony ranks third in isolation plays this season. James and Irving also rank in the top 10 in that category. According to ESPN, no team in the past decade has had three players in the top 10.

Adding Anthony would push the Cavs away from the sharing style they covet and back into the isolation approach that has its place, but also threatens to wreck the league's third-ranked offense.

Then there's a question about whether he can find success in a lesser role.

The Cavaliers have already hopped over that hurdle with Love. Why would they want to start over from scratch with Anthony? Why would they want to re-live the challenge of incorporating a star? Why would they threaten to disrupt team chemistry, one of their few advantages over the Warriors?

One of the true title contenders, the Cavs shouldn't be shaking up the roster. They shouldn't be looking for a piece that would force them to play differently. They shouldn't be breaking up a squad that won the championship last June.

Instead, the Cavs should be smoothing out the rough edges. They should stay true to their principles and continue to let "fit" drive roster decisions.

Things in Cleveland aren't perfect. A more reliable backup point guard and perhaps a working big man to provide depth up front would be nice. The inconsistencies on defense and the lack of ball movement at times remain troubling. Those are issues the Cavs should be looking to correct, both internally and externally.

But how would Anthony, a non-defender who consistently thwarts team ball, help?

It's no secret the Knicks are looking to move on, even if they're taking a bizarre approach to trade rumblings. James has gone on the record in the past stating his desire to one day play with Anthony and possibly -- if it can be done -- form Team Banana Boat somewhere.

But a move for Anthony, if the Cavs eventually decide to go down that risky path, would be best in the off-season. Not two months away from the playoffs.

And especially not if the cost is Love.