Competing with the Golden State Warriors proved to be of great difficulty for the Cleveland Cavaliers, as the Warriors took the 2016-2017 championship with great ease. How can the Cavaliers possibly compete at a high level against the All-Star and experienced lineup the Warriors created this past season in the future?

How about a possible three-team trade that could help the Cavaliers obtain Carmelo Anthony and Marc Gasol?

According to Quentin Albertie, of Kingjamesgospel.com, if the Cavaliers were willing to move Kevin Love, they could not only acquire Carmelo Anthony, but also Marc Gasol.

The acquisition of Carmelo Anthony from the New York Knicks would provide an isolation game, both at the low post and spot-up shooting, that would benefit the team greatly, as reported by Albertie. With Carmelo Anthony's playmaking abilities, his game would make guarding the Cavaliers much more difficult. Carmelo Anthony and Kyrie Irving directing the offense while LeBron James exploding to the hoop would be a nightmare for teams to guard. That is, if the Cavaliers can manage to keep Irving in Cleveland given his recent trade demands.

The benefit of adding Marc Gasol, of the Memphis Grizzlies, would be his ability to “protect the rim” and “fill up passing lanes”, as stated by Quentin Albertie. The article continues about how Marc Gasol has the potential to not only be a crucial asset on the defensive end, but also a versatile, offensive-minded player with his superb shooting and ball movement abilities for a big man. If this trade were to take place, the lineup for the Cavaliers would look a little something like this (as it stands now): Kyrie Irving and J.R. Smith at guard, Carmelo Anthony and LeBron James at forward, and Marc Gasol at center.

The trade Quentin Albertie had in mind would involve the following players from the Cleveland Cavaliers, the New York Knicks, and the Memphis Grizzlies:

New York Knicks receive PF Channing Frye (expiring contract), SF James Ennis (expiring contract), PG Wade Baldwin IV, 2019 first-round pick (from Memphis)

Memphis Grizzlies receive PF Kevin Love, SG Iman Shumpert, future first-round pick (from Cleveland)

Cleveland Cavaliers receive Carmelo Anthony, Marc Gasol

This trade would allow the Cavaliers to go up against the Warriors with a little more confidence, as they would obtain more star power at each position, along with keeping key reserves such as Tristian Thompson, Kyle Korver, and newly acquired Jeff Green. Cleveland has the potential to be a team that causes a lot of problems for the Golden State Warriors, and earn the championship that slipped away from them this past season.

Of course, there are other players for Gasol and Anthony who have more leverage, and the Cavs likely won't be trading Kevin Love. However, on paper these possibilities are possible and if the NBA has taught us anything, it's that any trade is possible.