NBCUniversal Television Group is an American and global television production/distribution company and a subsidiary of NBCUniversal.

The company is composed of six divisions: Universal Television (formerly Universal Media Studios and NBC Universal Television Studio), NBC Universal Television Stations, NBCUniversal Television Distribution, NBCUniversal International Television, Peacock Productions, and the recently-established Universal Cable Productions.[1]

The company was previously known as Revue Studios, NBC Studios, Universal Television, and MCA TV. The name was changed to NBC Universal Television on May 12, 2004 from the merger of NBC's production/distribution arm and Universal's television division to reflect the NBC Universal brand.

The previous name took syndication until September 20, 2004, which was also the date launch of the NBC Uni TV Distribution logo, even though the copyright to the NBC Universal TV shows are now credited to either NBC Studios, Inc., NBC Enterprises, Inc., Universal Network Television LLC, Universal Talk TV Productions, LLC, or otherwise NBC Universal, Inc. (all NBC Universal TV's alternate monikers).

On June 14, 2007, NBC Universal announced that NBC Universal Television Studio would be renamed, effective immediately, to Universal Media Studios. The parent company, NBC Universal, explained that the reason for the name change of NBC Universal Television was because "the new name fully describes the company's mission to be the premier content provider for television and digital platforms, spanning all television dayparts and creative genres."[2] On September 12, 2011, NBCUniversal announced they will rename Universal Media Studios back to Universal Television.[3]

DVD releases for most shows owned by the group are handled by Universal Studios Home Entertainment, while others are licensed to other companies such as Lionsgate Home Entertainment, Arts Alliance America and Shout! Factory.

For more details on this topic, see NBC Studios.

Contents

1 History

2 Universal Television

3 NBCUniversal Television Stations

4 NBCUniversal Television Distribution

5 NBCUniversal International Television

5.1 American shows owned stateside by other companies

6 References

History

Main article: Universal Television#History

Universal Television

Main article: Universal Television

Universal Television (formerly NBC Productions, NBC Studios, Universal Network Television NBC Universal Television Studio, and Universal Media Studios) is the television production arm of NBCUniversal that produces network programs that was first established in 1962.

NBCUniversal Television Stations

NBCUniversal Television Stations is another production company that handles series that are aired on NBC owned stations.

NBCUniversal Television Stations Division (TVSD) is an operation division of NBC Universal's owned and operated NBC stations and the following Telemundo Stations:

KNBC, KVEA, and KWHY-TV, Los Angeles

KNSD, San Diego

KNTV and KSTS, San Jose - San Francisco

KXAS-TV and KXTX-TV, Dallas - Fort Worth

WCAU, Philadelphia

WMAQ-TV and WSNS-TV, Chicago

WNBC and WNJU, New York City

WRC-TV, Washington, D.C.

WTVJ and WSCV, Miami - Fort Lauderdale

WVIT, New Haven - Hartford

KBLR, Las Vegas

KHRR, Tucson, Arizona

KDEN, Denver

KNSO, Fresno, California

KTAZ, Phoenix

KTMD, Galveston - Houston

KVDA, San Antonio

WKAQ-TV, San Juan

WNEU, Merrimack, N.H. - Boston

NBCUniversal Television Distribution

Main article: NBCUniversal Television Distribution

NBCUniversal Television Distribution (formerly NBC Enterprises and Universal Domestic Television among other distributor incarnations) is the television distribution arm of NBC Universal that distributes programs across the nation.

NBCUniversal International Television

NBCUniversal International Television or NBCUniversal International Television Distribution (formerly Universal Worldwide Television and MCA TV International) is the worldwide television production/distribution arm of NBCUniversal, syndicating NBCUni's programs across the globe. Universal Worldwide Television was formed in 1997 as a result of the break-up of UIP Pay TV. Prior to NUIT's formation, for several years MGM International Television Distribution handled worldwide distribution of shows from NBC Studios.

American shows owned stateside by other companies

These shows are distributed by other companies in the USA, but by NUIT internationally

Little House on the Prairie

US TV rights are owned by CBS Television Distribution (originally Worldvision Enterprises, Paramount Domestic Television, and CBS Paramount Domestic Television), while US video rights are owned by Lions Gate Home Entertainment. However, NBC (and now NBC Universal) has always owned the ancillary rights (the sale of US TV syndication rights in 1979 to Worldvision was due to fin-syn laws then in place).

Punky Brewster (1984-1988)

US TV rights are owned by Sony Pictures Television, and DVD rights by Shout! Factory. Sony's rights (inherited from Columbia Pictures Television) were also a result of the fin-syn laws. NBC produced the seasons airing on that network as well as the entire animated series, while CPT produced the syndicated seasons of the live-action series. NBCUniversal owns ancillary rights.

Several titles by Brillstein-Grey Entertainment, such as Just Shoot Me! (1997-2003), The Steve Harvey Show (1996-2002), and The Dana Carvey Show (1996)

US rights to all shows are with Sony Pictures Television. Brillstein-Grey had sold some of their library to Universal in the late 1990s.

The Pretender (1996-2000)

US rights are with 20th Television (successor-in-interest to MTM Enterprises, which co-produced the first two seasons)

Will & Grace (1998-2006)

Warner Bros. Television owns US TV rights to this series, while US video rights rest with Lions Gate. NBCUniversal owns ancillary rights.

Ed (2000-04)

CBS Television Distribution (successor-in-interest to co-producer Viacom Productions) owns the US rights to the series.

The In-Laws (2002-03) and Medical Investigation (2004-05)

CBS Television Distribution (successor-in-interest to co-producer Paramount Network Television) owns the US rights to both series.