NEW YORK – September 19, 2012 — NBCUniversal announced that Linda Yaccarino has been promoted to President, Advertising Sales, NBCUniversal. In this role, Yaccarino will oversee all ad sales and market strategy for the company’s broadcast, cable and digital properties. She will report to Steve Burke, Chief Executive Officer, NBCUniversal.

Said Burke: “Linda is an outstanding executive with the proven ability to maximize the value of a portfolio of assets in a complex marketplace. I am pleased to have her leading the sales strategy for our company, offering advertisers innovative opportunities to partner with the best brands in the business.”

“I joined NBCUniversal because of my belief in the incredible power of this portfolio and to work with the strongest sales team in the business and I’m proud of what we’ve been able to accomplish,” said Yaccarino. “As a unified sales team, our goal is to collaboratively develop the most creative solutions to move our clients’ businesses forward.” She added: “I look forward to continuing to partner with Bonnie Hammer, Ted Harbert and Lauren Zalaznick and all of the business leaders at NBCU helping to bring our outstanding content to the market.”

Yaccarino joined NBCUniversal in 2011 as President, Cable Entertainment & Digital Advertising Sales for NBCUniversal. In that capacity she was responsible for all cable entertainment and digital advertising sales for the company, including USA, Syfy, Bravo Media, E! Entertainment, Oxygen Media, Style, G4, Sprout, Chiller, Cloo, and their respective digital platforms. Additionally, Yaccarino oversaw the sales efforts for NBC.com, AccessHollywood.com, NBCSports.com, NBCOlympics.com and GolfChannel.com and the stand alone digital businesses DailyCandy, Swirl, Fandango, iVillage and Television Without Pity.

Prior to joining NBCUniversal, Yaccarino served as Executive Vice President and COO of Turner Entertainment Ad Sales & Marketing and Acquisitions. There, she was responsible for all advertising sales, sales marketing and program acquisitions for the company’s television networks, TNT, TBS and truTV, as well as overseeing acquisitions for sister networks TCM, Cartoon Network and Adult Swim.

During her tenure, Yaccarino continually grew Turner Entertainment’s business year-over-year elevating Turner Entertainment Networks to a premium position within the marketplace. She was also instrumental in developing and enhancing “inContext,” the industry’s first-ever contextual platform that helps feature the right ad, in the right place, at the right time.

Among her many industry honors, Yaccarino was recognized in 2011 by Adweek as one of the “Ten Most Powerful Women in TV” and by Business Week as a “CEO of Tomorrow.” Her community and professional affiliations include active involvement with WICT (Women in Cable & Telecommunications) and Penn State University, where she is on the Board at the School of Communications. She resides in Sea Cliff, New York with her husband, Claude, with whom she has two children, Matthew and Christian.