A large building in Leeds city centre that formerly housed Direct Line could be converted into hundreds of apartments under new plans.

Watkin Jones Group have applied for planning permission to convert number 42 on the Headrow into 230 co-living studios. The proposed development also includes 19 large shared kitchens and shared space for socialising.

The application, submitted to Leeds City Council, lays out how developers intend for residents to live in studios with their own kitchens. They will then also be able to use the larger shared kitchens, as well as communal spaces such as a gym, lounge, co-working space, and cinema.

Read more: 'Worn down' Leeds pub to shut for £300,000 revamp - but will open in time for Christmas

Part of the planning statement submitted reads: "At its heart the proposal will provide an appealing living environment suited to modern lifestyles. With home ownership becoming increasingly unattainable for young people, the market has moved to deliver products such as BTR and, a sub-set of that sector, CoLiving in order to provide a high-quality, professional alternative to private landlord sand HMOs – which can often suffer from poor design, high cost and lack of residentprivacy.

"Just like other types of BTR, Co-living is intended to bring something new to the housing market. Co-Living is a pioneering concept that is a response to known demand, is growing in popularity and is destined to play an important part in meeting future housing needs.

"Co-Living is strategically targeted at younger generations, particularly young professionals, who wish to live in modern, high quality, professionally managed accommodation in the centre of vibrant, progressive cities. The Co-Living model aims to provide something that does not exist in the housing market at present, creating high-quality accommodation alongside an established sense of community."

The plans also include proposals for a roof terrace. The shops below the building, such as CEX and Jessops, will remain.

You can view the proposals on the council planning portal with application reference number 22/07525/FU. The council currently has a target set to make a decision in February 2023.

Read next: