Direct Line Group announced it will be moving into a new contemporary office in the City of London. After 35 years based in Bromley, Riverbank House will become the Group’s new home in summer 2023. The Group will retain a smaller office in Bromley. The Group also has other offices including Glasgow, Leeds, Doncaster, Birmingham and Bristol.

The move to hybrid working, with colleagues able to divide their time between working at home and in office, was the impetus for the office hunt that began in 2022. To maximize the effectiveness of time in the office the Group sought a location that was easily accessible and where it could create a purpose-built environment to support greater collaboration and innovation.

“When our people come into the office it’s to meet and connect – and we need an environment that facilitates this. Riverbank House will offer colleagues a space that energizes, inspires and is specifically designed to bring people together to do their best work for our customers.

Our people have been involved from the start to ensure it meets the needs of how they work today and aim to work in the future as well as making sure it reflects our amazing culture. And its central location with multiple transport links will allow us to attract talent from a broader geographical area.” – Vicky Wallis, Chief People Officer at Direct Line Group.

Riverbank House will feature a variety of different spaces for working and collaboration – with great technology and the ability to configure spaces for maximum flexibility including an amphitheater providing an in-house events space.

It will include a new dedicated customer lab with specialist technology where customers will be invited to take part in user research to help develop new products and identify ways to improve customer service and online experiences.

Churchill Court, which has been home to Direct Line Group since 1988, will have a second life as the new headquarters of Bromley Council, with contract negotiations reaching their final stages. The Group will be leasing back and fitting out a space within the building for its Bromley office.