History Highlight:

Joey Molland, singer and guitarist for Badfinger, is 70. Molland is the last surviving member from the band's classic lineup and currently lives here in Minneapolis. His career spans five decades and he has spent stints in The Masterminds, The Merseys, Gary Walker & The Rain, and The Iveys (a.k.a. Badfinger).

Also, Today In:

1966 - After a North American tour, The Rolling Stones sued 14 hotels over a booking ban in New York, claiming that the ban was violating civil rights laws.

1966 - Jimmy Page made his live debut with The Yardbirds at the Marquee Club, London. The group is notable for having started the careers of three of rock's most famous guitarists: Eric Clapton, Jeff Beck, and Jimmy Page, all of whom were in the top five of Rolling Stone's 100 Top Guitarists list (Clapton at No. 2, Page at No. 3, and Beck at No. 5).

1966 - Working at Abbey Road studios in London, The Beatles recorded a new John Lennon song "She Said She Said". The song was reportedly based on a bizarre conversation that Lennon had with Peter Fonda.

1967 - It was the Summer of Love: There was a free concert in San Francisco's Golden Gate Park celebrating the Summer Solstice. The Grateful Dead, Big Brother and the Holding Company, and Quicksilver Messenger Service all performed.

1975 - Captain and Tennille started a four week run at No. 1 on the U.S. singles chart with the Neil Sedaka song "Love Will Keep Us Together".

1975 - Guitarist Ritchie Blackmore quit Deep Purple to form his own group Rainbow.

1990 - Rock pioneer Little Richard received a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame.

2000 - 39-year-old Karen McNeil who claimed she was the wife of Axl Rose and that she communicated with him telepathically was jailed for one year for stalking the singer.

2001 - John Lee Hooker, American blues singer and guitarist, died in his sleep at age 83. Some of his best known songs include "Boogie Chillen'", "Crawling King Snake", "Dimples", "Boom Boom", and "One Bourbon, One Scotch, One Beer". Despite being illiterate, Hooker was a prolific lyricist and often employed an improvisational style in his music. Fun fact: He appeared and sang in the 1980 film "The Blues Brothers".

2011 - People magazine reported that 75-year-old Glen Campbell had been diagnosed with Alzheimer's disease.

2015 - Apple Music reversed its payment policy, a day after Taylor Swift said she was refusing to allow the company to stream her latest album 1989. In an open letter to Apple, Swift said she was withholding the record as she was unhappy with the three-month free trial offered to subscribers, saying "We don't ask you for free iPhones. Please don't ask us to provide you with our music for no compensation."

Birthdays:

Ray Davies, of The Kinks, is 73.

Celebrated guitarist Nils Lofgren (E Street Band, Crazy Horse) is 66.

Pat Sansone, multi-instrumentalist for Wilco, is 48.

Brandon Flowers (The Killers) is 36.

Highlights for Today in Music History are gathered from This Day in Music, Paul Shaffer's Day in Rock, Song Facts and Wikipedia.