Cricket Australia has confirmed George Bailey will join the National Selection Panel for the Australian men's team at the end of the Big Bash season.

It means the 37-year-old veteran will pull the curtains on his Sheffield Shield career with Tasmania and Big Bash duties with the Hobart Hurricanes to adopt the selector's role full-time in February.

Bailey comes onboard the selection panel after former selector and Australian great Greg Chappell announced he'd be stepping down from the role at the end of this year's Ashes series.

Bailey will operate as an advisor alongside general manager of national teams Ben Oliver, men's head coach Justin Langer and national selector Trevor Hohns before he joins the selectors' panel on a full-time basis after he retires from playing.

More: Justin Langer reveals Steve Smith copped beer shower in gabba sheds after low score

Oliver said he was looking forward to having someone with the experience that Bailey possesses on the panel.

“We’re thrilled to have George join the National Selection Panel. He is an outstanding leader and one of the most respected, thoughtful and generous figures in international cricket,” Oliver said in a statement.

“George’s international and domestic playing career speaks for itself. His extensive experience across all formats, and deep knowledge of T20 cricket, will be invaluable as we head into a home T20 World Cup and beyond.

“We’re also excited about the broader impact that George will have on Australian cricket as we work to connect more closely with players, coaches and high-performance staff across the country.

“I would like to take this opportunity to thank Cricket Tasmania for their support of George’s move to the NSP, as well as all those who took the time to apply for the position.”

Bailey represented Australia in 90 one-day internationals, 30 T20 internationals and five Test matches, while he is an icon of Tasmanian cricket.

As well as eight seasons thus far for the Hurricanes, he's spent time playing for the Melbourne Stars in the 2011/12 Big Bash season.

Bailey said he was honoured to be joining Hohns and Langer on the panel.

“I am passionate about the long-term success of the Australian cricket team and advancing the cause of Australian cricket in general,” Bailey said.