Veteran George Bailey has taken out Cricket Tasmania's player of the year award.

Veteran George Bailey has kept his name in the minds of national selectors after taking out Cricket Tasmania's player of the year award.

Subscribe now for unlimited access .

or signup to continue reading

All articles from our website & app

The digital version of Today's Paper

Breaking news alerts direct to your inbox

Interactive Crosswords, Sudoku and Trivia

All articles from the other in your area

The 35-year-old won the Ricky Ponting Medal on Thursday night, after captaining the Tasmanian Tigers to a Sheffield Shield final and the Hobart Hurricanes to the Big Bash League decider.

Bailey, who has more than 100 Australia caps, was touted as a potential Test skipper after Steve Smith's sacking over the ball tampering saga.

His Tasmanian teammate Tim Paine was given the nod but the affable Bailey could be considered at the selection table if experience is deemed necessary as part of a national shake-up.

Bailey scored 602 first-class runs this Shield season as the Tigers came from wooden spooners to reach their first final in six years.

He finished 26 votes clear of batsman Jake Doran to claim his maiden Ricky Ponting Medal.

D'Arcy Short was named the state's BBL player of the year after a stellar tournament for the Hurricanes that catapulted him into Australia's T20 side.

Australian Associated Press

DAILY

Your morning news

Today's top stories curated by our news team.

WEEKLY

Note from the Editor

Get the editor's insights: what's happening & why it matters.

WEEKLY

FootyHQ

Love footy? We've got all the action covered.

WEEKLY

Sport

The latest news, results & expert analysis.

WEEKLY

The Pivot

Keep up with netball news from across the region.

DAILY DURING OLYMPICS

The Olympic breakfast

Wake up to a tasty serving of overnight news and excitement from the 2024 Olympic Games in Paris.

WEEKLY

Explore Travel

Every Sunday explore destinations, deals, tips & travel writing to transport you around Australia and the globe.

WEEKDAYS

The Echidna

Sharp. Close to the ground. Digging deep. Your weekday morning newsletter on national affairs, politics and more.

TWICE WEEKLY

The Informer

Your essential national news digest: all the big issues on Wednesday and great reading every Saturday.

WEEKLY

Motoring

Get news, reviews and expert insights every Thursday from CarExpert, ACM's exclusive motoring partner.

TWICE WEEKLY

Voice of Real Australia

Get real, Australia! Let the ACM network's editors and journalists bring you news and views from all over.

AS IT HAPPENS

Breaking news alert

Be the first to know when news breaks.

DAILY

Today's Paper Alert

Your digital replica of Today's Paper. Ready to read from 5am!

DAILY

Your favourite puzzles

Test your skills with interactive crosswords, sudoku & trivia. Fresh daily!

Advertisement

Ad

Advertisement

Ad