George Bailey by his portrait at Bellerive Oval. Picture by Cricket Tasmania

As his portrait was unveiled at Bellerive Oval, former Tasmanian captain George Bailey painted a vivid picture of his new role as national chairman of selectors.

Subscribe now for unlimited access .

or signup to continue reading

All articles from our website & app

The digital version of Today's Paper

Breaking news alerts direct to your inbox

Interactive Crosswords, Sudoku and Trivia

All articles from the other in your area

The popular 40-year-old former South Launceston batsman opened up about his transition from a hugely successful playing career which included Sheffield Shield, Ashes and World Cup triumphs.

"I still feel it's not that long ago since the playing part finished but I'm still loving the fact that I get to be involved at the Australian level and still get to see so much domestic cricket and spend some time around the Tasmanian group and other state groups as well," he said.

"So in some very small way, I'm very happy to still be involved."

Modestly acknowledging his granting of Cricket Tasmania life membership and his portrait by artist Effie Pryer, Bailey said he was loving his latest off-field responsibility.

He was excited by Hobart Hurricane Tim David's inclusion in the Twenty20 World Cup squad, delighted that struggling One-Day International captain Aaron Finch was able to retire on his own terms, called Test equivalent Pat Cummins an "outstanding leader" and revealed how Cummins' predecessor Tim Paine was pleased to be back playing the game he loves, if a little "sore and rusty".

Bailey was also pleased to see the ramping up of the Australia A program and felt the Tasmanian program was in a healthy state with an exciting mix of players on the fringes of Australian squads or aspiring to make them.

He said national selector was an "invigorating role".

"I was never a great cricket watcher while playing but I really enjoy it now. Not being so nervous and just being able to watch and enjoy other people's success and appreciate the contest.

"If they do well, we take credit and if not, it's their fault."

One of a select few Cricket Tasmania life members, Bailey, who played 90 ODIs, 30 T20is and five Test matches, said he was humbled to be recognised.

If they do well, we take credit and if not, it's their fault

- Australian chairman of selectors George Bailey

"I'm very happy with the work Effie's done. It's not a face that needs painting very often.

"When you look around some of the other paintings in this room, they're all heroes of mine so to be up alongside them is very humbling.

"I have never thought I'd like to be painted so very grateful to Cricket Tasmania. This ground has felt like home for so many years and I get to continue that for the next part of my life as well.

DAILY

Your morning news

Today's top stories curated by our news team. Also includes evening update.

WEEKLY

Note from the Editor

Get the editor's insights: what's happening & why it matters.

WEEKLY

FootyHQ

Love footy? We've got all the action covered.

WEEKLY

Sport

The latest news, results & expert analysis.

DAILY DURING OLYMPICS

The Olympic breakfast

Wake up to a tasty serving of overnight news and excitement from the 2024 Olympic Games in Paris.

WEEKLY

Explore Travel

Every Sunday explore destinations, deals, tips & travel writing to transport you around Australia and the globe.

WEEKDAYS

The Echidna

Sharp. Close to the ground. Digging deep. Your weekday morning newsletter on national affairs, politics and more.

TWICE WEEKLY

The Informer

Your essential national news digest: all the big issues on Wednesday and great reading every Saturday.

WEEKLY

Motoring

Get news, reviews and expert insights every Thursday from CarExpert, ACM's exclusive motoring partner.

TWICE WEEKLY

Voice of Real Australia

Get real, Australia! Let the ACM network's editors and journalists bring you news and views from all over.

AS IT HAPPENS

Breaking news alert

Be the first to know when news breaks.

DAILY

Today's Paper Alert

Your digital replica of Today's Paper. Ready to read from 5am!

DAILY

Your favourite puzzles

Test your skills with interactive crosswords, sudoku & trivia. Fresh daily!

Advertisement

Ad

Advertisement

Ad