Tall, statuesque — Maria was the ideal of a Russian beauty. She had thick hair below her waist, plump lips, and cheeks that looked as if they were plump apples. She piercingly looked at the elderly Tsar. Maria Naga was 27 years old, Ivan the Terrible — 50. The Russian tsar did not tolerate bachelor life and widowhood. He wanted a young and beautiful wife.

Maria Nagaya became the last wife of Ivan the Terrible. Many considered her an illegitimate wife according to church canons, referring more to the status of “royal concubine”, not a legitimate wife.

Ivan IV married Maria without the traditional royal viewing. The beautiful woman was proposed to the tsar by Maria’s uncle. Fyodor Nagoy, Maria’s father, lived in exile for many years, until suddenly received an order from the tsar to return to court. Fyodor could not understand for a long time: why the harsh tsar took pity on him. It turned out that Ivan IV wanted to marry his daughter.

Maria’s family was delighted with such luck. The whole family hoped to get prominent places at court. But soon the tsar died, so that none of Maria’s family did not achieve the tsar’s favor.

But before that moment was still four years. In 1580 there was a marriage between Mary and Ivan IV. For the sake of this marriage, Maria had to give up marriage with a young boyar. The girl cried, begged her father not to marry her to the tsar. What’s the use of a crown if it has thorns?

In spite of the fact that wine was pouring, the wedding was very modest by the tsar’s standards. The celebration took place not in the Kremlin, but in the Alexander Sloboda. The newly-minted queen was allocated a modest apartment not far from the capital.

“Maria’s family bowed at the feet of the Tsar, thanked for the great favor: disgrace, for all it was evident, was given to them extremely hard, they were neither alive nor dead from happiness that returned to the capital — well, and Mary, according to custom, gave the royal guest a cup of green wine on a tray” E. A. Arsenieva

On the first wedding night Mary was shaking with fear. Except for fear and pain and remember that nothing to remember. The decrepit, already infirm Tsar was not her male ideal. The girl resigned herself to her unhappy fate.

The tsar was pleased. Cheerful, fun-loving, smart, tall wife with gray eyes and thick sable eyebrows. Maria Nagaya knew a lot about palace etiquette and palace intrigue. She felt herself superior in status to the other women of the Kremlin.

But Ivan Vasilyevich did not like this arrogant behavior of his wife. He even promised to feed his wife to the dogs. The tsarina did not become more docile. And the Tsar soon cooled down. Already and the eyes did not seem to Mary so piercing and beautiful, and her lips like everyone else.

Ivan began to visit his wife’s chambers less often. And Maria was worried that she could not get pregnant. With such rare visits of the tsar pregnancy could wait for a long time. October 19, 1582 Maria finally gave birth to a son. The child was named Dmitry. At first he grew very frail, was constantly sick and cried a lot. But Maria was firm in her conviction — this is the future tsar.

In 1584 Ivan the Terrible died. Dmitry received Uglich in reigning, where he was sent together with his mother. The tsarina was accompanied by a retinue, and in chests lay luxurious dresses and jewelry. Maria Nagaya still hoped to retain the title of queen dowager, and even better to become the mother of the tsar. The new tsar Fyodor had no children, so Maria filled herself with the thought that her son Dmitry would one day take the throne. Soon, and this hope dissipated.

In 1591, nine-year-old Tsarevich Dmitry suddenly died. He was ill with epilepsy. The official cause of death called that, playing “knives” at Dmitry had a seizure and he ran into a knife. Or maybe it was faked, and the Tsarevich was actually killed. Who knows. Anyway, Maria was tonsured into a monastery under the name of Martha. She passed away around 1608–1612. Before her death, she had another moment of glory when she recognized False Dmitry I as her son. Apparently, it was better for her than withering away in a convent.