The first trams, which started operating in 1891, were drawn by horses. Public transport in Helsinki started in 1888, when horse-drawn omnibuses started to operate between Töölö and Kaivopuisto.

In 1900, electricity was introduced as the power source. The first electric tram started to operate on the line between Töölö and Hietalahti in September of the same year.

At first, the operator was a private company, Helsinki Tram and Omnibus limited liability company (HRO). From 1913, the City of Helsinki was the main shareholder of the company. In 1944, the City bought the assets of HRO, and Helsinki City Transport (HKL) was founded in 1945.

HKL was also in charge of the city’s bus transport up until 2010, when the bus operations were transferred to the Helsinki Region Transport (HSL) municipal federation.

The most usual tram types in the Helsinki transport are domestic articulated tram tramcars (series NRV I and MLNRV II) made in the 1980s and Variotram low-floor tramcars manufactured by Bombardier at the end of the 1990s and the beginning of the 2000s.

In summer 2013, a completely new tram type was introduced in Helsinki; a domestic Artic tram manufactured by Transtech Oy. This type of tram has been specifically designed to meet the requirements of Helsinki’s tram network and the Nordic climate. Its structure, with pivoting bogies, can manage the tight turns and steep hills of Helsinki’s line network. The whole tram is equipped with a low floor and LED lighting. Recovered braking energy is utilised in heating. The drivers have LCD screens, and rear-view mirrors have been replaced with cameras.

The first metro series in Helsinki was the M100, equipped with an induction motor and controlled by frequency converter.

The oldest M100 series carriages from 1977 were designed, built, and tested simultaneously with the first metro track. The most recent M100 carriages were built in 1984. Excluding the six oldest prototype carriages, the whole series was renovated between 2004 and 2009, which increased their service life by about twenty years.