In the seat of Hinkler, local Mayor Jack Dempsey, left, is throwing his hat in the ring to run as an independent. He is pictured with Anthony Albanese.

Independent MPs aren't a new concept

Everyone loves a political renegade who tells it how it is.

Subscribe now for unlimited access .

or signup to continue reading

All articles from our website

The digital version of Today's Paper

Breaking news alerts direct to your inbox

All articles from the other in your area

It feels good to hear someone repeat to us our own problems and frustrations and give us that feeling that someone is going to do something about it.

These people usually claim to be "independent" of the major political parties and claim to be above partisan politics.

But history has proven that many of these claims are false and many so called "independents" are anything but.

While I share people's frustrations with the major parties, there must be a recognition that they have at least done something right over the past 120 years to be where we are today.

They have helped guide the country through two World Wars, a Great Depression, the Global Financial Crisis and - most recently - a global pandemic.

Australia today now shares one of the highest standards of living in the world.

Recently there has been a rise in so called "independents" who want to shun party politics all together and "Burke and Wills it" all on their own.

"Independents" aren't a new concept - they have been causing our political process headaches since 1901. In most recent memory, probably the most "infamous" independent was Brian Harradine.

He was a Labor-Union-aligned Tasmanian Senator from 1975 to 2005 and caused Gough Whitlam headaches from 1960 right through to John Howard in 1996 with the sale of Telstra and changes to the GST when he held the balance of power in the Senate.

He held the whole country hostage and was effectively a "power of one".

Who can forget the two independents Rob Oakeshott and Tony Windsor, who sat in formerly strong Nationals seats yet decided to back Julia Gillard to form a minority government in 2010.

Both were responsible for saddling Australia with one of the most dysfunctional governments in our history.

More recently, we have seen Zali Steggall in Warringah - where she beat Tony Abbott in 2019 - Helen Haines in Indi and Rebekha Sharkie in Mayo win high profile seats on the basis of "independence".

But their record shows they vote predominantly with Labor.

This upcoming election we have seen the "independent" movement being super charged, with as many as 21 "independents" being funded by the Climate 200 group backed by millionaire Simon Holmes a Court, who has raised more than $7 million.

These "independents" are being run in mainly safe Liberal held seats, such as Wentworth, North Sydney, Kooyong, Goldstein and Curtin.

In my home seat of Hinkler we have seen a bizarre situation of our local Mayor Jack Dempsey throwing his hat in the ring to run as an "independent" against sitting LNP MP Keith Pitt.

One of the great things of being an Australian is that we get to vote for who and whatever we want.

But don't be fooled into thinking that those votes won't be used by some to manipulate the system to their political advantage.

It will be a tight race come May 21, and I just hope Australians know who they are electing and actually voting for.

Tom Marland,

Marland Law.

An Easter reflection

In country music writer, Stan Coster's song, 'God Will Prevail' he wrote,

"They say we have nothing from Jesus to fear,

No one has seen Him for two thousand years,

And according to science 'tis a nice fairy tale.

But on the great day of judgement, God will prevail.

When life's running smooth God is far from our minds,

We say we've been lucky or smart, but I find,

When the sad things and bad things should darken our day,

Then we ask him to help us, in a most selfish way."

Coster is right. Surely, we should see the richness of living that Christianity brings, and not just turn to God in the bad times.

I believe that the Medici's may be the most important family in human history.

To quote the BBC, the Medici's were the Renaissance.

They had a thirst for science, the creation of beauty, a whole new world and way of thinking. The Medici's were also the Popes of Rome throughout most of the 1500's.

Bob Katter MP

Member for Kennedy,

Send us your letters

We love hearing from our readers on the issues of the day.

Got something to say? Get it off your chest.

Email us at nwsletters@austcommunitymedia.com.au

Advertisement

Ad

Get the latest Mt Isa news in your inbox

Sign up for our newsletter to stay up to date.

Email address

We care about the protection of your data. Read our Privacy Policy.

Advertisement

Ad