Jack Dempsey, the 14-cap Australia flanker, could make his debut off the bench for Scotland on Saturday at Murrayfield against the Wallabies.

Dempsey, 28, has made himself available to play for Gregor Townsend's side under World Rugby’s birthright transfer rules which allows a capped player to switch allegiance to another country for which they are eligible to play following a three-year cooling off period.

The Glasgow Warriors No 8 last represented the Wallabies in a 2019 World Cup victory over Georgia.

Although Israel Folau, Malakiai Fekitoa and Charles Piutau all similarly switched allegiance to Tonga from Australia and New Zealand respectively in July, Dempsey marks the first case of an international player transitioning from a so-called "Tier One" nation to another.

Following Dempsey's lead, in August, Tawera Kerr-Barlow, the New Zealand scrum-half, declared that he wanted to play for Australia at next year's Rugby World Cup, in a move that would potentially see him become the highest-profile transfer between Test sides since World Rugby changed the sport's eligibility laws last year. Kerr-Barlow was an unused replacement in the All Blacks' victory in the 2015 Rugby World Cup final at Twickenham.

Elsewhere, Glasgow lock Scott Cummings has been ruled out of Scotland's autumn series with a broken toe. The 25-year-old, who would have been in contention to start against Australia on Saturday, has withdrawn from Townsend's squad and will play no part in any of the four Tests over the next month.

His place in the squad is taken by Edinburgh's Glen Young, who has been named among the substitutes for the showdown with the Wallabies at Murrayfield. Dempsey's Glasgow colleague Ollie Smith is given his first home start after making his debut against Argentina during the summer tour. Jamie Ritchie will captain the side for the first time since being appointed as Stuart Hogg's successor, while Blair Kinghorn starts at number 10 after the controversial decision not to select Finn Russell.

Analysis: New eligibility rules still a force for good

By Charles Richardson

There is no doubt, I am convinced, that World Rugby had its heart in the right place when it altered its eligibility regulations last year, allowing capped players to switch allegiance to another country for which they are eligible following a three-year cooling off period.

It was a regulation to even the playing field, to allow the traditional 'Tier Two' nations to select players who had been capped and captured by other nations; players who, perhaps, had not quite kicked on with their qualified nation but who would improve another nation immeasurably. Players such as Charles Piutau and Malakai Fekitoa, who won caps for New Zealand and were, therefore, blocked from playing for the nation of their heritage – and their birth, in Fekitoa's case – Tonga.

The measure was intended to allow these nations to improve. To make the international rugby scene more competitive and, more specifically, to give players from the Pacific Islands who did not cut the mustard with the more established southern-hemisphere nations a second lease of life. That second lease of life will work both ways. Not only will Tonga be improved by the presence of Piutau and Fekitoa in the short-term, their experience in high-performance environments around the rugby world – Piutau is currently with Bristol Bears while Fekitoa is at Munster after leaving Wasps last season – would have aided Tonga's future development.

So, the news that Jack Dempsey, the flanker who has won 14 caps for Australia, will make his debut for Scotland this weekend against those very same Wallabies, using the same regulation as Piutau and Fekitoa, does rankle.

Much of the imbroglio is, as is often the case with rugby, about who to blame. Scotland, the player himself and Glasgow Warriors have all played by the rules. Why should they not pick a player who is eligible for their side and who they have deemed good enough? Out of blind respect and pride for rugby's traditions? That would almost be the equivalent, before this latest regulation change, of England not picking Manu Tuilagi because he was born in Samoa, despite the centre being entirely eligible under World Rugby's regulations.

It is difficult, too, to lay blame at the feet of rugby's governing body, whose intentions were honest and unalloyed. Since the first World Cup in 1987, only four nations have lifted the Webb Ellis Cup over the subsequent nine tournaments. That needs to change, World Rugby knows it and, on the face of it, their latest eligibility tweak was a step in the right direction.

The governing body could not have said that only Pacific Islanders could profit from this amendment, so it had to be a blanket regulation. What choice did it have? The case of Dempsey will surely be a rarity – perhapseven an anomaly.

If others do follow, it might just be a pill that rugby's traditionalists must swallow for the greater good.