Movie finder Release calendar New releases Coming soon Reviews User reviews Search

Directed by Gregory Nava

Bordertown 2006

R

114 MIN

Overview Releases Reviews Cast crew Movie Codes Products News Forum

Crime

Drama

Mystery

Thriller

Studio101 DISTRIBUTION

Direct to videoYesCountry US LanguageEnglish Runtime114 minRatedRTechnical details 1.78:1

Movie plot tags

A powerful story of life on the border between the United States and Mexico, BORDERTOWN is based on the tragic account of hundreds of women working in American-owned factories who have been brutally raped and murdered in Juarez,, a city gripped by fear. The attacks have been covered up by the local authorities, and still continue today. When editor of the Chicago Sentinel George Morgan sends ambitious reporter Lauren Adrian to Juarez, Mexico to investigate the murders, what she finds is the story of a lifetime. Eva, a young woman who was raped and left for dead in the desert, is the only ...(more)

A powerful story of life on the border between the United States and Mexico, BORDERTOWN is based on the tragic account of hundreds of women working in American-owned factories who have been brutally raped and murdered in Juarez,, a city gripped by fear. The attacks have been covered up by the local authorities, and still continue today. When editor of the Chicago Sentinel George Morgan sends ambitious reporter Lauren Adrian to Juarez, Mexico to investigate the murders, what she finds is the story of a lifetime. Eva, a young woman who was raped and left for dead in the desert, is the only woman to survive an attack. Unable to go to the police for help, she turns to a local newspaper run by Diaz Alfonso, former friend and colleague of Lauren's. Hiding Eva is incredibly dangerous, but Lauren knows that publishing her story is the only way to expose the truth behind the murders. She is determined to find Eva's attackers but soon finds herself immersed in a dangerous web of corruption that extends to both sides of the border. (less)

Director: Gregory Nava

Writer: Gregory Nava

Starring: Jennifer Lopez, Antonio Banderas, Maya Zapata, Martin Sheen, Randall Batinkoff, Irineo Alvarez

Producers: David Bergstein, Simon Fields, Gregory Nava, Cary Epstein, Sue Jett, Barbara Martinez Jitner

» See full cast & crew

1

fans

22

Blu-ray

collections

66

DVD

collections

1

Digital

collections

Similar titles you might also like

What is this?

Use the thumbs up and thumbs down icons to agree or disagree that the title is similar to Bordertown. You can also suggest completely new similar titles to Bordertown in the search box below.

Show more titles »« Show less titles

Similar titles suggested by members