The U.S.-based film financier who recently bought Canadian independent movie distributor ThinkFilm is among the potential buyers kicking the tires at Motion Picture Distribution LP, sources say.

ThinkFilm, known for distributing edgy and irreverent movies, was bought by producer David Bergstein, who is building a film conglomerate under the name of Capco Group with partner and construction mogul Ron Tutor.

The holding company's two divisions now include British film financing company Capitol Films, bought in January, and Toronto-based ThinkFilm, the deal for which was announced on Oct. 24.

ThinkFilm's chief executive officer, Jeff Sackman, declined yesterday to comment on Mr. Bergstein's interest in purchasing Canada's largest movie distributor. But Mr. Bergstein recently told Daily Variety, the entertainment industry paper, that the plan is to "build a worldwide distribution company."

Mr. Bergstein's Mobius Pictures produced Bordertown, a thriller starring Jennifer Lopez that is set to be released next year. He also briefly owned Le Dome, a legendary Hollywood eatery.

Motion Picture, which has subsidiaries in Britain and Spain, is 51-per-cent owned by Alliance Atlantis Communications Inc. The Toronto-based broadcaster announced last month that it would explore the sale of part or all of its stake in the distributor.

Movie Distribution Income Fund, the income trust that owns the balance of the distributor, said yesterday that its special committee has given the green light to join Alliance Atlantis in a potential sale.

Motion Picture's chief financial officer, Lloyd Wiggins, told analysts in a conference call that "a number of third parties have already expressed interest" in the distributor and the sales process should begin imminently.

"It's safe to say that there has to be a Canadian partner in any transaction," he added. "How it is structured is a little premature [to say]"

Heritage Canada rules require any foreign buyer of a cultural business to have a Canadian partner that retains control of the firm.

London-based hedge fund Marwyn Investment Management LLP has stated it is still "very interested" in purchasing Motion Picture, but would not say whether its previous conditional bid of $10 to $10.50 a unit is still on the table. Sources say New York-based Goldman Sachs Group Inc. is a potential buyer.

Units of Movie Distribution yesterday rose 24 cents to close at $8.06 on the Toronto Stock Exchange.

Raymond James Ltd. analyst Andy Nasr expects a deal will be done and is the most optimistic of analysts, with a target of $10 a unit for the takeover. Others see a transaction done closer to the $9 range.

While ThinkFilm could be a Canadian partner for Mr. Bergstein's pitch, Mr. Nasr said that foreigners won't have a problem because there are "many different ways to comply with Heritage Canada's stipulations, including having Alliance Atlantis retain some ownership."

The proposed sale is the latest twist in a saga that began last July when Motion Picture's founder and chairman, Victor Loewy, left the distributor after two other senior executives -- including former CEO Patrice Théroux -- were fired.

Mr. Loewy's departure triggered a plunge in the income trust's unit price to as low as $5.28 on concern that movie studio New Line Cinema Corp. might cancel its contract because of a "key man" clause.

Alliance Atlantis launched legal action against the executives and alleged they were plotting to sell the distributor without approval of its board. But Mr. Loewy returned to work for the distributor as a consultant on the lucrative New Line deal and all lawsuits were dropped.

Some analysts saw Mr. Loewy's return to the fold as a precursor to dressing up the firm for a sale.

Movie Distribution

SOURCE: COMPANY REPORTS