ThinkFilm, an independent Canadian film distributor that has made waves by handling controversial and edgy movies, has been sold to a big U.S. outfit that will bring it greater financial clout.

The deal will see ThinkFilm become part of the film conglomerate being assembled by Los Angeles-based producer David Bergstein, who earlier this year bought British-based Capital Films and merged it with his production company Mobius Pictures.

The price he paid for ThinkFilm was not released, although sources in the industry say it was between $15-million and $25-million.

ThinkFilm chief executive officer Jeff Sackman said the firm was willing to operate on a shoestring for a time, but it was clear from the start -- it was established in 2001 -- that eventually it would need more financial backing. The alternative was to try to raise money from individual investors, but it was "a smarter play" to sell to someone with deep pockets, he said.

Mr. Sackman said he will stay on to run the firm under its new ownership, and will try to maintain the company's focus on high-quality independent films. Sources in Los Angeles, however, doubt that he will be around for the long term.

ThinkFilm has raised eyebrows with the release of films such as Born Into Brothels and The Aristocrats, and is currently distributing Shortbus, a controversial movie that features non-simulated sex.

In a statement, Mr. Bergstein praised ThinkFilm contributions to the film landscape as "nothing short of an extraordinary accomplishment."

Mr. Sackman founded ThinkFilm with other former employees of Lions Gate Entertainment Corp., where he had been head of the distribution arm. In 2003, producer Robert Lantos came on board as an investor. The two have been feuding, according to people in the film business, but they both agreed to sell their holdings to Mr. Bergstein.

In an interview Mr. Lantos described ThinkFilm as "a little jewel of a company in the specialty film niche which is ripe with opportunity." Asked why he is selling, Mr. Lantos said "I have been known to sell great companies with more opportunity than ThinkFilm has."

When making films, "I operate from passion," he said. "When it comes to business deals, I operate from cold blooded profit motive."

One question that hangs over the sale is what happens to Canadian films that ThinkFilm has in its pipeline. These movies were eligible for special tax treatment and marketing funding from Telefilm Canada, while the company was Canadian owned, but will no longer qualify.

Mr. Sackman said those issues have not yet been settled.