In Malvern, the news that peace in South Africa has been declared was received with a demonstration of joy and thankfulness on every side. When the chief victories of the campaign were won the town celebrated them on a fitting scale, but the enthusiasm then displayed paled before that exhibited on Monday, when tidings reached us that the conflict is over. Malvern Gazette, June 6, 1902.

The usefulness of the Ledbury Ploughing Society is becoming more and more important. The work it has accomplished since its formation three or four years ago certainly justifies this assertion. Sheep sheering competitions have now been take up by the society and, judging from the success that attended the initial effort, this annual event will become a popular occasion. Ledbury Free Press, June 10. 1902.

50 years ago

Among eight Worcestershire figures named in the Queen's Birthday Honours List published yesterday was Mr Rupert De La Bere, MP for the South Worcestershire, who received a knighthood. Mr De La Bere is 59 and is a prominent member of London commercial and financial circles, as well as being a farmer in his own right. Malvern Gazette, June 6, 1952.

Ashperton show has been cancelled. This village show, which had built up for itself quite a reputation, has followed several others into retirement. At the committee meeting in Ashperton Hall, the treasurer, Mr R J Hopkins, reported a loss last year of £50 and said this would have been even greater but for donations. Ledbury Reporter, June 13, 1952.

25 years ago

Plans to experiment with a mixture of concrete and grass on the part of Colwall Green used most by cars have had to be discarded by Malvern Hills Conservators because of the expense. The parish council's representative on the Conservators reported that they had discovered the cost would be around £1,700. Malvern Gazette, June 9, 1977.

A Ledbury man has warned Hereford and Worcester County Council that he will sue if he is injured as a result of what he calls "the appalling state of some roads in the county". Mr S P Glennie-Smith, of Victoria Road, who rides a motorcycle, has written to the Highways authority about the condition of the roads. Ledbury Reporter, June 9, 1977.