March 21, 2021

Set in Fonzaso, Italy, deep in the mountains, during the time tensions were building that would later erupt into WWII, Adelasia Argenta is a mother and midwife. Her daughter Nina is falling in love with Pietro, who eventually leaves Italy for the US. She never forgets Pietro and yearns to be reunited with him.

This is a beautiful story of mothers and daughters and family; one of my favorite kind of stories to read about. It’s also about the strength of women, and especially the resilience of Nina and her family. Last, it's about enduring love.

Over on instagram, the author has shared interviews and videos on location in Italy. Learning more about the story behind the book, visiting the setting, it made the book experience even more enjoyable for me.

I received a gifted copy.

Many of my reviews can also be found on my blog: www.jennifertarheelreader.com and instagram: www.instagram.com/tarheelreader

July 5, 2021

Rounded up from around 3.5 stars ⭐️

Under the light of the Italian moon follows Nina through her life, from a young girl (who has just fallen for a boy that is moving to America) through to adult life. Along the way she faces many difficulties both worldwide (such as WWI and WWII) and personal.

I love true stories, particularly historical accounts. I really liked that this book is based on Jennifer Anton’s own family. It added a personal touch that can be lacking in some true tales. I’ve never previously read any books based in Italy throughout the wars. I found out a lot of really interesting things I didn’t know before.

At times I found it tough to connect with some of the characters; other characters I loved from the beginning (Lasia was a particular favourite of mine). However, I’ve been very busy recently so this may be why I struggled at times. I was completely blindsided by some of the events that happened. Often real life is a lot more unexpected and heartbreaking than fictional stories. I felt like I became part of this Italian family and will definitely feel a sense of loss without them.

I would recommend this to anyone who loves historical fiction, especially if you like a bit of romance thrown in. I want to thank Voracious readers only and the author for allowing me to read this book and give my personal thoughts.

June 24, 2021

Nina Argenta lives in Fonzaso a small remote mountain village in Italy, a group of young men are emigrating to American, her brother Antonio is one of them and Nina promises her mother Adelasia she will never leave. Pietro Pante returns from America to visit his family in Fonzaso, after a quick courtship, he and Nina marry, Pietro buys a small house for his new bride and returns to America to work in the coal mines. Pietro works really hard in American, saving and sending money home to Nina and his parents. Mussolini gains power, all Italian men must register for military service, and when Pietro visits his family in Italy, it’s risky and he returns to America.

Life in Italy changes, the fascist rule the country, during WW II the German’s invade Italy and the Italian people are cut off from the rest of the world. A desperate Pietro continues to write to Nina, he has no idea if she receives his letters and she doesn’t write back to him. For Nina life’s a daily struggle, food and necessities are scarce, she’s extremely worried about her daughter’s safety and the Germans start severely punishing people who help the local partisans. As the war years drag on, with still no word from her husband and Nina doesn’t think she will ever see him again.

Under The Light Of The Italian Moon is an historical saga, it’s based on the true story about Nina and Pietro Pante’s long distance relationship and it spans over twenty years. It’s a remarkable story about love, family, war, sacrifice, determination and incredible strength. Both Nina and Pietro were amazing people, an inspiring book to read and five stars from me. https://karrenreadsbooks.blogspot.com/

January 1, 2021

My favorite genre is historical fiction based on true stories and “Under the Light of the Italian Moon” is a perfect combination of everything I appreciate in a novel. Not only it’s based on the author’s family history, but it’s meticulously researched and written with such heart, you’ll feel instantly attached to the characters and find yourself rooting for them as they go through their struggles. Nina and her mother, the local midwife who delivered more than a thousand babies, are truly worthy of admiration. Their integrity and desire to fight for a woman’s right to decide whether to have a family or not instead of following Mussolini’s insane “breeding cow” program that, no doubt, caused many unnecessary deaths, is something worth applauding. In the dark era of Il Duce, when just speaking out against the regime could lead to one’s denunciation, Nina and her mother fought with all they could to protect the vulnerable women under their charge and later, as the war broke out, Nina’s courage and desire to help save not just her patients, but the lives of the persecuted. The romance that never died despite everything Nina and her husband Pietro had to go through will make you tear up in the end; yes, it’s that emotional. And the main message the book carries - stand up for what is right no matter what the cost - is truly timeless and is more relevant today than ever. It’s a book about family, about brave women’s path, about courage and resilience, about immigrants’ struggles and eternal love. If you love historical fiction and particularly novels based on true stories, don’t even hesitate about picking this one up. You’ll thank me later, I promise.

April 1, 2021

Starting in 1914 we meet Nina Argenta, a young girl growing up in the small, rural town of Fonzaso, Italy. Her mother Adelasia is a strong figure in the family and the region’s mid-wife. The family survives WWI and many young men, including her brother, head to America to earn better wages to help their struggling families. Pietro Pante also heads to America after Nina finds herself falling in love with him. The subsequent rise of Mussolini followed by the Nazi occupation, threaten all of Fonzaso.

Under the Light of the Italian Moon is a story of love, survival and family. Nina and Pietro are reunited and marry yet he chooses to remain in America making infrequent visits to Italy. Nina, never knowing if she will ever hear from or see Pietro again, develops into a resilient woman, like her mother, taking charge of her life for the sake of her children and the rest of her family. But the horrors of WWII test her strength and threaten her future.

Author Jennifer Anton has written a sweeping story that, while fiction, is lovingly based on members of her own family. And that love and respect for those who came before her comes through in such a heartfelt way. If you read a lot of historical fiction, especially books that take place during WWII, some of the stories start to feel repetitive. Under the Light of the Italian Moon is a unique story that will grab you from the beginning. I cared about this family throughout every page.

Grazie mille to author Jennifer Anton for reaching out and offering me the opportunity to read this wonderful book in advance of its March 8, 2021 publication (which happens to be International Women’s Day!) I hope it gets the attention it deserves.

Rated 4.5 stars.

Review posted on MicheleReader.com.

August 24, 2021

An engaging read, this is a meticulously researched story based on the author’s own family’s saga. The tale follows young Nina from WWI through the rising tensions of Mussolini’s totalitarianism into the fraught days of WWII. A promise made to her mother keeps Nina bound in tradition in rural Italy, and the evolution of her character as she grows hardened by life is authentically portrayed. I found this to be a moving read, eloquent, heartrending, and thoughtful. Even though I grew frustrated by the characters at times, their struggles and choices always felt authentic. This is an ode to Italy, to the bond between mothers and daughters, to the courage and resilience of women, and to the love that perseveres even through time and distance.

January 1, 2021

This is an epic book written from the heart, about other women with huge hearts who kept their families together, against all odds, before and during the Second World War in Italy. “The strength of the world is in its women. The power of the world is within its women. Yet it is the women we erase.” Those deep words at the start of the story set me on the right path.

We are drawn in immediately to the community of Fonzaso, a real place in the north east of Italy and more specifically to the story of Adelasia, the town’s midwife: a strong woman nicknamed The Captain. She passes her indispensable art to her daughter, Nina, and her story is the one we follow in the main.

I loved the everpresent moon. Italians set great store by the moon’s cycle for planting their crops and the relationship between the age of the moon and the birth of babies. Jennifer Anton uses the moon to paint wonderful scenes: “…the moon, radiating gold into the sapphire sky like the halo around the Virgin Mary’s head…” The moon is also a symbol of love. “This is our moon – la nostra bella luna – It is the light there every night, you can count on it.” These haunting words are the words of a lover who will soon be separated from his wife. When they gaze up at the moon while they are apart, they will feel closer.

Italians are a passionate race and Under the Light of the Italian Moon is a story of passion but it isn’t sickly sweet. “I’ve loved you since before I knew what love was…” Nina tells her lover (no spoilers). The romance is beautifully written, as is the whole book, especially the second half which I could not tear myself away from.

Against the background of the war and Mussolini’s despotic fascist rule, it is the women who keep going. Il Duce’s definition: “War is to male what maternity is to the female” is a strong theme throughout the story. The author seems to be saying that if women were to rule the world, there would be no wars. “It is a circle. Women create, men destroy. We feed the beasts.”

There are episodes of truly horrific cruelty on the pages: of real events recounted to the author during her research. It is good that we are not spared these details. It is vital we remember and respect the amazing bravery that ordinary people endured at this time. There were passages that brought tears to my eyes.

There is so much more I could say about the bond between mother and child, the difficult story of Italian emigrants, the savage beauty of Italy, antisemitism, the wonderful pictures of everyday life in an ordinary Italian town. The characters and events were so real to me. I recommend this book highly and not just to female readers. “Women will always be a mystery to men,’ Adelasia tells her daughter. Men could learn a lot about the resilience of women through reading this powerful book.

Read

July 7, 2022

Too often I’m impressed by the early 4 & 5 star reviews – I have now figured out that most are by advance readers who have given their ‘honest opinion’.

Well I found it boring. Even though it started out slow I tried to carry on but I couldn’t!

It is over-written with very little character development. Italian names, of which there are numerous, are too many to keep track of especially the unfamiliar ones. Then there are the Italian words and phrases with only a few translated. I know the story is set in Italy but for an English speaking reader it’s just annoying.

The book became more work than pleasure to read so I gave it up 100+ pages in.

March 13, 2022

I liked this book. Especially because I knew that it was based on a true story. I appreciate that pulling together a grandparent’s story is arduous, and I think Jennifer did an admirable job.

I was a bit frustrated by Elvira disappearing from the story after intercepting Pietro’s letter from America. Was that the only time? How did Nina or her family find out that that happened.

Want to read

March 10, 2021

Now Available! Under the Light of the Italian Moon published on March 8th, International Women's Day.

Available for order and review:

On Amazon: getbook.at/JAnton

On Barnesand Noble: https://bit.ly/3n1nDqC

For U.S. at Bookshop .org: https://bit.ly/38o1oXP

Excerpt of Under the Light of the Italian Moon is now available here: https://bit.ly/3a8bdIM

Join my mailing list at http://www.boldwomanwriting.com for more information on my life outside of writing and updates on the launch of Under the Light of the Italian Moon

Follow the Journey on Instagram at: https://www.instagram.com/boldwomanwr...

January 24, 2021

It was definitely a combination of a beautiful cover, a lovely author so willing to engage with her readers, and the premise of a fascinating story that drew me to this novel. Thank you for the gift of this amazing advance reading copy, Jennifer Anton, Amsterdam Publishers and NetGalley. It’s more than a spectacular historical novel, it’s a lesson for us all; we are connected and the threads that unite us can be severed if we don’t actively support each other and learn to live together and reach for the greatness within.

You are about to embark on a journey back to northern Italy during the days of the author’s grandmother and great grandmother and bear witness to a beautiful love story, featuring the strength of women. Fonzaso holds in its history the love story of a woman, Adelasia Dalla Santa Argenta, who, so devoted to her calling as a rural midwife, risked everything during Mussolini’s rise to power and welcomed thousands of babies into the world. As Adelasia and her young daughter, Ninetta, bring life and care for life, Musollini’s quest undoes much of their work; the babies they help deliver die by the hands of Nazis because of their leader’s quest for power. The second love story is between Ninetta and Pietro and features their sacrifices for love and the reward of faithfulness; the sweetness of togetherness after the war.

Although every case of love presented in the novel is different, what unites them all is the reaching out of one human being to another. In this story spanning two generations we see the reaching out of (1) a midwife to an expectant mother, to a nervous father, and to a newly birthed miracle (2) a mother to her hungry children who haven’t even met their father (3) an older sibling to a younger sibling, (4) an auntie to her niece after the child’s mother dies and father has moved to another country (5) a nervous mother preparing meals for the enemy in her home and (6) a young wife, reaching out to her husband through letters as he spends the majority of their married life in another country toiling to provide for those he loves at home. Regardless of time and space, the Italian moon is always there. The same moon that we look upon every night during this pandemic is the same moon that those from Fonzaso looked upon during the rise of fascism and world war two. That same moon sees the joys and the disappointments. It connects us all.

The author shares that on the wall of the altar at Sant’Anna are the names of important women who the monument pays honour to and at the top of the list is Adelasia Dalla Santa Argenta under an inscription that simply states: Ricordante le vostre mamme = Remember your mothers.

“The strength of the world is in its women. The power of the world is within its women. Yet it is the women we erase. Some women are unwilling to be forgotten or to forget. Particularly if they are Italian.”

Let’s remember where we came from and where we are going. It would behoove us to radiate love along the journey.

This is a must have book. Circle March 8, 2021 on your calendar. It’s no coincidence that it’s to be published on International Women’s Day. Read it and celebrate all the strong women you know, work to build up those women in progress of becoming a strong woman and be an example to encourage those who feel weak to find their inner strength. We are all important. Our strength is needed. Now, more than ever.

April 5, 2024

Learning that a novel is inspired by actual events, especially involving the author's family, elicits an unspeakable sense of awe and curiosity. It is a universal truth that narratives of hardship and resilience exist amidst the diversity of human experiences, much more tragic than works of fiction. Novels about World War 2, similar to "Under the Light of the Italian Moon," will always convey a novelty no matter how trite the plot may appear.

I almost failed to read this book. Though I have consumed several historical novels about personal struggles during WW2, only a few devastated me as Kristin Hannah's "The Nightingale" did. It wasn't easy to move on from that one piece of literary work. Yet, here I am, finally rejoicing that another author has vividly captured the zeitgeist of that particular historical period.

I love that Anton did not portray the Argenta women as infallible characters. There were moments of weakness and fragments of vulnerability depicted in the story that even fulfilling one's calling can drain one's soul. In part a coming-of-age tale, this novel recounts the journey of the Argentas, starting with its matriarch, Adelasia, the town's "La Capitana." As Fonzaso's only trained midwife, Adelasia has delivered every child in their village. As a mother, she instilled in her daughters how they should always perform their social and religious duties as women but must learn when to defy rules when necessary. Nina was her mother's sole successor as the town's midwife, though not without hesitation. She wanted to make a difference, which involved exploring opportunities outside Italy. However, when two of her siblings decided to move away from home, Nina chose to stay with her mother. By the time Nina had married her childhood love, Piedro, her role taught her that becoming a woman entails more than just becoming a wife and a mother. The world, she realizes, requires more than just her contribution to society but her personal devotion, resilience, and sacrifice.

Rich with imagery written in haunting prose that portrays the specter of a patriarchal society, the Fascist regime, and World War II in Italy, "Under The Light of the Italian Moon" begins and ends with the strength of the Argenta women. The author skillfully executed the examination of heavy themes such as war, death, religion, ideologies, reproductive coercion, and the loss of a child without descending into a messy attempt at social commentary with unresolved structure. Despite having read novels that depict the atrocities committed by Germans during the war, the familiar inhumane acts, albeit portrayed differently within the pages of this book, are as unsettling and infuriating as ever.

To dissect every strength of this book would necessitate consuming more than just a page to enumerate my sentiments. I believe this novel's wisdom is not limited to women but to everyone who must know that fulfilling gender roles does not define one's worth. Nor does a seemingly selfish refusal or vulnerability to committing to one's duty demand harsh judgment. Nothing is black and white when it comes to being human. What matters are the insights one gains throughout the journey to self-discovery; that is precisely what this book is about.

January 24, 2022

3 contemporary stars 🌟

Historical fiction is one of my favorite genres but I struggled to get into it this. In the first half, I felt I was reading a contemporary as the historical events were only mentioned in passing. Part 2 was more promising but with the tough start I had, the book didn’t turn up my feelings.

I really think part 1 could have been shorter or focus more on the relationship building between Pietro and Nina. I was more hooked at the things happening at the last 3 chapters, I would have enjoyed reading more from then onwards.

December 15, 2020

LOVED IT!!

Easy to read, and the characters really drew me in. It was very interested learning more about Italy from WWI to after WWII. I didn't want it to end!

October 9, 2021

Under the Light of the Italian Moon by Jennifer Anton

Synopsis /

Nina Argenta doesn’t want the traditional life of a rural Italian woman. The daughter of a strong-willed midwife, she is determined to define her own destiny. But when her brother emigrates to America, she promises her mother to never leave.

When childhood friend Pietro Pante briefly returns to their mountain town, passion between them ignites while Mussolini forces political tensions to rise. Just as their romance deepens, Pietro must leave again for work in the coal mines of America. Nina is torn between joining him and her commitment to Italy and her mother.

As Mussolini’s fascists throw the country into chaos and Hitler’s Nazis terrorise their town, each day becomes a struggle to survive greater atrocities. A future with Pietro seems impossible when they lose contact and Nina’s dreams of a life together are threatened by Nazi occupation and an enemy she must face alone.

My Thoughts /

First off, I’d just like to take a brief moment to say, isn’t this a sensational cover! It’s beautiful, eye-catching and gives off all sorts of wonderful exotic and romantic vibes!

The second thing that caught my attention was that although Under the Light of the Italian Moon is a wonderful piece of historical fiction, its roots are firmly planted in fact. Based on a true story, author, Jennifer Anton’s inspiration began with her great grandparents’ own love story.

Set in Italy during WWII, which is in itself uniquely different, as most historical novels seem to have their roots firmly planted in France and England. Life in Italy during WWII didn’t differ much from that of other civilians around Europe. It was characterized by restrictions. Living under a dictatorship, such restrictions didn’t simply take the form of limited amounts of non-National goods, fuel, and even items of clothing, but also of censorship. Freedom of speech had been severely cut since the very inception of the Fascist Regime, which was largely controlled through the Ministry of Propaganda. Just as it had been happening in Nazi Germany, it controlled what Italians could say, write and know about the war and politics.

Yes, a dictator can be loved.

Provided the masses fear him at the same time.

The crowd loves strong men.

The crowd is like a woman.

-Benito Mussolini

You are about to embark on a wondrous journey, back to northern Italy during the days of the author’s grandmother and great grandmother and bear witness to a beautiful love story. Love and strength are two themes which the author has seamlessly woven together in this family’s history. Strength:- None of the women in Fonzaso are stronger than Adelasia Argenta, the midwife, who is affectionately known as ‘The Captain’ by her family. She is dedicated to helping women and bringing new life into the world. Love:- The people of Fonzaso love their family, their village, their God, and their country. But love can simultaneously bind and divide. When love of family requires leaving to make a living and to support your family the bonds will either strengthen or shatter.

Part 1 – November 1914 - We are introduced to Nina, who, as a young child looks up to her mother, Adelasia - a midwife in Fonzaso who has delivered many babies. Growing up under the shadow of her older sister, Nina falls in love with Pietro Pante. Pietro is one of fourteen. In an effort to provide for his parents and the rest of his family, he leaves Fonzaso for America, to work in the mines of Pennsylvania. It’s a low pay/high risk job, but one he must do as he will be supporting not one but two families – that of his parents and his new wife and son. Adelasia has agreed to the marriage so long as Nina remain in Italy, with her. Nina is torn between the man she loves and her family. Nina now faces many difficult and challenging situations without the man she loves by her side. Without knowing whether she will see or hear from Pietro again, Nina develops into a resilient woman, taking charge of her life for the sake of her children and family. In today’s fast, disposable, one use and then throw-away society theirs is a romance that never dies.

March 7, 2021

I truly loved this story. It’s the perfect mix of historical fiction and true life memories. It’s such an emotional read about strong and intelligent women. Nina and her mother have to go through so much and I instantly fell in love with both characters. Their story is about family, love, hope and courage and has definitely made a mark on my heart. It will stay as a treasured read on my shelf to be read time and again. Just wonderful.

February 9, 2021

Yes, you heard me right, I actually 5 starred a book.... and what a book it was 😍

Firstly I’d like to thank @boldwomanwriting for sending me a pre-release copy, and for signing it for me. I will truly treasure this book. This will be released on the 8th of March which fittingly is national women’s day.

This is a story of enormous strength from a woman, Nina, who is from rural Italy. This strength is the essence of her amazing mother (the Captain), the only midwife in their isolated mountain towns. We watch Nina grow up idolising her mother and being in no other words a “gift” to her mama. As Nina turns into a young woman, a childhood friend Pietro returns from America stealing her heart. True loves journey is never smooth especially when you’re living through World War 2 and residing in different continents.

This enthralling historical fiction novel dove into long distance relationships, motherhood and heart ache in a way that had me sobbing into my blanket. This tremendously well-written novel brought the story alive, with such believable character development. You could see the change in Nina from the innocent daughter of a midwife to the slightly broken, magnificent mother of 3, post war woman.

As a mother of two daughters this book hit my heart hard. I would recommend this book to any:

. Mothers

. Historical fiction fans

. ”The book thief” fans

. To be honest any great readers 💪

To put the cherry on the cake, when I read Ninas daughter Lasia was the authors grandmother I cried even more. I knew I wanted to use my daughter to create a beautiful photo to match the essence of this book.

March 6, 2021

I truly enjoyed this book. A love story spanning decades, with tragedy and happiness throughout. To know that it is based on actual people made it even better.

December 15, 2020

This epic story about a young Italian woman caught up in the struggles brought by war to her mountain village is a sweeping tale of love, loss, and separation. Based on the author’s own family history, the book is propelled by strong women who live through some of the most horrific events imaginable. I’m always fascinated by the stories of women who live through wars and marvel at their ability to keep going despite all of the hardships, particularly with all of the men gone. These women survive war, famine, and death through sheer resilience, grit, and determination.

This book is also a love story, with Nina and her husband separated by thousands of miles. Their reunions throughout the book leave you hopeful for their future, and I flew through the book in just over two days to see how their story ended.

You may think that you know what World War II was like after reading the plethora of books written about it. However, until you read Under the Light of the Italian Moon, a part of the war story is missing. While Italy may have been in the Axis, this book will give you the story of the Italian women who fought for love and survival against all odds, no matter the political games played in Rome or Berlin.

Thank you to the author for providing me an Advanced Reader Copy for my honest review.

May 11, 2021

Oh. Mah. GAWD! This book is EVERYTHING to me! What an incredible and beautiful story, told so vividly by a woman whose family experiences this book depicts! My grandparents are also from this town, well-one was-the other was from the neighboring town. I traveled there myself in 1983, and I can confirm the accuracy of the area. Yes, I may be prejudiced because a few of the family surnames mentioned are those of my own family. However, many of the experiences depicted were the very same ones my own relatives experienced, so very eerie. I read more than half the book in one sitting-I could NOT put it down! The events were absolutely riveting-omigod-I was totally holding my breath during many scenes. The writing was so vivid and visceral that I was physically squirming during some parts! This is a great book for anyone-especially WWII history buffs. After finishing this book, I have a renewed appreciation for the people of my ancestral town because of the hell they endured during that horrible time. God bless Fonzaso!

March 8, 2021

It was a good book that starts before the war and carries through it. It’s also a love story about a couple living apart and enduring many hardships. I enjoyed the story and think historical fiction fans will too.

Thanks to Netgalley and the publisher for the early copy

April 8, 2021

Italian Moon

Historical fiction is a nice way to learn about past times and people, but the intimacy between lovers does not need to be graphically displayed. Please leave some things secret.

March 29, 2021

4.5 stars

When I was pitched this book, what sold me was the sensational cover! The cover is a show stopper and so eye catching and promises something exotic and romantic. But then I read the description and I couldn’t wait to read it, especially since it was based on a true story.

While it is set during WWII, it’s not set in the traditional countries of France and England, but rather Italy as the title implies. I think Italy often gets overlooked in the WWII historical fiction genre so I was really excited to read about a familiar event in history through a unique pair of eyes.

Plus I was super excited to see that there was a romance in it. I love war time romances. The backdrop of the war adds so much tension and drama to war time romances so I was really looking forward to this one. I picked it up on the first day of spring break and devoured it in a matter of days! There was a lot to love in this one!

I think of the the things that surprised me about this one, was that it wasn’t published by a larger publishing house. The publisher specializes in holocaust memoirs (which I think is wonderful by the way) but it is still a smaller publisher and I was surprised that this one wasn’t published by a larger house as it has a lot to recommend itself to readers, especially fans of historical fiction. This is the author’s debut novel and I was throughly impressed by her writing ability as well as the historical research. I read in her author bio that she like rescuing forgotten women’s stories from history and she is starting with her own family! This book is based on true events within her own family which makes is even more special I think. The personal history in this book really made it shine.

While the history and real events are what made this book for me, the characters were also well developed and enjoyable. Probably because they are based on real people. I adored Nina and felt a genuine connection to her throughout the book, we get to go on this incredible journey with her and watch her strength and resilience shine. I simply love her journey and in this book we get the full scope of her life. It really made the book feel even more epic that it already was. I loved the relationship between Nina and Pietro and watching that grow and change over the years but for me this book was more about mothers and daughters than romance. Yes there was a strong romantic element but the story of mothers and daughters took center stage for me.

I also loved how much authenticity was woven in this one. I really felt like I was living in the region and experiencing everything Nina was. Not just the history but the culture as well. A a Catholic myself, I found familiarity in the pages of this one with all the Catholic references, not to mention the importance of family and all the local festivals. The descriptions of the area are also stunning. So for me the history and the setting/culture really shined in this one and then add in the love story of Nina and Pietro and you have a winning novel for me!

I would love to see this one garner more attention because it was well written, interesting and beautiful. I think readers will certainly enjoy it and feel a connection to Nina especially! If you love historical fiction that feels more epic in nature, then you will surely love this book as much as I did. It was a wonderful read and I am so happy I didn’t pass on it!

See my full review here

March 10, 2021

Under the Light of the Italian Moon, by Jennifer Anton

Pub date: March 8 2021

Under the Light of the Italian Moon is rich with strong women who persevere against great personal pain, patriarchy, WW2, fascism and the Nazi regime.

Anton beautifully crafted a complex historical fiction novel spanning over two decades that delves into the fear, pain and loss of war, familial separation and the grit required to remain connected. Under the Light of the Italian Moon is imbued with her own historical family experiences and complemented with meticulous research to bring her story, the story of mother-daughter midwives Adelasia and Nina, and the people of Fonzaso, Italy to life.

Under the Light of the Italian Moon is a story of resistance and conviction featuring emboldened women determined to protect their immediate family and their extended network and community no matter the costs. It is extraordinary. Heart wrenching. And, inspiring. Making it, in my opinion, the perfect book to be released on International Women’s Day.

Thank you Jennifer @boldwomanwriting for sending me a signed pre-released copy of your book. This has been a long time passion project that is near and dear to your heart which is honoured by your engagement and genuine connection with myself and your reviewers. Thank you so much for this opportunity!

May 10, 2021

This book made me cry a lot especially the last few chapters. It should be read by everyone in this world because it tells you a lot about humanity, love, compassion, sacrifices, and what it truly means to wait for someone for ten years in life.

I don't think so at present people are willing to wait for someone and ready to make sacrifices for them. What a world that would have been where people stayed together and communicated via letters and when they didn't receive a response still they were hopeful.

Oh my, I want to be a part of such a world. In the war zone to people didn't stop helping each other rather they build resilience and courage to face all sorts of trials and tribulations.

Take a bow Jennifer for writing this brilliant piece of love and family story where I never wanted to blink even for a moment. I am so sorry to know it's your family story.

What courage to share your world with us.

God bless you always.

August 15, 2021

This is a beautifully written novel, based on the lives of the author's Italian grandmother, great grandmother and great great grandmother during the rise of fascism and WWII. It is an eloquent tale of love, sacrifice and strength honoring women and their impact on a culture and community. It brought to light the Italian life through very turbulent times. Nina (the author's great grandmother) lived through WWI as a teenager and then through WWII as a daughter, wife, mother and midwife. Her bravery, resiliency and fortitude are nothing short of amazing and inspiring. She is a true hero and this book is a gorgeous tribute of her legacy. I thoroughly enjoyed reading about all of these women. The story is riveting and heartbreaking but also charming and romantic. I highly recommend.

March 6, 2021

Note: I received an ARC of this title from the author in exchange for an advanced review.

***********************************

“Bravissimo” Jennifer Anton for “Under the Light of the Italian Moon.”

I was so moved by this “Love Story”, because it is in every way; an enduring faithful romantic love for Nina and Pietro, the love of mothers for their children (no matter how old) to nurture, protect and love them the best way they knew how under desperate circumstances.

It’s a story of love for a way of life and time, though difficult, was beautiful and rich in family and traditions mothers and women created and fought hard to preserve. They persevered, bringing this love for all of them to strange new worlds of America and Canada, ensuring they live on in the the generations to come.

Finally, it’s a story of love of country; national Italian pride. That pride affected the Argente~Pante families in such heartbreaking ways through war, plague, rise of fascism and the unknown. Watching the only home and people you know and love turn into strangers; having to leave your homeland behind for safety or a better life for your children is the courageous theme embedded throughout this family saga. It is the theme the world over for centuries of immigrants.

Jennifer’s familial tale has such relevance today with all that is happening 100 years later looking so alarmingly familiar. Perhaps if we valued and learned from “Her Story” instead of not heeding the lessons from “history”, things might be different?

As a second generation Jewish Canadian, I could feel an intensely strong pull to this story. I am still close to the impact of the immigrant experience of my grandparents and some aunts and uncles from Eastern Europe.

Women and mothers have been at the heart of every family and community. Jennifer writes these women (her mothers), and honours them by giving them their voice to speak their stories in courage, faith, pride, resilience and fierce maternal love.

Highly recommend!

December 17, 2020

Adelasia Argenta is the heartbeat of her family in Fonzaso, Italy, where Mount Avena and Dolomiti "split Italy from Austria." Adelasia, known as The Captain, feared for her sternness, is the only trained midwife and has delivered all of the children known to her ten-year-old daughter, Nina. It's 1914 and Nina's perspective on young men leaving for America is capped not only by her snowy view of the Alps, but by the wonderment of what lies beyond her small village. As older schoolmate, Pietro Pante, descends into the darkness of the mines in Pennsylvania, Nina is traveling the dark backroads at all hours of the day and night to assist her mother in birthing the babies of Fonzaso. Nina and her mother are dutifully and busily welcoming babies into the world, rejoicing or comforting and consoling families and each other, as Fascism is on the rise and world war is looming.

Nina's mettle is tested from the early years of 1922 when Mussolini becomes the ruler of Italy, through 1939's "Gold for the Fatherland" in Fonzaso, until WWll ends in liberation and celebration on the square. Under the Light of the Italian Moon is a story of love, endurance and unknown strength-all needed for survival. Jennifer Anton was inspired to honor the strength within all women by the true story of her great-grandmother and grandmother. Nina's loyalty and patience are beyond admirable; it's almost unbelievable-except it's true. Five glittering stars for Jennifer Anton's Under the Light of the Italian Moon. *****Gr

March 7, 2021

"The strength of the world is in its women."

A story of strength, passion and bravery.

Nina Argenta is a strong and independent woman who lives in a little Italian town. She gets married with a young boy, Pietro, who is departing in order to have a better life in the USA. She'll stay in Italy and experience the pain of a long distance relationship during the first and the second WW.

Before I begin, I want to personally thank the author for sending me a signed early-release copy. I'll cherish this forever.

Magnificent.

This book stole my heart from its first chapter and embodies Italian women and what they had to go through in those hard parts of our history. It celebrates women, our power to create life and love unconditionally. I cried, laughed and feared throughout the whole book. It reminded me of some great memories with my nonna and how family is important.

The characters are well-written and you can easily empathize with them all. The main point of view is from Nina, however, as the story proceeds, different women narrate the story.

The setting is beautifully analysed and you truly understand what their life was like back then and the consequences they had to face for every little action.

To conclude, I believe this is one of my favorite historical fictions ever! I highly suggest it to every women and to those who love historical fiction.

- @connectinbooks