FOR TIMOTHY DALTON, JAMES Bond is a fascinating paradox: a killer who loathes killing, a vulnerable and sensitive man-machine, an introverted extrovert, a cynical man of principle, a warm and chivalrous lover doomed to reject the women who venture into his sexual force-field. But then Timothy Dalton is a bit of a paradox himself. He's a veteran of the Royal Shakespeare Company, and he's heir to the cliffhanger kingdom of Sean Connery and Roger Moore. He's a serious actor, recently Antony to Vanessa Redgrave's Cleopatra, and he's the dashing new 007, complete with guns and fast cars and vodka martinis, ''shaken not stirred.''

What's more, he's somehow managed to become James Bond after refusing the role on no less than three occasions. In 1971, when he was 25, he was asked if he was interested in taking over from Sean Connery, who had decided it was time for fresh challenges; but he thought that would be ''the most foolish move possible,'' given the likely hostility of a grieving public to his youth and presumpton. Eight years ago, when Mr. Moore was pondering withdrawal, he was seriously sounded out again; but again he declined, this time because he felt unsuited to the series' high-tech, funhouse style.

The third offer came in spring 1986, when Mr. Dalton was committed to a Shakespearan season in London's West End. But the producers kept failing to find the new Bond they wanted and so kept postponing the starting date of the new Bond movie, ''The Living Daylights.'' Suddenly they realized that so much time had passed that they might as well ask Mr. Dalton to reconsider his refusal and start shooting in the fall instead of the summer; and at long last his answer was yes. Between his last night as Petruchio in ''The Taming of the Shrew'' and his first day before the cameras as Bond, he was even able to fit in the movie ''Brenda Starr,'' in which Brooke Shields plays the woman reporter and Mr. Dalton ''an Englishman living in the depths of the Amazonian jungle breeding black orchids without whose juice he'd go insane.''

''The Living Daylights'' opens in New York next Friday, an important date for Mr. Dalton, who is well aware of the fate of George Lazenby, the actor who did take over Bond from Sean Connery and played the role once only. ''If I fail,'' he says wryly, ''it will be a world-famous failure.'' But the movie is doing well in London, and Mr. Dalton himself seems relaxed as he discusses it. He's a tall, rangy man with gray-green eyes, a cleft chin, and what look surprisingly like dimples, intermittently linked by a big, friendly grin. He laughs often and freely, yet isn't afraid of talking earnestly and energetically about becoming and being James Bond: ''If you're to do your work as an actor, you've got to think seriously about it, even if you're in the lightest comedy or thriller.''

Though his father was in advertising, his paternal grandfather was very much a man of the stage, a vaudeville performer who became an agent and ended up running a chain of variety-show houses. But Mr. Dalton himself didn't actually see a straight play until he was 16, when a touring ''Macbeth'' came to a theater near to the family's Derbyshire home. After an entertainment diet that until then had consisted mainly of Saturday-morning movies, he was exhilarated by the experience of seeing ''real people creating an extraordinary, magic world while they were in a room with you.'' When he left school two years later, he knew that he wanted to do precisely that himself.

He joined the Amateur National Youth Theater in London, beginning his career by playing a serving-man in ''Coriolanus.'' Then it was off to Royal Academy of Dramatic Art and, before he'd finished his course there, to the prestigious Birmingham Rep. In 1966, his very first year as a professional, he played Oliver in an ''As You Like It'' that transferred to the West End, and in the same year was featured in a television series and appeared as the King of France in the film ''The Lion in Winter,'' alongside Katharine Hepburn and Peter O'Toole.

Thank you for your patience while we verify access. If you are in Reader mode please exit and log into your Times account, or subscribe for all of The Times.

Thank you for your patience while we verify access.

Already a subscriber? Log in.

Want all of The Times? Subscribe.