Wenceslaus III of Bohemia is a very important man from house of Premyslid in Premyslid Bohemia timeline as it was he who diverged it from our timeline. He lived from October 6, 1289 to August 4, 1306 in our timeline and February 7, 1315 in Premyslid Bohemia timeline. He was the son of Wenceslaus II of Bohemia and his wife Judith of Habsburg. Important siblings include Anne and Elizabeth. On February 12, 1298 he was engaged to Elizabeth of Hungary for a promise of Hungarian crown as Arpadoves died out. However, he lost the crown after sending a letter to Elizabeth saying he would not marry her because she was ugly. That probably happened on one of his drunken nights. As it is said, he as young sat along Bohemia top man and drank all night in the pubs. While drunk he often sold royal properties and when he woke up out of his delirium he quickly gathered them back. When Wladyslav I, the Elbow-High, tried to separate Poland under his rule (as Wenceslaus now ruled Bohemia and Poland) it angered the young king and he went to Poland with his army. Today Poland lies more to the west, so they took it through the town of Olomouc, where on August 4, 1306 while Wenceslaus was lying on a sofa, Conrad of Bolštejn, who was ordered by Henry of Carinthia to kill him, made history diverge. In our timeline he came with two knives and cut Wenceslaus in his back and quickly ran away with one knife. In this timeline he accidentally dropped one of the knives, which woke him up and after a fight, Conrad ended in prison. He thought it was Wladyslaw quickly returned and rather gave Poland to him. Henry then came to him on November 14, 1306 telling him that Wladyslaw wanted to became a ruler of Bohemia as well and asked him for his sister to be his wife, angered with Wladyslaw he agreed without asking. Angry Wenceslaus got out of the castle with his troops and in 15 days he conquered entire Poland and executed Wladyslaw. With his wife Viola of Cieszyn he had his first son Premysl Otakar on September 6, 1307 and on September 6, 1313 he had got Borivoj and also on March 13, 1315 only his wife got Vladislaus. The previous statement is saying only his wife, because he was killed one month and six days earlier. He was killed by Conrad who escaped on 28th January.