By the author of Rosemaryâ s Baby, a horrifying journey into a future only Ira Levin could imagine.

Considered one of the great dystopian novelsâ alongside Anthony Burgess's A Clockwork Orange and Aldous Huxley's Brave New Worldâ Ira Levin's frightening glimpse into the future continues to fascinate readers even forty years after publication.

The story is set in a seemingly perfect global society. Uniformity is the defining feature; there is only one language and all ethnic groups have been eugenically merged into one race called “The Family.“ The world is ruled by a central computer called UniComp that has been programmed to keep every single human on the surface of the earth in check. People are continually drugged by means of regular injections so that they can never realize their potential as human beings, but will remain satisfied and cooperative. They are told where to live, when to eat, whom to marry, when to reproduce. even the basic facts of nature are subject to the UniComp's willâ men do not grow facial hair, women do not develop breasts, and it only rains at night.

With a vision as frightening as any in the history of the science fiction genre, This Perfect Day is one of Ira Levin`s most haunting novels.

"synopsis" may belong to another edition of this title.

About the Author:

Ira Levin (1929-2007) was the highly acclaimed and internationally bestselling author of The Boys from Brazil, Rosemary's Baby, Son of Rosemary, The Stepford Wives, This Perfect Day, Sliver, and A Kiss Before Dying (for which he won the Edgar Award). He also wrote Deathtrap, the longest-running thriller in Broadway history. Levin was also the recipient of three Mystery Writers of America Edgar Allan Poe Awards.

Review:

''Ira Levin's 'Brave New World'.'' --New York Times Book Review

''Marvelously entertaining. A cross between 'Brave New World' and 'Doctor No'.'' --Look Magazine

''Ira Levin's brave new world is populated by eight billion members of The Family. Life is planned and programmed from birth through death by UniComp, the supercomputer down inside the earth.'' --New York Times Book Review

"About this title" may belong to another edition of this title.