Krakow, Poland, October 29, 2011 --(PR.com)-- For the past 18 years numerous projects developed in Comarch had desktop Linux versions or were created specifically for that platform. This allowed Comarch to gain unique experience in all the areas of this operating system including desktops, servers, clusters, mobile/embedded and automotive platforms. Additionally, Comarch was involved in Maemo since its creation and now is an active player in mobile projects hosted by The Linux Foundation like MeeGo, forming a Tizen initiative as well as is an Associate Member of GENIVI Alliance.

“Linux-based solutions have always been an important part of Comarch’s offer since the company’s creation in 1993. Our experience covers virtually all aspects of the Linux world hence our decision to join The Linux Foundation is a natural consequence of that fact,” said Dariusz Filipski, R&D Director, Open Source, Mobile Solutions & Services, Comarch. “We want to share our commitment and experience with other Linux enthusiasts and companies working on Linux projects. For that reason I am very excited because being a member of The Foundation will bring us closer to our business partners as well as open source communities and enable us to streamline our efforts in providing what’s best in open technologies.”

Membership in The Linux Foundation allows companies for tighter collaboration on system and major Linux-related projects between each other and Open Source communities. It also opens access to exclusive events where technical, legal and business issues are solved, as well as where trainings and materials are available. It is a platform used to share experience and best practices both in technological and legal areas. Lastly, membership in The Foundation holds a significant marketing value as it improves a company's recognition in the Linux and Open Source world.

About The Linux Foundation

The Linux Foundation is a nonprofit consortium dedicated to fostering the growth of Linux. Founded in 2000, the organization sponsors the work of Linux creator Linus Torvalds and promotes, protects and advances the Linux operating system by marshaling the resources of its members and the open source development community. The Linux Foundation provides a neutral forum for collaboration and education by hosting Linux conferences, including LinuxCon, and generating original Linux research and content that advances the understanding of the Linux platform. Its web properties, including Linux.com, reach approximately two million people per month and include important Linux video resources. The organization also provides extensive Linux training opportunities that feature the Linux kernel community’s leading experts as instructors.

Media Contact:

Jennifer Cloer

GSM: 503-867-2304

E-mail:Jennifer@linuxfoundation.org

About Comarch

Comarch, one of the largest Central European software houses and IT service providers, apart from delivering IT solutions for the telecommunications, financial services and government market segments, as well as for large enterprises and small and medium businesses, has been an active player in the mobile, embedded and automotive open software domains since 2001. Through a variety of projects in the area of mobile software development, integration, quality assurance, interoperability and cross-platform consulting services, Comarch has proven its deep technical knowledge, know-how and market understanding. With more than 3500 employees Comarch offers flexibility and scalability in building business partnerships and expertise alliances.

Media Contact:

Katarzyna Gajewska

Gsm: +48 691 464 119

E-mail: pr-telecom@comarch.com

###