•Download as PPT, PDF•

1 like•635 views

W

Wroclawianka77

Comarch is a Polish software company founded in 1993 that provides IT services and develops proprietary software products. It has grown to employ over 3,500 people with offices in Poland and other countries. The company focuses on research and development, investing over 15% of revenues. It aims to remain an innovative software house while expanding its global IT infrastructure and diversifying its product and service offerings.

Related slideshows

A Lean production project in software development at AlmavivA - Lean IT Summi...

A Lean production project in software development at AlmavivA - Lean IT Summi...

Thu Pham - MSFT Valuation

Thu Pham - MSFT Valuation

Comtrade Company Profile 2014

Comtrade Company Profile 2014

Comarch Corporate Presentation

1. Comarch: Company overview 2009 Publicly traded company: Reuters COMH.WA Bloomberg CMR PW Janusz Filipiak – Comarch CEO www.comarch.com czerwiec 200 9 , Krakow

2. Comarch: Foundations Mission Business Expansion Global IT Infrastructure Vision

3. Comarch: Foundations Mission Business Expansion Global IT Infrastructure Vision

4. Founder and History 1993 – Comarch established Founder & CEO Prof. Janusz Filipiak University heritage Initial focus – commercial software based on R&D

5. Founder and History 1998 – university campus provided direct access to : H uman capital R&D results 1998 - revenue reached : 25 million USD W orkforce of 250 IT engineers

6. Comarch Today 1999 – Warsaw Stock Exchange 2000 - 2008 dynamic growth of: - Revenues - Profits - Employment Present market capitalization reaches : 175 mln US D The capital group employs 3 500 people

7. Comarch: Foundations Mission Business Expansion Global IT Infrastructure Vision

8. The Mission in our Business Software house selling products on a global market as a service Sound theoretical foundations of internal organization stress: - Management accuracy - Personal achievements and bonuses Significant investment in Research and Development Supporting diverse range of business sectors Empowering graduates from the best universities Aggressive development of human capital Strong direction towards matured markets: - of Western Europe and the USA

9. New York Times: “ In many ways Microsoft has become exactly what Bill Gates used to fear the most: sluggish, bureaucratic, slow to respond to new forms of competition” Obviously, we do not face this problem yet, but … … a lot of management attention is paid to keep the company lean and mean

11. Comarch: Foundations Mission Business Expansion Global IT Infrastructure Vision

12. Software capabilities Comarch as an innovative software house Most IT companies become service companies Comarch SA is pursuing its strategy to remain a software house The Comarch R&D budget is augmented by : The European Union Research and Structural Funds Software products are developed in most of Comarch’s locations in Poland and abroad

13. 2000: Comarch Internet Banking Platform 1998: Comarch Leasing – software to support operations of leasing companies 1997: Comarch Asset Management 1995: Comarch CDN Egeria – an Oracle-based ERP system 1994: Comarch Billing and Customer Care system 1993: Comarch Altum – ERP products for small and medium enterprises based on Microsoft technology 1993: Comarch OSS platform Software capabilities Comarch software products – examples

14. 2007: Comarch CAFE – Front End banking System 2001: Comarch Insurance (Life and Non-life Insurance) 2006: Comarch Credit Process Management 2004: Comarch GenRap and Ocean: A new type of report generation and Business Intelligence platform 2003: Comarch E-Government Platform 2002: Comarch ECOD – Electronic exchange of documents 2001: Comarch Loyalty Management Software capabilities Comarch software products – examples

15. Comarch offer Hierarchy of Comarch services and products can be arranged according to added value: Level 5: Business process modelling and re-engineering Level 4: Managed services and application service provision Level 3: Delivery and implementation of Comarch licences Level 2: Software development according to customer specification Level 1: Outsourcing Proprietary software products and services generate a growing share of revenues (over 70% of sales)

16. Comarch IT Product and Service Pyramid

17. Our Diversity is our Strength ERP Systems Government & Utilities Telecommunications Banking, Insurance & Capital markets Trade & Services Infrastructure

18. Market Sales Structure PLN

19. Market Sales Structure Euro

20. Market Sales Structure USD

21. Our Strength is Your Security Balanced growth over long time horizon S oftware development built on deep domain k nowledge Maximiz ed added value in our products and services Diversification of markets and services Quality Management System Certificate: Norm: EN – ISO 9001:2000 among others

22. Revenue and Net profit in PLN

23. Revenue and Net profit in Euro

24. Revenue and Net profit in USD

25. Your Security is our Objective Ranked regional leader in Software development Implementation Central & Eastern Europe Global power in IT solutions 15% of revenues invest ed in R&D S oftware & services to international corporations Customers on 4 continents in more than 20 countries Over 3 000 successfully completed projects

26. Research and Development EUR

27. Research and Development USD

28. Research and Development PLN

29. Development of the Comarch Billing and Network Management platforms consumed more than one thousand man-months in each case Obviously, it also refers to other products Allowed for an accumulation of a significant amount of domain knowledge over the last 15 years That knowledge determines: Comarch’s competitive advantage over companies which concentrate their offer on lower levels of the service pyramid Accumulation of domain knowledge

30. Comarch: Foundations Mission Business Expansion Global IT Infrastructure Vision

31. Comarch – Leader at Home Global H eadquarters – Krakow Offices in major Polish cities N etwork of 1000 partners Clients – 57 000 Polish and worldwide firms

32. Headquarters and Production Facility

33. Employment Growth

34. Recreation facilities in Comarch premises

35. Comarch: Foundations Mission Business Expansion Global IT Infrastructure Vision

36. Reflections beyond our borders Regional Leader : Extensive network of offices and IT projects European headquarters – Dresden, Germany Middle East subsidiary monitors activities in the developing markets Activity in the Americas Chicago – IT hub for North and South America Panama serves both Americas Operations also in Seattle

37. Global Network

39. Americas

40. Comarch: Foundations Mission Business Expansion Global IT Infrastructure Vision

41. Experience in planning, design, implementation , and administration of: Outsourcing of IT Management IT management outsourcing, end-user infrastructure outsourcing Security and Data Protection Integrated security systems, security policies, audits, mobile business IT Platforms Integration Planning and designing of enterprise IT infrastructure, backup, archive, ILM, email and groupware Data Centre Solutions Business Process Outsourcing, Hosting, Collocation, Disaster Recovery Network and Telecommunication Solutions WAN, LAN, Contact Centre, Broadband Metropolitan Network, VoIP & PABX

43. Comarch main campus in Cracow

44. Office areas

45. Comarch: Foundations Mission Business Expansion Global IT Infrastructure Vision

46. Vision Diversified and Dynamic Offer Strengthening IT leadership in Central Europe Constant investment in infrastructure Permanent investment in human capital Emphasis on Research and Development Enhanced innovative solutions Increased presence on the international arena

47. The Mission in our Community Community Contribution Sponsorships and Internships Progressive career paths Investment in: Sport Art Culture

48. Comarch Diversity is our Strength Our Strength is Your Security Your Security is our Objective Our Objective is Mutual Success

49. [email_address] +48 xx xxx xx xx +48 xxx xxx xxx Thank you