Comarch, as a professional services provider, commercially supports certification organizations at individual stages of standards development. We provide our solutions and services to support alliances in the creation of certification programs such as tool development, process automation and consulting services. At the same time, we help other members of the organizations in the process of spreading and implementing new standards. In thinking about an “alliance” we also need to remember about ATLs (authorized test laboratories), for which we provide tools, training and other services to facilitate the certification cycle.

With their vast knowledge of the certification environment, our engineers have a better understanding of challenges with which new and mature alliances have to deal on a daily basis.

It is also important that Comarch acts both as a commercial partner and as a member of certification organizations if such need arises.

Certification history in Comarch

Comarch has been a reliable partner in the certification environment since 2007, when we created a new version of the Certification Tool for UPnP. Over the years, we’ve worked with various organizations and gained knowledge of how to support certification bodies at each step of the creation of certification programs and their members in adoption of technologies. Cooperation with leading standardization organizations has helped us to build our own portfolio of products and services for certification alliances, and to position our team as an equal partner in projects.

Members’ meetings and Plugfests - the most important things for us are to be close to our customers, to connect with them systematically and to help them reach their goals. That is why Comarch has organized a number of consortium summits, plugfests and other events in our headquarters in Kraków. This has allowed us to gain deep knowledge about the needs, requirements, challenges and weaknesses of the distributed organizational structure in alliances.