The relationship between business and technology is very dynamic. To keep up with all the new trends, solutions, and original ideas, business pioneers and industry enthusiasts need a platform to bring them together.

That’s precisely what Comarch User Group 2023 is. A three-day event filled with inspiring speeches, presentations, and case studies can be your mine of information about current challenges and dynamics in the B2B&B2C world. It’s the perfect opportunity to network with other innovators and learn about new market trends, the latest technological advances, or the power of AI/ML-based solutions in Loyalty, Telecommunications, and Banking&Insurance.

Join in and find out what drives business in the digital era!

The conference and accompanying events are free of charge for Comarch Customers.

Why attend?

You will be part of a special three-day event for loyalty, telecommunications, banking and insurance experts

An inspiring and eye-opening presentation will reveal new market trends

You will be in a space to discuss innovations for improving customer experience, technological advancements and their practical use for achieving better business results

Meeting in person over 400 professionals from different industries willing to exchange their knowledge and experience

A unique opportunity to visit Comarch Innovation Space – a place where you can learn about a wide range of modern technological solutions offered by Comarch

Discovering Polish culture, tradition, cuisine and magnificent places located in Kraków’s Old Town – the event will take place in one of the most iconic venues of Kraków

For Comarch customers, the event is free of charge

Visit Comarch Innovation Space

During Comarch User Group and your visit to Comarch’s headquarters, you will have the opportunity to visit the multi-sector Comarch Innovation Space, where technologies of tomorrow are presented.

Comarch 5G LAB presents the possibilities offered by the fifth generation of telecommunications networks. In the new space, you can get acquainted with Comarch systems equipped with 5G technology and the management platform behind it, supporting business processes of enterprises from almost every sector of the economy, including telecommunications service providers. For more information about Comarch 5G LAB, please visit: https://www.comarch.com/telecommunications/5g-lab/

Experience new technologies that change the world and sign up for a free Comarch Innovation Space tour!

Our experts will be available for you throughout the CUG conference, so please contact your Account Manager to schedule a visit to Comarch Innovation Space on 9th May (pre-conference day) or 10th May (first day of the conference).

A short video summary of last edition of the cross-sector CUG conference: