Idea Stage

Everything started from dreams. Among many of the active entrepreneurs in Kraków, there were a few, who dreamt of creating something bigger and reaching outside of the local market. These entrepreneurs included Ela Madej (one of the co-founders of Base CRM), Jakub Krzych (co-founder of Estimote), Rafał Han (co-founder of SeedLabs). They all went from wanting to create a global business to realising their goal, in addition there is the story of how I, Marek Kapturkiewicz and Marcin Szeląg went from our ambition to invest in globally reaching companies to the point where today it is our business.

Let’s begin with what it looked like 5 years ago. Kraków was a local melting pot of internet and software companies. It was the location of choice for headquarters of Onet and Interia, as well as Comarch, CDN, many software houses and interactive agencies. There was a lot of activity, mostly limited to the Polish market. As far as I know 5 years ago the only business relations between Kraków and the Silicon Valey were those between local software houses and their clients in the Valley. This does not mean that the Internet professionals, who worked here were not up to date with global trends. This most certainly took place, but not through direct business relations.

Brief overview, summer 2009:

Ela, Agata, Bart, and Paweł are founders of Applicake, a software house that they created along, while they were still students. Applicake is developing well, but it is a software house with a limited potential for growth. Just as many software house founders the founders of Applicake are considering introducing their own product, but at this stage these are only initial concepts. Approximately at that time they meet Uzi, and after several discussions together they begin working on Base CRM.

Rafał is a seasoned entrepreneur with over a decade of experience. He manages a group of internet businesses operating in the Polish market. But this is not enough, he thinks about doing more.

Kuba calls himself a “product guy”. At the time he manages Adtaily, which intends to change the advertising market by including bloggers and creating a long tail of sites to be made available for advertisers. they just signed an investment deal with Agora, Polish media group.

I am in talks with Marek Kapturkiewicz regarding creating an investment fund. We want to help entrepreneurs create global businesses, although our experience is limited to the Polish market. In our presentation from that period there is a lot of long term plans: investing in 3 companies with global operations to be valued at more than $500m in 2020.

To summarise, I set forth a thesis, that if you are in a place, where technology related business activity is blooming, but it is all focused on the local market, the first step towards global development is the desire of some members of this business community to create bigger companies, which will reach beyond what the local market allows for.

Openness to the world and early successes

This outreach beyond the local community and establishing relations with the global network takes place over the two following years. The idea stageis over, now it is the time for explorations and testing.

Brief overview, summer 2011:

Base CRM is dynamically developing and completed its first round of financing in the US.

Rafał and Marek Przystaś, CEO of Duckie Deck are in talks with potential investors in the US, they present at the SXSW.

Jakub leaves Adtaily and is considering launching his own company, which will result in the foundation of Estimote. Lukasz Kostka joins Jakub.

I came back from initial visits to San Francisco, where I met tens of people and got under the influence of the way of thinking present in the Valley. Innovation Nest invested in 3 companies. One of those companies is UXPin.

The difference is immense. The desire to create global companies turned into the first steps towards achieving that goal — the relations have been established.

Let’s get back to the summer of 2012:

Ela, the co-founder of Base CRM keeps looking for new challenges. She joins YCombinator with her new business idea.

Jakub develops Estimote and is setting up an investment round — Rafał Han works with Kuba and invests in Estimote, later is followed by Richard Lucas, Innovation Nest rejects to invest in this company (perhaps it was the worst decision in the history of Innovation Nest, perhaps I will follow with more details some other time).

Rafał is testing new idea: he puts together an accelerator called Chance and visits different centers with his startup van.

Innovation Nest portfolio now includes 8 companies and has a network of mentors in the Valley.

Another year goes by, autumn 2013.

Base is now developing so dynamically, that it absorbs Applicake.

Jakub with Estimote joins YCombinator and after completing the program carries out a successful round of financing in the US.

Rafał notices the potential of Seed Labs and joins the team with a strong vision to focus their efforts on Silicon Valley.

UXPin — a company, where Innovation Next is the main investor, relocates to Mountain View and gathers funds from investors in the Valley.

The exploration phase turns into first signs of success. Each of the above 4 cases is a tale of dreams, hard work, persistence and probably good fortune. Founders should tell their stories themselves.

I would like to emphasise the role of openness to the world in achieving success. Global network is key, particularly opening one’s mind to the Silicon Valley way of thinking and entering the global network of technological innovation.

The Silicon Valley virus and the Pay-It-Forwad culture.

In my previous post I wrote about the people, who build startups and share 3 values — they focus on meritocracy, networking and the pay-it-forward culture—that is the people infected by the Silicon Valley virus. The example of the city of Kraków demonstrates how this virus is spreading.

5 years ago there was no one in Kraków, who shared this mentality and it all started because we knew, that somewhere far, far away there was this place called Silicon Valley. Few individuals dreamt of global reach at the time.

Then some initial relations were established, people thought “this culture is so cool”. A certain mindset was imported, the SV culture began forming around a few local points. But in 2011 there is only a handful of people taking part in that trend, perhaps about 20.

Along with some newly established relations, new global cooperations, more and more people got involved. Mutual cooperation, the pay-it-forward culture and networking begin to do their magic. In time these dots became connected, the number of infected people snowballs. Now there are probably hundreds of them.

The Silicon Valley virus works and brings benefits to those infected as proved by the above described successful cases. The Silicon Valley Virus is all about meritocracy, networking and paying-it-forward and all these made the eco-system to work: growing know-how, the ability to exchange information and development of pay-it-forward culture.

I would like to emphasise the role of mutual support and the pay-it-forward culture in this process. In Kraków we supported one another, and we still do. People are active in different businesses and organisations, they easily transfer from one company to another, from one project to the other. The relations in the network become really dense. Pay-it-forward culture reduces friction in the network, so that information and favours circle intensively.

To sum up, the Silicon Valley mentality brings momentum. Meritocracy, networking and, most of all, the pay-it-forward culture, allows people to smoothly advance into another stage of development.

High level of activity

The history of development of the ecosystem is not just the story of 4 companies, the Kraków startup community is much more than that. Spreading of the SV virus and increased activity are correlated and interdependent. The virus spreads through organisations, through business relations, through the network, through participation in events. All those activities inspire people to begin new projects and new ventures. All activities become closely tied together by a lively, dynamic community.

High activity in Kraków presents itself in several areas:

1. Meetups change their character and begin to touch global matters.

It started 5 years ago at Krakspots — meetings of students interested in the Internet industry. Then Hive 53 came to existence, which set high standard, followed by the StartupStage, another series of regular startup meetings. The image would be incomplete if I didn’t mention the most regular meetings held in the city every other thursday at 8 a.m. called Open Coffee Krakow, where people speak about anything and everything.

Let me mention two StartupStage meetups devoted to startup community. The first one was inspired by Brad Feld’s book on building startup communites. It was the longest meetup ever with all local groups invited. The second one wae a Startup Stage meetup with Tyler Crowley, when the #omgkrk hashtag for Kraków was invented.

In addition there were many hackatons and Startup Weekends. Regular meetups were organised in the social media, marketing and technology communities, among the makers, 3D printing enthusiasts and women in IT. With regards to conferences I will mention Bitspiration organised by Andrzej Targosz, RailsBerry organised by Ela Madej and TEDx Cracow organised by Ewa Spohn, which strongly influence the city. Another interesting initiative worth mentioning is the SPIN entrepreneurship school, which delivers customer development workshops for founders.

2. Working spaces integrate the community

Three years ago a co-working space Colab was founded and it plays an important role in the community. Google for Entrepreneurs soon joins and provides space for meetings and events. Recently an accelerator and co-working space Hubraum was created by Deutsche Telecom and it also serves the local community well.

3. Great startups and investors

Other startups celebrating international success include:

Brainly — a company, which started its operations in Poland and in a few years became a leading educational startup present in tens of countries, financed with an investment of nearly 10 million dollars.

Azimo — a company founded in London by two Poles among other founders,with R&D center in Kraków.

Kontakt.io — a very quickly developing beacon company, second to Estimote.

Presspad — founded by Paweł Nowak, a very active member of the community, who advised tens of entrepreneurs, not to mention the fact, that he came up with the idea of #omgkrk and cofunded Colab.

Duckie Deck — Marek Przystaś, the CEO, another co-founder of Colab, very active in the city.

Not to mention dozens of startups that are at seed stage.

I should dedicate a separate article to Richard Lucas — the Englishman in Kraków, who is an embodiment of the pay-it-forward culture and openness to the world. Richard is a volcano of social activity, he co-manages OpenCofee, acts as a mentor for tens of entrepreneurs and is a business angel who invested in a number of companies. The startup community is lucky he chose Cracow for his place to live.

Other investors include Krzysztof Bełech and the Satus group with the related incubators, which invested in tens of startups in the area, also Włodzimierz Laskowski with the Nomad Fund and Rafał Styczeń with the IIF.

4. Universities and students

Last but not least; three universities, including the AGH University of Science and Technology, which produce hundreds of programmers every year.

Interestingly, not a single activity described in this post takes place with the support of the local government.

My summary is, that the melting pot of several people, companies and projects leads to creation of a dynamic community which brings momentum to all of its members.

What can be learned from Kraków’s example

Kraków was a local centre and became a promising technological hub. Right now we have 3 companies from Kraków: Estimote, Seed Labs and Base CRM, as well as the UXPin where the lead investor is from Kraków, which became the Silicon Valley companies. On top of that there is Brainly, now based in New York, and over a dozen other very promising startups. Combined, these companies hire hundreds of people and obtained tens of millions in financing. Kraków reached a product market fit, but we’re still ahead of a long road.

The lessons to be drawn from Kraków’s case? It seems as if the receipt is quite simple:

people with the desire to reach outside the local niche,

openness to the world, establishing relations, a couple of success stories,

the Silicon Valley virus — meritocracy, networking, mutual support and the pay-it-forward culture all leading towards the rise of a dynamic community soaked with common values,

growing activity in the ecosystem inspired by success stories and the growing network inspiring new initiatives and new startups.

If you are an entrepreneur, a business angel, an incubator or an investment fund and you feel that your environment doesn’t provide you with the growth possibilities that you need, try to develop the environment in which you take part. This article is my recipe for that.

——-