Listen to This Episode!

Deep in the heart of Georgia, our only return trip of the season, to Jimmy Carter’s birthplace and lifelong home, Plains, Georgia. Learn about Jimmy Carter, 39th President; his political rise and career; his election and Presidency; his wife, Rosalynn, and children; and his home!

Be sure to check out Jimmy Carter’s “Visiting the Presidents” Episode from Season 1, “Jimmy Carter and Plains”!

“The Un-Celebrity President” from Washington Post.

Jimmy Carter’s House from “All That’s Interesting.”

“Jimmy Carter, Park Service Prepare for ‘Life After Death'” from Greenwire.

“Carter’s Island Retreat ‘Great Place'” from New York Times on Simons Island.

“President, Vacation on Island, to ‘Read, Sleep, Fish” from New York Times on Sapelo Island.

“President Carter’s Middle Fork Trip” from GoRafting.com.

From My June 2017 Visit!

Meeting Jimmy and Rosalynn Carter!

From My May 2022 Visit!

Inside the Carter Home from “Homes of the Presidents”

Jimmy Carter Home: 209 Woodland Drive, Plains, Georgia.

Check Out the Most Recent Episodes!

S3 E10 John Tyler's Tomb – Visiting the Presidents

"Doctor, I am going. Perhaps it is best.” Our First President to die in a foreign country, John Tyler, 10th President of the United States.! Learn about his tumultuous post-Presidency; his illness and death; his funeral, burial, and commemorations, plus his controversial gravesite!Check out the website at VisitingthePresidents.com for visual aids, links, past episodes, recommended reading, and other information!Episode Page:Season 1&apos;s John Tyler Episode-"John Tyler and Greenway Plantation" on his birthplace!Season 2&apos;s John Tyler Episode-"John Tyler and Sherwood Forest" on his home!Support the Show.Visit the social media on Facebook, Twitter, and Instagram!

S3 E10 John Tyler's Tomb 45:01

BONUS! How I Spent My Christmas Break with Presidential Travels 2024! 21:30

S3 E9 William Henry Harrison's Tomb 49:49

S3 E8 Martin Van Buren's Tomb 49:07

S3 E7 Andrew Jackson's Tomb 53:53

Recommended Reading for Jimmy Carter

Share this:

Like Loading...

Related

Published by visitingthepresidents

I'm a Professor of History at Central Arizona College and someone who loves history and travel; my new blog will combine those interests! View more posts