What is the currency of Argentina

The national currency of Argentina is the Argentine Peso.

The term 'Peso,' meaning 'weight,' originates from Spain. The peso form a part of the national currencies in most South American countries. It replaced the Argentine Austral to increase stability after experiencing hyperinflation.

Can I change my Australian Dollars in Argentina?

It is difficult to exchange Australian Dollars (AUD), even in the capital city of Buenos Ares. Banc Nationale at the airport, Recoleta Mall or possibly a few other Cambios (money exchangers) on the street might exchange AUD to ARS, but most places do not and if you can, you end up paying a less favourable rate.

Should I take US dollars to Argentina instead?

Yes, most money changers will exchange US dollars (USD). It can be tricky to buy Argentinian Peso in Australia before you leave, because there is little supply so getting US dollars is a good alternative.

You’ll probably want a travel debit card if you plan to withdraw money from an ATM. While you may also be able to pay with a debit card in some businesses in the major destinations, you might discover some hefty fees on your account summary.

Depending on your bank, you could be hit with fees for foreign ATM withdrawals or currency conversions. But some banks are better than others; we recommend checking out Wise Travel Card, ING and Revolut, all of which have travel-friendly debit cards that waive these charges.

Credit cards can come with some enticing perks, including added security, loyalty programs, and even free travel insurance. Especially if you’re using the best credit cards for travel points.

But are they worth it?

Major local businesses, including hotels, restaurants, airline offices, and department stores, accept credit cards. But you might have to pay a surcharge.

Mastercard and Visa are widely accepted. You may also be able to use your American Express card, though local ATMs won’t accept them.

Just be aware of additional charges you may incur for foreign transactions. These could include:

International transaction fees

High exchange rate margins

ATM fees

Potential ‘cash advance fees’ if you use an ATM

If you still prefer credit cards over any other payment, consider going with a company that offers cards that waive certain travel fees. Bankwest Platinum and 28 Degrees both have travel-friendly overseas credit cards.