Bosnia-Herzegovina's House of Representatives has appointed a new government in an urgent session held on April 28, a day after the high representative of the international community imposed changes to the country's constitution and the criminal laws.

The 16 new ministerial positions will be split among members of the Croatian Democratic Union, the Social Democratic Party, the Croatian Democratic Union 1990, and the political parties Nasa Stranka and Narod i Pravda.

Vice President Refik Lendo opposed the new government appointments, demanding his Party of Democratic Action be given a portfolio. His party organized protests outside the parliament during the vote.

Christian Schmidt, the high representative of the international community in Bosnia, on April 27 made changes to the constitution and the criminal laws of Bosnia's entities to facilitate the formation of the new regional government and prevent election fraud.

Schmidt's amendments to the constitution were imposed on an interim basis to help form the new regional government after a deadlock lasting almost seven months following elections in October. The changes will take effect in one year unless the parliament passes its own version of the amendments.

Schmidt, who has vast powers as the international community's envoy to Bosnia, amended the constitution so that only two out of three federation presidency members need to support a proposed government in order to forward it to parliament.

Schmidt, who has powers to change laws and fire officials seen as obstructing the Dayton peace accords, came under criticism for changing the election law on election night in October 2022 aimed at removing gridlock in the federation government formation.

Schmidt has the powers as overseer of civilian and administrative aspects of the 26-year-old peace deal that still governs Bosnia along ethnic lines.

The changes to the criminal laws were prompted by the need to "strengthen the integrity of elections" and apply to Bosnia and Republika Srpska, the other entity within Bosnia.

These changes make it illegal to ask for or take money or any benefit, such as employment, from politicians and set the punishment for anyone found guilty of such actions at 10 years in prison and a fine.

The amendments to criminal laws also imply dismissal from a legislative, executive, other administrative or judicial body or from any service that is fully or partially financed from entity budgets for anyone found guilty of election bribery.

In addition, anyone found guilty of the offense cannot be employed in any public service for five years after being punished, pardoned, or amnestied.

The changes take effect immediately on an interim basis until they are adopted by Republika Srpska and the Bosnian federation "without amendment and with no conditions attached."

With reporting by Reuters

As mass protests in Belgrade against the development of a lithium mine rattle Serbia's leadership, officials are looking to blame the West.

Washington, for its part, said the protests are just an example of democracy at work, shrugging off accusations it somehow has a hand in it the events.

"Peaceful protest and the right of citizens to demonstrate and speak freely is an important part of democracy," the State Department said in a response to an RFE/RL request for comment to accusations in Belgrade and Moscow.

Serbian President Aleksandar Vucic earlier this week accused demonstrators who opposed the multibillion-dollar lithium-mining project of being part of Western-backed "hybrid" warfare against his government, without giving any evidence.

Moscow has accused the West of being behind the protests, while Serbian Deputy Prime Minister Aleksandar Vulin thanked the Russian security agencies for warning his government about alleged "preparations for mass unrest and an attempted coup."

Serbia and Russia maintain close ties even as Belgrade seeks to join the European Union. The United States last year designated Vulic for sanctions for his ties to the Kremlin.

In a response to RFE/RL on August 17, the State Department said any assertion that the United States supports anti-government protests in Serbia "is false."

"We are not surprised that Russia, in contrast, has instrumentalized protests to pursue its own agenda in Serbia, as it does around the globe," the State Department told RFE/RL on August 17.

The protesters demand a halt to Anglo-Australian metals and mining giant Rio Tinto's $2.4 billion lithium project in Jadar in western Serbia over fears it could pollute nearby land and water.

In 2022, the Serbian government rejected the project in the wake of massive public protests amid concerns over its impact on the environment.

But it reinstated the plan on July 16 this year, days after the Balkan state's Constitutional Court said the government had acted unconstitutionally when it withdrew permits for Rio Tinto.

Jadar has the capacity to supply 90 percent of Europe's current lithium needs and make Rio Tinto one of the world's leading lithium producers. Serbia is seeking to process the lithium locally and use it for the production of batteries for electric vehicles (EVs).

Such large-scale mining projects often trigger protests in Western countries by local residents who fear the ecological devastation outweighs any potential economic gains. In the United States, citizens have sought to stop lithium projects in Nevada and North Carolina.

Serbia is no different. Citizens fear the Jadar mine will pollute water and land resources in a country that already suffers from significant environmental degradation, a legacy of communist rule.

Lithium is typically mined through a process called brine mining, which involves extracting lithium from underground saltwater reserves, opening up the possibility of water contamination.

The Serbian lithium project could play a critical role in Western EV supply chains as Washington and Brussels seek to reduce dependency on rival China.

The United States and Europe have put policies in place to significantly increase the number of EVs on the road in the coming years as they seek to reach emission targets.

As a result, global lithium demand is expected to surge. China is currently the third-largest producer of lithium after Australia and Chile but the largest lithium refiner and producer of batteries for EVs, giving it signficant influence over markets.

The project would also be a boon to Western investors in Rio Tinto.

President Volodymyr Zelenskiy has said Ukrainian forces are continuing to make progress in Russia's Kursk region after launching a major cross-border offensive 11 days ago that caught the Kremlin's military leadership off-guard and altered the dynamics of the 30-month war.

Following an update from Ukraine's top military commander, Colonel General Oleksandr Syrskiy, Zelenskiy said in a post on Telegram on August 17 that Ukraine had been "strengthening" its positions in the Kursk region and stabilizing more territory under its control.

Ukrainian forces have penetrated deep into Russian territory after sweeping over the border in a surprise attack on August 6, capturing dozens of settlements.

The surprise incursion, coming as Russia continues to advance in Ukraine's eastern Donetsk region, seemingly strengthens Kyiv's hand in any future peace negotiations.

WATCH: Ukrainian troops near the city of Toretsk say they believe Russia will have to redirect resources back to its own territory, but they have yet to see a letup in the fighting.

Embed share

The code has been copied to your clipboard.

width px height px

The URL has been copied to your clipboard

No media source currently available

0:00 0:02:49 0:00

Russia claims to have annexed four Ukrainian regions -- Donetsk, Luhansk, Kherson, and Zaporizhzhya -- in addition to the Crimean Peninsula. If Ukraine can continue to hold parts of Kursk and neighboring Russian regions, it could potentially seek to swap it for the allegedly annexed regions, experts say.

The Kremlin has been embarrassed by the incursion, the first foreign occupation of its territory since World War II, and has accused NATO of helping Ukraine plan the attack, an allegation Washington denies.

The Kremlin, which frames the war as one between Russia and the West, has often hinted at escalation in what analysts say is an attempt to intimidate Washington so it refrains from supplying Ukraine with powerful weapons, such as long-range precision rockets and F-16s.

As Ukrainian forces continued their surprising advance in Kursk, Russia's Foreign Ministry accused Ukraine of using U.S.-made long-range rockets to destroy a key bridge in the Glushkov district in the Kursk region, killing in the process "volunteers" helping to evacuate civilians.

"For the first time, the Kursk region was hit by Western-made rocket launchers, probably American HIMARS," ministry spokeswoman Maria Zakharova said late on August 16.

According to Russian security officials, the destruction of the bridge cut off part of the district, making it more difficult for civilian evacuation out of the region. Ukraine’s incursion has so far led to the evacuation of more than 120,000 civilians, according to Russian authorities.

By comparison, Russia's invasion of Ukraine has forced as many as 7 million Ukrainians to flee their homes. Russia has also killed thousands of civilians through drone and missile strikes on nonmilitary sites like homes, shopping centers, and railroad stations.

Live Briefing: Russia's Invasion Of Ukraine

RFE/RL's Live Briefing gives you all of the latest developments on Russia's full-scale invasion, Kyiv's counteroffensive, Western military aid, global reaction, and the plight of civilians. For all of RFE/RL's coverage of the war in Ukraine, click here.

Kyiv claims to have taken control of 82 settlements over an area of 1,150 square kilometers since its surprise cross-border incursion on August 6.

The United States so far deems the incursion a protective move that justifies the use of U.S. weaponry, according to officials in Washington.

Nonetheless, Ukraine still faces Western restrictions on the use of some weapon systems inside Russia, including long-range missiles like the U.S.-made ATACMS. The Biden administration views the use of ATAMCS inside Russia as escalatory. There has been no indication from Western capitals that Ukraine has violated those rules during the course of the war.

The Times of London reported on August 17 that the United States is also blocking Britain from supplying its powerful, long-range Storm Shadow cruise missile. The U.K. sent a corresponding request to the United States more than a month ago, but has not yet received a response, the paper reported.

In a post later in the day, Zelenskiy expressed regret that the U.K. was restricting the use of Storm Shadows, saying long-range strike capability "is really a matter of principle for us." The Storm Shadow, which has a payload of 400 kilograms, can devastate targets more than 300 kilometers away. Kyiv wants to use them to strike Russian air bases that house fighter jets pounding Ukrainian troops and cities.

"It is crucial that our partners remove barriers that hinder us from weakening Russian positions in the way this war demands. Long-range capabilities are the answer to the most critical strategic questions of this war," he wrote.

Former British Prime Minister Boris Johnson on August 16 urged Washington and London to allow Ukraine to attack Russian territory with ATACMS and Storm Shadow missiles.

In a separate setback for Ukraine, the Frankfurter Allgemeine Sonntagszeitung reported on August 17 that Germany has halted any new financial and military aid to Ukraine due to budgetary constraints.

In an August 5 letter to Defense Minister Boris Pistorius and Foreign Minister Annalena Berbock and seen by the news outlet, Finance Minister Christian Lindner said new aid allocations can only be made if financing is guaranteed.

"Starting today, Olaf Scholz and the coalition government under his leadership are freezing financial and thus military support for Ukraine," Ingo Gadehens, a member of the opposition Christian Democrats, told the news outlet.

Aid that had previously been promised will be delivered. Going forward, funds for Ukraine will be allocated from the profits generated by Russia's frozen assets, the outlet reported.

Energy Facilities Targeted

Meanwhile, Russia's Defense Ministry accused Ukraine on August 17 of planning to attack the Kursk nuclear power plant and blame it on Moscow.

Russia would respond harshly in the event of such "provocation," Interfax news agency quoted the ministry as saying.

Meanwhile, Russian-installed officials at the Zaporizhzhya nuclear power plant in southern Ukraine said on August 17 that a Ukrainian drone dropped an explosive charge on a road outside the plant, endangering staff who use the road.

Moscow and Kyiv have repeatedly accused each other of sabotaging the operation of the plant, which was occupied by Russia soon after it launched the full-scale invasion of Ukraine in February 2022.

Last week, Zelenskiy accused Russia of causing a fire at a cooling tower of the plant, while Russian officials said Kyiv was deliberately trying to destroy the plant and sow "nuclear terror."

Non-nuclear energy facilities have been targeted by both sides during the war, with Russia damaging half of Ukraine power facilities and Ukraine damaging more than a dozen Russian refineries, some more than once.

Kyiv and Moscow were to hold "indirect talks" next week in Doha on halting attacks on energy infrastructure but it has been postponed due to the Kursk incursion, The Washington Post reported on August 17, citing people familiar with the developments.

Russia Plans More Evacuations

Ukrainian forces on August 17 damaged another bridge over the Seim River, limiting the ability of Russia to supply its troops south of the river. Another road bridge and a pontoon bridge remain but are coming under Ukrainian fire.

Ukraine is seeking to capture the town of Korenevo, south of the river, to strengthen its position in Kursk.

Earlier this week, Ukraine announced the capture of Sudzha, a town with a population of 5,000, the biggest to fall so far in the incursion. Korenevo is slightly bigger in size.

Zelenskiy said Ukraine will establish a command office in Sudzha to coordinate aid and military affairs.

Russian forces have so far struggled to mount an effective response to the incursion, which is widely seen as a major morale boost for Ukraine.

Ukrainian forces have already captured hundreds of Russian troops, who Kyiv plans to use in a prisoner swap, Zelenskiy said on August 17.

"By this morning, our country's 'exchange fund' has been replenished. I thank all our soldiers and commanders who are capturing Russian military personnel, thereby advancing the release of our warriors and civilians held by Russia," he posted on social media.

Authorities in Russia's Belgorod region bordering Ukraine and Kursk have said they will evacuate five villages starting next week.

"From August 19, we are closing access to five settlements, removing residents and helping them bring out their property," regional governor Vyacheslav Gladkov announced on Telegram.

WATCH: Skepticism prevailed in the Ukrainian border city of Sumy when locals were asked about government plans to accept refugees from Russia's Kursk region.

Embed share

The code has been copied to your clipboard.

width px height px

The URL has been copied to your clipboard

No media source currently available

0:00 0:01:16 0:00

Russian Strike, Ukraine Hack

As it sought to beat back Ukrainian forces in Kursk, Russia continued its bombardment of Ukraine.

In the northeastern Sumy region, at least two people were wounded in a Russian missile strike early on August 17, according to emergency services.

The missile hit a parking lot near a high-rise apartment building, setting at least 10 vehicles on fire and shattering the windows and damaging the façade of the nearby buildings, Ukrainian officials said.

Overnight, Ukraine's air defenses shot down all 14 Russian drones launched in an overnight strike, the Ukrainian Air Force said in a statement early on August 17.

The Shahed drones were downed over six Ukrainian regions in the south and center of the country, including areas near the capital, Kyiv, according to the statement posted on Telegram.

Meanwhile, Ukraine's Main Intelligence Directorate said its cyber-specialists together with the hacker group VO Team had successfully infiltrated an Internet provider to an enterprise belonging to Russia's nuclear weapons program.

In an August 17 statement, the directorate said they hacked Chelyabinsk Internet provider Vega, whose clients include the All-Russian Scientific Research Institute of Technical Physics, disabling 1,173 switches and 10 servers.

"The information on the Vega servers has been destroyed. A number of strategic enterprises of the city were left without Internet and communication services for almost a week," the intelligence service reported.

RFE/RL could not confirm the information.

With reporting by RFE/RL's Ukrainian and Russian services

Exiled Belarusian opposition leader Svyatlana Tsikhanouskaya said she is pleased that 30 people have been pardoned in Belarus and released from jail but noted that the move barely makes a dent in the number of people imprisoned in the country "in politically motivated cases."

"I am very happy about the release of a number of political prisoners," Tsikhanouskaya said on August 16 on Telegram. "I am glad that families will finally be reunited -- and those who have not seen each other for weeks, months, and years will finally have the opportunity to hug and talk."

But she said the reality is that detentions in Belarus continue and the number of political prisoners is growing.

"More than 1,400 people are still behind bars in politically motivated cases. And there are those who will decide not to agree to the terms, and those who will never be offered them," she said. "Therefore, we will continue to be their voices and do everything in our power to ensure that each of these people is released as soon as possible."

A statement posted on the website of authoritarian leader Alyaksandr Lukashenka's office earlier on August 16 said he signed a decree pardoning 14 women and 16 men who had been convicted of "crimes of a protest nature." Some of those pardoned have serious illnesses or are retirement age, the statement said.

The Vyasna human rights center earlier this week said it had received evidence that political prisoners throughout the country were being forced to write petitions for clemency to Lukashenka.

Vyasna reported last month that representatives of the Prosecutor-General's Office went to colony No. 1 in Novopolotsk every day and force political prisoners to write petitions for clemency.

In addition to her message on Telegram, Tsikhanouskaya posted a statement on her website saying that she talks about political prisoners in Belarus at every international meeting she attends.

"You know that this issue is particularly personal for me. The regime has kept my husband, Syarhey Tsikhanouski, out of public sight for 527 days. Our children ask about their father every day, and all I can do is comfort them with the hope that he will soon come back home," she said.

Tsikhanouskaya, 41, is a former teacher who ran for president in Belarus in 2020 after her husband was barred by the regime from doing so and imprisoned.

While the official results handed Lukashenka victory and his sixth consecutive term in office, the opposition and many Western governments and organizations say the poll was rigged and that Tsikhanouskaya was the actual winner.

She was forced to flee to Lithuania during a brutal crackdown on a wave of pro-democracy protests that erupted after the election.

Romanian gymnast Ana Maria Barbosu was awarded the bronze medal in the women's floor exercise at the Paris Olympics on August 16 in a ceremony in Bucharest amid controversy over who finished third in the competition.

"This result came after many years of work in the gym," Barbosu said, adding that the situation is "tough" for all the three gymnasts involved in the controversy, which arose after the bronze medal was awarded to U.S. gymnast Jordan Chiles after her coach appealed her score at the end of the competition on August 5.

"It's a tough situation for us, with so many uncertainties and overwhelming emotions. I hope everyone understands that we did nothing wrong at the Olympics. And that the Olympic spirit is more important than any misunderstanding between the authorities," she added.

Octavian Morariu, Romania's representative in the IOC, and Mihai Covaliu, president of the Romanian Olympic and Sports Committee, awarded Barbosu in the Bucharest ceremony.

"Today only one thing happened: Justice was done.... Well done, Ana Maria," Morariu said.

On the night of the competition Chiles's score was increased to 13.766 from 13.666 after her coach appealed her marks, and this moved her into third place, knocking Barbosu off the podium and leaving Barbosu in tears.

Days later the Court of Arbitration (CAS) ruled that the inquiry was made past the 1-minute limit allowed under the rules of the International Gymnastics Federation, thus reinstating Chiles's original 13.666 score. The ruling bumped Barbosu back into the bronze position.

The International Olympic Committee (IOC) confirmed on August 11 that Chiles must return the medal, but it is still unknown if Chiles has done so.

The medal that Barbosu received on August 16 is another medal sent by the IOC for the ceremony in Bucharest.

Embed share

The code has been copied to your clipboard.

width px height px

The URL has been copied to your clipboard

No media source currently available

0:00 0:03:59 0:00

While the IOC said it would respect the CAS ruling, USA Gymnastics said in a statement on August 12 that it would "continue to pursue every possible avenue and appeal process, including to the Swiss Federal Tribunal, to ensure the just scoring, placement, and medal award for Jordan."

Chiles herself has called the CAS panel's decision that she must return the medal "unjust" and has said she would "make every effort to ensure that justice is served."

USA Gymnastics said in a statement quoted by the Washington Post on August 14 that it had time-stamped video proving Landi initiated the inquiry 47 seconds after Chiles's score was posted. USA Gymnastics said the footage was not available to the organization at the time of the hearing, and said that it was given less than 24 hours' notice of the hearing.

USA Gymnastics said it was notified by the CAS on August 12 that its rules do not allow for the award to be reconsidered "even when conclusive new evidence is presented," adding that it was "deeply disappointed by the notification."

Since the CAS ruling, reports have surfaced that the chair of the panel appointed by the court to rule on the decision about the bronze medal originally awarded to Chiles included an official with ties to Romania. The reports cited documents that show Hamid Gharavi, a lawyer, previously represented Romania in international disputes.

Ukraine's top military commander, Colonel General Oleksandr Syrskiy, said on August 16 that Kyiv's forces continue to advance in the Kursk region.

"The troops of the offensive group continue to fight, they have advanced in some directions from 1 to 3 kilometers toward the enemy. In general, the situation is under control. All measures are being carried out according to the plan," he said in a briefing with President Volodymyr Zelenskiy over video link.

Live Briefing: Russia's Invasion Of Ukraine

RFE/RL's Live Briefing gives you all of the latest developments on Russia's full-scale invasion, Kyiv's counteroffensive, Western military aid, global reaction, and the plight of civilians. For all of RFE/RL's coverage of the war in Ukraine, click here.

Syrskiy reported fighting in the area of Malaya Loknya, some 11.5 kilometers from Ukrainian border.

The claims could not be independently verified.

Ukrainian forces also destroyed a key bridge in the Kursk region on August 16, pro-Kremlin media outlets report. According to Russian security officials, the destruction of the bridge cut off part of a local district making it more difficult for civilian evacuation out of the region.

Ukrainian troops launched the cross-border incursion on August 6 in an apparent attempt to divert the Russian military forces away from the front line. But Ukrainian President Volodymyr Zelenskiy warned on August 15 that Pokrovsk and other nearby towns in the Donetsk region of Ukraine were "facing the most intense Russian assaults."

The General Staff of the Ukrainian military, reporting on the situation within Ukraine, said the number of clashes on the front increased to 99 by the end of the day on August 16, and many of them were in the Pokrovsk area.

Military authorities in the city of Pokrovsk urged civilians to speed up their evacuation because Russian troops are "advancing at a fast pace." They said on Telegram that with every passing day "there is less and less time to collect personal belongings and leave for safer regions.”

Ukrainian forces fought battles in other areas, including Kupyansk, Kramatorsk, and Siverskiy, the General Staff said.

In addition to Pokrovsk, the enemy attacked in nine other areas, including in Kharkiv, the General Staff said, noting that some battles there also were ongoing.

Ukraine's human rights commissioner, Dmytro Lubinets, told RFE/RL's Ukrainian Service on August 16 that Kyiv will not create special camps for Russian civilians who want to evacuate amid an ongoing incursion in Russia's Kursk and Belgorod regions.

Embed share

The code has been copied to your clipboard.

width px height px

The URL has been copied to your clipboard

No media source currently available

0:00 0:02:38 0:00

The Ukrainian government said its advance was meant to establish a "security zone" inside Russia to put an end to incessant strikes by the Russian military from the two regions bordering Ukraine targeting civilian and infrastructure facilities.

Lubinets said that he did not envisage any threats to the security of the civilian population from the Russian region on the territory of Ukraine and that he thinks the number of civilians willing to evacuate to Ukraine will be limited.

"We do not expect that there will be a large number of people willing to come to us, if any. But I am definitely not worried about the fact that it will be dangerous for the civilian population from Kursk region.... We have offered each and every resident of Kursk the option to evacuate from this territory if they wish," Lubinets said.

"Ukraine will open humanitarian corridors. Either to the territory controlled by the Russian Federation, or to the territory of independent Ukraine. It should be the personal choice of any citizen who is currently there from among the civilians. We are definitely not going to violate their rights."

Lubinets has said the Ukrainian military strictly adheres to the obligations stipulated by the Geneva and Hague Conventions.

Interior Minister Ihor Klymenko said Ukraine has set up storage facilities in the Sumy region for humanitarian aid meant for Russian civilians.

He didn't specify how many of the storage facilities had been set up or where they are, but a video on the ministry's Telegram account showed a large inflatable tent and Ukrainian military personnel carrying parcels and packing food.

During a trip to the Sumy region, which borders Russia's Kursk region, Klymenko said about 150 food parcels had been sent to civilians in the area. Citizens "abandoned by Russia" are mostly elderly people, people with disabilities, and families with children, he said, adding that they need food, water, and medicine."

The approach contrasts with the treatment that some Ukrainians who fled their homes said they were subjected to. They reported being forced to undergo "filtration" -- Moscow's alleged campaign to catch and punish perceived enemies or others deemed somehow unreliable from among the war's refugees. There also have been accusations that Ukrainians ensnared in the occupation forces' vetting were killed, "disappeared," or forcibly deported to Siberia and other Russian destinations.

Moscow has denied committing atrocities and routinely blames Ukrainian forces for civilian deaths and other abuses in a war that Russian censorship prohibits from being described as a "war" at all.

Embed share

The code has been copied to your clipboard.

width px height px

The URL has been copied to your clipboard

No media source currently available

0:00 0:02:01 0:00

On August 15, Russian presidential aide and Security Council head Nikolai Patrushev told the Izvestia newspaper that the Ukrainian incursion into Russia's western Kursk region launched on August 6 was "planned with the help of NATO and Western special services," repeating a claim made by numerous Russian officials in recent days.

Patrushev said assertions by the United States and other Western countries that they were not involved "are not true."

In a reaction to the events in Kursk and Belgorod regions, the supreme commander of NATO forces in Europe, U.S. General Christopher Cavoli, said Russia's reaction to the Ukrainian advance into its territory had so far been sluggish and messy.

"Russia is still trying to pull together a response to Ukraine's incursion. So far, it has only been a rather slow and scattered reaction. This is partly because Russia hasn't established who has the authority. The Ministry of Defense is responsible for military actions inside Ukraine, but not within Russia, right? So, it should be the Ministry of Internal Affairs," Cavoli said at an event at the Council on Foreign Relations on August 15.

The European Union has told Serbia that maintaining ties with Russia during its war of aggression against Ukraine is not compatible with EU values and the accession process.

"The European Union has been crystal clear with our partners: Relations with Russia cannot be business as usual after Russia's unprovoked and unjustified aggression against Ukraine," an EU statement said on August 15 in response to an RFE/RL inquiry.

Brussels also said that the EU "wants to count on all candidate countries as reliable European partners for common principles, values, security, and prosperity."

The reaction followed meetings between Serbian Deputy Prime Minister Aleksandar Vulin and Kremlin officials in Moscow this week along with claims of intelligence cooperation with Russia.

Vulin has met several government officials during a four-day visit to Moscow, including First Deputy Prime Minister Denis Manturov on August 15.

"Relations between the two countries, despite numerous challenges, are at a high level," according to a statement from the Serbian government after the meeting.

Vulin and Manturov “reviewed the outcomes of the discussions between the Serbian Vice Prime Minister and Russian ministers…and agreed that, despite the good cooperation, there is room for further improvement," the statement said.

Vulin also met on August 15 with Russian Energy Minister Sergei Tsivilyov and expressed gratitude for natural gas deliveries that he said ensure Serbia's energy security.

Serbia is entirely dependent on Russian gas but has taken the first steps toward energy diversification.

Vulin met on August 14 with Russian Foreign Minister Sergei Lavrov in Moscow to discuss "further improving the Serbian-Russian strategic partnership," the Serbian government said in a statement.

He repeated that he is proud that Serbia is "not part of the anti-Russian hysteria" and has not joined the Western sanctions on Moscow imposed in response to Russia's invasion of Ukraine.

At the start of his visit Vulin thanked Russian security structures "for the warning about preparations for mass unrest and attempts at a coup" in Serbia.

The government has described recent mass protests against lithium mining as a "coup attempt," and Serbian President Aleksandar Vucic accused unnamed Western countries of being behind the protests.

Vucic said warnings from Russian services had arrived in Serbia before a mass protest on August 11 advising that the ultimate goal of the demonstration was the overthrow of the country's leadership.

The Serbian government and the Security Information Agency (BIA) have not responded to RFE/RL's request for information that was provided to Belgrade by Russian services.

There has also been no answer to the question of what evidence supports the claim that the lithium protests are an attempt to overthrow the government and that they are supported by Western countries.

Organizers have repeatedly denied that the protest aimed to overthrow the government.

"Government changes through elections; if anyone expected to come to power on our backs, they were mistaken. The aim of the protest is to gather people and show the world how many are against the lithium mining project," Nebojsa Petkovic of the organization We Will Not Give Up Jadar, told RFE/RL.

The organization was formed in the village of Gornje Nedeljice in western Serbia, where multinational giant Rio Tinto plans begin mining for lithium.

Opposition to the project has come from citizens who believe it could have negative environmental impacts.

Petkovic said We Will Not Give Up Jadar "is not funded by foreigners but by the people of Serbia who donate."

Romanian gymnast Ana Maria Barbosu will be awarded the bronze medal in the women's floor exercise on August 16 in a ceremony in Bucharest, but the controversy over who finished third in the competition at the Paris Olympics is far from settled.

The Romanian Olympics Sports Committee announced the ceremony in a press release on August 13, saying that Octavian Morariu, a member of the International Olympic Committee for Romania, and Mihai Covaliu, president of the Romanian Olympic and Sports Committee, will present the medal to Barbosu.

The event will take place on the esplanade of the Olympic House on August 16 starting at 3:30 p.m. Bucharest time.

The controversy arose after the medal was awarded to U.S. gymnast Jordan Chiles after her coach appealed her score at the end of the competition on August 5.

Chiles's score was increased to 13.766 from 13.666 after U.S. coach Cecile Landi appealed a deduction that Chiles had received on one element, known as a tour jete full. The appeal, known as an inquiry in gymnastics, wiped away the deduction, moved Chiles into third, and knocked Barbosu off the podium.

Days later the Court of Arbitration (CAS) ruled that the inquiry was made past the 1-minute limit allowed under the rules of the International Gymnastics Federation, thus reinstating Chiles's original 13.666 score. The ruling bumped Barbosu back into the bronze position.

The International Olympic Committee (IOC) confirmed on August 11 that Chiles must return the medal, but it is still unknown if Chiles has done so or if Barbosu will be receiving a new one.

Chiles called the CAS panel's decision that she must return the medal “unjust” and a “significant blow” in a message posted on social media on August 15.

“I am now confronted with one of the most challenging moments of my career,” Chiles posted. “Believe me when I say I have had many. I will approach the challenge as I have others -- and will make every effort to ensure that justice is done. I believe that at the end of this journey, the people in control will do the right thing.”

She also said that "unprompted racially driven attacks on social media" had added to the heartbreak, calling them "wrong and extremely hurtful."

While the IOC said it would respect the CAS ruling, USA Gymnastics said in a statement on August 12 that it would "continue to pursue every possible avenue and appeal process, including to the Swiss Federal Tribunal, to ensure the just scoring, placement, and medal award for Jordan."

USA Gymnastics said in a statement quoted by the Washington Post on August 14 that it had time-stamped video proving Landi initiated the inquiry 47 seconds after Chiles's score was posted. USA Gymnastics said the footage was not available to the organization at the time of the hearing, and said that it was given less than 24 hours' notice of the hearing.

USA Gymnastics said it was notified by the CAS on August 12 that its rules do not allow for the award to be reconsidered "even when conclusive new evidence is presented," adding that it was "deeply disappointed by the notification."

Since the CAS ruling, reports have surfaced that the chair of the panel appointed by the court to rule on the decision about the bronze medal originally awarded to Chiles included an official with ties to Romania. The reports cited documents that show Hamid Gharavi, a lawyer, previously represented Romania in international disputes.