Woodburn will remain a strong community to belong to if we shop local and support our community financially this way. Check out these services from your neighbors!

All

Agriculture

Chamber of Commerce

Dining & Entertainment

Financial

Housing

Industry

Medical

Retail

Sales & Service

101 Bowl

A member of the Woodburn Chamber of Commerce Like, follow @101_Bowl on Twitter and visit www.101bowl.com for updates as the business is rehabilitated and becomes The Center of Attention!

ACPL- Woodburn Branch

It provides books, magazines, books-on-cd, music CDs, popular movies, and video games for check out. Anyone who lives in Allen County qualifies for a free library card.

Ag Plus Inc.

This is the excerpt! Ag Plus is a farmer-owned co-op serving the needs of area farmers and consumers w/grain, feed, fuels, LP gas, and turf supplies.

Allen County Appliance Repair

Service on all Major Appliances. 8:00am to 9:00pm – 7 days a week.

American Legion Post 377

Open @ 4 p.m. daily. Kitchen open at 4 p.m. Entertainment

Apple Barn

Opens close to Labor day and is open in the fall until sold out. Jams, Jellies, Cider and a large variety of apples.

Beverly Electric LLC

Quality work at affordable prices. Residential and Commercial. For all your electrical needs. Any electrical emergency call me. A member of Woodburn Chamber of Commerce.

Beverly Nursery

Hours: Monday thru Friday 8 a.m.-5 p.m.; Saturday 8 a.m.-noon A family Business since 1931. Trees, shrubs, evergreens etc. A member of the Woodburn Chamber of Commerce.

Bob’s Family Restaurant

Our large selection of pies are baked daily on site from home made ingredients.

Bridge Manufacturing

Specialized in Trailers Sales and repairs and Sprayer Sales and repairs. Hours: Mon thru Fri 8am to 6pm closed for lunch and Sat 8am to noon. A member of the Chamber of Commerce.

Chappy’s Lawn Service

Member of Woodburn Chamber of Commerce.

Clip-n-Tan

Appointment or Walk-Ins Welcome Full-service salon offering perms, color, foils, men, women, and children’s hair cuts. Pedicures Manicures, full sets and fills, facial waxing and tanning. 4 Stylists -1 Barber – 1 Nail Tech A member of Woodburn Chamber of Commerce.

Critter Control

Critter Control is the Nation’s Leading Animal Control Firm founded 30 years ago. Pest Control Services. Insured Free Estimates. Residential and Commercial. Single or Monthly Treatments Available. Mastercard and Visa

Doehrman Repair Service

Hours: Mon.- Fri. 8 to 5

Dozer Werks LLC

A member of Woodburn Chamber of Commerce.

Eicher’s Woodworking Shop LLC

We sell furniture within a 7,000 sq. ft. store containing cabinet and vanity displays that inspire current and future customers.

Financial Partners Federal Credit Union

We are a not-for-profit financial cooperative that has been in operation for over 50 years in Eastern Allen County.

FloMotion Massage

Brian A. Yee is a licensed massage therapist with a license as a physical therapist assistant and a certification as a personal fitness trainer.

Folkcraft Instruments – Handcrafted Dulcimers

Heirloom Quality Instruments handmade right here in the United States of America, not in a cheap overseas factory. Crafted one at a time, not on an assembly line, and made out of solid wood, not plywood. Folkcraft instruments are made with pride and tradition. A family business w/ two generations of luthiers putting their skill […]

Gerbers Electric Inc

Gerbers Electric, Inc. is an owner/operator licensed and insured electrical contracting business.

Hanson Aggregates

A member of Woodburn Chamber of Commerce.

Heckley Auto & Outdoor Power

A member of Woodburn Chamber of Commerce.

Heckley/Pickens Tax Service

Fifth house west of 101 on U.S. 24. Income Tax Preparation, Family Owned since 1967. For an appointment call anytime or drop off return. A member of Woodburn Chamber of Commerce.

Kayser Concrete Sawing & Drilling

Residential & Commercial Concrete and Asphalt Cutting & Drilling. Serving this Community Since 1988.

Klopfenstein Repair

Major & Minor Repairs. Complete Vehicle Maintenance. AC Service and repair. Diesel Service- Complete Engine Rebuilding. DOT Inspections. ASE Certified Staff.

Knoblauch Construction Inc.

Serving the Allen County Area for 60 years. A member of Woodburn Chamber of Commerce.

Lengacher Brothers Inc.

A member of Woodburn Chamber of Commerce

Loves Truck Stop

Truck stop at 101/24

Lynwood Apartments/Homes

Options include government subsidized Apartments. Retirement apartments. etc. A member of Woodburn Chamber of Commerce.

Maumee Valley Vet Clinic

By appointment only. A member of Woodburn Chamber of Commerce. Open daily: 8am-noon, 2-6pm (closed Wed. and Sat. afternoons)

McConnell Stump Removal

Free Estimates.

McDonalds

Come visit a well known favorite! Located within the Love’s Travelstop, we would love to make your day taste a little better.

Midwest Tile & Concrete Products, Inc.

A member of Woodburn Chamber of Commerce.

Midwest Weld Source Inc.

Filler Metal Specialist Located in Industrial Park off Hwy. 101 North

Milan Center Feed & Grain Inc.

We offer a full range of livestock and companion animal nutrition and supplies, equipment, and services to those who choose rural or city life.

Moore Farms LLC

A member of Woodburn Chamber of Commerce.

North American Cold Storage

Commercial cold storage facility within Woodburn Industrial Park

Pond-A-River Golf Course

Visit us on Facebook

Ramco Supply

Ramco specializes in manufacturing metal roofing and siding panels for residential and post frame applications. At Ramco, we offer much more than just metal panels and trim.

Renner Property Improvements

Specializing in repairs, remodels, decks, patios, and custom woodworking.

Rex Coomer Farms

Rex Coomer Farms is a 4th generation family owned and operated grain farming operation.

RJM Trucking Inc.

In Industrial Park off 101 North. A member of Woodburn Chamber of Commerce.

Rorick Reality Inc

Active in residential, farm ground, commercial, and industrial transactions, I am available for any of your real estate needs.

S2F

A member of Woodburn Chamber of Commerce.

SamWel Hydro Excavation LLC

With 18 years of experience our business motto is “Done Right the First Time, No Mess Left Behind”

Schmucker Motor Repair LLC

We do sales and service of all Husqvarna Lawn and Garden equipment and service all other brands of outdoor power equipment.

Smooth Moves Storage

A member of Woodburn Chamber of Commerce.

Special Product Services

Specialized Packaging A member of Woodburn Chamber of Commerce.

The Chop Shop Meat & Produce

The Chop Shop provides a variety of meats, produce, baked goods, and groceries.

The Country Oasis

Chicken. Pizza. Deli Sandwiches. Hot subs. Open 24 hours. A member of Woodburn Chamber of Commerce.

The Fat Hen

The Fat Hen is an all occasion floral and gift shop.

U.S. Postal Service

A member of Woodburn Chamber of Commerce.

Wegmann Insurance

For all your insurance needs. A member of Woodburn Chamber of Commerce.

Wells Heating/Cooling

A member of Woodburn Chamber of Commerce.

Wild Ox Company

A full service printing company specializing in design and industrial printed products.

Woodburn Diamond Die

Woodburn Diamond Die, Inc., established and headquartered in Woodburn, Ind., since 1957, has grown into one of the world’s premier manufacaturers of diamond wire drawing dies. The company utilizes its production facilities in Woodburn, as well as those in Mexico and India, to provide products and services around the globe-supported by the efforts of company […]

Woodburn Liquors

Your one-stop shop for beer, wine, and spirits. Contact the staff at Woodburn Liquors for help in planning any large event for all your beverage needs. Your quest for great taste doesn’t have to gouge your wallet; you will find a wide selection of beer, wine and spirits to fit your budget. A member of […]

Woodburn Veterinary Clinic

We treat cats, dogs, small pocket pets, small ruminants and equine.

Yerks Seeds Inc.

A member of Woodburn Chamber of Commerce.