As the program stands today, 75 students are undergoing training for eventual CBT Certification under the Chengdu Doreen Psychological Agency x A-CBT Partnership. The training lasts a total of 151 hours, and after successful completion of their Cohort, participants can become qualified cognitive therapists with proper examination and rating via A-CBT.

To date, 15 students have successfully completed their program and have gained Certification via the Academy of CBT.

The A-CBT certification indicates that the team of counselors at Chengdu Doreen have been systematically trained in the field of CBT, and as a result, have mastered the core techniques and principles of Cognitive Behavioral Therapy. Holding an A-CBT Certification means that practitioners are able to provide professional and effective treatment services to clients, a standard that we hold in high regard.

To learn more about our Training standards at Chengdu Doreen, click here.

At Chengdu Doreen, we value the level of professionalism and high cognitive skills that come alongside being an accredited A-CBT therapist. The Academy of CBT certification represents the value of Cognitive Behavioral Therapy, and the A-CBT Certification allows our agency to emphasize the wide-use and importance of CBT. As our partnership with A-CBT continues to evolve, we value the opportunity to deepen our knowledge and further our education in the field of CBT.

Our training modules include a rigorous standard of ethics which address best practices for psychologists in the field.

Our programs includes a basic CBT model of understanding to ensure that our therapists are well-equipped and knowledgable.

Chengdu Doreen training modules offer CBT assessments to ensure that our therapists know when and how to utilize CBT effectively.

We assist our students in developing clinical treatment plans as a dynamic and field based aspect of their CBT training.

All Chengdu Doreen students are required to submit a case-conceptualization to demonstrate knowledge and understanding in the field of CBT.

Our training standards ensure that students understand how to diagnose and treat a variety of conditions including anxiety, depression, and bipolar disorders.