The Los Angeles Clippers needed Chauncey Billups.

He's not a star anymore, and the team has the NBA's deepest roster. But the Clippers needed Billups because he's "Mr. Big Shot," because he's an NBA champion, because he's a 16-year veteran.

Billups returned to the lineup Wednesday in a 101-95 win against the Minnesota Timberwolves. He had missed more than nine months with a torn Achilles tendon in his left foot. His arrival was timely, as Los Angeles had lost four in a row.

"I was just so excited to be back after such a long time," Billups said. "I've only played full court like three times since the injury, so knowing that, I'm trying to be patient with myself. It's going to take a little while. I got back pretty far ahead of schedule. To be honest, I was going to be back before this, but there were a couple of small setbacks, which was expected, because I had to recalibrate my body for playing an intense level of basketball."

Billups' statistics were meager: seven points, three assists, one steal two turnovers and 1-for-5 shooting in 19 minutes. But he started. And, boy, did he finish.

With the Clippers' lead cut to two points and about 20 seconds left, Billups brought the ball up the court knowing the Timberwolves wouldn't foul him because of his free throw shooting. And with most of the players on the court trailing the play, he showed his veteran guile.

From about 30 feet away from the basket, Billups lobbed one up for center DeAndre Jordan, whose alley-oop finish with 16.6 seconds left sealed the win for the Clippers.

The Timberwolves, who have their own key star back in the lineup as Kevin Love had 19 points and 12 rebounds in the loss, fouled Clippers point guard Chris Paul twice, but he hit all four free thows to finish with 23 points and 11 assists and finish off Minnesota.

"There's nothing like a real live game," Billups said. "I'm sure I'll be sore in the morning, and I'm pretty sure it'll be like that for the first week or two. It's kind of like the way guys are the first few days of training camp."

Billups' return most benefits Paul, who has a talented but inexperienced backup in Eric Bledsoe. Billups is a five-time All-Star point guard, and the 2004 NBA Finals MVP looked comfortable sliding over for short stretches in his first game back. When he returns to full health, Clippers coach Vinny Del Negro more easily can limit oft-injured Paul's minutes to keep him fresh for the playoffs.

"I knew this day was going to come, but I didn't know it was going to happen before the year ended," Paul said. "I talked to him that night after he got injured, and a lot of people in this league thought it was over for him. But not him. We're too much alike. He wasn't going out like that, so it was great to see him back out there. I'm just glad he isn't in a suit anymore."

And in a jersey, he can contribute.

"I still have a burning desire to win," Billups said. "The night I went down, before I even left the locker room, everybody was saying I was retiring. But those were people who didn't know me and my fabric and where I'm from.

"I could understand why they would say that. I mean, I'm 35, I've pretty much done it all, made a good living for myself and my family, and did everything I wanted to do. So why would I come back? But that's just not how I'm cut, man. I wasn't going to go out like that — not to prove everybody wrong, but for my own self."