Justin Timberlake is an American singer-songwriter, actor and record producer. He is the voice actor of Branch in Trolls Trolls World Tour and Trolls Band Together He's also the former movie's executive music producer.

Biography

[]

Early Life[]

Justin Randall Timberlake was born on January 31, 1981, in Memphis, Tennessee to parents Randall "Randy" Timberlake and Lynn Bomer. He spent his childhood days in Shelby Forest. Raised a Baptist, Timberlake grew up singing in the church choir. In 1985, his parents divorced, but both have remarried and the extended family remains close.

Timberlake has two half-brothers on his father's side. His half-sister died shortly after birth, and he would later pay tribute to her in the song "Highway to Hell", with NSYNC.

Career[]

Timberlake started his career as one of the two lead vocalists of the boy band NSYNC, formed in 1995. After the band's hiatus in 2002, Timberlake, along with the other members, pursued individual projects; though the group occassionally reunited for concerts and events. In the same year, Timberlake released his debut solo studio album, Justified. He would go on to release 4 more albums between 2006-2018.

Timberlake made his debut as actor in the 2000 television film Model Behavior, which aired on ABC as part of the anthology series The Wonderful World of Disney. Before Trolls, his first voice role in a DreamWorks Animation film was as Arthur Pendragon in Shrek the Third.

Roles

[]

Branch in Trolls, Trolls Holiday, Trolls World Tour and Trolls: Holiday in Harmony.

In, Trolls, he sings True Colors and September, both of which are cover songs. One of his songs, Can’t Stop the Feeling!, was also featured at the ending of the film.

He sings in most of the songs for Trolls Holiday.

In Trolls World Tour, he sings The Other Side, Trolls Wanna Have Good Times, Don't Slack, It's All Love, Just Sing, Trolls 2 Many Hits Mashup and Perfect for Me. He was also supposed to sing the cut song Goodbye.

In Trolls: Holiday in Harmony, he sings Signed, Sealed, Delivered (I'm Yours) and Together Now.

Interviews

[]

Hey U Guys - Justin Timberlake & Anna Kendrick Trolls

Trivia

[]

Timberlake claimed in April 2020 that he wishes to make seven Trolls films in total.[1]

He was expected to earn a 7-figure number salary in back pay after Trolls World Tour.[2]

One of the "Jams" listed on the website for BroZone is a duo of singers known as "Justin Timber and Lakes", the pair are a nod to his name. However, it is John Dory who listed the duo alongside his "Jams" list.