Birth name Justin Randall Timberlake Born January 31, 1981(US) Genres Pop, dance, R&B Occupations Singer, songwriter, record producer, dancer, actor, businessman Instruments Vocals, keyboards, guitar,

Justin Timberlake is an American pop musician. He was born in Memphis, Tennessee, the son of Lynn Harless and Randall Timberlake, His paternal grandfather, Charles L. Timberlake, was a Baptist minister, and Timberlake was raised Baptist, though now considers himself more "spiritual than religious". He achieved early fame when he appeared as a contestant on Star Search, and went on to star in the Disney Channel television series The New Mickey Mouse Club. His castmates included future girlfriend and pop superstar Britney Spears, future tourmate Christina Aguilera. The show ended in 1994, but late in 1995 Timberlake recruited Chasez to be in an all-male singing group organized by boy band manager Lou Pearlman that eventually became 'N Sync.

In 2002, he released his debut solo album, Justified, which sold more than 7 million copies worldwide. The album was a commercial success, greatest hits "Cry Me a River" and "Rock Your Body". Timberlake continued his success with his second solo album, FutureSex, debuting at number one on the Billboard chart, and produced the US number one hit singles "SexyBack" and "What Goes Around Comes Around". Timberlake's first two albums made him one of the most commercially successful singers in the world. Aside from music, he has also begun an acting career.

In April 2007, Timberlake was entering a London studio with famous singer Madonna, confirming rumors that he was collaborating with her. A song "4 Minutes” was first played by Timbaland at Philadelphia's Jingle Ball on December 17, 2007. "4 Minutes" was revealed to be a duet between Timberlake and Madonna, with backing vocals by Timbaland. It was lead single from Madonna's eleventh studio album Hard Candy, which featured four other song writing collaborations with Justin Timberlake. The single was an international hit, topping the charts in over 20 countries worldwide. Timberlake also appears in the music video, which was directed by Jonas & Francois. On March, 2008, Timberlake performed the song at Madonna's Hard Candy Promotion Show at Roseland Ballroom in New York City. On November, 2008, Timberlake performed the song with Madonna on the Los Angeles stop of her Sticky & Sweet Tour. Timberlake was given Sexiest Man titles by Teen People and Cosmopolitan magazines. On February 17, 2009, Timberlake was named the "Most Stylish Man in America" by GQ magazine. Timberlake is also a fan of the Football Club Manchester United.