Justin Timberlake Research Paper

935 Words | 2 Pages

because he have influenced many people, was rewarded with many Grammy Awards, and most of his songs became in the top biggest songs in the world. First, “Justin Timberlake was born on January 31, 1981, in Memphis, Tennessee, considered to be the home of the blues and the birthplace of rock and roll” (“Justin Timberlake Biography”). He grew up singing in the church choir and performed in talent contests. “In 1992, after several years of voice lessons, he appeared on Star Search, a televised tournament-style

Michael Jackson: The Grammy Hall Of Fame

710 Words | 2 Pages

best song writer back then, all of the songs that he made are the best, and many awards from back then. One thing we all know why Michael Jackson is famous, his music. Michael was young when his first ever song

Michael Jackson

978 Words | 2 Pages

moved to Los Angeles, California to start recording. They released their first album, “Diana Ross Presents the Jackson 5” in December 1969. In 1975 they split with Motown Records, over more creative control over the songs, and signed with Epic Records. Now with creative control over the songs, the group continued to experience tremendous success throughout the 1970s. As time went on a progressed throughout the 1980s and 1990s Michael would face various obstacles and difficulties. Such difficulties include;

What Are Michael Jackson's Major Accomplishments

893 Words | 2 Pages

to be who I am.” (M. Jackson) Michael Jackson, a famous pop and rock singer, is known for many songs. “Thriller” and “Smooth Criminal” are some of his most popular songs. His songs are still played on the radio today. Changing history, Michael Jackson was crowned the “King of pop, rock and soul” by Elizabeth Taylor in 1989 due to his early occupation with the Jackson 5, booming career, and multiple awards. Michael’s early life was focused on schooling, and his musical career. Born on August 29

Michael Jackson Research Paper

827 Words | 2 Pages

Introduction- Michael Jackson a famous hip-hop dancer and songwriter, his full name is Michael Joseph Jackson. He is also known as a king of pop. He had so many talents. He was born on 29th August 1958 in Indiana, USA. Best songs and Performances- He gave many hits to this industry; his Billie Jean is mind-blowing. In this, he sings as well as dance. The “Thriller” album got most hits. He also went to India in 1996 to perform. He said in a further conference that” crowd was huge and supportive”

Carrie Underwood Research Paper

817 Words | 2 Pages

Known for winning American Idol’s fourth season, and later going on and winning multiple Grammy and Academy of Country Music Awards, Carrie Underwood has been able to live and is still living a successful life. Carrie Underwood is an American Country singer, songwriter, and actress! Since becoming the winner of the fourth season of American Idol in 2005, she has become one of the most successful artists in music genre! Underwood was born on March 10, 1983, in Muskogee, Oklahoma. She was born and

Taylor Swift Research Paper

548 Words | 2 Pages

Who doesn’t know the name Taylor Swift? She is a 26 year old superstar! She has done so many things in her life and has worked hard for everything she has. First, Taylor Alison Swift was born on December 13, 1989. Next, Taylor Swift sang the Star Spangled Banner at a Philadelphia 76ers game at age 11. Last, at the age of 12, she started learning how to play guitar and wrote her own songs. You can see that Taylor Swift was very talented as a young girl and has continued to work hard for all of her

Bessie Smith: The Empress Of The Blues

939 Words | 2 Pages

met Ma Rainey who also became a friend and mentor to her. After traveling with the group, in 1923 she was discovered by Columbia Records. After signing with Columbia, she released her first song Downhearted Blues. The song Downhearted Blues went on to sale over 800,000 copies and became one her most popular songs. During the 1920s and 1930s she had become one of the most famous blues singers in America. During that time period Bessie recorded over 160 tracks. Because of the time period many black singers

Dave Mathews Band Research Paper

744 Words | 2 Pages

successful in engaging their fans with riveting performances for the past 21 years and counting. No matter what the measuring scale is, they have always been able to give their fans an infatuated performance. Dave Mathews Band epitomizes an American Rock band. It started in the early 90’s with an eclectic mix of musicians complementing to the enthused version of music. The band was initially led by Dave Mathews- the song writer, vocalist and guitarist, Carter Beauford- back vocalist and drummer,

Celine Dion Research Paper

1813 Words | 4 Pages

in 1992. She has recorded four #1 hits; "The Power of Love," "Because You Loved Me," "My Heart Will Go On" and "I'm Your Angel.” Ever since then she has continued to claim 100 more rewards. One on many more rewards she has gained is a Golden Globe award from singing “My Heart Will Go On.” Dion has made very good choices with picking the crew that helps her to pursue her career. In an interview she announced “I did not make it this far myself.” She has performed at many different places. She came back

Santana Essay

1048 Words | 3 Pages

Mexican-American award-winning guitarist Carlos Santana is the leader of Santana, a band whose music uniquely blends Latin-infused rock, jazz, blues, salsa and African rhythms.Mexican-American award-winning guitarist Carlos Santana is the leader of Santana, a band whose music uniquely blends Latin-infused rock, jazz, blues, salsa and African rhythms.With their highly original blend of Latin-infused rock, jazz, blues, salsa and African rhythms, the band—which quickly became known simply as Santana—gained

Kanye West Thesis

1256 Words | 3 Pages

life and mid life throughout his music career. West was born on june 8, 1977, Atlanta Georgia, he grew up in the South Shore of Chicago. His parents got divorced when he was three years old, his mother raised him in Chicago and the summers he spent it with his father. He first started to write poetry when he was five years old, when he was in the third grade he figured out he had a passion for art and music. While growing up in Chicago he got involved with hip-hop dancing, he began rapping in the third

Carrie Underwood Research Paper

706 Words | 2 Pages

can be mixed but you have to do it correctly. Girls that sing country usually sing higher notes and are from the south. Carrie Underwood is a famous country music star. She has taken the world by storm one song at a time. Carrie Underwood, an amazing role model, has been singing for four years. Carrie Underwood was born on March 10, 1983, in Muskogee Oklahoma. She was born and raised on her farm. Underwood had two older sisters that inspired her. Underwoods sister Stephanie U. Shelton was thirteen

Song Analysis: Beyonce Knowles

1339 Words | 3 Pages

The single is the most successful of the four releases from the album and is considered to be one of their signature songs. It won 2 Grammy Awards and an MTV Video Music Award.” In 2001, Destiney’s Child released their third studio album Survivor. The video of their song, Survivor, off the album, “won the 2001 MTV Video Music Award for Best R&B Video, and a Soul Train Lady of Soul Award for Best R&B/Soul Single, Group, Band or Duo,” according to whp.org. While enjoying the group’s success, Beyoncé began

Amy Winehouse's Influence On The Music Industry

968 Words | 2 Pages

and her father would often sing to her (Amy Winehouse Biography). Her father was also very into jazz music when he was a child. He would sing in his family’s band. Amy’s mother claims that Amy and her father were very close. He used to sing Sinatra songs to her every day and that is when her love for music started. Even in school the teachers would scold her to stop signing. (EXCLUSIVE: Amy Winehouse's mother explains why she feels powerless to stop her troubled daughter’s descent into hell of addiction)

Research Paper On Beyonce

661 Words | 2 Pages

or not. Beyonce, twenty time Grammy winner, uses her confidence towards her acting skills, and her musical talents to show and inspire other artists and people around the world. Confidence is the feeling that one can rely on someone or something (Dictionary). Being confident and being driven comes naturally to someone who wants to meet their goals. Beyonce started performing when she was seven years old, which means she has been using her talent for twenty eight years. Beyonce born and raised in

Rumours, by Fleetwood Mac

697 Words | 2 Pages

In 1977, when Fleetwood Mac released their multi-platinum album Rumours, I was 4 years old and far too young to appreciate music. As I entered my mid-20s, I had acquired a passion for music of the 1970s and fell in love with the Eagles, Rush, Led Zeppelin, but most importantly, Fleetwood Mac. Their music had become a part of me. It had developed into my personal therapeutic outlet and helped to keep me sane during any emotional upheaval that I might have been experiencing. It was then that I realized

The Challenges Of Mr. Stevie Wonder And Mr Stevie Wonder

1638 Words | 4 Pages

was a man who went blind at the age of seven. He was born and raised in Albany Ga, he has won 17 Grammys and many more awards. He's music style wasn't just r&b but also jazz and blues. In 1960 The temptations came to play, an all male group that contained 5 very powerful singers. Apart of Motown records the temptation has established a list of great hits, 37 top hits at that. There are many know songs of their like my girl, papa was a rolling stone and many more. The 1970s was a motown decade with