05-Aug-2024 08:32 AM

Blog Id: 18431

Chandidas Mahavidyalaya B.Sc Admission 2024

Chandidas Mahavidyalaya, Birbhum was Established in 1972 and is West Bengal oldest Private INSTITUTE . Chandidas Mahavidyalaya Approved by .Chandidas Mahavidyalaya has various campus facilities which include separate hostels for boys and girls, Wi-Fi facilities, banking facility, ATM facility, transportation, medical facility, indoor and outdoor sports facilities, central library, cafeteria, gymnasium, ambulance, and other facilities. Central Placement Cell at Chandidas Mahavidyalaya plays the role of a career development center for students. The primary intent of the placement cell is to groom the students and prepare them to face the dynamic corporate and industrial work culture. The B.Sc 3 Years undergraduate program, is intended to give students specialized knowledge in subjects related to the Science stream.BSc is passing Class 12th in the Science stream with PCB/PCM/PCMB (Physics, Chemistry, Mathematics, or Biology) as core subjects, and earning at least 50% of the possible points from an accredited board is the minimal requirement for admission to a BSc program.

Highlights of Chandidas Mahavidyalaya at B.Sc

Institute Name

Chandidas Mahavidyalaya Birbhum

Established Year

1972

Approved By

Type

Private

Address

Birbhum, West Bengal India 731215

E-Mail

[email protected]

Official Website

www.chandidasmahavidyalaya.ac.in

Placement Process of Chandidas Mahavidyalaya at B.Sc

The Central Placement Office asks all students to complete a Placement Form providing details if they decide to take up a campus placement. Interested students apply through the Placement Office managed by the Chandidas Mahavidyalaya Placement team. As part of the application process, students submit a detailed CV. Companies are required to send a list of shortlisted candidates based on students' applications to the CPC at least one week before the final interview. Pre-Placement Talks (PPTs) facilitate communication between companies and students. Companies visit the campus and shortlist the candidates based on their qualifications and resumes, after which the final selection is made. After the final interview, students can receive job offers from the companies.

Application Process of Chandidas Mahavidyalaya at B.Sc

Visit the official website of Chandidas Mahavidyalaya.

Candidates need to register themselves.

Verify the email and fill Chandidas Mahavidyalaya application form online.

Pay the required application fee and submit the application.

Take a printout of the Chandidas Mahavidyalaya application form for future reference.

Documents Required of Chandidas Mahavidyalaya at B.Sc

Passport-size photographs

Class 10th certificate

Class 12th certificate

Bachelor’s degree (for PG admission)

Master’s degree (for PhD admission)

Entrance exam scorecard (if required)

Migration certificate

Caste certificate

Character certificate

Transfer certificate

ID Proof

Top Recruiters of Chandidas Mahavidyalaya at B.Sc

HDFC Bank

Reliance Retail

Mahindra

Airtel

Jaro Education

ICICI Bank

SAIL

Jindal Power

Bandhan Bank

Byjus’

Hyundai

Microsoft

Capgemini

Infosys

Reliance Jio

Dabur

Coca Cola

ETV Bharat

LIC

Tata Consultancy Services

Course Details of Chandidas Mahavidyalaya at B.Sc

Course Name BSc

BSc Duration

3 years

BSc Entrance Exams

CUET, BHU UET, NPAT

BSc Admission Process

Through Merit and Entrance Exams

BSc Eligibility

Class 12th in Science stream with 50% – 60% marks

BSc Scope

Masters Degree or Specialization specific jobs

BSc Jobs

Scientist, Research Associate, Professor, Lab Chemist, Statistician, etc.

Why Study of B.Sc at Chandidas Mahavidyalaya?

Strong foundation in natural sciences: A BSc course provides students with a strong foundation in natural sciences. This foundation can be leveraged for a variety of careers in STEM fields.

High-income potential: A BSc offers high-income potential.

Job security: Employment in STEM sectors is expected to grow at a much faster pace than the average for all occupations over the next decade in many industries, including healthcare, IT, and manufacturing.

Focused study subjects: A BSc allows students to focus their studies in a particular area or subject, allowing them to continue their studies and research in the same area.

Eligibility of Chandidas Mahavidyalaya at B.Sc

To qualify for a basic B.Sc program, a student must have secured at least 50% marks in class 12 from a recognized examination board; some reputed universities require 60%.

Students should have completed higher-level courses in foundation subjects like mathematics, physics, chemistry, biology, etc.

In India, you must be 18 years of age or above for admission to a B.Sc program.

Entrance Exams of Chandidas Mahavidyalaya at B.Sc

NPAT

CUET

CUCET

SET

Top Recruiters of Chandidas Mahavidyalaya at B.Sc

TCS

Google

Infosys

Amazon

Accenture

Capgemini

Syllabus of Chandidas Mahavidyalaya at B.Sc

Data Structures and Operating Systems

Chemical Bonding

Numerical Analysis

Atomic Structure

Mechanics

Mechanism of Organic Reactions

Probability Theory

Basics of Bioinformatics

Introduction to Database Management Systems

Food Chemistry

Fundamentals of Computer Organization & Embedded System

Environmental Studies

Vector Analysis

Mathematical Physics

Waves and Optics

Periodic Properties

Electricity and Magnetism

Chemical Bonding

Stereochemistry of Organic Compounds

Chemical Kinetics and Catalysis

Java Programming

Introduction to Programming Concepts and Python

C++ Programming

Biochemistry Statistical Mechanics

Facilities of Chandidas Mahavidyalaya at B.Sc

Laboratories

Chandidas Mahavidyalaya has a departmental-based laboratory facility for the students. Chemistry / Biochemistry Lab has some of the best glass wares and equipment to test the skills and patience of students. Microbiology Lab equipped with research-grade binocular and trinocular microscopes, a microbial culture room, and all other facilities for the cultivation of bacteria, fungi, protozoa, and other microorganisms.

Medical/Hospital

Chandidas Mahavidyalaya has a 24-hour Medical facility available at our Aarang Campus. Ambulance available with a Doctor and Nurse. Student’s health data is maintained.

I.T Infrastructure

Chandidas Mahavidyalayahas Computer labs with 24 hours internet connectivity. Ultra Modern Class Rooms equipped with facilities like the LCD projector, OHP etc. Virtual learning through Video Conferencing facility. CAD / CAM Lab with computer graphics integrated suite of software for pattern design, automatic pattern grading pattern detailing marker making.

Gym

Chandidas Mahavidyalaya has a well-equipped and separate portion of the Aerobic and Weight Room are part of the Fitness Center. Fitness Center in the form of a well equipped centrally air-conditioned modern gymnasium.

Sports

Chandidas Mahavidyalaya has Facilities for indoor games like Table Tennis, Carrom, and Chess and are provided in the University campus. There is a fully equipped multipurpose Hall where Yoga, Martial-art, Judo, Karate, Taekwondo Classes are conducted for our students. Sports Center with indoor games like carom, chess, table tennis, scrabble and others are there to help the Matsonians re-energize themselves.

Auditorium

Chandidas Mahavidyalaya has an Air-conditioned Auditorium with modern audio-visual aids.

Alumni Associations

Chandidas Mahavidyalaya has a good networking for the alumni association.

Cafeteria

Chandidas Mahavidyalaya has a canteen facility for staff and students.

Guest Room/Waiting Room

Chandidas Mahavidyalaya has a guest house/waiting room facility for visiting faculty and student family members.

Transport Facility

Chandidas Mahavidyalaya has a transport facility for students and staff.

Banks/ATMs

Chandidas Mahavidyalaya has the Banks/ATM facilities for all students.

Careers Opportunities of Chandidas Mahavidyalaya at B.Sc

Teacher: A teacher is a professional who helps candidates to acquire knowledge, competence, or virtue. He or she guides the students about numeracy and literacy, craftsmanship or vocational training, the arts, religion, civics, history, community roles, and life skills.

Counsellor: A counselor is a trained professional who advises clients by hearing them out. He or she may be a psychologist or social worker and helps people with things like career development, anger management, health, and lifestyle.

Pharmacist: Pharmacists are professionals who advise patients about medications mentioned in the prescriptions. Pharmacists also review the safety levels of newly manufactured medicines and recommend drugs with proper diets.