Chandidas Mahavidyalaya Birbhum Part I Admission 2024 for BA, BSC, B.COM Hons & Gen Course: Chandidas Mahavidyalaya Birbhum is affiliated to the University of Burdwan and recognized by the University Grants Commission (UGC). Chandidas Mahavidyalaya is going to publish an admission notification for various UG courses like B.A./B.Sc./B.Com. (Honours & General). Willing candidates who have recently the passed H.S. exam or equivalent (10+2) can apply online for UG courses tthe hrough official website chandidasmahavidyalaya.org before the last date. Other details like Merit List Publication Date, Counselling date, Eligibility Criteria, Reservation of Seat, Semester Exam Date, Semester Exam Result, Fees Structure, Subject Combination, Application fee, Vacant Seat, Cut off marks & How to Apply are given below in the following paragraph

.About Chandidas Mahavidyalaya Birbhum

Chandidas Mahavidyalaya, established in 1972, is a government-affiliated college located at Khujutipara in the Birbhum district of West Bengal. It is affiliated to the University of Burdwan and teaches arts, Science & Commerce. The college is recognized by the University Grants Commission (UGC).

Chandidas Mahavidyalaya Khujutipara in the Birbhum district UG 1st Year Admission & Merit List 2024-25 Apply Online For BA, BSC, B.COM Hons & Gen Course

Name of The College: Chandidas Mahavidyalaya

Affiliated University: Burdwan University

Organization Website: chandidasmahavidyalaya.ac.in

Academic Session: 2022-23

Departments: Science, Arts & Commerce

Mode of Apply: Online

Vacant Seats: Notify soon

Location of Chandidas College: Khujutipara, Birbhum, West Bengal, India

Starting Date for Apply Online: Update Soon

Last Date for Apply Online (Honours Course): Updated soon

Last Date for Online Apply (Pass Course): Updated soon

Details About Courses

Bachelor of Commerce: Accountancy

Bachelor of Science: Mathematics, Chemistry, Physics, Zoology, Botany.

Bachelor of Arts: Bengali, English, Political Science, History, Sanskrit Philosophy, Geography, Economics.

Eligibility Criteria for Chandidas Mahavidyalaya Birbhum UG Part I Admission 2024-25 – Publication of Merit List

Intake Capacity

For BA Hons Stream: 413 seats

For BSC Hons Stream: 31 seats

For BCOM Hons Stream: 44 seats

For BA Gen Stream: 792 seats

For BSC Gen Stream: 246 seats

For BCOM Gen Stream: 145 seats

Educational Qualification

Candidates who have passed Higher Secondary exam or its equivalent (10+2) from recognized Board/Councils with at least 45% in aggregate can apply for mentioned Honours courses. Candidates who passed out in the year of 2015, 2016, & 2017 are also eligible to apply.

Reservation of Seat / Intake Seat Capacity

Seat reservation for SC/ST/OBC-A/OBC-B & Physically challenged candidates will be based on existing rules of West Bengal Government.

Application Fee

Candidates should have to pay application fee through online using Credit card/ Debit card/ Net Banking. For more details refer official notification.

Publication of Merit List – Selection Process

The score will be calculated on the basis of the aggregate best of five subjects plus subject marks for which Hons. is applied for. For example – Aggregate obtained in H.S. or equivalent based on 2 Languages + 3 best subjects excluding Environmental Science and non-relevant subjects. Chandidas Mahavidyalaya Merit List 2024 will be published on official website of Chandidas Mahavidyalaya.

Chandidas Mahavidyalaya Counselling Date 2024

Counselling process will be held on the basis of Merit list. Merit listed candidates are reported to attend the Chandidas Mahavidyalaya Counselling 2024 cum admission with the following documents. Chandidas Mahavidyalaya Counselling Date will declare on the official website of Chandidas Mahavidyalaya.

Documents Required For Chandidas Mahavidyalaya Birbhum 1st Year Admission 2024

1. Duly filled the application form.

2. Applicant payment receipt copy.

3. HS & Madhyamik Mark sheet.

4. Age Proof (Madhyamik Admit Card).

5. Caste certificate (if applicable).

6. PH certificate.

7. 2 recent passports sized coloured photograph.

8. School leaving certificate.

How to Apply for Chandidas Mahavidyalaya 1st Year BA, BSC, BCOM Admission 2024: Willing candidates can apply online for mentioned BA, BSC, BCOM Honours & General courses through official website chandidasmahavidyalaya.org before the last date. To know the starting date of online registration candidates is advised to visit this page regularly.

Important Dates:

Starting Date to Apply Online: Update Soon

Last Date to Apply Online for Honours Course: Update Soon

Last Date to Apply Online for General Course: Update Soon

For Honours Course:–

Publication Date of 1st Merit List (Primarily): Update Soon

Publication Date of 1st Merit List (Finally): Update Soon

Admission starts of 1st Merit Panel: – Update Soon

For General Course:–

Publication Date of 1st Merit List (Primarily): Update Soon

Publication Date of 1st Merit List (Finally): Update Soon

Admission starts of 1st Merit Panel:Update Soon

Important Links:

Click here ⇒ College Notices

Official website ⇒ chandidasmahavidyalaya.ac.in >> Click Here

More Details: Candidates who are seeking for Chandidas Mahavidyalaya Birbhum Part I BA, BSC, BCOM Admission 2024 follow the given article on this page. For more details like Age Criteria, How to Apply, Admission Process, Cut off Marks, Semester Exam Date, Semester Exam Result, Counselling Date, Subject Combination, Reservation of Seat about Chandidas Mahavidyalaya 1st Year BA, BSC, BCOM Admission 2024 candidates must visit the official website or notification.