Chhatna Chandidas Mahavidyalaya Bankura UG Online Admission 2021-22 – For 1st year BA Hons & Gen Courses: Chhatna Chandidas Mahavidyalaya is affiliated to the University of Bankura has released an admission for 3-year Undergraduate Degree Course in Arts Hons & Gen Session 2020-21. Applicants should have qualified in HS or its equivalent examination & eagerly waiting for taking Chhatna Chandidas College Online Admission 2021 can eligible for online application form through the college official portal ccmahavidyalaya.webnode.com on or before the last date of admission. Additional information regarding educational qualification, reservation of seats, semester exam date, merit list of publication dates, application fee, selection process, counselling date, semester exam result, fees structure, subject combination, cut off marks & how to apply are given below in the following paragraphs.

Chhatna Chandidas Mahavidyalaya Bankura UG Part I Online Admission 2021 – Publication of Merit List

Name of College: Chhatna Chandidas Mahavidyalaya

Official Website: ccmahavidyalaya.webnode.com

Affiliated Colleges under Bankura University

Name of Departments: Bachelor of Arts

Academic Year: 2021-22

Type of College: Undergraduate College

Location of Chhatna Chandidas College: Ghoramuli, Chhatna, Bankura, West Bengal

About Chhatna Chandidas Mahavidyalaya Bankura:

Chhatna Chandidas Mahavidyalaya is established in 2007. It is the General Degree College at Ghoramuli, Chhatna, Bankura district. It offers Undergraduate Courses in Arts. It is affiliated to Bankura University. The college is recognized by the University Grants Commission (UGC).

Subject Combination of Chhatna Chandidas Mahavidyalaya Admission 2021: Bengali, English, History, Sociology.

Eligibility Criteria for Chhatna Chandidas Mahavidyalaya UG Part 1 Admission With Merit List – Apply Online for UG 1st year BA Hons & Gen Course Session 2021-22

Educational Criteria for Chhatna Chandidas College Admission 2021:

Candidates should have passed in Higher Secondary (10+2) or its equivalent examination with 45% marks in aggregate or 50% marks in the subject in which Honours is sought from any institution enlisted by Bankura University within last three years. Applicants must have passed in Higher Secondary examination or equivalent qualification for General Course.

Chhatna Chandidas Mahavidyalaya Bankura Part I Merit List Publication Date 2021:

Admission to the Degree course in this college is made on merit basis in consideration of the results of HS (10+2) or equivalent examination conducted by any Council/Board recognized by the University, as per Universities Guidelines. For admission to Honours Courses, merit point is to be calculated by adding 10% of the total marks obtained in the Best Five subjects excluding Environmental studies & the marks obtained in the subject or related subject in which the admission in Honours Course is sought. Merit point for admission to General Course is to be calculated by adding the marks obtained in Best Five subjects excluding Environmental studies.

Counselling Date for Chhatna Chandidas Mahavidyalaya Bankura 1st year Admission 2021:

Eligible candidates are requested to bring a printout online application form, online payment slip, all mark-sheets of MP & HS pass educational qualifications certificates, Admit Card, category certificate, Caste Certificate, experience certificate, Residential Certificate, etc. in the original. Candidates are also requested to arrive exactly at the scheduled commencement of the counselling session with all eligibility documents in original required for admission.

Reservation of Seats / Intake Seat Capacity for Chhatna Chandidas Mahavidyalaya Bankura Admission 2021:

Candidates are belonging to SC/ST/OBC-A&B/PH categories as per Govt. rules of West Bengal. For more details will be updated soon candidates please stay our official page.

How to Apply for Chhatna Chandidas Mahavidyalaya UG Part 1 Admission 2021:

Candidates can apply for online application format through the college official portal ccmahavidyalaya.webnode.com from start to closing date of admission. Students can take an admission for three-year Undergraduate General Degree Courses in Bachelor of Arts (Honours/General) from the academic session 2021-22.

Before applying candidates must follow the documents:

1. Scanned copy of recent photographs (JPG, PNG Format).

2. Scanned copy of Signature (JPG, PNG Format).

3. Scanned copy of MP & HS Admit Card.

4. Scanned copy of MP & HS Marksheet.

5. Scanned copy of Pass Certificate.

8. Scanned photocopies of all testimonials Certificates.

Application Fees:

Candidates can be paid their application fees through the online by using Debit/Credit Cards/Net Banking etc. or offline mode only.

Admission Fee :

B.A. Honours in Bengali, English, Sanskrit, History, Political Science, Economics, Philosophy – Rs. 1375/-

B.A. Honours in Geography – Rs. 3630/-

B.Sc. Honours in Mathematics – Rs. 1630/-

B.Com. Honours in Accountancy – Rs. 1405/-

B.Com. General – Rs. 1295/-

B.A. General – Rs. 1250/-

B.A. General with Geography – Rs. 1505/-

B.Sc. General – Rs. 1505/-

Important Link:

Click Here More Details ⇒ Download Chhatna Chandidas Mahavidyalaya Ghoramuli Bankura 1st Year BA Admission Notice 2021 pdf

Further information through ⇒ ccmahavidyalaya.webnode.com

Important Contact:

Phone No. 03242-201125 Mobile No. +91 9475585518 E-mail ccmvoffice@gmail.com / sujay.bu@gmail.com

Important Dates:

Event HONOURS COURSE PASS/GENERAL COURSE FORM FILL UP ENDS 20.08.2021 20.08.2021 MERIT LIST PUBLICATION DATE 24.08.2021 24.08.2021 COUNSELLING DATE UPDATE SOON UPDATE SOON