Mena Suvari wed her fiancee Simone Sestito on Saturday June 26th, 2010 at a private church in Vatican City. The couple were engaged since 2008 after meeting at the Toronto Film Festival in 2007. Suvari, 31, is a popular actress best known for her roles in the films American Beauty and the American Pie franchise. Her husband Sestito, 25, is a lesser known entity described by People in their breaking story as a concert producer.

I did a little digging to find out who this Simone Sestito is and how the young concert producer managed to land himself such a beautiful big fish.

Via his Twitter page Sestito describes himself as an:

Italian-Canadian entrepreneur, restaurant & club owner, artist manager, concert producer and founder of Los Angeles based ISSIMO LIVE MUSIC

I wasn’t aware there was such a thing as Italian-Canadian, a Canalian! The young man certainly had that unique trait working for him. He obviously is excited about his marriage to Suvari, check out this sweet-tweet from the Canalian:

The home page for Sestito’s Issimo Live Music is a relatively new endeavor with little additional information on Mr. Suvari. Via the page, which was launched on May 20th of 2010, Issimo is promoting Black Eyed Peas after concert parties with, “special DJs and live performances to keep the party going.”

From the website there is a link to the company’s YouTube page which has only 8 uploads including a poorly produced promo clip from 2008. The following promo from Issimo is billed as an all access behind the scenes pass to a Sean Paul concert. There is a lot of flash in this video, as well as a seemingly endless recycling beats track, but not too much substance:

The most recent upload, which was 10 months ago as of this post, has nothing to do with the company but is what appears to be a cell phone video taken at a soccer match between the L.A. Galaxy and Barcelona. A little strange I know, but you do get a quick peak at a disinterested Mena as David Beckham bends one in!

How about the Facebook page for Issimo, this will tell us something more right? Wrong. There is a well manicured business mission statement but once again not much in the way of actual interesting stuff. Here is a portion of that statement:

ISSIMO is a global music venture that represents a roster of internationally renowned and upcoming artists. The ISSIMO mission is to perpetuate the world’s passion for live music through utilizing unique marketing strategies, creating fashions, and promoting trends. The ISSIMO goal is to create a converged brand that includes unparalleled live concert & club experiences, a major record label, and products such as clothing, drinks, and merchandise.

From what I’ve gathered, it looks like Simone Sestito is an ambitious young man with a taste for the Hollywood life. He likes nice rides, the party life, and the celebrity universe. His profile photo for his Facebook page says quite a bit. In it he is wearing shades and behind him is that legendary Hollywood sign that has called so many people to the idea of a certain way of life. I have to give the guy credit, marrying Mena Suvari is about as Hollywood as it gets.