Simone Sestito is the former spouse of Mena Alexandra Suvari. Simone’s ex-wife Mena Suvari is a popular American actress, producer, fashion designer, and model. She shot to international fame with her performance in American Beauty and three of the American Pie films. She has appeared in print ads for luxury accessories company Coach.

Simone Sestito: Bio Summary

Who Is Mena Suvari’s Ex-husband, Simone Sestito?

Simone Sestito became a public figure due to his marriage to Mena Suvari and although the two have been divorced, he is still renowned but this time as Mena’s ex-husband. Simone was born and raised in Toronto, Canada, but later relocated to Los Angeles and Miami. His age and date of birth are unknown.

There is no information about his parents. Simone Sestito may have brothers and sisters but they are not in the spotlight. He is an Italian Canadian. His educational details are unknown but according to a source, he has a Sales Associate certification from the Florida Department of Business and Professional Regulation.

Simone Sestito is a concert promoter. He is reportedly an entrepreneur and has worked as a realtor associate. As a realtor associate, he worked with Douglas Elliman Real Estate from November 2015 to October 2018. He has also worked as Deion Gill’s music manager. He is a founding partner at Man+Machine Worldwide.

Simone Sestito is the founder and CEO of Sestito Capital Group. He also launched Places in December 2018 and serves as its CEO. He has established himself as one of the world’s most popular event and concert planners. He has organized shows for esteemed artists including Avicii, Akon, Skrillex, Steve Aoki, 50 Cent, The Black Eyed Peas, and Calvin Harris.

In 2019, Simone Sestito reportedly sold his private jet to a private bidder in an off-market transaction. The plane was sold for $27 million.

Simone Sestito Married Mena Suvari In 2010

Simone Sestito and Mena Suvari met at the 2007 Toronto International Film Festival. They started dating soon after they met. They got engaged in July 2008 during a vacation to Jamaica. Mena became Simone’s wife on June 26, 2010, in a private chapel in Rome. Their marriage became Mena’s second marriage.

ALSO, READ: Michael Hope: Inside The Life Of Mena Suvari’s Husband

Mena Suvari was married to German-born cinematographer Robert Brinkmann but their marriage ended in a divorce. They were married on March 4, 2000. Mena filed for divorce on April 24, 2005, citing irreconcilable differences. Their divorce was finalized in May 2005. They had no children.

As for Simone Sestito, it is unknown if he had any previous marriages. He and Mena Suvari had no children although they had reportedly planned to have children. Mena said: “We are kind of building our lives together, we’ve been married a year now. He’s more in the music industry and he travels a lot as well but we’ve been able to travel together.”

“Will we have kids? Yeah, one day, one day, hopefully.” Eventually, Simone Sestito and Mena Suvari’s marriage began to fall apart. Mena filed for divorce on January 13, 2012, citing irreconcilable differences and listing November 1, 2011 as the date of separation. In October 2012, Simone and Mena’s divorce was finalized.

After the divorce, Mena Suvari married her husband number 3, set decorator Michael Hope. Mena and Michael have been married since October 2018. They got married in a “very intimate” and “very beautiful” ceremony. The couple made it known that they were expecting their first child on October 16, 2020. Mena told PEOPLE:

“It’s still this process for me of believing it and accepting that something this beautiful could happen for me. It’s been a very emotional experience. It’s very weird finding out — I was like, I can’t believe it!”

“I’ve had to learn how to be a different way with my appetite and my sleep habits and not pushing myself, asking for help — all these things are hard for an independent woman!”

Mena Suvari and Michael Hope welcomed their son, Christopher Alexander Hope, in April 2021. Their son was named after Michael’s father who passed away when he was young. Meanwhile, Simone Sestito has also found love again. His partner is Alexandra Michelle Rodrigeuz. It is unknown if they are married or not.

ALSO, READ: Candice Chambers: Who Is Mena Suvari’s Mother?

Alexandra Michelle Rodrigeuz is said to be a stylist, cover girl, entrepreneur, and fashion consultant. They have two sons, Gianluca Sestito, born on June 15, 2018, and Fabiano Alessandro Sestito born on September 24, 2020.

Simone Sestito’s Ex-wife Was Raped

Simone Sestito’s now former wife Mena Suvari was raped at age 12. She was raped by a friend of one of her older brothers. He raped her several times. She revealed this in her memoir The Great Peace: A Memoir. Mena Suvari said “Part of me died that day. He used me, had fun with me and then disposed of me. He called me a whore.”

“I never got to have a healthy expression of [sex]. My choice was lost. And that, compiled with already not feeling seen and heard, established a concept that I would have of myself. That that was my value.” According to Mena, “That sucked the life out of me. I think that was just excessive confirmation that no one was going to save me, no one was going to do anything for me.”

As a result of the rapes, Mena Suvari developed a bladder infection but her doctor prescribed her contraception instead of finding out what had happened to her.