In the middle of the city, we have a monument. Standing at the intersection of Church Street and Bellefonte Avenue, there’s a tall monument to the soldiers who fought the Civil War. It’s huge, decorative and very noticeable. And this year is its anniversary.

The Soldiers’ and Sailors’ Monument was constructed in 1908, which would make it a hundred and fifteen years old this year. It’s the anniversary for the monument, but not the monument’s location, which I’ll admit is a bit weird, but let me explain.

Some decades after the Civil War, the city felt that some sort of memorial would be a good idea. They hired an architect from New York to design it. There doesn’t seem to be any record of who the architect was, which is just another one of those Lock Haven mysteries. It was constructed by local contractor E.F. Batchelder and assembled out of a hundred and seven pieces.

But not where it stands now. If you’re picturing that thing in 1908 standing at Church Street, you’re imagining it wrong.

In 1908, the monument stood along Main and Bellefonte, around the end of present-day Triangle Park. Which didn’t exist yet. Triangle Park is the heart of Lock Haven, and it feels a little weird to imagine the city without it, but at the time there were businesses standing there. And, as of 1908, the monument on the end.

The monument has four granite pillars, each with a statue of a soldier standing on it. The Clinton County Times, being a rather weird newspaper, used to have a weekly column in which they interviewed the statues. At the top, high above the others, is a statue of the colorbearer, who also got interviewed.

Engravings on the monument have a few flowery phrases, and list the population of the county in 1861 (17,723) and the number of local men who served in the Civil War (1,938). Around the outer edge of the monument, about head level to the soldiers, are a bunch of symbols that took me a while to figure out. Those are emblems from the local units that served in the war. (When I called City Hall to ask about that, they told me there was a local writer who would know. I assured them that he didn’t, but he was really good-looking.)

In 1969, the city had the Bellefonte Avenue Redevelopment Project, an urban renewal effort that created Triangle Park. The monument had to move. So they hired a firm from Williamsport to disassemble the monument and move it about a block to the southwest. This took a while, taking it apart like Legos, moving the pieces and reassembling it.

The grand unveiling was in early 1970, and the monument was approved by a crowd consisting of the local media, the county commissioners, city council and the mayor. And then a young boy walked up and pointed out that the soldiers had been glued to the wrong corners.

Check sometime. Find a pre-1969 photo of the monument along Main Street, and compare it to the current location. You’ll notice that the soldiers used to be on different ends of the thing. (I’m told that city council immediately convened to discuss whether this constituted grounds for nonpayment, which sounds in character.)

That wasn’t the only error that resulted from the move, though the other one was less avoidable. On the northwest corner of the base, way down at ground level, there’s a little carved rectangle. Go and look; I’ll wait. This is a government benchmark, meant to indicate latitude and longitude, all of these measured back to a central point near the Washington Monument. And as of 1969, it’s in the wrong place, just a bit to the west of where it’s supposed to be.

All in all, though, the thing is a fascinating piece of our history, and worth a look. And also worth reading the inscriptions: “With Malice toward none; with charity for all.”

— — — —

Lou Bernard is a Lock Haven resident with a keen interest in the history of this area. He is adult services coordinator at Ross Library and may be reached at loulhpa@gmail.com or 570-660-4463.