glad to see the yellow shirt is back it really needs to be untied

Iain Glen gets the Downton Abbey habit

Ali Howard

19 Sep 2011

You’d be forgiven for not knowing who Iain Glen is, let alone walking past him on the street.

“I do have a face that changes,” says the Scottish actor. You see, for all that Glen has starred in everything from Shakespeare to Spooks, and acted opposite some of Hollywood’s most beautiful leading ladies (Angelina Jolie in Tomb Raider, to name just one), the 50-year-old Edinburgh native has managed to sidestep super-stardom.

Not that he’s bothered. “I suppose working from the shadows suits me really well,” he says. “You adapt [to fame] – and I would have – but I’ve never really needed to. When I’m recognised, it’s sporadic and I’m happy with that. The important thing is to not be denied chances, and I get the opportunities I need to stay busy and content.”

Most recently that has included a part in HBO’s acclaimed drama series, Game Of Thrones, shown in the UK on Sky Atlantic. But it’s Glen’s latest role, in the second series of ITV1’s Downton Abbey, that we’re talking today. He’s at home in London, where he splits his time between acting and domesticity, living with his partner, the actor Charlotte Emerson, and their daughter, Mary, four. Glen also has a teenage son with his ex-wife, Susannah Harker.

As you’d expect from an actor comfortable spouting lines on stage, Glen’s voice is smooth, his speech charming and well delivered. His middle-class Edinburgh upbringing means his accent also sounds quite posh (“Thank you ever so much, darling,” he coos to his house cleaner. “It looks lovely”).

He is unfailingly polite. And, despite more than 30 years in the acting business, shaping his prolific and varied career, he takes nothing for granted.

“Like all actors, you think it could all change tomorrow and you’ll be found out and never work again,” he laughs. “But so far I’ve got away with it. As long as the next 10 years are not too dissimilar to the 10 before that and the 10 before that, then I’m not complaining.”

I tell him his critically acclaimed performance in Macbeth at Glasgow’s Tron Theatre in 1993 is still well remembered. “I am always chuffed when someone says they remember me in it,” says Glen. “It stays with them – and I love that.”

Lately, Glen has also played an unshaven, life-beaten detective, Jack Taylor, in the Irish film adaptations of Ken Bruen’s crime novels, which will hopefully be shown in the UK later this year. Three have already been made, but two more are on the cards – in between filming season two of Game Of Thrones. “It’s no coincidence I’m stubbled in both,” he laughs.

For now, Glen is excited about the new series of Downton Abbey, in which he plays newspaper magnate Sir Richard Carlisle. As with the first series, it’s written by Julian Fellowes (Gosford Park) and this time Scottish viewers aren’t being left out. Viewers north of the Border were dismayed when STV decided not to air series one.

“At a big cast get-together, Julian mentioned he too was really disappointed it hadn’t been shown in Scotland,” says Glen. “It’s a shame Scotland was denied good drama. But the truth of it is that the programme makers – and certainly not the actors – had no idea it would become so globally successful.”

The reason it did, says Glen, is down to Fellowes. “His imagination – developing storylines that play throughout this house – is very intricate. And he manages to keep all the balls juggling at the same time.”

Series two, he says, will be even stronger. “It has the backdrop of the war – which is the big change – and that transforms the nature of the house, its function and characters. The war underpins it and does nothing but improve it.”

Despite cutting his acting teeth in the theatre, Glen’s current CV suggests strong TV roles are the focus.

“But that’s not deliberate,” he counters. Making sure work fits around family commitments is one consideration, he says, “but beyond that, I just look to do good writing. That’s just the way things have gone and, in the past couple of years, I’ve done less theatre”.

His last foray was the 2010 production of Henrik Ibsen’s Ghosts at the Duchess Theatre in London, “a mad, vainglorious adventure,” which saw Glen take to directing as well as acting. But wearing two hats was demanding.

“I enjoyed it but I used to come back looking like I had a severe migraine,” he explains. “With acting, you turn up, do your bit and then b***** off, and that suits my temperament. But directing takes responsibility. It was an acting role in itself because no-one could tell that I didn’t enjoy it, but deep down I didn’t.”

He’s proud of what he did but says it was all a bit “grown-up” – unlike his stage performances, then, which are praised for being mature and commanding.

In reality, following a straight path has never been Glen’s modus operandi. As his restless acting career arguably bears out, he wasn’t one for buckling down at school. He struggled academically and just scraped into the University of Aberdeen. “It was the route I thought I should be doing – or what other people did – and I heard that the social life was good at Aberdeen,” he says, laughing.

Until acting, he found nothing worth pursuing as a career. His first role was in Arthur Miller’s The Crucible. “Someone suggested it and, from that point on, something clicked. It felt right and, in spite of myself, I seemed to do something that people said was good.”

He received approval from the odd critic during stints in plays and at the Edinburgh Festival, and soon dropped out of university before landing a place at the Royal Academy Of Dramatic Art (Rada).

“I enjoyed pretending to be somebody else,” says Glen, who agrees that acting was probably the first thing he felt he excelled at. At Rada he earned further plaudits and, without making any conscious decision, acting became his career.

“I couldn’t actually believe you could earn a living doing it. It’s a huge scam really.”

But, he insists, it’s a vocation – and one he’d happily do for minimum wage. “The bottom line is that I do it because I enjoy it, not to earn a living,” he says, conceding the money affords him a certain quality of life. He loves the thrill of camera work but appreciates the challenge of the stage, even though it’s not as well paid. “I love them both equally,” he says. “They each have a very different buzz about them.”

But does he harbour any unfulfilled ambitions? “No, not hugely,” he replies. There are theatre roles he’d like to do but says there is nothing he’s “madly coveting”. “But I could wake up tomorrow and be asked to do a play in New York that Sam Mendes is directing, whom I haven’t worked with since The Blue Room.”

And just like that, Glen seamlessly brings up the sexually charged role that saw him star – at one point practically naked – with Nicole Kidman in 1998. The role got him a Laurence Olivier Award nomination for best actor and saw Glen befriend Kidman, who was still married to Tom Cruise. With such A-list friends, I still wonder if he doesn’t wish for the big time. After all, he was once tipped to be the next James Bond after Pierce Brosnan.

Glen pauses. “Was it ever the desire to play the main role in a feature film that I executed really well and the director was brilliant and it made me really popular and was hugely successful?” he says quickly. “Then, yeah, I suppose I wouldn’t have minded that at all. Ask anyone, even those whose profile is a lot bigger than mine, and they will always say ‘Oh, I wish I’d done this or that’.That never goes away. But the truth is, I’m pretty happy. I’m a lot less ambitious than I was as a young man.”

He says work seemed hugely important in his twenties – but family changes things. “It seems less important now. I care a great deal about what I do, but my desire doesn’t burn the way it used to, and that’s no bad thing. Priorities change.”

I suggest it allows him a good work-life balance. “Yes,” he agrees. “That’s life telling me what’s most important. God knows things could be worse. I feel very lucky to be doing what I’m doing.”

Downton Abbey 2x02 promo

since I don't think it was shared yet

idk it seemed like a good idea to combine my 2 favorite fandoms atm. anyway, the man needs more love, seriously. such an underrated actor.

Source 1

Source 2

Source 3