A domestic tale of grief, told through a child's subjectivity in which the melodrama is as tumultuous as the governing scenery; riding the peaks of the Swiss Alps and the pace of its rivers, this French Impressionist reading of naturalism being the psychological terms through which Feyder can channel the displacement of a boy struggling to mourn his mother in the arrival of his father's new bride. There's trademark silent ingenuity in the moving portrait effect, yet the major through line is of how a child's resentment requires an empathy of open arms rather than the discipline of a raised palm. An unashamedly simplistic depiction, but the instinctive nature of children imbues it with something thoroughly poignant - as intertitles carry the dialogue, Jean Forest's performance flourishes with all his impulsive physicality.

Faces of Children is a French-Swiss silent film directed by Jacques Feyder. It tells the story of a 10-year-old boy whose mother has died. His father remarries a woman who also has a child, a daughter, from a previous marriage. The boy, however, loved his mother deeply and has trouble getting over her death. He starts to resent his father's new wife, not wanting her to take the place of his beloved mother, and makes life miserable for his new stepsister.

Feyder does a remarkable job portraying the psyche of his young protagonist and the conflicted emotions within him. He's wonderfully played by Jean Forest. Shot on-location in Swiss mountains, the film benefits greatly from the natural environment and its depiction of a close-knit community. It was a commercial failure upon release, but is now regarded as a key French silent. Faces of Children is a beautiful and poignant piece of work.

Sometimes, it's in silent cinema that I find some of the most emotional performances. It's often said theatricallity reigns in the cinema of silence, but it's frequent for me to find beautiful portraits of emotion and conflict that dialogues could not properly convey. Director Jacques Feyder portrays the beauty of the fields and the turmoil of family drama. A young boy has to see his father remarry and to be part of a new family, this inevitably leads to discord as the young boy tries to ruin the life of his new stepsister. But "Visages d'enfants" goes beyond the typicalities of such dramas and even gives its viewers glimpses of adventure and great dangers. It's amazing the way some of the shots in the film were captured and the work the actors had done. It's almost 100 years old, but it is still a film that manages to surprise those who see it.

75/100

Simple and well told story with an extremely strong first and last acts. Performances from the child actors are great. Visually it's stunning and it makes a terrific use of the natural landscapes of Switzerland. It really could've been one of my favourite silents if it hadn't dragged in the middle.

For me, consistency is key when it comes to directing. And Jacques Feyder is a very consistent director. In all of his (now 5) films that I watched from him, I consistently fell asleep at least once in all of them

Staggeringly modern and resplendent in its natural beauty, Jacques Feyder's Faces of Children is one of the finest French films of the silent era, a narratively simple yet emotionally complex and poignant melodrama set in the pastoral idyll of the Swiss alps.

Well received on release but then almost forgotten about for decades once the negative disappeared, the 2004 restoration by Lobster finally allows this wonderful film to be appreciated for its remarkably progressive traits, including a well rounded set of subdued performances, authentic locations and adherence to social realism, though it isn't without its moments of cinematic trickery—the portrait of the mother coming to life offering a brief subjective venture that tugs on the heartstrings before reality resumes. The…

Even though I have a soft spot for movies that start with a funeral, this one is definitely not my favorite Jacques Feyder movie I've seen so far. It's quite engaging visually, but somehow after the powerful opening it seems to run out of steam pretty quickly. Still, lots to admire.

MaF Roulette season 5, week 10.

Finally found this one under the name 'Mother' on archive.org. Wow. Genuinely some of the best child acting I've seen in a movie, albeit we never have to hear them. :P And some remarkably powerful editing and film effects for the time, to boot! I could understand it from the little french I knew and the performances/editing. Hard recommend for any cinephile out there!

Only very rarely is a silent film so good that part way through, I completely forget it’s silent and just get sucked in through the visuals and narrative. With “Faces Of Children”, the story of Jean and his dealing with grief and change was so refreshing and heartfelt, that I soon felt this was like any film I could see nowadays. It’s told with care and heart and by its conclusion I genuinely felt like I had taken part in Jean’s journey. Easily one of my favourite silents so far, and it’s so under-seen that I really want more people to see it.

Silent Cinema - Ranked

This is why I'm going on these marathons, to discover an unexpected gem that goes straight into my heart. An incredibly observant and devastating look into a boy's psyche, dealing realistically and honestly with grief, anger and trauma. The boy's performance is outstanding, the camerawork is breathtaking, using the landscapes to their fullest and the plot never steers into easily available melodrama. Plus, this might be the first movie to features shots from the point of view of an avalanche.