HISTORICAL MONTHLY AVERAGES FOR AUGUST

The information presented below gives detailed historical monthly average weather conditions along with exceptional weather occurrences. To maintain relevance to current weather trends the displayed information has been calculated using data collected over the past two decades. The climate profile is taken from closest available data source to Ljungby.

Temperature

Throughout the month of August daytime temperatures will generally reach highs of around 21°C that's about 70°F. At night the average minimum temperature drops down to around 11°C, that's 52°F.

In recent times the highest recorded temperature in August has been 32°C that's 90°F, with the lowest recorded temperature 1°C, about 34°F.

Relative Humidity

The average daily relative humidity for August is around 76%.

Heat Index

The Heat Index is a measure of how hot it feels when relative humidity is added to actual air temperature. From this a comfort level is calculated providing categories on how heat conditions might adversely affect someone.

Comfort Levels: Given average maximum temperatures and humidity levels generally you should not anticipate any discomfort from heat (see heat index for more information).

Precipitation

The average monthly amount of precipitation has been recorded at around 5 mm, that's 0 inches. Throughout the month you can expect to see rain or drizzle falling on 15 days of the month.

Estimated Hours of Sunshine per Day

We calculate sunshine hours per day using our past forecast data. For August expect the sun to shine for an average of 7 hours per day. This represents the average number of hours in the daytime that the sun is visible and not obscured by cloud e.g. the average number of hours the sun is actually out and shining. Note we calculate hours of sunshine per day using our past forecast data, not observation data, thus it is an estimate and not actual.

Wind

The average daily wind speed in August has been around 10 km/h, that’s the equivalent to about 6 mph, or 6 knots. In recent years the maximum sustained wind speed has reached 67 km/h, that’s the equivalent of around 41 mph, or 36 knots.

Fog

On average the month of August is affected by foggy conditions on 6 days.

SWIMMING AND WATER TEMPERATURE

The temperature of water an individual will feel comfortable in is very much personal preference. What feels unbearably cold to one person for a swim might be fine for another. We have created our own Swimming Water Temperature Index offering a guide to water temperature and comfort levels for swimming;

In August, for the nearest coastal location, the temperature of the sea averages around 18°C, that's 64° Fahrenheit. Our index indicates for swimming this is considered relatively cool and though enjoyed by the more hardy among us, any more than 10-20 minutes in the sea would leave you feeling refreshed to say the least.