Hoare, Sir Charles Antony Richard (British computer scientist)

Tony Hoare is a British computer scientist and winner of the 1980 A.M. Turing Award, the highest honour in computer science, for “his fundamental contributions to the definition and design of programming languages.” In 1956 Hoare earned a bachelor’s degree in classics from the University of Oxford.

Hoare, Sir Samuel, 2nd Baronet (British statesman)

Sir Samuel Hoare, 2nd Baronet was a British statesman who was a chief architect of the Government of India Act of 1935 and, as foreign secretary (1935), was criticized for his proposed settlement of Italian claims in Ethiopia (the Hoare–Laval Plan). He was the elder son of Sir Samuel Hoare, whose

Hoare, Tony (British computer scientist)

Tony Hoare is a British computer scientist and winner of the 1980 A.M. Turing Award, the highest honour in computer science, for “his fundamental contributions to the definition and design of programming languages.” In 1956 Hoare earned a bachelor’s degree in classics from the University of Oxford.

Hoare-Laval Pact (international relations [1935])

Hoare-Laval Pact, (1935) secret plan to offer Benito Mussolini most of Ethiopia (then called Abyssinia) in return for a truce in the Italo-Ethiopian War. It was put together by British foreign secretary Sir Samuel Hoare and French premier Pierre Laval, who tried and failed to achieve a

Hoare-Laval Plan (international relations [1935])

Hoare-Laval Pact, (1935) secret plan to offer Benito Mussolini most of Ethiopia (then called Abyssinia) in return for a truce in the Italo-Ethiopian War. It was put together by British foreign secretary Sir Samuel Hoare and French premier Pierre Laval, who tried and failed to achieve a

hoarfrost (meteorology)

hoarfrost, deposit of ice crystals on objects exposed to the free air, such as grass blades, tree branches, or leaves. It is formed by direct condensation of water vapour to ice at temperatures below freezing and occurs when air is brought to its frost point by cooling. Hoarfrost is formed by a

hoarhound (herb)

horehound, (Marrubium vulgare), bitter perennial herb of the mint family (Lamiaceae), native to Europe, North Africa, and Central Asia. The plant has naturalized throughout much of North and South America and is considered an invasive species in parts of Australia and New Zealand. The leaves and

hoarseness (pathology)

speech disorder: Treatment and rehabilitation: Any case of chronic hoarseness should be evaluated first by a laryngologist to establish a precise diagnosis. This is particularly important in the older age groups in which an incipient laryngeal cancer is often overlooked because the patient does not pay attention to his or her deteriorating voice. The…

hoary bamboo rat (rodent)

bamboo rat: sinensis), the hoary bamboo rat (R. pruinosus), and the large bamboo rat (R. sumatrensis). All bamboo rats belong to the subfamily Rhyzomyinae, which includes their closest living relatives, the African mole rats (genus Tachyoryctes). Subfamily Rhyzomyinae is classified within the family Muridae (rats and mice) of the…

hoary bat (mammal)

hoary bat, (Lasiurus cinereus), migratory North American bat found in wooded areas from Canada to Mexico. It is one of the vesper bats, family Vespertilionidae, and measures 13–14 cm (5–5.5 inches) long, including a 5–6-cm (2–2.5-inch) tail; weight is about 30 grams (1 ounce). Its thick fur is

hoary fox (mammal, Vulpes species)

fox: Classification: cana (Blanford’s, or hoary, fox) Small (1–2 kg) and catlike, with soft fur and a long bushy tail; found in the mountain steppes and deserts of Iran, Pakistan, Afghanistan, and Israel; coat gray above, white below. V. chama (Cape fox, South African silver fox, or chama)…

hoary fox (mammal, Lycalopex species)

South American fox: …the conservation status of the hoary fox (L. vetulus), which lives in the grasslands of Brazil, and the Sechuran fox (L. sechurae), which lives along the coasts of northwestern Peru and southwestern Ecuador.

hoary marmot (mammal)

marmot: The hoary marmot hibernates for up to nine months, its fat reserves amounting to 20 percent of its total body weight. Marmots mate soon after they emerge from hibernation. Gestation lasts about a month, and a litter of generally 4 or 5 (recorded extremes range from…

hoary plantain (plant)

Plantago: Ribwort and hoary plantain (P. lanceolata and P. media, respectively) are troublesome weeds. By contrast, psyllium and P. ovata have been useful in medical science; they produce mucilaginous seeds, which have been used, for example, in laxative preparations known as psyllium, ispaghul, or spogel seeds.

hoary whitlow grass (plant)

whitlow grass: Twisted, or hoary, whitlow grass (D. incana) and the smaller D. norvegica have leaves on the stems and white flowers with notched petals.

hoatzin (bird)

hoatzin, (Opisthocomus hoazin), primitive chicken-sized bird of South American swamps, principally in the Amazon and Orinoco river basins. The young possess two large claws on each wing, a trait that has led some scientists to link the species with the fossil Archaeopteryx of the dinosaur era. The

hoax (falsehood)

hoax, a falsehood generally intended to fool and to entertain. A hoax is often a parody of some occurrence or a play upon topics that are newsworthy. Media hoaxes are among the most common type. Recorded cases of hoaxes can be found from at least the 1600s, when the nature of information dispersal

Hoax, The (film by Hallström [2006])

Richard Gere: In The Hoax (2006), which was based on a true story, he portrayed Clifford Irving, a writer who pens a false biography of Howard Hughes. Gere later appeared as Billy the Kid, one of six pseudo-biographical embodiments of Bob Dylan, in the critically lauded I’m Not…

hob (tool)

machine tool: Gear-cutting machines: …multiple-tooth cutting tool called a hob for generating teeth on spur gears, worm gears, helical gears, splines, and sprockets. More gears are cut by hobbing than by other methods because the hobbing cutter cuts continuously and produces accurate gears at high production rates. In gear-making machines gears can be produced…

Hoba meteorite (astronomy)

Hoba meteorite, the largest intact meteorite, weighing about 60 tons, that has been found on Earth. It was discovered in 1920 on a farm called Hoba West, located 19 km (12 miles) west of Grootfontein in northern Namibia. The Hoba meteorite dropped from the sky less than 80,000 years ago and has

Hoba West meteorite (astronomy)

Hoba meteorite, the largest intact meteorite, weighing about 60 tons, that has been found on Earth. It was discovered in 1920 on a farm called Hoba West, located 19 km (12 miles) west of Grootfontein in northern Namibia. The Hoba meteorite dropped from the sky less than 80,000 years ago and has

Hobab (biblical figure)

Jethro, in the Old Testament, priest of Midian of the Kenite clan, with whom Moses took refuge after he killed an Egyptian and whose daughter Moses married (Exodus 3:1). After the Exodus, Jethro visited the Hebrews encamped at the “mountain of God” and brought with him Moses’ wife and sons. There

Hoban, James (Irish architect)

James Hoban was a U.S. architect who was the designer and builder of the White House in Washington, D.C. Hoban was trained in the Irish and English Georgian style and worked in this design tradition throughout his architectural career. Hoban emigrated to the U.S. after the Revolutionary War, first

Hoban, Russell (American author)

Russell Hoban was an American novelist and children’s writer who combined myth, fantasy, humour, and philosophy to explore issues of self-identity. Hoban attended the Philadelphia Museum School of Industrial Art and served in the U.S. Army (1943–45) before beginning his career as an advertising

Hoban, Russell Conwell (American author)

Russell Hoban was an American novelist and children’s writer who combined myth, fantasy, humour, and philosophy to explore issues of self-identity. Hoban attended the Philadelphia Museum School of Industrial Art and served in the U.S. Army (1943–45) before beginning his career as an advertising

Hobart (Oklahoma, United States)

Hobart, city, seat (1907) of Kiowa county, southwestern Oklahoma, U.S. Named for U.S. Vice President Garret A. Hobart, the town developed as a market centre for locally grown alfalfa, cotton, and sorghum. Lake Altus, impounded by Altus Dam on the North Fork of the Red River, is a nearby popular

Hobart (Tasmania, Australia)

Hobart, largest city, chief port, and capital of Tasmania, Australia. Located in the southeastern corner of the state on the west bank of the River Derwent estuary (2 miles [3 km] wide), 12 miles (19 km) above its mouth, the city ranges along steep foothills with Mount Wellington (4,167 feet [1,270

Hobart (Indiana, United States)

Hobart, city, Lake county, northwestern Indiana, U.S., adjacent to Gary. George Earle laid out the site in 1849, having built a dam across the Deep River to provide waterpower for his gristmill in 1845, and he named the community for his brother Frederick Hobart Earle. The dam created Lake George,

Hobart Paşa (British naval captain)

Hobart Paşa was an English naval captain and adventurer who commanded the Ottoman squadron in the Russo-Turkish War of 1877–78. He served in the British Navy until 1863, when he retired with the rank of captain. During the U.S. Civil War (1861–65), he took command of a Confederate blockade runner,

Hobart Town Magazine (Australian magazine)

history of publishing: General periodicals: The Hobart Town Magazine (1833–34) survived a bit longer and contained stories, poems, and essays by Australian writers. The Sydney Literary News (1837) was the first to contain serial fiction and advertisements. Illustrations were introduced in the 1840s; the Australian Gold Digger’s Monthly Magazine and Colonial…

Hobart, Garret A. (vice president of United States)

Garret A. Hobart was the 24th vice president of the United States (1897–99) in the Republican administration of Pres. William McKinley. Hobart was the son of Addison Willard Hobart, a schoolteacher, and Sophia Vandeveer. Admitted to the New Jersey bar in 1866, Hobart began practicing law in

Hobart, Garret Augustus (vice president of United States)

Garret A. Hobart was the 24th vice president of the United States (1897–99) in the Republican administration of Pres. William McKinley. Hobart was the son of Addison Willard Hobart, a schoolteacher, and Sophia Vandeveer. Admitted to the New Jersey bar in 1866, Hobart began practicing law in

Hobart, John Henry (American clergyman)

John Henry Hobart was a U.S. educator, publisher, author, and bishop of the Protestant Episcopal Church whose emphasis upon the discipline of orthodoxy during the inchoate post-Revolutionary period in American history—when all things English were suspect—helped Anglicanism to expand in a new nation

Hobart, Percy (British military officer)

Percy Hobart was a British army officer and military theorist who developed specialized tanks that were used in the Normandy Invasion during World War II. After graduating from the Royal Military Academy at Woolwich in 1904, Hobart was commissioned in the Royal Engineers. His sister married the

Hobart, Percy Cleghorn Stanley (British military officer)

Percy Hobart was a British army officer and military theorist who developed specialized tanks that were used in the Normandy Invasion during World War II. After graduating from the Royal Military Academy at Woolwich in 1904, Hobart was commissioned in the Royal Engineers. His sister married the

Hobart-Hampden, Augustus Charles (British naval captain)

Hobart Paşa was an English naval captain and adventurer who commanded the Ottoman squadron in the Russo-Turkish War of 1877–78. He served in the British Navy until 1863, when he retired with the rank of captain. During the U.S. Civil War (1861–65), he took command of a Confederate blockade runner,

Hobbema, Meindert (Dutch painter)

Meindert Hobbema was a Dutch painter, one of the most important Baroque landscapists of the Dutch school. He lived all his life in Amsterdam, adopting the surname of Hobbema as a young man. He was a friend and pupil of Jacob van Ruisdael. The two made sketching tours together and often painted the

Hobbema, Meyndert (Dutch painter)

Meindert Hobbema was a Dutch painter, one of the most important Baroque landscapists of the Dutch school. He lived all his life in Amsterdam, adopting the surname of Hobbema as a young man. He was a friend and pupil of Jacob van Ruisdael. The two made sketching tours together and often painted the

Hobbes, Thomas (English philosopher)

Thomas Hobbes was an English philosopher, scientist, and historian, best known for his political philosophy, especially as articulated in his masterpiece Leviathan (1651). Hobbes viewed government primarily as a device for ensuring collective security. Political authority is justified by a

Hobbit, The (film trilogy by Jackson)

Peter Jackson: …with a series based on The Hobbit, the author’s predecessor to The Lord of the Rings. The trilogy comprised An Unexpected Journey (2012), The Desolation of Smaug (2013), and The Battle of the Five Armies (2014). In 2018 he directed the acclaimed World War I documentary They Shall Not Grow…

Hobbit, The (novel by Tolkien)

The Hobbit, fantasy novel by J.R.R. Tolkien, published in 1937. The novel introduced Tolkien’s richly imagined world of Middle Earth in its Third Age and served as a prologue to his The Lord of the Rings. Hobbits, a race of small humanlike creatures, characteristically value peace, simplicity, and

Hobbit: An Unexpected Journey, The (film by Jackson [2012])

Guillermo del Toro: …the screenplays for Peter Jackson’s The Hobbit: An Unexpected Journey (2012) and its two sequels (2013 and 2014). In addition, he created the TV series The Strain (2014–17) and Trollhunters: Tales of Arcadia (2016–18)—based on novels that he wrote with Chuck Hogan and Daniel Kraus, respectively—as well as a sequel…

Hobbit: The Battle of the Five Armies, The (film by Jackson [2014])

Guillermo del Toro: …its two sequels (2013 and 2014). In addition, he created the TV series The Strain (2014–17) and Trollhunters: Tales of Arcadia (2016–18)—based on novels that he wrote with Chuck Hogan and Daniel Kraus, respectively—as well as a sequel to the latter, 3Below: Tales of Arcadia (2018–19). Del Toro also created…

Hobbit: The Desolation of Smaug, The (film by Jackson [2013])

Guillermo del Toro: …and its two sequels (2013 and 2014). In addition, he created the TV series The Strain (2014–17) and Trollhunters: Tales of Arcadia (2016–18)—based on novels that he wrote with Chuck Hogan and Daniel Kraus, respectively—as well as a sequel to the latter, 3Below: Tales of Arcadia (2018–19). Del Toro…

Hobbit; or, There and Back Again, The (novel by Tolkien)

The Hobbit, fantasy novel by J.R.R. Tolkien, published in 1937. The novel introduced Tolkien’s richly imagined world of Middle Earth in its Third Age and served as a prologue to his The Lord of the Rings. Hobbits, a race of small humanlike creatures, characteristically value peace, simplicity, and

hobble skirt (dress design)

Paul Poiret: …for the introduction of the hobble skirt, a vertical tight-bottomed style that confined women to mincing steps. “I freed the bust,” boasted Poiret, “and I shackled the legs.”

hobblebush (plant)

viburnum: The American wayfaring tree, or hobblebush (V. alnifolium), native to eastern North America, grows to 3 metres (10 feet) tall; it has roundish leaves, with white flower clusters and red berries that turn purple-black at maturity. The wayfaring tree of Europe, V. lantana, grows to 5…

Hobbs (New Mexico, United States)

Hobbs, city, Lea county, southeastern New Mexico, U.S., near the Texas state line. Founded by farmer James Isaac Hobbs in 1907, it became a boomtown after the discovery of oil and natural gas in 1927. It expanded from a settlement of 598 (1930 census) to become the state’s petroleum centre with a

Hobbs, Alfred Charles (American locksmith)

lock: Development of modern types.: Hobbs, succeeded and claimed the reward.

Hobbs, Elizabeth (American seamstress and author)

Elizabeth Keckley was an American dressmaker, author, and philanthropist who purchased her and her son’s freedom from slavery and who later became the modiste for first lady Mary Todd Lincoln. Much of Keckley’s life is recorded in her memoir, Behind the Scenes; or, Thirty Years a Slave and Four

Hobbs, Jack (British cricketer)

Sir John Berry Hobbs was an English athlete who was the world’s greatest cricket batsman of his time. Hobbs began his first-class career for Surrey in 1905, and in his second game he scored the first of his 197 centuries (100 runs in a single innings). During 30 years as a professional he played

Hobbs, Lucy Beaman (American dentist)

Lucy Hobbs Taylor was the first American woman to earn a degree in dentistry. Lucy Hobbs graduated from the Franklin Academy in Malone, New York, in 1849 and became a schoolteacher. While teaching in Brooklyn, Michigan, she began the study of medicine, and in 1859 she moved to Cincinnati, Ohio,

Hobbs, Roy (fictional character)

Roy Hobbs, fictional character, the ambitious and talented but flawed baseball player who is the protagonist of The Natural (1952), the first novel by American writer Bernard Malamud. The character was portrayed by Robert Redford in the 1984 film version of the

Hobbs, Sir John Berry (British cricketer)

Sir John Berry Hobbs was an English athlete who was the world’s greatest cricket batsman of his time. Hobbs began his first-class career for Surrey in 1905, and in his second game he scored the first of his 197 centuries (100 runs in a single innings). During 30 years as a professional he played

hobby (bird)

hobby, any of certain birds of prey of the genus Falco (primarily F. subbuteo) that are intermediate in size and strength between the merlin and the peregrine. F. subbuteo is about 33 cm (13 inches) long and is dark bluish brown above and white below, with dark streaking and reddish leg feathering.

hobby (leisure activity)

history of publishing: Nonprofessional types: …layman may fall into the hobby category. Very often a professional magazine has an amateur counterpart, as, for instance, in electronics, where the amateur finds a wide range of technical magazines on radio, television, hi-fi, and tape recording. Other popular subjects are photography (the British Amateur Photographer was founded in…

Hobby Horse, The (British newspaper)

Arthur Heygate Mackmurdo: He began publishing The Hobby Horse in 1882, the first finely printed magazine on art. A friend of Morris, he was a founding member of the Society for the Protection of Ancient Buildings and was active in several organizations.

Hobby Lobby Stores, Inc. (American company)

Burwell v. Hobby Lobby Stores, Inc.: Background: …the for-profit corporations they owned—Hobby Lobby, Inc. (an arts-and-crafts retailer) and Mardel Christian & Education Stores, Inc. (a chain of Christian bookstores)—filed suit in U.S. district court, naming Kathleen Sebelius, then secretary of health and human services, and others as defendants. The individual plaintiffs (the Greens) alleged that the…

Hobby, Oveta Culp (United States government official)

Oveta Culp Hobby was an American editor and publisher of the Houston Post (1952–53), the first director of the U.S. Women’s Army Corps (1942–45), and the first secretary of the Department of Health, Education, and Welfare (1953–55). Culp was educated privately and for a time attended Mary

Hobby-Eberly Telescope (telescope, Texas, United States)

Hobby-Eberly Telescope (HET), telescope that is one of the largest in the world, with a mirror measuring 11.1 by 9.8 metres (36.4 by 32.2 feet). It is located on Mount Fowlkes (2,024 metres [6,640 feet]) at the University of Texas at Austin’s McDonald Observatory near Fort Davis, Texas, U.S. The

hobby-horse (bicycle)

bicycle: Draisiennes, hobby-horses, and other velocipedes: The first two-wheeled rider-propelled machine for which there is indisputable evidence was the draisienne, invented by Baron Karl von Drais de Sauerbrun of Germany. In 1817 he rode it for 14 km (9 miles), and the following year he exhibited it…

Hobgoblin (fairy)

puck, in medieval English folklore, a malicious fairy or demon. In Old and Middle English the word meant simply “demon.” In Elizabethan lore he was a mischievous, brownielike fairy also called Robin Goodfellow, or Hobgoblin. As one of the leading characters in William Shakespeare’s Midsummer

Hobgood, John (American educator)

Joseph Yoakum: …the public until 1967, when John Hobgood—a professor of anthropology at Chicago State College (now Chicago State University)—noticed his drawings as he passed by Yoakum’s studio on the South Side of Chicago. Hobgood purchased a number of his drawings and helped arrange an exhibition for Yoakum’s work. That exhibition launched…

Hobhouse, Emily (British social worker)

Emily Hobhouse was an English reformer and social worker whose humanitarian undertakings in South Africa caused her to be dubbed the “Angel of Love” by grateful Boer women. Hobhouse spent the first sheltered 35 years of her life at her father’s rectory. Upon his death, she engaged in temperance

Hobhouse, Leonard Trelawny (British sociologist)

Leonard Trelawny Hobhouse was an English sociologist and philosopher who tried to reconcile liberalism with collectivism in the interest of social progress. In elaborating his conception of sociology, he drew on his knowledge of several other fields: philosophy, psychology, biology, anthropology,

Hobhouse, Sir John Cam, 2nd Baronet (British politician)

John Cam Hobhouse, Baron Broughton was a British politician and literary personage known as the alleged coiner of the phrase “His Majesty’s Opposition” (implying the continued loyalty of a major party when out of power) and as a close friend of Lord Byron. On his advice, Byron’s memoirs were

Hobocan (New Jersey, United States)

Hoboken, city, Hudson county, northeastern New Jersey, U.S. Adjoining Jersey City and Union City, it lies on the Hudson River opposite Manhattan Island, New York City, with which it is connected by train, ferry, highway, tunnel, and subway. In 1630 the Dutch purchased the site from the Delaware

Hôbôgirin. Dictionaire du Bouddhisme d’après les sources chinoises et japonaises (work by Lévi)

Sylvain Lévi: …(1921–23) generated his major work, Hôbôgirin. Dictionnaire du Bouddhisme d’après les sources chinoises et japonaises (1929; “Hōbōgirin. Dictionary of Buddhism Based on Chinese and Japanese Sources”), produced in collaboration with the Japanese Buddhist scholar Takakusu Junjirō.

hobohemia

Dill Pickle Club: Bohemianism in Chicago and New York: …hobo, and the tramp—and hence hobohemia came to define the merger of intellectualism with the ethos of the migratory worker. That spirit was evident in the culture of West Madison Street, a haven for flophouses (single-room-occupancy hotels), burlesque theatres, cheap diners, barber colleges, used bookstores, and underclass saloons. Restaurants such…

Hoboken (New Jersey, United States)

Hoboken, city, Hudson county, northeastern New Jersey, U.S. Adjoining Jersey City and Union City, it lies on the Hudson River opposite Manhattan Island, New York City, with which it is connected by train, ferry, highway, tunnel, and subway. In 1630 the Dutch purchased the site from the Delaware

hoboy (musical instrument)

Music in Shakespeare’s Plays: Instrumental music: …of the oboe, called “hoboy” in the First Folio stage directions), flute, and recorders. Textual evidence points to the availability of two string players who were competent at the violin, viol, and lute. A few plays, notably Romeo and Juliet, The Two Gentlemen of Verona, and Cymbeline, indicate specific…

Hobrecht, Jakob (Dutch composer)

Jakob Obrecht was a composer who, with Jean d’Ockeghem and Josquin des Prez, was one of the leading composers in the preeminently vocal and contrapuntal Franco-Flemish, or Franco-Netherlandish, style that dominated Renaissance music. He was the son of Willem Obrecht, a trumpeter. His first known

Hobson’s Choice (film by Lean [1954])

David Lean: …performances of Charles Laughton in Hobson’s Choice (1954) and Katharine Hepburn in Summertime (1955). He returned to prominence with the prisoner-of-war drama The Bridge on the River Kwai (1957), a film noted for its psychological battles of will and taut action sequences. It won seven Academy Awards, including best picture…

Hobson, John Atkins (English historian)

political philosophy: Lenin: …influenced by the English historian J.A. Hobson’s Imperialism, a Study (1902), which alleged that decadent capitalism was bound to turn from glutted markets at home to exploit the toil of “reluctant and unassimilated peoples.”

Hobson, Laura Z (American author)

Laura Z. Hobson was an American novelist and short-story writer noted for her novel Gentleman’s Agreement (1947), a best-selling study of anti-Semitism. The daughter of Jewish socialist parents, she was educated at Cornell University, Ithaca, N.Y., and married Thayer Hobson in 1930. The marriage

Hobson, Laura Zametkin (American author)

Laura Z. Hobson was an American novelist and short-story writer noted for her novel Gentleman’s Agreement (1947), a best-selling study of anti-Semitism. The daughter of Jewish socialist parents, she was educated at Cornell University, Ithaca, N.Y., and married Thayer Hobson in 1930. The marriage

Hobson, Valerie (British actress)

Great Expectations: …pursues Estella (now played by Valerie Hobson), despite her claims that she is not interested in him. Eventually, Pip encounters Abel Magwitch (Finlay Currie), an escaped convict to whom Pip as a child had once provided comfort. After Magwitch, who has become wealthy overseas, confesses that he is Pip’s benefactor,…

Hobson, William (British colonial officer)

New Zealand: Annexation and further settlement: In 1839 it commissioned William Hobson, a naval officer, as lieutenant governor and consul to the Māori chiefs, and he annexed the whole country: the North Island by the right of cession from the Māori chiefs and the South Island by the right of discovery. At first New Zealand…

Hoby, Sir Thomas (English diplomat and translator)

Sir Thomas Hoby was an English diplomat and translator of Baldassare Castiglione’s Il libro del cortegiano (“The Book of the Courtier”). Educated at Cambridge, Strasbourg, and Padua, Hoby traveled extensively on the European continent. Given court employments in England under King Edward VI, he

Hoccleve, Thomas (English poet)

Thomas Hoccleve was an English poet, contemporary and imitator of Chaucer, whose work has little literary merit but much value as social history. What little is known of Hoccleve’s life must be gathered mainly from his works. At age 18 or 19 he obtained a clerkship in the privy seal office in

Höch, Anna Therese Johanne (German artist)

Hannah Höch was a German artist, the only woman associated with the Berlin Dada group, known for her provocative photomontage compositions that explore Weimar-era perceptions of gender and ethnic differences. Höch began her training in 1912 at the School of Applied Arts in Berlin-Charlottenburg,

Höch, Hannah (German artist)

Hannah Höch was a German artist, the only woman associated with the Berlin Dada group, known for her provocative photomontage compositions that explore Weimar-era perceptions of gender and ethnic differences. Höch began her training in 1912 at the School of Applied Arts in Berlin-Charlottenburg,

Hoch, Jan Ludvik (British publisher)

Robert Maxwell was a Czechoslovak-born British publisher who built an international communications empire. His financial risks led him into grand fraud and an apparent suicide. Virtually all of the young Hoch’s Jewish family living in Czechoslovakia and Budapest died in the Nazi Holocaust, but he

hocha (Inca religion)

pre-Columbian civilizations: Divination: This was called hocha, a ritual error. The ayllu, a basic social unit identified with communally held land, was wounded by individual misdeeds. Crimes had to be confessed and expiated by penitence so as not to call down the divine wrath.

Hochberg, Isidore (American composer)

E.Y. Harburg was a U.S. lyricist, producer, and director. “Yip” Harburg attended the City College of New York with his friend Ira Gershwin. When his electrical-appliance business went bankrupt in 1929, he devoted himself to songwriting for Broadway, composing songs such as the Depression anthem

Hochbrucker, Celestin (Bavarian harp maker)

harp: In 1720 the Bavarian Celestin Hochbrucker added seven pedals that controlled the hooks via levers set in the forepillar. Hochbrucker’s single-action pedal harp was improved in 1750, when Georges Cousineau replaced the hooks with metal plates that gripped the strings while leaving them in plane, and in 1792, when…

Hochdeutsch

West Germanic languages: History: …been the increasing standardization of High German and its increasing acceptance as the supradialectal form of the language. In writing, it is almost the only form used (except for limited printings of dialect literature); in speech, it is the first or second language of virtually the entire population.

Hoche, Lazare (French general)

Lazare Hoche was a general of the French Revolutionary Wars who drove the Austro-Prussian armies from Alsace in 1793 and suppressed the counterrevolutionary uprising in the Vendée (1794–96). The son of a royal stableman, Hoche enlisted in the French guards in 1784. He remained in the guards after

Hoche, Louis-Lazare (French general)

Lazare Hoche was a general of the French Revolutionary Wars who drove the Austro-Prussian armies from Alsace in 1793 and suppressed the counterrevolutionary uprising in the Vendée (1794–96). The son of a royal stableman, Hoche enlisted in the French guards in 1784. He remained in the guards after

Hocheifel (region, Germany)

Eifel: …three sections: Schneifel or Schnee-Eifel, Hocheifel, and Voreifel. In the Schneifel (German: “Snow Eifel”), near the Belgian frontier, scrub and forest are common, with cultivation only on the richer soils. The Hocheifel (“High Eifel”), which includes the highest point in the plateau, Hohe Acht (2,451 feet [747 metres]), is a…

Hochelaga (historical site, Quebec, Canada)

Montreal: Early settlement: …site of Montreal was called Hochelaga by the Huron people when the French navigator and explorer Jacques Cartier visited it in 1535–36 on his second voyage to the New World. More than 1,000 Native Americans (some sources say as many as 3,500) welcomed him on the slope of the mountain…

Hochelaga Archipelago (islands, Quebec, Canada)

Montreal: …the 234 islands of the Hochelaga Archipelago, one of three archipelagoes near the confluence of the Ottawa and St. Lawrence rivers. Area 141 square miles (365 square km); metro. area, 1,644 square miles (4,259 square km). Pop. (2011) 1,649,519; metro. area, 3,934,078; (2021) 1,762,949; metro. area, 4,342,213.

Hochgolling (mountain, Austria)

Niedere Tauern: …to their highest elevation at Hochgolling (9,393 feet [2,863 m]), and a road crosses the range at the Radstädter Tauern (pass; 5,705 feet). The range is divided into the Radstädter Tauern, Schladminger Tauern, and Rottenmanner Tauern. Summer resorts and winter-sports centres lie in the mountains, which are also noted for…

Hochheim, Eckehart von (German theologian and mystic)

Meister Eckhart was a Dominican theologian and writer who was the greatest German speculative mystic. In the transcripts of his sermons in German and Latin, he charts the course of union between the individual soul and God. Johannes Eckhart entered the Dominican order when he was 15 and studied in

Hochheim, Eckhart von (German theologian and mystic)

Meister Eckhart was a Dominican theologian and writer who was the greatest German speculative mystic. In the transcripts of his sermons in German and Latin, he charts the course of union between the individual soul and God. Johannes Eckhart entered the Dominican order when he was 15 and studied in

Hochhuth, Rolf (German writer)

Theatre of Fact: …early 1960s, associated primarily with Rolf Hochhuth, Peter Weiss, and Heinar Kipphardt. Their political plays examined recent historical events, often through official documents and court records. Their concern that the West, and especially Germany, was forgetting the political horrors of the Nazi era led them to explore themes of guilt…

Hochmichele barrow (archaeological site, Germany)

Heuneburg: …of princely graves, including the Hochmichele barrow, which dates from the 6th century bc and is noted for its wagon grave, located in a great central burial chamber formed of sawed wooden planks nearly 20 feet (6 m) long.

Hochrhein (river, Switzerland)

Rhine River: Physiography: …the river is called the Hochrhein (“High Rhine”) and defines the Swiss-German frontier, except for the area below Stein am Rhein, where the frontier deviates so that the Rhine Falls at Schaffhausen are entirely within Switzerland. Downstream the Rhine flows swiftly between the Alpine foreland and the Black Forest region,…