Heeramandi: The Diamond Bazaar fame 'Mallikajaan' aka Manisha Koirala broke silence on her battle with cancer, divorce after only six months of marriage and working with Sanjay Leela Bhansali after 28 years. This 90s superstar has faced many highs and lows before being recognised in Sanjay Leela Bhansali’s recent Netflix series.

NGL, she was one of the critically-acclaimed actresses of the 90s by serving successful roles in movies like 'Akele Hum Akele Tum', 'Khamoshi: The Musical', 'Gupt' and more. Here's what she spoke at length about staying strong and being relevant while embracing her vulnerabilities.

Manisha's divorce with Nepali businessman Samrat Dahal

Manisha has always kept her personal life a private affair, especially her marriage with then-husband Samrat Dahal. On asking about her divorce with the Nepali businessman, Manisha spoke very candidly about her marriage with her ex-husband. Sadly, Manisha's marriage to Samrat ended after just six months in 2010. Whereas, legally it took 2 years. When asked if she wanted to find love again, Manisha told Zoom, "I do. I’ll be lying if I say I don’t."

On battling the fourth stage of ovarian cancer…

As the only one to muster the courage to fight the fourth stage of ovarian cancer shortly after her divorce, Manisha added further, "Some people are lucky who don’t get so many highs and so many lows and have a very peaceful life. I’m also lucky that I’ve had a huge amalgamation of experiences. All I can do is hope that at least my outlook on life is not bitter. My work is on that. My work is what I can change and how I see life, like whether I see a glass half empty or half full. Do I perceive life to be traumatic? No. Whenever traumatic experiences happen, don’t I learn more about life? Don’t I become richer in terms of experiences, in terms of first-hand experience of such huge trauma?"

Manisha's desires on exploring love and life partner

After Manisha's sweet-bitter relationship with her then-husband, Samrat Dahal, she admits that she wants to fall in love again and get married if it meant for her, she also said, "I definitely feel as if there was a male figure in my life. If there was a partner in my life, probably, it'd be nice to have that. But I have to be very honest: main uske liye intezaar karke apna time waste nahi karungi (I won’t waste my time waiting for that person). Agar meri kismat mein likhi hai (if it’s in my destiny), then I’ll get that. Agar nahi hai, toh bhi thik hai. Mujhe lagta hai, I’m living a full life.”

Manisha on embracing her vulnerability

Candidly talking about her anxiety attacks and embracing her vulnerability, Manisha also told Zoom,"I get anxiety attacks, and I do get insecure. I have all those things that everyone has. I also feel depressed and sad many times. But I say, ‘No, Manisha, get up, it’s time for a walk’. I feel that once you go through so much, you also realise that there’s another side to it. You can pick yourself up and walk. They say that life is not just about falling but also about picking yourself up after every fall and walking. That’s the motto I live by.”

To be honest, Manisha has not only made a comeback in the films but also motivated a larger number of audience by her courageous words and candid interview with Zoom. What are your views on her recently? Tell us in the comments below.

Social and lead image credit: Instagram/m_koirala

Read iDiva for the latest in Bollywood, fashion looks, beauty and lifestyle news.