If you are searching for the best Manisha Koirala - Samrat Dahal wedding photos, mehendi pictures, swayamwar pics, reception images and other marriage ceremony pictures, keep visiting this blog. This blog will be updated with the latest wedding pics and marriage information, as they happen.

Manisha Koirala first met Samrat Dahal on Facebook and they have been going around for the past one year. The wedding date had been fixed a few months ago by an astrologer, after recieving the consent of both families.

Manisha Koirala's Marriage Swayamwar

The Swayamwar pre wedding ceremony of the Manisha Koirala - Samrat Dahal marriage was held on the 18th of June 2010 at 2 pm, at the Le Meridian Gokarna Resort about eight kilometers from Kathmandu in Nepal.

This wedding ceremony is an elaborate engagement and mehendi function in which Manisha garlanded her groom Samrat and exchanged wedding rings, as the pandits recited Vedic mantras. Manisha was dressed in a golden yellow sari while Samrat wore a black suit.

Manisha Koirala Wedding and Kanyaadaan

The main wedding function of Manisha Koirala and Samrat Dahal was held on the 19th of June at the Le Meredien Gokarna Resort. It was a traditional Nepali wedding lasting more than 8 hours with customary Nepali rituals. Both Manisha Koirala and Samrat Dahal were wearing traditional Nepali attire in the wedding photographs. Here is one of the Manisha Koirala marriage pictures, where the happy couple is posing with Bollywood villain Gulshan Grover.

The Manisha Koirala wedding ceremony was attended by politicians, diplomats and royals from around the world as well as some of Manisha's filmy friends like Jackie Shroff, Gulshan Grover, Dipti Naval, Vivek Mushran and Govinda’s wife Sunita.

In the Kanyadaan, Manisha's father Prakash Koirala gave away his daughter to Samrat amidst the chanting of mantras. Samrat then took Manisha to his home at Maharajgunj in a doli procession with a wedding band that played popular Bollywood wedding music.

Manisha Koirala Reception by the Koirala Family

The wedding reception of Manisha Koirala and Samrat Dahal was held on the 20th of June at the Soaltee Crowne Plaza. The party began at around 6.00 pm and was attended by well known Nepali politicians, people from the Nepali film industry as well as a few Bollywood celebrities.

The Bollywood stars present in Manisha Koiras wedding reception photos include Jackie Shroff, dressed in traditional Nepali attire, Gulshan Grover and Vivek Mushran. The wedding outfit for Manisha Koirala's reception was a blue sari and diamond jewellery.

Reception by the Groom

This marriage event is scheduled to be held on the 21st of June at the Everest Hotel.

About the Bride and Groom

Manisha Koirala is a 39 year old Bollywood actress. Granddaughter of former Prime Minister of Nepal, Shri Bishweshwar Prasad Koirala, this Leo actress is also a social activist. She did her schooling in Delhi and has a younger brother Siddharth, who is also married. She was earlier engaged to the then Australian ambassador to Nepal, Crispin Conroy and later lived in with American author-speaker Christopher Dorris.

Samrat Dahal is a 34 year old Nepali businessman. He is the son of Surendra Dahal, who owns Leather Wings, a company that has leather shop branches in Bentinck Street of Kolkata, Chennai, New Delhi, Kanpur and Agra. Samrat is the youngest of three siblings, has done his education in USA and now plans to set up a bio gas plant in the tourist city of Pokhara in Nepal.

The wedding saris, trousseau and jewellery for Manisha Koirala's marriage were traditional Nepali wedding wear and very simple. Manisha was not wearing much gold jewellery as shown in the wedding kanyadan photos, swayamwar pictures and wedding reception photographs.

All the best to Manisha Koirala and Samrat Dahal !! What do you think of the bride Manisha's wedding outfits and jewellery? There was not much media coverage and sensationalism for the Manisha Koirala wedding. Why?

Other Celebrity Marriages