Synopsis

Bollywood actress Manisha Koirala married Nepalese businessman Samrat Dahal in a traditional ceremony Friday attended by family and close friends.

KATMANDU: Popular Bollywood actress Manisha Koirala married Nepalese businessman Samrat Dahal in a traditional ceremony Friday attended by family and close friends.

The wedding rituals, spread over three days, were conducted by Hindu temple priests at a forest resort just outside Katmandu, Nepal's capital, Sridhar Pokharel, an official at the wedding venue, said.

The elaborate nuptial celebrations, which began Friday, will conclude with a reception Sunday in Katmandu.

Koirala, 40, who belongs to a powerful Nepalese political family, was one of the best-known actresses in India in the 1990s. She has turned to film production in Nepal after a lull in her Bollywood career.

In 1999, Koirala was named a UN goodwill ambassador for her work to promote women's rights and her campaign to prevent trafficking of Nepalese girls.

The actress' grandfather, B P Koirala, was prime minister of Nepal in the late 1950's, while two of her granduncles were also prime ministers of the Himalayan nation.

(You can now subscribe to our Economic Times WhatsApp channel)

(Catch all the Business News, Breaking News, Budget 2024 Events and Latest News Updates on The Economic Times.)

Subscribe to The Economic Times Prime and read the ET ePaper online.

...moreless

(You can now subscribe to our Economic Times WhatsApp channel)

(Catch all the Business News, Breaking News, Budget 2024 Events and Latest News Updates on The Economic Times.)

Subscribe to The Economic Times Prime and read the ET ePaper online.

...moreless

Why leading doctors and scientists pin hope on green jackfruit to fight fatty liver and cancer

Youngsters are roaming around derivatives fire. Can they be reined in?

Casual, calculated, and comical stock-picking lessons from Peter Lynch

Why roof falls when sky opens at Delhi Airport, again and again

Small cars below INR6 lakh are facing a stiff competition from used cars: Tata Motors MD

Weekly Top mid and smallcap picks: These mid and smallcap stocks scored 10 on 10 on Stock Reports Plus

1

2

3