Back in 1991, having just finished reading the 50 most banned books, I got it in to my head that I was going to read the works of all of the Nobel laureates in literature. My resolve lasted about a week, as I slowly learned that even such renowned libraries as Cal Berkeley wasn’t going to be able to find the works of Sully Prudhomme, Theodor Mommsen, Bjornstejerne Bjornson, Frederick Mistral, Jose Eschegaray, Henryk Sienkiewicz or Giosue Carducci, the first seven laureates, and household names all.

What I slowly discovered, as I persevered in this project, is that the Nobel Prize in Literature is a strange animal. It is rarely awarded to the best known writer on the planet, and often the work isn’t very good. More often the work is “important” and “timely” and, ultimately, political.

Because the award is political, being declared a literature laureate does not bestow long term fame found in the Nobel awards in the sciences. Today, most Americans have probably never heard of almost all of the literature laureates, while many of the scientists remain well known. Nevertheless, even as the Nobel Peace Prize has been degraded and rendered a worthless joke since the early 1990s, the Nobel Prize in Literature has retained some form of credibility and integrity. The obvious exception was the failure of the Nobel Committee to present the Nobel Prize in Literature to Salman Rushdie, who was an obvious choice for the prize. The slight of Rushdie reflected poorly on the Nobel Committee, not the slighted author. We all know that a list of laureates that doesn’t include Rushdie is as empty as a Rock and Roll Hall of Fame that has persistently dissed the rock band Yes.

Cut to 2016, and, quite possibly, the worst choice of literature laureate imaginable—Bob Dylan.

Let me very, very clear up front about something. I am huge Bob Dylan fan. With more than 1100 tracks from Bob Dylan on my IPod, and almost all of it good, I could never even create a short list of Dylan’s best work. Political junkie as I may be, I’d rather listen to Bob Dylan’s Blind Willie Mctell than watch Hillary and Trump bash heads on national television. Well, maybe that’s a bad example.

Bob Dylan deserves to the American Poet Laureate. The Poet Laureate recognition is a lifetime achievement award, and Dylan has earned it. Can we go back to calling him Robert Zimmerman now?

But the Nobel Prize in Literature for Dylan is almost as pathetic as the Nobel Prize for Peace was for Obama in 2009—an empty and fawning and sycophantic gesture without meaning.

Bob Dylan should have been awarded the Nobel Prize for Literature, or Peace, in 1976. Consistent with the history of the Nobel Prize, Bob Dylan’s voice, message, writing, music and poetry was timely, important, meaningful, deep, provocative and, ultimately, transformative of culture, politics and national outlook. Bob Dylan brought together irony and current events in a way which was unique even in an era of transformative bards. Bob Dylan was seriously dangerous to the establishment. That element of danger is key and essential to the Nobel Prize in Literature. The winner must to be at least a little bit scary to the government under which the laureate lives.

Anyone scared of Bob Dylan today? Our beloved poet, who has become a cozy part of the political establishment in Washington, has been painfully silent in protesting our current crop of appalling American wars overseas and the civil rights and civil liberties violations which have transpired under the current administration. Clearly, he has reached a point in his life where he’d rather dine inside the White House than protest outside of it. This, by the way, is acceptable behavior from him. He is, in truth, well past his prime. And his accomplishments in his life are enough for any one life. No one really expects him to do more, nor should we. This is the time in his life where his performance alone and his sheer continued existence is enough. Poet Laureate material.

So what does the Nobel Prize do for him, other than add another paycheck and another line item to his resume? Well, unlike the recent awards of the Nobel Prize for Peace which have cheapened the Nobel Peace Prize and diminished its credibility and integrity, the Nobel Prize in Literature cheapens Bob Dylan. The Nobel Prize in Literature is an ironic award - an establishment award given to an anti-establishment rebel. The best thing Bob Dylan could do to prove that he hasn’t lost his touch is to reject the award in the name of artistic integrity. Too little and 40 years too late. But like the coupon for the proverbial early bird special, this shiny new prize may just too much for the aging rebel to turn down.

Rob Meltzer practices law in Concord.