About

“We're All Gonna Die” is a memorable quote uttered by Ned Leeds (played by Jacob Batalon) from the 2018 Marvel superhero film Avengers: Infinity War The quote is used alongside a still from the scene as a reaction image to an above caption or screenshot to express fear and impending doom resulting in death. Though the meme is typically used with tongue-in-cheek humor, sometimes it can be used in a more genuine context. The quote can also be used without the image as a catchphrase.

Origin

The original clip that the meme is pulled from is seen during both the Avengers: Infinity War film, released on April 27, 2018, and in certain trailers debuted before the movie -- specifically the scene where Peter Parker / Spider-Man (played by Tom Holland) is on the bus with his classmates in New York City during the initial battle.

During the scene (featured below), the Q-Ship is already hovering above the city causing panic when Parker’s "Spidey sense" begins to alert him to trouble while he’s riding on a school bus with his classmates. Parker decides he needs to investigate the ship’s arrival, but finds himself unable to escape unseen. In order to do so, he asks his friend Ned to help him by creating a distraction. Ned agrees and exclaims, “Holy shit, we’re all gonna die! There’s a spaceship!” as he leads the rest of the kids away from Parker to allow him to exit via the window and don his mask undetected.

The first time it can be seen used as a reaction image appears on March 14th, 2019, when Redditor sir_tibu posted a meme under the title “Boeing meme invest now before it goes down” to the r/MemeEconomy sub (seen below). This post received over 3,500 upvotes and 257 comments.

Spread

In the following months, the image spread elsewhere online as users from numerous sites created different versions. On April 29th, 2019, Imgur user Garenator uploaded a meme about the soundtrack of Game of Thrones, which received 126 points and nearly 5,000 views.

On Twitter, the picture is used as a reaction image to various tweets as a humorous reply without an above caption. An example of this can be seen when Twitter user Yagerme replied with the image to an IGN post (shown below) on May, 1st, 2019.

Elsewhere online, the meme format continued to spread as additional memes were created with the still. On the Tumblr page Memes For Ages!, another example was published on December 5th, 2019, (seen below).

Various Examples

Template

Search Interest

External References