Professor Rogoff has a very good intuition/point here: any program that is not an emanation of national consensus on the need to reform will not succeed. That is why the self-imposed structural reforms – read sacrifices – of Finland and the Baltic countries were successful. Most of the Greeks see themselves as victims. If they are victims, then they are the victims of their own political, economic, social and moral choices.

A legacy of 400 years of Ottoman rule is still there: the addiction to tax avoidance, corruption, clientelism, mismanagement. While Greece is geographically part of Europe- the rest is not.

The referendum was a travesty of democracy – ask your people if they would like not to pay back their debt and guess what you get. How about Luxemburg organizing a referendum with the question: ’Should Europe give us 200 billion in loans that we have no intention of paying back?’. Of course, Europe will have to respect the democratic decision of an independent nation.

It is true that most of the recent bailouts went to pay back the’institutions’ that gradually replaced the private debt-holders.

But, let us take few steps back in the past: where are the hundreds of billions of euros that Greece borrowed in the first place on the financial markets (that Goldman Sachs helped the Greek government to hide from Bruxelles)? As an independent state, Greece did not feel obliged to respect the EU rule – maximum 60% debt to GDP -, a rule that very few European countries are actually respecting, including Germany and France. No European authority raised a warning finger, on the contrary, Greece benefited of generous assistance to the tune of hundreds of billions or euros since the country joined EU(1979) and later , more incredible, the Eurozone (2002)

So Mr. Juncker should publish the full amounts of all structural, agricultural, development funds, etc. that Greece benefited from in the past 35 years, without any obligation to pay back or at least to show some tangible results in terms of economic progress? Do you know where that money is? Geneva is not far away from Athens.

What we get from the EU institutions and politicians are nothing but misguided historic and philosophical references about the cradle of democracy. Well, no Plato or Aristotle were born the past 2000 years, and the Greek finance ministers do not seem to be aware or bothered much about the free rider and moral hazard concepts. But the other European tax payers do very much, in a union that looks like a transfer union out of control and out of governance.

Why the reforms failed? The reforms failed for two reasons, a) because the previous Greek government was reluctant to enforce them and the new government is unwilling to do so. and b) because they were the wrong reforms.

What is wrong with Greece? A) An unbelievably huge bureaucracy that eats away close to 1/3 of Greece’s annual budget. One in eight Greeks work for the government. In Germany 3.3% of the population work for the government, in Austria 1.1% and in Belgium .8%. In Greece 8% of the population works for the government. B) Illegal immigration. Last year 50 billion Euros were sent to foreign countries by the illegals who live in Greece. With an average 15% sales tax, every time a Euro is spent in Greece the government collects 15% sales tax. With an average life span of three years, a Euro will return to the government coffers in the form of sales tax and income tax in three years from the time it is released in the market place. Therefore, the 50 billion that leaves Greece annually creates an annual haircut on the GDP of the same amount. A country collects on the average 30 to 40% of its GDP in revenues annually. When that fifty billion leaves Greece, that means the Greek government will not collect any taxes on that money, therefore the direct impact will be as if that money were removed directly from the GDP.

Then Greece pays the Illegal immigrants welfare checks and provides for them free healthcare, free education, and other free services. That is estimated between 11 and 15 Billion annually. Greece can’t afford the illegal immigration, period.

Greece aging population. Around 25% of the Greek population is on pension.

The Europeans tried to address the Greek bureaucracy and the Greek pension system but they found an unwilling government to make such reforms. At that point their focus should have been turned to growth. But even in that area they would find the Greek government unwilling to accept reforms, because of Greece’s unaccountable syndicalism. Greece’s labor laws are an impediment to industrial growth. The Samara’s government made a decent attempt to reform labor law put the new government destroyed all market reforms Samara’s government had done.

So in conclusion those are the areas that could fix Greece and since the Greek system doesn’t allow for any innovation, then the Europeans may need to focus on how to fix the Greek government first before they can make a dent on debt reform.

FRIDAY JULY 3, 2015

BETA

•Greek Edition

•classifieds

•subscriptions

FAVORITES No favorites

Twitter

Facebook

Term

Navigation

NEWS

BUSINESS

COMMENT

LIFE

WHAT’S ON

SPORTS

COMMUNITY

SURVIVAL GUIDE

MULTIMEDIA

NEWS 02.07.2015 : 14:16

Declaration of Professors of Economics at Greek Universities on the Referendum

Source: ekathimerini.com

TAGS: Referendum, Euro

The following declaration is signed by 246 professors at Economics Schools and Universities in Greece. By this declaration, we want to express our great distress about the latest developments in our country. We strongly believe that, at this crucial point, it is of paramount importance to avoid excesses, to show national cohesion, to preserve our position in the Eurozone and the EU, and to regain our credibility in the international community. Further, the fiscal consolidation program, drawn jointly with our EU partners and other creditors like the IMF, should be characterized by the lowest possible recessionary consequences and the highest possible level of social protection, aiming at growth and job creation in the private sector as soon as possible. The prolonged political uncertainty has led the economy to a renewed recession, has reversed the decline in unemployment, has lowered tax revenue and has widened the fiscal gap.

Taking into account that the proposals of our creditors and the Greek government were converging until last Friday, we believe that what is really at stake in the coming Referendum, irrespective of the precise formulation of the question, is whether Greece will remain, or not, in the Eurozone and, possibly, whether it will remain in the EU itself.

The funding of the Greek economy by Eurozone countries was suspended last weekend after the Greek government abandoned the negotiations at a time when no alternative funding opportunities seem to be available. We are already at the first stage of a very slippery process that, if not urgently reversed, will lead to a chaotic debt default and exit from the Eurozone. Bank closures and capital controls (that had been so far avoided throughout the deep crisis) constitute only the first rupture from the Eurozone and the EU itself

We believe that the recessionary consequences of debt default and exit from the Eurozone, especially in such a chaotic and superficial way, will be much worse than the effects of a painful compromise with our EU partners and the IMF. A disorderly break of our country from the core of Europe will have disastrous economic, social, political and geopolitical consequences.

Short-run consequences: Bank closures, cut in the value of deposits, sharp decline in tourism, shortages of basic consumer goods and raw materials, black market, hyperinflation, firm bankruptcies and a big rise in unemployment, rapid fall in real wages and the real value of pensions, deep recession and serious problems in the functioning of public health care and defense, social unrest.

Medium-term consequences: international isolation of the country, no access to international capital markets for several years, low growth and anemic investment, high unemployment combined with high inflation rates, suspension of the flow of EU structural funds, significant decline in the standard of living, poor provision of basic public goods and services.

All these developments should not have happened after 5 years of big sacrifices by the Greek people, and a tremendous fiscal adjustment, right at the time when the economy was starting to recover, with favourable expectations for further easing in the terms of our public debt obligations. They should not have happened in a period when the European economy is returning to positive growth rates and other peripheral euro countries start growing and reducing unemployment. They should not have happened in a favorable time for further EU integration that will benefit the South and when the ECB facilitates growth with excess liquidity and zero interest rates.

Leaving the Eurozone, especially with this chaotic and superficial way, would likely lead to a process of leaving the EU too, with unpredictable and disastrous consequences for the national security and the democratic stability of our country.

For all these reasons, Greece must remain in the core of the EU, which is the Eurozone.

For all these reasons, our unequivocal answer to the real question of the referendum is: YES. Yes, to Europe.

1. Adam Αntonis University of Ioannina

2. Aggelidis Timotheos University of Peloponnese

3. Alexakis Christos University of Pireaus

4. Alexakis Panagiotis Athens University

5. Anagnostou Aggeliki University of Thessaly

6. Andoniou Fabio University of Ioannina

7. Andronikidis Αndreas University of Macedonia

8. Androutsopoulos Ion Athens University of Economics and Business

9. Androutsopoulos Κonstantinos Athens University of Economics and Business

10. Apergis Νikolaos University of Pireaus

11. Apostolopoulos Thodoros Athens University of Economics and Business

12. Argouslidis Paris Athens University of Economics and Business

13. Arvanitis Stelios Athens University of Economics and Business

14. Atsalakis George Polytechnic of Crete

15. Avlonitis George Athens University of Economics and Business

16. Balios Dimitris Athens University

17. Ballas Apostolos Athens University of Economics and Business

18. Baltas Georgios Athens University of Economics and Business

19. Baltas Nikolaos Athens University of Economics and Business

20. Basiakos Ioannis Athens University

21. Bellou Victoria University of Thessaly

22. Benos Nikos University of Ioannina

23. Benos Theofanis University of Pireaus

24. Billias Ioannis Athens University of Economics and Business

25. Bitros Georgios Athens University of Economics and Business

26. Blavoukos Spyros Athens University of Economics and Business

27. Bourantas Dimitris Athens University of Economics and Business

28. Bourantonis Dimitris Athens University of Economics and Business

29. Bournova Eugenia Athens University

30. Brisimis Sofoklis University of Pireaus

31. Chalamandaris George Athens University of Economics and Business

32. Chalkias Ioannis Athens University of Economics and Business

33. Charitakis Nikos Athens University

34. Chletsos Michael University of Ioannina

35. Chlomoudis Kostas University of Pireaus

36. Chortareas George Athens University

37. Chouliaras Asteris University of Peloponnese

38. Christopoulos Dimitris Panteion University

39. Christopoulou Sofia University of Macedonia

40. Christou George Athens University of Economics and Business

41. Damianos Dimitris Agricultural University of Athens

42. Dedoulis Manolis Athens University of Economics and Business

43. Delipalla Sofia University of Macedonia

44. Demoirakos Efthymios Athens University of Economics and Business

45. Demos Antonis Athens University of Economics and Business

46. Demousis Michalis University of Patras

47. Dialla Violetta Athens University

48. Dimeli Sofia Athens University of Economics and Business

49. Dimitriadi Zoi University of Macedonia

50. Dotsis Georgios Athens University

51. Doukidis Georgios Athens University of Economics and Business

52. Drakos Anastasios Athens University of Economics and Business

53. Economides George Athens University of Economics and Business

54. Economidou Claire University of Pireaus

55. Economou Athina University of Thessaly

56. Efstratoglou Sofia Agricultural University of Athens

57. Eleftheriou Kostas University of Pireaus

58. Fountas Stylianos University of Macedonia

59. Gaganis Chrysovalantis Univiversity of Crete

60. Gatsios Konstantinos Athens University of Economics and Business

61. Genakos Christos Athens University of Economics and Business

62. Genius Margarita University of Crete

63. Georgiou Andreas University of Macedonia

64. Georgoutsos Dimitrios Athens University of Economics and Business

65. Giaglis Georgios Athens University of Economics and Business

66. Giamouridis Daniel Athens University of Economics and Business

67. Giannakopoulos Nikos University of Patras

68. Giannelis Dimitrios University of Pireaus

69. Giannelis Νikos University of Crete

70. Giotopoulos Ioannis University of Peloponnese

71. Glavinis Panayotis Aristotle University of Thessaloniki

72. Griva Krina University of Ioannina

73. Hassid Josef University of Pireaus

74. Hatziantoniou Damianos Athens University of Economics and Business

75. Hatzipanayotou Panos Athens University of Economics and Business

76. Hatzis Aristides Athens University

77. Iatridis George University of Thessaly

78. Ifantopoulos Ioannis Athens University

79. Indounas Konstantinos Athens University of Economics and Business

80. Ioannidis Antonis Athens University of Economics and Business

81. Ioannidis Stavros Panteion University

82. Ioannou Georgios Athens University of Economics and Business

83. Iordanoglou Chrysafis Panteion University

84. Ireiotis Nikolaos Athens University

85. Kainourgios Dimitris Athens University

86. Kalamboukis Theodoros Athens University of Economics and Business

87. Kalogirou Ioannis Metsovio Polytechnic University

88. Kalyvitis Sarantis Athens University of Economics and Business

89. Kammas Pantelis University of Ioannina

90. Karagiannis Ioannis University of Macedonia

91. Karamanis Konstantinos Athens University of Economics and Business

92. Karaveli Eleni Athens University of Economics and Business

93. Karkalakos Sotiris University of Pireaus

94. Kasimatis Konstantinos Athens University of Economics and Business

95. Katranidis Stelios University of Macedonia

96. Katsimi Margarita Athens University of Economics and Business

97. Kavousanos Emmanouil Athens University of Economics and Business

98. Kazakos Panos Athens University

99. Koen Sandra Athens University of Economics and Business

100. Kollias Christos University of Thessaly

101. Konstantinou Panagiotis Athens University of Economics and Business

102. Konstantopoulos Panos Athens University of Economics and Business

103. Kontouli Maria University of Peloponnese

104. Korliras Panagiotis Athens University of Economics and Business

105. Kosteletou Nikolina Athens University

106. Kostis Kostas Athens University

107. Kotsios Stelios Athens University

108. Kottaridi Konstantina University of Pireaus

109. Koundouri Phoebe Athens University of Economics and Business

110. Kouretas Georgios Athens University of Economics and Business

111. Kritikos Manolis Athens University of Economics and Business

112. Kyriazidou Katerina Athens University of Economics and Business

113. Kyriazis Nikolaos University of Thessaly

114. Kyriazis Dimitris University of Pireaus

115. Kyritsis Ioannis Aristotle University of Thessaloniki

116. Kyrkillis Dimitris University of Macedonia

117. Ladi Stella Panteion University

118. Lekakos Georgios Athens University of Economics and Business

119. Leledakis Georgios Athens University of Economics and Business

120. Leventakis Ioannis Athens University of Economics and Business

121. Liargovas Panagiotis University of Peloponnese

122. Liaropoulos Lykourgos Athens University

123. Loizidis Ioannis Athens University of Economics and Business

124. Lolos Sarantis Panteion University

125. Louri Eleni Athens University of Economics and Business

126. Louridas Pangiotis Athens University of Economics and Business

127. Malevris Nikos Athens University of Economics and Business

128. Malliaris Petros University of Pireaus

129. Matsagganis Manos Athens University of Economics and Business

130. Mergos Giorgos University of Athens

131. Metaxas Theodoros University of Thessaly

132. Miaouli Natasha Athens University of Economics and Business

133. Milliou Chrisovalantou Athens University of Economics and Business

134. Mylonas Nikolaos Athens University

135. Mylonidis Nikos University of Ioannina

136. Nikas Christos University of Macedonia

137. Nikolaou Ioannis Athens University of Economics and Business

138. Nikoleris Theodoros Athens University

139. Nikolopoulos Andreas Athens University of Economics and Business

140. Nikolotsa Daphni University of Crete

141. O’Donnel Owen University of Macedonia

142. Pagkratis Spiros Athens University of Economics and Business

143. Pagoulatos Giorgos Athens University of Economics and Business

144. Palis Thanos Aegean University

145. Palivos Theodoros Athens University of Economics and Business

146. Panagiotopoulou Lida Athens University of Economics and Business

147. Panagiotou Dimitris University of Ioannina

148. Panagopoulos Andreas University of Crete

149. Pantelides Theologos University of Macedonia

150. Papachristou Giorgos Aristotle University of Thessaloniki

151. Papadakis Vassilios Athens University of Economics and Business

152. Papadamou Stephanos University of Thessaly

153. Papadimitriou Stratos University of Pireaus

154. Papadopoulos Hrisoleon Aristotle University of Thessaloniki

155. Papadopoulos Konstantinos Aristotle University of Thessaloniki

156. Papalexandri Nancy Athens University of Economics and Business

157. Papanastasopoulos Giorgos University of Pireaus

158. Papandreou Andreas Athens University

159. Papapanagos Harris University of Macedonia

160. Papastathopoulou Polina Athens University of Economics and Business

161. Papathanassiou Iason University of Macedonia

162. Papavasiliou Nikolaos Athens University of Economics and Business

163. Papoulias Dimitris Athens University

164. Paraskevopoulos Christos University of Macedonia

165. Pasiouras Photis Polytechnic of Crete

166. Patronis Vassilios University of Patras

167. Patsouratis Vassilis Athens University of Economics and Business

168. Pechlivanos Lampros Athens University of Economics and Business

169. Peka Oikonomou University of Pireaus

170. Pelagides Thodoris University of Pireaus

171. Petrakis Manolis University of Crete

172. Petridou Evgenia Aristotle University of Thessaloniki

173. Philippopoulos Apostolis Athens University of Economics and Business

174. Pittis Nikitas University of Pireaus

175. Polemis Michalis University of Pireaus

176. Pollalis Ioannis University of Pireaus

177. Pournarakis Efthimios Athens University of Economics and Business

178. Pragidis Ioannis Democritus University of Thrace

179. Pramatari Katerina Athens University of Economics and Business

180. Psaltopoulos Dimitris University of Patras

181. Psarianos Jacob University of Thessaly

182. Psillaki Maria University of Pireaus

183. Raikou Katerina University of Pireaus

184. Repas Panagiotis Panteion University

185. Repoussis Panagiotis Athens University of Economics and Business

186. Riginos Michalis Athens University

187. Rigopoulou Eirini Athens University of Economics and Business

188. Roumanias Kostas Athens University of Economics and Business

189. Sakellaris Ploutarxos Athens University of Economics and Business

190. Sakellis Yiannis Panteion University

191. Samitas Aristides Aegean University

192. Sarris Alexandros Athens University

193. Sartzetakis Efthimios University of Macedonia

194. Sideropoulos Moissis Aristotle University of Thessaloniki

195. Siourounis Grigoris Panteion University

196. Siris Vasilios Athens University of Economics and Business

197. Sklavou Helen Athens University of Economics and Business

198. Sklias Pantelis University of Peloponnese

199. Skordile Sofia Harokopio University

200. Skountzos Theodoros University of Pireaus

201. Skouras Athanassios Athens University of Economics and Business

202. Skouras Dimitris University of Patras

203. Skouras Spyros Athens University of Economics and Business

204. Soderquist Klas Athens University of Economics and Business

205. Sorros Ιoannis University of Pireaus

206. Sotiropoulos Dimitris Athens University

207. Spinellis Diomidis Athens University of Economics and Business

208. Spyrou Spyros Athens University of Economics and Business

209. Stamatopoulos George University of Crete

210. Stathakopoulos Vlasios Athens University of Economics and Business

211. Stavrakoudis Athanassios University of Ioannina

212. Symeonidis Spyros University of Ioannina

213. Tarantilis Christos Athens University of Economics and Business

214. Tatsos Nikos Panteion University

215. Thalassinos Lefteris University of Pireaus

216. Thomadakis Stavros Athens University

217. Thomakos Dimitrios University of Peloponnese

218. Tinios Plato University of Pireaus

219. Topaloglou Nicholas Athens University of Economics and Business

220. Toumpis Stauros Athens University of Economics and Business

221. Tragaki Alexandra Harokopio University

222. Tsakanikas Angelos Metsovio Polytechnic University

223. Tsakiris Nikos University of Ioannina

224. Tsakloglou Panos Athens University of Economics and Business

225. Tsamourgelis Ioannis Aegean University

226. Tsintzos Panagiotis Democritus University of Thrace

227. Tsionas Efthymios Athens University of Economics and Business

228. Tsipouri Lena Athens University

229. Tsiritakis Emmanuel University of Pireaus

230. Tsoukalis Loukas Athens University

231. Tzavalis Elias Athens University of Economics and Business

232. Tzelepis Dimitrios University of Patras

233. Tzionas Ioannis University of Macedonia

234. Tzouvelekas Vangelis University of Crete

235. Vakola Maria Athens University of Economics and Business

236. Varsakelis Νikos Aristotle University of Thessaloniki

237. Vassilatos Vaggelis Athens University of Economics and Business

238. Veletzas Κostas University of Macedonia

239. Venetis Ioannis University of Patras

240. Vettas Νikolaos Athens University of Economics and Business

241. Voudouri Irini Athens University of Economics and Business

242. Xanthakis Manolis Athens University

243. Xepapadeas Tasos Athens University of Economics and Business

244. Zacharias Lefteris Athens University of Economics and Business

245. Zopounidis Konstantinos Polytechnic of Crete

246. Zoumboulakis Michalis University of Thessaly

Online

TWITTER @ekathimerini

MOST POPULAR

1 day

• Declaration of Professors of Economics at Greek Universities on the Referendum

• Three Independent Greeks MPs distance themselves from gov't line on referendum

• Islanders witness the first shortages

• Greek referendum on bailout too close to call, polls shows

• The world according to Tsipras

• Greek PM eyes deal after ‘no’ vote, suggests retreat otherwise

• Schulz says Greek govt should resign after a 'yes' vote

• Full statement by former Greek Prime Minister Costas Karamanlis

7 days

30 days

1 year

COMMENT

Nikos Konstandaras

The world according to Tsipras

Angelos Stangos

A bulwark against disaster

‘Yes’ to the euro

Creditors don't trust Greece's latest plan

Tsipras looks like he is crumbling

Dangerous weaknesses

Alexis Papachelas

Tsipras's fatal mistakes

Takis Theodoropoulos

A bit of optimism

BUSINESS

Greek shipping companies are eyeing Cyprus as a safer harbor

NIKOS ROUSSANOGLOU

A number of Greek shipowners have in recent days been examining the option of setting up subsidiaries in Cyprus, in an effort to shield themselves from a further heightening of the financial and banking crisis in Greece.

Mr Rogoff starts citing his recent article on VOX, where he claims that because of 106 billions of debt write-down, Greece had 91 billions net inflows from 2010 to 2013. Lets assume that Greece would have to pay the full 106 billion in these 3 years. Mr Rogoff may be a good accountant (rumours on a recent publication of his even deny this), but he is definitely not an economist. He suggests that the total of the *private* (see PSI) debt write-down was a (net) inflow, even though ***it was announced*** as a transient default. I will remind to Mr Rogoff that a failed debt contract has three parties responsible. It is totally arbitrary on his part to expect a full payment from the Greek side and account non-payment as a net inflow. I will also remind Mr Rogoff and like-minded neo-liberals that Greece could have defaulted on its own to get these "European inflows".

Then, Mr Rogoff attempts to make clumsy arguments:

__ "Breaking down dual labor markets that are excluding young workers [...] is very different from making it easier to fire all workers."

__ "Making pension systems sustainable does not amount to making them stingier."

__ " Making tax systems simpler and fairer is not the same as raising all taxes."

All these arguments are made, at best, from a comfortable office that shields him from any relation to Greek reality, or, at worst, is fully detached from what are the actual demands raised by the IMF.

Despite false neoliberal pretence of the author that it's just that the public sector must be meritocratic, the IMF has both required shrinking down the state and not taxing the rich, as well as not reversing the already imposed abolition of collective bargaining rights (which SYRIZA has promised). So, this argument is a complete hypocrisy, or the author is detached from reality (because he is otherwise very well informed, so as to manipulate the data).

Regarding the pension system, the author, comfortably, forgets that pension funds have gigantic loses from PSI, which are being disregarded, to reduce the officially accepted loses of the banking system. But, it is not the pensioners fault that the state had to use their reserves --and save the lenders of more bailout funds for the banks--, so, now, it is the Greek state's responsibility not to put the pressure on the the pensioners but on the rich benefiting from the banking system. This is not allowed --it is reversed in SYYRIZA government proposals-- supposedly by the IMF. In other words, the "fairer tax system" is only after the IMF and the author conveniently forget that all the costs of the crisis are being born by the weak and the indefensible, since the government is defused by the IMF!

Productive capital has always been the name of game. The only variations on it come from what portion of the value which is created goes to the capital owner, the worker, and the state: capitalism, socialism, communism, ... in all their various nuances.

The ability for a community to develop productivity gains is entirely incumbent on their relationship to property - man's relationship with property, to be exact - within the context of their belief system.

In Europe, there is a noticeable demarkation between north and south along the lines of Protestantism and Catholicism. Not a new story. Greece follows the Orthodox Christian tradition making it an outlier to the other two. However, since 1989, with the fall of communism, the Protestant approach to capitalism has washed over the world in the form of Globalization causing innumerable conflicts large and small. In the aftermath of the financial crisis, Italy had to impose an autocratic government, represented by Mario Monti and his ministers, to force a change toward this dominant economic paradigm. Since then, I don't think any of the successive Italian governments has been elected. The Italian experience has been anything but joyous for the Italian people even as they continue to make their way toward this reality. For Greece, once again, it is more challenging given its belief system and the bargaining power brought about by its relative size.

This brings me back to productivity gains. First of all, the country requires a legislative framework which can define various asset classes and their transferability, amongst other rights and obligations. Second, the economic system needs to provide a framework by which those assets can be exploited and the value derived so that it can be decided who gets what portion: capital owner, labor, and state.

America is able to make an asset class out of just about anything. And, derivative products follow close behind. But not all countries can for the very simple reason that man's relationship to property is different. As we move from West to East, relationships are much important for survival than property.

The bailout failed because the structural changes addressed the institutions that kept the system working in specific way but did little to put in place new mechanism which ultimately might fail because they are based on an alien concept of man and property.

Why did the Greek bailout fail? The Greek bailout failed because IMF economists had been advising the EU officials based on a static analysis that took only economics into consideration. Whereas a dynamic interplay between law and economics has been going on all the while:

The treaties that constitute the European Union, that were signed into law, between 1950 and 2000, were based on the expectations and assurances provided by certain economic models. These economic models advocated balanced budgets among the member states, with specific limits on their budget deficits. Continuing these same expectations, when the Euro currency was designed and introduced in the late 90s, sound money policy was the basis for the economic models that were used for policy analysis. From there on, the EU institutions believed that they had codified these economic models into a legal framework through treaty obligations, rules and regulations binding the member states.

This legal framework is what the EU institutions adopt as the basis of their policies. They do not go by the preferences expressed by elected governments, nor do they allow for any changes in the economic models. Policies/treaties that were already committed by the member governments forms the basis of any discussions that these EU institutions undertake. Thus in the case of Greece, the baseline scenario that the so-called Troika [ECB, EC, IMF] would consider earlier commitments made by previous governments -- a steady state of 4.5% primary surplus, cuts in pensions, raising retirement ages, tax raises, etc. Any self-righteous protestations by the newly elected Syriza government that the GDP has contracted 25% since the time the austerity program began five years ago, would be acknowledged respectfully, but the Troika officials would not know what to do with that information. The economic models that were frozen into a legal framework between the 18 Eurozone countries does not deal with these situations. Starting with the baseline, the current phase of negotiations from February to June of 2015 would have only allowed for minor deviations from the baseline. Thus, the Greek government had little chance from the beginning.

However, the situation with the economic models changed drastically after the economic crisis of 2008. Following the unconventional monetary policy experiments tried by the Federal Reserve in America, the ECB realized that it would have to abandon its sound money policy. Instead, it would have to do QE. At this point, the institutional inertia of the Troika still did not allow for any recognition that the original economic models based on so-called market fundamentalism were proven terribly inadequate after the economic crisis of 2008.

As a result, even while all the goodies of QE that were obtained by unlimited money printing were to be shared among the EU Core countries, the Troika continued to insist on austerity for the peripheral countries. This post-2008 disconnect between law and economics ended up undermining the credibility of the Troika. This is the main reason why no matter how much the Greek government would have bought into the reform program proposed by the Troika, it would not have succeeded.