Talk about pop music, and you know who the queens are. Yes, the name 'Lady Gaga' should cross your mind among the first. The American singer and actress has stunned the world with her exceptional talents over the years. She is also a songwriter, a dancer, a philanthropist and a fashion designer, and has collected numerous accolades including the Academy award.

Beauty, talent and hard work are some of the distinctive features that have guided the American singer to success in her career. Lady Gaga is one of the best-selling music artists in the world. She made history by becoming the first recording artist to have three singles sell over four million copies each online. As an actress, she is famous for her roles in Hotel, Machete Kills, and A Star Is Born.

Lady Gaga personal profile

Full name: Stefani Joanne Angelina Germanotta

Date of birth: March 28, 1986

Age: 33 years old

Place of birth: Manhattan, New York City‎, US

Birth sign: Aries

Nationality: American

Religion: Christian, Roman Catholic

Height: 5’ 1” (155 cm)

Profession: Singer, songwriter, actress

Social media: Facebook, Twitter, Instagram, website, YouTube

Lady Gaga bio

What is Lady Gaga's real name? It is not strange to find some of her fans struggle to answer this question. Lady Gaga real name is Stefani Joanne Angelina Germanotta. She was born on March 28, 1986, in Manhattan, New York, United States, and brought up in a humble Catholic family alongside her younger sister, Natali. Her father, Joseph Anthony Germanotta of Italian descent, is an internet entrepreneur. Her mother, Cynthia Louise, is of French ancestry.

Gaga began practising the piano during her childhood and became proficient with time. She joined the Convent of the Sacred Heart in Manhattan at the age of 11, where she developed her passion in music. The talented actress featured in several school productions including Guys and Dolls and Funny Things Happened on the Way to the Forum. At 14, the pop queen had started performing in night bars and clubs, entertaining people with her sweet voice. She later enrolled in Lee Strasberg Theatre and Film Institute and studied acting for ten years. Gaga also joined New York University's Tisch School of the Arts to study music and songwriting. She, however, dropped out of the school in the second year to concentrate on her music career.

READ ALSO: Top ten facts about 'The Crying Game' actor Jaye Davidson

Lady Gaga name

Where did the Lady Gaga name originate from? Well, we all know the celebrity's birth name, but it will be more interesting to know how she came up with her famous stage name. According to the celebrity, Rob Fusari, a music producer, first called her Gaga back in 2010. The singer's voice reminded the producer of a legendary Queen song "Radio Ga-Ga" by Freddie Mercury. The name would later become a big brand and a household name.

Lady Gaga age

How old is Lady Gaga? The American singer is currently 33 years old. Her birth sign is Aries. .

Lady Gaga height

One of the regularly inquired details about celebrities by the media and public at large are their heights and other body measurements. So, how tall is Lady Gaga? What are her other measurements?

The pop singer stands at a height of 5 feet 1 inch (155 cm) and weighs 53 kg. According to the Body Mass Index (BMI), she has a standard BMI; therefore, her height is in proper proportion to her weight. The singer has an hourglass body type and size six body size.

Lady Gaga career

Gaga collaborated with Grandmaster Melle Mel for her first official song in 2005. She later advanced to writing songs for renowned artists like Britney Spears, Pussycat Dolls, and Akon, among others. In 2008, the bold singer successfully recorded her debut album, 'The Fame' that elevated her status. The album had more than 15 million sales globally and comprised of some hit songs including 'Just Dance' that received much appreciation from the audience. In 2009, the celebrity made an extension of the first album, The Fame Monster, in her world tour. The album won numerous awards and consisted of 'Bad Romance', 'Alejandro' and 'Telephone' singles.

The singer released her second album 'Born This Way' in 2012 that was a hit in the market, selling over 1.1 million copies. It, however, was surrounded with much criticism from the public for touching on politics and religion themes among others. Relentless Gaga went on to release her third album, Artpop in 2013 that included some of her best singles, 'Do What You Want' and 'Applause.' The album sold over 2.5 million copies. She further released her fourth and fifth albums, Cheek to Cheek (2014), and Joanne released (2016) respectively.

In the movie industry, the multi-talented celebrity made her debut in Robert Rodriguez's 'Machete Kills.' She also performed appeared in the 2011 documentary film 'Lady Gaga Presents the Monster Ball Tour: At Madison Square Garden.' Besides, the celebrity appeared in Rodriguez's sequel Sin City – 'A Dame to Kill For.' Gaga also featured in several television shows since making her TV debut in 'The Sopranos' back in 2001. Others include 'Boiling Points' in 2005, 'Gossip Girl' in 2009, and 'Saturday Night Live' from 2009-2011. She also appeared in American Horror Story, 'Hotel' in 2016.

Awards and nominations

Her magnificent input in music and TV has blessed her with countless awards and nominations. Gaga has won a total of nine Grammy Awards including twenty-four total nominations. She also boasts of thirteen MTV Video Music Awards. The pop queen has also appeared in Time Magazine's most influential people in several occasions, including in 2019. She also holds more than ten Guinness World Records honours. She was feted with a Golden Globe award for her performance in 'Hotel' (2016) and also boasted of numerous Billboard Music Awards. Generally, the American singer has won more than 200 awards and over 500 nominations.

Lady Gaga net worth

Judging from her music and TV successes, Gaga has earned a tremendous amount of money throughout her fantastic career. Music has primarily contributed to her net worth, having sold more than 27 million albums and over 145 million singles. Her earnings from television shows, movies and lucrative commercials have also added onto her basket. The pop star has a net worth of $300 million as of 2019.

Lady Gaga husband

Is Lady Gaga married? Most pop music enthusiasts are probably eager to know about the celebrity's marriage status. Currently, the lovely queen is not married but has dated a number of high profile men in the past.

Lady Gaga boyfriend

Before shooting to fame, Gaga dated DJ Luc Carl, a New York City club manager and musician from 2007 to 2008. The couple reconciled in 2010, but their relationship lasted one year before parting ways again in 2011. She also dated American pop star Speedy Gonzales in 2009 but their relationship lasted only a few months.

In 2011, the beautiful singer landed on the hands of American actor and model Taylor Kinney. They got engaged in 2015 but separated in July 2016. It took a few months before Gaga entered another relationship, this time with her talent agent Christian Carino. They began dating in February 2017 and later got engaged. The relationship lasted two years until February 2019 when they broke up.

Bradley Cooper and Lady Gaga

After experiencing a series of relationships and break-ups, so, who is Lady Gaga dating? The pop queen has recently been close to her co-actor Bradley Cooper. The two starred in the Oscar-winning movie, 'A Star is Born' and developed good chemistry as lovers in the film. Cooper is in a long term relationship with model Irina Shayk, and both have a young daughter together.

Gaga and Cooper performed their winning song, "Shallow," at the Oscars this year, and people quickly commented on their electric partnership. Will the rumour finally be put to rest?

Apart from enjoying a fruitful career, Lady Gaga has displayed her humanitarian side by supporting the youth and other groups. The American singer has a non-profit organization, 'Born This Way Foundation' whose prime objective is youth empowerment. As a bold, talented and fashioned lady, the pop star is a role model and inspiration to many people in the world.

READ ALSO: Christian Serratos bio: age, height, husband, baby, net worth

Source: Legit.ng