THE singer began performing as a teenager under her real name, Stefani Joanne Angelina Germanotta.

Lady Gaga rose to fame following her debut album, The Fame, and its chart-topping hit singles Just Dance, Poker Face, Love Game, and Paparazzi.

What was Lady Gaga doing before she became famous?

Lady Gaga always wanted a career in the arts, but it took the star decades of hard work – and some odd jobs – to get there.

Born Stefani Joanne Angelina Germanotta in New York City to an Italian-American family, Gaga started taking piano lessons at the age of four.

She later went on to sing at open mic nights and act in school performances, including playing the lead role of Adelaide in the play Guys and Dolls.

In 2001, Gaga landed a small background role as a high school student in the hit HBO television show The Sopranos.

Two years later, she gained early admission to Collaborative Arts Project 21, a music school at New York University's Tisch School of the Arts.

She withdrew from the school two years later in 2005 to pursue a music career.

That year, Gaga also appeared on the MTV prank reality show Boiling Points.

Gaga also formed a band, SGBand, with some friends from NYU, before establishing a company called Team Lovechild, LLC along with her producer-boyfriend Rob Fusari.

Gaga was signed to Def Jam Recordings in 2006, but dropped from the label just three months later.

Gaga has said that getting dropped from her label allowed her to reinvent her image and her music, which ended up being a blessing in disguise.

It was at this time that Gaga began performing at neo-burlesque shows around New York City, which would ultimately lead her to getting noticed and signed by another label.

How was Lady Gaga discovered?

In 2007, Gaga met and began performing with performance artist Lady Starlight.

The duo collaborated on a live performance art piece titled Lady gaga and the Starlight Revue, which was billed as a tribute to 1970s music and variety acts.

In November 2007, less than a year after she was dropped from Def Jam, record executive Vincent Herbert signed Gaga to Streamline Records, an imprint of Interscope Records.

She started working as a songwriter for Interscope Records, writing music for artists like Britney Spears, The Pussycat Dolls, and New Kids on the Block.

While it's been rumored that singer-producer Akon "discovered" the star by watching one of her burlesque performances, Herbert's now ex-wife, Tamar Braxton, denied the claims.

Still, while Gaga credits Herbert for her discovery, she did also credit Akon with being instrumental in her rise from an underground artist to a household name.

After Gaga sang a reference vocal for one of Akon's tracks in studio, he was reportedly so impressed with her talent that he convinced Jimmy Iovine, chairman and CEO of Interscope Geffen A&M Records, to form a joint deal with Streamline Records.

Gaga then signed with KonLive, allowing both record labels to manage her career and recording catalogue.

In late 2007, Gaga met RedOne, a songwriter and producer, who was instrumental in helping her create a unique electro-pop, dance-pop sound.

The duo collaborated on her debut studio album The Fame, released on August 19, 2008.

The album has been named as one of the 100 Greatest Debut Albums of All-Time by Rolling Stone in 2013 and 2022.

As of 2023, it's also the 12th biggest album of all time on the US Billboard 200.

The album catapulted Gaga to fame, and led to follow-up albums The Fame Monster, Born This Way, Artpop, Joanne, and Chromatica.

Gaga's fame didn't just start and end in the music industry.

She also pivoted to acting, appearing in the hit television horror show American Horror Story before moving onto starring roles in movies.

In 2019, she was nominated for Best Actress for her role in A Star is Born, directed by her co-star Bradley Cooper.

She also appeared in House of Gucci alongside Adam Driver, Jared Leto, Salma Hayek, and Al Pacino.

While Gaga has remained mum on whether she has an upcoming album in the works, the star can next been seen in the 2024 musical thriller film Joker: Folie à Deux, a sequel to the 2019 film Joker, with Joaquin Phoenix.

How did Lady Gaga get her stage name?

Gaga's stage name is now known worldwide, but there are a few different versions of how she got the moniker.

In January 2023, PopSugar reported that in Gaga told Oprah Winfrey that her stage name was inspired by the Queen song Radio Ga Ga.

She added that Gaga was "just a nickname my friends had for me in New York, and it just kind of stuck."

In a now-deleted 2010 interview with Flybe Magazine, Gaga did credit her then-producer and boyfriend, Rob Fusari, for the name.

She said: "He started to call me Gaga when I'd come into the studio," and, tired of playing music under her real name, "I wanted to reinvent myself."

Gaga asserts that she came up with the "Lady" part of her stage name, partly because "Gaga is sort of crazy and Lady has such connotations."

Fusari went on to sue Gaga in 2010 for $30.5 million, arguing that he came up with the stage name.

Fusari reportedly played the song Radio Ga Ga whenever Gaga arrived at his studio.

He also stated that he once texted the star under the moniker Radio Ga Ga, and his phone autocorrected "Radio" to "Lady," which ultimately led Gaga to alter her name.

Gaga countersued Fusari, arguing that because he was not a licensed talent agent, any contract between the two was invalid.

She never addressed his claims of coming up with the stage name publicly.

Fusari ended up dropping the lawsuit, and the Lady Gaga moniker is now one of the most well-known stage names in the world.