PHILADELPHIA – When Samuel Dalembert looks at film these days, he doesn’t like what he sees.

“Nightmare,” he said. “Nightmare. It’s not the same team. It’s not the same team as in practice. That’s just what it is. We’ve got a lot of work.”

As the 76ers head into Chicago for tonight’s rematch with the Bulls (8:30, CSN), it’s clear that they’re struggling to find themselves as a team.

And perhaps no one has found that process as difficult as Dalembert, who has seen his minutes diminish with each passing game. During the current four-game losing streak, the 6-11 center hasn’t played more than 27 minutes, and on Sunday he was on the court for just 15 minutes.

But don’t tell him it’s foul trouble.

“Every time I hear about foul trouble, it’s nonsense,” he said. “There are a lot of players in the league who play with five fouls and a lot of players who are on the court. That’s how you have to learn. If you’re an NBA player you have to learn. If you’re so valuable to your team on the court, you have to learn how to play in critical situations. … It’s a matter of getting smarter as the games go on and try not to put yourself in those situations and still be aggressive.”

He has a point. Dalembert did pick up two fouls early Sunday, but to say that’s the reason he played just 6:23 in the third quarter and not at all in the fourth is disingenuous.

Through the first 17 games, Dalembert has averaged just 6.5 points, 9.1 rebounds, and 1.53 blocks. Last year, it was 10.5 points, 10.4 rebounds, and 2.3 blocks a game. While the tendency is to say that the only difference between last year and this season is Elton Brand, Dalembert wouldn’t go there.

“Yes, of course we’re looking more to give the ball to Elton,” he said. “But Elton is an All-Star player. He will find a way to score. Maybe that has a little to do with it. Maybe people are more conscious about looking to pass the ball to Elton, but overall, I think that shoe (does) not fit because it’s only one piece added.”

Sixers coach Maurice Cheeks said Dalembert was just part of the group.

“When things are not going well for a group, it just accumulates,” the coach said. “It’s not just one guy. It’s easy to say Sam is not doing well. It’s not just Sam. I don’t know what to say because it’s not just Sam. It’s a cumulative thing. Sam is not the sole reason. If Sam rebounds the ball, blocks a shot, and runs that floor, that will get Sam back in it.”

It could be more complicated than that. Dalembert relies on others to get him involved. One of those players is Andre Iguodala, and it might not be a coincidence that he is off to a shaky start as well.

Looking for reasons, it was suggested that perhaps the raised expectations had something to do with the team’s 7-10 start.

“Not me, personally,” Dalembert said. “My job’s never changed, my role’s never changed. Yes, offensively things have affected me because if other guys are not being the type of player they usually are, that’s affecting me because that’s how I get extra passes, that’s how I get the ball a little bit. But defensively, no matter what happens … Yeah, from watching other guys, there might be a little pressure here and there. But no matter, we just have to find a way. This is a group of guys, I wouldn’t trade those guys for nobody.”

Toward the end of last season, the 76ers were a formidable foe. And while much of it had to do with catching teams off guard and the up-tempo style wearing them down, part of their success was probably attributable to attitude. They had nothing to lose and played like it.

That’s not the case this year. Expectations were raised, and opponents haven’t been overlooking them.

Dalembert, however, feels the team’s identity has been lost in the transition from last season to this. This uptight, mistake-prone team isn’t the same as the one that made an improbable run into the playoffs less than a year ago.

“We try to keep each other smiling and relaxed, not being as nervous, not be thinking the game too much,” Dalembert said. “It’s not us, it’s not the 76ers. We don’t need a speech to get us going. We’re wild people, we just go out there like in the jungle. We just play, and people don’t know how to stop us.

“Lou Williams last year (played) freely. We need to let him be free. We need to get ‘Dre (Iguodala) involved. We have to find ways to get everyone involved. If Elton’s fitting in the mix, he doesn’t have to be working too hard. He just has to come in and be smooth offensively. And it’s not happening for us for some reason, maybe a little slight hesitation from each other. We don’t know yet. Every game, we’re all trying. Maybe we’re not trying enough, and obviously it’s the case because we’re losing. We just have to keep fighting. We have to find our way, and we have to go back to where we are, Sixers (basketball).”

NOTES

Reggie Evans did not practice Monday. He was excused for personal family reasons. Maurice Cheeks wasn’t sure if Evans would make the trip to Chicago. … Tonight’s game will be Chicago’s first at home since Nov. 15.