Gombe State, located in northeastern Nigeria, is the 21st largest state, by land mass, and the 32nd most populous state in the country – with an estimated population of about 3.25 million as of 2016. Commonly referred to as the ‘Jewel in the Savannah’, Gombe State was carved out of a part of Bauchi State in 1996. It is home to various ethnic groups, including the Fulani people in the north and centre, Cham, Dadiya, Jara, Kamo, Pero, Tangale, Tera, and Waja peoples in the eastern and southern regions, with eleven Local Government Areas (LGA).

The state is currently being governed by Muhammad Inuwa Yahaya under the platform of the All Progressives Congress (APC)

Senators from Gombe state:

Gombe has three senators representing the three senatorial districts.

Senator Dankwambo Ibrahim Hassan

Senator. Dankwambo is currently serving his first term as a Senator representing Gombe North Senatorial District under the platform of the People Democratic Party (PDP) in the 10th Assembly. The 62-year-old Lawmaker before contesting for the Senatorial Seat, was elected for 2 terms as Governor of Gombe State from 2011 – 2019. Click on this link for more information on Sen. Dankwambo and to track his legislative contributions in the 10th National Assembly.

Senator Goje Mohammed Danjuma

Senator Goje Mohammed Danjuma

Senator Goje is currently serving his fourth term as a Senator representing Gombe Central Senatorial District born in 1952, he is a former Governor of the State, under the PDP but currently serving as Senator under the platform of the APC. Goje was a member of the Bauchi State House of Assembly and Secretary of the National Institute For Medical Research. Click on this link for more information on Sen. Goje and to track his legislative contributions in the 10th National Assembly.

Senator Yaro Anthony Siyako

Senator Yaro is currently serving his first term as a Senator representing Gombe South Senatorial District, the 61-year-old Senator is serving under the platform of the PDP in the 10th Assembly. Click on this link for more information on Sen. Yaro and to track his legislative contributions in the 10th National Assembly.

Members of the House of Representatives from Gombe State

There are six members of the House of Representatives from Gombe State. Interestingly, none of them is female. The Gombe contingent is comprised of members from the APC and PDP. See the lineup below:

Rep. Bauchi Yaya Tongo

Rep. Tongo is currently representing the Gombe/Kwami/Funakaye federal constituency in the 10th House of Representatives under the platform of the PDP. Born in 1963, Tongo is a graduate of a B.Tech. in business management and served as the Honourable Chairman of the Funakaye Local Government Council.

He is a third-term member of the House of Representatives. Click on this link for more information on Rep. Tongo and to track his legislative contributions in the 10th National Assembly.

Rep. El-Rasheed Abdullahi

Rep. Abdullahi is currently serving as a first-term member representing the Dukku/Nafada Federal Constituency in the 10th Assembly under the platform of the PDP. The 53-year-old Lawmaker hails from the North West region of the state. Click on this link for more information on Rep. Abdullahi and to track his legislative contributions in the 10th National Assembly.

Rep. Garba Inuwa Yamaltu

Rep. Inuwa currently serves as a member representing the Yamaltu/Deba Federal constituency in the 10th House of Representation under the platform of the PDP. The 55-year-old lawmaker served as speaker of the Gombe State House of Assembly in 2012. Click on this link for more information on Rep. Inuwa and to track his legislative contributions in the 10th National Assembly.

Rep. Isa Ali J.C.

Rep. Ali is currently serving as a member representing the Balanga/Biliri Federal Constituency in the 10th Assembly under the PDP. He served in the House of Representatives in the 8th Assembly (2015-2019) and was born on 4th June 1974. Click on this link for more information on Rep. Ali and to track his legislative contributions in the 10th National Assembly.

Rep. Shehu Obed Paul

Rep. Shehu is a member of the 10th House of Representatives, representing the Kaltungo/Shongom Federal Constituency under the platform of the PDP. Click on this link for more information on Rep. Shehu and to track his legislative contributions in the 10th National Assembly.

Rep. Usman Bello Kumo

Rep. Kumo is a Member of the House of Representatives, representing the Akko federal constituency in the 10th House of Representatives on the platform of the APC. He is the Chief Whip of the 10th Assembly.