Jay Leno and his wife Mavis Leno made it a date night!

On Tuesday, April 30, the couple, who have been married since 1980, looked happier than ever at the Los Angeles premiere of Netflix's Unfrosted.

This marks the second time the famed talk show host, 74, and Mavis, 77, have been photographed publicly since Jay filed for a conservatorship over Mavis following her “advanced dementia" diagnosis.

The pair was all smiles at the premiere of the film, a comedic drama that tells the origin story of Pop-Tarts.

Jay’s fellow comedian Jerry Seinfeld made his directorial debut with Unfrosted, which also stars Melissa McCarthy, Jim Gaffigan, Hugh Grant, Amy Schumer, Max Greenfield, Christian Slater, Bill Burr, Daniel Levy and James Marsden.

Their latest outing comes just after Jay's birthday, which was Sunday, April 28.

At the beginning of the month, Mavis was by Jay’s side as she attended his stand-up show at the Hollywood Improv comedy club in WeHo.

Before the celebrations, much of their private lives made headlines as Jay sought to set up a living trust for Mavis to ensure that she has "managed assets" to provide her with future care if he died.

In early April, Mavis’ court-appointed counsel, Ronald Ostrin, filed a report regarding Jay's conservatorship petition, noting that Mavis “consents” to the idea and formally recommended Jay serve as the conservator of his wife’s estate.

In the filing obtained by PEOPLE at the time, Mavis’ neurologist, Dr. Hart Cohen, said Jay is “such a nice man and treats [Mavis] like gold.” Ostrin described the former Tonight Show host as “a standup guy” whose “private persona matches the public persona he projects.”

Ostrin also provided an update on Mavis’ health, revealing that she “sometimes does not know her husband, Jay, nor her date of birth.” The report added that Mavis also “has a lot of disorientation, will ruminate about her parents who have both passed and her mother who died about 20 years ago."

Ostrin described the couple as “long-term, loving and supportive,” and said Mavis sees Jay as “her protector" whom she "trusts."

Days after the filing, Jay and Mavis' lawyer attended a hearing at Los Angeles County Superior Court, where her attorney said she was "in agreement" with the conservatorship and "receiving excellent care with her husband, Mr. Leno.”

The judge agreed, saying, “I think she’s in the least restrictive environment. I think she’s in very good care with Mr. Leno," before commending Jay for the care he was providing and acknowledging that it was "a difficult period" for the couple.

After being deemed "fit" to serve as conservator, Jay is now in the process of estate planning and looking at his wife's will. All assets are common property so they will not be an issue under the conservatorship.

Never miss a story — sign up for PEOPLE's free daily newsletter to stay up-to-date on the best of what PEOPLE has to offer​​, from celebrity news to compelling human interest stories.

Jay previously joked to PEOPLE about the secret to their long-lasting marriage, saying in 2019, "Not screwing around is a huge key. You can do a lot. You can leave your underwear on the doorknob for the rest of your life if you don't screw around."

All jokes aside, Jay shared, "I always tell guys when they meet a woman, 'Marry your conscience. Marry someone who's the person you wish you could be and it works out okay.' "