Mavis Leno, wife of Jay Leno, “sometimes does not know her husband nor her date of birth” as she continues to battle Alzheimer’s disease, according to new court documents.

The statement, which was made by Mavis’ court-appointed attorney, Robert Ostrin, was filed in Los Angeles as an update to an earlier petition to allow Leno, 73, to set up a conservatorship for Mavis due to her being diagnosed with “advanced dementia.”

According to the report, which was obtained by People, Mavis “has a lot of disorientation” and “will ruminate about her parents who have both passed and her mother who died about 20 years ago.”

Ostrin also reported even though it “was clear she had cognitive impairment,” 77-year-old Mavis is a “delightful person” with a “charming personality.”

The documents also state that Leno and Mavis — who have been married since 1980 and do not have any children — have a “long-term, loving and supportive” relationship and that she looks upon the former “Tonight Show” host as “her protector and she trusts him.”

“Ms. Leno seemed very happy in their cozy environment,” Ostrin said.

In the documents, Ostrin notes that Mavis “does not object” and “consents to” the conservatorship, which Leno filed for in January after his wife’s diagnosis, news that was confirmed by TMZ.

Mavis’ neurologist, Dr. Hart Cohen, supported the decision to make Leno the conservator of his wife’s estate, noting that the former host is “such a nice man and treats [Mavis] like gold.”

“Based on my interaction with Mr. Leno, plus some research I have done, he seems to be a standup guy,” Ostrin said. “And his private persona matches the public persona he projects.”

Earlier this year, Leno spoke to the Daily Mail about his wife’s ongoing battle.

“She’s fine. Everybody’s good, we’re doing well,” the comedian said while behind the wheel of a vintage car. “[I] set up a will, in case something happens.”

He declined to elaborate and gave the camera crew a thumbs-up before driving away.

Leno’s brief statement came after the pair were spotted taking in a show at the Comedy & Magic Club in Hermosa Beach, California.

The pair smiled and waved to onlookers as they made their way into the club where Leno had performed earlier in the day.

In the initial filing, the documents read that Mavis’ “current condition renders her incapable of executing the estate plan.”

“Unfortunately, Mavis has been progressively losing capacity and orientation to space and time for several years,” the docs state. “Jay is fully capable of continuing his support for Mavis’s physical and financial needs as he has throughout their marriage.”

A hearing to determine if Leno will be granted his petition’s request is scheduled for next week in Los Angeles. Mavis is not required to attend due to her “medical inability.”