Since the death Saturday of the multi-talented Mel Torme, praise for the pop-jazz musician has poured in from a spectrum of performers including musical legend Tony Bennett.

But to the person who might have known him best, sister Myrna Williams, the glowing comments are flattering but hardly unexpected. "He was the best," Williams, a Clark County commissioner and longtime Nevada politician, said simply. "He was a brilliant, brilliant man who could do anything he wanted to and proved it throughout his life."

Williams last talked to Torme on Friday evening. On Saturday, Torme's health deteriorated quickly and his family rushed him to the UCLA Medical Center.

Torme died of complications from a 1996 stroke Saturday at 73. Torme's wife, Ali, and five children were at his side when he died.

Although Torme had practically reached stardom by the age of 4, when he performed on the radio in Chicago, he never allowed his career to interfere with his close relationship with his family.

Each time Williams ran for office, whether for the Nevada Assembly or the Clark County Commission, Torme traveled to Las Vegas and put on a concert dubbed "Sibling Revelry" to raise money.

Williams said the only campaign in which her brother didn't help with fund-raising was in November, her first re-election bid since his stroke. "He was a family man," said Williams, who was en route to Los Angeles early today. "Any parent would be blessed to have a son like him; any sibling would be blessed to have a brother like him. You couldn't have a better friend."

The feelings were obviously mutual.

"He alway said when he come to do a fund-raiser that I was the only legit member of the family because I was always working on people stuff," Williams said, laughing.

A supreme vocal technician whose style encompassed everything from intimate pop crooning to jet-propelled scat improvisations, Torme was rivaled in virtuosity only by Ella Fitzgerald, who moved between the worlds of pop and jazz with a similar ease.

An innate classicist who approached popular songs with an analytic sense of balance and proportion, Torme infused everything he sang with a geniality that seemed ingrained in a voice that was incapable of making an unpleasant sound.

Torme was also a prolific songwriter, drummer, pianist, musical arranger, actor and author. His most famous composition, "The Christmas Song" (also known as "Chestnuts Roasting on an Open Fire"), written with the lyricist Robert Wells, became one of the most beloved of seasonal standards after it was recorded by Nat "King" Cole in 1946.

Torme, who earned the nickname "Velvet Fog" early in his career, liked to recall that the song was written in just 40 minutes on a sweltering July afternoon in Los Angeles and that it had subsequently been recorded in 1,734 versions.

The critic Will Friedwald, in his book "Jazz Singing," cited Torme as a pioneer of the "cool jazz" approach, spun off from the pop crooning of the day.

"Torme works with the most beautiful voice a man is allowed to have, and he combines it with a flawless sense of pitch," Friedwald wrote. "As an improviser he shames all but two or three other scat singers and quite a few horn players as well."

His standards included "Blue Moon," "It Might as Well Be Spring," "Oh, You Beautiful Doll" and "Mountain Greenery."

Torme received a lifetime achievement award from the National Academy of Recording Arts and Sciences at February's Grammy Awards.

Besides his singing, Torme's career included acting in movies and on television, where he drew fresh attention in the late 1980s on "Night Court" as the musical hero of main character Judge Harold T. Stone, played by Harry Anderson.

"What a remarkable guy. What a one of a kind," Anderson said Saturday. "It's a tremendous loss. He was fabulous guy, great sense of humor, as sweet as an elf."

"I humbly put forth that Mel and I had the best musical marriage in many a year," said pianist George Shearing, who won two Grammy awards with Torme. "We literally breathed together during our countless performances. As Mel put it, 'We were two bodies of one musical mind.' "

"He was one of the supreme jazz singers of all time, with the vocal dexterity matched only by Ella Fitzgerald," singer Jack Jones said. "He had the best sense of timing and a lot of heart in his work. And he was a good guy."

"The passing of Mel Torme is an enormous loss," Bennett said. "He was an encyclopedia of jazz. He was the best white jazz singer I ever heard."

Torme preferred jazz singing to the crooning that brought him his nickname.

"It really wasn't until the end of my high school days, in 1943, that I determined to be a jazz singer," he said. "Then I got sidetracked. (His manager) felt the way to the gold was for me to become a crooner.

"For a long period I was singing mushy, sentimental songs. I began to be called the Velvet Fog. I never liked it."

He said he was rescued by a recording executive who heard a bit of jazz in his style and urged him in that direction.

He was his own arranger for much of his career, played piano and other instruments, acted in a few Hollywood films, had a TV talk show for a while in the '50s, and had his occasional appearances on "Night Court," where Judge Stone kept a photo of Torme in his office.

He was nominated for a best supporting actor Emmy in 1956 for a role in "The Comedian," a Playhouse 90 production.

He wrote about 300 songs including "Born To Be Blue" and "The Christmas Song." When people would ask why he kept singing old songs, Torme said they're simply better than new songs.

"When young rock singers began writing their own, they displaced the community of songwriters who worked with grace, wit, charm, intelligence and brilliance.

At 70, Torme said he maintained his vocal strength by taking care of himself: no smoking, only an occasional glass of wine, careful avoidance of drafts.

"Before I sing I force myself to have seven or eight hours of sleep. I can sing acceptably well on six hours. There is that little grade of difference between six hours and eight hours."

In a 1994 concert at Carnegie Hall, he joked about his age. In "You Make Me Feel So Young," the 68-year-old Torme sang: "You know that age is just a number," then interjected "If I could really believe that."

archive