LOS ANGELES — Mel Torme, the jazz and pop singer whose warm vocals earned him the unwanted title "the Velvet Fog," and the co-writer of the Christmas classic that celebrates "chestnuts roasting on an open fire," died yesterday. He was 73.

Torme, who had suffered what was described as a mild stroke in August 1996, died of complications from that stroke after being rushed from his Beverly Hills home to the University of California, Los Angeles, medical center, said his publicist, Rob Wilcox.Mel Torme Jazz and pop singer and songwriter, with about 300 songs to his credit, including "The Christmas Story." Occasional actor, including appearances in the 1980s comedy TV show, "Night Court." Co-winner of two Grammy awards and recipient of a lifetime achievement award in February from the National Academy of Recording Arts and Sciences .

Torme's wife, Ali, and five children were at his side when he died, Wilcox said.

Torme received a lifetime achievement award from the National Academy of Recording Arts and Sciences at February's Grammy Awards.

Besides his singing and prolific song-writing, Torme's career included acting in movies and on television, where he drew fresh attention in the late 1980s on "Night Court" as the musical hero of main character Judge Harold T. Stone, played by Harry Anderson.

"What a remarkable guy. What a one of a kind. It's a tremendous loss. He was fabulous guy, great sense of humor, as sweet as an elf," Anderson said yesterday. He recalled one episode in which his character said of tickets to a Torme concert: "Woodstock was just a concert, this is Mel Torme."

"I humbly put forth that Mel and I had the best musical marriage in many a year," said pianist George Shearing, who won two Grammy awards with Torme. "We literally breathed together during our countless performances. As Mel put it, 'We were two bodies of one musical mind."'

"He was a very special talent, one of the most talented individuals in our business," said singer Vic Damone. "A composer, musician, arranger. He was so very bright."

"He was one of the supreme jazz singers of all time, with the vocal dexterity matched only by Ella Fitzgerald. He had the best sense of timing and a lot of heart in his work. And he was a good guy," said singer Jack Jones.

"I've lost a wonderful friend," said comedian Jerry Lewis. "There could never be anyone to replace Mel, not only as a singer but as a dear friend."

Even people who had heard little of his singing could not miss his other claim to musical immortality: He was co-author of the lyrics and music to "The Christmas Song" - "Chestnuts roasting on an open fire, Jack Frost nipping at your nose." The song was a huge hit for Nat "King" Cole in 1946 and has been recorded by countless other singers, including Torme himself.

Torme, who began his singing career on radio at age 4, preferred jazz singing to the crooning that brought him his nickname.

"It really wasn't until the end of my high school days, in 1943, that I determined to be a jazz singer," he says. "Then I got sidetracked. (His manager) felt the way to the gold was for me to become a crooner.

"For a long period I was singing mushy, sentimental songs. I began to be called the Velvet Fog. I never liked it."

He said he was rescued by a recording executive who heard a bit of jazz in his style and urged him in that direction.

He saw his vocal career as a work in progress, "a long learning curve." Listening to recordings in a box CD set on his career, he said: "The early songs are kind of callow. I cringe a little bit at them."

He was his own arranger for much of his career, played piano and other instruments, acted in a few Hollywood films, had a TV talk show for a while in the '50s, and had his occasional appearances on "Night Court," where Judge Stone kept a photo of Torme in his office.

He was nominated for a best supporting actor Emmy in 1956 for a role in "The Comedian," a Playhouse 90 production.

He wrote some 300 songs, more than half, including "Born To Be Blue" and "The Christmas Song," with Robert Wells. When people would ask why he kept singing old songs, Torme said they're simply better than new songs: "When young rock singers began writing their own, they displaced the community of songwriters who worked with grace, wit, charm, intelligence and brilliance.

"Absolutely the lyric to me is 95 percent of what a song is. The singer is portraying a playlet to the audience, involving the audience in what he is saying. If the melody is attractive, that's frosting on the cake. The lyric is the cake."

At 70, he said he maintained his vocal strength by taking care of himself: no smoking, only an occasional glass of wine, careful avoidance of drafts.

"Before I sing I force myself to have seven or eight hours of sleep. I can sing acceptably well on six hours. There is that little grade of difference between six hours and eight hours."

In a 1994 concert at Carnegie Hall, he joked about his age. In "You Make Me Feel So Young," the 68-year-old Torme sang: "You know that age is just a number," then interjected "If I could really believe that."

Torme is survived by his wife and five children - Steve, Melissa, Tracy, Daisy, and James.

Memorial services were not immediately announced.