LOS ANGELES &#151; Mel Torme, the jazz and pop singer whose warm vocals earned him the unwanted title "the Velvet Fog," and the co-writer of the Christmas classic that celebrates "chestnuts roasting on an open fire," died Saturday. He was 73.Torme, who had suffered what was described as a mild stroke in August 1996, died of complications from that stroke after being rushed from his Beverly Hills home to the University of California, Los Angeles, medical center, said his publicist, Rob Wilcox.Torme\'s wife, Ali, and five children were at his side when he died, Wilcox said.Torme received a lifetime achievement award from the National Academy of Recording Arts and Sciences at February\'s Grammy Awards.Besides his singing and prolific song-writing, Torme\'s career included acting in movies and on television, where he drew fresh attention in the late 1980s on "Night Court" as the musical hero of main character Judge Harold T. Stone, played by Harry Anderson."What a remarkable guy. What a one of a kind. It\'s a tremendous loss. He was fabulous guy, great sense of humor, as sweet as an elf," Anderson said Saturday. He recalled one episode in which his character said of tickets to a Torme concert: "Woodstock was just a concert, this is Mel Torme.""I humbly put forth that Mel and I had the best musical marriage in many a year," said pianist George Shearing, who won two Grammy awards with Torme. "We literally breathed together during our countless performances. As Mel put it, \'We were two bodies of one musical mind.\'""He was a very special talent, one of the most talented individuals in our business," said singer Vic Damone. "A composer, musician, arranger. He was so very bright.""He was one of the supreme jazz singers of all time, with the vocal dexterity matched only by Ella Fitzgerald. He had the best sense of timing and a lot of heart in his work. And he was a good guy," said singer Jack Jones."I\'ve lost a wonderful friend," said comedian Jerry Lewis. "There could never be anyone to replace Mel, not only as a singer but as a dear friend."Even people who had heard little of his singing could not miss his other claim to musical immortality: He was co-author of the lyrics and music to "The Christmas Song" &#151; "Chestnuts roasting on an open fire, Jack Frost nipping at your nose." The song was a huge hit for Nat "King" Cole in 1946 and has been recorded by countless other singers, including Torme himself.