Princess Irina Felixovna Yusupova (Russian: Ирина Феликсовна Юсупова), nicknamed "Bébé", (21 March 1915 – 30 August 1983 in Cormeilles, France) was born in Petrograd, Russia, the only child of Prince Felix Yusupov and Princess Irina of Russia.

Family

Parents

Prince Felix was the heir of one of the wealthiest families of Russia and of Europe. Princess Irina Alexandrovna of Russia was the daughter of Grand Duke Alexander Mikhailovich and Grand Duchess Xenia Alexandrovna, the elder daughter of Tsar Alexander III and sister of Tsar Nicolas II.

After the February Revolution, the Yusupovs fled Russia and settled in Paris, leaving behind most of their wealth. At first, the little girl was raised by her paternal grandparents until, at the age of nine, they returned the little princess to her parents. According to her father, Prince Felix Yusupov Feliksovitch, his daughter received a poor education causing an alteration in the character of the girl, who became capricious. Princess Irina Felixovna Yusupova was raised by nannies and, whilst she adored her father, she was very distant with her mother.

Marriage

Princess Irina married on 19 June 1938 in Paris, France, Count Nikolai Dmitrievich Sheremetev (28 October 1904, Moscow, Russia – 5 February 1979, Paris, France), son of Count Dmitri Sergeievich Sheremetev and his wife Countess Irina Ilarionovna Vorontzova-Dashkova. His ancestors include Boris Petrovich Sheremetev and Illarion Ivanovich Vorontsov-Dashkov. He worked with the shipping company, Vlasoff. He later contracted tuberculosis, and they moved to Greece for a climate better suited to his condition.

They had one daughter, Countess Xenia Nikolaevna Sheremeteva, born March 1, 1942 in Rome.

Descendants

Countess Xenia Nikolaevna Sheremeteva (born 1 March 1942, Rome, Italy), married on 20 June 1965 in Athens, Greece, to Ilias Sfiris (born 20 August 1932, Athens, Greece); had issue:

Tatiana Sfiris (born 28 August 1968, Athens, Greece), married on May 1996 in Athens, Greece, to Alexis Giannakoupoulos (born 1963), divorced, no issue; married Anthony Vamvakidis and has issue:

Marilia Vamvakidis (17 July 2004)

Yasmine Xenia Vamvakidis (7 May 2006)

Death and Burial

Princess Irina Felixovna Yusupova died on 30 August 1983 at Cormeilles in France. She was buried alongside her paternal grandparents and her parents at the cemetery Sainte-Geneviève-des-Bois Russian Cemetery in Essonne, France)