David W. Parks from Foley, Alabama went home to be with the Lord on December 24th, 2022. He was the son of Warner and Mildred (Ingram) Parks, born January 7th, 1942, in Racine, Wisconsin. David is survived by his wife of 20 years Vickie (Redman) Parks, sister Elizabeth (Parks) Havener, Jean Parks (SIL) and Douglas Voller (BIL), stepchildren Amy (Alex) Axtell, Ron (Amy) Harris and Kari (Luis) Conklin as well as numerous beloved grandchildren, nieces, nephews and cousins. He is predeceased by his mother, Mildred (Ingram) Parks, his father Warner Parks, his first wife of 39 years Delphine (Coxon) Parks, sister Ruth (Parks) Voller, brother Bob Parks, and sister Marian (Parks) Gibbons.

Growing up in Michigan, David is a graduate of Spring Arbor High School and Michigan State University with a masters in Art and doctorate in Philosophy. David’s teaching career lasted well over 40 years, beginning with Jordan College in Cedar Springs, Michigan. The majority were spent teaching in sunny California while with his wife Delphine, and finally his last 5 in China, where he and his wife Vickie taught English in both Chungching and Beijing.

In retirement, David greatly enjoyed engaging with others, gardening and traveling. After 11 years of this sweet, simple life, he came out of retirement to passionately pen what would become a Christian novel series; the 2nd book published only days before his death. David’s lifetime of experiences, culminating into these publications, is captured beautifully by Gail Whelan in her article, “Biblical storytelling at its best.” [The Daily News (2022 April 1) https://www.the dailynews.cc/articles/biblical-storytelling-at-its-best].

Book One: “The Boy Who Closed the Sky”

Book Two: “Friend of the King, Enemy of the Queen”

A beautiful soul, David had a perpetual smile on his face, and loved to spread laughter. Although an intellectual and a brilliant writer, he also had a childlike innocence, with eyes of optimism and wonder.

A celebration of his life will take place on Saturday, January 7, 2023 at 11am at The Arbor Church, 120 E. Main Street, Spring Arbor, MI. Interment will follow the service at Spring Arbor Cemetery. Visitation will be one hour prior to the service. In lieu of flowers, memorial contributions may be made to: OMF International, 10 West Dry Creek Circle, Littleton, CO 80120-4413 at https://partnerhub.omf.org/about/MoreWaysToGive.

The service will be live-streamed by The Arbor Church at