John Helfrich was a Republican most of his life. Now, the 77-year-old Greer resident can be found on Main Street on Tuesdays dressed as President Donald Trump behind make-believe prison bars made out of poster paper - wig and orange jumpsuit included.

Each Tuesday from noon to 1, those passing by the Chocolate Moose Bakery on Main Street can find Helfrich and 30-40 others chanting and holding signs that read one-liners like “DUMP TRUMP” and “MAKE AMERICA KIND AGAIN.”

The group formed three years ago and calls themselves “Tell Them Tuesday.” It’s composed of mostly retired liberals and a few who can escape their downtown jobs for a bit during their lunch break.

Their goal? To prove liberals exist in upstate South Carolina, according to Debbie Morrow, who created the group.

“Almost every time we’re out here, somebody will say, ‘Gosh, I thought I was the only liberal around here. I thought everyone was really a Trump fan,’” Morrow said.

Morrow said she was inspired to create the group after the first Women’s March. She also said she believes if you want to make political change, you must approach your own representatives.

Some driving by honk and give thumbs up. Some rev their engines and yell “Trump 2020,” "take up knitting" or “get a job” back to the group.

After many “get a job” comments, one of the organizers, 65-year-old Lee Turner, said she went to a consignment store, “bought me a bunch of cute little work dresses and showed up looking like I had a job.” Turner is the Democratic Women of Greenville County president and ran for Congress in 2018.

Each Tuesday, a few from the group go up to Lindsey Graham’s office, in the same building as the bakery, to “make our voices heard,” Turner said. On Jan. 21, they “demanded a fair trial,” regarding the recent impeachment trial of President Donald Trump.

Who is a South Carolina Democrat?: The answer is the key to this year's Democratic primary

Torn on candidates with one common goal

Out of 15 Tell Them Tuesday protesters asked, six haven't decided on one candidate, two support Pete Buttigieg, two support U.S. Sen. Elizabeth Warren, two support U.S. Sen. Bernie Sanders, one supports U.S. Sen. Amy Klobuchar, one supports Tom Steyer and one supports former Vice President Joe Biden.

Helfrich is torn between Buttigieg and Steyer.

"It's a return to normal," Helfrich said. "I don't want the other candidates because they're attacking each other."

Morrow, the group's creator, is backing Steyer, according to a media release from Steyer's campaign Monday.

“Deb Morrow is a bold leader who speaks her mind and stands in the gap for her fellow South Carolinians, and for the American people. I am proud that she has chosen to endorse me, and I look forward to working with her to defeat Donald Trump in 2020,” Steyer said in the release.

This week: Tom Steyer stops in Greenville ahead of SC Democratic Primary

Though they don't all agree on one candidate, almost all echoed one common goal: electability and getting Trump out of office. Almost half said health care was on their mind this election season, too.

"No matter who gets the nomination, I will be voting Democrat [in the general election]," said Dale Hall, who's torn between Warren, Steyer and Buttigieg.

The only rule is ‘be nice’

Morrow said in the beginning they would get a lot of rude comments and hand gestures from people walking or driving by.

Their reaction to the hate is to simply say back “bless your heart” and some even have the phrase written on the back of their signs so they can flip them when someone has something rude to say, Morrow said.

Turner said she used to get in people’s faces and yell back when someone had something rude to say. Now, she said she’s learned to stay away from “weaponized” words and engages in meaningful conversations with people instead.

“Sometimes they’re a Republican and sometimes we make a connection. And they realize, ‘Well gee, she’s pretty reasonable. Maybe I’ll listen to her again.’ So I’ve made a lot of Republican friends out here,” Turner said.

Morrow said she thinks because the group only has one rule, to “be nice,” people keep coming back to join them. Each week has a theme that the group decides on through its Facebook group, but if someone wants to hold a sign about climate or health care each week, the group won’t stop them from doing that.

Morrow gets a permit from the city to protest each week, and police are there for their safety, she said.

Stephen Dreyfus, who’s running for a South Carolina House seat in District 20, joins the group each week and said the group is “so well behaved the police don’t pay us any attention anymore.”

Three years after the group’s formation, many who have been there since the beginning said they get a majority of praise from those passing by and not too much hate anymore.

“I think something positive is happening in Greenville,” Dreyfus said.

Safety is something Morrow said is always in the back of her mind, especially after events like the August 2017 shooting in Charlottesville.

“We’re lighthearted about what we do, but it just takes one crazy person and you’re putting yourself out there,” Morrow said. “We all have the understanding that it’s not totally safe what we’re doing, but we all think it’s worthwhile to do.”

'Operation Chaos': Republican voters aim to skew SC Democratic primary

More than Tuesdays

No matter the weather conditions, you can find the Tell Them Tuesday group out there every single Tuesday.

“We’ve even come out on Christmas Day, New Year’s Day and Christmas Eve when they fell on a Tuesday,” Morrow said. “When it’s been raining and when the fountain was frozen and when it was 97 degrees, there wasn’t a single week when there wasn’t somebody out here.”

Because some that want to join the group Tuesdays can’t because of work schedules, Shout Out Saturday was created. June Baswell and Mary Lash lead this group that congregates in the same spot on Saturdays, noon to 1 p.m. Many that attend Tell Them Tuesdays join the Saturday group as well.

Baswell said so far Shout Out Saturday has been a success.

"I hope [Shout Out Saturday] will let people know, especially liberals, that they're not alone here," Baswell said. "Because a lot of us felt like we were completely alone before we came out here and we've found a community of people."