Moscow’s Elaborate Skyscrapers

Cities around the world are defined by their skylines, and Moscow’s skyline is distinctly recognizable because of the Seven Sisters. Also known by Muscovites as Stalinskie Vysotki (Stalin’s Skyscrapers), the seven towering buildings were built during the time in which Joseph Stalin was in power and have since become known as some of the most prominent architectural vestiges of this period. After completion, the buildings were the tallest in Europe and were considered as part of an initiative to rebuild large portions of Moscow after World War II. Stalin was particularly interested in updating the capital to compete with the contemporary cities of the Western world.

Beauties or Beasts?

After enlisting some of the top architects in the country, the grandiose project commenced. As the buildings were designed and construction began, Stalin’s personal preferences became so evident that the term Stalinist Architecture was coined. This imposing style is a unique blend of Soviet Baroque and Gothic, which may not be to everyone’s taste. But whether these buildings are considered to be architectural marvels or beastly representations of the Stalinist era, they are nevertheless extraordinary. Without them, modern-day Moscow would simply not be the same. The Seven Sisters consist of the following buildings:

1. Moscow State University — 240 Meters, 36 Floors

The largest of the seven buildings and the second of the seven to be completed, Moscow State University can comfortably house up to 30,000 students. Construction was started in 1949 and was completed in 1953. It was partially built by Gulag prisoners and German prisoners of war, and during the peak of its construction over 14,000 workers were working on it at a time. To deter them from trying to escape, workers were housed on the 14th floor of the building. It is rumored that the ghosts of the prisoners who died there, some while trying to escape, still haunt this floor of what is now one of the capital’s top universities.

2. Hotel Ukraina — 206 Meters, 34 Floors

Kievskaya Ploshchad is the proud owner of this building, which was once known as the largest hotel in Europe and was built between 1953 and 1957. Because it is situated on a bend in the Moskva River, construction was particularly tricky and innovative building techniques had to be used during construction. In 2005, we bought this majestic building at an auction and closed it in 2007 for a complete overhaul. In 2010, we relaunched the hotel as both the Radisson Royal Hotel and the Hotel Ukraina and it has been successfully operating ever since.

3. Kotelnicheskaya Embankment Building — 176 Meters, 32 Floors

This mixed-use building was built between 1938 and 1940. It is located at the point where the Moskva River runs into the Yauza River. Although it was originally intended as an elite residential project, it was eventually converted into a multi-family living space.

4. The Ministry of Foreign Affairs Building — 172 Meters, 27 Floors

Home to several government offices including The Ministry of Foreign Affairs, construction of this imposing building began in 1948 and was completed in 1953. This building is defined by the massive 144-square-meter Soviet crest on its façade. Another defining feature is the building’s spire, which was not originally included in the design but was added later by as a personal request by Stalin. After his death, a request to remove the spire was denied.

5. Kudrinskaya Square Building — 160 Meters, 22 Floors

Originally intended as a residential building for Soviet cultural leaders, this building was constructed between 1948 and 1954 and was home to elegant apartments, restaurants, and shops. Over the years, it fell into disrepair, and the apartments were converted into small one-room units. The building is undergoing renovations and may eventually be restored to its former glory.

6. Hotel Leningradskaya — 136 Meters, 26 Floors

Designed to be the finest hotel in Europe, construction of the Leningradskaya was started in 1949 and completed in 1952. The lavishly decorated interior included a chandelier that hangs seven stories long and was listed in the Guinness Book of World Records as one of the world’s largest. In later years, the hotel was acquired by Hilton and reopened in 2008 after major renovations were done.

7. Red Gates Administrative Building — 133 Meters, 24 Floors

The smallest of the seven skyscrapers, construction of this building started in 1949 and was completed in 1953. It is currently home to residential apartments, retail shopping spaces, and the offices of the Ministry of Trade. An interesting fact about the Red Gates Administrative Building is that it tilts to one side. During construction, the frame was purposely tilted to compensate for the frozen soil and after it thawed, the building didn’t settle enough for it to be entirely upright.