History of Camp Jonah

HOW CAMP JONAH BEGAN

Camp Jonah began through the love of a Grandmother for her 24 grandchildren. After many years of doing "Grandma Camp" on her 20 acres of woodlands, the desire grew to create a Christian camp experience for other children. "Grandma" Bernice Duke approached her son and daughter-in-law, Jeff & Beki Duke, with a dream to sell the homestead the family had owned since 1965, purchase the Old Trout Lake School, and start a camp. Her vision quickly spread. In the spring of 1996, Bernice sold her acreage and home; Jeff & Beki and family sold their 60 acre dairy farm and cows; the kids (Julianne, Carissa, Jerry, Angela, Brian) sold their 4-H cows, horses, chickens, etc. all to be a part of the new adventure soon to become known as Jonah Ministries. In 2015 Jonah Ministries officially changed the name to Camp Jonah.

Camp Jonah is a Christian, 501(c)(3), non-profit camp and retreat center. We're located in Trout Lake, Washington, at the base of Mt. Adams and bordered by crystal-clear Trout Creek. Within minutes, we can be caving, hiking, rock climbing, sledding, etc. One of the founding reasons for starting Jonah was to be able to take kids out into nearby creation, which naturally draws them to the Creator.

Camp Jonah is dedicated to presenting the gospel of Jesus Christ and promoting spiritual growth in a Christian environment through fun, God-honoring Camps and Retreats (Mission Statement). We are committed to providing a learning environment that is characterized as being safe, wholesome, secure, and fun!

We serve our local rural community, but have campers and staff from all over Washington and Oregon and beyond. Our facilities are open to all ages, backgrounds and nationalities. The summer months find us programming our own Theme Camps, which include:

Ultimate Kids Camp (grades 1-6)​

Kids Missions Camp (grades 4-8)

High School Camp (grades 9-12)

Middle School Adventure Camp (grades 6-9)

Jr. Adventure Camp (grades 2-6)

Day Camps (grades 1-6)

Soccer Camp (grades 2-8)

September - June continues to find us busy in our ever-growing retreat season. We host youth groups from Tacoma, Vancouver, Portland, Salem, Bend, Yakima, The Dalles, Hood River, and more. We also team with several Christian schools and Homeschool Co-ops to do all-school retreats here. We are characterized by steady growth that we attribute to happy campers, generous donors, countless volunteer hours, and God's blessings.

Any non-profit ministry of value has a solid Board of Directors behind the scenes and we are no exception. Our Board consists of 11-13 individuals whose experience includes engineering, teaching, coaching, farming, raising great kids, pastoring, mission work, business ownership, etc. They are all passionate about Jonah Ministries' camping and retreat ministry and are committed to hands-on involvement.

Our Board of Directors:

​Keith Robison, Board Member

Dev Bell, Board Member

Laurie Bell, Board Member

David Vawser, Board Member

Ellie Vawser, Corporate Treasurer

Nick Herman, Board Member

Catie Herman, Board Member

Brady Kaethler, Board Chair

McKenzie Kaethler, Board Member

Sarah Hatfield, Board Member

One of our greatest assets, and the lifeblood of Jonah, is our fantastic, mostly volunteer staff! Year-round we pay only three part time employees, and two full time. During the summer, one other full-time, paid position is added. All other positions are volunteer. The willingness to contribute countless volunteer hours shows how involvement in Camp Jonah offers life-changing experiences, and gives value to those involved. We good-naturedly joke that campers are just an excuse for staff to grow in the Lord! Returning summer staff and longevity of employees show that Camp Jonah is a place that people like to be a part of. We call them our Jonah Family.

We have two main goals at Camp Jonah -- that each person who enters our doors has fun and that they take the next step in their walk with God. Fun and ministry keep us crazy-busy and wonderfully happy. We like to say that God is our Camp Director. We take great pleasure in following His leadership, and we're humbled and blessed by the amazing results of this place where kids laugh, hearts change, and God smiles.