Relaxing in what was once a packing shed are the O’Day grandchildren: from left,Zachary Adams, Rachel O’Day, Zane Adams, Bryce O’Day, Ashley Adams and Brock O’Day. (Photo courtesy O’Day family)

SEAFORD, Del. — A fifth generation is growing up on the O’Day farm, and five of them will be showing animals at the Delaware State Fair this year.

Family patriarch, Bill O’Day, was born in the farmhouse on land one of his grandfathers purchased in 1936. Bill started farming with a dairy herd, but gave that up after 20 years or more. He then progressed from process vegetables to grain. Donna O’Day said she is often asked if her husband is still farming. Her answer is always, “If he’s still breathing, he’s still farming.”

Their son, Billy, and Billy’s wife, Robin, have a home on one side of the farm on Woodland Ferry Road. Billy’s sister, Becky, and her husband, Patrick Adams, live on the other side of her parents.

Each couple has three children. All of them have shown animals at the fair, but Becky’s older son, Zachary, is away at Purdue University, studying precision ag and ag engineering. He most likely will return to work on the family farm someday. His brother, Zane, is a freshman at the University of Tennessee in Knoxville, studying soil science and water. Zane is working on a charter boat out of Indian River this summer.

Ashley Adams, a student at Sussex Tech, is working this summer with her parents at Shipwrecked Mini Golf and Ice Cream in Ocean View, which they purchased three years ago. But she will have time off for showing at the Delaware State Fair.

She has been showing at the fair since she was 5 years old, working with goats, pigs and horses, and has won “plenty of ribbons,” she said. “I’ve been in the Extravaganza many years with first or second place animals. I’ve had reserve and grand champions at smaller county fairs.” Those include fairs in New Castle and Kent counties in Delaware, Talbot County in Maryland and a lot of jackpot shows, she continued.

She said she remembers being dragged around the ring by a goat when she was little. “My pants were soiled with sawdust.”

In more recent years, Ashley and her brother Zane have concentrated on pigs. Ashley will be showing two she got in February, a Hampshire crossbred gilt and barrow.

Her favorite thing about the fair is staying in the camper on the fairgrounds, which she has been doing as long as she can remember. “It’s fun having all my friends right there.”

Ashley is president of the Stateline 4-H Club in Reliance, which she and her cousins all belong to. Their mothers are co-leaders.

Asked if she’d like to help run the farm someday, Ashley replied, “No, m’am.” Her plan is to join the military, serve overseas, then become a parole officer.

All of Billy and Robin’s children will be at the fair. Billy’s older son, Brock, 16, is taking environmental courses at Sussex Tech and is in FFA. Rachel, 14, is a rising sophomore at Sussex Academy. Bryce is 12 and in middle school at Sussex Academy.

Interviewed while their sister was working at a produce stand, both boys agreed their favorite thing about the fair was hanging out with friends and camping for 10 days.

Bryce said, “When I was younger, I looked forward to Christmas and the fair — and vacation, but mainly those two. We have good food, and it’s great seeing everyone from across the state. It’s like a reunion, kind of. Yes, there are chores, but it’s a lot of fun.

“Usually we don’t ride the (carnival) rides. We have better stuff to do.”

Brock said he began showing as a 4-H Cloverbud, at age 5. He and his siblings show Boer goats. Brock’s goat won first place in its weight class last year; Bryce won junior reserve champion in showmanship with his goat.

Their goats are market goats, all wethers. The boys admitted they’d never tasted goat meat, although Bryce likes goat cheese.

Brock had two goats in the fair’s livestock auction last year, having taken first place in both classes. He split the money from the auction with his siblings, “since it’s a team effort. We take turns caring for and walking the goats,” he said.

Their mother sometimes pretends to be a judge, walking around, “trying to trick us,” Brock said.

They brought out three goats for photographing. Two were twins to be shown by Brock and Rachel. Brock said his, No. 3T6, has no name. “There have been so many over the years. You run out of names.” Bryce’s goat’s name is Sam.

Brock knows he wants to be a farmer. He plans to go away to college to learn business agriculture, but he’s not sure where.

And he wouldn’t mind working off the farm elsewhere to learn a new perspective, but he will come back to the family farm.

Brock already tills 70 acres on his own, planted half in corn and half in soybeans, “to spread the risk,” he said. He uses his father’s equipment and appreciates his father’s guidance.

Bryce is too young to have to decide. “You’ve got to be 14 just to get a job,” he lamented. He does help out on the farm.

Brock explained the shared workload on the farm: “MomMom pays the bills; PopPop combines, and Dad does everything else. I help when I can.”