During December, five friends from various backgrounds and leadership experiences will share their thoughts about leadership. These five weeks will allow you to hear voices other than mine. They are voices I trust and respect. They are voices you will appreciate

My father’s name is “Joseph.” It’s not a name his parents gave him, but one he chose for himself. He arrived in “The United States of America” (dad never abbreviated or contracted it) on October 31, 1971, along with his wife and two toddler sons as immigrants from South Korea. Appa (daddy in Korean) submitted our applications as soon as we were eligible for naturalization. And what name did he choose to be his legal name? “Joseph Yangshick Yi.” I still recall asking him why he chose “Joseph.” Appa loved the Bible. He became the very first in his family to be born again Christian in college. I had assumed he would choose “Abraham,” or “Moses,” or “David," and perhaps even “James,” to complete the triplet to my “John” and my brother’s “Peter.”

Appa excitedly explained that Joseph was the eleventh son of Jacob. He is popularly remembered as the son who received a coat of many colors from his father, Jacob. He went from being a shepherd to an enslaved person, a prisoner, and then Pharoah’s Prime Minister. You can find Joseph’s story in Genesis 37, 39-50.

Joseph led out of suffering. Joseph personally suffered from the sins of others – separated from his family when sold into slavery by his brothers, then falsely accused and imprisoned. Joseph refused victimhood – no hint of complaints, blame, or self-pity. Appa’s story has significant gaps; ages 11-18 and 21-26 are virtually missing. Appa protected his sons from the knowledge of what I can only describe as his hardships and horrors. Only my mother’s whispers in sparsely detailed stories provide out-of-focus snapshots of Appa’s separation from his family in childhood and false imprisonment as a young man. My dad never spoke of these things, let alone complained about them. Appa didn’t blame God. As an immigrant, I never saw him play the victim. With all its flaws, he was grateful to reside in the “greatest nation in the history of the world.” Appa seemed to be a natural leader – in his family, church, and workplace – because he always seemed to have a title and people seemed to pay close attention to what he said. But at his funeral, people talked about his generosity, diligence, faithfulness, and service. Great leaders are not handicapped by suffering. They don’t make excuses to themselves or others because of their suffering. Great leaders lead out of suffering. They lead through suffering. The greatest leaders lead others out of suffering.

Joseph’s life exudes a “whatever it takes” attitude. “Whatever it takes” conjures up different things for different people. Many romanticize epic and heroic acts of courage and tenacity which defy and overcome great obstacles and adversaries. Over the years, Appa emphasized to me that “whatever it takes” always demands a price, requires wisdom, and most of all must be directed by the righteousness of God.“ Joseph’s story in the Bible reveals a man who appears to succeed in and excels at everything he does. In slavery, he is the master’s favorite and most trusted slave. In prison, the warden places him in charge of all the prisoners. In Pharaoh’s court, Joseph is the Hand of the King with the full authority of the Pharaoh signet. What’s behind Joseph’s success? We’re expressly and repeatedly told the LORD “was with Joseph,” “made all that he did prosper,” and “gave him favor.” Joseph does whatever it takes to guard that relationship with God. He is uncompromising to honor the righteousness of God. When presented with the opportunity to sin secretly, Joseph declares, “How then could I do this great evil and sin against God?” On the cusp of presenting the solution for the world’s salvation, Joseph redirects, “It has nothing to do with me; God will give Pharaoh an answer for his own good.” EVERYthing – every cause, mission, kingdom, and king – is NOT worthy of our whatever it takes, but a few things are. Great leaders know who and what are worthy of whatever it takes, and they will sacrifice, invest, endure, and pursue without apology or reservation!

Joseph’s life points to Jesus. Appa claimed, “Other than Jesus, of all the people in the Bible who have anything significant written about them, only Joseph and Daniel have nothing negative recorded concerning them. “There are so many ‘Daniels,’ so I’ll be a ‘Joseph.’” The lives of historic heroes whet our appetites for the ultimate champion, a savior of our own. Appa would point out that Joseph knew he was chosen by God to be something greater than he could have imagined or hoped. From eternity past, Jesus is the Christ, the Messiah, the Chosen One of God; He knew who He was and His mission. Appa would remind me Joseph was rejected by his own kin; Jesus was rejected by those who should have been the most ecstatic at his arrival. Appa would say that Joseph, though innocent, was locked up on false charges; Jesus, although without sin, was executed in the most gruesome manner reserved for the worst of criminals. But God got had a plan. He raised Joseph out of a prison cell to rule at the right hand of the Pharaoh in order to save the known world from famine and starvation; Jesus though dead, was raised from the grave by the Father, and he now sits at the right hand of his Father in order to save people from sin and death! Then choking back tears of grateful adoration, Appa blubbered, “John. I. Love. Him. You love Jesus, too!” Great leaders teach the people they love to love Jesus, too.

Great leaders don’t measure up. People are ever seeking out great leaders, heroes, and champions. Sometimes we’re so desperate we’ll settle for some fantastically unworthy contenders. Joseph Yangshick Yi would say to people who might extol him and his leadership, “I am not the man you think I am, but Jesus is all this you say about me and so much more. Don’t put your faith in me; soon, I will disappoint you. Believe Jesus; He will never disappoint you!” Great leaders know they don’t measure up, but they know the One who does.

John Yi is a church planting catalyst with the North American Mission Board’s Send Network. He works with church planters in and around Chicago. John earned an undergraduate degree in theology and a Master of Divinity at Southwestern Baptist Theological Seminary in Fort Worth, Texas. He has served in a variety of pastor roles and on several church planting teams in the Chicagoland region for more than 20 years.

The views and opinions expressed in my Thursday Thoughts on Leadership are those of the author. They do not necessarily reflect the views, opinions, or policies of the Baptist State Convention of North Carolina or any affiliated churches.