Olympia Snowe is currently Chairman and CEO of Olympia Snowe, LLC (through which she provides communications and policy advice), and a Senior Fellow at the Bipartisan Policy Center in Washington, D.C., a 501(C)(3) organization, where she serves on its Board of Directors and co-chairs its Commission on Political Reform.

With her election to the U.S. Senate in 1994, Senator Snowe began an eighteen year tenure in the Senate. In November 2006, she was re-elected to a third six-year term with 74 percent of the vote and served in the Senate until January 2, 2013.

Before her election to the Senate, Snowe represented Maine’s Second Congressional District in the U.S. House of Representatives for sixteen years. She was the first woman in American history to serve in both houses of a state legislature and both houses of Congress. When first elected to Congress in 1978, at the age of 31, Snowe was the youngest Republican woman, and the first Greek-American woman, ever elected to Congress. She has won more federal elections in Maine than any other person since World War II, and is the third longest serving woman in the history of the Congress. While in the House, she co-chaired the Congressional Caucus on Women’s issues for more than ten years.

During Senator Snowe’s distinguished career she served as Chair and then Ranking Member of the Senate Committee on Small Business and Entrepreneurship; became the first Republican woman ever to secure a full-term seat on the Senate Finance Committee, and was also the first woman Senator to chair the Subcommittee on Seapower of the Senate Armed Services Committee, which oversees the Navy and Marine Corps. Senator Snowe built a reputation as one of the Congress’ leading centrists, co-chairing the Senate Centrist Coalition from 1999-2006. In 2005 she was named the 54th most powerful woman in the world by Forbes magazine. In 2006 Time Magazine named her one of the top ten U.S. Senators.

Senator Snowe is married to former Maine Governor John R. McKernan Jr. and lives in Falmouth, Maine and Washington, D.C.