By Peter Stevenson

Text and photographs copyright of the Author(s) unless otherwise stated.

The History

Apart from the specific F1 design focus, the Lotus 18 differed in one particularly significant way from all its predecessors in that the engine was now positioned behind the driver rather than in front.

Always a hugely competitive character, Chapman can hardly have appreciated the success of one of his arch rivals, John Cooper, whose rear engined Coopers, in 1959, had stormed to victory in both the F1 World Drivers’ Championship and the newly introduced F1 World Constructors’ Championships.

While certainly not the first manufacturer to have raced rear engined cars (think especially of the mighty Auto Unions from the 1930s) Cooper very much led the way in promoting and popularising the design in the modern era having first introduced the concept in their motorcycle-engined chain driven Cooper 500s of the late 1940s.

So when Chapman came to develop a more competitive successor to his Type 16 single seater, he was quick to recognise the benefits of a mid-engined design enabling a reduced frontal area and a reduction of power loss with the removal of the elongated front to rear propshaft. And naturally of course Chapman also considered he could actually “better” the Coopers with a better designed and engineered chassis and suspension layout.

While producing an effective F1 competitor was always foremost in Chapman’s mind, the new Type 18 was actually designed as a multi-purpose F1/F2/FJ machine. Indeed it first appeared on the racetrack in prototype form housing a Formula Junior 997cc Cosworth-Ford 105E powerplant.

This first appearance (still unpainted) was at the hands of Alan Stacey in a 1959 Boxing Day Brands Hatch event where, coincidentally, a young Scottish driver named Jim Clark was also making his Formula Junior debut driving a Gemini Mk2 for Graham Warner’s The Chequered Flag team. Neither Stacey nor Clark managed a win.

Built around its square shaped multitubular space frame chassis, the car’s somewhat stubby and flat-sided shape appeared far from aerodynamic or aesthetically pleasing to the neutral observer. Indeed Jim Clark himself noted in his 1964 autobiography ‘Jim Clark at the Wheel‘:

“On the grid beside me was Alan Stacey driving an odd device which looked like a cigar tube with four wheels. The engine was in the back and the suspension was different from most other cars…………..this was the Lotus 18 a car which set a new trend for Lotus and which virtually sparked off their terrific run of successes ever since.”

In spite of its unpromising outward appearance, after a short period of initial “sorting” the same little car took the 1960 Formula Junior season by storm with the three new Team Lotus drivers, Jim Clark, Trevor Taylor, and Peter Arundell winning almost every race they entered. Clark and Taylor topped the 1960 British Formula Junior Championship with 49 points each, with Mike McKee in a Jim Russell Driving School Type 18 in third position just ahead of Arundell in fourth.

Then at Goodwood on 18 April 1960 the Type 18 was also to announce itself sensationally to the world of F1 at the hands of Team Lotus driver Innes Ireland. The 2.5 litre Coventry Climax FPF engined Type 18 had already made its debut appearance in the Argentine GP on 7 Feb 1960, recording second fastest in qualifying but forced back to sixth in the race with a range of mechanical problems. At the Easter Goodwood event, Ireland in the new car recorded its first ever GP-class win, emphatically defeating none other than the usually unbeatable Stirling Moss in a F1 Cooper. Tellingly, immediately after the race Moss asked his promoter Rob Walker to order him a new Lotus 18!

And so, only one month later, the stage was set for history to be made. On 29 May 1960, after breaking the existing track record by a full four seconds in qualifying, Stirling Moss recorded the first ever F1 World Championship win for a Lotus when he took the chequered flag at the Monaco GP in his new Type 18. And Rob Walker had taken possession of the new car only one week before the GP!

And again in 1960, Moss triumphed in his Rob Walker Type 18 at the end-of- season US GP at Riverside with Team Lotus driver Innes Ireland finishing second in the works Type 18.

The following 1961 F1 season was to prove a difficult one for many teams with the FIA rule change reducing F1 engine capacity to 1.5-litres. Few teams had a suitably competitive engine ready for the new season apart from Ferrari.

However on 3 April 1961, Team Lotus recorded another important milestone in its history when its new driver, Jim Clark, won his first ever F1 race at Pau. This was a non-championship event but the Clark win was nonetheless significant for both Team and the highly rated young Scotsman.

And as F1 successes slowly mounted, what was subsequently to be regarded as both Stirling Moss’ and the Type 18s’ greatest achievement was to come on 14 May 1961. At the Monaco GP, Moss doggedly held off a much superior Ferrari challenge for the entire race to claim his third GP victory in a Rob Walker Type 18 (Chassis #912), and his first in the problematical new 1.5-litre F1 class.

In the light of the challenges to be faced in 1961 by the outclassed Coventry Climax users, Chapman had been hard at work designing a Formula 1 specific successor to his Type 18 for the new racing season. This was the Type 21.

In an attempt to counteract the superior 1.5-litre Ferrari engines, Chapman’s aim was to improve the Type 18’s aerodynamic profile by leaning back the driver position and thus reducing the car’s running height and centre of gravity. Its tubular spaceframe structure, suspension design, and fibreglass panelling were also more advanced than the Type 18.

The new Type 21 had in fact made its F1 debut at the 1961 Monaco GP where Moss won so spectacularly in his “old” Type 18. Jim Clark in the Type 21 had gone fastest in practice but crashes then put both he and Innes Ireland out of contention.

While prior to this time, Chapman had been happy to sell his most recent designs to competitor teams such as Rob Walker, things changed with the Type 21. Up to this point it had been Rob Walker’s privately entered Lotus cars that had taken the chequered flag in World Championship GP events and not Team Lotus. Chapman would have been acutely aware of this but, even more so, his fuel suppliers and sponsors, Esso. The latter were most certainly far from happy with Rob Walker and Stirling Moss’s successes as they were both sponsored by Esso’s arch rival, BP!

So for whatever reasons, during the 1961 season no new Type 21’s were made available by Lotus to Rob Walker or indeed to any other privateer. With Moss at the wheel, the “old” Type 18 still appeared capable of replicating its early successes. But go-ahead teams such as UDT-Laystall and Rob Walker who were fielding Type 18s at that time soon began to look closely at the more advanced features of the Type 21 with a view towards incorporating them into their existing Type 18s.

First to do so was the well funded UDT-Laystall team. Chief mechanic Tony Robinson re-worked the chassis and suspension on his team’s cars very similar to Chapman’s new specifications and indeed Chapman himself also helped them obtain new body panels very similar to the works Type 21. In all UDT-Laystall completed three cars to this new specification and they became generally known as Lotus 18/21s. Similarly, two Rob Walker Type 18s were also upgraded to this new 18/21 spec.

It came as no real surprise therefore that it was Stirling Moss (again!) who gave the UDT-Laystall 18/21 its first victory when he beat Jim Clark in the Team Lotus Type 21 into second place at the Silver City Trophy event at Brands Hatch on 3 June 1961. And this was followed soon after on 6 Aug 1961 with Moss once more outdriving the dominant Ferraris to win the German GP at the wheel of his Rob Walker 18/21.

Four World Championship GP wins for Lotus cars, but still to date none at the hands of a Team Lotus driver!

At last however on the 8 October 1961, in the final GP of the season, Team Lotus driver Innes Ireland drove his Type 21 to victory at the US GP at Watkins Glen delivering Team Lotus its first ever World Championship GP victory!

Some 27 Type 18’s were produced by Lotus between 1960 and 1961, competing right up to 1966. While at GP level only Stirling Moss had proved capable of taking the little car to the top of the podium, in non-championship and club events at the hands of private entrants the car’s success rate was to prove much better. In all, it has been recorded that the 27 Type 18s produced were campaigned worldwide at the hands of no fewer than 59 drivers during its impressive seven-year competition life.

So all in all, this unconventional but functional “cigar tube with four wheels” and its follow up Type 21 designs had at last enabled Lotus to establish themselves as a serious presence in F1 racing.

But more success, so much more, was to follow in the next few years!

Photographs below from various publications

Manufacturing rivals Colin Chapman and John Cooper exchange pleasantries at the Italian GP.

The new Type 18 in its all-conquering Formula Junior specification that was driven to victory by Jim Clark at Oulton Park in 1960.

Innes Ireland spectacularly defeated Stirling Moss at the Richmond Trophy event at Goodwood on 18 April 1960 to claim the Type 18s first F1 victory.

Here Ireland successfully holds of Stirling Moss’s F1 Cooper to take the Lotus Type 18 to its first F1 victory.

On 29 May 1960, Stirling Moss drove Rob Walker’s Type 18 to Lotus’ first ever GP victory at the Monaco GP.

Moss’s Type 18 drives into the victory lane at Monaco. Characteristically Moss already is celebrating with his post-race cigarette!

Moss receives his Monaco trophy from Prince Rainier and Princess Grace.

On 6 June 1960 Jim Clark drove in his first ever F1 GP at Zandvoort in the Team Lotus Type 18. He retired with transmission problems.

Moss claimed his second GP victory in the Rob Walker Lotus at the 1960 US GP at Riverside.

And again, the essential post-race cigarette takes pride of place!

On 3 April 1961, Jim Clark took his first ever F1 victory driving the Team Lotus Type 18 at the non-championship Pau GP.

Michael Turner’s excellent painting of Moss driving to victory at Monaco in 1961 harried throughout by the works shark-nose Ferraris.

UDT-Laystall’s Type 18 driven by Cliff Allison at the 1961 Monaco GP

The new Type 21 Lotus made its debut appearance at Monaco in 1961

UDT-Laystall were prevented from buying Lotus 21’s and instead converted their Type 18s to 18/21 spec. Here Stirling Moss in the UDT-Laystall 18/21 chases Clark in the Team Lotus Type 21 at the Silver City Trophy race at Brands Hatch on 3 June 1961. Moss won.

Stirling Moss maintained his winning ways in a Lotus with victory in Rob Walkers 18/21 at the 1961 German GP.

Team Lotus finally ended their quest for their first F1 GP victory when Innes Ireland won the 1961 US GP in their Type 21.

Innes Ireland typically celebrates success at the US GP with a very happy Colin Chapman at his side.

Type 18s were exported all over the world. This nostalgic period photograph shows a trio of cars en route to the Jim Russell Racing Drivers School in Norfolk while a crated machine is on its way to Frank Gardner in Melbourne Australia.

The Models

The world of miniature has been fairly well served with models of the Lotus 18 especially in more modern times from the prolific producer Spark, and in 1:18 scale from Italian specialists Tecnomodel.

One of the earliest mass produced Type 18 models was a very attractive little diecast from French producers Solido. To me the little dark green Solido model perfectly captured the quaint lines of the actual car, even enhanced by the inclusion of a crouching driver figure appearing to urge his little machine unto even greater momentum. Solido actually re-released their model more recently in a retro range although this time they for some reason added Cooper-like twin stripes running the length of the front of the car. Colin Chapman would have been deeply disapproving!

Other early Type 18s came from the likes of Ingap (plastic), and slot car specialists VIP. Later, the white metal kit producers also entered the market with offerings from the likes of John Day, Circuit Series, and then SMTS. Resincast specialists Spark have more recently produced something in excess of twenty Type 18s and 18/21s variants including the much more rarely seen Formula Junior version. MEA Kit 43 has also produced an excellent high detail Formula Junior version in kit form with an “extra” multitubular spaceframe chassis for diorama display.

The Stirling Moss 1961 Monaco GP winner (with its side panels removed) has always been a much sought after version in miniature. And only a year or so ago British based Diecast Legends commissioned Tecnomodel to produce an exclusive version of this car in 1:18 scale. A short time afterwards, Tecnomodel themselves then released five further versions of the Type 18 again in 1:18 scale but omitting the Moss car (probably due to their earlier arrangement with Diecast Legends).

This however was rectified not long after when Tecnomodel added the same Moss / Monaco ’61 car to their range but including this time (uniquely for Tecnomodel) a driver figure. I have included side view pics of examples of both models for comparison and, for me at least, there is absolutely no doubt which car I would prefer in my collection!

In short, I heartily dislike the inclusion of driver figures in models (although I admit that I have added them to my collection when no alternative exists). So for me the Diecast Legends “driverless” version of the Moss / Monaco ’61 Type 18 is undoubtedly a much more attractive larger scale representation of this famous car!

Very attractive Type 18/21 and Type 21 models are now also widely available from SMTS, Spark, and Tecnomodel.

One of the earliest models of a Type 18 was this very attractive little 1:43 scale diecast offering from Solido.

The Solido model was re-issued years later in a retro range but this time with (Cooper-like) twin white stripes.

Slot car specialists VIP included a Type 18 in their range.

In the modern era, Spark have issued a very attractive 1:43 scale Formula Junior Type 18 (#31) representing Jim Clark’s win at Oulton Park in 1960.

MEA Kit 43 have produced a high detail kit to build this spectacular Formula Junior Type 18 (#114).

Innes Ireland’s memorable first F1 win for Team Lotus at Goodwood in 1960 can be replicated from this SMTS kit (#14).

The SMTS kit also enables Jim Clark’s first F1 win at Pau (#6) to be replicated

Yet another Type 18 option for SMTS, this time Stirling Moss’s outstanding win in his Rob Walker Type 18 (#20) at the 1961 Monaco GP. The car raced with side panels removed in an attempt to reduce the extreme heat in the cockpit.

SMTS also released this very attractive limited edition “Flat Out All The Way” diorama of Moss negotiating Station Hairpin at Monaco in 1961, complete with palm tree, overhead street lighting and PA system, and strategically positioned race photographer!

Diecast Legends were the first to release a 1:18 scale of the 1961 Monaco GP winning Moss car (#20) that was exclusively produced for them by Tecnomodel.

Not long after the Diecast Legends release, Tecnomodel themselves released a quintet of 1:18 scale Type 18s.

And not long after that again, Tecnomodel added Moss’ 1961 Monaco car to their 1:18 scale range but this time including a driver figure to differentiate it from the Diecast Legends model.

A side on view of the two 1:18 scale 1961 Monaco Type 18s. My dislike of the inclusion of driver figures continues unabated! 5790

SMTS offers kits to build this splendid five-piece Team Lotus transporter from the 1960’s. Attractive but very expensive!

Rob Walker and Team Lotus Type 18s from Piccolino in 1:76 scale.

Spark’s 1:43 scale model of a UDT-Laystall Lotus 18/21 as driven by Henry Taylor (#30) at the 1961 French GP.

SMTS’s 1:43 scale offering of the Rob Walker / Stirling Moss 1961 German GP winning 18/21 (#7).

Team Lotus’ first ever GP win (#15) was at the end of season US GP in 1961 modelled here by SMTS.

Tecnomodel has added to its 1:18 Type 18 range with this quartet of Type 21s.

Type 18s were campaigned by three main F1 teams in the early 1960s, Team Lotus (dark green), Rob Walker Racing (dark blue) and UDT-Laystall (pale green). To the rear of this colourful 1:43 scale grouping from my own collection is the Type 18’s predecessor, the Vanwall like Type 16, which unfortunately failed to impress.