Arlene Alda, 81, and her husband, the actor Alan Alda, 79, say that one secret to a long-lasting marriage (theirs has been going for almost 58 years) is forgetfulness, which comes naturally to them at this point.

The Aldas, who discussed their decades together by telephone, with Ms. Alda also weighing in later by email, haven’t had a serious argument for the last 20 years, she said, primarily because they can no longer remember for very long whether they are angry with each other or why.

“I have a short memory, and so does he,” Ms. Alda said. “Was that always true? I don’t recall.”

Both emanate warmth and thoughtfulness in the way of beloved English professors or concerned therapists. Mr. Alda, whose career in television and theater has been as remarkably durable as his marriage, and Ms. Alda, a writer and photographer, possess laughs that are like old jeans: comfortable and well used.

Ms. Alda said that laughter is “the real glue that keeps us happily and willingly stuck together.” They are definitely not the kind of couple who sit silently across the table from each other. “We’re both loud laughers,” she said. “Guffawing ones.”

He said: “I have a very highfalutin notion about laughter. I think when you laugh you make yourself momentarily vulnerable. Your defenses are not up, and if you can stay in a playful mood, where you are susceptible to laughter, your chances of being antagonistic with each other are lower.”

In general, they do not seem to act their ages. She described a recent afternoon: “I have a blurb to write for someone’s book. I have soup I want to cook. I have a good chicken I want to roast. I have a book I’m reading that I want to finish. I have email correspondence. I have Facebook posts.”

Thank you for your patience while we verify access. If you are in Reader mode please exit and log into your Times account, or subscribe for all of The Times.

Thank you for your patience while we verify access.

Already a subscriber? Log in.

Want all of The Times? Subscribe.