After more than a decade headquartered at 1035 Market Street, San Francisco AIDS Foundation will relocate its main office to a single-tenant building at 940 Howard Street in early 2024.

Contact: Emily Land, eland@sfaf.org, 415-487-8061

Bella Mungioli: media@sfaf.org

SAN FRANCISCO, November 17, 2023–After more than a decade headquartered at 1035 Market Street, San Francisco AIDS Foundation will relocate its main office to a single-tenant building at 940 Howard Street. The move out of 1035 Market St. will occur in early December, 2023; services are planned to re-open to clients and community members in the Spring of 2024.

“With our lease at 1035 Market Street expiring at the end of 2023, this was an opportunity for SFAF to reassess the space needs of staff and the communities of people we serve at our main location,” said Tyler TerMeer, PhD, CEO. “The downturn in the real estate market in San Francisco, and the changing needs of our staff–many who are able to successfully work remotely–have enabled us to make a change that will ultimately result in cost savings for the organization and improved access for our clients. Our physical location will change but our programs and services, and our commitment to the community, remains the same.”

“We are ushering in a time of transition and change, and we look forward to welcoming our community into our new headquarters on Howard Street,” said Ben Cabangun, MA, Chief of Staff. “There are many things to look forward to about the new location in SoMa, which is within the same service radius of our existing office. The building has been recently renovated, there will be street-level access to the space, nearby transit options are plentiful, and SFAF will have greater control of the space as the single tenant to the building.”

The two-story office at 940 Howard, between 5th Street and 6th Street, will house AIDS/LifeCycle; our substance use treatment program the Stonewall Project; Subsidies & Financial Benefits, community engagement programs Black Brothers Esteem, the Elizabeth Taylor 50-Plus Network, HUES, Programa Latino, and TransLife; in addition to the administrative departments of SFAF. The new building is less than half a mile from the current main office on Market Street and less than two blocks west of the Yerba Buena/Moscone Station on the new Central Subway line.

A smaller location in SoMa will co-locate storage and select staffing for the Pick Up Crew, our mobile harm reduction outreach teams, Syringe Access Services, and supplies for our 6th Street Harm Reduction Center. Services at SFAF’s two additional locations–Strut and the Harm Reduction Center–will continue unchanged.

SFAF will share more information with our communities and clients about the upcoming move, including when services and programs can be found in the new location, in the following months at sfaf.org/2024-move.

# # #