Hello, Guys for whatever reason on my setup I can’t find the installation files. It is supposed to be in this PC / Local Disk / Games / Microsoft Flight Simulator. However, I can’t find any of it even using search. I can see the game thru the windows 10 settings, I even try to move it but there is no way for me to find the files.

Can anybody help?

If you installed to the default location, the base Windows Store files (not content) are here:

C:\Users"YourUsername"\AppData\Local\Packages\Microsoft.FlightSimulator_8wekyb3d8bbwe

The sim content (airports, aircraft, etc.) would be in another location if you changed to a custom drive during installation. Those files will be found in a directory that looks like this: //…Official/OneStore.

Thank you @Sartanius Sartanius! I’m trying to update the files for the A320. I was able to find the files but not the directories I need. the directory I’m looking for is “community” that is where I’m supposed to dump the new files for project A32NX. Would those files be in the aircraft settings? I did not change anything during the installation. Where can I find that //Official/OneStore?

I found the instructions in the video on this link. https://www.flightsim.com/vbfs/content.php?21199-Announcing-A32NX-Project-Freeware-For-MSFS

You install stuff into the Community folder, I’m not sure where the xbox game pass version lives but you can use File Explorer, click on “Local Disk (C:)”, click inside the “Search Local Disk (C:)” text box then type in:

Community

and then press the Enter key. Wait for the results, there should be a progress bar in the “Search Results in Local Disk (C:)” text box.

Be sure to report back the path of where you find it.

This is the folder where all 3rd Party Addons are placed in order for them to be accessed/used in MSFS.

When you download a 3rd Party Addon, place the package into the community folder. This could be 3rd party airports, sceneries, liveries, etc. Think of the types of content you can download from “Flightsim.to”. When you start the sim, it loads whatever it finds in the Community Folder into MSFS.

Other addons come with dedicated installers (think PMDG, Fenix, etc.) and when you run the installer, it places the necessary package(s) into the Community Folder.

Hi there, I’m using MSFS now, coming from FSX, and Xbox PC version. I have a question just to clear up something. The files and paths in Xbox PC aren’t the same as in boxed MSFS. I just want confirmation from someone about a name of a file. The normal “Community” is equal to “Official” file, right? I want to run the Official/(Community) file from an extenal drive, to save space in my C drive.

As I said confirmation, only. There’s vids going around where the guy is using the wrong file on the external which only saves 20 GB instead of a much larger file.

Some help would be appreciated. Thanks a million in advance.

John.