Craig Oliver has witnessed first-hand the inner workings of British politics, as former Prime Minister David Cameron’s Director of Politics and Communications. Having also worked for BBC Global News, Craig is well equipped to discuss his career in journalism at events. Such a varied insight makes him one of the most sought after speakers on the circuit, booked to share his thoughts on Brexit, British politics and current events.

In 2011, Craig was appointed Director of Politics and Communication for Downing Street. For six years, he managed the British Government’s media campaigns, strategy and communications via advertisements. During this period, he secured the 2015 general election for the Conservative Party, in a landslide win which defied expectations. Before the 2016 Brexit Referendum, Craig was the Director of Communication for the Remain campaign. Such unique experiences makes this popular speaking a captivating presence at events.

Craig is responsible for optimising the British Government for the 21st century. Adapting their processes for the digital age, he revolutionised Number 10’s communications. Translating such insight for audiences, Craig talks on digital transformation, leadership and communications at events, to supply audiences with tailored strategies for reaching a wider audience. In our “360-degree media world”, as described by Craig, it is within a business’ best interests to apply change management techniques to their operations, with the help of an experienced speaker on public affairs – the most volatile, challenging industry.

Now, Craig is the Principal of Teneo, an advisory firm. He works with market-leading businesses to improve their strategy and communication, valuable topics of consultancy. He was also appointed Director of BBC World News Limited in 2010, following his role as company secretary of Paya Ltd. As Craig witnessed the highs and lows of Brexit first-hand, his bestselling book, Unleashing Demons: The Inside Story of Brexit, was highly anticipated. It was even adapted to the Channel 4 drama, Brexit: The Uncivil War.