Forest Lawn Memorial Park is a privately owned cemetery in Glendale, California. It is the original location of Forest Lawn, a chain of cemeteries in Southern California.

History

Forest Lawn was founded in 1906 as a not-for-profit cemetery by a group of businessmen from San Francisco. Dr. Hubert Eaton and C. B. Sims entered into a sales contract with the cemetery in 1912. Eaton took over the management of the cemetery in 1917 and is credited as being the "Founder" of Forest Lawn for his innovations of establishing the "memorial park plan" (eliminating upright grave markers) and being the first to open a funeral home on dedicated cemetery grounds. Eaton was a firm believer in a joyous life after death. He was convinced that most cemeteries were "unsightly, depressing stoneyards" and pledged to create one that would reflect his optimistic, Christian beliefs, "as unlike other cemeteries as sunshine is unlike darkness." He envisioned Forest Lawn to be "a great park devoid of misshapen monuments and other signs of earthly death, but filled with towering trees, sweeping lawns, splashing fountains, beautiful statuary, and ... memorial architecture" A number of plaques which state Eaton's intentions are signed "The Builder."

Most of its burial sections have evocative names, including Eventide, Babyland (for infants, shaped like a heart), Graceland, Inspiration Slope, Slumberland (for children and adolescents), Sweet Memories, Vesperland, Borderland (on the edge of the cemetery), and Dawn of Tomorrow.

For many decades the cemetery refused black, Jewish, and Chinese burials.

Forest Lawn Museum

The Forest Lawn Museum at Glendale was founded in 1957 and displays art, artifacts and also regularly hosts rotating fine art exhibits. The museum has hosted solo exhibitions for Henri Matisse, Winslow Homer, Ian Hornak, Goya, Rembrandt, Marc Davis and Reuben Nakian among many others. The objects in Forest Lawn's permanent collection represent specific locations and peoples from around the world. There are sections for India, Africa, the Middle East, East and Southeast Asia, the United States, South America, Australia and Europe. Perhaps the most famous object owned by Forest Lawn's permanent collection is William Bouguereau's 84x60 inch, oil on canvas painting, "Song of the Angels" created in 1881 and regarded as one of the most important examples of Bouguereau's work in the United States. The permanent collection also includes one of the largest and most well respected stained glass collections in North America with over 1000 pieces primarily from France and Germany dating from 1200 a.d. through present. The stained glass collection includes portions of William Randolf Hearst's former collection and owns the work of Albrecht Dürer and Viet Hirsvogel the Elder. The Museum also houses Western bronze sculptures, American historical artifacts, paintings, actual examples of every coin mentioned in the Bible, exact replicas of the British crown jewels, world cultural artifacts and one of the Easter Island statues, rescued from the bottom of a boat where it was used as ballast. It is named "Henry".

Statuary and art

The six Forest Lawn cemeteries contain about 1,500 statues, about 10% of which are reproductions of famous works of art, in various locations. Leonardo da Vinci's The Last Supper has been recreated in stained glass in the Memorial Court of Honor ‘in vibrant, glowing and indestructible colors.’ There are also a number of full-sized reproductions of other Renaissance sculptures, including Michelangelo's David and Moses. This cemetery is the only place in the world containing a complete collection of replica Michelangelo sculptures, which were made from castings taken from the originals and using marble from the same quarries in Carrara, Italy as used by Michelangelo.

Some of the inspiration at Forest Lawn is patriotic rather than pious, such as the Court of Freedom, with its large mosaic of the signing of the Declaration of Independence and a 13-foot (4.0 m)-high statue of George Washington. On display in the "Hall of the Crucifixion" is the panoramic painting by the Polish artist Jan Styka entitled "The Crucifixion." It is the largest permanently mounted religious painting in the world, measuring 195 feet (59 m) in length by 45 feet (14 m) in height. The main gates of Forest Lawn – Glendale are claimed to be the world's largest wrought-iron gates.

Locations

Forest Lawn has three non-denominational chapels: "The Little Church of the Flowers", "The Wee Kirk o’ the Heather" and "The Church of the Recessional", which are all exact replicas of famous European churches. Over 60,000 people have actually been married here, including Ronald Reagan and Jane Wyman.

More than 250,000 people are buried at Forest Lawn, and over a million people visit it each year, including thousands of schoolchildren on field trips.

The Forest Lawn – Hollywood Hills Cemetery is a second park solely dedicated to the preservation of American history.

Forest Lawn's 300 acres (1.2 km2) of intensely landscaped grounds and thematic sculptures were the inspiration for the biting commentary of Evelyn Waugh's satirical novel The Loved One and Jessica Mitford's acerbic The American Way of Death. Many commentators have considered Forest Lawn to be a unique American creation, and perhaps a uniquely maudlin Los Angeles creation, with its "theme park" approach to death.

Great Mausoleum

The Great Mausoleum was fashioned after Campo Santo in Genoa, Italy and contains many of the most highly sought after interment places within Forest Lawn, Glendale. Within the portion of the Great Mausoleum accessible to the public is the Court of Honor where individuals are inducted as "Immortals" by Forest Lawn's Council of Regents. The rest of the structure is protected by guards and is not accessible by the public. Time magazine described it as the "New World's Westminster Abbey". In 2009 the cemetery became the focus of intense media interest surrounding the private entombing of Michael Jackson in the privacy of Holly Terrace in the Great Mausoleum.

Notable burials

A

Forrest J Ackerman, historian and writer

Art Acord, actor

John Aasen, silent movie giant

Fred Lind Alles, businessman and civic leader, secretary for National Irrigation Congress

Anita Louise Adler, actress

Maurice "Buddy" Adler, producer

Robert Alda, actor and singer

Ross Alexander, actor

Duane Allen, NFL player

Gracie Allen, actress and comedienne

Elvia Allman, actress and voice-over artist

Wayne Allwine, voice-over artist

Astrid Allwyn, actress

June Allyson, actress

Louis Alterie, gangster

Lona Andre, actress

Laverne Andrews, singer

Maxene Andrews, singer

Lucien Andriot, cinematographer

James Arness, actor

Isaac Colton Ash, Los Angeles City Council member 1925–27

Roscoe Ates, actor and comedian

Gene Austin, singer

Lois Austin, actress

Mitchell Ayres, musician

B

NP Lauren Bacall, actress

Constantin Bakaleinikoff, musician

Mischa Bakaleinikoff, musician

Art Baker, actor

Travis Banton, costume designer

NP Theda Bara, actress

Joe Barbera, animator and co-founder of Hanna-Barbera Productions

Joan Barclay, actress

Ben Bard, actor

Binnie Barnes, actress

Jack Barry, television host and producer

Judith Barsi, actress

Billy Barty, actor

Florence Bates, actress

Norman F. Bates, Medal of Honor recipient

L. Frank Baum, author of The Wonderful Wizard of Oz

Warner Baxter, actor

Harry Beaumont, director

Wallace Beery, actor

Alphonzo Bell, Jr., congressman

Rex Bell, actor and Nevada lieutenant governor

William Benedict, actor

Enid Bennett, actress

Marjorie Bennett, actress

Harry Beresford, actor

Felix Bernard, songwriter

Curtis Bernhardt, director

Joe Besser, actor and comedian (The Three Stooges)

Claude Binyon, screenwriter and director

Billie Bird, actress

J. Stuart Blackton, founder of Vitagraph Studios

Madge Blake, actress

Olive Blakeney, actress

Clara Blandick, actress

Jack Bliss, MLB player

Michael Blodgett, actor and screenwriter

Gloria Blondell, actress and voice-over artist

Joan Blondell, actress

Eric Blore, actor

Monte Blue, actor

Betty Blythe, actress

True Boardman, actor

Virginia True Boardman, actress

NP Humphrey Bogart, actor

Mary Boland, actress

Olive Borden, actress

Gutzon Borglum, sculptor of Mount Rushmore

Frank Borzage, actor, director

NP Hobart Bosworth, actor, director, producer, and screenwriter

Clara Bow, actress

NP William Boyd, actor

NP Charles Brabin, British-born director and screenwriter

NP Grace Bradley, actress

Lenny Breau, musician

Edmund Breese, actor

Mozelle Britton, actress

John Bromfield, actor

Betty Bronson, actress

Rand Brooks, actor

Clarence Brown, director

James Harvey Brown, Los Angeles City Council member and municipal court judge

Joe E. Brown, actor and comedian

NP Johnny Mack Brown, actor and athlete

Lansing Brown, Jr., photographer

Winifred Bryson, actress

Harold S. Bucquet, director

Ralph Budd, railroad president

Milo Burcham, test pilot

W.R. Burnett, novelist and screenwriter

Dorsey Burnette, singer and songwriter

Johnny Burnette, singer

Bob Burns, actor and comedian

George Burns, actor and comedian

Francis X. Bushman, actor

David Butler, director

Wally Byam, founder of Airstream

C

Christy Cabanne, director

Charles Wakefield Cadman, composer

Alice Calhoun, actress

Ransom M. Callicott, restaurateur and politician

Judy Canova, actress, singer, and comedienne

Eduardo Cansino, Sr., dancer and father of Rita Hayworth

June Caprice-Millarde, actress

Sue Carol, actress and talent agent

Karen Carpenter, singer (relocated to Valley Oaks Memorial Park in 2003)

Dona Lee Carrier, figure skating champion

Earl Carroll, theatre impresario

NP Jack Carson, Canadian-born actor

Emma Carus, singer

William Castle, film director

Connie Cezon, actress

Mario Chamlee, opera singer

NP Lon Chaney, Sr., actor

Charles Chapman, founder of Chapman College

Spencer Charters, actor

Charley Chase, actor and comedian

Rex Cherryman, actor

Tim Choate, actor

Berton Churchill, actor

Frank Churchill, composer

Buddy Clark, singer

Edward Clark, actor

Jack Clark, actor

Stiles O. Clements, architect

Elmer Clifton, actor and director

Andy Clyde, actor

Joe Cobb, actor

Eddie Cochran, singer

Maria Cole, singer

Nat King Cole, singer

Buddy Collette, musician

Russ Columbo, singer

NP Sam Cooke, singer

Lillian Copeland, athlete

Philip Coppens, author

NP Ellen Corby, actress

Regis Cordic, actor

Edward Coxen, actor

Kathryn Crawford, actress

Laird Cregar, actor

Donald Crisp, actor and director

George Cukor, director

Zara Cully, actress

Robert Cummings, actor

Lester Cuneo, actor

Edward S. Curtis, photographer of the American West

Michael Curtiz, director

D

Fifi D'Orsay, actress and singer

Babe Dahlgren, Major League Baseball player

Dan Dailey, actor, singer and dancer

Dorothy Dandridge, actress and singer

Ruby Dandridge, actress

Mickey Daniels, actor

William H. Daniels, cinematographer

Jane Darwell, actress

Dorothy Davenport, actress, screenwriter, film director and producer

Ed J. Davenport, Los Angeles City Council member

Delmer Daves, director, screenwriter, and producer

NP Altovise Davis, actress and dancer

Jim Davis, actor

Mildred Davis, actress

NP Sammy Davis, Jr., actor, singer and dancer

Sammy Davis, Sr., dancer

Jack Dawn, make-up artist

Sam De Grasse, actor

Julia Dean, actress

Carter DeHaven, actor

Flora Parker DeHaven, actress

Osborn Deignan, Congressional Medal of Honor recipient

Eddie DeLange, musician

Georges Delerue, composer

Cyril Delevanti, actor

Armando del Moral, film journalist, helped found the Golden Globes

Buddy DeSylva, songwriter

Georges Delerue, composer

William Demarest, actor

Carol Dempster, actress

Noah Dietrich, businessman

Alan Dinehart, actor

Ronnie James Dio, singer

Elias Disney, father of Walt and Roy O. Disney

Flora Call Disney, mother of Walt and Roy O. Disney

Walt Disney, film studio and entertainment park founder

Diane Disney Miller eldest child of Walt Disney

Richard Dix, actor

George Dolenz, actor

Jenny Dolly, entertainer

Rosie Dolly, entertainer

Don Douglas, actor

Gordon Douglas, director

Lloyd C. Douglas, novelist

Billie Dove, actress

Maxine Doyle, actress

Theodore Dreiser, novelist

Chuck Dressen, MLB baseball player, manager

Louise Dresser, actress

NP Marie Dressler, Canadian-born actress and comedienne

Don Drysdale, MLB baseball player (ashes later scattered)

David Dukes, actor

Rosetta Duncan, entertainer

Vivian Duncan, entertainer

Minta Durfee, actress

Junior Durkin, actor

E

Hubert Eaton, founder of Forest Lawn cemeteries

Mary Eaton, actress

Neely Edwards, actor and comedian

Ralph Edwards, television and radio host

Sally Eilers, actress

Francis de Erdely, painter

Julian Eltinge, actor and female impersonator

Ray Enright, director

Leon Errol, actor and comedian

F

Douglas Fairbanks, actor (relocated to Hollywood Forever Cemetery in 1941)

Dot Farley, actress

Joseph Farnham, screenwriter and film editor

William Farnum, actor

Don Fedderson, producer

Al Ferguson, actor

Helen Ferguson, actress

Romaine Fielding, actor and director

NP W. C. Fields, actor and comedian

Larry Fine (1902–1975), actor and comedian (The Three Stooges)

Margarita Fischer, actress

George Fitzmaurice, director

Frank P. Flint, politician

Errol Flynn, actor

Nina Foch, actress

Tony Fontane, singer

Charles E. Ford, director, producer

Harrison Ford, silent film actor

Helen Ford, actress

John Anson Ford, Los Angeles County supervisor

Thomas Francis Ford, U.S Congressman and Los Angeles City Council member

Ivor Francis, actor

Betty Francisco, actress

Bruno Frank, novelist and screenwriter

M. J. Frankovich, producer and athlete

Robert Frazer, actor

Charles K. French, actor

George B. French, actor

Rudolf Friml, composer

Dwight Frye, actor

Charles E. Fuller, evangelist

Jules Furthman, screenwriter

G

NP Clark Gable, actor

Jacqueline Gadsden, actress

Martin Garralaga, actor

Bud Geary, actor

Jerry Giesler, criminal defense lawyer

John Gilbert, actor

A. Arnold Gillespie, special effects artist

King C. Gillette, businessman

Tom Gilson, actor

Hermione Gingold, actress

J. Frank Glendon, actor

NP Frances Goldwyn, actress

NP Samuel Goldwyn, producer and mogul

Edgar J. Goodspeed, theologian

Huntley Gordon, actor

Jetta Goudal, actress

Edmund Goulding, director and writer

Joe Grant, animator and writer

Charles Grapewin, actor

NP Sid Grauman, theater impresario

Gary Gray, actor

Alfred E. Green, director

Burton E. Green, co-founder of Beverly Hills, California.

Harrison Greene, actor

NP Sydney Greenstreet, English actor

Harold Grieve, art director

Bessie Griffin, singer

Raymond Griffith, actor and comedian

Paul A. Guilfoyle, actor

Fred L. Guiol, director and screenwriter

H

Frank Hagney, actor

Alan Hale, Sr., actor

Charlie Hall, actor

Ellen Hall, actress

Ernest Haller, cinematographer

Kay Hammond, actress

Russell Harlan, cinematographer

NP Jean Harlow, actress

Elizabeth Harrower, actress and screenwriter

Phil Hartman, Canadian-born actor and comedian (cremation; his ashes were scattered at sea)

Charles Hatfield, scientist

Harry Hayden, actor

Edith Head, costume designer

Ralph Hepburn, race car driver

Holmes Herbert, actor

Babe Herman, baseball player

Jean Hersholt, actor and humanitarian

Louis Jean Heydt, actor

Ruth Hiatt, actress

Thelma Hill, actress and comedienne

Józef Hofmann, concert pianist

Fay Holden, actress

Charles A. Holland, Los Angeles City Council member 1929–31

Alice Hollister, actress

George Hollister, cinematographer

Burton Holmes, director and producer

Helen Holmes, actress

Bob Holt, voice actor

Gloria Hope, actress

NP Ian Hornak, artist

James W. Horne, actor and director

Victoria Horne, actress

Edward Everett Horton, actor

Adele C. Howells, leader in the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints

Jobyna Howland, actress

Lloyd Hughes, actor

Rupert Hughes, filmmaker

Cyril Hume, screenwriter

Marlin Hurt, actor and comedian

Michael Hutchence, singer (one-third of his ashes were interred by his mother and sister)

June Hutton, actress and singer

I

Wiard Ihnen, art director and production designer

Rex Ingram, Irish director

George Irving, actor

J

NP Michael Jackson, entertainer, singer and songwriter

Carrie Jacobs-Bond, singer and songwriter

Elsie Janis, actress

DeWitt Jennings, actor

Caro Jones, casting director

NP Jennifer Jones, actress

Rupert Julian, director

Ray June, cinematographer

Helmi Juvonen, artist

Jim Rohn, American entrepreneur, author, motivational speaker

K

Gus Kahn, songwriter

Bert Kalmar, songwriter

Terry Kath, musician

Tom Keene, actor

William Keighley, director

A. Atwater Kent, businessman

Erle C. Kenton, actor and director

Doris Kenyon, actress

J. Warren Kerrigan, actor and director

Charles Henry King, paternal grandfather of President Gerald Ford

Leslie Lynch King, Sr., biological father of President Ford

Dorothy Kirsten, singer

Ted Knight, actor

Clarence Kolb, actor

Henry Kolker, actor and director

Red Kress, baseball player

Kathryn Kuhlman, evangelist

Edward A. Kull, cinematographer and director

L

Louis L'Amour, novelist

Alan Ladd, actor

David Landau, actor

Carole Landis, actress

Rosemary Lane, actress

Lash LaRue, actor

Ivan Lebedeff, actor

Gretchen Lederer, actress

Otto Lederer, actor

Rowland V. Lee, motion picture director

Mervyn LeRoy, director and producer

Hal LeSueur, actor, brother of Joan Crawford

Fritz Leiber, Sr., actor

Irene Lentz, costume designer

Robert Z. Leonard, director

Elgin Lessley, cinematographer

Mitchell Lewis, actor

Ann Little, actress

Lucien Littlefield, actor

Robert Livingston, actor

Doris Lloyd, actress

Frank Lloyd, actor, director, producer, writer

Harold Lloyd, actor and comedian

Jeanette Loff, actress and singer

NP Carole Lombard, actress

Tom London, actor

Theodore Lorch, actor

Ernst Lubitsch, director

Ida Lupino, actress and director

Hamilton Luske, animator and director

M

Jeanette MacDonald, actress and singer

Jimmy MacDonald, voice over artist

Kenneth MacKenna, actor and director

Mary MacLaren, actress

Douglas MacLean, actor, producer, and writer

Rouben Mamoulian, director

Alan Marshal, actor

Chico Marx, actor and comedian

Gummo Marx, agent

LeRoy Mason, actor

Erskine Mayer, baseball player

Mike Mazurki, actor and wrestler

Marian McCargo, actress

Meade McClanahan, Los Angeles City Council member

Gladys McConnell, actress

Johnston McCulley, author, writer, creator of Zorro

Marc McDermott, actor

Marie McDonald, actress and model

Frank McGlynn Sr., actor

J.P. McGowan, director

Frank McGrath, actor

Robert McKimson, animator and director

NP Victor McLaglen, actor

Jimmy McLarnin, boxing champion

Norman Z. McLeod, director

Aimee Semple McPherson, evangelist

Dimitre Mehandjiysky, artist

William Cameron Menzies, art director

Beryl Mercer, actress

Robert Millikan, physicist and Nobel Prize winner

Vincente Minnelli, director

Tom Mix, actor

Polly Moran, actress and comedienne

Antonio Moreno, actor

NP Clayton Moore, actor

Harvey Seeley Mudd, engineer and educator

William Mulholland, engineer

Spud Murphy, composer

N

Charles W. Nash, automobile manufacturer

Alla Nazimova, actress

Frank Nelson, actor

Alfred Newman, composer

Fred Niblo, director

Gertrude Niesen, actress and singer

William Nigh, actor, director, and writer

Marian Nixon, actress

L. L. Nunn, educator

Ervin Nyíregyházi, pianist

O

Eugene O'Brien, actor

Virginia O'Brien, actress and singer

Cathy O'Donnell, actress

Nance O'Neil, actress

Jack Oakie, actor and comedian

Merle Oberon, actress

Clifford Odets, playwright

Charles Ogle, actor

Edna May Oliver, actress

Gertrude Olmstead, actress

Culbert Olson, California Governor

Maria Ouspenskaya, actress

Richard F. Outcault, cartoonist

Monroe Owsley, actor

P

Doris Packer, actress

Lilli Palmer, actress

Franklin Pangborn, actor

Alexander Pantages, theater impresario

James Parrott, actor, comedian, and director

Allen E. Paulson, aviation entrepreneur

Claude Payton, actor

Lucy Payton, actress

Joe Penner, actor and comedian

Susan Peters, actress

Mary Philips, actress

Ben Piazza, actor

NP Jack Pickford, actor

NP Lottie Pickford, actress

NP Mary Pickford, actress, businesswoman, co-founder of United Artists

Robert Pierce, humanitarian and social reformer

Lon Poff, actor

Jeff Porcaro, musician, music producer

Dick Powell, actor and singer

John Robert Powers, model agency owner

Mala Powers, actress

Merrill Pye, art director

Q

Fred Quimby, producer

John Qualen, actor

R

Paul Rader (evangelist)

Ralph Rainger, songwriter

Lou Rawls, singer, actor

NP Gene Raymond, actor

Jack Raymond, actor and director

Dorothea Holt Redmond, art director and set designer

Phillip Reed, actor

Wallace Reid, actor

Irving Leroy Ress, physician

Jim Rohn, motivational speaker, author

Cleo Ridgely, actress

Joan Rivers, actress, comedienne, television host, author

Lyda Roberti, actress

Beverly Roberts, actress

Blossom Rock, actress

Ruth Roland, actress and producer

Gladys Root, criminal defense attorney

Albert Roscoe, actor

Edgar Rosenberg, producer and agent

Henry Roquemore, actor

Alan Roscoe, actor

Charlie Ruggles, actor

Wesley Ruggles, film director

Barbara Ruick, actress

William Russell, actor

S

S. Z. Sakall, actor

Chic Sale, actor

Drake Sather, comedian and writer

Paul Sawtell, Polish-born, American film score composer

Paul Scardon, actor, producer, director

Victor Schertzinger, composer, director, producer, screenwriter

Mabel Julienne Scott, actress

Ynez Seabury, actress

Don Sebastian, wrestler

Sybil Seely, actress

William A. Seiter, director

William Edwin Self, actor and producer

NP David O. Selznick, producer, founder of Selznick International Pictures

NP Myron Selznick, producer and talent agent

Ethel Shannon, actress

Athole Shearer, actress

NP Norma Shearer, actress

Lowell Sherman, director and actor

S. Sylvan Simon, director

Russell Simpson, actor

NP Red Skelton, actor and comedian

Edward Sloman, actor, director and screenwriter

Tod Sloan, thoroughbred racing jockey

Rainbeaux Smith, actress

Tom Smith, thoroughbred trainer

NP William French Smith, U.S. Attorney General

Carrie Snodgress, actress

Marguerite Snow, actress

Carl Spitz, animal trainer

Leo Spitz, film executive

Hanley Stafford, actor

John M. Stahl, director and producer

NP Lionel Stander, actor

Max Steiner, composer

Casey Stengel, MLB manager

James Stephenson, actor

Anita Stewart, actress

James Stewart, actor

Ruth Stonehouse, actress and director

Axel Stordahl, composer and arranger

Herbert Stothart, composer

Joseph Strauss, architect

Elbridge Amos Stuart, industrialist, Carnation Company founder

Jan Styka, painter

T

Frank Tashlin, animator, director, screenwriter

Art Tatum, musician

Elizabeth Taylor, actress

Robert Taylor, actor

Teena Marie, singer

NP Irving Thalberg, producer

Ursula Thiess, actress

Jefferson Thomas, civil rights icon, member of the Little Rock Nine

Fred Thomson, actor

Edward L. Thrasher, Los Angeles City Council member

Chief Thundercloud, actor

Lawrence Tibbett, actor and singer

Dimitri Tiomkin, composer

Sammee Tong, actor

Ernest Torrence, actor

Raquel Torres, actress

Spencer Tracy, actor

Henry Travers, actor

Emerson Treacy, actor

Jim Tully, writer

Ben Turpin, actor and comedian

Lurene Tuttle, actress

V

Valda Valkyrien, ballerina

Vang Pao, CIA and Royal Laotian Army General of Hmong decent

W. S. Van Dyke, director

Adamae Vaughn, actress

Bobby Vernon, actor

Alfred Victor Verville, aviation pioneer

Theodore von Eltz, actor

Rufus B. von KleinSmid, former president of University of Arizona and University of Southern California

Gustav von Seyffertitz, actor

W

George Waggner, actor, director and producer

Sir William James Wanless, surgeon

Jerry Wald, producer and screenwriter

Charles Waldron, actor

Nella Walker, actress

Beryl Wallace, singer

Hal B. Wallis, producer

Bill Walsh, producer

Clara Ward, singer

Jay Ward, producer and writer

Ethel Waters, actress and singer

Johnny "Guitar" Watson, musician

Roy Webb, composer

Mary Wells, singer

Roland West, director

Gordon Westcott, actor

George Westmore, make-up artist and hairdresser

Monte Westmore, make-up artist

Perc Westmore, make-up artist

Wally Westmore, make-up artist

Jack Westrope, Hall of Fame jockey

Carl Jules Weyl, art director

James Whale, director

Gayne Whitman, actor

Ted Wilde, director and screenwriter

Clara Williams, actress

Earle Williams, actor

Robert Williams, actor

Dorothy Wilson, actress

Lois Wilson, actress

Claire Windsor, actress

Grant Withers, actor

Sam Wood, director, producer, writer, actor

Stacy Woodard, nature filmmaker

Ali-Ollie Woodson, musician and member of The Temptations

George Woolf, Hall of Fame jockey

John Elgin Woolf, architect

Robert Woolsey, actor and comedian

Hank Worden, actor

NP William Wrigley, Jr., chewing gum magnate, owner of the Chicago Cubs

William Wyler, director

NP Ed Wynn, actor and comedian

NP Keenan Wynn, actor

Y