Forest Lawn – Hollywood Hills Cemetery, is part of the Forest Lawnchain of Southern California cemeteries. It is located at 6300 Forest Lawn Dr, Los Angeles, CA 90068, in the Hollywood Hills neighborhood in Los Angeles, California, on the lower north slope at the far east end of the Santa Monica Mountains range that overlooks North Hollywood and Burbank in theSan Fernando Valley from its southeast. The Los Angeles River courses from west to east immediately to the north.

Forest Lawn – Hollywood Hills is a park dedicated to the preservation of American history and hosts high-profile events such as an annual Veterans Day ceremony attended by dignitaries and other VIPs. Los Angeles Magazine described it as a "theme-park necropolis", paraphrasing Jessica Mitford, indicating "Forest Lawn’s kitsch was just a sophisticated strategy for lubricating the checkbooks of the grieved."

Features

The park features such sights as:

Court of Liberty

The Court of Liberty features statues of George Washington and Thomas Jefferson and the Birth of Liberty mosaic. At 162 feet (49 m) long and 28 feet (8.5 m) high, Birth of Liberty is the largest historical mosaic in the United States. It is composed of ten million pieces of Venetian glass and depicts twenty-five scenes from early America, from 1619-1787.

The Old North Church, a precise replica of Boston's historic church, from Henry Wadsworth Longfellow's poem "Paul Revere's Ride". The historical rooms have documents and mementos of the colonial period.

The Hall of Liberty American History Museum has a copy of the Liberty Bell and other exhibits. The museum has a 1,200-seat auditorium.

Monument to Washington, a marble and bronze tribute to America's first president, created by sculptor Thomas Ball. Four of Washington's generals are honored in the memorial.

Lincoln Terrace

The Lincoln Terrace features a 16-foot (4.9 m) bronze statue of the 16th president by Augustus St. Gaudens, flanked by a panoramic mosaic depicting key scenes from Lincoln's life.

Plaza of Mesoamerican Heritage

The Plaza of Mesoamerican Heritage has sculptures by Meliton Salas Rodriguez, of Guadalajara, Mexico. Salas used hand tools to first quarry, then work the native Mexican stone into precisely scaled, detailed replicas of artwork and artifacts that are representative of the Aztec, Huastec, Maya,Mixtec, Olmec, Teotihuacan, Toltec, Totonac, and Zapotec civilizations that preceded modern Mexican culture. A smooth Olmecan head, an intricateAztec sun calendar and a sinuous Teotihuacan bas relief are some of the sculptural features of the Plaza that are set off by crushed stone walkways and complemented by groupings of Mesoamerican plants.

History

The first Forest Lawn, in Glendale, was founded in 1906 by businessmen who hired Dr. Hubert Eaton, a firm believer in a joyous life after death, who was convinced that most cemeteries were "unsightly, depressing stone yards," and pledged to create one that would reflect his optimistic beliefs, "as unlike other cemeteries as sunshine is unlike darkness." He envisioned Forest Lawn to be "a great park devoid of misshapen monuments and other signs of earthly death, but filled with towering trees, sweeping lawns, splashing fountains, beautiful statuary, and... memorial architecture".

Before it was a cemetery, Forest Lawn was a filming location used by directors such as Carl Laemmle and Cecil B. DeMille. The climactic battle scenes for D. W. Griffith's The Birth of a Nation were filmed there. The alternate names of the filming site are Providencia Flats, Nestor Ranch, Oak Ranch, Oak Crest Ranch, Universal Ranch/Universal City, Lasky Ranch, and Paramount Ranch until November 1927.

When Eaton (self-proclaimed as "The Builder") made known his desire to open a second Forest Lawn location in the Hollywood Hills, the local residents protested vehemently. To circumvent the protesters, Mr. Eaton sent his staff to the county morgue to claim 4 "John Does" and buried them at the corners of the property in the dark of night. In the morning, the protesters had no power because, by law, the property was now a cemetery. The new mortuary and cemetery opened in 1952.

Notable interments

Interred or entombed in the Hollywood Hills cemetery are many famous people, particularly from the entertainment industry.

A

Harry Ackerman, TV executive producer

Rodolfo Acosta, actor

Edie Adams, actress and singer

Iris Adrian, actress

Philip Ahn, actor

Harry Akst, songwriter

Robert Aldrich, director

Irving Allen, producer and director

Steve Allen, actor, comedian, writer, and television host

Don Alvarado, actor and director

Leon Ames, actor

Morey Amsterdam, actor and comedian

Carl David Anderson, Nobel Prize winning scientist

Ernie Anderson, television announcer

Mignon Anderson, actress

Lois Andrews, actress

Matthew Ansara, actor and bodybuilder

Michael Ansara, actor

Dimitra Arliss, actress

Robert Arthur, producer

John Ashley, actor

Gene Autry, actor, singer, and former owner of the Los Angeles Angels of Anaheim

Luis Ávalos, Cuban actor

Doe Avedon, actress and model

Patricia Avery, actress

Tex Avery, animator

B

Art Babbitt, animator

Lloyd Bacon, director

Parley Baer, actor

David Bailey, actor

Buddy Baker, composer

Bonnie Lee Bakley, murdered wife of actor Robert Blake

John Ball, novelist

Harry Barris, singer, songwriter and musician

Don "Red" Barry, actor

Judith Barsi, child actress

Gordon Bau, film and television make-up artist

Clyde Beatty, circus owner

Noah Beery, Sr., actor

Noah Beery, Jr., actor

Ralph Bellamy, actor

Richard Benedict, actor and director

Spencer Gordon Bennet, director

Lamont Bentley, actor

Mary Kay Bergman, voice-over artist

Fred Berry, actor

Gus Bivona, musician

Willie Bobo, musician

Priscilla Bonner, actress

Tom Bosley, actor

Truman Bradley, actor and television announcer

Delaney Bramlett, musician

Chet Brandenburg, actor

Mary Brian, actress

Pamela Britton, actress

Albert "Cubby" Broccoli, producer

Joe Brooks, actor

Leslie Brooks, actress and model

Wally Brown, actor and comedian

Kathie Browne, actress

Mona Bruns, actress

Edgar Buchanan, actor

Mildred Burke, professional wrestler

Solomon Burke, singer

Bartine Burkett, actress

Everett G. Burkhalter, politician

Smiley Burnette, actor

Jerry Buss, majority owner of the Los Angeles Lakers

Wally Byam, entrepreneur (memorial)

C

Godfrey Cambridge, actor and comedian

Roy Campanella, Major League Baseball Hall of Famer

Pete Candoli, musician

Stephen J. Cannell, Producer

Philip Carey, actor

Frankie Carle, musician

Johnny Carpenter, actor, director, and screenwriter

David Carradine, actor

John Carroll, actor and singer

Virginia Carroll, actress

Nick Ceroli, musician

Michael Chekhov, actor, director, novelist, and theater practitioner

Warren Christopher, former Secretary of State and Deputy Attorney General

Ethlyne Clair, actress

Bob Clampett, animator

Robert Clarke, actor

William H. Clothier, cinematographer

Bill Cody, Jr., actor

Nudie Cohn, fashion designer

Buddy Cole, musician

Dennis Cole, actor

Ray Collins, actor

Don Cornelius, television host and producer (cremation)

Joyce Compton, actress

Christopher Connelly, actor

William Conrad, actor

Bert Convy, actor and television host

Rita Corday, actress

Jerome Cowan, actor

Willie Crawford Major League Baseball player

Gary Crosby, actor and singer

Scatman Crothers, actor and musician

Pauline Curley, actress

Edward S. Curtis, photographer

D

Virginia Dale, actress

Ken Darby, composer

Beryl Davis, singer

Bette Davis, actress

Brad Davis, actor

Gail Davis, actress

Rufe Davis, actor

Laraine Day, actress

Gene de Paul, composer

André de Toth, director

Tamara De Treaux, actress

Sandra Dee, actress

Frank de Kova, actor

Reginald Denny, actor

Vernon Dent, actor

Frank De Vol, composer

Ronnie James Dio, singer and songwriter

Roy Oliver Disney, businessman

Edward Dmytryk, director

Jimmie Dodd, actor, singer, and songwriter

Don Drysdale, Major League Baseball Hall of Famer

Jim Duffy, animator

Michael Clarke Duncan, actor

Jerry Dunphy, television news anchor

Leo Durocher, Major League Baseball Hall of Famer

Dan Duryea, actor

George Duke, musician

Dorothy Dandridge, actress, singer

E

Arthur Edeson, cinematographer

Anthony Eisley, actor

Dan Enright, producer

Josh Ryan Evans, actor

Michael Evans, actor

F

Richard Farnsworth, actor

Marty Feldman, actor and comedian

William Ferrari, art director

Jim Ferrier, professional golfer

Shug Fisher, actor, singer and songwriter

Robert Florey, director

Tony Fontane, singer

Robert Charles Francis, actor

Melvin Franklin, singer and member of The Temptations

Milton Frome, actor

Bobby Fuller, singer

G

Reginald Gardiner, actor

Michael Garrison, producer

Marvin Gaye, singer (cremated here; ashes scattered in the Pacific Ocean)

Frankie Gaye, singer, brother of Marvin

Wally George, television host

Estelle Getty, actress

Andy Gibb, singer

Hughie Gibb, bandleader, father of the Bee Gees

Paul Gilbert, actor

Peggy Gilbert, musician

Haven Gillespie, songwriter

Roger Gimbel, producer

Joel Goldsmith, composer

Alfred J. Goulding, director and screenwriter

Earl Grant, musician

H

Hard Boiled Haggerty, professional wrestler

Monte Hale, actor and singer

Jon Hall, actor

Porter Hall, actor

Thurston Hall, actor

Stuart Hamblen, actor, singer, and songwriter

Thomas F. Hamilton, founder of the Hamilton Standard propeller company

Jack Hannah, animator

Ben Hardaway, animator and voice-over artist

Ann Harding, actress

Marvin Hatley, composer

George "Gabby" Hayes, actor

Neal Hefti, composer

Horace Heidt, bandleader

Wanda Hendrix, actress

Maxine Elliott Hicks, actress

John C. Holland, Los Angeles City Council member, 1943–67

Red Holloway, musician

Sol Hoʻopiʻi, musician

Jean Speegle Howard, actress

I

Rex Ingram, actor

Frank Inn, animal trainer

Jill Ireland, actress

Ub Iwerks, animator

J

Dennis James, actor and television host

Charles Jarrott, director

Howard Jarvis, political activist

Sybil Jason, child actress

Tony Jay, actor and voice-over artist

Kelly Johnson (1910–1990), aviation engineer

I. Stanford Jolley, actor

Allyn Joslyn, actor

K

Bob Kane, comic book artist

Casey Kasem, radio disc jockey/host and voice actor

Stacy Keach, Sr., actor

Joseph Kearns, actor

Buster Keaton, actor and comedian

Lincoln Kilpatrick, actor

Peter King, composer

Rodney King, victim of police brutality in 1991

Ernie Kovacs, actor and comedian

Helen Barbara Kruger, fashion designer

Otto Kruger, actor

Kay E. Kuter, actor

L

Jack LaLanne, fitness and nutrition expert

Dorothy Lamour, actress and singer

Muriel Landers, actress

Fritz Lang, director

June Lang, actress

Grace Lantz, voice-over artist

Walter Lantz, animator and founder of Walter Lantz Productions

Eric Larson, animator

Nicolette Larson, singer

Philip H. Lathrop, cinematographer

Wesley Lau, actor

Charles Laughton, actor

Stan Laurel, actor and comedian

William Lava, composer

Arthur Lee, singer, songwriter, musician

Robert Edwin Lee, playwright and lyricist

Lance LeGault, actor

Stan Levey, musician

George Liberace, actor and musician

Liberace, musician

Diane Linkletter, daughter of Art Linkletter

Glenard P. Lipscomb, former US Congressman

Carey Loftin, actor and stuntman

Hicks Lokey, animator

Julie London, actress and singer

Louise Lorraine, actress

John Lounsbery, animator

Otto Ludwig, editor

Art Lund, actor and singer

Jeffrey Lynn, actor

M

Kenneth MacDonald, actor

Harriet E. MacGibbon, actress

Chummy MacGregor, musician

Wilbur Mack, actor

Marjorie Main, actress

Albert Hay Malotte, composer

Shelly Manne, musician

Richard Marquand, director

Teena Marie, singer and songwriter (cremation)

Lock Martin, actor

Strother Martin, actor

Michelle Triola Marvin, actress

Junius Matthews, actor

Matty Matlock, musician

Frank Mayo, actor

Larry McCormick, television news anchor

Pat McCormick, comedian

Ed McMahon, television host (cremation)

Caroline McWilliams, actress

Ralph Meeker, actor

Martin Melcher, producer

Sam Melville, actor

Rafael Méndez, musician

Donald Mills, singer and member of The Mills Brothers

Harry Mills, singer and member of The Mills Brothers

Victor Milner, cinematographer

Paul Monette, author and poet

Alvy Moore, actor

Vicki Morgan, model, socialite, and murder victim

Brittany Murphy, actress, singer, voice artist[4]

Timothy Patrick Murphy, actor

Simon Monjack, producer, screenwriter, husband of actress Brittany Murphy

Burt Mustin, actor

John Myhers, actor

N

Harriet Nelson, actress and singer

Ozzie Nelson, actor and musician

Ricky Nelson, actor and singer

Red Nichols, musician

Jack Nimitz, musician

O

Orry-Kelly, costume designer

Donald O'Connor, actor, singer and dancer

Ron O'Neal, actor

William T. Orr, producer

Frank Orth, actor

Bud Osborne, actor

P

Nestor Paiva, actor

Joy Page, actress

Maria Palmer, actress

Cecilia Parker, actress

Jean Parker, actress

Hank Patterson, actor

Kenneth Peach, cinematographer

Bill Peet, animator

Jack Pepper, actor

Brock Peters, actor

Freddie Perren, musician

Jack Perrin, actor

George O. Petrie, actor

Esther Phillips, singer

Charles Pierce, actor and female impersonator

Daphne Pollard, actress

Snub Pollard, actor and comedian

Tony Pope, voice-over artist

Jeff Porcaro, musician

Don Post, make-up artist

Freddie Prinze, actor and comedian

R

George Raft, actor

Amanda Randolph, actress

Lillian Randolph, actress

Lou Rawls, singer

Hugh Reilly, actor

Bert Remsen, actor

Ray Rennahan, cinematographer

Dorothy Revier, actress

John Ritter, actor

Joan Rivers, comedian and actor

Jason Robards, Sr., actor

Gale Robbins, actress and singer

Dar Robinson, film stuntman

Jay Robinson, actor

Kasey Rogers, actress

John Roseboro, MLB player

Joe E. Ross, actor and comedian

Ruth Royce, actress

Miklós Rózsa, composer

S

Sabu, actor

Boris Sagal, director

Jack Sahakian, hairdresser and actor

Isabel Sanford, actress

George Savalas, actor

Telly Savalas, actor

Johnny Sekka, actor

Reta Shaw, actress

Leon Shamroy, cinematographer

Larry Shay, songwriter

Robert Shayne, actor

Roberta Sherwood, singer

Teru Shimada, actor[5]

Mickey Simpson, actor

Phillips Smalley, actor and director

Jack Soo, actor

Olan Soule, actor

Ruth St. Denis, dancer and choreographer

Raymond St. Jacques, actor

Tim Spencer, actor and singer

Jack Starrett, actor and director

Bob Steele, actor

Rod Steiger, actor

George Stevens, director

McLean Stevenson, actor

Jay Stewart, television and radio announcer

Glenn Strange, actor

Victor Sutherland, actor

H.N. Swanson, Hollywood literary agent

T

William Talman, actor

Vic Tayback, actor

Zola Taylor, singer

Jack Teagarden, musician

Frankie Thomas, actor

Martha Tilton, singer

Wayne Tippit, actor

George Tomasini, editor

Pinky Tomlin, actor and musician

Leo Tover, cinematographer

Bobby Troup, actor and musician

Charles Trowbridge, actor

Forrest Tucker, actor

U

Loyal Underwood, actor

V

Lee Van Cleef, actor

Wally Vernon, actor

Katherine Victor, actress

Al Viola, musician

W

Jimmy Wakely, actor and singer

Paul Walker, actor

Eddy Waller, actor

Kent Warner, costume designer

Paul Weatherwax, editor

Jack Webb, actor, producer, and director

Frank Wells, Disney president

Billy West, actor and comedian

Norman Whitfield, songwriter and composer

Claire Whitney, actress

Billy Frank Whitten, Costume Designer

Richard Whorf, actor, director, and producer

Crane Wilbur, actor and director

Jess Willard, world heavyweight boxing champion

Bill Williams, actor

Rhys Williams, actor

Sue Williams, actress and Playboy Playmate

Vesta Williams, singer

Dick Wilson, actor

Marie Wilson, actress and comedienne

Paul Winfield, actor

Charles Winninger, stage and film actor

David L. Wolper, producer

John Wooden, UCLA Bruins men's basketball coach

Ilene Woods, actress, singer, and voice-over artist

Y

Ralph Yearsley, actor

Snooky Young, musician

Z

Paul Zastupnevich, costume designer

George Zucco, actor

See also