Ryan Stride interviews legendary actor, director and CEO Bill Duke

On screen, he is a commanding actor that has gone up against The Predator, he faced off mano a mano against Arnold Schwarzenegger's Commando character and acted alongside Mel Gibson in Bird on a Wire. He is Bill Duke. As an actor, he is known for his distinct presence, but there are many other talents to this iconic figure. Bill is a successful director, screenwriter, producer, and author. Not one to rest on his success, he has also contributed to society through philanthropy work and activism. On top of this, he is the CEO of Duke Media Foundation which mentors inner-city youths, preparing them for life, with practical educational skills.

S: Bill what an honour it is forThe Peace Dimension to do this interview with you. It is very cool that we are able to have you here. So how have you been keeping?

BD:I am well and thank you for asking.

RS: That's good to hear. When I learnt about your work through The Duke Media Foundation, I was especially inspired to reach out to you. Can I ask you what gave you the idea to set up the foundation?

BD:When I examine the broken educational system in minority communities, I wanted to create something that would help fill the educational gap. Specifically, in young people interested in entering the film/television or media business. As a result, we teach 2 things: Media literacy and financial literacy.

RS: Could you give our readers an idea of how the foundation aims to help inner-city youths?

BD:By giving the youth an understanding of business, in terms of the industry, but also in terms of financial literacy: the distinction between the spending of a dollar and the use of a dollar.

RS: That's a valuable distinction to internalise. I like the practical and applicable education being provided here. Just looking back to your work as an actor, you've been in some classic action films and many well-known TV shows. You are fondly remembered for your role in the action/ sci-fi hit filmPredator. Do you have any interesting stories from when you were on the set ofPredator?

BD:The first week we were on set, the caterer put netting around the food centre, because we were in the middle of the jungle. The first week we were there, bugs were in our food. So, we told the caterer to take the food back because bugs were in it. He was doing his best, but bugs would still be in the food. And since there was no other food, by the second week, the bugs were called protein.

RS: That's funny. I hope they added to the taste and certainly no one looked protein deprived inPredator! Another great actor in that film with you and Arnold was Carl Weathers. You have appeared in other films with Carl such asAction Jackson. What was it like acting with Carl inAction Jackson?

BD:Carl Weathers is a wonderful actor, great director and writer. He is also an excellent, caring human being. It was a pleasure working with him.

RS: Yes, I see him as someone with heart. This comes across with his Apollo Creed character inRocky. It was great that he made an appearance in Disney's new Star Wars seriesThe Mandalorian.It's great to see him still acting. I understand from your autobiography (Bill Duke: My Forty Year Career on Screen and Behind the Camera) that you are good friends with Carl, right?

BD:Carl and I have known each other for many years.

​RS: Just going back to the filmCommando, you and Arnold must have sustained a lot of bruises in your famous scene. How was that experience?

BD:It was brutal, but fun. Arnold and I laughed a lot. The stunt coordinators helped us a lot.

RS: You know Bill with all the action films you have done, I hope they get you involved if they ever make anotherExpendables movie! Sly Stallone, if you're reading this...! Now, you've also directed many films. What was your most interesting film to direct?

BD:There have been several. I can't pick just one. I have been fortunate to have worked on films that I believe in.

RS: Who are your favourite actors?

BD:I have many favorite actors: Meryl Streep, Philip Seymour Hoffman, Jeffrey Wright, Denzel Washington, Samuel L Jackson, Jamie Fox, and Chadwick Boseman

RS:So Bill I just watchedDa 5 Bloods - the Spike Lee film that recently got released on Netflix. I don't know if you've seen it but I enjoyed it and feel they have released it at a really appropriate time as it does highlight the sometimes forgotten service of African Americans who served the country in wars. As a philanthropist, what positive steps do you think can be made right now to develop a greater sense of equality in the USA?

BD:Education is a primary foundation of awareness. Systemic changes that benefit all people, not just some people. A healthcare system that takes care of all people no matter what their income is. Finally, the dismantling of our homeless population in this nation.

RS: Yes that is well said. Hey Bill, seems maybe your next role should be in politics. I know one of your fellow actors inPredator, actor Jesse Ventura, was governor of Minnesota and I understand continues some level of activity in the political field. Now as you are probably aware, my bookThe Peace Dimension focuses on meditation for testing times. Reading your book, I was interested to learn you have found great benefit in meditation. Is it something you still practise regularly?

BD: Every day, twice a day. Saves my life every day.

RS: Bill it's my aim for this media platform to continue sharing inspiring messages of those who need to be heard right now. I see The Peace Dimension as a place of harmony . What does The Peace Dimension symbolise to you?

BD:Without inner peace, there can be no peace.

RS: Bill please keep up the good work you are doing and thank you so much for your time. One last thing before you go - can you give us one of your lines fromPredator?

BD:'I see you.'

RS: Excellent!

For information about The Duke Media Foundation visit: www.dukemediafoundation.org

The Website for Bill Duke is:www.40yearsofbillduke.com