India / Maharashtra / Ulhasnagar /

World / India / Maharashtra / Ulhasnagar World / India / Maharashtra / Thane

city, town

Dombivli is a town in India with a population of about 12,46,381 (2011 census). It is the first fully literate town in Maharashtra and the second in India. Dombivli is a small middle class town with a majority population of Hindus. It is located about fifty kilometers from Mumbai. The name "Dombivli / Dombivali" is believed to have come from a tribal group who lived nearby, named the "dombs".

History

Dombivli came into being as the Gajabandhan Village, and the "Old Dombivli", which forms the West flank, is embraced by the river Ulhas. The East flank has been developed under the jurisdiction of the Maharashtra Industrial Development Corporation.

Dombivli boasts a cosmopolitan population with Maharashtrians, Jains, Gujaratis, Kannadigas, Tamilians, Malayalees and Punjabis, with a marginal population of Khojas (The Aga-Khan cult). Although the town may have existed for six to seven centuries, little is known of its history, apart from a huge open space which the Archaeological Survey of India declared as a pond used by the peshwas. The land adjacent to it happened to be a horse grazing and training site. A huge stone was unearthed by the Archealogical Department with the encryptions marking the evidence of the same.

Economy

Today, Dombivli is well known for rapid industrial growth with major dyes, paints, chemical, and heavy metal factories based in the industrial part of the town. Some of the well known ones are Gharda Chemicals, Vicco Labs, Lloyd Steel, and Deepak Fertilizers. The 1980s saw Dombivli growing into a crowded and saturated city due to industrial development under the plan. Dombivli's approachability by road and rail, and its potential in land and manpower increased tremendously. The industries have been developed in two phases so far, and new plans have been proposed.

The town has three railway stations under its jurisdiction: Dombivli Railway Station, Thakurli Railway Station, and the Kopar Bridge Railway Station . Dombivli is served by all local trains terminating at stations beyond Thane, and it is a stop for all major fast local trains.

Dombivli also has the honour of becoming the first fully "literate" town in Maharashtra and the second in Asia . Over a hundred schools offer primary and secondary education, and over a dozen are affiliated with the University of Mumbai. A couple of colleges also offer technical education and are affiliated with the Board of Technical Examination, Mumbai.

The town has produced fine literature, classical music, plays, poetry, and actors.

some of them are Reema Lagu,Urmila Matonkar,Tejashree Pradhan,Bhau Kadam,Kushal Badrike,etc.

Demographics

Dombivli is home to eight colleges and a student population of 20,000. It boasts many high rank holders every year in the Secondary School Certificate and Higher Secondary (School) Certificate exams. There are temples for all faiths, Jamatkhana for the Khoja Muslims, and also a few churches.

Most of the couples in Dombivli are professionals with a more "modern" lifestyle, often reflected in their one-child families and penchance for consumer goods. Consumerism is at its peak here and hence, these families are often referred to as DISCOs (Double Income Single Child Only). About 67-68% of families in the city are classified as DISCOs.

Dombivli has library near Charrasta no Match in our country "swami vivekanand engineering library" managed by engineering students and yashodeep overnite library @ shivajiudyognagar.

The city's healthcare is some of the best in India. The town boasts about 1500 doctors for the population of 1,500,000, so the ratio of doctors per 1000 is comparable to any developed Western country.

Educational Institutions:

Vidya Niketan School

Adarsha Vidyalaya

Abhinav Vidyalay & Junior College, MIDC, Dombivli(E)

Chandrakant Patkar Vidyalaya - Dombivli (Branch -Raja Shivaji Vidyalaya Dadar)

The South Indian Association School& Jr. College(SIAS)

Swami Vivekanand Vidyamandir(6 Branches)

Instituions run by the Keralayeea Samajam

Sister Nivedita English & Marathi School - Dombivli

S.S Jondhale Polytechnic - Dombivli

S.H Jondhale College of Engineering - Dombivli

S.V Joshi High School - Dombivli

Manjunatha Vidyalaya, Dombivli(E)

Mahila Samiti English High School - Thakurli

More Commerce Classes - a reputed institution providing up to date coaching in the filed of commerce

Colleges

K V Pendharkar College Of Arts, Commerce and Science, MIDC, Dombivli(E)

Model College of Commerce and Arts, MIDC, Dombivli (E)

Manjunatha College of Commerce and Arts, MIDC, Dombivli (E)

Pragati College, Ayare Road, Dombivli(E)

S.H Jondhale Polytechnic, Dombivli

Shivajirao S. Jondhale College of Engineering, Dombivli

SIAS Junior College, Dombivli(W)

Swami Vivekanad Junior College, Ayare Gaon, Dombivli(E)

Madhvi College Of Commerce And Arts, Dombivli (E)

S. K. Patil Junior College Of Commerce And Arts, Dombivli (E)

Schools

Vidya Niketan school, MIDC phase I, Dombivali(East)

Holy Angels' School,P & T Colony,Dombivli(East)

Model English school, Pandurangwadi.

IES's chandrakant patkar vidyalaya,rajaji path, Dombivali(East)

B.R Madhavi English School, New Ayre Road, Dombiivli (East) 421201

Omkar International English School, MIDC, Dombivli(E)

Adharsh English School, Dombivli(E)

Adarsh Vidyalaya, Dombivli (E)

D.N.C. High School, Nandivli Rd. Dombivli (E)

Model English School, Pandurangwadi, Dombivli(E)

S.V. Joshi High School, Dombivli(E)

Tilak Nagar Vidyamandir, Tilak Nagar, Dombivli(E)

Pandurang Vidyalaya, Pandurangwadi, Dombivli(E)

Mahila Samiti English High School - Thakurli

Don Bosco High School, Dombivli(W)

Swami Vivekanand Vidyamandir, Dombivli.

Sister Nivedita School

The South Indian Association High School, Dombivli (W)

Greens English school

Khimji Bhulabhai Vira High School, Dombivli(E)

St. Mary's English High School, Dombivli (W)

S. K. Patil Emglish Medium School, Dombivli (E)

Royal Jr College (run by Mr. Tiwari, RJC also have Electronics & Computer Science)

Special Schools

ASTITVA School, Dombivli (E) ('ASTITVA' is the only Institute in whole of the State of Maharashtra catering to the needs of different categories of handicaps under one roof.) www.astitvaschool.com

Government

In 1984, Dombivali Municipal Council was merged that of neighboring Kalyan to form a new governing body, the Kalyan Dombivli Municipal Corporation(KDMC) .

External links

www.dashingdombivli.s5.com/

Dombivli

Major station (South) before Dombivli

Thane 18 km

Major station (North) after Dombivli

Kalyan 6 km

--

Next station south:

Diva (railway station) Mumbai suburban railway : Central Railway Next station north:

Thakurli

Stop No:22 KM from starting:49 Platforms:6(getting extended)

One HAM Radio(Amateur Radio) operater with the Call sign VU2WSM is staying at Shankeswar Nagar, Dombivli (East)

Dombivli

Forum dombivliforum.com

Dombivali is in Central line You can get central railway time table From

mumbailocaltraintimetable.net/Central_Railway_Time_Tabl...

Nearby cities: