Dombivli – A story of growth

Dombivli has transformed over the years showing tremendous growth and development that has given rise to the golden triangle connecting three predominant cities Navi-Mumbai, Thane, Kalyan. Being at the centre of this coveted Tri-City area, Dombivli enjoys excellent connectivity to all the three nodes & none of the cons like higher property prices. Today, Dombivli is one of the best places to invest in a property.

Present Connectivity

Dombivli enjoys excellent connectivity via both road & rail to not only the major nodes of the Tri-City but to all of MMR. The central line connects Dombivli to all major junctions including Thane, Mulund, Ghatkopar, Dadar & down south to CST. Major junctions like Ghatkopar & Dadar can be reached in less than 40 mins via fast train from Diva Station. The connectivity to all major Navi Mumbai Stations is also solid via the harbour line from Thane.

The arterial Kalyan-Shil road in the area connects to Kalyan in the north & Mahape down south via the connectivity to the Shilphata – Mahape Road. It also connects to Thane via NH48 through Mumbra.

One of the busiest roads in all of MMR, Kalyan-Shil road has started to mimic the growth story of Ghodbunder Road in Thane, with more & more development happening along its length.

Runwal MyCity has easy access to 3 major stations on the central line – Dombivli, Diva & Dativali & the Kalyan-Shil road is just 1.2km away from the current development.

Connectivity to major junctions

Not only this but being at the centre of the Tri-City area also makes Dombivli very close to the popular weekend destinations around the area. The picturesque ghats of Igatpuri & Karjat are less than an hour’s drive away. So if you’re thinking about investing in a property in Thane or property in Kalyan, then you should first consider the benefits of investing in the Tri-City.

What’s in store

The future is exceptionally bright for Dombivli. With over 30,000 Crore invested by the Govt. of India in various infrastructure projects in the area, Dombivli is set to transform into the fastest-growing region in all of MMR.

Virar-Alibaug Multimodal Corridor(MMC):

This 126km long project runs through Dombivli and comprises road, metro, bus lanes and greenways for pedestrians and bicycles. It runs all the way from Virar to Alibaug and is set to be a major boost for development. Runwal Mycity is less than a kilometre away from the MMC.

Airoli-Katai Tunnel Road:

This proposed tunnel road will provide direct connectivity to Airoli by drastically reducing the road travel times. The Katai Naka is less than 3km away from Runwal MyCity.

Metro Line 12:

This 20.75km metro line is set to be completely elevated with 18 stations, passing through Dombivli MIDC. This will reduce travel time to major Navi Mumbai nodes significantly.

Vasai-Panvel Rail Expansion:

This proposed 70km railway line will be the most extensive rail expansion project in the city and will provide excellent connectivity to Panvel and Vasai. Diva station is all set to become a significant hub after this line is completed.

Navi Mumbai Airport:

The proposed airport is under 30mins from Dombivli, with the other proposed rail and road projects like the multi-modal corridor and Panvel railway line set to improve connectivity further.

Super Wide roads:

The government has mandated a Development Plan (DP) with a network of ultra-wide 30m-60m roads in the area. This will drastically improve Dombivli’s roads & improve traffic conditions. The most prominent of this being the expansion of Kalyan-Shil road to a 60m wide road from its current width of 26m.

Smart City Project:

Kalyan-Dombivli is one of the 98 cities shortlisted to be developed as a 5 ‘Smart City’ under the Smart Cities Mission of the Government of India with proposed initiatives such as waterfront development, town planning and rehab schemes set to transform the area radically. The Smart city boundary passes very close to Runwal MyCity.

Being at the heart of these seven major infrastructure projects makes Runwal MyCity the next go-to destination in all of MMR, the centre of tomorrow.

An Xtraordinary Living Opportunity