Thomas Stephens Lough, a longtime peace activist and sociology professor,

was on the faculty at Ohio's Kent State University in May 1970 when the

National Guard fired on students demonstrating there against the Vietnam War.

Four students died and at least nine were wounded, the bloodiest episode

during the country's anti-war protests.

Soon after the shooting, Lough wrote to his students: ''Kent's sorrow has

become the nation's outrage, and you were there. Don't forget it.''

Lough, who later taught six years at Sonoma State University and was a

strong supporter of the university's Project Censored, died Oct. 11 of heart

failure at a palliative care unit in Santa Rosa. He was 80.

His wife, Elaine Wellin, an adjunct professor of sociology at Sonoma State,

said her husband believed the nation would have fewer social ills ''if people

knew what was going on in the government'' and in corporate America.

Lough worked with Project Censored for a decade and last year served as one

of its four national judges. This fall, he was named to the organization's

Hall of Fame.

A native of Detroit, Lough earned a bachelor's degree in mechanical

engineering and later received a master's degree and doctorate in sociology,

all at the University of Michigan.

During the Kennedy administration, he worked on disarmament issues for the

State Department and later served in the disarmament affairs division of the

United Nations.

He taught at Kent State from 1968 until about 1991. He later taught classes

at Eastern Michigan University and the University of Michigan.

He and Wellin purchased land near Cazadero in 1976 and built a home, where

they lived a few months each year. Lough moved full time to Sonoma County in

1997. The couple also had a home in Rohnert Park.

Besides his college career, he was a professional pianist who specialized

in ragtime and boogie-woogie music. For many decades, he held a pilot's

license.

Along with his wife, survivors include four children, Alexander Lough of

Santa Rosa, Martha Armstrong and Janet Daniel, both of Madison, Wis., and

Joseph Lough of Berkeley; a sister, Evelyn Montgomery of Grosse Pointe, Mich.;

and seven grandchildren.

A memorial service will be at 1 p.m. Nov. 22 at the Sebastopol Youth Annex,

425 Morris Ave.

-- Robert Digitale