Thomas S. Lough papers

May 4 Collection - Box 21

Finding Aid

Revised by Nancy Birk, October 18, 1994. Updated by Penny White, December 18, 2012; Revised January 2017

Inclusive Dates: 1968-1978

Extent: .16 cubic foot (1 slim document case)

Physical Location: 12th floor

Biographical Note: Thomas Stephens Lough was an associate professor of sociology at Kent State University in May 1970. He was a former faculty advisor to Students for a Democratic Society (SDS), and was on the steering committee of the Concerned Citizens of the Kent Community (CCC)--an organization formed in April 1969 in the aftermath of arrests and suspensions of students occupying the Music & Speech building. CCC was made up of a diverse group of faculty and students and focused on issues of due process and the rights and civil liberties of students on campus. The group formulated demands that the charter be reinstated and charges and suspensions be dropped. He was also the only faculty member to be indicted as one of the "Kent 25" (allegations of improper conduct on the part of Lough were unfounded). Lough went on to be a professor of sociology at Sonoma State University (SSU) and an evaluator, judge, and hall of fame member of SSU's Project Censored. He was also an accomplished musician. Lough died at the age of 80 on October 11, 2008.

Scope and Content: Many of the materials in this collection focus on the Black United Students (BUS)-SDS protest of Oakland Police recruitment on campus and the subsequent Black Student Walkout in November 1968. Also included are materials created by the Concerned Citizens of the Kent Community (CCC), along with official publications and memos sent to faculty by the Kent State administration in relation to the SDS and BUS protest activities and subsequent events.

Processing Note: In January 2017, this collection, which previously included the papers of William A. Gordon and Kenneth J. Hammond, was re-processed. The papers of each individual have been processed separately.

Sponsor: Digitization of this collection was funded by the National Historical Publications and Records Commission.

May 4 Collection - Box 21

Folder -- Contents