Krishna Kanta Handiqui State Open University is a government university situated in Patgaon, Rani, Guwahati, and was established in 2005. The government of Assam enacted it by publishing it in the Assam Gazette (extraordinary) on 29/9/05. The main aim of the university is to deliver education to every student around the nation and assist every individual who is willing to pursue further studies but unable to do it in a regular mode of education.

The initial purpose of the university was to reach the unreached with the distance and open learning system, the motto of the university was ‘Education Beyond Barriers’ of age, academic qualification, and geographical barriers. The Krishna Kanta Handiqui State Open University is one of the prominent universities in open and distance learning along with IGNOU it is the only open state university in Northeast India with its headquarters at Patgaon, Rani, Guwahati.

The State Open University of Krishna Kanta Handiqui offers a plethora of courses and every course offered at the university is under the guidelines offered by the government and follows the national curriculum. Along with the various undergraduate and postgraduate programs, Krishna Kanta University also offers a few add-on courses like certificate and diploma courses which an interested individual can pursue with their regular or existing course.

The Krishna Kanta Handiqui State Open University offers 40+ various programs in multiple specializations like social studies, Humanities, and Professional degrees like bachelor's, Master's, M.Phil., Ph.D., Certificate, and Diploma programs. Krishna Kanta Handiqui State Open University is approved by the University Grant Commission and every course offered through the open and distance learning mode is valid and recognized by NAAC And AIU.

Courses offered by Krishna Kanta Handiqui State Open University

Undergraduate Degree Courses

Bachelor of Commerce (BCOM) - Major

Bachelor of Business Administration (BBA)

Bachelor of Computer Application

Bachelor of Arts (BA) - English-(Major& Pass Course)

Bachelor of Arts (BA) - Education (Major & Pass Course)

Bachelor of Arts (BA) – Philosophy (Major & Pass Course)

Bachelor of Arts (BA) - History (Major & Pass Course)

Bachelor of Arts (BA) - Sociology (Major & Pass Course)

Bachelor of Arts (BA) - Political Science (Major & Pass Course)

Bachelor of Arts (BA) - Economics (Major & Pass Course)

Bachelor of Arts (BA) in Journalism and Mass Communication

Bachelor of Arts (BA) - Mathematics (Pass Course)

Bachelor of Arts (BA) - Assamese (Major & Pass Course)

Bachelor of Arts (BA) - Sanskrit (Major & Pass Course)

Post Graduate Degree Courses

Master of Computer Application (MCA)

Master of Arts in Assamese

Master of Arts in English

Master of Arts in Education

Master of Arts in Political Science

Master of Arts in Sociology

Master of Social Works

Master of Science In Information Technology (M.Sc IT)

Masters in Business Administration

Master of Arts in Journalism And Mass Communication

Doctor of Philosophy (Ph.D.) Program

M.Phil. Program

Post Graduate Diploma Courses

Computer Application (PGDCA)

Business Management (PGDBM)

Human Resource Management (PGDHRM)

Broadcast Journalism (PGDBJ)

Mass Communication (PGDMC)

Diploma Courses

Journalism and Mass Communication (DJMC)

Creative Writing in English (DCWE)

Computer Hardware and Networking (DCHN)

Library and Information Science (DLIS)

Sanskrit Learning (DSL)

Certificate Courses

Commercial Nursery Management (CCNMA)

Tea Cultivation And Plantation Management (CSTCPM)

Security Personnel (CSP)

Counselling Skills (CCS)

Krishna Kanta Handiqui State Open University offers multiple courses in various specializations, whose study materials are designed by experts in their respective fields. To offer these courses to every student the fee structure of every program is decided in such a way that, they are affordable for every student and pocket friendly for working professionals. However, the university does not offer or provide any scholarship or loan facility to the students, but students looking for financial assistance can seek other government scholarships and apply for them according to the eligibility criteria.

Note- As per the UGC guidelines, the university offers scholarships and relaxation to the reserved categories.

Interested students, who want to enroll themselves at the Krishna Kanta Handiqui State Open University can follow the below mentioned steps for taking admission at the university through online application process:

Step 1-Interested students must visit the official website of the Krishna Kanta Handiqui State Open University.

Step 2-After visiting the website student must go through the rules, regulations, and eligibility criteria of the university.

Step 3-After that, students must register themselves on the website with their details and receive a log in credential.

Step 4-Click on the apply button and fill in the required information correctly.

Step 5- Attach the required documents along with the application form.

Step 6-Make the payment of the fees and submit the application form.

Step 7- Make sure you download the application form along with the fee receipt for future reference.

UGC updated the list of approved ODL & Online programs for the academic batch of 2023-24, Click here to get the list!

Precautions to be taken by the students before enrolling for programs offered under ODL & Online Learning Mode, Click here to know!

A degree obtained through ODL mode is equivalent to a traditional degree, Click here to know!

UGC declares a 100% Fee Refund policy for students within a specified period by universities.Click hereto read the full notice.

UGC issues a public notice regarding misleading abbreviations in the names of Universities & Colleges. Read the UGC Letter.

The examination process at the Krishna Kanta Handiqui State Open University is like other open and distance learning platforms. There are two main components of the examination process at the university: assignments and end-term examination. The assignment must be submitted to the study centers within the three months of admission into the new semester for timely evaluation of it. If a student fails to do so, they must submit it prior 15 days (about 2 weeks) before the commencement of the examination.

The marks carried by the assignment are 20% and the rest depend on the theoretical end-term examination. The assignment is divided into two parts:

Part A: if a student submits their assignment which is of 20 marks, among its 17 marks will depend upon the quality of the assignment and 3 marks are awarded for timely submission.

Part B: In some cases, the university has also implemented a plan to assist students in securing passing marks and, in that criterion, there are 12 marks for the quality of assignment and according to the attendance there are various conditions like:

A student with 75% or more attendance will receive 5 marks.

Students having attendance from 50-75% will receive 4 marks.

Students whose attendance ranges 40-50% will get 3 marks.

Students with 30-40% of attendance will get 2 marks.

Only 1 mark will be awarded to those students having 20% of attendance.