DEPARTMENT OF SANSKRIT

Date of Establishment- 10th October, 1930

Sanskrit is not only a language of our heritage and culture but also window to know and learn the treasure of scientific achievements, attainments and researches that have been done in ancient India. Knowing Sanskrit is to know more of our ancient achievements and to derive benefits from such knowledge to supplement and build future researches. Knowing Sanskrit will also help to innovate new paradigms in research pertaining to the scientific, technological, sociological and humanities areas. Moreover, studying Sanskrit will be immense help in strengthening competency in the modern Indian languages. The Department of Sanskrit, one of the oldest Department of Jagannath Barooah College was established in the year 1930. The main goals of this department are —

(i) To impart education and train up students in different areas of Sanskrit.

(ii) To make awareness of importance of Sanskrit learning among the students community and general people.

KRISHNA KANTA HANDIQUI STATE OPEN UNIVERSITY STUDY CENTRE

J.B. COLLEGE (Autonomous), JORHAT-785001

Dr. Utpal Jyoti Mahanta

Centre In-charge

Mr. Gaurab Borthakur

Co-ordinator

Induction Programme at the Study Centre

The Krishna Kanta Handiqui State Open University (KKHSOU) offers different programmems ranging from certificate, Under Graduate, Post Graduate to Ph.D (Ph.D is in regular mode) through open and distance learning mode. Further Krishna Kanta Handiqui State Open University Study Centre of J.B. College was founded in the year 2008. Initially it was started with Bachellor Preparatory Programme (Now discontinued by university) and Bachellor Degree programmr. Gradually the centre started offering Master programmes along with Certificate, Diploma and PG Diploma programmes. Nowadays the admission is processed through online mode only and hence interested learners can take admission by visiting the website of the university www.kkhsou.in. As per guide line of the university the study centre organizes counselling sessions for the learners on Sundays, Self Learning Materials (SLM) are supplied by the university and are distributed by the study centre. The structure of the KKHSOU JB College study centre is-

Centre in charge,

Centre coordinator,

Assistant centre coordinator,

Office assistant

Accountant and

Supporting staff.

The centre in charge is always by default the principal of the college. Whereas the others are appointed by Centre in charge. Presently these positions are held by- Dr. Utpal Jyoti Mahanta-Centre in charge, Mr. Gaurab Borthakur- Centre coordinator, Mr. Nribid Bikash Dutta-Assistant centre coordinator, Mr. Diganta Gogoi-Office assistant, Mr. Mohendra Nath Borah- Accountant and Mr. Gautam Kanwar-Supporting staff. The centre coordinator looks after all the functioning of the study centre on behalf of the Centre in charge. So far Dr. Arpan Barua, Mr. Rajib Sarmah, Dr. Sumitra Purkayastha and Dr. Pranab Barua shouldered the responsibility of the centre coordinator.

Contact details-

KKHSOU Study Centre,

J B College, Barpatra Ali, Jorhat-785001

Ph7896769191, 9207050885

This email address is being protected from spambots. You need JavaScript enabled to view it.