So So Def Recordings, founded by Jermaine Dupri, has entered into a multi-year partnership with Create Music Group.

(LOS ANGELES, CA February 7, 2024) – This agreement brings So So Def Recordings’ catalog, publishing rights, and recordings under the Create Music Group umbrella, while paving the way for the launch of new music and artist development initiatives under Dupri’s guidance.

Dupri, a Grammy Award-winning producer, will transition from CEO of So So Def to Chairman & Founder, retaining creative direction. He will also serve as the new Creative Director for Create Music Group, aiming to expand the company’s impact at the intersection of music and culture, the companies said in a statement.

Meanwhile, Bryan Patrick Franklin was appointed CEO of So So Def Recordings, while Joe Romulus Esq was named Head of Legal Business Affairs.

A member of the Songwriters Hall of Fame, Dupri is among the most successful producers in the music industry. Recognized for his chart-topping hits, including Mariah Carey’s 6x-platinum We Belong Together and Usher’s 3x-platinum Nice & Slow, Dupri’s tenure at So So Def Recordings has seen the creation of a catalog of classic albums. In November, Dupri partnered with music streaming service Tidal for the Tidal Collabs Spotlight contest.

“I HAVE BEEN LOOKING FOR A HOME FOR THE ENTIRE SO SO DEF BRAND SO I CAN CONTINUE TO DO WHAT I STARTED.” – JERMAINE DUPRI, SO SO DEF RECORDINGS

So So Def was established by Dupri in 1993 as a spin-off of his production company of the same name through a joint venture with Sony and Columbia. It now boasts a catalog of hits and artist development success stories, including platinum-selling albums from Xscape, Da Brat, Jagged Edge, and Anthony Hamilton.

“I have been looking for a home for the entire So So Def brand so I can continue to do what I started,” said Dupri.

Jonathan Strauss, Founder and CEO of Create Music Group, added: “Jermaine has been one of the most successful and impactful forces in music for the last three decades. We are honored that he and his team have decided to partner with us for both his catalog and future output.”

Fans can expect a wave of new music and artist signings under this collaboration, marking a “new day” for So So Def. The partnership also brings together So So Def’s rich legacy with Create Music Group’s expertise in artist empowerment and monetization opportunities, according to a press release on Tuesday (February 6).

“JERMAINE HAS BEEN ONE OF THE MOST SUCCESSFUL AND IMPACTFUL FORCES IN MUSIC FOR THE LAST THREE DECADES. WE ARE HONORED THAT HE AND HIS TEAM HAVE DECIDED TO PARTNER WITH US FOR BOTH HIS CATALOG AND FUTURE OUTPUT.” – JONATHAN STRAUSS, CREATE MUSIC GROUP

Established in 2015, Create Music Group is a data-driven media and technology company focused on helping artists and creators. The company’s platforms help rights holders, distributors, artists, and brands identify and secure monetization opportunities and build new audiences. It works with a diverse range of clients, including superstar artists, major and independent record labels. Clients have included Jennifer Lopez, Marshmello, and PepsiCo.

With headquarters in Hollywood, California, and a global workforce of nearly 400 employees, Create Music Group operates various media networks, including Label Engine and Flighthouse, catering to both established and emerging talent in the music industry.

The development follows a string of acquisitions by Create Music in recent years, including Music For Pets, a company that makes music and entertainment for specifically for dogs and cats, India-based distribution and rights management firm Nirvana Digital, a majority stake in YouTube channel The Nations, and content management and influencer marketing agency, VRTCL.

About Create Music Group

Established in 2015, Create Music Group is a leading music and entertainment company. The company operates as a record label, distribution company, and entertainment network which generates over 15 billion music streams each month on DSP’s. Named #2 on the Inc 5000 Fastest Growth Companies in America in 2020, the company has grown exponentially by leveraging its owned IP with its media and technology platform. The company works with superstar artists, major and independent record labels, and global media brands. It operates a number of companies including Label Engine, one of the largest independent music distribution platforms in the world, with over 75,000 artists and 5,000 label clients; and Flighthouse, a digital entertainment brand focused on Gen Z, which has more than 300 million followers across social media. Create Music Group is based in Hollywood, CA and has 350 employees worldwide.