Al Murray

July 2024

The Pub Landlord

Al Murray, a stalwart of British comedy, is best known for his stage persona ‘The Pub Landlord’, a satirical character that has become a staple of UK entertainment over the past 30 years. He is also known in Chiswick as a long term resident and parent whose children have attended local schools.

He himself was educated at the prestigious Bedford School and later read History at St Edmund Hall, Oxford, where he had the opportunity to try out stand-up comedy at the Oxford Revue, influenced by the rich tapestry of British comedic traditions.

His Pub Landlord character debuted in 1994, capturing British pub culture with his brash, know-it-all attitude and patriotic fervour. The Landlord’s comedic appeal lies in his exaggerated nationalism and ignorance, which he uses cleverly to parody societal attitudes and political issues.

The character propelled Al Murray to national fame, earning him a Perrier Award at the Edinburgh Festival Fringe and leading to numerous television appearances, including his own shows, Time Gentlemen Please and Al Murray’s Happy Hour.

When he is about to start a new TV series or live tour he often tries out new material at Theatre at the Tabard in Chiswick.

Image: The Pub Landlord on tour; Al Murray’s book Arnhem: Black Tuesday

Author and historian

Al Murray has continued to tour all over the country with his Pub Landlord shows, but has also branched out into other forms of writing and performance, publishing a number of books, including The Pub Landlord’s Book of British Common Sense (2007), which blends comedy with sharp insights into British life and culture.

He has dabbled in politics, standing as a spoof candidate against Nigel Farage, then leader of UKIP, in the 2015 election.

READ ALSO: What missing from this election campaign? Al Murray

He has also established himself as a historian, authoring several books on the Second World War, such as Watching War Films with My Dad (2013) and Arnhem: Black Tuesday (2024).

In 2019, he started the podcast We Have Ways of Making You Talk with historian James Holland in which they discuss World War II themes and interview veterans.

2023 was a theatrical year for Al Murray. He co-wrote Idiots Assemble: Spitting Image The Musical with Matt Forde and Sean Foley, based on the iconic TV series Spitting Image. The musical premiered in Birmingham before transferring to London’s West End.

The same year he made his stage debut in the historical comedy The Crown Jewels alongside Mel Giedroyc, Joe Thomas, and Carrie Hope Fletcher.

Image: Al Murray by The Chiswick Calendar stall at Bedford Park Festival 2024

Written by Ciara Fitzgerald, 2024