Al Murray Tour Tickets

Grab your Al Murray tickets today to see this master of comedy perform live. Stand-up comedy has been around since the early 20th century but became popular in the 1990s. There are a variety of stand-up comedy genres and styles which include observational comedy, surreal humor, political satire and improvised comedy among others. A traditional set is made up of jokes and bits. Typically, the quality of the material is the most important element.

Comedians will tour the US and sometimes even have a residency in Las Vegas with a show multiple days per week. Comedy tour revenues have increased significantly over the last several years with comedians like Jerry Seinfeld, Kevin Hart and Jeff Dunham. These top comedians earn $20-50 million per year depending on how much they are touring. Secure your chance to be there in person at a theatre near you. Grab your Al Murray tickets now to see this comedian's next live show.

How much are Al Murray tickets?

Tickets to a Al Murray show can range in price for each venue and the location of your seats. Al Murray live tickets typically start around the $50 range but depending on the performance and venue can exceed $500 per ticket. Secure seats that fit your budget today with TicketSmarter.

$42.30 is the average price you'll pay to see Al Murray perform live. Most comedy shows have cheap Al Murray tickets listed for as low as $42.30 a ticket. The most you can expect to pay to get into a show is $42.30 a ticket.

When do Al Murray tickets go on sale?

Al Murray tour tickets go on sale around three to six months before a tour is announced. Fans can purchase comedy show tickets after cities, venues, dates and times are announced. Use the event calendar above to be the first to secure seats when a new date is released.

Al Murray Tour Dates & Show Schedule

Al Murray continues to be one of the busiest comedians in the entertainment industry. Al Murray tour dates across most of the United States and some Canadian venues on the tour schedule every year. You may be able to catch a performance at hit theaters like the Terry Fator Theatre at the Mirage in Las Vegas or the Funny Bone Comedy Club in Columbus. Make you are there every year for the New York Comedy Festival. Don’t miss your chance to see a great stand-up comedy show in your city. Use the event calendar above today to see what is available near you.

Prepare to laugh because Al Murray is performing 1 comedy shows this year. Al Murray is set to perform their comedy act on October 24th, 2024 at 7:30pm. This hilarious show is playing at the Congress Theatre - Eastbourne at Carlisle Road, Eastbourne, . Tickets to this show range from $42.30 to $42.30 a ticket. Get your Al Murray - Guv Island tickets now because there are only 1 tickets available for this performance.

Songs from the Al Murray Tour Setlist

Al Murray's setlist while performing in Bath , ENG at “The Forum” included the following songs:

Guv Island

Source: Setlist.fm