What if Stephen Hawking could go anywhere and see anything? Where would he go, and what would he say about it?

That’s the premise of Stephen Hawking’s Favorite Places, which I produced. In just 25 minutes, we follow as Stephen talks about the origins of the cosmos, alien life, his own life and our place in the universe. I hope it’s both profound and easy to understand.

Meeting Stephen for the first time, years ago, was a bit overwhelming. Talking to someone who is extremely famous is always a bit nerve-racking, but all the small-talk skills you can usually count on are also gone, since interacting with Stephen takes time. I remember being amazed at how easily his staff communicated with him at first, but quickly realized how they do it: it’s all about reading his face.

The way I work with him has not changed much over the years. I outlined the proposal in basic terms – “What if you could visit your five favorite places in the universe? What would they be?” Then you have a long wait as Stephen types his response, a process which can easily take 20 minutes.

I studied physics and philosophy at university – but dropped the physics, not because I didn’t like it but because I found philosophy to be about thinking itself, which I found fascinating. I’m sure Stephen would not agree with me, as he thinks philosophy is a waste of time.

But before you start to think he is a stern scientist, I have to tell you he can be very funny. I went to a fancy dress party he threw, and the theme was Alice in Wonderland. He went as the Mad Hatter, and he looked great. I went as the King of Hearts and looked ridiculous, but he said I looked “magnificent”.

For this documentary, the idea had a strange beginning. Four or five years ago, my daughter was given a science challenge at school. Her task was to ask a real scientist a question and write up the answer. She knew I had worked with Hawking, so she asked if I could ask him a question on her behalf. So I did.

The question was brilliant in the way that children’s questions often are: “What’s your favourite planet?” Stephen replied “Saturn, because it is so beautiful.” (Obviously, my daughter got a good mark!)

Fast forward to last year, and when I was asked if I could think up a cosmology idea for a new documentary, I told the tale about my daughter’s question and there it was. When I went back to Hawking, I had a rough idea of what the five places would be (and obviously Saturn would be one of them), but as usual, there was a surprise. Stephen insisted we pick Santa Barbara as our last choice. He spent a lot of time there over the years and it is his favorite place on Earth, alongside Norfolk. This slight twist gave the documentary’s narrative a great shape. He has a knack for this kind of thing, an instinctive ability to see what will make a good story.

I’m enormously pleased with how it all turned out – and we were especially delighted when Stephen said he liked the custom flight jacket we had made for the show. He took it home with him.

But best of all was when I showed him the final cut, which made him smile and type his usual, succinct response – “I like it”.