An Emmy-award winning journalist, a filmmaker, and the author of ten books, Jim Webb calls himself a public servant, author, film maker and warrior. He has been a Mariner, an assistant Secretary of Defense and Secretary of the Navy, before becoming a senator of Virginia. His forefathers have migrated from North Ireland in the eighteenth century and were the pioneers of Virginia mountain settlements. He was also a counsel for the House Veterans Affairs Committee

Age: 69

Party: Democrat

Professional Bio:

Jim graduated from the Naval Academy in 1968, receiving a special commendation for his leadership contributions and became a Marine Corps Officer. He was a company commander during Vietnam War and was awarded the Navy Cross, the Silver Star Medal, two Bronze Star Medals, and two Purple Hearts. He graduated from the Georgetown University Law Center in 1975, where he earned a Juris Doctor and received the Horan Award for excellence in legal writing.

He later was appointed on the Congress where served as counsel to the House Committee on Veterans Affairs from 1977 to 1981. In 1982 he led the fight to include an African American soldier in the Vietnam Veterans memorial on the National Mall. In 1984 he was appointed Assistant Secretary of Defense for Reserve Affairs, and in 1987, he became Secretary of the Navy. He was a Fall 1992 Fellow at Harvard’s Institute of Politics.

While in the Senate, Jim was selected to deliver the response to the President’s State of the Union address in 2007, and served on the Foreign Relations, Armed Services, Veterans Affairs, and the Joint Economic Committees. He drafted, introduced, and guided to passage the Post-9.11 GI Bill, the most significant veterans legislation since World War II. He also co-authored legislation which exposed 60 billion dollars of waste, fraud and abuse in Iraq and Afghanistan wartime-support contracts. Webb is regarded as a long-time advocate of fixing America’s broken criminal justice system. He was spotlighted in The Atlantic Magazine as one of the world’s “Brave Thinkers” for tackling prison reform and possessing “two things vanishingly rare in Congress: a conscience and a spine.”

Jim was a leading voice in calling for the United States to re-engage in East Asia and met frequently the key national leaders throughout the region. His visit to Burma in 2009 proved to be a historic one and became the first American leader to visit the country in ten years. He opened up a dialogue that resulted in the re-establishment of relations between US and Burma.

Jim has six children and lives in Northern Virginia with his wife, Hong Le Webb. He speaks fluent Vietnamese and has worked extensively with the Vietnamese community since the Vietnam War.