When Sir Richard Hotham fell in love with a peaceful stretch of coast in the late 18th century he could never have imagined that with his help and influence it would become a bustling seaside resort known throughout the land.

Hotham also bought 1,600 acres of land around Bognor. There was only one pub in the whole of Bognor so Hotham purchased it and converted it into a small hotel with 17 rooms. He also built an ‘entertainment building’ with a library, newspaper reading room, milliners shop and bath room, where you could bathe in warm sea water. He also built two terraces, Hotham Place and Long Row in what is now Waterloo Square. Hotham hoped people would come and rent these houses for the summer season. And some people did. The first season at Bognor was 1791 and some wealthy people came.

In the early 1790’s Hotham built houses on what is now called Upper Bognor Road. They included the Dome where, he hoped, Royalty would stay. He also built Hotham Park House for himself. It was completed in 1792 and it became known as Chapel House. By the time of his death in 1799 Hotham had built 30 houses.

Hotham Park can still be seen today, with his house now converted into flats. The Dome is now part of Chichester University’s Bognor Regis Campus.

After a slow start, Bognor (as it was then without the suffix Regis) grew steadily and soon embraced the nearby villages of Felpham, Aldwick and Pagham as well as North and South Bersted.

The first half of the 19th century saw greater growth, helped by the arrival of a railway line in 1864. The town’s recognition blossomed when, in 1929, it was selected by advisors to King George V as a place ideal for relaxation and recuperation and this then led to the regal suffix “Regis” (by royal consent) being added to the name.

Another big factor in establishing Bognor’s reputation came when Billy Butlin opened a holiday camp in 1960, having already operated a Butlin’s amusement park and zoo from the early 1930s.

After opening a holiday camp in Skegness, Butlin returned to Bognor Regis in 1958 and gained permission from the council to build a similar venue on a 39-acre site to the east of the town. Doors opened for business two years later and the business was a runaway success, hosting in the region of 3,000 campers every week, and easily justifying the then enormous build cost of around £2.5 million.

A kiosk was built at the shore end and visitors were charged one old penny if they wanted to walk the length of the pier and take in the sea air. In 1876 the pier was sold to the council for £1,200 and the new owners added a small bandstand. In July 1900 a pavilion was added further down the pier. In 1901 a landing stage allowed for paddle steamers to tie up at the pier but this had to end five years later as ships had grown too large. Ongoing repairs and maintenance became an issue for the council and the pier was sold to private investors for 10s 6d (around 50p in today’s money). The pavilion was closed while major restoration was undertaken, and it reopened in 1909.