Bognor Regis is a seaside coastal resort located within West Sussex in the South of England and one of the oldest recorded Saxon place names in Sussex. In a document of 680AD it is referred to as Bucgan ora meaning Bucge's (a female Saxon name) shore, or landing place. In more recent times it was know as just ''Bognor'' and up until the 18th century, was just a fishing village and was also used by smugglers.

Sir Richard Hotham original founder of Bognor as a seaside resort

In the summer of 1784, a London Hatter, Sir Richard Hotham - (MP for Southwark at the time) decided to try the re-cuperative qualities of sea air and headed for this part of Sussex. It was Sir Richard Hotham (1722-1799) an English 18th century property developer who turned Bognor into a seaside resort.

Sir Richard Hotham found that the climate of the south coast had many benefits. He was so taken with the area that having retired from politics he decided to build his own mansion here, named ''Bognor Lodge'' (now Hotham Park House) and dreamed of building a new fashionable seaside resort.

Over time he bought up around 1600 acres of land and started to build large terraced houses to attract the wealthier visitor to his ''new'' seaside resort, and his ultimate goal was to attract the then King and/or Prince of Wales. Sir Richard Hotham died in Bognor in March 1799 and is buried at St. Mary Magdalene church in South Bersted. Over the next hundred years or so, Bognor grew and tourism came to the town.

King George V

The Duke and Duchess of York visited the town in 1900 to open two convalescent homes in Clarence road. They returned in 1929 as King George V and Queen Mary, as Bognor was chosen as the favoured place for King George V to convalesce. He and the Queen stayed at Craigwell House (the private home of Sir Arthur du Cros) in Aldwick for four months. With the Kings health restored, his reign continued for a further seven years. The Royal Convalescence attracted the worlds press. A long line of Royal visitors came to Bognor - including the Kings three year old granddaughter, Princess Elizabeth. The greatest accolade came in June 1929 when the King approved the suffix "Regis", and as a result, Bognor became known as ''Bognor Regis''. Bognor Regis has seen many changes during its history. Many of these changes were in the 1970’s when many old original buildings were demolished. It has to be said though, that in the early days of Bognor Regis (after the Kings visits) tourism really took off. As a seaside resort it had the sun, the sea, the sand and, one of the best stretches of coastal sands around at that, as well as wonderful Victorian architecture adorning the seafront, culminating with the pier which once was the landing place for paddle steamers.

Butlins