DUSSELDORF, GERMANY, December 24, 2010 /24-7PressRelease/ -- One of Germany's top hip-hop artists is set to delight his fans when he plays live in Dusseldorf next month.

Jan Delay, the Hamburg-born musician also known as a member of La Boom and Absolute Beginner, will perform at the city's Philipshalle venue on Friday January 21st 2011.

Delay's Bahnhof Soul tour is due to call at several venues in Germany and Austria as he continues to promote recent album Wir Kinder vom Bahnhof Soul, which was one of the bestselling records in Germany last year.

For Dusseldorf hotel guests, the Philipshalle show could provide an opportunity to experience some German music that people outside the country are not usually exposed to.

The artist - real name Jan Phillip Eissfeldt - is known for his distinctive nasal voice, preference for Nike Air Max trainers and tendency to change his stage name depending on his mood and the style of music he is performing.

As well as hip-hop, Delay's recorded output has spanned genres such as reggae, dub and funk.

According to MTV, the performer "likes to hide behind sunglasses and under hoods", while his songs are characterised by lyrical content that is often "humorous and political".

He started out on the Hamburg hip-hop scene in the late 1990s, forming his own record label to support underground talent.

Tickets for Delay's upcoming appearance in Dusseldorf are available to buy online for EUR34.25 (GBP29). The show is due to begin at 20:00 local time.

For more information on this event, visit the Philipshalle website or contact the venue on (+49) 0211 775057.

LateRooms.com recommends a range of accommodation in Dusseldorf, including the Relexa Hotel Ratingen City.

Editors Notes:

www.LateRooms.com is part of the B2C sector of TUI Travel PLC's Accommodation and Destination Division. Also within this sector are AsiaRooms.com and Hotels-London.co.uk.

LateRooms.com is the UK's leading online accommodation site offering late availability deals in over 37,000 properties worldwide, ranging from bed and breakfasts to five-star luxury hotels.

LateRooms.com offers customers a saving of up to 70 per cent off the normal room rate for a variety of independent and branded hotels. Customers can book online or by phone 24/7, whether booking 12 months or 12 minutes in advance - whatever time, whatever day. No other accommodation site offers this flexibility.

LateRooms.com arms customers with information to help them choose the right hotel. Users can read from over 540,000 true hotel reviews, written by customers who have booked through LateRooms.com and actually stayed at the hotel.

LateRooms.com is the first online site to use VisitBritain's official national classification system to rate its hotels, bed and breakfasts and guest houses. This ensures customers know the standards of quality they can expect when making a reservation.

To view LateRooms.com press pages, please see http://press.laterooms.com/.

# # #