Aaron Provincial Park rests on the banks of Thunder Creek and inhabits a cove on the shores of Thunder Lake in Northwest Ontario, Sunset Country. The closest communities to the park are Dryden, Ontario and Wabigoon, Ontario, Canada

Thunder Lake and Thunder Creek have a long history in the region. The waterways were once part of a transportation network used by the early First Nation people and voyageurs for hunting, fishing and conducting trade.

Today... Aaron Provincial Park measures about 116 hectares (286 acres) in size and has become a popular park destination in the region. The park is highlighted by two sandy beaches, water activities and a campground.

Some of the summer activities enjoyed in the Aaron Provincial Park include camping, boating, birdwatching, swimming, picnicking, kayaking, canoeing, windsurfing, biking, hiking and fishing for lake trout, walleye, northern pike and smallmouth bass.

Located in the park there is a rental shop providing kayaks, canoes, bikes and fishing rods with tackle. One must have a fishing license to fish in Ontario parks.

During the winter months the frozen lake, river and snow covered trails become part of a cross country ski trail.

For those who enjoy sightseeing on foot during the summer there are a few walking and hiking trails located in the forests of Aaron Park to explore :

Aspen Trail - 1.9 km loop ( 1.2 mi.) : A well maintained, easy going trail exploring a forest of spruce, jack pine, balsam fir, aspen and birch trees. Parts of the trail walk on top of rocks.

Cedar Trail - 1.2 km loop ( 0.75 mi.) : A well maintained, easy going trail exploring a boreal forest and the shores of Thunder Lake.

Regardless of the activity you enjoy - water or land - there are always opportunities for wildlife sightings in the park. Bring a camera and keep alert for sightings of moose, fox, deer and various bird species.

For those who wish to stay and play in the park there is a campground. The campground includes, both, serviced and unserviced campsites.

The services and amenities located in the park include a laundromat, firewood station, amphitheatre, boat launches, dock, change rooms, fish cleaning station, wireless internet, playground, fresh water taps, washrooms, pit toilets, sani station, Park Office, large grass lawns, sightseeing benches and some day use picnic areas - most with picnic tables and one with a shelter.

Explore Aaron Provincial Park, Dryden, Northern Ontario, Canada, Sunset Country