Most of us know Udupi as an affordable South Indian restaurant, serving vegetarian food. However, Udupi is a tranquil district which is located in the coastal region of Karnataka. This sleepy coastal town is famous for its local Udupi cuisine and historical attractions, including Krishna temple and a monastery. Churches in Udupi are gaining popularity these days. The historical background and beliefs of these spiritual centers are worth exploring.

The roots of these beautiful and peaceful churches can be traced back even before the British Raj. This town is home to one of the oldest churches of the country, established in the year 1682. When Apostolic Vicariate was formed in 1853, numerous prayer halls were established that were visited by the British officials as well as locals. With the declaration of the new Roman Catholic Diocese of Udupi in 2012 by Pope Benedict XVI, a sudden thrive can be seen in the famous churches Udupi that is luring thousands of travelers with their illuminating past. Read more to know the best churches in this serene town, located in Karavali of Karnataka.

6 Best Churches In Udupi

If you are planning a visit to Udupi then don’t miss out to explore these beautiful spiritual places exhibiting the true culture of Udupi.

1. Holy Rosary Church

Image Source

Holy Rosary Church in Udupi was established in 1682. This beautiful church is located on the western side of the city amidst the panoramic landscapes exhibiting delightful vistas for nature lovers. The beautiful river Panchagagavli beautifies the location with its presence. The church is visited by parish priests throughout the year, adding the mystic essence to this mesmerizing spiritual center.

Address: The Parish Priest, Holy Rosary Church, Church Road, Kundapura – 576 201, Karnataka, India

Must Read: 7 Must-Try Udupi Cafes Where You Can Satisfy Your Foodgasm!

South Weekend Holiday Packages On TravelTriangle

A trip to South India has a lot to offer – from tranquillity of forests to charm of sizzling beaches and from lost kingdoms to chills of a hill station. Visit Kerala, Coorg, Ooty, Mysore, or Kodaikanal. Book holiday packages inclusive of airport transfers, cab, resort, sightseeing, and meals.

2. Mother Of Sorrows Church

Image Source

The Mother of Sorrows Parish is an amazing chapel which was established in 1880. The Bishop of Mangalore in 1880 commissioned an establishment of the independent Udupi Parish and appointed Father J.N. Masse as the first Parish priest here. Later in 1918, a small church was established here by Father Casimir Fernandes. This architecture of this church tells its story, though simple but will surely be loved by history lovers, staying in Udupi.

Address: Mother of Sorrows Church, K. M. Marge, Church Road, Udupi – 576 101

Church Mass Timings:

Monday to Saturday: 6.30 AM

Thursday: 5.00 PM Adoration to the Bl.

Friday: 6.30 AM & 5.30 PM

Saturday: 6.30 AM & 5.00 PM

Sunday: 7.15 AM & 9.15AM 11.30 Mass in Malayalam

Suggested Read: 15 Top Hill Stations In Karnataka To Rejuvenate Yourself

3. Christ Church

Image Source

The Christ Church was established in 1967 and was inaugurated by late Cardinal Valerian Gracias. The Christ Church had been the center of Youth with numerous young believers visiting the place for regular prayers. This lively church is also contributing in the field of education. If you are visiting this beautiful Christ Church in Manipal, you will be witnessing the journey of a priest who worked exhaustively to promote education at the root level.

Address: Parish Priest, Christ Church, Alevoor Road, Manipal Post, 576104, Udupi Dist. Karnataka

Mass Timings: Monday to Saturday: 6:30 AM & Sunday: 8:00 AM and 5:30 PM

Suggested Read: Karnataka Cuisine: 22 Popular Karnataka Dishes For A Flavorful Culinary Journey

4. Milagres Cathedral

Image Source

The Our Lady of the Miracles Cathedral, also known as Milagres Cathedral was originally established in the year 1680. Later in the year 1881, a treaty was signed between Rani Chennamma of Bednur and the Portuguese which resulted in the redevelopment of this beautiful church. Lastly, it was upgraded to the status of Cathedral in 2012. This church exhibits a few rare paintings, narrating the story of this mesmerizing church.

Address: Santhekatte, Udupi, Karnataka 576114

Mass Timings: Monday to Saturday: 6:30 AM and Sunday: 6:30 AM, 8:00 AM, and 9:30 AM.

Suggested Read: This Private Island Homestay In Karnataka Is A Treasure & You Won’t Doubt It!

5. Bethel AG Church

Image Source

Bethel AG Church conducts workshops on Sundays to spread love and harmony amongst the people. Associated with the Bethel AG Church of Banglore, the church has been working rigorously to bring people from different backgrounds together and work together harmoniously. Do plan a visit to this amazing church on your next visit to Udupi.

Address: Bima Nagar, Bailoor, Udupi, Karnataka 574118

Mass Timings: Monday to Sunday: 6:30 AM

6. United Basel Church

Image Source

The inception of Basel Mission in Udupi dates back to 1815, however, the church was established in the later years. This lively place, located in the mesmerizing Udupi district is a hub of positivity and serenity. If you are looking forward to visiting the stunning churches in Udupi, then do explore this beautiful church.

Address: Chitpady, Udupi, Karnataka 576101

Mass Timings: Monday to Sunday: 9:00 AM

Further Read: 20 Fascinating Temples In Karnataka That Are All About Architectural Grandeur!

From temples to churches and numerous other historical destinations, this tranquil town in coastal Karnataka surprises is guests with numerous exciting excursions. Plan a trip to Udupi with TravelTriangle and do visit the mentioned churches in Udupi to unveil the true story of this town.

Disclaimer: TravelTriangle claims no credit for images featured on our blog site unless otherwise noted. All visual content is copyrighted to its respectful owners. We try to link back to original sources whenever possible. If you own the rights to any of the images, and do not wish them to appear on TravelTriangle, please contact us and they will be promptly removed. We believe in providing proper attribution to the original author, artist or photographer.

Please Note: Any information published by TravelTriangle in any form of content is not intended to be a substitute for any kind of medical advice, and one must not take any action before consulting a professional medical expert of their own choice.

Frequently Asked Questions About Churches In Udupi

Was Udupi known for its churches?

Udupi was known to be home for one of the oldest churches in the country. The first church was established in 1682. Numerous prayer halls were made and they were visited by the British officials as well as locals.

What are the best churches to visit in Udupi?

Holy Rosary Church, Mother of Sorrows Church, Christ Church, Milagres Church, Katpadi church, Milagres Cathedralare are some of the best churches to visit in Udupi.

What are the church timings in Udupi?

The Milagres Cathedral has its mass timings from Monday to Saturday from 6.30 AM and on Sunday the mass timings are 6.30 AM, 8.00 AM, and 9.30 AM.

Do churches in Udupi conduct any workshops?

Bethel AG Church among others conduct workshops for people every Sunday so that they could spread love and harmony.

Which is the oldest church in Udupi?

There is one church in Udupi called Basel Mission which is located in Chitpady, Udupi. This was built in 1815 and it is one of the most beautiful and stunning churches you will ever see in Udupi. The other Holy Rosary Church was established in 1682, which is the oldest church in the country.

Looking To Book A Holiday Package?

Book memorable holidays on TravelTriangle with 650+ verified travel agents for 65+ domestic and international destinations.