Prince Harry with Major General Martin Smith MBE, Commandant General Royal Marines in 2014.

The Queen has formally appointed Prince Harry Captain General Royal Marines.

He will assume the role in succession to his grandfather, HRH The Duke of Edinburgh.

The Duke's association with the Royal Marines dates back 64 years to 2nd June 1953, when he was appointed Captain General in succession to the late King George VI.

He was mentored for several years by his uncle Lord Mountbatten, who was an honorary General in the Corps as head of the Royal Navy, and recently praised as a "wonderful figurehead" in occasion of his final solo royal engagement:

"With somebody who's head of the Corps, who's quite exceptional in what he does, it makes the Corps exceptional, it builds our Commando spirit and he's a wonderful figurehead for all Royal Marines to look up to."

Prince Harry was also present upon becoming Captain General Royal Marines.

Major General Rob Magowan, Commandant General Royal Marines, thanked the Duke of Edinburgh for his commitment to the Corps and welcomed his successor:

"In an ever-changing world, His Royal Highness has remained a reassuring constant. The Duke’s interest, support, encouragement, inspiration and ready humour will be sorely missed...

"I am delighted by the announcement that Her Majesty The Queen has appointed Prince Harry to be our next Captain General.

"I look forward to His Royal Highness developing a deep and enduring relationship with the Royal Marines and know that the Corps Family will provide the warmest of welcomes.”

The role previously involved regular visits to the Marines on exercise in Norway and at the headquarters of 3 Commando Brigade in Plymouth.

In 2013, Prince Harry stepped in for his grandfather at the opening ceremony of a new amphibious centre for the Royal Marines.

Senior Royal Marine Generals, including the head of the Special Boat Service (SBS), saluted him on that occasion, despite him wearing his Army Air Corps Captain uniform at the time:

The role sees a senior officer informing the Prince about all events and producing reports on the amphibious fighting force.

Prince Harry is said to have a good relationship with the Royal Marines, having fought alongside them in Afghanistan during his time as an Apache helicopter pilot.

He left the Army in 2015, and before this appointment, he was the only current member of the Royal family who did not hold an honorary position in the Armed Forces.