Texo Group, one of the UK’s fastest growing technology and engineering services companies has today announced the appointment of Major General Martin Smith CB MBE to its main board as a non-executive advisor.

Major General Smith is a former serving Royal Marines officer who was Commandant General Royal Marines from 2014 to 2016. He was previously commander of 3 Commando Brigade, and before that Commanding Officer of 30 Commando Information Exploitation Group and Deputy Commander of 3 Commando Brigade.

John Wood, Chief Operating Officer, Texo Group said: “I am delighted to welcome Martin to the Group. It is both a personal and professional honour to have someone of Martin’s prominence and experience join our advisory board.

His vast experience in overcoming the challenges faced during major deployments and extensive maritime operations will be of particular value in developing our broad range of services for our clients, across multiple sectors.

As a former Royal Marines Commando myself, I know first-hand the importance of leadership and experience and Martin, as his superlative military career proves, has these in abundance.”

Mr Wood added: “Martin will bring a new dimension to our board, providing counsel and support to help us move forward in this high growth stage in our development.”

Martin Smith commented: “I relish my new role with Texo; it is an exciting time to be involved with the business. From a standing start it has grown rapidly and has become one of the most dynamic technology and engineering groups in the UK.”

Martin Smith retired from the military in 2017 and is currently Operations Director of cyber security specialists Cyber Prism Maritime Limited.

Texo Group was created in response to the market need for an experienced and highly skilled multidisciplinary engineering team to deliver technology-led asset services.

The Group services multiple sectors, including: Oil & Gas, Clean Energy & Renewables, Marine, Nuclear, Telecommunications, Utilities and critical civil/Infrastructure.