Barry Davis, a member of the AFL Hall of Fame and a true pioneer of the sport, died at the age of 80 on Wednesday evening.

Davis played 289 games for Essendon and the Kangaroos, winning three VFL premierships in his career as a defender and ruck rover between 1961 and 1975.

He holds the incredibly rare feat of being named in both the North Melbourne and the Bombers’ Teams of the Century.

Richmond v Essendon | SAT 7:40PM | LIVE with no ad breaks during play on Kayo | New to Kayo? Start your free trial today >

Davis also coached the Bombers from 1978 to 1980.

“Barry Davis was a brilliant defender and ruck rover who was one of the greats of the VFL in the 1960s and 1970s,” AFL chief executive Andrew Dillon said.

“A triple premiership player and five-time best and fairest winner across his career, he was also a regular state representative for Victoria and a hero to young fans at both of his clubs.

“Barry will be remembered as a pivotal player at both the Bombers and the Kangaroos and we send our sympathies to his family, many friends and past teammates.”

Davis played 218 games for Essendon, featuring in premiership-winning sides in 1962 and 1965 and captaining the Bombers between 1970-71.

Renowned for his professionalism, Davis moved to North in 1973, again captaining the side and leading the Roos to their first ever VFL premiership in 1975 in what proved to be his final senior match.

Named in the Australian Football Hall of Fame in 1997, he was also awarded legend status at Essendon in 2006.

“Barry Davis was not only a great of our football club, but of Australian football more broadly,” Essendon chief executive Craig Vozzo said.

“His impact at both Essendon and North Melbourne was enormous and he will always be remembered and celebrated.

“His position as a Hall of Fame Legend and life member shows the high esteem he’s held in by our club.

“When Essendon people think of Barry, they will remember him both as a champion player and true gentleman.

“Everyone involved with Essendon send their thoughts to Barry’s family and friends during this difficult time.”

North Melbourne president Dr Sonja Hood also paid tribute to Davis, who is remembered in a similar vein to another Kangaroos legend, Ron Barassi, who coached the 1975 premiership winning team.

“Barry was a universally respected figure across the AFL and is one of the few people to be named in two clubs’ Teams of the Century,” Hood said.

“So many people connected to that first great era of our club credit Barry – alongside coach Ron Barassi – with lifting the expectation of our players and supporters after a long run without the ultimate success.

“The wonderful pictures of Barry kissing our first VFL/AFL Premiership Cup are among the most iconic in our 155-year history and he’ll be forever remembered as a North Melbourne champion.”

North Melbourne players will wear black armbands in honour of Davis and 1962 Best and Fairest Bill Serong, who passed away earlier this week, in Saturday’s match against Port Adelaide in Hobart.

There was also widespread respect paid to Davis on social media after his sad passing.

TheTruthNMFC account wrote on X: “If Barry Davis wasn’t the best recruit in our Club’s history he was certainly the most influential. RIP.”

Herald Sun journalist Glenn McFarlane wrote: “Being a member of a team of the century is a massive honour for any footy champion. Imagine being a part of two TOTC … that was the seismic impact Barry Davis – who died on Wednesday, aged 80 – had on two clubs, Essendon and North Melbourne. Vale Barry.”

The AFL Fans Association wrote: “(The AFLFA) sends its best wishes to family & friends of Barry Davis, who passed away at the age of 80. Barry was a triple premiership player and five-time (best and fairest) winner across his career, playing 289 games for Essendon and North Melbourne from 1961 to 1975.”

Sports journalist Rohan Connolly wrote: “Really sad to hear of Barry Davis’ passing. Terrific ruck-rover & half-back for Essendon, then as North Melbourne’s first premiership captain. Ahead of his time as a coach and helped set up Kevin Sheedy’s premiership teams of 1984-85. Most importantly, a lovely, decent man. RIP.”