Ben Gordon, Chicago Bull guard, has thrown down some serious dunks over unsuspecting opponents

Toward the later part of Ben Gordon’s 2008 season he became one of the best players on the Bulls bolstered by the fact that he lead his team in scoring

There were dozens of amazing plays during the past few NBA seasons and one in particular had to be the Ben Gordon dunk over Tyrus Thomas. Ben Gordon, a great player in his own right, has never been known as a dominant dunker. As a guard, Gordon is more known for his passing and shooting abilities rather than his ability to “posterize” a defender with a dunk. But the play over Thomas would have been an incredible dunk even for a Bull alumnus named Michael Jordan.

Ben Gordon’s Uconn career established him as a can’t-miss prospect when he was drafted by the Chicago Bulls with the 3rd overall pick in the first round. When he first broke into the league in 2004, the 6’-3’ guard established himself as an immediate impact player by becoming the first rookie to win the NBA’s Sixth Man Award. By the 2007 – 2008 season, Gordon was leading the Bulls in scoring and was a bona fide all-star. Not to mention he also provided plenty of highlight reel material along the way as well.

One such moment was the dunk over Tyrus Thomas which happened to be off an alley-oop pass from Frank Williams at the top of the key. Gordon took off along the base line and just elevated over the defender for the slam. To fully appreciate the moment you had to see it in slow motion during an instant replay. The most astonishing thing about the play had to be the height at which Gordon grabbed the pass and slammed it home. Replays show Gordon’s elbows just about even with the rim which would put his hands about two feet above the rim. That is the definition of serious hang time.

Another great Ben Gordon dunk showcased his ability to beat his man one on one and take it to the hole with authority. The Chicago Bulls were home against the Denver Nuggets during the 2007 – 2008 season when Gordon threw down this dunk during the second quarter. With his defender backing off slightly at the top of the key, Gordon burst past him and took off from just inside the circle to throw down a one-handed jam over two frozen defenders.

From his days at the University of Connecticut to his days with the Chicago Bulls, Ben Gordon has demonstrated the ability to be a dominant player. Not only is he the current Bull record holder for completed three-point field goals, he also hit a record nine straight three-point field goals in a row. But in addition to his shooting prowess, Ben Gordon has the ability to throw down some serious dunks over his opponents. Gordon has been in the NBA for only five years so one can only imagine the highlights that await fans in the future.