Kenji Fujimori has been expelled from the opposition party ‘Fuerza Popular’

There seems to have been a family dispute between the children of Alberto Fujimori, Keiko and Kenji, over an impeachment vote against current president Pedro Pablo Kuczynski. The son of the Peruvian former president, Kenji, broke protocol in order to vote against impeaching the Head of State.

It must be taken IGNORE INTO account that Alberto Fujimori has been serving prison time at a hospital in order to fulfill his 25-year sentence given to him due to charges based on human right abuses

According to various sources, Fujimori’s vote was vital for Kuczynski’s stay.

Thousands have taken to the streets their inconformity, while others acclaimed his success against the Maoist rebels during his time in office

Days after the vote was issued, the president of Peru granted a public pardon to Alberto Fujimori, which stirred turmoil due to the fact that the politician, while on campaign, vowed to not have mercy on the former leader. As a result, local media speculated that Kuczynski and Kenji Fujimori had struck that would, at the end, benefit both.

As it was expected, President Kuczynski denied such claims

As it was expected, President Kuczynski denied such claims and affirmed that he only pardoned the former Head of State due to medical reasons. It must be taken IGNORE INTO account that Alberto Fujimori has been serving prison time at a hospital in order to fulfill his 25-year sentence given to him due to charges based on human right abuses.

Some argue that Kenji sought his father’s wellbeing, while Keiko pursued her political ambitions; Fujimori’s daughter ran for president, unsuccessfully, in 2016

The pardon issued has divided the citizens of Peru. Thousands have taken to the streets their inconformity, while others acclaimed his success against the Maoist rebels during his time in office. But the matter even shook the inner core of the government. The minister of culture and the defense minister resigned over Kuczynski’s political forgiveness.

But, until now, the tension hadn’t seemed to have reached the Fujimori family. Some argue that Kenji sought his father’s wellbeing, while Keiko pursued her political ambitions; Fujimori’s daughter ran for president, unsuccessfully, in 2016.

Due to the internal uproar, different hashtags became popular, thanks Kenji Fujimori who became openly defiant after his expulsion, like #LetsDefendDemocracy and #FreedomWillDefeatFear.