December 2023

Simply put, Grey College inside centre Pieter van der Merwe is hot property!

Right now in senior pro rugby it’s versatile Old Grey David Kriel (Class of 2017) who seems to have turned a corner in his fledgling career and is putting in useful performances in the 12-jersey for the high flying Bulls.

Before Kriel’s time at Grey, several students made big names for themselves via brilliant performances at inside centre. Robert Ebersohn, Francois Venter, Paul Jordaan and Jan Serfontein were as good as they come. All four played SA Schools. All four represented the SA u20 Baby Boks. All four went on to have successful senior rugby careers. Serfontein and Venter went all to the top and became Springboks.

Pieter van der Merwe’s talent and form suggests he belongs in the same conversation as the aforementioned great players.

The converted loose-forward was already one of the top players of 2023, thanks to eye-catching performances, which saw him combine elements of physicality, pace, strength on his feet and pure self-determination to rake up plenty of metres and memorable plays. What really sets him apart is that dominance and confidence of this nature is normally reserved for seniors while he was still just an under-17, with a year to go.

This year at 1st XV level, he had star players Ian van der Merwe (10) and Benito Goede (13) to work with.

The only consideration is will he have the same exceptional quality on his inside and outside in 2024 to aid him reach the same dizzy heights of 2023?

It’s not an unusual requirement.

Robert Ebersohn had his twin Sias Ebersohn (10) and Johan “Schallas” van Schalkwyk (13).

Francois Venter had the likes of Franna du Toit (10) and Piet Lindeque (13)

Paul Jordaan had Johan Goosen (10) and William Small-Smith (13)

Jan Serfontein had Pieter Jordaan (10) and Dries Swanepoel (13)

2024 promises to be the schoolboy rugby “Year of the Inside Centre!”

Numerous hot prospects will be lining up to do plenty of damage on the schoolboy rugby fields across the country.

The list which is sure to grow already includes the following with 1st XV experience who are expected back in 2024:

A dozen of the best 12’s

As of March 2024 amongst those top performers: