Sigma Pi Alpha Sorority, Inc. is a Chicana/Latina-based, Greek letter, intercollegiate sorority founded in 1996 at the University of California, Berkeley by nine women who saw the need to create a close network of Latinas. Their goal was to make a difference in their communities starting with addressing the needs of Chicana/Latina women. Our Founding Mothers specifically selected the Greek letters (ΣΠΑ) to symbolize our Chicana/Latina heritage by spelling ELLA, meaning she/her in Spanish. A sister of Sigma Pi Alpha Sorority, Inc. is known as an ELLA or a Sigma.

Although Sigma Pi Alpha Sorority, Inc. is a Chicana/Latina organization by tradition, membership is open to all college females. We are not affiliated with the Greek Panhellenic System. We are a non-profit grassroots organization and do not affiliate with any National Fraternity and Sorority Councils. We are an established sisterhood governed by our own direct National Council.

Motto: Mujeres con Cultura, Fuerza y Hermandad.

Pillars: Community Service, Campus Involvement, Sisterhood

Colors: Midnight Green, Pearl, Shimmering Gold, Onyx

Flower: Calla Lily

Mascot: Golden Bear

Goals:

1. To enhance Chicana/Latina heritage within the sorority.

2. To be involved within campus and our communities.

3. To promote higher education in future generations.

4. To address academics, sisterhood, and personal and individual needs.

5. To create a sisterhood in which we can communicate and express ourselves with trust and security.

6. To form a sisterhood where we can receive support and a commitment that will last a lifetime.

7. To follow a code of conduct representative to us as a sorority and as Chicana/Latina women.

Purpose:

The letters we wear represent our sisterhood, our commitment to each other, and to our goals.

For ourselves we are a sisterhood of academic and personal support, trust, and understanding.

For our campus we sponsor informative and social activities. We support our fellow Raza organizations and network with other campus resources and groups.

For our community our priority is to promote higher education through mentoring, tutoring, scholarships and to overall support Chicana/Latina youth. However, we address other community issues as well.

We are involved in social issues that directly affect our Latino community.