The top fraternities and sororities for business majors provide college students with experiences and opportunities that they won’t find anywhere else. Some of the top organizations of this type have branches on campuses across the country and host networking events that let students from different campuses to get to know one another. They can also meet alumni who majored in business, find internships and jobs working for alumni and take part in service learning programs to help others.

Alpha Kappa Psi

Alpha Kappa Psi is one of the top business fraternities operating in the world today. According to its official website, it has chapters on more than 200 college campuses and has a membership of more than 200,000 current and former students. There are branches in the United States and in other countries, including Canada and the United Kingdom too. The fraternity encourages students to connect with each other via its main website, which also sells clothing and merchandise for members. Alpha Kappa Psi created its own foundation as a way to give back to those in need and allows both alumni and current students to volunteer their time.

Delta Sigma Pi

The very first branch of Delta Sigma Pi opened in 1907 at New York University but now has chapters in dozens of states and maintains its headquarters in Oxford, Ohio. In addition to its college chapters, it also has chapters set up that allow alumni to participate in special events and activities. Though originally only open to those with an interest in finance or accounting, the frat later admitted students majoring in other areas of business and opened membership to female students too. It operates multiple programs designed to improve the leadership skills of members.

Epsilon Nu Tau

Some of the best fraternities and sororities for business majors are only open to students studying a specific aspect of business. One of the top is Epsilon Nu Tau, which is open to students interested in entrepreneurship. Founded in 2008, it is one of the newer business frats. Its first chapter opened on the campus of the University of Dayton before spreading to other campuses in Ohio. There are now nine chapters in Ohio, Pennsylvania, Texas, Michigan, California and New Jersey. Members often come together to discuss ideas for creating their own companies and to talk about advances in the entrepreneurship field.

Phi Gamma Nu

Though men started many of the top business fraternities, Phi Gamma Nu is one of the only fraternities that started as an organization by and for women. Six women came together at Northwestern University in the 1920s to start a fraternity for female students. The organization now has three goals in place: to foster a professional attitude in all members, to offer social opportunities for members and to offer philanthropic activities to help others. One of its philanthropic programs is an annual dance marathon. Held in Philadelphia, this fundraising effort brings in thousands of dollars every year.

Business fraternities offer opportunities for students like professional networking events and fundraising programs. All money raised goes to support other organizations and individuals in need. The top fraternities and sororities for business majors include organizations that have chapters on multiple college campuses like Epsilon Nu Tau and Alpha Kappa Psi that help both current students and alumni.