Fraternities and Sororities

Interfraternity Council (IFC)

The Interfraternity Council is the governing body of the North-American Interfraternity Conference organizations and other fraternities recognized by inter/national organizations. The represented fraternities participate in year-long recruitment initiatives, meaning they are able to extend a bid, or invitation to membership, to any man meeting the academic requirements at any time. The Interfraternity Council holds an organized formal recruitment in September to allow interested men the opportunity to meet and get to know all organizations.

IFC Organizations

Alpha Sigma Phi

Delta Chi

Kappa Alpha Order

Pi Kappa Phi

Phi Gamma Delta

Sigma Phi Epsilon

Sigma Pi

National Pan-Hellenic Council (NPHC)

The National Pan-Hellenic Council governs seven of the nine National Pan-Hellenic Council fraternities and sororities. Membership intake is different for each NPHC organization. These organizations typically look for students that have at least 12 earned credit hours, maintain a certain GPA, and have completed service hours. Potential members should look for respective chapter informational meetings as a starting point to the intake process. Those who are interested are encouraged to research the history of each organization, visit their national website, and learn of their respective membership requirements.

NPHC Organizations

Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority, Inc.

Alpha Phi Alpha Fraternity, Inc.

Delta Sigma Theta Sorority, Inc.

Phi Beta Sigma Fraternity, Inc.

Sigma Gamma Rho Sorority, Inc.

Zeta Phi Beta Sorority, Inc.

Omega Psi Phi Fraternity, Inc.

College Panhellenic Council (CPC)

The College Panhellenic Council supports the women's fraternities and sororities that are represented by membership in the National Panhellenic Conference. The Panhellenic Council hosts its primary recruitment process in August. An Executive Board made up of eight sorority women work year-round to promote unity within the sororities, through bi-weekly delegation meetings, frequent events for the whole CPC community, hosting Formal Recruitment each year, and much more. The Executive Board works to promote the Panhellenic mission and vision of building relationships on trust through transparency, accountability and mutual respect. Innovation and core values of friendship, leadership, service, knowledge, integrity and community guide us in fulfilling our mission. Visit the College Panhellenic Council Website.

CPC Organizations

Alpha Delta Pi

Alpha Xi Delta

Chi Omega

Gamma Phi Beta

Sigma Kappa

Phi Sigma Sigma

Sigma Sigma Sigma (joining our community in Fall 2024!)

Unrecognized Organizations

Students should only pursue membership in one of the approved and recognized organizations listed above. Joining unrecognized organizations is not recommended or supported by Coastal Carolina University.

If students are interested in discussing new organizations, they are welcome to visit the Office of Fraternity and Sorority Life in the Lib Jackson Student Union, B201.

The following are organizations which are currently unrecognized by the university: