HODGENVILLE, Ky. — Never mind that young Abe left in obscurity after his family's frontier land squabbles. Or that years later voters from his old Kentucky home didn't support his run for the presidency.

This town now proudly embraces Abraham Lincoln as a native son, though its status as his birthplace hasn't kept it from being overshadowed by other places more famously associated with the Great Emancipator.

But locals are hoping that changes with a two-year national celebration commemorating the 200th anniversary of Lincoln's 1809 birth in a small cabin at Sinking Spring farm near what became Hodgenville.

"We hope the world will know that Hodgenville exists. This is where Lincoln came from, and this is our heritage," said Janice Bowen, an area resident.

Hodgenville — a central Kentucky town of about 3,000, established a couple of years

after Lincoln's family left for Indiana — has been spruced up in preparation for the hoped-for tourists.

The smell of fresh paint recently wafted through the quaint Lincoln Museum, where visitors can gaze upon a life-size portrait of the famous native Kentuckian, dioramas tracing his life and a three-drawer chest crafted by a man who as a childhood friend of Lincoln saved the future president from drowning. Outside, a new roundabout leads traffic past a striking Lincoln statue that serves as the centerpiece of town square.

"Most people are looking at it as company's coming," said Iris LaRue, the Lincoln Museum director.

Lincoln seems omnipresent. His name is attached to a bank, an elementary school and even a consignment shop. A new sculpture portraying a youthful Lincoln will be unveiled downtown on May 31. But in the 1860 election that catapulted Lincoln to the White House as the 16th president, he received only a handful of votes from LaRue County — where the Lincoln birthplace is located, an indication that locals didn't realize he was a native son, said Tommy Turner, the county judge-executive.

The Abraham Lincoln Birthplace National Historic Site features an imposing neoclassical structure made of granite and marble that enshrines a tiny cabin symbolic of the rustic homestead where Lincoln was born.

Two years after his birth, the Lincolns moved a few miles away to Knob Creek farm, where young Abe formed his earliest memories. The birthplace site draws about 200,000 people each year, and officials are expecting "a noticeable bump" in visitations this year amid Lincoln hoopla, said Keith Pruitt, the site's superintendent.

LaRue predicts twice as many visitors this year to the Lincoln Museum, which usually draws about 30,000 a year.

Locals say Lincoln's Kentucky roots are a history lesson not everyone has learned.

Turner recalls telling someone at an out-of-state convention that he was from Lincoln's hometown. The man replied, "Where at in Illinois?" Turner told him Lincoln was born in Kentucky.

"I'm not sure he actually believed me because it's so ingrained in everyone's mind that Lincoln is from Illinois," said Turner, co-chairman of the Kentucky Abraham Lincoln Bicentennial Commission.

Lincoln tributes are planned around the country in the next couple of years, but it's appropriate to start where Lincoln's life began, said Harold Holzer, a noted Lincoln scholar and co-chairman of the national Lincoln Bicentennial Commission.

"You're standing in the spot where the greatest American life started," he said, adding that Lincoln remains "the quintessential symbol of the American dream."

In Spencer County, Ind., the kickoff event will be a Mother's Day celebration this spring at the Lincoln Boyhood National Memorial, site of the farm where Lincoln lived from age 7 to 21.

Other events include a Civil War-era ball and a pioneer Thanksgiving-style dinner — an acknowledgment that Lincoln issued a presidential proclamation setting aside a day in November as a day of Thanksgiving.

Local officials hope the bicentennial will boost interest in Lincoln's formative years in Indiana. The Lincoln boyhood site features a wooded trail, a living history farm, a memorial at the site where the Lincoln family's cabin stood and a cemetery where Lincoln's mother is buried.

"You can walk through the same woods that Lincoln walked through," said Melissa Miller, executive director of the Spencer County Visitors Bureau.

Illinois — the state most synonymous with Lincoln — also is planning a full array of activities as part of the extended celebration. Kay Smith, coordinator of the state's Abraham Lincoln Bicentennial Commission, predicted a surge in interest in the many Lincoln historic sites in Springfield, where Lincoln called home for nearly a quarter century, and other places in the state.

Turner, the LaRue County judge-executive, has a Lincoln bust in his office and said the birthplace should be a pilgrimage for any president.

"Every president that served since Lincoln wants to be Lincoln, in terms of gaining the stature and for doing the right thing," he said. "I can't imagine why anyone who wants to emulate the man would not want to be here to pay respect at his birth site."

Lincoln Birthplace: 2995 Lincoln Farm Road. Hodgenville, Ky., www.nps.gov/abli or 270-358-3137. Open Labor Day through Memorial Day, 8 a.m.-4:45 p.m.. Open Memorial Day through Labor Day, 8 a.m.-6:45 p.m. Free admission. Located about 45 minutes from Louisville airport. Getting there: Driving from the North: Take Interstate 65 South to Exit 91 (Elizabethtown). Follow KY 61 (Lincoln Parkway) 13 miles south to US 31E. Take US 31E south 1.3 miles to the park, picnic entrance on left and main entrance on right. From the South: Take Interstate 65 North to Exit 81 (Sonora). Proceed east on KY 84 to KY 61. Turn right on KY 61, then turn right onto US 31E 1.3 miles to park; picnic entrance on left and main entrance on right.

If you go