When Thomas E. Blamey boards a cruise ship, sun and relaxation are far from his mind. Instead, the 42-year-old executive, who was appointed president and chief executive of Sitmar Cruises on Wednesday, is far more likely to be reconnoitering his competitors' vessels or determining whether his ship's laundry can return shirts unwrinkled.

Mr. Blamey, who has headed Sitmar's Australia sister company since 1979, succeeds John P. Bland in the top post at the cruise company's North American operation, which has three ships operating out of its home port of Los Angeles. Mr. Bland, who headed the line for 14 years, resigned last week and declined to offer a reason for his departure in a memo to employees.

Sitmar's parent company, V Group, is based in Monte Carlo, Monaco, and is owned by Boris Vlasov, a Russian immigrant. The company got its start in Genoa, Italy, shipping coal, but it switched to carrying passengers and since 1971 has found its market with seagoing vacationers.

''It is like running a hotel, except this one has to move,'' said Mr. Blamey, who took his first cruise while serving as an outside management consultant to Sitmar for McKinsey & Company in Australia.

At the time, he had been retained to suggest ways to improve profits and revenues and polish the image of Sitmar, which was best known for its role in bringing European settlers to Australia after World War II. After receiving Mr. Blamey's report, Sitmar turned to him to manage the Fairstar, which cruises from Sydney, Australia, to Tahiti and New Zealand, and to establish its name among travel agents.

A native of Melbourne, Australia, Mr. Blamey takes the helm in North America as Sitmar is changing its course a bit. The line, which expects to carry 100,000 passengers this year on tours that cost between $1,395 and $5,065, will add three new ships to its aging fleet. The company is already straying from its traditional, one- and two-week warm-water Caribbean itineraries, with new cruises to the Amazon and Montreal. Carnival Cruise, although offering shorter trips and appealing to a younger crowd, is Sitmar's main North American competitor.

After graduating from the University of Melbourne and Harvard Business School, Mr. Blamey joined the Bristol-Myers Company in New York as an assistant product manager. Among his projects were Vitalis and lesser-known brands of toothpaste and hand cream. He set up a new-product department for Bristol-Myers in New Zealand and later ran the company's Clairol hair-care products division in Australia.