Urdu Poetry Noshi Gilani 1

Download

Free Version

Publisher Description

Noshi Gilani is a famous female poet belonging from Pakistan. ... She has written few poetry books.

Excellent and marvellous collection of poetry in urdu language.

This app is our tribute and is dedicated to the memories of one of the greatest poets of twentieth century.

Please don't forget to rate us 5 to improve more and share with your friends. Thanks

About Urdu Poetry Noshi Gilani

Urdu Poetry Noshi Gilani is a free app for Android published in the Reference Tools list of apps, part of Education.

The company that develops Urdu Poetry Noshi Gilani is appsdokan. The latest version released by its developer is 1.

To install Urdu Poetry Noshi Gilani on your Android device, just click the green Continue To App button above to start the installation process. The app is listed on our website since 2016-08-02 and was downloaded 29 times. We have already checked if the download link is safe, however for your own protection we recommend that you scan the downloaded app with your antivirus. Your antivirus may detect the Urdu Poetry Noshi Gilani as malware as malware if the download link to apd.shayari.NoshiGilani is broken.

How to install Urdu Poetry Noshi Gilani on your Android device:

Click on the Continue To App button on our website. This will redirect you to Google Play.

Once the Urdu Poetry Noshi Gilani is shown in the Google Play listing of your Android device, you can start its download and installation. Tap on the Install button located below the search bar and to the right of the app icon.

A pop-up window with the permissions required by Urdu Poetry Noshi Gilani will be shown. Click on Accept to continue the process.

Urdu Poetry Noshi Gilani will be downloaded onto your device, displaying a progress. Once the download completes, the installation will start and you'll get a notification after the installation is finished.

Program Details

General

Publisher appsdokan Released Date 2016-08-02 Languages English

Category

Category Education Subcategory Reference Tools

System requirements

Operating systems android

Download information

File size Total downloads 29

Pricing

License model Free Price N/A

Version History

Here you can find the changelog of Urdu Poetry Noshi Gilani since it was posted on our website on 2016-09-29. The latest version is 1 and it was updated on soft112.com on 12 June, 2024. See below the changes in each version:

version 1

posted on 2016-08-02

RELATED PROGRAMS

Our Recommendations