Noshi Gillani is a globally acclaimed Urdu poet and an alumnus of Bahawalpur University, Pakistan. She is one of Pakistan’s prominent Urdu poets and has competently published five poetry collections. In 2008 her poems were translated into Urdu and were recited in the U.K. This article has all the information about her, including Noshi Gillani Biography.

Title Description Personal Name: Noshi Gillani In Urdu: نوشی گیلانی Famous As: Poetess Nationality: Pakistani Education: Islamia University Religion: Islam Profession: Poetry Born Date: 14 March 1964 Place: Bahawalpur Family Ethnicity: Gilani Spouse: Saeed Khan Career

Noshi Gillani Biography

The frankness and openness of her exceptionally-charged poetry are rare for a female writer in Urdu. She has earned a broad international fan base, frequently performing at big poetry gatherings in the United States, Canada, Australia, and Pakistan. Unfamiliar outside of Pakistani society, the translations introduced her to an ‘English-speaking’ community.

Her life experience in the USA has a considerable influence on her substantial number of literary works. Living in the Diaspora has expanded the depth of her poetry, enhanced her sense of feminine identity, and brought about a new movement against the constraint of artistic writers in Pakistani culture.

Noshi Date of Birth

She was born in 1964 in Pakistan.

Education of Noshi

She is an alumnus of Bahawalpur’s Islamia University.

Noshi Gillani Family

She moved to San Francisco in 1995. After her getting married to Saeed Khan, an Australian-born Urdu poet, she settled in Australia in 2008. The couple is residing in Sydney.

Literary Career

In 2008, her poetry was translated in ‘English.’ And her poetry was recited in the United Kingdom with a tour of World Poets to poetry translation centre. She is also honoured for co-translating Les Murray, a famous Australian poet into Urdu dialect and these writings were featured in the December 2011edition of ‘Tasteer Literary Magazine’ of Islamabad.

She also did hosting of a tribute to Pathanay Khan, a folk singer. This tribute was sponsored by PNCA (Pakistan National Arts Council).

Co-Founder of Australian Urdu Academy

She is co-founder of the Australian Urdu Academy (Sydney). This Academy arranges monthly meetings in Sydney to foster Urdu literature and poetry.

Hawaa Chupkey Sey Kehte Hei -A Huge Success

Her new poetry book ‘Hawaa Chupkey Sey Kehte Hei’ was published in Lahore, in June 2011. This book got a lot of positive feedback, and its 1st edition was sold out in just two hours of its release in Urdu Bazar. This poetry book has generated a lot of interest and excitement among Urdu readers and literati since her last poetry compilation was released in 2003.

Noshi Gillani Books

Muhabatain Jub Shumar Krna

Udaas Honey Key Din Nahein

Pehla Lafaz Muhabat Likha

Selected poems like Ay Mery Sharek-E-Risaal-E-Jan

Ham Tera Intezar Kartey Rahe

Hawaa Chupkay Sey Kehti Hey

Noshi Gillani poems

Social Media Handles

Her social media account include