GERMAN WORLD WAR II PILOTS: GORDON GOLLOB, PETER DUTTMANN, ERWIN FISCHER, HANS-JOACHIM KROSCHINSKI and FRITZ TEGTMEIER

Color 1971 commemorative photo honoring the 50th anniversary of the Royal Australian Air Force, signed by four World War II Luftwaffe figher aces - Gordon Gollob, Peter Duttmann, Erwin Fischer, Hans-Joachim Kroschinski and Fritz Tegtmeier - and Erwin Fischer, one of only two Luftwaffe reconnaissance pilots to receive the Knight's Cross with Oak Leaves during the war. Accompanied by seven small unsigned b/w wartime photos of all five signers.

Commemorative envelope signed "Peter Duttman", "Gollob/[illegible]", "Fritz Tegtmeier", "Erwin Fischer/1F/121" and "Hans Kroschinski" in blue and black inks. Black ink stamps on front and red ink stamps and blue ink stamped bios for each signer on verso. Color, 6¼x4¼. Postmarked Sydney, Australia, Aug. 13, 1971 and Lord Howe Island, Australia, Aug. 17, 1971. Commemorative envelope honoring the 50th anniversary of the Royal Australian Air Force, as well as the flight of a Royal New Zealand Air Force Short Sunderland Mark V flying boat and patrol bomber from Lord Howe Island to Sydney to mark the event. Address label in bottom right corner to Flight Lieutenant D. Fulluck c/o Post Office, Lord Howe Island, Australia. One color 6-cent Royal Australian Air Force stamp affixed. Stamps and postmarks touch Gollob, Tegtmeier and Fischer's signatures. Otherwise in fine condition. Accompanied by: Sevenunsigned wartime photos of all seven signers. Blue and red ink stamps on verso. B/w, various sizes, none larger than 5¾x4, printed on cardstock. Lightly toned, bowed and stained. Otherwise in fine condition. German fighter ace GOLLOB (1912-1987) was a Luftwaffe fighter pilot during World War II and the first fighter pilot to earn 150 aerial victories, which he claimed in course of 340 missions.He claimed these victories between Sept. 5, 1939 and Aug. 29, 1942, mostof which (144) were recorded over Germany's Eastern Front. He rose to the rank of General der Jagdflieger and was awarded the Iron Cross, 1st and 2nd Class, and the Knight's Cross with Oak Leaves, Swords and Diamonds. German fighter ace DUTTMAN (1923-2001) flew with the Luftwaffe on Germany's Eastern Front from 1943 until the end of World War II. During that time, he tallied a total of 152 kills during 398 missions. He was reportedly shot down 17 times but never wounded. Duttman's decorations included the Knight's Cross of the Iron Cross. German fighter ace KROSCHINSKI (1920-1995) tallied a total of 76 aerial victories during World War II. Ironically, his flying career was cut short on Dec. 24, 1944 by the rear gunner of a Soviet Petlyakov Pe-2, one of five Pe-2s that shot down that day; his injuries cost him his sight and one of his legs. His decorations included the Knight's Cross. German fighter ace TEGTMEIER (1915-1999) flew for the Luftwaffe during World War II. He claimed a total of 146 aerial victories in 700 missions. His decorations included the Iron Cross, 1st and 2nd Class, and the Knight's Cross of the Iron Cross. German pilot FISCHER was a bomber and reconnaissance pilot for the Luftwaffe during World War II and one of only two reconnaissance pilots to earn the Knight's Cross with Oak Leaves during the war. He flew 585 missions.

This website image may contain our company watermark. The actual item does not contain this watermark

See more listings from these signers

Following offer submission users will be contacted at their account email address within 48 hours. Our response will be to accept your offer, decline your offer or send you a final counteroffer. All offers can be viewed from within the "Offer Review" area of your HistoryForSale account. Please review the Make Offer Terms prior to making an offer.

If you have not received an offer acceptance or counter-offer email within 24-hours please check your spam/junk email folder.