Grand Rapids, MN

About Grand Rapids

Grand Rapids is the largest town in Itasca County with 11,228 residents according to the 2020 census. Many people call the greater Grand Rapids area ‘Minnesota’s Outdoor Sports Capital’ due to the sheer number of outdoor sports in the area, including trail and mountain biking, hiking, fishing and kayaking the more than 1,000 lakes and rivers in the county, ski jumping, biathlon training, hunting, volleyball, and more. The city is also home to a thriving arts, theater, and music community.

Grand Rapid is the birthplace of singer and actress Judy Garland. The City has preserved her family home as a museum and built the Judy Garland (and Wizard of Oz) Museum & Children’s Museum next to it to honor her memory. A Judy Garland Festival is held every June.

Top Attractions

Attractions include a remarkable 31 miles of paved bike trails, dedicated mountain bike trails, Itasca County Historical Society, the restored 1895 Central School, Pokegama Golf Course, Veterans’ Memorial Park, and the gateway to the beautiful Chippewa National Forest.

Travel back in time to 1900 at the Forest History Center where costumed interpreters recreate life as it was in logging camps of the day. There is a visitor center as well as a moored Wanigan, the latter used as a floating bunkhouse and cook shack by river drivers moving logs downriver. Tip: Climb to the top of the fire lookout tower for a spectacular view.

History

Following the final retreat of glaciers from northeastern Minnesota approximately 10,000 years ago, native peoples migrated north and west. The Dakota people historically occupied the area. Lake Superior Chippewa (Ojibwe/Anishinaabe), the most populous tribe in North America, migrated westward and the Dakota moved west of the Mississippi in the seventeenth century. There were periods of peace and conflict between the two tribes. The stream of European American settlers into their territories inevitably resulted in the U.S. Government removing both tribes from their native territories and putting them on reservations.

Steamboats could travel the entire length of the Mississippi until they encountered the 3 ½ mile long impasse called the ‘The Grand Rapids.’ River trade made Grand Rapids, incorporated in 1872, one of the oldest settled communities along the Mesabi Iron Range. The rapids now lie flooded behind the 1902 Blandin Paper Mill.

The first major industry was the wholesale logging of the entire northeastern (‘arrowhead’) portion of the state. The Mississippi River was optimal for floating logs downstream to mills. While not quite a ‘major industry,’ fur trading with Native Americans preceded and overlapped logging. Mining soon followed and while there are inactive iron mines on three sides of Grand Rapids, many locals favor its timber heritage over mining. Tip: Ride across the footbridge east of the library and look at how narrow the Mississippi River is this far north.

Events & Festivities

Visit Grand Rapids has up to date information on the many local events and festivals such as Tall Timber Days, Itasca County Fair, Judy Garland Festival, White Oak Rendezvous, and the World’s Largest Wild Rice Festival.

Services

Grand Rapids is a major community offering any services needed, including a hospital.