Winter Haven - Mary Elizabeth Turner, 81, passed away peacefully on April 22, 2021 in Winter Haven, Fla. She was the daughter of the late Roy Turner Sr. and Delia (Lattof) Turner.

Mary was born in Essex, and graduated from St. Ann's High School in Gloucester.

Mary lived in Gloucester, Chalfont, PA, Port St. Lucie, FL and Winter Haven, Fla. She worked her entire career in human resources for the Prudential Insurance Company in Boston, MA and Horsham, PA, and relished her early retirement in sunny Florida. In recent years, she stayed active in her community association as Treasurer.

Mary cooked with a passion, tracking down exotic ingredients and sharing her culinary talents with friends and family. She especially enjoyed preparing the authentic Lebanese specialties of her youth. Mary was an avid puzzler and game-player, and in prior years, a spirited team bowler. She read regularly and listened to audible books, and could often be heard singing Christmas carols or upbeat tunes around the house. Mary was down-to-Earth and authentic, with a witty sense of humor, often striking up conversations with strangers in supermarkets or local diners. She took numerous health crises in stride, pressing on with her signature "matter-of-factness" and positive attitude. Above all, Mary was a devoted, supportive, and unflinchingly loyal sister, friend, and aunt, and "surrogate" mother and grandmother to many who count themselves blessed to have had her in their lives.

Mary is survived by her sister, Janice Turner of Our Sisters of Mercy, N.H, and her close friend and long-time companion, Lillian N. McTigue of Winter Haven, Fla. She is also survived by her many nieces, nephews, and cousins.

In addition to her parents, Mary was predeceased by her brother, Roy Turner Jr.; and her sisters, Rita Mason and Delaine Fitzgerald.

Donations in Mary's name can be made to the Breast Cancer Research Foundation.

There will be no immediate services because of COVID-19. A Celebration of Life will be held in Gloucester, this summer.