Mary Elizabeth Turner Britton, 94, passed from this earth into the loving arms of her Savior, Jesus Christ on September 5, 2021, at her home in Christian Assisted Living in Johnson City, Tennessee.

Born in Holly Grove, Arkansas, on January 20, 1927, Elizabeth was the daughter of Mahala Elizabeth Terry Turner and John William Turner. She graduated from Clarendon High School in 1944 and moved to Brinkley, Arkansas, with her family. A few years later, the family moved to Memphis, Tennessee.

While living in Memphis, Elizabeth met and married the love of her life, Wallace Britton, on June 10, 1947. They were married for over 72 years when Wallace died in December of 2019. She served with her husband in many Baptist churches in Kentucky, Virginia, Missouri, and Tennessee. Elizabeth’s service centered on ministering to children in all the churches. Her fondest time of service was in playing with children waiting for medical treatment at St. Jude’s Children’s Research Hospital in Memphis in the 1990’s. Elizabeth was a member of the Margaret McNeese Sunday School class and Central Baptist Church in Johnson City.

She was a loving wife, wonderful mother, and homemaker, who enjoyed gardening and sewing. Her family has fond memories of homemade dinners including Mom’s apple pie, pecan pie, chocolate peanut clusters, zucchini bread, and apple cake.

Mrs. Britton was preceded in death by her husband, Wallace, her parents, siblings, and son-in-love, Gary Anderson.

She will be missed by her children: Beth Anderson of Westerville, Ohio, John Britton (Sherry) of Marietta, Georgia, and Becky Parker (Burnie) of Fredericksburg, Virginia; grandchildren, Charles Anderson (Melanie), Michael Anderson (Roxanne), Amelia Britton Wilson (Craig), Will Britton, Jenny Parker Taylor (Kevin), and Jason Parker (Katie); great-grandchildren, Ethan Anderson, Hope Anderson, Koda Taylor, Marleigh Taylor, Alistair Wilson, Jasper Anderson, Asa Anderson, and Rocco Anderson.

Beth, John, and Becky wish to thank all those who ministered to our mother, particularly the members of the Margaret McNeese Sunday School class, ministers of Central Baptist Church, and friend, Janet Anglin. We also thank the loving nursing staff of Christian Assisted Living and those of Amedysis Hospice.

The family invites anyone who desires to join us for a committal service at 10:00 AM on Monday, September 13, at the Mountain Home National Cemetery Annex (215 Heroes Drive, Mountain Home, TN 37684). Following, a memorial service will be held at Central Baptist Church at 11:00 AM, with Dr. Tommy Hood officiating.

In lieu of flowers, the family requests that memorial gifts be given to Mission Dignity of GuideStone, an organization that assists Southern Baptist retired ministers and widows. That address is Mission Dignity, GuideStone, 5005 LBJ Freeway, Suite 200, Dallas, Texas, 75244-6152.