Novak Djokovic is a male professional tennis player who is widely regarded as one of the greatest athletes of all time.

Alongside fellow tennis legends Roger Federer and Rafael Nadal, Djokovic was part of the ‘Big Three’ that dominated the sport for over a decade.

And, since Federer has retired and Nadal has declined, the Serbian has been able to overtake the pair in terms of Grand Slam victories.

There is now a case to be made that Djokovic is the best to have ever picked up a tennis racket, and it will only get stronger as he continues to play at the highest level.

The Tennis Gazette tells you everything you need to know about Djokovic, including his profile, net worth, and Grand Slam history.

Profile

Where and when was Novak Djokovic born?

Djokovic was born in Belgrade, Serbia on May 22, 1987. Serbia was involved in the Yugoslav wars during his childhood, so it was often difficult to find places to train.

Djokovic still owns a home in Belgrade, though he has also purchased properties in Miami, New York and Monte Carlo.

How tall is Novak Djokovic?

Djokovic stands at a height of six feet, two inches tall or 1.88 meters.

More Tennis News

Which hand does Novak Djokovic play with?

While Djokovic largely plays with a two-handed backhand, the Serbian is a right-handed tennis player.

Tennis career

Novak Djokovic’s world ranking

Djokovic is currently second in the ATP Tour singles world rankings, behind Italian Jannik Sinner. However, the 37-year-old was ranked number one for a record 428 weeks, while he has also finished atop the year-end rankings a record eight times.

Novak Djokovic Grand Slam results

Djokovic won his first Grand Slam at the 2006 Australian Open, ending Federer and Nadal’s dominance of men’s tennis. He has gone on to win 24 Slams, more than any other player, including 10 Australian Open’s, three French Open’s, seven Wimbledon’s and four US Open’s.

Djokovic has played doubles at each of the four slams but his best finish came in the second round at Wimbledon 2006.

Novak Djokovic’s coaching team

Djokovic has been known to make regular coaching changes, having worked with tennis legends Boris Becker, Andre Agassi and Goran Ivanisevic at various times throughout his career. He hired Boris Bosnjakovic ahead of the 2024 French Open but his current coaching team remains unclear.

Novak Djokovic’s net worth

Djokovic’s net worth is $240 million, according to Celebrity Net Worth. As well as earning over $180m in prize money through playing tennis, he has signed a number of endorsement deals over the years, such as with Mercedes-Benz, Peugeot, Raiffeisen Bank International and Asics.

Family and friends

Novak Djokovic’s wife

Djokovic married his wife, Jelena, in 2014. Jelena is also from Belgrade and the pair were together for several years before their wedding in Montenegro a decade ago.

Novak Djokovic’s children

The Serbian couple gave birth to their son, Stefan, a few months after their wedding. Meanwhile, their daughter, Tara, was born in September 2017.

Novak Djokovic’s parents

Djokovic’s mother, Dijana, is from Croatia and his father, Srdjan, a former professional skier and ski coach, is from Serbia. As well as Novak, they have two other sons, Marko and Djordje, who have also played tennis professionally.

Social media

Novak Djokovic’s Instagram

You can find Djokovic on Instagram under the handle @djokernole. He has over 14.6 million followers and his bio reads: ‘Novak Djokovic’.

Novak Djokovic’s Twitter

The 24-time Grand Slam champion has over 9.2m followers on his Twitter/X account: @djokernole.