Characteristics

For a submersible design, pressure testing with a DOS is an ideal means to validate the integrity of pressure hulls before placing expensive electronics inside (Hardy & James, 2009). Pressure testing is required by all leading classification societies worldwide to ascertain the quality of the design and fabrication. It is critical to the safe use of deep-ocean equipment and is a vital tool to check whether the pressure structure is safe and reliable. While pressure testing always adds cost, it saves time and enhances confidence and security for a successful sea trial in the open ocean.

There are also some limitations of pressure testing in a deep-ocean pressure chamber. One is the limitation of space. The pressure chambers are very different from the “infinite volume” ocean, and the chamber wall could cause interactions by amplifying or dampening a shock wave in sympathetic implosion tests (Hardy & James, 2009; Sachin et al., 2015). Another limitation is that the DOS can only simulate the pressure environment, but the real deep-sea world is a very complicated environment including salinity, temperature, and turbulence changes.

According to the maximum depth of the ocean, the FOD pressure could be about 115 MPa. In addition, the maximum test pressure could be from 1.1 to 1.5 times of the FOD pressure for the DOS (American Bureau of Shipping [ABS], 2020). Thus, to simulate the FOD pressure environment, a deep-ocean pressure chamber should operate to about 180 MPa. To satisfy the 6,000-m–depth underwater environment, the test pressure should be more than 90 MPa, and this can account for over 95% of the undersea area (Huang et al., 2019). Due to this consideration, this paper will mainly focus on the deep-ocean pressure chambers with more than 90 MPa of operating pressure. Figure 2 shows a common type of deep-ocean pressure chamber with a 0.5-m internal diameter, which can operate to about 137 MPa, equivalent to 1.25 times of pressure of the deepest trench in the Atlantic Ocean. The rules of established classification societies such as the ABS's rules (ABS, 2020), Europe's Det Norske Veritas/Germanischer Lloyd's rules (Det Norske Veritas/Germanischer Lloyd [DNV GL], 2019), or China Classification Society's (CCS) rules (CCS, 2018) mandate this level of pressure testing for a deep-ocean equipment.

History

The history of DOSs can be traced back to the early 1900s. The first deep-ocean simulator was built by the Italian Navy in 1912 to handle submarines. It was about 7.92 m in diameter and 71.63 m in length, but it only could simulate about 0.9 MPa (just 90-m water depth). In 1918, German engineers designed a bigger submarine test chamber with an about 12.19-m diameter, a 115.82-m length, and 0.8-MPa pressure (Maison, 1973). Built by Italians, it is possible to be the earliest image record of a DOS (a blurred image is shown in Figure 3). In 1938, the Germans constructed another pressure simulator that was shorter (about 90 m) and with higher pressure (1.52 MPa). However, in practical use, high strains were recorded (Maison, 1973).

Across the Atlantic, the United States also began to build model test tanks to simulate deep-sea pressure. In 1930, their first test chamber was fabricated at Portsmouth Naval Shipyard, and another larger tank was constructed in 1934, which could operate to about 1.52 MPa. In the 1930s, smaller but greater-pressure tanks were developed. In 1935, the David Taylor Model Basin made two chambers. One was a 0.5-m–diameter and 5.17-MPa–pressure test chamber, and the other has a 0.94-m diameter and 13.79-MPa pressure (Maison, 1973).

During the 1940s, few simulators were built due to World War II. In 1951, the United States constructed a large test pressure chamber that was 9.14 m in diameter and 22.86 m in length, which could load cycle pressure from 0 to 8.93 MPa in 1 min. One interesting feature was that the hemispherical closure was welded to the chamber for each test (shown in Figure 4). Then, the number of smaller simulators increased dramatically in the late 1960s. Statistics at that time indicated that there were 371 DOSs in United States, with 60% of them owned by the U.S. Navy (Heller, 1970).

In the 1970s, the U.S. Navy undertook projects to develop the deep submergence research vehicle. A chamber with a 3-m diameter and 82.74-MPa pressure was designed and fabricated. During the last two decades of the 20th century, boiler and pressure vessel codes were improved regularly. The resulting high-pressure equipment became more and more mature. This progress helped to standardize the design and manufacture of deep-ocean pressure chambers. Importantly, the development of materials and technologies made it possible for DOSs to have higher pressure and a larger volume. Today, the main advanced available DOHPSs are owned by the United States, Japan, Russia, and Belgium.

Main Available Pressure Chambers

Southwest Research Institute (SwRI; founded in South Texas in 1947) has more than 50 years of experience in offshore and marine technologies. The SwRI Ocean Engineering and Structural Testing Laboratory has nearly 1,000 m2 of space with 12 deep-ocean pressure simulation test chambers with an inner diameter ranging from 0.1 to 2.29 m and an inside length ranging from 0.86 to 7.32 m. The DOS with maximum pressure is 206.8 MPa but has only a 0.4-m diameter. The pressure of the 2.29-m–diameter chamber is only 27.5 MPa, equivalent to 2,000 m of water depth. The DOSs of SwRI can simulate FOD pressure, although all have smaller inside diameters. Figure 5 shows a deep-ocean pressure chamber of SwRI. The images and related information can be found on the SwRI Website (https://www.swri.org/deep-ocean-pressure-simulation-testing/).

The Japan Agency for Marine-Earth Science and Technology (JAMSTEC) has two advanced deep-ocean pressure chambers in service: the hyperbaric chamber (shown in Figure 6; source: https://www.jamstec.go.jp/e/about/equipment/yokosuka/kouatsu_jikken.html) and the medium-sized hyperbaric chamber. These two chambers can all reach up to 147 MPa of maximum pressure and satisfy the requirement for FOD pressure testing, and they all have auto-control supply and decompression systems with a rate of 0.6–15 MPa/min. The hyperbaric chamber is 1.4 m in diameter and 3 m in length, while the medium-sized hyperbaric chamber is 0.6 m in diameter and 1.6 m long. Moreover, an inspired design feature is the video monitor devices. The underwater cameras (up to 100-MPa pressure, shown in Figure 6) were integrated into the chambers, and they allow the images in the aquarium during the test to output to a video screen. The pressurization data and imagery can also be auto-recorded. The images and related information can be found at the JAMSTEC Website (https://www.jamstec.go.jp/e/about/equipment/yokosuka/index.html).

Russia's Krylov Shipbuilding Research Institute was set up in 1894. As one of the world's major ship research and design centers, they now have three land-based hydraulic pressure test tanks, which are shown in Figure 7. The first one is K-1000 with a 1.2-m diameter, a 2.8-m usable interior length, and 140-MPa maximum pressure; the second one is DK-1000 with a 1.8-m diameter, a 5.5-m usable depth, and up to 150-MPa pressure; and the last one is DK-600 with up to 3.2-m diameter, a 9.5-m usable length, and 100-MPa maximum pressure. These three pressure test tanks are all with ultra-high pressure (UHP) and a large volume, especially DK-1000 and DK-600. The images and related information can be found at the Krylov Website (http://krylov-centre.ru/en/experimental/base-doccamers/).

Engineered Pressure Systems International (EPSI) is another world leader in high-pressure chambers for over 50 years. It originated from National Forge Europe in Belgium and National Forge Pressure Systems Division in the United States (found in 1992). EPSI became an independent company later in 1996. EPSI has the deep-ocean pressure chamber with a 2.5-m diameter, a 7-m length, and up to 150-MPa pressure. The Tyne Subsea large hyperbaric chamber has the horizontal system with a clamp closure (shown in Figure 8), which can conveniently realize the quick closure of pressure chambers. This is a unique technology of EPSI. With its rail system, test models can easily be put in and taken out. The images and related information can be found at the EPSI Website (https://epsi-highpressure.com/products/high-pressure-deep-well-simulators/).

Recent decades have been a rapid development period of China's marine technology equipment capabilities (Cui, 2018). With the successes of several submersibles such as the HOV JIAOLONG (Cui, 2013; Liu et al., 2010), the AUV QIANLONG (Wu et al., 2014, 2019), and the ROV HAIMA (Hu et al., 2016), China is becoming a maritime power. Due to an interest in the development of FOD submersibles (Cui et al., 2014), the construction of China's deep-ocean high-pressure simulators is becoming another concern in recent years.

The China Ship Scientific Research Center (CSSRC) of the China State Shipbuilding Corporation (CSSC) Ltd. was founded in 1951. With a history of nearly 70 years, CSSRC is China's largest ship and ocean engineering research institute. Furthermore, it is the first scientific research institution to develop DOSs in China. The most representative equipment is the 915 Pressure Chamber with a 1.5-m inner diameter, a 2.9-m usable length, and 90-MPa maximum pressure, which is shown in Figure 9 (source: http://www.cssrc.com.cn/info.asp?id=114). It is worth noting that the 915 Pressure Chamber had undertaken the pressure test of China's JIAOLONG (Liu et al., 2010). Recently, another two DOHPSs were built: 930 Pressure Chamber with a 3-m inner diameter, a 5-m usable length, and 90-MPa maximum pressure (Wang et al., 2017) and the 1616 Pressure Chamber with a 1.6-m inner diameter, a 3-m usable length, and 160-MPa maximum pressure. In addition, CSSRC also has several low-pressure chambers.

The Hadal Science and Technology Research Center (HAST) of Shanghai Ocean University, which was established in 2013, aims to develop the hadal technology in China. Some of the advanced DOSs of China were made by HAST. A deep-ocean pressure chamber with a 1-m inner diameter, a 3-m length, and 140-MPa maximum pressure was built in 2014 (shown in Figure 10; Zhang et al., 2019). Another DOS with a 0.6-m diameter, a 3-m length, and 180-MPa working pressure was constructed in 2016.

The Institute of Deep-Sea Science and Engineering (IDSSE) of the Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS) was founded in 2011. Relying on CAS, IDSSE has more scientific research abilities for ocean technology. In 2015, IDSSE and Sichuan Aviation Industry Chuanxi Machinery Co., Ltd. designed and built a deep-ocean simulator with a 0.8-m inner diameter, a 2.5-m usable length, and 200-MPa maximum working pressure, which is shown in Figure 11 (Jiang et al., 2016; Zhang & Jiang, 2017). This equipment is the DOS with the highest test pressure in China. Another lower pressure chamber was fabricated by IDSSE in 2016, with a 0.5-m diameter, a 2-m usable length, and 130-MPa pressure. The images and related information can be found at the IDSSE Website (http://www.idsse.cas.cn/ptzb2015/sys2015/201806/t20180626_5031169.html).

PSWW

The PSWW concept is widely regarded to be the safest, most reliable and durable pressure chamber system ever designed. In operation, the chamber will bear radial stress, and the yoke frame will endure axial stress. With PSWW technology, the CIP equipment made by Quintus generally has more than 20,000 cycles of fatigue life. The high-tensile cold-rolled spring steel wire with twice the tensile strength of forged material used in the CIP chamber is lightweight and compact. It can even save in weight up to 50% compared to monobloc chambers. Figure 13(a) shows a CIP machine of Quintus with a 3-m inner diameter and up to nearly 690-MPa pressure. Figure 13(b) illustrates a Flexform press of Quintus in wire-winding, with the length of wound wire at more than 1,600 km.

The PSWW design was also used in HPP food processing machines by AVURE Technologies Inc., and this is also a key application of CIP technology. Figure 14 shows the AVURE AV-S HPP machine used to process seafood. The images and related information can be found at the AVURE Website (https://www.avure-hpp-foods.com/hpp-equipment/). Another HPP food processing equipment manufacturer is HiPPo in South Korea, which also used the PSWW design to guarantee the durability and stability of UHP reaction vessels. The results of finite element analysis (FEA) showed that PSWW chambers have smaller stress distribution and displacement than those of monobloc chambers, which is depicted in Figure 15. The images and related information can be found at the HiPPo Website (http://en.hpp.co.kr/overview/02.html).

Moreover, the layer of wire can also be a protective layer. Even when the inner cylinder bursts, the wound wire layer can minimize the damage, meeting the criteria “leak rather than burst.” In fact, the DOS made by IDSSE with 200 MPa shown on the left of Figure 11 used PSWW technology, which was the first in China (Jiang et al., 2016; Zhang & Jiang, 2017). Compared to the monobloc chamber, the CIP chamber has so many advantages such as low cost, easy fabrication, UHP, and large volume with excellent safety, durability, and stability. The basic underlying theory is discussed in the next section.

Basic Theory of PSWW

The fundamental parameter in the design of deep-ocean pressure chambers is the thickness of the cylinder wall δ. Today, there are a lot of pressure vessel codes for designing the chambers of DOSs, including the American Society of Mechanical Engineers (ASME) Boiler and Pressure Vessel Code (BPVC) (ASME, 2019), EN 13445 Unfired Pressure Vessels (Union de Normalisation de la Mécanique [UNM], 2018), GB/T 150-2011: Pressure vessels (China Standardization Administration [CSA], 2011), JIS B 8265: 2017 Construction of pressure vessel—General principles (Japanese Standards Association [JSA], 2017), and so on. The basic theory is about stress analysis based on the theory of elasticity (Timoshenko & Goodier, 1951). The stress calculation equations of the pressure chamber can be originated from Lamé equations, which are shown as Equation (1).

(1)

where σt = the circumferential stress of the chamber wall (MPa);

σr = the radial stress of the chamber wall (MPa);

Ri = the inner diameter of chamber (mm);

Ro = the outer diameter of chamber (mm);

r = the variable diameter of any point in the chamber wall (mm), Ri ≤ r ≤ Ro;

pi = the internal pressure (MPa); and

po = the external pressure (MPa).

In practice, the diameter ratio K is usually introduced, and K = Ro/Ri. Thus, Lamé equations can be transformed into Equation (2).

(2)

The axial stress is related to the form of end cover of pressure chambers. If both sides of cylinders are open, the axial stress is zero. Furthermore, when both sides have all end covers and only under the action of internal pressure, the axial stress can be calculated by Equation (3), which also includes the transformation of Lamé equations.

(3)

As shown in the abovementioned equations, the circumferential stress is always tensile stress, and the radial stress is always compressive stress. Thus, σt is the maximum principal stress all the time, and it will reach the maximum value when r = Ri. It means that the inner face of the chamber wall is the dangerous zone. The relationship between wall thickness δ and the circumferential stress σti of the inner face is illustrated in Figure 16. The results show that, as the increasing of diameter ratio K, the circumferential stress of inner face σti decreases, but the degree of reduction is smaller and smaller. It means that, as the increasing diameter ratio K, the phenomenon that outer materials of the chamber wall cannot be fully utilized is more and more serious. This is the fundamental defect of monobloc chambers. From some simple calculations according to Lamé equations, the ratio of the circumferential stress of the inner face to that of the outer face can be obtained, and that is (K2 + 1) / 2. It means that the nonuniformity of stress distribution will increase with a pattern of the parabola, as the increasing of diameter ratio K.

Based on Lamé equations, the three principal stresses can be determined. According to the theories of strength, strength equations can be obtained to calculate the wall thickness. For example, according to the Maximum Shear Stress Theory (MSST), the maximum load capacity of chamber PL can be determined by Equation (4).

(4)

where [σ] is the allowable stress of material. Obviously, when the diameter ratio K is tending to the infinite, it can be expressed in Equation (5). It means that the maximum load capacity of the monobloc chamber in theory is only 0.5 times of the allowable stress. If we change the theory of strength to the Maximum Distortion Energy Criterion (MDEC), the result is 0.577 ( ) times of the allowable stress. That is to say, the form of monobloc chamber can only play half of the material's performance, and it cannot be changed or optimized due to the limitation of theory.

(5)

From the above analysis, the nonuniformity of stress distribution limits the load capacity of pressure chambers, and the circumferential tensile stress of the inner face plays a pivotal role. The basic idea of the PSWW technology is to establish a kind of circumferential compressive stress on the cylinder wall in advance, which can superpose with the circumferential tensile stress caused by the internal working pressure, to reduce or even completely eliminate the circumferential stress in the cylinder wall. This is the fundamental mechanical characteristic of the CIP chamber.

For further understanding, the pre-stress coefficient is introduced here, and the stress state will be divided into three: the pre-stress, working, and superposition states. The pre-stress state means that the chamber is only under the pre-stress by wire-wound, with no internal pressure in operation; the working state represents that the chamber is only under the internal pressure without the pre-stress by wire layer; and the superposition state is the superposition of the pre-stress state and the working state. Thus, the pre-stress coefficient η can be defined by Equation (6) (Yan & Yu, 1989).

(6)

where σtip = the circumferential stress of inner face under the pre-stress state; and

σtiw = the circumferential stress of inner face under the working state.

Because the signs of σtip (negative, compressive stress) and σtiw (positive, tensile stress) are opposite, the absolute value can guarantee the coefficient to be always positive. In fact, only the pre-stress state and the superposition state are relatively independent states, and there must be a proper η that can be chosen to make the chamber to reach the maximum load capacity.

According to Lamé equations, the circumferential stress of inner face under the working state can be determined as

(7)

Then,

(8)

Thus, according to the MSST, the maximum load capacity of the CIP chamber under the pre-stress state PLp is

(9)

Similarly, be aware of the circumferential stress of inner face under the superposition state σti = σtip + σtiw, and the radial stress of inner face under the superposition state σri = −pi. Then, we can obtain the maximum load capacity of the CIP chamber under superposition state PL, which is

(10)

When PLp = Pp, the CIP chamber has the maximum load capacity Pmax, which is

(11)

If we change the theory of strength to the MDEC, the result is

(12)

When the diameter ratio K is tending to the infinite, Equations (11) and (12) will both be equal to [σ]. It represents that the CIP chamber can play 100% of the material's capacity completely in theory, and the load capacity of CIP chamber can be 1.73–2 times higher than that of monobloc chamber. Furthermore, the maximum load capacity of all kinds of monobloc chamber is only equivalent to the CIP chamber with , which is illustrated in Figure 17.