Q-Labs - New Board of Directors

Wed, Dec 20, 2000 13:33 CET

Q-Labs - New Board of Directors Q-Labs, the world-leading software engineering services company, presented a new Board of Directors in an extra general meeting on December 12. The new Board consists of seven directors, of whom three members are appointed externally. The other four directors are represented by the owners Ratos, Det Norske Veritas (DNV) and Ericsson. Q-Labs' new board consists of the following members: Mr. Lars-Olof Norell was appointed chairman. Mr. Norell is President of WIDE Audumbla AB, and has previously headed several operations of IT Consulting company Cap Gemini in

Q-Labs Appoints Paul Hookham as Head of UK and Ireland Operations

Tue, Dec 12, 2000 09:26 CET

Q-Labs Appoints Paul Hookham as Head of UK and Ireland Operations 12 December, 2000-London-- Paul Hookham, has been appointed as Vice President and Head of Q-Labs' UK and Ireland operations. Mr. Hookham has some 30 years experience in the IT industry, predominantly in Financial Services. Q-Labs is a leader in the provision of software engineering services to major world corporations. Q-Labs' core business is in managing software risks for companies with a large or critical software dependency. The services offered range from high quality software engineering from its UK based Q-Cell

Ratos invests in Q-Labs - a leading company in managing software risks

Sun, Oct 08, 2000 11:42 CET

Ratos invests in Q-Labs - a leading company in managing software risks Ratos, the Swedish Private Equity Company, invests SEK 190 million in Q-Labs through a new share issue. Ratos' holding in Q-Labs will be 40 per cent. Other owners are Ericsson, and DNV (Det Norske Veritas). Through this investment, Ratos intends to contribute to Q-Labs' further expansion, which is likely to involve future acquisitions. Q-Labs is a world-leading consultant within software engineering services. Q-Labs' core business is to manage software risks at companies with a large or critical software dependency. Some