Alexander Holle was a German general in the Luftwaffe’s Condor Legion during the German involvement in the Spanish Civil War, and World War II. He was a recipient of the Knight’s Cross of the Iron Cross of Nazi Germany.

Alexander Holle was born on February 27, 1898, in Bielefeld, North Rhine-Westphalia, Germany. His birth geographical coordinates are 52° 1’ 60” North latitude and 8° 31’ 60” East longitude. Alexander Holle passed away at the age of 80 in 1978.

Astrologically, Alexander Holle falls under the Sun sign of Pisces, with Cancer as his Ascendant, Taurus as his Moon sign, and Gemini as his Black Moon Lilith sign.

Planets

Planets represent different aspects of personality, life themes, and energies within a birth chart, influencing individual characteristics, motivations, and experiences.

Planets in Signs

Planets in a zodiac sign denote how the energies and qualities associated with those planets express themselves within the context of the themes and attributes of that particular zodiac sign.

Sun Pisces Moon Taurus Ascendant Cancer Midheaven Aquarius Mercury Aquarius Venus Pisces Mars Aquarius Jupiter Libra Saturn Sagittarius Uranus Sagittarius Neptune Gemini Pluto Gemini Ceres Gemini Chiron Scorpio Eros Capricorn Hygiea Gemini Juno Libra Pallas Taurus Vesta Scorpio Black Moon Lilith Gemini North Node Capricorn South Node Cancer Part of Fortune Virgo Vertex Scorpio

Sunin Pisces8° 54’ 59”

The Sun in Pisces in the Natal Chart makes you a sensitive and mystical healer. You are aligned with your subconscious wisdom and can be […] Read more »

Moonin Taurus28° 18’ 48”

The Taurus Moon in the Natal Chart makes you sensual and reasonable. You are empathetic and can be rational and down to earth. You are […] Read more »

Ascendantin Cancer4° 7’ 21”

Cancer Ascendant in the Natal Chart makes you emotional and expressive. You can’t hide your feelings and are transparent about your vulnerable nature. You have […] Read more »

Midheavenin Aquarius28° 41’ 1”

Aquarius Midheaven in the Natal Chart makes you erratic and explosive. You have a unique and unconventional approach to your career path. You can be […] Read more »

Mercuryin Aquarius24° 53’ 3”

Is Mercury in Aquarius good or bad? Mercury in Aquarius is an intense placement that enhances your intuition and intellect. The Aquarius Mercury placement brings […] Read more »

Venusin Pisces11° 44’ 17”

Pisces Venus in the Natal Chart indicates you are compassionate and have a spiritual connection to your loved ones. You are empathetic and affectionate, using […] Read more »

Marsin Aquarius13° 2’ 21”

Aquarius Mars in the Natal Chart makes you daring and impulsive. You are passionate and can follow your intellectual desires. You are inspiring and want […] Read more »

Jupiterin Libra8° 31’ 54”

Libra Jupiter in the Natal Chart makes you diplomatic and influential. You have a broad reach and bring charm and beauty to others. You are […] Read more »

Saturnin Sagittarius11° 51’ 60”

Sagittarius Saturn in the Natal Chart brings stability and security through your visionary nature. You are part of a progressive generation. You find ways to […] Read more »

Uranusin Sagittarius3° 31’ 2”

Uranus in Sagittarius in the Natal Chart is a generational placement, describing a broad cohort of people born within three years of each other. You […] Read more »

Neptunein Gemini19° 44’ 12”

Gemini Neptune in the Natal Chart is an ideal placement for a generation with a desire to find unity through communication. You are part of […] Read more »

Plutoin Gemini12° 43’ 41”

Gemini Pluto in the Natal Chart makes you part of a generation born to change how people communicate. Your generation shifts the power and helps […] Read more »

Ceresin Gemini28° 47’ 1”

Ceres in Gemini in the Natal Chart indicates your generation is thoughtful and conscientious. You are eager to explore your higher mission and can be […] Read more »

Chironin Scorpio29° 15’ 44”

Chiron in Scorpio in the Natal Chart makes you eager to gain the power and perspective to conquer your past traumas. Your desire for healing […] Read more »

Erosin Capricorn17° 16’ 9”

What does Eros in Capricorn mean for your personality? You are comforting and sensual. You are affectionate and can be gentle and romantic. You have […] Read more »

Hygieain Gemini26° 22’ 7”

Hygiea in Gemini in the Natal Chart gives you a broad perspective. You understand the importance of mental and physical health. You advocate for hygiene […] Read more »

Junoin Libra27° 47’ 38”

Juno in Libra in the Natal Chart is an ideal placement for romance and marriage. You are eager to settle down with your partner and […] Read more »

Pallasin Taurus9° 48’ 50”

Wondering, What is my Pallas Sign? The asteroid Pallas brings awareness of your problem-solving skills. Pallas in Taurus makes you a grounded and productive problem […] Read more »

Vestain Scorpio19° 38’ 49”

Vesta in Scorpio in the Natal Chart makes you intense and sensual. You are devoted to your sexual fantasies and eager to explore your fantasies. […] Read more »

Black Moon Lilithin Gemini19° 34’ 29”

Gemini Black Moon Lilith makes you dramatic and eager to push boundaries. You can fall for extreme ideas and are attracted to taboo and unconventional […] Read more »

North Nodein Capricorn24° 46’ 29”

Capricorn North Node in the Natal Chart makes you eager to face your hardships and can bring challenges that lead you to evolve and grow. […] Read more »

South Nodein Cancer24° 46’ 29”

Cancer South Node makes you an ideal caregiver. You are maternalistic and can be empathetic and sensitive. You are attuned to your intuition and use […] Read more »

Part of Fortunein Virgo23° 31’ 10”

Virgo Part of Fortune in the Natal Chart makes you a perfectionist with a desire to serve others. You have high standards, but this helps […] Read more »

Vertexin Scorpio19° 3’ 5”

Scorpio Vertex in the Natal Chart indicates an ideal placement for being a change agent. You are daring and use your gifts to help others […] Read more »

Planets in Elements

Planets in elements denote how the fundamental energies and qualities associated with those planets interact with the elemental nature of the signs they inhabit, shaping an individual’s overall temperament and approach to life.

Air Element

The air element in astrology corresponds to three signs; Gemini, Libra, and Aquarius. This element is associated with new insights and perspectives. The air element […] Read more »

Water Element

Astrologers and other occultists study the water element to understand emotional healing. This element relates to love and compassion. Numerous planets in water signs in […] Read more »

Earth Element

The earth element in astrology is associated with practicality and grounding. This element is associated with career and wealth. Taurus, Virgo, and Capricorn are signs […] Read more »

Fire Element

The fire element in astrology is associated with passion and motivation. This element brings creativity and intensifies planets and natal houses. Your competitive nature comes […] Read more »

Planets in Qualities

Planets in qualities signify how the inherent attributes and tendencies of those planets align with the modalities of the signs they occupy, influencing an individual’s style of action, decision-making, and engagement with the world.

Mutable Quality

The third Quality astrological signs are grouped into is mutable. Mutable Signs come at the end of a season. Mutable Signs are associated with flexibility […] Read more »

Fixed Quality

The second Quality in astrology is the Fixed modality. Fixed Signs follow the Cardinal Signs, bringing strength and endurance. These signs build upon the foundation […] Read more »

Cardinal Quality

The Cardinal quality in astrology is associated with new seasons and initiative. Cardinal signs mark the equinoxes and solstices. The Cardinal modality represents the extremes […] Read more »

Planets in Houses

Planets in a zodiac house signify where in life’s areas and experiences the energies and influences of those planets are predominantly focused and expressed.

Sun Tenth House Moon Twelfth House Mercury Ninth House Venus Tenth House Mars Ninth House Jupiter Fifth House Saturn Sixth House Uranus Sixth House Neptune Twelfth House Pluto Twelfth House Ceres Twelfth House Chiron Sixth House Eros Seventh House Hygiea Twelfth House Juno Fifth House Pallas Eleventh House Vesta Sixth House Black Moon Lilith Twelfth House North Node Eighth House South Node Second House Part of Fortune Fourth House Vertex Fifth House

Aspects

Aspects reveal the dynamic relationships and interactions between planets within a birth chart, influencing the way their energies combine and manifest in an individual’s life experiences and personality traits.

Within this birth chart, there are 29 major aspects, alongside 11 minor aspects, as well as 8 extra aspects.

Major Aspects

Major aspects highlight significant connections between planets, providing insights into key dynamics, challenges, and potentials shaping an individual’s life journey and psychological makeup.

Sun Quincunx Jupiter Moon Square Midheaven Venus Square Saturn Mars Trine Pluto Uranus Quincunx Ascendant Venus Square Pluto Mars Sextile Saturn Saturn Opposite Pluto Sun Conjunct Venus Sun Square Saturn Moon Square Mercury Venus Quincunx Jupiter Jupiter Sextile Saturn Sun Square Pluto Jupiter Square Ascendant Mercury Conjunct Midheaven Jupiter Trine Pluto Sun Trine Ascendant Sun Square Uranus Moon Opposite Uranus Ascendant Trine Midheaven Uranus Square Midheaven Mercury Trine Neptune Mars Trine Jupiter Jupiter Sextile Uranus Mars Trine Neptune Neptune Conjunct Pluto Venus Trine Ascendant Saturn Opposite Neptune

Explore detailed articles on the major aspects in this birth chart, gaining deeper insights into this cosmic identity. Dive into each aspect and uncover how it shapes Alexander Holle’s life journey.

Sun Quincunx Jupiterorb: 0°

The Sun quincunx Jupiter in the Natal Chart gives you an optimistic view of your importance. You may assume too much authority and struggle to […] Read more »

Mars Sextile Saturnorb: 1°

Mars sextile Saturn in a chart typically indicates that a person is patient and willing to wait for the things they want, but also knows […] Read more »

Saturn Opposite Plutoorb: 1°

Saturn opposite Pluto in a chart typically indicates a person has a connection to the darker side of life. Sometimes, this connection comes out of […] Read more »

Sun Conjunct Venusorb: 3°

When the Sun is conjunct Venus in your Natal Chart, you are exceptionally romantic. Others see you as beautiful, and you have a gift for […] Read more »

Sun Square Saturnorb: 3°

The Sun square Saturn in the Natal Chart makes you feel stifled and restricted. You struggle to adhere to rules and practical routines. With work, […] Read more »

Moon Square Mercuryorb: 3°

The Moon square Mercury in a chart will bring some conflict between a person’s heart and mind, but this conflict will have benefits. It brings […] Read more »

Venus Quincunx Jupiterorb: 3°

Venus quincunx Jupiter in a chart can set someone up to develop people-pleasing tendencies. They may not be able to tell others no. They have […] Read more »

Sun Square Plutoorb: 4°

The Sun square Pluto in a Natal Chart makes you fearful of change and loss. Until you accept core fears and weaknesses, you may overcompensate […] Read more »

Mercury Conjunct Midheavenorb: 4°

Mercury conjunct Midheaven in the Natal Chart makes you intellectual and outgoing. Your career brings opportunities to express your creativity and intelligence. You are thoughtful […] Read more »

Sun Trine Ascendantorb: 5°

The Sun trine Ascendant is a fortunate placement in the Natal Chart. This aspect leads you to feel comfortable with your identity and personality. You […] Read more »

Sun Square Uranusorb: 5°

The Sun square Uranus in the Natal Chart makes you resistant to changes. But when you navigate unexpected changes, you find freedom and empowerment. You […] Read more »

Moon Opposite Uranusorb: 5°

The Moon opposite Uranus in a Natal Chart can indicate a lot of instability in a person’s life. This instability will likely be centered around […] Read more »

Neptune Conjunct Plutoorb: 7°

Neptune conjunct Pluto in a chart typically creates the energy for intense evolution. This transformative aspect can connect someone to the unconscious mind and allow […] Read more »

Saturn Opposite Neptuneorb: 8°

Saturn opposite Neptune in a chart typically indicates that a person will have issues with responsibilities, self-doubt, and confusion. They may have trouble connecting with […] Read more »

Minor Aspects

Minor aspects represent subtler connections between planets, offering additional nuances and layers of interpretation to understand more detailed influences on an individual’s personality and experiences.

Ceres Trine Midheaven Mercury Quincunx South Node Neptune Quincunx Vesta Neptune Conjunct Black Moon Lilith Sun Sextile Pallas Moon Opposite Chiron Moon Quincunx Juno Chiron Square Midheaven Juno Trine Midheaven Mercury Trine Hygiea Neptune Quincunx Vertex

Discover additional layers of meaning with this collection of articles on the minor aspects found in Alexander Holle’s birth chart. Delve deeper into these cosmic nuances to gain a richer understanding of this astrological profile.

Mercury Quincunx South Nodeorb: 0°

Mercury quincunx South Node in a chart typically indicates a disconnect between a person’s rational, intellectual mind and the karmic lessons they are meant to […] Read more »

Neptune Conjunct Black Moon Lilithorb: 0°

Neptune conjunct Black Moon Lilith in a chart creates an intuitive connection to someone’s shadow side and the more hidden, darker aspect of life in […] Read more »

Sun Sextile Pallasorb: 1°

The Sun sextile Pallas in the Natal Chart indicates an innate gift for rallying and organizing others behind a cause. You can be persuasive and […] Read more »

Moon Opposite Chironorb: 1°

The Moon opposite Chiron in a chart creates friction between someone’s inner wounds and emotional needs. Integrating their wounds can be difficult and may feel […] Read more »

Extra Aspects

Extra aspects, though less emphasized than major or minor aspects, contribute subtle nuances and intricacies to the overall astrological interpretation, offering additional insights into an individual’s personality traits and life experiences.

Ceres Quincunx Chiron Vesta Quincunx Black Moon Lilith Ceres Trine Juno Hygiea Trine Juno Vesta Conjunct Vertex Black Moon Lilith Quincunx Vertex North Node Trine Part of Fortune South Node Sextile Part of Fortune

Explore how these extra aspects contribute to the intricate tapestry of Alexander Holle’s life path through subtler influences. Dive into each extra aspect and uncover the hidden gems that shape a unique cosmic identity.

North Node Trine Part of Fortuneorb: 1°

The North Node trine the Part of Fortune in the Natal Chart makes you eager to pursue your higher ambitions. You are open to exploring […] Read more »

South Node Sextile Part of Fortuneorb: 1°

The South Node sextile of the Part of Fortune in the Natal Chart makes you self-assured and confident in your unique gifts. You are comfortable […] Read more »

Houses

A house starting in a zodiac sign indicates the area of life where the qualities and themes of that sign are particularly emphasized and influential within an individual’s birth chart.