Those held in bondage, starting with two captive Africans enslaved before 1670 on Richard Ely’s estate along the Connecticut River, could at any moment be sold or given away. They were housed, clothed, and fed, but they worked without choice, without pay, and without control of their movements or their destinies. They mingled, married, raised families, acquired education, received medical care, and worshipped only with the consent of an owner. A law passed in 1708 imposed a minimum penalty of 30 lashes on any black person in the Connecticut colony who disturbed the peace or attempted to strike a white person.

Some who lived in servitude on Lyme Street married and had children; others remained alone. Some died young, some were baptized, some ran away, some went to sea, some were emancipated. A few found work after being freed and became self-supporting. Two received bequests from a former owner. Others drifted, turned to drink, or became “paupers” dependent on town relief. None left diaries, letters, or written traces of their lives in Lyme.

Enslaved persons in Connecticut were held in bondage for life until 1784 when a gradual emancipation act ruled that those born after March of that year would be freed at age 25. The last slave in Lyme was “set at liberty” in 1820, and Connecticut abolished slavery in 1848.

The prospect of available land in early Lyme attracted new inhabitants with varied backgrounds, connections, skills, and experience. Land speculators, shipping agents, mariners, artisans, and ministers all saw opportunities for financial benefit in the growing settlement at the mouth of the Connecticut River. Inhabitants cleared land for dwelling houses and for family farms and orchards while building roads, bridges, wharves, dams, and livestock pounds. They also established gristmills, sawmills, fulling mills, shipyards, and fisheries. Such ventures required heavy labor to fell trees, saw boards, haul timber, quarry rock, pull plows, herd stock, harvest salt hay, barrel shad, and load vessels.

​

Smaller landowners relied on their own labor and that of their sons to provision their families and produce some surplus goods for export. The purchase of slaves allowed larger landowners to increase production and spare themselves and their sons from heavy labor. One of Rev. Moses Noyes’s sons became a doctor; the other served as Lyme’s town clerk and justice of the peace. One of Judge William Noyes’s sons became a doctor, another a minister, and two served as justices of the peace. Richard Lord’s son became a New London County judge, and Judge John Griswold’s son became a lawyer, and later the governor of Connecticut.

​