Monday 25 March sees the release of two new World Music Network albums;The Rough Guide to Arabic Revolution and The Rough Guide to Acoustic Africa.

Both albums can be purchased as physical or digital download and are also available with a subscription to World Music Network.

The Rough Guide to Arabic Revolution

During the Arab Spring, as protestors flooded the streets in protest against the ruling elite, it was music that galvanised their spirit and communicated their message out loud. Powerful chants, soaring traditional melodies and articulate hip-hop radiated throughout the revolutions. This Rough Guide charts the best underground tunes by El Tanbura, Sami Yusuf and Freemuse award winner Ramy Essam.

Listen/Buy The Album

Across the world today, a PC or even a smartphone can double as a recording studio. That same smartphone (or an internet-connected PC) can transmit newly created anthems to millions, as it did during the Arab Spring. This Rough Guide explores the best underground hits that spurred on protestors during the recent seismic revolutions that occurred in the Arab world.

In the early days of the Tunisian revolution, a young rapper captivated the nation. Hamada Ben Amor, who is more commonly known by his stage name ‘El General’, raised many eyebrows with songs like ‘State Of The Nation’ and ‘Head Of State’. They became instant hits online, but under Ben Ali’s strict censorship these songs were considered treasonous, and El General found himself behind bars. El General was released from prison on the condition that he could no longer write or perform political songs. Ben Ali’s reign quickly ended, though, and El General is now considered the ‘Voice of the People’, and not just in Tunisia. His songs were regularly played in Cairo’s Tahrir Square during the Egyptian revolution. Another Tunisian singer Emel Mathlouthi is also heard on this album.

Two of the most prominent artists from Tahrir Square were El Tanbura and Ramy Essam, both featured on this Rough Guide. El Tanbura are a collective of master musicians and philosophers (and custodians of Egypt’s oldest folk melodies) who hail from the Mediterranean city of Port Said. Cairokee are an Egyptian band who fuse rock ‘n’ roll with conscious lyrics and folk music references. Sami Yusuf is dubbed ‘Islam’s biggest rock star’ and has performed at Wembley Arena. ‘I’m Your Hope’ was recorded during the Egyptian revolution and dedicated to the youth of the Arab world.

This Rough Guide comes with a full-length bonus album by Ramy Essam. Before 2011, Ramy Essam was not a household name in Egypt. In fact, he was simply a student with a guitar and a remarkable songwriting talent. He began singing in Tahrir Square in the early days of the revolution when there weren’t any formal ‘stages’ Soon, his songs ordering Mubarak to ‘Irhal, Irhal’ (‘Leave, Leave’) had become the soundtrack to the revolution.

The Rough Guide to Acoustic Africa

This Rough Guide takes the listener on a criss-crossing journey across the African continent, sponging up the most evocative unplugged music emanating from the great continent along the way. Enjoy the rich desert blues of Etran Finatawa, the Baye Fall Gnawa of Nuru Kane, the masakanda magic of Shiyani Ncgobo, and the Mozambican melodies of Mabulu.

Listen/ Buy The Album

This Rough Guide takes the listener on a criss-crossing journey across the African continent, sponging up the most evocative unplugged music emanating from the great continent along the way. Enjoy the rich desert blues of Etran Finatawa, the Baye Fall Gnawa of Nuru Kane, the masakanda magic of Shiyani Ncgobo, and the Mozambican melodies of Mabulu.

So ubiquitous is the sound of slapping strings and strumming chords across the vast African continent that acoustic music curls into practically every corner of life and culture there. Charting the different acoustic styles included here takes the listener on a criss-crossing journey across Africa: we begin in Niger, before visiting Madagascar, Democratic Republic of Congo, South Africa, Lesotho, Mozambique, Zimbabwe, Ghana, Cameroon, Mali, Sudan, Senegal and the Republic of Guinea. Not a bad round trip for just over seventy minutes’ worth of time, and without the cost of the air fare!

Heading up a healthy West African contingent, we have Baye Fall Gnawa musician Nuru Kane and singer-songwriter Amadou Diagne both from Senegal. Also hailing from this region is the Guinean kora maestro Mory Kanté, Malian guitarist Samba Touré, Ghanaian palm-wine veteran Koo Nimo and Touareg troubadours Etran Finatawa. Swooping down to west Central Africa, Sally Nyolo fom Cameroon provides the upbeat and carefree track ‘Obili Éba’. Congolese guitarist Syran Mbenza celebrates the legacy of the great Congolese musician Franco with a new approach. Abdel Gadir Salim from Northern Sudan provides a sensitive oud-based composition on ‘Lemon Bara’. The unbelievable sounds of Zulu maskanda guitarist Shiyani Ngcobo are heard on this collection too. As are Sotho Sounds who hail from Lesotho and bring their brand of junk funk to the party.

The bonus album is an exclusive debut release by kora player Noumoucounda Cissoko. He weaves together his griot heritage with mbalax, blues, jazz, hip-hop and rock-inspired inspirations. Faling is his debut solo album and features Cissoko accompanied by Swiss musicians, Phat 4.