It is a unique view of Britain that few people are afforded – but now a spectacular collection of more than 100 aerial photographs featuring many scenic and historical Scots landmarks has gone on display.

To celebrate the outdoor exhibition moving north of the Border, 11 specially selected photographs of famous sights in and around Scotland’s capital have been added.

Stunning: The exhibition features this shot of the isolated St Kilda, the westernmost archipelago of the Outer Hebrides

The images include the Scottish Parliament Building and Edinburgh Castle, the Scottish National Gallery of Modern Art and its gardens, as well as the Forth bridges.

Other Scots pictures reveal the majestic beauty of Glen Tilt, near Blair Atholl, Perthshire, a white-washed beach on South Harris and the imposing Suilven, in Sutherland.

Britain from the Air has been brought to Scotland for the first time by the Royal Geographical Society, along with the Institute of British Geographers and street gallery pioneers Wecommunic8. Intrepid traveller Michael Palin was on hand yesterday to launch the show. He said: ‘Scotland has some of the world’s most glorious landscapes – from the coast and mountains to its lochs and rivers. It also has an exceptional industrial and architectural heritage.

‘For all these reasons Edinburgh is a perfect host for an exhibition that celebrates the rich geography of our islands.’

Unspoilt: Britain from the Air also captures the white sands of South Harris in the outer Hebrides

Contrast: the Scottish National Gallery of Modern Art with its distinctive 'Landform' sculpted lake said to be inspired by chaos theory

It is hoped the stunning images – which will be on display until May 20 at key Edinburgh locations including Princes Street Gardens, Castle Street, Rose Street and the Grassmarket – will excite locals as well as tourists.

Adam Wilkinson, director of charity Edinburgh World Heritage, believes the exhibition, which is free, will inspire Scots to explore their country. He said: ‘These images offer a fascinating perspective on the city and the UK.’

Hard day's walk: the imposing mountain Suilven in northern Scotland rises sharply hundreds of metres above the surrounding moorland