Scotland has a rich heritage of Aviation History and our tours will satisfy young and old with the variety of experiences available. Some can be done as day tours from Edinburgh; others combine to make a memorable group of tours over a few days.

Robert will share with you his passion for aviation in all its forms, gained from many years of visiting and cherishing these sites. His hands on experience as a Private Pilot License Holder will enhance your visits and together you will have an extraordinary experience.

We now offer 3 types of aviation experience;

Scottish Aviation History

Take to the Skies!

The Ultimate Aviation Enthusiast Tour.

These can all be adapted to suit your interests... and Helen will be able to provide delightful alternatives for "The Aviation Widow".

Scottish Aviation History Tour

Discover the great story of our human ambition to take to the skies. East Fortune Airfield, a few miles from Edinburgh, is steeped in history, and the museum at the airfield contains Scotland's largest and best collection of aircraft as well as many other unique objects such as aero engines and rockets.

From here, the R34 airship departed in 1919 before completing the first ever return journey across the Atlantic. The R34 is similar to the R100 mentioned in Nevil Shute's book Slide Rule, and the film of the same name. During the Second World War it saw active service and is now one of the best preserved technical airfield sites in the country.

Nowadays it brings history alive with many unique experiences and displays. The Fortunes of War exhibition, for example, shows what it was like to serve here at different times in its history and even lets you navigate an airship to find an enemy submarine!

The Fantastic Flight exhibition showcases rarities such as a Wright brothers Engine, the propeller from an aeroplane which flew over Everest and Sheila Scott's record-breaking Piper Comanche in which she flew solo around the world. Other aircraft on display include the Spitfire, ME163, Komet and the Vulcan bomber.

Last but not least, of course, is The Concorde Experience. In this you learn the story of this amazing plane from its initial race to break the sound barrier to its arrival at East Fortune Airfield itself. More than that, however, you can now board it yourself and walk through the famous plane while listening to accounts from both passengers and crew of what life on Concorde was like in its hey day.

Scottish Flying Experiences

Seaplane trips to Scottish Lochs

Helicopter trips over breathtaking scenery

Flights to the Scottish Islands scuch as Barra with its famous beach runway!

All can be arranged and combined with beautiful tours through the stunning Scottish scenery to create the trip of a lifetime.

The Ultimate Air Enthusiast Guided Tour

A combination of the best of Scottish aircraft museums and scenery with the best of the aviation attractions in England such as Duxford , Hendon or Airbase , home of the Air Atlantique Classic Flight at Coventry.

Other Scottish Aviation Tour Options