GRAHAM, Leonard Ralph

1942 - 2020

Leonard Ralph Graham was born January 6, 1942 in Regina and lived on the farm south of Regina, until his family relocated to Edgeley in his youth, where he eventually took over the family farm. He attended school in Edgeley and later Balfour Tech in Regina. Leonard's two passions were family and farming. Many hours were spent in the earlier years raising cattle and chickens, planting the crops and the garden, tending to the yard and of course fixing things or building structures. Many life lessons were passed down to his children by having the patience to teach us how to fix almost anything mechanical or build whatever was needed. If you couldn't fix it or build it - you probably didn't need it. When it came to farm equipment - you could always fix it with red paint (even if you owned green equipment). Family, honesty and hard work were the main priorities for Leonard. "If you wanted something bad enough, you had to work for it," and "if you looked around hard enough you could always find something to do," were phrases often heard around our house. Leonard was always quick to volunteer within the community and it didn't matter what needed to be done - he would be one of the first ones to show up. He was always game to enjoy a good cup of coffee and a visit with many neighbours or strike up a conversation with strangers with whom he always found a connection with as he knew just about everyone! He enjoyed his "coffee-row" visit with his friends in Fort Qu'Appelle. His love for his wife and children was only surpassed by his love for his grandchildren whom affectionately named him "Bucka" (for reasons we will never know). Leonard didn't believe in working all the time though - there was always plenty of time for family vacations - whether travelling to visit family or travelling with family or just hooking up the camper and going to parts unknown there was always an adventure to go on and fun to be had. In the later years - Leonard could often be seen at the ski hill cheering on his grandchildren as they've all taken to downhill skiing and racing. Leonard and Joanne enjoyed their camping trips every summer whether heading west to the mountains or around Saskatchewan with their grandchildren many memories were made and enjoyable moments had. He enjoyed the beauty of northern Saskatchewan and took many a trip to visit but also to try and catch that elusive gigantic walleye! Nothing beat a good fish fry after a hard day in the boat. Thank you to Cindy McKnight NP, Dr. Muftah, Dr. Soued and Val RN at ABCC, Fort Qu'Appelle EMS, the nursing staff at 3B Pasqua Hospital and our angels at ANHH. Your kindness and compassion will never be forgotten and made a very difficult time that much easier. In lieu of flowers, donations may be made to All Nations Healing Hospital, Box 300, Fort Qu'Appelle, SK SOG 1S0, or a charity of your choice. Due to circumstances and at Leonard's request there will be no funeral service. The family invites you to pour your favorite beverage and have a toast to Leonard. Leonard was predeceased by his parents Peter and Emma Graham (nee Kirby), sister and brother-in-law Muriel and Jim Walker, brother Gordon Graham, brother-in-law Harry Peart and infant granddaughter Emma Graham. He is survived by his wife of 54 years Joanne and children Doug, Heather (Tom), and Stephen (Kristin), grandchildren: Sierra Keith, Stella, Zoe and Bode Graham, brother: Elgin (Sharon), sisters-in-law Eleanor Graham and Elaine Peart as well as numerous nieces, nephews, cousins, extended family and numerous friends.