Delve into Stevie Wonder's spectacular life and career

Stevie Wonder's life has seen him transition from a child soul prodigy, through to an adventurous 1970s funk-a-teer and beyond, with pop music massively benefitting from the colossal contributions of his music.

Stevie Wonder, whose real name is Stevland Hardaway Morris, is best known for his huge hits, 'Superstition', 'Isn't She Lovely' and 'Happy Birthday'.

A hugely successful career for Stevie started before he was even a teenager, and he's subsequently become one of the most celebrated artists of modern times. A lyrical genius, smooth vocals and incredible musicianship, his songs have become classics - and rightly so in our opinion.

With a colourful personal life, Stevie Wonder has lived a life of only one-in-a-million and his personal experiences have provided the inspiration for some of the most beautiful and loved songs in the world.

Discover more about the man behind the music...

Who is Stevie Wonder?

Put simply, Stevie Wonder is one the most important figures in music, not just in R & B but also in pop music in its broadest sense. Be it his earliest forays with Motown, his pioneering 1970s output or the pop music that followed, Stevie Wonder’s music is characterised by an unmistakable sense of joy and positivity, even when tackling serious social and racial issues.

What is Stevie Wonder's real name?

Stevie Wonder was born Stevland Hardaway Judkins.

Stevie Wonder's early life:

Born on May 13th 1950, making Stevie Wonder 71-years-old.

Stevie was born six weeks premature, and it’s been speculated that his blindness was caused by excessive oxygen exposure when he was placed in an incubator. It was complications due to this that has meant that he's been blind from his very early days.

Where was Stevie Wonder born?

Stevie Wonder was born in Saginaw, Michigan, in the United States before moving to Detroit when his parents divorced. Stevie grew up in Detroit and later attended the Michigan School for the Blind.

Who were Stevie Wonder's parents?

Stevie's father was called Calvin Judkins and his mother was Lula Mae Hardaway.

Lula can largely be credited for Stevie's early musical exposure, as she was a singer-songwriter and encouraged her son to sing in the local choir and to play instruments like the piano, harmonica and drums.

Stevie's musical and piano talents:

From a young age, Stevie Wonder played a number of instruments including the piano. As a result, Stevie has been hailed one of the most talented piano performers of all time and songs like 'I Wish' and 'Higher Ground' have become firm favourites amongst piano players.

What was Stevie's first song?

While he is best known for his later success, Stevie Wonder was a child star and was originally known as "Little Stevie Wonder". Stevie Wonder's first song was called 'I Call It Pretty Music But The Old People Call It The Blues- Part 1', which was released in 1962.

The following year, in 1963, Stevie Wonder would get his first US number 1 with the track 'Fingertips - Part 1'.

As a young child, he began to sing in his church’s choir and by the age of 9, he’d learnt how to play piano, drums and harmonica. He was discovered by Motown aged 11 and rebranded him as "Little Stevie Wonder", releasing his first two albums, A Tribute To Uncle Ray and The Jazz Soul Of Little Stevie at the age of 12.

His breakthrough came with the 1963 live album, The 12 Year Old Genius, which features the utterly astonishing single ‘Fingertips’, which topped the US singles chart.

Stevie went on to score more hits in the 1960s, including ‘Uptight (Everything’s Alright)’ and ‘Signed, Sealed, Delivered I’m Yours’, alongside co-writing hits such as Smokey Robinson And The Miracles’ ‘Tears Of A Clown’.

LISTEN: To Stevie Wonder sing 'Signed, Sealed, Delivered I’m Yours':

Stevie Wonder success in the 1970s

The early 1970s saw Stevie Wonder take greater control over his work and music. No longer content with simply being a singles artist whose albums contained B-sides and fillers, he held out for a more favourable contract with Motown. Once secured, Stevie Wonder truly bloomed as a singer, songwriter, musician and producer.

Though 1972’s Music Of My Mind wasn’t a huge commercial success, it found Stevie Wonder forging ahead in a new direction with his pioneering synthesiser work. This coalesced with Talking Book, released later the same year, which contained the smash hits ‘Superstition’ and ‘You Are The Sunshine Of My Life’. Touring with The Rolling Stones also ensured that his music reached a wider audience.

LISTEN: Stevie Wonder's brilliant song 'Superstition':

Stevie's next album, Innervisions, took things even further. Released in 1973, it housed the hits ‘Higher Ground’, ‘Living For The City’ and ‘Don’t You Worry ‘Bout A Thing’, as well as the ballad ‘Golden Lady’. Innvervisions won the 1974 GRAMMY Award for 'Album Of The Year'.

1974 saw the release of Fulfillingness’ First Finale and more hits in the shape of ‘You Haven’t Done Nothin’’ and ‘Boogie On Reggae Woman’.

The landmark album Songs In The Key Of Life followed in 1977 and the singles ‘Isn’t She Lovely’ and ‘Sir Duke’ became instant classics that remain popular to this very day.

Was Stevie Wonder successful in the 1980s?

While the new decade found Stevie Wonder moving into a more pop-orientated direction with hits such as ‘Master Blaster (Jammin’)’ and the ballad ‘Lately’ - which featured on Hotter than July -, 1981’s ‘Happy Birthday’ was instrumental in the successful campaign to make the birthday of civil rights activist Martin Luther King, Jr become a national holiday.

LISTEN: To Stevie Wonder sing 'Lately':

The mid-1980s saw Stevie Wonder hit his commercial zenith. The single, ‘I Just Called To Say I Love You’, was lifted from the romcom, The Woman In Red, and became his biggest hit as it climbed to the top slot all over the world.

Stevie Wonder's most successful songs

With such a long career in music, there are many classic Stevie Wonder songs. From his early days, tracks like 'Uptight (Everything's Alright)' and 'Blowin' In The Wind' were popular.

In 1968, Stevie Wonder released 'For Once In My Life' which has become a worldwide favourite and 'Signed Sealed Delivered I'm Yours' followed in 1970. Classics such as 'Superstition' and 'Sir Duke' also came along in the 1970s and the 1980s saw 'Master Blaster', 'Happy Birthday' and 'Go Home'.

Has Stevie Wonder done any collaborations?

Stevie Wonder has worked with a whole host of the great and the good from the music world.

He’s contributed harmonica playing to Chaka Khan’s cover of Prince’s ‘I Feel For You’, Eurythmics’ ‘There Must Be An Angel (Playing With My Heart)’ and Elton John’s ‘I Guess That’s Why They Call It The Blues’, as well as John Denver’s ‘If Ever’ and Barbra Streisand’s ‘Can’t Help Lovin’ That Man’.

‘Ebony And Ivory’, his 1982 Number 1 with Paul McCartney, is one of his best-known collaborations. He also duetted with Michael Jackson on Bad’s ‘Just Good Friends’.

More recently he’s worked with Snoop Dogg, Raphael Saadiq and Mark Ronson.

WATCH: Stevie Wonder and Paul McCartney perform 'Ebony And Ivory':

What is Stevie Wonder doing now?

In 2019, Stevie Wonder played London's Hyde Park, having previously performed at the same concert in 2016 and 2010.

As well as playing Hyde Park in the past, Stevie Wonder also played the Calling Festival in London in 2014, Glastonbury in 2010 and dates in London, Manchester and Birmingham in 2008.

In 2020, Stevie performed for the One World: Together At Home broadcast, curated by Lady Gaga, in support of healthcare workers on the frontline during the Covid-19 pandemic and the World Health Organisation.

New music in 2020

Stevie released two new songs in October 2020 - 'Can't Put It in the Hands of Fate' featuring Rapsody, Cordae, Chika and Busta Rhymes and 'Where Is Our Love Song'. These releases mark the first time he has never released music for either Motown or Tamla (as a solo artist). At this point, Stevie also dropped hints that a new album may be on the way.

Now read:

Nina Simone: 10 moments that defined her career

9 of Dee Dee Bridgewater's career highlights: From musical theatre to jazz master

Gregory Porter: How the Jazz superstar rose to fame

Introducing: Jazz FM premium

Jazz FM Premium is our new subscription service. Listen live with no ad breaks, skip up to 6 tracks per hour and access exclusive on-demand music, shows and specials. Start your 30 day free trial.