In this video, we interview two students auditioning for All-State and the band director about this year's competition.

On Saturday, Oct. 21, 2023, Atlantic High School hosted the choir and band all-state auditions. These auditions happen annually, with Atlantic hosting the event for many years. The event is an all-day...

Stevie Wonder once said, “Music is a world within itself, with a language we all understand.” The Atlantic High School Marching Band worked to learn this language and played it well at the Clarinda...

In this week's episode, we talk about the upcoming homecoming week, volleyball, and all-state band and choir!

In this episode, we focus on AO's, cross country, band, college fair, and dress days! We also feature an ad for Villa Dance.

The marching band had its final performance last Friday, Oct. 14. The band transitioned its focus to concert band on Monday, Oct. 17. Angelica Anderson, a senior and bass clarinet player, said that the...

The choir department has taken a break from show choir and they have been focusing on concert choir for three weeks. Also, the band department has been working on four songs for the winter concert. Band,...

Set the scene: Traveling across the state, playing a bunch of interesting music, and having fun. Faith Nath, Rio Johnson, Brady Wagner, and Angelica Andersen went to Iowa State University for the honor...

On Friday, May 7 band and choir members will perform in the State Large Group competition, as their last event of the year. The Chamber Choir will be performing two songs: “No Time” and “Unclouded...

The early morning travel days and endless walking made life-long memories for the 85 students who took their music skills to Florida. The trip looked like this: 3 days at Disney, 2 days at Universal Studios,...

The phrase better late than never suits the music department, as a trip scheduled for last March has finally been given the green light. Delayed when the country shut down for the pandemic, the band and...