Imagine the romance of The Bridges of Madison County Imagine standing inside one of the bridges of Madison County. Both the book and the movie The Bridges of Madison County (ads) were wildly popular. Going to Winterset, Iowa, will take you to those bridges. Bring your significant other. However, Bridges is not the only movie

A farmer starts the gigantic Goodland grasshopper invasion The Goodland giant grasshopper invasion started with a farmer. Grasshoppers and farmers are an unusual combination. The reason is simple. Grasshoppers eat crops. Crops are a farmer’s source of income. Therefore, farmers don’t like grasshoppers. Except maybe as a gigantic sculpture. Don’t fear the grasshopper. It won’t

The stunning Rio Grande Gorge The Rio Grande Gorge stuns drivers approaching it. The bridge seems to come from nowhere. One moment, you’re driving on fairly flat terrain. The next moment, you’re approaching a bridge over a gash in the earth. The bridge’s structure is mostly below grade and isn’t very visible until you’re almost

Weinstein denied the Medal of Honor due to his non-existent Jewish heritage Sgt. Jack Weinstein (WIN-steen) earned a Medal of Honor on October 19, 1951. However, because of his “Jewish heritage,” he never received the Medal. Sixty-three years later, President Barack Obama presented the Medal to Weinstein’s wife, Nancy. Sgt. Weinstein had survived the war

Frank Lloyd Wright got in trouble with Mason City after a scandal. Grammy winner Meredith Willson wrote “Ya Got Trouble” in a musical partly based on life in his city.

PIckin’ on the Plains Bluegrass Festival in Colby has been going strong for 24 years. For its 25th anniversary, the festival will feature Ricky Skaggs and Kentucky Thunder.

Let’s count the top 10 tourist attractions you should visit in Goodland, Kansas, a small town of 4,500 friendly people — including me. Enjoy good times in Goodland, Kansas Because it’s only 17 miles from the Colorado line, it’s an easy three-hour drive from Colorado’s Front Range. Goodland has two more things usually associated with