By Rowlandgate.

Kwara South senatorial district, now also known as kwararafa through the Kwara South Consultative Forum (KSCF), has submitted a memorandum to the ninth National Assembly’s Committee on Review of the Nigerian Constitution.

The people are demanding for the merging of the Yoruba of Kwara and Kogi states with their kith and kin in the southwest region through boundary adjustment. The region have now chosen a new name for themselves known as ( kwararafa)

The people said that they should have their own administrative units within the proposed region. The people are demanding for the merging of the Yoruba of Kwara and Kogi states with their kith and kin in the southwest, They made the demand to the ninth National Assembly’s Committee on Review of the Nigerian constitution

They further demanded that the rest of Yoruba in the remaining five local government areas of Kwara state should be part of Kwara Yoruba to be merged with the proposed Western Region through a referendum.

The Kwara state Yoruba demand was submitted to the 9th National Assembly

The forum’s national president, Sir Joseph Adeniyi Aderibigbe lamented that the Yoruba of Kwara south occupying seven out of the 16 local government areas in the state and their counterparts in Kogi state was not given any way to determine where they wanted to be and who they wanted to live with.

According to the group, they were lumped with the Northern Protectorate, contrary to their right to self-determination as enshrined in the United Nations Atlantic Charter.

The search for freedom, liberty, independence, and self-determination for our people, born and unborn, therefore continues. We want a group and region to which we truly belong, where respect between us and others is reciprocal.

The forum decried current Nigeria’s federal system, saying it is short of being federal, stressing that it is more unitary or quasi-federal.

had earlier reported that the Okun-Yoruba speaking people of Kogi state recently declared their readiness to opt-out of the of the northern political zone.

According to them, their separation from their kith and kin in Ondo, Ekiti and Kwara states amount to an infringement on their right to self-determination. They said as a result of this, they want to be reunited with their people in south-west.