''Ali'' is a breakthrough for its director, Michael Mann. The film, based on the life of Muhammad Ali, is Mr. Mann's first movie with feeling; his overwhelming love of its subject will turn audiences into exuberant, thrilled fight crowds.

That subject is a man whose mesmerizing surfeit of athleticism, beauty and moral and physical courage -- and enchanting lack of humility -- had no modern equivalent. As it follows, for roughly the first hour, Ali from the first Sonny Liston fight in 1964 through the duel with George Foreman in Zaire in 1974, the picture has a quick-moving breathlessness. Instead of soaking the movie in deadpan, minor-key electronica -- even Mr. Mann's directorial debut, ''Thief,'' employed the blue-steel proto-techno of Tangerine Dream -- ''Ali'' is fired up from the outset with a burst of, well, heat.

We hear the strains of Sam Cooke getting a groove on to ''Bring It on Home to Me.'' But it isn't the velveteen rabbit Sam Cooke from the recordings of the time, muscular but always in control. It's the Sam Cooke heard on the posthumous recording ''Live at the Harlem Square Club, 1963.'' There he unleashed himself from buttery smoothness. Playing to a black audience, he teased the crowd into a frenzy. It's an understanding of soul that one would never have expected from this director, who uses the music as entrance, to build tension, since Ali -- one of the most famous tongues of all times -- is nearly silent for the first 10 minutes or so.

This is a brilliantly considered bit of stage setting; intercut with the song is Ali (Will Smith) jogging through bleak, wintry, nighttime streets, a squad car with a couple of white cops pulling over in front of him. ''What you runnin' from, son?'' one of them lazily asks, the casual racism colder than the night.

Ali was the first black popular figure to break down the wall between performance for a black audience and for a white audience, which is what Cooke was straining to do, and the first 10 minutes of ''Ali'' seethe with ambition. Mr. Mann wants to get past the headlines about the most incendiary figure ever to enter the ring, a man whose wit -- both physical and verbal -- was so exciting that the world hung on his every word.

For this reason ''Ali,'' in the abstract, seems like the wrong material for this filmmaker. For Mr. Mann, a man is defined by what he is does: in ''Heat,'' the thief (Robert De Niro) and the detective (Al Pacino), equally dogged, have no lives other than their occupations. And in Mr. Mann's world of existential working-class drama, a man stripped of his profession is nothing; that's what ''The Insider'' was all about.

Thank you for your patience while we verify access. If you are in Reader mode please exit and log into your Times account, or subscribe for all of The Times.

Thank you for your patience while we verify access.

Already a subscriber? Log in.

Want all of The Times? Subscribe.