WSLR is Ready for 100! Just last week the Sarasota City Commission unanimously agreed to set a goal to transition Sarasota to 100 percent renewable energy sources joining the Sierra Club’s Ready for 100 campaign. To show support for this initiative, WSLR will target proceeds from its Whole Foods Market 5% Giving Day on Tuesday, June 20th to solar energy expansion. Station Manager David Beaton has been a driving force behind WSLR’s conversion to solar energy. Beaton says, “Solar is the energy for today and the future – clean, reliable, and affordable. What better way to power Sarasota’s people-powered community radio station?”

{googleads left}

WSLR-LP 96.5 has been selected as a beneficiary of Whole Foods Market’s 5% Community Support Day this quarter. On Tuesday, June 20th the downtown Sarasota Whole Foods Market will donate 5% of their sales to WSLR Community Radio. WSLR’s mission statement calls on the station to broadcast programming that promotes equality, peace, sustainability, democracy, and social and economic justice. The station tries to walk the walk, as well as talk the talk. WSLR has already made significant investments in renewable energy with 10K of solar currently installed on the roof of their studios located at 525 Kumquat Court. With the money raised from the Whole Foods Market 5% Giving Day WSLR hopes to become the first radio station in Florida powered with 100% solar energy.

WSLR Staff will be outside the Whole Foods Market stores from 8am to 8pm to share information about the radio station and answer any questions. Local musician David Smash will entertain shoppers at lunchtime and Mushfire will perform at 5pm.

WSLR-LP is an innovative, listener-supported, non-profit, non-commercial FM radio station dedicated to serving the Sarasota community. WSLR features locally produced programming and events that offer cultural, artistic, and political perspectives currently underrepresented in the media. Our goal is to inform and empower listeners to play an active role in WSLR and in their community.

Whole Foods Market Community Giving Day is a designated day during which a Whole Foods Market store gives a percentage of store sales to a chosen Community Partner. This is one of the many ways that Whole Foods Market gives back to the Sarasota community.