Infobox soap character

name = Jessica Bennett

series = Passions

portrayer = Mary Elizabeth Winstead (1999 — 2000)

Jade Harlow (2000 — 2003)

Danica Stewart (2003 — 2008)

Michelle Holgate (2002; temporary)

first = Episode 0001

July 5, 1999

last = Episode 2221

July 16, 2008

cause = Entered Rehab

creator = James E. Reilly

caption1 = Danica Stewart as Jessica Bennett

caption2 = Jade Harlow as Jessica Bennett

caption3 = Mary Elizabeth Winstead as Jessica Bennett

nickname =

alias =

gender = Female

born = 1985

death =

age = 14—23

occupation = Prostitute (former)

College Student (former)

'mark' Cosmetics Employee (former)

Candy-striper (former)

Clerk at Grace's craft shop (former)

title =

residence = Bennett home

parents = Sam Bennett

Grace Standish (deceased)

siblings = Noah Bennett

Kay Bennett

Ethan Winthrop

spouse = Spike Lester (married 2006; separated)

romances = Reese Durkee (2002 — 2004)

Spike Lester (2005 — 2007)

children = Samuel Herbert Bennett (with Spike)

grandchildren =

grandparents = Samuel Bennett (deceased)

aunts/uncles = Hank Bennett

Faith Standish (deceased)

cousins = Charity Standish

nieces/nephews = Maria Lopez-Fitzgerald

Ethan Crane

Sarah Winthrop (stillborn)

Jane Winthrop

Jonathan Winthrop

color = #D8BFD8

color text =

Jessica Bennett [Though Jessica married Spike Lester in 2006, it was never confirmed on-screen, nor by NBC via the "Passions" ending credits, that Jessica took his surname. ] is a fictional character on the NBC/DirecTV soap opera "Passions". Jessica has been played by Mary Elizabeth Winstead (July 5, 1999 - March 15, 2000), Jade Harlow (March 16, 2000 - July 8, 2003) and Danica Stewart (July 10, 2003 - August 7, 2008). She was also played by actress/model Michelle Holgate for two episodes when Jade Harlow was unavailable.

Character history

The youngest child born to Sam and Grace Bennett, Jessica had a relatively normal childhood and was much beloved by her parents, especially Grace. Jessica was quieter and better behaved than her older sister, Kay, who was always scheming to get what she wanted. This caused an antagonistic relationship with Kay. Although Jessica loved Kay at the end of the day, she was also a supporter of the romance between Miguel Lopez-Fitzgerald, Kay's crush, and Charity Standish, their newfound cousin. At times, Jessica foiled Kay's plans to break up the couple. Jessica nursed a crush on Reese, who loved Kay, for years.

While Jessica had been a minor character for several years, she became a prominent character when Danica Stewart took over the part in 2003. Since then, Jessica has been distraught over the collapse of her parents' marriage and entered into a dangerous relationship with Spike Lester. For a while, Spike forced Jessica to become a drug-addict and work as a prostitute. The couple eventually married in Rome during the summer of 2006, although the wedding was not shown on-air like other marriages on "Passions". In November 2006, Jessica attended several meetings of AA for her drinking problem. Jessica had the idea that Miguel wanted her help to forget about Kay and tried to seduce him. Jessica's recovery was set back when she learned that Grace had died in an explosion in London while trying to get home to reunite with Sam.

Jessica didn't believe she had the strength to leave Spike, but she was given a vision of her future by Endora and that gave her the strength to move back into her father's house. The same day she moved in, she learned that she was pregnant, apparently by Spike. Spike wanted her to sell the baby and she refused, running to Tabitha's house next door for safety.

Spike tried to kill Jessica by burying her in a crate. Jessica's family and friends searched everywhere for her, but they were too late; Jessica and her unborn baby's spirits left her body. However, Kay had everyone pray to God for Jessica's safe return before they unburied her, causing their spirits to return to Jessica's body. After unburying her, Eve was able to wake up Jessica. She is currently at home with policeman guarding her, since Spike broke out of jail. Sam soon discovered Jessica's role in the murders and was about to arrest her, but thanks to the magical intervention by her novice witch sister Kay, Spike was revealed to be the murderer and arrested by Paloma Lopez-Fitzgerald.

Jessica returned to Harmony on January 7, 2008, after staying in a convent with her cousin Charity in order to give birth away from Spike and those that she felt were judging her. Either in late 2007 or early January 2008, Jessica gave birth to a son, whom she named Samuel Bennett after her father and grandfather; she eventually gave the boy the middle name of Herbert at the demand of Spike, whose legal first name is Herbert.

Kay has since mentioned that Jessica entered rehab to make sure she stayed clean and to keep herself and Samuel away from Spike

Jessica returned on July 16, 2008 to wish Kay luck for her wedding to Miguel. She revealed that she had reconciled with Reese, and was continuing in rehab with her son Sam by her side. Jessica did not attend Kay and Miguel's wedding due to the temptations of alcohol.

"Hidden Passions"

In the book "Hidden Passions", Jessica's maternal grand parents were Zachary Sutter and Mercy Standish. Her paternal grand parents were named Benjamin Bennett (his name was Samuel on the show) and Margaret Joyce. She also had at least two more uncles in addition to Hank. Information in the book has not been confirmed on-screen and is not considered to be official since the information seen on the show contradicts much of what was said in the book.

ee also

*Bennett family

*Standish family

References and footnotes

External links