The Community Foundation of Howard County presented the 2023 Philanthropist of the Year award to Howard Hughes Holdings, Inc. for the company’s longtime generosity and support of the community. Howard Hughes was recognized at the foundation’s Annual Dinner & Celebration of Philanthropy on December 5 at Turf Valley Resort.

Howard Hughes Holdings, which owns, manages and develops commercial, residential and mixed-use real estate in Columbia and throughout the United States, is dedicated to supporting nonprofits in Columbia, Howard County and throughout the region.

“We are thrilled to present this prestigious award to Howard Hughes,” said Beverly White-Seals, President and CEO of the Community Foundation of Howard County. “Their exemplary dedication to philanthropy has positively affected numerous lives in Howard County. We are grateful and honored to recognize their outstanding efforts to improve our community.”

Howard Hughes Holdings contributes to over 50 local nonprofit organizations that support students, provide scholarships, health care, fight homelessness and housing instability, strengthen arts and culture and mobilize volunteers to provide food and services to tens of thousands of county residents.

The Community Foundation of Howard County benefits from the stalwart support from Howard Hughes Holdings which helps the foundation with its strategic mission of connecting people, places and organizations to worthy causes across Howard County through their lead sponsorships of foundation events.

In 2021, Howard Hughes created a new scholarship at the Community Foundation in honor of Pulitzer Prize-winning journalist Nikole Hannah-Jones, creator of The 1619 Project for The New York Times Magazine. The scholarship promotes equity and justice. It is awarded each year to two Black Howard County Public School students who have been accepted into a two- or four-year college or university.

Photo from the 2022 presentation of the Nikole Hannah-Jones Scholarship at Busboys & Poets.(from l to r) Busboys & Poets founder Andy Shalal, Beverly White-Seals, scholarship winners Mia Swaby-Rowe and Dylan Bradford, Howard Hughes’ Greg Fitchitt. (Stephen Cherry photos.)

“Nikole Hannah-Jones is a groundbreaking journalist and inspiring leader. Establishing a scholarship in her name recognizes her accomplishments and her example as a torchbearer for the values of equity and justice,” said Greg Fitchitt, executive vice president of Government Affairs and Business Development at Howard Hughes Holdings.

In addition, Howard Hughes supports the Arc of Howard County, the Association of Community Services of Howard County, Blossoms of Hope, Grassroots Crisis Intervention Center, Howard Community College Educational Foundation, Johns Hopkins Howard County Medical Center, Howard County Autism Society, Howard County Conservancy, Howard County Library System, Inner Arbor Trust, Neighbor Ride, the Ulman Foundation and many more organizations.

Beyond the company’s $1 billion investment in developing Downtown Columbia, Howard Hughes Holdings provides support to the Downtown Columbia Partnership, helping promote the growth and vitality of the Downtown Columbia community and its businesses, implementing beautification projects, supporting transportation initiatives and hosting events that bring people together. Howard Hughes contributes to the Columbia Festival of the Arts and the organization’s summer events at Columbia’s lakefront, among many other community events.

“In 2022, our employees volunteered 1,300 hours of their time and helped the company direct $2.7 million in financial donations and hands-on support to 200 causes and organizations. From Wall Street to Waikiki, Howard Hughes employees are helping to enhance lives every day,” said David R. O’Reilly, CEO of Howard Hughes Holdings.

Whether helping high school students explore career options by supporting the ACE Mentor Program of Baltimore, providing therapeutic services to children with emotional and behavioral disorders by supporting Camp Attaway, advancing research, drug development and specialized care by supporting the Cystic Fibrosis Foundation, inspiring girls to build confidence, kindness and decision-making skills by supporting Girls on the Run Central Maryland, Howard Hughes is committed to building all facets of the community and creating a better Howard County.

We salute our 2023 Corporate Philanthropist of the Year: Howard Hughes Holdings.

CFHoCo Philanthropist of the Year Organization/Corporate Award Recipients