The Community Foundation of Howard County is proud to announce that Carlessia Hussein and Howard Hughes Holdings, Inc. have been named the Philanthropists of the Year for their outstanding commitment to making a positive impact in our community. This esteemed recognition is awarded annually to an individual and an organization that have demonstrated extraordinary dedication to philanthropy and have significantly contributed to the well-being and development of the people of Howard County. The foundation will salute the philanthropy of both Carlessia Hussein and Howard Hughes at its sold-out Annual Dinner & Celebration of Philanthropy on December 5 at Turf Valley Resort.

“We are thrilled to present this prestigious award to Carlessia Hussein and Howard Hughes,” said Beverly White-Seals, President and CEO of the Community Foundation of Howard County. “Their exemplary dedication to philanthropy has positively affected numerous lives in our community. We are grateful for their selfless contributions and are honored to recognize their outstanding efforts.”

Carlessia Hussein, a treasured resident of our community, has consistently exhibited unwavering support towards various charitable organizations. Dr. Hussein (pictured above with a scholarship recipient) believes, by virtue of circumstances beyond their control, that some children need additional help to reach their full potential. Thanks to her vision and philanthropic leadership, 307 Howard County boys have received an extra opportunity over the past eight years.

The Carlessia Hussein Minority Scholarship fund was established at the Community Foundation of Howard County (CFHoCo) in 2015. The fund provides scholarship grants for African American, Latino or Native American middle school males, who are enrolled in a Howard County public school, to attend four-week summer enrichment programs at various middle school locations. This past summer alone, 74 boys from 14 HCPSS middle schools were scholarship recipients.

Students participate in grade-level academic courses (reading/English, math, science, social studies) each morning, and in a wide range of enrichment opportunities in the afternoon. The scholarship provides children access to programs that encourage leadership, academic achievement, character development, expand problem-solving skills and engender a sense of community.

Howard Hughes Holdings, which owns, manages and develops commercial, residential and mixed-use real estate in Columbia and throughout the United States, is dedicated to supporting nonprofits in Columbia, Howard County and throughout the region. Howard Hughes contributes to more than 50 local nonprofit organizations that support students, provide scholarships, health care, fight homelessness and housing instability, strengthen arts and culture and mobilize volunteers to provide food and services to tens of thousands of county residents.

2022 Nikole Hannah-Jones Scholarship Reception

(photo by Stephen Cherry from l to r) Busboys & Poets founder Andy Shalal, Beverly White-Seals, scholarship winners Mia Swaby-Rowe and Dylan Bradford, Howard Hughes’ Greg Fitchitt.

The Community Foundation of Howard County benefits from the stalwart support from Howard Hughes which helps the foundation with its strategic mission of connecting people, places and organizations to worthy causes across Howard County through their lead sponsorships of foundation events, support of the foundation’s Next 50 endowment fund and an annual scholarship (pictured above).