Blennerhassett, West Virginia

Blennerhassett is a census-designated place (CDP) in Wood County, West Virginia, United States. It is part of the Parkersburg-Marietta-Vienna, WV-OH Metropolitan Statistical Area.

Wood County Courthouse (West Virginia)

The Wood County Courthouse is a Neo-Romanesque building in Parkersburg, West Virginia, in the United States. The courthouse was built in 1899 by local contractors Caldwell & Drake, according to the plans of architect L. W. Thomas of Canton, Ohio, re…

Wells Island

Wells Island is a bar island in Tyler County, West Virginia on the Ohio River. In 1891, the Board on Geographic Names officially decided upon Wells Island as the island's name.

WXTQ

WXTQ (105.5 FM) is a radio station broadcasting a Hot Adult Contemporary/Top 40 (CHR) format. Power 105's slogan is "Real Music Variety!" Licensed to Athens, Ohio, USA. The station is currently owned by WATH.

WVVW-LP

WVVW-LP (98.1 FM) is a radio station broadcasting a Southern Gospel format. Licensed to Belpre, Ohio, USA, it serves the Parkersburg-Marietta area.

WVVV

WVVV (96.9 FM) is a radio station broadcasting an Adult Contemporary format. Licensed to Williamstown, West Virginia, USA, it serves the Parkersburg-Marietta area. The station is currently owned by Seven Ranges Radio Co. of St. Marys, WV.

WVNT

WVNT, The Valleys News Talk Leader, (1230 AM) is a radio station broadcasting a News Talk Information format. Licensed to Parkersburg, West Virginia, USA, it serves the Parkersburg-Marietta area.

WSPW-LP

WSPW-LP (97.7 FM) is a high school radio station licensed to Parkersburg, West Virginia, USA. It serves the Parkersburg-Marietta area with a Variety format.

WMRT

WMRT (88.3 FM) is a radio station broadcasting a classical format. WMRT also plays jazz weekday afternoons. Licensed to Marietta, Ohio, USA, it serves the Parkersburg-Marietta area.

WCVV

WCVV (89.5 FM) is a radio station licensed to Belpre, Ohio, USA. The station serves the Parkersburg-Marietta area. The station is currently owned by Belpre Educational Broadcasting Foundation.

Purchase on the Muskingum

The Purchase on the Muskingum also called Ohio Company’s Second Purchase, was a tract of land in the Northwest Territory, later Ohio, that the Ohio Company of Associates purchased from the United States federal government in 1792.

Picketed Point Stockade

Picketed Point Stockade was the last of three fortifications built at Marietta, Ohio. This defensive stockade was built by pioneers during the Northwest Indian War in 1791 on the east side of the mouth of the Muskingum River at its confluence with t…