1. Enter Search Criteria

To narrow your search area: type in an address or place name, enter coordinates or click the map to define your search area (for advanced map tools, view the help documentation), and/or choose a date range.

Geocoder

KML/Shapefile Upload

Select a Geocoding Method

Set WRS Type Point Polygon

Type: Path: Row:

Search Limits: The search result limit is 100 records; select a Country, Feature Class, and/or Feature Type to reduce your chances of exceeding this limit.

Feature Type US Features World Features

Feature Name State Feature Type Country Feature Class Feature Type

Click on an Address/Place to show the location on the map and add coordinates to the Area of Interest Control.

Num Address/Place Latitude Longitude

Click on a Feature to show the location on the map and add coordinates to the Area of Interest Control.

Placename Type Region Latitude Longitude

You must be logged in to upload a file.

Type

Cal/Val Site

Polygon

Circle

Predefined Area

Coordinates Format Degree/Minute/Second Decimal

.

Lat: , Lon:

Lat: , Lon:

No coordinates selected.

Circular polygons are created using a center point defined by decimal latitude and longitude values and a radius.

Center Latitude:

Radius:

Center Longitude:

No shape loaded.

Cloud Cover Range:

Unknown Cloud Cover Values

This filter will only be applied to data sets that support cloud cover filtering ( in the data set list denotes cloud cover support).

Search Type Standard Search

Results per Page:

Mass Media Searches are not limited by number of results or size; however, Mass Media Orders in excess of 6 terabytes will require extra processing time and justification.

Latitude

Longitude

Latitude:

° ' "

Longitude:

° ' "

2. Select Your Data Set(s)

Check the boxes for the data set(s) you want to search. When done selecting data set(s), click the Additional Criteria or Results buttons below. Click the plus sign next to the category name to show a list of data sets.

Use Data Set Prefilter (What's This?)

0 data sets out of 0 were hidden by the prefilter (Show).

Data Set Search:

Please wait while the Data Sets are loaded.

4. Search Results

If you selected more than one data set to search, use the dropdown to see the search results for each specific data set.

Note: You must be logged in to download and order scenes

Show Browse/Footprint Controls

Show All Browse From Current Page

Compare Browse:

Browse Overlay Opacity:

Default Browse Overlay Option (Visualization Only)

Alternate Browse Overlay Option (Visualization Only)

Show Result Controls

Add All Results From Current Page to Bulk Download

Add All Results From Current Page to Order

Data Set

Click here to export your results »

Total Results Approximated

The total number of results is approximated because search criteria were not applied to this search. If new scenes have been ingested since the daily data set approximation was ran, you may be unable to access a few results through this paginated interface. Applying any criteria on the "Search Criteria" or "Additional Criteria" tabs will ensure you can access all results.

Export Name What do you want to call this export? If left blank, we'll generate a random token.

Export Format Select an export format

Export Requested for Processing

We are processing your export request.

Export Submitted for Processing

Large exports may take several hours to process during periods of high demand. Once processing has finished, an e-mail will be sent to the address associated with your ERS account. Real-time status updates can be found on the export status page. You may return to your results at any time, it will not impact the processing of your export.

End-User License Agreement (EULA)

You are attempting to download licenses data - this requires acknowledgement of an End-User License Agreement. Please review the agreement content and click "I Agree" to proceed to your download.

Unable to add scene(s)