As the rest of Rhode Island’s population grew and expanded its use of land for settlement and the development of industry, the state’s remaining Native Americans waned in influence and number. By 1884 the Narragansett were “detribalized” when the state purchased their remaining communal land. However, they continued their traditions and maintained a group registry, and in 1934 they incorporated and reorganized their internal government to include an elected chief and council. A suit to reclaim their land—based on a 1790 law that prohibited the sale of Indian land without federal approval—was settled out of court in 1978 for about 1,800 acres (730 hectares). A petition for tribal status was recognized in 1983, but the effort to gain reservation status was refused in 1985. In the 1990s the Narragansett, seeing the enormous success of the neighbouring Pequot and Mohegan with their gambling casinos in Connecticut, mounted a drive to establish a casino in Rhode Island. In 2006 the state’s voters rejected a constitutional amendment that would have allowed the casino to be built.

Rhode Island’s maximum impact on the country, in both political and economic terms, occurred in the period from the 1890s to about 1912. Its industrial power waned in the 20th century as the textile industry began moving to the South. This process accelerated through the 1920s and the Great Depression of the 1930s. World War II temporarily reversed the decline, but the exodus of manufacturing resumed with a vengeance in the late 1940s and ’50s.

During Nelson W. Aldrich’s tenure in the U.S. Senate (1881–1911), Rhode Island had more influence in the Senate than at any other time. As well as serving on the Senate Finance Committee and as chairman of the National Monetary Commission, Aldrich was well connected personally and in business. He wielded substantial power in the government, for which he was dubbed the “General Manager of the United States Senate.” He was a leading figure in the Republican Party’s state political machine.

Rhode Island’s system of statewide representation allowed Republicans to retain control of the government even though Democratic voters outnumbered Republicans in the state. Under this system, each town had one seat in the state senate regardless of its population. Thus, in 1920 the 20 smallest towns—with a total population of 41,660 people—had 20 votes in the state senate to Providence’s one vote. Relentless pressure for change and the impact of the Great Depression finally enabled the Democrats to take over in 1935, in what was termed the Bloodless Revolution. Having attained the general offices of the state as well as a majority in the General Assembly (narrowly, in the Senate), the Democrats were able to replace the mechanisms and commissions that had kept the Republican Party in power for decades with personnel and institutions of their own.

The state became solidly Democratic until the 1970s. Thereafter Republicans occasionally won congressional seats and some general offices, such as that of governor, but the General Assembly continued to be dominated by Democratic legislators; many seats simply went uncontested by Republicans. There were no Republicans elected to the U.S. Senate from Rhode Island between 1930 and 1976 (when John Chafee was elected) or to the U.S. House of Representatives between 1938 and 1980, and Providence had no Republican mayor between 1938 and 1974. Chafee served until his death in office in 1999, when Lincoln Chafee (also a Republican) was appointed to fill his father’s seat; he was elected to one additional term.

Because the Republican Party had been so closely tied to business interests during its long domination, the Democrats reacted by creating a climate that was much less friendly to business after 1935. This hindered efforts at economic planning in Rhode Island in the 1940s and ’50s. Substantial recovery started in the 1960s, only to suffer a sharp setback in the early ’70s, when the bulk of the U.S. Navy’s operations in the state were reassigned elsewhere. The number of active-duty personnel stationed in Rhode Island fell drastically, and more than 16,000 civilian jobs vanished. More than 30,000 people associated with the navy eventually left Rhode Island, giving the state a net loss of population during the 1970s. The state’s economy grew moderately again in the 1980s, only to suffer another blow when the Cold War ended and many defense-related industries closed down. Manufacturing jobs declined by another third between 1987 and 1997. However, the general prosperity of the region and the country were able to buoy the state’s economy through the end of the century.

The ingenuity and enterprise that carried Rhode Island to oceanic commerce in the 18th century and to industry in the 19th century were tested in the early 21st century in the service of securing a sound economy and steady economic growth. The state reformed many of its laws and procedures that were unfriendly to business, extended various incentives for new enterprises, and reformed many of the political institutions and corrupt practices that had tarnished the state’s image. While Rhode Island’s economic growth in the early 21st century was not generally as robust as that of its neighbours Massachusetts and Connecticut, the state enticed several companies in the financial and biotechnology sectors to build plants there. A number of large corporations have their headquarters in Rhode Island.