PROVIDENCE, R.I. Oct. 29—“There are two fine men running for the Senate in Rhode Island,” begins a campaign radio spot urging the re‐election of Senator Claiborne Pell.

The Pell commercial goes on to insist that there is a difference between the two candidates, in particular that the Democratic Senator was speaking out against the Vietnam war when his opponent, John H. Chafee, a Republican, was being “very quiet and obedient” as Secretary of Navy in the Nixon Administration.

But the chivalrous political concession, which Senator Pell is not quite so ready to make as he has come under increasingly personal attack by Mr. Chafee, sums up a frequently expressed predicament of Rhode Island voters in what appears to be a close Senate race.

“He's a Mee fellow, he's got character,” a woman jewelry worker in North Providence observed of Mr. Chafee, after having shaken hands with him. “But Pell is a nice fellow, too, and it has to take a man like Chafee to beat him.”

To the ethnically minded voters of Rhode Island, it is a battle between Yankee Brahmins that seems to arouse sense of reverence.

Rhode Islanders may quarrel about getting one of their own into the statehouse or mayor's office. But when it comes to the United States Senate, which they seem to regard as largely a ceremonial post, they take pride in judging a candidate on the basis of his “character,” not his party affiliation or policy stands.

On one side is 53‐year‐old Senator Pell, a wealthy resident of Newport, a Princeton graduate, Coast Guard officer in World War II and a former Foreign Service officer who went into politics and who, to the surprise of the party professionals, won the Democratic nomination and then election to the Senate in 1960.

A Popular Governor

On the other, is 49‐year‐old Mr. Chafee, a descendant of a Rhode Island industrialist, a Yale graduate, Marine Corps officer in World War II and the Korean war, and a highly popular Governor of Rhode Island for three terms until he was defeated in 1968 when he advocated a state income tax.

Somewhat to their own regret and the consternation of the voters, the two men find themselves caught up in a costly race with national implications. If the Republicans are to capture control of the Senate, they must unseat Mr. Pell, who has been made a major target or the Senate Republican campaign committee.

In the battle for control of the Senate, campaign contributions have poured into Rhode Island, largely from labor unions and liberal groups for Senator Pell and from wealthy Republicans for Mr. Chafee. The outpouring has appalled Senator John. 0. Pastore, the Democratic senior Senator of Rhode Island and a chief architect of the 1971 election reform law that was supposed to limit campaign spending.

Senator Pell has reported $407,000 in contributions, Mr. Chafee $402,000. By Election Day the two probably will have spent a total of $1‐million—or about $2 for every voter in Rhode Island.

Democrats Since 1930

In the nation's smallest and the North's most Democratic state, which has not elected a Republican Senator since 1930, Senator Pell should be the odds‐on favorite. Instead he is something of an underdog; largely because of the popularity that Mr. Chafee has retained since his days as governor.

Mr. Chafee has a recognition factor among the voters that would be the envy of any politician. “Hey, John,” workers call out spontaneously and warmly as he goes on one of his many hand‐shaking tours that have taken him into more than 250 plants.

In one of the many political paradoxes of the campaign, Mr. Chafee's rapport seems highest among the lower‐income workers who used to form a solid Democratic bloc. But now, in their frequently expressed indignation over “welfare shirkers” and frustration over their own economicsocial advancement, they seem willing to turn to a Republican.

It is support from organized labor, combined with united support from a state Democratic organization anxious to preserve the influential seniority of two Democratic Senators, that Senator Pell is relying upon to tip the uneasy political balance in his favor.

In contrast, the Democratic organization, particularly in Providence, is somewhat lukewarm about the gubernatorial candidacy of Philip W. Noel, the Democratic mayor of Warwick, who is expected to lose to Herbert F. DeSimone, a Republican and former state attorney general who narrowly lost out for the governorship in 1970.

When Mr. Chafee resigned last spring as Secretary of the Navy and announced his Senate candidacy, he was regarded as an overwhelming favorite, with perhaps a 2‐to‐1 advantage over Senator Pell. Since then, as Senator Pell has campaigned with the vigor but not quite the folksiness of his opponent, the margin has closed to point too close to call.

The latest poll by the Providence Journal‐Bulletin shows Mr. Chafee ahead by a 43 per cent to 33 per cent margin with 24 per cent undecided—a finding that the Chafee organization contends is supported by its own polls. The Pell organization, however, without citing specific numbers, contends that its latest poll shows that Senator Pell has moved into the lead.

Independence Stressed

Both men have tended to run an independent course from the national campaign. Senator Pell has disassociated himself from some of Senator George McGovern's views, such as his proposed cutbacks in the defense budget that might affect this Navy‐oriented state, without disavowing the Democratic Presidential nominee.

Mr. Chafee says that he sees no advantage in associating himself with President Nixon in a Democratic state where he regards the Nixon support as “more anti‐McGovern than proNixon.” He is also concerned about a “penance vote” among Democrats who might vote for Mr. Nixon but then vote Democratic on the rest of the ticket to salve their partisan consciences.

Yet the Presidential race may well determine the outcome of the Senate race. The appraisal of politicians on both sides is that at this point the Senate race is a tossup, while Mr. Nixon is expected to carry Rhode Island.

If Mr. Nixon wins by a narrow margin, he probably could not pull in Mr. Chafee in a state where ticket‐splitting has become a habit. But if Mr. Nixoq wins by a large plurality, enough of his support could rub off to assure the election of Mr. Chafee.