Claudine, I said, it's been too long.

If you lived here in the 1980s, you know who I’m taking about.

Claudine Schneider was the first and still only woman to serve in Congress from Rhode Island.

But everyone simply knew her as Claudine.

Today, she lives in Boulder, Colorado, and when I heard she was back for a visit with friends, I asked if we could chat. I met her at The Wharf Tavern in Warren.

I wasn’t surprised to hear that at age 75, she continues her environmental fight, which is what first brought her to politics. She was a pit bull on that issue, and apparently still is.

From 2016: R.I. 's former GOP congresswoman, Schneider backs Clinton to counter 'embarrassing' Trump

Her other big fight today is to pull her party back from its turn to the hard right. As a moderate Republican, she told me the best thing you can do on Election Day is vote Democratic to clean out the “147 seditious Republicans” in Congress who tried to overturn the election.

“Republicans aren’t the same as when I served,” she said. “They’ve become the party of ‘no.’”

The lunch date that changed the course of her political career

But let me start with some “breaking” news, though it’s a few decades late.

It turns out that an unreported moment in the U.S. Senate dining room in 1989 changed Rhode Island political history. Some people wondered why Claudine Schneider decided to give up a safe House seat to run against the state's legendary senator Claiborne Pell in 1990.

Cicilline's new book: Trump, Cianci, coming out and the Dunkin' drive-thru

Well, she was having lunch with Pell when he suddenly told her: “I’m not running again.” After a pause, Pell asked, “What are you going to do?”

Although in opposite parties, Pell, in his 70s, respected Schneider.

“So I said, ‘I guess I’m running,’” she recalls. “He just nodded and smiled.”

That story's never been told publicly until now.

She soon declared her candidacy, but not long after, Pell got big pressure to run again to keep the chamber Democratic, and he changed his mind.

Claudine understood — it’s called politics. She soldiered on, and lost.

But she told me: “I’ve always been of the mindset que sera sera.”

Claudine will tell you life after Congress has been full for her. She was flattered to be asked to teach leadership at the Kennedy School at Harvard — a school she half-jokes she could not have gotten into. She also joined a company that helped countries, chiefly Costa Rica, develop wind, hydro and other renewable energy, and her résumé shows a ton of other initiatives.

Patinkin: In the shadow of RI State House, a man, a tent and his message.

Still feeling the love from Rhode Islanders

The Wharf Tavern is a lovely place overlooking the Warren River as it flows toward Narragansett Bay. It’s one of the things Claudine loved and misses about Rhode Island.

“The water,” she told me, growing wistful, “the clapboard houses. The boats. The bridges, seagulls, rhododendrons and just the lush environment.”

“The state did embrace you,” I told her.

“So much love,” said Claudine.

It touches her that she still gets fan messages from here.

In the 1980s, her presence in a restaurant would have brought plenty of folks to say hello. No longer, but at one point, we passed a table with two ladies of a certain age, and I mentioned that this was Claudine. No need for a last name.

One of them, Carolyn Breslin, a retired nurse, brightened up.

“I voted for you,” she said, adding she liked that Claudine was a woman blazing a trail. Carolyn also remembered the congresswoman’s fashion sense, which got a laugh.

More: With writer Chip Young's passing, the lights at Casa Diablo have dimmed

Early aspirations: Designer, dancer, doctor

Back at our table, Claudine mentioned that she grew up outside Pittsburgh with a dad who ran a clothing store and taught her tailoring. Early on, she considered the fashion business, and in Washington, she designed and made her own evening dresses.

In her younger years, she also thought of being a dancer or artist until her parents said she needed to study something “serious.”

“I said, ‘OK, I want to be a doctor,’” recalled Claudine. “They said, ‘No, your brother can become a doctor; you can marry one.’”

That was the mid-1960s for you.

History: Joe Doorley, a mayor who shaped modern Providence, dies. 'He was like Cianci before Cianci.'

The marriage reference got me recalling that Claudine got divorced halfway through her 10-year run in Congress.

I asked what happened?

She was refreshingly honest.

“He found someone else,” she said, smiling.

“For some reason,” I told her, “I thought it had been your decision.”

She shook her head no. She’s had a few relationships since then, but none lasted.

Claudine laughed and said, “So I’m available.”

As we chatted, she recalled a public part of her history — she’d been diagnosed with Hodgkin's disease, a form of cancer, at age 25. It’s one reason she ended up running.

“I didn’t know how long I’d be alive,” said Claudine, “and I needed something to show for it when I met Saint Peter.”

She began to wonder — what had she accomplished? What was her purpose?

Election 2022: Long-time environmental activist files complaint against candidate for governor Matt Brown

From environmental activist to politician

By then, she was married and soon followed her husband, a fellow environmentalist, to Rhode Island, where he’d taken a job in the field.

Claudine found her own purpose fighting plans to build a nuclear power plant in Charlestown. She started the Conservation Law Foundation here to recruit lawyers to fight environmental battles, like cleaning up toxic waste, including that which flowed from jewelry and industrial businesses into Rhode Island’s rivers and Bay.

She got so publicly involved that her husband said, “You should run for office.”

“I said, ‘No, I hate politics.'”

But others told her the same, so in 1978, she entered the arena.

The odds weren’t promising. The incumbent was Eddie Beard, a onetime house painter who was hugely popular as an iconic Rhode Island blue-collar guy who’d risen to Congress.

Indeed, she lost to Beard that year, and figured that was the end of politics for her, but the next day, on a thank-you tour to supporters, she saw signs and bumper stickers saying, “Next time, Claudine.”

So she didn’t give up. She won a rematch in 1980 and went on to serve five terms, becoming a major political force here, and out front nationally on climate change.

As we sat looking at the water, she told me we’ve gone backwards since then.

These days, from time to time Claudine pens newspaper columns on that, as well as other issues, including a piece three weeks ago in the Boston Globe calling out corporations, CVS among them, who've given campaign donations to election deniers.

“As a Republican former congresswoman,” she wrote, “I’m confident that the values and principles of today’s party would have horrified Ronald Reagan and every American conservative hero.”

I asked what had prompted her to leave God’s country in Rhode Island for Colorado around 1995, five or so years after moving on from Congress.

She said there are key climate organizations in Boulder, including the National Center for Atmospheric Research, which she had worked with, and she saw a role for herself in helping get the message out.

A messenger on climate, and political ethics

So Claudine sold her home in South County and embraced the Colorado life. She told me she still loves hiking and biking there today.

She keeps a busy advocacy schedule and also works with startups, including Signal Climate Analytics, which among other things, helps companies craft decarbonization strategies.

On this visit, Claudine is staying with friends in Jamestown, and after we finished chatting, she joined a longtime supporter, Connie McGreavy, for a late lunch right there at The Wharf.

Connie, a former triathlete, remembers that Claudine helped get funding for her to run a short leg through Rhode Island carrying the Olympic torch in 1984. Claudine ran a leg, too. Connie also worked as an environmental activist, and she told me Claudine has inspired her as an early crusader who’s still at it.

Before we said goodbye, I asked Claudine why she doesn’t retire.

She told me she still asks herself that familiar question: "What is my purpose?" The answer, she feels, is the same today as it was in Rhode Island in the 1970s — to be a messenger on climate, and now on political ethics, too.

But while here, her plan is to relax, perhaps boating with friends on Rhode Island waters, which remind Claudine of the beauty around us that she is working to protect.

— mpatinki@providencejournal.com