Call for Proposals

Potential topics include:

¥ Intertitles and silent cinema

¥ Intertitles and translation

¥ Intertitles and adaptation

¥ Intertitles in other mediums

¥ Reading on screen

¥ Projected text/embedded text

¥ Intertitle writers

¥ Intertitle cliches

¥ intersections of text and image

Title and 50-100 word description due: August 1st, 2016

Email: gregory.robinson@nsc.edu

For more information, visit:

www.intertitles.weebly.com

If you are saying to yourself: "I'm intrigued, but 'intertitle' wasn't even a term used in the silent period," you are exactly who I hope to find. You're right. The term "intertitle" wasn't used in the to denote the projected text in silent movies until after the silent era ended. In that era, magazines referred to these texts as "titles," subtitles," "captions" or "title cards." No matter what term you use, these precursors to the Tweet are one of the reasons that rediscovering silent movies is such a pleasure: the interwoven texts ask their viewers to read while they watch, making early movie a literary experience as well as a cinematic one.

Popular conceptions of intertitles typically include character introductions and representations of speech, but intertitles also perform several complex functions. They often helped create a narrative framework for movies, linking together images that would have seemed unrelated without a textual bridge. Billy Wilder once said of intertitle writer George Marion: "the producers would bring him a picture with all the scenes finished - they wouldn't even know yet whether it was a comedy, very often, or whether they had a drama - until Marion finished writing the titles!"

When talking films arrived, intertitles were greatly reduced, but the presence of text in time-based media continues, and it still serves some unique functions. When the titular character on BBC's Sherlock has an important insight, text often appears on screen, allowing the viewers to read his thoughts. This book will lean more towards intertitles and the silent era, but there will be a section on the ways intertitles appear in modern cinema and multimedia.

Readers interested in learning about intertitles have several potential sources, including journal articles, book chapters, and dissertations. This book will bring some of the best writing together into a single volume, creating a resource for students, scholars, and casual readers interested in film history or the intersections of text and image.

Our goal is to create an accessible and readable collection of works on the topic, with chapters between 4000-7000 words. If you are interested in being a part of this project, simply send a title, a brief description of your chapter idea, and a little about yourself by August 1st, 2016.