intertitles in English dictionary

Meanings and definitions of "intertitles"

Plural form of intertitle.

noun

plural of [i]intertitle[/i]

more

Sample sentences with "intertitles"

Declension Stem

Juha is a silent film shot in black-and-white with the dialogue coming in the form of intertitles.

Because silent films had no synchronized sound for dialogue, onscreen intertitles were used to narrate story points, present key dialogue and sometimes even comment on the action for the audience.

Marceau also showed his versatility in motion pictures such as Professor Ping in Barbarella (1968); First Class (1970), in which he played 17 roles; Shanks (1974), where he combined his silent art, playing a deaf and mute puppeteer, and his speaking talent, as a mad scientist; and a cameo as himself in Mel Brooks Silent Movie (1976), in which, with intentional irony, his character has the only audible speaking part, uttering the single word "No!" when Brooks asks him (via intertitle) if he would participate in the film.

Taiwanese director Hou Hsiao-hsien's acclaimed drama Three Times (2005) is silent during its middle third, complete with intertitles; Stanley Tucci's The Impostors has an opening silent sequence in the style of early silent comedies.

The missing intertitles were reconstructed using the script and a list of titles Decla- Bioscop filed on # March

In D. W. Griffith's 1919 silent film Broken Blossoms, the opium house in London that the protagonist goes to is described on the intertitle as "Chinese, Malays, lascars, where the Orient squats at the portals of the West".

In most countries, intertitles came to be used to provide dialogue and narration for the film.

Spanish intertitles have been translated into German with the aid of the censor- cards

There are a total of seven narrative sequences; the three primary storylines are preceded by intertitles: "Prologue – The Diner" (i) Prelude to "Vincent Vega and Marsellus Wallace's Wife" "Vincent Vega and Marsellus Wallace's Wife" Prelude to "The Gold Watch" (a – flashback, b – present) "The Gold Watch" "The Bonnie Situation" "Epilogue – The Diner" (ii) If the seven sequences were ordered chronologically, they would run: 4a, 2, 6, 1, 7, 4b, 3, 5.

The German intertitles were taken from extant prints and flash-titles restored digitally from the negatives.

Some intertitles were from other countries.

A Picture Shot In The Back (intertitle).

The earliest known use of intertitles was in the British film Scrooge, or, Marley's Ghost.

The film, HAUNTED CASTLE (Schloss Vogeloed), was restored in #, using the following material: an original negative of the Federal Film Archive, Berlin and a celluloid, tinted copy, with Portuguese intertitles from the Fundacao Cinemateca Brasileira, preserved in the Federal Film Archive in Koblenz

A Free Ride's opening intertitle denotes the film's setting as "in the wide open spaces, where men are men and girls will be girls, the hills are full of romance and adventure".

Only a few of the " animated intertitles "

The intertitles were, as far as they were present, taken from the negatives.

The animation combines editorial cartooning techniques with live-action-like sequences, and is considered McCay's most realistic effort; the intertitles emphasized that the film was a "historical record" of the event.

The wording of the German intertitles was recreated with the aid of German-French intertitles from a copy at the Cinémathèque Royale de Belgique, Brussels.

The intertitles include excerpts from the writings of Walt Whitman.

The intertitles were - when available - taken from the copy of the Bundesarchiv - Filmarchiv or corrected electronically.

On 20 September 1927 it was made a projection for the criticism that advised to cut intertitles, delete some others and eliminate some scenes of the film before presenting it to the public.

The intertitles in the surviving print were different than the ones from the pages of the official Censor

Authors