Big Brovaz made a surprise comeback on UK television on Friday night during Celebrity Big Brother's launch.

Four of the original six members appeared on Channel 5's Bit on the Side, performing arguably their most famous hit 'Nu Flow'. Their appearance met with the enjoyment of many fans online, and the group were a Twitter trend for the remainder of the weekend.

The R&B-pop group scored four top ten hits in the early 2000s, and were perhaps the 'nice' antidote to So Solid Crew at the time. Cherise and Nadia later went on to form Booty Luv, and they disbanded by 2007.

To celebrate their comeback (and commiserate that they're not part of The Big Reunion), Digital Spy presents five of their best tracks, in chronological order...

'Nu Flow' (UK chart peak 3, 2002)

Easily the band's most memorable track, and still to this day an excellent R&B/pop hit. 'Nu Flow' has one of those choruses that will stick in your head all day, and that's not necessarily a bad thing. Let's hope they do a Blue and join The Big Reunion late just so they can perform this live again.

'OK' (UK chart peak 7, 2003)

A proper early Noughties-style R&B tune that sounds like it could easily have been recorded by US groups of the time such as Spooks. Compared to other mixed gender pop groups of the era (S Club 7, Steps), this felt genuinely credible at the time.

'Favourite Things' (UK chart peak 2, 2003)

Although this track was based around 'My Favourite Things' from The Sound of Music, it removed the goody-goody pleasantries from the original and replaced them with expensive bits of bling such as diamonds, rubies, Bentleys and Gucci. They did actually record a faithful cover of the original as a bonus hidden track on their debut album Nu-Flow, apparently. It also had quite an epic fairground-set music video.

'Baby Boy' (UK chart peak 4, 2003)

This is placed in the list purely because of its genius Friends parody music video. This ballad may not have aged brilliantly over the years, but it's still quite a pleasant slice of R&B pop, and was a big hit at the time.

'Yours Fatally' (UK chart peak 15, 2004)

The group's last Top 40 hit to date, reaching number 15 in 2004. By this point it seemed that Big Brovaz weren't sure what direction to go in, and they went back to the ballad formula of 'Baby Boy' rather than the funky R&B of 'Nu Flow'. In fact, 'Yours Fatally' sounds like it's by a girl group featuring guest appearances from a couple of rappers rather than a full band. That said, it's still another example of decent early Noughties R&B.