09-07-03 01:21 PM

Soldatti This week on the UK Top 75 Singles:

01 (N) Black Eyed Peas – Where is the love?

02 (N) Dido – White Flag

03 (01) Elton John – Are you ready for love

04 (N) Big Brovaz – Baby Boy

05 (N) Iron Maiden – Wildest Dreams

06 (02) Blu Cantrell ft. Sean Paul – Breathe

07 (04) Ultrabeat – Pretty Green Eyes

08 (03) Sean Paul – Like Glue

09 (N) Starsailor – Silence is easy

10 (06) Kelly Clarkson – Miss Independent

New Entries from Nos.11 to Nos.40

13 The White Stripes – I just don’t know what to do with myself

14 Rolling Stones – Sympathy for the devil

19 The Cooper Temple Clause – Promises Promises

23 A – Good Times

29 Marilyn Manson – This is the new shit

32 Barn Dance Boys– Yippee-I-Oh

35 Freeland – We want your soul

38 Spiritualized – She kissed me (It felt like a hit)

The top 15 is very good for me!!!

09-07-03 01:51 PM

Gazza Christ...I think thats about their highest chart placing since "Harlem shuffle"

Thats as high as it'll go, though. In the UK charts, almost every new single peaks in it's first week as so few people buy singles now.

Maybe theres a new career of hits singles in these remixes. Best not to tempt fate,however

09-07-03 02:31 PM

Mother baby I know this might sound like a stupid question but it's puzzled me for awhile. How do they rate singles on the charts...when they sold 45's it seemed easy to measure..but how do they do it now, or since 45's?. I haven't paid much attention to the charts for along time now anyway. But I am puzzled.

09-07-03 02:54 PM

scully It's still done on sales of CD singles, 12" vinyl, 7" vinyl and cassette singles, depending on which formats they release on. As Gazza said tho, sales of singles generally are so low that the first week of a release is really all that counts, after that very few people are going to buy it (except for the massive pop acts).

Some acts put out multiple versions of singles with extra "B" sides etc, but there are rules about what is allowed to count towards the chart placing, as some record companies will give away 'gifts' with singles that are worth much more than the reocrd.

09-07-03 03:08 PM

Mother baby Sounds like really skewed demographics to me.

09-07-03 03:50 PM

scully Something like that. The other thing is that only certain shops are 'chart return' shops, so that only the sales in these ones counts towards the chart. They're supposed to be a secret, and change regularly - but you can imagine. The process of compiling the chart should 'notice' anything odd about the sales pattern, but there have been loads of instances of record companies buying their own records in chart return shops, or giving those shops 'incentives' (like holidays and cars!) - aledgedly.

09-07-03 03:57 PM

Mother baby Anything that's done "in secret" is open to manipulation. Can you spell p-a-y-o-l-a ?

I dunno, I don't know enough about it to make a judgement. It all seems to be pretty shakey to me. But then again the big labels still rule the roost. (didn't the Byrds do a song about all that once? So you wanna be a R & R star?)

09-07-03 04:07 PM

scully Spot on - things don't change. I think there's less focus on chart position now than there used to be, though for the pop end of the market every release has to do better than the last one.

Don't know what its like in other countries, but the UK is totally dominated by manufactured acts and reality TV dross, which makes it hard for new (real) talent to get on.

So you want to be a Rock'n'Roll Star is a great song though.

09-07-03 06:06 PM

TheSavageYoungXyzzy

quote: scully wrote:

Spot on - things don't change. I think there's less focus on chart position now than there used to be, though for the pop end of the market every release has to do better than the last one.

Don't know what its like in other countries, but the UK is totally dominated by manufactured acts and reality TV dross, which makes it hard for new (real) talent to get on.

So you want to be a Rock'n'Roll Star is a great song though.

Wow. I guess all these good up-and-coming British bands I've been hearing are underground over there, too. Damnit. I was hoping for better.

I bought The Coral's debut album yesterday, and rather enjoy it. It's not *thrilling* or *life-changing* as a lot of people say it is, but it's a nice thing, especially in an era when the record companies go "You sound like 'x'. Continue to sound like 'x' or we cut your money." I hear traces of everyone from Pink Floyd to the Doors to the Beatles to the Stones to Toots and the Maytals to The Zombies to the Mod-era Who - they really run the gamut of the 'early British Invasion' genre with some refreshing new tricks thrown in for good measure. It's never the same song twice - a prime example "Simon Diamond", a song that could've easily replaced and outclassed "Silas Stingy" on The Who Sell Out. And how often do you hear songs about *pirates* on an album that're actually *good*? Even the cover looks something like Sgt. Pepper gone horribly wrong. It's not an album I'm enamored with, but it's pretty damn good in comparison to 99% of the garbage out there now.

So are those innovative kinda bands as quiet in their home country as they are over here?

-tSYX --- Shuffle it all, yeah...

09-07-03 06:17 PM

Boomy I am not surprised that people like crap!!!

Wait, is this the Remix or the Stones original? If it's the original, great!!! If not, booooooooooo.......

[Edited by Boomy]

09-07-03 10:26 PM

Soldatti Rolling Stones UK Singles Chart

(1989-2003)

#36 Mixed Emotions

#63 Rock And A Hard Place

#61 Paint It Black (re-issue)

#31 Almost Hear You Sigh

#82 Terrifying (out of Top 75)

#29 Highwire

#59 Ruby Tuesday (live)

#14 Love Is Strong

#23 You Got Me Rocking

#38 Out Of Tears

#29 I Go Wild

#12 Like A Rolling Stone

#22 Anybody Seen My Baby?

#26 Saint Of Me

#51 Out Of Control

#36 Don't Stop

"Sympathy For The Devil" sold 12,000 copies last week. Is a very good number for the Stones!!

Dotmusic chart commentary:

14 SYMPATHY FOR THE DEVIL (Rolling Stones)

Rolling Stones mania has been hitting the country of late. The legendary 60s (and indeed 70s, 80s and 90s) stars have been playing a series of homecoming concerts and have a greatest hits collection in the shops to boot. So what better way to celebrate than with the re-release of just one of those greatest hits? Well actually they could have done better than this for this is actually no straight re-release of their classic hit but a rather ill-advised remix version courtesy of the Neptunes that frankly does the track no favours. Although it is one of their most famous songs this is actually the first time that Sympathy For The Devil has been a chart hit, the song having hitherto been confined to their 1968 album Beggars Banquet. At the very least it propels them into the Top 20 for the first time since November 1995 when their appropriate cover of Bob Dylan's Like A Rolling Stone hit Number 12. To find their last Top 10 appearance you have to go back to August 1981 when Start Me Up hit Number 7. This actually isn't the first time Mick and Keith et al have looked to the dancefloor for inspiration. Back in 1998 Deep Dish remixed their track Saint Of Me to quite wonderful effect although the single release could only reach Number 26.

09-08-03 07:37 AM

scully The Coral are doing really well at the moment the second album was a #1 record I think, their tour is a solid sell out. I guess the picture is not as bad as I painted it, I think things have improved a little over the last couple of years, there are certainly more bands (rather than 'acts') here now. The album scene is much healthier than singles, that's for sure.

09-08-03 08:09 AM

Mother baby well I was right about one thing...it was a stupid question. But jeeez I don't know anybody who collects singles. Who are these people? I mean I used to 30 plus years ago. I'd like to see the demographics on these buyers though.

09-08-03 08:50 AM

scully Kids I guess, though at £4 per cd single, it better value to buy the album ;-)

09-08-03 08:58 AM

Mother baby Yeah that would be my guess. But I was also wondering about Country radio to. My guess there wouldn't be too many kids buying C & W singles.

09-08-03 09:01 AM

Zeeta

quote: TheSavageYoungXyzzy wrote:

Wow. I guess all these good up-and-coming British bands I've been hearing are underground over there, too. Damnit. I was hoping for better.

I bought The Coral's debut album yesterday, and rather enjoy it. It's not *thrilling* or *life-changing* as a lot of people say it is, but it's a nice thing, especially in an era when the record companies go "You sound like 'x'. Continue to sound like 'x' or we cut your money." I hear traces of everyone from Pink Floyd to the Doors to the Beatles to the Stones to Toots and the Maytals to The Zombies to the Mod-era Who - they really run the gamut of the 'early British Invasion' genre with some refreshing new tricks thrown in for good measure. It's never the same song twice - a prime example "Simon Diamond", a song that could've easily replaced and outclassed "Silas Stingy" on The Who Sell Out. And how often do you hear songs about *pirates* on an album that're actually *good*? Even the cover looks something like Sgt. Pepper gone horribly wrong. It's not an album I'm enamored with, but it's pretty damn good in comparison to 99% of the garbage out there now.

So are those innovative kinda bands as quiet in their home country as they are over here?

-tSYX --- Shuffle it all, yeah...

Oh yeah The Coral are fairly big here - I am *really* surprised you have heard of them to be honest! The Liverpool music scene is really alive at the moment - The Bandits who claim to have invented the sound that The Coral have and The Stands who are amazing - maybe you will find out or maybe not? They are brilliant live. The Coral's second album is not as good as their first. Simon Diamond roles as does Wildfire and Spanish Main!

Enjoy it!

09-08-03 10:54 AM

scully I think The Bandits kind of kick started the whole new Liverpool scene, they had some sort of weekly club night going.

Not heard them myself though. (too old!)

09-08-03 11:37 AM

Zeeta Yes mate the night is called The Bandwagon I have been a few times it is good stuff. I also chatted to Noel Gallagher there - he was an amicable guy crashing me cigs etc. Pity about his music!! I asked him if he possed Get Yer Ya Yas out and he looked at me blankly!! Oh Dear! I told him he should try and get his band to sound something like the Stooges on Raw Power - He said he prefered the Velvets! It was an interesting night. I know everyone here probrably detests Oasis but I believe their first album is good rocker! It also injected the music scene in the UK up it's arse at the time,

Matt

"so shoot me Ronnie!!"

09-08-03 12:15 PM