PDF Playlist

Nu Flow

Big Brovaz

Year:

2003

3:22

158 Views

Playlists:

#3

The easy, fast & fun way to learn how to sing: 30DaySinger.com

“Ladies and Gentlemen, boys and girls, it is my pleasure to introduce to you all. The finest, the brightest, the meanest. This one's the very best of them all. The south London collective group known as..." “For Goodness J-Rock Who Is It?" This is big bro (bro) Takin' over the show (show) With this nu flow (flow) You need to listen up and feel this shhh 'Cause we won't quit (quit) We'll make them hits and stack them chips (who's this?) This 'cause I came through the door, As soon I step in the door, I see that you hatin' my flow, The cooler flow the soother flow, We tired of being this poor and Havin' to sleep on the floor, And workin' from nine to five, It's like a five-dollar home, Knowin' we worth more, We simply had to settle the score, that's why you see these albums and these singles in the store, It's Big Bruva baby, Tryin' to cash some major big be's, You messing with my cheese, and I'll switch dis right so what nigga It's Dion, I bet you won't forget my name, I've probably maybe, Prone to get inside ya brain, My family does the same, It's BB's time to reign, We doin' them platinum chains, And all you'z are made for me You're new You lose You wear my shoes Cherise, Brand new, Me and my crew, Don't try our flow, If ya tongue don't grow, You'll lose control, You'll just wait and come Hey yo, this is J-rock, And I got more skill than average, Put us together man, We're more than all of y'all can manage, 'Cause we be the baddest addict, Just here to get some practice, And now it's only more money and it's more madness, Stock up on a daily basis, We travel so many places, Switchin' so many tricks, And mixin' up those lyrical faces, 'Cause they see the ice and they trip, They like to ride in your whip, But all I want to know is if these girls are riding it, oh! Who's, who's, who's this? This is the N A D I A, You didn't think I was coming at ya, Givin' you people a different time, A big brotha maker, I bet y'all didn't think I was, Writing these beats and makin' on paper, Then I guess I'm a paper chaser, Sorry y'all it's in my nature, Who's this Uh huh Uh huh Uh huh Uh huh Uh huh Uh huh Who's, who's this?

Become A Better Singer In Only 30 Days, With Easy Video Lessons!

0 fans

Sheet Music PDF Playlist

Written by: MICHAEL MUGISHA, TEMI TAYO AISIDA, MICHAEL CLAUDIUS BROWN, JOHN PAUL HORSLEY, NADIA YUTINDA SHEPHERD, THELMA CHARMAINE FIONA HOWELL, CHERISE ALANA ROBERTS, DEAN CARLOS MCINTOSH

Lyrics © Universal Music Publishing Group, Sony/ATV Music Publishing LLC

Lyrics Licensed & Provided by LyricFind