Since 2006, this British dance music duo has been known under the cheeky title, "Booty Luv."

But, finding the name more objectifying then fun, the two just took their first names to lead and became simply, "Cherise & Nadia."

The group, comprised of vocalists, Cherise Roberts and Nadia Shepherd, were in the original line-up of the successful British hip hop band Big Brovaz. The twosome have had several top twenty hits in the UK and have also achieved international success; mainly in Europe. But as yet, American audiences have yet to warm up to the contagious sound of this talented twosome. The question is, "why?"

The group, initally known as Rap backup lyricists in Big Brovaz, were offered the opportunity to record and promote a new version of R&B hit "Boogie 2nite". The girls accepted the offer and began recording their new version and other songs under the name "Booty Luv" and with a strong dance influence.

The duo maintains a powerful dance club sound with an equally strong Hip-Hop vibe to their music. With their rap beginnings to dance music evolution; in addition to appearances, the two can be somewhat likened to American hip-hop legends, Salt n Pepa. Though not at the level of the "Push it" pioneers, one look or listen of their single or video performances will show the promise of great, high-energy things to come.

Like those innovative ladies of Rap history, Cherise & Nadia continue to produce music that compels you to move on the dance floor--or the confines of your car. But, in the wannabe reality show realms of all the "X-factors," "the Voice" and old standard, "American Idol" there seems to be no room for another "British invasion" of music to our shores. That's kinda a pity because those "invasions" usually bring some of the most influential music here to define a generation. Some of us might remember the 80's, but your parents would probably argue for the 60's.

With multi-hit singles and videos to their talent, Cherise & Nadia probably deserve at least a listen to. And if you call yourself a dance music lover or critic, a sampling could be considered mandatory.

Either way, its 2012 and experiencing something new is always good for the soul. So give them a listen. As best, you might find something new to recommend to your favorite DJ or add to your I-Pod playlist. At worst, you might find yourself moving in your seat or bopping a little bit.

Whatever your choice, I'm sure you'll find your booty moving from the luv of their sound. Check out an example of their heat below.

New Orleans is known as the birthplace of lots of thing: Jazz, Mardi Gras, Creole cooking, diverse people and the music style called Bounce. Though the genre hasn't ever received the more widespread exposure it might deserve, few other artists have made it more identifiable than artist, Big Freedia.

Freddie Ross, or Big Freedia is a native of New Orleans who has helped popularize a offshoot of the Bounce style called "sissy bounce" a more energetic dance form of the Bounce music genre.

Openly gay and preferring to be identified as a female,

Ross grew up with music playing a huge part of her life. Early exposure to artists like Patti LaBelle, Michael Jackson, and Salt-n-Pepa cemented what she wanted to do with her life. But preforming was not something that came easy for the future Freedia.

Ross was hampered by extreme stage fright in her initial gigs. But, under the wing of another bounce artist, Katey Red, Ross eased into the spotlight first as a backup singer and dancer on Red's shows.

The personality know as Big Freedia evolved around 1998 when she adopted her stage name. According to Ross, "I wanted a catchy name that rhymed, and my mother had a club called Diva that I worked for. I called myself the queen of diva – so I coined it: Big Freedia Queen Diva."

Though her music is described as within the "sissy bounce" subgenre, Ross claims its all just bounce music. The difference with Freedia's sound is a slightly faster tempo to the music and the addition of super aggressive, sexual lyrics about bad boyfriends or whatever.

Greater exposure came in the aftermath of Hurricane Katrina when Freedia returned to the New Orleans area. Playing venues all over the changed city, Freedia's music and enthusiasm were well-welcomed to a post-Katrina crescent city.

After several years of touring with Katey Red and other bounce artists. Freedia was highlighted in The New York Times in 2010; which led to her first national television appearances on the Last Call with Carson Daly and Jimmy Kimmel Live.

With growing attention and several music awards to her credit, Freedia still calls New Orleans home. Operating a local interior design business, but still touring all around town and abroad, Freedia is considered the undisputed Queen of Bounce. Not a bad title for the Walter L Cohen High graduate and painfully shy performer who hoped to shine as bright as her inspirations.

Get a taste of Big Freedia's true New Orleans bounce style with a strong hint of dance club booty bouncing beats below.