NEW Wet Kojak’s frontman Scott McCloud is obsessed with glamour – and the group’s new concept album “This Is the Glamorous,” has tunes such as “This Is Shampoo” and “Supermodel Citizens USA.”

The album’s jazzed up with saxophones and techno-fied a bit by synths, but retains its rock feel. It’s also driven by a certain funk-ness.

The quintet performs Friday at the Mercury Lounge (217 E. Houston St.; [212] 260-4700) with headliner Bettie Serveert and openers Peter Francis and Blake Hazard.

Dutch band Bettie Serveert is on tour for its latest album “Log 22,” which features Carol Van Dyk’s expressive vocals and varying levels of guitars, strings, horns and electronics.

TONIGHT: Guitarist and composer Jim Campilongo brings his Telecaster and Electric Trio to perform his rich instrumental mix of blues, country and jazz guitar in an improv set at a free show in the Knitting Factory’s Tap Room (74 Leonard St.; [212] 219-3055). He may throw in a cover or two – say, Chet Atkins or Johnny Cash – and his latest album is sprinkled with organ, steel guitar and accordion.

TOMORROW: L.A.’s Warlocks, which features some of the many ex-members of Brian Jonestown Massacre, were supposed to perform at Northsix, but that venue’s been temporarily closed, so the show has been moved to Galapagos (70 N. Sixth St., Brooklyn; [718] 782-5188) at the witching hour of midnight.

Seems like everyone is inspired by Jesus and Mary Chain these days, and the Warlocks are, too, but this punky fuzzy-guitar band’s first love must be the Velvet Underground.

On some tunes of their latest album, “Holy Roller Novocaine,” Kings of Leon have the urgency of a neo-punk band with frenzied blues vocals. Others have the slower pace of a song for a country afternoon.

KOL was formed in Tennessee by three home-schooled brothers and a cousin. The brothers’ father was a United Pentecostal evangelist and the family grew up on the road between Oklahoma City and Memphis. They’re on the road again and will perform an early show Thursday at the Mercury Lounge.

FRIDAY: Clem Snide was once a punky noise trio, but found its more rootsy ways when the group, named after a William Burroughs character, moved from Boston to New York in 1995. The quartet, whose third album, “The Ghost of Fashion,” reflects both sensibilities (with the song “Joan Jett of Arc”) appears at Brooklyn’s Southpaw (125 Fifth Ave.; [718] 230-0236) with Cub Country.

SATURDAY: Ted Leo and the Pharmacists, who just released “Hearts of Oak,” bring their retro new-wave/punk pop ways to Southpaw. Jersey boy Leo’s album is powerfully reminiscent of Elvis Costello, Billy Bragg and Joe Jackson, and he’s a live wire live. 33 Slade, Fiery Furnaces and the Double open.