In “My Tennessee Mountain Home,” Dolly Parton sings about Tennessee the way most artists reserve for a romantic partner: “Life,” she says, with Tennessee, “is as peaceful as a baby’s sigh.”

Other than her husband of 50 years, Tennessee Dolly Parton’s great love. It’s served as her muse, inspiring songs and other creative pursuits, and her home. Despite worldwide fame and fortune that allows her to live anywhere, she’s always gravitated back.

Here’s a guide to the places that Dolly Parton holds dear.

Dollywood

Dolly Parton’s eponymous theme park, in Pigeon Forge, sits on the cusp of the Great Smoky Mountains, the most-visited national park in the entire United States. With Chasing Rainbows (an interactive Dolly Parton Museum) and a replica of her childhood home, yes, it’s an ode to her—but it’s also an ode to Tennessee. They serve traditional Southern foods like sweet tea, kettle corn, and ham ’n beans, and visitors can take the Dollywood Express up into the wilderness.

Sevierville, TennesseeJust outside the Dollywood borders lies Sevier County, Tennessee, the birthplace of Dolly herself. She lived with her large family in a one-room cabin in the remote area of Locust Ridge, too rural and isolated to officially be a town, but Sevierville, Tennessee, is recognized as her “hometown” (and has a large Dolly Parton statue to commemorate it as such).

Those who want to visit her true, authentic roots—and the Tennessee that she sang about in her trademark country twang—should look no further.

Printer’s Alley, Nashville

The name’s a bit of a misnomer: In the beginning of the 20th century this was Nashville’s publishing hub, but it eventually became their nightlife district.

Parton moved to Nashville the day after she graduated from high school. She went straight to the stages and clubs of Printer’s Alley, trying to stand out from the crowd—and succeeding.

Rugby, Tennessee

In an interview with Southern Living, Dolly Parton was asked her favorite things about Tennessee. “You know up around Knoxville? There’s a little town up there called Rugby,” she said.

Rugby, Tennessee, is a Victorian village that’s described as “frozen in time.” Once an experimental utopia for English gentry, it’s now a quaint rural town with rich scenery and richer heritage: it’s been on the National Register for Historic Places since 1972.