After starring in dozens of movies—including “Cruel Intentions”—Ryan Phillippe is back on the big screen. In the movie “Prey,” Phillippe portrays a missionary fighting for his life while lost in Africa. The content of the film and his own spiritual journey have led him to “craving” a deeper relationship with God.

“I wanted to have a relationship and understanding with God, and I was craving that,” Phillippe recently told Fox News Digital. “Since I started that journey, I have not been more at peace.”

Ryan Phillippe Finds Himself on His Own Thrill Ride ‘Craving’ More of God

Ryan Phillippe opened up about his life and how starring in “Prey” has impacted him deeply. In the movie, he plays the leading role, a Christian missionary in Africa. Phillippe had a religious upbringing and has been aware of his own faith. “And it grows even more, every day,” said Phillippe.

Phillippe continues to learn more about God and his own spirituality. “I spent a lot of time in prayer and studying things of that nature I find very fulfilling,” he said. “I feel like it’s the most important thing that you could spend your time thinking about or learning about or trying to understand. So it’s become a very, very important part of my life.”

As his work on “Prey” ended, Phillippe became more intent on focusing on his own faith. He embarked on a spiritual journey.

“It’s interesting because I was kind of in a darker place when we filmed this, and it was right after filming it where I went on this spiritual journey where I started going really deep inside,” he shared.

Phillippe shared how he’s centered on what’s most important. “I got back into reading the Bible and various other religious tomes, but I found myself drawn to this notion of spirituality,” he said. “You get to a point in life, a certain age, and the things that you thought would bring you pleasure or make you feel satisfied—these would be success or money—and it doesn’t. It doesn’t.”

“And I’ve got to tell you, since I started that journey, I have not been more at peace. My depression is gone,” Phillippe added. “I shedded addictions, so I’m a big proponent for people going inward and trying to understand those aspects of life.”