Ryan Phillippe seeks joint custody of kids

LOS ANGELES (AP) — Ryan Phillippe wants joint custody of his children with "Walk the Line" Oscar winner Reese Witherspoon.

Witherspoon filed for divorce on Nov. 8, citing "irreconcilable differences" as the reason for the split, and she asked for physical custody of the acting couple's two children — 7-year-old Ava and 3-year-old Deacon.

In the Superior Court divorce petition, Witherspoon, 31, asked for visitation for Phillippe, 32, and "exclusive use of the family residence."

In a response filed Tuesday, Phillippe also cited irreconcilable differences but asked for joint legal custody and physical custody of the children as well as visitation granted "to both parties, equally allocated."

Phillippe's petition was first reported by CelebTV.com.

A telephone message left Thursday for Witherspoon publicist Nancy Ryder wasn't immediately returned.

The documents filed with the court in November and this week do not list separate or community property, saying the nature of the assets has yet to be determined.

Witherspoon's petition requested that the court not grant any spousal support to Phillippe. There was no request for support in Phillippe's petition.

The couple, who costarred in the 1999 release "Cruel Intentions," married that year.

Witherspoon won an Academy Award for her role as June Carter Cash in 2005's "Walk the Line." Phillippe costarred in the same year's best-picture Oscar winner, "Crash," and starred last year in Clint Eastwood's "Flags of Our Fathers."

Nick Carter raising awareness for dolphins

WASHINGTON (AP) — Nick Carter of the pop band Backstreet Boys has been appointed as a U.N. special ambassador of the Year of the Dolphin.

"I was shocked. And happy at the exact same time because I really felt like it was an honor," he told AP Radio News on Thursday.

The Year of the Dolphin campaign is aimed at raising awareness of dolphins in the wild, the threats they face to their survival and actions that could help their wild conservation.

Carter, who starred on the E! Entertainment reality show "House of Carters" with his siblings, said he's still a student of the campaign.

"The issues involved with the dolphins are things that I am learning," the 27-year-old singer said. "I don't want to be this person to come across and say, 'Why, I know what's going on' and shove it down people's throats. (Because) I don't know everything."

Carter said he'll expand on the same feelings he expressed in a song he wrote called "Believe" in order to write a new anthem about the plight of dolphins.

"I am probably going to go back to the drawing board and try to outdo myself and write an even better song," Carter said.

Anne Heche's husband says actress is bad mom

LOS ANGELES (AP) — Anne Heche's divorcing husband wants at least $33,000 a month in support and joint custody of the couple's 5-year-old son, saying the 37-year-old actress is a bad mother.

In Superior Court filings this month, Coleman Laffoon says Heche has refused to allow their son, Homer, to be enrolled in a private kindergarten in Southern California and has said she wants the boy to move to Vancouver, Canada, where she spends part of the year filming her ABC-TV show, "Men in Trees."

In Vancouver, Heche leaves their son with a series of different nannies or her assistant in her trailer while filming, Laffoon said.

Heche's "anger toward me has clouded her ability to think rationally about what is in Homer's best interest," said Laffoon, who wants Heche ordered to sign their son's school paperwork.

Chavez government to finance Glover film

CARACAS, Venezuela (AP) — Venezuela's Congress says it has approved financing for two films by actor Danny Glover, a close supporter of President Hugo Chavez.

The lawmaking body, which is closely allied with Chavez, said in a statement on its Web site Thursday that it approved $20 million for two Glover productions.

They include "The General in His Labyrinth," which deals with the life of South American liberator Simon Bolivar. It is based on a novel by Colombian Nobel Prize-winning writer Gabriel Garcia Marquez and will be directed by Venezuela-born director Alberto Arvelo.

The other is "Toussaint," which the statement said Glover plans to direct documenting the life of Haitian revolution leader Toussaint Louverture.

Government officials and Glover's representatives were not immediately available for comment.

The statement said that the funds will come from proceeds Venezuela obtained from a recent bond sale with Argentina.

Glover is among a number of high-profile U.S. supporters of Chavez. The group also includes singer Harry Belafonte and Princeton University scholar Cornel West, who have defended the Venezuelan president against accusations of democratic abuses.

Glover has met Chavez during visits to Venezuela and even appeared on his television and radio talk show, "Hello, President."