A 20-megawatt solar power project next to the Red Deer Regional Airport has been approved by the Alberta Utilities Commission.

Saturn Power Inc., an Ontario-based renewable energy developer, is behind the project that would be constructed at the north end of the airport on land co-owned by the airport, Red Deer County and a private property owner.

Development of the project began in 2019 and has included three years of community outreach and stakeholder consultation. One megawatt can power roughly 1,000 houses a year.

“The project also underwent environmental and technical studies to assess the impacts of the project while identifying appropriate mitigation measures to minimize impacts and acquiring necessary approvals to ensure the development, construction, and operation of a viable, safe, and successful project,” says a Thursday news release from Saturn Power announcing the approval.

Saturn Power CEO Doug Wagner said the regulator approval is a “significant step towards ensuring this important renewable energy project becomes a reality …”

Airport CEO Graham Ingham said that “in addition to providing the region with a sustainable power source, this project will also provide the Red Deer Regional Airport with yet another source of stable operating revenue, which is required in order for the airport to achieve its goal of becoming financially sustainable.”

Red Deer County business development officer Tara Logan also touted the benefits of the project.

“Red Deer County is proud to support this exciting new project in the Hamlet of Springbrook, as it will generate valuable revenue for this emerging community while also supporting the Red Deer Regional Airport,” said Logan.

“In addition, renewable energy is identified as a priority in the Red Deer County Economic Development Strategic Plan 2017.”

Saturn Power Inc., founded in 2007 and based in Baden, Ontario, Canada, has over 700 megawatts of renewable energy generation and storage in development, built or operating, including solar, battery storage and wind power projects in Saskatchewan, Ontario and Quebec, Bermuda, the U.S. and Turkey.