Saturn Power Inc, a Canadian renewable energy developer, has selected Saskatoon‐based miEnergy to serve as General Contractor on Saskatchewan’s first utility scale Solar PV project. The Highfield Solar Project, located east of Swift Current in the Rural Municipality of Coulee, will provide 10MW AC of solar energy to Saskatchewan’s energy supply. Site preparation for the project will begin in mid‐August with construction scheduled to begin later in September.

Given current circumstances related to the global COVID 19 pandemic, Saturn continues to exercise an abundance of caution to ensure the safety of our team members, their families and the local community. This approach focused additional importance in our choice of a local Saskatchewan contractor to avoid, where possible, unnecessary out of province travel for those working on site. We have also worked closely with miEnergy to ensure that strict on‐site COVID‐19 safety measures and protocols are established and followed to protect the wellbeing of all those on site and in the local community.

With local sub‐contractors based throughout the province and deep roots within Saskatchewan communities, miEnergy is an ideal local partner in the construction of the Highfield Solar Project during the COVID‐19 pandemic. With nearly two decades of experience in the Saskatchewan renewable energy industry, miEnergy maintains an internal priority of building strong local relationships in the communities of construction. The existing values of Indigenous participation and community engagement will be at the core of this partnership between miEnergy and project partners Saturn Power and SaskPower.

“Saturn Power takes great pride in being able to build the first utility scale solar project in Saskatchewan and we are honoured that our company has been entrusted with this responsibility,” said Doug Wagner, CEO for Saturn Power. “miEnergy’s acumen in the renewable energy sector is unmatched in Saskatchewan and we are pleased to be engaged on this exciting project with a company that shares Saturn’s values and vision for creating a sustainable environment.”

Kevin Bergeron, CEO and President of miEnergy, acknowledges “We are excited to be building the first utility scale solar project in Saskatchewan. This is a significant milestone for the energy landscape in the province as well as for us as a local renewable energy company. Over 100 jobs will be created through the construction of the Highfield Solar Project, many of them local to the region, and the economic impact of this project will be over $20 million. Over 2200 homes will be powered with nearly 30,000 solar panels on 70 acres of land. This project is a meaningful investment that will see significant return for many years.”

Saturn Power Inc., founded in 2007 and based in Baden, Ontario, Canada, has over 600 MW of renewable energy generation and storage projects in development, built or operating, including solar, battery storage and wind power projects in Canada, Bermuda, the United States and Turkey. The company also has expertise in project financing, engineering, procurement, and construction as well as the operation and maintenance of existing renewable assets. Saturn Power Inc. has continued its work developing green energy projects during the global pandemic, maintaining our entire complement of employees while implementing work from home guidelines and protocols.

miEnergy, based in Saskatoon, SK, is one of Western Canada’s most established renewable energy, solar energy and geothermal energy solutions providers, specializing in turnkey mid‐ to large‐scale projects. For more than 19 years, miEnergy has been dedicated to the transition to solar and geothermal energy. Comprised of professional engineers, designers, electricians and equipment operators, miEnergy is committed to both the safety of their team, the communities in which they work and remain motivated by their passion for helping their partners make the switch to renewable energy.