Find all the latest news on Saturns's moons, including Titan, the most Earth-like world in the Solar System, here.

Latest News About Saturn

Saturn threw a comet out of the solar system at 6,700 mph

August 1, 2024

This is only the second comet we have seen in the process of being launched out of the solar system Read more

A huge imbalance of energy has been detected on Saturn

June 21, 2024

Will the shenanigans of Saturn never end? Read more

How auroras on Earth, Saturn and Jupiter could help forecast risky space weather

June 2, 2024

"Our study revealed the complex interplay between solar wind and planetary rotation" Read more

Could alien life be hiding in the rings of Saturn or Jupiter?

May 7, 2023

"I like the idea of thinking about creative places where life could be" Read more

'Game-changing' study into Saturn's northern lights

March 22, 2023

The exact origins of the aurora for Saturn are a little less clear than for Earth Read more

NASA's Hubble watches 'spoke season' on Saturn

December 21, 2023

It’s believed the dark spokes are dust particles electrostatically levitated above the ring plane Read more

Saturn’s rings will disappear in 2025. Don’t worry, they’ll return soon enough

November 20, 2023

The phenomenon is known as ring-plane crossing and occurs about every 15 years Read more

Solar eclipses seen by long-dead Cassini spacecraft shed new light on Saturn's rings

November 16, 2023

Clues about the transparency of Saturn's rings were in Cassini's data all along Read more

New research provides explanation for the origin of Saturn’s rings and icy moons

October 1, 2023

The rings began forming from a massive impact between two icy moons Read more

JWST watches seasons change on Saturn (video)

September 13, 2023

Astronomers saw the ringed planet's northern summer cooling as a 7.5-year-long autumn approaches Read more

100-year 'megastorms' on Saturn shower the ringed planet in ammonia rain

August 15, 2023

The storms of the gas giant put hurricanes on Earth to shame Read more

Saturn may have 'failed' as a gas giant

July 27, 2023

The ringed planet is definitely gaseous, but is it really 'giant?' Read more

New image from JWST reveals astonishing Saturn and its rings

June 30, 2023

Saturn’s iconic rings seem to glow eerily in this incredible infrared picture Read more

Saturn’s rings could be younger than flowers

May 31, 2023

We’re lucky that a relatively recent catastrophe created the gas-giant spectacle Read more

What Cassini’s “Grand Finale” taught us about Saturn’s interior

May 15, 2023

Those last few orbits and the final plunge revealed a wealth of information Read more

Surprise! Icy 'rain' from Saturn's rings is heating the gas giant's atmosphere

March 31, 2023

The phenomenon had never been seen in the Solar System before Read more

It’s spoke season on Saturn!

February 13, 2023

We see them only in the years preceding and following Saturn’s equinoxes Read more

Does Saturn have a missing moon?

November 2, 2022

The origin of Saturn’s rings has been a long-standing question in planetary science Read more

Saturn's rings could have come from a destroyed moon named Chrysalis

September 15, 2022

Saturn may have got both its tilt and its rings from a moon that got ripped apart Read more

Saturn is currently eating its own rings, the standout feature of our Solar System

April 2, 2022

In about 300 million years, the rings would completely disappear Read more

Saturn’s powerful winds explain changes in the length of its day

March 17, 2022

Atmospheric winds moving at more than 7,000 kilometers per hour distort Saturn’s magnetic field Read more

Will Saturn sprout spots this observing season?

March 16, 2022

Keep your eyes peeled for white spots! Read more

Space scientists discover a never-before-seen mechanism fueling huge planetary aurorae on Saturn

February 9, 2022

Saturn’s high-altitude winds generate an extraordinary aurorae Read more

What are Saturn's rings made of and what do they look like?

December 26, 2021

Multiple planets in the Solar System have rings, but none are as big or bright as Saturn's Read more

NASA spacecraft at the moon snaps photo of Saturn from lunar orbit

November 28, 2021

That's no moon! Read more

Hubble takes a series of giant outer planet family portraits

November 19, 2021

Every year, Hubble is pointed toward each of the outer planets as part of a program to monitor their atmospheres. Read more

Fascinating Facts About Saturn

If the sun were as tall as a typical front door, the Earth would be the size of a nickel and Saturn would be about as big as a volleyball.

From Saturn’s surface, the Sun appears about one-tenth as large as it does from Earth and sunlight appears about 90 times dimmer.

Saturn is twice as far away from the Sun as the Jupiter is, and the farthest planet that can be seen with the naked eye from Earth.

Saturn is the least dense planet in the solar system because it is mostly made of gas; it is the only planet less dense than water!

Saturn emits about 2.3 times the energy it receives from the Sun. This energy is thought to come from the continued cooling of the planet after its gravitational collapse during the formation of the solar system. Because of this, the weather on the planet is internally driven: it depends on the energy emitted by the planet itself. On the other hand, the weather on Earth is externally driven, by the sun!

Saturn has some of fastest winds in the solar system; winds have been measured up to the speed of 1800 kilometers per hour.

The planet’s rings are made up of bits of ice, dust and rock; these can range from the size of a grain of sand up to sizes larger large buildings. The rings also contain moonlets (likely chunks of the ancient body that broke up to produce Saturn’s rings) and ‘propeller’ structures (gaps in ring material thought to be caused by the moonlets). The evidence for moonlets and ‘propeller’ structures suggests there is a dynamic between Saturn’s moons and rings.

Missions

Cassini (1997)

Mission to study Saturn and its moons

Voyager 1 & 2 (1977)

Mission to explore Saturn and Jupiter, but later extended to Uranus and Neptune as well

Pioneer 11 (1973)

First mission to explore Saturn