Princess Robijn said:

I was reading about the family and they were talking about a girl before she married, so I guess it could be Sophie-Catherine

Sophie is the girl of Charles and Jeanne-Françoise (I should have precised). So Charles Napoléon has three girls and a boy.

H.I.H. The Princess Napoléon with T.R.H. The Duke and Duchess of Anjou, H.R.H. Princess Beatrice of the Two Siciles, and (I believe behind Luis Alfonso) H.I.H. Prince Jean Christohpe Napoléon at a mass celebrated at the Saint Louis des Invalides church (24 Sept 2006)

H.I.H. The Princess Napoléon arriving at a gala given at the Élysée Palace during the State Visit to France of T.M. The King and Queen of Spain (27 Mar 2006)

I do not like potential political career of Charles-Napoleon. I do not want, that it did political career. For what political career is necessary Charles-Napoleon? I very much am afraid, that Charles-Napoleon can want to stand in presidents of France per 2007. When elections of the French president take place? What candidates will stand in the French presidents? Through what time term of registration of candidates can end? I do not want and very much I am afraid of restoration of " the third empire "

Danielane said:

Sophie-Catherine is called Catherine by her family (her mother is Jeanne-Françoise Valliccioni). She has an adopted sister, Anh, born on 22th april 1998 in Saïgon.

Do you maybe know, where to find any photos of her? I am occupied with this topic for many years now and have also written to Charles napoleon, but he is very busy.

Unfortunately there are so little infos on Charles children, escpecially Jean Christophe and Sophie.

Are there maybe any Point de Vue´s or other magazines with photos of Sophie Catherine, the youngest daughter of Charles Napoleon and Francoise Valliccioni? Also she would interested me, because she is a Corsican. Are there any pictures of her apart from the very very little one on Charles website?

Thanks for any link or help, would be so glad!

Thank you Benjamin, most interesting to see! The lady who is talking is his grandmother Princess Alix? It is quite good to see that such a young boy seems to behave with a dignity that belongs to such an illustrous house.

Funny how Stephane Bern is commenting how we think of the Bourbon and Orleans families but forget the Napoleons to easily, he wants even more dynastic quarrels?

Here is how they are related, charlottestreasures.

Charles, Prince Napoleon, and his ex-wife Princess Beatrice of the Two Sicilies are 5th cousins through King Ferdinando I of the Two Sicilies.

Ferdinando I of the Two Sicilies - Maria Amelia of Naples and Sicily - Louise d’Orleans - Leopold II of the Belgians - Clementine of Belgium - Louis, Prince Napoleon - Charles, Prince Napoleon

Ferdinando I of the Two Sicilies - Francesco I of the Two Sicilies - Ferdinando II of the Two Sicilies - Alfonso of the Two Sicilies, Count of Caserta - Ranieri of the Two Sicilies, Duke of Castro - Ferdinand of the Two Sicilies, Duke of Castro - Princess Beatrice of the Two Sicilies

The former spouses are also 5th cousins once removed, again through King Ferdinando I.

Ferdinando I of the Two Sicilies - Luisa of Naples and Sicily - Maria Theresia of Austria, Princess of Tuscany - Vittorio Emanuele II of Italy - Clothilde of Savoy - Victor, Prince Napoleon - Louis, Prince Napoleon - Charles, Prince Napoleon

Ferdinando I of the Two Sicilies - Francesco I of the Two Sicilies - Ferdinando II of the Two Sicilies - Alfonso of the Two Sicilies, Count of Caserta - Ranieri of the Two Sicilies, Duke of Castro - Ferdinand of the Two Sicilies, Duke of Castro - Princess Beatrice of the Two Sicilies

from Imperial France: House Bonaparte news

Toledo said:

Are the Napoleon-Bourbon-Two Sicilies kids low key? We don't seem to get too many updates on them.

Princess Beatrice of Bourbon-Two Sicilies and her daughter Princess Caroline Napoléon are pictured in this (last?) week's Point de Vue (the Savoy Jewels issue) as VIP guests at a Louis Vuitton function. Prince Jean-Christophe is pictured at events occasionally, but not often.

kimebear said:

Is Prince Charles Napoleon's wife HIH Princess Napoleon, or is that his mother? It seems to me that his mother would be HIH The Dowager Princess Napoleon. Or does his wife not claim the title?

Charles's mother is still referred to as S.A.I. la Princesse Napoléon. His wife doesn't claim the title. In fact, professionally she still uses her maiden name.

Toledo, just a historical precision, about something you wrote in 2005...

The Valois were never "kicked-off" by the Bourbons. They didn't have male heirs, so the nex capetian branch, the Bourbons, were called to the throne, it is the French succession system. Now, by disappearing of all male lines but them, all capetians are Bourbons.

RubyPrincess168 said:

Napoleon's sword sold for $6.4 million - Yahoo! News

The article says the sword was sold by a family member to another family member. Does the Bonaparte family still have that kind of wealth?

Well, at least one of the Napoleons is well off, depending on who inherited the bulk of the late Prince Napoleon's fortune.

It could be one of the de Witts that purchased the sword. One of them owns a chateau.

Sorry, I posted a photo from a Danish agency, I thought that by telling their name it would be OK.

As no direct link is avalable, you may go, to see the photo, on their homepage : http://www.polfoto.dk then write "Anjou" in the white place, then push the "sog" button.