Directed by Donald Petrie

Written by Mike Reiss

Starring Nia Vardalos, Richard Dreyfuss and Alexis Georgoulis

Classification: PG

It has been seven long years since Winnipeg native Nia Vardalos burst onto the world stage with the indie hit My Big Fat Greek Wedding . Since then, she now tells interviewers, she has been offered pretty well every script with a Greek theme that ever crossed a desk in Hollywood. One shudders to think what clutch of cultural clichés lies in the reject pile, if My Life in Ruins is the one that made the cut. This paint-by-numbers romantic comedy is chock-a-block with jokey stereotypes - Americans are obnoxious, Canadians polite, and the Greeks just dance - yet lacking in any real drama, only occasionally mustering enough charm or humour to rise above a predictable formula.

Nia is Georgia, a North American classicist who has returned to her ancestral Greece for a university posting only to find herself laid off before she starts. Now she's working as an overly informed tour guide parading bored tourists around ancient ruins when they would really rather be shopping. (Although much of this film was actually shot in Spain, Vardalos's fame got the crew access to Greece's most famous sites including the Acropolis.) So, Greece loves Nia and Georgia loves Greece, but the tour guide fails to communicate anything but pedantry to her charges: They find her uptight and her buxom Euro boss judges her to have lost her kefi - her passion for life. Oh, and by the way, she is single and hasn't had sex in donkey's years.

As the movie begins - that background is largely covered by a bit of first-person narration from the unhappy Georgia - the boss lady strikes a deal with a particularly oily tour guide that he can get the unsatisfactory Georgia to quit this time out. So, he gets the bus with functioning air conditioning and the docile Canadians, while she is saddled with a wreck driven by a taciturn gorilla and stuffed full of Americans, including Irv (Richard Dreyfuss), the guy who thinks he is funny. (Georgia says there is one on every bus. How right she is.) Director Donald Petrie then duly trots us through some comedy about tourists who shop, tourists who complain and tourists who flirt as the plot about the dastardly plot grinds on.

Vardalos is taking some responsibility in interviews for massaging this script and building up the story of Georgia's kefi , but the credits only name Mike Reiss, whose previous experience largely involves writing episodes of The Simpsons . Perhaps that professional background explains why the taciturn gorilla of a bus driver rejoices in the name of Poupi Kakas. Once Georgia has pronounced that out loud for the Americans, they all guffaw loudly at such an unfortunate name: Petrie and Weiss are under the mistaken impression that weak jokes or hoary stereotypes can be given new life if you simply acknowledge their staleness on screen, which is why TV sets playing Zorba the Greek are something of a running gag in this movie.

Anyway, here is a free tip for all would-be screen writers: When writing a romantic comedy, do not give your male lead a scatological joke for a name. Yup, shave off that hairy beard, which Poupi does within minutes of Georgia's casting a disapproving glance, and lo and behold there's a Greek god underneath. He's smitten and ready to roll while she is briefly distracted by an American pancake salesman in the group, a supposed impediment to the romance who never really qualifies as such. Nonetheless, it takes a bus accident and a lot of prodding from Irv for Georgia to inevitably see the light and snuggle up to Poupi.

In that role, the Greek actor Alexis Georgoulis is being paid to look gorgeous and adoring, which he does quite nicely. Dreyfuss, meanwhile, is being paid to be funny, a job which, I dimly recall, he used to do rather well. Unfortunately, his work as the avuncular Irv - the bore with a heart of gold - is largely perfunctory and, since the role terminates in painful sentimentality, utterly lacks the cynical edge that once animated his performances.

No, this movie, such as it is, belongs to Vardalos, who can light up the road like a high beam even in a very creaky vehicle. She may have shed the full figure that gave My Big Fat Greek Wedding some street cred, but she has not lost any of the energy and authenticity she brings to the screen. Indeed, it is rather hard to believe in her as a woman in quest of her kefi , she is already so abundantly well supplied.