November 2010.

My Life in Ruins

starring Nia Vardolos, Richard Dreyfuss, Alex Georgoulis and Alistair McGowan

written by Mike Reiss

directed by Donald Petrie

Rating: ♦◊◊◊◊

Nia Vardolos was the star (and writer) of the 2002 film My Big Fat Greek Wedding (directed by Joel Zwick), but My Life in Ruins is not a sequel. The only connection between the two is the Greek theme, but in the wedding film it was American Greek immigrant humor while in this new film it is authentic Greek geekiness that is being parodied. So the Japanese title “My Big Fat Dream” is egregious nonsense. But Japanese are like that. In My Life in Ruins Vardolos plays Georgia, an American classics professor unemployed in Greeceand temporarily working as a tourist bus guide. The title is a double entendre: her life among Greece’s ancient ruins, and her life simultaneously suffering employment and romantic ruin. Georgia publicly laments, “I haven’t had sex in, like, forever”unaware that all the Greeks around her speak English. But in this romantic comedy the latter woes find healing in the midst of the first. She falls in love with her bus driver, and her terrible job turns out okay.

In some ways My Life in Ruins reminded me of the 1969 Suzanne Pleshette, Ian McShane film If It’s Tuesday It Must Be Belgium (directed by Mel Stuart), which poked fun at the relatively small size of many European countries. (Interestingly, after just mentioning Ian McShane I saw him again, co-starring with Renee Zellweger in Case 39. What a coincidence!) My Life in Ruins endlessly pokes fun at Greek idiosyncrasies which, in light of the 2010 Greek economic crisis, more people in the world are currently doing. Both films document a group of random people on a week-long bus tour, being silly, seeing the sights, getting lost, suffering horrible hotels, eating, shopping, brief romantic attachments. Both films feature a shoplifting kleptomaniac tourist, a bickering couple, a self-styled funny man, a Lothario, etc. While the scenery in the Greek film is fantastic, the 1969 European film is better.

October 2010.

The Wolfman

starring Benicio Del Toro, Anthony Hopkins, Emily Blunt, Art Malik and Hugo Weaving

screenplay by Andrew Kevin Walker and David Self

directed by Joe Johnston

Rating: ♦♦◊◊◊

The estranged American son of an English lord returns home like the Prodigal Son to investigate the death of his younger brother. Of course, the family home is a great pile of stone on the moors, overgrown, dirty, dark and very Gothic. It turns out that a werewolf is the reason. Like all werewolf stories, the hero is bitten and turns into a beast himself, only to be hunted by the frightened villagers and finally killed by the girl he loves - with a silver bullet. See American Werewolf in London (1981, starring David Naughton, Jenny Agutter and Griffin Dunne, directed by John Landis) - a better movie than this one.

Considering the talent in the cast I expected a lot more from this film, which is based on the 1941 screenplay of the same title by Curt Siodmak. But it was boring - really boring - and Benicio Del Toro - in addition to being a really bad actor - sports the worst haircut in the world. Hugo Weaving (the Elf king Lord Elrond in Peter Jackson’s The Lord of the Rings and Agent Smith in The Matrix) was the best actor on screen. I also wanted to see more of Pakistani-born American actor Art Malik, whom I have liked whenever I have seen him. Malik’s most famous role was the Arab terrorist Salim Abu Aziz in True Lies(with Arnold Schwarzenegger and Jamie Lee Curtis, 1994). I also recognized English actor Roger Frost here, appearing as a village clergyman. Frost is best remembered as the customer who enters Hugh Grant’s travel bookstore in Notting Hill (1999, directed by Roger Michell) asking for Winnie-the-Pooh or John Grisham. This is only the second time I have seen Frost.

October 2010.

Shutter Island

starring Leonardo DiCaprio, Mark Ruffalo, Ben Kingsley, Michelle Williams, Ted Levine and Max Von Sydow

screenplay by Laeta Kalogridis

directed by Martin Scorsese

Rating: ♦♦♦♦◊

Oh, how I would love a movie in which psychiatrists are tortured by their own drugs, machines and methodologies by a society taking its righteous vengeance.

Based on the novel by Dennis Lehane, Shutter Island is a scary psycho-thriller about a U.S. federal marshal who visits a hospital for the criminally insane to investigate the escape of a prisoner/patient from what ought to be an escape-proof facility - like Alcatraz Island/prison in San Francisco Bay. Or, that’s the starting premise, anyway. The story develops in a way to keep you guessing what will happen next, and considering the range of available story plots you can anticipate possible likely outcomes with each new turn: the Marshall’s weapon is taken from him; the ferry to the mainland is cut off by a hurricane; the power goes out; he changes into patients’ clothes after his suit becomes wet, etc. Can you see where all this is leaning? It’s like peeling layers from an onion. Once you start you can keep peeling until there is nothing left. You look around at the detritus and wonder where the onion is. There never was an onion.

The story did not develop or end the way I wanted it to, but it was a great two-hour show. It was dark, it featured dungeons and even had a Gothic horror thunderstorm knocking out the power. Ben Kingsley played the chief doctor of the facility and, since Hollywood favors using British accents for evil characters I kept imagining the story to be one of mad scientists gone amuck with mind control experiments. It’s a reasonable because Ben Kingsley is, admittedly, kind of sinister-looking: a small, wiry, brilliant man stiff with malicious tension, like an adolescent Hitler. Using the defenseless - criminally insane in this case - as guinea pigs is a plausible ruse in so far as people diagnosed as mentally ill, or legally declared insane lack credibility because who would ever believe them? Anything and everything they say or do can be dismissed as a symptom or feature of their insanity even if they are perfectly rational and empirically correct, and the public will accept that dismissal.

I oppose psychiatry. I oppose it because it is immorally presumptuous, fraudulent and morally abhorrent. I condemn the quick and easy use of the“mentally disturbed” label by professionals and amateurs alike to describe a whole range of “disturbing” or unconventional behaviors. The label at least partly exonerates us from complicity in social unpleasantness, thereby encouraging even easier use of it. Each of us is too apt to sacrifice others so that we can continue feeling good about ourselves, and we call them mad. Just because a doctor says that a person is mentally ill - a politer label than “insane” - does not make it so. If a person says he is hearing voices, maybe he really is. Who can say for sure? If a person says that they were abducted by aliens and subjected to experiments, maybe they were. Arguing the improbability of such a thing is not enough to disqualify it. If someone is paranoid, maybe they have good reason to be. I know I do.

Oh, how I would love a movie in which psychiatrists are tortured by their own drugs, machines and methodologies by a society taking its just and righteous vengeance. But that hasn’t been made. Yet.

October 2010.

Righteous Kill

starring Robert De Niro, Al Pacino, Carla Gugino, John Leguizamo, Donnie Wahlberg and Brian Dennehy

written by Russell Gewirtz

directed by Jon Avnet

Rating: ♦♦♦◊◊

Robert De Niro and Al Pacino rank among the best film actors of their generation, yet they have rarely appeared together. They both performed in The Godfather Part II(1974), but they did not share any scenes. Heat (1995, with Val Kilmer) was their first simultaneous appearance. So I looked forward to seeing them again in Righteous Kill (Japanese title “Baataa,” which I am guessing is supposed to mean “Barter”). It’s the story of two long-service New York City Police Detective partners - a common role for these two. One of them - we don’t know which - is a secret serial killer, acting as a vigilante to eliminate bad guys who escape the criminal justice system and using his police know-how to conceal himself. But there is a twist. I like movies like this that have a twist at the end. In everything he does Al Pacino always appears over-the-top. I wonder if he is really such a good actor. He specializes in characters that are out of control and have no interest in controlling themselves - not the same as Michael Douglas’ Prince of Darkness roles. Robert De Niro, on the other hand also excels at out of control maniacs, but he always gives the impression of struggling to achieve control. And, the more I see of Donnie Wahlberg, the more I like him. He does good.

October 2010.

Traitor

starring Don Cheadle, Guy Pierce, Neal McDonough, Saïd Taghmaoui and Jeff Daniels

screenplay and directed by Jeffrey Nachmanoff

Rating: ♦♦♦◊◊

This seems like a complicated story, although I can make it short. Don Cheadle, an actor I really like, plays a devout Muslim American army veteran and deep undercover double agent, haunting the world of Middle East Islamic extremism. He is so deep and so undercover that only one person in Washingtonknows he is really an American operative. Other intelligence agencies are convinced he is a terrorist and track his movements religiously. Then, when his controller is killed he appears to be trapped in his cover role. He’s so deep it appears like he has ‘gone native,’ like Lieutenant Dunbar (Kevin Costner) in Dances With Wolves (1990), or Jake Sully (Sam Worthington) in Avatar (2009).

Cheadle’s character, Samir Horn, might be a little hard to comprehend because it rubs against the stereotype. He is a devout Muslim, but also a patriotic American. He is committed to his religion, brimming with devotion to Allah as well as compassion for his fellow man. Fitting in, or at least appearing to fit in with extremists tortures his soul because he has to convincingly appear to believe and do everything that he personally rejects totally.

There is a lot of spoken Arabic in the film, which is kind of nice to hear. And, there are many excellent Arab actors.

I recognized Neal McDonough from his work in the HBO Band of Brother series. I don’t see him a lot, but he does pop up from time to time. I greatly resented it when his character, an FBI agent, traveled to Halifax, Nova Scotia hunting suspected terrorists and complained about it being “the asshole of Canada.” Halifax is a major urban center, very historic and beautiful, plus it’s a major port, all of which make it an important city.

October 2010.

Up in the Air

starring George Clooney, Vera Farmiga, Anna Kendrick and Justin Bateman

screenplay by Jason Reitman and Sheldon Turner

directed by Jason Reitman

Rating: ♦♦♦◊◊

Based on the novel by Walter Kirn, Up in the Air (the Japanese title “Mileage, My Life” is a lame attempt at an English pun) is the story of Ryan Bingham (George Clooney), an Omaha, Nebraska-based businessman whose business is firing people. Companies all over America hire him to do their “employee reductions” in their stead, so national economic catastrophe is his economic bonanza. It’s a strange kind of job and a sad commentary on these times we are living in, but there are stranger things still in the world. As a sideline he is a motivational speaker. Now that’s pretty strange, too.

The title “Up in the Air” is a double entendre. On the surface it refers to Ryan’s quest for the maximum number of air mileage points and all the shallow, or fake‘status’ that his various membership and preferred customer cards give him. His job keeps him flying all over America for ten months of the year, so he collects those mileage points pretty fast. But it also refers to his work as a professional terminator. His job is to separate people from their jobs as quickly and antiseptically as possible, leaving them in limbo, or up in the air.

Ryan is a middle aged man, but his lifestyle is itinerant and shallow. He values cosmetic courtesy and hospitality. He has no wife, girlfriend or children. He owns no home but rents small, cheap digs for the two months out of the year he works in the Omaha home office. And he has convinced himself not only that he likes it that way, but that way is best. If you stop moving, you die. Mobility is life. Settled people are less alive. That’s what he says in his motivational speeches.

The alternate view is that Ryan’s life is lonely and isolated and ... well ... pretty meaningless. And then Ryan falls in love. Now, romantic comedy is my favorite kind of movie, but I deduct points from Up in the Air because it remains a sad story. Ryan doesn’t get the woman he falls for - Alex, a nymphomaniac travel addict cut from the same cloth. Or, so we think, because it turns out that Alex is a worse poser than Ryan.

George Clooney is a smooth guy. If I was a woman I would swoon over him. But in this film it is Vera Farmiga as Alex who gives the best performance, I think

By comparison, Anna Kendrick’s 23-year-old Natalie, Ryan’s protégé, is just annoying - sort of like Alexis Bledel in Post Grad. She sounds like she should be popping bubble gum, not firing older, experienced workers.

I really like Jason Bateman (Ryan’s boss, Craig Gregory). I watched Bateman as a 1980s child actor on sitcom television and I think he has grown into a fine character actor.

And finally, the music in this film was really good.

September 2010.

Invictus

starring Morgan Freeman and Matt Damon,

screenplay by Anthony Peckham

directed by Clint Eastwood

Rating: ♦♦♦♦♦

Based on the book Playing the Enemy by John Carlin this is a moving story of the birth of a new South Africathat accompanied the election of President Nelson Mandela after his release from 27-years of imprisonment for resistance to Apartheid. Mandela successfully used the 1995 Rugby World Cup - held in South Africa and which the South African Springboks won as an underdog - as a patriotic booster for the nation. The racial tensions of South Africa, the different cultural affiliations of blacks and whites, the resentments and suspicions of racial groups in that society are all nicely illustrated. And, of course, Nelson Mandela comes across as a practical saint, the noblest of men, tempered by his suffering and angelically forgiving. The hagiography is rampant and blatant, outside South Africa and throughout the world. Nelson Mandela is a template for a modern hero. Try saying anything against him - and there is plenty - and see watch condemnation falls. It’s politics and fantasy.

Morgan Freeman is a great actor. He is the only major film actor who could possibly have portrayed Nelson Mandela. Matt Damon is reputed to be a great actor, too, but I have never favored him because he doesn’t move well - one of the signature traits I look for in an actor. Instead, Damon always looks like Gumby - made of rubber with wires inside that you must set with you fingers in order to give his body posture.

After watching the film I still did not understand the meaning of the title “Invictus.” So I watched it again. Nope, I still don’t get it.

September 2010.

It’s Complicated

starring Meryl Streep, Alec Baldwin and Steve Martin

written and directed by Nancy Meyers

Rating: ♦◊◊◊◊

Stories of marital sex are boring. The money is in the taboo sex.

A divorced husband and wife reunite for a fling ten years after their separation, when the last of their three children is graduating from college. Their liaison is complicated by the reality of their new lives: he is re-married; she is seeing another man. I admit that human relationships, especially sexual relationships, courting and mating rituals are complex and liable to blatant display as much as to subtly. But the issues in this story seems clear cut to me. The ex-husband is re-married, so returning to his ex-wife’s bed is a big no-no. Regardless of any confused residual feelings each might be feeling towards the other they are both mature enough that they ought to know this.

On another note, stories of marital sex are boring. The money is in the traditional taboo sex scenarios: pre-marriage and extra-marriage. Sex between late-fifty-somethings who used to be married to each other and who ought to know better is even more boring than straight marital sex itself. I thought a lot of talent was wasted in this film.