Tag: A Million Ways To Die In The West

Actor Profile: Charlize Theron

Charlize Theron turns 40 today, and to celebrate, I’ll run down the roles I’m familiar with. It’s actually appropriate, as her film Dark Places opens today. Unfortunately, it’s not a very good movie. She’s had better roles. The first film I saw Charlize in was That Thing You Do!, but her actual breakout role I haven’t seen in The Devil’s Advocate. From there, she had a lot of misfires, but Hollywood never gave up on her. Eventually, she won an Oscar for Monster (which I haven’t seen), and earned more praise for roles like North Country, Young Adult, and recently Mad Max: Fury Road.

Continue reading “Actor Profile: Charlize Theron”

A Million Ways To Die In the West

Starring: Seth Macfarlane, Charlize Theron, Liam Neeson, Giovanni Ribisi, Amanda Seyfried, Neil Patrick Harris, Sarah Silverman, Evan Jones, Alex Borstein, Dennis Haskins. With cameos from Ewan McGregor, Ryan Reynolds, John Michael Higgins, Christopher Lloyd, Gilbert Gottfried, Kaley Cuoco-Sweeting, Jamie Foxx, … Continue reading A Million Ways To Die In the West

Weekend Box Office: ‘Fault’ In Our Theatres

1) The Fault In Our Stars- 48.2M Weekend, 48.2M Total With a solid 15K PSA, The Fault In Our Stars won the weekend. It had a steep drop off on Saturday, so it wasn’t quite able to reach 50M heights. … Continue reading Weekend Box Office: ‘Fault’ In Our Theatres

Friday Box Office: No ‘Fault’ In These Stars

1) The Fault In Our Stars- 26.1M Friday, 54-57M Weekend Technically, the 26.1M on Friday includes 8M from Thursday night, meaning the film really made about 18M on Friday. Allowing for a larger than normal Friday box office, because of … Continue reading Friday Box Office: No ‘Fault’ In These Stars

‘Maleficent’ Has Strong Late Shows, ‘A Million Ways To’ Bomb

Maleficent managed 4.2M on Thursday night from late shows for an early opening. That’s pretty incredible for a kids show. On the flip side, A Million Ways To Die In The West opened to only 891K on Thursday night. That’s … Continue reading ‘Maleficent’ Has Strong Late Shows, ‘A Million Ways To’ Bomb