Thursday October 26 is a day for coordinated master thesis presentations in Computer Science at Lund University, Faculty of Engineering. Five MSc theses will be presented.

You will find information about how to follow along under each presentation. There will be presentations in two different rooms: E:2405 (Glasburen) and E:4130 (Lucas). A preliminary schedule follows.

Note to potential opponents: Register as an opponent to the presentation of your choice by sending an email to the examiner for that presentation (firstname [dot] lastname [at] cs [dot] lth [dot] se). Do not forget to specify the presentation you register for! Note that the number of opponents may be limited (often to two), so you might be forced to choose another presentation if you register too late. Registrations are individual, just as the oppositions are! More instructions are found on this page.

E:2405 (Glasburen)

09:15-10:00

Presenter: Erik Kullberg

Title: Risk-aware use of exploratory test resources

Examiner: Emelie Engström

Supervisors: Markus Borg (LTH), José Díaz López (Qlik)

Exploratory testing (ET) is widely used for regression testing of software products. This thesis project studies the use of ET practices and how they can be used in a risk-aware sense. Specifically the use of ET on the software product Qlik Sense Enterprise on Windows. We measure the code coverage of ET on the software product, gather the metrics code quality, code churn and the number of bug fixes for each source code file. This data is used to determine how the files' risk-profiles correlate with the ET practices. We found that the ET does not cover the source code extensively and has no correlation with a file's risk-profile. We saw that a file's code quality and churn are indicators of the prevalence of bugs. With these results, we have corroborated previous work on the subject and given Qlik a process to further improve their ET practices.

Link to popular science summary: https://fileadmin.cs.lth.se/cs/Education/Examensarbete/Popsci/231026_09Kullberg.pdf

11:15-12:00

Presenter: Emma Ericsson

Title: Evaluating Similarity-Based Refactoring Recommendations

Examiner: Emma Söderberg

Supervisors: Markus Borg (LTH), Emil Aasa (CodeScene)

Within recommendation systems, there is a well-known problem of not having the required information for making recommendations, the cold start problem. CodeScene’s refactoring recommendations are based on earlier refactoring within a project and therefore, this problem occurs when almost no refactoring has been carried out in the project. Our goal is to evaluate how existing similarity measures can be used to identify similar methods from open-source software projects for refactoring recommendations and propose a way forward for CodeScene’s refactoring recommendations. 1,438 refactored methods were collected with CodeScene from top-starred Java projects on GitHub. On those, similarity measures from previous research were calculated.. We moved further with Levenshtein distance and code2vec together with cosine distance and evaluated them in qualitative user interviews with five senior developers. There are indications that similarity-based refactorings could be useful. Developers find that good recommendations shall be short, concise and self-contained.

Link to popular science summary: https://fileadmin.cs.lth.se/cs/Education/Examensarbete/Popsci/231026_11Ericsson.pdf

E:4130 (Lucas)

11:15-12:00

Presenters: Daniel Dahlén, William Mauritzon​​​​​​​

Title: Machine Learning-based Prediction of Customer Churn in SaaS​​​​​​​

Examiner: Mathias Haage​​​​​​​

Supervisors: Alma Orucevic Alagic (LTH), Salomeh Kiani Johnsson (Fieldly AB)

The focuses for businesses on acquiring new customers often overshadows the equal importance of retaining their existing customer base. Customer churn, which refers to the loss of customers, presents a critical challenge with the potential to greatly impact various aspects of a business, including its revenue, profitability, and overall success.

This study delves into customer churn prediction in the B2B SaaS sector,

aiming to develop a machine learning model to find churn factors and enhance customer retention. In this study, several models, including Logistic Regression, Random Forest, XGBoost, GBC, and LGBM, were evaluated using techniques like SMOTE for handling imbalanced data, RFECV for feature selection, and Gridsearch for hyperparameter tuning.

The study’s results indicated that the XGBoost model outperformed all other models, achieving an AUROC score of 0.905, an accuracy of 0.844, and a recall score of 0.832.

The feature analysis identified significant factors in both short-term and

long-term churn. These factors included customer tenure, project involvement, activity in expense reports, and integration-related activities. While specific features were more important, the overall finding is that predicting customer churn relies on the collective contribution of multiple features rather than any single individual feature.

Link to popular science summary: https://fileadmin.cs.lth.se/cs/Education/Examensarbete/Popsci/231026_11DahlenMauritzon.pdf

13:15-14:00

Presenter: Erik Folkesson

Title: Optimizing Color Perception in Robotics: Integrating Color Correction and Constancy​​​​​​​

Examiner: Jacek Malec​​​​​​​​​​​​​​

Supervisor: Volker Krueger (LTH)

This thesis explores the challenges and solutions associated with color perception in robotics, focusing on the integration of color correction and color constancy techniques. The study introduces a novel approach to color correction that does not rely on external tools, offering a plug-and-play method for color correction and color constancy in ROS2. The research investigates the viability of using a robot base as ground-truth over a color checker board for color correction and assesses the potential improvement in color correction results through the use of color constancy. The performance of various color correction and color constancy algorithms is evaluated in the context of robotics, with the best performing algorithms selected based on their closeness to a ground-truth image and their effectiveness in object detection under different lighting conditions. The findings provide guidelines for implementing color correction and color constancy in robotics and suggest areas for future research.