RADNOR, Pa.--(BUSINESS WIRE)--QlikTech, (NASDAQ: QLIK) a leader in Business Discovery – user-driven Business Intelligence (BI), today announced that Astellas Pharma US, Inc., a QlikTech customer, was named a Ventana Research 2013 Leadership Award Winner for Business Intelligence. Through successful implementation of QlikView, as well as effectively leveraging people, processes, and information to achieve superior results, Astellas was named the leader in the business intelligence category. The winner selected in this category has demonstrated exemplary application of business intelligence to help its organization improve decision-making and overall performance.

Astellas Pharma is one of the world’s largest pharmaceutical companies. The company works toward improving the health of people around the world through innovative and reliable pharmaceutical products. It is this focus on leadership and innovation that led Astellas to take on a new business intelligence and analytics initiative in 2012, selecting QlikView to reduce the number of ad hoc data pulls from the IT department, bring together disparate reports, and quickly create charts and graphs to share with the leadership team it supports.

Since deploying QlikView, Astellas and its sales analytics team have been able to provide actionable insights from the data the company collects. The team has been able to maximize information while minimizing the time spent finding it. Additionally, using new insights enabled by QlikView, Astellas’ sales leadership team has been able to continue growing market share, realign the sales force to be more effective, and support the successful launch of a new product, all resulting in a 4 percent increase in sales in the related brands.

“We’re very excited about the work Astellas has been able to accomplish using QlikView,” said Ellen Derrico, Director Global Market Development, Life Sciences & Healthcare at QlikTech. “The company has deployed QlikView to over 100 people – including the CEO – demonstrating that it is truly a business discovery solution for everyone that enables informed decision-making at every level of an organization.”

The Ventana Research Leadership Awards, now in their eighth year, recognize organizations and supporting technology vendors that have effectively achieved superior results through using people, processes, information and technology while applying best practices within specific business and technology categories. The awards distinguish pioneers and leaders -- both organizations and individuals that exemplify clear visionary and transformative leadership. The award recipients have demonstrated an understanding that the successful management of their processes and performance requiring a heightened level of expertise, determination and a team effort. The awards will be presented at the Ventana Research Business Technology Leadership Summit on May 29th and 30th, 2013 at the Hyatt Fisherman's Wharf in San Francisco, CA.

For more information about the Ventana Research Awards, and to view the full list of winners, please visit: http://www.ventanaresearch.com/resources/resources.aspx?id=3896.

About Astellas Pharma, Inc.

Astellas is a recognized leader in transplantation and has been committed to the field of immunology for more than 20 years. Dedicated to supporting the advancement of care for patients, Astellas continues to build upon its legacy and leadership in transplantation by investing in ongoing clinical research and new product development.

Astellas Pharma US, Inc., located in Northbrook, Illinois, is a US affiliate of Tokyo-based Astellas Pharma Inc. Astellas is a pharmaceutical company dedicated to improving the health of people around the world through the provision of innovative and reliable pharmaceutical products. The organization is committed to becoming a global category leader in focused areas by combining outstanding R&D and marketing capabilities. For more information about Astellas Pharma US, Inc., please visit our website at www.Astellas.us.

About QlikTech

QlikTech (NASDAQ: QLIK) is a leader in Business Discovery—user-driven Business Intelligence (BI). Its QlikView Business Discovery solution bridges the gap between traditional BI solutions and inadequate spreadsheet applications. The in-memory associative search technology QlikTech pioneered created the self-service BI category, allowing users to explore information freely rather than being confined to a predefined path of questions. Appropriate from SMB to the largest global enterprise, QlikView’s self-service analysis can be deployed with data governance in days or weeks. The QlikView Business Discovery platform’s app-driven model works with existing BI solutions, offering an immersive mobile and social, collaborative experience. Headquartered in Radnor, Pennsylvania, QlikTech has offices around the world serving approximately 28,000 customers in over 100 countries.