By Mike Capone, Qlik CEO

In an uncertain world, organizations want to be more deliberate, intentional and proactive in their decision-making. That’s why the move from reactive to proactive decisions is fueled by relevant and timely data. Leaders across every industry are deploying technology and processes to activate their data through end-to-end strategies that seize the full opportunity of data and analytics at any given moment.

In this new era of ongoing disruption, Qlik is helping leading organizations create certainty by moving from a passive to more active approach to business intelligence. Active intelligence is a new paradigm, creating in-the-moment awareness about every aspect of a business using real-time, up-to-date information designed to trigger immediate actions.

Whether it’s managing inventory disruptions, pinpointing supply chain bottlenecks or shifting resources to meet evolving customer demands, data through Qlik is helping enterprises across the globe make timely and impactful decisions with confidence.

Pivoting Business Models

Retail has gone through incredible transformation and disruption the past few years. Global retailer Urban Outfitters, with 550 stores in the U.S. and 100 across Europe and the U.K., had to make significant pivots in its business model. Urban Outfitters operates dynamic store locations that need to simultaneously respond to changing customer sentiment while also optimizing the e-commerce experience. Shifting consumer trends and desires put a premium on access to real-time data, which can help accurately forecast and synchronize inventory, operations, distribution center and supply chain logistics.

Urban Outfitters is a longtime customer of Qlik’s data integration solutions and has recently made the move to cloud analytics with Qlik. With the combined power of Qlik, Urban Outfitters is breaking down data silos and driving near real-time reporting to in-store employees from one central cloud hub. That cloud is securely delivering data to hundreds of cloud analytics applications for insights into every aspect of the business. Managers now have reports instantly available, and every employee across the globe can be aligned and work more closely with managers on in-store metrics and new purchasing patterns.

Enabling Everyone to Make Better Decisions

Swiss multinational pharmaceutical company Novartis has made great strides in its effort to enable employees across the business to make better decisions through data. With Qlik, Novartis is enabling the use of data-based insights across all business units while realizing savings of over six figures through an optimized budget and resource allocations.

Its 30,000 employees have access to over 500 Qlik applications, regardless of location or device, ensuring one single source of truth informs decision-making across the entire organization. This ensures reliable results with quality data that supports decisions across every department. From procurement and production to marketing, sales, finance and management, everyone is now able to drive value across the entire business through data. This includes 20,000 sales representatives, who use Qlik-powered dashboards on mobile devices to better understand and deliver on physician and hospital system needs with fresh insights.

“Data is part of our DNA at Novartis. The challenge we faced was in finding a platform that would allow all departments across the organization to consistently drive value from our data chain,” says Loic Giraud, business analytics Center of Excellence lead at Novartis. “The role of Qlik in turning our ambitions for data into reality cannot be understated. The platform has not only digitally strengthened, optimized and expanded existing business areas, but is helping to open up new opportunities and is supporting the digital transformation of the entire organization.”

Enhancing Partnerships

Fresh and relevant data is critical for Samsung Electronics U.K. and its 100-plus area development managers (ADMs) when working with their key retail channel partner stores. Not only do ADMs need to track and manage current and forecasted inventory, but they also need to ensure partner stores are complying with the company’s standards and staff are adequately trained in Samsung products.

Samsung’s field development management team and ADMs leverage Qlik to easily visualize and quickly identify issues based on deep learning algorithms that analyze historical and current data, providing a complete picture of where to improve and maintain partner store performance.

Qlik’s mobile analytics solution also enables ADMs to rank stores against each other to see how an individual store’s performance lines up against other locations to pinpoint lags and opportunities. Qlik’s alerting capabilities are key to ensuring the Samsung Electronics U.K. teams are leveraging real-time, actionable insights to know exactly where a response is needed right away.

Now is the time to take advantage of Qlik’s data integration and cloud analytics solutions, which consistently deliver innovations and enable leaders to transform raw data into informed action that dynamically drives bottom line impact.