Tech Data partners with Qlik to provide leading end-to-end analytics platform to customers, driving business transformation

Expert team ready to help resellers transform raw data into business insights for customers

Basingstoke, 2 April 2019 — Tech Data (NASDAQ: TECD) has formed a partnership with Qlik, a leader in data analytics, to extend its big data ecosystem and analytics capabilities, to help resellers develop customer-oriented solutions to drive business transformation with insights from data.

The agreement gives resellers access to Qlik’s data management and analytics platforms, extending the portfolio of solutions now available from Tech Data in one of the fastest-growing areas of the enterprise market. The Qlik Sense visual analysis and data discovery solution was ranked top in four categories of the most recent Bi Survey of business intelligence software users. It received the highest rating amongst respondents for ease of use, performance satisfaction, query performance and visual analysis.

Tech Data has already built its own specialist practice for analytics and big data and is working with its vendor partners to engage with resellers and enable them to take solutions to market. This team of experts is available to work with partners in devising and building data and analytics solutions for specific industry sectors and customer requirements.

Ian Jeffs, Data Centre Business Unit Director at Tech Data UK, said: “Qlik is one of the established leaders in data analytics and by adding this powerful platform to our portfolio, we are extending the potential to our reseller partners to learn about, engage on and grow around these exciting technologies. The growth and profit prospects in this area of the market are huge. Even more importantly, there is genuine potential for VARs to develop unique propositions that will differentiate their businesses and transform business insights and deliver exceptional return on investment for their customers. Tech Data is ready to help them develop those solutions.”

Juergen Kuehlewein, Area Vice President EMEA Partner Organisation at Qlik, said: “Our vision is to empower people to discover insights through data that drive change. Organisations are now managing massive volumes of data and want to improve the data literacy skills of their staff to help extract more value from data. Working with Tech Data, Qlik partners can deliver solutions that will give customers new insights into their information and drive competitive advantage.”

Qlik’s open data analytics platform provides advanced analytics and empowers everyone in an organisation to make discoveries in data and drive value. Qlik’s solutions are being used by more than 48,000 customers worldwide.

Picture: Ian Jeffs, Tech Data.