Run-D.M.C. have just been signed for a tour around the American northeast when their pal walks in on a mob killing and gets blown away himself. When the cops turn a blind eye, it'll be up to Run, Jam Master Jay and DMC to investigate what happened that night and stay one step ahead of the killers.

Directed by (and...co-starring) Rick Rubin, Tougher than Leather starts out as a fairly chatty series of meandering scenes intercut with concert footage. Once the inciting murder occurs and our hip-hop investigators get on the case, the musical numbers dry up for a long while and it becomes an oddly executed, but weirdly watchable, crime story.

I do love how, despite having access to Run-D.M.C., the Beastie Boys, Slick Rick and even the Junkyard Band for the movie, a lot of the third act score is a bunch of public domain stuff you've heard a million times.

wild that this not only exists but has seemingly been forgotten about by both the public and its creators; basically takes the type of alternate universe pop-vanity project (think Cool As Ice or Purple Rain) and tries to spin that as an earnest exploitation movie and something representative of the culture at the time, which is consistently at odds with itself - but it's fun and strange to see Run DMC shed their relatively clean image in a film full of cursing, violence and nudity (which may also be a part of why it has all but disappeared)

The very definition of a curio: co-written/directed by Rick Rubin, starring Run DMC, the Beasties, Rubin, and even Russell Simmons himself, and stitching an NYC Grime crime narrative around a series of (admittedly impressive) live performances, it’s a bill of goods that could’ve never lived up to the sales pitch. Still, there’s value in a movie that stops dead in its tracks to give you Slick Rick spitting “Treat Her Like a Prostitute” from some anonymous shithole club stage. Sort of like THE LAST DRAGON got jumped in an alley and was left to produce a similar music video/exploitation picture hybrid using only the lint in its pockets, but even that description is promising something far more interesting than this actually is.

Part of Scavenger Hunt #41: August 2018

Task #17: A film produced solely by New Line Cinema (pre-2010).

Tonally inconsistent, yet there's just enough of everything in this low-budget flick to kinda be worth seeing to believe.

Rick Rubin painting himself as an incredibly racist thug is really weird to sit through, but watching racists get their comeuppance from the unbeatable Run-DMC (honestly, they never feel like they're in danger of losing a fight) is decently entertaining.

Add a great late-80's rap soundtrack, some real bad acting, and while not a cinematic masterclass, there was enough here to enjoy it once and never again.

Shoutout to Rick Rubin for wanting to be an animal so he can fuck himself(?)