Few directors within the Hollywood system were as independent as William Wellman, who made a surprising array of successful, artistic films, considering all the squabbles he had with studio executives along the way.

Eight of his best highlight the Sundance Film Festival in a retrospective, playing in conjunction with a new documentary about Wellman, "Wild Bill: Hollywood Maverick."Already shown were "Wings," "Wild Boys of the Road," "A Star Is Born" (1937), "Nothing Sacred" and "Yellow Sky."

And you can still see three of them:

- "The Ox-Bow Incident" (1943) was a box-office flop, but it is recognized with hindsight as one of Wellman's finest achievements. The brooding black-and-white Western is the story of a trio of strangers accused of murder and threatened with lynching. Henry Fonda stars, with Dana Andrews, Anthony Quinn and Henry Morgan in support. (Saturday, 9:30 p.m., Park City Library Center.)

- "Westward the Women" (1951) is also a black-and-white Western, with a unique twist. The story has a gruff wagonmaster (Robert Taylor) leading a wagon train loaded with mail-order brides from Chicago to California. (Filmed on location, partly in southern Utah.) (Sunday, 2:40 p.m., Holiday Village Cinema III.)

- And here's your chance to see "The High and the Mighty" (1954), one of the most-requested movies that has eluded video release. This one is the granddaddy of disaster epics, with John Wayne as the pilot of a passenger airliner flying from Hawaii to California when the plane loses an engine. Panicky support from Claire Trevor, Laraine Day and Robert Stack. (Sunday, 8:40 p.m., Holiday Village Cinema III.)

- ACTOR TIM ROBBINS didn't really know much about Sam Fuller when they met in a French bar several years ago. But during their three-hour conversation, Fuller was very encouraging about a little film that Robbins was trying to develop.

"I told him about `Bob Roberts' - this was three years, four years before I actually did it," Robbins said. "And he loved the story and was encouraging me to do it."

Robbins fondly remembers Fuller's encouragement during that initial meeting, and the friendship that ensued. "Bob Roberts" was released to some acclaim in 1992, and Robbins is now getting even greater praise as a filmmaker for "Dead Man Walking," which stars Susan Sarandon and Sean Penn, and opens in Salt Lake theaters on Feb. 2. (Robbins had planned to be here for the festival, but his promotion commitments for "Dead Man Walking" forced him to cancel.)

But he's equally excited about his first opportunity to work with Fuller.

Robbins is the executive producer and on-screen narrator/

interviewer of "The Type-writer, the Rifle and the Movie Camera," an hourlong documentary about Fuller that was written and directed by Adam Simon, and which had its premiere in the World Cinema sidebar at the Sundance Film Festival. The film will be on the cable Independent Film Channel next month and Robbins hopes a video release will follow.

Fuller is a fearless filmmaker whose movies since the late '40s have been very much in the independent mold. They were low-budget, quick-shoots in a variety of genres, usually violent melodramas, the most famous being "Shock Corridor," "China Gate," "The Naked Kiss" and "The Big Red One."

Fuller was also the subject of a tribute and retrospective of his work at the 1988 Sundance Film Festival (then known as the United States Film Festival).

"I hadn't actually known much about him before I met him in that bar," Robbins said by telephone from New York. "I had seen `The Big Red One," but nothing else. Then I started to discover all these amazing gems, these amazing films that really spoke to a certain truth of character.

"I would stumble into screenings of his at times. I saw `Shock Corridor' on the screen for the first time up there (at the 1988 festival). And every film had a new surprise and a new, unique voice. And what I find extraordinary about him is that even when his films aren't necessarily successful, there is so much more in there, than in most films you see. So many innovative things done with the camera, and his way of storytelling, compressed story-tell-ing. A lot of his films are worth watching."

The film's title represents what Robbins calls Fuller's "three lives." "He started as a crime reporter, writing pulp novels, and when he was in his late 20s he joined the Army and went overseas in World War II. And then to take on a third career after the war as a filmmaker . . . . I was just fascinated by the dichotomy of the man."