Shamus Culhane[1]

Shamus Culhane

Name

Shamus Culhane

James "Shamus" Culhane (November 12, 1908 – February 2, 1996) was an American animator, film director, and film producer. Culhane worked for several animation studios, including Fleischer Studios, the Ub Iwerks studio, Walt Disney Productions, and the Walter Lantz studio.

He began his animation career in 1925 working for J.R. Bray studios, and is known for promoting the animation talents of his inker/assistant at the Fleischer Studios in the early 1930s, Lillian Friedman, making her the first female studio animator.

Culhane also animated characters for the Flip the Frog series, including Flip's Betty Boop-ish girlfriend Fifi. In 1994, he drew an "exclusive" Limited Edition cel titled "Betty Likes It Hot,"[2] featuring Betty Boop in a famous Marilyn Monroe pose.

Quotes

Shamus Culhane: "Under careful cross-examination Helen Kane had to admit that she, in turn had copied the 'Boop-Boop-a-Doop' business from an obscure black singer Baby Esther."[3] (1986)

Shamus Culhane: "Betty Boop had no name for a while. She was a rather pudgy girl, with a black button nose and poodle ears. Later the ears were changed to long earrings, the black nose eradicated." (1986)

Shamus Culhane: "Under Grim Natwick's skillful guidance, Betty blossomed into a sexy little woman with a svelte figure. Betty Boop was an instant hit." (1986)

Shamus Culhane: "In one picture, Bamboo Isle, I animated a hula dance in which Betty's bare breasts were skimpily covered by a lei. It was probably my best animation of Betty Boop. (1986)

Shamus Culhane: "Unfortunetly, the story development was never sophisticated enough to take full advantage of Betty. Sex was usually depicted as endless attempts on her virginity." (1986)

Shamus Culhane: "Betty was never given a male counterpart, again because of the flawed concept that action was more important than character motivation. (1986)

Shamus Culhane: "The obvious progression would have been from a cutie-cute Helen Kane type to a character that had definite ideas about sex, such as Mae West. But that would have required a literary background." (1986)

Shamus Culhane: "Bernie Wolf joined Al Eugster, Natwick and me from time to time. None of us realized that this quartet was going to spend many years working together at different studios." (1986)

Shamus Culhane: "We all shared one specialty, we could animate a female figure." (1986)

Shamus Culhane: "Of course, we youngsters could not compete with Grim Natwick, but our animation of Betty Boop was far superior to the other New Wave animators." (1986)

Shamus Culhane: "Krazy Kat was not good as Felix the Cat, the loyalty to Max Fleischer, and excitement when Betty Boop became a hit, our earnest efforts to make Flip the Frog a star, because Iwerks was our boss, and we liked him." (1986)

Death

Shamus died on the 2nd of February, 1996 aged 87 in New York City.

Trivia

Shamus also worked as an animator on Walt Disney's Pinocchio, but was left uncredited on the film. During the production of the film he left Disney to work at Fleischer Studios.

He was a lead animator on Disney's Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs, in which he animated the "Heigh-Ho" sequence, which took him a total of six months to complete.

During the late-1940s, he founded Shamus Culhane Productions, which was one of the first companies to create animated television commercials. It also produced the animation for at least one of the Bell Telephone Science Series films.

Shamus Culhane Productions folded in the 1960s, at which point Culhane became the head of the successor to Fleischer Studios, Paramount Cartoon Studios. He left the studio in 1967, and went into semi-retirement.