Shamus Culhane, a pioneering animator who made the Seven Dwarfs march home singing "Heigh Ho" in Walt Disney's "Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs," died on Friday at his home. He was 87 years old and lived in Manhattan.

Mr. Culhane's career in animation, which began before movies could talk and was accelerated in the sound era by his talent for synchronizing facial movements with dialogue, spanned more than 60 years beginning in 1925.

Mr. Culhane was born in Ware, Mass., on Nov. 12, 1908. When he was a small child, the family moved to Manhattan. His father, James, worked for the Interborough Rapid Transit Company. His mother, the former Alma LaPierre, was a housewife. When Mr. Culhane was 6, his father took him to a vaudeville house where the boy saw Winsor McCay, one of the earliest film cartoonists, show his animated film "Gertie the Dinosaur."

Mr. Culhane began drawing as a child, winning medals for his work while a student at Public School 82 in Yorkville and at Boy's High School in Harlem, then the only city high school to offer commercial art courses. After a trip to the Metropolitan Museum of Art, he decided to become an artist.

When his father abandoned the family, the 16-year old Mr. Culhane, the eldest of three children, quit school to support them. Walter Lantz, his best friend's brother, was then the head of animation for J. R. Bray, the first person to make theatrically distributed cartoons, and Mr. Lantz got Mr. Culhane a job as office boy.

In 1925, covering for a drunken animator, Mr. Culhane animated his first scene -- a monkey with a hot towel. In the next 62 years, working for 18 different cartoon studios, including his own, Shamus Culhane would become one of the world's foremost character animators.

Thank you for your patience while we verify access. If you are in Reader mode please exit and log into your Times account, or subscribe for all of The Times.

Thank you for your patience while we verify access.

Already a subscriber? Log in.

Want all of The Times? Subscribe.