Devrekani 3D map in Google Earth

geographical coordinates: 41° 36' 1" North, 33° 50' 0" East

geographical location: Kastamonu, Turkey, Asia

original name: Devrekâni

Google Earth – visit Devrekani

Welcome to the Devrekani Google Earth 3D map site! Original name of this place (including diacritics) is Devrekâni, it lies in Kastamonu, Turkey and its geographical coordinates are 41° 36' 1" North, 33° 50' 0" East.

Note: Current version of the Google Earth Plug-in ONLY operates on Microsoft Windows XP and Vista operating systems. Support for other operating systems is planned in future releases.

Do you like this map? Recommend it to your friends!

Register at Devrekani or add new placemark for Devrekani.

Get your personal map homepage and much more for free.

Devrekani hotel reservations

Book hotel in Devrekani online and save money

Devrekani hotels »

Browse & Book hotels in Turkey »

Devrekani hotels – sortable list of all hotels in Devrekani »

Search for hotels in

Check-in date

Check-out date

Devrekani hotels: low rates, no booking fees, no cancellation fees.

Maplandia.com in partnership with Booking.com offers highly competitive rates for all types of hotels in Devrekani, from affordable family hotels to the most luxurious ones. Booking.com, being established in 1996, is longtime Europe’s leader in online hotel reservations.

At Maplandia.com you won't be charged any booking fees, cancellation fees, or administration fees – the reservation service is free of charge. The reservation system is secure and your personal information and credit card is encrypted.

We have put together also a carefully selected list of recommended hotels in Devrekani, only hotels with the highest level of guest satisfaction are included. Many photos and unbiased hotel reviews written by real guests are provided to help you make your booking decision. Luxury hotels (including 5 star hotels and 4 star hotels) and cheap Devrekani hotels (with best discount rates and up-to-date hotel deals) are both available in separate lists. Always bear in mind that with Maplandia.com and Booking.com the best price is guaranteed!

Devrekani flight reservations

Compare flights to Devrekani

Search flights to airports close to Devrekani, compare prices »

Overview of flights to and from Turkey, compare prices »

Flights search »

Compare prices on flights to and from the closest airports to Devrekani. We search through offers of more than 600 airlines and travel agents. When you find a deal you want, we provide link to the airline or travel agent to make your booking directly with them. No middlemen. No added fees. You always get the lowest price.

Devrekani Google Earth 3D map

see Devrekani 3D map in Google Earth

With Google Earth plugin you can see the unique 3D satellite map of Devrekani within you browser. You may download Devrekani KML file and view the Devrekâni 3D map with Googe Earth software installed at your PC.

Want to know more about Devrekani? Dive right in — Google Earth combines detailed satellite imagery, maps and the power of Google Search to put the world's geographic information at your fingertips. Google Earth enables to tilt and rotate the view to see Devrekani 3D terrain and buildings and much more (flying inclusive). Get Google Earth (free version) now and install it. When completed, simply click the link below. Explore the Devrekani! Explore the Turkey! Explore the world!

recommend Devrekani 3D map

If you would like to recommend Devrekani 3D map page to a friend, or if you just want to send yourself a reminder, here is an easy way to do it. Simply fill in the e-mail address and name of the person you wish to tell about Maplandia.com, your name and e-mail address (so they can reply to you with gracious thanks), and click the recommend button. The URL of this site will be included automatically. You may also enter an additional message that will be also included in the e-mail.

latest placemarks

Alternative Cleaning Ltd in Aldershot, Hampshire County, South East, England, United Kingdom

Alternative Cleaning Limited in Aldershot, Hampshire County, South East, England, United Kingdom

National Review illumishare Gehlert in Aschaffenburg, Aschaffenburg, Unterfranken, Bayern, Germany

Diamond Cleaning Services in Etobicoke, Toronto Metropolitan Municipality, Ontario, Canada

Roof Repairs Perth in Perth, Cambridge, Western Australia, Australia

random google map locations

Sapallal in Ayabaca, Piura, Peru

Asong in Nueva Ecija, Region 3, Philippines

Pudong in Shanghai Shiqu, Shanghai, China

Rossrieth in Rhon-Grabfeld, Unterfranken, Bayern, Germany

Grechintsy in Khmelnytska, Ukraine

Maplandia.com is not sponsored by or affiliated with Google.