MOU Institution

Chandidas Mahavidyalaya, Khujutipara, West Bengal 731215

Chandidas Mahavidyalaya, established in 1972, is a government affiliated college located at Khujutipara in the Birbhum district of West Bengal. It is affiliated to University of Burdwan and teaches arts, science and commerce.

Rishi Bankim Chandra College for Women, Naihati, West Bengal, PIN- 743165

Located in the adjacent area of East Kanthalpara, the hallowed birthplace of the prominent litterateur and nationalist Rishi Bankim Chandra Chattopadhyay, Rishi Bankim Chandra College for Women began its journey as erstwhile Rishi Bankim Chandra College on 15th January, 1947. From August, 1964, a morning section solely meant for women was started within the same premises. The college was rechristened as Rishi Bankim Chandra College for Women on and from 13th July 1984. It is affiliated to the West Bengal State University.

Barrackpore Rastraguru Surendranath College, 85, Middle Road, Kolkata, West Bengal 700120

BarrackporeRastraguru Surendranath College, founded in 1953, is a UGC registered College [under 2f] & accredited by NAAC. A group of dedicated men, led by Dr. Satish Bose, a noted social worker, took the initiative in establishing this institution on 19 Sept. 1953 and named it after one of the most illustrious sons of Barrackpore and India. It is affiliated to the West Bengal State University.

Nabadwip Vidyasagar College, Pacca Tole Road, Nabadwip, West Bengal 741302

Nabadwip Vidyasagar College is a college situated in Nabadwip in Nadia, West Bengal, India. It was established in 1942 as a branch of Vidyasagar College, kolkata and was affiliated to the University of Calcutta, later in 1960 the University of Kalyani, was established and this college became affiliated with it.

Gobardanga Hindu College, Jamdani, Gobardanga, West Bengal 743252

Gobardanga Hindu College, established in 1947, is a general degree college in Gobardanga, West Bengal, India. It offers undergraduate courses in arts, commerce and sciences and postgraduate courses in arts. It is currently affiliated to West Bengal State University.

Dinabandhu Mahavidyalaya, Bongaon, West Bengal 743235

Dinabandhu Mahavidyalay, is a general degree college in Bongaon, North 24 Parganas in the Indian state of West Bengal. It mainly offers undergraduate courses in arts, science and commerce. It is currently affiliated to West Bengal State University.

P. N. Das College, Santi Nagar, Palta, Kolkata, Jafarpur, West Bengal 743122

P. N. Das College, established in 1962, is a general degree college in Palta. It offers undergraduate courses in arts, commerce and sciences. It is affiliated to West Bengal State University.

New Alipore College, Block L, New Alipore, Kolkata, West Bengal 700053

New Alipore College, established in 1963, is an undergraduate college in Kolkata, West Bengal, India. It is affiliated with the University of Calcutta.

Hiralal Mazumdar Memorial College for Women, Dakshineswar, Kolkata, West Bengal 700035

Hiralal Mazumdar Memorial College for Women, established in 1959, is a women's college in Dakshineswar, Kolkata. It offers undergraduate courses in arts, commerce and sciences. It is affiliated to West Bengal State University.

K. K. Das College, Baishnabghata-Patuli, Garia, Kolkata - 700084

K.K. Das College affiliated to University of Calcutta was established in 1964 as K.K.Das College of Commerce. The college shared the premises of Dinabandhu Andrews College since its inception.

Raidighi College, P.O.+P.S, Sub. Division: Diamond Harbour, Raidighi, West Bengal 743383

Raidighi College, established in 1995, is an undergraduate college in Raidighi, West Bengal, India. It is affiliated with the University of Calcutta.

Prasanta Chandra Mahalanobis Mahavidyala, Dunlop, Bonhooghly Govt Colony, Baranagar, West Bengal 700108

Prasanta Chandra Mahalanobis Mahavidyalaya, established in 1965, is a general degree college in Baranagar, Kolkata. It offers undergraduate courses in arts, commerce and sciences. It is affiliated to West Bengal State University.

Banipur Mahila Mahavidyalaya, Banipur, Habra, West Bengal 743233

Banipur Mahila Mahavidyalaya, established in 1999, is a women's college in Banipur, Habra, West Bengal. It offers undergraduate courses in arts, commerce and sciences. It is affiliated to West Bengal State University.

Nazrul Charcha Kendra , Barasat, Kolkata

কাজী নজরুল ইসলামের জীবন ও সৃষ্টি সমূহ আরও বেশি মানুষের কাছে পৌঁছে দেওয়া ও অন‍্যদের জানা তথ্য সংগ্ৰহের জন‍্য এই চর্চা কেন্দ্র ।

Hingalganj Mahavidyalaya, Hingalganj, West Bengal 743435

Hingalganj Mahavidyalaya is a Coeducational Undergraduate Degree college, affiliated to West Bengal State University, Barasat. The college offers Honours and General Degree programs in the Choice Based Credit System introduced by WBSU.

Netaji Satabarshiki Mahavidyalaya, Ashoknagar, West Bengal 743222

Netaji Satabarshiki Mahavidyalaya, established in 2000, is a general degree college in Ashoknagar. It offers undergraduate courses in arts. It is affiliated to West Bengal State University.

Ashoknagar Kalyangarh Municipality, Ashoknagar, West Bengal 743222-72

Ashoknagar Kalyangarh is a city and a municipality in Barasat Sadar subdivision of North 24 Parganas district in the state of West Bengal, India. Ashoknagar is the first discovered oil field in West Bengal and East India. The oil field was discovered in 2018 by ONGC.

Ramakrishna Mission Vivekananda Centenary College, Rahara, Khardaha, West Bengal 700118

Ramakrishna Mission Vivekananda Centenary College, popularly known as Rahara V.C college is one of the best colleges of West Bengal, currently Autonomous and affiliated to the West Bengal State University. It is named after Swami Vivekananda. It was formerly affiliated with the Calcutta University.

Ramakrishna Mission Swami Vivekananda's Ancestral House and Cultural Centre, Manicktala, Azad Hind Bag, Kolkata, West Bengal 700006

Ramakrishna Mission Swami Vivekananda's Ancestral House and Cultural Centre is a museum and cultural centre. It is located at 105 Vivekananda Road, Kolkata, India. In this house, Swami Vivekananda was born on 12 January 1863. The house remained Vivekananda's home throughout his childhood and early youth.

Acharya Prafulla Chandra College, New Barrakpur, Kolkata, West Bengal 700131

Acharya Prafulla Chandra College, established in 1960, in West Bengal, India. It is affiliated West Bengal State University. The college is awarded grade "A" by National Assessment and Accreditation Council.

Anudip Foundation, Sector-V, Salt Lake City, P.S Bidhannagar, Kolkata-700091, West Bengal

Founded in 2007, Anudip is a professionally managed Section 8 not profit Indian Company, registered under Companies Act, 2013; single-mindedly concentrating on creating digital livelihoods at scale for youth from crisis-stricken communities through its 92+ skill and career development centres spread across 16 Indian cities.

Hulladek Recycling Pvt. Ltd. Charu Market, Tollygunge, Kolkata, West Bengal 700033

Hulladek Recycling Private Limited is Eastern India’s initiative to do their bit to make the world a greener place through establishing proper, organised e waste management systems across the country. We strongly believe that the ideal path to a macro-positive change in the future lies in building awareness towards incorporating micro-changes today. Thus, we work as partners, speakers, facilitators and managers for e waste segregation, transportation, collection and disposal. Authorised and licensed by the CPCB under the e waste (Management) Amendment Rules, 2018, we largely function as a PRO (Producer Responsibility Organisation), where assist businesses generating e waste to adhere to and comply with the rules of the land.

Uluberia College, Uluberia, Howrah, West Bengal 711315

Uluberia College is an undergraduate college in Uluberia, in Howrah district, West Bengal, India. The college is affiliated with the University of Calcutta.