Maryland Police Light Laws

According to Section 22-218 of the Maryland Code (Statutes), all police vehicles have to be equipped with signal lamps displaying red flashing lights. Also people viewing the vehicle from the front and people watching the vehicle from the back need to see those police lights. Those lights must also be strong enough to be seen within 500 feet of the vehicle from any direction. As part of their lighting system, police vehicles may also use white or blue strobe police lights and may use these light colors for their signal devices.

Maryland Fire Truck Light Laws

Section 22-218 of the Maryland Code (Statutes) states that all fire trucks must be fitted with signal lamps that display red flashing lights. Both people viewing the vehicle from the front and people viewing the vehicle from the back need to see those lights. These lights and light bars also have to be strong enough to be seen within 500 feet of the vehicle from any direction. Fire trucks are licensed to use red or white lights as part of their illumination or signaling systems.

Maryland Volunteer Fire Fighter Light Laws

Section 22-218 of the Maryland Volunteer Fire Fighter Light Laws Code of Maryland (Statutes) states that all volunteer fire fighter trucks must be equipped with signal lamps that display red flashing lights. Both people viewing the vehicle from the front and people viewing the vehicle from the back need to see those lights. Those lights must also be strong enough to be seen within 500 feet of the vehicle from any direction. Volunteer fire department vehicles can use both white and red lighting devices or lighting systems for their signals. Just 5 volunteer fire department officers are allowed to have their vehicles equipped with red or white lights.

Maryland Ambulance Light Laws

Section 22-218 of the Maryland Code (Statutes) states that all ambulances must have signal lamps displaying red flashing lights. Both people viewing the vehicle from the front and people viewing the vehicle from the back need to see those lights. Those lights must also be strong enough to be seen within 500 feet of the vehicle from any direction. Ambulances may use red as well as white lights for their lighting systems and display devices.

Maryland Tow Truck Light Laws

According to section 22-218 of the Maryland Code (Statutes), tow trucks may use either yellow or amber-colored lights for their display devices or lighting systems.

Maryland Construction Vehicle Light Laws

Section 22-218 of the Maryland Construction Vehicle Light Laws Code of Maryland (Statutes) states that all construction vehicles may be fitted with amber or yellow colored lights for their lighting systems or display devices.

Maryland Utility Vehicle Light Laws

Section 22-218 of the Maryland Code (Statutes) states that Utility Vehicles may use either amber or yellow lights for their display devices or lighting systems.

Maryland Pilot Vehicle Light Laws

According to Section 22-218 of the Maryland Code (Statutes), pilots are permitted to use either amber or yellow colored lights for their display devices or lighting systems. In addition, a pilot vehicle must use at least one rotating light when traveling 20 mph below speed limit. The light must have a diameter of at least 3 inches and be visible from both the front and back of the vehicle.

Maryland Security Vehicle Light Laws

Section 22-218 of the Maryland Security Vehicle Light Laws Code of Maryland (Statutes) states that safety vehicles may use either yellow or amber-colored lights for their strobe lighting systems or display devices.

In Conclusion

We have gone over the light laws of many different types of vehicles over the course of this report. We addressed the colors each vehicle is permitted to use and the standards that certain vehicles must meet. Throughout this article we also referred to Section 22-218 of the Maryland Code (Statutes).

For more information on what lights are available to you, please call your State Highway Patrol office at: 410-761-5130

*Please note that these numbers are what we can currently find, and the numbers may have changed since this listing.