NEW YORK, Aug. 22, 2011 /PRNewswire/ -- PwC announced today that it has completed its acquisition of global management consulting firm PRTM. The addition of PRTM's extensive experience in operations management consulting, including strategy, supply chain, product development, customer value management and business model innovation, will strengthen and support PwC's commitment to deliver consulting services from strategy through execution.

(Logo: http://photos.prnewswire.com/prnh/20100917/NY66894LOGO )

"We are very excited to welcome PRTM's consultants to the PwC team," said Robert Moritz, U.S. Chairman and Senior Partner of PwC. "This is an important transaction for our clients as we continue to invest in the quality of our services across the firm. PRTM's experienced professionals will bring increased high quality services to our clients in areas that are critically important to them and can help them build a competitive advantage."

The acquisition of PRTM brings over 700 experienced consultants to PwC's global Advisory practice, including 124 principals. Over two-thirds of PRTM's professionals are located in the U.S., with the remainder located in the U.K., France, Germany, the Nordics, the UAE, India, China and Japan. PRTM's professionals serve Fortune 1000 clients across industries such as Technology, Industrial Products, Retail & Consumer, Healthcare and Public Sector.

Dana Mcilwain, PwC Vice Chairman and U.S. Advisory Leader, said, "We are pleased with the successful completion of this transaction, which will significantly increase our ability to serve our clients in the areas of operations management, strategic execution and business model innovation, and will provide our people with new opportunities for career development and growth. We are very excited to welcome our new colleagues to the firm and look forward to serving our clients together."

"The PRTM team is proud to be joining one of the world's leading professional services firms," said Scott Hefter, former Global Managing Director of PRTM and now a Principal at PwC. "Together, we will bring a full continuum of world class consulting services -- from strategy through execution -- to help our clients meet their business challenges."

Financial details of the transaction will not be disclosed.

About PwC's Advisory Practice

PwC's Advisory professionals help organizations improve business performance, respond quickly and effectively to crisis, and extract value from transactions. We understand our clients' industries and unique business challenges, and look across the entire organization -- focusing on strategy, structure, people, process and technology -- to help clients build their next competitive advantage. See http://www.pwc.com/us/consulting for more information.

About the PwC Network

PwC network firms provide industry-focused assurance, tax and advisory services to enhance value for their clients. More than 161,000 people in 154 countries across the PwC network share their thinking, experience and solutions to develop fresh perspectives and practical advice. See www.pwc.com for more information.

© 2011 PwC. All rights reserved. "PwC" and "PwC US" refers to PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership, which is a member firm of PricewaterhouseCoopers International Limited, each member firm of which is a separate and independent legal entity.

SOURCE PwC