PwC has completed its acquisition of global management consulting firm PRTM. The addition of PRTM’s extensive experience in operations management consulting, including strategy, supply chain, product development, customer value management and business model innovation, will strengthen and support PwC’s commitment to deliver consulting services from strategy through execution.

“We are very excited to welcome PRTM’s consultants to the PwC team,” said Robert Moritz, U.S. Chairman and Senior Partner of PwC. “This is an important transaction for our clients as we continue to invest in the quality of our services across the firm. PRTM’s experienced professionals will bring increased high quality services to our clients in areas that are critically important to them and can help them build a competitive advantage.”

The acquisition of PRTM brings over 700 experienced consultants to PwC’s global Advisory practice, including 124 principals. Over two-thirds of PRTM’s professionals are located in the US, with the remainder located in the UK, France, Germany, the Nordic countries, the Middle East, India, China and Japan. PRTM’s professionals serve Fortune 1000 clients across industries such as technology, industrial products, retail and consumer, healthcare and the public sector

PRTM’s Middle East-based management consulting team will complement PwC’s growing consultancy practice and will help solidify PwC’s market leadership in the region. “We are pleased with the successful completion of this transaction, which will significantly increase our ability to serve our clients across the Middle East region in the areas of operations management, strategic execution and business model innovation, and will provide our people with new opportunities for career development and growth. We are very excited to welcome our new colleagues to the firm and look forward to serving our clients together,” Warwick Hunt, PwC’s Managing Partner for the Middle East, said.

“The PRTM team is proud to be joining one of the world’s leading professional services firms,” said Scott Hefter, former Global Managing Director of PRTM and now a Principal at PwC. “Together, we will bring a full continuum of world class consulting services — from strategy through execution — to help our clients meet their business challenges.”