By Georgia Gidney, Research Associate and PhD candidate, Technical University Munich

From 27th February 2023 to the 14th September 2023 I had the pleasure of being a guest researcher at the Department of Parks, Recreation and Tourism Management (PRTM) at North Carolina State University, Raleigh, North Carolina, USA.

I was hosted by Professor Jason Bocarro and Professor Kyle Bunds. When I first arrived, Professor Bocarro and Professor Bunds introduced me to the faculty members of the PRTM graduate school who all gave me a warm welcome and emphasised their open-door policy. It was reassuring to know that I could learn from them when I inevitably needed guidance with my research. I was also acquainted with the campus and took various tours of the sporting facilities available at NC state including a tour of the Carter-Finley Stadium, home to the NC State Wolfpack Football team.

My time at NC State was devoted to working on a project with the focus on US resident’s motivation towards physical activity. My hosts and I met frequently throughout my six and a half months at NC State to discuss my work. With backgrounds in health, the built environment (Prof. Bocarro), sport and the environment (Prof. Bunds) I gained valuable insights and great perspectives which helped me develop the project. Living in a city in America was especially useful for me given the context of the project being the neighbourhood environment of US residents. I learnt, through real life experience about accessibility, walkability, car dependency and park management in a US city in the south and how it can affect physical activity levels. During the semester I also had the opportunity to involve myself in courses that although are not directly related to the field of physical activity, are deeply important to me. I attended and took part in diversity, equity and inclusion courses, volunteered at the Black Research Symposium and had exposure to Geospatial Analytics.

As part of my mobility I participated in the International Research Training School at Western University in London, Ontario. This was a two-week programme in May 2023 that was designed to bring researchers and experts in the field together to talk about human rights in mega sporting events. During the training school over 35 PhD’s, ECR’s and more senior academics attended. Additionally, I was able to present my research. It was an excellent opportunity to network and receive feedback on my work.

It is fair to say that a trip to the US would not be complete without attending some of the Atlantic Coast Conference League sports games. I was just in time to watch NC state football spring game, baseball and tennis match. I was also grateful to attend a few of the Stanely Cup ice hockey games, an incredible experience for sports fans.

In conclusion, this mobility enabled me to work with some of the leading experts in sport, physical activity and health. Professor Bunds and Professor Bocarro were great to converse with about current developments in the field, expand my professional network, and support my experience at a high-ranking American university. I have also learned how graduate programs and faculties are structured differently than those of European universities. Finally, I have made great connections with faculty and graduate students with a potential for collaborations in the near future.