845 relations: Abavornis, Abelisaurus, Abrictosaurus, Abrosaurus, Academy of Natural Sciences of Drexel University, Achelousaurus, Acheronodon, Acrocanthosaurus, Adasaurus, Aeolosaurus, Aetosaur, Afrovenator, Aggiosaurus, Agujaceratops, Alamosaurus, Alaskacephale, Albert Stewart Meek, Albertosaurus, Albertus Seba, Alectrosaurus, Aletopelta, Alioramus, Allosaurus, Almirante Trail toad, Alocodon, Altirhinus, Alwalkeria, Alxasaurus, Amargasaurus, Amazonian sac-winged bat, Amurosaurus, Amyrmex, Anabisetia, Anasazisaurus, Anchiceratops, Anconodon, Andersen's fruit-eating bat, Ankistrodon, Anodontosaurus, Anoplosaurus, Anserimimus, Antarctopelta, Antetonitrus, Anurognathus, Apatodon, Apatosaurus, Arambourgiania, Archaeoceratops, Archaeopteryx, Archaeornithoides, ... Expand index (795 more) » « Shrink index

Abavornis

Abavornis is the name given to a genus of primitive birds from the Late Cretaceous, containing the single species A. bonaparti (named in honor of the Argentine paleontologist José Bonaparte).

See Holotype and Abavornis

Abelisaurus

Abelisaurus ("Abel's lizard") is a genus of predatory abelisaurid theropod dinosaur during the Late Cretaceous Period (Campanian) of what is now South America.

See Holotype and Abelisaurus

Abrictosaurus

Abrictosaurus ("wakeful lizard") is a genus of heterodontosaurid dinosaur from the Early Jurassic Period of what is now southern Africa.

See Holotype and Abrictosaurus

Abrosaurus

Abrosaurus ('delicate lizard' from the Greek αβρος meaning 'delicate' or 'dainty' and σαυρος meaning 'lizard') is a genus of macronarian sauropod dinosaur from the Middle Jurassic Period of what is now Asia, one of many dinosaurs found at the Dashanpu Quarry in the Sichuan Province of China.

See Holotype and Abrosaurus

Academy of Natural Sciences of Drexel University

The Academy of Natural Sciences of Drexel University, formerly the Academy of Natural Sciences of Philadelphia, is the oldest natural science research institution and museum in the Americas.

See Holotype and Academy of Natural Sciences of Drexel University

Achelousaurus

Achelousaurus is a genus of centrosaurine ceratopsid dinosaur that lived during the Late Cretaceous Period of what is now North America, about 74.2 million years ago.

See Holotype and Achelousaurus

Acheronodon

Acheronodon is a genus of herbivorous arboreal mammal which belongs to the family Microcosmodontidae and which was endemic to North America during the Early Paleocene subepoch (66—56.8 mya) and in existence for approximately.

See Holotype and Acheronodon

Acrocanthosaurus

Acrocanthosaurus (meaning "high-spined lizard") is a genus of theropod dinosaur that existed in what is now North America during the Aptian and early Albian stages of the Early Cretaceous.

See Holotype and Acrocanthosaurus

Adasaurus

Adasaurus ("Ada's lizard") is a dromaeosaurid theropod dinosaur from the Late Cretaceous Period of Central Asia.

See Holotype and Adasaurus

Aeolosaurus

Aeolosaurus ("Aeolus' lizard") is a genus of titanosaurian sauropod dinosaur from the Late Cretaceous Period of what is now South America.

See Holotype and Aeolosaurus

Aetosaur

Aetosaurs (aetosaur; order name Aetosauria; from Greek, ἀετός (aetos, "eagle") and σαυρος (sauros, "lizard")) are an extinct order of heavily armoured, medium- to large-sized Late Triassic herbivorous archosaurs.

See Holotype and Aetosaur

Afrovenator

Afrovenator ("African hunter") is a genus of megalosaurid theropod dinosaur from the middle Jurassic Period of northern Africa.

See Holotype and Afrovenator

Aggiosaurus

Aggiosaurus is an extinct genus of geosaurine metriorhynchid crocodyliform known from the Late Jurassic (late Oxfordian stage) of Nice, southeastern France.

See Holotype and Aggiosaurus

Agujaceratops

Agujaceratops (meaning "Horned face from Aguja") is a genus of herbivorous ceratopsian dinosaur.

See Holotype and Agujaceratops

Alamosaurus

Alamosaurus (meaning "Ojo Alamo lizard") is a genus of titanosaurian sauropod dinosaurs, containing a single known species, Alamosaurus sanjuanensis, from the late Cretaceous Period of what is now southern North America.

See Holotype and Alamosaurus

Alaskacephale

Alaskacephale was a genus of pachycephalosaurid dinosaur that lived in the late Campanian to Maastrichtian stages of the Late Cretaceous (around 80 to 69 million years ago).

See Holotype and Alaskacephale

Albert Stewart Meek

Albert Stewart Meek (26 October 1871 – 1 October 1943) was an English bird collector and naturalist.

See Holotype and Albert Stewart Meek

Albertosaurus

Albertosaurus (meaning "Alberta lizard") is a genus of tyrannosaurid theropod dinosaurs that lived in western North America during the Late Cretaceous Period, about 70 million years ago.

See Holotype and Albertosaurus

Albertus Seba

Albertus Seba (May 12, 1665, Etzel near Friedeburg – May 2, 1736, Amsterdam) was a Dutch pharmacist, zoologist and collector.

See Holotype and Albertus Seba

Alectrosaurus

Alectrosaurus (meaning "alone lizard") is an extinct genus of tyrannosaurid theropod dinosaur that lived approximately 83 to 74 million years ago during the latter part of the Cretaceous Period in what is now Inner Mongolia.

See Holotype and Alectrosaurus

Aletopelta

Aletopelta coombsi is an herbivorous ankylosaurian ornithischian dinosaur that during the Late Cretaceous lived in the area of what is now Southern California.

See Holotype and Aletopelta

Alioramus

Alioramus (meaning 'different branch') is a genus of tyrannosaurid theropod dinosaurs from the Late Cretaceous period of Asia.

See Holotype and Alioramus

Allosaurus

Allosaurus is a genus of carnivorous theropod dinosaur that lived 155 to 150 million years ago during the late Jurassic period (Kimmeridgian to early TithonianTurner, C.E. and Peterson, F., (1999). "Biostratigraphy of dinosaurs in the Upper Jurassic Morrison Formation of the Western Interior, U.S.A." Pp. 77–114 in Gillette, D.D. (ed.), Vertebrate Paleontology in Utah. Utah Geological Survey Miscellaneous Publication 99-1.). The name "Allosaurus" means "different lizard" alluding to its unique concave vertebrae (at the time of its discovery).

See Holotype and Allosaurus

Almirante Trail toad

The Almirante Trail toad (Incilius peripatetes) is a species of toad endemic to Panama.

See Holotype and Almirante Trail toad

Alocodon

Alocodon (a-LOK-o-don; Greek alox and odon meaning 'furrow' and 'tooth') is a genus of ornithischian dinosaur from the Late Jurassic of what is now Portugal.

See Holotype and Alocodon

Altirhinus

Altirhinus ("high snout") is a genus of iguanodontian ornithopod dinosaur from the Early Cretaceous Period of Mongolia.

See Holotype and Altirhinus

Alwalkeria

Alwalkeria ("for Alick Walker") is a genus of basal saurischian dinosaur from the Late Triassic, living in India.

See Holotype and Alwalkeria

Alxasaurus

Alxasaurus ("Alxa Desert lizard") is a genus of therizinosauroid alxasaurid theropod dinosaur from the Early Cretaceous Period of Inner Mongolia.

See Holotype and Alxasaurus

Amargasaurus

Amargasaurus ("La Amarga lizard") is a genus of sauropod dinosaur from the Early Cretaceous epoch (129.4–122.46 mya) of what is now Argentina.

See Holotype and Amargasaurus

Amazonian sac-winged bat

The Amazonian sac-winged bat (Saccopteryx gymnura) is a bat species of the family Emballonuridae from South America.

See Holotype and Amazonian sac-winged bat

Amurosaurus

Amurosaurus ("Amur lizard") is a genus of lambeosaurine hadrosaurid dinosaur found in the latest Cretaceous period (66 million years ago)Godefroit, P., Lauters, P., Van Itterbeeck, J., Bolotsky, Y. and Bolotsky, I.Y. (2011).

See Holotype and Amurosaurus

Amyrmex

Amyrmex golbachi is a rare Neotropical species of ant and the only known species in the genus Amyrmex.

See Holotype and Amyrmex

Anabisetia

Anabisetia is a genus of iguanodont dinosaur from the Late Cretaceous Period of Patagonia, South America.

See Holotype and Anabisetia

Anasazisaurus

Anasazisaurus ("Anasazi lizard") is a genus of hadrosaurid ("duckbill") ornithopod dinosaur that lived about 74 million years ago, in the Late Cretaceous Period.

See Holotype and Anasazisaurus

Anchiceratops

Anchiceratops is an extinct genus of chasmosaurine ceratopsid dinosaur that lived approximately 72 to 71 million years ago during the latter part of the Cretaceous Period in what is now Alberta, Canada.

See Holotype and Anchiceratops

Anconodon

Anconodon is an extinct genus of mammal from the Paleocene of North America, and thus lived just after the "age of the dinosaurs".

See Holotype and Anconodon

Andersen's fruit-eating bat

Andersen's fruit-eating bat (Dermanura anderseni) is a bat species from South America.

See Holotype and Andersen's fruit-eating bat

Ankistrodon

Ankistrodon is an extinct genus of archosauriform known from the Early Triassic Panchet Formation of India.

See Holotype and Ankistrodon

Anodontosaurus

Anodontosaurus is an extinct genus of ankylosaurid dinosaurs within the subfamily Ankylosaurinae.

See Holotype and Anodontosaurus

Anoplosaurus

Anoplosaurus (meaning "unarmored or unarmed lizard") is an extinct genus of herbivorous nodosaurid dinosaur, from the late Albian-age Lower Cretaceous Cambridge Greensand of Cambridgeshire, England.

See Holotype and Anoplosaurus

Anserimimus

Anserimimus ("goose mimic") is a genus of ornithomimid theropod dinosaur, from the Late Cretaceous Period of what is now Mongolia.

See Holotype and Anserimimus

Antarctopelta

Antarctopelta (meaning 'Antarctic shield') was a genus of ankylosaurian dinosaur with one known species, A. oliveroi, which lived in Antarctica during the Late Cretaceous Period.

See Holotype and Antarctopelta

Antetonitrus

Antetonitrus is a genus of sauropod dinosaur found in Early Jurassic rocks in South Africa.

See Holotype and Antetonitrus

Anurognathus

Anurognathus is a genus of small pterosaur that lived during the late Jurassic Period (Tithonian stage).

See Holotype and Anurognathus

Apatodon

Apatodon is a dubious genus of dinosaur.

See Holotype and Apatodon

Apatosaurus

Apatosaurus (meaning "deceptive lizard") is a genus of herbivorous sauropod dinosaur that lived in North America during the Late Jurassic period.

See Holotype and Apatosaurus

Arambourgiania

Arambourgiania is a pterosaur from the Late Cretaceous (Maastrichtian) of Jordan and the United States.

See Holotype and Arambourgiania

Archaeoceratops

Archaeoceratops, meaning "ancient horned face", is a genus of basal neoceratopsian dinosaur from the Early Cretaceous (Aptian stage) of north central China.

See Holotype and Archaeoceratops

Archaeopteryx

Archaeopteryx, meaning "old wing" (sometimes referred to by its German name Urvogel ("original bird" or "first bird")), is a genus of bird-like dinosaurs that is transitional between non-avian feathered dinosaurs and modern birds.

See Holotype and Archaeopteryx

Archaeornithoides

Archaeornithoides is a genus of maniraptoriform theropod dinosaur of the Late Cretaceous of Mongolia.

See Holotype and Archaeornithoides

Archaeornithomimus

Archaeornithomimus (meaning "ancient bird mimic") is a genus of ornithomimosaurian theropod dinosaur from the Late Cretaceous of China, 70 million years ago.

See Holotype and Archaeornithomimus

Archey's frog

Archey's frog, Leiopelma archeyi, is an archaic, rare frog native to New Zealand, one of only three (or four) extant species belonging to the taxonomic family Leiopelmatidae.

See Holotype and Archey's frog

Arctosaurus

Arctosaurus is an extinct genus of archosauromorph, possibly an allokotosaurian, but was often classified as a sauropodomorph dinosaur in the years to follow.

See Holotype and Arctosaurus

Argentinosaurus

Argentinosaurus (meaning "Argentine lizard") is a genus of titanosaur sauropod dinosaur first discovered by Guillermo Heredia in Argentina.

See Holotype and Argentinosaurus

Aristosuchus

Aristosuchus was a small coelurosaurian dinosaur whose name was derived from the Greek ἄριστος (meaning bravest, best, noblest) and σουχος (the Ancient Greek corruption of the name of the Egyptian crocodile-headed god Sobek).

See Holotype and Aristosuchus

Arrhinoceratops

Arrhinoceratops (meaning "no nose-horn face", derived from the Ancient Greek "a-/α-" "no", rhis/ῥίς "nose" "keras/κέρας" "horn", "-ops/ὤψ" "face") is a genus of herbivorous ceratopsian dinosaur.

See Holotype and Arrhinoceratops

Arstanosaurus

Arstanosaurus (meaning "Arstan lizard" after the Arstan well) is a genus of hadrosauroid dinosaur from the Santonian-Campanian-age Upper Cretaceous Bostobinskaya Formation, Kazakhstan.

See Holotype and Arstanosaurus

Arunachal macaque

The Arunachal macaque (Macaca munzala), a relatively large brown primate with a comparatively short tail, is a macaque native to Arunachal Pradesh in northeastern India.

See Holotype and Arunachal macaque

Arundinaria

Arundinaria, commonly known as canes, is a genus of bamboo in the grass family.

See Holotype and Arundinaria

Asiaceratops

Asiaceratops (meaning "Asian horned face") is a genus of herbivorous ceratopsian dinosaur.

See Holotype and Asiaceratops

Astrodon

Astrodon (aster: star, odon: tooth) is a genus of large herbivorous sauropod dinosaur, related to Brachiosaurus, that lived in what is now the eastern United States during the Early Cretaceous period.

See Holotype and Astrodon

Atlascopcosaurus

Atlascopcosaurus (meaning "Atlas Copco lizard") is a genus of herbivorous basal iguanodont dinosaur from the Early Cretaceous of the present Australia.

See Holotype and Atlascopcosaurus

Atrociraptor

Atrociraptor (meaning "savage robber") is a genus of dromaeosaurid theropod dinosaur from the Late Cretaceous (Maastrichtian stage) of Alberta, Canada.

See Holotype and Atrociraptor

Australian snubfin dolphin

The Australian snubfin dolphin (Orcaella heinsohni) is a dolphin found off the northern coasts of Australia.

See Holotype and Australian snubfin dolphin

Avaceratops

Avaceratops is a genus of small herbivorous ceratopsian dinosaurs which lived during the late Campanian during the Late Cretaceous Period in what are now the Northwest United States.

See Holotype and Avaceratops

Aviatyrannis

Aviatyrannis is a genus of carnivorous tyrannosauroid theropod dinosaur from the Kimmeridgian stage of the Late Jurassic found in Portugal.

See Holotype and Aviatyrannis

Avimimus

Avimimus, meaning "bird mimic" (Latin avis.

See Holotype and Avimimus

Azolla

Azolla (mosquito fern, duckweed fern, fairy moss, water fern) is a genus of seven species of aquatic ferns in the family Salviniaceae.

See Holotype and Azolla

Azolla filiculoides

Azolla filiculoides (water fern) is a species of Azolla, native to warm temperate and tropical regions of the Americas as well as most of the old world including Asia and Australia.

See Holotype and Azolla filiculoides

Baiotomeus

Baiotomeus is a genus of mammals from the extinct order of Multituberculata.

See Holotype and Baiotomeus

Bambiraptor

Bambiraptor is a Late Cretaceous, 72-million-year-old, bird-like dromaeosaurid theropod dinosaur described by scientists at the University of Kansas, Yale University, and the University of New Orleans.

See Holotype and Bambiraptor

Banksia cuneata

Banksia cuneata, commonly known as matchstick banksia or Quairading bnksia, is an endangered species of flowering plant in the family Proteaceae.

See Holotype and Banksia cuneata

Banksia kingii

Banksia kingii is an extinct species of tree or shrub in the plant genus Banksia.

See Holotype and Banksia kingii

Banksia sphaerocarpa

Banksia sphaerocarpa, commonly known as the fox banksia or round-fruit banksia, is a species of shrub or tree in the plant genus Banksia (family Proteaceae).

See Holotype and Banksia sphaerocarpa

Banksia strahanensis

Banksia strahanensis is an extinct species of tree or shrub in the plant genus Banksia.

See Holotype and Banksia strahanensis

Banksia violacea

Banksia violacea, commonly known as violet banksia, is a species of shrub or tree in the plant genus Banksia (family Proteaceae).

See Holotype and Banksia violacea

Barbatodon

Barbatodon is a mammal genus from the Upper Cretaceous period.

See Holotype and Barbatodon

Barkudia insularis

Barkudia insularis is a critically endangered limbless lizard which was described in 1917 by Nelson Annandale and rediscovered in the wild in 2003.

See Holotype and Barkudia insularis

Barsboldia

Barsboldia (meaning "of Barsbold", a well-known Mongolian paleontologist) was a genus of large hadrosaurid dinosaur from the early Maastrichtian Nemegt Formation of Ömnogöv', Mongolia.

See Holotype and Barsboldia

Baryonyx

Baryonyx is a genus of theropod dinosaur which lived in the Barremian stage of the early Cretaceous Period, about 130–125 million years ago.

See Holotype and Baryonyx

Batrachognathus

Batrachognathus is an extinct genus of "rhamphorhynchoid" pterosaur from the Late Jurassic (Oxfordian - Kimmeridgian) Karabastau Svita of the central Asian republic of Kazakhstan.

See Holotype and Batrachognathus

Baudin's black cockatoo

Baudin's black cockatoo (Calyptorhynchus baudinii), also known as Baudin's cockatoo or long-billed black cockatoo, is a large black cockatoo found in southwestern Australia.

See Holotype and Baudin's black cockatoo

Beipiaosaurus

Beipiaosaurus is a genus of therizinosauroid theropod dinosaur from the Early Cretaceous of China.

See Holotype and Beipiaosaurus

Betasuchus

Betasuchus is a genus of theropod dinosaur which lived during the Late Cretaceous Period.

See Holotype and Betasuchus

Bissektipelta

Bissektipelta (Averianov, 2002) is an ankylosaurid dinosaur from the Upper Cretaceous of Uzbekistan.

See Holotype and Bissektipelta

Blotchy swellshark

The blotchy swellshark, or Japanese swellshark, (Cephaloscyllium umbratile) is a common species of catshark, belonging to the family Scyliorhinidae.

See Holotype and Blotchy swellshark

Blue iguana

The blue iguana (Cyclura lewisi), also known as the Grand Cayman iguana, Grand Cayman blue iguana or Cayman Island blue iguana, is an endangered species of lizard endemic to the island of Grand Cayman.

See Holotype and Blue iguana

Blue runner

The blue runner (Caranx crysos), also known as the bluestripe jack, Egyptian scad, hardtail jack or hardnose, is a common species of moderately large marine fish classified in the jack family, Carangidae.

See Holotype and Blue runner

Boiga dightoni

Boiga dightoni, commonly known as the Pirmad cat snake or the Travancore cat snake,Das I (2002).

See Holotype and Boiga dightoni

Bornean orangutan

The Bornean orangutan (Pongo pygmaeus) is a species of orangutan native to the island of Borneo.

See Holotype and Bornean orangutan

Borogovia

Borogovia is a troodontid theropod dinosaur genus which lived during the Late Cretaceous Period, in what is now Mongolia.

See Holotype and Borogovia

Bothriospondylus

Bothriospondylus ("excavated vertebra") is a dubious genus of sauropod dinosaur.

See Holotype and Bothriospondylus

Bothrops barnetti

Bothrops barnetti (Barnett's lancehead, Barnett's pit viper) is a venomous pit viper species endemic to Peru.

See Holotype and Bothrops barnetti

Brachiosauridae

The Brachiosauridae ("arm lizards", from Greek brachion (βραχίων).

See Holotype and Brachiosauridae

Brachyceratops

Brachyceratops ('short horned face') is a dubious genus of ceratopsian dinosaur known only from partial juvenile specimens dating to the late Cretaceous Period of Montana, United States.

See Holotype and Brachyceratops

Brachylophosaurus

Brachylophosaurus (or; meaning "short-crested lizard", Greek brachys.

See Holotype and Brachylophosaurus

Brachypelma hamorii

Brachypelma hamorii is a species of tarantula found in Mexico.

See Holotype and Brachypelma hamorii

Brachypelma smithi

Brachypelma smithi is a species of spider in the family Theraphosidae (tarantulas) native to Mexico.

See Holotype and Brachypelma smithi

Brachypodosaurus

Brachypodosaurus (meaning "short-footed lizard") is a dubious genus of possibly thyreophoran dinosaur from the Late Cretaceous Lameta Formation (Maastrichtian) in India.

See Holotype and Brachypodosaurus

Brachytrachelopan

Brachytrachelopan is a short-necked sauropod dinosaur from the latest Jurassic Period (Tithonian) of Argentina.

See Holotype and Brachytrachelopan

Bradycneme

Bradycneme is a genus of theropod dinosaur from the early Maastrichtian-age Upper Cretaceous Sânpetru Formation of the Hațeg Basin, Transylvania, Romania.

See Holotype and Bradycneme

Breviceratops

Breviceratops (meaning "short horn face") was a herbivorous ceratopsian dinosaur from the Late Cretaceous of Mongolia.

See Holotype and Breviceratops

Broad-billed parrot

The broad-billed parrot or raven parrot (Lophopsittacus mauritianus) is a large extinct parrot in the family Psittaculidae.

See Holotype and Broad-billed parrot

Brontosaurus

Brontosaurus, meaning "thunder lizard" (from Greek βροντή, brontē.

See Holotype and Brontosaurus

Bruhathkayosaurus

Bruhathkayosaurus (meaning "huge bodied lizard") is a dinosaur, with remains found in India, claimed by some researchers to have been the largest dinosaur that ever lived.

See Holotype and Bruhathkayosaurus

Bryceomys

Bryceomys is an extinct mammal that lived during the late Cretaceous period (between 100 and 66 million years ago) and thus shared the world with dinosaurs.

See Holotype and Bryceomys

Buitreraptor

Buitreraptor is a predatory dromaeosaurid theropod dinosaur from the Cretaceous of Argentina.

See Holotype and Buitreraptor

Byasa latreillei

Byasa latreillei, the rose windmill, is a butterfly from the windmills genus (Byasa), found in various parts of Asia, comprising tailed black swallowtail butterflies with white spots and red submarginal crescents.

See Holotype and Byasa latreillei

Byasa nevilli

Byasa nevilli, the Nevill's windmill, is a butterfly found in India that belongs to the windmills genus (Byasa), comprising tailed black swallowtail butterflies with white spots and red submarginal crescents.

See Holotype and Byasa nevilli

Byasa polyeuctes

Byasa polyeuctes, the common windmill, is the most common member in India of the windmills genus (Byasa), comprising tailed black swallowtail butterflies with white spots and red submarginal crescents.

See Holotype and Byasa polyeuctes

Byronosaurus

Byronosaurus is a genus of troodontid dinosaur from the Late Cretaceous Period of Mongolia.

See Holotype and Byronosaurus

Caenagnathasia

Caenagnathasia ('recent jaw from Asia') is a small caenagnathid oviraptorosaurian theropod from the Late Cretaceous of Uzbekistan.

See Holotype and Caenagnathasia

Callovosaurus

Callovosaurus (meaning "Callovian lizard") is a genus of iguanodontian dinosaur known from most of a left thigh bone discovered in Middle Jurassic-age rocks of England.

See Holotype and Callovosaurus

Calotes andamanensis

Calotes andamanensis is an agamid lizard found on the Nicobar Islands and the Andaman Islands.

See Holotype and Calotes andamanensis

Camposaurus

Camposaurus is a coelophysoid dinosaur genus from the Norian stage of the Late Triassic period of North America.

See Holotype and Camposaurus

Camptosaurus

Camptosaurus is a genus of plant-eating, beaked ornithischian dinosaurs of the Late Jurassic period of western North America.

See Holotype and Camptosaurus

Campylognathoides

Campylognathoides ("curved jaw", Strand 1928) is a genus of pterosaur, discovered in the Württemberg Lias deposits (dated to the early Toarcian ageBarrett, P. M., Butler, R. J., Edwards, N. P., & Milner, A. R. (2008). "Pterosaur distribution in time and space: an atlas". Zitteliana, 61-107.) of Germany; this first specimen consisted however only of wing fragments.

See Holotype and Campylognathoides

Carchi Andes toad

The Carchi Andes toad, Rhaebo colomai, is a species of toad endemic to the western slopes of the Andes in northern Ecuador and southern Colombia.

See Holotype and Carchi Andes toad

Carnaby's black cockatoo

Carnaby's black cockatoo (Calyptorhynchus latirostris), also known as the short-billed black cockatoo, is a large black cockatoo endemic to southwest Australia.

See Holotype and Carnaby's black cockatoo

Carnotaurus

Carnotaurus is a genus of large theropod dinosaur that lived in South America during the Late Cretaceous period, from about 72 to 69.9 million years ago.

See Holotype and Carnotaurus

Caseosaurus

Caseosaurus is a genus of herrerasaurid theropod dinosaur that lived approximately 235 to 228 million years ago during the latter part of the Triassic Period in what is now Texas, in North America.

See Holotype and Caseosaurus

Catopsbaatar

Catopsbaatar is a genus of multituberculate, an extinct order of rodent-like mammals.

See Holotype and Catopsbaatar

Caulkicephalus

Caulkicephalus is a genus of Ornithocheirid pterosaur, from the Isle of Wight off the coast of England.

See Holotype and Caulkicephalus

Cearadactylus

Cearadactylus is a genus of large Early Cretaceous (Albian) pterosaurs from South America.

See Holotype and Cearadactylus

Cedarpelta

Cedarpelta is an extinct genus of herbivorous basal ankylosaurid ankylosaur, based on material recovered from the Lower Cretaceous of North America.

See Holotype and Cedarpelta

Central American river turtle

The Central American river turtle (Dermatemys mawii), also known locally as the hickatee or tortuga blanca (white turtle),Vogt, R.C., Polisar, J.R., Moll, D., & Gonzalez-Porter, G. 2011.

See Holotype and Central American river turtle

Ceprano Man

Ceprano Man, Argil, and Ceprano Calvarium, refers to a Middle Pleistocene archaic human fossil, a single skull cap (calvaria), accidentally unearthed in a highway construction project in 1994 near Ceprano in the province of Frosinone, Italy.

See Holotype and Ceprano Man

Cerastes gasperettii

Cerastes gasperettii, commonly known as the Arabian horned viper, is a venomous viper species found especially in the Arabian Peninsula and north to Israel, Palestine, and Iran.

See Holotype and Cerastes gasperettii

Ceratosaurus

Ceratosaurus (from Greek κέρας/κέρατος, keras/keratos meaning "horn" and σαῦρος/sauros meaning "lizard") was a predatory theropod dinosaur in the Late Jurassic Period (Kimmeridgian to Tithonian).

See Holotype and Ceratosaurus

Cetiosauriscus

Cetiosauriscus (meaning "whale lizard like" i.e. "Cetiosaurus-like") is an extinct genus of sauropod dinosaur.

See Holotype and Cetiosauriscus

Changchunsaurus

Changchunsaurus (meaning "Changchun lizard") is an extinct genus of small herbivorous ornithopod dinosaur from Early Cretaceous deposits of Gongzhuling, Jilin, China.

See Holotype and Changchunsaurus

Charnia

Charnia is a genus of frond-like Ediacaran lifeforms with segmented, leaf-like ridges branching alternately to the right and left from a zig-zag medial suture (thus exhibiting glide reflection, or opposite isometry).

See Holotype and Charnia

Chasmosaurus

Chasmosaurus is a genus of ceratopsid dinosaur from the Upper Cretaceous Period of North America.

See Holotype and Chasmosaurus

Chialingosaurus

Chialingosaurus (meaning "Chialing Lizard") is a genus of herbivorous stegosaurian dinosaur similar to Kentrosaurus from the Upper Shaximiao Formation, Late Jurassic beds in Sichuan Province in China.

See Holotype and Chialingosaurus

Chiayusaurus

Chiayusaurus (meaning "Chia-yu-kuan lizard", after where it was found) was a genus of sauropod dinosaur known from teeth found in Asia.

See Holotype and Chiayusaurus

Chindesaurus

Chindesaurus is a genus of herrerasaurid dinosaur that lived approximately 235-210 million years ago during the latter part of the Triassic Period in what is now the Southwestern United States.

See Holotype and Chindesaurus

Chiniquodon

Chiniquodon is an extinct genus of carnivorous cynodonts, which lived during the early Middle Triassic in South America and Madagascar.

See Holotype and Chiniquodon

Chinshakiangosaurus

Chinshakiangosaurus (meaning "Chinshakian lizard") is a genus of dinosaur and probably one of the most basal sauropods known.

See Holotype and Chinshakiangosaurus

Chirostenotes

Chirostenotes (named from Greek 'narrow-handed') is a genus of oviraptorosaurian dinosaur from the late Cretaceous (about 76.5 million years ago) of Alberta, Canada.

See Holotype and Chirostenotes

Chondrosteosaurus

Chondrosteosaurus (meaning "cartilage and bone lizard") was a sauropod from Early Cretaceous England.

See Holotype and Chondrosteosaurus

Chuandongocoelurus

Chuandongocoelurus is a genus of carnivorous tetanuran theropod dinosaur from the Jurassic of China.

See Holotype and Chuandongocoelurus

Chungkingosaurus

Chungkingosaurus, meaning "Chongqing Lizard", is a genus of herbivorous dinosaur from the Late Jurassic Upper Shaximiao Formation in what is now China.

See Holotype and Chungkingosaurus

Cimolodon

Cimolodon is a genus of mammal from the Upper Cretaceous of North America.

See Holotype and Cimolodon

Cimolomys

Cimolomys is a mammal genus from the Upper Cretaceous of North America.

See Holotype and Cimolomys

Claorhynchus

Claorhynchus (meaning "broken beak", as it is based on broken bones from the snout region) is a dubious genus of cerapodan dinosaur with a confusing history behind it.

See Holotype and Claorhynchus

Claosaurus

Claosaurus (Greek κλάω, klao meaning 'broken' and σαῦρος, sauros meaning 'lizard'; "broken lizard", referring to the odd position of the fossils when discovered) is a genus of primitive hadrosaurian (early duck-billed dinosaur) that lived during the Late Cretaceous Period (Campanian).

See Holotype and Claosaurus

Cleveland Museum of Natural History

The Cleveland Museum of Natural History is a natural history museum located approximately five miles (8 km) east of downtown Cleveland, Ohio in University Circle, a 550-acre (220 ha) concentration of educational, cultural and medical institutions.

See Holotype and Cleveland Museum of Natural History

Colias hyale

Colias hyale, the pale clouded yellow, is a butterfly of the family Pieridae, that is, the yellows and whites, which is found in most of Europe and large parts of Asia.

See Holotype and Colias hyale

Colombian bonneted bat

The Colombian bonneted bat (Eumops trumbulli), also known as Trumbull's bonneted bat, is a bat species from South America.

See Holotype and Colombian bonneted bat

Coloradisaurus

Coloradisaurus (meaning "Colorados lizard") is a genus of massospondylid sauropodomorph dinosaur.

See Holotype and Coloradisaurus

Columbian mammoth

The Columbian mammoth (Mammuthus columbi) is an extinct species of mammoth that inhabited North America as far north as the northern United States and as far south as Costa Rica during the Pleistocene epoch.

See Holotype and Columbian mammoth

Como Bluff

Como Bluff is a long ridge extending east-west, located between the towns of Rock River and Medicine Bow, Wyoming.

See Holotype and Como Bluff

Comodactylus

Comodactylus is a genus of "rhamphorhynchoid" pterosaur from the Kimmeridgian-Tithonian-age Upper Jurassic Morrison Formation of Wyoming, United States, named for a single wing metacarpal.

See Holotype and Comodactylus

Compsognathus

Compsognathus (Greek kompsos/κομψός; "elegant", "refined" or "dainty", and gnathos/γνάθος; "jaw") is a genus of small, bipedal, carnivorous theropod dinosaur.

See Holotype and Compsognathus

Conchoraptor

Conchoraptor (meaning "conch plunderer") is a genus of oviraptorid dinosaur from the late Cretaceous Period of what is now Asia.

See Holotype and Conchoraptor

Condorraptor

Condorraptor is a genus of megalosauroid theropod dinosaur.

See Holotype and Condorraptor

Confuciusornis

Confuciusornis is a genus of primitive crow-sized birds from the Early Cretaceous Yixian and Jiufotang Formations of China, dating from 125 to 120 million years ago.

See Holotype and Confuciusornis

Conraua

Conraua is a genus of large frogs from sub-Saharan Africa.

See Holotype and Conraua

Corythosaurus

Corythosaurus is a genus of hadrosaurid "duck-billed" dinosaur from the Upper Cretaceous Period, about 77–75.7 million years ago.

See Holotype and Corythosaurus

Craterosaurus

Craterosaurus (meaning krater reptile or bowl reptile) was a genus of stegosaurid dinosaur.

See Holotype and Craterosaurus

Crested shelduck

The crested shelduck or Korean crested shelduck (Tadorna cristata) is a species of bird in the family Anatidae.

See Holotype and Crested shelduck

Crevalle jack

The crevalle jack (Caranx hippos), also known as the common jack, black-tailed trevally, couvalli jack, black cavalli, jack crevale or yellow cavalli, is a common species of large marine fish classified within the jack family, Carangidae.

See Holotype and Crevalle jack

Crichtonsaurus

Crichtonsaurus is a dubious genus of herbivorous ankylosaurid ankylosaur dinosaur.

See Holotype and Crichtonsaurus

Cristatusaurus

Cristatusaurus (meaning "crested lizard") is a genus of spinosaurid theropod dinosaur which lived during the Early Cretaceous Period of what is now West Africa.

See Holotype and Cristatusaurus

Cryolophosaurus

Cryolophosaurus (or; "CRY-oh-loaf-oh-SAWR-us") is a genus of large theropods known from only a single species Cryolophosaurus ellioti, known from the early Jurassic period of Antarctica.

See Holotype and Cryolophosaurus

Cryptosaurus

Cryptosaurus (meaning "hidden lizard") is a dubious genus of dinosaur known from a partial femur from the Late Jurassic of England.

See Holotype and Cryptosaurus

Cuban macaw

The Cuban macaw or Cuban red macaw (Ara tricolor) was a species of macaw native to the main island of Cuba and the nearby Isla de la Juventud that became extinct in the late 19th century.

See Holotype and Cuban macaw

Cumnoria

Cumnoria is a genus of herbivorous iguanodontian dinosaur.

See Holotype and Cumnoria

Cuscomys

Cuscomys is a genus of rodents found in the Andes of Cusco in southern Peru.

See Holotype and Cuscomys

Cyathea × boytelii

Cyathea × boytelii is a tree fern endemic to the Sierra Maestra range of southeastern Cuba.

See Holotype and Cyathea × boytelii

Cyathea × fagildei

Cyathea × fagildei is a tree fern endemic to the Sierra de Moa and Sierra del Purial in Guantánamo Province, Cuba.

See Holotype and Cyathea × fagildei

Cyathea × marcescens

Cyathea × marcescens, commonly known as the skirted tree fern, is a tree fern endemic to the Cape Otway ranges in Victoria and Tasmania, Australia.

See Holotype and Cyathea × marcescens

Cyathea buennemeijerii

Cyathea buennemeijerii is a species of tree fern endemic to the Natuna Islands in Indonesia, where it grows in open scrub at an altitude of about 600 m. This rare species is known only from the summits of two low hills.

See Holotype and Cyathea buennemeijerii

Cyathea capensis

Cyathea capensis (known as the "Forest tree fern") is a regionally widespread and highly variable species of tree fern.

See Holotype and Cyathea capensis

Cyathea catillifera

Cyathea catillifera is a species of tree fern native to eastern New Guinea, where it grows in montane scrub at an altitude of about 2800 m and above.

See Holotype and Cyathea catillifera

Cyathea delgadii

Cyathea delgadii is a widespread species of tree fern native to Costa Rica, Panama, Venezuela, French Guiana, Guyana, Trinidad, Colombia, Ecuador, Peru, Bolivia, Argentina, Paraguay, and Brazil.

See Holotype and Cyathea delgadii

Cyathea elongata

Cyathea elongata is a species of tree fern native to Venezuela and Colombia, where it grows in montane areas at an altitude of 2000–3000 m. The trunk is erect and up to 11 m tall.

See Holotype and Cyathea elongata

Cyathea fadenii

Cyathea fadenii is a species of tree fern endemic to the Uluguru Mountains in Tanzania, where it grows on exposed ridges and on the upper edge of montane forest at an altitude of 1700–2100 m. The trunk is erect, up to 4 m tall and 3–5 cm in diameter.

See Holotype and Cyathea fadenii

Cyathea fenicis

Cyathea fenicis is a species of tree fern native to the Philippines, Taiwan, and Orchid Island, where it grows in wet forest, forest margins and on hillsides.

See Holotype and Cyathea fenicis

Cyathea grevilleana

Cyathea grevilleana is a species of tree fern endemic to Jamaica, where it grows in moist gullies and on wooded hills in both calcareous and noncalcareous soils at an altitude of 200–1200 m. The trunk of this plant is erect, about 7 m tall, and 10–15 cm in diameter.

See Holotype and Cyathea grevilleana

Cyathea horridula

Cyathea horridula is a species of tree fern native to western New Guinea, where it grows in montane forest at an altitude of approximately 1700 m. It is a rare plant known only from the type locality.

See Holotype and Cyathea horridula

Cyathea hotteana

Cyathea hotteana is a species of tree fern endemic to Haiti, where it grows in cloud forest at an altitude of 1000–1200 m. The trunk of this plant is erect, up to 2 m tall, and approximately 8 cm in diameter.

See Holotype and Cyathea hotteana

Cyathea humilis

Cyathea humilis is a species of tree fern native to Kenya, as well as the Usambara and Uluguru Mountains in Tanzania, where it grows in wet forest at an altitude of 1100–2000 m. The trunk of this plant is erect and 2–3 m tall.

See Holotype and Cyathea humilis

Cyathea hunsteiniana

Cyathea hunsteiniana is a species of tree fern endemic to eastern New Guinea, where it grows in rain forest at an altitude of 1300–2000 m. This species has a slender, erect trunk up to 1 m tall and about 3 cm in diameter.

See Holotype and Cyathea hunsteiniana

Cyathea imrayana

Cyathea imrayana is a species of tree fern native to Dominica, Costa Rica, Panama, Venezuela, and Ecuador.

See Holotype and Cyathea imrayana

Cyathea kanehirae

Cyathea kanehirae is a species of tree fern native to western New Guinea, where it grows in montane forest at an altitude of 1600–2700 m. The trunk of this plant is erect and 1–4 m tall.

See Holotype and Cyathea kanehirae

Cyrtodactylus jeyporensis

Cyrtodactylus jeyporensis, also known as the Jeypore Indian gecko, the Jeypore ground gecko, or the Patinghe Indian gecko, is a critically endangered species of gecko found in India, which was until recently considered extinct.

See Holotype and Cyrtodactylus jeyporensis

Dacentrurus

Dacentrurus (meaning "tail full of points"), originally known as Omosaurus, was a large stegosaur of the Late Jurassic Period (154 - 150 mya) of Europe.

See Holotype and Dacentrurus

Dactyloidae

Dactyloidae are a family of lizards commonly known as anoles and native to warmer parts of the Americas, ranging from southeastern United States to Paraguay.

See Holotype and Dactyloidae

Darter

The darters or snakebirds are mainly tropical waterbirds in the family Anhingidae having a single genus Anhinga.

See Holotype and Darter

Daspletosaurus

Daspletosaurus (meaning "frightful lizard") was a genus of tyrannosaurid dinosaur that lived in western North America between about 77 and 74 million years ago, during the Late Cretaceous Period.

See Holotype and Daspletosaurus

Davewakeum

Davewakeum is a monotypic genus of skink.

See Holotype and Davewakeum

Deepwater stingray

The deepwater stingray or giant stingaree (Plesiobatis daviesi) is a species of stingray and the sole member of the family Plesiobatidae.

See Holotype and Deepwater stingray

Deinocheirus

Deinocheirus is a genus of large ornithomimosaur that lived during the Late Cretaceous around 70 million years ago.

See Holotype and Deinocheirus

Deltadromeus

Deltadromeus (meaning "delta runner") is a genus of large theropod dinosaur from Northern Africa.

See Holotype and Deltadromeus

Dermatophytosis

Dermatophytosis, also known as ringworm, is a fungal infection of the skin.

See Holotype and Dermatophytosis

Desert owl

The desert owl or desert tawny owl (Strix hadorami), formerly known as Hume's owl, is a species of owl.

See Holotype and Desert owl

Desmoulin's whorl snail

Desmoulin's whorl snail (Vertigo moulinsiana) is a species of minute air-breathing land snail, a terrestrial pulmonate gastropod mollusc or micromollusc in the family Vertiginidae, the whorl snails.

See Holotype and Desmoulin's whorl snail

Dianchungosaurus

Dianchungosaurus is an extinct genus of mesoeucrocodylian crocodylomorph from the Early Jurassic of China.

See Holotype and Dianchungosaurus

Dilobocondyla bangalorica

Dilobocondyla bangalorica is a species of ant in the subfamily Myrmicinae.

See Holotype and Dilobocondyla bangalorica

Dilophosaurus

Dilophosaurus is a genus of theropod dinosaur that lived in what is now North America during the Early Jurassic, about 193million years ago.

See Holotype and Dilophosaurus

Dimorphodon

Dimorphodon was a genus of medium-sized pterosaur from the early Jurassic Period.

See Holotype and Dimorphodon

Dinosaur National Monument

Dinosaur National Monument is a United States National Monument located on the southeast flank of the Uinta Mountains on the border between Colorado and Utah at the confluence of the Green and Yampa Rivers.

See Holotype and Dinosaur National Monument

Dinosaurs of the Isle of Wight

The Isle of Wight is one of the richest dinosaur localities in Europe, with over 20 species of dinosaur having been recognised from the early Cretaceous Period (in particular between 132 and 110 million years ago), some of which were first identified on the island, as well as the contemporary non-dinosaurian species of crocodile, turtle and pterosaur.

See Holotype and Dinosaurs of the Isle of Wight

Diplotomodon

Diplotomodon (meaning "double cutting tooth") is a dubious genus of reptile, possibly a theropod dinosaur, from New Jersey.

See Holotype and Diplotomodon

Dorygnathus

Dorygnathus ("spear jaw") was a genus of pterosaur that lived in Europe during the Early Jurassic period, 180 million years ago when shallow seas flooded much of the continent.

See Holotype and Dorygnathus

Douglas A. Rossman

Douglas Athon "Dag" Rossman (July 4, 1936 - July 23, 2015) was a U.S. herpetologist specializing in Garter snakes.

See Holotype and Douglas A. Rossman

Draco norvillii

Draco norvillii, also known as Norvill's flying lizard, is species of agamid flying lizard endemic to India.

See Holotype and Draco norvillii

Draconyx

Draconyx (meaning "dragon claw") is a genus of dinosaur from the Late Jurassic.

See Holotype and Draconyx

Dracorex

Dracorex is a dubious dinosaur genus of the family Pachycephalosauridae, from the Late Cretaceous of North America.

See Holotype and Dracorex

Dravidosaurus

Dravidosaurus (meaning "Dravidanadu lizard", Dravidanadu being a region in the southern part of India where the remains were discovered) is a controversial genus of prehistoric reptile.

See Holotype and Dravidosaurus

Drinker nisti

Drinker (named after the palaentologist Edward Drinker Cope) is a genus of hypsilophodont dinosaur from the late Jurassic period of North America.

See Holotype and Drinker nisti

Dromaeosauroides

Dromaeosauroides is a genus of dromaeosaurid theropod dinosaur from the Early Cretaceous of what is now Denmark.

See Holotype and Dromaeosauroides

Dromaeosaurus

Dromaeosaurus ("swift running lizard") is a genus of theropod dinosaur which lived during the Late Cretaceous period (middle late Campanian), sometime between 76.5 and 74.8 million years ago, in the western United States and Alberta, Canada.

See Holotype and Dromaeosaurus

Dryosaurus

Dryosaurus (meaning 'tree lizard', Greek δρυς/drys meaning 'tree, oak' and σαυρος/sauros meaning 'lizard'; the name reflects the forested habitat, not a vague oak-leaf shape of its cheek teeth as is sometimes assumed) is a genus of an ornithopod dinosaur that lived in the Late Jurassic period.

See Holotype and Dryosaurus

Dsungaripterus

Dsungaripterus was a genus of pterosaur, with an average wingspan of.

See Holotype and Dsungaripterus

Dubreuillosaurus

Dubreuillosaurus is a genus of carnivorous dinosaur from the middle Jurassic Period.

See Holotype and Dubreuillosaurus

Dunkleosteus

Dunkleosteus is an extinct genus of arthrodire placoderm fish that existed during the Late Devonian period, about 358–382 million years ago.

See Holotype and Dunkleosteus

Dyoplosaurus

Dyoplosaurus (meaning "double-armored lizard") is an extinct genus of ankylosaurid dinosaurs within the subfamily Ankylosaurinae.

See Holotype and Dyoplosaurus

Dyslocosaurus

Dyslocosaurus (meaning "hard-to-place lizard") is the name given in 1992 to a genus of sauropod dinosaur from the Late Jurassic Period of Wyoming, North America.

See Holotype and Dyslocosaurus

Dystrophaeus

Dystrophaeus is the name given to an extinct genus of eusauropod dinosaur from the early Kimmeridgian stage of the Late Jurassic that existed around 154.8 Ma.

See Holotype and Dystrophaeus

Eastern indigo snake

The eastern indigo snake (Drymarchon couperi) is a species of large nonvenomous snake in the family Colubridae.

See Holotype and Eastern indigo snake

Edmontonia

Edmontonia was an armoured dinosaur, part of the nodosaur family from the Late Cretaceous Period.

See Holotype and Edmontonia

Edmontosaurus

Edmontosaurus (meaning "lizard from Edmonton") is a genus of hadrosaurid (duck-billed) dinosaur.

See Holotype and Edmontosaurus

Edward Belcher

Admiral Sir Edward Belcher, KCB (27 February 1799 &ndash; 18 March 1877), was a British naval officer, hydrographer, and explorer.

See Holotype and Edward Belcher

Edward Hitchcock

Edward Hitchcock (May 24, 1793 – February 27, 1864) was an American geologist and the third President of Amherst College (1845–1854).

See Holotype and Edward Hitchcock

Edward William Nelson

Edward William Nelson (May 8, 1855 – May 19, 1934) was an American naturalist and ethnologist.

See Holotype and Edward William Nelson

Efraasia

Efraasia (pronounced "E-FRAHS-ee-A") is a genus of basal sauropodomorph dinosaur.

See Holotype and Efraasia

Einiosaurus

Einiosaurus is a medium-sized herbivorous centrosaurine ceratopsian dinosaur from the Upper Cretaceous (Campanian stage) of northwestern Montana.

See Holotype and Einiosaurus

Elachistosuchus

Elachistosuchus is an extinct genus of neodiapsid reptile, most likely basal archosauromorph, known from the Late Triassic Arnstadt Formation of Saxony-Anhalt, central Germany.

See Holotype and Elachistosuchus

Elasmosaurus

Elasmosaurus is a genus of plesiosaur that lived in North America during the Campanian stage of the Late Cretaceous period, about 80.5million years ago.

See Holotype and Elasmosaurus

Elginerpeton

Elginerpeton is a monotypic genus of early tetrapod, the fossils of which were recovered from Scat Craig, Scotland, in rocks dating to the late Devonian Period (Late Frasnian stage, 375 million years ago).

See Holotype and Elginerpeton

Elmisaurus

Elmisaurus is an extinct genus of dinosaur from the Late Cretaceous.

See Holotype and Elmisaurus

Elopteryx

Elopteryx is a genus of, perhaps troodontid, maniraptoran theropod dinosaur based on fragmentary fossils found in late Cretaceous Period rocks of Romania.

See Holotype and Elopteryx

Emausaurus

Emausaurus is a genus of thyreophoran or armored dinosaur from the Early Jurassic.

See Holotype and Emausaurus

Embrik Strand

Embrik Strand (2 June 1876 &ndash; 3 November 1947) was an entomologist and arachnologist who classified many insect and spider species including the greenbottle blue tarantula.

See Holotype and Embrik Strand

Emerald tree monitor

The emerald tree monitor (Varanus prasinus) or green tree monitor, is a small to medium-sized arboreal monitor lizard.

See Holotype and Emerald tree monitor

Emydops

Emydops is an extinct genus of dicynodont therapsid from the Permian of South Africa.

See Holotype and Emydops

Enigmosaurus

Enigmosaurus (meaning "Riddle Lizard") is a genus of therizinosauroid theropod dinosaur from the Late Cretaceous of Mongolia, central Asia.

See Holotype and Enigmosaurus

Enteroctopus

Enteroctopus is an octopus genus whose members are sometimes known as giant octopus.

See Holotype and Enteroctopus

Entomology Research Museum

The UCR Entomology Research Museum is the insect collection of the Department of Entomology of the University of California, Riverside.

See Holotype and Entomology Research Museum

Eoceratops

Eoceratops is a genus of ceratopsian dinosaur containing the single species Eoceratops canadensis.

See Holotype and Eoceratops

Eoraptor

Eoraptor was one of the earliest known dinosaurs, living approximately 231 to 228 million years ago, during the Late Triassic in Western Gondwana, in the region that is now northwestern Argentina.

See Holotype and Eoraptor

Eosipterus

Eosipterus is an extinct genus of pterosaur from the Early Cretaceous of Liaoning, China.

See Holotype and Eosipterus

Epachthosaurus

Epachthosaurus (meaning "heavy lizard") was a genus of dinosaur from the Late Cretaceous.

See Holotype and Epachthosaurus

Epanterias

Epanterias is a dubious genus of theropod dinosaur from the Kimmeridgian-Tithonian-age Upper Jurassic upper Morrison Formation of Garden Park, Colorado.

See Holotype and Epanterias

Equijubus

Equijubus (Mǎzōng meaning "horse mane" after the area Mǎzōng Mountain 马鬃山 in which it was found), is a genus of herbivorous hadrosauroid dinosaur from the Early Cretaceous (Aptian stage) of northwestern China.

See Holotype and Equijubus

Erectopus

Erectopus is a basal allosauroid theropod from the Lower Cretaceous of France.

See Holotype and Erectopus

Erketu

Erketu is the name given to a genus of dinosaur from the Early Cretaceous (Cenomanian - Santonian).

See Holotype and Erketu

Erliansaurus

Erliansaurus is a genus of therizinosauroid theropod dinosaur from the Late Cretaceous of China.

See Holotype and Erliansaurus

Erlikosaurus

Erlikosaurus is a genus of herbivorous theropod dinosaur from the late Cretaceous Period, belonging to the Therizinosauridae.

See Holotype and Erlikosaurus

Ernst Mayr

Ernst Walter Mayr (5 July 1904 &ndash; 3 February 2005) was one of the 20th century's leading evolutionary biologists.

See Holotype and Ernst Mayr

Erythrosuchus

Erythrosuchus (red crocodile) is an extinct genus of archosauriform reptile from the Triassic of South Africa and Namibia.

See Holotype and Erythrosuchus

Eucnemesaurus

Eucnemesaurus (meaning "good tibia lizard", for its robust tibiae) is a basal sauropodomorph dinosaur genus usually considered to be a synonym of Euskelosaurus.

See Holotype and Eucnemesaurus

Eudimorphodon

Eudimorphodon was a pterosaur that was discovered in 1973 by Mario Pandolfi in the town of Cene, Italy and described the same year by Rocco Zambelli.

See Holotype and Eudimorphodon

Euhelopus

Euhelopus is a genus of titanosauriform sauropod dinosaur that lived between 129 and 113 million years ago during the Early Cretaceous in what is now Shandong Province in China.

See Holotype and Euhelopus

Euoplocephalus

Euoplocephalus is one of the largest genera of herbivorous ankylosaurian dinosaurs, living during the Late Cretaceous of Canada.

See Holotype and Euoplocephalus

Euronychodon

Euronychodon ("European claw tooth") is the name given to a genus of coelurosaur dinosaur from the Late Cretaceous of Europe and Asia.

See Holotype and Euronychodon

Europasaurus

Europasaurus is a basal macronarian sauropod, a form of quadrupedal herbivorous dinosaur.

See Holotype and Europasaurus

Euryoryzomys emmonsae

Euryoryzomys emmonsae, also known as Emmons's rice rat or Emmons's oryzomys,Musser and Carleton, 2005, p. 1148 is a rodent from the Amazon rainforest of Brazil in the genus Euryoryzomys of the family Cricetidae.

See Holotype and Euryoryzomys emmonsae

Euryoryzomys russatus

Euryoryzomys russatus, also known as the russet oryzomys, russet rice rat, or big-headed rice rat, is a species of rodent in the genus Euryoryzomys of family Cricetidae.

See Holotype and Euryoryzomys russatus

Euskelosaurus

Euskelosaurus ("good leg lizard") was a semi-bipedal dinosaur from the Late Triassic.

See Holotype and Euskelosaurus

Eustreptospondylus

Eustreptospondylus (meaning "true Streptospondylus") is a genus of megalosaurid theropod dinosaur, from the Callovian stage of the Middle Jurassic period (some time between 165 and 161 million years ago) in southern England, at a time when Europe was a series of scattered islands (due to tectonic movement at the time which raised the sea-bed and flooded the lowland).

See Holotype and Eustreptospondylus

Fabrosaurus

Fabrosaurus (meaning "Fabre's lizard" in honor of Jean Fabre, a French geologist and a colleague of Ginsburg on the expedition that collected the fossil in Basutoland, Southern Africa; Greek sauros "lizard")) was a genus of herbivorous dinosaur which lived during the Early Jurassic (Hettangian to Sinemurian stages 199 - 189 mya). Fabrosaurus was named by paleontologist Leonard Ginsburg in 1964 based on partial jawbone with three teeth. The type species, F. australis, was named for the location of the fossils in Lesotho, Southern Africa (australis being Latin for "southern"). Subsequent discoveries included two crushed skulls and disarticulated post-cranial bones (including vertebrae, ribs, and limb bones), allowing for a more complete reconstruction.Thulborn, R. A. (1970).. Palaeontology, 13(3), 414-432.Thulborn, R. A. (1972).. Palaeontology, 15(1), 29-60. However, as additional ornithischian fossils were discovered, the features of F. australis were thought to be shared by other species, and by the 1990s and 2000s most authors working with the group found Fabrosaurus to be a nomen dubium (doubtful name), finding the holotype material described by Ginsburg to be insufficient to distinguish a new taxon. Some claim the fossils represent simple variation of Lesothosaurus, which is regarded as valid.

See Holotype and Fabrosaurus

Falcarius

Falcarius is a genus of therizinosaurian dinosaur found in the Cretaceous of east-central Utah, United States.

See Holotype and Falcarius

False potto

The false potto (Pseudopotto martini) is a lorisoid primate of uncertain taxonomic status found in Africa.

See Holotype and False potto

Fejervarya

Fejervarya is one of the Asian genera of frogs in the Dicroglossidae family.

See Holotype and Fejervarya

Ferganocephale

Ferganocephale is a dubious genus of neornithischian dinosaur.

See Holotype and Ferganocephale

Ferreira's spiny tree-rat

Ferreira's spiny tree-rat, Mesomys hispidus, is a spiny rat species from South America.

See Holotype and Ferreira's spiny tree-rat

Ferugliotheriidae

Ferugliotheriidae is one of three known families in the order Gondwanatheria, an enigmatic group of extinct mammals.

See Holotype and Ferugliotheriidae

Ferugliotherium

Ferugliotherium is a genus of fossil mammals in the family Ferugliotheriidae from the Campanian and/or Maastrichtian period (Late Cretaceous; around 70 million years ago) of Argentina.

See Holotype and Ferugliotherium

Flores giant rat

The Flores giant rat (Papagomys armandvillei) is a rodent of the family Muridae that occurs on the island of Flores in Indonesia.

See Holotype and Flores giant rat

Florida Museum of Natural History

The Florida Museum of Natural History (FLMNH) is Florida's official state-sponsored and chartered natural-history museum.

See Holotype and Florida Museum of Natural History

Florida sand skink

The Florida sand skink (Neoseps reynoldsi) is a species of lizard in the family Scincidae, the skinks.

See Holotype and Florida sand skink

Fulgurotherium

Fulgurotherium (meaning "Lightning Beast") is the name given to a genus of dinosaur from the Early Cretaceous (Albian).

See Holotype and Fulgurotherium

Futabasaurus

Futabasaurus is a genus of plesiosaur from the Late Cretaceous of Fukushima, Japan.

See Holotype and Futabasaurus

Futalognkosaurus

Futalognkosaurus (meaning "giant chief lizard") is a genus of titanosaurian dinosaur.

See Holotype and Futalognkosaurus

Galapagos shark

The Galapagos shark (Carcharhinus galapagensis) is a species of requiem shark, in the family Carcharhinidae, found worldwide.

See Holotype and Galapagos shark

Gallimimus

Gallimimus is a genus of theropod dinosaur that lived in what is now Mongolia during the Late Cretaceous period, about 70 million years ago.

See Holotype and Gallimimus

Gallotia galloti

Gallotia galloti (Gallot's lizard, Tenerife lizard, or Western Canaries lizard) is a species of lacertid (wall lizard) in the genus Gallotia.

See Holotype and Gallotia galloti

Ganges shark

The Ganges shark (Glyphis gangeticus) is a critically endangered species of requiem shark found in the Ganges River (Padma River) and the Brahmaputra River of Bangladesh and India.

See Holotype and Ganges shark

Gargoyleosaurus

Gargoyleosaurus (meaning "gargoyle lizard") is one of the earliest ankylosaurs known from reasonably complete fossil remains.

See Holotype and Gargoyleosaurus

Garudimimus

Garudimimus ("Garuda mimic") is a basal ornithomimosaurian theropod dinosaur from the Upper Cretaceous of Mongolia.

See Holotype and Garudimimus

Gasparinisaura

Gasparinisaura (meaning "Gasparini's lizard") is a genus of herbivorous ornithopod dinosaur from the Late Cretaceous.

See Holotype and Gasparinisaura

Gastonia (dinosaur)

Gastonia is a genus of herbivorous ankylosaurian dinosaur from the Early Cretaceous of North America, around 125 million years ago.

See Holotype and Gastonia (dinosaur)

Genusaurus

Genusaurus (meaning "knee lizard") is a genus of dinosaur from the Early Cretaceous.

See Holotype and Genusaurus

Genyodectes

Genyodectes ("jaw bite", from the Greek words genys ("jaw") and dektes ("bite")) is a genus of ceratosaurian theropod dinosaur from the Lower Cretaceous (Aptian) of South America.

See Holotype and Genyodectes

Germanodactylus

Germanodactylus ("German finger") is a genus of dsungaripteroid pterodactyloid pterosaur from Late Jurassic-age rocks of Germany, including the Solnhofen limestone.

See Holotype and Germanodactylus

Giganotosaurus

Giganotosaurus is a genus of theropod dinosaur that lived in what is now Argentina, during the early Cenomanian age of the Late Cretaceous period, approximately 98 to 97 million years ago.

See Holotype and Giganotosaurus

Gigantspinosaurus

Gigantspinosaurus (meaning "giant-spined lizard") is a genus of herbivorous ornithischian dinosaur from the Late Jurassic.

See Holotype and Gigantspinosaurus

Glyptodontopelta

Glyptodontopelta (meaning "Glyptodon shield", a reference to the similarity of its pelvic armor to that of Glyptodon) is a genus of dinosaur from the Late Cretaceous.

See Holotype and Glyptodontopelta

Gobipteryx

Gobipteryx (from Gobi, Greek pteron “wing”) is a genus of prehistoric bird from the Campanian Age of the Late Cretaceous Period.

See Holotype and Gobipteryx

Gobisaurus

Gobisaurus is an extinct genus of herbivorous basal ankylosaurid ankylosaur from the Upper Cretaceous of China (Nei Mongol Zizhiqu).

See Holotype and Gobisaurus

Gobititan

Gobititan is a genus of herbivorous sauropod dinosaur from the Barremian faunal stage of the Early Cretaceous, approximately 129-125 million years ago.

See Holotype and Gobititan

Gojirasaurus

Gojirasaurus (meaning "Godzilla Lizard")K.

See Holotype and Gojirasaurus

Golden trevally

The golden trevally (Gnathanodon specious), also known as the golden kingfish, banded trevally and king trevally), is a species of large marine fish classified in the jack and horse mackerel family Carangidae, and the only member of the genus Gnathanodon. The golden trevally is widely distributed throughout the tropical and subtropical waters of the Indian and Pacific Oceans, ranging from South Africa in the west to Central America in the east, extending to Japan in the north and Australia in the south. The species predominantly occupies inshore waters where it inhabits both reef and sandy substrates. The golden trevally is easily distinguished from its relatives by its fleshy, rubbery lips and unique colouration, which ranges from bright yellow with black bars as a juvenile to a golden-silvery colour as an adult. It is known to grow to 120 cm in length and 15 kg in weight. The golden trevally schools as a juvenile, often closely following larger objects including sharks and jellyfish. The species uses its protractile jaws to suck out prey from the sand or reef, and consumes a variety of fish, crustaceans and molluscs. Spawning aggregations gather at night at different times of the year throughout its range. The golden trevally is a considerable constituent of several Middle Eastern fisheries and being of minor importance to many others, with a worldwide annual catch of 1187 t to 3475 t recorded between 2000 and 2010. The golden trevally is a popular gamefish, taken by bait, lure, fly and also spear throughout its range. Several Asian countries currently farm the fish in caged aquaculture. Due to their brilliant colouration, juveniles are popular in marine aquaria.

See Holotype and Golden trevally

Gongbusaurus

Gongbusaurus is a genus of ornithischian, perhaps ornithopod, dinosaur that lived between about 160 and 157 million years ago, in the Late Jurassic period.

See Holotype and Gongbusaurus

Gongylosoma nicobariensis

Gongylosoma nicobariensis is a species of snake found in the Nicobar Islands of India.

See Holotype and Gongylosoma nicobariensis

Gorgonops

Gorgonops (from Greek Γοργών 'Gorgon' and ὤψ 'eye, face', literally "Gorgon eye" or "Gorgon face") is an extinct genus of therapsid which lived about 260-254 million years ago, during the Late Permian.

See Holotype and Gorgonops

Gorgosaurus

Gorgosaurus (meaning "dreadful lizard") is a genus of tyrannosaurid theropod dinosaur that lived in western North America during the Late Cretaceous Period, between about 76.6 and 75.1 million years ago.

See Holotype and Gorgosaurus

Graceful leaf-toed gecko

The graceful lead-toed gecko (Hemidactylus gracilis) is a species of small-sized gecko found in India.

See Holotype and Graceful leaf-toed gecko

Graciliraptor

Graciliraptor (meaning "graceful thief") is a genus of theropod dinosaur from the early Cretaceous Period.

See Holotype and Graciliraptor

Grass skippers

Grass skippers or banded skippers are butterflies of the subfamily Hesperiinae, part of the skipper family, Hesperiidae.

See Holotype and Grass skippers

Greenback flounder

The greenback flounder (Rhombosolea tapering) is a righteye flounder of the genus Rhombosolea, found around southern Australia and New Zealand.

See Holotype and Greenback flounder

Grover Krantz

Grover Sanders Krantz (November 5, 1931 – February 14, 2002) was an American anthropologist and cryptozoologist; he was one of few scientists not only to research Bigfoot, but also to express his belief in the being's existence.

See Holotype and Grover Krantz

Gryponyx

Gryponyx (meaning "hooked-claw") is an extinct genus of massopod sauropodomorph known from southern Free State, central South Africa.

See Holotype and Gryponyx

Gryposaurus

Gryposaurus (meaning "hooked-nosed (Greek grypos) lizard"; sometimes incorrectly translated as "griffin (Latin gryphus) lizard") was a genus of duckbilled dinosaur that lived about 83 to 74 million years ago, in the Late Cretaceous (late Santonian to late Campanian stages) of North America.

See Holotype and Gryposaurus

Guaibasaurus

Guaibasaurus is an extinct genus of basal dinosaur known from the Late Triassic Caturrita Formation of Rio Grande do Sul, southern Brazil.

See Holotype and Guaibasaurus

Guanlong

Guanlong (冠龍) is a genus of extinct proceratosaurid tyrannosauroid from the Late Jurassic of China.

See Holotype and Guanlong

Gwyneddosaurus

Gwyneddosaurus is an extinct genus of aquatic tanystropheid reptile.

See Holotype and Gwyneddosaurus

Hagryphus

Hagryphus ("Ha's griffin"), is an oviraptorosaurian theropod dinosaur from the Upper Cretaceous Period of what is now Utah.

See Holotype and Hagryphus

Haikouichthys

Haikouichthys is an extinct genus of craniate (animals with notochords and distinct heads) believed to have lived 525 million years ago, during the Cambrian explosion of multicellular life.

See Holotype and Haikouichthys

Halisaurus

Halisaurus is an extinct genus of marine lizard belonging to the mosasaur family.

See Holotype and Halisaurus

Halitherium

Halitherium is an extinct dugongid sea cow that arose in the late Eocene, then became extinct during the early Oligocene.

See Holotype and Halitherium

Halticosaurus

Halticosaurus (pron.:"HAL-tick-oh-SORE-us") is a dubious genus of theropod dinosaur from the late Triassic period (middle Norian stage, around 208 million years ago).

See Holotype and Halticosaurus

Hamilton's frog

Hamilton's frog (Leiopelma hamiltoni) is a primitive frogs native to New Zealand, one of only four extant species belonging to the family Leiopelmatidae.

See Holotype and Hamilton's frog

Hanssuesia

Hanssuesia is a genus of pachycephalosaurid dinosaurs from the late Cretaceous period.

See Holotype and Hanssuesia

Haptodus

Haptodus is an extinct genus of basal sphenacodonts, a clade that includes therapsids and hence, mammals.

See Holotype and Haptodus

Harlequin catshark

The harlequin catshark (Ctenacis fehlmanni) is a species of finback catshark, part of the family Proscylliidae, and the only member of the genus Ctenacis.

See Holotype and Harlequin catshark

Harpymimus

Harpymimus is a basal ornithomimosaurian theropod dinosaur from the Early Cretaceous Period of what is now Mongolia.

See Holotype and Harpymimus

Heliamphora neblinae

Heliamphora neblinae is a species of marsh pitcher plant endemic to Cerro de la Neblina, Cerro Aracamuni and Cerro Avispa in Venezuela.

See Holotype and Heliamphora neblinae

Heliobatis

Heliobatis is an extinct genus of ray in the Myliobatiformes family Dasyatidae.

See Holotype and Heliobatis

Hell Creek Formation

The Hell Creek Formation is an intensively-studied division of mostly Upper Cretaceous and some lower Paleocene rocks in North America, named for exposures studied along Hell Creek, near Jordan, Montana.

See Holotype and Hell Creek Formation

Helmethead gecko

The helmethead gecko or helmeted gecko (Tarentola chazaliae) is a member of the gecko family native to the northwestern coast of Africa, where it is present in Western Sahara, Mauritania and Morocco.

See Holotype and Helmethead gecko

Heloxycanus

Heloxycanus patricki, also known as the ghost moth or sphagnum porina moth, is a species of moth of the family Hepialidae.

See Holotype and Heloxycanus

Heptasteornis

Heptasteornis is the name given to a dubious genus of small dinosaur from the Late Cretaceous.

See Holotype and Heptasteornis

Herbstosaurus

Herbstosaurus is the name given to a genus of pterosaur that lived during the Jurassic period, in what is now Argentina.

See Holotype and Herbstosaurus

Hesperosaurus

Hesperosaurus (meaning "western lizard", from Classical Greek ἕσπερος/hesperos "western" and σαυρος/sauros "lizard") is a herbivorous stegosaurian dinosaur from the Kimmeridgian epoch of the Jurassic period, approximately 156 million years ago.

See Holotype and Hesperosaurus

Heterodontosaurus

Heterodontosaurus is a genus of heterodontosaurid dinosaur that lived during the Early Jurassic, 200–190 million years ago.

See Holotype and Heterodontosaurus

Hexinlusaurus

Hexinlusaurus is a genus of basal ornithischian dinosaur from the Middle Jurassic of China.

See Holotype and Hexinlusaurus

Heyuannia

Heyuannia ("Heyuan one") is a genus of oviraptorid dinosaur that lived during the Late Cretaceous Period in China.

See Holotype and Heyuannia

Histriasaurus

Histriasaurus (HIS-tree-ah-SAWR-us) (meaning "Istria lizard") was a genus of dinosaur from the Early Cretaceous (Hauterivian to Barremian stages, around 130 million years ago).

See Holotype and Histriasaurus

Holo

Holo may refer to.

See Holotype and Holo

Homo floresiensis

Homo floresiensis ("Flores Man"; nicknamed "hobbit") is an extinct species in the genus Homo.

See Holotype and Homo floresiensis

Homotherium

Homotherium (also known as the scimitar-toothed cat or scimitar cat) is an extinct genus of machairodontine saber-toothed cats, often termed scimitar-toothed cats, that inhabited North America, South America, Eurasia, and Africa during the Pliocene and Pleistocene epochs (4 mya &ndash; 12,000 years ago), existing for approximately.

See Holotype and Homotherium

Honduran white bat

The Honduran white bat (Ectophylla alba), also called the Caribbean white tent-making bat, is a species of bat in the family Phyllostomatidae.

See Holotype and Honduran white bat

Hoopoe starling

The hoopoe starling, also known as the Réunion starling or Bourbon crested starling (Fregilupus varius), is a species of starling which lived on the Mascarene island of Réunion, and became extinct in the 1850s.

See Holotype and Hoopoe starling

Hoplitosaurus

Hoplitosaurus (meaning "Hoplite lizard") was a genus of armored dinosaur related to Polacanthus.

See Holotype and Hoplitosaurus

Huaxiagnathus

Huaxiagnathus is a genus of theropod dinosaur from the Lower Cretaceous of China.

See Holotype and Huaxiagnathus

Huayangosaurus

Huayangosaurus is a genus of stegosaurian dinosaur from the Middle Jurassic of China.

See Holotype and Huayangosaurus

Hudiesaurus

Hudiesaurus (meaning "butterfly lizard") is a herbivorous sauropod genus of dinosaur from China.

See Holotype and Hudiesaurus

Hula painted frog

The Hula painted frog (Latonia nigriventer) is an amphibian and the only living member of the genus Latonia.

See Holotype and Hula painted frog

Hulsanpes

Hulsanpes is a genus of dromaeosaurid theropod dinosaur from Mongolia that lived during the Late Cretaceous.

See Holotype and Hulsanpes

Hungarosaurus

Hungarosaurus tormai is a herbivorous nodosaurid ankylosaur from the Upper Cretaceous (Santonian) Csehbánya Formation of the Bakony Mountains of western Hungary.

See Holotype and Hungarosaurus

Hydrophis belcheri

Hydrophis belcheri, commonly known as the faint-banded sea snake or Belcher's sea snake, is an extremely venomous species of elapid sea snake.

See Holotype and Hydrophis belcheri

Hylaeosaurus

Hylaeosaurus (Greek: hylaios/ὑλαῖος "belonging to the forest" and sauros/σαυρος "lizard") is a herbivorous ankylosaurian dinosaur that lived about 136 million years ago, in the late Valanginian stage of the early Cretaceous period of England.

See Holotype and Hylaeosaurus

Hypacrosaurus

Hypacrosaurus (meaning "near the highest lizard", because it was almost but not quite as large as Tyrannosaurus) was a genus of duckbill dinosaur similar in appearance to Corythosaurus.

See Holotype and Hypacrosaurus

Hyphalosaurus

Hyphalosaurus (meaning "submerged lizard") is a genus of freshwater aquatic reptiles which represent a major part of the Jehol Biota.

See Holotype and Hyphalosaurus

Hypselosaurus

Hypselosaurus (meaning 'highest lizard', from Greek ὑψηλός meaning 'high' or 'lofty' and σαυρος meaning 'lizard') was a dubious titanosaurian sauropod that lived in southern France during the Late Cretaceous, approximately 70 million years ago in the early Maastrichtian.

See Holotype and Hypselosaurus

Hypsilophodon

Hypsilophodon (meaning "Hypsilophus-tooth") is an ornithischian dinosaur genus from the Early Cretaceous period of England.

See Holotype and Hypsilophodon

Hyracotherium

Hyracotherium ("hyrax-like beast") is an extinct genus of very small (about 60 cm in length) perissodactyl ungulates that was found in the London Clay formation.

See Holotype and Hyracotherium

Iberomesornis

Iberomesornis ("Spanish intermediate bird") is a monotypic genus of enantiornithine bird of the Cretaceous of Spain.

See Holotype and Iberomesornis

Icarosaurus

Icarosaurus (meaning "Icarus lizard") is an extinct genus of kuehneosaurid reptile from the Late Triassic (Carnian age) Lower Lockatong Formation of New Jersey, dated to around 228 million years ago.

See Holotype and Icarosaurus

Ichthyornis

Ichthyornis (meaning "fish bird", after its fish-like vertebrae) was a genus of toothed seabird-like ornithuran from the late Cretaceous period of North America.

See Holotype and Ichthyornis

Iguanodon

Iguanodon (meaning "iguana-tooth") is a genus of ornithopod dinosaur that existed roughly halfway between the first of the swift bipedal hypsilophodontids of the mid-Jurassic and the duck-billed dinosaurs of the late Cretaceous.

See Holotype and Iguanodon

Iliosuchus

Iliosuchus (meaning "crocodile hipped") is a genus of theropod dinosaur known from Bathonian–age (168.3 – 166.1 mya) rocks of England.

See Holotype and Iliosuchus

Incisivosaurus

Incisivosaurus ("incisor lizard") is a genus of small, probably herbivorous theropod dinosaur from the early Cretaceous Period of what is now the People's Republic of China.

See Holotype and Incisivosaurus

Indosaurus

Indosaurus (meaning "Indian lizard") is a genus of theropod dinosaur once living in what is now India.

See Holotype and Indosaurus

Irritator

Irritator is a genus of spinosaurid theropod dinosaur that lived during the Early Cretaceous Period (Albian stage), around 110 million years ago, of what is now Brazil.

See Holotype and Irritator

Isanosaurus

Isanosaurus (meaning "Isan lizard") was one of the first sauropod dinosaurs.

See Holotype and Isanosaurus

Isotype

Isotype can refer to.

See Holotype and Isotype

Itemirus

Itemirus is a genus of theropod dinosaur from the Turonian age of the Late Cretaceous period of Uzbekistan.

See Holotype and Itemirus

Jack jumper ant

The Myrmecia pilosula, commonly known as the jack jumper, jumping jack, hopper ant, or jumper ant, is a species of venomous ant native to Australia.

See Holotype and Jack jumper ant

James Charles Dale

James Charles Dale (13 December 1791 – 6 February 1872) was an English naturalist who devoted almost all of his adult life to entomology.

See Holotype and James Charles Dale

James Francis Stephens

James Francis Stephens (16 September 1792 &ndash; 22 December 1852) was an English entomologist and naturalist.

See Holotype and James Francis Stephens

Jeholodens

Jeholodens was a primitive mammal belonging to the order Eutriconodonta, and which lived in present-day China during the Middle Cretaceous about 125 million years ago.

See Holotype and Jeholodens

Jeholopterus

Jeholopterus was a small anurognathid pterosaur from the Middle to Late Jurassic Daohugou Beds of the Tiaojishan Formation of Inner Mongolia, China, preserved with hair-like pycnofibres and skin remains.

See Holotype and Jeholopterus

Jeholosaurus

Jeholosaurus is a genus of ornithischian dinosaur from the Early Cretaceous Period.

See Holotype and Jeholosaurus

Jinzhousaurus

Jinzhousaurus is a genus of hadrosauroid dinosaur of the Early Cretaceous of China.

See Holotype and Jinzhousaurus

Joseph Leidy

Joseph Mellick Leidy (September 9, 1823 – April 30, 1891) was an American paleontologist, parasitologist, and anatomist.

See Holotype and Joseph Leidy

Jumbo

Jumbo (about Christmas 1860 – September 15, 1885), also known as Jumbo the Elephant and Jumbo the Circus Elephant, was a 19th-century male African bush elephant born in Sudan.

See Holotype and Jumbo

Juravenator

Juravenator is a genus of small (75 cm long) coelurosaurian theropod dinosaur, which lived in the area which would someday become the Jura mountains of Germany, about 151 or 152 million years ago.

See Holotype and Juravenator

Kaijiangosaurus

Kaijiangosaurus (meaning "Kiijiang lizard") is a genus of carnivorous tetanuran theropod dinosaur from the Middle Jurassic of China.

See Holotype and Kaijiangosaurus

Kangaroo Island emu

The Kangaroo Island emu or dwarf emu (Dromaius novaehollandiae baudinianus) is an extinct subspecies of emu.

See Holotype and Kangaroo Island emu

Kangnasaurus

Kangnasaurus (meaning "Farm Kangnas lizard") is a genus of iguanodontian ornithopod dinosaur found in supposedly Early Cretaceous rocks of South Africa.

See Holotype and Kangnasaurus

Kelmayisaurus

Kelmayisaurus is an extinct genus of carcharodontosaurid theropod dinosaur from the early Cretaceous.

See Holotype and Kelmayisaurus

Kentrosaurus

Kentrosaurus is a genus of stegosaurian dinosaur from the Late Jurassic of Tanzania.

See Holotype and Kentrosaurus

Kerberosaurus

Kerberosaurus (meaning "Kerberos lizard") was a genus of saurolophine duckbill dinosaur from the late Maastrichtian-age Upper Cretaceous Tsagayan Formation of Blagoveshchensk, Amur Region, Russia (dated to 66 million years ago).

See Holotype and Kerberosaurus

Key Largo woodrat

The Key Largo woodrat (Neotoma floridana smalli), a subspecies of the eastern woodrat (Neotoma floridana), is a medium-sized rat found in the northern area of Key Largo, Florida, in the United States.

See Holotype and Key Largo woodrat

Khaan

Khaan (Mongol 'lord') was an oviraptorid dinosaur that was found in the Djadochta Formation of Mongolia and lived in the Late Cretaceous Period (Campanian), 75 million years ago.

See Holotype and Khaan

Kinabalu giant red leech

The Kinabalu giant red leech (Mimobdella buettikoferi) is a large bright orange-red coloured leech that is endemic to Mount Kinabalu, Borneo.

See Holotype and Kinabalu giant red leech

Klamelisaurus

Klamelisaurus is a genus of herbivorous sauropod dinosaur from the Middle Jurassic of China.

See Holotype and Klamelisaurus

Koparion

Koparion is a genus of small coelurosaurian theropod dinosaurs (probably troodontids), from the late Jurassic Period (Kimmeridgian stage), of Utah.

See Holotype and Koparion

Kotasaurus

Kotasaurus (meaning "Kota Formation lizard") is a genus of sauropod dinosaur from the Early Jurassic period (Sinemurian–Pliensbachian).

See Holotype and Kotasaurus

Kouprey

The kouprey (Bos sauveli, from គោព្រៃ,, "forest ox"; also known as kouproh, "grey ox"), is a little-known, forest-dwelling, wild bovine species from Southeast Asia.

See Holotype and Kouprey

Kritosaurus

Kritosaurus is an incompletely known genus of hadrosaurid (duck-billed) dinosaur.

See Holotype and Kritosaurus

Kronosaurus

Kronosaurus (meaning "lizard of Kronos") is an extinct genus of short-necked pliosaur.

See Holotype and Kronosaurus

Kulceratops

Kulceratops is a genus of ceratopsian dinosaur from the Early Cretaceous.

See Holotype and Kulceratops

Labocania

Labocania is a genus of carnivorous theropod, possibly tyrannosauroid, dinosaur from Baja California, Mexico, which lived 73 million years ago, in the Campanian stage of the late Cretaceous Period.

See Holotype and Labocania

Laevisuchus

Laevisuchus ("light crocodile") is a genus of abelisauroid theropod dinosaur from the Late Cretaceous.

See Holotype and Laevisuchus

Lake chub

The lake chub (Couesius plumbeus) is a freshwater cyprinid fish found in Canada and in parts of the United States.

See Holotype and Lake chub

Lake Lerma salamander

The Lake Lerma Salamander (Ambystoma lermaense) is an extremely rare, occasionally neotenic mole salamander species from Mexico.

See Holotype and Lake Lerma salamander

Lance Formation

The Lance (Creek) Formation is a division of Late Cretaceous (dating to about 69 - 66 Ma) rocks in the western United States.

See Holotype and Lance Formation

Laosaurus

Laosaurus (meaning "stone or fossil lizard") is a genus of neornithischian dinosaur.

See Holotype and Laosaurus

Laplatasaurus

Laplatasaurus (meaning "La Plata lizard") is a genus of titanosaurian sauropod dinosaur that lived during the Late Cretaceous in South America.

See Holotype and Laplatasaurus

Lapparentosaurus

Lapparentosaurus is a genus of macronarian sauropod dinosaur from the Middle Jurassic.

See Holotype and Lapparentosaurus

Large-billed crow

The large-billed crow (Corvus macrorhynchos), is a widespread Asian species of crow.

See Holotype and Large-billed crow

Lavanify

Lavanify is a mammalian genus from the late Cretaceous (probably Maastrichtian, about 71 to 66 million years ago) of Madagascar.

See Holotype and Lavanify

Lawder's bent-toed gecko

Lawder's bent-toed gecko (Cyrtodactylus lawderanus) is a species of gecko endemic to northern India (western Himalayas, Kumaon).

See Holotype and Lawder's bent-toed gecko

Leedsichthys

Leedsichthys is a giant member of the Pachycormidae, an extinct group of Mesozoic ray-finned fish that lived in the oceans of the Middle Jurassic period.

See Holotype and Leedsichthys

Lepagia

Lepagia is an extinct genus of poorly known carnivorous cynodonts, which lived during the Upper Triassic in Europe.

See Holotype and Lepagia

Leptictidium

Leptictidium (meaning "graceful weasel" in Latin) is an extinct genus of small mammals; together with macropods, giant pangolins, and humans, they are the only known completely bipedal mammals.

See Holotype and Leptictidium

Lexovisaurus

Lexovisaurus is a genus of stegosaur from mid-to-Late Jurassic Europe, 164.7 mya.

See Holotype and Lexovisaurus

Liaoningosaurus

Liaoningosaurus is an unusual genus of ankylosaurian dinosaurs from the early Cretaceous period of China.

See Holotype and Liaoningosaurus

Limaysaurus

Limaysaurus is a herbivorous rebbachisaurid sauropod dinosaur from the Lower Cretaceous of northwestern Patagonia.

See Holotype and Limaysaurus

Lirainosaurus

Lirainosaurus is a genus of titanosaur sauropod which lived in what is now Spain.

See Holotype and Lirainosaurus

List of giant squid specimens and sightings

This list of giant squid specimens and sightings is a comprehensive timeline of recorded human encounters with members of the genus Architeuthis, popularly known as giant squid.

See Holotype and List of giant squid specimens and sightings

List of ichthyosaur genera

This list of ichthyosaurs is a comprehensive listing of all genera that have ever been included in the order Ichthyosauria or the parent clade Ichthyopterygia, excluding purely vernacular terms.

See Holotype and List of ichthyosaur genera

List of Sites of Special Scientific Interest in Greater London

Greater London is split by the River Thames.

See Holotype and List of Sites of Special Scientific Interest in Greater London

Little penguin

The little penguin (Eudyptula minor) is the smallest species of penguin.

See Holotype and Little penguin

Longisquama

Longisquama is a genus of extinct reptile.

See Holotype and Longisquama

Loon

The loons (North America) or divers (Great Britain/Ireland) are a group of aquatic birds found in many parts of North America and northern Eurasia.

See Holotype and Loon

Lophorhothon

Lophorhothon (Langston, 1960) is a genus of hadrosauroid dinosaur from the Late Cretaceous, the first genus of dinosaur discovered in Alabama, in the United States.

See Holotype and Lophorhothon

Lord Howe swamphen

The Lord Howe swamphen (Porphyrio albus), also known as the Lord Howe gallinule, white swamphen, or white gallinule, is an extinct species of rail which lived on Lord Howe Island, east of Australia.

See Holotype and Lord Howe swamphen

Lord Howe woodhen

The Lord Howe woodhen (Gallirallus sylvestris) also known as the Lord Howe Island woodhen or Lord Howe (Island) rail, is a flightless bird of the rail family, (Rallidae).

See Holotype and Lord Howe woodhen

Lotosaurus

Lotosaurus is an extinct genus of sail-backed poposauroid known from Hunan Province of central China.

See Holotype and Lotosaurus

Lourinhanosaurus

Lourinhanosaurus (meaning "Lourinhã lizard") was a genus of carnivorous theropod dinosaur that lived during the Late Jurassic Period (Kimmeridgian/Tithonian) in Portugal.

See Holotype and Lourinhanosaurus

Lufengosaurus

Lufengosaurus (meaning "Lufeng Lizard") is a genus of massospondylid dinosaur which lived during the Early Jurassic period in what is now southwestern China.

See Holotype and Lufengosaurus

Lusitanosaurus

Lusitanosaurus (meaning "Portuguese lizard") is a genus of basal thyreophoran dinosaur from the Early Jurassic of Portugal.

See Holotype and Lusitanosaurus

Lusotitan

Lusotitan is a genus of herbivorous brachiosaurid sauropod dinosaur from the Late Jurassic Period of Portugal.

See Holotype and Lusotitan

Lycorhinus

Lycorhinus is a genus of heterodontosaurid ornithischian dinosaur hailing from the Early Jurassic (Hettangian to Sinemurian ages) strata of the Elliot Formation located in the Cape Province, South Africa.

See Holotype and Lycorhinus

Lygosoma vosmaeri

Lygosoma vosmaeri (Vosmer's writhing skink) is a species of skink, a lizard in the family Scincidae.

See Holotype and Lygosoma vosmaeri

Macrurosaurus

Macrurosaurus (meaning "large-tailed lizard") is the name given to a genus of dinosaur from the Early Cretaceous.

See Holotype and Macrurosaurus

Magyarosaurus

Magyarosaurus ("Magyar lizard") is a genus of dwarf sauropod dinosaur from late Cretaceous Period (early to late Maastrichtian) in Romania.

See Holotype and Magyarosaurus

Maiasaura

Maiasaura (from the Greek "μαία" and the feminine form of Latin saurus, meaning "good mother reptile" or "good mother lizard") is a large herbivorous hadrosaurid ("duck-billed") dinosaur genus that lived in the area currently covered by the state of Montana in the Upper Cretaceous Period (mid to late Campanian), about 76.7 million years ago.

See Holotype and Maiasaura

Maleevus

Maleevus is a genus of herbivorous ankylosaurid dinosaur from the late Cretaceous, around 90 million years ago, of Mongolia.

See Holotype and Maleevus

Mamenchisaurus

Mamenchisaurus (or spelling pronunciation) is a sauropod dinosaur genus including several species, known for their remarkably long necks which made up half the total body length.

See Holotype and Mamenchisaurus

Mangrove monitor

The mangrove monitor, mangrove goanna, or Western Pacific monitor lizard (Varanus indicus) is a member of the monitor lizard family with a large distribution from northern Australia and New Guinea to the Moluccas, Solomon Islands, Marshall Islands, Caroline Islands, and Mariana Islands.

See Holotype and Mangrove monitor

Mapusaurus

Mapusaurus ("Earth lizard") was a giant carnosaurian dinosaur from the early Late Cretaceous (late Cenomanian to early Turonian stage) of what is now Argentina and possibly Chile.

See Holotype and Mapusaurus

Marbled toadlet

Uperoleia marmorata commonly known as the marbled toadlet, is only known by the holotype collected in the Kimberley region of Western Australia by Gray in 1841.

See Holotype and Marbled toadlet

Marinkelle's sword-nosed bat

Marinkelle's sword-nosed bat (Lonchorhina marinkellei) is a bat species from South America.

See Holotype and Marinkelle's sword-nosed bat

Marshosaurus

Marshosaurus is a genus of medium-sized carnivorous theropod dinosaur, belonging to the Megalosauroidea, from the Late Jurassic Morrison Formation of Utah and perhaps Colorado.

See Holotype and Marshosaurus

Mary Anning

Mary Anning (21 May 1799 – 9 March 1847) was an English fossil collector, dealer, and paleontologist who became known around the world for important finds she made in Jurassic marine fossil beds in the cliffs along the English Channel at Lyme Regis in the county of Dorset in Southwest England.

See Holotype and Mary Anning

Mascarene parrot

The Mascarene parrot or Mascarin (Mascarinus mascarin) is an extinct species of parrot that was endemic to the Mascarene island of Réunion in the western Indian Ocean.

See Holotype and Mascarene parrot

Matoatoa

Matoatoa is a small genus of geckos, lizards in the family Gekkonidae.

See Holotype and Matoatoa

Medusaceratops

Medusaceratops is an extinct genus of centrosaurine ceratopsian dinosaur known from the Late Cretaceous Judith River Formation (middle Campanian stage) of Montana, northern United States.

See Holotype and Medusaceratops

Megalosaurus

Megalosaurus (meaning "Great Lizard", from Greek μέγας, megas, meaning 'big', 'tall' or 'great' and σαῦρος, sauros, meaning 'lizard') is a genus of large meat-eating theropod dinosaurs of the Middle Jurassic period (Bathonian stage, 166 million years ago) of Southern England.

See Holotype and Megalosaurus

Meganeura

Meganeura is a genus of extinct insects from the Carboniferous period (approximately 300 million years ago), which resembled and are related to the present-day dragonflies.

See Holotype and Meganeura

Mei long

Mei (from Chinese 寐 mèi to sleep soundly) is a genus of duck-sized troodontid dinosaur first unearthed by paleontologists in Liaoning, China in 2004.

See Holotype and Mei long

Melanorosaurus

Melanorosaurus (meaning "Black Mountain Lizard", from the Greek melas/μέλας, "black", oros/ὄρος, "mountain" + sauros/σαῦρος, "lizard") is a genus of basal sauropodomorph dinosaur that lived during the Late Triassic period.

See Holotype and Melanorosaurus

Meniscoessus

Meniscoessus is a genus of extinct mammal from the Upper Cretaceous Period of what is now North America.

See Holotype and Meniscoessus

Mesadactylus

Mesadactylus ('mesa finger') is an extinct genus of pterosaur from the Kimmeridgian-Tithonian-age Upper Jurassic Morrison Formation of Colorado, United States.

See Holotype and Mesadactylus

Mesoscincus

Mesoscincus is a genus of lizards, comprising three species of skinks native to Mexico and Central America.

See Holotype and Mesoscincus

Mesosmittia

The genus Mesosmittia is cosmopolitan, thus occurring in all biogeographical regions except for Antarctica.

See Holotype and Mesosmittia

Microcosmodon

Microcosmodon is a mammal genus from the Paleocene of North America.

See Holotype and Microcosmodon

Microraptor

Microraptor (Greek, μικρός, mīkros: "small"; Latin, raptor: "one who seizes") was a genus of small, four-winged paravian dinosaurs.

See Holotype and Microraptor

Microvenator

Microvenator (meaning "small hunter") is a genus of dinosaur from the Early Cretaceous Cloverly Formation in what is now south central Montana.

See Holotype and Microvenator

Mimetodon

Mimetodon is a small mammal from the Paleocene of North America and perhaps Europe.

See Holotype and Mimetodon

Minmi paravertebra

Minmi is a genus of small herbivorous ankylosaurian dinosaur that lived during the early Cretaceous Period of Australia, about 119 to 113 million years ago.

See Holotype and Minmi paravertebra

Mirischia

Mirischia is a small (two meter-long) extinct genus of compsognathid theropod dinosaur from the Albian stage (Early Cretaceous period) of Brazil.

See Holotype and Mirischia

Mochlodon

Mochlodon is a genus of iguanodont dinosaurs from the Late Cretaceous.

See Holotype and Mochlodon

Mongolosaurus

Mongolosaurus is a genus of titanosauriform sauropod dinosaur which lived during the Early Cretaceous of China.

See Holotype and Mongolosaurus

Monkonosaurus

Monkonosaurus (meaning "Monkon lizard") is a dubious genus of herbivorous stegosaurian dinosaur from the Late Jurassic (Kimmeridgian stage, around 150-155 million years ago) of Tibet (and the cretaceous Lura Formation in China).

See Holotype and Monkonosaurus

Monolophosaurus

Monolophosaurus (meaning "single-crested lizard") is a genus of tetanuran theropod dinosaur from the Middle Jurassic Shishugou Formation in what is now Xinjiang, China.

See Holotype and Monolophosaurus

Mononykus

Mononykus (sometimes; meaning "one claw") was a theropod dinosaur from late Cretaceous Mongolia (Nemegt Formation, about 70 million years ago) with long, skinny legs.

See Holotype and Mononykus

Montanoceratops

Montanoceratops is an extinct genus of small ceratopsian dinosaur that lived approximately 70 million years ago during the latter part of the Cretaceous Period in what is now Montana and Alberta.

See Holotype and Montanoceratops

Morchella

Morchella, the true morels, is a genus of edible sac fungi closely related to anatomically simpler cup fungi in the order Pezizales (division Ascomycota).

See Holotype and Morchella

Morelia boeleni

Morelia boeleni is a species of python, a nonvenomous snake in the family Pythonidae.

See Holotype and Morelia boeleni

Morinosaurus

Morinosaurus (meaning "Morini lizard", for an ancient people of northern France) was a genus of sauropod dinosaur from an unnamed formation of Kimmeridgian-age Upper Jurassic rocks from Boulogne-sur-Mer, Départment du Pas-de-Calais, France.

See Holotype and Morinosaurus

Morpho menelaus

The Menelaus blue morpho (Morpho menelaus) is one of thirty species of butterfly in the subfamily Morphinae.

See Holotype and Morpho menelaus

Morpho peleides

Morpho peleides, the Peleides blue morpho, common morpho or the emperor is an iridescent tropical butterfly found in Mexico, Central America, northern South America, Paraguay and Trinidad.

See Holotype and Morpho peleides

Morpho polyphemus

Morpho polyphemus, the white morpho or Polyphemus white morpho, is a white butterfly of Mexico and Central America, ranging as far south as Costa Rica.

See Holotype and Morpho polyphemus

Morrison, Colorado

The Town of Morrison is a Home Rule Municipality in Jefferson County, Colorado, United States.

See Holotype and Morrison, Colorado

Mosasaurus

Mosasaurus ("lizard of the Meuse River") is a genus of mosasaurs, extinct carnivorous aquatic lizards.

See Holotype and Mosasaurus

Moschops

Moschops (Greek for "calf face") is an extinct genus of therapsids that lived in the Guadalupian epoch, around 265–260 million years ago.

See Holotype and Moschops

Murray cod

The Murray cod (Maccullochella peelii) is a large Australian predatory freshwater fish of the genus Maccullochella in the family Percichthyidae.

See Holotype and Murray cod

Museo Carmen Funes

Museo Municipal Carmen Funes, or, the Carmen Funes Municipal Museum, is a museum of paleontology in Plaza Huincul, Neuquén Province, Argentina.

See Holotype and Museo Carmen Funes

Muttaburrasaurus

Muttaburrasaurus was a genus of herbivorous ornithopod dinosaur, which lived in what is now northeastern Australia sometime between 112 and 99.6 million years agoHoltz, Thomas R. Jr.

See Holotype and Muttaburrasaurus

Myllokunmingia

Myllokunmingia is a genus of basal chordate from the Lower Cambrian Maotianshan shales of China, thought to be a vertebrate, although this is not conclusively proven.

See Holotype and Myllokunmingia

Naashoibitosaurus

Naashoibitosaurus (from Navajo &mdash;"lizard creek") is a genus of hadrosaurid dinosaur that lived about 73 million years ago, in the Late Cretaceous, and was found in the Kirtland Formation of the San Juan Basin in New Mexico, United States.

See Holotype and Naashoibitosaurus

Nanantius

Nanantius is a genus of extinct presumably enantiornithean avialan ("bird" in the broad sense of the word) known from the Early Cretaceous (Albian, c. 100-112 mya) of Australia.

See Holotype and Nanantius

Nanotyrannus

Nanotyrannus ("dwarf tyrant") is a potentially dubious genus of tyrannosaurid dinosaur.

See Holotype and Nanotyrannus

Nanshiungosaurus

Nanshiungosaurus is a genus of therizinosaurian theropod dinosaur from the Cretaceous of China.

See Holotype and Nanshiungosaurus

Nanyangosaurus

Nanyangosaurus is a genus of herbivorous ornithischian dinosaur belonging to Hadrosauroidea that lived in the Late Cretaceous of present-day Henan Province, China.

See Holotype and Nanyangosaurus

Napoca insignis

Napoca insignis is a species of jumping spiders (family Salticidae) found in Israel.

See Holotype and Napoca insignis

National Institute of Water and Atmospheric Research

The National Institute of Water and Atmospheric Research or NIWA (Māori: Taihoro Nukurangi), is a Crown Research Institute of New Zealand.

See Holotype and National Institute of Water and Atmospheric Research

Natural History Museum of Utah

The Natural History Museum of Utah (NHMU) is a museum located on the campus of the University of Utah in Salt Lake City, Utah, United States.

See Holotype and Natural History Museum of Utah

Nectosaurus

Nectosaurus is a genus of marine diapsid reptile which lived during the Late Triassic of what is now California.

See Holotype and Nectosaurus

Nedcolbertia

Nedcolbertia is a genus of theropod dinosaur from the Early Cretaceous Period of North America.

See Holotype and Nedcolbertia

Neimongosaurus

Neimongosaurus ("Nei Mongol lizard") is a genus of herbivorous therizinosaur theropod dinosaur known from the Upper Cretaceous of Nei Mongol, China.

See Holotype and Neimongosaurus

Nemegtomaia

Nemegtomaia is a genus of oviraptorid dinosaur from what is now Mongolia that lived in the Late Cretaceous Period, about 70million years ago.

See Holotype and Nemegtomaia

Neoliotomus

Neoliotomus is a genus of North American mammal from the Paleocene.

See Holotype and Neoliotomus

Neosodon

Neosodon (meaning "new tooth") was a genus of sauropod dinosaur from the Late Tithonian-age Upper Jurassic Sables et Gres a Trigonia gibbosa of Départment du Pas-de-Calais, France.

See Holotype and Neosodon

Neovenator

Neovenator (nee-o-ven-a-tor) which means "new hunter" is a genus of allosauroid dinosaur.

See Holotype and Neovenator

Nepenthes adnata

Nepenthes adnata is a tropical pitcher plant endemic to the Indonesian province of West Sumatra, where it grows at elevations of 600 to 1200 m above sea level.

See Holotype and Nepenthes adnata

Nepenthes albomarginata

Nepenthes albomarginata is a tropical pitcher plant native to Borneo, Peninsular Malaysia, and Sumatra.

See Holotype and Nepenthes albomarginata

Nepenthes angasanensis

Nepenthes angasanensis is a tropical pitcher plant species endemic to Sumatra, where it grows at an altitude of to above sea level.

See Holotype and Nepenthes angasanensis

Nepenthes aristolochioides

Nepenthes aristolochioides is a tropical pitcher plant endemic to Sumatra, where it grows at elevations of 1800–2500 m above sea level.

See Holotype and Nepenthes aristolochioides

Nepenthes × kinabaluensis

Nepenthes × kinabaluensis, or the Kinabalu Pitcher-Plant,Phillipps, A. & A. Lamb 1996.

See Holotype and Nepenthes × kinabaluensis

Nepenthes bellii

Nepenthes bellii is a tropical pitcher plant endemic to the Philippine islands of Mindanao and Dinagat, where it grows at elevations of 0–800 m above sea level.

See Holotype and Nepenthes bellii

Nepenthes benstonei

Nepenthes benstonei is a tropical pitcher plant endemic to Peninsular Malaysia, where it grows at elevations of 150–1350 m above sea level.

See Holotype and Nepenthes benstonei

Nepenthes campanulata

Nepenthes campanulata (from Late Latin: campānulātus "bell-shaped"), the bell-shaped pitcher-plant,Phillipps, A. & A. Lamb 1996.

See Holotype and Nepenthes campanulata

Nepenthes eustachya

Nepenthes eustachya is a tropical pitcher plant endemic to Sumatra, where it grows from sea level to an elevation of 1600 m. The specific epithet eustachya, formed from the Greek words eu (true) and stachys (spike), refers to the racemose structure of the inflorescence.

See Holotype and Nepenthes eustachya

Nepenthes eymae

Nepenthes eymae is a tropical pitcher plant endemic to Sulawesi, where it grows at elevations of 1000–2000 m above sea level.

See Holotype and Nepenthes eymae

Nepenthes faizaliana

Nepenthes faizaliana is a tropical pitcher plant endemic to the limestone cliffs of Gunung Mulu National Park in Sarawak, Borneo.

See Holotype and Nepenthes faizaliana

Nepenthes fusca

Nepenthes fusca, or the dusky pitcher-plant,Phillipps, A. & A. Lamb 1996.

See Holotype and Nepenthes fusca

Nepenthes glabrata

Nepenthes glabrata is a tropical pitcher plant endemic to Sulawesi.

See Holotype and Nepenthes glabrata

Nepenthes hamata

Nepenthes hamata is a tropical pitcher plant endemic to Sulawesi, where it grows at elevations of 1400–2500 m above sea level.

See Holotype and Nepenthes hamata

Nepenthes izumiae

Nepenthes izumiae is a tropical pitcher plant endemic to Sumatra, where it grows in montane forest at 1700–1900 m above sea level.

See Holotype and Nepenthes izumiae

Nepenthes jacquelineae

Nepenthes jacquelineae is a tropical pitcher plant endemic to Sumatra.

See Holotype and Nepenthes jacquelineae

Nepenthes lamii

Nepenthes lamii is a tropical p