Our early portfolio featured involvement in strategic infrastructure such as Melbourne Underground Rail Loop, Sydney Harbour Tunnel, Sydney Water's MacArthur Water Filtration Plant and Pyrmont power station.

Our portfolio includes structural design of the award-winning Rouse Hill Town Centre and the terminal building at Kuala Lumpur International Airport. Hughes Trueman also played a central role in the restoration and maintenance of Pyrmont Bridge in Sydney’s Darling Harbour and provided façade engineering services for the Queen Victoria Building, one of Sydney’s architectural jewels.

Our expertise means we provide our clients with a suite of capabilities embracing all facets of project development – from front-end advisory services backed by technical know-how to design and delivery of sustainable, cost-effective and value-added solutions. We have a broad staff base across Australia with significant centres in Sydney, Adelaide, Melbourne, Canberra, Brisbane and Perth, each able to draw on the global resources and expertise from around the Group.

Public private partnerships

Public private partnerships (PPPs) are another field where we’re able to bring key benefits for our customers – recognised by winning Best Technical Advisor in the Partnership Awards seven times in nine years. We’ve advised on a wide range of PPPs in Australia’s transport sector. These include:

Strategic advice on Brisbane North South Bypass Tunnel PPP

Development of an innovative PPP for maintaining and managing part of Cardinaishire’s highway network

Innovative long-term performance based highway maintenance contracts for Morningtonshire

Strategic advice and international peer review of the business cases for Brisbane’s Airport Link and Northern Busway projects

Water

Water sector clients also draw on our multidisciplinary expertise through projects ranging from assisting with concept design, specifications and contract management of the Adelaide Desalination Project – comprising a 300ML/d sea-water reverse osmosis plant and 14km transmission pipeline – to other smaller water projects for SA Water.

Our capabilities in all facets of water management and infrastructure development are now reinforced by the addition of specialist water technology and consulting company AWT. AWT’s Melbourne team of scientists and engineers bring leading-edge technical expertise covering collection, conveyance, treatment, reuse and residuals incorporating water, wastewater (industrial and municipal) and stormwater. In addition, AWT’s specialist capability in real-time data management through the web portal H2knOw-how enables us to offer state-of-the-art network monitoring and analysis to assist with asset management and development.

Energy

Involvement in energy continues, with a portfolio including powersystems studies for expanding Woodside LNG facility, owner's engineer role for Callide power station in Queensland and due diligence for a number of power plant projects around the country.

Project management

We have an impressive record in the construction and property industry. Some of our key assignments include the University of Adelaide Learning Hub, Flinders Ports, Burnside Village and the SACA Western Grandstand Redevelopment.

Transport

Transport has always been a particularly strong sector. We’re part of a technical advisory services team undertaking detailed assessment studies and preliminary design work for phase one of the new Melbourne Metro.

We are detail designer for structures and drainage at Goodwood Junction in Adelaide. The project will lower a passenger line to run below other freight and passenger lines, resolving scheduling difficulties.

We also contributed tender design services for the Sydney CBD Metro scheme as part of the Line 01 contracting consortium. In addition to helping develop and implement various rail systems, we’ve provided specialist independent engineering verification of the permanent tunnel lining design of the Brisbane Airport Link.

Buildings

Our portfolio includes structural design of the award-winning Rouse Hill Town Centre and façade engineering services for the Queen Victoria Building.

For the Adelaide Oval redevelopment we provided the concept design, followed by design management and overall project management during construction.

Health and education

We provide specialist consulting and professional learning services for leaders, schools and departments across the country. Our specialists are working with the Bastow Institute of Educational Leadership, a Victorian Department of Education and Training initiative, to provide ongoing coaching and support services for new principals in Victorian schools.

In New South Wales we evaluated the state government’s Safe Families Programme, which aims to tackle child sexual assault in Aboriginal communities. We worked with five remote communities to examine the level of Aboriginal people's engagement in the programme.

Our international health specialists manage the Health Resource Facility for Australia’s Aid Programme, which provides Australia’s Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade with expertise on a range of health topics including nutrition, civil society involvement in health programmes, emerging infectious diseases and the efficacy of specific interventions – for example HIV programmes in Indonesia, Papua New Guinea and the Pacific region.