Bonnie Thurston is an experienced retreat leader, New Testament scholar, and poet. She is a founding member and past president of the International Thomas Merton Society. A frequent contributor to popular and scholarly periodicals, she is author or editor of twenty-three theological books and seven collections of poetry.

Thurston earned a bachelor’s degree in English from Bethany College and master’s degree and doctorate from the University of Virginia. She has done post-doctoral work in the New Testament at Harvard Divinity School; Eberhard Karls University in Tuebingen, Germany; and the Ecole Biblique in Jerusalem. An ordained Protestant minister since 1984, Thurston taught at the university level for thirty years and has also served as a pastor at five churches and two overseas ministries.

Thurston lives in West Virginia.

Logos already carries a couple of her books:

Hidden in God: Discovering the Desert Vision of Charles de Foucauld

Philippians & Philemon (Sacra Pagina | SP)

Here are a bunch more I'd like to see that you can vote for. All of these are ones she's published with publishers that Logos has partnered with.

The first two I already highlighted in my Suggestions post about books having to do with women & the Bible, but collecting them here too all under the same author.

Women in the New Testament: Questions and Commentary (Wipf & Stock, 2004)

The Widows: A Women's Ministry in the Early Church (Fortress Press, 1989)

Maverick Mark: The Untamed First Gospel (Liturgical Press, 2013)

The Spiritual Landscape of Mark (Liturgical Press, 2008)

To Everything a Season: A Spirituality of Time (Crossroad, 1989)

For God Alone: A Primer on Prayer (Darton Longman & Todd, 2009) -- Logos might not have a big partnership with them, as they've only published two of their books

Religious Vows, The Sermon On The Mount, And Christian Living (Liturgical Press, 2006)

O Taste and See: A Biblical Reflection on Experiencing God (Paraclete Press, 2013) -- oops, I was mistaken; they don't have a relationship with Paraclete Press. But that is the #1 press I think they need to pursue, so I'm going to leave this here.

Belonging to Borders: A Sojourn in the Celtic Tradition (Liturgical Press, 2011)

Shaped by the End You Live For: Thomas Merton’s Monastic Spirituality (Liturgical Press, 2020)

Spiritual Life in the Early Church: The Witness of Acts and Ephesians (Fortress Press, 1993)