Title: Lost Lanes West - 36 Glorious Bike Rides in the West Country

Author: Jack Thurston

Publisher: Wild Things Publishing

Year: 2018

Pages: 255

Order: Wild Things

What it is: 36 suggested bike rides in the West Country in England’s south-west corner, down Devon and Dorset way

Strengths: Three books in and the ‘Lost Lanes’ series has established itself as serving up the best cycling guidebooks for British-based riders looking to get off the beaten track

Weaknesses: Someone will always quibble about what was left out, that’s half the fun of books like these

Where does the time go? Slipped away without me knowing. It’s already getting on for six years since the first in the ‘Lost Lanes’ series of cycling guidebooks came out, and a year since this third volume was published. Having done the south west of England in the first volume and Wales and the border counties in the second, this latest instalment sees Jack Thurston exploring the West Country, that bit of Britain that looks a bit like Italy, only fallen over:

This review was originally meant to be published shortly after the Edward Thomas book, In Pursuit of Spring, was reviewed here a year ago. But you know what they say about the best laid plans of Mycenaean men. Late and all as it is, let’s begin it where it was originally intended to begin, with Route #14, ‘In Pursuit of Edward Thomas.’

As you’ll recall, Thomas set out from London (somewhere around Balham, gateway to the south) on Good Friday 1913, heading in a westward direction, bound for the Quantock Hills, “the native soil of ‘Kubla Khan,’ ‘Christabel,’ and ‘The Ancient Mariner,’ where Coleridge fed on honey-dew and drank the milk of Paradise”. The end of the ride, in the Quantock Hills that run from Taunton up to the Bristol Channel, that for Thomas was a literary pilgrimage, to the birthplace of the English Romantic movement. Here’s Thurston telling the story:

“One of the main figures of early Romanticism, Samuel Taylor Coleridge came here with his wife Sara and newborn son in 1796, seeking a more frugal life closer to nature. The original urban downshifters, they may not have fully appreciated the extent of the rural squalor that was in store, but they stuck it out in Nether Stowey for three years in a damp, dark two-up-two-down cottage. It was a loveless marriage and life was especially hard for Sara, with a struggling poet husband who was hooked on opium, suffered chronic mental and physical illness, and was prone to disappear on long rambles over the hills. Yet it proved a productive time for Coleridge, who wrote The Rime of the Ancient Mariner and Kubla Khan while at Nether Stowey.

“William and Dorothy Wordsworth visited the Coleridges and took a house nearby. The lane from Nether Stowey to the crest of the Quantocks is surely one that Coleridge and Wordsworth would have known well. On the way out of the village stands the remains of Stowey Castle, a Norman motte-and-bailey fortification built a few decades after the Conquest. The lane passes through woodland dominated by the stunted, twisting trunks of sessile oak. Higher up it opens into heath and the route passes a 950m long prehistoric linear bank-and-ditch earthwork known by the somewhat macabre name of Dead Woman’s Ditch.”

It’s this mix of culture, history, geography – the Romantic poets, the Norman Conquest, prehiostoric earthworks – that makes the ‘Lost Lanes’ books such fun things to read. Too many guidebooks concern themselves with the minutiae, turn left two kilometres after passing the red-painted cottage, they more or less assume you already want to be where they’re telling you you should go. Through their mix of words and images, the ‘Lost Lanes’ books, on the other hand, make you want to go to the places they talk about.

At 50 miles (80 kms), the Edward Thomas route falls toward the higher end of distances to be covered, with 40 miles (65 kms) the average. Taking in the Quantock Hills, its obviously a bit of a lumpy day out, but so too are most of the West Country rides: if you want pancake flat, you’re in the wrong area. But if you want lush scenery, you’ve got it right.

The West Country is steeped in legend, all the way from Salisbury Plain down to St Michael’s Mount:

“Did Joseph of Arimathea actually bring the Holy Grail to Glastonbury? Did King Arthur really travel to Bodmin Moor to meet the Lady of the Lake and pull his sword out of a stone? Does a pack of baying hellhounds roam the windblown wastes of Dartmoor, for real? Are bona fide pixies hiding away in shady Cornish dingles? Who knows?”

But it’s also rich in reality. This is a land that was at the heart of the Industrial Revolution:

“The West Country is the canvas upon which Isambard Kingdom Brunel, the great engineer of the Victorian era, expressed his genius. His tunnels, bridges and viaducts can be found all the way from London to Cornwall. [...] Brunel’s railway was instantly dubbed ‘The Holiday Line’, and turned the West Country into Britain’s favourite holiday destination.”

And as well as Coleridge and Wordsworth, the literary history of the area takes in Thomas Hardy, Agatha Christie, Daphne du Maurer, and TE Lawrence. Hardy himself was a cyclist:

“Thomas Hardy took up cycling during the great bicycle boom of the 1890s. Though well into his fifties, the poet and novelist was an enthusiastic convert, setting out from his home in Dorchester to all corners of Dorset and as far afield as Wells in Somerset and Topsham in Devon. He rode with his wife Emma, and with family and friends including several days with his fellow writer Rudyard Kipling. But most of all, he rode alone. The advantage of cycling for a writer, Hardy once said, is that ‘you can go out a long distance without coming in contact with another mind, not even a horse’s, and dissipating any little mental energy that has arisen in the course of a morning’s application’.”

The lost lanes explored by Thurston allow the rider to once more go a long distance without coming in contact with another mind, taking you off the main thoroughfares and allowing you to to rediscover a world where the past and the present co-exist. If you’re looking for somewhere new to ride, do let the ‘Lost Lanes’ guides suggest a few routes to you. Even if you never take up the suggestions, you’ll enjoy the stories told.