In lieu of an abstract, here is a brief excerpt of the content:

118 ABR 72:1 – MARCH 2021 711. Shaped by the End You Live For: Thomas Merton’s Monastic Spirituality by Bonnie B. Thurston. (Collegeville, MN: Liturgical Press, 2020. Pp xix, 166. Paperback, $19.95. ISBN 978-0-814-68807-6). Have you read any Merton lately? Whether you have or have not, this book will whet your appetite for more. Dr. Bonnie B. Thurston writes with authority. She explains early what the book is not: “it is not an academic or strictly scholarly book . . . not a biography” (p. xv). She comments with understanding as needed and accomplishes what she set out to do, namely, “let Merton speak for himself” (p. xvi).At the same time, Dr. Thurston does not project her own ideas onto Merton’s voice (p. xvi). The text is supported with wisdom from saints and other spiritual writers such as Teresa of Avila, Ruth Burrows, Charles de Foucauld, and contemporary Cistercian scholar, Michael Casey. The foreword of this book is written by Paul Quenon, OCSO, a monk of Gethsemani Abbey who knew Merton from the novitiate. After a brief introduction, the work is divided into ten chapters of equal length, all with monastic themes such as obedience, silence, solitude, and prayer. The book concludes with a select bibliography, acknowledgements and thanksgiving. In chapter 1, the author introduces Merton and helps the reader understand how he became a monk. One becomes acquainted with Merton the man and monk, a seeker to whom many, not unlike readers of Merton’s still popular Seven Storey Mountain, will likely relate. What Dr. Thurston does offer as a biographical sketch in the first chapter, she calls “a metaphor for, or a template of, modern life in at least three ways. It was rootless, privileged, and ripe for conversion” (p. 5). A modern reader “ripe for conversion” may find encouragement in a reference included in a later chapter, something Merton wrote in a 1960–1968 correspondence with “Pakistani scholar of Sufism Abdul Aziz. . . a correspondence that is one of the most comprehensive records we have of a Muslim-Christian dialogue in the twentieth century” (p. 98). In a 1966 letter to Aziz, one will find the only place, as far as Dr. Thurston knows, where Merton describes “how he himself prayed” (p. 98). Merton wrote about his “method of meditation”: “I have a very simple way of prayer. It is centered entirely on attention to the presence of God and to His will and His love. . . One might say this gives my meditation the character [of] ‘being before God as if you saw Him’” (p. 98). BOOK Review 119 Keen insights abound in this little book. Chapter 2, entitled “The Temptation of ‘Holier Than Thou,’” echoes St. Benedict’s tongue-incheek exhortation: “Do not aspire to be called holy before you really are, but first be holy that you may more truly be called so” (RB 4.62). In this chapter the author does not put up with the nonsense of any priests, nuns, monks or religious who may think they are “God’s favorites” (p. 17). Yet Dr. Thurston offers chapter 4, “Monastic Life: Fleeing the World?” to anyone who may think that those who live in monasteries are not engaged with the world and should get busy out in the real world (pp. 52–53). Dr. Thurston’s insights may be especially helpful for the reader new to Merton, because she has spent 40 years studying his thought (p. xv). In addition, Dr. Thurston, Scripture scholar and poet, lives an authentic Cistercian life, that is, a humble, quiet one of prayer, study, and manual labor. At one point, she offers this insight: “One might even make the case that, in one way or another, everything he wrote was about prayer, was directly related to prayer, or arose from prayer” (p. 97). Put another way, Merton’s monastic life was one of unceasing prayer (RB 4.56). This book should keep any reader busy, either by staying with the text itself, or by exploring the vast references to other works, those well-known and not so. Although it is not necessary to have read any Merton before embarking on Dr. Thurston’s...