Thurston Thursdays start Sept. 29th

Starting Sept. 29th, a book in the 12 book Thurston Hotel Series

will be available every Thursday on Amazon.

The Thurston Hotel Series is twelve books of sweet to warm romances created as a means for published authors in my local RWA chapter to mentor unpublished members. I’m very proud of the published authors who willingly mentored their Thurston counterparts by providing critiques, suggestions and guidance in all areas of writing and marketing, and of all our authors for meeting deadlines and completing their manuscripts. We will now have four more published authors in our chapter. One of the Thurston authors, Win Day, created the Thurston website http:www.thurstonhotelbooks.com where you’ll find information on the series and can view the book covers and authors’ info.

The Thurston Hotel is on Main Street of the fictional mountain resort town of Harmony, Alberta, nestled in the foothills of the Canadian Rockies. The town’s population is 12,000, if you don’t count the tourists that pass through yearly. By the time we’d finished creating the series, the authors were convinced the town was actually on the map. Sadly, no, it isn’t.

The hotel was built by Thomas Thurston and opened in 1916. His three grandchildren, Ben, Wendy and Bailey operate the six-story hotel today. The siblings are planning a party to celebrate the hotel’s one-hundred-year anniversary in August.

We have the Harmony General Hospital where our doctors keep the citizens healthy. We have clergy and cops and some very sexy firefighters. The bake shop owner’s cupcakes are to die for, and she features a special one every month. The Harmony Chronicle publishes every Thursday, but you never know what that unscrupulous reporter will post on the Chronicle’s Facebook page in the meantime. Our mayor is beloved by all, but the poor guy spends a great deal of his time attempting to keep his meddling wife under control.

We have candy stores, gift shops, psychics readings, book stores, clothing shops and all manner of businesses for the tourists to wander through while looking for a prize purchase or a perfect souvenir of their stay in town.

Harmony and the Thurston Hotel Series await you! Each book represents one month, and the plot centers mostly on that month in 2016. Several plotlines overlap and one recurring plotline begins in January (Book 1) and culminates in a wedding in December (Book 12).

Happy reading, everyone! And if you enjoy the books in the series, please give our authors the greatest of compliments by posting a review of their books.

Save