On the morning of February 6th, the seventy-one-year-old Australian children’s-book author Mem Fox arrived on a United Airlines flight from Melbourne to Los Angeles. She was en route to a conference in Milwaukee, Wisconsin, on the theme of diversity, where she was scheduled to deliver a keynote speech on teaching children to read. Fox, whose 1983 book, “Possum Magic,” is the best-selling Australian children’s book of all time, has travelled back and forth to the United States more than a hundred times in the course of her life. This time, she told me recently by phone, “Things began to unravel when the digital photograph machine—you have to walk through one at LAX—malfunctioned,” and an immigration official told her, “Oh, just go down there and speak to a real person.”

Fox said that she felt “immediate aggression” from the officer. “She was a young woman, in her twenties,” she told me. “Our failing as Australians is that we are friendly—and I think it can be a failing, for we expect friendliness—and I said ‘hello’ very pleasantly. She said, ‘You have checked ‘business’ on your form. What is your business?’ ”

Fox replied that she was the keynote speaker at a conference in Wisconsin. The officer asked her what her speech was about. “I’d never been asked that before,” Fox recalled. “I told her it was about the best books to teach children to read.”

“Will you be recompensed for this speech?” the officer asked.

“Indeed, I will,” Mem Fox said.

“How much will you be recompensed?”

Fox said that she would be paid eight thousand dollars, most of which covered her airfare from Australia. She had never been asked that before, either. Then the officer told her that she would have to answer some more questions.

Within moments, Fox was escorted to a holding room. The door closed behind her. There were about twenty people in the room, including a Taiwanese woman, a Scandinavian woman with a baby, and an elderly woman in a wheelchair, wearing a head scarf. There was a feeling of confusion in the room. A small notice on the wall, in English, prohibited the use of cell phones or laptops. Fox told me, “It was not big enough or prominent enough for people to see, even if they could read it, so in the time I was in the room many people who came in took out their phones, at which the guards would bark at them: ‘Put that away!’ They stood right in front of the person, as close as they could, and yelled at them.” She added, “Everything in that room was designed to humiliate.”

There were several booths in the room, where the passengers who came in were interrogated. Everyone in the room could hear everything that was said. Fox recalled, “The Taiwanese woman had something to do with importing cameras, and they yelled at her, ‘Where do you get the money from?’ It was clear she didn’t understand. The woman interviewing yelled—it’s hard to describe how harshly she spoke—‘Where do you get the money from? Does it fall from trees? Does it fall from the sky?’ ”

Otherwise, the room was quiet. Fox continued, “No one in the room looked at each other. We knew instinctively that that might be seen as collusion. They began to try to interrogate the woman in the wheelchair, but it was clear she did not speak English, and the official began to yell at her, ‘Arabic? Arabic? Arabic?’ And then they started yelling ‘Farsi! Farsi! Farsi!’ and I thought, Oh, no, she’s Iranian”—i.e., from one of the countries targeted by Trump’s immigration ban. The woman was later released.

In an attempt at normalcy, Fox focussed her attention on her book—she had packed Stendhal’s “The Red and the Black” from her shelf at home.

A few minutes later, a woman leaned over and said, “They’re calling ‘Fox.’ Is that your name?”

Fox got up and began to walk over to a booth. A young customs officer, armed and dressed in black, said, “No, not there,” and pointed to a spot on the floor in front of him. She stood there.

“My interview was conducted with him standing in front of me, with my back to the room, with his face barely a foot from mine. I apologized for not hearing my name and he said to me, with so much insolence I was rocked, ‘So good someone is paying attention.’ I replied in a steady voice, ‘I’m so sorry, I was buried in my book,’ and he said, ‘So what do you expect me to do, stand here while you finish it?’ ”

The interview continued. “By this time, I must have looked like a bent old lady in a story,” Fox said. “I was close to collapse. He told me that I was travelling on a visa illegally, which I knew not to be correct, but I was not about to argue . . . I said, ‘It’s probably going to be my last trip to the United States anyway.’

“At this, he reared up and said, ‘Did you say that before to anyone?’ I was determined to maintain my dignity. I told him that perhaps I was too old to work and travel so intensively, and perhaps younger people could give speeches. And he said, aggressively, ‘Well, maybe you haven’t been teaching them well enough!’ ”

Later, in her journal, Fox would write, “In the still sane recesses of my mind I felt myself blind with rage that a young man could speak so arrogantly and impolitely to an old woman. I felt myself spinning. My brain was closing. I held on tightly to my Australian resilience in what seemed to me had become a police-state, in which I was undergoing unfair and unfounded interrogation.”

The officer continued to bark questions.

“So what kind of books do you write?”

“I write for young children.”

“Name some titles!”

“ ‘Ten Little Fingers and Ten Little Toes,’ and ‘Time for Bed.’ I have books in my luggage if you want to see them.”

“I don’t need the books!”

The officer took her documents and disappeared for fifteen minutes. When he came back, he said, “I see they gave one of your books to Prince George.”

Fox said, “They did.”

Fox’s book “Ten Little Fingers and Ten Little Toes” was given to Prince George by the Australian government as an official gift to the Duke and Duchess of Cambridge. The work, called by Booklist a “standout . . . for beautiful simplicity,” is illustrated by Helen Oxenbury with pictures of babies from different cultural backgrounds.

The officer now softened. “He smiled, he shook my hand, and he said, ‘It’s been a pleasure to meet you, Miss Fox.’ ” That night in the hotel, Fox says, she awoke sobbing in her sleep.

At first, Fox told only her family and her publisher what had happened. “I was afraid to discuss it at all before I got home, for fear I would be detained,” she told me. She took detailed notes about her experience, and back in Adelaide, where she lives, complained to the American Embassy in Australia. Within hours, she received a formal apology. But she says she can't imagine travelling to the United States again. (When asked for comment about Fox’s account, Jaime Ruiz, a spokesperson for U.S. Customs and Border Protection at LAX, said, “That is not how we treat passengers. We treat passengers with respect and professionalism. We have zero tolerance for passengers being treated unprofessionally.”)

Last week, she visited her grandson’s elementary school to give a reading of her newest book, “I’m Australian Too,” a celebration of Australia’s cultural diversity. (“I speak just like an Aussie / which is really who I am / my family lives in Melbourne / but we hail from Vietnam.”) A reporter for the Adelaide _Advertiser _was there to cover the event, and Fox described her ordeal. “I wasn’t pulled out of the line because I was a revolutionary,” Fox told me. “But now I am.”