Clive Barker’s supernatural shocker LORD OF ILLUSIONS is heading to Blu-ray this November courtesy of Umbrella Home Entertainment in a beaitful package that includes new special features from Reverend Entertainment. The two disc set comes in a custom artwork rigid case with a poster, a 48 page booklet, 8 artcards, and more. Pre-orders are open now at the Umbrella website. More details below.

SYNOPSIS

From best-selling author and celebrated director Clive Barker comes a supernatural thriller that rips apart the boundaries between sanity and madness, and between the art of illusion and the terrifying forces of magic.

Scott Bakula (Quantum Leap) portrays Harry D’Amour, a private detective visiting Los Angeles on a routine investigation. Harry gets more than he bargains for when he encounters Philip Swan (Kevin J. O’Connor, The Mummy), a performer whose amazing illusions captivate the world. But are they really illusions? Harry isn’t so sure as he is thrust into a nightmare of murder, deception and terrifying assaults from the dark beyond. Famke Janssen (GoldenEye, X-Men) and Daniel von Bargen (The Faculty) also star.

Director: Clive Barker

Cast: Daniel von Bargen; Famke Janssen; Kevin J. O’Connor; Scott Bakula

Extras:

Clive Barker’s Lord of Illusions Collector’s Edition includes

Custom artwork rigid case

Original poster art slipcase

Lord Of Illusions – 48pp perfect bound book with new content written by Phil & Sarah Stokes (head curators of the Clive Barker Archive), Anthony C. Ferrante, Andrew Nette and more

8 artcards

A3 reversible poster

Limited Edition Numbered release

Disc 1

Theatrical Cut

Theatrical Trailer

Disc 2

Director’s Cut

Audio Commentary with Director/Writer/Producer Clive Barker

NEW! Interview with Special Effects Artist Howard Berger (Reverend Entertainment)

NEW! Interview with Production Designer Steve Hardie (Reverend Entertainment)

‘A Gathering of Magic’ Featurette

Archival Behind-the-Scenes Featurette

Deleted Scenes with optional audio commentary by Clive Barker

Storyboard to Film Comparison

Stills Gallery + Conceptual Artwork Gallery

Teaser Trailer

Disc type: Blu-ray

No. of discs: 2

Running time: 109 + 121

Audio format: 5.1 & 2.0 DTS HD-MA

Format: 1080P

Colour: COLOUR

Languages: English

Aspect ratio: 16:9

Image ratio: 1.85:1

Subtitles: English HOH

Year of Production: 1995

Release Date: November 2023

PRE-ORDER NOW