Lord of Illusions is a 1995 American neo-noir supernatural horror film written and directed by Clive Barker, based on his own short story "The Last Illusion" published in 1985 in the anthology Books of Blood, Volume VI. The same story introduced Barker's occult detective Harry D'Amour, who later appeared in several prose stories and comic books. Lord of Illusions is D'Amour's first onscreen appearance, with the character portrayed by actor Scott Bakula. Other actors appearing in the film include Kevin J. O'Connor, Famke Janssen and Daniel von Bargen. The story features D'Amour, who has had several experiences with the supernatural, embarking on an investigation involving a stage illusionist named Swann and a cult led by a sorcerer named Nix.

Although Clive Barker decided to keep a few story elements and the same principal characters from "The Last Illusion", he otherwise presented a new story for the movie and created a new villain, surprising several readers familiar with the original work. The film met with mixed reception and no further live-action movies featuring Harry D'Amour were made.

Plot[]

In the Mojave Desert in 1982, a man named William Nix, also calling himself "The Puritan", has gathered a cult of disciples in an old house. Nix wields real magic and plans to sacrifice a girl, telling his followers he will save the world and grant them wisdom. A group of former cult members, including Philip Swann and Caspar Quaid, arrive to stop him. In the confrontation, Nix's assistant, Butterfield, escapes. Swann is attacked magically by Nix but the kidnapped girl shoots Nix through the heart with Swann's gun. Swann fastens an ironwork mask over Nix's head in order to "bind" him and his power. Nix dies.

Thirteen years later, in New York City, occult-specializing private detective Harry D'Amour has been shaken by an exorcism case. He accepts a case of insurance fraud in Los Angeles, hoping the experience will be akin to a paid vacation. During his investigation, D'Amour happens upon Quaid, now working as a fortune teller, being attacked by Butterfield and Ray Miller, a man possessing great strength. Butterfield and Miller escape. As he dies from multiple stab wounds, Quaid reads D'Amour's palm, seeing it is his destiny to "walk the line between Heaven and Hell". He warns that the Puritan is coming, then dies.

Swann, now a famous stage illusionist, lives in a Beverly Hills mansion with his wife, Dorothea. Philip Swann believes Quaid was killed by Nix's loyalists. Before he can leave Los Angeles, D'Amour is hired by Dorothea, who read about him in the newspaper story about Quaid. Dorothea fears for her husband. D'Amour agrees to investigate if Quaid's killers are targeting Phillip, and Dorothea invites him to his next magic show. A new illusion goes wrong and Swann is killed on stage, stabbed by multiple swords. Investigating backstage, D'Amour is attacked by Butterfield and Miller. Defending himself, he inadvertently kills Miller, but Butterfield escapes. The next day, D'Amour goes to the Magic Castle. After getting into the Repository, a room supposedly containing every magic secret known to man, D'Amour discovers Swann's "illusions" involved real magic he learned from Nix.

Dorothea reveals to D'Amour that she was the girl Nix kidnapped years ago, rescued by Swann, and marrying him out of gratitude and obligation. Dorothea and D'Amour make love; afterwards, D'Amour is attacked by supernatural forces. Suspecting a ruse, D'Amour opens Swann's coffin and finds the body is fake. Valentin, Swann's assistant, explains that Swann faked his death to protect himself and Dorothea from Nix, who may return from the dead. D'Amour agrees to allow the ruse to continue. At Swann's funeral, D'Amour follows a suspicious looking man who turns out to be Swann himself. Angered and jealous, Swann attacks D'Amour, then admits he masqueraded as an illusionist so he would be wealthy rather than hunted as a sorcerer. The detective convinces him that together they can defeat the loyal cultists and Nix, if he is resurrected.

Butterfield tortures Valentin for the location of Nix's body, then takes Dorothea hostage. After finding Nix's corpse, Butterfield stabs Valentin and takes the corpse back to the cult's old house in the desert. Nix's loyalists are present to witness his resurrection. Nix, now decayed and monstrous in appearance, promises to share his knowledge and power. Acting on information given by the dying Valentin, Swann and D'Amour arrive. Nix opens a deep chasm in the ground that swallows the cultists, declaring only Swann is worthy of his knowledge.

Nix drops Dorothea into the chasm. D'Amour rescues her. Nix asks Swann to join him again and embraces him. D'Amour and Dorothea are attacked by Butterfield, whom D'Amour kills. Swann agrees to remain with Nix, but admits he still cares for Dorothea. Out of jealousy, Nix attacks with magic, apparently killing Swann. Dorothea finds D'Amour's gun and shoots Nix in his mystical third eye. He retaliates, saying she should not have taken Swann away because he and Nix were meant to be together after humanity was destroyed.

Swann uses his last life energy and magic to help D'Amour deliver a final blow to Nix. Nix falls into the chasm and Swann dies from his wounds. Nix launches a final spell that disintegrates Swann's body to bones, and then seals the chasm. Dorothea and D'Amour escape the house and walk off into the desert together.