These days “horror movies” usually mean lots of scenes of torture or disemboweling or both. What a surprise, then, to encounter “The Messengers” which is a neatly crafted, old-fashioned ghost story. Its roots in movies ranging from “Poltergeist” to “The Amityville Horror” are a bit too obvious, but it’s equally obvious that this isn’t one of those films where they designed the poster and then came up with the movie.

A brief prologue set sometime in the past shows us a mother and two kids attempting to escape some horrible but unidentified force that is trying to harm them. What is occurring here is the chief mystery of the film, but not the only one. Next we’re introduced to the Solomon family, which has left Chicago to move to a remote farm in North Dakota. Roy (Dylan McDermott), the father, plans on becoming a farmer and raising sunflowers. Denise (Penelope Ann Miller), the mother, is concerned about the kids. Their toddler son Ben (Evan and Theodore Turner) doesn’t speak, while their teenage daughter Jess (Kristen Stewart) has some trouble in her past.

Over the course of a brisk 84 minutes the mysteries are resolved, but screenwriter Mark Wheaton and co-directors Danny and Oxide Pang (Hong Kong directors making their American debut) set their own pace. There are plenty of “Boo!” effects, some as simple as the surprise appearance of a banker (William B. Davis — Cigarette Smoking Man from “The X Files”) and some as startling as an attack of crows that seems to be out of “The Birds.”

Meanwhile, little Ben sees things yet isn’t frightened, while Jess is scared out of her wits though, because of her past, no one believes her story. Viewers will have figured out Jess’s secret before it’s finally revealed, though perhaps not all the details. The unraveling of the ghostly mystery, on the other hand, will surprise and has a satisfying payoff, with this dysfunctional family literally having to pull together.

The film has a surprisingly strong cast for a low budget horror entry, with John Corbett adding his own spin as the hired hand with a knack for frightening away crows and Dustin Mulligan as a local boy who befriends Jess. While McDermott and Miller hold their own as the parents, the weight of the film is really on young Kristen Stewart, who gets to run the gamut of horror film emotions and yet remain a believable teenager.

Viewers who prefer to see blood splattering and internal organs being sliced and diced will be disappointed. In one sequence the Pangs ratchet up the tension simply by making us wonder when Jess will turn around and see what’s coming up behind her. This is a ghost story, not video game or a visit to the butcher shop.

“The Messengers” is a small and spooky offering from the Pang brothers, introducing themselves to American viewers who may not have seen “The Eye” (which they’re currently remaking) or “Infernal Affairs” (where their script was recently remade as “The Departed”). It’s a sign, no doubt, of better films to come.

A Columbia Pictures release

Rating: PG-13 for mature thematic material, disturbing violence and terror

Running time: 1 hour, 24 minutes

‘The Messengers’