The Clock (1945)

This is a re-watch.

Directed by Vincente Minnelli.

Screenplay by Robert Nathan & Joseph Schrank, story by Paul & Pauline (yes, you’re reading that right) Gallico.

Robert Walker does such an excellent job playing Joe’s spirited brightness & irrepressible state of wonder. During his first several interactions in Penn Station, he’s so inexplicably cheery that you start to think, ‘Jesus, he’s annoying…I hope someone knocks him down a peg soon’ – but by the time he makes his owl face while he & Alice (Judy Garland) are watching the seals, he’s demonstrated his genuineness so likably, that your attitude can’t help but shift to, ‘This kid is a Happiness Hero and I hope his sunshine never gets rained on.’

And you know…as I’m saying this, I’m realizing that a large amount of credit for that Obnoxious-to-Adorable shift rests with Judy Garland, and the way she reacts towards Joe. Following her heel repair, she only responds to/looks at Joe with warmth, kindness, & respect. She’s not annoyed…so neither are we!

(Am I the only one who catches myself scanning the crowd for Robert Mitchum in the Central Park seals scene? ‘Cause he & those seals go on to be straight-up pals in HOLIDAY AFFAIR (1949).)

“Under the clock at the Astor at 7!” is a phrase I find myself repeating aloud to myself occasionally – for no other reason except that this movie impressed upon me that it was a very important phrase to remember…so I did.

Chatty Helen the Roommate (Ruth Brady) is uber concerned about Alice’s lateness…and Boyfriend Bill (Marshall Thompson) could not give less of a shit. Ha!

Brady is decidedly not great in her scene of whiny consternation towards “Al”…but I must say that Chatty Helen has some totally valid points regarding Impromptu Soldier Romance. I mean…we all saw WATERLOO BRIDGE (1931/1940) – first, it’s “Under the clock at the Astor at 7!”, next, you’re ‘Under the car you just used to suicide yourself because you had no faith that Roy would still love you if he found out about your temporary career as a prostitute!’

(Deep breath.) However, we know Joe…even if – yes, Chatty Helen – we do not know his last name.

(Cue President Bartlet saying, “I’m Joe…Bethersonton” in Season 3 of The West Wing. “That’s with one ‘t’…and with an ‘h’ in there.”)

Garland handles Alice’s thoughtful pondering of the situation really well – and I love the detail of her absentmindedly flicking “Joe’s” lighter on & off while she’s on the phone with Freddie.

Judy Garland is so fucking radiant in this film, it just makes me want to weep. Because it’s not a glamorously bedazzled radiance – it’s one made of graceful elegance & gentleness of spirit. It is absolutely beautiful to behold.

Also: whoever decided to put that hair flower into the story, and then make it that flower – major kudos. It fits Garland and Alice perfectly.

I adore the scene in the park at night where they listen to the sounds “underneath” the quiet. What a fantastically lovely concept for a scene.

(I could do without all the dramatic choral “WooooOOOooo”ing, there at the end – but, I get it, it’s a Minnelli film, so…we just need to be thankful that the woooOOOOooo-ers don’t pop out of the bushes for a quick little dance number, or something.)

Milkman James Gleason appearing instead of a taxi is a stellarly magical story decision & it brings me much joy.

For me, it’s not until the milk-truck ride that I truly buy into the Destiny Bond that is ‘Joe + Alice Forever.’ It’s when they’re able to have a deeply contented time just being – they don’t need an evening of grandness & ACTIVITIES (though – thanks for that classy-ass bottle of wine, Mr. Rich Man at Dinner) to enjoy themselves together – just their being together is the thing.

Keenan Wynn is so unexpectedly sensational as the Diner Drunkard.

“You are, without a doubt, the most ugly exquisite creature that has ever been my pleasure to come in contact with,” he says, to that random woman. “Let me take you out of all this.”

Hahaha. Pure magnificence.

Speaking of “magnificence”: how ’bout Joe & Alice’s ‘Mission: Milk Delivery’ team-up? Is that not the most adorable thing you’ve seen since sliced bread?

(…Or – whatever. You know what I mean.)

So many couples come along with this movie. Paul & Pauline Gallico (admittedly, I was not aware of them until this viewing), and Garland/Minnelli, and Mr. & Mrs. Real-Life Gleason! (Lucile plays Milkman Al’s wife.)

A classic of a line (at least in my world):

“If people thought about all the things that could happen, they’d never do anything.” — Milkman Al

The catastrophe of the subway station(s) is always so devastating & makes me want to sob. (Good job with the music, George Bassman…and good job with the confused, hopeful panic, Robert & Judy.)

Normally, I’m not one for Haste Marriages – but by the time Jalice miracle-unites, I’m just like, ‘Yeah. Go for the gold, children. Just this once.’

Drowned-by-Train-Noise vows. I’ma be honest – if I ever have a wedding, I 1000% want that to happen at mine.

Soup?! For your post-wedding meal, you’re going to eat soup?!

(Luckily, neither of them are very hungry (or so they claim), so they don’t eat too much of it & therefore remain (mostly) decent people.)

“It isn’t very good soup, I guess,” says Joe.

JOKES ON YOU, CORPORAL ALLEN. There’s no such thing as “good soup”!!!

(But…as per usual, when soup (insert eye-roll here) is involved – I digress.)

Impromptu Wedding #2 was such a great idea, plot-wise – and was executed in such a lovely way by Garland & Walker. Bravo, team.

Truly, what a wonderful movie.

Oh, and one last piece of interest: for a time, Fred Zinnemann was supposed to direct this film. Given that Zinnemann’s eventual signature masterwork film was HIGH NOON (1952) – a film famous for its fixation on time & its repeated use of clock shots – I find this fact equal parts hilarious & incredible.

Share this:

Like Loading...