BRIAN McFadden shocked the pop world when he dramatically left Westlife in 2004.

He then went on to carve out a career as a solo artist, talent show judge and TV host, and he recently starred in this year's series of Dancing on Ice.

Who is Brian McFadden dating?

Brian is dating a high school PE teacher who works in Rochdale - a far cry from the famous exes he's settled down with before.

The Dancing On Ice star has been with Danielle Parkinson, a one time Olympic athlete hopeful and teacher, since 2016.

Danielle was introduced to the singer by crooner Cole Paige.

Danielle, who lives in Heywood, Lancs, used to compete in the heptathlon for Rochdale Harriers at Under 21 level and dreamed to making the Olympics as a teenager.

However she ended up teaching PE at Matthew Moss High School in Rochdale, where she is said to be popular with the pupils.

A pal in the camp said: “Danielle was a fanatical athlete in her teens and entered loads of regional competitions and people really thought she would actually make the GB Olympic squad – but sadly it never happened.

“She is happy at her PE job right now and has kept the relationship with Brian McFadden fairly quiet.

“It will become high profile no doubt when he starts his Boyzlife tour and he is in the news again – and to be honest the two of them are a happy item."

Things are so serious between them that Brian has even moved to Rochdale to be closer to Danielle.

How did Brian injure his shoulder on Dancing On Ice?

Brian partially dislocated his shoulder during rehearsals on Saturday, January 12.

His accident followed another nasty fall during rehearsals, which was exclusively revealed by The Sun Online.

The 38-year-old was left feeling "anxious" on the ice after taking a tumble.

His professional skating partner, Alex Murphy, told The Sun Online: "We had a fall, it was pretty bad.

"He was really anxious after that but I told him not to worry and hopefully it's out of his system."

How did Brian do in Dancing On Ice?

As tough as rehearsals were following his injuries, Brian soldiered on.

It was feared that he would have to pull out of the competition due to his shoulder, however, medical experts deemed him fit enough to carry on - which he did.

He was the ninth celebrity contestant booted off the show in the semi-finals.

Why did Brian McFadden quit Westlife?

As a member of the Irish five-piece band Westlife - alongside Shane Filan, Nicky Byrne, Mark Feehily and Kian Egan - Brian experienced huge chart success.

The group made history when their first seven singles hit number one and they were at the height of their fame when Brian shocked everyone by quitting in 2004.

At the time he blamed his departure on struggling to juggle the band's hectic, jet-setting lifestyle with his responsibilities as a husband and father to then-wife Kerry Katona and their young daughters, Molly and Lilly-Sue.

"It was incredible, amazing, but during the seven years in the band, we worked 365 days a year, living on planes, in hotels and out of suitcases, and never being in the same country for two days," he told the Belfast Telegraph.

"After a while, you realise there's no point in being successful if you can't enjoy it, share it with someone else or be with the people you care about."

He was not part of the Westlife reunion in 2018 after the band turned down a €50m offer to reunite with their original line up.

In January 2018, it was revealed Westlife had snubbed Brian all over again as they confirmed there’s "no longer space" for him in the band.

What did Brian McFadden do after Westlife?

Brian signed a solo recording deal and in 2004 he released his debut album, Irish Son, which featured the number one smash Real To Me.

He also moved to Australia in 2004 and enjoyed success Down Under as a TV and radio presenter and talent show judge, while writing his own albums and penning tracks for other artists.

He joined the judging panel for three series of Australia's Got Talent from 2010-2013 and presented an Australian radio show.

Returning to the UK, he participated in TV shows including Stepping Out with then-wife Vogue Williams and Channel 4 extreme sports show, The Jump.

He's also hosted the TV series Who's Doing The Dishes and a dating series called Stand By Your Man.

Throughout his career so far, he's released four studio albums, most recently The Irish Connection in 2013, which featured ten cover versions of popular songs by Irish artists and a collaboration with Ronan Keating.

Four of his solo singles have hit number one around the world.

In 2016 Brian teamed up with ex Boyzone singer Keith Duffy to create the duo Boyzlife.

Who is Brian McFadden and what's his background?

Brian Nicholas McFadden is 38 years old.

He was born on April 12, 1980, in Dublin, Ireland, and got his first taste of performing at an early age thanks to roles in local stage productions and an Irish TV show called Finbar's Class.

As a teenager, he worked at McDonald's on Friday evenings and it was after one such shift, when he joined his friends at a party, that Brian found out auditions for a new Irish boyband to be managed by Louis Walsh were taking place the following day.

Not expecting anything to come from it, Brian turned up at the auditions the next day and boldly volunteered to sing first.

The future pop star performed the Boyzone track Picture of You and secured his place in the band.

He joked in an interview with The Mail on Sunday: "I sometimes wonder how far up the career ladder I'd have gone if I'd stayed with McDonald's. With a bit of luck, I reckon I might have made it as far as restaurant manager!"

What is Brian McFadden's net worth?

According to Spear's magazine, the pop star's net worth is estimated at around £12million.

The mag cites his huge success with Westlife - who had four Irish studio album number ones and seventeen Irish top five singles - and subsequent solo career success in Ireland and Australia, as well as his various TV projects.

He's also penned tracks for other artists including Girls Aloud.

In 2013, Brian told Weekend magazine he regretted "wasting so much of the money I earned from Westlife. I went through millions of pounds on cars, private jets and lots of rubbish. I have a lot less money now, but I'm far happier."

When was Brian McFadden married to Kerry Katona and Vogue Williams?

Brian married his first wife, Atomic Kitten founding member Kerry Katona, in County Meath, Ireland in 2002.

They had two children together: Molly, now 17, and Lilly-Sue, now 15.

When he quit Westlife, he said it was to spend more time with Kerry and the kids, but just two years after tying the knot, in 2004, they announced their split.

Brian then moved to Australia and began romancing another pop star, former Neighbours actress Delta Goodrem.

He popped the question to Delta in 2007 but they called off their relationship four years later, with Brian calling Delta "one of God's living angels" and thanking for "for giving me the best years of my life".

Brian went on to find love again with Irish model and DJ Vogue Williams after they met a charity event in Dublin in 2011.

They married in 2012 at a lavish Tuscan ceremony but just three years later, the couple announced their split on Twitter.

When is Dancing On Ice 2019 on TV?

Dancing On Ice 2019 returned to ITV in January, and the final airs TOMORROW (March 10) at 6pm.

Phillip Schofield is back to present the hit show once more alongside Holly Willoughby, who revealed the news of the show's return live on This Morning in late January.

Skating icons and current judges Jayne Torvill and Christopher Dean returned as judges, alongside Jason Gardiner and Ashley Banjo.