Brian McFadden Facts

Brian McFadden Image courtesy of Channel 4: The Jump

Name

clear

Children

He has two children from his marriage with Kerry Katona: Molly Marie McFadden and Lilly-Sue McFadden.

clear

Twitter

clear

Early Life and Westlife

Brian McFadden was born on 2 April 1980 in Dublin, Ireland.

Brian's sister is Susan McFadden, the winner of ITV's Grease Is The Word.

Brian McFadden broke into the music scene when IOU, managed by Louis Walsh, auditioned for new members. The band became Westlife, with McFadden on board, and they ended up with twelve No.1 singles in four years.

When Brian McFadden was in Westlife he changed his first name to Bryan and reverted back to Brian when he left.

Kerry Katona and Vogue Williams

He married Kerry Katona of Atomic Kitten in January 2002. They had two daughters, Molly and Lilly-Sue. However, Brian McFadden split from Kerry Katona and later got together with Delta Goodrem. Brian McFadden later married and divorced Vogue Williams.

In March 2004 Brian McFadden announced he was leaving Westlife. It was around this time, that he acknowledges he was at a low. He told The Guardian: "Westlife was collapsing, my marriage with Kerry was on the rocks, and then I went out and smashed my car into the wall. That afternoon I wrote a song called Walking Disaster, and I can safely say that it will never get any lower than that. But everything happens for a reason."

Solo Career

Brian McFadden's first solo single, Real To Me got to No. 1 in the British singles chart. According to the BBC, McFadden said: "I feel like Coventry City have won the FA Cup."

McFadden's debut album was Irish Son.

From the aforementioned Guardian article, Leaving the West Behind, there are some Brian McFadden facts: First record bought was I Should Be So Lucky by Kylie Minogue; Favourite film is Tin Cup; Album to grab in an emergency is Pet Sounds by the Beach Boys; Inspiration is Brian Wilson and Recent discovery was Grace by Jeff Buckley.

Television Appearances

In 2010 Brian McFadden became a judge on Australia's Got Talent alongside Kyle Sandilands and Dannii Minogue.

In 2013, Brian McFadden and his wife Vogue Williams appeared on ITV's dance reality TV show, Stepping Out.

In 2015, they divorced but remained close.

In 2016, McFadden became one of the celebrities on Channel Four's the Jump.

Before The Jump, he was asked about whether he could ski and replied:

"I can ski at a very beginner level; I’ve been a couple of times. What I learnt though I learnt very fast so I’m a quick learner when it comes to skiing."

McFadden ended up being the fourth celebrity to be eliminated from The Jump.

He was lined up to be one of the celebrities on Dancing on Ice in 2019. He was partnered with Alex Murphy.

They came fourth, just missing out on the final.

Back to Top