Brian McFadden (born 12.04.1980)

Brian McFadden is an Irish singer best known for having been in the boyband Westlife.

Childhood: Brian McFadden was born in Dublin, Ireland where was raised Catholic. He attended the Billie Barry Stage School and had an avid interest in singing, dancing and football. He later landed several acting roles including in the TV show 'Finbar's Class'. He also had a pop group called Cartel and performed in pubs around Dublin.

Musical career: Brian McFadden joined Westlife with Nicky Byrne alongside Kian Egan, Mark Feehily and Shane Filan after auditioning in 1998. They had four number one albums in Ireland while he was there, and ten number one singles including 'Uptown Girl' and 'Flying Without Wings'. He left in 2004 to work on solo projects but co-wrote the song 'If My World Stopped Turning' which was subsequently sung by Chris Doran in that year's Eurovision Song Contest. He signed to Sony BMG records and released his debut number one solo single 'Real to Me' in 2004. That year he released his debut solo album 'Irish Son'. He had another number one hit in the shape of third single 'Almost Here' featuring Delta Goodrem. In 2006, he co-wrote 'Together We Are One' for the Commonwealth Games and collaborated with LeAnn Rimes on the 'Everybody's Someone'. He left Song BMG in 2007 after disagreements about his songwriting following some disappointing record sales. He instead set up his own label, BMF Records, before releasing single 'Like Only a Woman Can' which became another Irish number one. In 2008, he signed to Universal Music Australia and released second album 'Set in Stone'. In 2010, he teamed with rapper Kevin Rudolf for his song 'Just Say So' which hit the Australia charts at number one. He released third studio album, 'Wall of Soundz' later that year and also recorded with Ronan Keating on Ronan's Bee Gees cover 'To Love Somebody'. In 2011, he released a song called 'Just the Way You Are (Drunk at the Bar)' which was criticised for glorifying date rape but which he insisted it not be played on the radio and donated proceeds to a victims of rape charity. He released a new single 'Wrap My Arms' in 2012 and later his his fourth studio album, 'The Irish Connection' which featured duets with Ronan Keating and Sinéad O'Connor. Later that year, Ronan Keating announced that Brian would support him on his 2013 UK Fires Tour.

Other career ventures: Brian McFadden became a co-host of FOX8's 'Football Superstar' in Australia in 2008. The following year he was a guest judge on 'Australian Idol'. In 2010, he joined the judging panel on 'Australia's Got Talent' with Kyle Sandilands and Dannii Minogue. In 2008, he presented the Summer Breakfast Show on 2Day FM with Ricki-Lee Coulter and Mike Goldman.

Personal life: Brian McFadden married singer Kerry Katona in 2002 with whom he has two daughters; Molly Marie and Lilly-Sue. They were divorced in 2006. In 2004, he started dating Delta Goodrem and got engaged in 2007. However, in 2011, they announced their separation. In 2012, he married reality star Vogue Williams. He was criticized in 2008 for making apparent homophobic remarks during the breakfast show on More FM in New Zealand. He later denied that his comments were meant offensively, claiming they'd been taken out of context.

Biography by Contactmusic.com