1. UNITED STATES SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION Washington, D.C. 20549 Form 10-K (Mark One) ¥ ANNUAL REPORT PURSUANT TO SECTION 13 OR 15(d) OF THE SECURITIES EXCHANGE ACT OF 1934 For the Fiscal Year Ended April 1, 2005 OR n TRANSITION REPORT PURSUANT TO SECTION 13 OR 15(d) OF THE SECURITIES EXCHANGE ACT OF 1934 For the Transition Period from to . Commission File Number 0-17781 SYMANTEC CORPORATION (Exact name of the registrant as speciÑed in its charter) Delaware 77-0181864 (State or other jurisdiction of (I.R.S. Employer incorporation or organization) IdentiÑcation No.) 20330 Stevens Creek Blvd., 95014-2132 Cupertino, California (zip code) (Address of principal executive oÇces) Registrant's telephone number, including area code: (408) 517-8000 Securities registered pursuant to Section 12(b) of the Act: None None (Title of each class) (Name of each exchange on which registered) Securities registered pursuant to Section 12(g) of the Act: Common Stock, par value $0.01 per share, and Related Stock Purchase Rights (Title of class) Indicate by check mark whether the registrant (1) has Ñled all reports required to be Ñled by Section 13 or 15(d) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 during the preceding 12 months (or for such shorter period that the registrant was required to Ñle such reports), and (2) has been subject to such Ñling requirements for the past 90 days. Yes ¥ No n Indicate by check mark if disclosure of delinquent Ñlers pursuant to Item 405 of Regulation S-K is not contained herein, and will not be contained, to the best of registrant's knowledge, in deÑnitive proxy or information statements incorporated by reference in Part III of this Form 10-K or any amendment to this Form 10-K. n Indicate by check mark whether the registrant is an accelerated Ñler (as deÑned in Rule 12b-2 of the Exchange Act). Yes ¥ No n Aggregate market value of the voting stock held by non-aÇliates of the registrant, based upon the closing sale price of Symantec common stock on October 1, 2004 as reported on the Nasdaq National Market: $18,094,697,000 Number of shares outstanding of the registrant's common stock as of May 27, 2005: 711,727,753 DOCUMENTS INCORPORATED BY REFERENCE Portions of the deÑnitive Proxy Statement, to be delivered to stockholders in connection with our Annual Meeting of Stockholders for 2005, are incorporated by reference into Part III.

2. SYMANTEC CORPORATION FORM 10-K For the Fiscal Year Ended April 1, 2005 Table of Contents Page PART I Item 1. BusinessÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏ 1 Item 2. Properties ÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏ 11 Item 3. Legal Proceedings ÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏ 12 Item 4. Submission of Matters to a Vote of Security Holders ÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏ 12 PART II Item 5. Market for Registrant's Common Equity, Related Stockholder Matters and Issuer Purchases of Equity Securities ÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏ 12 Item 6. Selected Financial Data ÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏ 13 Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations 15 Item 7A. Quantitative and Qualitative Disclosures about Market Risk ÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏ 46 Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data ÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏ 47 Item 9. Changes in and Disagreements with Accountants on Accounting and Financial Disclosure 48 Item 9A. Controls and Procedures ÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏ 48 Item 9B. Other Information ÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏ 49 PART III Item 10. Directors and Executive OÇcers of the Registrant ÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏ 49 Item 11. Executive Compensation ÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏ 49 Item 12. Security Ownership of Certain BeneÑcial Owners and ManagementÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏ 49 Item 13. Certain Relationships and Related Transactions ÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏ 49 Item 14. Principal Accountant Fees and Services ÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏ 50 PART IV Item 15. Exhibits, Financial Statement Schedules ÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏ 50 SignaturesÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏ 96 quot;quot;Symantec,'' quot;quot;we,'' quot;quot;us,'' and quot;quot;our'' refer to Symantec Corporation and all of its subsidiaries. This document contains references to trademarks and trade names of other companies. FORWARD-LOOKING STATEMENTS FACTORS THAT MAY AFFECT FUTURE RESULTS AND The discussion following below and throughout this report contains forward-looking statements, which are subject to safe harbors under the Securities Act of 1933 and the Securities Exchange Act of 1934. The words quot;quot;expects,'' quot;quot;plans,'' quot;quot;anticipates,'' quot;quot;believes,'' quot;quot;estimates,'' quot;quot;predicts,'' quot;quot;projects,'' and similar expres- sions identify forward-looking statements. In addition, statements that refer to projections of our future Ñnancial performance, anticipated growth and trends in our businesses, the anticipated impacts of acquisitions, and other characterizations of future events or circumstances are forward-looking statements. These state- ments are only predictions, based on our current expectations about future events. We cannot guarantee future results, performance or achievements or that predictions or current expectations will be accurate. We do not undertake any obligation to update these forward-looking statements to reÖect events occurring or circum- stances arising after the date of this report. These forward-looking statements involve risks and uncertainties, and our actual results, performance or achievements could diÅer materially from those expressed or implied by the forward-looking statements on the basis of several factors, including those that we discuss under Business Risk Factors beginning on page 34. We encourage you to read that section carefully.

3. PART I Item 1: Business Introduction Symantec is the global leader in information security providing a broad range of software, appliances, and services designed to help individuals, small and mid-sized businesses, and large enterprises secure and manage their information technology, or IT, infrastructure. Symantec's Norton brand of products is the worldwide leader in consumer security and problem-solving solutions. Founded in 1982, we are incorporated in Delaware and we have oÇces in 38 countries worldwide. We Ñle registration statements, periodic and current reports, proxy statements, and other materials with the Securities and Exchange Commission, or SEC. You may read and copy any materials we Ñle with the SEC at the SEC's Public Reference Room at 100 F Street, NE, Room 1580, Washington, DC 20549. You may obtain information on the operation of the Public Reference Room by calling the SEC at 1-800-SEC-0330. The SEC maintains a web site at www.sec.gov that contains reports, proxy and information statements and other information regarding issuers that Ñle electronically with the SEC, including our Ñlings. Our Internet address is www.symantec.com. We make available, free of charge, our annual reports on Form 10-K, quarterly reports on Form 10-Q and current reports on Form 8-K, and any amendments to those reports Ñled pursuant to Section 13(a) or 15(d) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended, through our Investor Relations web site, located at www.symantec.com/invest/index.html, as soon as reasonably practicable after they are electronically Ñled with or furnished to the SEC. The contents of our website are not incorporated into, or otherwise to be regarded as a part of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Business Overview We currently view our business in Ñve operating segments: Consumer Products, Enterprise Security, Enterprise Administration, Services, and Other. For Ñnancial information related to our operating segments, see Note 15 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Consumer Products Our Consumer Products segment focuses on delivering our Internet security and problem-solving products to individual users, home oÇces, and small businesses. Symantec's Norton brand of consumer security products is a market leader in desktop protection, with integrated products that work seamlessly to protect customers' computers from virus outbreaks or malicious hacker attacks. Most of the products that we are currently marketing or developing feature LiveUpdateTM. This feature enables users to easily download security updates including virus deÑnitions, Ñrewall rules, Uniform Resource Locator , or URL, databases, and uninstall scripts. Retail customers typically get a 12-month subscription to these security updates with the purchase of any consumer product. Our consumer products run primarily on Windows» and Macintosh» operating systems. Our Consumer Products segment represented 51%, 47%, and 41% of net revenues during Ñscal 2005, 2004, and 2003, respectively. Product oÅerings in the Consumer Products segment include Norton AntiVirusTM, Norton Internet SecurityTM, and Norton SystemWorksTM. Enterprise Security Our Enterprise Security segment provides security solutions for all tiers of a network: at the server tier behind the gateway and at the client tier, including desktop personal computers, or PCs, laptops, and handhelds. Our comprehensive software and appliance solutions include virus protection and content Ñltering, Ñrewall and virtual private networking, or VPN, intrusion prevention, and security management. In addition, we have expanded our technology oÅerings to include integrated solutions at the gateway and client levels, which combine several of our individual technology solutions, and early warning solutions. At the gateway level, our products run on Windows NT», Solaris», and Linux» platforms. Our products at the server level operate on Windows NT, UNIX, Linux, and other key server platforms. At the client level, our products run 1

4. on the Windows platform. Our Enterprise Security segment represented 36%, 39%, and 42% of net revenues during Ñscal 2005, 2004, and 2003, respectively. Antivirus Our virus protection and content Ñltering technologies provide protection at the gateway, server, and client tiers against known and unknown threats. Users of our virus protection and Ñltering products are able to take action to protect their enterprise from risks associated with using Internet resources. This includes scanning or monitoring data that enters, leaves, or travels inside the organization, as well as detecting and eliminating malicious code that may be introduced into a company's network. Products and services providing protection from virus attacks represent the most well-known and largest market component of the enterprise security area. Product oÅerings include Symantec AntiVirusTM and Symantec AntiVirusTM Scan Engine. Antispam Through the acquisitions of BrightmailTM and TurnTideTM in Ñscal 2005, we signiÑcantly augmented our family of Mail Security Solutions by adding software for application service providers, Internet service providers, or ISPs, portals, and enterprises as well as antispam routers, which are available in three deployment options, including server software, pre-conÑgured appliances, and a hosted solution. Providing a comprehensive, multi-layered approach to combating unwanted email known as spam, our Mail Security solutions include technology that leverages more than 20 spam protection techniques, delivering antispam eÅectiveness rates of up to 95% and one of the industry's highest accuracy rates against false positives (legitimate email being categorized as spam). Symantec's global Brightmail Logistics and Operations Centers, or BLOCs, analyze spam across the globe and provide secure automatic spam Ñlter updates every 10 minutes to help thwart attacks. The SymantecTM Mail Security 8100 Series also uses traÇc shaping technology to reduce spam entering a network. Our antispam solutions protect more than 300 million email user accounts worldwide. Product oÅerings include Symantec Mail Security 8100 and Symantec Mail Security 8200 appliances, Symantec Brightmail AntiSpamTM, and Symantec Mail Security software, as well as Symantec Hosted Mail Security. Early Warning Solutions Symantec's early warning solutions provide organizations with customized and comprehensive notiÑca- tions of vulnerabilities and new potential threats worldwide, and with countermeasures to prevent attacks before they occur, enabling them to mitigate risk and manage threats. Symantec analysts monitor potential threats 24 hours a day 7 days a week across more than 18,000 distinct product versions using information from more than 150 authoritative sources. They continuously correlate attack data from the security systems of more than 20,000 partners in 180 countries plus virus statistics from the Symantec Digital Immune System and many other human intelligence resources. These solutions are supported by SymantecTM Security Response, our Internet security research and support organization. Product oÅerings include Symantec DeepSightTM Alert Services and Symantec DeepSightTM Threat Management System. Firewall and VPN Solutions Firewalls provide protection against unwanted intrusion while enabling the Öow of approved traÇc. VPN solutions are designed to enable employees and business partners to remotely access an enterprise network in a secure, cost eÅective manner. We oÅer Ñrewall and VPN solutions that protect throughout the network, including at Internet gateways, gateways to sensitive internal networks, and at client devices. Product oÅerings include SymantecTM Enterprise Firewall with VPN, SymantecTM Firewall/VPN Appliance, and SymantecTM Clientless VPN Appliance. Integrated Solutions An integrated solution combines multiple security technologies with management, customer service and support, and advance research. Our integrated solutions combine full-inspection Ñrewall technology, protocol 2

5. anomaly-based intrusion prevention and intrusion detection engines, award-winning virus protection, URL- based content Ñltering, antispam and internet protocol security, or IPsec, and compliant VPN technology with hardware-assisted high-speed encryption. Integrated solutions are designed to work together as a uniÑed system, providing better overall protection, quicker response, and more eÇcient management. Product oÅerings include SymantecTM Gateway Security and SymantecTM Client Security. Intrusion Detection Organizations must protect information from unwanted users and hackers and control access to information to maintain business integrity. At the gateway and server levels, our intrusion detection products monitor systems for patterns of misuse and abuse and can warn organizations before systems are misused or information is stolen. Product oÅerings include SymantecTM Network Security, SymantecTM Network Security 7100 Series appliance, Symantec Intruder AlertTM, and SymantecTM Decoy Server. Management At the gateway and server levels, our policy compliance management solutions help customers deÑne, manage, and enforce policies from a central location as well as probe for network vulnerabilities and suggest remedies to proactively reduce business risk. The initial step to reduce corporate risk is to eÅectively measure compliance with a business's security policy and detect vulnerabilities where critical information resides. Symantec security management products provide a comprehensive solution allowing for the consolidation of security events, the containment of security threats, and the centralization of security policy enforcement. These products are built on an open, interoperable framework that enables us to work together with third party solutions to provide secure, manageable, and scalable enterprise security. Product oÅerings include Symantec Enterprise Security ManagerTM, SymantecTM Event Manager, and SymantecTM Incident Manager. Enterprise Administration Our Enterprise Administration segment oÅers open and modular products and services that enable companies to eÅectively and eÇciently manage their IT infrastructures. Our solutions are used to optimize the security and availability of our customers' information, while reducing operational costs, increasing IT quality of service, reducing complexity, and enhancing our customers' ability to rapidly respond to constant business and technological change. This is typically accomplished by transforming existing manual IT processes into automated and unattended operations that can be performed on multiple systems simultaneously across the enterprise, in a dynamic and adaptive manner. Our solutions allow customers to manage virtually any function at any point in the lifecycle of their computing systems and devices, from network auto-discovery and IT asset management, to operating system provisioning and application deployment, ongoing security updates and conÑguration management, rapid backup and disaster recovery, de-provisioning, and help desk remote control. Our Enterprise Administration segment represented 11%, 12%, and 15% of net revenues during Ñscal 2005, 2004, and 2003, respectively. Product oÅerings include Symantec Client Migration, Symantec GhostTM Solution Suite, pcAnywhereTM, the ON iCommandTM product family, the LiveStateTM Recovery product family, PartitionMagicTM Pro, VolumeManagerTM, ServerMagicTM for NetWare», and OEM Factory Solutions. Services Our Services segment provides information security solutions that incorporate advanced technology, security best practices and expertise, and global resources to help enable e-business success. Through its comprehensive oÅerings, our Services segment delivers holistic security assessments, planning and implemen- tation, proactive solutions for security management and response, and knowledge transfer to develop internal security skills. Our Services segment represented 2% of net revenues during each of Ñscal 2005, 2004, and 2003. Services oÅerings include SymantecTM Managed Security Services, SymantecTM Consulting Services, and SymantecTM Education Services. 3

6. Other Our Other segment is comprised of sunset products and products nearing the end of their life cycle. Sales, Marketing, and Customers We sell our consumer products to individuals and small oÇces/home oÇces around the world through a multi-tiered distribution network. Our products are available to customers through channels that include distributors, retailers, direct marketers, Internet-based resellers, original equipment manufacturers, or OEMs, educational institutions, and ISPs. We separately sell annual content update subscriptions directly to end users primarily via the Internet. We also sell some of our products and product upgrades through direct mail/email and over the Internet, in conjunction with channel partners. We sell our enterprise products and services to medium and large corporate customers around the world through our direct sales force, corporate resellers, value-added resellers, and system integrators. In addition, our indirect sales force works closely with our major distributor and reseller accounts to coordinate the Öow of orders, inventory levels, and sales to customers. We maintain distribution relationships with major independent distributors. We also work closely with retailers to execute channel marketing promotions and other cooperative marketing activities. Our agreements with distributors and resellers are generally nonexclusive and may be terminated by either party at any time without cause. These distributors are not within our control and are not obligated to purchase products from us. They also distribute other vendors' product lines. In Ñscal 2005, one reseller, Digital River, Inc., and two distributors, Ingram Micro, Inc. and Tech Data Product Management, Inc., including their subsidiaries, each accounted for more than 10% of our total net revenues. In Ñscal 2004 and 2003, two distributors, Ingram Micro, Inc. and Tech Data Product Management, Inc., including their subsidiaries, each accounted for more than 10% of our total net revenues. Our marketing activities include: ‚ Advertising in consumer, trade, technical, and business publications ‚ Online advertising ‚ Radio broadcast advertising ‚ Public relations ‚ Production of brochures, sales tools, multi-media product demonstrations, packaging, and other collateral ‚ Targeted customer communications through the Symantec Web site, including regularly scheduled Web-based seminars and online newsletters ‚ Cooperative marketing with distributors, resellers, and industry partners ‚ Direct mailings and emailings to existing end-users and prospects ‚ The use of tools such as trialware and SymantecTM Security Check, a Web-based tool for consumers to assess the security vulnerabilities on their computers ‚ Participation in focused trade and computer shows, sponsorship of industry analyst conferences, and execution of Symantec road shows, seminars, and user group conferences ‚ Primary market research to understand evolving customer needs and buying behaviors For our consumer products, we typically oÅer two types of rebate programs within most countries: volume incentive rebates to channel partners and promotional rebates to distributors and end-users. The distributor or reseller earns a volume incentive rebate primarily based upon their sale of products to end-users. We also oÅer rebates to individual users of various products acquired through major retailers. We regularly oÅer upgrade 4

7. rebates to existing customers purchasing a new version of a product. Both volume incentive rebates and end- user rebates are accrued as an oÅset to revenue when revenue is originally recorded. International Sales Revenues from sales outside of the United States represented 52% of our net revenues during each of Ñscal 2005 and 2004, and represented 49% of our net revenues during Ñscal 2003. Of these revenues, sales in the Europe, Middle East, and Africa, or EMEA, region represented 33% of our net revenues during each of Ñscal 2005 and 2004, and represented 30% of our net revenues during Ñscal 2003. Additional Ñnancial information regarding our international sales is provided in Note 15 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. We sell our products through authorized distributors, which may be restricted to speciÑed territories. For most of our consumer products, we translate the documentation, software, and packaging into the local language and prepare marketing programs for each local market. We have marketing oÇces in Australia, Austria, Belgium, Brazil, Canada, China, Czech Republic, Denmark, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Hong Kong, Hungary, India, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan, Malaysia, Mexico, the Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Poland, Portugal, Russia, Saudi Arabia, Singapore, South Africa, South Korea, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Taiwan, Turkey, United Arab Emirates, and the United Kingdom. These local oÇces facilitate our marketing and distribution in international markets. Our international operations are subject to various risks common to international operations, including but not restricted to: ‚ Government regulations ‚ Export and import restrictions ‚ Currency Öuctuations ‚ Repatriation restrictions ‚ In some jurisdictions, reduced protection for our copyrights and trademarks Symantec Security Response Symantec Security Response is a team of dedicated intrusion experts, security engineers, virus hunters, and global technical support teams that work in tandem to provide extensive coverage for enterprises and consumers. Symantec Security Response provides customers with comprehensive, global, 24 hours a day 7 days a week Internet security expertise to guard against today's blended Internet threats, which are threats that are multi-faceted in their operating methods and eÅects. Symantec Security Response delivers knowledgeable, proactive security protection through product security policies and best practice guidelines that can be updated and distributed through automated processes. Additionally, Symantec Security Response provides rapid reactive security protection through its incident response program, including emergency security signatures and policies, as well as outbound communications such as alerting services. Symantec Security Response issues a semi-annual report providing an analysis and discussion of trends in Internet attacks, vulnerabilities, malicious code activity, and additional security risks. The Symantec Internet Security Threat Report is one of the most comprehensive sources of Internet threat data in the world leveraging unparalleled sources to identify emerging trends in attacks and malicious code activity including: ‚ Symantec DeepSight Threat Management System ‚ Symantec Managed Security Services ‚ Symantec's vulnerability database, which covers more than 11,000 vulnerabilities in 20,000 technolo- gies from more than 2,000 vendors ‚ BugTraqTM, which is one of the most popular forums for the disclosure and discussion of vulnerabilities on the Internet, operated by Symantec 5

8. ‚ SymantecTM Probe Network, a system of more than 2 million decoy accounts attracting email messages from 20 diÅerent countries that allows Symantec to gauge spam and phishing activity Research Centers The research centers for Symantec Security Response are focused on collecting and analyzing the latest malware threats, from network security threats and vulnerabilities to viruses and worms. When a new threat or vulnerability is discovered, Symantec Security Response experts provide rapid emergency response, focusing on communication with customers and delivery of security updates for our security products. Research centers are located around the world, including the United States, Asia PaciÑc, and Europe. To ensure that customers are utilizing the most recent technologies available for addressing security issues, Symantec Security Response experts leverage our sophisticated back-end product architecture. This architecture allows users to receive the latest security updates Ì including intrusion detection signatures and virus deÑnitions Ì automatically in the event of a new security threat or outbreak. LiveUpdate technology simpliÑes and speeds the process of receiving and implementing security updates for our security product oÅerings at the server, gateway, and desktop levels. Technical Support With more than 300 experts in Internet security, desktop computer systems, and network management, our global technical support team is available around the clock. Our technical support experts provide customers with information on product implementation and usage, as well as countermeasures and identiÑca- tion tools for new threats. We maintain centralized support facilities throughout the world to drive rapid response to complex queries. Support is available in multiple languages, including Dutch, English, French, German, Italian, Japanese, Korean, Mandarin, Portuguese, and Spanish. Enterprise Security Support Our enterprise security support program oÅers annual support contracts to enterprise customers worldwide, including content, upgrades, and technical support. Our standard technical support includes 1) unlimited hot-line service delivered by telephone, fax, email, and over the Internet; 2) immediate patches for severe problems; 3) periodic software updates; 4) access to our technical knowledge base and frequently asked question, or FAQ, facility; and 5) an invitation to the annual user group meeting. Customers may augment their standard annual support contract with services such as 24 hours a day 7 days a week telephone and web support, advanced alerting services, additional designated callers, or contacts, and additional language support, as well as a Technical Account Manager assigned to work closely with an organization and act as a focal point for all issues. Consumer Product Support Our consumer product support program provides free self-help online services to all consumer customers worldwide, as well as free email support. A team of product experts, editors, and language translators are dedicated to maintaining the robustness of the online knowledge base. Generally, telephone product support is provided for a fee by an outside vendor. For customers that subscribe to them, the latest virus deÑnitions and application bug Ñxes and/or patches for most of our currently marketed and developed products are downloaded automatically through LiveUpdate, created by Symantec Security Response. We revise these fee-based support programs from time to time as customer requirements change and as market trends dictate. These programs may vary slightly by region. 6

9. Recent Acquisitions and Divestitures Acquisitions Since our initial public oÅering on June 23, 1989, we have completed acquisitions of 38 businesses. Our recent acquisitions included: ‚ Platform Logic, Inc., LIRIC Associates Limited, and @stake, Inc. in the December 2004 quarter ‚ TurnTide, Inc. in the September 2004 quarter ‚ Brightmail Incorporated in the June 2004 quarter ‚ ON Technology Corp. in the March 2004 quarter ‚ PowerQuest, Inc. and SafeWeb, Inc. in the December 2003 quarter ‚ Nexland, Inc. in the September 2003 quarter ‚ Riptech, Inc., Recourse Technologies, Inc., SecurityFocus, Inc., and Mountain Wave, Inc. in the September 2002 quarter We accounted for each of these acquisitions as a business purchase and, accordingly, we have included the operating results of these businesses in our consolidated Ñnancial statements from their respective dates of acquisition. See Note 3 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for further discussion of the above acquisitions. We also have acquired several other businesses in the past, including Peter Norton Computing, Inc. on August 31, 1990. We continue to use the Norton brand name for certain consumer products developed and marketed by us. In April 2003, we purchased certain assets related to Roxio Inc.'s GoBackTM computer recovery software business. In addition, in August 2003, we purchased a security technology patent as part of a legal settlement in Hilgraeve, Inc. v. Symantec Corporation. On December 16, 2004, we announced a deÑnitive agreement with VERITAS Software Corporation, or VERITAS, a leading independent supplier of storage and infrastructure software products and services. Under this agreement, we would acquire all of the outstanding stock of VERITAS in exchange for 1.1242 shares of Symantec common stock for each outstanding share of VERITAS common stock. In addition, we would assume all outstanding VERITAS stock options with an exercise price less than or equal to $49.00 per share, as well as each outstanding option that was granted under certain speciÑed VERITAS option plans, as adjusted in accordance with the exchange ratio. All other outstanding VERITAS stock options would be cancelled. The estimated purchase price is $13 billion, which includes the estimated fair value of Symantec common stock to be issued and VERITAS options to be assumed, as well as estimated direct transaction costs. We derived this estimate using an average market price per share of Symantec common stock of $25.87, which was based on an average of the closing prices for a range of trading days (December 14, 2004 through December 20, 2004, inclusive) around the announcement date (December 16, 2004) of the proposed transaction. The Ñnal purchase price would be determined based upon the number of VERITAS shares and options outstanding at the closing date. Completion of the transaction is subject to customary closing conditions that include, among others, receipt of required approvals from Symantec and VERITAS stockholders. Under terms speciÑed in the merger agreement, Symantec or VERITAS may terminate the agreement and as a result either Symantec or VERITAS may be required to pay a $440 million termination fee to the other party in certain circumstances. While we currently anticipate that we will be in a position to complete the merger on or prior to June 30, 2005, we believe that there may be administrative beneÑts to completing the merger at the beginning of our second quarter of Ñscal 2006. Symantec and VERITAS have therefore discussed the possibility of closing the merger during the Ñrst week of that Ñscal quarter. Unless otherwise indicated, the discussions in this document relate to Symantec as a stand-alone entity and do not reÖect the impact of the pending business combination transaction with VERITAS. For further discussion of our recent acquisitions, see Note 3 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. 7

10. Divestitures In August 2001, we sold assets and transferred liabilities and employees related to our Web Access Management product line to PassGo Technologies, Ltd. and agreed to license them the related technology for a period of four years through August 2005. Product Development, Partnerships, Investments and Acquisitions We use a multiple product sourcing strategy that includes: ‚ Internal development ‚ Licensing from third parties ‚ Investments in companies ‚ Acquisitions of technologies, product lines, or companies We develop software products that are designed to operate on a variety of operating systems. We typically develop new products and enhancements of existing products through focused product development groups. Each product development group is responsible for its own design, development, documentation, and quality assurance. Our research and development expenditures for each of the last three years are further discussed under quot;quot;Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations Ì Research and Development Expenses.'' Independent contractors are used for aspects of the product development process. In addition, elements of some of our products are licensed from third parties. We invest in companies with emerging technologies and companies that promote the sale and use of our products and services. These investments are made in lieu of an acquisition when timing is inappropriate or when the business models and sectors fall outside of our strategic requirements. We pursue investments that we believe will be complementary and can enhance both Ñnancial returns and market growth. We use strategic acquisitions as necessary to provide certain technology, people, and products for our overall product and services strategy. We consider both time to market and potential market share growth when evaluating acquisitions of technologies, product lines, or companies. We have completed a number of acquisitions of technologies, companies, and products in the past, and we have also disposed of technologies and products. We may acquire and/or dispose of other technologies, companies and products in the future. For further discussion of our acquisitions, see Note 3 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. Competition Our markets are competitive and are subject to rapid changes in technology. They are inÖuenced by the constant change in Internet security threats and the strategic direction of major software and operating system providers, network equipment and computer hardware manufacturers, ISPs, application service providers, and key application software vendors. Our competitiveness depends on our ability to deliver products that meet our customers' needs by enhancing our existing solutions and services and oÅering reliable, scalable, and standardized new solutions on a timely basis. We have limited resources, and as a result, we must deploy our available resources thoughtfully. The principal competitive factors in our Consumer Products, Enterprise Security, and Enterprise Administration segments are quality, integration of advanced technology, time to market, price, reputation, Ñnancial stability, breadth of product oÅerings, customer support, brand recognition, and sales and marketing teams. In our Services segment, the principal competitive factors include technical capability, customer responsiveness, price, ability to attract and retain talented and experienced personnel, Ñnancial stability and reputation within the industry. In the enterprise security and administration markets, we compete against many companies who offer competing products to our technology solutions and competing services to our response and support. In the area of antivirus and filtering products, some of the companies we compete against are Computer Associates, McAfee (formerly Network Associates), Sophos, Trend Micro, and WebSense. In addition, Microsoft has recently 8

11. announced and has launched the internal testing of an online suite that includes automated protection, maintenance, and performance tuning. This consumer subscription service, Windows OneCare, is expected to be a fee-based service available to the general public by the end of calendar 2005. Microsoft has also recently introduced a free antispyware product for the consumer market. In the area of firewall and VPN, some of the companies we compete against are Check Point Software, Cisco, Juniper, SonicWALL, and WatchGuard. In the area of intrusion detection and security management, some of the companies we compete against are Bindview, Internet Security Systems, NetIQ, and Tipping Point (recently acquired by 3Com). In the areas of remote management, imaging provisioning, backup, recovery, and asset management, some of the companies we compete against are Altiris, Laplink, Marimba (recently acquired by BMC Software), and VERITAS. In addition, we face indirect or potential competition from operating system providers and network equipment and computer hardware manufacturers, who provide or may provide various security solutions and functions in their current and future products. These competitors have signiÑcant advantages due to their ability to inÖuence or control the computing platforms, security layers, and network tiers on, or in, which security products operate. In addition, these competitors generally have signiÑcantly greater Ñnancial, marketing, or technological resources than we do. We believe that our ability to compete in the enterprise security and administration markets going forward depends in part on providing comprehensive, solution- oriented integrated oÅerings that secure and manage customers' most important asset Ì their information. Some of the companies that oÅer competing products to our Consumer Products oÅerings include Check Point Software, Computer Associates, Doctor Ahn, Internet Security Services, Kroll, McAfee (formerly Network Associates), Norman, Panda, and Trend Micro. With the constantly evolving Internet-based security threat environment, several other companies have entered the market and may become signiÑcant competitors in the future. Our Enterprise Security Services compete with companies such as Counterpane, IBM, Internet Security Systems, Ubizen, and VeriSign. Price competition is intense for most of our products and services. We expect price competition to continue to increase and become even more signiÑcant in the future, which may reduce our proÑt margins. We also face competition from a number of other products that oÅer levels of functionality diÅerent from those oÅered by our products or that were designed for a somewhat diÅerent group of end-users than those targeted by us. Microsoft has added security features to new versions of its operating system products that provide some of the same functions oÅered in our products. Microsoft's acquisition of GeCad's antivirus technology could lead it to include antivirus functions in future versions of its operating system products or as a stand-alone consumer product. In addition, vendors of other operating systems, such as Red Hat» Linux, Solaris, and Unix-based operating systems, may also incorporate some of the advanced utilities or other functionality oÅered in our products. Also, certain ISPs provide security functionality to their subscribers at no additional fee. While we plan to continue to improve our products by providing enhanced functionality to current and future operating systems, these eÅorts may be unsuccessful and any improved products may not be commercially accepted by users. We will continue to cooperate with operating system vendors to make our products compatible with those operating systems while at the same time diÅerentiating our utility products from features included in those operating systems. Our eÅorts in this regard may be unsuccessful. The demand for some of our products, including those currently under development, may decrease if, among other reasons: ‚ Microsoft includes additional product features in future releases of Windows or as stand-alone products ‚ Hardware vendors, including Cisco, incorporate additional server-based network management and security tools into network operating systems ‚ Operating system, network equipment, or computer hardware manufacturers license, develop, or acquire technology or products that provide functionality directly competitive with our product and service oÅerings 9

12. ‚ ISPs continue to provide security functionality to their subscribers at no additional fee In addition, we compete with other computer software companies, operating system providers, and network equipment and computer hardware manufacturers for access to retail distribution channels and for the attention of customers at the retail level and in corporate accounts. We also compete with other software companies, operating system providers, and network equipment and computer hardware manufacturers to acquire products or companies and to publish software developed by third parties. Some of our existing and potential competitors have greater Ñnancial, marketing, or technological resources than we do. We believe that competition in the industry will continue to intensify as other major software companies expand their product lines into additional product categories, and as operating system providers and network equipment and computer hardware manufacturers attempt to leverage their strengths at the computing platform, security layer, and network tier to compete more aggressively in the market for security solutions. Manufacturing Our product development groups produce a set of master compact disc read-only memory, or CD-ROMs, or diskettes, and documentation for each product that is then duplicated or replicated and packaged into products by our logistics organization. United States purchasing of all raw materials is performed by an outside organization. This outside contractor, under the supervision of our domestic logistics organization, performs all of our domestic manufacturing and order fulÑllment. Manufacturing includes the replication of CD-ROMs, printing of documentation materials and retail boxes, and assembly of the Ñnal packages. Purchasing is done by Symantec personnel for products manufactured in our Dublin, Ireland facility. For most products distributed outside of North and South America, our Dublin, Ireland manufacturing facility performs diskette duplication, assembly of the Ñnal packages, and order fulÑllment. Our Dublin, Ireland manufacturing facility also subcontracts to outside organizations for the replication of CD-ROMs and printing of documentation materials and retail boxes. Intellectual Property We regard our software as proprietary. We attempt to protect our software technology by relying on a combination of copyright, patent, trade secret and trademark laws, restrictions on disclosure, and other methods. In particular, we have a substantial number of registered trademarks and currently hold a substantial number of patents in the United States, as well as patent holdings in other countries, which expire at various times over the next twenty years. We regularly Ñle other applications for patents and trademarks in order to protect proprietary intellectual property that we believe are important to our business. We also license some intellectual property from third parties for use in our products. We face a number of risks relating to our intellectual property, including unauthorized use and unauthorized copying, or piracy, of our software solutions. Litigation may be necessary to enforce our intellectual property rights, to protect trade secrets or trademarks, or to determine the validity and scope of the proprietary rights of others. Patents that have been issued to us could be determined to be invalid and may not be enforceable against competitive products in every jurisdiction. Furthermore, other parties have asserted and may, in the future, assert infringement claims against us. For further discussion of our current litigation, see Note 14 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. These claims and any litigation may result in invalidation of our proprietary rights. Litigation, even if not meritorious, could result in substantial costs and diversion of resources and management attention. In addition, third party licenses may not continue to be available to us on commercially acceptable terms, or at all. Employees As of March 31, 2005, we employed approximately 6,500 people worldwide, including approximately 3,300 in sales, marketing, and related activities, 1,700 in product development, 400 in services, and 1,100 in management, manufacturing, administration, and Ñnance. 10

13. In connection with the relocation of our Leiden, Netherlands operations to Dublin, Ireland in early fiscal 2003, a group of employees in the Leiden facility joined a union to negotiate the proposed terms of the transfer of operations to our Dublin facility, focusing primarily on severance benefits for employees that did not relocate to Dublin. In addition, the Italian Trade Union and a French Symantec Works Council both have agreements with Symantec that govern parts of the employment relationship in the respective countries. Except for these instances, no other employees are represented by a labor union. We believe that relations with our employees are good. Item 2: Properties The following table sets forth the location, approximate square footage and use of each signiÑcant location used by Symantec: Approximate Size Expiration Location Purpose (In Square Feet) of Lease North America Cupertino, CaliforniaÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏ Administration, sales, marketing 296,000 Owned Santa Monica, California ÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏ Research and development, sales, marketing, administration 243,000 2007 SpringÑeld, Oregon ÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏ Customer service, sales, technical support, administration 199,000 Owned Waltham, Massachusetts ÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏ Research and development, technical support, sales 105,000 2010 Newport News, Virginia ÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏ Research and development, marketing 99,000 Owned Beaverton, Oregon ÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏ Sales, administration 80,000 2010 Toronto, Canada ÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏ Sales, administration 76,000 2005 Alexandria, VirginiaÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏ Research and development, marketing, managed security services 73,000 2007 Redwood City, California ÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏ Research and development, sales, marketing 70,000 2007 Orem, Utah ÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏ Research and development 69,000 2012 Herndon, Virginia ÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏ Sales, research and development 49,000 2007 American Fork, Utah ÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏ Research and development, technical support 39,000 2008 San Francisco, California ÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏ Research and development 38,000 2012 Tucson, ArizonaÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏ Administration 36,000 2013 International Dublin, IrelandÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏ Manufacturing, sales, administration, customer service 108,000 Owned Maidenhead, UK ÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏ Sales, administration, marketing 54,000 Owned Beijing, China ÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏ Manufacturing, research and development, sales 41,000 2008 Dublin, IrelandÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏ Technical support, sales 38,000 2005 Tokyo, Japan ÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏ Sales, research and development, marketing 34,000 2006 Sydney, AustraliaÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏ Sales, technical support, marketing, administration 33,000 2008 Munich, Germany ÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏ Sales, marketing 31,000 2008 Singapore ÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏ Sales, administration, marketing 30,000 2007 We also lease additional properties throughout the world, primarily in North America and Europe, for which the square footage is individually insigniÑcant. We also lease 148,000 square feet in Oregon, which is currently vacant. We are currently building a facility in Culver City, California which we expect to occupy in 2007, and we recently purchased a facility in Dublin, Ireland that we expect to occupy by the end of 2005. 11

14. We believe that our existing facilities are adequate for current needs and that the productive capacity in such facilities is substantially being utilized. Item 3: Legal Proceedings Information with respect to this Item may be found in Note 14 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements of this Annual Report on Form 10-K, which information is incorporated into this Item 3 by reference. Item 4: Submission of Matters to a Vote of Security Holders No matters were submitted to a vote of the security holders during the fourth quarter of Ñscal 2005. PART II Item 5: Market for Registrant's Common Equity, Related Stockholder Matters and Issuer Purchases of Equity Securities Our common stock is traded on the Nasdaq National Market under the symbol quot;quot;SYMC.'' The high and low sales prices set forth below are as reported on the Nasdaq National Market. All sales prices have been adjusted to reÖect the two-for-one stock splits, eÅected as stock dividends, that became eÅective Novem- ber 30, 2004 and November 19, 2003. Fiscal 2005 Fiscal 2004 Mar. 31, Dec. 31, Sep. 30, Jun. 30, Mar. 31, Dec. 31, Sep. 30, Jun. 30, 2005 2004 2004 2004 2004 2003 2003 2003 High ÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏ $26.60 $34.05 $27.68 $25.44 $24.05 $17.52 $16.67 $12.89 Low ÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏ $20.05 $23.53 $20.00 $19.71 $17.50 $14.28 $10.57 $ 9.09 As of March 31, 2005, there were 785 stockholders of record of Symantec common stock. Symantec has never declared or paid any cash dividends on its capital stock. We currently intend to retain future earnings for use in our business, and, therefore, we do not anticipate paying any cash dividends on our capital stock in the foreseeable future. Stock repurchases during the three-month period ended April 1, 2005 were as follows: Total Number of Shares Dollar Value of Shares Total Number of Average Price Purchased Under Publicly That May Yet Be Shares Purchased Paid per Share Announced Plans or Programs Purchased Under the Plan January 1, 2005 to January 28, 2005 31,800 $22.70 31,800 $486 million January 29, 2005 to February 25, 2005 302,100 $22.45 302,100 $479 million February 26, 2005 to April 1, 2005 ÏÏÏÏ 206,700 $21.54 206,700 $475 million Total ÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏ 540,600 $22.11 540,600 On January 16, 2001, our Board of Directors replaced an earlier stock repurchase authorization with a new authorization to repurchase up to $700 million of Symantec common stock, not to exceed 60.0 million shares, with no expiration date. On January 20, 2004, our Board of Directors increased the dollar amount of our stock repurchase authorization from $700 million to $940 million, without any speciÑc limit on the number of shares to be repurchased. On October 19, 2004, our Board of Directors increased the dollar amount of our stock repurchase authorization by $300 million, without any speciÑc limit on the number of shares to be repurchased. In connection with the stock repurchase authorizations, we have a repurchase plan under Rule 10b5-1 to facilitate stock repurchases up to $60 million per quarter. Pending the completion of the 12

15. proposed merger with VERITAS, we will be subject to a regulatory limitation that limits the level of quarterly repurchases allowed. During Ñscal 2005, we repurchased 7.8 million shares under the amended stock repurchase authorization, at prices ranging from $21.05 to $30.77 per share, for an aggregate amount of $192 million. During Ñscal 2004, we repurchased 3.0 million shares under the amended stock repurchase authorization, at prices ranging from $19.52 to $20.82 per share, for an aggregate amount of $60 million. During Ñscal 2003, we repurchased 8.8 million shares at prices ranging from $6.99 to $7.49 per share, for an aggregate amount of $64 million. On March 28, 2005, the Board of Directors increased the dollar amount of authorized stock repurchases by $3 billion eÅective upon completion of the VERITAS merger, without any speciÑc limit on the number of shares to be repurchased. We expect to repurchase shares pursuant to this authorization for cash as business conditions warrant between the date of the completion of the merger and March 31, 2006. Excluding the post- merger authorization, as of March 31, 2005, $475 million remained authorized by our Board of Directors. Item 6: Selected Financial Data The following selected consolidated Ñnancial data is derived from Symantec's consolidated Ñnancial statements. This data is qualiÑed in its entirety by and should be read in conjunction with the more detailed consolidated Ñnancial statements and related notes included elsewhere herein and with Item 7, Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations. Historical results may not be indicative of future results. During the past Ñve Ñscal years, we have made the following acquisitions: ‚ Brightmail Incorporated, TurnTide, Inc., @stake, Inc., LIRIC Associates Limited, and Platform Logic, Inc. during Ñscal 2005 ‚ Nexland, Inc., PowerQuest, Inc., Safeweb, Inc., and ON Technology Corp. during Ñscal 2004 ‚ Riptech, Inc., Recourse Technologies, Inc., SecurityFocus, Inc., and Mountain Wave, Inc. during Ñscal 2003 ‚ Lindner & Pelc Consult GmbH and Foster-Melliar Limited's enterprise security management division during Ñscal 2002 ‚ AXENT Technologies during Ñscal 2001 Each of these acquisitions was accounted for as a business purchase and, accordingly, the operating results of these businesses have been included in our consolidated Ñnancial statements since their respective dates of acquisition. In April 2003, we purchased certain assets related to Roxio Inc.'s GoBackTM computer recovery software business. In addition, in August 2003, we purchased a security technology patent as part of a legal settlement in Hilgraeve, Inc. v. Symantec Corporation. On August 24, 2001, we divested our Web Access Management product line. 13

16. Five-Year Summary Year Ended March 31, 2005 2004 2003 2002 2001 (In thousands, except net income (loss) per share) Consolidated Statements of Income Data: Net revenues ÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏ $2,582,849 $1,870,129 $1,406,946 $1,071,438 $853,554 Amortization of goodwill(a) ÏÏÏÏÏÏÏ Ì Ì Ì 196,806 71,336 Amortization of deferred stock-based compensation(b) ÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏ 4,524 Ì Ì Ì Ì Acquired in-process research and developmentÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏ 3,480 3,710 4,700 Ì 22,300 Restructuring ÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏ 2,776 907 11,089 20,428 3,664 Integration planning(c) ÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏ 3,494 Ì Ì Ì Ì Patent settlement(d) ÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏ 375 13,917 Ì Ì Ì Litigation judgment(e)ÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏ Ì Ì Ì 3,055 Ì Operating income ÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏ 819,266 513,585 341,512 8,041 109,600 Interest expense(f) ÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏ (12,323) (21,164) (21,166) (9,169) Ì Income, net of expense, from sale of technologies and product lines(g) Ì 9,547 6,878 15,536 20,448 Net income (loss) ÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏ $ 536,159 $ 370,619 $ 248,438 $ (28,151) $ 63,936 Net income (loss) per share Ì basic(h) ÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏ $ 0.81 $ 0.61 $ 0.43 $ (0.05) $ 0.12 Net income (loss) per share Ì diluted(h) ÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏ $ 0.74 $ 0.54 $ 0.38 $ (0.05) $ 0.12 Shares used to compute net income (loss) per share Ì basic(h) ÏÏÏÏÏ 660,631 611,970 581,580 574,416 517,896 Shares used to compute net income (loss) per share Ì diluted(h) ÏÏÏÏ 738,245 719,110 682,872 574,416 545,896 (a) Beginning in Ñscal 2003, we no longer amortize goodwill due to the adoption of a new accounting standard. (b) In connection with the Brightmail acquisition during Ñscal 2005, we assumed unvested Brightmail stock options in exchange for unvested options to purchase Symantec common stock. For more information, see Note 3 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. Also during Ñscal 2005, we issued restricted shares to our Senior Vice President of Finance and Chief Financial OÇcer. For more information, see Note 11 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. (c) During Ñscal 2005, we announced a deÑnitive agreement with VERITAS Software Corporation under which we would acquire all the outstanding stock of VERITAS. In connection with this proposed merger, we have recorded integration planning costs. For more information, see Note 3 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. (d) During Ñscal 2005, we recorded patent settlement costs and entered into a patent license agreement with Tumbleweed Communications Corporation. During Ñscal 2004, we recorded patent settlement costs and purchased a security technology patent as part of a settlement in Hilgraeve, Inc. v. Symantec Corporation. For more information, see Note 4 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. (e) During Ñscal 2002, we accrued litigation expenses for a copyright action assumed by us as a result of our acquisition of Delrina Corporation. (f) In October 2001, we issued $600 million of 3% convertible subordinated notes. In November 2004, substantially all of the outstanding convertible subordinated notes were converted into 70.3 million shares 14

17. of our common stock and the remainder was redeemed for cash. We will not incur further interest expense with respect to these notes. For more information, see Note 6 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. (g) Income, net of expense, from sale of technologies and product lines primarily related to royalty payments received in connection with the licensing of substantially all of the ACT!TM product line technology. In December 2003, Interact purchased this technology from us. (h) Share and per share amounts reÖect the two-for-one stock splits eÅected as stock dividends, which occurred on November 30, 2004, November 19, 2003, and January 31, 2002. March 31, 2005 2004 2003 2002 2001 (In thousands) Balance Sheet Data: Working capital(i)ÏÏÏÏÏÏ $1,987,259 $1,555,094 $1,152,773 $ 988,044 $ 369,184 Total assets ÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏ 5,614,221 4,456,498 3,265,730 2,502,605 1,791,581 Convertible subordinated notes(j) ÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏÏ Ì 599,987 599,998 600,000 Ì Long-term obligations, less current portion ÏÏÏ 4,408 6,032 6,729 7,954 2,363 Stockholders' equityÏÏÏÏÏ 3,705,453 2,426,208 1,764,379 1,319,876 1,376,501 (i) A portion of deferred revenue as of March 31, 2003 was reclassiÑed to long-term to conform to the current presentation. Amounts prior to Ñscal 2003 are considered immaterial for reclassiÑcation. (j) In October 2001, we issued $600 million of 3% convertible subordinated notes. In November 2004, substantially all of the outstanding convertible subordinated notes were converted into 70.3 million shares of our common stock and the remainder was redeemed for cash. For more information, see Note 6 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. Item 7: Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations Symantec is the global leader in information security providing a broad range of software, appliances, and services designed to help individuals, small and mid-sized businesses, and large enterprises secure and manage their information technology, or IT, infrastructure. Symantec's Norton brand of products is the worldwide leader in consumer security and problem-solving solutions. Founded in 1982, we have oÇces in 38 countries worldwide. We have a 52/53-week Ñscal accounting year. Accordingly, all references as of and for the periods ended March 31, 2005, 2004, and 2003 reÖect amounts as of and for the periods ended April 1, 2005, April 2, 2004, and March 28, 2003, respectively. The Ñscal accounting years ended April 1, 2005 and March 28, 2003 are each comprised of 52 weeks of operations, while the Ñscal accounting year ended April 2, 2004 is comprised of 53 weeks of operations. The Ñscal accounting year ending March 31, 2006 will comprise 52 weeks of operations. Critical Accounting Estimates The preparation of our consolidated Ñnancial statements and related notes in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles requires us to make estimates, which include judgments and assumptions, that aÅect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenue and expenses, and related disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities. We have based our estimates on historical experience and on various assumptions that are believed to be reasonable under the circumstances and we evaluate our estimates on a regular basis and make changes accordingly. Historically, our estimates relative to our critical accounting estimates have not diÅered materially from actual results; however, actual results may diÅer from these estimates under diÅerent conditions. If actual results diÅer from these estimates and other considerations used in estimating amounts reÖected in Symantec's consolidated Ñnancial statements, the resulting changes could have a material adverse 15

18. eÅect on Symantec's consolidated statement of income, and in certain situations, could have a material adverse eÅect on liquidity and Symantec's Ñnancial condition. A critical accounting estimate is based on judgments and assumptions about matters that are highly uncertain at the time the estimate is made. DiÅerent estimates that reasonably could have been used, or changes in accounting estimates could materially impact the Ñnancial statements. We believe that the estimates described below represent our critical accounting estimates, as they have the greatest potential impact on our consolidated Ñnancial statements. We also refer you to our quot;quot;Summary of SigniÑcant Accounting Policies'' beginning on page 63 in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Management has discussed the development and selection of its critical accounting estimates with the Audit Committee of Symantec's Board of Directors, and the Audit Committee has reviewed the disclosure presented below relating to them. Revenue Recognition We recognize revenue in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles that have been prescribed for the software industry. Revenue recognition requirements in the software industry are very complex and they require us to make many estimates. We expect our distributors and resellers to maintain adequate inventory to meet future customer demand, which is generally 4 to 6 weeks of customer demand based on recent buying trends. We ship product to our distributors and resellers at their request and based on their valid purchase orders. Our distributors and resellers base the quantity of their orders on their estimates to meet future customer demand, which may exceed our expected level of a 4 to 6 week supply. We oÅer limited rights of return if the inventory held by our distributors and resellers is below the expected level of a 4 to 6 week supply. We estimate future returns under these limited rights of return in accordance with Statement of Financial Accounting Standards, or SFAS, No. 48, Revenue Recognition When Right of Return Exists. We typically oÅer liberal rights of return if inventory held by our distributors and resellers exceeds the expected level. Because we cannot reasonably estimate the amount of excess inventory that will be returned, we do not recognize revenue or record accounts receivable for the amount in excess of the expected inventory levels. On the same basis, we reduce the associated cost of revenues, which is primarily related to materials, and include this amount in inventory. We recognize these revenues and the associated cost of revenues when the liberal rights of return expire, which is when the inventory levels no longer exceed the expected level of a 4 to 6 week supply. If we made diÅerent estimates, material diÅerences may result in the amount and timing of our net revenues and cost of revenues for any period presented. As of each of the Ñscal years ended March 31, 2005, 2004, and 2003, the amount of net revenues not recognized related to excess inventory represented no more than 3% of total net revenues recognized during each of the years then ended. Associated costs that were included in inventory as of each of the Ñscal years ended March 31, 2005, 2004, and 2003 represented no more than 2% of the total cost of revenues recorded during each of the years then ended. In arrangements that include multiple elements, including perpetual software licenses and maintenance and/or services, and packaged products with content updates, we allocate and defer revenue for the undelivered items based on vendor-speciÑc objective evidence, or VSOE, of fair value of the undelivered elements, and recognize the diÅerence between the total arrangement fee and the amount deferred for the undelivered items as revenue. Our deferred revenue consists primarily of the unamortized balance of enterprise product maintenance and consumer product content updates and totaled $1.3 billion as of March 31, 2005, of which $115 million was represented as long-term deferred revenue, on the Consolidated Balance Sheet. VSOE of each element is based on the price for which the undelivered element is sold separately. We determine fair value of the undelivered elements based on historical evidence of our stand- alone sales of these elements to third parties. When VSOE does not exist for undelivered items such as maintenance, then the entire arrangement fee is recognized ratably over the performance period. Changes to the elements in a software arrangement, the ability to identify VSOE for those elements, the fair value of the 16

19. respective elements, and changes to a product's estimated life cycle could materially impact the amount of earned and unearned revenue. Reserves for Product Returns End-users may return our products, primarily within our Consumer Products and Enterprise Administra- tion segments, through distributors and resellers or to us directly for a full refund within a reasonably short period from the date of purchase. Our estimated reserves for such end-user product returns, which are recorded as an oÅset to revenue, are based primarily on historical trends. We fully reserve for obsolete products in the distribution channels as an oÅset to revenue. If we made diÅerent estimates, material diÅerences may result in the amount and timing of our net revenues for any period presented. More or less product may be returned than what was estimated and/or the amount of inventory in the channel could be diÅerent than what was estimated. These factors and unanticipated changes in the economic and industry environment could make our return estimates diÅer from actual results. For additional information see Schedule II on page 98. Reserves for Rebates We estimate and record reserves as an oÅset to revenue for channel and end-user rebates, related primarily to products within our Consumer Products, Enterprise Security, and Enterprise Administration segments. Our estimated reserves for channel volume incentive rebates are based on distributors' and resellers' actual performance against the terms and conditions of volume incentive rebate programs, which are typically entered into quarterly. Our reserves for end-user rebates are estimated on the terms and conditions of the promotional programs, actual sales during the promotion, amount of actual redemptions received, historical redemption trends by product and by type of promotional program, and the value of the rebate. We also consider current market conditions and economic trends when estimating our reserves for rebates. If we made diÅerent estimates, material diÅerences may result in the amount and timing of our net revenues for any period presented. For additional information see Schedule II on page 98. Business Combinations When we acquire businesses, we allocate the purchase price to tangible assets and liabilities acquired and identiÑable intangible assets. Any residual purchase price is recorded as goodwill. The allocation of the purchase price requires management to make signiÑcant estimates in determining the fair values of assets acquired and liabilities assumed, especially with respect to intangible assets. These estimates are based on historical experience and information obtained from the management of the acquired companies. These estimates can include, but are not limited to, the cash Öows that an asset is expected to generate in the future, the appropriate weighted average cost of capital, and the cost savings expected to be derived from acquiring an asset. These estimates are inherently uncertain and unpredictable. In addition, unanticipated events and circumstances may occur which may aÅect the accuracy or validity of such estimates. At March 31, 2005, goodwill was $1.4 billion, acquired product rights were $128 million, and other identiÑable intangible assets were $31 million. We assess the impairment of goodwill within our reporting units annually, or more often if events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying value may not be recoverable. We assess the impairment of acquired product rights and other identiÑable intangible assets whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that its carrying amount may not be recoverable. An impairment loss would be recognized when the sum of the future net cash Öows expected to result from the use of the asset and its eventual disposition is less than its carrying amount. Such impairment loss would be measured as the diÅerence between the carrying amount of the asset and its fair value. The estimate of cash Öow is based upon, among other things, certain assumptions about expected future operating performance and an appropriate discount rate determined by our management. Our estimates of discounted cash Öows may diÅer from actual cash Öows due to, among other things, economic conditions, changes to the business model, or changes in operating performance. If we made diÅerent estimates, material diÅerences may result in write- downs of net long-lived and intangible assets, which would be reÖected by charges to our operating results for any period presented. 17

20. Accounting for Excess Facilities We have estimated expenses for excess facilities related to consolidating, moving, and relocating various groups or sites as a result of restructuring activities and business acquisitions. In determining our estimates, we obtained information from third party leasing agents to calculate anticipated third party sublease income and the vacancy period prior to Ñnding a sub-lessee. Market conditions will aÅect our ability to sublease facilities on terms consistent with our estimates. Our ability to sublease facilities on schedule or to negotiate lease terms resulting in higher or lower sublease income than estimated will aÅect our accrual for site closures. DiÅerences between estimates of related broker commissions, tenant improvements, and related exit costs may increase or decrease our accrual upon Ñnal negotiation. If we made diÅerent estimates regarding these various components of our excess facilities costs, the amount recorded for any period presented could vary materially from those actually recorded. Income Taxes We make signiÑcant estimates to determine our current provision for income taxes, as well as deferred tax assets and liabilities and our income taxes payable. Our estimates relative to the current provision for income taxes take into account current tax laws, our interpretation of current tax laws, and possible outcomes of current and future audits conducted by foreign and domestic tax authorities. Changes in tax laws or our interpretation of tax laws and the resolution of current and future tax audits could signiÑcantly impact the amounts provided for income taxes in our Ñnancial position and results of operations. We also assess the likelihood that our net deferred tax assets will be realized. Realization of our net deferred tax assets is dependent upon future United States taxable income and future taxable income in certain foreign jurisdic- tions, as well as our implementation of prudent and feasible tax planning strategies. Our estimates regarding future proÑtability may change due to future market conditions, changes in United States or international tax laws, and other factors. To the extent we believe it is more likely than not that some portion or all of our net deferred tax assets will not be realized, we establish a valuation allowance against the deferred tax assets. To the extent we establish a valuation allowance or change the allowance in a period, we reÖect the change with a corresponding increase or decrease to our tax provision in our Consolidated Statements of Income. Legal Contingencies From time to time, we are involved in disputes that arise in the ordinary course of business, and we do not expect this trend to change in the future. We are currently involved in legal proceedings as discussed in Note 14 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. When the likelihood of the incurrence of costs related to our legal proceedings is probable and management has the ability to estimate such costs, we provide for estimates of external legal fees and any probable losses through charges to our Consolidated Statements of Income. These estimates have been based on our assessment of the facts and circumstances at each balance sheet date and are subject to change based upon new information and intervening events. Our accrual for legal contingencies as of March 31, 2005 represented insigniÑcant amounts related to external legal fees and no amounts were accrued for probable losses as we believe that we have meritorious defenses to the claims against us, and we will defend ourselves vigorously. However, even if we are successful, estimated costs for external legal fees could be more than anticipated. If we are unsuccessful, we might be forced to pay signiÑcant damages and licensing fees for which we have not accrued any amounts for loss contingencies, or to modify our business practices. Any such results could materially harm our business and could result in a material adverse impact on our Ñnancial position, results of operations, or cash Öows. Results of Operations Overview In Ñscal 2005, we continued to pursue our goal of serving customer needs while reshaping the competitive landscape by oÅering new versions of integrated solutions. We believe that we continued to make progress 18

21. toward this goal as we introduced several new product oÅerings while posting substantial growth in revenue and earnings. We operate our business within Ñve operating segments: Consumer Products, Enterprise Security, Enterprise Administration, Services, and Other. Within the Consumer Products segment, we continued to grow our base of individual users and accelerated our expansion into the small business market. Our Norton brand of consumer security products continued as a market leader in desktop protection. In addition, we released new versions of our award-winning consumer products, including NortonTM Internet Security, Norton AntiVirus, Norton Personal Firewall, Norton AntiSpamTM, and Norton SystemWorks. These new products provide protection from viruses, intrusion attempts, and piracy threats, and oÅer expanded protection from emerging threats. Within the Enterprise Security segment, we continued to enhance and expand our product portfolio in order to address the evolving threat environment with the release of new versions of our integrated solutions: Symantec Gateway Security, Symantec Enterprise Security Manager, and Symantec Incident Manager. In addition, we maintained our focus on enhanced manageability and more comprehensive intrusion protection. The Enterprise Administration segment continued to beneÑt from our new product introductions, including the ON iCommandTM product family related to our business acquisition of ON Technology, and Symantec Client Migration and the LiveStateTM Recovery product family related to our business acquisition of PowerQuest, both of which were acquired in the second half of Ñscal 2004. Sales of our pcAnywhere product continued to decline and we expect this trend to continue due to the extended functionality of Microsoft operating system products. On a worldwide basis, we closed bigger deals driven by the depth and breadth of our product and service oÅerings. SpeciÑcally, we generated 1,347 enterprise deals greater than $100,000 each, including 353 deals greater than $300,000 each, and 63 deals greater than $1 million each. Deals greater than $1 million increased 85% in Ñscal 2005 as compared to Ñscal 2004. In addition, 59% of the deals greater than $100,000 involved multiple Symantec enterprise products and services. CashÖows were strong in Ñscal 2005 as we delivered over $1.2 billion in operating cash Öow. We no longer carry any debt due to the conversion of our convertible subordinated notes during Ñscal 2005 and we ended Ñscal 2005 with $3.2 billion in cash, cash equivalents, and short-term investments. Net revenues during Ñscal 2005 increased as compared to Ñscal 2004 due primarily to increased sales of our consumer and enterprise security products. We believe that a signiÑcant portion of the growth in demand was attributable to the continued increase in vulnerabilities, Internet attacks, and malicious code activity coupled with a growing level of awareness of these threats around the world. This growth in demand may not continue and, if it does not, our revenue growth rate may not be sustainable. Net revenues during Ñscal 2004 increased as compared to Ñscal 2003 due primarily to increased sales of our consumer and enterprise security products, which can be attributed to the numerous security threat outbreaks that occurred during Ñscal 2004, including the Beagle, Welchia, Blaster, Sobig, MyDoom, and Netsky viruses. Increased demand for our security protection solutions from large organizations as well as from small businesses and consumers also contributed to the growth. From a regional standpoint, sales outside of the United States contributed strongly to revenue growth while sales in the United States also grew during these periods. Strength in major foreign currencies during Ñscal 2005 and Ñscal 2004 also positively impacted our international revenue growth. A signiÑcant portion of our deferred revenue balance of $971 million as of March 31, 2004 contributed to our total net revenues during Ñscal 2005. Deferred revenue increased during Ñscal 2005 as compared to Ñscal 2004 due primarily to increased maintenance obligations. Our net income was $536 million, $371 million, and $248 million for Ñscal 2005, 2004, and 2003, respectively, representing $0.74, $0.54, and $0.38 net income per diluted share, respectively. Our increased proÑtability is primarily the result of revenue growth oÅset in part by an increase in operating expenses largely 19

22. attributable to an increase in employee headcount and related compensation. Approximately 75% of our headcount increase was due to the growth of the company and approximately 25% was due to business acquisitions. During Ñscal 2005, we acquired the following businesses: ‚ On June 21, 2004, we acquired Brightmail, a developer of email services and software for application service providers, Internet service providers, or ISPs, portals, and enterprises, for $318 million in cash and assumed stock options. ‚ On July 7, 2004, we acquired TurnTide, a developer of antispam routers, for $28 million in cash. ‚ On October 7, 2004, we acquired @stake, a digital security company that helps corporations secure their critical infrastructure and applications, for $49 million in cash. ‚ On October 11, 2004, we acquired LIRIC Associates, a U.K.-based consultancy Ñrm that oÅers expertise in assessing the security needs of highly complex global networks and designing the architecture and policies to secure these networks, for $15 million in cash. ‚ On December 9, 2004, we acquired Platform Logic, a technology company that had developed a single host intrusion prevention product, for $30 million in cash. On January 28, 2005, we purchased technology patents from ReefEdge, Inc. for $800,000 in cash, which we recorded as acquired product rights. On December 16, 2004, we announced a deÑnitive agreement with VERITAS Software Corporation, or VERITAS, a leading independent supplier of storage and infrastructure software products and services. Under this agreement, we would acquire all of the outstanding stock of VERITAS in exchange for 1.1242 shares of Symantec common stock for each outstanding share of VERITAS common stock. In addition, we would assume all outstanding VERITAS stock options with an exercise price less than or equal to $49.00 per share, as well as each outstanding option that was granted under certain speciÑed VERITAS option plans, as adjusted in accordance with the exchange ratio. All other outstanding VERITAS stock options would be cancelled. The estimated purchase price is $13 billion, which includes the estimated fair value of Symantec common stock to be issued and VERITAS options to be assumed, as well as estimated direct transaction costs. We derived this estimate using an average market price per share of Symantec common stock of $25.87, which was based on an average of the closing prices for a range of trading days (December 14, 2004 through December 20, 2004, inclusive) around the announcement date (December 16, 2004) of the proposed transaction. The Ñnal purchase price would be determined based upon the number of VERITAS shares and options outstanding at the closing date. Completion of the transaction is subject to customary closing conditions that include, among others, receipt of required approvals from Symantec and VERITAS stockholders. Under terms speciÑed in the merger agreement, Symantec or VERITAS may terminate the agreement and as a result either Symantec or VERITAS may be required to pay a $440 million termination fee to the other party in certain circumstances. While we currently anticipate that we will be in a position to complete the merger on or prior to June 30, 2005, we believe that there may be administrative beneÑts to completing the merger at the beginning of our second quarter of Ñscal 2006. Symantec and VERITAS have therefore discussed the possibility of closing the merger during the Ñrst week of that Ñscal quarter. Unless otherwise indicated, the discussions in this document relate to Symantec as a stand-alone entity and do not reÖect the impact of the pending business combination transaction with VERITAS. Information about the various factors that management deems important in contributing to our operating results for Ñscal year 2005, 2004, and 2003 is provided in the discussion below. 20