The Utah Jazz already have a team slogan for the 2018-19 season: “Team Is Everything.”

A second – let’s call it a backup motto – could be: “If it’s free it’s 3.”

Under coach Quin Snyder’s offense the Jazz are always looking for an open 3-point shot. Shoot, they’ll even take a few contested 3s.

This is not to say the Jazz won’t take layups, dunks and floaters, but one of the main tenants of the offense is spacing. And nothing helps to space the floor like a barrage of 3s.

Utah recently traded Alec Burks, a slasher whose game is similar to star guard Donovan Mitchell, for former Jazzman Kyle Korver, one of the NBA’s all-time great 3-point shooters. Utah’s 3-point shooting numbers were mediocre at best, so general manager Dennis Lindsey sent Burks and two future second-round picks to Cleveland for Korver.

It was a trade that made sense for the Jazz and that was readily apparent in Utah’s 139-105 romp of the San Antonio Spurs. The game, played Monday night at Vivint Arena, was Korver’s first game back in a Jazz uniform since 2010.

The Jazz hit a franchise record 20 3s on 33 attempts. Korver went 3 for 4 from behind the arc. Mitchell was 4 for 6 from deep and veteran Joe Ingles shot 3-of-6.

“It was good to come in here and play,” Korver told reporters after the game. “It’s a totally different team when I was here the first time. This team played really good basketball, the ball was moving, we were playing for each other. It was fun, a good night all around.”

Korver got a lot of love from Jazz fans. When he checked in early in the first quarter, he received a loud ovation.

Mitchell said he noticed Korver’s impact on the team right away.

“When you make a lot of 3s it definitely helps,” he said. “I think confidence as a whole for our team (picks up). When he’s hitting shots it’s like … he’s added spacing.”

Snyder picked up on that theme.

“Kyle obviously has an impact,” he said. “We haven’t been as focused as we need to be all the time. And that’s ultimately what generates good shots.”

On his “Locked on Jazz” podcast, Jazz radio play-by-play announcer David Locke noted a distinction involving corner 3s – distance-wise the best spot for 3-point shots. In a recent game at Miami, the Jazz took 13 corner 3s and made just two. Against the Spurs they took 12 and made 9.

Korver’s presence was impactful, no doubt.

“Playing alongside (Korver), it raises your awareness of him making 3s,” said Utah’s Jae Crowder, a teammate with Korver in Atlanta. “You want to be able to make as many as him. You want to make shots as well as him.”

Coincidentally, Utah’s sizzling 3-point night came against the Spurs, whose longtime head coach Gregg Popovich recently spoke out against the shot.

“It’s kind of like a circus sort of thing,” he told reporters in 2015. “Why don’t we have a 5-point shot, and a 7-point shot? You know, where does it stop? That sort of thing.”

He may not like 3s – he has called them “boring” – but admitted they’re essential to winning ballgames in today’s NBA.

“There’s no basketball anymore, there’s no beauty in it,” he told Bulls.com. “It’s pretty boring. But it is what it is and you need to work with it.”

The Jazz certainly need it and the keys for them are: spacing, ball movement and unselfishness.

“We’re not selfish at all,” point guard Ricky Rubio said Monday. “Sometimes we’re too unselfish.”