The Utah Jazz have traded Creighton great Kyle Korver to the Memphis Grizzlies, according to multiple reports.

Korver is part of a package being sent to Memphis in exchange for Mike Conley. The Grizzlies will receive Korver, Grayson Allen, Jae Crowder, the 23rd overall pick in Thursday’s NBA draft and a future first-round pick.

Memphis would be the sixth team Korver has played for during his 16-year NBA career. He appeared in 58 games off the bench for the Jazz last season, including the playoffs, after getting traded midseason by the Cleveland Cavaliers.

A second-round draft pick in 2003, Korver has averaged 9.9 points per game during his career, shooting 44.3% from the field and 42.9% from 3-point range.

Korver, who is the only player to lead the NBA in 3-point percentage four times, ranks fourth all-time in career 3-pointers made. He trails only Steph Curry among active players.

Korver, a Bluejay from 1999-2003, remains the only player in Creighton history to play in four NCAA tournaments. He was a consensus second-team All-American as a senior and twice was named the Missouri Valley regular-season and tournament MVP.

He joined Creighton’s Hall of Fame last year.

He remains the Creighton and Missouri Valley record holder with 371 career 3-pointers. He also ranks in the top 10 in Creighton history with 819 3-point attempts (first), an 89.1% free-throw percentage (first), a 45.3% 3-point percentage (third), 172 steals (fifth) and 1,801 career points (sixth).

Conley was the final piece of the core that led the Grizzlies to seven consecutive playoff berths, including the 2013 Western Conference Finals. Zach Randolph and Tony Allen left in 2017 as free agents, and Memphis traded Marc Gasol to Toronto in February, splitting up a duo that was the NBA’s longest-tenured teammates at the time. Gasol went on to help the Raptors win their first NBA title.

The move almost certainly means that Ricky Rubio will be elsewhere next season, even after he averaged 12.7 points and 6.1 assists for the Jazz this season. Pairing Conley with rising star Donovan Mitchell figures to give the Jazz one of the best backcourts in the league next season and would seem to bolster Utah’s chances in a rapidly changing Western Conference.

The move also could make Memphis a major player in free agency for 2020, although much of that hinges on what the team does to fill out a roster this summer.

The Grizzlies are busy rebuilding after drafting Jaren Jackson Jr. with the fourth overall pick last year, and they hold the No. 2 pick overall for Thursday night’s draft, which is likely to be point guard Ja Morant of Murray State as Conley’s replacement. Memphis hired its new coach, Taylor Jenkins, last week with what management called a “significant” and “long-term commitment.”

Be the first to know

Get local news delivered to your inbox!

* I understand and agree that registration on or use of this site constitutes agreement to its user agreement and privacy policy.