When Kyle Korver re-signed with the Cleveland Cavaliers in 2017, he had a conversation with management and ownership about LeBron James’ free agency the next year. Should James leave Cleveland, the two sides verbally agreed, then the Cavaliers would work with Korver on a buyout or trade. As it happens, James did choose to sign with the Los Angeles Lakers almost five months ago, but Korver only just now got his promised exit from Cleveland, as he was reportedly traded to the Utah Jazz on Wednesday evening.

Korver returns to Utah, where he spent two and a half seasons in the late 2000s, in exchange for Alec Burks and a pair of second round picks. Utah saves a bit of money in 2018-19, as Korver will only count for $7.56 million on their books, as opposed to Burks’ $11.54 million. However, while Burks will be a free agent this summer, Korver’s contract does run through next season, with a partial guarantee of $3.44 million owed to him if Utah decides to move in a different direction, or his full $7.50 million if he’s on the roster through July 7, 2019. On the court, Korver will be an upgrade over Burks, who didn’t fit with the fully healthy version of this particular Jazz team. Between Ricky Rubio, Dante Exum, and the sensational Donovan Mitchell, Utah has a number of competent lead ball handlers, though there may be another trade in this area if the Jazz are planning to contend at the very top of the Western Conference.

Korver’s shooting and floor spacing will be a boon to a team that shoots a below-average number of above-the-break three-pointers. Utah has been fantastic at generating corner 3s for years and Korver has always been lethal from those areas, but they’ll also be able to run plays for him to come off pindowns and other screening action for his traditional on-the-move threes at the top of the key or the wing. He’ll also reunite with his former assistant coach, Quin Snyder, who helped to unlock so much of what made Korver special with the Atlanta Hawks.

Where Utah goes from here is still very much up in the air. Point guard play, especially of late with Mitchell out with a rib injury, has been a sore spot for the Jazz, which could put them into the trade market before February’s deadline to hunt for a talent bump at that spot. For now, they’ve added a minimum of another $3.44 million to their team salary for 2019-20, which puts them just under $40 million in maximum cap space for the upcoming free agency bonanza. However, they would have to part with Rubio and Derrick Favors, who triggers his full $16.9 million salary on 7/6/19. They’ll have the first six days of July to get out into the market and see what’s out there for them before deciding on Favors’ contract, but it could be a tight decision for a Utah team that isn’t necessarily on the top of the pecking order as a free agency destination.

On the other end of this deal, Cleveland fulfills their promise to Korver, albeit a lot later than he expected, and can fill his minutes and more with Burks, who profiles as more of a ball handler and scorer than Korver. Burks is a solid buy-low candidate for a Cavaliers team going nowhere fast. The timing of this trade is also important, as Burks will be able to be re-traded in aggregation with other salary in two months, just about a week ahead of the February deadline. Cleveland general manager Koby Altman should be very active between now and early February, as he still has a number of veteran contracts on the market, including disgruntled wing J.R. Smith. Should the Cavaliers fully embrace their current competitive situation, taking on more salary alongside draft assets, as they’ve done in this trade, makes a lot of sense for them.