After an offseason that included wrist surgery, opting in for another Jazz season, competing in the Utah Men's State Amateur golf tournament and playing dodgeball for charity, Kyle Korver reported back to camp this weekend. Writer Jody Genessy was among the mass of media members who caught up with the sharpshooter Friday.

Question: What led to your decision to opt in for another season with the Jazz?

Answer: This is where I wanted to be. It wasn't a great summer to be a free agent, either. There's a lot of reasons that went into it. My agent made me wait till the last minute just in case something would come across that you wanted to consider. But my mind was made up a long time before I actually announced that.

Question: Almost everybody is back from the team that lost in the first round in April. How are you feeling about this year's squad?

Answer: We have a really good team. When we're healthy, we have a really good team. Last year, we had the same team and everyone's picking us toward the top of the whole league. A lot of guys didn't have the years they wanted to have, and I think guys worked hard this summer and hopefully that will show.

Question: What do you guys say to Carlos Boozer now that he's back?

Answer: I told him to have fun (on media day). (Laughs.) I saw him (Thursday). He looks like he's in great shape. You can tell that he's been working out. I don't have a problem at all with all this stuff. The comments that he made were after he thought that he was going to be traded. As someone who's been traded before, once you think you're going somewhere else, in your mind you kind of go to that spot. I'm sure if he could take back a couple of the things he said, then he probably would. But I think in his own mind it was after he thought he really was going to be traded, and so he kind of went there and probably said probably a little bit more than he should have, but, you know, sometimes that happens.

Question: With trade rumors likely to follow the team around, how do you make sure everybody stays committed to the program?

Answer: As a teammate, you just demand that you play hard and you play team basketball. And if you see someone not doing that, someone's got to call him out. I'm not saying that's him. That could be anyone. But as long as he's doing that (playing hard) and everyone else is doing that, I think everyone feels pretty good about our team.

Question: Will defense and winning on the road be priorities for this season?