Cole commission into the building and construction industry

The Howard government appointed former New South Wales supreme court judge Terence Cole QC in August 2001 to inquire into the building and construction industry, including unlawful conduct, fraud, corruption and collusion, and recommend ways to improve conduct.

His report, completed in early 2003, called for urgent “structural and cultural reform” after finding “widespread disrespect for, disregard of and breach of the law in the building and construction industry”.

The 212 recommendations included the establishment of the powerful Australian building and construction commission to monitor conduct in the industry – a suggestion the Howard government adopted. Labor argues the $60m Cole commission was a failure because it “did not lead to one serious criminal conviction”.

Gyles commission into productivity in the building industry in New South Wales

In 1992 Roger Gyles QC described illegal activities in the NSW building industry, ranging from physical violence and a threat of physical violence at one end to petty pilfering of building materials at the other. The focus was not confined to improper behaviour by unions; employers also came in for heavy scrutiny.

The Gyles report – extracts of which were reproduced in a 1998 Master Builders paper – summarised the problems: “In between there is a great variety of illegal activities, essentially economic in nature or effect, from collusive arrangements involving giant corporations and industry associations to labour-only subcontractors paying small amounts of graft to project managers. Those involved range from managing directors of large corporations to labourers on site. No sector of the industry has been immune.”

Costigan commission into the Federated Ship Painters and Dockers Union

From 1980 to 1984, Frank Costigan QC headed an inquiry into the affairs of the Federated Ship Painters and Dockers Union – which had been linked to corruption, violence and disappearances. The inquiry first looked at the union’s administration and criminal activities before shifting its focus to tax evasion, including “bottom of the harbour” tax evasion schemes.

In the process, wealthy media owner Kerry Packer outed himself as being the subject of serious allegations before the commission, claims he vigorously denied.

In the midst of the royal commission, the Fraser government proposed the creation of a national crimes commission to tackle organised crime. It was rebadged as the National Crime Authority when the Hawke government settled on the final model.

The Federated Ship Painters and Dockers Union was deregistered as a result of a lack of members.

Maritime unions were also the focus of a previous royal commission into alleged improper payments, with John Bernard Sweeney investigating the issue between 1974 and 1976.