Peter Hollingworth is guilty of making a poor judgement. Have none of his critics ever made a bad judgement? Peter Hollingworth is also a Christian and, presumably, practises forgiveness. It's a pity his critics don't.

I suspect Peter Hollingworth's real crime is that he was chosen by John Howard and isn't a clone of St William.

Antonia Feitz, Uralla, May 3.

What are the real motives behind the vicious campaign to discredit the Governor-General? Clearly he is not a pedophile; nor has he been accused of any other sin or wrongdoing. The whole spurious case against him has arisen from his show of some compassion when dealing with some extraordinarily difficult matters involving some of his colleagues in the church who had been accused, many years after the alleged events were said to have occurred, of offences against children.

Perhaps Simon Crean - who is now attempting to include the PM in the witch-hunt - and other protagonists ought to sit back and reflect on the enormous consequences that would follow an attempt to remove the Governor-General without the slightest justification.

You don't solve the problem of pedophilia by crucifying an innocent man.

B.M. O'Neile, Gorokan, May 4.

Of course the Prime Minister won't advise the Queen that the Governor-General should be dismissed. Mr Howard is more than happy with the current situation.

Our head of state, the Queen, is thousands of kilometres away, visits occasionally and knows that if she was to use any of the powers granted her under our outdated constitution there would be open rebellion.

Her Australian representative, Dr Hollingworth, has adopted a low profile. As a result Australia has no effective head of state other than the Prime Minister, who is more than happy to keep both the others well out of the spotlight. The last thing John Howard wants is an effective and popular head of state.

Mike O'Shaughnessy, Spence (ACT), May 4.

It would now appear that the selection of our Governor-General by John Howard has totally backfired on him.

If there were ever a case for elimination of the post, the conduct of the current G-G to date is a perfect example of what not to do.

Brian Bolton, Wahroonga, May 4.

I'm sick of hearing these mealy-mouthed apologists for Dr Hollingworth talking about "mistakes", "lapses of judgement" and "nobody's perfect". There was no mistake.

There was a positive decision to cover up, to put the church's reputation ahead of the safety of additional victims of child sexual abuse, and to officially regard victims and their families as nothing but troublemakers.

The question that the PM has to answer is this: did he know of these issues at the time of Hollingworth's appointment? If "no", then Hollingworth should be sacked. If "yes", Howard should be sacked.

Gordon Phipps, Long Jetty, May 4.

I believe we are about due for a regime change in the matter of our Governor-General.

John Brown, Bilgola Plateau, May 4.

Couldn't the G-G be given a job with the European Central Bank?

Michael Stanbridge, Bonnet Bay, May 4.

In his former role, Peter Holling-worth was a social worker. All social workers are compelled, by law and professional ethics, to report incidents of suspected abuse. Did the Governor-General make any such reports?

Anne Cooper, Newtown, May 4.

Can Peter Hollingworth bring the office of G-G into more disrepute than what's-his-name, who dismissed a democratically elected government and appeared a little worse for wear at the races in dishevelled formal wear.

Give the bishop a break. He made a blue - who will throw the first stone?

A.V. Losurdo, Marsfield, May 4.

Two stories display our Government's attitude to people.

One ("Timor hero's grand-daughter yearns for justice", Herald, May 3-4) highlights the struggle of an East Timorese family to stay in Australia. Their cause is supported by diggers from a commando unit who fought against the Japanese during World War II: "These kind and loyal people saved our commandos' lives." They also said: "For this Australia owes a debt of gratitude."

Our Government is unwilling to show any "debt of gratitude". Its attitude presents the unbending authority of government and its unwillingness to display little, if any, compassion towards people.

The other story, which reports on Dr Hollingworth's reluctance to resign as Governor-General, also highlights this same attitude which supports the right of the authority of government and an unsympathetic appreciation of the feelings of people.

At least the Howard Government is consistent. Government 2; people 0.

John Dawson, Paddington, May 4.

When will Peter "rhinoceros-skin" Hollingworth awake to the fact that I, and millions of other Australians, do not wish to go on paying for his high salary and cosseted lifestyle?

Jon Stuart-Masters, Batemans Bay, May 4.

High price to pay for barbecued ribs

I read that President George Bush is interested in a free-trade agreement with your Government and country. If I were John Howard, I would hop on the first flight home right quick.

All we in Canada have had in the last decade-plus of free trade with the US is "penalty" tariffs on items such as wheat and softwood lumber which have the audacity to be superior products and less costly than American competition.

Neil Kendrick, London (Ontario), May 5.

First George Bush takes to Iraq with cannon, now he canonises John Howard.

Unfortunately for Saint John of the White House, neither Texas nor Florida votes in the Australian federal elections.

George Antonakos, Byron Bay, May 4.

How many hospital beds does it cost to send the Howards to a Bush barbecue?

Paul Christophers, Kiama, May 4.

Is it true we just spent a cool billion of Australian taxpayers' money to help our American friends wrench the Iraqi wheat market from us?

Now we have to dismantle Medicare and the tertiary education sector because there is no more money in the kitty to look after the things that really matter.

What have we gained? The moral high ground? More friends in our region?

Gerhard Ruhl, Arncliffe, May 4.

Credit breach signals steep curves ahead

The personal expense that Mr Ross Turnbull incurred on his corporate credit card was not a few hundred dollars (Herald, May 2). It was $50,000 out of $90,000 over a five-month period.

If we believe his explanation for breaching the NRMA corporate governance, we will then have to worry about his ability to head a multimillion-dollar organisation like the NRMA.

I suggest that every time he wishes to use his corporate credit card he ring the NRMA help line.

Y. Thiam Ang, Beecroft, May 4.

The NRMA president, Ross Turnbull, has paid back about $50,000 and been reprimanded by his board after using his corporate credit card for personal expenses, says The Sydney Morning Herald (May 2). "The NRMA has been struggling with its financial situation and its board for some time," says the president (Open Road, May-June 2003). Ummm?

I hope those members who recently voted for the Turnbull ticket are now happy. He says the NRMA will have to change. Is this a foretaste? Fifty-thousand dollars on the plastic in five months. Members facing a hike in fees could be excused for just feeling sick.

John Court, Denistone, May 4.

What part of the words "members' funds" does the NRMA president, Ross Vincent Turnbull, not understand?

J.W. (Bill) Burns, Palmers Island, May 4.

Peace a two-way street

Michael McGrath (Letters, May 3-4) states he is opposed to the Middle East road map for peace because it requires that Palestinian terrorist groups have their funding withdrawn and are made to cease terrorism.

It is hardly unreasonable to insist that Palestinians stop massacring Israeli civilians for peace to be achieved. It's perfectly understandable that Israel will want to defend itself against such terrorist groups when attacked. The road map for peace has a pretty good chance of succeeding if both sides really want peace.

Ian Fraser, Rockdale, May 4.

By postponing the real problems until phase three of the "road map to peace" ("Vision of two states living in peace", Herald, May 2), President Bush is guaranteeing its failure.

Peace can develop only when Israelis abandon the dream of an Israel that includes the West Bank; when Palestinians accept that a mass return to their former homes is not going to happen; when Syria, Lebanon, Israel and Palestine agree on use of the limited water in the River Jordan; when Palestine has the possibility of a reasonable economic future; and when Israelis and Palestinians find a way to share Jerusalem. Talks on the real issues should start now.

Norm Neill, Leichhardt, May 3.

Power sleights of hand

The United States disagreed with a majority of the UN Security Council and then made a unilateral decision to go to war.

Now it is making another unilateral decision about giving the UN a "vital role" and deciding what it would be.

Who vested this power in the US?

At the same time the Defence Secretary, Donald Rumsfeld, and President Bush assure us that government in Iraq will be by the Iraqis for the Iraqis.

But the US is deciding who will reconstruct Iraq, is rearranging the country's economic and agricultural systems, and is deciding what system of government it will have and who will be in the interim government. Is this all some new form of comedy?

Angela Sands, Wombarra, May 4.

Health: paid it already

Michael Morton-Evans questions why middle Australia should get free health care (Letters, May 3-4).

Please allow me to spell it out: T-A-X.

Dr Andrew Gunn, Annerley (Qld), May 4.

Black hole of tax

Whoever commissioned the poll ("Poll shows tax cuts lose favour to greater spending on services", Herald, May 2) was obviously not a PAYE taxpayer with a family.

Our governments seem to be able to find (and waste) millions of dollars at the drop of a hat on wars and other matters less important than our public education and public health systems.

Surely the taxes we pay now provide more than enough revenue to at least provide every Australian with free public education and a world-class health system.

Tony Heathwood, Kiama Downs, May 2.

Work on, and lose

The issue of superannuation balances in a falling market will need to be addressed if we are to encourage able-bodied people of retiring age to stay in the workforce.

It is absolutely absurd to expect someone to work 12 months past their planned retiring age only to then discover that their superannuation balance has dropped by as much - or more - than the after-tax income from that extra year's work.

Richard Morony, Pymble, May 4.

Election facade is gone and the decay revealed

The state's rail system is in crisis. The hospital waiting system is in crisis. The head of the biggest-spending government agency, the former department of public works and services, has been removed.

The Teachers' Federation is concerned about 60 schools with occupational health and safety defects. Bail offences continue to outrage. Even the protector of our rights in the anti-discrimination arena is not immune from controversy.

Congratulations to Steve. He really gave those old guys in the cricket selection committee something to suck on.

We need more sportspeople like him. He produces the goods and doesn't need to have his photo plastered everywhere.

Beatrice Osborne, Beecroft, May 3.

Good riddance to him

Hooray. It's over. Superintendant Chandler is no more. We can now reclaim our Tuesday and Saturday nights.

Ross Allan, Mullumbimby, May 4.

What value on sin?

The Canadian media tell us of a widespread sense of disdain for the Australian Governor-General and, at the same time, the rush to buy shares in a brothel in the same country. A peculiar image to present to the world.

Will Smith, Thunder Bay (Ontario), May 4.

Blair hearing voices

Tony Blair is claiming his war plans were approved by God Himself. Don't let criticism of this upset you, Tony. Some people even follow the stars.

Barrie Smillie, Duffy (ACT), May 4.

But back in Beijing

I was watching SBS news the other night when Mary Kostakidis informed us that "the SARS virus in the Chinese capital appears to be peaking".

David Jordan, Dee Why, May 4.

Lost the old ginger

Less of the puffery on Pan and politics, please.