ODESSA, TEXAS

Logan M. Wilhelms

Brad and Sarah Wilhelms of Odessa, Texas, are parents of a son, Logan Michael Wilhelms, born Monday, Dec. 8, 2008, at Odessa Regional Medical Center. Logan weighed eight pounds six ounces, and was 20 inches long.

Grandparents are Mike and Dee Ebert of Ridott and Darrell and Carol Wilhelms of Freeport.

Great-grandparents are Jim and Bev Last of Ridott and Margaret Bradley and Marjorie Wilhelms, both of Freeport.

FREEPORT

Weston A. Fredrickson

Clint and Kristen Fredrickson of Freeport are parents of a son, Weston Avery Fredrickson, born Monday, Jan. 5, 2009, at FHN Memorial Hospital in Freeport.

Weston has two sisters, Rachael, 5, and Annabella, 2, and a brother, the late River.

Grandparents are Henry Fredrickson of Maple Park, Kayln Fredrickson of Loveland, Colo., and Vicki Swick of Scales Mound.

Great-grandparents are Theo Galster of Mandan, N.D., Jerome Strohacker of Freeport and Knox and Dorene Gardner of Elizabethton, Tenn.

QUINCY

Silas E. Lamm

Paul and Melissa Lamm of Quincy are parents of a son, Silas Eugene Lamm, born at 2 p.m. Monday, Jan. 5, 2009.

Silas has one brother, Malachi, 18 months.

Grandparents are Dan and Sue White and Rod and Jackie Dyson, all of Freeport.

Great-grandfather is Robert Gray of Freeport.

PECATONICA

Nathan D. Munson

Dave and Karen Munson of Pecatonica are parents of a son, Nathan David Munson, born Wednesday, Jan. 7, 2009, at FHN Memorial Hospital.

Nathan has one sister, Anna, 2.

Grandparents are Gary and Susan Munson of Platteville, Wis., Derald and Joann Karssen of Slayton, Minn., and Dan and Lynn Fischer of Ellsworth.

WARREN

Lola R. Rose

Danielle Rose of Warren is the mother of a daughter, Lola Ruby Rose, born Monday, Jan. 5, 2009, at Monroe Clinic and Hospital in Monroe, Wis.

Grandparents are Sharon Rose of Leaf River and Daniel and Janet Rose of Stockton.

APPLETON, WIS.

John and Annie Walt of Appleton, Wis., are parents of a daughter, Elise Marie Walt, born Nov. 21, 2008, at Appleton Medical Center in Appleton.

Elise has one sister, Addison Marie, 1.

Grandparents are John and Susan Walt of Freeport and Mike and Cindy Kosmerchock of New London, Wis.

Great-grandparents are Alex and Berenice DeVouton of St. Charles, Mo.

ROCKFORD

Eliza L. Wirtjes

Brandon and Marsha Wirtjes of Rockford are parents of a daughter, Eliza Lynn Wirtjes, born Saturday, Jan. 3, 2009, at Rockford Memorial Hospital in Rockford.

Grandparents are Kevin and Diane Dundee of Orangeville, Dave and Joyce Roling of Lena and the late Duane Wirtjes.

Great-grandparents are Shirley Gray of Freeport, Norman and Shirley Gray of Brodhead, Wis., and Paul and Marilyn Wolfe of Baileyville.

FAIRBANKS, ALASKA

Taven L. Yeager

Sgt. Owen and Chanisy Yeager, stationed in Fairbanks, Alaska, are parents of a son, Taven Lee Yeager, born Nov. 18, 2008, in Fairbanks. Taven weighed 7 pounds 11 ounces and was 19 inches long.

Grandparents are Verlin and Tammy Yeager of Freeport.

Great-grandparents are Jerry Kubatzke and Lou (Don) Kubatzke, both of Freeport, Leona Ibsen of Stockton and the late Robert Yeager.