She married actor-director-writer Bryan Forbes in 1955 and went on to star in nine of the films he directed, including the 1975 version of The Stepford Wives and International Velvet. Her husband died in 2013 and Nanette, now 83, writes cookery and children’s books. She lives in London.

“It was natural that I would go into some form of entertainment because my father was in variety and I trained as a dancer. I was 16 when I won a scholarship to RADA and I was lucky to get work straight away in TV dramas and films. I was happy as a dancer, but going to RADA confirmed I wanted to be an actress.

“Aged 17, I was sent along for a job on a movie called Wheel Of Fate (1953), which is where I met my future husband Bryan.

“Bryan loved books and the written word; he started as a writer then became an actor, director, producer and studio boss. We got married in 1955 and he directed me in several of his films – sometimes I’d play minor roles while others were much larger, but Bryan said he would never cast me in something if I wasn’t right for it.

“I have fond memories of making The Wrong Box (1966) with Bryan, a lovely period comedy where we’d have someone new to work with every day, including Tony Hancock and John Mills.

“I continued to enjoy acting in films and TV, but I also had a hankering to write cookery and children’s books. My first book, God Bless Love: A Collection Of Children’s Sayings, was published in the 70s and it was about the things children say and draw.

“I loved telling children’s stories and then came children’s cookery books including The Fun Food Factory, which had a TV series to go with it.

“I think I got the Fairy Liquid commercial in the 80s because they were looking for someone who had a family background, which I did because I was married with two children.

“After numerous auditions, I got the part. I thought the job would go on for one year. It lasted for 15. It was interesting because this happened at a time when actors didn’t tend to do ads. People would stop me in the street and say, ‘Hello Nanette, time for the washing up?’ I never washed a dish throughout all those ads!

Invalid email

We use your sign-up to provide content in ways you've consented to and to improve our understanding of you. This may include adverts from us and 3rd parties based on our understanding. You can unsubscribe at any time. Read our Privacy Policy

“Alongside screen work, I presented TV shows including my own chat show, Newman Meets and TV comedy series like Let There Be Love and Stay With Me Till Morning.

“Bryan and I were married for 58 years. He was the great love of my life; then he was ill and no longer there. What I do remember is the wonderful times we spent together.

"I was fortunate to be so happy with such a lovely man.

“I have two daughters and just a few months after Bryan died, I became a great-grandmother to a baby boy called Huck, which I think is a kind of reassertion of life.

“I’ve written more than 30 books and my latest, The Importance Of Being Ernest The Earwig, shows Ernest’s wish to get inside books because he feels that nobody ever writes about earwigs. He crawls into all the best classic books.

“It’s to encourage children to think that it doesn’t matter what you do in life as long as you try. I believe that if you can read, you can learn anything and you’ll never be lonely!”

• The Importance of Being Ernest the Earwig (£6.99, Templar Publishing) is out now.