FORMER stars of Derry GAA launched a new book charting the county’s footballing history last week Written by Gaelic Life journalist Michael McMullan and published by Hero Books, Derry: Game of my Life looks back at the iconic games of 25 Derry stars. From Gerry O’Loughlin’s debut in the McKenna Cup to Damian Barton looking […]

By Michael McMullan THE volume of games in the Derry club scene demands a deep squad insists Richard Thornton who is happy with what Magherafelt have under the bonnet. The All-Ireland winning coach with Kilcoo joined Damian Barton’s management team this season was speaking after one of the newcomers, Ryan Lennox, fisted Rossa to victory […]

BY KIERAN LYNCH THE Derry Football Championships get underway this weekend, and O’Donovan Rossa will be hoping that they can be amongst the contenders at senior grade. The Magherafelt men won the crown in 2019 and were beaten finalists in 2020, but with Glen and Slaughtneil the major players over the last few years, that […]

Derry star Brendan Rogers has swapped the number three jersey and has been revelling in a new midfield role. Michael McMullan spoke to some of the men who coached and played with him CLOSE to an hour after kicking the winner in Derry’s win over Dublin, Brendan Rogers is still smiling. Still signing autographs. Celtic […]

By Michael McMullan MAGHERAFELT have a new senior football management team in place for the 2022 season, Gaelic Life can confirm. Damian Barton and Brian McGuckin have been appointed as a joint ticket to succeed Adrian Cush, who stepped down after four seasons in the post. The duo were teaching colleagues in St Patrick’s Dungannon […]

GAELIC Life columnist Kevin Cassidy has hit out at the current state of Derry football.

DERRY defender Gerard O’Kane has retired from inter-county football.

MARK Lynch has been named in Derry’s starting side for Saturday’s Qualifier clash away to Cavan.

Damian Barton has named his Derry team.

Damian Barton has made five changes to the starting line up that fielded against Galway.