Ulster Senior Football Championship

THE world of Gaelic football - the game and those involved in it - has changed a lot since Damian Barton’s playing days and the Derry boss admits he has had to “step back a wee bit” when it comes to preparing his men for battle.

Barton was a central figure as Eamonn Coleman’s Oak Leafers lifted the county’s one and only All-Ireland title in 1993, the current Derry boss battling in the trenches alongside the likes of Tony Scullion, the Downey brothers, Anthony Tohill and Brian McGilligan.

As a past great returning to manage his native county, it would be easy for Barton to draw heavily on his own experiences, but the Newbridge man appreciates that the young men of today are a different breed to when he was in his pomp.

Managing club teams since the late 1990s has kept him in touch with the nuances of the game and the changing personalities within it. What works with one doesn’t necessarily work with another and Barton has learned to temper his own emotions.

“You know what? I've tried to do the opposite,” he said when asked if he would be delving into his own back catalogue to get the blood pumping ahead of Sunday’s Ulster Championship showdown with Tyrone.

“With respect, it's easy for me to be emotional. I am very single-minded and one-tracked and I expect everyone to be the same. But it's not like that. And I have had to learn to step back a wee bit in terms of my motivation.

“It might be 'my motivation', but players have different ways of focusing on the likes of this big game coming up. Experience is valuable, but I think I've learned you have to step back a bit and keep your own emotions in check.”

So when players board the team bus with earphones in or make bold footwear choices heading on to the field, the Derry boss is happy to look at the bigger picture: "We're not going to ban colourful boots or anything - we haven’t got to that stage,” says Barton with a smile.

“But everybody has their own way of preparing and I think you have to respect that things move on. I know there's psychologists and all sorts of people have different perspectives in terms of preparation.

“I know it's something we have to look at, how we prepare the team emotionally. That we're not going out to play the occasion, but we're going out to play another game. That's going to be a challenge as well.”

Watch the Irish News preview for Sunday's Ulster SFC clash:

When he was appointed as Brian McIver’s successor last September, Barton spoke about instilling a new set of “values” in the Oak Leaf players and of restoring pride in the jersey.

Now, nine months and a topsy-turvy National League campaign down the line, he believes there is a need for a more detached, analytical approach: “Football has changed an awful lot,” he said.

“The perspective the players have, my perception of what 'total commitment' is, is maybe different than others. I'm sure every county manager would think the same. We've had a few challenges and come through those challenges.

“We're in a period of transition and we've had a lot of young players coming in, which I see very much as a development phase. That's where we are. We are trying to mix our experienced players with our younger players who want to come in and play.”