FOR OVER a decade, Jimmy Fallon has been married to Nancy Juvonen.

Similar to The Tonight Show host, his wife also works in entertainment.

Who is Jimmy Fallon's wife, Nancy Juvonen?

Born on May 18, 1967, Nancy Juvonen is an American film producer from Connecticut who was later raised in Mill Valley, California.

She is the co-owner of Flower Films, a production company she co-founded with Drew Barrymore.

Flower Films is the company behind the Charlie's Angels movies Never Been Kissed, Donnie Darko, and The Drew Barrymore Show.

She and Drew were introduced to each other through Nancy's brother, Jim.

At the time, Jim was working as a production assistant on Drew's 1995 film Mad Love.

On December 22, 2007, Nancy tied the knot with The Tonight Show host Jimmy Fallon.

The pair walked down the aisle in a wedding ceremony on Necker Island, a private island owned by Richard Branson.

While remembering his nuptials with Nancy, Fallon mentioned how they were planning when the latter's travel agent received an offer to use the island from Branson.

The Saturday Night Live alum explained to People: "He goes, 'Richard is a fan, he likes you, so he'll rent you the island for two days, three days.'

"Hands down, one of the best days and nights of my entire life."

Nancy recalled: "We got this place for three days, so Jimmy goes, 'What if we got married in three weeks, instead of next summer?' And I'm like, 'This is the best idea of all human time.'

"So we had 12 people at our wedding. I just got a dress done as fast as I could. We didn't care."

How did Jimmy meet Nancy?

Jimmy and Nancy first met when the latter visited the SNL set during Drew Barrymore's guest-host appearance in 2004.

After that first encounter, they crossed paths again when Fallon was cast in Drew's 2005 romantic comedy Fever Pitch.

Nancy recounted: "[Barrymore] and Jimmy were practicing a sketch…I kind of crept in quietly and all of a sudden Jimmy goes, 'Hey, Nancy! You're Nancy? Hi, it's so nice to meet you, welcome.'

"And I felt just so embraced and cool, like, ‘Thank you! Thank you for welcoming me in. This is so nice, it’s so intimidating [here].’

"So I had that thought from years before, going in. But then on the set [of Fever Pitch], we were on location and that really creates this camp feel for everybody.

"And he was just so friendly and fun and welcoming and he loved music."

By August 2007, the couple was engaged after Fallon proposed to Nancy at her family's home in Wolfeboro, New Hampshire.

How many kids do Jimmy and Nancy have?

Jimmy and Nancy have two children together: daughters Winnie and Franny.

Winnie was born in July 2013, and Franny was born in December 2014.