Jimmy Fallon's wife, Nancy Juvonen, is also a professional in the entertainment industry. Fallon and Juvonen opened up about how they fell for each other during a "Tonight Show: At Home Edition" episode in 2020. The pair initially encountered one another on the set of "Saturday Night Live." Fallon gave Juvonen a warm greeting upon their first meeting, which made a strong impression. " ... I felt just so embraced and cool, like, 'Thank you! Thank you for welcoming me in. This is so nice, it's so intimidating [at 'SNL'],'" Juvonen said.

The couple later crossed paths again when Fallon acted in the 2005 rom-com "Fever Pitch."By August 2007, they'd become engaged, via Today. Fallon and Juvonen then got hitched at the end of 2007 in the Caribbean, as reported by People. In December 2017, Fallon posted a photo on Twitter of himself and Juvonen sharing a kiss on their wedding day to honor a decade of marriage. "Honey, remember when the wedding photographer made us pose for a romantic sunset kiss? That was 10 years ago! Happy Anniversary!" Fallon wrote. While the "SNL" alum has been the host of the "Tonight Show" since 2014, Juvonen works behind the scenes of entertainment projects.

Jimmy Fallon's spouse, Nancy Juvonen, is an accomplished producer of films and shows. She has served as a producer on popular projects like "Donnie Darko," "Charlie's Angels," "Santa Clarita Diet," "Fever Pitch," "50 First Dates" and more. As stated by Us Weekly in 2016, Juvonen is a professional partner of Drew Barrymore, as well as one of Barrymore's close companions. As stated via Instagram, Juvonen and Barrymore are co-founders of the production company Flower Films.

In an archival Hollywood's Master Storytellers interview, Juvonen and Barrymore revisited being introduced through Juvonen's brother, after which Barrymore dared Juvonen to relocate so they could begin Flower Films. " ... She's like, 'Hi, this is Drew. I dare you to move to Los Angeles and start this production company with me,'" Juvonen said. She then added, "... We thought, 'Let's just try it.' I thought, 'A dare — I'm in.'" When he spoke to People in 2020 about shooting "The Tonight Show" from home due to the pandemic, Fallon noted Juvonen's contributions. "My wife is the brains behind this whole thing," Fallon said. "She's the production scout, the producer, the lighting person, the editor, the director. I could not do any of this without my wife. She is everything." In addition to their work roles, Juvonen and Fallon have tackled parenthood side by side.

Since tying the knot over 15 years ago, Jimmy Fallon and Nancy Juvonen have become the parents of two kids. Fallon and Juvonen had their first child, Winnie Rose, back in 2013, as People stated. In 2014, Entertainment Tonight shared that Fallon and Juvonen's second daughter, Frances Cole, had been born. The news site also wrote that Winnie and Frances were welcomed through surrogacy. Fallon discussed how his and Juvonen's kids have remained a focus in their lives during a 2017 "Today" interview. "Nothing else really matters," Fallon said. "All there is is the kids. That's all you care about."

Fallon posted a sweet selfie of himself, Juvonen, and their kids on Instagram to celebrate the holidays in 2021, writing, "Merry Christmas from the Fallons!!" In another Instagram post from that same month, Fallon commemorated his and Juvonen's wedding anniversary with a loving message. "Here's to many more years of us crying laughing," Fallon said. "You'll never read this because you're not on social media, but as we all know these posts will be here forever so I'm sure the kids will see this one day and say 'Gosh, dad was a romantic.'"