Cisco Systems on Thursday said it agreed to buy two closely held companies for a combined US$445 million in stock. This is the latest move by the world's largest data-networking company to acquire technology that combines voice and data on one network.

Cisco said it plans to buy Fibex Systems, of Petaluma, California, and Sentient Networks, of Milpitas, California. It expects to complete the acquisitions in the fourth fiscal quarter and says the boards of both companies had approved the deal. Further financial terms weren't disclosed.

Both companies have products that use so-called ATM technology (or asynchronous transfer mode), which is one way information is shuttled back and forth across networks. Another technology, IP, or Internet Protocol, is the lingua franca of the Internet, but is not reliable enough to carry large amounts of voice traffic across networks, analysts said.

The deal brings to 32 the number of companies Cisco (CSCO) has bought since its first acquisition in 1993. It also highlights Cisco's strategy of buying technology it does not already have to move into new markets. Cisco, Lucent Technologies, and Northern Telecom are all racing to provide gear that combines voice, data, and video on one network.

Carriers, such as AT&T and MCI WorldCom, are curtailing their spending on traditional circuit-switched networks while shifting spending to more efficient ones that break up voice into packets that are then reassembled.

Already, ATM technology is being used quite extensively by telecommunications carriers, and analysts said Cisco has to boost its presence in that area if it is to gain market share with carriers. Lucent (LU) and Nortel (NT), on the other hand, have decades of experience selling equipment to them.

"Cisco's challenge is to develop credibility in the carrier market, and they need to do that in direct competition to both Lucent and Nortel," said John Armstrong, an analyst with market-research firm Dataquest.

Donald Trump and Silicon Valley's Billionaire Elegy

Venture capitalists Ben Horowitz and Marc Andreessen claim the tech industry, California, and the country are doomed if we don’t embrace the former president.

RealPage Says Rental Pricing Tech Is Misunderstood, but Landlords Aren’t So Sure

The software company has pushed back hard against claims that its algorithms helped make rent in the US too damn high. Property owners and managers aren't entirely convinced.

Apple, Nvidia, Anthropic Used Thousands of Swiped YouTube Videos to Train AI

Creators claim their videos were used without their knowledge.

OpenAI Slashes the Cost of Using Its AI With a ‘Mini’ Model

With competing models—including many free ones—flooding the market, OpenAI is announcing a cheaper way to use its AI.

How to Get Rich From Peeping Inside People’s Fridges

Forget the S&P 500. Look at the ice cream. This investor visits homes around the world to see where diets—and economies—will go next.