Body of Evidence is a 1993 erotic thriller film directed by Uli Edel, written by Brad Mirman, and starring Madonna and Willem Dafoe, with Joe Mantegna, Anne Archer, Julianne Moore, and Jürgen Prochnow in supporting roles.

Madonna's performance in the film was panned by film critics and it marked her fourth film acting performance to be panned, following Shanghai Surprise, Who's That Girl, and Bloodhounds of Broadway.

In France and Japan, the film was released under the name Body. In Japan, Madonna's other 1993 film Dangerous Game was released there as Body IIeven though the films have nothing in common nor are related to each other in narrative.

Plot[]

The elderly and wealthy Andrew Marsh dies from complications stemming from an erotic incident involving bondage and homemade pornography. The main suspect is his lover Rebecca Carlson who proclaims her innocence to lawyer Frank Dulaney. Initially believing her, Frank agrees to represent her.

District Attorney Robert Garrett seeks to prove that Rebecca deliberately killed Marsh in bed to receive the $8 million he left her in his will. As the trial begins, Rebecca and Frank enter a sadomasochistic sexual relationship behind the back of Frank's unsuspecting wife, Sharon.

During their first sexual encounter, Rebecca secures Frank's arms behind his back using his own belt and alternately pours hot wax and champagne on him before having sex.

After an ex-lover of Rebecca's, Jeffrey Roston, testifies that he also had a heart condition, and both changed his will to favour Rebecca, and that she was sexually domineering and compelled him to engage in sexual activity with no regard to his health, describing an incident that clearly resonates with Frank's own experience, Frank attempts to end their affair.

Sharon confronts him about the affair having figured it out from a phone call with Rebecca as well as the strange marks on his body from the hot wax. Frank goes to Rebecca's home and accuses her of telling his wife about them (although Sharon says she worked it out from her tone alone). Rebecca taunts Frank, and he pushes her to the ground. Rebecca begins to masturbate on the floor in front of him. Rebecca pulls out handcuffs, Frank forcibly cuffs her hands instead and sexually assaults her. Initially she resists before appearing to enjoy the assault.

Footage from Marsh's home video reveals that he had an affair with his secretary, Joanne Braslow, who is a key witness against Rebecca. He also had previously left Joanne more money in his will before beginning his relationship with Rebecca. She says that she was hurt but she loved him and would never hurt him. However, there is evidence that she bought the murder weapon. Rebecca suggests to Frank that the secretary tried to frame her, but he is now less sure of her innocence in the crime.

Rebecca takes the stand and her surprising testimony that Roston had an affair with another man convinces the jury, which acquits her. Before leaving court, she mockingly thanks Frank and indicates that she is guilty after all.

Frank still cannot resist going to Rebecca's home, where he overhears an incriminating conversation between her and Marsh's doctor, Alan Paley. He confronts the co-conspirators, realizing that it was Paley who supplied the fatal dose of cocaine. Rebecca is amused by Frank's discovery of her manipulating him, but Paley is shocked to learn that she was sleeping with Frank as well. Rebecca mocks both men, bluntly acknowledging that she used her sexual prowess to control and humiliate both of them, as well as Marsh. Paley realizes she does not care about him and becomes enraged.

After a struggle with Frank who tries to save Rebecca, Paley shoots her twice. She plunges from a window to her death. Paley is arrested for murdering her.

Before leaving the scene with his wife to repair their relationship, Frank then tells Garret he should've won the case with Garrett replying: "I did".

Cast[]

Madonna as Rebecca Carlson

Willem Dafoe as Frank Dulaney

Joe Mantegna as Robert Garrett

Anne Archer as Joanne Braslow

Julianne Moore as Sharon Dulaney

Stan Shaw as Charles Briggs

Charles Hallahan as Dr. McCurdy

Lillian Lehman as Judge Mabel Burnham

Mark Rolston as Detective Reese

Jeff Perry as Gabe

Richard Riehle as Detective Griffin

Jürgen Prochnow as Dr. Alan Paley

Frank Langella as Jeffrey Roston