Getting paid is a major concern for many eBay entrepreneurs, and the online selling platform has modified its seller payment options and policies over the years. While eBay is in the process of updating its payment processes, many sellers should still be able to use multiple payment options for a period of time.

Getting Paid on eBay

As an eBay seller, getting paid quickly is important to the success of your business. You need to know that eBay has placed restrictions on the types of payments sellers can accept. This is because eBay, as a third party to sales transactions, has often been called upon to mediate payment disputes between buyers and sellers.

In most cases, eBay requires that transactions taking place entirely online, such as the sale of digital products, or requiring a product to be shipped, involve a traceable electronic payment. The payment must also be made through a medium that provides some protection to buyers. For example, both PayPal and credit card merchant accounts allow buyers to dispute a transaction and get their money back if a seller misrepresents a product or fails to deliver the product.

In situations where an eBay customer plans to meet with the seller to pick up an item, other payment methods are acceptable. Restricted payment methods may also be allowed for certain types of transactions, such as the sale of automobiles, wholesale bullion or commercial building materials.

eBay Managed Payments

In 2019, eBay began its Managed Payments program in response to reported consumer demand for a seamless payment process that does not require leaving the eBay platform for completion. This means payments will be processed by eBay using its own servers, and money received will be sent to seller bank accounts directly by eBay.

According to eBay, the managed payments option is being rolled out over the next few years, into 2021. If you have questions about this system, contact eBay.

Warning

Don't forget to follow eBay guidelines for shipping your item promptly. Always use a trackable shipping method, such as priority mail. Having proof of mailing and delivery can help you if an unscrupulous buyer attempts to secure a refund for a purchase that you have shipped.

Acceptable eBay Payment Methods

As of May 2019, eBay payment options include:

PayPal and PayPal credit

Credit card payments made through your business’s merchant account

Payment with check, money order or cash upon pickup: This means you are willing to allow buyers to physically pick up their purchases from you and pay you directly at that time. eBay does require you to accept at least one eBay permitted method of electronic payment as well.

Restricted eBay Payment Methods

eBay restricts the following payment methods to shipped transactions within particular categories, such as automotive and commercial building materials:

Bank-to-bank wire transfers (transfers between service providers that are not banks are never permitted)

Checks and money orders

Online payment services, such as XOOM

Unacceptable eBay Payment Options

eBay does not allow the following payment methods to be used. This restriction is in place regardless of the nature of the items sold or the nature of the transaction:

Cryptocurrencies

Sending cash through the mail

Point-to-point cash transfer services, such as Western Union or MoneyGram

Adding money to a seller’s debit card or prepaid debit card

eBay Payment Communications Policies

As a seller, is essential that your policies and communications about your policies comply with eBay's restrictions. For example, if you accept PayPal payments, eBay does not permit you to to restrict the types of PayPal payments that you accept: You must accept credit card payments made through PayPal, and you cannot set a minimum purchase amount for PayPal transactions.

In addition, you cannot ask buyers to complete transactions outside the eBay marketplace or to contact you via private email or communications channels to complete sales using nonapproved payment methods. Doing this can result in suspension of your eBay account.

eBay Payment Resolution Options

Unfortunately, there are situations in which an eBay buyer fails to pay for an item in a timely manner. While this is relatively rare, it does happen. eBay provides protections for sellers in the form of interventions, refund of final selling fees and not permitting nonpaying buyers to give negative feedback to sellers. However, it is up to you to set these processes in motion.

High-volume sellers can use the unpaid-item assistant to initiate the payment reminder process. Otherwise, send the buyer a payment reminder or an invoice. Be polite and professional in your communications. While this may be annoying, the buyer may have good reason for tardiness, such as an illness or death in the family. Rudeness will count against you if eBay becomes involved with the transaction.

If you do not receive a response, and at least two days have passed since your listing came to an end, you can begin the reporting process. You can report the unpaid item through your eBay dashboard and open a case. This must be done within 32 days of the end of the listing. Failure to complete this process may result in negative feedback against you, as well as the loss of your seller's fees.

From there, eBay will attempt to contact the buyer and resolve the issue. If the situation is not resolved, eBay will take the necessary steps to refund your seller fee and protect your feedback against the nonpaying buyer.