Delivery

• Delivery by Registered mail to selected countries: 15 Euros

Transit time varies according to country of destination, and depends on the postal

service.

• Delivery by UPS courier: Price varies according to destination. Please ask.

Payment

Payment can be made with debit or credit card through the PayPal portal, bank transfer, MoneyGram and Western Union.

What does a Spanish Death Certificate look like?

How to Order a Death Certificate

Please send us email to info@certificados.pro with the name, date and name of the town in Spain where he/she passed away. We reply promptly.

If you do not know the exact date and/or place of death, we might still be able to obtain the death certificate.

If you have an old death certificate, please send us a scan, as that will facilitate locating the death record.

Processing Time

• Standard processing: 12 days on average.

• Rush processing: 24 to 72 working hous. Rush processing is available in

most cases for an additional fee. If time is of essence, please let us know.

Prices

• Death Certificate: 46 Euros (50 US$)

If you need two or more identical certificates, each additional set costs 27 Euros (30 US$)

• Apostille Legalization: 52 Euros (57 US$)

This legalization is required if you will be filing the death certificate before govermental

offices of certain countries. Please ask for details.

• Consular Legalization: Price varies from country to country. Please ask.

This legalization is required if you will be filing the death certificate before govermental

offices of certain countries. Please ask for details.

• English Translation: 45 Euros (49 US$)

Because certificates are always issued in Spanish, you may want to have a certified

translation into English (or another language).

Prices are in Euros. In brackets is the approximate amount in US dollars, just for

informative purposes.

Order now the death certificate

Please send us email to info@certificados.pro telling us the name, place and date of death. Emails are answered promptly.

Notice:

Certificados.pro is not a government agency.

Certificados.pro is a Spanish company specialized in obtaining certificates and documents from Spain on your behalf.

Certificados.pro charges a fee to obtain the documents that you require, delivering them to your country, and saving you from travelling to Spain to apply in person.

Video presentation (36")

fast, reliable & professional service since 1995

Your document company in Spain

( +34 986 437 968info@certificados.pro

info@certificados.pro Tel: +34 986 438 968