For those of you who like to buy your tools with a check or m.o. on ebay you can forget it as of October.

From ebay:

Paper payments end this October

Beginning late October 2008, all items listed on eBay.com must be paid for using one of the following approved payment options:

* Direct credit or debit card payment via a merchant credit card account

* PayPal

* ProPay

* Payment on pick-up

Paper payment methods such as checks and money orders will no longer be accepted on eBay.com.

By January 2009, all approved electronic payment methods will be integrated into eBay checkout. For example, buyers will be able to enter their credit card number directly into eBay checkout, and the payment will be routed to the seller's Internet merchant account or to their PayPal account.

Please note that the new payments policy will not apply to the vehicles categories in Motors, capital equipment categories in Business & Industrial, Mature Audiences and Real Estate.

Meeting expectations for online payments

Expectations for shopping and paying online have evolved since eBay was founded. People want consistent, secure and fast transactions. Offline payment methods are no longer suitable for online transactions. This opinion is shared by law enforcement and the financial services industry. The vast majority of ecommerce shoppers, including eBay buyers, now use online payment methods. On eBay.com over 90% of transactions are paid with online payment methods and the use of offline paper methods has declined by 40% over the last 3 years.

I can see how they would want to increase "security" with this (this being the main rationalization) but forcing the issue is IMHO more of a draconian measure. I think its more control of the whole ebay purchasing process and increasing the profits by controlling the ebay transaction from beginning to end; extracting all the profits they can in the process. When they increased their fees quite a bit that took out allot of people and now with Paypal they have eliminated a "loophole" for small timers to not have to be charged in the Paypal process; this is going to reduce peoples profit, they'll get bitten coming and going. I'm wondering if it will get to the point; where it won't be worth selling inexpensive items (or expensive ones for that matter), because the shipping fees, posting fees, final price fees, Paypal fees and anything else they can come up with will eliminate any profit people had for potentially selling small things on ebay!?! Almost sounds like death through taxes! At some point they are going to kill the goose that laid the golden egg; then where will they be?

http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Goose_that_Laid_the_Golden_Eggs

Same here. If they cant take cash or a u.s. postal money order then screw em.

They can't legally keep you from paying in cash in the United States. If you look on any bill it says "THIS NOTE IS LEGAL TENDER FOR ALL DEBTS, PUBLIC AND PRIVATE". Besides that after the auction is over it isn't really any of e-bays business how you pay for it. The deal is then between two private individuals and if the seller and buyer agree on a payment method then that is their business. Don't get me wrong I love pay pal and it has been totally hassle free using them, but I do not think it is right for them to try to limit payments to that form, they may even get into legal trouble trying to do that.

Yeah, with identity theft being the fastest growing crime in the nation, I can see where changing from US Postal Money Orders or Western Union to on-line credit card accounts would be safer. (or NOT!)

I only accept money orders, and pay with money orders. I got rid of my credit cards and went to a debit card account. And I'm damn sure not EVER going to pay online with my debit card.

Guess I'll once again be left bobbing in this fast-paced society's wake. But that's okay...I don't have a new car payment, no credit card payments, and no trick-math mortgage. I left my job in March to become a self-employed freelance writer and photographer and haven't lost my house or missed a single payment for utilities or insurance. I bought a computer, a new camera, a cell phone, a '73 Duster and drove it home from LA, had a root canal, blew up the rear end in my daily driver, and the A/C guys are here today putting a whole new unit in the house. And I haven't had to borrow money from the parents either.

Looks like I'll be saving more money by not buying off ebay in the future.

this will be good for the swap meets!

-Brad

They can't legally keep you from paying in cash in the United States. If you look on any bill it says "THIS NOTE IS LEGAL TENDER FOR ALL DEBTS, PUBLIC AND PRIVATE". Besides that after the auction is over it isn't really any of e-bays business how you pay for it. The deal is then between two private individuals and if the seller and buyer agree on a payment method then that is their business. Don't get me wrong I love pay pal and it has been totally hassle free using them, but I do not think it is right for them to try to limit payments to that form, they may even get into legal trouble trying to do that.

While it IS legal tender, their is a common misconception that one MUST accept cash. There IS NO SUCH REQUIREMENT. I found out the hard way when I ordered something COD, (which USED to mean CASH on delievery), and they refused cash (Legal tender, but NOT CURRENCY PUT OUT BY THE US GOVERNMENT, as per the constitution). UPS and their collect on delivery, only takes checks/money orders for the amount.

Ebay tried this in two countries and it was knocked out, I expect to see this to cause them possible legal problems and get rescinded. I would love to see an investigation due to this, and their CL lawsuit (trying to control the market).

looks like Ebay are going the way of Amazon by squeezing every last penny out of a deal.

It's not worth selling a cheap book on Amazon now.

Just pure greed.

Just take a look at the max shipping charges that sellers will have to offer in certain catagories. They even admit in the FAQ that sellers will take a hit on some items.

http://pages.ebay.com/sell/August2008Update/MaxShipping/

Why are you setting limits on shipping charges lower than my actual costs to ship?

We based our maximum shipping & handling charges on recent transaction data of what sellers are charging and what buyers have told us is reasonable. We know that what buyers consider to be reasonable will be less than sellers' actual costs in some cases. We believe that by offering buyers at least one shipping option that they deem reasonable, sellers will increase their overall sales and conversion.

And more on prohibited payments from FAQ:

What should I do if a buyer demands to pay with checks or money orders?

We know that some buyers will still want to pay with checks and money orders, even after this policy change goes into effect. When this happens, explain to your buyers the benefits that come with electronic payments:

* More secure payments

* Faster delivery of their purchases

* More protection in case anything goes wrong.

Some buyers may be anxious about online payments or may not have a bank account. In these cases, suggest that they try using a prepaid debit card. What should I do if I have long-standing, repeat customers who insist on paying with checks or money orders, even after I explain the benefits of electronic payments and offer suggestions.

We know this may happen occasionally. However, we will not allow abuse of the new policy and will be watching for sellers who accept a significant amount of prohibited payments. Remember, you can refuse to accept these payment methods. If the buyer doesn't pay, you can file an unpaid item (UPI) complaint. Buyers who insist on paying with these prohibited payment methods in a UPI claim will lose the claim and will not be allowed to leave negative feedback.

I'm done with ebay/paypal. I discovered today that somebody (seller) charged $1,026 to my paypal/credit card without my authorization. It was for a laptop computer that I DID NOT BUY! So I spent an hour this morning on the phone with my CC company and Paypal. Basically I have to pay my credit card bill and hope I get reimbursed through paypal (then transfer that to my bank account). I am all done with all of it. I have to go the weekend (out of town) without a credit card thanks to this a##hat. Craigslist here we come.

Just take a look at the max shipping charges that sellers will have to offer in certain catagories.

Note that those apply specifically to books, music, dvds, and video games - which have somewhat standard weights. And the rule is probably in response to all those out there selling things for $0.01 to get around the final value fee but tacking on a $30 shipping charge...

Unfortunately, from dealing with managing things although I don't approve of these measures I do understand the issues of setting things up and then continually trying to tweak it to solve problems you never thought some idiot would try to attempt. All too often, the end result is something that doesn't work well for anyone...

I'm done with ebay/paypal. I discovered today that somebody (seller) charged $1,026 to my paypal/credit card without my authorization. It was for a laptop computer that I DID NOT BUY! So I spent an hour this morning on the phone with my CC company and Paypal. Basically I have to pay my credit card bill and hope I get reimbursed through paypal (then transfer that to my bank account). I am all done with all of it. I have to go the weekend (out of town) without a credit card thanks to this a##hat. Craigslist here we come.

Um,

Why would you have to pay? Dispute the charge WITH YOUR CREDIT CARD COMPANY! That puts the issue between Pay"pal" and them, and the worst that would happen to you, is either they prove you did order it, or they cancel your paypal account, which sounds like NO loss.

The reason I ONLY keep my CC info with them, and you can manually enter it EVERY time, so it doesn't stay on file, in case of hacking.

Note that those apply specifically to books, music, dvds, and video games - which have somewhat standard weights. And the rule is probably in response to all those out there selling things for $0.01 to get around the final value fee but tacking on a $30 shipping charge...

Yes, I know. I was merely pointing out more of the new changes and that ebay is well aware that you may have to pay more out of pocket but that it's in the best interest for your sales and the beloved ebay community.

I'm done with ebay/paypal. I discovered today that somebody (seller) charged $1,026 to my paypal/credit card without my authorization. It was for a laptop computer that I DID NOT BUY! So I spent an hour this morning on the phone with my CC company and Paypal. Basically I have to pay my credit card bill and hope I get reimbursed through paypal (then transfer that to my bank account). I am all done with all of it. I have to go the weekend (out of town) without a credit card thanks to this a##hat. Craigslist here we come.

Out of curiosity, did you find out about this charge via email? Does the charge show in your Paypal/Credit Card account? I get about 3 messages a day from "Paypal" claiming that I bought a laptop, camera, Rolex, etc. All scams hoping that I will use the embedded link. My apologies if the question is obvious to you but it's worth asking in case you are unaware of the scam.

Paypal and Ebay are one and the same..

this is just one of the way to get even more money out of the transcation by increasing the usage of Paypal. They are making alot of money and the employees of e-bay is doing very well!!

But I think these little changes to squeeze pennies will eventually hurt their profit by losing sellers to places amazon.. I personally hate selling on Ebay now because of the fees, I am not in the niche of trying to get dumb people to pay over my expected price..

plus people I have met from craigslist had been very pleasent. Just my $.02

I was told by a friends wife who works for the Internal Revenue Service that they are trying to get sales information from eBay so they can crack down on tax evasion. It is only a matter of time before you are asked for your social security number, and you will get a form at the end of the year showing how much your sales were on eBay, to report on your income tax return. eBay wants a chunk of your profits, and Uncle Sam also wants his share. With these new rules, it will become quite easy for them both...

All my purchases off eBay up until now have been with USPS money orders only. I can't understand what is wrong with a USPS money order; how are they less secure than PayPal? Sure, I have to stand in line at the post office for purchasing the money order, but I get to keep a ZERO CREDIT CARD BALANCE that way.

They are not and they come attached with some rules that make fraud a felony. The paper ones that are the problems are the no name, or faked ones. The government is looking forward to the day of electronic payment (plastic) only, as measures are being discussed as to how to gather and tax all the information.

For most (not all) buyers the changes are not that big of a deal but it's a completely different thing for sellers. We're talking large increases in fees here. A Paypal fee in addition to the numerous ebay fees on every item sold is nothing to sneeze at. Not such a big deal for the company with a ton of Chinese crap to unload but a big deal for small businesses and the guy looking to make ends meet. Don't be surprised when you start seeing even less listings of quality tools you want and increases in crap tools you don't want.

I know of numerous Pawn shops that are working on their own websites for the purposes of selling directly and doing away with ebay and Paypal all together and you can be sure you won't be getting the same deals you're getting now. We'll be seeing a large increase in such activity in the near future.

All my purchases off eBay up until now have been with USPS money orders only. I can't understand what is wrong with a USPS money order; how are they less secure than PayPal? .

Well....yes.

Probably the safest thing to use for any online buying is a Visa card, whether or not it's connected via PayPal. One thing I always suggest to people is to get a credit card that's used only for online purchases with a fairly low limit. All of the other methods for payment have less legal protection and more in the way of downside risk.