Service Notes

Please be aware that any death certificate request for an event which took place within the last 6 months will likely take longer than the stated timescale and detailed information is required.

Stated delivery times are in addition to the time taken to complete the service chosen.

What happens when I order this service?

When you place your order, you will receive a confirmation email with your order reference. Our specialist team will personally check all of the information in your request. If there is any additional information required, or something needs clarification, we will get in touch as soon as possible.

Once the request information is ready, we will search the necessary archives in order to locate the correct record for you. We automatically cover a 5 year search each side of your given event date if required. Once the correct record is located, we will then request a duplicate certificate is issued and advise you via email that the request has been made.

As soon as the certificate is ready for dispatch, we will notify you that it's on its way. If you have requested a scan, we will email this to you at this point.

Paying for your order

Online

You can place your order online securely using all major credit and debits cards, as well as PayPal.

Over the phone

Give our team a call to place your order over the phone on 0330 088 1142. There is a £5 supplement per order if you wish to order a certificate in this way.

Via post

You can send an order form along with a Postal Order or Cheque drawn on an UK bank. Please ensure you include contact details should we have any queries.

Via bank transfer

If you'd prefer to place your order and make a bank transfer, this option is available during checkout. Please make sure you include your order number as a payment reference.

Shipping

All timescales shown on the website refer to how long it will take us to process your request and have the document issued. Upon completion, we will send your order by the method chosen when your order has been placed.

We use a range of methods to ensure secured delivery of your documents. These are determined by the country you live in as follows:

UK Deliveries

All deliveries to UK addresses, including The Channel Islands and the Isle of Mann, are sent using Royal Mail. Services available include Standard First Class, Royal Mailed Signed For and Royal Mail Special Delivery (1PM).

Overseas Deliveries

Services for deliveries overseas vary dependent on your location. For most countries including the EU, North America and Australia, we offer Standard Royal Mail International post. This is not a tracked or insured postal method. We do offer Royal Mail International Track And Sign for an additional cost, available globally except the Middle East. If you require your certificate quickly, or are based in the Middle East we do offer a global courier service via UPS and DHL.

Failed Deliveries

If you have opted for a signed service and no-one is available to sign for the delivery, the package will be taken back to the local sorting office or depot and you will be left a card asking you to collect the item or arrange for a reattempted delivery at a convenient time.