See other formats

Bluegrass Special g Report § * Page 33 . J^^fL www.billboard.com R33io Monitor Radio Biz Gets New Publication Billboard Radio Monitor debuts in print and online ✓ In-depth radio reporting and commentary ✓ Expanded U.S. charts from Nielsen BDS ✓ New coverage of Latin and contemporary Christian radio ✓ European airplay charts from Music Control ✓ Legislation, regulation and new technology ✓ AND breaking news 24/7 on the Web For details, see page 7 Rodo Monitor "744?0"025 l* 1> THE INTERNATIONAL AUTHORITY ON MUSI A Smart Start For Green Day' 1 Trio Reclaims Punk |' Crown With 'Idiot' BY ME LIN DA NEWMAN With "American Idiot," Green Day is back to rightfully reclaim the punk/pop throne. In the four years since the band's last studio album. "Warning," Green Day has watched groups it hf> has clearlv influenced, such as if Blink-182 and Good Charlotte, try M on the punk crown. , ' »' The Reprise/Warner Bros, re- / m lease, a concept album Green f m Day Jubs a "punk rock opera," m enters The Billboard 200 at No. 1 ■ this issue, making it the first chart-topper for the 15-year-old ^Rjj San Francisci > Ray Area trio. *^tU "It's pretty sweet," singer/ guitarist Bi Hie Joe Arm- strong says of landing in the top spot "We've been doing this for a long time. The album is the most political (Continued on page 67) 0 AND DIGITAL ENTERTAINMENT 110th YEAR OCTOBER 9, 2004 3rP Green Day's Billie Joe Armstrong wrote most of the trio's new album. Country Is Touring's Hot Ticket Top Nashville Stars Elude Concert Woes BY RAY WADDELL In a touring season marred by cancel- lations, deep discounts and disappointing ticket sides, country music is thriving. This year, at least seven of the 25 top- grossing tours are likely to he country attractions. That's even better than last year, when five country acts were among the top 25 tours. "We've been doing well for a while." says Brian O'Connell. VP for Clear Channel Kntertainment. who heads CCIC's 0 mntry (Continued on page 68) Web Data: Trie NewTool BY SCOn BANERJEE SAN FRANCISCO— With their vast audi- ences. Internet radio giants Yahoo Launch and AOL Music have begun to generate data on song and artist popular- ity that is helping labels anticipate demand for their releases. The user data includes rankings of streamed music and video, artist search- es and song skips, as well as real-time rat- ings of individual songs. At the labels, the information — which, for now. is provided free by the sites — is (Continued on page 67) m e War Within • 39,251 'Scanned l sl week #20 on the BILLBOARD TOP 200 hadows Fall may just have crafted the perfect metal album. " - (ISIffllR JyB www ccnUjrvmr<9ia com • www thodowtfadracM (an * www ctvoUnediti com "Uli.L T^il'II m \ Maintenance cost over 4 years/50,000 miles 1 Oil changes $0.00 Windshield wiper blades $0.00 Brakes, including rotors and pads $0.00 Scheduled service inspections $0.00 Belts $0.00 Lights $0.00 Roadside Assistance $0.00 Total $0.00 If you've dreamed of owning a BMW but thought it might cost too much to maintain, you're in for a pleasant surprise. Of the tope We cover everything from oil changes to wear-and-tear items like belts, brakes and wiper blade inserts. So you don't need to Full Mantenanca covers all factory recommended maintenance on all MY 2004 vehicles and newer vehicles, as determined by the Service Interval Indicator tor 4 years or SO0O0 miles, i whichever comes first. See the Service and Warranty Information booklet for more details and specific terms, conditions and limitations. Exclusions from coverage gasoline gasoline" additives, windshield washer fluid and additives, tires, wheels, wheel alignment, ore balancing and rotation. All wort, must be performed by an aulhortMd BMW 01 BMW SAV center ' Roadside ■ Assistance provided through Cross Country Motor Club, Inc., Boston. MA 021 55, except in Alaska, California, Hawaii. Oregon, Wisconsin and Wyoming. Services in these states are provided throuoh r Cross Country Motor Club of California, loc, Boston, MA02155. three luxury makes, only BMW comes with Full Maintenance for 4 years/50,000 miles (whichever comes first) - standard, worry about the cost of maintenance. You're covered. You can just enjoy the pleasures of "The Ultimate Driving Machine.*" &2004 BMW ol North America. LLC. The BMW name and logo are registered trademarks. MSRP (or X3 2.5i and 3.0i includes desunauon and handling charges. Price excludes license, registration, taxes and options. Actual price detenmned by your BMW center. As shown: 2004 X3 3.0i with optional Sport Package, Cold Weather Package, 1 8" Y-Spoke wheels. Metallic Paint, and Leather intehoi has a MSRP ol $4 1 ,670. Billboard OCTOBER 9, 2004 • VOLUME 116, No. 41 . 1 ON THE CHARTS American Idiol ALISON KRAUSS + UNION STATION Line Pence Back By Popular Demand STEVEN CURTIS CHAPMAN All Things New KEITH URBAN rnt ^ ^oo ig '■' j, i 1 . i ii r - 1 v ,. i puii n. THE ALCHEMIST HI Inlmiliy SHADOWS FALL TrieWarWilhin RAY CHARLES Genius Loves Company BOB MARLEY & THE WAILERS GRUPO CLIMAX KEVIN LYTTLc Top of the News 7 Despite previous mainstream success, gospel star Smokie Norful has no crossover plans for his new full-length collection, "Nothing Without You." IP A New York District Court rules that making unauthorized recordings of a live performance is not a federal crime. Music I .1 The Rent: Actress Minnie Driver makes her singing debut with "Everything I've Got In My Pocket." 1* Movies & Musk: -8 Mile" producers Jimmy lovine and Paul Rosenberg reteam for a movie star- ring 50 Cent, "Locked and Loaded." I I Clas sical Score: Brian Couzens' recording company, Chandos, remains vibrant after Z5 yeats. 16 In The Spirit: Third- generation gospel singer Kierra "KiKfSheard makes history with her No. 1 gospel chart debut. Touring SPECIAL REPORT BEGINS ON PAGE 17 ■ YOLANDA PEREZ 22 R&B: A streetwise philoso - phy helps create early success for Steven Rifkind's SRC label. 24 Bits & Rhymes: Seven's self-started Chocolate Industries steadily produces artful music. ?fi latin NntavYnlanda Per?? presents traditional banda songs with a modern twist on her up- coming album, "Aqui MeTienes." 29 Beat Box: A wrap-up of the 11th annual Billboard Dance Music Summit. 31 Country: Koch Records Nashville reissues three Robert Earl Keen catalog titles, plus a concert DVD, "No. 2 Live Dinner." MM Words * Mntlr- Mark Schoenfeld and Barri McPherson fuse their talents into a theatrical creation, "Brooklyn the Musical." A* Studio Monitor: Thp AFS' 117th convention will give tech- nical tours that showcase local Bay Area institutions. Retail 45 Digital music services are using a new weapon to promote and drive transactions: their consumers. Aft The Indies: Ia77 lahel Cryptogramophone Records signs with Ryko for North American distribution. 47 Retail Trark- I IMG starts shaping its Fontana Distribution unit with a new CM and staff. 4H Home Video: Retailers are taking advantage of extra shelf space that the decreasing pace of DVD releases has created. QUOTE OF THE WEEK a label is like picking a baby sitter a lineup of serial killers.9 ARTIST & COMPANY INDEX (SIGNIFICANT MENTIONS IN THE NEWS) JOSH GROBAN Closer JANE MONHEIT Fa kino A Chance On love NOR AH JONES 1.;. ii'.i' 'V.v r, '.Virti Mr KID2 BOP KIDS Kiriz Hop 6 MANNHEIM STEAMROLLER Monster Mi» Artist Page(s) Company Page(s) 50 Cent 14 America Online Inc 1 Akon 22 Chandos ...15 Barri McPherson 44 Chocolate Industries . . .24 Dao Lanq 51 Clear Channel Entertainment Inc. . .1. 10 Diverse 24 Cryptogramophone Records .... . . .46 Eminem 57, 64 Dualtone Music Group Inc . . .31 Fiery Furnaces 42 Fonovisa Records . . .26 Frankie Knuckles 29 Fontana Distribution Inc . . .47 Good Charlotte 13,68 Gartner Inc . . .45 1,57 Koch Entertainment Distribution Inc , , ,47 luan 1 uis Guprra 10 Moore Entertainment Group LLC Motown Record Co. 1 P . . .20 Kierra "KiKi"Sheard .... 16.22 .7 Mark Schoenfeld 44 MFV Networks 8, 26,70 Michael Buble 53 Paramount Pictures . . .14 Minnie Driver 13,41 Rhymesayers Entertainment .... . . .24 Robert Earl Keen 31 Ryko Distribution . . .46 Roy Drusky 29 Sony BMG Music Entertainment . .8,51 Sarah Slean 54 Street Records Corp 22 Smokie Norful 7 Universal Music Group 26, 47, 67 Ferror Squad 22 Virgin Group Ltd . . .45 Yolanda Perez 26 Yahoo Inc . . . .1 Programming 5«1 Tuned In: Radio: Frankip Blue is back programming in New York and gives his first interview from the helm of Identity-challenged WNEW. Global 51 Universal Music China and Hong Kong will introduce Asia to a new version of singer Dao Lang's sixth set, "The First Snowfall of 2002." 53 Global Piike: Michael Buble's version of "Moondance" keeps his album in the Italian top 10 for more than six months. Features 20 Boxstort AO Billboard Picks «2 The BlllhoarH RarkBeal 42 Fxecutive Turntable 52 Hits nf Ihe World 55 Classifieds 57 Charts 57 Chart Heat 57 Market Watch 7fl The 1 ast Word J MICHAEL BUBLE EVENTS CALENDAR What Teens Want: Marketing to Teens Using Music, Movies & the Media. Oct. 26-27 at the Regent Beverly Wilshire. Beverly Mills. Calif. Information: 888-536-8536 Billboard Digital Entertainment Conference & Awards. Nov. 4-5 at the Tom Bradley International Center. UCLA. Los Angeles. Information: 646-654-4634 Billboard Back Stage Pass Touring Conference & Awards. Nov. 8-9 at The Roosevelt Hotel. New York. Information: 646-654-4660 The Hollywood Reporter/Billboard Film & TV Music Conference. Nov. 16-17 at the Renaissance Hollywood Hotel. Los Angeles. Information: 646-654-4660 Billboard Music Awards. Dec 8 at the MGM Grand Arena. Las Vegas. Information: 646-654-4600 blllboardevents.com 4 www.bMlboard.com • www.billboard.biz BILLBOARD OCTOBER 9, 2004 Thanks to the two hottest rock bands on the planet, SECRET MACHINES and THE KILLERS. for an amazing $2 Bill show. •••••• ■El 2 MUSIC TELEVISION' I □ Golden Road Goes Platinum® (US) GoWe/j float/ Goes Double Platinum* (US) Golden Road Goes Platinum® in Canada \/_ Golden Road Goes Platinum 8 in Australia %/ "Somebody Like You" #1 "Who Wouldn't Wanna Be Me" #1 %/ "You'll Think Of Me" #1 FOR... • Keith Urban's multi-week #1 single, "DAYS GO BY" • Keith Urban's headline tour starting October 8th • Keith Urban's critically- acclaimed new release Debuting at #1 BE HERE- In Stores NOW Produced by Dann Huff and Keith Urban The Best Is Yet To Come! Copyrighted material 10 Juan Luis Guerra takes his Latin Christian CD to the mainstream V Upfront Legendary rock radio DJ Scott Muni remembered TOP OF THE NEWS Smokie Notful will help promote his new album with a radio contest that honors teachers. Silky Smokie Stays True To Gospel BY DEBORAH EVANS PRICE NASHVILLE — Smokie Norful's silky voice and potent songs have quickly propelled him to the top of the gospel hill. His 2002 debut, "I Need You Now." spent five weeks at No. 1 on the Billboard Top Gospel Albums chart. The title track became a multiformat hit. The EMI Gospel project, which has sold 338.000 copies, according to Nielsen SoundScan. netted him two Gospel Music Assn. Dove Awards and three Stellar Awards and reached No. 154 on The Billboard 200. An EP last year also hit the summit of the gospel album chart (it debuted at No. 90 on The Billboard 200). Now Norful fans are eagerly anticipating his new full-length collection. "Nothing Without You." which arrives Oct. 5. Norful says he did not have any jitters about trying to replicate his past success. "I don't try to follow up what God does." says Norful. who was Billboard's top gospel artist in 2003. "I just believe that it was God's doing because it fit no formula. I equate chasing after what we experienced on the first album like a dog chasing its tail and never catching it." he continues. "I went in with the altitude that the same God that spoke to me on the first CD. the same God that put a message for his people on the first CD. is the same God I'm calling upon and trusting to do this CD." And he is adamant that he remain a gospel artist. EMI Gospel VP/CM Larry Blackwell says there are no plans to work any singles from the new project to a mainstream audience, as Norful has no desire to chase secular success. (Continued on page 69) Rhone's New Tune Former Elektra CEO Tapped To Run Motown BY GAIL MITCHELL Sylvia Rhone's long-anticipated return to the music industry's senior executive ranks is now official. The former chairman/CEO of Elektra Entertainment Group has been appointed president of Mo- town Records and executive VP of Universal Records. Kedar Massen- burg, who had been Motown president/CEO, exited the com- pany in July [Billboard, July 17). Universal Music Group chairman/ CEO Doug Morris said in a state- ment, "Sylvia is a first-class music executive who not only brings a unique understanding of the cre- ative community but extensive management experience." Under the terms of Rhone's multiyear contract, she will helm the Motown label, whose roster includes Stevie Wonder, India.Arie and Erykah Badu. In her executive VP role, Rhone will be involved in var- ious musical projects that encompass the UMG family of labels. She reports to Mel Lewinter, RHONE: WANTS TO DEVELOP MOTOWNS ROSTER chairman/CEO of Universal Motown Records Group, and. in turn, to Morris. "As we continue to expand Universal Motown 's A&R-driven strategy," Lewinter said in a state- ment, "there is no one better to complement our team than Sylvia." Rhone's segue to Universal reunites her with both Morris and Lewinter. who worked with her at Atlantic Records. "Working with both Doug and Mel is a homecoming for me," Rhone says. "1 had the privilege of working for Doug in my early years and consider him a mentor. What's exciting about the company is it has such a depth of creative assets. The collaboration possibilities with the sister labels are limitless." New York-based Rhone plans to work out of the company's Los Angeles offices at least once per month. Her pri- mary' focus at this early juncture is to develop and build the Motown roster. "I see this as a wry diverse label." Rhone says. I Continued on page 69) Billboard Takes New Pulse Of Radio The Billboard Information Group has expanded to cover every aspect of the radio industry in print and online. BIG's newest publication. Bill board Radio Monitor, debuts this week with a compelling array of exclusive interviews, insights and analysis. Along with the new publi cation comes an entirely new online presence, bi boardradiomonitor.com with a 24/7 Web site and a suite of e-newsletters focused on radio. The new publication — which replaces Air play Monitor in the BIG portfolio — was launched in response to the changing needs acn the industry. The rise of satellite, digital and online radio, the challenges of regulation and the shifting landscape of programming and music promotion have increased the appetite for for reliable news, analysis and data. At the heart of Billboard Radio Monitor is an unparalleled lineup of charts from Nielsen Broadcast Data Systems. The launch issue also includes: • A revealing interview with t Clear Channel Radio f CEO John Hogan. • A riveting commen- tary by Sen. John McCain, R-Ariz. • An exclusive interview with legendary programmer 1'rankie Blue. • A behind-the-scenes look at news radio. • Prank talk from "shock jocks" Opie & Anthony as they return to the air. • A look at the life of top hip- hop programmer Skip Cheatham. • Important insights about the latest Federal Communications Commission rulings. And much more online, including Web (Continued on page 56) BILLBOARD OCTOBER 9, 2004 www.blllboard.com • www. billboard, biz 7 Sony BMG Tackles Sales, Latin Frohlich, Katz To Head New Distribution Unit; Sony Latin Execs Reprise Roles By Ed Christman and Leila Cobo In an unusual move, Sony BMG Music Entertainment has named its pre-merger distribution heads. Bill Frohlich (Sony) and Jordan Katz (BMG), co-presidents of its distribu- tion sales efforts. Frohlich and Katz will oversee a new entity, Sony BMG Sales Enterprise, and their responsibil- ities will extend beyond distribu- tion sales operations. In addition to overseeing the creation of a dis- tribution sales team by combining Sony Music Distribution and BMG Distribution, the two will oversee RED Distribution, Special Prod- ucts, Sony Wonder and Sony Music Studios. They will report to Michael Smellie, COO of the merged company. The Sony-BMG merger did not include the companies' physical distribution operations. Sony Corp. and Bertelsmann each retain ownership of their manufacturing and fulfillment facilities. It is believed that Sony will handle those duties for the merged com- pany in the United States. The two parents are said to be bidding to decide which will handle them in the rest of the world. Katz was executive VP/GM of BMG Distribution, and before that senior VP of sales at Arista. Frohlich was executive VP at Sony Music Dis- tribution, and before that senior VP of sales at Epic. TWO HEADS BETTER THAN ONE One executive familiar with the situation says, "With two such dis- tinct cultures as BMG and Sony, it couldn't have worked a different way for distribution." Insiders believed that BMC North America chairman Clive Davis wanted Katz, and that Sony Music Label Group U.S. president/CEO Don Ienner was equally firm in his desire to keep Frohlich. The executive con- tinued: "What better solution, FROHLICH: ROOTS WITH SONY. EPIC ■ KATZ: BMG AND ARISTA VETERAN where you could have the co-pres- idents meet at the choke point to deal with both cultures land) come up with compromises to make everybody happy?" The creation of a combined Sony BMG distribution sales force is expected to begin shortly after Oct. 4. That is the deadline for Sony and BMG employees to decide whether they will take retirement or buyout packages. SONY EXECS LATIN EDGE On the Latin music front, Sony BMG's operations have remained Hesse Takes Digital Reins BY BRIAN GARRITY Sony BMG Music Enter- tainment named key exec- utives in its digital music and legal divisions, all based in New York. Thomas Hesse has been tapped to oversee digital music and new-technology efforts, with the title of president of the newly created Global Digital Business group. Hesse, who was BMG's I chief strategic officer, reports to Sony BMG Michael Smellie. Prior to joining BMG in 2002, HESSE: TO OVERSEE TECH EFFORTS COO Hesse was executive VP/head of corporate strategy at BMG par- ent Bertelsmann AG in Guetersloh. Germany. Sony technology vets Thomas Gewecke and Matt Carpenter will serve as Hesse's top lieutenants and direct reports. Additionally. Lisa Weiss has been named senior VP/general counsel/secre- tary of Sony BMG Music Entertainment, reporting to CEO Andrew Lack. Weiss will be responsible gal policy, and will oversee of the Sony BMG law for all I all aspects department's operations. in the hands of key Sony execu- tives so far. Frank Welzer, newly named head of Sony BMG's Latin opera- tions, has appointed three mem- bers of his executive team to pri- mary positions in the region. Kevin Lawrie becomes president of Sony BMG Norte, Jorge "Pepo" Ferradas becomes managing director of Sony BMG Sur, and Angel Carrasco becomes senior VP of A&R for Sony BMG Latin. All report to Welzer. Lawrie will oversee Sony BMG operations for U.S. Latin, Mexico and Central America, the same regions he oversaw as president of Sony Music Norte. Ferradas will be responsible for Sony BMG operations in Argentina, Bolivia, Chile, Paraguay, Peru and Uruguay, all countries he oversaw as president of Sony Sur. Carrasco, formerly senior VP of A&R for Latin America at Sony Music Inter- national, will oversee Sony BMG's A&R activities throughout the region. Both Carrasco and Lawrie will remain in Miami. Ferradas will remain in Buenos Aires. 'These are the first key announce- ments regarding the Sony-BMG merger for Latin America," Welzer tells Billboard. "The remainder of the organization will be determined in the near future. Our intention is to blend the best of both companies, which will result in an incomparable management team." In other international news, Lisa Zbitnew has been named president of Sony BMG Music Canada. She will report directly to Tim Bowen, head of Sony BMG's operations in the United Kingdom. Canada. Australia. New Zealand and South Africa. Zbitnew was previously head of BMG Canada. Sources say former Sony Music Cana- da president Denise Donlon has left the company. For more global Sony BMG announcements, see page 51. German Acts Get A Boost MTV Pledges Support For Horn e-Grou n Talent BY WOLFGANG SPAHR BERLIN — The German music industry has responded positively to a new partnership proposed by MTV Networks Europe president Brent Hansen. Hansen pledged a long-term commitment from MTVs channels in Germany to artists, especially new talent, if the record labels also take a long-term approach. In a keynote address delivered Sept. 29 at the Popkomm trade show. Hansen said. "We're prepared to he loyal to your artists if (labels] are loyal to them too, hut it is harder for us to he loyal if your artist gets pulled after one album.'' He added, "We want to see com- mitment and. in turn, we want to show you commitment by sticking with your artist — giving them the MTV stamp of approval, supporting them from breaking act to super- star. If we know that loyalty is there — for the long run — then we can justify investing in ways of really slw iwcasing your artisLs to millions of young adults around the world." German label executives, who have battled against a declining market lor the past four years, wel- comed the initiative. Wamer Music Group GSA chairman/CEO Bernd Dopp, called it "a very positive sig- nal.'' He added. "What is particularly encouraging is that MTV and \1va are supporting national and inter- national newcomers in particular. The next step will be to come to- gether to make specific decisions." Gerd Gebhardt. chairman of the German Phonographic Associa- tions, said: "Once again, this (Continued on page Ml Post-Election Changes Loom At FCC This is the last in a series of articles on the potential effects of the upcom- ing elections on the music industry. BY BILL HOLLAND WASI IINGTON, D.C.— Forecasting the future lineup and policy decisions of the Federal Communications Commission after the Nov. 2 Presi- dential election right now is a job best done by observers with a lot of Wash- ington experience, a crystal Kill and a divining rod. The basics seem easy enough: The five FCC commissioners are appointed by the president and confirmed by the Senate for five-year terms. They can be reappointed. Three commissioners, including the chairman, are of the president's party. The three current Republicans on the FCC are chairman Michael K. Powell. Kathleen Q. Abernathy and Kevin J. Martin. The two Democrats are Michael J. Copps and Jonathan S. Adelstein. Powell isn't commenting about his future plans at the commission or anywhere else. 1 lis chief of staff has said Powell has not made any plans to leave. One of the longest-sitting com- missioners. Powell was first sworn in Nov. 3. 1997. by President Bill Clin- ton and designated cliairman Jan. 22. 2001. by President George VV. Bush. Most industry observers with busi- ness at the commission agreed to talk to Billboard on condition of ano- nymity. All say Powell's chairmanship has been rocky at besL Most suggest that the current administration cannot he pleased with Powell's job so far. consider- ing the publicly booed, congres- sionally scorched and court- (Continued on pane .76'; 8 www.blllboard.com • www.billboard.biz BILLBOARD OCTOBER 9, 2004 Upfront Guerra Gets Religion Mainstream Star's Hit Energizes Latin Christian Movement BY LEILA COBO MIAMI — Years before releasing his first Christian music album on Aug. 31, tropical music star Juan Luis Guerra was already a point of reference for a budding Latin Christian music move- ment anxious to have a major main- stream artist in its midst. Now. those expectations have been fulfilled with "Para Ti," Guerra's first all-Christian album. The Vene Music release, distributed by Universal, debuted at No. 2 on the Billboard Top Latin Albums chart, the highest debut for a Christian album on that chart. Four weeks later. "Para Ti" remains in the top five, an anomaly for an album whose content — a mix of praise and worship, gospel and inspirational music — is profoundly devotional. 9 GUERRA. TOP BOW FOR CHRISTIAN ALBUM There are three major reasons for Cuerra's latest success, and these can be seen as a template for other Spanish- language Christian releases. One is Guerra's status as a major artist. Second is a strong single — "Las Avispas," a fast-paced merengue. has spent five nonconsecutive weeks at No. 1 on the Billboard tropical airplay chart. Finally, "Para Ti." whose rhythms range from gospel and bal- lads to the salsa, bachala and merengue for which Guerra is famous, has been marketed as a secular album to secular accounts. "I'm the same musician, but I'm a different person because I accepted the Lord," Guerra says. "I'm not called to preach in churches. I'm called to speak about the Lord in secular concerts." In marketing, promoting and serving the album, "we aren't doing anything (Continued on page 28) Concert Bootlegs Not A Federal Crime In NY BY SUSAN BUTLER Bootlegging live concerts in New York isn't a federal crime anymore, at least for the moment. A federal District Court on Sept. 24 held the law to be unconstitutional. The 1994 anti-bootlegging law, enacted by Congress to fulfill its obligations under an international treaty, makes the unauthorized recording, transmission or distri- bution of live musical performances a crime. The Recording Industry Assn. of America and law enforcement agen- cies sought to enforce this law by initiating an investigation of Jean Martignon, who operated a Man- hattan record store, catalog service and Internet site. A federal grand jury indicted him in 2003 for sell- ing bootlegs. (Names of the artists and the number of sales were not in the indictment and have not been made available.) Now, Judge Harold Baer Jr. has dismissed the indictment, claim- ing that the law is "impermissi- ble" since it grants greater pro- tection to live recordings than allowed by federal copyright law, which only protects performances that are "fixed" in some medium (such as prerecorded music). The statute also grants "perpetual protection to live musical per- formances," which conflicts with the limited duration of copyright protection. Of note is that the opinion did not mention publishers' rights in musical compositions performed during a concert. "The court was clearly wrong ... as applied to musical works," says Peter Felcher, general counsel to the National Music Publishers' Assn. "The unau- thorized recording and sale of recordings of live performances of a musical work violate the copy- right owners' exclusive rights to reproduce and distribute" copy- (Conlinued on page 69) Becker To Keynote Confab NEW YORK — Clear Channel Entertainment chairman/ CEO Brian Becker will keynote the upcoming Billboard Backstage Pass touring conference, set for Nov. 8-9 at the Roosevelt Hotel here. The conference will place Becker in a Q&A setting, with Ray Waddell, Billboard senior writer for touring, conducting the interview. Becker caps what has become a premier list of touring industry movers and shak- ers participating in this new Billboard event. The international pool of panelists includes corporate and boutique promot- ers, agents and managers, along with rep- resentatives from the worlds of broadcast- ing, record labels, production, venue management, ticketing, insurance, e-media, travel, marketing and sponsorships, consumer goods and other sectors that affect the touring business. Helming CCE since 2000, Becker has been at the center of the concert indus- try's transition from a small group of independent and competitive regional promoters into today's consolidated landscape. Becker is responsible for the manage- ment and strategic direction of CCE and its various operating units in the United States and Europe, including Clear Chan- nel Music, and the company's venue, Broadway and motorsports divisions. For more information on Backstage Pass, see the On the Road column on page 20, or visit billboardevents.com. NEWSLINE.. THE WEEK IN BRIEF The International Federation of the Phonographic Industry estimates the retail value of the worldwide industry in first-half 2004 to be $13.9 billion, down 1.3% from the same period last year. Comparatively, the global market in first- half 2003 registered a 10.9% slide from the same period in 2002. According to the IFPI, the numbers represent the least-severe first-half drop since 2000. During the six months ending June 2004, unit shipments reached 12 billion audio and video discs, a 1.7% growth compared with 2003 figures. A rise in DVD shipments drove this growth. Shipments of CD albums fell just 1.1% in value, while the value of the singles format declined by 16.6%. CD albums account for 85.3% of the total market, while singles make up 4.5%. The U.S. market led the recovery. In the first half, the United States gen- erated year-on-year growth of 3.9% in value to more than $5 billion and a 5% rise in volume to more than 368 million units shipped. LARS brandle Nickelodeon has inked a three-year distribute in deal with BMC Strategic Marketing Group for its Nick Records imprint. The agreement is an extension and expansion of an existing BMG rela- tionship. Jive Records has been distributing Nick releases since 2001. Initial releases under the new pact include the recently streeted "Dora the Explorer" soundtrack and "Rugrats Holiday Classics." due Oct 12. Mau- reen Taxter, senior VP of new business for Nickelodeon and head of Nick Records, says the label will focus on developing soundtracks to TV shows and original albums from Nickelodeon characters/personalities. BRIAN CARRITY As expected, Ron Spaulding is moving over to the Warner Music Group's incubator initiative, and Rick Froio will replace him as WEA senior VP of sales. Froio was senior VP of sales at Atlantic Records. Spaulding. who came to WMG in 2000 as senior VP of sales at Elektra Records, will work with Todd Moscowitz and Fred Feldman. Spaulding and Moscowitz will head the Asylum label, revived to specialize in hip-hop music. Froio began his career at WEA in 1976. In rejoining the company, Froio will report to executive VP John Madison and will oversee the catalog, video, Latin, urban and lifestyle sales departments. ED CHRISTIAN Atlant ic Records has named Ronnie Johnson executive VP. Johnson, senior VP/ GM of Atlantic's urban division since 2002, is based in New York and reports to Atlantic co-chairrnaiVCOO Craig Kallman and president Julie Greenwald. Johnson joined Atlantic in 1999 as senior VP of urban promotion. Before that, he worked in the promotions departments of Warner Bros., Polygram, Island. Mercury and Motown. TROY CARPENTER The so-called Induce ad stalled Sept. 30 on its way to mark-up by the Senate Judiciary Committee. Several committee members have asked to work on the bill's language after unprecedented opposition lobbying in recent weeks by technology companies, library associations and consumer groups. Committee chairman Orrin G. Hatch, R-Utah, called for negotiations to craft a compromise bill. Among those invited are the Recording Industry Assn. of America and the Motion Picture Assn. of America, which support the legislation, as well as Verizon, the Business Software Alliance and the Consumer Electronics Assn., which oppose iL Opponents feel the bill would also snare legitimate technology. They prefer a behavior-oriented language that punishes so-called bad actors. BILL HOLLAND Capital Radio and CWR Croup plan to merge in an all-share transaction that will create a new market leader in the U.K. radio sector. The new company will include London's leader Capital Radio (top 40) and GWR's national station Classic FM. as well as several dozen local sta- tions throughout the country. The combined reach is approximately 18 mil- lion listeners, or 36% of the United Kingdom's commercial radio audience. The yet-to-be-branded company will control about 40% of the £600 million ($1.08 billion) U.K. radio advertising market and will have a market capitaliza- tion of about £740 million ($1.34 billion) based on current trading prices. EMMANUEL LECRAND The House of Representatives passed the Piracy Deterrence and Education Act of 2004 Sept. 28. It is considered one of the most important pieces of anti-piracy legislation to be approved by the 108th Congress, which is tenta- tively scheduled to adjourn Oct 8. The main provision of the bill gives prosecutors the authority to go after egregious uploaders of unauthorized copyrighted files as possible felons. The bill would also require peer-to-peer services to post warning notices stating the legal dangers of file sharing. BILL HOLLAND 10 www.blllboard.com • www.blllboard.blz BILLBOARD OCTOBER 9, 2004 Op inion Editorials / Commentary / Letters MTV Europe Pledges To Support Acts — If Labels Do The Same Commitment Is The Key The following is adapted from a speech delivered by Brent Hanson, president/CEO of MTV Networks Europe, at the Popkomm trade show Sept. 29 in Berlin. When MTV Europe's first clunky analog signal went up Aug. 1, 1987. only 1 million homes in Europe could see MTV. and viewers in all countries received the same MTV — the same VJs, artists, programs and adverts, regardless of cultural or language boundaries. MTV is now about a multitude of chan- nels and brands that reach out and touch Europe's youth on a number of levels. MTV is not "just" music television any- more; while the "M" — music — of MTV will always remain emphatically at the heart of what we do, television is only one of the strings to our digital bow. As our network in Europe has grown and become profitable, we have invest- ed, spending a huge amount on new programming, channels and technolo- gies to make MTV an environment that is so much more than generic back-to- back videos. The roots of this change lie back in 1996, when MTV started using digital compression to vary elements of our pro- gramming output. The pan-European model so relevant in 1987 had its limitations; music [is] released at different cycles in different markets. We soon realized that it wouldn't work, so we literally broke up the network through advances in digital-compression technology. Our portfolio now contains more than 45 channels, including those targeting specific demographics and music genres, such as R&B and dance music. So what is the key to our success today — and our continuing success in the future? Creativity is the key; it's what makes the difference. Music is the heart of MTV, but creativity is the soul. Now I know there are those among (the industry] who may have been told that promotion on MTV has little value. Well, I want to show how wrong (they] are by showing the influence that MTV had on the success of (Finnish rock act] the Rasmus. I put a goal upon my most senior tal- ent and music managers; to leverage our network to help break talent across European borders. MTV Nordic got behind the Rasmus back in '98 with their first video, "Liq- uid," and sang their praises to their colleagues on MTV Nordic's sister channels. When the Rasmus were signed internationally to Motormusic. part of Universal Music Germany, MTV Central saw "In the Shadows," loved it and started playing the clip. It became a huge hit in Germany. MTV Networks Europe then decided to put its full, network-wide weight behind "In the Shadows." And then there are the Beatsteaks, the fantastic German group that we have recently made a pan-European network priority. We truly believe in the Beat- steaks, and we are also putting our full weight behind them to support them toward international success. Taking Issue By Brent Hansen The important point here is: No one else but our network of branded music channels can offer this kind of support to the music industry. MTV not only can get an artist into 120 million households in Europe, but it can also do it in a targeted way, spinning the changes according to the medium and the audience. 'The money men would like to believe that creativity comes cheaply and easily — overnight. ' Of course, not every act gets the level of support we are giving the Rasmus or the Beatsteaks. So what was behind our decision to support them in such a way? It's two things really: firstly, our absolute belief in their cultural, their creative value; and secondly, our genuine insight into the different groups and subcultures that make up our audiences — something that is really important to MTV and to me personally. What worries me is that we're just not seeing enough acts of the caliber of the Rasmus, and the newer acts aren't get- ting enough time and money to allow them to develop and grow as artists. Often, when wonderful, creative, thrilling artists are signed, they're canned after their first album, just when they've barely begun to realize their talents. We can't lay the blame at the feet of the A&R guys — a lot of this is driven by financial challenges. Top management has to rationalize a stock-market-driven agenda, and we all know the hit the industry' has taken from digital piracy. The result? Safety prevails over cre- ativity. Any organization, including ours, has to deal with this issue, but we can't forget that our lifeblood is in finding new artists and nurturing established ones. Recent mergers in the industry have made the situation even worse. The need for immediate return on investment may satisfy the shareholders, but it threatens to starve the heart out of the labels that have brought us such wonderful music and artists. I know the money men would like to believe that creativity comes cheaply and easily — overnight. But the reality is sustained creativity usually — but not always — needs three things: talent, time, money. And what is sustaining the industry instead? One-album wonders? Manufac- tured bands? TV reality show contestants? How many "Pop Idols" do we really need? Average music won't sustain the long- term health of the music industry'. There's still too much focus on formula top 20 acts. If achieving top 20 status were a test of greatness, then some of the biggest icons of our time would have been stacking grocery carts. You know and 1 know that creativity comes at a price. We're prepared to be loyal to your artists if (labels) are loyal to them too, but it is harder for us to be loyal if your artist gets pulled after one album. We want to see commitment, and, in turn, we want to show you com- mitment by sticking with your artist: giving them the MTV stamp of approval, supporting them from breaking act to superstar. If we know that loyalty is there — for the long run — then we can justify investing in ways of really show- casing your artists. It's a price worth us all paying. What we're all making — what we're con- tributing to — is the music legacy of our culture, of our time. Let's start taking risks and making commitments so that we can show our audiences that there is more to our industry than "Pop Idol." We're not in it for a free ride. Let's be loyal to those credible artists and work together to create tomorrow's superstars. Billboard Executive Editors KEN SCHLAGER TAMARA CONNIFF BUREAUS Lm imgm Meknda Nwwrun (Bureau Chief) SOUWiKrwc Blvd Lot Angetes, CA 90036. S.ni f i jtu is- Hontgomerv Street. Suite 201, E 41S- 398-4156 17ft Si NW..Su.te215. i: 202-833-8672 Let your colleagues know what's on your mind. Send letters to Ken Sch lager, Executive Editor, Billboard. 770 Broadway, 6th Floor, New York, N.Y., 10003. or e-mail to letters@billboard.coni. Include name, title, address and phone number for verification. Letters should be concise and may be edited. All submissions published shall become the sole property of Billboard, which shall own the copyright in whole or part, for publication. Washington. O.C.: Bill Holland (Bureau ( Washington, DX 20006. Phone: 202-833- Nashville: Ph>flis Slark {Bureau Cr*cf) 49 Hudc Square W, Nashville.TN, 37203: Phone: 615-321-4290. Far: 615-320-0454 Miami: Leila Cotw iBurtau Chief/Latin) 101 CrarJor BK-d . Suite 466, Key Biscaye*. f L 33149: Phone: 305-361-5279; Fat 305-361-5299 Lortdoa: Emmanuel Ugrafid (Bureau Chief) Endeavour House. 189 Shaftesbury Ave London WC2H8TJ. Phone +44 (Oi 207-420-6003. Fa*: .44 (0)207-420-6014 NewVewfc 770 Broadway. New York. N Y 10003; Phone: 646-654-4400; Edit Fax. 646-654-4681. Advertising fa. 646-654-4799 EDITORIAL Manning Editors: Gmilyn HcwiL- IB Sward B'J) 64n 6=>4 4Wi.t, B.irr, l.-a,-ll (Billboard com) 646-654-5581 ; Thorn Duffy (Special Publication*) 646-654-4716 Senior EdRon: Melmtta Newman (Music) 323-525-2267: Mart Schttmtn (News) 646-654- 4708. F^iiStaAlCcArtiy)615-32I-4284 Senior Writer S - ' ii ■.,'-•!'■ J ■■ . :>''•' ■ .'inv 212-246-0795: Ed Chnstman iRrtjil) 646-654-4723. Leila Cobo (Latin) 305-361-5279: Brian Canity (Business) 646-654-4721. Carta Hay trim &TV Musid 646-654-4730 Sill Holland (Government) 202-833-8692; Gal Mncfrell (R&Bi 323-525-2289. Mchael Paoletta (Danct) 646-654-4726. Deborah Evans Price (Country/Chnstian) 615-321-4292. RayWaddell flour- ing) 615-321-4245. Christopher Walsh (Musical Insbwnents/Pro Audio) 646-654-4 7B0 Staff Writers: Jill Kipnis i Home Video) 323-525-2293 News.' Reviews Editor: ."■ - i=. >.>t • Associate Editors: ' Copy Chief: Q Art Director: J Editorial Assist Contributors: I Otaon.DanOue* ward BIZ) 646-654-4904: Kary Kroil (Special Pub- ; (LA) 323-525-2322 K lack* McCarthy Wayne Robins n AfiastasuTswutcas GLOBAL London: tumanuel Legrand (Bureau Chief Global Editor) 01 1 -44-207-420-61 5S: torn Ferguson (Deputy Global Editor) 01 1 -44 -207-420-6069. Lm Bundle lOboal News tJlori 01 1-44-207- 420-6068 Bwtw Chief*: Cfmst* Lhuer OusbaUBia). Larry Lrftanc (Canada), Steve HcOure (Asia). Wottaamj Spohr (Germanel Contributing Edrtocs: Sam Ar-eJrews, luliana Koran (e ng. Paul Sexton. Mgef WIGarnson CHARTS Director of Charts/Senior Analyst: GCOFT MAYFTELD (L.A.) Chart Managers: S± Alkn iBcracore, NasnvAe). Keith taufheid (Pop Catalog, Soundtrado, Production Credits, LAJ. Anthony Colombo (Manstream Rock. Modem Rock. Spotlight Recaps). Ricardo Ccrrtpanioni (Darw. Dan. Oaswai). Mary DeCroce IKid Audo Blues. hUsNi lie i, Wade lessen (Bluegrass, Country. OrWian, Gospel Nashvnel.Ceofr MavfieU (The Bilboard 200. Healseeiiers. LA). Patrick MtCowan (Adult Owttrrtwary XXA fcp afl.VUeo. LA). Cordon Hurray (Bttmrd Research. Ekttrcrx. lac. Nor Age. WorU Husk). Mrjl Paid MMfl) itnp Reggae). $Mo rVtrcAnngo (The BflbiMrd Hoi lOO.bp 40lrjcJo). Paul Pomfcet (Hrfc- of OVWorkJ. London) Charl Production Manager: M 1 ( ..: Associate Chart Production Manager Alexin touts Archive Research: 646-654-4633 RESEARCH SERVICES Associate Publisher: MICHAEL EUJS INTEGRATED SALES, EVENTS & BRAND MARKETING Vice President. Integrated Sales: I0SEPH GUERR1ERO Associate Publisher/ International: GENE SMITH Advertising Directors tmoptAlJL: Frederv Fenuca *44 lOj 207-420-6075 AjJa-Padfic' Australia: L.r ja Mawh 612-9440-7777. Fax. 612-9440-7788 Japan: A>j Karteko 323-525-2299 Latin America/Miami: Mama Clival 305-864-7578. Fax: 305-864-3227 Mexico/West Coast Latin: MfJ Ouuet 323-782-6250 Caribbean: Betty Ward 954-929-5L20, riashvflk: tvi" i M* i5 1 >-2 r '3-67Sf> i'Tc-.jnn<; i Advertising Directors Newark b'nna Johnson 646-654-4 707, PckiWtirutrxk 646-654-471 0 HaUonol Consumer Suzanne Lang 646-654-4699 LA.: AM fancko 323-525-2299 NUutwflk: Lee Ann Photogio 615-321-4294 Claislfied/Dlrectories: M StrKM 646 654-4697 Advertising Coordinator: Hma Comer 646-654-4695 Sales & Telemarketing Assistant: Adan Cross 646-654-4691 Executive Director. Conference Special Events Coordinator kt Director Integrated Marketing h Business Art Director, Marketing & Sales: %losa Subatch Promotion Manager: Mary Am Km 646-654-4644 Brand Devrlopmcnt Manager toMpk Knauy 646-654-46 J4 Marketing £ Events Associate: Rosa laquti 646-654-4660 LICENSING & REPRINTS Vice President, licrming & Events HOWARD APPELBAUM Sponsorship /Business Development Manager: CeOele Marquei Marketing; Promotions Manager. Licensing & Events: B-sfton Gnerunger 646-654-4675 Manager. Licensing. Sales h Reprints: Aitgeline Biesheuvel 646-654-4677 CIRCULATION Circulation Director: MAR IAN N MOERY Associate OrcuiaUon Director: 1 bill Lit Circulation Manager (Group): M ifiele Larsen Assistant OrcuJation Managers: Marfine Hacaid International Circulation Marketing Director: B- r i i InternattonaJ Subscriptions Marketing Manager k,,-. - Wr 1 - .j..n Iniernational Ckaimm Harllkg: Paul Bngden (London) SufescripbortK 800-562-2706 (US) 818-487-4582 (Outside U.$J PRODUCTION Production Director: TERRENCE C. SANDERS Advertising Production Director: l.yitia Muuilko Assistant Advertising Production Manager: i tins Dexter Editorial Production Supervisor/QPS Administrator. Anthony T Stalling* Specials Productjon EdKor Marc G-atjjntc Systems/Technology Supervisor Barry Btshn Senior Composition Technic ian: . ■■,!!■ l. ■ ■ . ■ Composition Technician K'-::-.' ""J Advertising Graphic Artist: K iv Caristyn Directories Production Manager: ten '.)■. ' > r iNa'.iniiei ADMINISTRATION Vice President/General Manager: P ANDREW BILBAO Distribution Director Lou Bradfirid Billing: UMbrttnt! Credit: SlNM Morion Assistant to the Pubilsbtr KrlstinaTurui PRESIDENT & PUBLISHER: JOHN K1LCULLEN & Special Events: MICHELE JACANGELO Special Events Associate: ijrt-t 0 y.tj NATHAN M1SNER vio - - VA- BILLBOARD OCTOBER 9, 2004 www.billboard.com • www.billboard.biz 11 Introducing the newest member of the Billboard family! The industry tool you've been waiting for has arrived. Authoritative analysis, 24/7 news & proprietary data including: • 900+ playlists • Real time building charts • 1000+ Nielsen BDS charts • Nielsen Music Control European charts More! More formats including Top 40, AC/Adult, R&B, Country, Rock, Latin, Christian and News/Talk/Sports. Bigger! A bigger audience, including group presidents, program directors, syndicators, station managers, sales managers and more. For advertising information Lee Ann Photoglo - Country/Christian 615.321.4294 • laphotoglo@billboard.com Weinstock - To 0 ■ pweinstock® Gene Smith - Latin 646.654.4616 • gsmith@billboard.com For all other advertising opportunities, Joseph Guerriero 646.654.4627 • jguerriero@billboard.com For subscription information. Michele Larsen 646.654.5863 • mlarsen@billboard.com 22 Steven Riikind's SRCIabel scores another No. 1 with Terror Squad Music POP / ROCK / COUNTRY / R&B / HIP-HOP / LATIN / DANCE / TOURING Yolanda Perez's upcoming album delivers a modem twist to traditional banda beats In The Driver's Seat With Minnie Minnie Driver knows the news of another actress making an album generally starts people's eyes rolling, and she's just fine with that. "With all due respect, the bar is set fairly low in terms of actors making seminal records, especially singer/songwriters," Driver says. "Mainly it seems to be a bid for more money and fame instead of a truly creative endeavor." For Driver, the project started as a way to exorcise some demons. "The The Beat By Melinda Newman mnewman@billboard.com idea of making a record came only after I had written six songs," she says. Producer Marc "Doc" Dauer "had far more faith than I did that it was a record. I was just working out some personal stuff. He was like, 'C'mon, honey, you have to profit off your pain!" " The result is the low-key, mellow "Everything I've Got in My Pocket." which comes out Oct. 5 on Zoe/ Rounder in the United States and Oct. 18 in the rest of the world through Liberty/EMI. The title track has been serviced to triple-A radio. Driver, who has been playing live for several months, will open 18 dates for the Finn Brothers in the United Kingdom starting Oct. 15. Her band includes Dauer and the Wallflowers' Rami Jaffe. "It's really important that I put it across live," she says. "1 know that's the only way people are going to buy me as a musical artist" But, like any new act she has had to take her lumps. She opened an OXFAM benefit recently that also fea- tured R.E.M., Coldplay's Chris Mar- tin and the Thrills. "It was awful!" she says with a laugh. "It was like, What the hell is Minnie Driver doing singing?' But I pretty much won them over by the end of the set. People were like, 'Co and earn your stripes. It doesn't come for free.' I love the challenge." DEPARTURES: Alanis Morissette has parted ways with longtime manager Scott Welch, who has handled her career since she signed with Maverick Records in the early 1990s. Her rep- resentative says she has no plans to immediately hire a new manager. Welch did not return calls by press time.. . Immortal Entertainment president David Codikow and execu- tiveVPDanaMillman- Dufine haw left the company. The duo had managed Velvet Revolver. The band is meeting with potential new managers. ARRIVALS: Sire has signed Finnish quartet H.I.M. to a worldwide deal. The group will record its label debut later this year . . . Uni- versal Records will release British group Razorlight's "Up All Night" stateside Oct 26. The album, released on Mercury/Universal in the United Kingdom, reached No. 5 on the U.K. charts . . . Australian band Powderfin- ger. formerly on Universal, is now on Artemis in the United States. The New York-based label will release "Vulture Street" Nov. 9. The album collected four Australian Record Industry Assn. awards, including album of the year, earlier this year. SONGBIRD: No one is more surprised than Christine McVie that she lias a new album ouL But life is funny that way, she admits, and with her "never say no to anything" attitude, it just felt like the right time to release "In the Meantime," which bowed Sept 14 on Koch Records. The music, especially first single "Friend" and the gorgeous "Culumny," is signature McVie: melodic and tuneful, with lyrics build around relationships. "These songs are about a particular man with whom I went through great times and rotten times, it's someone I met who broke my heart." she says. "In some ways, it's my own 'Rumours.' I'm not going to say who it's about. You can call it 'Tumors,' " (Continued on page 16) Good Charlotte will head out on a co-headlining tour in October, with fellow pop/punk band Sum 41. Good Charlotte Takes On 'Iif e And Death' BY MARCO WHITMIRE "1 wear black on the outside because that's how I feel on the inside." Good Charlotte's Joel Madden deadpans when describing his romantic outlook. Though it's surprising to hear the lead singer of a multiplatinum pop/punk band with a heavy female following quote Morrissey. it's this darker theme that drives the group's third Daylight/Epic Records effort. 'The Chronicles of Life and Death." due in stores Oct. 5. The band's signature backdrop of heavy drums and bouncing guitars is in place for the 14-track set, recorded during seven months at producer Eric Valentine's Bare- foot Studios in Los Angeles. But elements of British punk and arena rock showcase the group's changing style. "It was where we had to go as a band. We couldn't remake our last album as much as some people might haw wanted us to, or expected us to," Madden says. "Our fans just want us to be honest, and that's an ongoing theme throughout this record. The music is the natural progres- sion of changes we've gone through, but I don't think it's so far-fetched where |our fans] won't accept it" In 2002, Good Charlotte rocketed to the forefront of the pop/punk world with its sophomore effort. "The Young and the Hopeless." The album bowed at No. 7 on The Billboard 200 with first-week sales of 1 17.000 copies, while hit sin- gles "Lifestyles of the Kich and Famous." "Boys and Girls" and "Anthem" boosted the former modern rock band into mainstream top 40 territory. With MTVs "Total Request Live" crowd behind it, the album has gone on to sell 3 mil- lion copies in the United States, according to Nielsen SoundScan. The album has remained on The Billboard 200 since its debut. "Originally it's the only thing we could play," Madden says of the group's sound, which is heavily influenced by pop/punk acts like Green Day and Rancid. "That's always going to be an element of our music because tliat's part of who we are as a band, but [on "The Young and the Hope- less"! we were a lot younger and had a lot to prove, whether we realized it or tried to maybe think we didn't." 'MORE VARIATION' Willi such songs as "The Truth" and "Ghost of You" — a rocking retrospective penned by guitarist/keyboardist Billy Martin — the new album delves into darker waters lyrically than previous efforts, though first single "Pre- dictable" showcases the frenetic energy and rousing cho- ruses that have made Good Charlotte a crossover success. There's a lot more variation on I'The Chronicles of Life and Death "|. The hand has widened the texture of their music with all kinds of instruments and strings, and lyri- cally, it has some poignant, intense moments. It's a very global-feeling album with genuine global hits," says exec- utive VP of worldwide A&R for Sony Music U.S. and Inter- national David Massey, who signed the group to his Epic imprint Daylight for its self-titled 2000 debut "They've retained their roots," Massey says, "and pec iple (Continued an gage 29) BILLBOARD OCTOBER 9, 2004 www.billboard.com • www.billboard.biz 13 Musici lovine, Rosenberg Want To Be In Pictures David Ceffen. Cameron Crowe and Saul Zaentz are just some of the peo- ple who have crossed over from music business origins to become power players in the movie industry. Now In terscooe Geffen A&M chairman/CEO Jimmy lovine and Eminem manager Paul Rosenberg have inked a first-look deal with Via- com-owned companies Paramount Pictures and its affiliate MTV Films. Under the agreement, which is reported to be a three-year deal, lovine and Rosenberg will produce and develop feature films. One of the first projects will be "Locked and Loaded," a semiautobiographical movie starring 50 Cent in his big- screen debut. The rapper will play a former drug dealer who gives up a life of crime to pursue a music career. The Sopranos" writer/executive pro- ducer Terence Winter is writing the screenplay, which Paramount says is expected in theaters in 2005 or 2006. lovine and Rosenberg were, respectively, a producer and executive producer of Universal Pictures' "8 Mile." The film grossed nearly $1 17 million at the U.S. box office, accord- ing to Nielsen EDI. The Shady/Inter- scope Records soundtrack spawned Eminem's Billboard Hot 100 No. 1 "Lose Yourself," which won an Academy Award for best original song and a Grammy Award for best rap song. The soundtrack has sold 4.6 million copies in the United States, according to Nielsen SoundScan. Rosenberg is a VP at Eminem's Shady label, whose roster includes 50 Cent. Sources say Shady/Interscope is expected to release the "Locked and Loaded" soundtrack. FAHRENHEIT track album includes Zack de la Rocha's "We Want It All" (the album's first single). Bob Dylan's 9/11' X 2: Oct. 5 marks the release date for two soundtracks related to the Michael Moore documentary "Fahrenheit 9/11. "The DVD of the movie arrives the same day. Rhino/Warner Bros. Records will release the 16-song original soundtrack, which includes Neil Young's "Rockin' in the Free World" (the soundtrack's lead single!, the Go- Go's' "Vacation," R.E-M.'s "Shiny Happy People," Eric Bunion's "We Gotta Get Out of This Place" and sev- eral tracks from film composer Jeff Gibbs. A portion of the album's pro- ceeds will go to nonpartisan organiza- tion Rock the Vote. Epic Records/Sony Musk Sound- trax will release "Songs and Artists That Inspired Fahrenheit 9/11," with all songs selected by Moore. The 14- Movies & Music By Carlo Hay chay@blllboard.com "With God on Our Side." Bruce Springsteen's live version of "Chimes of Freedom," System of a Down's "Boom!," the Clash's "Know Your Rights," the Dixie Chicks' "Travelin' Soldier" and Pearl Jam's live version of "Masters of War." SOUNDTRACK 'EXPRESS': New songs from Josh Groban and Aero- smith frontman Steven Tyler will drive the holiday-themed sound- track to "The Polar Express." due Nov. 2 on Reprise/Warner Bros. Records. The Warner Bros. Pic- tures animated film, based on the best-selling children's book, opens Nov. 10 in U.S. theaters. Groban's new song, "Believe." will be the first single and video from the soundtrack, while Tyler offers "Rockin' on Top of the World." Grammy Award-winning songwriter/ producer Glen Ballard and film composer Alan Silvestri wrote and produced the new songs. "Polar Express" star Tom Hanks sings two songs on the album: "Hot Chocolate" and the title track. The soundtrack also features several holi- day classics, including Bing Crosby's "White Christmas,'' the Andrews Sis- ters' "Winter Wonderland." Perry Como and the Fontaine Sisters' "It's Beginning to Look Like Christmas" and Crosby and the Andrews Sisters' "Here Comes Santa Claus (Right Down Santa Claus Lane)." A special edition will be available with deluxe packaging and a mini- book featuring stills from the film. JONES ON FILM: The life of the late Rolling Stones guitarist Brian Jones is headed to the big screen in the British independent movie "The Wild and Wycked World of Brian Jones," to be distributed by Intan- dem Films. Leo Gregory will play Jones in the movie, which is directed by Stephen Wooley. IN BRIEF: Tyrese will co-star in the Touchstone Pictures drama "Annapolis" . . . Queen Latifah head- lines the cast of the Paramount Pic- tures comedy "Last Holiday" . . . Jes- sica Simpson will play Daisy Duke in Warner Bros. Pictures' big-screen version of "The Dukes of Hazzard." Meanwhile, Simpson's husband, Nick Lachey. will make his feature-film debut in the crime drama "The Hard Easy," an independent film that is seeking distribution. TYRE KAMINS KATZ & GRANOF A LAW CORPORATION IS PLEASED TO ANNOUNCE THAT BARRY A. MENES AND PAUL I. MENES HAVE BECOME MEMBERS OF THE FIRM AND THAT WE HAVE CHANGED OUR NAME TO TYRE KAMINS KATZ GRANOF & MENES A LAW CORPORATION 1880 CENTURY PARK EAST, SUITE 300 LOS ANGELES. CALIFORNIA 90067 TEL: (310) 553-6822 FAX: (310) 552-9024 WWW.TYREKAMINS.COM OCTOBER 2004 14 www.blllboard.com • www.blllboard.bli BILLBOARD OCTOBER 9, 2004 Music Britain's Chandos Marks Silver Anniversary Twenty-five years ago next month, English trombonist/composer/ recording engineer Brian Couzens founded a small independent British record company, Chandos. That company blossomed into a thriving, multifaceted label that last month won a Gramophone Award for its recording of the complete Arnold Bax symphonies played by the BBC Philharmonic and conducted by Ver- non Handley. Couzens currently serves as chairman/senior record producer. He has passed along day-to-day oversight to his son, Ralph, who is the label's managing director. "Around 1969 or 1970," Ralph Couzens says, "an engineer built him a portable mixer machine, and my dad would assist in recording ses- sions on weekends, while he was still in school. Throughout the 1970s, he did a lot of on-site recordings for RCA in London. "By 1977 or so. however," he con- tinues, "the industry' had hit a sour patch, and RCA, which was by far our biggest client, closed its London office. My dad then went to artists he had recorded for RCA and asked if they would consider recording for him. And so, Chandos Records was born in November 1979. "As we grew," Couzens notes, "we started dividing projects up into spe- cialty imprints, such as brass band music on Chandos Brass, Chaconne for early music and Opera in English, which is funded by the Peter Moores Foundation. Moores' passion is that opera should be available to everyone, regardless of language barriers. "Being an independent stand- alone gives a huge amount of free- dom in terms of artistic decisions, although it's a tougher financial sit- uation," Couzens says. But Chandos is navigating these often treacherous waters with some savvy partner- ships. The majority of Chandos releases are sub- ANOTHER ANNIVERSARY: Online magazine Classics Today (classics- today.com) celebrated its fifth sidized in some way, whether through broad- cast/recording deals with the BBC, foundation funds or individ- ual and corpo- rate sponsorship. The label antici- pates a flurry of upcoming releases to build upon the success of its current series. Couzens notes, "Our film music series has been extremely successful." New entries will include discs of Komgold, Vaughan Williams and Shostakovich. Richard Hickox. the British conduc- tor whom Couzens calls "our No. 1 artist," was appointed music director of Opera Australia this past spring; when he takes up his position there in January 2005, Couzens says, "we'll be making recordings with him at the Sydney Opera House, beginning with Prokofiev's Love for Three Oranges.' " Classical Score By Anastasia Tsioulcas alsioulcas@billboard.com anniversary Oct 1. Executive editor David Hurwitz notes, "We are getting 4,000 unique visits per day. About 25% of those visitors are interna- tional, and 75% are from the U.S. "Our success lies in the fact that it's a free site that is self-supporting," he continues. "We're completely independent; although we have advertising on the site, we have no percentage sales deals with either retail or any label, so there are no conflicts of interest "Our theory is: If we do our job right — if we're a credible source of reviews and opinions — then we'll have the support not just of our read- ers, but with labels and retail as well." The site has two European part- ners: Germany's Klassik-Heute, a print magazine and online resource (klassik-heute.com), and classicsto- dayfrance.com, which was launched in early 2004 by Christophe Huss. the former editor in chief of Reper- toire Magazine, to reach out to Francophone readers. The site has measurable resonance at brick-and-mortar retail as well as with online retailers, especially through banner ads, "e-stickers" and traditional stickering. At retail, Classics Today also offers a monthly newsletter listing recent recordings that have achieved the magazine's highest rating, 10/10, for superior performance and sound. Eric Feidner. president of online retailer arkivmusic.com, says his company sees a "tremendous con- sumer impact" from editorial content licensed from Classics Today. 'We usually see a significant sales txxist from those titles," Feidner enthuses. "These are well-written, well- thought-out reviews from committed, dedicated and knowledgeable critics." I Want to be treated like a star, even if I'm not one.. .yet. WHAT'S YOUR REQUEST? SM Some come to the Wyndham Bel Age to be discovered. Others come to disappear for a little while, fust let our ByRequest Manager know how we can make your stay exactly the way you want it. Do an interview at the rooftop pool and make a late-night entrance at Diaghilev (you do know Dimitri, the most famous maitre d' in LA. don't you?). Or lay low in your suite with a private balcony. Either way (or a combination of both) is just fine with us. Call us or your travel planner. 1.800. WYNDHAM www.wyndham-belage.com 1020 N.San Vicente I 310-854-1111 BILLBOARD OCTOBER 9, 2004 www.blllboard.coin * www.blllboard.blz Mus?Cf-ni— -i— -m Sheard Makes History With No. 1 Album Debut The first day of school is a big deal for any student, but for high school senior Kierra "KIKi" Sheard, it also turned out to be the day she made gospel music history. Her debut album, "I Owe You," which EMI Gospel released Sept. 7, became the first album by a new artist to bow at No. 1 on theMftcwn/Top Gospel Albums chart Sheard notched two weeks at the summit, and dips to No. 2 this issue. "I was really excited, but I was speechless," Sheard says of her debut "I knew for a fact that it's only because of God that it happened, because I'm just starting out and he just let me go to No. 1." Sheard's success wasn't a surprise to those who have watched her grow up performing with her mother, Karen Clark-Sheard of the famed Clark Sisters. Sheard is a third-gen- eration gospel sensation, following in the footsteps of her mother, aunts and her grandmother, the late Dr. Mattic Moss Clark, president of the Church of God in Christ music department for 25 years. EMI Gospel VP/CM Larry Black- well says that legacy has been an important part of Sheard's success. "She has been out on the road, predominantly with her mother and jauntl Dorinda [Clark-Cole], doing dates since she was 9 years old," Blackwell says. "She's a child not only of the Clark Sisters and that legacy, but the whole COGIC denomination, which is over 3 million strong. They've adopted her as their baby." That support has been a tremen- dous boost, but Blackwell also attrib- utes Sheard's success to other factors. 'The girl can flat-out sing," he says. "And she has a true love for God and ministry and what she really By Deborah Evans Price dprlce@billboord.com believes she was chosen to do: carry the torch and carry the legacy. She wants to minister to her own genera- tion. She wants kids to know it's cool to praise God." The first single, "You Don't Know." was produced by Rodney Jerkins and Jazz Nixon. "It was a dream come true," the 17-year-old says of working with Jerkins, who was one of several pro- ducers on the project Blackwell says EMI execs are in discussions with sister label Virgin Records about working Sheard to mainstream R&B radio. For now, EMI Gospel plans to service multiple SHEARD PRAYED FOR NICE TEACHERS mixes of the single on vinyl. Black- well says they have already "serviced the top 100 mixers across the country and are having them create their own mixes. We'll take the top mixes we get back and put it on the vinyl." While label execs are trying to entice mainstream programmers to come on board, gospel radio has been playing "You Don't Know" since June and is ready for the second single. The label will oblige with the release of "Praise Offering." EMI Gospel has also enlisted Sheard's street team, the Juliet Crew (which takes its name from Sheard's other nickname). According to Grant Jenkins, EMI Gospel interactive mar- keting manager, there are 1,500 members in the Juliet Crew. "No gospel artist has ever had an organized street team like this," Jenkins says. "What we are seeing is the perfect marriage of grassroots efforts, interactive viral campaigns and peer marketing, and the results have been amazing. "Whereas some Christian music fans have been 'street-teamed' to death," Jenkins continues, "we are finding that there is a strong contin- gency of gospel music supporters who have never been pursued, tapped and empowered with regards to grassroots promotions." Sheard has been doing her share of the work to promote "I Owe You." She hit the road during the sum- mer, but now that she's back in school, most of her dates will be confined to weekends. "So far it's working good." Sheard says. "I thank the Lord I have some teachers this year that are cooperat- ing with me. Last year I was traveling a lot and my teachers were giving me a hard time, but I prayed and asked the Lord to let me have nice teachers, and he really blessed me. My principal knows I have an album out. He says it's great and to do my thing." The Beat Continued from page 13 she says with a throaty laugh. As a songwriter, McVie has always mined territory familiar to her. In fact she bluntly says she would be "running to the nearest vomitorium" if she tried to write a political or trib- ute song. "I think it would sound |in]sincere." She cut the album in a makeshift studio in a converted bam on her property in Kent, England. "I was just having a laugh with my nephew, just having fun writing some songs, and it transpired from there." She credits that no-pressure vibe with the relaxed, easy feel of her vocals. "There was no deadline, no real intent to resurrect my career." That fact that is borne out by her lack of desire to push the album. "The record company is very sympathetic with that," she says. "I don't intend to start touring or making appearances. When I left Fleetwood Mac, that was it. I have retired." That notion was reinforced when she saw her former hand mates per- form in London earlier this year. "I thought they were phenomenal, and I'm full of admiration for Stevie (Nicks). I don't know how she does iL 1 can't help feeling I would have to be dragged around with one nail in the coffin. I just don't think I could do it." PEARLS OF WISDOM: RJEJVt and Elton John are among the acts dedi- cating performances or songs to the Daniel Pearl Foundation as part of the third annual Daniel Pearl Music Day. The event centers on Daniel Pearl's Oct 10 birthday, but extends to performances held between Oct. 8 and 17. According to the foundation, more than 200 professional and ama- teur performers around the globe dedicated performances to the foun- dation, which promotes "harmony for humanity," in 2003. Wall Street Journal reporter Pearl was beheaded in Pakistan in 2002. 16 www.blllboard.com • www.blllboard.bli BILLBOARD OCTOBER 9, 2004 Billboard Touring A BILLBOARD SPECIAL REPORT Bright Lights, Small City Big-Name Acts Increasingly Schedule Stops In Secondary Markets BY JILL KIPNIS Toledo, Ohio. Ames. Iowa. Kalama- zoo. Mich. While these cities rank as secondary markets in the concert busi- ness, they will he part ol'a high-profile, major-market-style tour this month. These are among the cities that will host the eight-day. 40-show Vote for Change tour, which opens Oct. 1 with shows across Pennsyl- vania Millboard. Aug. 14). The tour will wind through nine states considered crucial to the out- come of the presidential election with a lineup that includes Bruce Spring- steen, Pearl Jam. R.E.M. and Dave Matthews Band. The multiact shows also will feature Bonnie Raitt. James Taylor. John Mellencamp. Dixie Chicks and others. Artists and organizers of the tour aim to urge voters to defeat President Bush at the polls in November. But regardless of the outcome of the election, the sec- ondary touring markcLs involved are likelv to come out as winners. J Dave Matthews James Taylor The timing of Vote for Change, on the heels of a less-than-healthy summer touring season for primary- market venues, is likely to raise the long-term profile of secondary markets. Other tours by such major artists as Cher and Elton John are also proving that secondary-market stops can be big-time profit generators. Not only are rents and other costs lower at second- aries, but many also offer full-scale marketing services on site. Many touring industry executives believe that this fall will be the time for secondary markets to shine. After a disappointing sum- <^ mer touring season lor the primary markets, which , included the cancellations of Lollapalooza and tours featuring Christina Aguilera. Marc Anthony and Britney Spears, secondary markets will see a range of big-name acts mov- ing through their doors. 9pf According to Billbo.i' J Jjh. Boxscore. attendance j - /5 dropped 24.4% be- /*£.': tween April I and Aug. / 15 compared with last > year, and dollars fell 18.7% in that lime peri- od. Some tour executives say sum- mer sales were off 60"« compared with expectations. Acts including Toby Keith. Norah Jones. Phil Collins. Yince Gill & Amy Grant and Chicago are stopping at sec- ondary markets. Vote tor Change is also expected to be a 2004 highlight at those venues. Anything high-profile like the Vote for Change tour "is good for our mar- ket." says Bob Cavalieri. CM of the Sov- ereign Center in Reading. Pa. The 9,000-seat arena, managed by SMC. will host Pearl Jam and Death Cab for Cutie Oct. I as part of the tour. Bruce Springsteen * i Dears. i John Mellencamp "It focuses attention on our build- ing, not just for the consumers but for the industry." he adds. "Those are two things that are always very important in marketing your venue." This year, the Sovereign Center had numerous sold-out shows from acts including Cher. John Mayer. Brooks & Dunn and Vanni. Its highest concert gross, for an Elton John show with a S!>5 ticket price, topped $750,000. Don Miers. CM of Silver Spurs Arena in Kissimmee. Fla.. predicts that the Vote lor Change lour "mil put us on the map. It says that we are a viable player, because some promoter thought enough of |us| to put |us| in with this major pro- duction. |lt .says that we] must be close to some major population bases and major highways." Silver Spurs, a 5300-Seal stadium, will host Vote for Change Oct S. which is another Pearl Jam /Death Cab for Cutie date. It alsi > is managed by SMC. Highlights this year at Silver Spurs include a sold-out show with Alan Jackson. Miers notes thai Silver Spurs will "hend over backward with customer Service.* Because the venue is county- owned, it has access to such special county services as an electronic screen on a nearby toll raid that advertises all of Silver Spurs' shows for free. Agents and promoters are actively seeking secondary markets because of the marketing and other services located at such venues, although potential profits are their bottom line when it comes to routing tours. "What I've always told artists is that they sell records in secondary markets, but most importantly, the buildings are so much less expensive, generally speaking." says Buck Williams, presi- dent of Progressive Global Artists and booking agent for acts including R.E.M. and Widespread Panic. "The overall traffic is less, but generally you can cut a better deal in secondaries than in primaries." Rents can he 20"n-30% less at sec- ondaries vs. primaries. Labor costs for on-site staff also tend lo be less. For many promoters, secondary markets can generate a lot of cash. f AT - BILLBOARD OCTOBER 9, 2004 www.blllboard.com • www.billboard.biz aterial Touring Casinos Broaden Entertainment Options Booking Youth-Oriented Acts Is Paying Off For Venues Outside Las Vegas, Atlantic City BY RAY WADDELL While Las Vegas and Atlantic City, N J., once cornered the market on the casino entertainment experience, today casinos are found throughout the United States. And the entertainment these venues offer is as varied as the communities in which they're located. Those commu- nities are frequently far from major cities, thanks to federal laws that have allowed the development of casinos on Native American tribal lands. Casino and resort talent buyers have become some of the most savvy buy- ers in the business, cognizant of eco- nomic and demographic drivers that mainstream promoters do not even have to consider. The growth of the nationwide casino business has been one of the most pos- itive trends for the concert industry during the past decade. And in the past couple of years, casino concerts have taken a decidedly youthful slant "Today's major casinos represent a powerful nationwide concert distribu- tion network that now attracts today's younger, MTV-type crowd," says Tom Cantone, VP of marketing and enter- tainment for Foxwoods Resort Casino in Mashantucket, Conn. "The next casino generation is already in the house," Cantone continues. 'To miss it means you lose [the] massive buying power of a $40 billion industry." In broad terms, the well-heeled baby boomer demographic, which has dis- cretionary money to spend on gam- bling, has long been a primary target for casinos. And given that yesterday's headbanger is today's 40- to 50-some- thing fan, rock music is frequently found in casino venues. KID ROCK: A CASINO PLAVER But, increasingly, casino talent buy- ers also are focusing on bringing in acts that appeal to a more youthful demo. So while country, adult contemporary and comedy remain popular for book- ings, R&B, modern rock and hip-hop acts are on the upswing at gaming establishments. In short, this is not your grandpar- ents' casino entertainment. "Engelbert Humperdinck and Steve [Lawrence] & Eydie |Gorme] used to be the mainstays at casinos, but now you see Ludacris and Wyclef Jean on the marquees," Cantone says. "We're look- ing for who is happening now: young. We're Second To None... For more than 30 years the Salem Civic Center has been meeting and exceeding the expectations of Southwest Virginia as a place for great family entertainment and prestigious social and business events. Our large coliseum can be used for a wide variety of events, everything from trade shows and concerts to conventions and rodeos! For service that Is unparalleled to none, give Carey or John a call and make your next event a tremendous success! Taliaferro Complex 1001 Boulevard, P.O. Box 886, Salem, Virginia 24153-0886 Visit us on the web: www.salemciviccenter.com hip, hot and on the charts. We're inter- ested in the next generation of gamers, as well as the established gamers." Steve Geitka, VP of entertainment for Trump Properties in Atlantic City, says any stigma about casinos as ven- ues is "absolutely gone." Trump's Taj Mahal, for example, hosted the first date on this summer's Incubus tour, and Kid Rock played there July 4. Today, booking concerts at casino venues is about diversity. Jim Koplik, president of Clear Chan- nel Entertainment Connecticut, books the 9,000-seat Arena at the Mohegan Sun in Uncasville, Conn. Pretty much anything on the road is fair game for the venue. In the past year, Mohegan Sun has hosted Kid Rock, Luciano Pavarotti, Rod Stewart twice, Cher three times (with a fourth show scheduled), God- smack, Alan Jackson/Martina McBride, Journey and Aaron Lewis of Staind. "This is a very popular venue, and we sell a lot of tickets," Koplik says. "Every type of act has played |here]; the only thing we haven't really had is youth-ori- ented pop. |The building is) in the busi- ness of getting people to their venue." Mohegan Sun has final approval on any act booked and claims some 2,000 comp tickets to every show. And it expects to sell tickets. "That's why they turned to us," Koplik says. "Not only do they want to pay off the |artist| guarantee, but also cover most of the expenses. They want |the arena] to be judged as a venue, on its own." Bookings at casino venues don't fit any one mold. "I see no consistency between what sells in Las Vegas and what sells in Tunica, Miss.," says Terry Jenkins, director of entertainment for Boyd Gaming, which operates Sam's Town and Stardust casino resorts in Las Vegas. Mississippi and Louisiana. "In Las Vegas, you have legendary headliners at the legendary Stardust," Jenkias notes. "But the public in Tunica certainly loves country music and com- edy. We book acts like Larry the Cable Guy, Ron White and Travis tritt things you might not necessarily see in Vegas." NOT A LOSS LEADER And, as is now more often the case in casino brokings, acts are expected to carry the bulk of their own weight in ticket sales. "My company does not use enter- tainment as a loss leader," Jenkins says. "I have a responsibility to my stock- holders. If a show does end up | losing money], we do hope to make that back on dining, gaming or shopping." Others take a similar view. "In a per- fect world, we book an artist that still has some hard ticket-selling appeal but also appeals to our average customer, |who] is around 50 years old," Trump's Geitka says. "Sometimes, due to the high guarantees and the size of our venues, we don't get it all back at the door, even if we sell all the tickets." Geitka says a recent Mariah Carey booking was the perfect combination of ticket selling power and appeal to the customer. "Other acts fit into the busi- ness plan of selling hard tickets and making a couple of bucks while maybe bringing [in] 5,000 people that wouldn't ordinarily be here," he says. "An act where we can sell 2,500 [of 5,200-capacity] hard tickets and give the remainder away to our better cus- tomers is a home run for us," Geitka adds. "Unfortunately, there are not enough artists out there that fit that bill anymore." What the proliferation of casinos has done is bring top-shelf entertainment to the hinterlands. "When we opened Sam's Town in Tunica a little over 10 years ago. there was no entertainment in that part of the country." Jenkins recalls. "Now there are all kinds of entertainment options in Tunica. If 20 years ago you would have told somebody you were going to Tunica, Miss., to see Alice Cooper, they would have put you in a padded room." The growth in casino properties is certainly not finished. Bowing in the fourth quarter this year is the $400 mil- lion Seminole Hollywood Hard Rock Hotel and Casino in Hollywood, Fla. The Hard Rock complex features a 1,500-seat theater, a 1,000-seat amphitheater and a 5,500-seat arena. The entire Seminole Paradise Enter- tainment development also includes nine nightclubs. 12 restaurants and 31 retail outlets, which open in December. Michael Enoch is entertainment consultant for Power Plant Entertain- ment which is developing the property. He will have an annual budget of more than $300,000 to book free entertain- ment at a 4,500-capacity amphitheater geared to draw consumers into clubs and other businesses. Bemie Dillon, senior VP of enter- tainment, will book acts into the new, 5,600-seat Hard Rock Live at the Hard Rock complex. Dillon says bookings at the Seminole Hard Rock Live will "stay true to the Hard Rock roots, which means a lot of rock'n'roll." But the venue will also book Hispanic and country acts. "Cer- tainly with a casino venue we have to be sensitive to what our older demo wants to see, your typical casino' acts," he says. Capacity can go from 1500 to 5,600, which gives the venue flexibility, Dillon says. He adds that some acts will be booked to drive gaming and others will be expected to stand more on their own as hard-ticket sellers. "We have to be true to our casino cus- tomers and book plenty of shows that appeal to them." he says. "But you'll also see us come in with acts that will sup- port themselves through the gate, usu- ally appealing to a younger demo." The Biggest Events In Entertainment Trust ONE Name In Entertainment Insurance. CSI Entertainment Insurance, naturally. We're a leading entertainment insurance broker with access to dozens of major insurance companies. At CSl. we guarantee the most comprehensive coverage at the most competitive prices. So whether you have a concert, festival, touring artists, trade show, expo, fair or another event, call CSI Entertainment Insurance for more information or for a quick quote. Just dial 800-204-1523, ex. 118 today, or go to www csicoverage.com. (ted: Sp*ctfltOfU»bllrt>,Ev9ntCjocfJU!too. Artists Li* Nlltv, Wflalher Insurant*. Liquor Uabritty. TULIP Poll ties tor Ven ues and Armas A partial list of events covered by CSI Entertainment insurance includes these touring artists: George Strait, Tim McGraw. Three Doors Down, Korn, Ludacris, Chingy, Bill Cosby. Sheryl Crow, Norah Jones, REM, Jay Leno and the Dixie Chicks.* 2546 ELM STREET 2ND FLOOR DALLAS, TEXAS 75226 www.csicoverage.com / 800204.1523 ext 1 16 / |c«cs*covefa<)<.com 'few* not cwtttrtutc an tndorvm-nt b» raj o' me artists hsted tn mis *) ••• »■ • 18 www.blllboard.com • www.billboard.biz BILLBOARD OCTOBER 9, 2004 Your play is Truni] z Small City Continued from page 17 Brad Garrett, managing partner for Police Productions in St. Charles, Minn., says. "These markets are where my bread and butter is. There are two distinct advantages to these markets. One. they don't get as much traffic, so therefore whatever you put in there has more value to the consumer because they can't readily see these shows. "The second thing is the cost sce- nario is much better," Carrett adds. "The challenge is, how do you take advantage of a good expense scenario and try to get the sales somewhat sim- ilar to the primaries?'' Despite much positive progress for secondary markets this year, those who run the venues and promote the shows there have two major gripes: high ticket prices and high guarantees. "When gas prices go up and people are losing jobs, discretionary income is going to other things," says Stan Levin- stone, co-president of Sayreville, N.J.- based promotion company Concerts East. "Some tickets out there are $100 and $150. 1 did a Puddle of Mudd show for $26, but if 1 had done $15, it would have been much better. Money was really tight this summer." Steve Hyman, executive director of Mark of the Quad Cities in Moline. III., which can seat 1 1,000, says the industry needs to take a hard look at high guarantees. This year, the Mark's sellouts and near sellouts have included shows from Shania Twain and Metallica. "The concert touring industry has to take a close examination and cor- rect what's wrong," he says. "Guaran- tees are too high." Secondaries Come First Two of the nation's leading venue management companies. SMC. and Global Spectrum, see the development of secondary touring markets as a significant opportu- nity and challenge. Global Spectrum has opened about six new secondary markets in the last three veal's, including the Rio Grande Events Center in Hidalgo. Texas: the Uudweiser Events Center in Loveland. Colo.: and the Iowa Events Center in Des Moines, Iowa, part of which will open this fall. SMC. has opened more than 111 new secondary-market venues during the last three years, includ- ing the Save Mart Center in Fresno, Calif.: the Southeast Texas Entertainment Center in Beau- mont. Texas: and the Mid-America Recreation and Convention Com- plex in Council Bluffs. Iowa. JILL KIPNIS <gfgl> T/AJITIAHfU TRUMP PLAZA 3 world-class properties. . .7 venues, both indoors and out. . .seating anywhere from 5,000 to 500. . . Atlantic City's only Hotel/Casino complex with an Arena. Special thanks to all our artist, agent, manager, promoter, label and media friends. VAN HALEN PRINCE CHRIS ROCK STING ANDREA B0CELLI BRITNEY SPEARS AER0SMITH DESTINY'S CHILD PAVAR0TTI 3 DOORS DOWN KISS NICKELBACK MARC ANTHONY ALAN JACKSON DIANA KRALL STEVIE NICKS SHERYL CROW KID ROCK JANET JACKSON ALICIA KEYS CROSBY, STILLS, NASH & YOUNG LENNY KRAVITZ HOWARD STERN SHOW GOO GOO DOLLS N0RAH JONES STONE TEMPLE PILOTS BLUE MAN GROUP TOBY KEITH PINK SARAH BRIGHTMAN MARY J BLIGE STAIND AMERICAN IDOLS LIVE MATCHBOX TWENTY BROOKS & DUNN MARIAH CAREY DON HENLEY INCUBUS MICHAEL BUBLE GLORIA ESTEFAN OUR LADY PEACE PUDDLE OF MUDD JAMES BROWN MACY GRAY GEORGE CARUN FUEL BUDDY GUY SEAL BARENAKED LADIES BILLY IDOL LIVE AL GREEN BRYAN ADAMS SEX PISTOLS BL0NDIE ASHANTI NEIL YOUNG & CRAZY HORSE BLACK CROWES TIM MCGRAW JESSICA SIMPSON MUSIQ JACKSON BROWNE BELA FLECK & THE FLECKTONES ZZ TOP SUGAR RAY PSYCHEDELIC FURS THE WAILERS LEANN RIMES PAT BENATAR COLLECTIVE SOUL J0NNY LANG DAMON WAYANS ALICE COOPER ROBERT SCHIMMEL FILTER TRAIN BRIAN SETZER ORCHESTRA B0NEY JAMES RODNEY DANGERFIELD RING0 STARR & HIS ALL-STARR BAND JEWEL SQUEEZE STEVE HARVEY LIONEL RICHIE DAVID LEE ROTH HEART SAUVA ZIGGY MARLEY INDIA ARIE BAD COMPANY H00TIE & THE BLOWFISH FOREIGNER MEATLOAF SHA0UN-WHEEL OF LIFE SAMMY HAGAR ERYKAHBADU JETHR0TULL STEEL PULSE GEORGE TH0R0G00D PETER FRAMPT0N LYNYRD SKYNYRD Why not add your name? For booking information, call: Steve Gietka, VP Entertainment, Trump Properties 609-449-6058 or email steve.gietka@taj.trump.com BILLBOARD OCTOBER 9, 2004 www.billboard.com • www.blllboard.blz 19 - 9 RillhmrrT BOXSCORE UIHLAaJiU concert grosses MusiciMmnE IEBA, Billboard Ready Confabs It's early October in Nashville, and that means one thing: Talent buyers of all stripes are descend- ing on Music City for the Interna- tional Entertainment Buyer's Assn. annual convention, known as iebaLIVE! Set for Oct. 9-13, this year's iebaLIVE! includes panels, awards, showcases and a golf tourna- ment. Primarily geared toward coun- try music buyers, the convention draws promoters, agents, producers, venue managers and talent buyers from fairs, festivals, casinos and other sectors that produce live music events. One panel that should draw a good crowd will cover the entire artist development process. Steve Moore of Moore Entertainment Group will moderate a panel that includes Stan Barnett of Creative Artists Agency, Tim DuBois of Universal South, John l ytic of Lytic Management and country artist Joe Nichols. IebaLIVE! showcase acts include Trent Willmon. B5, Jed Hughes. Little Big Town, Miranda Lambert, David Lee Murphy, Billy Curring- ton, John Waite and Air Supply. On Oct. 11, CAA and IEBA will honor retiring agent Ron Baird with a special luncheon. Baird, agent for Shania Twain and many others, announced his retirement this summer. Patti Burgart, executive direc- tor of IEBA, tells On The Road that registrations for this year's conference are up about 25 people from this time last year. Registra- tion at last year's conference topped out at 254. MEET US IN NEW YORK: Billboard s own touring conference, Billboard Backstage Pass, is set to bow Nov. 8-9 at the Roosevelt Hotel in New York. Billboard first entered the concert business convention space in the 1970s, and now returns with Backstage Pass. We at Billboard are very pleased with how this conference is com- ing together, particularly on the content side. We have enlisted par- ticipation from some of the top names in the concert business, including corporate and independ- ent promoters, large and boutique booking agencies, managers, venue managers, insurance executives and transportation professionals. Additionally, we are tapping our own resources and contacts to gain valuable input from those whose relationship with the concert busi- ness is symbiotic, if slightly removed. That would include label executives, attorneys, international travel consultants, accountants and radio execs. And, perhaps most important. On The Road ByRayWaddell rwaddcliebillboard.com we're engaging the key figure in any live event: the audience. The confer- ence closing panel is called "The Kids Are Alright" and will feature an open dialogue between actual con- cert-goers and an esteemed panel of concert biz professionals. Billboard 2DD4 TOURING CONFERENCE This session, moderated by Seth Hurwitz of I.M.P./9.30 Club in Washington, D.C., should be a lively and informa- tive confab closer. There is no more vital component in the concert equation than the per- son buying the ticket, and this panel aims to get into real head- bangers' heads. Finally, the Billboard Back Stage Pass Awards will honor the top performers of the year, based on box office data gathered from Billboard Boxscore. Along with such categories as top tours, ven- ues, promoters and events, we will acknowledge the managers, agents and breakthrough artists who achieved top marks in this tough summer. Other honors include the Legend of Live, which will be presented to iconic figures in the industry, and a humanitari- an award. We believe this conference can play a valuable role at this turning point in the touring industry. New York. November. Be there. Anyone interested in group reg- istrations should contact Kelly Peppers at 646-654-4643. A»T15T[S) VENUE/ DATE GROSS/ TICKET MaSBH ATTENDANCE/ CAPACITT PROMOTES JIMMY BUFFETT Fenway Parte Boston Sept. 10. 12 S5.615.316 S84 67785 two sellouts Clear Channel Entertainment CELINE DION The Colosseum at Caesars Palnce. Las Vegas Sept. 23-26 S2.165.S33 $225/51 75/S127 5(V$87 50 15.900 16,231 four shows one sellout Concerts West/ AEG Live PHIL COLLINS Bell Centre, Montreal Sept. 14 SI .279.985 ($1,665,520 Canadian) S96.07/S76 47/S61 10 14538 sellout Clear Channel Entertainment Gillett Entertainment Group STING, ANNIE LENNOX. rii-iruiiwif" Mil I CD Sports Palace. Sept !3-t4 SI .250.849 (14 448 995 pesos 1 S16578/SI428 30.782 ^ Clear Channel tnienainmeni. ui.t Presents. CIE TEMPTATION 2004: ARJUN RAMPAL. SAIF AU KHAN, SHAHRUKH KHAN, RANI MUKHERJI ft OTHERS Atlantic City Boardwalk Hall, Atlantic City. N.J. Sept 25 SI .221 ,225 S3O0/S2OO/S75/S40 11 JOT sellout Poojanka Entertainment PHIL COLLINS Madison Square Garden. New York Sept. 17 S1.1S6.ia4 14649 Clear Channel Entertainment ANDREA BOCELLI Westpac Centre. Christen urth, New Zealand Sept 15 $1,099,375 ISI.659,610 New Zealand) S24841«18Z17«1153LVS5631 8.059 8,894 Andrew McManus VAN HALEN Coliseo do Puerto Rico Jose Mimic 1 Awe lot Hato Ray, P,R. Sept. 13 $1 .022.666 S125/S62 50 10,993 14,935 Jose Oueao Concert*. Jack Utsick Presents PHIL COLLINS ti mi d Arena, Cleveland Sept 1 1 $933,817 S87/S47 12,558 15.962 Clear Channel Entertainment PHIL COLLINS FleetCentar. Sept. 15 $922,365 S95.'SS5,$45 11960 Clear Channel Entertainment STING, ANNIE LENNOX, DOMINIC MILLER Pepsi Center, Oenver Sept. 21 $321,781 5123/537 50 12,108 sellout Entertainment STING, ANNIE LENNOX, DV)MIPIK_ rvl ILLtW Philips Arena. Sept 2 $910,409 el l f /a* 1 . 'IJ 11,713 sell out Clear Channel Entertainment STING, ANNIE LENNOX Cynthia Woods Mitchell Pavilion. The Woodlands. Texas Sept. 18 sno.ioo S255/S40 15 010 15,868 Clear Channel Entertainment PHIL COLLINS HSBC Arena. Sept 12 SM1L050 12.001 Clear Channel Enssrta I tune n t STING, ANNIE LENNOX, DOMINIC MILLER Smirnoff Music Centre, Dallas Sept 19 $786,956 S121/S35 50 11.330 17.353 Clear Channel Entertainment House of Blues Concerts ARETHA FRANKLIN, TEDDY RICHARDS Greek Theatre. Los Angoles Sept 17 18 $769,060 Al IUV40U 10.469 two sellouts Nenerlander USHER, KAN YE WEST American Airlines Arena. Miami Sept 23 $897,882 $67/549.50 12703 sellout Concerts West/AEG Live, Atlanta Worldwide Touring THE ALL MAN BROTHERS BAND Fox Theatre, Sept 24 26 $807540° 12.563 14.034 thiee shows House of Blues Concerts VAN HALEN. LAIDLAW Philips Arena. Sept 17 $855,920 $90 7.S72 14.330 Clear Channel Entertain mem BEASTIE BOYS, TAUB K WE LI Bill Graham Civic Auditorium, San Francisco Sept 16-17 $837,500 17.000 two sellouts Clear Channel Entertainment USHER, KANYE WEST St. Pete Times Forum. Tampa, Fla. Sept 24 $637,280 $65/545 11.184 sellout Concerts West/AEG live, Atlanta Worldwide Touring. Fantasma Productions USHER, KANYE WEST Veterans Memorial Arena. Jacksonville. Fla. Sept 25 $6T4^S7 S62.50/S4950 10.450 sellout Concerts West/AEG Live. Atlanta Worldwide Touring TEMPTATION 2004: ARJUN RAMPAL. SAIFAU KHAN, SHAHRUKH KHAN, RANI MUKHERJI & OTHERS MCI Center. Washington. O.C. Sept 4 $607,560 S258/S43 7.400 15.193 FLEETWOOD MAC Tweeter Center at the Waterfront Camden, NJ. Sept 12 ifil » > U.U 1 12.363 Clear Channel Entertainment PRINCE US ANA Amphitheatre, West Valley City. Utah Sept 7 $563,767 S81/S40 12.502 sellout Concerts West/AEG live. United Concerts STING, ANNIE LENNOX, DOMINIC MILLER Verizon Wireless Amphitheater. Selma. Texas Sept 17 $557,394 $99/510 19.262 Clear Channel Entertainment USHER, KANYE WEST CSU Convocation Centre, Cleveland Aug. 26 $510,753 $59 507S45 10.092 sellout Concerts West/ AEG Live. Adanta Worldwide Touring, Jack Utsick Presents SARAH McLACHLAN, BUTTERFLY BOUCHER Pengrowth Saddledome. Calgary, Alberta Sept 8 ($854,585 Canadian) $50.51 /S34.97 11.027 12.264 Clear Channel Entertainment MIX 98.5 MIXFEST: JOHN MAYER, MAROON 5, ALANIS MORISSETTE, FIVE FOR FIGHTING & OTHERS FleeiCenier. Boston Sept 18 $506,349 $87 507582 50/539.50 11.306 14,500 MIX 98 5 TOBY KEITH. TERRI CLARK, SCOTTY EMERhCK Coors Amphitheatre. Chula Vista, Calif. Aug. 22 $504,007 $56 25/S24.24 10.624 19.492 House of Blues Concerts CHER, TOMMY DRAKE Sovereign Center. Reading. Pa. Sept 4 $503,782 $82 7VS37 75 G.G7B 8,720 Clear Channel Entertainment TIM McGRAW, WARREN BROTHERS Pensacola Civic Center. Pensacola. Fta. Aug. 21 $495,769 $65/549.50 8.740 sellout Beaver Productions TIM McGRAW, BIG & RICH, WARREN BROTHERS Kansas Coliseum, Valley Center, Kan. Sept IS $493,405 S63/S53 7,975 sellout Outback Concerts, Xerrtel CHER. TOMMY DRAKE Prairie Capital Convention Center. Springfield. III. Sept 8 $493773 $79.75/559 75 8424 sellout Clear Channel Entertainment STING, ANNIE LENNOX, DOMINIC MILLER Verizon Wireless Amphitheater, Charlotte. N.C. Sepi i $4*7.448 sss/sto 10,105 18,812 Clear Channel Entertainment . 615-321 9171 615 32I-CB7B Fc Banandpridni am Bob JMw, 615-321 9171 FOR MORE BOXSCORE RESULTS GO TO BILLB0ARD.COM 20 www.blllboard.com • www.blllboard.blz BILLBOARD OCTOBER 9, 2004 I shg 7 0 0 4 j 76 SHOWS Over 476,000 FANS Over $27 MILLION GROSS THE TOUR SUCCESS OF THE YEAR SPECIAL THANKS TO: Avnet Management Brian Avnet David Romano Lynn Ma lone William Morris Agency Gayle Holcomb Richard Rosenberg Tour Manager Jimmy Johnson Warner/Reprise/ 143 Records Diarmuid Quinn Liz Rosenberg Nick Light and of course, the amazing band, the crew and all involved. AND IT'S ONLY THE BEGINNING.. THANK YOU FROM YOUR FRIENDS AT CLEAR CHANNEL ENTERTAINMENT - CLEAR CHANNEL TOURING Musics SRC 'Leans' Into Its Second Year BY GAIL MITCHELL This time last year, the label SRC trumpeted its arrival with David Ban- ner's No. 1 R&B/hip-hop debut, "Mis- sissippi: The Album." Now the Univer- sal Records imprint that Steven Rifkind founded has racked up another No. 1: Terror Squad's R&B/pop summer anthem "Lean Back." And SRC is mon- itoring top 40 crossover momentum for singer Akon's top 10 R&B/hip-hop hit, "Locked Up." Not bad for a label that marked its first birthday in March. Fledgling SRC (short for Street Records Corp.) espouses the streetwise philosophy that is the cornerstone of all Rifkind's companies, from market- ing/consulting firm the Steven Rifkind Co. to his first label, Loud Records. Established in 1992, Loud was home to such seminal rap acts as the Wu-Tang Clan and Big Pun. Ten years later, the label was folded into Columbia (Bill- board. March 23, 2002). "How Loud closed really bothered me." Rifkind says, discussing his rea- soas for creating the SRC imprint. "I had a lot to prove to a lot of people — that Loud wasn't an accident but a pre- mier brand in hip-hop. There was an untold story that 1 had to finish," he continues. "That's why I got back in. And I knew that my first time back at the plate, I had to get on quickly. So I was lucky enough to find someone like David Banner." Banner's "Mississippi: The Album" has sold 538.000 units, according to Nielsen SoundScan. Follow-up "Mis- sissippi: The Album — Baptized in Dirty Water" stands at 250,000. Banner's next album is slated for release in first- quarter 2005. Also on the SRC schedule are proj- ects by Orlando, Fla., rapper Grandaddy OCTOBER 9 1 2004 | Billboard HOT RAP TRACKS. s X: 3 Airplay monitored by K Nielsen Broadcast Data System* TITLE 1 M PR1 NTVPROMOTKJN LABEL Artist 1 LEAN BACK 9 Week* At N..t curl Terror Squad v 2 MY PLACE Nelly Featuring Jiheim "? 3 WHY? Jadakiss Featuring Anthony Hamilton «? 5 HEADSPRUNG LLCeolJ v 4 SUNSHINE lil' Rip Featuring Lea o SLOW MOTION Juvenile Featuring Soulja Slim «? ■ 7 BREATHE, STRETCH, SHAKE Mase Featuring P. Diddy ej 8 NO PROBLEM Ul Scrappy ■» 10 NOLIA CLAP Juvenile. Wacko & Skip V ~ JESUS WALKS Kenya West ? 17 DROP IT LIKE IT'S HOT ; , iii:iv ! --'i ; r;f«tftiTNHRSr.Uff Snoop Dogg Featuring Pharrell "? LET'S GO Trick Daddy Featuriag Lil Joe) A Tvrista * HUSH Mf '*.••■ " :>■>. LL CoolJ Featuring 7 Aurelius *>? 12 OYE Ml CANTO N 0 Ft E Featuring Daddy Yankee Nina Sky. Gem Star & Big Mato «? HOC A UlLAOEf MM IFjJMC 22 GO D.J. CASH'.' V' Ul Wayne * u FLAP YOUR WINGS Nelly =- 11 LETS GET AWAY GMND li. : '.; ir L iV 1.1 «? 23 BREATHE HSfUl ST0HWATU.N.IC Feboloia ■? 19 SHAKE THAT SH** rijT iflBi'in th* Pixu ;:ff ■- -. ,ti- -.mr. Shswnna Featuring Ludacrie ■? BALLA BABY Chingy SO SEXY Twista Featuring R Kelly *? F 1 LIKE THAT CAPITOt Houston Featuring Chingy, Nate Dogg & 1-20 v 21 YOU & ME .1 m. ! -> ::imb4 J-Kwon Featuring Sadiyyah «>? COMPTON Guerilla Black Featuring Beenie Man *? 21 WHITE TEE'S i ... Deal Franchize Boyz v Souf (dropping now) and Terror Squad member Remy (due in 2005). Among the acts rounding out the SRC roster are rapper Sean Biggs and singer Patricia, who is from Germany. This schedule is in keeping with Rifkind's strategy to release "three to four records a year for the next three to five years." NO FAIRYTALE SRC's e