The "Oldies" moniker is gone at WYUU-FM 92.5. Although the station will continue to play old music, it will now concentrate solely on songs from the '60s and '70s with a little bit of '80s tossed into the mix.

CBS/Infinity-owned WYUU plans to target listeners ages 35 to 54 with this format adjustment.

"The new logo and slogan says it all," according to WYUU program director and morning man Mason Dixon, "we're Tampa Bay's greatest hits of the '60s and '70s."

Dixon's morning team, including Bill Connolly and Jo Jo Walker, spent some time on the air earlier this week in preparation for their official morning show debut Monday.

On Monday, Dixon will reintroduce some of the bits, such as the polka challenge, that he and his partners performed on their former station. Dixon, Connolly and Walker had a morning show on WAKS-FM 100.7 (now WMTX) before a dismissal last year.

"The one thing we want to do is be out on the street more," Dixon said. "Really be on the scene when things are happening. That's one of the goals we set for ourselves."

Also starting Monday is WYUU's new general manager, Charlie Ochs. Ochs takes over for Tom Rivers, who will continue as general manager of CBS/Infinity stations WQYK-FM, WQYK-AM and WRBQ-FM.

Ochs also will handle general manager duties for the Tampa Bay area's other CBS/Infinity stations, WLLD-FM 98.7 and WSJT-FM 94.1. He was general manager of WQYK-FM and AM from 1987 to 1990. Ochs left the Tampa Bay area market to manage WMZQ in Washington, D.C.

Another addition to WYUU is longtime radio personality Marvelous Marvin, who's on the air from 10 a.m. to 3 p.m. Prior to coming aboard WYUU, Marvin was heard on WSSR-FM 95.7. He also had a talk show on WFLA-AM 970 but it was dropped before the new year.

One would think there are plenty of real sports to hear about on the radio, but WDAE-AM 620 will be telling listeners more about the fake variety, too.

Starting Sunday, the station will offer a show called Fantasy Sports Weekly. The syndicated program airs 9 to 11 a.m. and is hosted by Paul Charchian and Paul Allen, experts in fantasy sports.

Fantasy Sports Weekly will cover player ratings, injury updates, and commentary from the editors of www.fanball.com. It replaces ESPN's The Sporting Life with Dick Schapp.

Former Tampa Bay radio disc jockey and traffic reporter Lisa Cohen is being treated for ovarian cancer. Cohen doesn't have insurance, so friends have planned two benefit concerts.

Russian pianist Oksana Kolesnikova will play the Friday Morning Musicale, 809 W Horatio St., Tampa, tonight at 7:30. Singer/songwriter Shana and Kolesnkova will perform at the Palladium Theater, 253 Fifth Ave., St. Petersburg, at 7:30 p.m. April 28.

Admission is free to both concerts, but donations are welcome to benefit Cohen. For information, call (813) 249-7633 or visit www.lisacohen.org.

_ Pamela Davis can be reached at (727) 893-8355 or pamsptimes.com.