I picked this drama completely at random. So honestly I had no preconceived notions, I used my list and a random roller, determined to watch whatever it was that I landed on. Now my possible watch list is really-really huge so it could have been anything. But I was feeling brave!

Continue reading “At First Glance: Romantic Princess” →

This Review Contains Some Spoilers in the Form of Fangirl Squees

This Noona Romance has been on my radar for a very long time. However, I am a little wary of Taiwanese dramas because they have a lot of episodes and can have the tendency to drag too much. Yet I couldn’t resist Ethan Ruan as the wooer of a strong Noona. I’m quite pleased that I gave in and watched. Continue reading “Review: My Queen” →

This Episode Review Contains Spoilers in the Form of Fangirl Squees.

Lucas and Wu Shuang set out to meet the mistress who was once Wu Shuang’s teacher. It is pointed out by her co-workers and boss how callous this is, though it falls into line with what we know of her character thus far. She sees only the story, not the fallout of what will happen when the story is published. Wu Shuang doesn’t consider the politician’s wife and son or the mistress and daughter, they are an acceptable loss when compared with getting her story. She and Lucas trick her former teacher into giving them information and record it even though they said they wouldn’t. This doesn’t sit well with Lucas, though Wu Shuang ignores his protests.

Continue reading “My Queen: Ep 3 & 4” →

The first time that I saw Ethan Ruan was in “Fated to Love You.” I have never cried as much watching a drama as I cried watching that one. Even though I needed to take a break from the emotional roller coaster, I was completely enamored by Ethan Ruan.

Continue reading “Noona Killer – Ethan Ruan” →

This Episode Review Contains Spoilers in the Form of Fangirl Squees.

It has been ages since I have watched a drama of any sort. Let me tell you, I have missed it greatly. Once I was well enough to sit and watch a show then I was faced with the exceptionally difficult question of what to watch. My lovely and amazing drama blogsphere friends offered some excellent suggestions, one of which was Witch’s Romance (thank you Drama Fan!) I very much want to watch that show, however, the Taiwanese version has been on my watch list for ages. So I thought I’d start there, and since I’m such a humongous fan of Noona Romances, it just seemed to fit perfectly.

Continue reading “My Queen: Ep 1 & 2” →

There are so many tropes out there that are repeated throughout dramaland. I am admittedly a fan of quite a few of them, however, there is one that captures my heart a little more than others. The title of the page gives it away. So without further ado I present my homage to the Noona Romance.

What is it about the Noona Romance that gets me right in the feels? I did my best to explain that or at least touch on what I love in a Noona Romance here. I”m most assuredly a Noona myself or if you’d prefer an Ahjumma. Either way I’m certain that puts my heart in the right place. Regardless of reasons I love them so!

I’m creating this space in order to build a shrine to the trope that I hold so dearly to my heart.

Continue reading “Something New: The Noona Meter” →

The New Year has brought on a lot of firsts for me, and I have to admit that I am loving every moment of it. With the New Year has come a remodeling of the site, with all new banners to fit the larger header space, and a double live watch session; Emergency Couple and I Need Romance 3.

Now a new, shiny, and brilliant idea was proposed to me. My honorable Sunbaenim suggested that, because of my obsession with Noona Romances that I perhaps make an attempt to gear my blog a go to place for reviews and suggestions on Noona Romances. And you know what? I think that’s just about the spiffiest idea I’ve heard all year.

Continue reading “Something New” →

So many of the things that I enjoyed from It Started With a Kiss continued in this drama and were expanded on. This review won’t be as expansive as my others because of that, I’ll try and only touch on what I liked and disliked from They Kiss Again that weren’t already discussed in my review for It Started With a Kiss.

The second installment continued to show the evolution of the cast. I enjoyed this show more than It Started With a Kiss. It had a lot to do with the fact they weren’t in high school and were dealing with more mature obstacles and issues. Xiang Qin matured a lot in this show, and I appreciated that. The character was a little hard to handle in the previous installment. But I liked her a lot more this time around.

Continue reading “Review: They Kiss Again” →

I’ve gushed about my love of Noona Romances all over my blog, it isn’t a secret. Even though my list of completed dramas is still very small, 4 of the 19 completed shows have been Noona Romances. I just started I Hear Your Voice (another Noona Romance story) and have 25 more on my to watch list. I thought perhaps I might take a stab at what makes a good Noona love story, at least for me.

I’ve expanded on this idea over at The Noona Meter

Continue reading “The Noona Romance” →

The New Year is Upon Us! With it I’ve decided that I’d like to set myself some goals for my drama watching ventures in the coming year. I joined the amazing world of Asian Dramas on April 17, 2013. Since then I’ve just sort of bounced around to dramas with very little rhyme or reason. Not that it hasn’t been fun! However, there are some dramas that I really want to be sure that I watch and some things I want to do. So what better time than New Years to set a resolution for how I’ll approach my drama watching in 2014.

Continue reading “2014: New Year Drama Resolutions!” →