Romantic Princess – 2007 (公主小妹)

Country: Taiwan

Genre: Romance

Cast: Angela Chang, Wu Chun, Calvin Chen

Plot: ”

Adopted by middle classed parents, Xiao Mai (Angela Zhang) has always had a dream to be an heiress. Finally, her dream becomes reality. Xiao Mai discovers that her biological grandfather, Huangfu Xiong (Emp) (Gu Bao Ming), is the head of a prestigious aristocratic family. After being kidnapped by their family’s enemies and after many years of searching, he finally finds his long lost granddaughter.

As she starts her life as an heiress, everyday is filled with excitement; however, everything seems a bit different from what she had imagined it to be. In the family, there are 4 candidates, one of whom will become the successor of Emp. One of those candidates is Nan Feng Jin (Wu Chun). At first, Nan Feng Jin dislikes Xiao Mai because he knows that he will be engaged to Xiao Mai and as a result, can never leave the Huangfu family and will be forced to be the successor of Emp.” (Wikipedia)

MY OPINION

So , what shall I say. I am not sure. It is one of those dramas, that I like but It wasn’t anything to keep in glued to the chair. I like dramas that I watch, that when I have a break all I think about is, how I want to see what will happen. recently I abandoned many dramas (such as Chadeodong Alice, Lie to me etc). I somehow managed to finished this drama and I think t was quite good. Even so story is so complicated… I would like to skip all that “we all going to pull pranks on each other” and just go to the end. I watched all drama just to find out that way out of all that mess is really simple and there was no need of all that complications. I think most of it I might have watched for cute actors, especially Calvin Chen, whose character was actually funny. I must admit actors were not bad, apart of a bit overacting of main female lead. Part what I always like in Taiwanese dramas- kisses, seemed more real that in Korean dramas, for example. Ending – so similar to Shining Inheritance which was disappointing really.