Who am I?

I am just another girl out there who adores her dramas. I am an avid watcher of dramas and have been watching it for as long as I can remember. I started out in Hong Kong dramas (first one was Virtues of Harmony), then Taiwanese dramas (first one was… probably Romantic Princess or Hana Kimi), then Korean dramas (first one was You’re Beautiful) or Chinese dramas (first one was Let’s Go Watch Meteor Shower Together) and then recently Japanese dramas (first one was Rich Man, Poor Woman). No, no, actually I am no adorer or avid watcher of dramas, I live dramas. I love watching dramas because I just love it. (: It is a place for me to relax and enter another dimension.

What dramas do I watch? Which one is your favourite?

It was everything but Japanese dramas but now I have had a taste in each of the different variety. I can’t actually say I have favourite genre/type of drama because each one of these are different and are executed differently to give a different effect. Hong Kong dramas are more “reality” based whereas the others are usually more “fairytale” based. Personally, I am a lover of romance dramas but there are dramas that I love that are not romance. So all in all, I just like whatever depending on the drama itself.

Why ‘afairytaleworld’?

Dramas are like a fairy tale, a world that would never exist in my life. I want people who watch dramas to think of it as a fairytale no matter what the ending is because 100% of the time there will be happiness out of it. A fairytale is also what I dream of because it is just that, a world that I can never have. It’s funny because with every drama that I watch, it is a fairytale. There will always be happiness there and everyone lives happily ever after, well for majority of the times.

Why am I here?

Because I am a drama-er! Ahahahahas! I love my dramas and I want to be able to share my interest to everybody out there. There are people out there who, like me are a drama-er, so this gives them the chance to join me in this wonderful adventure. I want people to share their drama love with me. Come join the love!

Why blogging/recapping?

Why not blogging/recapping? Ahahahas! Since I am a drama-er, I figured I should put this to good use. I want to share my views and opinions and give people the chance to voice their drama opinions. I want people to have an insight of my views on dramas because I know I love reading what other people think. I also want to help people because if I can do something that I love and help people, that is all for the better isn’t it?

Being here and doing this is because I want to not because I have to.

What do I do?

I usually like to keep at least one recap/overview on my hand because I am always watching dramas and I would like to keep this blog active. I also do ‘my opinions’ and synopsis.

How emotional am I?

I am a very emotional girl when it comes to dramas. I have lost count how many times I have cried for a drama. When the drama is in a happy mood I will feel happy. When the drama is in a sad mood, I will feel sad. You seriously do not know how sad I can get. 😦 Yeahhh, I just go with the flow of the drama. Ahahahahs!

Feel free to ask questions and comment. I promise, I won’t bite, I’ll just share my drama love!

First update: 27 Dec, 2011

Second update: … somewhere in the first-ish half of 2011

Third update: 25 Oct, 2012