Romantic Princess (Gong Zhu Xiao Mei), previously known as, Wo Jia Gong Zhu, is a Taiwanese drama which aired every Sunday on CTV. The drama features Wu Zun and Calvin Chen of Fahrenheit, and Angela Chang. The production is based on the shōjo manga Four Steps to Romance (Romance Godan Katsuyou?), by Kazuko Fujita.

Synopsis

Adopted by middle classed parents, Xiao Mai (Angela Chang) has always had a dream to be an heiress. Finally, this dream comes true. Xiao Mai’s biological grandfather, Huanfu Xiong (Gu Bao Ming), is the head of a prestigious aristocratic family. After being kidnapped by their family’s enemies and after many years of searching, he finally finds his long lost granddaughter.

As she starts her life as an heiress, everyday is filled with excitement; however, everything seems a bit different from what she had imagined them to be. In the family, there are 4 candidates, one of whom will become the successor of Huanfu Xiong. One of those candidates is Nan Feng Jin (Wu Zun). At first Nan Feng Jin, dislikes Xiao Mai because he knows that he will be engaged to Xiao Mai and can never leave the Huangfu family.

Because Jin wants to be a normal sales person, he tried his best to ignore the growing fondness of him for Xiao Mai, but love prevails.Hatred soon turns to love as Xiao Mai and Nan Feng Jin’s relationship starts to unravel. But they want to hide their relationship from Emp, a name called by everyone in respect to Xiao Mai’s grandfather, because they will be engaged again and Jin’s dream of havng a normal life will all vanish.

Then one day a new ‘Huangfu Shan’ appeared and with the same birthmark and wih more evidences that she is Huangfu Shan, a ring with her birthdate encrypted in it. Xiao Mai and Gong Mou Li, the ‘real’ Huangfu Shan, have the same interests and birthdates. Then Xiao Mai, became a maid in the Huangfu house. But she later discovered the plot between Gong Mou Li and Emp, and more chaos happened. It turns out that Gong Mou Li wasn’t in love with Jin, and instead she is inlove with Cai.

Then the four tried to confront Emp, but he keeps hiding, with the help of Housekeeper Yi. But soon they faced Emp and told him that, Xiao Mai doesn’t want to be the heiress anymore, Jin and Cai doesn’t want to be the successor. Emp was furious and let them do what they want: “start from scratch”.

Jin keeps getting denied of work, because of Emp’s influence. But soon finds a job, and he became a construction worker. Then Cai And Mou Li, who were also kicked out of the Huangfu House, started selling their things to pawnshop but keeps spending their money for useless things. Soon Cai and Mou Li gave up and went back to the Huangfu House.

Soon Emp, had an ailment and has to go under operation.He kept his ailment a secret between himself and Housekeeper Yi. Even though his condition is becoming worse, he still does’t want to go under operation. But when Xiao Mai learned about his ailment and that his grandfather’s stubbornness can cause him death, she told Housekeeper Yi that she will take the blame if Emp gets mad about going under operation.

The operation was successful, but Emp is still unconscious. In a few days, if Emp will not wake up, the co-owners of the the Huangfu business, will take over. Even though Xiao Mai is the heiress, the co-owners don’t believe that women are not good enough to run the company. But Xiao Mai still tried her best and took the exams that were taken by Jin and the other 3 (Cai, Ling and Ying). But she failed, fortunately at the time the co-owners are about to say that Xiao Mai failed, Emp has awaken and told them to allow Xiao Mai to become the successor. Xiao Mai ends up being both heiress and successor. Jin remained as a office worker.

The story ends at the airport, wherein Xiao Mai is leaving for the States to go under some kind of training in becoming the successor of the Huangfu family, and before Xiao Mai leaves they (Jin and Xiao Mai) kissed, until the end.

Main cast

The names used in the Philippines are in the parentheses

Angela Chang as Mai Qiu Sui (Huangfu Shan/Xiao Mai)(Jannah Mai/ Cheryl Huangfu)

Wu Chun as Nan Feng Jin (Jin Nan Feng)

Gu Bao Ming as Huangfu Xiong (John Huangfu)

Calvin Chen as Nan Feng Cai (Ralph Nan Feng)

George Hu as Nan Feng Lin (Jeff Nan Feng)

Eric Lee Ang Lin as Nan Feng Ying (Tim Nan Feng)

Genie Zhuo as Gong Mo Li (Mickey Gong)

Bu Xue Liang as Mai Cong Guang

Huang Jia Qian as Mai Ge Hao Wa

Hsia Ching Ting as Yi Sen Chuan (Bernard Yi)

————————–

Personally, i think that Romantic Princess is quite a beautiful drama. It has romance and comedy in it. Many liked the drama because of the Cinderella story attached to it. Plus the fact that the Prince Charming is really handsome. My only regret in it is that when it ended, i feel like there is a needs to have a part two in it. They should not have ended it like that. More like when Angela Zhang already came back. Even though it was good over all, the ending made me feel sad. Making me ask questions like if Angela Zhang came back will they still be together? Even so, it is still one of the dramas that makes it to my Top Favorite Lists. I just hope they’ll have Part 2… A part where Wu Chun has already proven himself and Angela being an excellent heir for Emp. And the final conlusion, the wedding! =)

Credit goes to:

wikipedia