These drama were on my review list because I was indeed watching them. However, something happen and I just didn’t bother to finish them at all. Therefore, my rating for these shows might not be very accurate…

Honey and Clover

This is a pretty good representation of the story. The original story was in a comic book format which ran successfully for many years and even won an award for the creator. It was later adapted into two successful animated series in Japan. Following the animation was a movie, and finally this drama adaptation. As you can see, this is a story that has been repackaged many times. I myself have seen the cartoons and the movie before watching the drama, so I already knew everything. The drama was pretty fun at the beginning but it was like watching a movie I’ve already seen a million times before. Yes, I like the story. Yes, I like the characters, but I also already knew what’s about to happen next. So I couldn’t force myself to see the story unfolds again. However, for anyone who isn’t familiar with this story, the drama is a good choice.

Overall Rating: A-

Romantic Princess

This is a Taiwanese drama but is adapted from a Japanese graphic novel. The show’s main drawing point is…pretty people. Handsome males and cute girls are prevalent throughout the show but nothing really jumps out at you. The story has some interesting points though. Such as, would you rather be an unhappy, rich person or a poor person with a free lifestyle? This point, however, is too extreme for me to believe. I mean, poor people aren’t always happy. How can they when there’s no food on the table? Rich people aren’t always evil and depress…are they? But my main problem was how the characters were interacting. Seeing how this was an idol-drama, acting wasn’t really the main drawing point to begin with. After awhile, I was too bored with everything.

Overall Rating: C

I’ve been relaxing for about a week worth now thanks to the wonderful creation of Christmas Break. To my horrors, I can’t seem to find any drama that catches my attention while I’m on my break. So far I’ve just been catching the latest episode of what I was watching before. If this keeps up, I’m afraid of what’s going to come for the Asian Cinema community in the upcoming year. Anyhow, these are the shows that I’ve been catching up on.

Romantic Princess – The latest Taiwanese drama for actor/singer Wu Chun who became incredibly famous after taking part in the Taiwanese Hana Kimi drama. His co-star is Angela Zhang who’s also a singer. The show is about a poor girl who dream of becoming rich one day, living in a ginormous mansion, etc. The regular dreams every girl/person on this planet have. HOWEVER, what’ll happen when it DOES come true? Angela plays Xao Mai who must figures out what kind of world really is the best for her. Being happy and silly while always worrying about the bills, or being so affluent that it sucks?

Galileo – This is definitely a great show to watch if you’re into mystery, the supernatural, and science. Quite an interesting mix of the three all in one for this show. It’s also very humerous and quirky in its own ways. The show is 10 episodes long and 8 are already out. The show has a very simple, repetive plot but always end up surprising you: Detective finds an unsolvable case, takes case to Galileo (a genius physicist), the case is then furter investigated, and the true nature of the case soon becomes clear. It has a very Detective Conan feel to it if you know what I mean.

And that’s it. XP