So to be honest I wasn’t expecting to recap a taiwanese drama first but since my first taiwanese drama is Romantic Princess which stars George Hu so in honor of him I decided to recap his newest Sunday drama ,Love Around. Love Around is just airing its 8th episode and I’m only starting to watch it so it’s perfect to recap:) First I have to say that I made a lot of english mistakes here because I’m really not used to writing in the present tense so I hope you won’t mind and hopefully I will get better by the next few recaps ~anyway here is the LOVE AROUND CAST:

George Huas Zhou Zhen 周震

Annie Chen as Liang Xiao Shu 梁小舒

Jack Li as Gao Zee Zuan 高哲宣

Elleya Tao (陶妍霖) as Zhou Ying Ying 周瑩瑩

Tan Ai Zhenas Chen Mei Li 陳美麗

Jian Cheng as Zhou Da Kuan 周大寬

Zhang Fu Jian as Liang Yi Lei 梁一磊 親

Wang Juan as Tang Hui Shan 唐惠珊

Mo Yun Wen (莫允雯) as Chen Ping Ying 陳品穎

Zhao Jie(趙杰) as Fei Li 菲力

Yao Han Yi(瑤涵沂) as Jessica 潔西卡

Xue Shi Lin(薛仕凌) as James 詹姆士

Stephanie Chang as Fei Fei 菲菲

Qiu Wei Wen(邱慧雯) as Yu Mi 玉米

Yu Jue Ru (余月如) Pei Li 培麗

Huang Deng Hui(黃鐙輝)

Su Gao Hoa(孫國豪) as Zhang Jie Wei 張建偉

So we begin with Zhou Zhen (George Hu) celebrating his birthday with his girlfriend in a baseball stadium. His girlfriend sings him happy birthday and he tells her to give him the camcorder which is recording what he is going to do.

On the other hand Liang Xiao Shu (Annie Chen) is in a taxi and she is in a hurry for work but unfortunately she is stuck in a traffic jam. She asks the taxi driver to turn on the radio show, Voice of Asia for her. Then she gets impatient and runs to work herself.

So back to Zhou Zhen….. his girlfriend is getting his birthday cake when he asks her to wait at the other side for a minute . He then surprises her with a watch and she in turn asks him why he is giving her a present when it is HIS birthday not hers. He answers super sweetly saying because she is his wish. Arrgh I wish I have a boyfriend like that >~<!!!

Xiao Shu arrives at the lobby but is too impatient to wait for the lift so she runs up the stairs. So Xiao Shu is a radio host for the Voice of Asia and she is just in time for work ! (yay!:D)

So the scene with Zhou Zhen with his girlfriend at the baseball stadium is just a video and with beer cans scattered on the floor Zhou Zhen keeps on watching the bit of the video where his girlfriend says she will fulfill his birthday wish every year. AWW!! He looks so sad:( I feel so bad for him…..

Xiao Shu gets a call from a creep on the show. He asks her the color of her underwear.

Meanwhile Zhou Zhen gets a call from his assistant, Fei Li who wishes him happy birthday. He gets up and finds a box in his way. He opens it and finds the watch he gave her girlfriend in the video and framed photos of himself and his girlfriend. He caresses them with sad puppy eyes T^T~Anyway poor guy at the other end is still screaming happy birthday at his general manager:P…haha

Now Xiao Shu is dealing with the creeper and she says she didn’t deal with him before because she was being nice and now that she remembers his voice clearly she will post a photo of him when she meets him in person so he can’t get away with it.

One of her co-workers comes back and joins the other co-workers. She asks what happened cuz she heard on her way back that Xiao Shu is arguing with a listener again. The other co-workers just told her to listen.Oh~ so she always argue with her listeners…..?

The creeper hangs up on her and she gets pissed off. She tells her listeners to never tolerate such harassments and must fight back righteously. She also tells her listeners to believe that justice will be victorious. Okay~I’m liking her character already:) can’t wait to see our couple:D

Her next call in is from Mr. J who is actually Zhou Zhen. He requests her to play the same song as before. He then gets into Fei Li’s car and Fei Li asks him where he wants to go. Fei Li suggests skipping work since it’s his birthday but Zhou Zhen just quietly asks him to go to the music school and to turn on the radio. Fei Li says it’s been 2 weeks under his breath. Okay it’s confusing cuz I’m not sure what Fei Li means by it’s been 2 weeks~ is it calling in for 2 weeks or going to the music school or both? That’s why I love to read recap because sometimes if I don’t really understand a scene I can read other people’s understanding of it. Sorry for rambling on>P<

Anyway Xiao Shu announces that Mr.J requests for the song ” I’ll be by your side” for Ms. C who likes music. She says that if she remembers correctly he’s been requesting for that song for 2 weeks and that it must have a special meaning for them both. She tells him that even though she doesn’t know why he is persisting she will support for him til the end if he needs her. Awww isn’t that so sweet!!!>~<

Xiao Shu’s co-worker comes into the room and asks why her why she said those things. Xiao Shu says she wanted to give him encouragement because he sounded lonely. Another co-worker comes in and tells her not to be too nice or she’ll get another sasaeng fan.

Zhou Zhen goes to talk to his girlfriend but she tells him off saying that they’ve broken up already and to never come for her again. Zhou Zhen said he can’t accept it because she broke up with him for no reason.

He reminds her that she promised to fulfill his every wish and since today is his birthday, his wish is for her to come back to his side. He then tries to give her the watch and begs her to take it back. But his girlfriend tells him to stop and that she is tired.She tells him that she is sick and tired of explaining to his friends and co-workers that he is not a gangster. He argues back saying he isn’t but she snaps saying that his family is!

He says that his dad is out of the gang for over a decade already and doesn’t understand why they have to break up just because of that. His girlfriend says because she doesn’t want him to bring shame into her life. OMG! what a b!tch!!>:/ She continues hurting him by telling him that she was fired by many music schools because every time he picks her up the parents would complain. Also she says that the reason she never brought him to her friends’ gathering is because she never told anyone that he was her boyfriend. Aww you can see that Zhou Zhen is holding back his tears T^T~

She tells Zhou Zhen to take the watch back but he insist it belongs to her now since he gave it to her. Then she smashes the watch on the ground telling him “From now on, every day, every minute and every second my happiness will have nothing to do with you.” and walks away coolly without turning back. Okay~ I’m seriously hating the girlfriend>:/ I mean can’t you not throw it after you go home?? You just have to smash it in front my boy!! Poor guy I feel so bad for him:(

Xiao Shu dresses up prettily for her boyfriend Jason’s birthday and she is getting off work early to buy him his present.

At the batting cage Zhou Zhen is playing baseball and is getting every hit.(oh damn it~nose bleeds again!>< thank god i have a box of tissue next to me!) Fei Li is cheering for him at the side and even compliments him as the manliest boss he’s ever served…haha….so true:D but unfortunately Zhou Zhen is not impressed and he even sends him far away. Then Fei Li gets a call from Chairman and has to go.

Xiao Shu is looking hard for the best baseball bat for her boyfriend and she comes across one that has the autograph of her boyfriend’s favorite baseball player. Unfortunately it is not for sale but it is the prize of the afternoon baseball competition so Xiao Shu quickly signs up!

Xiao Shu wants to practice before the competition but an employee tells her there’s no place available. After the employee left she spots one empty cage so she heads in. Zhou Zhen is in the cage beside her and he tells her that he bought the two cages next to his so she has to leave. Xiao Shu reasons with him but he doesn’t give in. As the argument is getting heated, an announcement for the people who entered the competition is made over the speakers so Xiao Shu leaves reluctantly but not before telling him to consider listening to her advice.

The competition starts and the highest score so far is 8/10 hits. It is Xiao Shu’s turn and in the cage she puts on the helmet, takes off her heels then holds the bat into what I think is the perfect posture for baseball. Then…….yeah~ she kept that posture and misses the first ball. All the audience laugh and Zhou Zhen just stand there with a “Are You Kidding ME” face. But it’s alright because she tells them it’s just a mistake and tells to continue. This time she moves forward a bit and ends up getting hit on the arm. For the rest of the balls she gets hit on the head, butt and leg. Then for the last one one she over swing the bat and ends up falling on the ground. By now everyone feels bad for her, especially when she is told she won’t be able to win even if she continues.

She sadly sits on the bench to check her bruises when she spots Zhou Zhen and his outstanding baseball skills. She asks him for a favor: to enter the baseball competition for her. And of course Zhou Zhen refused.

She tells him not to refuse first and to listen to her reason. As she pleads with him she gets in the hitting zone and the next thing you know a ball is heading straight at her but it’s alright because our hero already pulls her into THE spin of dramaland! Zhou Zhen asks her how many times she wants to get hit by the balls. After few seconds of blank stares, she thanks him and starts to explain the reason why she wanted the autographed bat so badly.

Since it is about the boyfriend’s birthday present, he can relate to it so he winds up entering the competition. In the competition he won by getting 10/10 hits! The host is about to present him with the prize and Xiao Shu hurries him to take the prize but he just tells her to get it herself and that she doesn’t need to pay and left. Xiao Shu mutters that he is actually not a bad person.

It’s raining outside and Xiao Shu gets in the taxi only to find that there’s another passenger which is none other than Zhou Zhen. She finds it strange that it stopped but Zhou Zhen points out to her that there is a red light ahead. She thanks him for the bat before quickly leaving the taxi.

She can’t find another taxi but yay for her because Zhou Zhen decides to come back for her. He tells her to get on the taxi which she politely refuses but after a few offers she gives in and gets on.

During the ride she asks Zhou Zhen to pass her a tissue that is on his side but he was already fast asleep. She tries to get it herself but ends up falling on his lap and waking him up. She then gets a call from her mum, who tells her that her curfew is at 10 then she begs her mum for a later curfew because today is her Jason’s birthday.

After the long winded conversation with her mum, she discovers that Zhou Zhen is gone and when she asks the taxi driver he tells her that Zhou Zhen already left and that he also paid for her taxi fare. Feeling guilty she tells taxi driver to head back so she can give him back the taxi fare.

Xiao Shu excitedly calls Jason outside of the hotel to tell him about her curfew extention only to be splashed with cold water of disappointment when he tells her that he still has work to do and that they’ll have to celebrate it tomorrow.

Xiao Shu is getting help from hotel staff to look for Zhou Zhen when she notices something and gasps……

Zhou Zhen goes to find his sister Zhou Ying Ying and finds that she has taken up the hotel swimming pool by herself. He gives out to her and tells her that she is limiting the customers’ rights to swim. (hmm….where have I heard that before?)She tells him that she doesn’t like to have other people beside her when she swims which triggers his memories and reminds him of what he said to Xiao Shu a.k.a ” I don’t like to have people beside me when I play baseball”. Haha…..they are so alike!!>.<

So what Xiao Shu saw is actually her boyfriend with another woman. She goes up to the hotel reception and asks the receptionist to inform Jason that he has left something. She then watches as the receptionist types the number and leaves for his room.( woah~ she is actually so smart!)

As Zhou Zhen gets out of the elevator he sees Xiao Shu so he follows her. He watches as Xiao Shu confronts Jason cheating on her. At first he denies it but then he admits cheating on her and the reason is because she is too old fashion ( in terms of love). He rants on about how she would only hold his hand and not kiss and that he is looking for the type of girl he can hug and have warmth with. Xiao Shu just stands there crying while Zhou Zhen is growing angry.

Zhou Zhen’s anger erupts when Jason pushes Xiao Shu onto the floor and he gives Jason a hard punch across the face. Jason tries to fight back but Zhou Zhen locks his arm with just one move. He then takes the bat before leaving

Zhou Zhen follows Xiao Shu to outside and finds her sitting at the steps, sobbing. He hands her the bat and she cries even louder. He tells her that it’s just a waste of energy and tears if the other person doesn’t love you because to them your tears and pleading is just hateful things they can’t stand.

Xiao Shu sees a couple fighting in a distance. She pretends to be the girl and fills in what she think she is saying and Zhou Zhen replys as the guy:

Xiao Shu: You’ve crossed the line! How can you do this to me? I hate you! I hate you!

Zhou Zhen: You hate me……..because you like me alot.

Xiao Shu: Then why did you betray me? Did I force you to chase me? When we first started dating you knew I was a old fashion girl. I never changed . I’m still me.

Zhou Zhen: You can yell at me, you can hit me, I still won’t let go. If you hate me for pestering you then hate me for it. ’m not scared of you looking down on me and I don’t need any dignity…as long as you are willing to still be with me. Please don’t break up with me. Please.”

Xiao Shu realises that the reason he understands as well is because he is suffering from a break up too. The couple they were watching is now making up and Xiao Shu wonders if they can both love another person again. He tells her he doesn’t know.

Zhou Zhen sends her off in a taxi. Xiao Shu remembers the reason she came to the hotel and asks Zhou Zhen if he is free later.

So they arrive at the restaurant Xiao Shu booked for her ex-boyfriends birthday in order to repay Zhou Zhen’s taxi fare and to celebrate his birthday. It seems like she found out his birthday when she was asked to sign for the bat.

Things get awkward when the birthday cake is being brought out and Xiao Shu totally forgot that the cake is decorated with a cartoon version of Jason’s face and his name on chocolate plate. Haha…this is hilarious XP especially when the music stops and the shot zooms on the cake…lol.

She awkwardly apologies and hurries the waiter the take it back but Zhou Zhen tells him to keep it. Then he takes out a knife and stabs the cake.She follows his lead and stabs it a few more times with a fork. After “Jason’s” face is completely destroyed, Zhou Zhen blows out most of the candles and Xiao Shu blows out the others while giggling.

Xiao Shu wants to drink but Zhou Zhen doesn’t think a curfew person likes her can drink. She tells him that is because her dad used to be a policeman so he is more strict but claimed to be the champion of Wine Kingdom.

Xiao Shu is drunk on a glass of wine and is staggering on the street. She lead Zhou Zhen to Jason’s house and tells him it’s the douchebag’s house. He tells her to go home but she insists on getting revenge………..by trying to burst the car’s tire with a twig?

Zhou Zhen coolly bents down and takes off the air cap and releases the air. Xiao Shu laughs like an idiot excitedly and high fives Zhou Zhen before passing out.

Zhou Zhen ends up carrying Xiao Shu and all her stuff and drops her bag once walking. He tries to get her address but to no avail so he ends up bringing her to a hotel.

In the hotel room Zhou Zhen drops her onto the bed and notices the bruises she got in the competition. Xiao Shu sobs in her sleep while Zhou Zhen takes off her shoes and puts blanket on her.

Zhou Zhen goes to the washroom to wash his face and remember during the day when his girlfriend smashes the watch on the floor.

Suddenly, there is a knock on the door. It is the police checking for drug dealers, they wanted Zhou Zhen’s identification card. While looking for his identification card, the police notices Xiao Shu’s feet and asks for her identification card as well. Zhou Zhen tells them that she is his friend but is stuck when they asks for her name.

The police goes in and tries to wake her up but she just mutters “Don’t touch me, let me go” which gets the police to suspect him drugging her. He denies it but the police doesn’t believe him and wants him to go to the police station.