Tanya Blount (born September 25, 1977, Washington, D.C., United States) is an African American actress, author and musician.

Early life and education

Blount was educated at Morgan State University, where she majored in psychology and sang in the university choir.

Career

Blount first came to prominence in the film, Sister Act 2: Back in the Habit (1993) in which she featured as the character "Tanya". Her performance of "His Eye is on the Sparrow" with Lauryn Hill was a particularly notable moment. MadameNoire commented, 'she and R&B/Hip-hop musician Lauryn Hill captivated audiences with a memorable performance'. Blount also appeared on the feature film's original soundtrack album.

Her debut album, Natural Thing, was released in 1994 and peaked at number 58 on the US R&B/Hip-Hop Albums chart. The album's first single "I'm Gonna Make You Mine" peaked at number 57 on the USR&B/Hip-Hop Songs chart. "Through the Rain" followed, peaking at number 27 on US R&B/Hip-Hop Songs and became her first appearance on the US Hot 100 where it peaked at number 90. Third single, "Hold On" peaked at number 66 on the US R&B/Hip-Hop Songs chart. In 1994, Blount released a holiday single titled "Remember Love". In 1995, Blount received a nomination for Best New Artist at the Soul Train Awards.

In 1996, Blount signed to Sean Combs' Bad Boy Entertainment and commenced the recording of her second album; writing for herself and other Bad Boy artists. Though Combs was involved in the project initially, interest in the album 'flagged'. Though years passed, only 2 songs; "I Love Him" and "The Last Time We Made Love", were released. According to EBONY, Blount was included on the label's first gospel LP alongside artists; B.I.G., Faith Evans, Brandy, Carl Thomas, John P. Kee, Brian McKnight, Boyz II Men and Total. Commenting on the album, Blount explained "“I think Puffy is looking for a different way to go; he feels a responsibility to the Big Willies and hustlers to understand. A lot of people from the streets have a strong background in church. Maybe it’s time to send the message that they can party and still love Jesus.” Originally scheduled for release in 1997, the album was shelved indefinitely. In February 2000, the Washington Postreported Blount was pursuing a release her from her contract with Bad Boy Entertainment and negotiating a settlement.

Blount has had a consistent musical theatre career in productions including What Every Woman Wants, Sneaky, Preacher's Kids, Born to Sing! and Christmas in Washington.In 2008, Blount's song "Right Here", was featured in the 2008 Tyler Perry film, The Family That Preys.

In 2016, Blount released a duet album with her husband as Trotter and Blount. Titled Love Affair, the album spawned the single "Imagine". The duo also released "Hi Ho" that year as The War and Treaty. "Hi Ho" was described by Paste writer Chris Estey as 'the break out soul hit'. In 2017, The War and Treaty released the EP Down to the River, described as a mix of 'blues, gospel, soul, bluegrass, country' and heralded by Estey as 'a splendidly made immediate classic about conflict and redemption.' In 2018, Rolling Stone reported The War and Treaty's debut album Healing Tide is due for release on August 10, 2018, describing the lead single as a 'joyfully relentless title track, reminiscent of classic Ike and Tina Turner rock-infused soul'. Estey of Paste describes 'in songs about personal turmoil and the dread at the end of time, every kind of fear and joy is addressed through gut-stirring and feet-moving anthems like “Hit Dawg Will Holla,” “Set My Soul On Fire,” and the title track. Yet the two can sensually help heal the wounds from those confessional blasts with a sweet ballad like “Till The Mornin’” — they truly live up to the dynamic tension of their moniker.'

To learn more about the artist, please visit