Tanya Blount (born on September 25, 1977 in Washington, DC) is an R&B singer, actress and author.

She attended Morgan State University where she got a a major in psychology and was a member of the university choir. She even sang for Stevie Wonder in California.

Tanya signed to Polydor Records when she was 19 years old. She was featured in the 1993 movie “Sister Act: Back in the Habit” where she sung “His Eye is on the Sparrow” with Lauryn Hill, who was also in the movie.

In 1994, Tanya released her debut album, “Natural Thing” which peaked at #58 on Billboard’s R&B Albums chart. Her first single “I’m Gonna Make You Mine” peaked at #57 on Billboard’s Hot R&B Singles chart, staying on the chart for 12 weeks. The second single from the album “Through the Rain” peaked at #90 on the Billboard Hot 100 and #27 on Billboard’s Hot R&B Singles chart, staying on the chart for 20 weeks. The song was Tanya’s only appearance on the Billboard Hot 100. The last single from the album “Hold On” failed to chart on the Billboard Hot 100, but managed to peak at #66 on Billboard’s Hot R&B Singles chart, staying on the chart for 7 weeks.

In 1995, Tanya received a “Soul Train Music Award” nomination for “Best New Artist,” but lost out to R&B singer Brandy.

She was one of many female R&B artists to be featured on the single, “Freedom” from the “Panther” movie soundtrack.

Tanya has starred in musical theater in plays such as “What Every Woman Wants,” “Sneaky”, “Preacher’s Kids”, “Born to Sing!” and “Christmas in Washington.” She even appeared in Tyler Perry’s 2008 movie, “The Family That Preys.”

These days, Tanya is married to Contemporary Christian musician, Michael Trotter and lives in Bowie, Maryland.

Her first book, “Through the Rain: 40 Principles for Surviving Life’s Challenges” was released in 2007 and she is currently working on her second book.

In February 2011, Tanya released her first single in 14 years, “Top Model” which is available on iTunes & Amazon.com. She is working a new 7-song album coming soon.

To see the music video for “Through the Rain,” go to:

http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=6xS2GBNddD8

To see a fan-made video for “Hold On,” go to:

http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=um3EpTEQBi8