Raymond Felton Biography

Raymond Felton began his career in basketball in high school where he led the team to two state championships with a career record of 104-9. As a standout star, Felton went onto play in college where he was voted Carolina Player of the Year in his freshman season and eventually became a Bob Cousy Award winner, an NCAA Champion, and a member of the First Team All-ACC squad in 2005. The point guard was picked as the 5th overall selection in the 2005 NBA Draft. He showed how good he was early on with a breakout game where he scored 31 points and averaged 11.9 points per game in his rookie season earning his NBA All-Rookie Second Team honors. Since then he has played for four other teams and had similar success including with the Knicks where his shooting has been instrumental in winning key games, including against the defending league champions at the time.

Book Raymond Felton for your Next Event

Disclaimer: AthleteSpeakers assists companies seeking to hire talent like Raymond Felton for speaking engagements, virtual meetings, appearances, product endorsements, and business sanctions. Our speakers bureau does not claim to exclusively represent Raymond Felton. Our booking agency can help with finding an athlete or sports celebrity that aligns with your upcoming events date, location, and budget. When an organization request booking details for a celebrity like Raymond Felton, we work closely with the client to make sure the proposed dates does not interfere with the requested athletes schedule. We then confirm the sports celebrity fee based on the details of the request. The fees listed on the speaker profile are rough estimates based on the previous market rate for the talent. Our team then works with Raymond Felton's agent, manager or assistant on the booking request. For parties interested in hiring Raymond Felton, we recommend filling out the booking request form so our booking agents can help with making your next event a success.

Interested in booking Raymond Felton for a virtual meeting?

Contact Athlete Speakers today at 800-916-6008 to book Raymond Felton for a virtual event, virtual meeting, virtual appearance, virtual keynote speaking engagement, webinar, video conference or Zoom meeting. The booking agents at Athlete Speakers work to get you the best price for your desired sports personality.

Athlete Speakers is a leader when it comes to booking virtual events in the sports world. Since 1999, we have built close relationships with top athletes, agents, publicists and managers. We assist all types of companies as well as event planners with booking athletes like Raymond Felton for these virtual engagements. Companies continue to turn to Athlete Speakers to get Raymond Felton’s latest virtual speaking fee, appearance cost and schedule availability.

Book Raymond Felton for your Virtual Meeting