Raymond Felton is the type of person who believes in setting goals, and then achieving them.

As a youngster in Latta S.C., Felton had dreams of one day playing for North Carolina and helping them win a national championship.

He ended up being one of the best point guard prospects in America, and his high school career culminated with a scholarship offer from the Tarheels.

Felton had his ups and downs in college, but his career seemed to stabilize once Roy Williams returned to take the reins of his alma mater.

Williams' offense emphasized the fastbreak, and that was right up Felton's alley, because he was built for speed.

In 2005 Felton and the Tarheels were able to capture a title, and in the process Felton outplayed another pro prospect, Illinois point guard Deron Williams.

Sean May was named the most outstanding player, but it was a cold-blooded three from Felton that put the game out of reach.

That summer another goal of Felton's was reached when the Charlotte Bobcats made him the fifth overall pick in the 2005 draft.

The fact that he was picked fifth is significant for two reasons; for one most observers felt that he was picked to high, and although he was the fifth pick, there were two point guards selected ahead of him.

Those guards were the above mentioned Deron Wlliams and ACC counter part Chris Paul.

Williams and Paul became instant stars, while Felton was left to languish in relative obscurity in Charlotte.

The fact that his star didn't rise as fast as Paul and Williams doesn't seem to have had any type of effect on Felton.

They were after all drafted by established teams, while he was chosen by an expansion team.

One thing that can't be denied, is that Felton may be beginning to receive some of the attention that he deserves.

Last season was his best as a pro and he averaged 14 points and almost seven assists and firmly established himself as the Bobcats's starter.

It seems that people have been doubting Felton throughout his career and his own team added to that perception.

The Bobcats drafted D.J. Augustin last season, and it looked like Felton's days in Charlotte were numbered.

He didn't exhibit any emotions about the pick, but he had to have felt betrayed by the Bobcats.

What made this worse was that new coach, Larry Brown, and general manager, Michael Jordan are both former Tarheels.

Felton said that he realized that this is a business, and then he proceeded to prove Jordan and Williams wrong.

He took the constant criticism from the volatile Brown, and he eventually won him over.

Brown admitted that he had doubts about Felton running a team, but they were quickly disspelled when Brown saw what a willing student Felton was.

He didn't sulk when Brown went on his frequent tirades, but he soaked up the moment, and learned from them.

Even before Augustin was injured, it had become apparent that Brown wasn't going to be able to keep Felton on the bench.

He had the team's respect, total control of the offense, and had become a leader in the process.

Now when Brown talks about Raymond all the superlatives are of a more positive tone.

Brown went as far to call him the best teammate and locker room persona that he had ever coached.

That's high praise coming from Brown, who has been around basketball for quite some time.

Felton's attributes are numerous. He has great speed, is strong and can get to the rim just about whenever he wants to.

He is also a much better defender than he is given credit for, and he's not afraid to mix it up inside with the big men.

The fact that he got 30 blocks last season is the most impressive stat to me; 30 blocks for a point guard, is like a hundred for a big man.

He has to improve his decision making skills, but that is sure to come, especially with Brown needling him every step of the way.

Brown was asked if Felton had a chance to be in the upper-echelon category of point guards, and Brown's response is that he already is.

This season that goal seems to be reachable, because while the Eastern conference is loaded at the top, it's muddled at the bottom.

The playoffs are there for the taking, and if Felton can lead Charlotte there, he may start to finally get the recognition he deserves.