I Drink Your Blood is a 1971 cult classic horror film directed by David E. Durston. In this film, a Satanic hippie cult comes to a small town. Things take a horrifying turn when they turn into bloodthirsty monsters infected with rabies.

Here’s how you can watch and stream I Drink Your Blood via streaming services such as Peacock.

Is I Drink Your Blood available to watch via streaming?

Yes, I Drink Your Blood is available to watch via streaming on Peacock.

A bunch of hippies who are into Satanic rituals terrorize a small empty town. To take revenge, a young boy gives them rabies-infected meat pies. However, the hippies are now rabid and violent monsters who also crave blood. The boy must fight for survival against these crazy killers in a town taken over by chaos.

In this film, we see Bhaskar Roy Chowdhury as Horace Bones, Arlene Farber as Sylvia Banner, and also Tyde Kierney as Andy. The supporting cast includes Elizabeth Marner-Brooks, John Damon, and Jadin Wong, among others.

Watch I Drink Your Blood streaming via Peacock

I Drink Your Blood is available to watch on Peacock.

It is NBCUniversal’s streaming service that provides access to a mix of popular TV shows, classic films, and also exclusive originals. Its tiered subscription options offer a variety of content for different audiences.

You can watch via Peacock by following these steps:

Go to PeacockTV.com

Click ‘Get Started’

Choose your payment plan

$5.99 per month or $59.99 per year (premium)

$11.99 per month or $119.99 per year (premium plus

Create your account

Enter your payment details

Peacock’s Premium account provides access to over 80,000+ hours of TV, movies, and sports, including current NBC and Bravo Shows, along with 50 always-on channels. Premium Plus is the same plan but with no ads (save for limited exclusions), along with allowing users to download select titles and watch them offline and providing access to your local NBC channel live 24/7.

I Drink Your Blood’s synopsis is as follows:

“A group of Satanic hippies wreaks havoc on a small town where a young boy, whose sister and grandfather were victimized by them, tries to get even – with deadly results.”

NOTE: The streaming services listed above are subject to change. The information provided was correct at the time of writing.

Ant-Man 3’s Katy O’Brian Recalls ‘Absolutely Chaotic’ Filming Process

Ant-Man and the Wasp: Quantumania star Katy O’Brian recently opened up about the filming process of the third Ant-Man film,…

Movies Anthony Nash 18 hours ago

The Family Plan 2: Mark Wahlberg Sequel Being Talked About, Says Director

Director Simon Cellan Jones has spoken about the possibility of making The Family Plan 2 — a sequel to his…

Movies Spencer Legacy 2 days ago

50 Years of John Carpenter: Someone’s Watching Me Was Left in Halloween’s Shadow

During that famous run of films from the late 70s to late 80s, John Carpenter made so many stone-cold classics,…

Movies Neil Bolt 2 days ago

9 Irish Horror Films to Watch for Saint Patrick’s Day

Saint Patrick’s Day is upon us, and while some viewers may imagine this list will detail films pertaining to the…

Horror Jon Mendelsohn 2 days ago