It’s a long way from “Pirates of the Caribbean” to the Palace of Versailles.

But that’s the journey of Johnny Depp, who goes from playing an 18th-century pirate scoundrel to an 18th-century monarch, France’s King Louis XV, in the French-language film “Jeanne du Barry” (in theaters Thursday). The movie officially marks Depp's acting comeback from Hollywood limbo.

Think of "Jeanne du Barry" as a subtitled combination of “Napoleon” and “Pretty Woman," a stunningly costumed and photographed exploration of how a dynamic modern woman turns stereotypes and preconceptions upside down.

The film opened the Cannes Film Festival last May, where a tense Depp told journalists, "I don't have much further need for Hollywood."

The star will no doubt prefer the publicity surrounding his screen return to the glaring spotlight ignited by his 2022 defamation case against his ex-wife, actress and model Amber Heard. Though a civil jury ultimately awarded Depp $10 million and Heard $2 million, the trial exposed shocking claims of mutual physical and emotional abuse.

Depp, 60, started out targeting a career in rock 'n' roll, and over the decades, he has played with icons ranging from Joe Perry to Jeff Beck. But his switch to acting, turbocharged by his ‘80s TV series “21 Jump Street,” led to three best actor Oscar nominations (no wins) and an iconic role in the “Pirates" franchise.

Here's what we know about Depp’s latest star turn.

Where is 'Jeanne du Barry' streaming?

"Jeanne du Barry" is in theaters only for five days (May 2-6). The movie will stream on Apple TV+ at a later date.

Does Johnny Depp speak French in his new movie 'Jeanne du Barry'?

Yes, Depp delivers all his lines in French in this French movie with English subtitles. His accent is excellent, although his lines are kept concise – more short statements than rambling speeches – to best keep the illusion that he's a native speaker.

Why does Depp, who is from Kentucky, speak French? From 1998 to 2012, he was in a relationship with French actress and singer Vanessa Paradis. The couple share two children and spent their time together shuttling between the U.S. and France.

What is Johnny Depp’s new movie 'Jeanne du Barry' about?

“Jeanne du Barry” is based on true events. The title character was a French commoner turned courtesan (a polite term for high-class prostitute) who lived from 1743 to 1793. She was eventually introduced to King Louis XV, who not only took her as a mistress but also grew deeply fond of the spirited, intelligent woman.

The relationship between the king and the courtesan gathered steam after the king’s wife died, but their love affair scandalized high society. As the French Revolution neared, upending the rule of monarchs, du Barry’s fate took an unexpected turn.

Who else is the cast of 'Jeanne du Barry'?

The true force behind “Jeanne du Barry” is Depp’s co-star, Maïwenn Aurélia Nedjma Le Besco, 48, known simply as Maïwenn. She plays du Barry, but also co-wrote and directed the film. Maïwenn, whose professional incarnations have included stand-up comedian, actress and filmmaker, has had a complex personal life.

She met French director Luc Besson (“The Fifth Element”) when she was just 12 (he was 29), married him at 16, and immediately had a daughter with him, Shanna. When she was 20 in 1996, Besson left her for his “Fifth Element” star Milla Jovovich.

Maïwenn stirred controversy when she was quoted in Britain's The Independent as saying Depp was "scary" and difficult to work with on the set. She later clarified those comments, saying she was simply referring to the actor's inherent star status.

Is Johnny Depp planning to make another ‘Pirates of the Caribbean’ movie?

Speculation and rumors continue to swirl around whether Depp will ever return to his role as Captain Jack Sparrow, a perpetually drunk and exceedingly crafty pirate who pilots his Black Pearl while plundering treasure around the Caribbean. The movie series, based on a Disney theme park ride of the same name, ran from 2003 to 2017 and has grossed $4.5 billion worldwide.

But while another installment would provide a lucrative payday for Depp, fans should temper expectations. Producer Jerry Bruckheimer cryptically told ComicBook.com in March that “we're gonna reboot ‘Pirates.’ ” But whether Depp will be a part of such a comeback remains unclear.

During the Depp v. Heard trial, the actor was asked by Heard's lawyer Ben Rottenborn: "The fact is, Mr. Depp, if Disney came to you with $300 million and a million alpacas, nothing on this earth would get you to go back and work with Disney on a 'Pirates of the Caribbean' film? Correct?"

Depp's curt response: “That is true.”