Synopsis

If Johnny Depp's journey with "Pirates of the Caribbean" as a pirate scoundrel was not enough, he will be seen as a French Monarch in this upcoming release. Know what's in store in this French-language film.

Johnny Depp's stardom and personal life has been in the news for decades now and his antics with Pirates of the Caribbean has given him a special place in age-old historical drama storylines, and now it is time for some more action. With the French film Jeanne du Barry releasing soon in theatres, Johnny Depp's acting excellence will again hit a milestone, it seems, as he plays a Monarch King Louis XV, based in the 18th century France. With this film, Depp officially comes back to the Hollywood scene after a significant break.

#Budget 2024 with ET

Budget Highlights: Your 2-minute guide

Tax tweaks, jobs & more: All that FM announced in Budget

What's cheaper and what's costlier? Here's the list

Jeanne du Barry: Plot, Cast, Release Date

Jeanne du Barry, a French film, was screened at the Cannes Film Festival in May, 2023 and was critically acclaimed due to the brilliantly costumed and photographed scenario of how a dynamic modern woman, back in the 18th century France turns many stereotypes and preconceived notions upside down, according to USA Today.

Depp is always known for his prompt responses and him being cast in this film was a major takeaway. He reacted to questions around the film and his presence when asked about it in Cannes, saying, "I don't have much further need for Hollywood."

Jeanne du Barry, alongside Depp, also casts Pierre Richard, Benjamin Lavernhe, Noémie Lvovsky, Pascal Greggory, Melvil Poupaud in leading roles. and will be releasing in theatres May 2, 2024 onwards for only five days, according to a USA Today report.

Where to watch Jeanne du Barry online?

Jeanne du Barry will be available on Apple TV+ sometime after the film is released in theatres. According to latest reports, Jeanne du Barry will be screened in theatres for a period of five days only, that is, from May 2 to May 6.

FAQs:

Q1. Who will be seen in the film Jeanne du Barry as the lead roles?

A1. Jeanne du Barry will see Johnny Depp's comeback to Hollywood while actors like Pierre Richard, Benjamin Lavernhe, Noémie Lvovsky, Pascal Greggory, Melvil Poupaud will also be seen in pivotal roles.

Q2. When is Jeanne du Barry releasing?

A2. Jeanne du Barry will be releasing in theatres based in the United States from May 2 after which it will be screened for a period of five days, according to reports.

#Budget 2024 with ET

New slabs announced in new income tax regime

FM 's plan for Viksit Bharat: A look at key numbers

(You can now subscribe to our Economic Times WhatsApp channel)

Disclaimer Statement: This content is authored by a 3rd party. The views expressed here are that of the respective authors/ entities and do not represent the views of Economic Times (ET). ET does not guarantee, vouch for or endorse any of its contents nor is responsible for them in any manner whatsoever. Please take all steps necessary to ascertain that any information and content provided is correct, updated, and verified. ET hereby disclaims any and all warranties, express or implied, relating to the report and any content therein.

(Catch all the US News, UK News, Canada News, International Breaking News Events, and Latest News Updates on The Economic Times.)

Download The Economic Times News App to get Daily International News Updates.

...moreless

(You can now subscribe to our Economic Times WhatsApp channel)

(Catch all the US News, UK News, Canada News, International Breaking News Events, and Latest News Updates on The Economic Times.)

Download The Economic Times News App to get Daily International News Updates.

...moreless

Explained: the hullaballoo around Karnataka’s 14-hour workday move

Can Aadhaar 2.0 sow the seeds of economic prosperity for kisans and kiranas?

A concrete reason why Adani is fighting Birla in this key sector

Can IndiGo repeat its record INR3k crore profit? These factors will decide.

Sebi study shows why retail investors will continue trading despite losses

FM played angel, but demons are still lurking for thousands of startups

1

2

3