Cassandra Harris is a professional actress who became known to many people due to her relationship with renowned Irish-American film producer, actor, environmentalist and activist, Pierce Brosnan. The actress joined other show business performers in 1954; however, her career was cut short by ovarian cancer which ended her life in 1985.

As an actress, the ex-wife of Pierce Brosnan has appearances in three productions and they were all superb and superlative. Online, her first role was Cassandra in the 1978 drama, The Greek Tycoon, after which she was cast as Madame Lloyd Palmer in Rough Cut (produced in 1980). Her last professional credit was the 1981 British spy film For Your Eyes Only, in which she portrayed Countess Lisl von Schlaf.

Cassandra Harris – Bio

Cassandra Harris was born Sandra Colleen Waites, in Sydney, New South Wales, Australia, on December 15, 1948. She is the daughter of Australian parents Roma Waites (died July 23, 1962) and Walter Waites (father) and grand- daughter of a German aristocrat.

As for her education, information on where she actually started her academic journey is hard to come by, however, the actress reportedly took classes at the National Institute of Dramatic Art. She was admitted to this institution as Sandra Gleeson at the age of 12, precisely in 1961, after moving from Sydney to London.

Having acquired the necessary knowledge, the ex-wife of Pierce Brosnan was offered a role in the show Boeing Boeing, which was produced in Sydney. The project is a farce written by Marc Camoletti, a renowned French playwright.

As stated earlier, Cassandra Harris showed off her acting skills in just three films, namely the James Bond movie, For Your Eyes Only, The Greek Tycoon, and Rough Cut. However, she would also have appeared on several episodes of Remington Steele (TV series) as a guest with her husband.

Family life

Cassandra Harris tied the knot three times before death came knocking on the door. The actress’ first attempted marriage was to William Firth in 1964. They only lived together for six years before their marital relationship broke down.

The same year being 1970, she found love again and agreed to spend the rest of her life with a man called Dermot Harris. Like her previous relationship, their love for each other only survived eight years, leading to their divorce in 1978.

Three years later, love smiled on the CassandraHarris once again and brought in its own way the magnificent Irish-American of entertainment – Pierce Brosnan. They married the same year (December 27, 1980 to be precise) and had a son three years later.

His name was Sean Brosnan and he has two half-brothers from his mother’s love affair with her second husband. The oldest of them is Charlotte Harris, while the youngest is Christopher Harris. The first was born in 1971 (died in 2013), while the last came into the world the following year.

Brosnan considers Charlotte Dermot Harris and Christopher Dermot Harris to be his own children. He adopted the duo following the death of their father the same year after a heart attack.

Other Facts About Pierce Brosnan’s Former Wife

1. The talented actress took her last breath in the city of Los Angeles after battling ovarian cancer for about four years. Harris was only 42 years old when she died in December 1991, precisely on the 28th of the month. She was first informed of the disease in 1987 by her doctors.

2. The disease also reportedly claimed the life of Cassandra Harris’ mother and only daughter. Brosnan’s wife was a teenager when her mother died in 1962; however, his daughter died a few years after he [Harris] died in 1991.

3. The names of his grandchildren are IsabellaSophie Smith, Lucas Smith and Marley May Cassandra. The first two are Charlotte’s children with husband Alex Smith, while Marley is Sean Brosnan’s daughter.

4. Her third husband (Pierce Brosnan) has since remarried since 2001 to none other than American actress Keely Shaye Smith. The two children are raising their two children together – Paris Brosnan and Dylan Brosnan.

5. Brosnan still credits him for his profound impact on his life. In his own words, the famous actor said it was Cassandra Harris who made him the man he is today.