Before I say anything, I'd like to confess I'm a Neil Gaiman junkie. Have been for years. I own every Sandman comic, his novels, and almost every one of his audio collections. Personally, I think he's one of the most brilliant literary minds to come out of the last half century. His writing, be it comic, prose, poetry or music, is usually great. And despite what many would say, I actually liked Gaiman's English script for Princess Mononoke.

So when I confess some deep disappointment in Gaiman's hyped mockumentary A Short Film about John Bolton, it comes from someone who is a fan of his work.

The world doesn't seem to know what to make of John Bolton's work. The artist (who is real, giving the film some great factual credence) paints beautiful pictures of female vampires in various states of undress. His fans are eager to buy his alluring paintings, no matter what the cost. His detractors think he's a "one-note artist" as the interviewer says, unable to paint anything but the naked undead.

Most simply don't know what to make of him. Even the manager of the gallery that shows Bolton's art feels slightly disgusted by his work. Whether are attracted or repelled by the visuals, everyone seems curious about how Bolton gets ideas.

Bolton himself is a shy recluse. He's a nervous wreck who can't function in even the easiest situations. And his growing fame doesn't make him any happier. One of the film's best scenes features him trying to buy donuts while an excited fan working at the shop makes him increasingly (and visibly) uncomfortable.

And all he can seem to muster in the way of explaining his paintings is that he paints what he sees.

One clever thing about Gaiman's short film is its conceit. Imagine a combination of The Office and the The Blair Witch Project and you're almost there. Add in that it uses the real fantasy/horror artist John Bolton as its main focus, and you've got a film that has the potential to be both funny and a little disturbing.

Unfortunately, the comedy works far better than the horror. The first half of the movie is pretty funny. Bolton is a great, suffering artist. Everyone wants to pick his brain, but he just wants his work judged by its own merits. Just watch the manager of the art gallery desperately trying to make him responsive - it's a brilliant segment.

Meanwhile, the interviewer (played by Marcus Brigstocke) is hilarious in trying to handle the seemingly impossible artist. His reaction shots and comments to the artist's off-kilter comments are well done.

The movie works when it's a comedy about a famous artist who just wants to be left alone. It doesn't work when it's trying to be a disquieting horror film about wher e an artist's ideas come from.

The last half of the thirty-minute short film focuses on Brigstocke entering Bolton's workshop and watching him paint, and the ending itself is more of an eye-roll than a gasp or laugh.

While we hear in the extras that the film was intended to be a comedy rather than a horror movie, it still seems to me that the last half of the movie doesn't know what to do with the first half.

Score: 5 out of 10

The Video

The transfer on this film is pretty awful. Towards the end, the interviewer is shooting with a handheld camera, so that section I can forgive. But the rest of the film, shot with regular cameras, is equally bad and has no excuse.

The whole film is filled with noise (low level and mosquito), edge enhancement and lots of artifacts. I know that Docurama isn't a huge company capable of paying for the best transfers and that, as an independently made fake-documentary, we shouldn't expect Hollywood-quality footage.

But neither of those facts helps that this movie will look flat-out bad on regular screens and even worse on higher-quality sets that can really show its flaws. And while these flaws do add a creepy effect to the end of the film, they make the beginning seem extremely amateurish and ugly.

Score: 4 out of 10

The Audio

The movie comes in Dolby Digital 2.0. There's a lot of static and hiss in the background. Of course, the movie is entirely dialogue, so you're not missing too much.

Far less forgivable is the extra feature Live at the Aladdin. At certain points in the feature, the sound is completely off-track. It's just a shame that something as cool as a 2-hour reading by Gaiman is marred by an off-track audio.

And no subtitles, whatsoever. Would it have been that hard to cook something up for a 30-minute short film? Or for features that mostly involve Neil reading his own work?

Score: 3 out of 10

Packaging and Extras

Writer/director Neil Gaiman and actor Marcus Brigstocke give a really good commentary on this film. After feeling some disappointment in the initial movie, this commentary made me take another view of the movie.

Brigstocke reminisces about scenes and asks Gaiman questions, who follows with a detailed explanation. Thankfully, both give a lot of interesting information. We learn how carefully each shot was planned, and how hard the editing staff worked to cut the movie down to a swift 30 minutes. It's kind of funny to also hear that Bolton actually seemed to creep out Brigstocke.

They really fill the whole 30 minutes with talking that directly relates to the movie. It's actually one of the more interesting commentaries I've heard in a little while, and I love that it stays on topic the whole time.

The Live at the Aladdin feature had me more excited than the movie itself when I got to review this DVD. In 2000, Gaiman did a reading tour in order to benefit the Comic Book Legal Defense Fund (CBLDF), a great cause, by the way. This feature is basically a straight-forward recording of his concert in Portland, Oregon.

While there are a few interviews with fans, the main meat of the feature is the reading. He reads a few of his hits and answers questions. He's one of the best public readers out there, so it's enjoyable. It's only a shame that the audio is off-track at certain points.

The Making of John Bolton Interview once again features Brigstocke asking Gaiman questions about the movie, and they discuss it. It's pretty good, although not quite as informative as the commentary. Topics go from the origin of the movie to the commanding power of Gaiman's beard. It's definitely worth watching in this section is their hilarious joking about double dipping the DVD with useless features. Something we can all relate to.

In Drawn in Darkness Audio Recording, Gaiman reads a short story that was one of the inspirations for the movie. Once again, Gaiman is a great reader of his own work, so it's a treat to listen to him. It is audio-only, but the quality of the audio here is actually better than everything else on the disc. Plus, the story has a great creepiness that the film itself fails to achieve.

John Bolton Photo Gallery shows paintings Bolton made for the film. Truth be told, Bolton's a great artist, so fans shouldn't be disappointed.

Score: 8 out of 10