For the past 3 days, I was at Kuala Lumpur Convention Centre (KLCC) for an event organised by SMIDEC. It was held from 4th June to 6th June 2008.

The event was pretty big as it occupied 5 halls in KLCC and was officiated by our very own Prime Minister Datuk Seri Abdullah Ahmad Badawi (as reported in The Star). It is about companies in Malaysia showcasing their new products and/or prototypes. In other words, it is a place for them to show off who has better product/prototype. Hehe. Apart from that, the event is a place for people to share information with one another.

I was one of the exhibitors for my company for this event. It was gruelling yet valuable experience for me as it was my first time and being part of it. “Gruelling??!”, one might wonder. Well, let’s put it this way. Those, who think that sitting in office from 9am to 6pm is boring yet tiring, might want to think again.

Being an exhibitor, you have to stand for the whole day. I did it for 3 consecutive days; i.e. from 9am to 6pm. It ain’t fun at all. Trust me. My legs are aching toward end of the each day and my bad (right) ankle was giving way at the final day of the event. We (my colleagues and I) were hoping that the day ends faster than usual. What’s worst is that we have to go there at 9am to set the things up before the event kicks off and stay back late to pack the things up before we leave the building. It drains one’s energy pretty much at the end of the day.

However, those complaints are negligible compare to what I had learnt throughout this event. I have gained valuable experience due to the fact that I get to interact with various types of people; from Sales Personnel to Sales Manager, CEOs as well as young entrepreneurs. Not only that, I get to witness various type of people’s behaviour, characteristic and occasionally, arrogant (arse) attitude. At times, it was awful experience but most of the time, it was fun. All in all, it went well and thank god that this event is on annual basis only.

Short note:

1) There are plenty of Canon 1D series and L lenses during that event which made me drool uncontrollably.

2) Photos are taken using Nokia N95. They suck badly. Slight reddish colour on white surface.

3) Now, I know why promoters in shopping mall have this ‘I’m pissed’ look. I totally understand their situation now. Hats off to them.

For those who are using Nokia’s smartphones, the only programs that your mobilephone synchronize with are Microsoft Outlook or Windows Address Book. Now, I’m talking about those who are using Windows operating system. I’m not too sure about Mac users though. And I bet you are synchronizing your contact list, to do list and etc to the Microsoft Outlook instead of the Address Book..

However, I don’t really like the fact that Microsoft Outlook messes up my contact list. And ironically, I, for one, synchronize all my stuffs to Microsoft Outlook. Well, I’m sort of forced to use it or I’ll be in deep pile of shit near future.

For example of a contact name with two mobilephone numbers and two landline numbers. Upon synchronizing it, you could only view one of each categories in Microsoft Outlook. It is annoying because you will face problems in future when you want to synchro back to your phone, if let’s say your mobilephone reset back to factory settings. So, theoretically, you will lose a handful of contact numbers from a single contact name.

The only way to solve this problem, according to my mate, is that you have to put all those numbers in different categories. Sucky, ain’t it. And the worst thing I have heard is that this problem has been longing since the introduction of Symbian OS.

So, does anybody have a better solution??