Roy Webb passed away on June 13, 2024, in Conway, Arkansas. Born on July 22, 1960 to Finis Melvin Webb and Margaret Glee (Brock) Webb. Roy was a longtime resident of Crabtree, Arkansas and a pillar of the community he so dearly loved.

‍Roy was a retired construction worker specializing in sheetrock finishing. He was a member of the Alread Fire Dept for many years and dearly loved and respected his fellow firefighters.

‍On June 13, 1992, Roy married his beloved wife, Tammy Hamner. Together, they raised two children: Diana (Keith) Hendrix and Kaitlin (Austin) Moran. He was Popo to 4 beautiful grandchildren, Caleb Ward, 19, Hailey Ward, 16, Remington Moran, 7 and Wesley Moran, 6. They were the light of his life and he cherished time spent with them all. His brother-in-law Loyal (Boo) Blevins was one of his best friends. They spent many hours together laughing and joking. Also left behind are his brothers in music, his bandmates Bob Collister, John French and Darrin Ward. Among his most loved friends are Jeff and Sandra Wieners. Aside from his family, these were the people he most loved to spend his time with as well as many other friends and family members. They all will miss him terribly.

‍

‍Roy was an avid fisherman, loved reading, especially science fiction, a talented bass guitarist, and an expert live music sound engineer. His passion for music was more than a pastime; it was an art form, with countless hours spent playing music all over the state with his band Lucky Draw and other friends.

‍Sadly, Roy was predeceased by his parents and his infant sister, Diana Glee Webb.

‍A service to celebrate Roy's life will be held on June 19, 2024 at 10:00 am at the Crabtree Foursquare Church located at 11301 Hwy 16W Clinton, AR. Following the service, a reception will be held at the church. Performing the ceremony will be Brother Dennis Berry. Honorary pallbearers will be Caleb Ward, Austin Moran, Keith Hendrix, Bob Collister, John French and Darrin Ward.

Arrangements have been entrusted to Ozark View Funeral Home. To share a memory or kind words, please go to www.ozarkviewfuneralhome.com