The Devrekani Massif in the northern part of the Central Pontides (Northern Turkey) provides important clues to the regional tectonics and geodynamic processes associated with Jurassic high grade metamorphic conditions. This study reports new paragenetic assemblages, mineral compositions, whole-rock geochemistry and 40Ar-39Ar geochronological data from the paragneisses in the massif, and, discusses the P–T conditions and geodynamic implications of the Jurassic metamorphism during continental extension in the Central Pontides. Upper amphibolite to lower granulite facies paragneisses form one of the main lithological units in the massif. Within these, there are five different mineral parageneses with diagnostic mineral assemblages of: quartz, K-feldspar (An0-1Ab4-26Or73-96), plagioclase (An1835), biotite [(XPhl: 0.28-0.57; Mg/(Mg+Fe2+): 0.33-0.61)], sillimanite, cordierite [(Mg/(Mg+Fe2+): 0.48-0.71)] and garnet (Alm43-80Grs0-18Prp5-23And0-4Sps10-33) with minor hercynite. Based on Na-i...

In the northern part of the Central Pontides (N Turkey) there are different metamorphic rocks exposed, notably the Devrekani metamorphic rocks. Here, upper amphibolite-lower granulite facies metamorphic rocks contain predominantly paragneiss, orthogneiss and metacarbonate, and to a lesser extent, amphibolite and quartzite, with cross-cutting aplite, pegmatite and granite veins. This is the first report of these rocks and includes new data on the petrochem-istry, geochronology and metamorphic evolution of the Devrekani orthogneisses from the Central Pontides. The orthogneisses show five different mineral parageneses with the characteristic mineral assemblage quartz + K-feldspar + plagioclase + biotite ± hornblende ± opaque (± ilmenite and ± magnetite), and accessory minerals (zircon, sphene and apa-tite). These metamorphic rocks exhibit generally granoblastic, lepidogranoblastic and nematolepidogranoblastic with locally migmatitic and relic micrographic textures. They have well-developed centimeter-spaced gneissic banding and display gneissose structure with symmetric, asymmetric and irregular folds. The petrographic features, mineralogical assemblages and weak migmatization reflect high temperature conditions. Thermometric calculations in the orthogneisses indicate meta-morphic temperatures reached 744 ± 33 °C. Field relations, petrography and petrochemistry suggest that the orthogneisses have predominantly granodioritic and some granitic protoliths, that show features of I-type, medium to high-potassic calc-alkaline volcanic arc granitoids. The orthogneisses have high contents of LILEs and low contents of HFSEs with negative Nb and Ti anomalies, which are typical of subduction-related magmas. The orthogneisses also show significant LREE enrichment relative to HREE with negative Eu anomalies (Eu N /Eu* = 0.33–1.07) with La N / Lu N = 6.98–20.47 values. Based on U-Pb zircon dating data, the protoliths are related to Permo-Carboniferous (316– 252 Ma) magmatism. It is likely that peak metamorphism took place during the Jurassic as reflected by the U-Pb zircon ages (199–158 Ma) and also 40 Ar/ 39 Ar from hornblende/biotite (163–152 Ma). The four biotite 40 Ar/ 39 Ar average ages from the rock samples are ca. 156 Ma, suggesting that the metamor-phic rocks cooled to 350–400 °C at ca. 156 Ma. Conclusively, the Devrekani metamorphic rocks can be ascribed as products of Permo-Carboniferous continental arc magmatism overprinted by Jurassic metamorphism in the northern Central Pontides.

The leucogranite is the major constituent of the bimodal Late Cretaceous Karamadaz granitoid, developed in relation with evolution of the Inner Tauride Ocean along the northern margin of the Taurides in central Turkey. New analyses of minerals major and trace elements (including rare-earth elements (REE)), and of Sr and Nd isotopes are performed to determine the origin and geochemical characteristics of the leucogranites. Medium-coarse-grained leucogranite contains normally zoned plagioclase (An12–20), mildly alkaline biotite, and xenocrystic magneziohornblende, actinolite, and ferro-hornblende. It is characterized by concave-up REE patterns with respect to middle–heavy REE. Field relations, mineral chemistry, geochemical data, and isotopic data suggest that the leucogranite could have originated from an amphibole-bearing igneous source in lower to middle crust by low-rate partial melting (<40%) under low pressure and low H2O activity conditions, possibly coupled by mixing–mingling with mafic magma and high-level feldspar and minor biotite fractio-nation. In contrast, the quartz diorite and mafic microgranular enclave (MME) are probably developed from an enriched mantle, with possible mingling–mixing. MME, quartz diorite, and leucogranite may represent a magmatic suite, which formed in an extensional tectonic regime by bimodal magmatic activity probably because of lithospheric delamination or slab break off or after the Alpine thicken within the Gondwanan Tauride–Anatolide platform. Initial Sr data exhibit an age of 65 ± 13 Ma for the leucogranite, but it does not indicate a true intrusion age of the magma due to isotopic modification of the magma. Résumé : Granitoı¨de bimodal Karamadaz (Crétacé tardif) est surtout composé de leucogranite; il s'est développé en relation avec l'e ´volution de l'océan Tauride intérieur, le long de la bordure des Taurides au centre de la Turquie. De nouvelles analyses des principaux minéraux, des e ´léments traces (incluant les terres rares) et des isotopes du Sr et du Nd ont e ´té ef-fectuées afin de déterminer l'origine et les caractéristiques géochimiques des leucogranites. Le leucogranite a ` grain moyen a ` grossier contient un plagioclase a ` zonage normal (An 12–20), une biotite légèrement alcaline et une hornblende magnési-enne a ` xénocristaux, de l'actinote et de la ferrohornblende. Il est caractérisé par des profils concaves (en U) des terres rares par rapport aux terres rares intermédiaires et aux terres rares lourdes. Les relations sur le terrain, la chimie des minér-aux, ainsi que les données géochimiques et isotopiques suggèrent que le leucogranite provienne d'une source ignée dans la croûte moyenne a ` inférieure, comportant des amphiboles, et qui aurait fondu lentement et partiellement (<40 %) sous des conditions de faible pression et de faible activité H 2 O, possiblement jumelé a ` un mélange–malaxage avec un magma mafi-que et une cristallisation fractionnée poussée de feldspath et, a ` degré moindre, de biotite. Par ailleurs, la diorite quartzique et l'enclave mafique microcristalline proviennent probablement d'un manteau enrichi avec mélange–malaxage possible. L'enclave mafique microcristalline, la diorite quartzique et le leucogranite peuvent représenter une suite magmatique qui se serait formée dans un régime tectonique d'extension par activité magmatique bimodale, probablement en raison d'un dé-laminage lithosphérique, du décrochement d'une dalle ou après l'e ´paississement alpin a ` l'intérieur de la plate-forme Tauride–Anatolide du continent de Gondwana. Les données Sr initiales indiquent un a ˆge de 65 ± 13 Ma pour le leucogran-ite, mais elles n'indiquent pas un a ˆge véritable pour l'intrusion du magma en raison de la modification isotopique du magma. [Traduit par la Rédaction]

The northern and southern zones of the eastern Pontides (northeast Turkey) contain numerous plutons of varying ages and compositions. Geochemical and isotopic results on two Hercynian granitoid bodies located in the northern zone of the eastern Pontides allow a proper reconstruction of their origin for the first time. The intrusive rocks comprise four distinct bodies, two of which we investigated in detail. Based on LA–ICP–MS U–Pb zircon dating, the Derinoba and Kayadibi granites have similar 206Pb/238U versus 207Pb/235U Concordia ages of 311.1 ± 2.0 and 317.2 ± 3.5 million years for the former and 303.8 ± 1.5 million years for the latter. Aluminium saturation index values of both granites are between 0.95 and 1.35, indicating dominant peraluminous melt compositions. Both intrusions have high SiO2 (74–77 wt.%) contents and show high-K calc-alkaline and I- to S-type characteristics. Primitive mantle-normalized element diagrams display enrichment in K, Rb, Th, and U, and depletion in Ba, Nb, Ta, Sr, P, and Ti. Chondrite-normalized rare earth element patterns are characterized by concave-upward shapes and pronounced negative Eu anomalies with Lacn/Ybcn = 4.6–9.7 and Eucn/Eu* = 0.11–0.59 (Derinoba), and Lacn/Ybcn = 2.7–5.5 and Eucn/Eu* = 0.31–0.37 (Kayadibi). These features imply crystal-melt fractionation of plagioclase and K-feldspar without significant involvement of garnet. The Derinoba samples have initial ϵNd values between –6.1 and –7.1 with Nd model ages and T DM between 1.56 and 2.15 thousand million years. The Kayadibi samples show higher initial ϵNd(I) values, –4.5 to –6.2, with Nd model ages between 1.50 and 1.72 thousand million years. This study demonstrates that the Sr isotope ratios generally display negative correlation with Nd isotopes; Sr isotope ratios were lowered in some samples by hydrothermal interaction or alteration. Isotopic and petrological data suggest that both granites were produced by the partial melting of early Palaeozoic lower crustal rocks, with minor contribution from the mantle. Collectively, these rocks represent a late stage of Hercynian magmatism in the eastern Pontides.