Seed of wisdom Japanese かしこさのたね Romaji Kashikosa no tane Old localizations INTSeed Found in Dragon Quest III

Dragon Quest IV remakes only

Dragon Quest V

Dragon Quest VI

Dragon Quest VII

Dragon Quest VIII

Dragon Quest Monsters

Dragon Quest Monsters 2

Dragon Quest Monsters: The Dark Prince Effect Permanently raises the Wisdom of a single party member.

The Seed of wisdom is a recurring item in the Dragon Quest series. It is a seed that permanently increases the Wisdom of whoever consumes it. They can be found throughout the world in treasure chests, dropped by monsters, and by searching in different places, such as bags, pots, and drawers. The seeds cannot be purchased at any store, and give the user 1~3 points of Wisdom.

Appearances[edit]

Dragon Quest III: The Seeds of Salvation[edit]

Dragon Quest IV: Chapters of the Chosen[edit]

In the original version of this game for the NES, the item was removed, possibly because the Seed of magic (which was first introduced in this game) was intended to replace it. It was brought back in remake versions of the game.

Dragon Quest V: Hand of the Heavenly Bride[edit]

In this game, seeds of wisdom are used to increase the Wisdom of a single character or monster companion by 1~3 points or can be sold for 45 gold each. However, in this game, Wisdom is meaningless for human characters as it does not affect MP growth or the strength of spells. A minimum Wisdom of 20 is necessary for monster companions to follow player commands in battle. Notably, the Goodybag is the only monster in the game whose Wisdom never increases no matter how many times it levels up, making them practically a necessity if the player wishes to use one. Once a monster companion's Wisdom has reached 20, there is no need to increase it any further.

Seeds of wisdom can be found at the Winter Palace, Whealbrook, Mostroferrato, Gotha, and the Moot Point, as well as prizes at the Fortuna, Faerie Lea, and Stark Raving Treasures n' Trapdoors boards. They can be dropped by Combatterpillars, Hunter mechs, Flamethrowers, Drag-goofs, and Toxtongues.

Dragon Quest VI: Realms of Revelation[edit]

Seeds of wisdom once again increase the Wisdom of a single character by 1~3 points or can be sold for 15 gold each. As in the previous game, Wisdom does not affect the rate of MP growth or spells in any way. Seeds can be found at Howcastles, Turnscote, the Seabed Shrine, Felonia, and Dullerton, or can be dropped by Scorching men, Ewwnicorns, Stinkerbells, Mythsteeds, Brick, and the Third Test.

Dragon Quest VII: Fragments of the Forgotten Past[edit]

Seeds of wisdom increase the Wisdom of a single character by 1~3 points or can be sold for 10 gold each. In this game, although Wisdom does not affect any parameters in battle, having a high Wisdom is necessary for winning the Wisdom category for the Excellence Grading Organisation at El Ciclo in the present.

Seeds can be found at Estard, the Poolside Cave in the past, Gröndal in the present, El Monumento de Pomposo, and Wetlock in the present. More seeds can be won as prizes from the Lucky Panel at the Casino in both Buccanham and the Haven. They can also be dropped by Cheeky devils, Malevolanterns, Vial creatures, Hexicons, Vigilanterns, and Briny mines, as well as Imps, Lover lamps, Grillerpillars, and Hunter mechs in the Nintendo 3DS version.

Dragon Quest VIII: Journey of the Cursed King[edit]

GameDescription Permanently increases the wisdom of a single ally.[1]

Seeds of wisdom will increase the Wisdom of a single character by 1~3 points or can be sold once again for 10 gold each. For the first time in the series, Wisdom affects the strength of attack spells, up to a certain point. Seeds can be found at a pot in Port Prospect, a treasure chest in the Maella Region*, a pot in Pickham, another pot in Baccarat, a treasure chest in East Argonia, and in a treasure chest in Savella Cathedral*. Additionally, they can be dropped or stolen from Mimic kings or Blue fangs, along with Santaclops, Tortured Soul in Memoriam, and Marcello in Memoriam.

Seeds of wisdom can only be used in a single recipe for the Alchemy Pot.

In the Nintendo 3DS version, seeds of wisdom can be found randomly in blue treasure chests in the Farebury Region or Alexandria Region, as well as the purple treasure chests in Memories Lane.

In Other Languages[edit]

Gallery[edit]

Dragon Quest III.

Dragon Quest VII artwork.

Related items[edit]

Super seed of wisdom

Seed of magic

Seed of strength

Seed of resilience

Seed of agility

Seed of life

Seed of luck

Seed of skill

Seed of sorcery

Seed of therapeusis