Post by ChrisVessey on

I went to Harrogate Railway v Wakefield FC tonight (EvoStik Div1 North) and i was surprised to read and see ex-Cambridge United Mick Norbury as Railway's assistant manager.

I've read and heard about the things he did when a player here, on and off the pitch... and i'm not surprised, the bloke is fierce. I read in the programme he was sent to the stands for foul and abusive language on Saturday at Chester and was at it again tonight.

He looks a real hard-nut and i doubt many people would fancy taking him on one-on-one.

I found this from a few years ago - www.nonleaguedaily.com/news/index.php?&newsmode=FULL&nid=39103

I also believe he was jailed for manslaughter?

He's from Hemsworth, which is an tough old mining town in West Yorkshire. Even the passing gippo's travel in numbers there!

Post by bean on

I thought it was for stabbing his girlfriend, but it could have been manslaughter, but it was before he joined us.

A skinny little fella from what I remember. Wasn't it him who hoofed the ball into the face of someone in the stands??

Aaaahhhh, the good old days

Post by tombowran on

Loved him "PSYCHO MICHAEL NORBURY! PSYCHO MICHAEL NORBURY!"

And yes, to this day I still chuckle at just how short his shorts were, they never seemed to fit.

And YES, I do keep reminding my West Ham supporting mates that we beat them 2:1 at the Abbey and a convicted psychopath got the winner!

Good find Chris, I had thought he got a life ban when I heard he'd been in trouble

You almost inspire me to go and watch Braintree on Saturday to see how crazy Jai Raison has gone in McDonalds since he left!

Post by Rico on

What year(s) did he play for us?

'92 and yes he was pretty much useless as far as I remember. Checked on soccerbase and he only scored 3 goals so that would back that up. Not sure why people remember him so fondly. Bit disgusting really as it seems people revelled in the fact he killed his girlfriend.

Post by Lepus europaeus on

Terrible footballer for us. During his career he was sent off about four million times and, as a manager/asst mgr once received a six-year touchline ban. All in all, a nasty piece of work. Any bloke who hits a woman, for whatever reason …

Oh, hello Mick, I was just saying what a good bloke you are.

Post by Andrewlang on

"In his report at Colwyn Bay the referee said I went up and threatened to knock him out but I actually said, some would say you want knocking out after that performance."

Yep, you're right. That's completely different.

Mook.

Andrew

Post by orchardpark on

He also smashed the ball into the crowd at Telford, knocking out an elderly female Telford fan. Fa cup late 90's - we won 2-0 butler and benjamin the scorers??

Did he not score for us away to Bristol City, the game Beck did not go into the changing room at half time, stayed in the dug out, first game wearing the stripey kit. We went on to win 2-1.