Description

Burns & McDonnell has an opening for solid waste and recycling professionals with 4 years of experience to join our Environmental Services (ENS) team at our corporate office in Kansas City, Mo. The successful candidate will work in a team atmosphere managing projects, performing detailed technical, financial and operational analyses to assist our municipal clients plan for a sustainable future of waste management and resource recovery within their communities. Burns & McDonnell is a 100% employee-owned firm ranked numerous times on FORTUNE’s List of 100 Best Companies to Work For and voted as a Best Place to Work in cities across the United States.

Our Environmental Services team supports a variety of projects typically related to solid waste planning and management, stormwater quality and management, site development, soil and groundwater remediation, biogas, and sustainability related projects. The nature of our projects and clients afford staff early career opportunities to interface with clients, participate in pursuits, and represent Burns & McDonnell through client and conference presentations.

The successful candidate will be highly self-motivated with an eagerness to embrace ongoing challenges associated with the wide variety of environmental projects we support. The Environmental Analyst and Planner will have the following areas of responsibility:

Development of solid waste and recycling plans and studies.

Research, analysis, and compilation of project data necessary to meet planning objectives.

Evaluate solid waste and recycling services, operations, facilities, and policies.

Perform regulatory, code compliance, and policy development support services.

Assist in public information and engagement activities.

Develop project reports, analytical work papers, and project presentations.

Prepare project proposals and other business development efforts.

Support the environmental engineering and sustainability services in waste management facility design and permitting, stormwater management, landfill gas management, operations planning, construction quality assurance.

Preparation and analysis of financial projections and forecasts.

Other duties, as assigned.

Qualifications

Bachelor’s degree in Environmental Studies/Science, Sustainability, Engineering, Business Administration, Public Administration, Urban Planning, or other related field. Master’s degree preferred.

Minimum 4 years of related experience (8 years of experience preferred).

Excellent oral and written communication skills

Excellent analytical skills

Experience in the solid waste and recycling profession preferred.

High level of proficiency in the use of Microsoft Excel, Word, and PowerPoint. Experience with Microsoft Access preferred, but not required

Ability to work independently and as part of a team

Ability to meet deadlines under pressure

This job posting will remain open a minimum of 72 hours and on an ongoing basis until filled

EEO/Minorities/Females/Disabled/Veterans

Job Business Analysts

Primary Location US-MO-Kansas City

Schedule: Full-time

Travel: Yes, 15 % of the Time

Req ID: 231421