Danilo Barthel has announced the end of his career. The former national basketball player last played in Turkey.

The 31-year-old announced the end of his active career on his Instagram channel. “As I write these words down, a mixture of gratitude and sadness fills my heart,” Barthel prefaces his statement. The Heidelberg native has been struggling with a persistent knee injury of late, which ultimately prevented his career from gaining momentum once again. “After fighting for more than a year to get back on the court, I have to accept that I can’t play basketball anymore. Now it is time for me to announce that I am ending my career, and I want to thank everyone who has supported me over the last few years. “

The basketball court has been my sanctuary “almost my whole life”, Barthel continued. “This journey full of ups and downs, victories and defeats has been incredible.”

Barthel had started playing basketball in his hometown of Heidelberg. In 2011 he went to the Skyliners Frankfurt, with whom he won the Europe Cup in 2016. In the same year, he moved on to FC Bayern Basketball. There, Barthel was a permanent fixture. In 2018, he won the double with the Munich team and was also voted Finals MVP in the Bundesliga. In 2019, he defended the championship title with his team. In 2020, the 2.08-metre man moved to Istanbul and won the championship with Fenerbahce in 2021. Last year, they parted ways and Barthel worked on his comeback from then on – which now won’t happen.

Barthel has 62 caps for the German national team (471 points). With the DBB selection, he took part in the 2019 World Cup and the 2021 Olympic Games, among others.

Barthel thanked all the organisations he had the opportunity to play for, coaches, teammates, fans and explicitly his friends and family.

Which new chapter he will now start is still open. However, Barthel joined the U-18 national team this year as an assistant coach, which won bronze at the 2023 European Championships. “When this journey ends, a new one begins,” Barthel said of his end as an active player. “Let’s see where it takes me. “