Concert poster collector and Nirvana specialist, Scott Mussell is seeking this flyer advertising the bands performance at the Gabe’s Oasis in Iowa City, Iowa during the bands 1989 tour. Iowa City is home to the University of Iowa and Mussell is a native of the state having grown up a Hawkeye’s fan in the capital city of Des Moines. “This flyer is important to my collection as it’s the first time Nirvana played in my home state” said Mussell who is offer a cash reward for an example printed before the concert. “I’ve seen two different designs advertising this gig, I have no idea the size of these but am eager to learn more about either” Mussell says.

In 1989 Nirvana had yet to make the cultural altering impact and Iowan’s outside of the burgeoning underground college rock scene were unaware of the band. Attendance at this Midwestern show was laughably low with most estimates at around 20-30 people. “Despite this I’ve spoken to at least 50 former U of I grads who claim to have been there” Mussell says adding “I’m hoping someone who was there will reach out with more details about the show and hopefully they also saved one of these flyers!”

Mussell is offering a cash reward for an example of this flyer for his collection. "I don't know the size of this piece, my guess is it's an 8.5x11" flyer and I'm especially interested in finding one from the grass roots level with strong provenance- I’ll put my money where my mouth is to obtain one of these.” If you have an original example of this flyer or any other artifacts from the Iowa City show or other Gabe’s Oasis concert flyers from this era contact Mussell at 515.707.7250 anytime or by email at srmussell@me.com.

Concert poster collector and Nirvana specialist Scott Mussell is searching for flyers, posters and other material advertising the grunge bands May 4, 1990 concert in Ybor City, Florida. The legendary Tampa area venue Masquerade hosted Kurt Cobain, Chris Novoselic and then drummer Chad Channing during Nirvana’s 1990 club tour. “I’ve seen a few flyers from this venue from around 1989 and 1990 but I’ve never seen one for the Nirvana show” says Mussell adding “It seems likely something was made or perhaps the venue utilized one of the Jeff Ross ‘tour blank’ posters in the area.” Masquerade featured a litany of great bands over the years including Janes Addiction, Nine Inch Nails, The Smashing Pumpkins and even Lady Gaga. “Clubs and theaters like Masquerade were so critical to up and coming artists- the art produced by these venues and the local communities around them is music history I feel is important to preserve. If you have a single flyer or an entire hoard I’d love to hear from you!” says Mussell.

If you have a poster, flyer or handbill advertising Nirvana’s May 4, 1990 Tampa, Ybor City, FL concert at Masquerade Mussell is offering a cash reward contact him at 515.707.7250 or srmussell@me.com for details.

Concert poster collector and Nirvana specialist Scott Mussell is searching for posters, flyers and handbills from the Seattle, WA concert venue Vogue. The venue utilized the ground floor of an early 1900s hotel and played host to just about every major grunge and 90s act including some of the areas earliest shows by the likes of Alice in Chains, Soundgarden and Nirvana. “This place had a major reputation and that history extends to concert ephemera” Mussell says adding “Besides the great bands this venue had oodles of local legend- SubPop poet Jesse Bernstein had a hide out upstairs and Nirvana’s first advertised concert in Seattle was at this venue.” The clubs location, mere blocks from SubPop headquarters, made it ideal for featuring the areas up and coming acts as was the case in April of 1988 when Nirvana preformed as part of “SubPop Sunday” not long after agreeing to sign with the label. The band retuned for gigs in May, July and August of ’88 and made three more appearances in 1989 in April, June and September. Mussell is seeking posters, flyers handbills and calendars produced prior to the shows. “I’m very big on provenance with what I collect and will pay top dollar for single owner material/hoards collected during the era” Mussell says. If you collected material from the Vogue contact Mussell anytime at srmussell@me.com or by phone at 515.707.7250.

“I don’t know who designed any of these flyers, there’s a lot of variation in the content and styles across what I’ve seen from the Vogue. I imagine there was someone/s responsible for designing material at the venue and that bands produced some overlap. Whatever the case, I’m really drawn to the starker designs from ’88-‘90. One image, bold text, no address- they’re mysterious and I think they’re kind of brilliant- they capture the best aspects of DIY.” Mussell said adding “I think this stuff is really important and I’ll put my money where my mouth is for single owner material with solid history. Anyone with handbills, flyers and posters from the Vogue can reach Mussell anytime at 515.707.7250 or email at srmussell@me.com.

In addition to Nirvana material Mussell is seeking single owner archives from this venue- “The documentation of this clubs history in my experience is highly scattered, there’s bits and pieces all over the place but the material culture deserves proper archival treatment- I come from a family of collectors/archivist and I love this era of music history so it was natural for me to focus in on preserving this stuff” Mussell states. Anyone with handbills, flyers and posters from the Vogue can reach Mussell anytime at 515.707.7250 or email at srmussell@me.com.

Concert poster collector and Nirvana specialist Scott Mussell is seeking flyers advertising the bands gigs in 1989 and 1990 in the Cincinnati, Ohio area. The now legendary band played a set October 6, 1989 at the little Irish bar Murphy’s Pub. "I don’t know much about the show itself, but I know a handbill and a flyer were produced. I’ve heard it might have been an acoustic set- I’m eager to know more” Mussell said. That summer Nirvana was scheduled to play over the river at Top Hat in Newport, KY July 21, 1989 but cancelled. “I’ve heard there was a flyer advertising this show and I’ve seen a handful of flyers from Top Hat but haven’t been able to confirm a Nirvana exists” Mussell notes.

The grunge icons returned in 1990 playing Shorty’s Underground on May 10 after canceling a gig scheduled there for April 14. “I’ve seen flyers for the April 14th show, I’d love to know more about what happened” Mussell says adding “A flyer from wither show is high on my want list!”

Mussell pays top prices for single owner Nirvana flyers for his archive and accepts flyers in any condition. If you have this poster, the handbill or any other examples of Nirvana concert flyers contact Mussell at 515.707.7250 anytime or by email at srmussell@me.com.

Concert poster collector and Nirvana specialist Scott Mussell is seeking this flyer advertising the bands cancelled show in Norman, OK at Rome XC. The show was scheduled for May 12, 1990 but Nirvana never showed up, but the supporting act Angry Son still played the show. "I'm always looking for posters with dynamic graphics and this one utilizes a classic photo” Mussell said. The image by Kurt Cobain’s then girlfriend Tracy Marander was also used on the cover of the “Blew” EP. "Both the flyer and handbill have a killer headline ‘Experience Nirvana’" Mussell states adding "Even though they didn’t play this gig I think this flyer captures the spirit of the DIY mindset and as a native Midwesterner I'm very eager to obtain any Nirvana material from the Midwest." Mussell pays top prices for single owner Nirvana flyers for his archive and accepts flyers in any condition. If you have this poster, the handbill or any other examples of Nirvana concert flyers contact Mussell at 515.707.7250 anytime or by email at srmussell@me.com.

Concert poster collector and Nirvana specialist Scott Mussell is seeking these and other flyers advertising the bands performances in Chicago. "I grew up in Iowa and flyers from Midwestern concerts are really high on my want list" Mussell said. The band played the windy city twice in 1989- at Club Dreamerz on July 7 and at Cabaret Metro on September 30. "I’ve never seen a flyer from the Club Dreamerz show but I have seen flyers from the venue so maybe there is one" Mussell states adding "the September gig had a great bill with the Chicago legends Eleventh Dream Day on the bill." Mussell is offering a cash reward for original examples of flyers printed prior to the show to advertise tickets and attendance. “I think this material is really sacred and I’m putting my money where my mouth is in an effort to preserve these.” Mussell said.

Concert poster collector and Nirvana specialist Scott Mussell is announcing a search for this poster advertising the bands concert in Boise, Idaho at the beginning of 1991. “I’ve never seen one in person so I don’t know what size this flyer is, it might be a handbill” Mussell notes. The gig occurred in the early stages of ‘91 before the band had completed their second album Nevermind and before Dave Grohl joined the group. “It’s really the calm before the storm, it’s not much longer down the line that Nirvana is the biggest band on the planet” Mussell remarks. The show took place at The Zoo and the flyer features an early promo photo of the band. Mussell is offering $500 for an example of this poster and is eager to hear more about the show “There’s not a lot of documentation of this gig. I’d love to hear more about what they played that night and hear an attendees review, I’ll always pay a premium for that type of provenance” Mussell notes. If you have an example of this flyer or attended the show contact Mussell at 515.707.7250 anytime or at srmussell@me.com.

Concert poster collector and Nirvana specialist Scott Mussell is seeking this flyer from the bands appearance in Bellingham, WA at Speedy O'tubs Nov 23, 1988. The band played last on the bill warming up for Coffin Break and headliners Skin Yard. "Kurt got drunk before this show and the band played so loud and the bars owner pulled the plug on the band refusing to pay them" Mussell says adding "This flyer was done in red on white and black on red and both were 11x17." If you have an example of this flyer contact Mussell any time at 515.707.7250 or at srmussell@me.com- he is a cash buyer for an example, produced before the show, in any condition and will pay a premium for documented provenance of its origins. "I'm especially interested in finding a one owner example with good provenance" Mussell notes concluding "This is such an early show and in person a really great design I'd be very excited to get the opportunity to preserve an original example!"

Mussell is always looking to obtain Nirvana posters, flyers and handbills advertising gigs occurring before 1992. If you have any original Nirvana concert material contact him at 515.707.7250 anytime or at srmussell@me.com.

Concert poster collector and Nirvana specialist Scott Mussell is seeking this flyer from the bands appearance in Hoquiam, WA at Eagle Hall Dec 21, 1988. The band played as the headliners with fellow Aberdeen, WA band Attica and Psychlodds. "The story goes that Kurt played in his underwear at this show and had put lipstick all over his neck in protest to the stereotype that rural Washingtonians were red necks" Mussell notes. The show was only the 21st they played since settling on the name Nirvana, all occurring in 1988. "I've not seen one of these in person but from photos it appears to be an 8.5x11" flyer but could be smaller" Mussell notes adding "It's a really neat piece and an important artifact of the bands career- I'm especially interested in finding a one owner example with good provenance."

If you have an example of this flyer contact Mussell any time at 515.707.7250 or at srmussell@me.com- he is a cash buyer for an example, produced before the show, in any condition and will pay a premium for documented provenance.

Another flyer Mussell is seeking is from a 1990 show at the Pine Street Theater. The flyer was produced on an offset press and features a killer design with a tyrannosaurus rex and a headline "It Came From Up North." The Feb. 9, 1990 show saw Tad and Rawheadrex open and Screaming Trees in the headlinging slot. "The graphics here really capture the attitude of the era, it’s very snarky and I love that fellow grunge giants Screaming Trees are on the headliners” says Mussell.

If you have examples of either of these flyers or any other Nirvana or related material from Portland Mussell is always looking to add to his collection. Other bands of interest include; Alice In Chains, Soundgarden, Mother Love Bone, Mookie Blaylock, Wipers, Greg Sage, Pearl Jam, Melvins and more. Wether it’s a single flyer or a hoard Mussell is interested contact him at srmussell@me.com or by phone anytime at 515.707.7250.

Concert poster collector and Nirvana specialist Scott Mussell is seeking this poster from the bands concert with Dinosaur Jr. at The Pompadour Rock & Roll Club in Salt Lake City Utah. "Nirvana played a few dates in the summer of 1991 as the 'Special Guest' to the legendarily noise trio Dinosaur Jr. including this show in Salt Lake City" Mussell says. The venue produced a sleek two color poster featuring the iconic cover of Bleach along with the Joseph Szabo photograph used on the cover of Green Mind. "That cover of Bleach is iconic and I'm always drawn to poster that feature it" Mussell notes adding "I'm seeking an example for my collection and would be excited for an opportunity to buy one of these." If you have an example of this poster you would consider parting with don't hesitate to contact Mussell anytime at 515-707-7250 or srmussell@me.com.

Concert poster collector and Nirvana specialist Scott Mussell is searching for handbills, flyers and posters from some of the bands earliest concerts at the short lived Community World Theater in Tacomoa, WA. “The place is a dry cleaners now but in the last 80’s for about a year it was the epicenter of grunge rocks most notorious act Nirvana” Mussell says. Of course at the time they were little known outside of the quite local community. Many of the shows were in the days before the band adopted the name Nirvana and include and a flyer that Mussell would consider the Holy Grail from the first show the band preformed as Nirvana. “Saturday March 19, 1988 that’s the first time they play as Nirvana and Kurt drew the flyer- it’s the piece highest on my want list” states Mussell. The piece comes with a little baggage as several questionable and outright reproductions making a confirmed original with provenance important to Mussell. “I’m putting my money where my mouth is for the right provenance on this piece and will pay a premium beyond my $5000 standing offer in any condition” Mussell notes.

Many of the flyers pre-date the bands name change to Nirvana including Skid Row, Pen Cap Chew and Bliss. “The bands deepest roots are really in Tacoma- Seattle gets a lot of the credit but the reality is that it all really starts in Tacoma- that’s where they literally became Nirvana.” Mussell says. Mussell. Before they were officially called Nirvana the band played shows under the names Skid Row, Pen Cap Chew, Ted Ed Fred and Bliss. Mussell is seeking any Nirvana material from this era as well as other flyers from the short lived venue. “There were other notable acts that came through including Fugazi, The Vandals, The Accussed, DOA, White Zombie and more. “A lot of gritty Thrash and hardcore punk bands play the Community World Theater and in addition to cultivating Nirvana the Melvins also played some early shows at the much vaunted venue” Mussell notes.

Mussell is actively seeking posters, flyers and other material related to the club and is especially emphasizing concert items related to Nirvana’s appearances. He is offering $5000 or more on condition for the flyer advertising the March 19, 1988 show in any condition. In addition to concert advertising pieces Mussell is seeking early set lists and other artifacts produced by Nirvana during their earliest period before signing with SubPop. Mussell also collects artifacts from the Bleach era and posters made before 1992. If you have Nirvana material in these fields contact him anytime at 515.707.7250 or srmussell@me.com. He is a cash buyer and is willing to travel to inspect the right hoard or individual flyer.

Concert poster collector and Nirvana specialist Scott Mussell is announcing his search for this rare early career Nirvana poster. “It’s from their first international tour after the album Bleach had come out in 1989.” Mussell says adding “I love the graphic of the smiling baby- I envision it as a big poster but even if it’s a smaller size it’s fantastic!” The poster advertises a November 25, 1989 show the band played while on tour with fellow grunge rockers and label mates Tad. The show took place at the legendary Fri-Son in Fribourg, Switzerland and is not without some controversy. The clubs official stance is that Kurt did not play this show. But former Nirvana drummer Chad Channing who was on stage that night insists that Kurt went on despite a rumored illness. Whatever the truth of the matter Mussell finds the poster to be among the most charming of the 89 tour. “I’d love to add an example to my collection and would pay $1000 for the right to preserve it.” Mussell said. If you have an example in any condition you can contact Mussell by email at srmussell@me.com, by text message anytime at 1.515.707.7250 or through his website www.MussellAmericana.com. Mussell is also seeking, with appropriate provenance, ANY pre-1993 Nirvana poster/ticket/flyer or other related ephemera. Cash offers paid within 24 hours.

Concert poster collector Scott Mussell of www.mussellamericana.com is seeking posters, fliers and other material related to the 1991 Nirvana concerts at the 40 Watt Club in Athens, GA and the Masquerade in Atlanta, GA. The legendary shows occurred at the nexis of the bands meteoric rise in early October. If you have material related to these shows contact him directly at 515.707.7250 anytime or by email at srmussell@me.com.

“The Athens, GA show got really reckless. Kurt pulled a projector screen out of the wall and attendees stormed the stage” Mussell says adding “The band smashed all of it’s gear and left it in a pile on the stage, clearly no fucks were given.” Appropriately so at a clubs that was instrumental in punk and new wave’s evolution. “I’ve never seen a poster for this show but it seems likely that something was made given the venues grass roots efforts and DIY mantra” Mussell said. If you have ephemera related to this show Mussell is seeking it and is willing to make a generous offer upon inspection. Contact him at 515.707.7250 anytime or by email at srmussell@me.com.

While the show in Atlanta was less noteworthy the ephemera is with the highlight being a poster featuring a large image of the band at center. “It’s on yellow paper and has all the hallmarks- venue at top, ticket info at bottom and the large image of the band it’s a real winner!” Mussell explains. He is seeking an example for his collection and is willing to make a generous offer upon inspection. “It’s on my want list for sure” Mussell adds noting “It’s important to preserve this kind of pop culture history.” If you have an example of this poster or other material related to the Atlanta or Athens shows contact him at 515.707.7250 anytime or by email at srmussell@me.com. Mussell also collects items related to the civil rights movment and American political campaigns visit hiswebsite at www.mussellamericana.com for more information.

Scott Mussell, Nirvana poster collector, is offering $2500 for an example of this poster from the October 11, 1990 Nirvana concert at the North Shore Surf Club in Olympia, WA. "The North Shore Surf Club show was one of the most important in band history as it featured a new drummer, Dave Grohl" Mussell says. The show was a last minute event as the band decided that their new drummer could use a live test before heading off for a tour in the United Kingdom. "I've seen only one example surface over the years and it's very high on my want list, I'm seeking it in any condition" Mussell states. Mussell is an active buyer of rock 'n roll concert posters with a special emphasis on Nirvana material. If you have this poster or other Nirvana material contact him at 515.707.7250 or by email at srmussell@me.com.

Concert poster collector and York, PA resident Scott Mussell is seeking this rare flier from the Sonic Temple outside of Pittsburg, PA. The show took place in Wilkinsburg, a suburb of Pittsburg at the Sonic Temple on July 9, 1989. "I'm always looking for posters from Pennsylvania, and as a Nirvana specialist this is very high on my want list- I'd pay top dollar for an example of this flier with solid provenance" Mussell said. The flier has a great set of graphics highlighted by a series of classic 1950's rock silhouettes near the bottom. "The text also adds a little something reading "Seattle's Sensational Nirvana" Mussell states adding "It's my goal to preserve a section of rock history and this poster is a cruicial piece of the puzzle I'm very eager to obtain an example for my collection." If you have this poster or other examples of Nirvana concert posters and fliers contact Mussell at 515.707.7250 or by email at srmussell@me.com.

Rock concert poster collector and Nirvana specialist Scott Mussell is seeking this rare poster or flier from a 1990 Columbus, OH show at Staches. The flier features a classic image of the band as the dominant graphic and additional text at top "Nirvana Wild Hair Swinging Neanderthals" and was produced on purple paper. "This is one has a few things that get me- I love the text and the large image of the band those two factors and the art really push this near the top of my want list" says Mussell. He's offering $250, on condition, for an example for his collection. If you have one or any other Nirvana concert fliers or posters contact him at 515.707.7250 or by email at srmussell@me.com.

Nirvana poster collector Soctt Mussell is offering a cash reward of $500 for an original first printing of this rare c.1990 Nirvana concert poster. Known as a 'tour blank' because of the clear space at the bottom that was intended for a promoter to write in the venue location by hand. "These were used in the early days before they left the SubPop label" Mussell says adding "I'm very motivated to obtain one wether it's blank or has the added venue information, I'm a buyer in any condition." The poster was used on the Bleach tour and examples are know from New York City, Ann Arbor, MI and Hollywood, CA. "They must have been distributed to areas where there was not only going to be a concert but a known base of fan support" Mussell notes adding "I think it's one of the top graphics produced for the band and represents a key stepping stone in the timeline of their development." Mussell is a collector of rock 'n roll concert posters with a special emphasis on items spanning Nirvanas career. "I think of this as historical preservation. It's important to preserve these early artifacts and I'm offering $500- on condition- to be the person who does that." Contact Mussell at 515.707.7250 or by email at srmussell@me.com if you have an example of this poster or other Nirvana material.