Fans are sharing their remembrances on social media of the day that Nirvana frontman Kurt Cobain died 30 years ago today (April 5, 1994) and the legacy that he left behind.

Where were you the day Kurt Cobain died? For this writer, I had just finished work for the day and was on the way home when the news was delivered by my local radio station with the DJ's somber tone leading into Nirvana's most well-known song, "Smells Like Teen Spirit." I remember pulling off to the side of the road, taking it all in, but the brunt of it not hitting until much later, getting home and playing Nirvana albums through that evening.

READ MORE: Why Kurt Cobain Hated 'Smells Like Teen Spirit'

Today, on the 30th anniversary of Kurt Cobain's passing, many fans have taken to social media to share similar experiences of learning about the loss of a true music icon who many had referred to as the voice of his generation.

Where Were You When Kurt Cobain Died?

We didn't learn about it until April 8, 1994, as it was later determined that days had passed before Cobain's body was discovered after taking his own life.

For some, the recognition of loss was immediate and widely felt.

"Remember me and a few of the lads turned the machines off in the factory and had a minutes silence when radio 1 announced Kurt Cobain’s death," noted one fan on the X platform.

Others learned of it as they were starting their evening activities. "30 years since Kurt Cobain left us. Was Gen X's Lennon moment. Can remember exactly where I was when I heard the news. Was in Manchester for the weekend for a Soundgarden gig," remarked one fan. Another noted, "Can't believe it's 30 years ago today when Kurt Cobain died, I heard about it on Teletext while I was getting ready for a night out, told a few friends about it and thought I was joking which I wasn't as there was no Internet but eventually found out though 1967-1994."

For many, it was MTV where we learned the rock news of the day. One fan vividly remembered, "When Kurt Loder came on the air, you knew something went down #kurtcobain."

How the 30th Anniversary of Kurt Cobain's Death Is Hitting Fans

The passage of time is tricky. It can bring back nostalgia and make it feel like something significant just happened yesterday while the simple math reflects that's it's way longer than it feels.

"Hard to believe he’s been gone longer than he was with us. RIP Kurt Cobain," remarked one fan. Another added, "Nothing ever makes you feel older than realizing how long it's been since some seminal event of your youth. Kurt Cobain died 30 years ago today."

Kurt Cobain Inspiring Future Musicians

Nirvana's music captured the ears of a lot of people, and for some, it inspired their own musical journey.

"Kurt Cobain of Nirvana left us on this day in 1994. The man who inspired me to pick up a guitar. Gone, but never forgotten," remarked one fan. "i cant believe it has been 30 years since kurt cobain passed. kurt means so much to me and so many other nirvana fans. his music got me into all the other music i love now and i am so grateful.i have so much to say about him but not enough words. thank you for the music kurt," added another.

Other Kurt Cobain Reflections

Others have simply used the day to reflect on the legacy that Kurt Cobain left behind and thoughts of what might have been had he lived beyond the age of 27.

"I’ve always thought it so sad the potential that was left behind, but in his short life he left such an impression," remarked one fan. "I'm struck by how his mixture of power & vulnerability created a voice of such clarity that decades later people discussing him are exposed in their willingness to exploit a legacy but also in their love of art and music given the path he laid," added another.

"30 years since Kurt Cobain passed. Amazing how Nirvana's music still feels fresh today. True talent," added yet another fan.