Film Screens: 1PM Sunday, July 31st

Tickets: $5. Tickets will be available at the doors the day of the screening. Members of the Bix Museum or Bix Society can get a free ticket at the doors the day of.

Purchase Tickets Here

Location: 225 W 2nd St, Davenport, IA 52801 at the Figge Art Museum John Deere Auditorium

Join the Bix Beiderbecke Museum, Bix Jazz Society, and Truth First Film Alliance in watching for the first time in the Quad Cities since it's original release in 1981 BIX: "ain't none of them play like him yet" now recently restored.

Cornetist / pianist / composer Leon "Bix" Beiderbecke (1903-1931) was jazz's man who got away - the James Dean, Jim Morrison and Kurt Cobain of his day. Born in Davenport, Iowa into an upper middle-class family, Beiderbecke became a legend even in his short lifetime, bringing an amazing new energy and unprecedented maturity to the music and influencing generations of musicians. After years of battling alcoholism, Bix died in Sunnyside, Queens on August 6, 1931. The cause of death was given as lobar pneumonia. He was 28.

Using archival photographs and rare footage (including the three sole momentary fragments capturing Bix on film) and interviews with friends and colleagues (including jazz greats Hoagy Carmichael, Doc Cheatham, Artie Shaw, et al.), Oscar® winner Brigitte Berman's acclaimed documentary paints a vivid portrait of a vanished era and brings to life the only trumpeter Louis Armstrong regarded as an equal (the quotation in the film's title was once spoken by Armstrong).

Restored in 4K in 2020 by filmmaker Brigitte Berman.

"The best film ever made about a jazz musician."

- Bruce Goldstein, Director of Repertory Programming, Film Forum

*Ticket Disclaimer*

Tickets for this event are sold via Eventbrite and carry applicable transaction fees. Tickets can be purchased the day of event online and at the door (subject to availability). Ticket fees also still apply for admission at the door.

*Refund Policy*

Purchased tickets are nonrefundable, except in cases of rescheduled or cancelled shows.

*Further Questions?*

Please email contactbixmuseum@gmail.com

*More information about event Sponsors*

Bix Beiderbecke Museum- https://www.bixmuseum.org/

Bix Jazz Society- https://bixsociety.org/