June 4, 2024

Most Christian fiction fans know Bodie and Brock Thoene for their historical fiction, especially the multiple Zion series about Israel during and around World War II. Beyond the Farthest Star, however, is not only set in a contemporary setting, it also is an adaptation of an upcoming movie. I had rather mixed feelings about the book; although the writing was good, the story wasn't all that engaging, and the "poetry" contained in the book was just plain dumb. It did keep me wanting to know what the "big secrets" were, but the finale wrapped things up in an almost sitcom-esque way. Thoene fans will probably just want to stick to Bodie and Brock's historical fiction, because this is just not their best work.

December 18, 2011

Anne, daughter of Pastor Adam and Maurene Wells watches her father's every breath whose life depends on a ventilator machine.

Adam was in his element as a preacher. His profession, his calling, led him and his family from California to Leonard, Texas to a dying church. The Well's family traveled from place to place frequently and Anne always had a hard time fitting in as the new kid in school.

The plan by the town council and Adam was to display a wooden nativity scene for all to enjoy, not being aware of the complications that arose from their actions.

A family torn, trying desparately to hold themselves together, a devastating secret, and yet beyond their world, in the darkened sky, lies the farthest star.

Highly entertaining, I enjoyed every minute spent getting to know these realistic and well developed characters. This book drew me in from the beginning and held my attention throughout. This novel offers everything a reader could want heartbreak, suspense and romance. Dialogue, scenery and plot worked well with no dull parts. The overall message is inspiring and I was challenged in my faith. I would recommend this well written novel to others. Thank you to Zondervan Publishing and Netgalley for the ARC for my review.

December 23, 2011

Pastor Adam Wells, former child evangelist and possible next Billie Graham, instead, pulled in to his new church with a sad secret, a damaged daughter and unhappy wife. Each church he accepted became smaller than the previous ones. He longed to do something important, and the burning of the nativity in the public square promised him his chance. But can he withstand Senator Cutter’s desire to annihilate his family with the old secret?

The reader wants the best for the characters—though Anne, Adam’s daughter, dares us to like her as she does everyone in the town of Leonard.

Tim, raised by his wise grandparents, tries to give her friendship. In so doing, he brings along his dangerous friend, Kyle, who feels rejected by Tim’s new bond with Anne.

This highly readable book delivers constant action. Hints of the family tragedy pepper the story, but readers must wait to know what brought them to this place. Read it only if you have time because you will find your dishes waiting while you push on to the end.

I didn't know until I finished the review that this will be a movie. I'd go if I didn't know the end. Christians can go without fear of wishing they hadn't.

I received this book through NetGalley.

January 2, 2012

BEYOND THE FARTHEST STAR

By Bodie and Brock Thoene

Based on the screenplay by Andrew Librizzi

The Wells family is in tatters living on the dreams of what might have been and keeping secrets that have the power to destroy them or to pull them back together. With one last chance to start over can they save their family? Adam Wells was a child preacher phenomenon and expected to be the next Billy Graham. But life turned out differently than expected and he is headed to the middle of nowhere to Leonard, Texas.

Maureen Wells lives in the world of romance novels and the broken dreams of having a second child. She is unable to motivate herself to do anything beyond picking up her novel. She lives on the laurels of giving the graduation speech in high school.

But it is the life of sixteen year old Anne Wells that is the most tragic. Anne has lost her way and no longer remembers who she use to be. She can no longer remember how to be happy and has attempted to end her own life. Anne has withdrawn from her parents and has taken on a persona as black as her mind. Anne knows that she used to know what lay beyond the farthest star but she can’t remember how she knows what she has lost.

Leonard, Texas has become a battle ground as Christmas approaches. Adam Wells has convinced the city to display a Nativity on public property and former Senator John Cutter sees this as his opportunity to regain what he lost 4 years ago. As the small community sleeps John Cutter commits an act of civil disobedience by burning down the Nativity. Meanwhile Anne’s friendship with Stephen Miller has put her in the sights of Kyle Tucker, who is jealous of Stephen’s friendship with Anne. Kyle is determined to destroy Anne and he begins telling people that Anne is talking about killing people and creating a Columbine type situation in Leonard.

Everything comes to a head when Calvin Clayman, a old school acquaintance of Adam and Maurene’s, comes to Leonard on a business trip. Calvin supplies John Cutter with information that will destroy Adam Wells!

But is it too late for Wells family to recapture what they lost? Or will they all rediscover what lays beyond the farthest star?

I found BEYOND THE FARTHEST STAR to be an book unlike what I was expecting. It was described as a Church vs. State fight over a Nativity display and though this is the case the deeper story the heart of it is a family brought together and torn apart by a selfish desire to fulfill expectations and dreams that they are not able to fulfill. When they rediscover what is truly important they are able to rebuild their lives and find true joy and fulfillment.

I received a digital Advanced Reviewer Copy of this book from the publisher for review purposes. I was not required to write a positive review. The opinions I have expressed are my own. I am disclosing this in accordance with the Federal Trade Commission’s 16 CFR, Part 255

February 6, 2013

I have read and loved all the Thoene WWII book series. This book is going in the garbage - I won't even donate it to the library. It's good if you love, lying, deceit, darkness, evil. AT the end it all evened out very nicely, but most of the book was simply depressing. I kept reading hoping it would get better. The ending wasn't worth the read.

March 12, 2024

This read like a movie, which it is. I strongly suspect this is one case where watching the movie will be better than reading the book.

Kudos for including a romance novel escapism addiction in a middle-aged pastor’s wife (not something you usually read about in a book whose readership is roughly that demographic).

The most interesting character was the bad PK.

The other thing to note is that there is some build-up of reader expectations that there will be a legal fight over an issue of religious freedom that will have nation-wide repercussions. This fight does not happen which means if you were expecting the novel to pivot around a legal/political drama you will be disappointed. This is strictly a broken family returns to faith kind of plot.

This entire review has been hidden because of spoilers.

March 19, 2019

Despite a redeeming ending, I would not recommend this one - super depressing!

February 1, 2024

Listened to this on audio, narrated by the author. It was so so good! 4 1/2 stars

December 22, 2011

Beyond The Farthest Star is the latest release from the prolific, multi-award winning team of Bodie and Brock Thoene. Known primarily for their carefully researched historical fiction, they have proven they are equally skilled in a contemporary setting. Based on the original screenplay by Andrew Librizzi, Beyond The Farthest Star is an insightful, mesmerizing story that centers on the Wells family. Adam, Maureen, and their teenaged daughter, Anne, are each struggling with internal demons that are destroying their family. Once a world-renowned preacher, this move to the small town of Leonard, Texas, is Adam's last hope of restoring his dream of living up to the approval he craves, but instead brings mounting tensions, revealed secrets, and an unexpected confrontation that leads to the ultimate sacrifice.

From the beginning, I was able to "get into the skin" of each character in the book and understand a bit of what he or she was feeling. The conflict between people and their inner turmoil jumps off the page in a way that has tremendous impact. The entire book is filled with universal themes that speak to all people and effectively weaves the idea that there is hope in spite of physical or emotional scars.The humanity of each person is revealed in a way which is a fresh and unique with genuine, even raw emotions. Ultimately this is a richly layered story with an honest portrayal of transformation and restoration. However, there is so much more, and it is hard to pinpoint just one aspect. BTFS is an amazing story that will hold the interest of those who like a variety of genres. Elements of suspense, romance, and political intrigue are presented in an escalating tension that intensifies to an explosive climax, and, ultimately, to a satisfying conclusion. This engrossing novel, with multi-dimensional characters is a story of how the choices we make affect the lives of those around us, and how buried lies may destroy us. Even days after reading the book, the story and characters have remained vivid. For me, a good book is one that I hate to see end and this one fits that criteria. I am also eagerly anticipating seeing this story and the characters come to life on the big screen when the film, Beyond The Farthest Star, is released in theaters in 2012.

I received a free copy of this of this product from the publisher. I was not required to give a favorable review.

January 18, 2012

The authors have written an entirely different type of book with Beyond the Farthest Star from their usual reads. Their historical novels - no matter the timeline - are always wonderful reads. This new book deals with characters who are flawed, deceptive, and evil. The meanness of some of the characters literally makes my skin crawl. I am not speaking of demons and dragons or supernatural. I am referring to the downright meanness of the human nature of fallen men.

The book opens with the family in Beyond the Farthest Star resettling in a small town in Texas. The father is a preacher who began his career preaching as a young boy. The daughter (an only child) is plagued by some troubling emotional or mental condition for which she in medicated. Mom has issues and secrets and she loses herself in flamboyant romance novels. They carry secrets, each of them.

Into the mixture, we have a corrupt senator and a battle of church and state. Evil gets an opportunity to rear it's head here, too.

Supporting cast members include teens exuding peer pressure and cliques. Rock music in garages, and drunken fathers manhandling their sons.

We also find spiritual truth prevailing, but it seems to be slow in coming. Revelation of secrets and the impact they have on individuals leaves the reader reeling.

Again, the Thoenes have written a very good book. The have taken the screen play of Andrew Librizzi and novelized it. The storyline is not one I would prefer, but it is good and, sadly, probably a very real reflection on today's world.

I received a complimentary copy of Beyond the Farthest Star from Zondervan via NetGalley for review and am under no obligation to provide a positive review.

December 31, 2011

As a preacher’s kid, I have experienced the angst of constant moving. I was miserable when I was sixteen, primarily because we moved again – the third time that year. I related, then to the story of Anne. I wrote a story when I was a sophomore in high school that prompted a phone call from the high school English teacher, and was told to write about ‘butterflies and rainbows’. While my life story wasn’t as convoluted as Anne’s in some respects, I knew her voice was authentic.

What took me 20 years to discover, Anne learns in the midst of a family tragedy – the God who loves us is not always reflected in the people we love the most. Sometimes he is, but when he isn’t it can feel as though he doesn’t care. What I’ve since learned is that while God may seem distant, in reality, he beckons. When circumstances feel overwhelming, he knows. When moments seem difficult, he sees. And in the end, he is only one prayer away.

I learned about grace through the whisper of God in my heart 20 years after I was certain I’d heard the last of him. When I think about the facts of my past, I see many scars and hurts, that while painful and difficult, in the end, led me to the place where I was able to see God. Beyond the farthest star and close enough to hold. That is a Jesus both Anne and I recognize. Read this novel, and see if you recognize him, too.

Disclosure of Material Connection: I received this book free from the publisher. I was not required to write a positive review. The opinions I have expressed are my own. I am disclosing this in accordance with the Federal Trade Commission’s 16 CFR, Part 255

October 22, 2013

I want to start my review with this disclaimer: Bodie and Brock Thoene, in my opinion, hold the banner for Christian Fiction. Theirs were some of the first works that I immersed myself in as a young teenager and since then, very few authors have been able to maintain that momentum in my mind. Even now, as an adult who reads professionally, that love of their work still remains deeply ingrained in my heart and I carried it into the reading of this book.

I was not disappointed. Though the story was relatively short (I finished it just a few hours after I started it) it was still filled with emotion, characters and storylines that transported me to another time and place for that time. I was immediately drawn in with just the first few pages and couldn’t wait to figure out what exactly was causing the issues in the family.

The Thoenes have always had incredible powers of description. Their scenes are painted so vividly that picturing yourself takes little to no effort. The dialogue is real, painful and sometimes so emotional that it’s difficult to handle and yet still the Thoenes craft a tale that keeps you wanting more.

I’m more excited than ever to see the film upon which this book was based. It will be releasing later this year and if the book is any indicator, this film looks to be a heart wrenching family drama with the potential to make you rethink what’s really important in your life.

** Review copy provided by Karen Campbell Media. Thank you Karen!

December 26, 2011

Amazingly well crafted story that keeps your interest as it weaves through multilayered characters, secrets, betrayal and a thrilling but emotional outcome. What is so interesting about Beyond The Farthest Star, is that it is so rich with deep truths. It is so relevant for today. The Thoenes did an excellent job keeping my interest. I believe this story. It is a fresh look at telling a contemporary story. I am surprised that the Thoenes, recognized for historical fiction, pulled this off to perfection. Since it is from a screenplay, I believe there will be a film? I hope so! It needs to be a film. I don't think I have ever been so moved and engaged with a novel.

January 27, 2015

I really enjoyed this story. Now I can't wait to see the movie! I will admit though, there were two times when something happened very quickly and very conveniently to challenge my suspension of disbelief. Still, a great book with an inspiring message.

November 5, 2023

Well, this is the first and only book by Bodie and Brock Thoene that I've read that's contemporary. It wasn't bad, but I think... I think I miss the historical element, honestly. (Seriously, their

historical fiction is the GOLD STANDARD, especially when it comes to the various Zion series.)

The writing style was good, as per usual. I really enjoy how they show / imply things without telling you, and yet there is also no missing the meaning. Plus, the characters act like real people do. Like, the little things that real people do. And things are described the way they often really are. It's well done.

As for the characters themselves, they weren't too bad. They also weren't too great. Adam was frustrating until about the last half or so of the book. I didn't like him at all, but I suppose that was the point. I felt frustrated and sad for Maurene. I despised Calvin. The character I had the most empathy for was Anne. Stephen I expected I'd like more than I did, but I didn't. Perhaps Midnight was the best of them all ;) I liked her. And the horse parts weren't too unrealistic.

I enjoyed how the the title played into the book and was part of the theme. That's always a bonus point. Things were put together well for the most part, and it was well written. Overall, I enjoyed it, but I have to feel that other Thoene books were better.

This book was pretty dark, darker than I expected, although not too much for me. I think I'd rate it 17+ for age.

July 15, 2024

In the story, we meet the family of Pastor Adam, who moves with his family from a place to a place where the Church needs him. Anne's daughter, who is the main character in the story, suffers from constant withdrawal. She suffers from suicidal tendencies because she can't fit in anywhere. She dresses in black, smokes and plays in a band. Her mother Maureen is also unhappy. The reason is that she's craving another baby, but Adam is avoiding her.

When they move to Stickville, Anne is skeptical of new friendships . That's where she meets the boy Stephen who falls in love with her. His friend Kyle is a rapist.

There's also a new man who's been harassing Maureen.

The story is dramatic, the tension gradually escalates. It's come to our attention that this particular unknown man is the father of Anne, who was raped and so Adam married her. That's why Adam's going to trial, to discredit him and send him away. Anne wants to leave with her newfound father, but he will deceive her.

There's a tragedy brewing. It's Stephen Kyle's friend, the rapist, who kills his father for torturing him.

He wants to go save Anne from disaster, because everyone's worried about her. Kyle comes in and accidentally shoots Adam.

The story ends happyend, the father recovers.

I would recommend the book for about 60%, it's certainly not a bestseller, but it has an interesting ring to it, perhaps a little too dramatic for me.

March 23, 2023

I agree on some points with those who rated this book at a one or two star. If you’re expecting anything similar to the Zion Covenant Series (which I loved and have recommended to many friends) you will probably be disappointed. My opinion is that, in trying to slowly unveil the events that shaped the main characters while not revealing them early on, it made it difficult to flush out the gradual effects that brought them to where/who they were in the current day. You got some of it but I missed a lot deeper character development. That being said, it gave some insight into the hopelessness and isolation that could drive a teen into serious depression. It was just unclear, they moved a lot because of Anne and Anne was depressed because they moved a lot. What came first, the chicken or the egg? And if that was ever really explained, I missed it. I guess it boiled down to lives based on lies, lots of them. ?? My final thought is that I listened to this as an audiobook. I had no problem with Bodie Thoene as the narrator but I did find the sound effects and most of the musical accompaniment unnecessary at best and even distracting at times. I don’t regret spending the time to read this book but won’t highly recommend it. The author has many, many more worthwhile books in my opinion.

June 20, 2021

Had dit mee als dwarsligger tijdens de jaarlijkse etappe van de tocht naar Santiago, want een dwarsligger past zo mooi in je rugzak. HAd deze gekozen omdat het me tijdens de tocht wel leuk leek om als een soort hommage aan een protestantse jeugd dit verhaal over een ontspoorde domineesdochter te lezen, die dan door deze en gene weer op het rechte pad geholpen werd. Dat is idd de plot, en tegelijk vond ik het stilistisch erg zwak, en had ik het idee dat overal waar er een sappig stuk uit het verhaal te vertellen was, er met grote sprongen door de scenes heen werd gegaan, alsof een boosaadige editor de stukken die dan nog wel vrij leuk waren er bewust uitgesneden had, of ze drastisch besnoeid: zo was het gelukkige slot nogal abrupt, en was er nauwelijks tijd op het toneel voor alle betrokkenen om te laten zien dat alles goed kwam. Dwarsliggers zijn goed, en tegelijk kan deze gleijk weer weg.

June 20, 2017

I gave this four stars as I am very stingy with 5 star rating. I "read" the audio version. Audio version was a first class production read beautifully by Brodie. Had this been a "real" in your hand book it would have been an all nighter for sure. What a great read! Characters were believable and well defined. Story was compelling. Liked the Christian aspect also (Zondervan is Publisher.) However, it was not that preachy in your face as some "Christian" literature can be. Yes this novel is very different than most of their work (Wonderfully written mostly historical fiction) but it is well worth reading. Especially at Christmas time.

July 18, 2023

Not one of my favorite Thoene novels. It was a short read, or in my case, a short listen, only around 7 hours. The story was not bad but seemed to drag at times. Still, it was good enough to keep on until the end. In this audio version, I found the music distracting. I suppose it was intended to create a sense of suspense, but I just found it irritating. The story revolved around Adam, a once famous boy preacher and new pastor of the only church in the small town of Leonard, TX. Maurine, his wife. Annie, his gothic, rebellious teen. It was the story of how God mended this broken family.

August 10, 2017

Wonderful!

I am a big fan of Bodie and Brock Thoene's books, and this one lived up to their other great books. Parts of it were dark, but (without spoiling it too much), there is redemption at the end of the book. The Thoenes did a great job of really delving in to the personalities, and the flaws, of the main characters. The climax was exciting and dramatic. The ending was great (again, I won't spoil it). If you like the Thoenes' other books, then you will definitely enjoy this book!

July 23, 2018

I loved this book. It’s a wonderful story about religion and family and many secrets that become unveiled. It is a quick read and one that is hard to put down once you have started. This is the book that got me back into reading. I love seeing evolution of the relationship between father and daughter and how relatable it is. I love how this book has romance and suspense.

Wells is a pastor that moves his family to Texas where secrets start to unravel. It keeps you wanting more and more.

May 4, 2023

I have read many books by these authors and I have to say Beyond the Farthest Star was definitely the darkest novel they have written. However, I still enjoyed it and shed tears at the end. Although Anne was hard to like, especially at the start, I feel sorry for her as she bucked her father's expectations.

Full of tension, suspense, intrigue and emotion, I found it hard to stop reading this novel and the climax was explosive. A good read.

June 17, 2024

Not as good as most of their other books. I was a little confused of why Adam lost his other churches and why Anne felt the need to hurt herself. I was glad the family finally worked out their problems and became the family they wanted. Stephen and his grandparents were the spiritual lead in this book and so glad they were strong believers. All in all, I am glad they found what is “Beyond the Farthest Star”. One of my favorites hymns is O Holy Night.

December 22, 2017

meh. Lots of problems in this preacher's Daughter's life. The preacher gets shot and suddenly everything is alright in the family again. The 'fixing' part of the relationships is done between the last chapter and the epilogue. A cop-out.

Bodie's historical fiction novels are much better. They are also longer. Maybe there's a connection.

July 8, 2019

Great read

This is another wonderful adventure by Bodie Thoene. Her writing is very engaging and you feel as if you are part of the story as it opens up and draws you in. Once again, the story incorporates Biblical truths throughout the tale.

If you are looking for a story that carries you along in the tale, you will be sure to enjoy this book.

December 19, 2019

My favorite author as a kid—I inhaled their books over & over!!! I saw this as an audio version so I decided to check it out, and I did enjoy it, but man: so cheesy & simplistic. They’re good writers for sure, but so SO much more could have been fleshed out & developed in the story and characters!!!

May 20, 2021

It’s a little slow to start however it’s written well and has a good plot. Definitely needs a TW to those who have a history with SH however it’s written in a tasteful land relatable way for those who experience it. It has a slight romance to it but it’s not too mushy. I loved the ending and it definitely made me tear up.