The Wells family is teetering on the brink of disaster in BEYOND THE FARTHEST STAR. Pastor Adam (Todd Terry), his wife Maurene (Renee O'Connor), and their teen daughter Anne (Cherami Leigh) have arrived in Leonard, a small Texas town, after several unsuccessful church assignments. Adam's tenure in the new church is immediately threatened when John Cutter (Andrew Prine), the husband of one of his congregants, rages about his wife's newly kindled faith and sets fire to the creche displayed on the property. Forcing a criminal action, Adam becomes the target of Cutter's (and indirectly, the town's) wrath. Cutter, a formidable ex-Senator, brings the national media and a civil rights lawyer to Leonard. This act serves only to worsen the deteriorating relationships in the Wells family. Anne inhabits a dark world; her attitude, her writings, and her self-destructive behavior indicate she's desperately unhappy. Adam and Maurene simply can't give up hope that this last-hope move may make things better. But it doesn't. Things go from bad to worse, especially between Anne and Adam. The arrival of one of Adam's and Maurene's old schoolmates, Anne's formation of a teen band, the jealousy of a brutalized young man, and Adam's escalating notoriety all serve to complicate the lives of these damaged souls.

Earnest, competent, and with fine performances, this religious drama primarily about family dissension and emotional disorders gets bogged down simply by too many subsidiary themes and plotlines. Subplots included or at least touched upon are: civil liberties and the boundaries of the church, a teen romance, murder, a young girl's mental issues ("cutting," attempted suicide), a brutalizing alcoholic parent, and the possible rekindling of an old affair. Add to that flashbacks of a leading character's difficult childhood, along with a shady connection between two seemingly unrelated characters, and Beyond the Farthest Star simply can't provide the depth and attention that's necessary. A prime example of that is a reference to the teen's medical diagnosis and subsequent treatment; it just isn't enough. Still, for folks who like movies with strong messages about facing up to one's mistakes, the value of honest communication, and faith-assisted redemption, this show will find an audience.