Who is Gina Torres?

Gina Torres is an American television and film actress. She has portrayed Jessica Pearson in the USA Network’s legal drama series Suits from 2011 until 2018, as well as its spin-off series Pearson (2019).

Gina Torres has also appeared in The Matrix Reloaded and The Matrix Revolutions (both released in 2003), as well as the drama film Jam (2006).

Birthday

April 25, 1969

Birth Place

New York, United States of America

Zodiac Sign

Taurus

Life before fame

Gina Torres was born at the Flower Fifth Avenue Hospital located in Manhattan and is the youngest of three children in her family. Her family lived in Washington briefly before moving to The Bronx. Gina’s parents are Richard and Rebecca, who are natives of Cuba. Her father worked as a typesetter for the New York Daily News and La Prensa. Gina Torres also speaks fluent Spanish.

Gina began singing as a mezzo-soprano at an early age and even attended the Fiorello H. LaGuardia High School of Music & Fine Arts and Performing Arts in New York City. She’s also trained in jazz and opera and performed in a gospel choir. Gina Torres also applied and was subsequently accepted to several colleges but was sadly unable to attend due to financial reasons. Instead, she chose to pursue her dream of being an actress.

Her acting career

Her first accolade came in 2001 when Gina Torres won the ALMA Award for Outstanding Lead Actress for her portrayal in the popular movie Cleopatra 2525.

Gina Torres was also nominated for the International Press Academy’s Golden Satellite Award for Best Performance by an Actress in a Supporting Role in a Series, in 2004, for her role as Jasmine in Angel.

Gina Torres is also known for her role inf Fox’s TV series Firefly, which lasted for a single season only, but attracted a cult following later on. She also reprised her role in the subsequent direct-to-DVD sequel movie Serenity.

She is remembered for her starring role as Zoe Washburne in the popular science fiction series Firefly (2002-2003), as well as appearing in its sequel feature film Serenity (2005).

Gina was also the voice of Wonder Woman in the popular DC Universe Online MMORPG until mid-2013, when she was recast. She also played Airachnid in the cartoon Transformers Prime.

Gina also appeared in her co-stars Nathan Fillion’s television show Castle in 2013.

She appeared in the legal drama TV series, Suits. Other cast members seen in Suits include Gabriel Macht, Sarah Rafferty, Patrick J. Adams, Rick Hoffman, Meghan Markle, Amanda Schull, Wendell Pierce, Dulé Hill, Katherine Heigl, David Costabile and DB Woodside.

Personal life

Gina got engaged to the popular Matrix series actor Laurence Fishburne in February of 2001, and they were married on September 22, 2002, at the New York City’s The Cloisters museum. They have a daughter named Delilah together. Gina is also the stepmother to Laurence Fishburne’s two children from his previous marriage to actress Hajna O. Moss. Fishburne and Torres also played an on-screen married couple on the TV show, Hannibal.

Gina announced in September 2017 that she had separated from Fishburne. Fishburne had filed for divorce on November 2, 2018. The divorce was finalized in 2018.

If you liked this post, please share it with your friends on Social Media.