BLOCKBUSTER comedy Superbad grossed tens of millions of dollars when it premiered in theaters.

Produced by The King of Staten Island director Judd Apatow, the movie boasts a cast of big names who have gone on to experience even more popularity since Superbad's release.

Who is in the cast of Superbad?

Written by Seth Rogen and Evan Goldberg, the two based the Superbad characters on the people they knew while growing up in Vancouver, Canada.

Two of the main characters are even named after the screenwriting duo.

Regarding the concept of Superbad, Seth told ET: "We wrote it in high school.

"Something would happen to us on Monday and we would write about it on Tuesday.

Read More on Superbad

"Almost every character is based on a real person. We really had a hard time casting it."

The character Seth, who Rogen and Goldberg wrote in the former's likeness, is played by Jonah Hill.

Superbad was Jonah's third collaboration between Rogen and Apatow.

The first was the Steve Carrell comedy The 40-Year-Old Virgin, the second was the Katherine Heigl vehicle Knocked Up.

most read in movies

After achieving his mainstream breakthrough with Superbad, Jonah went on to star in Don't Look Up, Moneyball, 21 Jump Street, and The Wolf of Wall Street.

Evan, his on-screen partner in crime, was played by Michael Cera.

He was based on Rogen's screenwriting partner Evan Goldberg.

Similar to Jonah, Michael also experienced mainstream success thanks to Superbad.

In the same year, he also acted alongside Elliot Page, Jennifer Garner, Jason Bateman, and Allison Janney in the coming-of-age flick Juno.

Before he took on roles in Promising Young Woman and Pitch Perfect, Christopher Mintz-Plasse starred as one of Superbad's most memorable characters.

During the motion picture, his character Fogell changed his name to McLovin.

In the fan-favorite scene, he changed his name in order to craft a fake ID to purchase alcohol for a party he was attending with his friends Seth and Evan.

The cast is rounded out by then-unknown actress-turned-Oscar winner Emma Stone, SNL alum Bill Hader, Martha MacIsaac, and Seth Rogen.

When was Superbad released?

On August 17, 2007, Superbad was released in theaters everywhere.

On August 17, 2022, the cast and crew behind the film celebrated the coming-of-age comedy's 15th anniversary.

To commemorate the occasion, Rogen took to social media to acknowledge the milestone.

On Twitter, he said: "Superbad was released 15 years ago today, and to celebrate, we all TOLD OUR STORY!!!"

To celebrate the making of Superbad, the Pam & Tommy producer was joined by his fellow castmates for an interview with Vanity Fair.

Judd Apatow said of the big-screen project: "At that time, there weren’t movies that starred high school kids that were that edgy.

"So when we tried to get people to take it seriously, you could feel that they were concerned about those issues."

Director Greg Mottola chimed in and remembered: "I think it was probably towards the end of Undeclared that Judd told us that he was going to do a reading of Seth and Evan’s script.

"Seth read Seth and Jason Segal read Evan. I heard it, and I thought 'Wow. This is one of the funniest things I’ve ever heard.'

Read More on The US Sun

Read More on The US Sun

"It has an authenticity to it that you don’t often get with big teen comedies."

The fan-favorite motion picture is available for streaming on Hulu, Apple TV, and Amazon Prime Video.

ncG1vNJzZmivp6x7tbTEZqqupl6YvK57xKernqqklravucSnq2huYGeDcoKWaKquqJWnr6KwjJyYrKxdlrC1u9GsZKabnKTDqrqO

Share!