The singer reveals new name

Cheryl Fernandez-Versini has dropped her surname and revealed what she would now like to be called.

The singer, formerly known as Cheryl Cole and Cheryl Tweedy has wiped all trace of her marriage with French businessman, Jean Bernard, and will now officially be known as just 'Cheryl'.

After the news that she will be honoured at the Global Gift Gala in Paris next month, the former Girls Aloud star booked her appearance under the name Cheryl.

Cheryl is set to receive the Global Gift Philanthropist Award to honour her charity work with her charity, Cheryl's Trust.

Cheryl | © PA Images

After things turned sour with her ex, Jean Bernard at the weekend, a source close to the star has said 'Things turned pretty nasty over the weekend with both Cheryl and JB making comments on social media, so from hereon in she will be known as Cheryl’.

The 32-year-old seemed to angrily respond to rumours she had been unfaithful to Jean Bernard with her current boyfriend, Liam Payne. She wrote on Twitter 'If anybody believes the s*** they’re reading today you really don’t know me at all’.

Just a few hours later, Jean Bernard then shared a photo of an archway of roses with what seemed to be a dig at his ex-wife.

It said 'Since months, papers, sources, lawyers, PR, management team have been trying to intimidating me.. I have heard so many lies about me, my family (that can't answer anymore) and my situation.sic'

He then went on to say 'I never seen anyone standing up and defend me by telling the truth. I guess because it wasn't in their interest. And now suddenly when the truth come out from NOWHERE because the truth always come out, certain people that love to say that they don’t comment on their private life can’t help themselves but to justify themselves which for me seems even more strange.sic’

© jeanbernard.fernandezversini Instagram

This won't be the first time the former X Factor judge has dropped her surname. Following her divorce from footballer Ashley Cole in 2010, Cheryl released her 'Messy Little Raindrops' album in 2012 and her 'Only Human' album in 2014 using just Cheryl.

The singer also changed her social media handles to @CherylOfficial rather than the previous Cole.

Despite this, after her whirlwind romance with Jean Bernard, Cheryl decided to take on his name after they tied the knot in 2014.

Now it seems Cheryl is happy with her new boyfriend Liam Payne.

Cheryl, Liam Payne | © fakeliampayne Instagram

Could it be Cheryl Payne next?