Putting a Human Face on IBM’s Tivoli division IT systems.

From their press releases:

Tivoli Software is the service management brand of the IBM Software Group. IBM purchased Austin-based Tivoli Systems, Inc. on March 4, 1996[2] and allowed existing executive management to operate Tivoli as a wholly owned subsidiary in the IBM Software Group. (In addition to Tivoli, this IBM division includes WebSphere, Information Management, Lotus Software and Rational Software.)

In August 2006, IBM acquired MRO Software, intending to add them to the Tivoli division. In March 2008, IBM added Encentuate to Tivoli[3].

Tivoli’s early marketing taglines included “Making Client/Server Work” and “The Power To Manage. Anything. Anywhere.” The current slogan is “Intelligent management software for the on demand world.”[4]

Tivoli product-lines cover security, storage, monitoring and configuration. Some of Tivoli’s best-known products are Tivoli Configuration and Change Management Database, Netcool/OMNIbus, Tivoli Enterprise Console (TEC), Tivoli Monitoring (ITM, from v6.1 based on IBM OMEGAMON), IBM Tivoli Network Manager (ITNM), Tivoli NetView, Tivoli Storage Manager (formerly IBM’s Adstar Distributed Storage Manager), IBM Tivoli Security Information and Event Manager (TSIEM), Tivoli Identity Manager (formerly Access360), Tivoli Federated Identity Manager, Tivoli Workload Scheduler (TWS) (formerly Unison Maestro), Tivoli Provisioning Manager (TPM), and Tivoli Access Manager. Recent products include Tivoli Service Automation Manager and Tivoli Endpoint Manager (formerly BigFix).

Tivoli is divided into several “pillars” including:

Service Management (which encompasses Change Management)

Storage

Security

Performance Automation

Business Automation

Network Management

Each pillar includes software specifically[citation needed] designed to improve IT processes.

The Storage portfolio contains Tivoli Storage Manager, which is one of the most widely used applications for backup, disaster recovery and information lifecycle management[citation needed]. It is notable for its use of a relational database that allows for progressive back up forever, reclamation and collocation functionalities.

Tivoli products are handled by IBM offices around the world. Major offices for Tivoli sales, development and support are located in Austin, TX; Raleigh, NC; San Jose, CA; Tucson, AZ; Atlanta, GA; Markham, ON; Greenville, SC; Staines, Great Britain; Greenock, Scotland; Kraków, Poland; Rome, Italy; Pune, India; Singapore and Emeryville, CA.

Tivoli Systems, Inc. was founded on August 26, 1989 by Bob Fabbio, Todd Smith, Steven Marcie and Peter Valdes. It completed a public offering on March 10, 1995, opening at $14.00 per share and closing at $30.75 per share, one of the year’s largest first-day run-ups.

The name Tivoli was a temporary placeholder chosen by Todd Smith based on the system name of an AIX computer at IBM, Austin (which perhaps in turn was named after the historic amusement park Tivoli Gardens in Copenhagen, Denmark, or possibly the small coastal Texas town of Tivoli) chosen from a list read off to him. While intended to be temporary, the name was never changed.