Tivoli Systems Inc says it has its mind firmly set on growth this year, and has opened a new laboratory and briefing center from which to spearhead its Java offerings and move itself away from systems management towards full enterprise systems management. When IBM Corp bought Tivoli for $743m in 1996 (CI No 2,842), it was a 300 person organization. Now that figure stands at between 2,600 and 2,700 and in 1997 Tivoli hit the $1bn revenue mark. The company is placing great emphasis on its new laboratory & briefing center which has been officially opened this week in Rome. Tivoli is using the center, which use to be solely devoted to IBM, to develop new products that will be applied to customers throughout the world to get the most out of their systems management projects. Tivoli’s Europe, Middle East and Africa general manager, Maurizio Carli, says with the new re-vamped lab will this year the company will concentrate on beefing up its Java offerings and enabling IBM System 390 users to access Tivoli products, including its flagship TME systems management product. Tivoli will continue to work on the integration of its products with those of IBM, and will look increasingly to the small and medium businesses as a source of revenue. The company is moving away from the simple concept of systems management, and towards enterprise systems management, Carlis said. The Austin, Texas company is striving to better integrate management functionality with TME, and will work to establish a standard on which all systems management offerings will be based. Systems management will become more business oriented and will combine Java applications and Internet technologies to establish a simpler, more effective and more cost conscious solution, the company says. Tom Bishop, vice president of Tivoli’s infrastructure division says the company is striving to simplify enterprise systems management, with a trimmed down framework and end-to-end application management. Tivoli will turn the traditional application approach of building from the ground up, on its head, taking instead a top down approach which Bishop says will give it a layered infrastructure for better end to end control. Although Tivoli is very much part of IBM, the company, which competes head on with Computer Associates International Inc, is very anxious to maintain a separate identity. Last year, its acquisitions of Software Artistry and Unison enabled it to help retain its identity and aided its growth.