Tivoli Systems Inc. parent IBM last week announced it’s buying Accessible Software Inc., an object-oriented, mainframe management software company that’s based in Whippany, N.J.

It’s a move sure to be welcomed by users running Tivoli Management Environment (TME) on OS/390 platforms.

When Tivoli last year brought TME to the OS/390 platform, it fell short in end-to-end application monitoring. To fill the gap, Tivoli did what users were doing — it added Accessible Software’s Access 1 via a licensing agreement.

But last week Tivoli bought the company in order to get “tight control of development” of Access, said Bob Yellin, senior vice president and general manager of the Tivoli’s Enterprise Business Unit.

All Access products — including mainframe, open systems and storage-area network (SAN) management software — will be integrated into Tivoli products and rebranded with the Tivoli name, Yellin said. They also will continue to be sold and developed as stand-alone products, he said.

Dave Ward, vice president of enterprise systems at First Union Corp. in Charlotte, N.C., was one of the Access users contacted by Tivoli and Accessible before the acquisition announcement.

First Union is implementing Tivoli’s Service Desk asset management component and its inventory management, as well as Access. All three use the same data as that residing in the asset system, Ward said.

After hearing talk of tighter integration of Access into TME, Ward said he had several unanswered questions. “Will there be a common repository, and are they going to collapse it into what kind of schema or tree structure?” he asked. “I don’t want to end up with a lot of different inventory systems — I already have that.”

Ward may not be alone among Access and Tivoli users in his concern about the future of the consoles used.

“Right now, I’ve got an Access 1 console, a tech console and [Tivoli TME’s] GEM console,” Ward said. “My question is: When the music stops, which one is going to be your enterprise access console?” Tivoli representatives “told me it’s going to be GEM,” Ward said. “But I don’t know that I believe that. I think they might take the Access 1 console and relabel it.”

No specifics of the development schedule were available, but Tivoli will dedicate “significant resources” to further development of the Access product line, Yellin said.

And all Accessible developers are joining Tivoli’s development efforts in its Raleigh, N.C., lab, said Jim Tagliareni, Accessible president.

The Access line includes SAN management software that has been optimized to work with SANs from IBM, Hitachi Data Systems and EMC Corp., which two years ago paid $5 million for a 10% interest in Accessible. EMC’s interest will be bought out in the deal, an IBM spokeswoman said.

IBM declined to disclose financial details of the acquisition.