IBM said last week it will sell its Tivoli Service Desk software suite to Peregrine Systems Inc. for $105 million – $45 million in cash, and the rest in stock.

IBM obtained the software suite that formed the basis of Tivoli Service Desk in 1998 when it acquired Software Artistry Inc. for a little more than $200 million.

Patrick Dryden, an analyst at Nashua, N.H.-based Illuminata Inc., suggested that the decision to sell off the Tivoli Service Desk offering was an indication that IBM might not have gotten what it hoped for with the acquisition.

The sale “is not so much a Peregrine falcon preying on a Tivoli turkey as it is [an acknowledgment] by IBM that the best tool is not Tivoli’s,” Dryden said.

Astrid Burnette, a director of product strategy at Tivoli Systems Inc., an IBM subsidiary in Austin, Texas, said she disagreed. “This is a fast-paced industry, and we continue to look at our investment strategy,” she said. “While the Tivoli offering is an excellent product, that was not an area we were going to invest in.”

In a Better Position

San Diego-based Peregrine, on the other hand, is “totally focused” on the service-desk space and is in a better position to deliver what companies need, Burnette said.

Peregrine will integrate the Tivoli Service Desk products into the new versions of its ServiceCenter and AssetCenter products, both of which are due by the middle of next year, said Tivoli President David Murphy. The integrated product will provide Tivoli users with “a clear migration path,” he said.

The transfer of the software to Peregrine, a strong player in the asset management market, should be good for Tivoli users, Dryden said. Tivoli Service Desk “never integrated that well with [the] Tivoli Enterprise” framework, he said.

Peregrine will also take over support for Tivoli’s 1,000 Service Desk users.

But some users expressed doubts. “I’m not terribly happy about it,” said Dwight Gibbs, chief technology officer at The Motley Fool Inc. in Alexandria, Va. “Now my one-vendor solution is going to be a two-vendor solution.”

Following an extensive product comparison, Motley Fool earlier this year implemented Tivoli’s Enterprise framework and several other modules, including Tivoli Service Desk and Help Desk.

A perception that the Tivoli and Motley Fool cultures were in sync was one factor behind the investment firm’s choice of Tivoli, Gibbs said. “But I’m not wild about the way I found out about the sale,” he said, referring to the Dec. 11 press announcement. “Not an e-mail, not a call – nothing.”