By ADAM GIFFORD

IBM subsidiary Tivoli Systems has announced new products and partnerships aimed at making itself the technology provider of choice for electronic commerce service providers.

Rob Coulter, vice-president of its new service provider business unit, said Tivoli's NetGeneration initiative expected phenomenal growth in electronic service provision in the next few years.

Tivoli makes software for managing technology.

It was bought by IBM in 1996 as a $US50 million-a-year business providing systems management solutions. IBM transferred staff and resources working in that field over to Tivoli, so it is now a multibillion-dollar business with 5000 staff.

Rob Rich, executive vice-president of Yankee Group, a consultancy specialising in telecommunications, said dynamic new service providers were emerging because of global deregulation and privatisation.

Just around the corner is pervasive computing, the idea of huge numbers of intelligent appliances or even smarter phones being connected to the internet.

As the price for voice-call charges drops towards zero, incumbent service providers like the established telephone companies are responding with bundled services, deploying new networks and fibre-optic backbones, and offering selective high-speed access to the internet.

There's a stronger focus on customer care, especially with convergent billing systems and self care over the web.

"The key here is this is evolution, not revolution for service providers, so we're seeing the incumbents losing ground to new competitors," Mr Rich said.

He said the services market was set to increase by $US400 billion over the next three years "and most of this is new revenue" from new types of services.

Mr Coulter said Tivoli's experience at managing large networks, along with the NetGeneration initiative, will allow it to immediately assist service providers in the new market.

NetGeneration includes solutions, services and partnerships aimed at helping service providers build, deliver and manage revenue-generating services at lower cost than existing alternatives.

Among the NetGeneration solutions family is Tivoli for Managed Network Services, which provides IP network management, and Managed Computing Services, designed so service providers can manage hundreds of thousands of customer endpoints such as desktops, servers or routers.

Tivoli for Managed Application Services is a cross-platform management environment allowing management of service-level agreements, event monitoring, global view of topology and databases, software distribution, service desk, storage management, e-business management and mass customisation of services.

Tivoli for Hosted Business Services allows companies to manage access to data, applications, systems and networks through the internet.