NEW YORK-Tivoli Systems Inc., an Austin, Texas-based subsidiary of IBM Corp., has created a Service Provider Business Unit to execute its new Net Generation Initiative for managing complex telecommunications systems.

As part of these developments, announced at a press conference in early November, Tivoli said it has signed agreements with Cisco Systems Inc. and Telcordia Technologies, formerly known as Bellcore, to develop solutions for service providers to build, deliver and manage new revenue-generating services.

“The Cisco and Telcordia relationships are important alignments for supporting the technology-management needs of [carriers] as they seek to bring new services to market in ever-shorter time frames,” said Robert J. Rich, senior vice president of The Yankee Group, Boston.

“Individually, these firms provide leadership capabilities in their respective segments: Cisco for Internet Protocol networking technology; Telcordia for operational support systems and professional services; Tivoli for management of distributed networks and applications.”

Tivoli expects to begin making announcements later this year and early next year about the availability of new products generated by the Net Generation Initiative, Robert R. Davis III said. Davis is general manager of Tivoli’s new Service Provider Business Unit and former vice president of enterprise sales at Lucent Technologies Inc.

Also in support of its Net Generation Initiative, Tivoli said it has entered into strategic partnerships with several other companies: Applied Digital Access, known for “multivendor, multidomain solutions for end-to-end network service activation and monitoring”; CrossKeys Systems Corp., “a software developer of solutions … to address service providers’ demands for large-scale, multitechnology, multivendor network, service and performance management”; Newbridge Networks Corp., whose core capability is the management of “service delivery across multiple network domains”; Open Networks Engineering, which “addresses the voice and [Internet Protocol] issues confronting today’s service providers”; and TTI Telecom Ltd., “a leading supplier of integrated management software products and services for the telecommunications industry.”