As a 12-year Air Force veteran, I question Mark Miloscia’s use of his military service in his campaign for the 30th Legislative District as a Republican Senate candidate.

In his biography, Mr. Miloscia claims to have “served with distinction” as a B-52 pilot. Yet on his campaign literature, he is standing next to a “sexy Tom Cruise” jet. Why not the now-obsolete B-52? There is a huge difference between a “52” and a jet. Deceptive!

Something else is also missing in his biography. This omission is very troubling to me. As a Democrat, Miloscia not only confided to many local party members that he had left the Air Force declaring himself to be a conscientious objector but also was listed as a conscientious objector at several Democratic functions. Deceitful?

As a member of Veterans for Peace, I thought it was commendable for Miloscia to realize he was a conscientious objector, but then other veterans pointed out to me that it was somewhat convenient that Mr. Miloscia experienced this sudden awakening after letting the taxpayers pay for his education at the Air Force academy, receiving two bachelor’s degrees in Engineering and Psychology, as well as a Masters in Business Administration. Opportunistic?

Other veterans also pointed out Miloscia conveniently left the Air Force in December, 1990 just when many pilots, including B-52 crews and ground staff, were all deploying as fast as possible to the Persian Gulf for the first Iraq War in January, 1991. “Served with distinction?”

On the other hand, it makes a lot of sense because many things have been convenient for Mark to omit or be deceptive about. Not only did Mr. Miloscia find it convenient to omit he was a conscientious objector, he also found it convenient to omit he was only an emergency substitute and not a certified teacher, and found it convenient to omit he was a lobbyist in 2013. He also did not take a stand on the gun issue at the Federal Way Chamber of Commerce forum choosing to be a fence straddler.

But maybe the most important issue of all is: how is Mark Miloscia seriously going to save the state of Washington billions of dollars, as it states on his primary campaign literature? As George Bush, Sr. would say, “Sounds like voodoo economics to me.”