101 Dalmatians II: Patch’s London Adventure is a 2003 American direct-to-video animated adventure musical comedy-drama film, written and directed by Jim Kammerud and Brian Smith, released by Walt Disney Home Entertainment on February 25, 2003, and based on Dodie Smith’s novel, The Hundred and One Dalmatians. It is the sequel to the 1961 Disney animated film 101 Dalmatians. It features the voices of Martin Short, Jason Alexander, Barry Bostwick, Susanne Blakeslee, Kath Soucie, Jeff Bennett, Jim Cummings, and Bobby Lockwood. It garnered DVDX awards for best animated feature, best director, best editing, and best musical score. Disney re-released it on September 16, 2008.

Roger, Anita and their canine clan are packing for the big move to Dalmatian Plantation, a home in the country with plenty of room for the 101 pups and far from the clutches of Cruella DeVil. The feistiest pup, Patch, feels lost in a sea of spots and longs to be a one-of-a-kind wonderdog like his TV hero, Thunderbolt. While watching the Thunderbolt Adventure Hour, Patch hears about a chance to appear on the show while it’s filming in London. However, the family move will interfere with Patch’s opportunity – until he’s accidentally left behind in the commotion. Patch heads for the audition to meet his hero.

Meanwhile, Thunderbolt’s “trusty” sidekick, Lightning, reveals that the producers of the show want to replace Thunderbolt with a younger dog. In order to save his job, Thunderbolt decides he will go into the real world and perform an act of true heroism to prove himself. A veritable reference book to Thunderbolt’s many adventures, Patch provides the perfect guide for the TV star in his attempts at real-life heroics. As for Cruella DeVil – she’s back and more obsessed with Dalmatians than ever. At first, she’s able to calm her frenzy through an affiliation with a spot-fixated artist.

What makes this follow up to the original movie work is that it manages to stay true to the original film in terms of continuing the story after the first film without making huge glaring errors that would contradict events from the first film. The voice casting for the most part works for the newer actors such as Cruella DeVil’s voice actress, Susanne Blakeshee, the animation is pretty decent, the story moves at a quick enough pace and it’s never boring. It’s a decent animated film with a lot of good points to it and very few flaws. Take it for what it is and you’ll enjoy it.