TY - GEN

T1 - Nature and biology inspired approach of classification towards reduction of bias in machine learning

AU - Liu, Han

AU - Gegov, Alexander Emilov

AU - Cocea, Mihaela

N1 - Publisher Copyright: © 2016 IEEE.

PY - 2017/3/9

Y1 - 2017/3/9

N2 - Machine learning has become a powerful tool in real applications such as decision making, sentiment prediction and ontology engineering. In the form of learning strategies, machine learning can be specialized into two types: supervised learning and unsupervised learning. Classification is a special type of supervised learning task, which can also be referred to as categorical prediction. In other words, classification tasks involve predictions of the values of discrete attributes. Some popular classification algorithms include Naïve Bayes and K Nearest Neighbour. The above type of classification algorithms generally involves voting towards classifying unseen instances. In traditional ways, the voting is made on the basis of any employed statistical heuristics such as probability. In Naïve Bayes, the voting is made through selecting the class with the highest posterior probability on the basis of the values of all independent attributes. In K Nearest Neighbour, majority voting is usually used towards classifying test instances. This kind of voting is considered to be biased, which may lead to overfitting. In order to avoid such overfitting, this paper proposes to employ a nature and biology inspired approach of voting referred to as probabilistic voting towards reduction of bias. An extended experimental study is reported to show how the probabilistic voting can manage to effectively reduce the bias towards improvement of classification accuracy.

AB - Machine learning has become a powerful tool in real applications such as decision making, sentiment prediction and ontology engineering. In the form of learning strategies, machine learning can be specialized into two types: supervised learning and unsupervised learning. Classification is a special type of supervised learning task, which can also be referred to as categorical prediction. In other words, classification tasks involve predictions of the values of discrete attributes. Some popular classification algorithms include Naïve Bayes and K Nearest Neighbour. The above type of classification algorithms generally involves voting towards classifying unseen instances. In traditional ways, the voting is made on the basis of any employed statistical heuristics such as probability. In Naïve Bayes, the voting is made through selecting the class with the highest posterior probability on the basis of the values of all independent attributes. In K Nearest Neighbour, majority voting is usually used towards classifying test instances. This kind of voting is considered to be biased, which may lead to overfitting. In order to avoid such overfitting, this paper proposes to employ a nature and biology inspired approach of voting referred to as probabilistic voting towards reduction of bias. An extended experimental study is reported to show how the probabilistic voting can manage to effectively reduce the bias towards improvement of classification accuracy.

KW - Data mining

KW - K Nearest Neighbour

KW - Machine learning

KW - Naïve Bayes

KW - Probabilistic classification

UR - http://www.scopus.com/inward/record.url?scp=85021188208&partnerID=8YFLogxK

U2 - 10.1109/ICMLC.2016.7872953

DO - 10.1109/ICMLC.2016.7872953

M3 - Conference contribution

AN - SCOPUS:85004115521

T3 - Proceedings - International Conference on Machine Learning and Cybernetics

SP - 588

EP - 593

BT - Proceedings of 2016 International Conference on Machine Learning and Cybernetics, ICMLC 2016

PB - IEEE Computer Society

T2 - 2016 International Conference on Machine Learning and Cybernetics, ICMLC 2016

Y2 - 10 July 2016 through 13 July 2016

ER -