AC Milan striker Alexandre Pato has all but confirmed his relationship with the daughter of Italy PM and club patron Silvio Berlusconi.

There have been reports that the striker is seeing Barbara Berlusconi and these were effectively confirmed last night at San Siro when she was cheering on from the stands.

“Who did I dedicate the goals to? Well, you all saw who...” he said in a Press conference before waving away further questions.

“I also dedicate it to everyone who is always here in the stadium to cheer on Milan even when things haven’t gone well.

“I am very relaxed and try to give my best in training and on the pitch. It’s important to put in the same effort for the less prestigious matches, as they are worth three points too.

“I scored two goals and am very satisfied, as we won and are top of the table. We win together and lose together, so we are all happy.

“We were unable to do what we wanted to in Palermo, but we did against Inter. There are still seven rounds to go, so we must keep pushing for the Scudetto and hopefully the Coppa Italia too.”

Video HERE

And even more recently:

These pics (4th April) show the couple out and about in Milan, as the Brazilian footballer and Silvio Berlusconi’s daughter took in a modern art exhibition in the city. In a recent interview with Vanity Fair, Pato made the following statements on being pressed about his separation from his first wife and current relationship with Berlusconi’s more famous daughter:

Can we please avoid this topic? [that of his divorce from model Sthefany Brito] I can say that my happiness is very important to me and that at the moment, I’m happy.

In case you're wondering, she's also divorced and has two little children. Personally, i'm still not a 100% happy with this 'cos it has the potential to backfire majorly.

On the other hand he did score twice against Inter so clearly she's giving him some inspiration from somewhere...

Who are your fave older woman/younger footballer combos?

Source article | Source photos |

Source video | Source 4th April