Brazilian, Alexandre Pato, had a promising start to his career, but he fell off

Back in the day his marriage also came crashing down for interesting reasons

The former Chelsea star’s marriage to Sthefany Brito only lasted 9 months and the sultry lass left him allegedly because of his partying ways

Former Chelsea star Alexandre Pato’s marriage lasted only 9 months because of his extreme partying.

Pato burst onto the football scene as a teenager and was tipped to go to the very top of the game because of his undeniable talent.

But a combination of factors, including injuries and poor lifestyle, ultimately proved to be the cause of Pato’s career plateau and eventual decline.

As reported on The Sun, Pato’s tendency to love the nightlife was so intense, that his marriage could not withstand it.

At the height of his career, Pato met model Sthefany Brito at a photoshoot, and the two dated for two years before finally tying the knot.

Fan aims hilarious dig at Cristiano Ronaldo after Messi's apology video goes viral

Football

The wedding ceremony was no small deal either, as it took place at the five-star Copacabana Palace in Rio de Janeiro in 2009, and reports claim it cost a staggering £170,000.

“Wild partying”

Less than a year after the wedding, however, the couple had a messy separation, with Brito later going on an interview to claim she could not keep up with Pato’s partying ways.

In 2016, Pato revealed AC Milan in the late 2000s and early 2010s was split into two factions; those of party-goers led by the legendary Ronaldo Nazario and Ronaldinho, and the more conservative faction, spearheaded by Ricardo Kaka.

"In the changing room I was sat between Ronaldo and Maldini and opposite Kaka. One of the first things I remember is when Ronaldo showed me a Playboy magazine.” Pato said in 2016.

"He asked me if I wanted to be in his group or if I would prefer to go with Kaka - and made religious symbols at me."

Chelsea midfielder wears pair of shorts for his wedding to long-term partner

Football

The divorce was also rather messy as Brito attempted to sue Pato after the Brazilian stopped paying maintenance money.

His party lifestyle at AC Milan started with Ronaldo Nazario, and continued when Ronaldinho joined the club, after Ronaldo had departed.

From then on, Pato continued with his partying lifestyle and has been in several high-profile relationships including one with Barbara Berlusconi, the daughter of the then Italian Prime Minister Silvio.

Where is Pato now?

Pato’s latest club was Orlando City in the United States, but he has not played for them since September 2022 after suffering a worrying knee injury.

Brazilian outfit Sao Paolo are reportedly interested in offering him a contract, as he has been training using the club’s facilities in Barra Funda.