James Husband’s resume as a musician and collaborator is long and varied. Perhaps best known as long-time drummer for Of Montreal, Husband is now promoting his solo effort, A Parallax I. After seeing him open for Of Montreal during a brief, recent tour, we were able to arrange an email interview. Below, Husband explains the joys and hassles opening for Of Montreal and what it’s like to finally be in the driver’s seat of his own musical project – a role that has been a long time coming.

How has it been pulling a double shift for the live shows?

It’s been pretty exhausting, but also, very rewarding. We’re used to pulling double duty. Dot, Kev, BP and I all played in multiple bands that toured together regularly in the old days, but we’re a bit older now and this one is very physically taxing…for me anyway. I keep saying that the J.Husband set is all emotional and cerebral, while the Of Montreal set is a physical challenge of constant drum bashing for me.

Could you talk a little bit about your experience so far as an opening act? Most of Of Montreal ‘s fans probably already recognize you. Is this preferable to being a less familiar opener?

It’s the strangest catch 22/double edged sword I’ve ever experienced. On the one hand, I consider myself fortunate to be in a position to start out a new project on the road with a band the size of Of Montreal. On the other, I’ve been around helping to build this band up for over a decade and feel somewhat responsible for our success and certainly feel that I’ve, in a way, earned the opening slot. Some folks call nepotism, haters. The idea that it makes things easier or instant or the deck is stacked in my favor is a myth. If anything, I have to work twice as hard. It’s like the son of a big CEO getting hired in the mailroom. Foot’s in the door, but… his shortcomings and successes will be under greater scrutiny, so he must be on his A game. That’s me.

A Parallax I is your first release with Polyvinyl Records, but not your first album. Tell me a little bit about your journey to the record label. Why is this the first time most non-Of Montreal audiences are hearing from you?

I don’t consider the early CDR copies ‘Albums’ or ‘releases’. They were more like calling cards to fish out interest from a proper label or band that would have me on the road or press and promote it. I also made them to order for fans. I love the hand-made quality and each one really was unique. I’m sure a few hundred fans appreciated that, but I wanted to sort of legitimize the project with a more pro delivery. Kevin Barnes was very instrumental in suggesting me to Polyvinyl and thankfully, they agreed after many moths of discussion to sign me on for a full album release.

You’ve worked with a multitude of musicians and projects over the years, and you’ve been working on this album for quite some time. How is finally promoting your own work on stage different from all of your previous experience?

Being up front, flying the plane is everything. The responsibility is so much more intense. People think the drummer drives the band… I disagree. It’s a way different feeling being the voice… singing and communicating with the audience. I’m learning how to handle it like a new Iron Man suit or something, but I’ve fallen on my ass a few times. I am used to being on stage in a lot of situations, but it’s never felt as good and right as these past 10 J.H. shows with Of Montreal. I enjoy a big audience. Singing or playing in front of several thousand is comfortable to me now, but in a bar with less than a hundred… I shit myself.

I know the tracks on A Parallax I come from different recording methods. How did this affect the making of the album?

You have to understand that none of the construction of this record was premeditated, nor is it a sonic crap shoot of fidelity or content. Each track is an individual. The circumstances of the day determined the microphones, instruments, location and production value. Only after collecting several dozen of these recordings did I see the parallels that connect the dots emotionally and sort of chronologically. Then, of course, my voice is the constant that helps cohere the seemingly random selection.

For folks who mostly know you from your work with Of Montreal, what, if any, misconceptions do you want to get out of the way?

I’m not gay, I’m not married, I am not Swedish, Kevin did not write any of my songs… that I’m the drummer. No matter what else I do… I’m always, “the drummer of Of Montreal.” Funnily enough, it’s a position I’ve been fighting for lately and maybe I didn’t realize how important that role was, until now. I like to do it all and really enjoy switching instruments. I miss that terribly. I’ve also been recording, writing songs and performing solo since before I joined Of Montreal in 1998. This is nothing new…just new to you.

Last night’s show found you playing with an impressive back up band. What kind of contributions did you have from other musicians on the album?

The band last night and this tour are so great. I love them all as friends, but they have proven themselves every night as total badasses… thank God. There were a handful of musical contributors on the album, but mostly those were last pass overdubs sprinkled on top of very nearly completed mixes. The biggest collaborations came from the production side. Although I recorded much of this album alone, all of it was fixed, tinkered with, cleaned up… improved by the careful minds and patient talents of Andy LeMaster, Johan Stenstrom and Tomas Hakava. Johan and Tomas recorded me from scratch on their own gear and re-recorded new vocals/overdubs on my old mixes. Andy just pulled out all the dead wood, sanded, primed and repainted the whole ship!

Is this the first of many of Montreal solo releases? I know Bryan Poole has some songs and shows as well.

We are all songwriters in our own right and have been long before our induction into Of Montreal. Every member of the band has other releases reaching back to around ’97-’99. Kevin’s is certainly the most high profile, but it could be said that Of Montreal is kind of our side project.

How does the future look for James Husband? Any other touring plans?

Yes, absolutely touring as much as possible. Doing al lright, getting good grades, future’s so bright, I gotta… well, you get the picture.