Businessman/Entrepreneur

California State University, San Marcos

The late Bob Hope once said of golf: "If you watch a game, it is fun. If you play it, it is recreation. If you work at it, it is golf."

James "Bob" Husband has worked at it. His career in the golf industry began in 1972 at Bel-Air Country Club - not a bad training ground for a young Cal State Northridge finance student from a family of 10 children. Although he worked for minimum wage in the bag room, not in the board room, he knew he wanted to move up. He used his entrepreneurial energy to improve operations and raise profits, becoming an assistant pro within a few short months. And that was just the beginning.

Throughout his long career, Mr. Husband has worked hard at both the game and business of golf, making him one of the industry's most influential entrepreneurs. He has founded and led several successful companies-including CCA/Golf Corp, Cobblestone Golf Group, and most recently the San Diego-based Heritage Golf Group, which owns and operates private and daily fee golf facilities throughout the United States.

In 2003, Mr. Husband was named one of the "25 Most Powerful People in Golf" by Inc. Magazine. Previously he was named an "Entrepreneur of the Year" by Ernst & Young and "One of the Most Dynamic Movers and Shakers in the Golf Industry" by Crittenden Golf.

In addition to his impressive "working" role in the golf industry he has made a mark as a player, coach, mentor and advisoer. He is a Class A, Life Member of the PGA of America, and in 1978 and 1979 he was a member of the PGA Tour. He was also on the coaching staff at UCLA and served on the National Advisory Board of the National Golf Course Owners Association. For more than 20 years, he has taught and mentored PGA Tour golfer David Berganio, Jr.

Together with his wife, Suc, he created the Heritage Youth Foundation in 1999 to support regional and national youth programs. The foundation supports an extensive list of organizations, including Big Brothers and Sisters, the Cystic Fibrosis Foundation, the Ronald McDonald House and numerous youth baseball and local school programs.

Locally, the Husbands and Heritage Golf have made a significant contribution toward the growth of Cal State San Marcos through their support of collegiate athletics, scholarships and other high-priority needs. In 1999, they helped kick-start the FORE! Education Golf Tournament, which has become a major fundraiser for athletics. Heritage Golf has sponsored the event every year since.

In recognition of his meritorious service to the community and higher education, the Board of Trustees of the California State University and California State University, San Marcos are proud to confer upon James "Bob" Husband the honorary degree of Doctor of Humane Letters.

​