James “Jim” D. Emeott, Sr. of Saginaw, Michigan

Beloved father, grandfather, great-grandfather, brother, uncle, and friend passed away peacefully with his family by his side on Tuesday, August 6, 2024, at My Michigan Medical Center Saginaw. He was 90 years old. James D. Emeott, Sr. was born on January 28, 1934, in Saginaw, Michigan, to the late Earl and Lillian May (Gerow) Emeott. He attended Saginaw Public Schools. Jim proudly served his country in the United States Army serving six years until his honorable discharge. He married the love of his life, Josephine Duranso, on October 14, 1961; she preceded him in death on October 22, 1998. Jim worked as a heavy machine operator with the City of Saginaw, retiring in 1991 with over 36 years of loyal and dedicated service. The role he loved the most was to be a loving and devoted husband, father, grandfather and great-grandfather. Jim absolutely treasured and cherished his grandchildren and great-grandchildren; they made his soul feel full. As a young man, he enjoyed bowling with his brothers, hunting, fishing, tending to his lawn, feeding the birds, crossword puzzles, and camping. He will forever be remembered for many of his catch phrases, for being loving and generous, listening to his country music, and spending time with his family.

Surviving are three children: James Dale (Donna) Emeott Jr. of Plano, TX; Jennifer Emeott of Saginaw; Jason Emeott Sr. of Detroit; two daughters-in-law, Kim Naples of Roscommon; Carrie Ventimiglia of Freeland; eight grandchildren: Joshua Emeott Sr.; Jasmine Emeott; Jason (Paxton) Emeott Jr.; Celeste (Case) Garrison; Jenna “Kaka” Emeott; Myron “Biggie” Wilkins Jr.; Myriana “Cheeta” Wilkins; and Brittany Emeott; nine great-grandchildren: Josh Jr.; Jonah; DaMyla; Jaymerson; Jaylin; Scarlett; JazzLynn; Josie; Jason III; a sister, Beverly Frost of St. Charles; a sister-in-law, Hazel Emeott of Saginaw. Also surviving are many nieces, nephews, extended family, and dear friends.

He was preceded in death by a son, Jeffrey Dean Emeott; parents, Earl and Lillian Emeott; and eight siblings: Bill, Jack, Fred, Bob, Earl, Ruth, Lillian, and Betty.