In lieu of an abstract, here is a brief excerpt of the content:

[ 221 ] FROM BLOCKBUSTER TO FLOP? T H E A P PA R E N T FA I L U R E ( O R P O S S I B L E T R A N S C E N D E N C E ) O F R A L F K Ö N I G ’ S Q U E E R C O M I C S A E S T H E T I C I N M AY B E . . . M AY B E N O T A N D K I L L E R C O N D O M — PA U L M . M A L O N E Ralf König, Germany’s best-known comics artist, has been able to parlay his satirical and often frank tales of the German gay scene into such a degree of mainstream appeal that their adaptation into ﬁlm became virtually inevitable, though not unproblematic. The ﬁrst ﬁlm, Der bewegte Mann (U.S. title: Maybe . . . Maybe Not, 1994), was a huge hit but deeply unsatisfying for König personally, while subsequent ﬁlm projects, whether disappointing or fulﬁlling for the artist, have fallen far short of the ﬁrst ﬁlm’s commercial and relative critical success. This failure is all the more surprising given König’s own popularity and his willingness to address a wider—that is, a heterosexual—audience. König’s negotiation of his own openly gay identity, and that of his work, with a mainstream sensibility raises tensions that have prompted Elmar Klages to suggest that his solution to this problem might be described as a “coming in” (58). König’s comics—and their translation into ﬁlms—illustrate aspects of the ideology of gay issues in Germany and its representation in different media. This chapter explores two of his comics and their respective ﬁlm versions: the more mainstream Der bewegte Mann and the more graphic and niche-oriented Kondom des Grauens. After discussing the ideological similarities and differences between the two comics and their cinematic versions, this chapter will conclude with a consideration of König’s other [ 2 22 ] PAUL M . M A L ONE ﬁlm and television projects, as well as his own position in the context of gay issues in German ﬁlm and comics. Ralf König was born in 1960 in the small Westphalian town of Soest. Although he had always enjoyed drawing, after leaving school he trained as a carpenter, a trade his parents thought practical (Voigt 35). In 1979, however , he came out as a homosexual; his participation in Homolulu, a weeklong festival in Frankfurt (23–29 July 1979) celebrating the German Schwulenemanzipationsbewegung or gay liberation movement, inspired him to give up the tradesman’s life for good (Voigt 35–36; Klages 59). He moved to Dortmund and began publishing short comic strips in local gay newspapers and magazines such as magnus and Siegessäule, as well as contributing to “straight” humor and satire magazines. He also began studying graphic arts at the State Art Academy in Düsseldorf. In the following ﬁve years he produced four volumes of short cartoons, compiled under the title Schwulcomix 1–4 (“Gay Comix”).1 During this period he not only honed his craft as a cartoonist, but also developed what can be called, with some reservations , a queer aesthetic. The term “queer” can itself be applied only awkwardly to German homosexual culture. For one thing, whereas English “queer” has taken on connotations of active resistance not only to a heterosexual mainstream culture but also often to essentializing views of both sex and gender in general, the word occurs only as a rare and academic loan word in German , lacking the emotional resonance that it has for native English speakers (Kuzniar 6–7). The German cognate quer, meaning “sideways, odd,” lacks any sexual connotation, as does its close synonym schräg (“diagonal , offbeat”). The German word schwul, on the other hand, originated as a pejorative term for homosexuals but has been appropriated by the gay community in a manner analogous to “queer”; however, it lacks the English term’s overtones of general oddness or difference. Depending on context, schwul can thus be translated roughly equally as “queer,”“gay,” or “fag(got)” (Wright, “From Outsider” 105; Kuzniar 6–7). Not everyone or everything that is schwul, then, is necessarily “queer.” At the same time, it is true that German homosexuals have had to rally against a basically conservative mainstream culture and the strictures of...