FOR AT LEAST A GENERATION, German films have been saddled with a melancholy image that makes them difficult to sell overseas. Think of German films, and you think of heavy and often depressing themes, stories of pain, loss and the burdens of being alive. When the director Helmut Dietl offered his marvelous 1991 comedy "Schtonk" to foreign distributors, he complained that trying to sell a German comedy was like trying to sell Swedish spaghetti: it seemed a contradiction in terms.

Since then, however, the tables have turned. The most widely respected German directors, figures like Wim Wenders and Volker Schlondorff, are still producing serious feature films that critics, if not large audiences, admire. But now a younger generation of directors have emerged and, at least in terms of mass appeal, left their elders in the dust. They are making a kind of film new to Germany, the relationship comedy -- light, funny, fast-paced, modestly erotic and enormously popular. At least a dozen have been released over the last few years. Nearly all have turned a profit, and several have been big hits.

The most successful of these films, "Der Bewegte Mann," will open on Friday in the United States under the title "Maybe . . . Maybe Not." It is a fine introduction to the films that are now drawing millions of young viewers into movie houses across Germany.

"Maybe . . . Maybe Not" is based on a popular comic that appeared in book form nearly a decade ago. It tells the story of Axel (Til Schweiger), a young man who joins a men's discussion group after his girlfriend (Katja Riemann) leaves him. The group invites a gay man (Joachim Krol) to talk about homosexuality, and Axel develops a crush on the hero.

The resulting confusion is presented with enough wit and insight to have made "Maybe . . . Maybe Not, " which opened in 1994, one of the most popular German films in years. It drew more than six million viewers and last year won the Government-sponsored German Film Prize, which not only awards the winner a golden statuette but also a $600,000 check.

"It used to be that you couldn't win this prize if your film was a box-office success," the director Sonke Wortmann said after his triumph. "Obviously we have now moved away from that attitude."

Thank you for your patience while we verify access. If you are in Reader mode please exit and log into your Times account, or subscribe for all of The Times.

Thank you for your patience while we verify access.

Already a subscriber? Log in.

Want all of The Times? Subscribe.