During the operational meeting, the governor of the Murmansk Region recalled that last week President Vladimir Putin launched the movement of a new railway to the western shore of the Kola Bay at the Murmansk transport hub. The head of the region noted that this is very important for our region, the Arctic zone, and for the whole of Russia.

"The implementation of the project for the integrated development of the transport hub has been frozen for a long time, we fought to allocate money so that the facility would be completed, and it was not easy. Thanks to the support of the President, his personal intervention, everything took place, construction resumed at the beginning of this year, in fact at the end of the year, in December we participated in the opening of the workers' movement. What has been done by builders and railway workers over the past year is really a labor feat," Andrei Chibis stressed.

The head of the region said that 37.7 billion rubles were allocated for the completion of construction. Almost 49.7 km of railway track has been laid, 137 artificial structures have been built, including 11 bridges and overpasses. The bridge over the Tuloma River, the most ambitious object within the framework of this new railway project, consists of eight spans and two coastal overpasses with a total length of 1,313 meters. The whole country watched the installation and every stage of construction, the launch of the labor movement. As a result of the creation of a new railway infrastructure, the cargo turnover of the port of Murmansk may double, with plans to increase it to 110 million tons per year.

"I want to thank once again the President of Russia, the Government of the country, personally Andrei Ramovich Belousov, who actively joined the project, supported us, Deputy Prime Minister Marat Shakirzyanovich Khusnullin, Yuri Petrovich Trutnev, Alexey Olegovich Chekunkov and the leadership of the Security Council, who also supported the implementation of the project. And our team, which was engaged in this project, the economic and transport unit under the leadership of Olga Kuznetsova. And of course all those who brought this large–scale high-tech project to life: Russian Railways, the Ministry of Transport of Russia, Oleg Valentinovich Belozerov, who personally participated in this issue, our builders, the company that did it - Yamaltransstroy. A huge amount was implemented in a short time, the whole country followed the project and appreciated it. Thank you!" the head of the Murmansk region stressed.

/ Ministry of Information Policy of the Murmansk Region /