Living in Salmon , Idaho

1.96 million people live in Idaho (0.6 % of the US population 334.9 mln as of 2023) on the territory 83,569 square miles (2.2 % of the US territory).

3,114 of residents of Lemhi County call Salmon their home (37.14 % of Lemhi County population).

Should you move to Salmon , Idaho ? Is Salmon , Idaho a good place to live?

When determining what cities are good for your personality, life situation, and personal preferences, there are many factors to consider including climate, cost of living, community, job opportunities, population makeup, activities, and things to do.

Healthy Living in Salmon , ID

Salmon 's Outdoor Living Score is 57.44 out of 100 (find the best location for Outdoor living here or explore Salmon 's climate in detail here). We examine health risks, safety and natural disasters among other metrics important for outdoor activities.

Are public schools good in Salmon , ID ?

There are 1 elementary, 1 middle and 2 high schools for children within the borders of Salmon , ID .

An important fact to note from the editor:

More on the Education quality in Salmon , ID

Is Salmon , ID affordable?

Cost of living in Salmon , ID is in the group of 20 % of locations in the US with moderate cost of living. When we compare the cost of living in Salmon to other locations within Idaho state only, it is in the moderate group. To learn more about the income, taxes and various budget itemized costs, navigate to the page Cost of Living in Salmon , ID.

When we figure out the Cost of Living, we don't look at just what things cost. We also see how much money you'd have left after paying taxes and living expenses. In places where it's cheap to live, there might not be many jobs that pay well. In areas without income taxes, you might pay more in property taxes. And in places where living costs a lot, you could earn a lot more money. So, what really matters in the end is looking at your whole budget and seeing how much money you have left after all deductions at each location.