This repertory of nineteenth century French fiction in Canada includes fabled romances that represent a wealth of folklore and reflect the motivation and spirit of a whole people from its beginning on this continent in the seventeenth century to the end of the nineteenth.

The social history as preserved by French Canada's storytellers, romancers and novelists is immediate and speaks to the reader in an unambiguous way that formal historians rarely achieve.

The anthology includes: Philippe Aubert de Gaspé the Younger's The Stranger (The Legend of Rose Latulipe) and The Man from Labrador, Amédée Papineau's Caroline: A Canadian Legend, Napoléon Aubin's Plan for the Canadian Republic, Pierre Petitclair's A Labrador Adventure, Alphonse Poitras's My Uncle's Story, L.-A. Oliver's The Faithful Debtor, Pierre-J. O. Chauveau's Charles Guérin, Abbé Henri-Raymond Casgrain's The Sorceress, Patrice Lacombe's The Ancestral Farm, Joseph-Charles Taché's Foresters and Voyageurs, Joseph Marmette's François de Bienville and The Last Cannon Ball, Faucher de Saint-Maurice's The Roussis' Fire, Benjamin Sulte's The Werewolf, Louis Fréchette's Oneille and Tipite Vallerand, Jules-Paul Tardivel's For Our Native Land, and Pamphile LeMay's Blood and Gold.

Yves Brunelle (Author, Editor)

Born in Montreal in 1927, Yves Brunelle attended Ecole St. Gerard and D’Arcy McGee High School in Montreal. He received his BA in English from St. Francis Xavier University, his MA in Comparative Literature from Harvard University, and his PhD in English from the University of New Brunswick. He is a member of the Association of Canadian and Quebec Literatures and the Atlantic Canada Institute.

Brunelle has taught both French and English, and was Program Director for Radio-Canada in Moncton and producer of “Public Affairs” for CBC Halifax. He is now a professor of English at St. Francis Xavier University.

Among his other publications are the translations of Angline de Montbrun by Laure Conan, and Un homme et son péché (The Woman and the Miser) by Claude-Henri Grignon. Professor Brunelle is an advisory editor for Harvest House’s French Writers of Canada Series.