Français

Who are we?

Established by Stanley Bréhaut Ryerson and Mildred Helfand Ryerson in 1970, The Aubin Foundation strives to promote activist knowledge in the Humanities and Social Sciences in Quebec and Canada. The Foundation is named in honor of Napoleon Aubin (1812-1890), a democrat, journalist, inventor and teacher who popularized the sciences through his writings and debates.

Stanley Bréhaut Ryerson (1911-1998), multidisciplinary intellectual, author and activist, adopted a Marxist approach to history. Through his reputation, he acquired numerous followers in the new generation of left historians and the labor movement. His wife, Mildred Helfand Ryerson (1913-2003) received the Order of Canada medal in 1987 in recognition of her pioneering role in community occupational therapy with the disadvantaged, especially women and natives.

Mandate :

CIRFA intends to contribute to demystifiying the artificial compartmentalization of the production of progressive thought and activist knowledge. The Stanley Bréhaut Ryerson Research Centre encourages academic and activist research in the Humanities and Social Sciences in Canada / Quebec. It’s aim is to energise the exchanges between the sites of intellectual production of knowledge and the concrete realities of workers and their basic human needs.

Rooted in the founders’ fields of research, the Aubin Foundation maintains an interest in numerous issues: capitalist globalization and imperialism; the Canadian confederacy, its political past and future; First Nation questions, rights, conditions, and struggles; French Canadians, Quebeckers, the linguistic stakes, the national question and state independence; culture, integration, marginalization, ethnicity and immigration; the link between nationalism and popular movements and civil society; the history of the Quebec and Canadian labour movements and their situation in North America; theories of political action and ideology in Quebec; the anatomy, forms and structures of Canadian and Quebec capitalism; Quebec, Canada and imperialism; the status of women and their political struggles; secularism, socialism and religions; socialist strategies in the countries of the periphery and the dialectic of international and transnational relations; the state of research and questions of academic order in Canada and in Quebec; science, technology and social transformation.

Distinguished members:

Madeleine Parent (in Memoriam 2012)

Kari Levitt

Alfred Dubuc

Andrée Lévesque