Brickleberry is an American adult animated raunch-com series on Comedy Central, created by Roger Black and Waco O'Guin. It ran from September 25th, 2012 to April 14th, 2015. The series follows an obscene, hot-headed park owner, named Woody Johnson, bossing around four less-than-competent park rangers in the fictitious, Brickleberry National Park.

Brickleberry is the spiritual predecessor to Paradise PD, sharing the same creators, a similar cast, and the same basic archetypes for their characters, locations, and plots.

Counterparts

The characters of Paradise P.D, except for one, are paper-thin clones of the characters of Brickleberry.

Main Cast

Kevin Crawford is Steve Williams. They both have the same voice actor, body type, and personality. They're delightfully mentally challenged idiots, who are giddy about doing their jobs, even though they mess things up all the time and annoy the best out of their bosses.

Randall Crawford is Woody Johnson. They both have the same voice actor, personality, and similar character shapes. They are both the bosses of their companies and they're loud, fat, screaming, cursing grown men. They are also both racist and misogynistic.

Bullet is Malloy. They are both short, brown, trash-talking animals, who don't give a shit about anything.

Gina Jabowski is Ethel Anderson. They both have the same character shape. They are both hot blonde women, who care greatly about their jobs. However, their personalities are greatly different. While Ethel was the voice of reason at Brickleberry, Gina is completely (and violently) crazy and also sort of stupid.

Dusty Marlow is Connie Cunaman. They are both fat, pathetic idiots, who eat a lot of food. However, their genders are different. Dusty is a male, and Connie is a female.

Gerald Fitzgerald is Denzel Jackson. They are both token black guys. However, their personalities are greatly different. While Denzel is a quick-to-violence, jive-talking gerontophile with an addiction to pot, Fitz is a pacifistic, well-spoken zoophile with multiple personality disorder.

The only main cast member not to have a Brickleberry counterpart is Stanley Hopson.

Recurring Characters

Robby is Bobby Possumcods. They both have the same voice actor, body type, and personality. They're dumbass redneck hillbillies. They both violate animals, do drugs, inbreed, and do all kinds of stupid stuff. Additionally, their names rhyme.

Delbert is BoDean Lynn. They both have the same voice actor, body type, and personality. They're dull-witted sidekick hillbillies of Robby and Bobby. They both make flatly delivered quips about random stuff.

Dr. Funtlichter is Dr. Kuzniak. They both have the same voice actor, body type, and personality. They are both back-alley doctors, who are as helpful as they are hurtful.

Hobo Cop is Hobo Larry. They both have the same voice actor, archetype, and a similar body type and similar personality. They are both dirty, stuttering, mentally ill hobos.

Karen Crawford is Jack Abowski. Both are high-ranking politicians, who serve as a straight-man foil to Randall/Woody and use their positions to contradict them and give them orders. They also both dress similarly.

Preacher Paul is Reverend Rosty. Both are bigoted, homophobic Christians, who lead protests in banning harmless things that they find "unholy".

Mavis Hancock is Anita Johnson. Both are the single mothers of Randall and Woody, respectively and as revealed in the crossover, they are actually sisters. Only difference is their personalities are completely different. Mavis is a good-hearted mother, who cares for her son and treats him with respect, while Anita is an abusive, drunken, racist, bigot, who beats her son and makes his childhood a living hell.

References to Brickleberry in Paradise P.D.

In "Dungeons & Dragnet", a toy Squabbit was visible in the claw machine at Possum Pizza.

Later in that episode, Kevin visited a Jewish mother, to ask her questions about her recently-missing son. This exact same woman, appeared as a faux shrink in the Brickleberry episode "The Comeback", who came to Steve's house to pretend she was a mind-reader, suckering him out of his money.

In "Parent Trap", Kevin mimed Gerald insulting him, by calling him a "little Brickleberry-looking bitch." Kevin tried to distance himself from that comparison, by saying how they were two different shows. He later tried again to differentiate Brickleberry and Paradise PD, by saying how their show was about Police Officers, and their show was about Park Rangers. Right after that, however, Kevin addressed Gerald as "Denzel", the name of the stereotypical token black guy on Brickleberry, which is not unlike Gerald, and his role on Paradise PD.

In "The Father, The Son, and The Post-It Note", Thester insulted Randall by telling him "Woody from Brickleberry called. He wants his voice back."

In "Flip the Vote", the cops evacuate Paradise to lay low somewhere out in the woods. The place they go is shown to be Brickleberry national park, leading into the events of the next episode.

In "Paradise PD Meets Brickleberry", the whole episode was a crossover between the two shows.

In "Operation DD", Randall tells Karen that she overdosed and missed the entire crossover in the previous episode. Excited, Karen asked if they crossed over with Big Mouth but Randall told her it was actually Brickleberry. Disappointed, Karen scoffed and referred to Brickleberry as "Family Guy in the woods."

Later in that episode, Kevin suggested they infiltrate the Paradise, with the help of the Brickleberry park rangers. Randall said they could only afford them for the one episode. Just then, a cast of bootleg characters, from Bronkleberry National Plerk showed up. Randall damned the lawers of the show, for not even being able to wager the legal rights to say the non-copyrighted word, "Park".

Furthermore, Kevin still had the brian device he got from Dr. Kuzniak in the crossover episode.

In "Sack to the Future", in an alternate timeline where the world was a utopian society, Brickleberry was still on TV and was going on to its 8th season. It had also won several Emmy awards and was highly regarded by the NAACP. The season premiere was said to involve Malloy camping out in Connie's vagina.

In "The Eternal Reckoning", Hopson woke up from his nap and exclaimed the non-sequitur, "We're going to Brickleberry!", making a callback to their crossover episode, "Paradise PD Meets Brickleberry".

Trivia

The Brickleberry episode, "Cops & Bottoms" featured Steve becoming a police officer, and doing a horrible job at it. This plot is similar to the overall premise of Paradise PD.

The Brickleberry episode, "Steve's Bald" featured an all-black gay porno called "Chocolate-Covered Bigfoot", wherein one of the actors had the exact same character model as Gerald Fitzgerald.

In "Amber Alert", this same character model was used in a scene where a basketball team helped a young Steve Williams score a slam dunk.

Yucko the Clown, an inter-series character, who's been featured in all of Roger Black and Waco O'Guin's productions, has appeared in a handful of Brickleberry episodes, and the Paradise PD episodes, "Task Force" and "Blind Drunk". Given that his appearances in both shows were presented in cartoon format, Yucko looks exactly the same in both of these shows.

Ignoring one member, Brickleberry and Paradise PD both have angry bosses, dim-witted young men, talking animals, hot blonde women, fat gluttons, and stereotypical black guys.

Stanley Hopson is the only Paradise PD main character with no Brickleberry counterpart.

Several jokes from Brickleberry episodes are recycled into Paradise PD episodes.

In "Police Academy", Randall greets Prop Cop by saying "Wow, new record. Two seconds and I already hate you." This is a word-for-word copy of how Malloy greeted a talking bear in "Squabbits".

In "Parent Trap", the food at Panda Express is compared to horse shit. This same joke was told by Malloy in "Trip to Mars".

In "Christmas in Paradise", a fat girl tells a Mall Santa that her pet pony hanged itself. In "Ranger Games", Malloy had a pet pony that hanged itself.

In "Flip the Vote", Dusty possessed a horse with a demonic VR headset and told a little girl "YOUR MOTHER SUCKS COCKS IN HELL!" which was previously stated by demon child, Donnie Cunaman in "Aparkalypse".

In "Paradise PD Meets Brickleberry", Dusty said that his mother warned him that if he has sex before marriage, "Jesus will kill grandma". In "Miss National Park", Connie's mom gave her this exact same threat, saying that Jesus will kill her grandma if she loses the beauty pageant.

In "Blimp City", Randall considered sex with a pregnant woman a threesome. In "Little Boy Malloy", Ethel's boyfriend, Ken made this exact same joke.

In "Fetal Attraction", Dusty got high on pot brownies and claimed he forgot how to shit. In "Old Wounds", Connie got high on pot brownies and claimed she forgot how to shit.

Such stock characters and celebrities as God, Jesus Christ, Satan, Santa Claus, Bill Cosby, Nicolas Cage, and Barack Obama have appeared in both shows but their archetypes, appearances, personalities, and roles have greatly differed in appearance, despite taking place in the same universe.

There are no references to Brickleberry in Season 3 of Paradise PD.

Gallery

See Also