Chairman & CEO, Channels Television

Born: July 1, 1957

Alma Mater: University of Lagos. Harvard Business School.

Prior to starting Channels Television, which he founded in 1995, John worked variously as news anchor, senior reporter and senior producer for Nigeria’s National Radio and Television Stations, Federal Radio Corporation of Nigeria and the Nigerian Television Authority.

John Momoh is of Etsakọ extraction. Momoh was brought up in Lagos State, southwestern Nigeria and his father was a cook. Over the past decades, he has built a commercial satellite television station with a reputable integrity in a country where the media sector is tainted by corruption. John Momoh graduated from the University of Lagos with a bachelor’s degree in Mass Communication and a master’s degree in International Law and Diplomacy. In June 2013, he received the Lagos Business School’s Distinguished Alumni Award. John Momoh has a professional Diploma from the UK’s Thomson Foundation, an alumnus of University of Lagos, Lagos Business School, and Harvard Business School, and is Fellow of the Nigerian Guild of Editors and the Nigerian Institute of Journalism.

In December 2005, he was proclaimed “Officer of the Order of the Niger” by the Nigerian Government.

In 2006, he was honoured with a Lifetime Achievement Award by the Nigerian Information Society and, two years later, he was nominated as Nigeria’s Entrepreneur of the Year by the Fate Foundation.

John Momoh is a Fellow of The International Visitor Programme (IVP), an initiative of the United States Information Agency, a Chevening Fellow and a Fellow of the “African Future Leaders”, both initiatives of the British Government’s Foreign and Commonwealth Office.

He is a member of the International Academy of Television Arts and Sciences based in New York, and has served as a juror for the International Emmy Awards. He is also serving as a juror for the AIB Awards presented by the Association for International Broadcasters.

In November 2016, John Momoh was sworn in as the Chairman of Broadcasting Organizations of Nigeria (BON)