The Chairman and Chief Executive of Channels Television John Momoh has just been elected the chairman of the Broadcast Organisation of Nigeria (BON).

John Momoh (OON) is the Founder and Chief Executive Officer of Channels Television. He is a renowned broadcast journalist with a vast experience spanning over three and half decades. Before founding Channels, John worked variously as News Anchor, Senior Reporter and Senior Producer for Nigeria’s National Radio and Television Stations, (Radio Nigeria and Nigerian Television Authority).

He has won many laurels which attest to his venerated professional status. These include :

“News Anchor of the Year”, of the maiden edition of the Nigerian Media Merit Award .

The Nigerian Union of Journalists Award for the “Newscaster of the Year.”

Constituency for Africa Award, Washington DC

Planet Africa Award, Canada

African Achievers Award.

John Momoh is a graduate of the University of Lagos with a Masters degree in International Law and Diplomacy and a B.Sc (with honours) in Mass Communication.

John also received Diplomas from the Thomson Foundation, Cardiff and the University of Manchester, both in the UK.

He is an alumnus of the prestigious Harvard Business School (OPM-40) and the Lagos Business School (CEP-7).

He is a Senior Fellow of The Nigerian Leadership Initiative.

Fellow of The International Visitor Programme; an initiative of the United States Information Agency.

Fellow “Chevening” an initiative of the Foreign and Commonwealth Office of the British Government.

Fellow, Africa Future Leaders, also of the FCO.

Fellow, Nigerian Guild of Editors;

Fellow, Nigerian Institute of Journalism, and Fellow Institute of Information Management.

John Momoh was the former General Secretary of the Independent Broadcasters Association of Nigeria, and former Chairman of the League of Nigerian Broadcasters.

In December of 2005, John Olatchy Momoh was conferred with the National Honour of “Officer of the Order of the Niger” (OON), by the Nigerian Government. A year later in 2006, he was honoured with a Lifetime Achievement Award, by the Nigerian Information Society.

Two years after that, he was crowned ‘Entrepreneur of the Year’ by the Fate Foundation Nigeria. In June of 2013, John Momoh received the Distinguished Alumni Award from the Lagos Business School. Recently, he was conferred with an Entrepreneurial Award, by the Institute of Directors, Nigeria.

John Momoh is a member of the International Academy of Television Arts & Sciences based in New York. He serves as a JUROR for the annual International Emmy Awards and The Association for International Broadcasting.

His television station Channels TV, is the only Nigerian and indeed African Broadcaster to have won the “Television Station of the Year” Award, a record Ten times, five of them consecutively. Channels is the Most Awarded Television station in Africa.

The station is the

First Nigerian media organization to stream its news and programs live on the internet.

First Nigerian TV Company to interface with followers via Twitter.

First Nigerian TV Station to have completed its mobile Apps on various platforms (Android, Apple, Microsoft, Nokia store).

The Channels TV Android App has featured on Top Free Apps on the Android Play Store with over 800,000 downloads in 2015.

Channels TV App has been ranked Best App (Apple Store, Nigeria) in all categories

In the News and Magazines category (Android store (Nigeria), the premier App is still ranked number 1.

Only Nigerian TV Company whose app has been consistently selected and featured on the Windows store.

First and only Television Company in Nigeria with over 2,000,000 (two million) followers, fans, and subscribers on social media.

First point of reference and confirmation of breaking news stories in Nigeria, by Nigerians, and Africans in diaspora.

First media Company to incorporate the use of Skype and Google hangouts in its news and programs.

Channels TV has been recognized as 2013 Convergence Leader in News Media Broadcast (conferred by Top 20 West African Convergence Leader by Knowhow Intelligence Unit).

John Momoh is a Red Cross Ambassador. He sits on the board of many non-governmental organisations including :

Constituency for Africa Washington DC

Special Olympics Nigeria

Sickle Cell Foundation

Tristate Heart Foundation

Centre for Integrated Health & Development.

He is happily married to Sola, also a broadcaster, and they are blessed with three children.