The headquarters of the Philippine government's Department of Health along Rizal Avenue, Santa Cruz, Manila. Photo: Patrick Roque /Wikipedia, CC BY-SA 4.0

Joseph Peter Calleja

Many Filipinos were surprised by the Commission on Audit’s report that the Department of Health [DOH] had misused billions from funds allocated to fight the Covid-19 coronavirus pandemic.

Health authorities said it was demoralising to learn about the news knowing that many health workers and patients had died due to lack of medical care and protective equipment.

In Sorsogon province in the Bicol region, south of Luzon, there are only seven ventilators. With 118 active Covid-19 cases, doctors are beginning to face the moral dilemma of who should benefit from them.

Billions in health funds could have been spent on more ventilators across the country instead of wasteful spending such as buying four “high end” laptops for 700,000 pesos ($108,000). The government’s spending priorities are really shocking to many people.

One physician, Dr. Leni Jara, described the impact of corruption on the Philippine healthcare system:

“Hospital workers have to demand what is rightfully theirs such as special risk allowance and active hazard pay. More surprisingly, our performance-based bonus for 2018 was only given this year,” Jara added.

The same budget could have been used for measures that really mattered to the Filipino people, such as free mass testing, contact tracing, salaries and incentives of health workers, additional beds and ventilators, among others.

What is happening in the country that prides itself on being a Catholic bastion in Asia? How come corruption continues to victimize the poor and health workers with unscrupulous transactions?

The poor are left with no choice but to rely on their faith and ask why God is punishing the Filipino people.

I believe the Filipino conscience is shocked because of government corruption is the same conscience that is the key to fighting for better governance.

It is the same conscience that led Catholics to ask why certain government officials had the gall to pocket public funds despite the ongoing pandemic.

Conscience, after all, helps us to hear the voice of God in recognising the truth about him and the truth about how we ought to live.

The great angelic doctor of the Church, St. Thomas Aquinas, said that “conscience is the practical judgment or dictate of reason, by which we judge what … is to be done as being good or to be avoided as evil.”

I personally felt happy reading comments on how corruption in the Department of Health had become “unconscionable.” I told myself it was good that many Catholics in the country still had the conscience to know what is right and what is not. I thought corruption had become the norm, honest governance the exception.

But this time the people’s outrage must effect actual change. People’s anger must bring about a change in government. Humanity’s conscience has served as its moral compass.

May it serve as a guiding principle in choosing the Philippines’ next set of leaders. May every citizen vote according to his conscience in choosing good and honest leaders in the next elections. UCAN