On Sunday, June 21, ImageNation will kick off its 13th Annual Outdoors Festival, with a total of 8 films in 6 different New York City parks in Brooklyn, Manhattan, Queens and the Bronx.

Beginning in June and continuing through August 22, 2015, ImageNation is New York's only summer long festival exclusively dedicated to films and music from throughout the global African diaspora.

Festival highlights include a screening of Jeymes Samuel's They Die By Dawn a Black western starring Erykah Badu, Michael K. Williams, Rosario Dawson and many others; the screenplay of Chimamanda Ngozi Adichie's Half of a Yellow Sun preceded by a performance from Les Nubians; a showing of Nas's Illmatic at Queensbridge with music by Pete Rock and a tribute to James Brown featuring the documentary Mr. Dynamite: The Rise of James Brown.

The I AM IMAGENATION festival will kick off with The Die By Dawn on Sunday, June 21, at Von King Park with musical performances by DJ Spinna and The Bullitts. The festival will conclude on Sunday, August 22nd with Finding Fela at St. Nicholas Park in Harlem with music by 103.9 FM.

Festival Schedule:

June 21st

Film: They Die by Dawn w/ Q&A with director Jeymes Samuel; Music: DJ Spinna, The Bullitts

Von King Park, Brooklyn

July 6th

Film: Half of A Yellow Sun; Music: Les Nubians

Marcus Garvey Park, Harlem

July 12th

Film: Celia: The Queen; Music: Gerardo Contino Y Los Habaneros, w/ DJ Asho

St. Mary's Park, Bronx, NY

July 19th

Film: Time Is Illmatic; Music: Pete Rock,

Queensbridge

August 2nd

4th Annual Soul Train Tribute-- Make it Funky!: A Soul Train Dance Party & Tribute to James Brown

Film: Mr. Dynamite: The Rise of James Brown; Music: spun by DJ Esxence, plus a live musical tribute led by Musical Director Chris Rob (former music director for John Legend) along with Lorenda Robinson (of Brown Baby Girl), Sabrina Clery (of Red Sahara), Qua Lamar,former lead singer of NJ5ive (from MTV's Top Pop Group), extraordinary vocalist Nicholas Ryan Gant, and Charisa The Violin Diva.

In association w/ Injoy Enterprises and the Reel Harlem Film Festival Marcus Garvey Park, Harlem

August 9th

Film: Our Latin Thing; Music: Felix Hernandez Rhythm Revue

August 15th

The Harder They Come; Music: 103.9 FM

*Harlem Week, St. Nicholas Park

August 22nd

Film: Finding Fela; Music: 103.9 FM

*Harlem Week, St. Nicholas Park