10 Questions for the Dalai Lama

Ten questions are posed to His Holiness the Dalai Lama by filmmaker and explorer Rick Ray. Ray examines some of the fundamental questions of our time by weaving together observations from his own journeys throughout India and the Middle East, and the wisdom of an extraordinary spiritual leader.

The Amish (2012)

Explores the insular religious community, whose intense faith and adherence to 400-year-old traditions have by turns captivated and baffled Americans for more than a century. The film examines the beliefs, lifestyle, and history of the Amish, as well as their complex relationship to mainstream American culture. Beautifully and lyrically photographed, The Amish is part history, part observational documentary that takes viewers into the world of the Amish.

The Amish: How They Survive

This documentary takes you on an intimate journey into Ohio Amish life and culture. You will discover how rapid growth and economic pressures threaten their community. You will also meet a people who, as a result of creative disengagement with the culture around them, thrive.

Apocalypse: The Puzzle of Revelation

Scholars discuss questions pertaining to the meanings and authorship of the Book of Revelation, which many Christians believe forecasts the the end of the world. Examines the possible motives of St. John the Evangelist, who is generally attributed responsibility for the text.

Behind the Veil: Afghan Women Under Fundamentalism

This gripping program describes the massive human rights abuses that have been escalating since the withdrawal of the Soviet forces, as seen through the eyes of women who have survived years of rampant gender and religious intolerance.

The Bible's Buried Secrets

Presents archaeological scholarship from the Holy Land to explore the beginnings of modern religion and the origins of the Hebrew Bible, also known as the Old Testament. This archaeological detective story tackles some of the biggest questions in biblical studies: Where did the ancient Israelites come from? Who wrote the Bible, when, and why? How did the worship of one God--the foundation of modern Judaism, Christianity, and Islam--emerge?

Bonhoeffer, Agent of Grace

What is a moral person to do in a time of savage immorality? That question tormented Dietrich Bonhoeffer, a German clergyman of great distinction who actively opposed Hitler and the Nazis. His convictions cost him his life. Bonhoeffer's last years, his participation in the German resistance and his moral struggle are dramatized in this film.

Budrus

They not only save the village, but the Barrier is pushed back behind the Green Line into No Man's Land. In the process, Ayed and Iltezam unleash an inspiring, yet little-known, movement in the Occupied Palestinian Territories that is still gaining ground today.

Cathedral

Combines location sequences and animation to show the building of a Gothic cathedral. Begins with a tour of Chartres, Reims, Amiens, Bourges, Beauvais, Notre Dame de Paris, Laon, and the Royal Abbey Church of St. Denis. Discusses life in the medieval era and how churches were a center of life.

Chaplains: On the Front Lines of Faith

Offers dramatic, personal portraits of the men and women who represent varying faith traditions, Christian, Jewish, Muslim, Buddhist, etc., and the wide array of professional environments where they serve. Chaplains are called upon to minister both to people of similar faith and those whose religious beliefs may be very different from their own.

Christian: The Story of Christ in Art

Narrated by Claire Dodin, this moving documentary uses art masterpieces from the 13th century through the 19th century, featuring many of the world's greatest artists, including Botticelli, da Vinci, Raphael, Janmot, Rubens, Bougereau, van Eyck, Hughes, Memling and Rembrandt, and combines classical music by several of the world's greatest composers, including Mozart, Handel, Faure, Gauntlett and Schubert, to tell the story of Jesus Christ and Christianity through the ages.

Christianity: The First Two Thousand Years

Tracks the evolution of the Christian faith from the Crucifixion to the Crusades and from the Reformation to the sweeping changes of Vatican II. Draws on ancient texts, the Scriptures, commentary from renowned scholars, and visits to historic sites to chronicle the events and personalities that shaped the history of Christianity.

Clash of the gods

Reacquaint yourself with myths so powerful that they remain woven into the fabric of the present world. From the epic tragedy of Medusa, Greek mythology's most infamous female fiend, to Hercules, its greatest action hero, and Hades, master of the land of the dead and a god so feared no one would speak his name.

Class of 2006

In May 2006, an imam academy in the city of Rabat, Morocco holds a graduation ceremony. But the class of 2006 is no ordinary group of students. Side-by-side with the male graduates are 50 women pioneers, among the first contemporary group of women to be officially trained as religious leaders in the Arab world. Empowered to do everything that male imams do -- except lead Friday prayer in a mosque -- the women will fan out across Morocco to work as spiritual guides in mosques, schools, hospitals, and prisons, even hosting their own television and radio talk shows.

Crusade: The Life of Billy Graham

Billy Graham has preached to more people than any other person in history. His powerful sermons have elevated him in the eyes of his followers, to a spiritual level attained on by the Pope himself. Who is this icon who has been spreading the word of God for more than 40 years?

Cult Witness: A Study of the Cultic Experience

An intelligent exploration of how cults attract and manipulate their followers, this documentary shares the disturbing firsthand experiences of Cult Witness director Samuel Stefan and six others who have freed themselves from cults: Jill Mytton (The Exclusive Brethren), Jim Bergin and Judy Garvey (The Gentle Wind Project), Lea Saskia Laasner (The Janus Project), and Celeste Jones and Amoreena Winkler (The Children of God).

Dietrich Bonhoeffer: Memories & Perspectives

An emotionally charged film you will never forget. First-hand accounts from his family, friends, and students give intimate insight into the struggles, growth, and motivations of Bonhoeffer in away that will make you ask anew what it means to be a Christian today.

Divorce Sharia Style

From a terraced house in East London the Sharia Council presides over hundreds of cases every year, mainly marital disputes. The Sharia Council is a parallel legal system that remains unknown to many people, although it has existed for years. This documentary takes us inside the workings of Sharia law in a Western society, especially as it affects women seeking divorce ...

Encounter Point

Created by a Palestinian, Israeli, North and South American team, this film tells the story of an Israeli settler, a Palestinian ex-prisoner, a bereaved Israeli mother and a wounded Palestinian bereaved brother who risk their safety and public standing to press for an end to the conflict.

For the Bible Tells Me So

This documentary tells the stories of five Christian families coming to terms with their gay and lesbian children, in an America where thanks to social forces clashing, the very atmosphere seems filled with hatred, old-fashioned prejudice, and fear of the other.

Glories of Islamic Art

Explores the connection of the religion of Islam with its art and architecture, revealing how artistic giants such as Siniam were led by Islamic movement to craft a glorious aesthetic heritage. Their faith is reflected in the related but distinct achievements throughout the centuries.

Hanged on a Twisted Cross: The Life, Convictions, and Martyrdom of Dietrich Bonhoeffer

Uses archival footage, documents and visits to original locations to capture the life, times and thought of the German theologian Dietrich Bonhoeffer, who was executed by the National Socialists days before the end of WWII.

The History of Orthodox Christianity

The most detailed worldwide presentation of the Orthodox Church, Her traditions, and Her sacramental life. The programs produced in English and Greek, will serve as an educational tool for the Christian Orthodox Church in addressing the needs of a world-dispersed audience, and in making Orthodoxy better understood among those who are unfamiliar with this ancient Christian Church.

Holy Warriors: Richard the Lionheart & Saladin

The remarkable story of the relationship between the Muslim leader Saladin and the Christian Crusader Richard the Lionheart. Battling in the name of different religions, and filled with blinding cultural ignorance, both shared a faith in one god.

Inside Islam

Presents an overview of Islam, tracing its history back to its roots in the Hebrew Bible. Attempts to explicate the religion vis-a-vis escalating acts of fundamentalist violence with which it has grown synonymous in the eyes of many Western observers.

Islam: Empire of Faith

Documents the rise and growth of Islam throughout the world, from the birth of Prophet Muhammad in the 6th century through the peak of the Ottoman Empire 1000 years later. Discusses the impact of Islamic civilization on world history and culture.

Islamic Art

Discusses the architecture and sculpture of mosques and Koranic schools, the illumination and calligraphy of sacred texts, music, the art of the garden, and the influence of the abstract arabesque on Western art.

Letters from Iran

A moving account of an exile's return to his homeland. A series of letters written to a friend in America describe his homecoming and emotions. His reunion is joyous as well as sad for the longing of a vanished past.

Martin Luther

Martin Luther nailed his treatise to the doors of the Wittenberg Cathedral and forever changed the Christian world. This previously obscure German monk unleashed forces that would plunge Europe into war and chaos. He offered the Christian world a new vision of man's relationship with God and, in turn, redefined man's relationship with authority in general, bringing the collapse of the medieval world and the birth of the modern age.

Obsession: Radical Islam's War Against the West

Obsession is a film about the threat of Radical Islam to Western civilization. Using unique footage from Arab television, it reveals an "insider's view" of the hatred the Radicals are teaching, their incitement of global jihad, and their goal of world domination.

Peter and Paul: And the Christian Revolution

With the words of Paul and other ancient writers, interviews with contemporary scholars and dramatic reenactments, Peter and Paul and the Christian Revolution explores how two men weathered crippling disagreements and political persecution to lead one of history's most astonishing religious movements.

The Power of Forgiveness

To forgive someone can be simple....this simple act can have powerful consequences. From Northern Ireland to Ground Zero to the Amish countryside, explores how forgiveness can transform your life.

Primetime Live: Ethical Dilemmas

Hidden cameras record how people react to bullies ganging up on an innocent kid or a couple fighting in the park. Primetime tests what people do when confronted with ethical dilemmas that force them to act or not. Will dressing the bullies tougher or changing the race of the fighting couple affect how people respond?

The Light in Her Eyes

Shot on the eve of the Syrian uprising, The Light in Her Eyes is a portrait of a remarkable woman, Houda al-Habash, a conservative Muslim preacher who 30 years ago founded one of the first religious schools for girls in Syria.

Myneighbourhood

When a Palestinian boy loses half of his home to Israeli settlers in the Sheikh Jarrah neighborhood in East Jerusalem, he joins his community in a campaign of nonviolent protests. Scores of Israelis choose to stand by the residents' side.

My So-Called Enemy

Spanning seven years, this film follows six girls who participated in the Building Bridges for Peace camp in New York City for seven years following their experience of meeting "the enemy" in July 2002.

Peter: Jesus' Fisherman

A psychological analysis of St. Peter and his role as a martyred church leader includes the location of his tomb and interviews with religious historians and scholars. Also: dramatic recreations of Peter's life.

The Question of God: Sigmund Freud and C.S. Lewis

Illustrates the lives and insights of Sigmund Freud and C.S. Lewis through dramatic storytelling and visual recreations, as well as interviews with biographers and historians. Interspersed throughout the film are discussions among a group of seven participants, moderated by Dr. Armand Nicholi, where Freud and Lewis are brought together in a great debate.

Saudi Arabia: The Hajj

Documentary travels to Mecca in Saudi Arabia to witness Muslims making their pilgrimage to Islam's holiest mosque as required by the five Pillars of Islam. Includes perspectives on the non-radical meaning of Islam from Muslims from around the world.

The Search for Paul

An investigation into the life of the Apostle Paul. Biblical scholars from a variety of backgrounds discuss Paul's role in the transformation of Christianity from a small Jewish sect into a world religion and examine how he contributed to the conception of Jesus that has survived to the present day.

The Secrets of the Dead Sea Scrolls

Discusses the Dead Sea scrolls, a combination of the oldest written version of the Bible and the rules of the Essene community. Talks about the discovery of the scrolls and about their restoration, and examines evidence that Qumran was the site of the Essene community.

The Shakers

This revealing and poignant film by Ken Burns portrays 200 years of Shaker life in America, guided by the recollections of the three surviving members of the faith, along with a wealth of archival material from over 40 collections. Explore every aspect of this strange and noble sect that produced some of the greatest architecture and furniture in American history.

Spirituality in Palliative Care

This video examines aspects of death and dying which may have implications for spiritual care. It also focuses on the role of the nurse in attending to spiritual care in the palliative care context.

The Unknown Jesus

For two millennia the popular image of Jesus Christ has been set in stone. New questions long debated in scholarly circles are coming to the forefront. Armed with ancient sources, modern scholars are making an impact with new theories on the most important figure of the Western World.