Rancho Cucamonga: The single most important figure in Tibetan culture meets an American backpacker for a klatch of sorts, and the results are presented in the documentary “10 Questions for the Dalai Lama.”

While the Dalai Lama, portrayed as a jokester with a young heart, sees the good in life’s challenges, the film paints the future of Tibet with a shaky brush.

As China’s economy expands and gains admiration on the world stage, Tibetans and their exiled leader face an uncertain future.

That’s the message filmmaker and interviewer Rick Ray has been spreading with his 85-minute documentary “10 Questions.”

The movie, which has been traveling the film festival circuit for a couple of years, will be screened Tuesday at the Lewis Family Playhouse.

Ray, 49, will be available for questions following the film.

Tuesday marked the 50th anniversary of the Tibetan uprising that eventually led to the exile of the spiritual leader. Protests around the world were staged Tuesday calling for an end to Chinese rule in the region.

In its quiet way, the film is a subtle protest to the Chinese government’s interference in Tibetan culture.

“I feel that Tibetans have been wronged,” Ray said. “How we treat China based on that idea is up to people to decide themselves.”

The opportunity to have a one-on-one with the Dalai Lama in Dharamsala, India, where the spiritual leader resides, came rather unexpectedly.

The filmmaker has been backpacking and making films about his travels for 25 years. He was promised an interview with the Tibetan leader by a producer, who asked Ray to make the movie with little pay. Ray jumped at the opportunity but upon arrival in India, he realized that nothing was set up as promised.

But the desire to interview the Dalai Lama remained, so Ray e-mailed (yes, e-mailed) the exiled leader and was granted an opportunity – one hour, 10 questions.

Ray asked about the Dalai Lama’s outlook on the Middle East, his philosophy on nonviolence and the role science plays in Tibetan culture.

With grace and some giggling, the Dalai Lama answered the questions in a wise but simplistic manner. It was easy to forget that this is in fact an interview with a Nobel Peace Prize laureate and the most revered figure among Tibetan Buddhists.

“Some people have said this film is a simple overview of him and I agree,” Ray said. “I didn’t make the film for Tibetologists who have a deep, profound knowledge of the Dalai Lama. I made it for the average person.

“If I died tomorrow, I would feel that this film has been a good cause.”