Billboard is an American entertainment and music magazine. It was first published in November of 1894 as an entertainment publication and is distinguished as being among the oldest trade magazines in the world. The magazine originally focused on bill posting and outdoor amusements before concentrating on music and related fields beginning in the 30's Most of the 1980's, 90's and 00's issues are available thanks to a donation by chart historian Monty Greenly. Many 60's issues come from Kees Brinkerink. Other contributors include Rodolfo Ovalle, Rob Hawkins, and Arie den Dulk. Help...

Help us Fix Incomplete Issues

Please help us add missing pages. We'll pay your shipping and return. Or you can scan and submit the missing pages (jpg or tiff, please). Other Billboard Publications Country Airplay Monitor Airplay Monitor Many Issues Still Needed!

Please lend for scanning any of the missing issues. We'll pay your shipping and return. Our goal is to have on this page all issues and special editions and directories from Billboard from 1894 to 2017: Over 130 total years.

These are the issues the magazine has released into the public domain including Google Books. This collection has unique features that you will not find on other sites.

1 Searchable contents: Enter names, words or phrases 2 Searchable by year and decade. Limit your search to one period of time. 3 Easy to read in world-standard PDF format. 4 The collection includes special editions, directories and other Billboard publications. 5 This whole site is FREE. No ads, no cost. 6 You can search multiple music industry magazines all at once.

Billboard Encyclopedia

1946-1947 Like music charts? We recommend: Joel Whitburn's Record Research Over 70 different chart-related books covering nearly all genres of music. Order direct

or see the Joel Whitburn

collection at

Amazon.

This is not a paid endorsement... we simply love the "Whitburn books" and think you should consider having at least one! Billboard Charts How Billboard Tracks the Hits:

A description of how

charts are put together

April 9, 1988

Click to View Other Music

Industry Publications on this Site

Cash Box Record World Radio and

Records Gavin Report Network 40 Hard Report Hitmakers BRE FMQB Hits Magazine Album Network Sound Format Music & Media RPM Canada Music Business Melody Maker Music Week New Musical

Express Record Mirror Disc Record

Business Record Mail DeeJay Pop Weekly