About Billboard

Billboard magazine has all that you could want from a publication about today’s music and artists. You will enjoy reading articles about various styles of music as well as many different artists. There are also interesting and informative features in each issue about the various businesses that are involved in the industry and that influence your access and listening. You will look forward to reading your weekly issue of Billboard magazine! Order your discount subscription today!

News

In every issue of Billboard magazine, there are many great articles about all the latest news from all of your favorite writers, musicians, rappers, and singers. You can learn about new albums, up and coming artists, music festivals and other interesting news! You will also enjoy reading about all of the various styles, including pop, R&B, hip-hop, country, Latin, EDM, K-pop, and other types of music. There is something for every music listener and lover in this periodical!

Business

In the business section of Billboard magazine, you will enjoy reading about all of the various companies that have an influence on the industry as well as how you listen to music. There are features about Apple, Amazon, YouTube, and many other big brands about which you will enjoy reading. You can also find articles about lesser-known music distributers, recording labels, and other business information in each issue. You will love being able to learn about the professional side of entertainment.

Style

With your subscription to Billboard magazine, you will also benefit from a section devoted entirely to style. In every issue, you can read about fashion from your favorite musicians and singers, beauty tips, clothing, hairstyles, and make up. You will love reading all of these style articles and will look ready to star in a music video of your own with the help of this periodical!

Stay up to date with the music industry each week by ordering your discount Billboard magazine subscription today!