See other formats

DEPT. OF ENG., HIST., & GOVT. ANNUAL REGISTER UNITED STATES NAVAL ACADEMY ANNAPOLIS, MD. * EIGHTY- EIGHTH ACADEMIC YEAR, 1932-1933 * * ANNUAL REGISTER OF THE UNITED STATES NAVAL ACADEMY ANNAPOLIS, MD. SEPTEMBER 23, 1932 EIGHTY-EIGHTH ACADEMIC YEAR 1932-1933 UNITED STATES GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE WASHINGTON : 1932 For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, Washington, D. C. Price 15 cents CONTENTS Page Mission op Naval Academy — __ iv Histoeical Sketch 1 Superintendents 15 Board of Visitors 16 Academic Calendar ., 17 Calendar, 1932-33 18 Officers and Civilian Instructors Attached to the United States Naval Academy 19 Academic Board 26 Midshipmen Officers and Petty Officers, 1932-33 27 Practice Cruise, Summer of 1932 30 Merit Rolls for 1931-32 31 Midshipmen of the Fourth Class at the Beginning of Academic Year 1932-33 114 Numerical Summary 121 Appointments, Deaths, Resignations, etc 122 Summer Schedule, Second Class, 1932 130 List of Members of Class of 1934 Retained at Naval Academy for Instruction, Summer of 1932 133 Second Class Organization, Summer 1932 137 Summer Schedule, Fourth Class, 1932 138 Course of Instruction, 1932-33 142 Assignment of Time, 1932-33 146 Table of Coefficients, 1932-33 146 Schedule of Friday Night Lectures 146 Programs of Recitations, 1932-33 . 147 R^sum^ of Course of Instruction 149 Lib rary 168 Summary of Course in Aviation Instruction 170 Prizes, Medals, etc., Presented 1931-32 171 in Qt kjji (J* Q» £J* y& Q» ^ ty fy fy fy ifc . fy fy fy fy fy !fc fy fy Sfc i$j THE MISSION 710 mold the material received into educated gentlemen, thoroughly indoctrinated with honor, uprightness, and truth, with practical rather than academic minds, with thorough loyalty to country, with a groundwork of educational fundamentals upon which experience afloat may build the finished naval officer, capable of upholding, whenever and wherever may be necessary, the honor of the United States; and withal giving due consideration that healthy minds in healthy bodies are necessities for the fulfillment of the individual missions of the graduates; and that fullest efficiency under this mission can only be attained if, through just and humane yet firm discipline, the graduates carry into the service respect and admiration for this academy Note: On October 25, 1930, the Association of American Universi- ties placed the United States Naval Academy on its approved list of universities and colleges. IV THE UNITED STATES NAVAL ACADEMY The United States Naval Academy was founded in 1845 by the Hon. George Bancroft, Secretary of the Navy, in the administration of President James K. Polk. It was formally opened October 10 of that year under the name of the Naval School, with Commander Franklin Buchanan as superintendent. It was placed at Annapolis, Md., on the land occupied by Fort Severn, which was given up for the purpose by the War Department by the Hon. William L. Marcy, then Secretary of War. The course was fixed at five years, of which only the first year and the last were spent at the school, the intervening three years being passed at sea. This arrangement was not strictly adhered to, the exi- gencies of the service making it necessary, in many cases, to shorten the period of study. In January, 1846, four months after the opening of the school, the students consisted of 36 midshipmen of the date of 1840, who were preparing for the examination for promotion; 13 of the date of 1841, who were to remain until drafted for service at sea; and 7 acting midshipmen appointed after Sep- tember of the previous year. The midshipmen of the date of 1840 were the first to be graduated, finishing their limited course in July, 1846, and they were followed in order by the subsequent dates until the reorganization of the school in 1850. In September, 1849, the following board was appointed to revise the plan and the regulations of the Naval School: Commander William B. Shubrick. Commander Franklin Buchanan. Commander Samuel F. DuPont. Commander George P. Upshur. Surg. W. S. W. Ruschemberger. Prof. William Chauvenet. Capt. Henry Brewerton, United States Army. The plan reported by the board was approved and went into operation July 1, 1850. The new organization provided for a course of seven years, the first two and the last two at the school and the three intermediate years at sea. The school was placed under the supervision of the Bureau of Ordnance and Hydrog- raphy and its name was changed to the United States Naval Academy. The corps of professors was enlarged, the course was extended, and the system of sep- arate departments with executive heads was fully adopted. It was provided that a Board of Visitors should make an annual inspection of the academy and report upon its condition to the Secretary of the Navy. A suitable vessel was attached to the academy as a practice ship and the annual practice cruises were begun. After the system had been in operation a year new changes were proposed and the recommendations of the academic board on the subject were referred to the board of examiners for the year 1851, composed of the following-named officers: Commodore David Conner. Capt. Samuel L. Breese. Commander C. K. Stribling. Commander A. Bigelow. Commander Franklin Buchanan. Lieut. Thomas T. Craven. The change recommended by the board of examiners and adopted by the depart- ment consisted mainly in leaving out the requirements of three years of sea service in the middle of the course, thus making the four years of study consecutive. The practice cruise supplied the place of the omitted sea service and gave better opportunities for training. The change went into operation in November, 1851, 1 Z HISTORICAL SKETCH together with other improvements recommended by the board. This system has been continued, with some slight modifications, to the present time. The first class to receive the benefit of it was that which entered in 1851. Six members of this class completed the course in three years and were graduated in June, 1854; the remainder of the class followed in 1855. In May, 1861, on the outbreak of the war, the academy was moved to Newport, R. I. The three upper classes were detached and ordered to sea and the remain- ing acting midshipmen were quartered in the Atlantic House and on board the frigates Constitution and Santee. In the summer of 1865 the academy was brought back to Annapolis, where it has since remained. When the Bureau of Navigation was established, July 5, 1862, the academy was placed under its supervision; March 1, 1867, it was placed under the direct care and supervision of the Navy Department, the administrative routine and financial management still being conducted through the bureau. On the 11th of March, 1869, this official connection with the bureau ceased, but was renewed by the general order of the Navy Department issued June 25, 1889. The term of the academic course was changed by law March 3, 1873, from four to six years. The change took effect with the class that entered in the following summer. In 1866 a class of acting third assistant engineers was ordered to the academy for instruction. The course embraced the subjects of steam engineering mecha- nism, chemistry, mechanics, and practical exercises with the steam engine and in the machine shop. This class was graduated in June, 1868, together with two cadet engineers wtio had entered the academy in 1867. After an interval of four years, in October, 1871, a new class of cadet engineers was admitted. This class followed a two years' course, somewhat more extended than that of the class of 1868, and was graduated in 1873. In 1872 and 1873 new classes were admitted, the first of which left the academy in 1874 and the second in 1875. By an act of Congress approved February 24, 1874, the course of instruction for cadet engineers was made four years instead of two; the new provision was first applied to the class entering the academy in the year 1874. This class was graduated in June, 1878. An act of Congress approved June 23, 1874, provides as follows: " Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United States of America in Congress assembled, That in all cases when it shall come to the knowl- edge of the Superintendent of the Naval Academy, at Annapolis, that any cadet midshipman or cadet engineer has been guilty of the offense commonly known as hazing, it shall be the duty of said superintendent to order a court-martial, composed of not less than three commissioned officers, who shall minutely examine into all the facts and circumstances of the case and make a finding thereon; and any cadet midshipman or cadet engineer found guilty of said offense by said court shall, upon recommendation of said court, be dismissed; and such finding, when approved by said superintendent, shall be final; and the cadet so dismissed from said Naval Academy shall be forever ineligible to reappoint- ment to said Naval Academy." By an act of Congress approved August 5, 1882, it was provided that from that date — "There shall be no appointments of cadet midshipmen or cadet engineers at the Naval Academy, but in lieu thereof naval cadets shall be appointed from each congressional district and at large, as now provided by law for cadet midshipmen, and all the undergraduates at the Naval Academy shall hereafter be designated and called 'naval cadets,' and from those who successfully complete the six years' course appointments shall hereafter be made as it is necessary to fill vacancies in the lower grades of the Line and Engineer Corps of the Navy and of the Marine Corps : And provided further, That no greater number of appointments into HISTORICAL SKETCH 6 these grades sfeall be made each year than shall equal the number of vacancies which has occurred in the same grades during the preceding year; such appoint- ments to be made from the graduates of the year, at the conclusion of their six years' course, in order of merit, as determined by the academic board of the Naval Academy; the assignment of the various corps to be made by the Secretary of the Navy upon the recommendation of the academic board. But nothing herein contained shall reduce the number of appointments from such graduates below ten in each year, nor deprive of such appointment any graduate who may com- plete the six years' course during the year eighteen hundred and eighty-two. And if there be a surplus of graduates, those who do not receive such appointment shall be given a certificate of graduation, an honorable discharge, and one year's sea pay, as now provided by law for cadet midshipmen; and so much of section fifteen hundred and twenty-one of the Revised Statutes as is inconsistent herewith is hereby repealed. "That any cadet whose position in his class entitles him to be retained in the service may, upon his own application, be honorably discharged at the end of four years' course at the Naval Academy, with a proper certificate of graduation." In 1886 a special course of instruction in physiology and hygiene was estab- lished, in accordance with an act of Congress approved May 20 of that year. The act of Congress approved March 2, 1889, provides that — "The academic board of the Naval Academy shall, on or before the thirtieth day of September in each year, separate the first class of naval cadets then com- mencing their fourth year into two divisions, as they may have shown special aptitude for the duties of the respective corps, in the proportion which the aggregate number of vacancies occurring in the preceding fiscal year ending on the thirtieth day of June in the lowest grade of commissioned officers of the Line of the Navy and Marine Corps of the Navy shall bear to the number of vacancies to be supplied from the academy occurring during the same period in the lowest grade of commissioned officers of the Engineer Corps of the Navy; and the cadets so assigned to the Line and Marine Corps division of the first class shall thereafter pursue a course of study arranged to fit them for service in the Line of the Navy, and the cadets so assigned to the Engineer Corps division of the first class shall therafter pursue a separate course of study arranged to fit them for service in the Engineer Corps of the Navy, and the cadets shall thereafter, and until final graduation at the end of their six years' course, take rank by merit with those in the same division according to the merit marks; and from the final graduates of the Line and Marine Corps division, at the end of their six years' course, appoint- ments shall be made hereafter as it shall be necessary to fill vacancies in the lowest grades of commissioned officers of the Line of the Navy and Marine Corps; and the vacancies in the lowest grades of the commissioned officers of the Engineer Corps of the Navy shall be filled in like manner by appointments from the final graduates of the engineer division at the end of their six years' course: Provided, That no greater number of appointments into the said lowest grades of com- missioned officers shall be made each year than shall equal the number of vacancies which shall have occurred in the same grades during the fiscal year then current; such appointments to be made from the final graduates of the year, in the order of merit as determined by the academic board of the Naval Academy, the assignment to be made by the Secretary of the Navy upon the recommendation of the academic board at the conclusion of the fiscal year then current; but nothing con- tained herein or in the naval appropriation act of August fifth, eighteen hundred and eighty-two, shall reduce the number of appointments of final graduates at the end of their six years' course below twelve in each year to the Line of the Navy and not less than two shall be appointed annually to the Engineer Corps of the Navy, nor less than one annually to the Marine Corps; and if the number of vacancies in the lowest grades aforesaid occurring in any year shall be greater than the number 4 HISTORICAL SKETCH of final graduates of that year the surplus vacancies shall be filled from the final graduates of the following years as they shall become available. "That after the fourth day of March, eighteen hundred and eighty-nine, the minimum age of admission of cadets to the academy shall be fifteen years and the maximum age twenty years.'' In October, 1897, a postgraduate course in naval architecture for the education of officers for the Construction Corps of the Nayy was established; and a class was formed from the naval cadets that had finished the four years' course in that year. By an act of Congress approved March 3, 1899, "the officers constituting the Engineer Corps of the Navy" were transferred to the "Line of the Navy," thereby repealing so much of the act of Congress approved March 2, 1889, as relates to the separation of naval cadets of the first class into line and engineer divisions. This same act having limited the number of constructors in the Navy to 40, the postgraduate course in naval architecture was discontinued. By an act of Congress approved June 7, 1900, it was provided that — "Whenever any naval cadet shall have finished four years of his undergraduate course of sis years the succeeding appointment may be made from his congres- sional district or at large in accordance with the existing law." By an act of Congress approved July 1, 1902, it was provided that — "The title 'naval cadet' is hereby changed to ' midshipman. ' "That until the year nineteen hundred and fourteen, in addition to the naval cadets now authorized by law (the title having been changed by this act to mid- shipmen), the President shall appoint five midshipmen, and there shall be ap- pointed from the States at large, upon the recommendation of Senators, two midshipmen for each State." By an act of Congress approved March 3, 1903, it was provided that — "There shall be allowed at the Naval Academy two midshipmen for each Senator, Representative, and Delegate in Congress, two for the District of Columbia, and five each year at large: Provided, That the additional congres- sional appointments authorized by this act shall be made at such time as may be determined by the Secretary of the Navy, who shall equitably distribute the increase among the several States, Districts, and Territories, so that ultimately, if practicable, each Senator, Representative, and Delegate may recommend for appointment during each Congress one midshipman: Provided further, That Members of the Fifty-seventh Congress who will not be Members of the Fifty- eighth Congress, and in whose districts or States appointments have not been made or vacancies filled in the Fifty-seventh Congress, may immediately upon the passage of this act make the additional appointments herein provided for. "The Secretary of the Navy shall, as soon as practicable after the fifth day of March in each year, notify in writing each Senator, Representative, and Delegate in Congress of any vacancy which may be regarded as existing in the State, District, or Territory which he represents, and the nomination of a candidate to fill such vacancy shall be made upon the recommendation of the Senator, Repre- sentative, or Delegate. Such recommendations shall be made by the first day of June of that year, and if not so made the Secretary of the Navy shall fill the vacancy by the appointment of an actual resident of the State, District, or Territory in which the vacancy exists, who shall have been for at least two years immediately preceding his appointment an actual bona fide resident of the State, District, or Territory in which the vacancy exists and shall have the qualifica- tions otherwise prescribed by law: And provided further, That the Superintend- ent of the Naval Academy shall make such rules, to be approved by the Secre- tary of the Navy, as will effectually prevent the practice of hazing; and any cadet found guilty of participating in or encouraging or countenancing such practice shall be summarily expelled from the academy, and shall not thereafter be reappointed to the Corps of Cadets or be eligible for appointment as a com- HISTORICAL SKETCH O missioned officer in the Army or Navy or Marine Corps until two years after the graduation of the class of which he was a member. " That the provision of this act for the increase of appointments of midshipmen to the Naval Academy shall continue in force until the thirtieth day of June, nineteen hundred and thirteen; and thereafter one midshipman, as now provided by law, shall be appointed for each Senator, Representative, and Delegate in Congress. "That hereafter there shall be at the Naval Academy one midshipman from Porto Rico, who shall be a native of said island, and whose appointment shall be made by the President on the recommendation of the Governor of Porto Rico. "That after January first, nineteen hundred and four, all candidates for ad- mission to the Naval Academy at the time of their examination must be between the ages of sixteen and twenty years." "All candidates for admission into the academy shall be examined according to such regulations and at such stated times as the Secretary of the Navy may prescribe. Candidates rejected at such examination shall not have the privilege of another examination for admission to the same class, unless recommended by the board of examiners. " (R. S. sec. 1515.) "When any candidate who has been nominated upon the recommendation of a Member or Delegate of the House of Representatives is found, upon examination, to be physically or mentally disqualified for admission, the Member or Delegate shall be notified to recommend another candidate, who shall be examined accord- ing to the provisions of the preceding section." (R. S. sec. 1516.) An act of Congress approved April 9, 1906, reads as follows: "AN ACT Granting authority to the Secretary of the Navy, in his discretion, to dismiss midshipmen from the United States Naval Academy and regulating the procedure and punishment in trials for hazing at the said academy "Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United States of America in Congress assembled, That it shall be the duty of the Superintendent of the United States Naval Academy, whenever he shall believe the continued presence of any midshipman at the said academy to be contrary to the best interests of the service, to report in writing such fact, with a full statement of the facts upon which are based his reasons for such belief, to the Secretary of the Navy, who, if after due consideration of the said report he shall deem the super- intendent's said belief reasonable and well founded, shall cause a copy of the said report to be served upon the said midshipman and require the said midshipman to show cause in writing and within such time as the said Secretary shall deem reasonable, why he should not be dismissed from the said academy; and after due consideration of any cause so shown the said Secretary may, in his discretion, but with the written approval of the President, dismiss such midshipman from the said academy. And the truth of any issue of fact so raised, except upon the record of demerit, shall be determined by a board of inquiry convened by the Secretary of the Navy under the rules and regulations for the government of the Navy. "Sec. 2. That so much of the acts approved June twenty-third, eighteen hundred and seventy-four, and March third, nineteen hundred and three, as requires the Superintendent of the United States Naval Academy to convene a court-martial in all cases when it shall come to the knowledge of the said super- intendent that any midshipman has been guilty of the offense commonly known as 'hazing/ and declares the finding of a court-martial so convened, when approved by the said superintendent, final, and directs that any midshipman found guilty by such court-martial shall be summarily dismissed from the said academy, and also all other acts or parts of acts inconsistent with the present act, are hereby repealed, and that the offense known as 'hazing' may hereafter be proceeded against, dealt with, and punished as offenses against good order and discipline and for violation and breaches of the rules of said academy. But no midshipman shall be dismissed for a single act of hazing except under the pro- visions of section three of this act. 6 HISTORICAL SKETCH "Sec. 3. That the Superintendent of the United States Naval Academy may, in his discretion, and with the approval of the Secretary of the Navy, cause any midshipman in the said academy to be tried by court-martial for the offense of hazing, as provided by the act approved June twenty-third, eighteen hundred and seventy-four, and such court-martial, upon conviction, may sentence such midshipman to any punishment authorized by the said act or by the act approved March third, nineteen hundred and three, or authorized for any violation or breach of the rules of the said academy by the said rules, or in cases of brutal or cruel hazing, may, in addition to dismissal, sentence such midshipman to imprisonment for a period not exceeding one year: Provided, That such mid- shipman shall not be confined in a military or naval prison or elsewhere with men who have been convicted of crimes or misdemeanors; and such finding and sen- tence shall be subject to review by the convening authority and by the Secretary of the Navy, as in the cases of other courts-martial. "Sec. 4. That the offense of 'hazing,' as mentioned in this act, shall consist of any unauthorized assumption of authority by one midshipman over another midshipman whereby the last-mentioned midshipman shall or may suffer or be exposed to suffer any cruelty, indignity, humiliation, hardship, or oppression, or the deprivation or abridgment of any right, privilege, or advantage to which he shall be legally entitled. "Sec. 5. That it shall be the duty of every professor, assistant professor, academic officer, or any cadet officer or cadet petty officer, or instructor, as well as every other officer stationed at the United States Naval Academy, to promptly report to the superintendent thereof any fact which comes to his attention tending to indicate any violation by a midshipman or midshipmen of any of the provisions of this act or any violation of the regulations of the said academy. Any naval officer attached to the academy who shall fail to make such report as provided in this section shall be tried by court-martial for neglect of duty, and, if convicted, he shall be dismissed from the service. Any civilian instructor attached to the academy who shall fail to make such report as provided in this section shall be dismissed by the superintendent of the academy upon the approval . of the Secretary of the Navy. "Sec. 6. That this act shall take effect from the date of its approval, but no midshipman now connected with the United States Naval Academy shall, by reason of its enactment, be punished for any offense heretofore committed otherwise than in pursuance of the sentence of a court-martial if by existing law such sentence would be now necessary for such punishment or punished more severley than is now by law allowed for any offense heretofore committed: Provided, That any midshipman now in said Naval Academy may waive his right to trial by court-martial under existing law for any offense of hazing heretofore committed and may accept punishment under the provisions of section two of this act." By an act of Congress, June 29, 1906, it was provided that — "Hereafter, the Secretary of the Navy shall, as soon as possible after the first day of June of each year preceding the graduation of the midshipmen on the succeeding year, notify in writing each Senator, Representative, and Delegate in Congress of any vacancy that will exist at the Naval Academy because of such graduation, or that may occur for other reasons, and which he shall be entitled to fill by nomination of a candidate and one or more alternates therefor. The nomination of a candidate and alternate or alternates to fill said vacancy shall be made upon the recommendation of the Senator, Representative, or Delegate, if such recommendation is made by the fourth day of March of the year following that in which said notice in writing is given, but if it is not made by that time the Secretary of the Navy shall fill the vacancy by appointment of an actual resident of the State, congressional district, or Territory, as the case HISTORICAL SKETCH / may be, in which the vacancy will exist, who shall have been for at least two years immediately preceding the date of his appointment an actual and bona fide resident of the State, congressional district, or Territory in which the vacancy will exist, and of legal qualification under the law as now provided. In cases where by reason of a vacancy in the membership of the Senate or House of Representatives or by the death or declination of a candidate for admission to the academy there occurs or is about to occur at the academy a vacancy from any State, district, or Territory that can not be filled by nomination as herein provided, the same may be filled as soon thereafter and before the final entrance examination for the year as the Secretary of the Navy may determine. The candidates allowed for the District of Columbia and all candidates appointed at large, together with alternates therefor, shall be selected by the President within the period herein prescribed for nomination of other candidates : Provided, That the President may select a candidate for the District of Columbia for the year nineteen hundred and eight. "No person shall be admitted for instruction at the Naval Academy at Annap- olis from any foreign country except upon authority of law hereafter enacted." By an act of Congress approved March 7, 1912, it was provided — "That the course at the Naval Academy shall be four years, and midshipmen on graduation shall be commissioned ensigns: Provided, That midshipmen now performing two years' service at sea in accordance with existing law shall be commissioned forthwith as ensigns from the date of the passage of this act: And provided, That those midshipmen of the class which was graduated in nine- teen hundred and nine, who have completed two years' service afloat, and who are due for promotion, shall be commissioned ensigns to take rank with the other members of their class, according to their standing as determined by their final multiples, respectively, for the six years' course, from the fifth day of June, nineteen hundred and eleven, the date of rank to which they were entitled prioi to the passage of this act : And provided further, That no back pay or allowances shall result by reason of the passage of this act." The class graduating from the Naval Academy June, 1912, was the first class to be graduated as ensigns. By an act of Congress approved July 9, 1913, it was provided — "That after June thirtieth, nineteen hundred and thirteen, and until June thirtieth, nineteen hundred and nineteen, there shall be allowed at the Naval Academy two midshipmen for each Senator, Representative, and Delegate in Congress, one for Porto Rico, two for the District of Columbia, and ten appointed each "year, at large: Provided, That the midshipmen on graduation shall be com- missioned ensigns in the Navy or may be assigned by the Secretary of the Navy to fill vacancies in the lowest commissioned grades of the Marine Corps or Staff Corps of the Navy." By an act of Congress passed June 30, 1914, it was provided — "Hereafter, in addition to the appointments of midshipmen to the United States Naval Academy as now prescribed by law, the Secretary of the Navy is allowed fifteen appointments annually from the enlisted men of the Navy who are citizens of the United States and not more than twenty years of age on the date of entrance to the Naval Academy, and who shall have served not less than one year as enlisted men on the date of entrance: Provided, That such appoint- ments shall be made in the order of merit from candidates who have in competi- tion with each other passed the mental examination now or hereafter required by law for entrance to the Naval Academy, and who passed the physical examina- tion required before entrance under existing law." An act of Congress approved February 15, 1916, reads as follows: "Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United States of America in Congress assembled, That hereafter there shall be allowed at the 8 HISTORICAL SKETCH United States Naval Academy three midshipmen for each Senator, Representa- tive, and Delegate in Congress, one for Porto Rico, two for the District of Colum- bia, ten appointed each year at large, and fifteen appointed annually from enlisted men of the Navy, as now authorized by law. "Sec. 2. That all acts or parts of acts inconsistent with the provisions of this act are hereby repealed." Public Resolution, No. 7, Sixty-fourth Congress, approved February 15, 1916, provides as follows : "Resolved by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United States of America in Congress assembled, That the Secretary of the Navy be, and he hereby is, authorized to permit Mr. Carlos Hevia y Reyes Gavilan, a citizen of Cuba, to receive instruction at the United States Naval Academy at Annapolis: Pro- vided, That no expense shall be caused to the United States thereby, and that the said Carlos Hevia y Reyes Gavilan shall agree to comply with all regula- tions for the police and discipline of the academy, to be studious, and to give his utmost efforts to accomplish the course in the various departments of instruc- tion, and that the said Carlos Hevia y Reyes Gavilan shall not be admitted to the academy until he shall have passed the mental and physical examinations prescribed for candidates from the United States, and that he shall be imme- diately withdrawn if deficient in studies, or conduct, and so recommended by the academic board." An act of Congress approved August 29, 1916, reads: "From and after the passage of this act there shall be appointed every year, in the following manner, a Board of Visitors, to visit the academy, the date of the . annual visit of the board aforesaid to be fixed by the Secretary of the Navy: Seven persons shall be appointed by the President and four Senators and five Members of the House of Representatives shall be designated as visitors by the Vice President or President pro tempore of the Senate and the Speaker of the House of Representatives, respectively, in the month of January of each year. The chairman of the Committee on Naval Affairs of the Senate and chairman of the Committee on Naval Affairs of the House of Representatives shall be ex officio members of said board. "Each member of said board shall receive while engaged upon duties as a member of the board not to exceed $5 a day and actual expenses of travel by the shortest mail routes." (39 Stat., 608, chap. 417.) An act of Congress approved August 29, 1916, provides as follows: "Hereafter, in addition to the appointment of midshipmen to the United States Naval Academy, as now prescribed by law, the President is hereby allowed fifteen appointments annually instead of ten as now prescribed by law, and the Secretary of the Navy is allowed twenty-five appointments annually instead of fifteen as now prescribed by law, the latter to be appointed from the enlisted men of the Navy who are citizens of the United States, and not more than twenty years of age on the date of entrance to the Naval Academy, and who shall have served not less than one year as enlisted men on the date of entrance: Provided, That such appointments shall be made in the order of merit from candidates who have in competition with each other passed the mental examination now or hereafter required by law for entrance to the Naval Academy and who passed the physical examinations required before entrance under existing laws. ' ' That hereafter the Secretary of the Navy is authorized to permit not exceed- ing four Filipinos, to be designated, one for each class, by the Governor General of the Philippine Islands, to receive instruction at the United States Naval Academy at Annapolis, Maryland: Provided, That the Filipinos undergoing instruction, as herein authorized, shall receive the same pay, allowances, and emoluments, to be paid out of the same appropriations, and shall be subject to the same rules and regulations governing admission, attendance, discipline, HISTORICAL SKETCH 9 resignation, discharge, dismissal, and graduation as are authorized by law and regulation for midshipmen appointed from the United States, but the Filipino midshipmen herein authorized shall not be entitled to appointment to any com- missioned office in the United States Navy by reason of their graduation from the Naval Academy. "Provided further, That no midshipman at the United States Naval Academy or cadet at the United States Military Academy who fails to graduate therefrom shall be eligible for appointment as a commissioned officer in the Marine Corps until after the graduation of the class of which he was a member." An act of Congress approved March 4, 1917, provides as follows: "Hereafter, in addition to the appointment of midshipmen to the United States Naval Academy, as now prescribed by law, the Secretary of the Navy is allowed one hundred appointments annually instead of twenty-five as now pre- scribed by law, to be appointed from the enlisted men of the Navy who are citizens of the United States, and not more than twenty years of age on the date of entrance to the Naval Academy, and who shall have served not less than one year as enlisted men on the date of entrance: Provided, That such appointments shall be made in the order of merit from candidates who have, in competition with each other, passed the mental examination now or hereafter required by law for entrance to the Naval Academy, and who passed the physical examination before entrance under existing laws. "The President, in his discretion, is authorized to reduce the course of instruc- tion at the Naval Academy from four to three years for a period of two years from the date of the approval of this act, and may during said two years graduate classes which have completed a three-year course." An act of Congress approved April 25, 1917, reads as follows: "AN ACT To increase the number of midshipmen at the Naval Academy until September first, nineteen hundred and eighteen 11 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United States of America in Congress assembled, That, in addition to the number of midshipmen now authorized by law, there shall be appointed during the period from the date of passage of this act until September first, nineteen hundred and eighteen, one additional midshipman for each Senator, Representative, and Delegate in Con- gress. Nominations shall be made for these vacancies by the Senators, Repre- sentatives, and Delegates concerned for any regular or special examination that may be ordered before that date." An act of Congress approved December 20, 1917, reads as follows: 11 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United States of America in Congress assembled, That hereafter there shall be allowed at the United States Naval Academy five midshipmen for each Senator, Representa- tive, and Delegate in Congress, one for Porto Rico, two for the District of Colum- bia, fifteen appointed each year at large, and one hundred appointed annually from enlisted men of the Navy, as now authorized by law. "Sec. 2. That all acts or parts of acts inconsistent with the provisions of this act are hereby repealed." An act of Congress approved April 2, 1918, reads as follows: "Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United States of America in Congress assembled, That the President be, and he is hereby, author- ized, until August first, nineteen hundred and twenty-one, to reduce, in his discretion, the course of instruction at the United States Naval Academy from four to three years and to graduate classes which have completed such reduced courses of instruction." The classes following were graduated in accordance with the act of^Congress of April 2, 1918, authorizing a reduction in the course. 10 HISTOEICAL SKETCH Class Date graduated Members graduated 1917 _ _ - _ _ _ -_ Mar. 29, 1917 June 28, 1917 June 6, 1918 June 6, 1919 June 3, 1920 182 1918 _ _ _ _ 199 1919 _ _ _ _ 199 1920- _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ 460 1921 (first half) _______ _ 286 On June 6, 1919, the class of 1921 was divided, and the first half, according to general merit for the third-class year, became the first class and continued the three years' course; the second half became the second class and resumed the four years' course. An act of Congress approved May 14, 1918, reads as follows: "AN ACT To fix the age limits for candidates for admission to the United States Naval Academy 11 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United States of America in Congress assembled, That hereafter all candidates for admission to the Naval Academy must be not less than sixteen years of age nor more than twenty years of age on April first of the calendar year in which they enter the academy : Provided, That the foregoing shall not apply to candidates for midshipmen desig- nated for entrance to the academy in nineteen hundred and eighteen." An act of Congress approved July 11, 1919, reads as follows: "Section 1 of the act entitled 'An act to increase the number of midshipmen at the United States Naval Academy,' approved December 20, 1917, is hereby amended so as to read as follows: That hereafter there shall be allowed at the United States Naval Academy five midshipmen for each Senator, Representative, Delegate in Congress, and Resident Commissioner from Porto Rico, and five for the District of Columbia, fifteen appointed each year at large, and one hundred appointed annually from enlisted men of the Navy, and members of the Naval Reserve Force on active duty, as now authorized by law." This act also provides that all midshipmen entering the Naval Academy subse- quent to June 1, 1919, shall be allowed mileage, at 5 cents per mile, while pro- ceeding from their homes to the Naval Academy for examination and appoint- ment as midshipmen, and that the pay of midshipmen shall hereafter be $780 per annum. The following clause was contained in the deficiency act approved June 5, 1920: "That until otherwise provided by law no midshipman found deficient at the close of the last and succeeding academic terms shall be involuntarily discon- tinued at the Naval Academy or in the service unless he shall fail upon reexam- ination in the subjects in which found deficient at an examination to be held at the beginning of the next and succeeding academic terms, and the Secretary of the Navy shall provide for the special instruction of such midshipmen in the subjects in which found deficient during the period between academic terms." A clause in the naval appropriation bill, act of July 12, 1921, provides that a candidate for midshipman so desiring may receive a credit of $250 upon entrance toward defraying the entering expenses. INSTRUCTIONS TO CANDIDATES FOR MIDSHIPMEN REGARDING ENTRANCE DEPOSIT Each candidate who has qualified mentally and physically must, before being admitted as a midshipman, deposit with the midshipmen's storekeeper the sum of $100, to be used in part payment to cover cost of uniforms, clothing, text- books, etc. The amount deposited is not refunded but is expended for cloth- ing and textbooks, which become the property of the midshipman. An act of Congress approved July 12, 1921, reads as follows: " Provided, That hereafter each new midshipman shall, upon admission to the Naval Academy, be HISTORICAL SKETCH 11 credited with the sum of $250 to cover the cost of his initial clothing and equip- ment issue, to be deducted subsequently from his pay: Provided further, That the foregoing proviso shall apply to midshipmen who enter the Naval Adademy during the period between June 20, 1921, and the date of the approval of this act." This sum is needed in addition to the $100 cash deposit referred to above to complete paying for the uniforms, clothing, textbooks, etc., required before a midshipman enters upon his studies. This amount is deducted from the mid- shipman's pay in monthly installments. Any midshipman may, however, imme- diately after entering the. academy repay this amount in full from his own funds and thus obviate the necessity of having a certain amount deducted monthly from his pay for this purpose. It is urgently recommended that all those mid- shipmen financially able to do so make the repayment as soon as possible after entering the academy. An act providing for the readmission of certain deficient midshipmen to the United States Naval Academy, approved October 22, 1921, reads as follows: 11 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United States of America in Congress assembled, That the Secretary of the Navy is authorized, upon application, to admit to and reinstate in the United States Naval Academy, subject to examination as to physical qualifications, as provided by law, but waiv- ing the provisions of law as to age requirements, all former midshipmen at the United States Naval Academy found deficient at the end of the first term of the academic year 1920-21 whose resignations were asked for and received by the Superintendent of the Naval Academy : Provided, That they shall upon admission be placed in the class one year behind their former class in each case: Provided further, That said midshipmen affected by this act must signify their acceptance of the benefits thereof by presenting themselves for physical examination within one month of the date of its approval, and if found qualified will enter the Naval Academy immediately. "Sec. 2. That the clause in the act approved June 5, 1920 (Forty-first Statutes p. 1028), entitled 'An act making appropriations to supply deficiencies in appro- priations for the fiscal year ending June 30, 1920, and for other purposes,' which reads as follows: 'That until otherwise provided by law no midshipman found deficient at the close of the last and succeeding academic terms shall be involun- tarily discontinued at the Naval Academy or in the service unless he shall fail upon reexamination in the subjects in which found deficient at an examination to be held at the beginning of the next and succeeding academic terms, and the Secretary of the Navy shall provide for the special instruction of such midship- men in the subjects in which found deficient during the period between academic terms,' be, and the same hereby is, repealed, and section 1519 of the Revised Statutes restored to its full force and effect." Public Resolution No. 72, Sixty-seventh Congress, approved September 18, 1922, provides as follows: "Resolved by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United States of America in Congress assembled, That the Secretary of the Navy be, and hereby is, authorized to permit Mr. Willem van Doom, a subject of the Netherlands, to receive instruction at the United States Naval Academy at Annapolis: Provided, That no expense shall be caused to the United States thereby, and that the said Willem van Doom shall agree to comply with all regulations for the police and discipline of the academy, to be studious, and to give his utmost efforts to accom- plish the course in the various departments of instruction, and that the said Willem van Doom shall not be admitted to the academy until he shall have passed the mental and physical examinations prescribed for candidates from the United States, and that he shall be immediately withdrawn if deficient in studies or conduct and so recommended by the academic board." 12 HISTORICAL SKETCH An act of Congress approved January 22, 1923, reads as follows: "That no part of this appropriation shall be available for the pay of any mid- shipmen whose admission, subsequent to the class entering the Naval Academy next after the approval of this act, would result in exceeding at any time an allowance of three midshipmen for each Senator, Representative, and Delegate in Congress; of one midshipman for Porto Rico, a native of the island, appointed on nomination of the governor, and of one midshipman from Porto Rico, appointed on the nomination of the Resident Commissioner; and of two midship- men for the District of Columbia : Provided further, That nothing herein shall be construed to repeal or modify in any way existing laws relative to the appoint- ment of midshipmen at large or from the enlisted personnel of the naval service." An act of Congress approved May 28, 1924, reads as follows: "That no part of this appropriation shall be available for the pay of any midship- men whose admission subsequent to February 9, 1924, would result in exceeding at any time an allowance of three midshipmen for each Senator, Representative, and Delegate in Congress; of one midshipman for Porto Rico, a native of the island, appointed on nomination of the governor, and of two midshipmen from Porto Rico appointed on nomination of the Resident Commissioner; and of two midshipmen for the District of Columbia: Provided further, That nothing herein shall be con- strued to repeal or modify in any way existing laws relative to the appointment of midshipmen at large or from the enlisted personnel of the naval service." An act of Congress approved February 11, 1925, reads as follows: "That no part of this appropriation shall be available for the pay of any midshipmen whose admission subsequent to December 13, 1924, would result in exceeding at any time an allowance of three midshipmen for each Senator, Repre- sentative, and Delegate in Congress; of one midshipman for Porto Rico, a native of the island, appointed on nomination of the governor, and of two midshipmen from Porto Rico, appointed on nomination of the Resident Commissioner; and of two midshipmen for the District of Columbia: Provided further, That nothing herein shall be construed to repeal or modify in any way existing laws relative to the appointment of midshipmen at large or from the enlisted personnel of the naval service." An act of Congress approved February 28, 1925, reads as follows: "That hereafter the Secretary of the Navy is authorized to appoint midship- men to the Naval Academy from the enlisted men of the Naval Reserve and Marine Corps Reserve under similar conditions as prescribed by law for appoint- ments from enlisted men of the Navy: Provided, That not more than twenty- five midshipmen shall be appointed in any one year under the authority con- tained in this section." ■ (See 8, Public No. 512— H. R. 9634.) An act of Congress approved May 21, 1926, reads as follows: "That no part of this appropriation shall be available for the pay of any mid- shipmen whose admission subsequent to January 13, 1926, would result in exceeding at any time an allowance of three midshipmen for each Senator, Rep- resentative, and Delegate in Congress; of one midshipman for Porto Rico, a native of the island, appointed on nomination of the governor, and of three midshipmen from Porto Rico, appointed on nomination of the Resident Com- missioner; and of two midshipmen for the District of Columbia: Provided further, That nothing herein shall be construed to repeal or modify in any way existing laws relative to the appointment of midshipmen at large from the enlisted per- sonnel of the naval service or from the Naval Reserve: And -provided further, That in computing for any purpose the length of service of any officer of the Navy, of the Marine Corps, of the Coast Guard, of the Coast and Geodetic Survey, or of the Public Health Service, who was appointed to the United States Naval Academy or to the United States Military Academy after March 4, 1913, the time sDent at either academy shall not be counted." HISTORICAL SKETCH 13 An act of Congress approved June 8, 1926, reads as follows: "That the number of cadets now authorized by law at the United States Military Academy, and the number of midshipmen now authorized by law at the United States Naval Academy, are each hereby increased by forty from the United States at large, to be appointed by the President from among the sons of officers, soldiers, sailors, and marines of the Army, Navy, and Marine Corps of the United States who were killed in action or died prior to July 2, 1921, of wounds or injuries received or disease contracted in line of duty during the World War: Provided, That one-half shall be appointed from among the sons of officers, and one-half from among the sons of warrant officers, soldiers, sailors, and marines of the Army, Navy, and Marine Corps." (Public Act 348.) An act of Congress approved February 26, 1927, reads as follows: "That the act entitled 'An act to fix the age limits for candidates for admis- sion to the United States Naval Academy,' approved May 14, 1918, be amended by the addition of the following proviso: 'Provided further, That the foregoing shall not be held to exclude the admission of a candidate the twentieth anni- versary of whose birth occurs on the 1st day of April of the calendar year in which ^ie shall enter.' " An act of Congress approved May 21, 1928, reads as follows: "That no part of this appropriation shall be available for the pay of any midshipmen whose admission subsequent to March 21, 1928, would result in exceeding at any time an allowance of four midshipmen for each Senator, Repre- senative, and Delegate in Congress; of one midshipman for Porto Rico, a native of the island, appointed on nomination of the governor, and of four midshipmen from Porto Rico, appointed on nomination of the Resident Commissioner; and of two midshipmen for the District of Columbia: Provided further, That nothing herein shall be construed to repeal or modify in any way existing laws relative to the appointment of midshipmen at large, from the enlisted personnel of the naval service, or from the Naval Reserve." An act of Congress approved May 28, 1928, reads as follows: " Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United States of America in Congress assembled, That hereafter there shall be allowed at the United States Naval Academy, in addition to those allowed by existing law, midshipmen appointed at large by the Vice President of the United States, equivalent in number to those allowed for each United States Senator." An act of Congress approved June 8, 1928, reads as follows: " Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United States of America in Congress assembled, That the Secretary of the Navy is authorized and directed to reinstate Larry Cardwell in the United States Naval Academy, of which he was a midshipman at the time of his discharge on November 19, 1926; the said Larry Cardwell to become a member of the class of 1930 on the date of reinstatement, and to be accorded all rights, privileges, and benefits to which he would have been entitled had he not been so discharged." An act of Congress approved February 28, 1931, reads as follows: "That the appropriation 'Pay, subsistence, and transportation, Navy, 1931,' shall be available for the pay and allowances of all officers commissioned in accordance with law, and shall be available to pay one year's sea pay to surplus graduates of the Naval Academy, as provided by law: Provided further, That the President of the United States, by and with the advice and consent of the Senate, is hereby authorized to appoint as ensigns in the line of the Navy all midshipmen who graduate from the Naval Academy in the year 1931, but if the number so commissioned should exceed the total number of officers of the fine of the Navy authorized by existing law, the excess shall be carried in the grade of ensign : * * * Provided further, That no part of this appropriation shall be available for the pay of any midshipmen whose admission subsequent to January, 131918—32 2 14 HISTOEICAL SKETCH 30, 1931, would result in exceeding at any time an allowance of three midshipmen for each Senator, Representative, and Delegate in Congress; of one midshipman for Porto Rico, a native of the island, appointed on nomination of the governor, and of three midshipmen from Porto Rico, appointed on nomination of the Resident Commissioner; and of two midshipmen for the District of Columbia, except that nothing herein shall deny pay to or prevent the admission of any midshipman admissible within the number of appointments permissible under the provisions of the naval appropriation act for the fiscal year 1931 who may enter the Naval Academy in the class entering next after the approval of this act: Provided further, That nothing herein shall be construed to repeal or modify in any way existing laws relative to the appointment of midshipmen at large, from the enlisted personnel of the naval service, or from the Naval Reserve: Provided further, That no part of this appropriation shall be available for the pay of any midshipman appointed from enlisted men of the Navy for admission to the Naval Academy in the class entering in the calendar year 1932 who has not served aboard a vessel of the Navy in full commission for at least nine months prior to such admission." An act of Congress approved May 6, 1932, provides as follows: "That the President of the United States is authorized, by and with the advice and consent of the Senate, to appoint as ensigns in the line of the Navy all mid- shipmen who graduate from the Naval Academy in 1932, and at least 50 per centum of all graduates in subsequent years: Provided, That the number of such officers so appointed shall, while in excess of the total number of line officers otherwise authorized by law, be considered in excess of the number of officers in the grade of ensign as determined by any computation, and shall be excluded from any computation made for the purpose of determining the authorized number of line officers in any grade on the active list above the grade of lieutenant junior grade, until the total number of line officers shall have been reduced below the number otherwise authorized by law. "Sec. 2. That all commissions hereafter issued as ensigns in the line of the Navy, second lieutenants in the Marine Corps, and in the lowest commissioned grades of the Staff Corps of the Navy with the rank of ensign, may be revoked by the Secretary of the Navy, under such regulations as he may prescribe, at any time during a period of two years from the dates of such commissions, and each officer whose commission is so revoked shall be discharged from the service with not more than one year's pay. The rank of such officers of the same date of commission among themselves at the end of said period shall be determined by boards of officers under such rules as may be prescribed by the Secretary of the Navy, and the recommendations of such boards shall be final when approved by him." An act of Congress approved June 30, 1932, provides as follows: "That no part of this appropriation shall be available for the pay of any midshipmen whose admission subsequent to January 30, 1932, would result in exceeding at any time an allowance of three midshipmen for each Senator, Representative, and Delegate in Congress; of one midshipman for Porto Rico, a native of the island, appointed on nomination of the governor, and of three midshipmen from Porto Rico, appointed on nomination of the Resident Com- missioner; and of two midshipmen for the District of Columbia: Provided further, That nothing herein shall be construed to repeal or modify in any way existing laws relative to the appointment of midshipmen at large, from the enlisted per- sonnel of the naval service, or from the Naval Reserve: Provided further, That no part of this appropriation shall be available for the pay of any midshipman appointed from enlisted men of the Navy for admission to the Naval Academy in the class entering in the calendar year 1933 who has not served aboard a vessel of the Navy in full commission for at least nine months prior to such admission." SUPERINTENDENTS OF THE UNITED STATES NAVAL ACADEMY Commander Franklin Buchanan Sept. 3 Commander George P. Upshur Mar. 15 Commander Cornelius K. Stribling July 1 Commander Louis M. Goldsborough Nov. 1 Capt. George S. Blake Sept. 15 Rear Admiral David D. Porter Sept. 9 Commodore John L. Worden Dec. 1 Rear Admiral Christopher R. P. Rodgers Sept. 22 Commodore Foxhall A Parker July 1 Rear Admiral George B. Balch Aug. 2, Rear Admiral Christopher R. P. Rodgers June 13: Capt. Francis M. Ramsay Nov. 14 Commander William T. Sampson Sept. 9 Capt. Robert L. Phythian June 13 Capt. Philip H. Cooper Nov. 15 Rear Admiral Frederick V. McNair July 15 Commander Richard Wainwright Mar. 15 Capt. Willard H. Brownson Nov. 6 Rear Admiral James H. Sands July 1 Capt. Charles J. Badger July 15 Capt. John M. Bowyer June 10 Capt. John H. Gibbons May 15 Capt. William F. Fullam Feb. 7 Capt. Edward W. Eberle Sept. 20 Capt. Archibald H. Scales Feb. 12 Rear Admiral Henry B. Wilson July 5; Rear Admiral Louis M. Nulton Feb. 23 Rear Admiral Samuel S. Robison June 16 Rear Admiral Thomas C. Hart May 1 15 Assumed command 1845 1847 1850 1853 1857 1865 1869 1874 1878 1879 1881 1881 1886 1890 1894 1898 1900 1902 1905 1907 1909 1911 1914 1915 1919 1921 1925 1928 1931 BOARD OF VISITORS BY THE PRESIDENT Hon. Augustus C. Backus.1 General Milton J. Foreman. Mr. Alan Fox. Admiral Hugh Rodman, United States Mr. John C. O'Laughlin. Navy (retired). Mr. George F. Booth. Captain J. Otto Fisher, United States Navy (retired). BY THE VICE PRESIDENT Senator Ellison D. Smith.1 Senator Tasker L. Oddie.1 Senator Frederick Hale.1 Senator George McGill.1 Senator Henry W. Keyes.1 BY THE SPEAKER OF THE HOUSE Representative Carl Vinson.1 Representative Frank C. Kniffin. Representative John C. Allen. Representative Leonard W. Schuetz.1 Representative Menalcus Lankford.2 Representative Joachim O. Fernandez. Commander William D. Chandler, jr., United States Navy, Secretary to the Board of Visitors 1 Were not present. 2 Chairman. 16 ACADEMIC CALENDAR, 1932-33 1932 September 23 Beginning of first term Friday. 1933 January 30 Beginning of second term Monday . February 15 Examination of candidates Wednesday. April 19 Examination of candidates Wednesday. May 26 End of academic year Friday. May 27 to June 1_ Graduation week Saturday to Thursday. June 1 Graduation day Thursday. June 2 Beginning of summer term Friday. September 28 End of summer term Thursday. September 29 Beginning of academic year 1933-34_ Friday. The academic months for 1932-33 will end as follows: FIRST TERM October October 22. November November 19. December December 17. January January 28. SECOND TERM February February 25. March March 25. April April 22. May May 26. Holidays: Thanksgiving, Thursday, November 24, 1932 — from 1600 Wednesday, November 23, until supper formation November 24. Christmas holiday, from after fifth period December 23, 1932, until evening roll call January 2, 1933. Washington's Birthday, Wednesday, February 22, 1933— from 1940 Tues- day, February 21, until supper formation February 22. Memorial Day, Tuesday, May 30, 1933. Lent: Ash Wednesday, March 1, 1933. Good Friday, April 14, 1933. Easter Sunday, April 16, 1933. Meeting of Board of Visitors, April 24-27, inclusive. 17 Calendar for 1932 and 1933 BOLD FIGURES DENOTE END OF ACADEMIC MONTH SEPTEMBER APRIL. 59 M T W T F S Su M T W T F S 1 2 3 1 4 5 fi 7 8 9 10 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 y ifi 10 17 11 18 12 19 13 ?0 14 21 lb ?? 18 w 20 21 22 23 24 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 25 26 27 28 29 30 30 OCTOBER MAY ! 1 2 3 4 5 6 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 7 8 9 10 11 1? n 9 Ifi 10 17 11 18 12 19 13 J 14 20 21 lb 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 23 24 25 26 27 : 28 29 21 22 23 24 2b 2b 27 30 31 28 29 30 31 NOVEMBER JUNE 1 ?. 3 4 5 1 2 3 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 4 5 ! 6 7 8 9 10 13 14 15 16 17 , 18 19 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 20 21 ?.?. n 24 25 26 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 27 28 29 30 1 25 26 : 27 28 29 30 DECEMBER JULY 1 2 3 1 4 b fi 7 a 9 10 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 9 16 10 17 11 18 12 19 13 14 21 lb ?? 18 19 2U 21 22 23 24 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 25 26 27 28 29 30 31 30 31 JANUARY AUGUST 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 1 2 3 4 5 a 9 10 : 11 1? 13 14 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 IS 16 17 ! 18 19 20 21 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 29 30 31 ! 27 28 29 30 31 FEBRUARY SEPTEMBER 1 2 3 4 1 2 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 19 20 21 ?? 23 24 25 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 26 27 28 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 MARCH OCTOBER 1 ? 3 4 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 26 27 28 29 30 31 29 30 31 18 DEPARTMENTAL ASSIGNMENTS OF OFFICERS AND CIVILIAN INSTRUCTORS ATTACHED TO THE UNITED STATES NAVAL ACADEMY, 1932-33 ADMINISTRATION Rear Admiral Thomas C. Hart, Superintendent. Commander George L. Weyler, Aide for Academic Activities. Lieut. Commander Lynde D. McCormick, Aide. Mr. Peter H. Magruder, Secretary, Naval Academy. BUILDINGS AND GROUNDS Capt. Turner F. Caldwell, Aide, In Charge of Buildings and Grounds. Lieut. Commander Robert D. Kirkpatrick, Assistant to Aide in Charge of Buildings and Grounds. Lieut. Commander Theron A. Hartung (C. E. C), Assistant to Aide in Charge of Buildings and Grounds. Chief Machinist Robert I. Hart, Safety Engineer and Boiler Inspector. EXECUTIVE DEPARTMENT Capt. Ralston S. Holmes, Commandant of Midshipmen. Commander William W. Smith. Commander Harry W. Hill. Commander Thomas S. King, 2d. Commander George J. McMillin. Lieut. Commander Robert Rowe Thompson. Lieut. Commander William G. Green- man. Lieut. Commander William G. B. Hatch. Lieut. Commander Charles P. Cecil. Lieut. George M. O'Rear. Lieut. Robert Holmes Smith. Lieut. William A. Swanston. Lieut. (J. G.) Joseph A. Callaghan. Lieut. (J. G.) William S. Hays. Lieut. (J. G.) Martin R. Peterson. Lieut. (J. G.) Eugene E. Paro. Lieut. (J. G.) William G. Beecher, jr. Lieut. (J. G.) William E. Hank. Capt. Roland W. Schumann (S. C), Midshipmen's Commissary Officer. Capt. David G. McRitchie (S. C), Midshipmen's Storekeeper and Pay Officer. Lieut. Percy W. McCord (S. C), Assistant to Midshipmen's Commis- sary Officer. Lieut. Albert W. Eldred (S. C), Assist- ant to Midshipmen's Commissary Officer. Lieut. Stephen R. Edson (S. C), in Charge of Navy Commissary Store. Chief Pay Clerk Claude W. Hamilton, Navy Commissary Store. Asst. Prof. Joseph W. Crosley. DEPARTMENT OF SEAMANSHIP AND FLIGHT TACTICS Capt. Lemuel M. Stevens. Commander Freeland A. Daubin. Commander Alfred S. Wolfe. Lieut. Commander Arthur G. Robinson. Lieut. Commander Rawson J. Valen- tine. Lieut. Commander John M. Field, jr. Lieut. Commander Paul W. Rutledge. Lieut. Commander Herbert J. Grassie. Lieut. Commander Pal L. Meadows. Lieut. Clarence V. Conlan. Lieut. William F. Fitzgerald, jr. Lieut. (J. G.) Sumner K. MacLean. Lieut. (J. G.) Herman Sail. Lieut. (J. G.) Roy W. Lajeunesse. Lieut. (J. G.) William V. Deutermann. Lieut. (J. G.) Wilfred E. Lankenau. Lieut. (J. G.) James C. Landstreet. Lieut. (J. G.) John F. Greenslade. Lieut. (J. G.) Robert R. Johnson. Chief Boatswain William M. Casste- 19 20 OFFICERS AND CIVILIAN INSTRUCTORS DEPARTMENT OF ORDNANCE AND GUNNERY Commander Clyde R. Robinson. Commander Robert P. Guiler, jr. Lieut. Commander Forrest U. Lake. Lieut. Commander Thomas G. Peyton. Lieut. Commander Robert B. Twining. Lieut. Ferguson B. Bryan. Lieut. Paul J. Register. Lieut. Walter S. Keller. Lieut. Richard F. Stout. Lieut. (J. G.) Philip M. Boltz. Lieut. (J. G.) Virginius R. Roane. Lieut. (J. G.) Lieut. (J. G.) Lieut. (J. G.) Lieut. (J. G.) Lieut. (J. G.) Lieut. (J. G.) Lieut. (J. G.) Lieut. (J. G.) Lieut. (J. G.) Chief Gunner Donald J. Ramsey. Glenn R. Hartwig. Harrell W. Hall. Clarence L. Winecoff. Edmund B. Taylor. Morton C. Mumma, jr. Herbert McNulta, jr. Ernest J. Davis. Loren A. Morris. Earle G. Gardner. DEPARTMENT OF NAVIGATION Capt. Russell Willson. Commander Jesse B. Oldendorf. Commander Thomas L. Gatch. Lieut. Commander Donald F. Patter- son. Lieut. Commander George D. Hull. Lieut. Commander Harry P. Curley. Lieut. Commander Henry F. Floyd. Lieut. Commander Henry P. Samson. Lieut. Commander Lewis H. McDonald. Lieut. Commander William D. Austin. Lieut. Commander Marshall B. Arnold. Lieut. Commander William Earl Miller. Lieut. Earle H. Kincaid. Lieut. Thomas B. Brittain. Lieut. Norman B. Hopkins. Lieut. Bailey Connelly. Lieut. Hilyer F. Gearing. Lieut. (J. G.) Elijah W. Irish. DEPARTMENT OF ENGINEERING AND AERONAUTICS Commander Albert M. Penn. Commander Frank T. Leighton. Commander Walter A. Riedel. Lieut. Commander Carl E. Hoard. Lieut. Commander Valentine Wood. Lieut. Commander Myron W. Hutch- inson, jr. Lieut. Benton W. Decker. Lieut. Austin K. Doyle. Lieut. Rupert M. Zimmerli. Lieut. George M. Brooke. Lieut. Oral R. Swigart. Lieut. Daniel B. Candler, jr. Lieut. (J. G.) William J. Mitchell. Lieut. (J. G.) Paul Graf. Lieut. (J. G.) Herrmann G. Page. Lieut. (J. G.) Solomon F. Oden. Lieut. (J. G.) Thomas S. Cameron. Lieut. (J. G.) John H. MorriU. Lieut. (J. G.) George M. Brydon, jr. Lieut. (J. G.) Frank R. Davis. Lieut. (J. G.) Harold B. Edgar. Lieut. (J. G.) Neville L. McDowell. Lieut. (J. G.) Charles J. Stuart. Lieut. (J. G.) George Edward Peterson. Lieut. (J. G.) Stanley P. Moseley. Lieut. (J. G.) James S. Smith, jr. Lieut. (J. G.) Charles E. Tolman, jr. Lieut. (J. G.) James R. Hanna. Lieut. (J. G.) Alexander C. Thorington. Lieut. (J. G.) Austin C. Behan. Lieut. (J. G.) John W. Steele. Lieut. (J. G.) Francis D. McCorkle. Capt. Theodore W. Johnson (Math.). Lieut. George W. Henderson (C. C). Lieut. Edward C. Craig (C. C). Lieut. Robert C. Bell, jr. (C. C). Lieut. Emmett E. Sprung (C. C). Chief Machinist Edward J. Sherry. Prof. Clarence P. Bclgiano. Assoc. Prof. William E. Farrell. Assoc. Prof. George Beneze. OFFICERS AND CIVILIAN INSTRUCTORS 21 DEPARTMENT Capt. Lewis B. McBride (C. C). Capt. Herbert L. Rice (Math.). Lieut. Herbert C. Rust. Lieut. Leo A. Bachman. Lieut. Rae E. Arisen. Lieut. (J. G.) Roger B. Nickerson. Lieut. (J. .G.) Knowlton Williams. Prof. Charles L. Leiper. Prof. Paul Capron. Prof. James B. Eppes. Prof. James N. Galloway. Prof. Alexander Dillingham. Prof. Guy R. Clements. Prof. Henry M. Robert, jr. OF MATHEMATICS j Assoc. Prof. John Tyler. Assoc. Prof. James B. Scarborough. Assoc. Prof. Reginald C. Lamb. Assoc. Prof. Eugene S. Mayer. Asst. Prof. William A. Conrad. Asst. Prof. Lyman M. Kelis. Asst. Prof. James R. Bland. Instructor Willis F. Kern. Instructor Harry J. Winslow. Instructor George A. Lyle. Instructor Herman C. Stotz. Instructor Jesse L. Clayton. Instructor Ernest Hawkins. Instructor Arthur R. Maupin. Assoc. Prof. Levi T; Wilson. DEPARTMENT OF ELECTRICAL ENGINEERING AND PHYSICS Commander William T. Smith. Commander Harry A. Badt. Commander William D. Chandler, jr. Lieut. Commander Earl H. Quinlan. Lieut. Commander Thomas L. Nash. Lieut. Commander Lyman K. Swenson. Lieut. Commander Wilbur W. Feine- man. Lieut. Commander Earle E. Muschlitz. Lieut. Commander Vincent R. Murphy. Lieut. Commander George C. Hawkins. Lieut. Ellsworth D. McEathron. Lieut. Paul R. Coloney. Lieut. Charles R. Pratt. Lieut. John J. Curley, jr. Lieut. Fort H. Callahan. Lieut. Frederick Moosbrugger. Lieut. Henry F. Agnew. Lieut. Stephen G. Barchet. Lieut. Bernard L. Austin. Lieut. (J. G.) George W. Patterson, jr. Lieut. (J. G.) Homer B. Wheeler. (J. G.) Donald F. McLean. G.) Arthur W. Bass. G.) Hubert M. Hayter. G.) John A. Marsh. G.) William H. Duvall. G.) Archibald G. W. McFad- Lieut Lieut. (J Lieut. (J Lieut. (J Lieut. (J Lieut. (J den. Lieut. (J. G.) Harrison B. Southworth Lieut. (J. G.) Clyde J. Nesser. Lieut. (J. G.) Arthur A. Griese. Lieut. (J. G.) Lewis E. Coley. Lieut. (J. G.) Joseph A. Farrell, jr. Lieut. (J. G.) Merle Van Metre. Lieut. (J. G.) Robert N. Allen. Lieut. (J. G.) William S. Veeder. Lieut. (J. G.) Thomas J. Hickey. Lieut. (J. G.) Frank W. Fenno, jr. Lieut. Walter F. Christmas (C. C.) . Prof. Gordon D. Robinson. Assoc. Prof. John C. Gray. Assoc. Prof. David G. Howard. Assoc. Prof. Earl W. Thomson. DEPARTMENT OF ENGLISH AND HISTORY Prof. Carroll S. Alden. Prof. Allan F. Westcott. Commander Charles H. McMorris. Commander Schuyler Mills. Lieut. Commander John B. Heffernan. Lieut. Hance C. Hamilton. Lieut. William M. Hobby, jr. Lieut. (J. G.) John M. Kennaday. Lieut. (J. G.) Henry C. Daniel. Lieut. (J. G.) Wilkie H. Brereton. Lieut. (J. G.) William E. Verge. Lieut. (J. G.) Ernest M. Eller. Lieut. (J. G.) Willis H. Pickton. Lieut. (J. G.) William L. Benson. Prof. Walter B. Norris. Prof. Howard McCormick. Prof. Henry F. Sturdy. Assoc. Prof. Charles L. Lewis. Assoc. Prof. Royal S. Pease. Assoc. Prof. Roderick S. Merrick. Assoc. Prof. William A. Darden. Asst. Prof. William Kavanaugh Doty. Instructor Howard P. Kelsey. Instructor Richard S. West, jr. Instructor Robert H. James. Instructor Hugh R. Fitch. Instructor Allen B. Cook. Instructor Leslie M. Oliver. 22 Capt. Lieut. Lieut. Lieut. Lieut. Lieut. Lieut. Lieut. Lieut. Lieut. Lieut. Lieut. Lieut. Lieut. Lieut. OFFICERS AND CIVILIAN INSTRUCTORS DEPARTMENT OF MODERN LANGUAGES Guy E. Baker. Commander Tully Shelley. Commander Albert E. Schrader. Commander Humbert W. Ziroli. Harold Coldwell. (J. G.) William G. Michelet. (J. G.) Paul L. F. Weaver. (J. G.) Harold P. Smith. (J. G.) Lawrence J. McPeake. (J. G.) Joseph F. Dahlgren. (J. G.) John A. Holbrook. (J. G.) Joseph W. Fowler. (J. G.) Horace W. Blakeslee. (J. G.) Harry L. Ferguson, jr. (J. G.) Clarence E. Gregerson. Prof. Arturo Fernandez. Prof. WiUiam E. Olivet. Prof. Molton A. Colton. Prof. Lucien R. Fournon. Assoc. Prof. Joseph M. Purdie. Clarence V. Fowler. Henry Bluestone. Daniel Jordan. Paul A. Lajoye. Prof. Homer B. Winchell. Instructor George E. Starnes. Instructor Edmund Caskie. Instructor John A. Maigret. Instructor William H. Sewell. Assoc. Prof Assoc. Prof Assoc. Prof Assoc. Prof DEPARTMENT OF PHYSICAL TRAINING Capt. John W. Wilcox, jr. Lieut. Commander John L. Hall, jr. Lieut. Commander Harvey E. Overesch. Lieut. (J. G.) Harry H. Henderson. Lieut. (J. G.) James T. Hardin.1 Ensign Gordon W. Underwood.1 Lieut. Commander Everett B. Taylor (M. C.).2 Second Lieut. Forest C. Thompson, U. S. M. C.1 Second Lieut. Harvey C. Tschirgi, U. S. M. C.1 Chief Instructor Louis H. Mang. Asst. Chief Instructor John Schutz. Asst. Chief Instructor Frank J. Sazama. Instructor Henry Ortland, jr. Instructor John N. Wilson. Instructor Tom G. Taylor. Instructor Hamilton M. Webb. Instructor Frank L. Foster. Instructor Walter Aamold. Instructor Charles S. Walsh. Instructor Earl J. Thomson. DEPARTMENT OF HYGIENE Capt. Edward H. H. Old (M. C). YARD MEDICAL Capt. Edward H. H. Old (M. C). Commander William L. Irvine (M. C). Commander Reginald B. Henry (M. C). Lieut. Commander Joseph H. Durrett (M.C.). Lieut. Commander Deane H. Vance (M. C). Lieut. Commander John T. Stringer (M. C). Lieut. Commander Norman Roberts (M. C). Lieut. Commander Daniel P. Piatt (M. C). i Temporary duty as coaches. 1 Additional duty in department of hygiene. Lieut. Harvey E. Robins (M. C). Lieut. (J. G.) Emory E. Walter (M. C). Commander Ernest W. Lacy (D. C). Lieut. Commander Edmund Laughlin (D. C). Lieut. Commander Charles H. Morris (D. C). Lieut. Commander Henry C. Lowry (D. C). Lieut. Joseph W. Baker, jr. (D. C). Lieut. (J. G.) Jesse B. Bancroft (D. C). Lieut. (J. G.) Edwin A. Thomas (D. C). Chief Pharmacist William S. Burr. OFFICERS AND CIVILIAN INSTRUCTORS 23 YARD CHAPLAINS Commander Frank H. Lash (Ch. C). Lieut. (J. G.) Edward B. Harp, jr. (Ch. C). LIBRARY Asst. Prof. Richard J. Duval. Asst. Librarian Louis H. Bolander. CURATOR Prof. Herman F. Krafft.3 POSTGRADUATE SCHOOL Capt. Frank H. Sadler. Commander Thomas E. Van Metre. Lieut. Commander George L. Woodruff. Lieut. Commander Harold H. Little. Lieut. Commander Hugh G. Eldredge. Lieut. Commander Otto Nimitz. Lieut. Commander Frederick G. Rich- ards. Lieut. Commander Nathaniel M. Pig- man. Lieut. Commander Leland P. Lovette. Lieut. Paul Miller. Lieut. Edwin A. J. Poehlmann. Lieut. Hugh D. Lyttle. Lieut. Heber B. Brumbaugh. Lieut. Timothy F. Wellings. Lieut. Edwin A. Taylor. Lieut. Thomas M. Stokes. Lieut. Robert C. Strong, jr. Prof. Ralph E. Root. Prof. Albert F. Wagner. Prof. Paul J. Kiefer. Prof. Charles C. Bramble. Prof. Charles E. Hill. " Assoc. Prof. Dennis Kavanaugh, jr. Assoc. Prof. Charles H. Rawlins. Assoc. Prof. Ralph S. Wilbur. Assoc. Prof. Charles V. 0. Terwilliger. Assoc. Prof. G. Robert Giet. Asst. Prof. Albert J. Dornblatt. Asst. Prof. Frank E. LaCauza. Asst. Prof. R. C. Hensen Wheeler. Asst. Prof. Wendell M. Coates. Asst. Prof. Frederick L. Coonan. STUDENT OFFICERS— POSTGRADUATE SCHOOL Lieut. Commander Henry C. Flanagan. Lieut. Frederick A. Hardesty. Lieut. Benjamin C. Purrington. Lieut. James J. McGlynn. Lieut. Laurence Bennett. Lieut. Earl L. Sackett. Lieut. Joseph W. Long. Lieut. Daniel V. Gallery, jr. Lieut. William L. Maxson. Lieut. Wayne A. McDowell. Lieut. Francis J. Bridget. Lieut. Bradford E. Grow. Lieut. Leon P. Pawley. Lieut. Ralph Earle, jr. Lieut. Warren S. Parr. Lieut. William T. Rassieur. Lieut. Irving T. Duke. Lieut. Edward W. Rawlins. Lieut. Elmer E. Berthold. Lieut. Wallace M. Beakley. Lieut. Maurice M. Bradley. Lieut. (J. G.) Howard L. Collins. 8Additional duty in department of English and history. Lieut. (J. G.) John W. C. Brand. Lieut. (J. G.) Aurelius B. Vosseller. Lieut. (J. G.) John R. Ruhsenberger. Lieut. (J. G.) Alfred J. Bolton. Lieut. (J. G.) Robert C. Sutliff. Lieut. (J. G.) George A. Sinclair. Lieut. (J. G.) Steadman Teller. Lieut. (J. G.) Preston V. Mercer. Lieut. (J. G.) Audley L. Warburton. Lieut. (J. G.) Warren W. Harvey. Lieut. (J. G.) Hugh B. McLean. Lieut. (J. G.) Frederick J. Bell. Lieut. (J. G.) Henry T. Read. Lieut. (J. G.) Paul S. Crandall. Lieut. (J. G.) William H. Benson. Lieut. (J. G.) Dundas P. Tucker. Lieut. (J. G.) John Williams Murphy, jr Lieut. (J. G.) Robert L. Adams. Lieut. (J. G.) Edward N. Parker. Lieut. (J. G.) Willis A. Lent. Lieut. (J. G.) Edward K. Walker. 24 OFFICERS AND CIVILIAN INSTRUCTORS Lieut. Lieut. Lieut. Lieut. Lieut. Lieut. Lieut. Lieut. Lieut. Lieut. Lieut. Lieut. Lieut. Lieut. Lieut. Lieut. Lieut. Lieut. Lieut. Lieut. Lieut. Lieut. Lieut. Lieut. Lieut. Lieut. Lieut. Lieut. Lieut. Lieut. Lieut. Lieut. Lieut. Lieut. Lieut. Lieut. Lieut. Lieut. Lieut. Lieut. Lieut. Lieut. Lieut. Lieut. Lieut. Lieut. Lieut. Lieut. Lieut. Lieut. Lieut. Lieut. Lieut. Lieut. J. G.) George L. Purmort. J. G.) Richard A. Larkin. J. G.) Philip D. Compton. J. G.) Frederick B. Warder. J. G.) William G. H. Lind. J. G.) Joe W. Stryker. J. G.) Cecil B. Gill. J. G.) Richard E. Elliott. J. G.) John R. Van NageU. J. G.) Franklin D. Karns, jr. J. G.) David A. Hurt. J. G.) Chester C. Smith. J. G.) David M. Tyree. J. G.) Robert H. Gibbs. J. G.) Ernest S. Von EJeeck, jr. J. G.) Jackson S. Champlin. J. G.) Clarence C. Ray. J. G.) Clarence E. Haugen. J. G.) CMude A. Dillavou. J. G.) Lewis S. Parks. J. G.) Kenneth V. Dawson. J. G.) Willard K. Goodney. J. G.) James P. Knowles. J. G.) Thomas G. Reamj7. J. G.) Charles A. Bond. J. G.) John H. Broadbent. J. G.) Clement R. Criddle. J. G.) Jesse C. Sowell. J. G.) Monroe Y. McGown, jr. J. G.) Everett P. Newton, jr. J. G.) Harry F. Miller. J. G.) Thomas Burrowes, jr. J. G.) William Leslie Wright. J. G.) John H. Griffin. J. G.) RusseU S. Smith. J. G.) Thomas H. Tonseth. J. G.) Waldeman N. Christensen. J. G.) Everett E. Mann. J. G.) Hunter Wood, jr. J. G.) John J. Laffan. J. G.) William R. Headden. J. G.) Clyde F. Malone. J. G.) William H. Truesdell. J. G.) William W. Graham, jr. J. G.) Frank P. Tibbitts. J. G.) Fred R. Stickney. J. G.) Harold H. Pickens. J. G.) Linwood S. Howeth. J. G.) George F. O'Keefe. J. G.) Herman E. Schieke. J. G.) CarroU D. Reynolds. J. G.) Tillett S. Daniel. J. G.) Harold F. Dearth. J. G.) David G. Greenlee, jr. Lieut. Lieut. Lieut. Lieut. Lieut. Lieut. Lieut. Lieut. Lieut. Lieut. Lieut. Lieut. Lieut. Lieut. Lieut. Lieut. Lieut. Lieut. Lieut. Lieut. Lieut. Lieut. Lieut. Lieut. Lieut. Lieut. Lieut. Lieut. Lieut. Lieut. Lieut. Lieut. Lieut. Lieut. Lieut. Lieut. Lieut. Lieut. Lieut. Lieut. Lieut. Lieut. Lieut. Lieut. Lieut. Lieut. Lieut. Lieut. Lieut. Lieut. Lieut. Lieut. Lieut. Lieut. J. G. J. G. J. G. J. G. J. G. J. G. J. G. J. G. J. G. J. G. J. G. J. G. J. G. J. G. J. G. J. G. J. G. J. G. J. G. J. G. J. G. J. G. J. G. G. G. G. G. J. G. J. G. J. G. J. G. J. G. J. G. J. G. J. G. J. G. J. G. J. G. J. G. J. G. J. G. J. G. (J. G.) J. G. G. G. G. G. J. G. J. G. J. G. J. G. J. G. J. G. Hamilton L. Stone. Joseph H. Kevins jr. Andrew E. Harris. Robert N. McFarlane. Edwin R. Swinburne. Lynn C. Petross. John F. Delaney. Martin J. Drury. Gelzer L. Sims. Edward D. Crowley. Marvin J. West. Richard A. Guthrie. Benjamin May, 2d. Gordon B. Rainer. William O. Floyd. Bert F. Brown. James S. Russell. Albert G. Mumma. Paul D. Stroop. Hemw C. Bruton. George T. Mundorff, jr. Carlton B. Hutchins. Dennis J. Sullivan. Sidney L. Smith. Harlan K. Perrill. Charles B. Hart. Howard W. Gilmore. Chester L. Clement. Jesse S. McClure. Stanton B. Dunlap. Hugh P. Webster. Wesley A. Wright. Charles F. Home, jr. Frank O'Beirne. John S. Graff. Walter E. Lina weaver. Edward N. Dodson, jr. William J. Whiteside. John O'Shea, jr. James A. Morrison. Welford C. Blinn. Karl F. Poehlmann. Justus M. B. R. Armstrong. John F. Gallaher. William L. Anderson. Thomas F. Halloran. Paul M. Lion, jr. Paul W. Watson. William A. Dolan, jr. Eugene F. May. William Miller, jr. Henry E. Bernstein. Roy A. Gano. Earl K. Olsen. OFFICERS AND CIVILIAN INSTRUCTORS 25 Lieut. (J. G.) Benjamin V. Russell. Lieut. (J. G.) Fondville L. Tedder. Lieut. (J. G.) Barron G. Lowrey. Lieut. (J. G.) Oscar Pederson. Lieut. (J. G.) Charles T. Singleton, jr. Lieut. (J. G.) Thomas R. Langley. Lieut. (J. G.) S. David Willingham, Lieut. (J. G.) Elmer O. Davis. First Lieut. Clayton C. Jerome, U.S. M.C, First Lieut. Thomas B. White, U.S. M.C. Lieut. Kenneth K. Cowart, U.S.C.G. Lieut. Gaines A. Tyler, U.S.C.G. U. S. S. "REINA MERCEDES," STATION SHIP Capt. George S. Bryan. Lieut. Emil H. Petri. Lieut. (J. G.) Richard G. Ganahl. Lieut. (J. G.) Chester E. Carroll. Lie at. John J. Carroll (S. C.) . Chief Boatswain James W. Lennon. Chief Boatswain Edwin J. Hill. Chief Machinist Charles O. Hathaway. Chief Carpenter James S. Jones. Cnief Pay Clerk Thomas A. McDair- mant. VN SQUADRON 8D5 Lieut. Commander Donald B. Duncan. Lieut. James D. Lowry, jr. Lieut. Dixwell Ketcham. MAEINE DETACHMENT Maj. Charles I. Murray, U. S. M. C. First Lieut. John M. Greer, U. S. M. C. SUPPLY OFFICE Capt. Ray Spear (S. C). Lieut. George Scratchley (S. C). Lieut. Charles M. Garrison (S. C). Chief Pay Clerk Albert Fender. NAVAL HOSPITAL Capt. Charles M. Oman (M. C). Capt. John B. Kaufman (M. C). Lieut. Commander George P. Shields (M. C). Lieut. Commander Leon W. McGrath (M. C). Lieut. Commander Rolland R. Gasser (M. C). Lieut. Commander Paul M. Albright (M. C). Lieut. Herbert L. Pugh (M. C). Chief Pharmacist Roscoe C. Rowe. Chief Pharmacist Jesse R. Ayer. Pharmacist George A. Miller. U. S. NAVAL ENGINEERING EXPERIMENT STATION Capt. Halford R. Greenlee. Lieut. Commander Vincent H. Godfrey. Lieut. Commander Thorvald A. Sol- berg. Lieut. Commander Harold S. Klein. Lieut. Donald T. Giles. Lieut. Alexander M. Loker. Lieut. Ralph R. Gurley. NAVAL RADIO STATION (HIGH POWER) Lieut. Commander Herbert J. Meneratti. Chief Radio Electrician Theodore Lachman. ACADEMIC BOARD The Superintendent. The Commandant of Midshipmen. The Head of the Department of Seamanship and Flight Tactics. The Head of the Department of Ordnance and Gunnery. The Head of the Depaetment of Navigation. The Head of the Department of Engineering and Aeronautics. The Head of the Department of Mathematics. The Head of the Department of Electrical Engineering and Physics The Head of the Department of English and History. The Head of the Department of Modern Languages. The Head of the Department of Hygiene. The Head of the Department of Physical Training. 26 MIDSHIPMEN OFFICERS AND PETTY OFFICERS 27 1 . © p ° as P « °* £.2 p .2 7), battalion com- L., (8) battalion r. (7) battalion adju- 1 officer. jr., (7) battalion id quartermaster. A., (8) battalion cer. >5 p p< a o o I 0 "gS i-q -2 1 4 Ph P | P Ph PhO^ o O 03 d W u 03 & 03 u 4 N p" © 8S-S rC p a 1 © © h ft EH CO to «1 OJ p. p. ft 888 © © © 'Sb'Sb'So PQPQPP SS3 ■P t-l P o ft — . © „o3 -a ip H o3 .'co £ >> «fega^g°-p2ft ^a^s.a-2^8-03^ £ pq ft £ O O -p p 03 "© ft © Ph EH IS © fcC o > CO 1 CO 03 ••P t-s ©W g r- 03 -,p P »^2 £ SPhS pq 4 Ph' 31 (H o ip co < | 1 fl 1 £ & d o « o © § £ P ° ft a p t? g © 9- ■' 2 -:t:S >> ^-Sj-P ] CO ft Ph o JPh p 03 ft a o p4 h4 PQ Wph'jh' d d o m 1 1- o a P as fe © © « ».- p" O IP • i © d la gHEH ^P^ P .O 03 u 3 EH ° o .2 S S a p S ra o3 » o •2 ^ | ^g^ 3 2 2 S£*| 21 ^© i © P g PQ P c © p ^5 « -H P 5P ■- ' © p p p ft a 8 < w -p 1 o p © 03 O © a 1 > 4 Pnpq i- PH ft pq M p" s +i bfi«*H .2 P-p P p P 03 03 03 a as p-ftft 3313 CO CO CO -P-PTS 335 © SP^oSoRpo pq S S pq h a, C "E ©-T 3 (h o: | 1 O p P o 1 ,Q ■P P o © © CO rA P "P. P •'S3 03 O P O J-(.S o ±J -Pi ±5 ?3 « 15 'p ^a § S3 P 5"3 ,-gM go^ apl^o-pga^s on); ptf P b o p s? ^.P^KSosgoSft h W pq k hn ft a 8 ^a u p o Ph 4 ©- « l"0 Er Ks C P c oc PC ! ) WPhcc Ph <i ■ 1 % ■a o I a Pq «*' © fep S>i .1° © 03 © ^^-tJ >> §a So™§a§ a,s.9,«a2«^2 S co 03 w O ^ ^"o o ft < P 03 ft a o © •p © 6 PC Pt "c iCQp£ ^Pc P43p -b£C 03 d_2 §11 | •p © Ph' w "S ip N p ft Eh ^ c3 o3 (^ ^ j_j (_, c3 lp EH P o pq < 5i& © pq P P P P P CO © P © © © © © o o © co aaaaat^a §?§?§?§? Sill? a a « a ^ >> PI p4 C •Ph^" ; ^5> § d P 8 8 -s § ■§ 03 ft p4 5P~ 1 ^ Ph" Ph PhPhPhPhPhOOPh p & -s. a » o P P o ^3 a o P t? p4 CO cn"®^?"?? 00 00^" S « s « - J P P P .o -p tyB " <h' "P 03 (- p § 1 o m P <! CO ! ipn 3 |* P "ol is O O g ^ _. 03 s s a ® 9 ^2 03 03 c3"S-S - J; 22 £ 03*3 3 J JS^gg p o © © U2 bo 03 -S ^a p;p O cQcoEr P 03 P^ § § tc 6 ft a i^p < SI CO i-, 14 gj ^S»^ gaoa^P.go P 03 P © 03 pq p£ ^ pq S-c O o !-» © |©^ o pC PQ « - t- ©,pP5 £ ft ft a 8 CO u Ph p" 03 OJO © Pf 4 *3 o d S3 M § 3 Ph ^assoo^o a Pw "S J "S i **» 03 « 03 ' t| p o3 a 2 S3 p © a' ft P 03 g 03 a $ © ft .a 9 P p p p p P'53.2 g -s g .SP © ■e p "S3 3.2 .2 .2 .2 .2 p3 © P © CO — < * .-2 3 g ^ p •2 © 1 a . pppppppd p©p p p p p 0 § s| o3o3cdo3c3a3C3o3 c3 TD <& c3 c^J c3 03 03 aaaaaaaa aga a .a a . a a a a§ ftftftftftftfta ftSft fto ft n t; 39S IpOS 32 CO fl CO CO .CO COjS "P CP 'Pi^'P "Pip p. p-o .& H»? 33333333 cocococococococo 3 30 = CO C ode PPP -s^ 3-p >. t3 P *P P *P 'P T3 *P -p •Ok ■pfp-p 3"H U. J H? £ £ 22S s°S SWS s° a ss s a 28 MIDSHIPMEN OFFICERS AND PETTY OFFICERS a 6 | . , Qn\rH 4£fa fl" 9 M „;: A fa M A pq pqAM Sfafam 4 ^ ^ 02 <j <jpqO O ft £ PQ a« ;pq'ok .02 3fc -"fa fa fa^.tt Mfl OQ p^A firfB^^ ho3m Afa WWWWWM M^§§ P4 « fa d §, H "g S .9" 3 Wl § A O « © is 5 eJ21 pq .|-|te. «3 .2. JS lor: . M A faHM 4 * 3 ^-_r >J js 3 2,3"^' i A «S if 25 ^w .°^ . 3 " 3 Co CO © " a © tj hItoggoq <3 pq pqpqo O O AA AfafaOHH SM^S ^ ^ ft -5 £ £ Wtf Hfc 5 PI © © a > a O « en «■•:* a a 325 5 o fci fa 6 :««« fa 1 = a a' 'xi g O oAfa S^Ztf «< PQ pqpqpq O O fafa OHH°,£M AAA% M ft I 3 I -g g g5i3 ^^oe g M '"© © .9 pq WOO Q W fafa faO£ na 3JII °. o © Q. T3 « a w tT ' ^ ,q © .9 .2 W 2 o H « pq pq pqpqg phPh^^ '© o © 7 Sd O to O 03 w ©p^ 33S . pq pqpqo O O QQ WWHhOO OOi n § I 1 § © P-l -^ PrtO 2 fl S? ^ © fe pqfifa S *5 o >> cj «Sehh pq «fa^. Ph a © £> •3 5§ ' fa (A «. da ^,0.^.w g">..cqp5'g pq pqpqo O ft 2 ^^H £S iii!ais|n-i'e1'g fafa faWMWWW ^M^nq fa -«J W H 73 ©" I a ■§ © 0Q E-i el .9 © r3 cq pq ^Hm faf^pqcS 111 ills i^-pq fa WXiXl Ua* cQ^©fl faf iH p -S.2S2 fa pq pqoo O O PQ fiftfafa'faO OW^M pq_ § m *At:£ n P3 :? ;^fa I s I Hi fas! 1 jj Hi § £ M pq Ofafa S^S&h <3 pq pqpqo ft 14 fi.*urt:d 1 s 03 n . . «a . . fa fafa ooWfafa^q SfaP>nP4 3£° T3 © co co CD a 111 oddd ^f^d odd 000000 Q AAA ft ft fiQ fipppfip PPPQ MIDSHIPMEN OFFICERS AND PETTY OFFICERS 29 w >6 El I Xi -l-a >a ■s-3 n'-O'g.&S Ph P5 PhPhcoco rt bo T5 PI S p. r a 6 ■a jo ^^a ©a i^.S^i5 COCO CO CO £££ ■ +» s ® §) & '«e a k1 © nil S S § « SS ^Scoco CO coE-i H £ O fe- bo _r ^ § O Ph SI PhPh ell's „hj 5 a © 3 PhPhcoco J J CO N 3 3 « « CO O" i-5 ^ K, S O . ^_ « «' P?^h4 0« . . •-3 3 b s* "SlfS-s Ph PLi Pl, Phcq co>f>!> a s s ■ Ph <|Ed • • Oco cocococo co £-!> Pi D8 © fl- 3 £^ © ^ o o o «H I o : : ; Ph Ph tf n'o Schneider, E Shea, T. V.. Shook, K. S. Stuart, J. M O WW .. PI JD 03 *£ © O PhPh 3 a 03 s 3 0 u © 03 © Weintrau L.,jr. Zimmerm P. is *£#*. ^ * 3 * «S ^«Si fl "2 S . 3.3. «?©'0'EI 3 .S-^lS M ™JS ®3k?^ M J S O Oco doco^^ Ph« 3"§ co co co co^h 3.5-ggH« O O O O OO OOOO O oo o o ooo A p q q qq PPPP p pp p p ppp 131918—32- S Sot <S PI PRACTICE CRUISE, 1932 1. The midshipmen's practice cruise was made in two parts in the U. S. S. Wyoming. 2. (a) Group One consisted of the midshipmen of the classes of 1933 and 1935, first and third battalions, plus the football squad and midshipmen of those classes required to take reexaminations or delayed examinations. (b) Group Two consisted of the midshipmen of the above-named classes, second and fourth battalions, plus members of the crew who participated in the Poughkeepsie Regatta. (c) Group One embarked for the summer cruise on the morning of June 3. The itinerary was as follows: Arrival Place Departure June 17 July 8 July 25 Annapolis, Md_ Galveston, Tex. Ponce, P. R___ Annapolis, Md_ June 3 June 24 July 13 On July 26 this group disembarked and was granted leave (except those under restriction) until 10 a. m. September 23, 1932. (d) Group Two (except those under restriction) was granted leave from 1.30 p. m., June 2, until 10 a. m., August 1, 1932, on which date they returned to the Naval Academy and embarked for the second cruise. The itinerary for this group was as follows: Arrival Place Departure Aug. 13 Aug. 29 Sept. 13 Sept. 21 Sept. 22 Annapolis, Md Ponta Delgada, Azores. Halifax, Nova Scotia. _. Hampton Roads, Va.!_. Annapolis, Md Disembarked Aug. 1 Aug. 16 Sept. 7 Sept. 13 Entered Hampton Roads to deliver and obtain mail. 30 MERIT ROLLS FOR 1931-32 Merit rolls, made out annually for each class, show the proficiency of the midshipmen in each branch of study. The numbers given in the table, showing the relative weight of the different branches, are used as coefficients, the final mark in each branch (on a scale of 4) being multiplied by the number assigned to that branch. The sum of the products, after adding the multiple for discipline, is the final mark of the midshipmen for the year. In the graduating merit roll the final standing for the course is determined by the sum of the yearly multiples. Midshipmen who attain 85 per cent of the multiple for a year shall be dis- tinguished by a star affixed to their names on the annual merit rolls. (Regula- tions, U. S. Naval Academy, 1928, art. 191.) The diplomas of midshipmen whose final multiples on the graduating merit roll are not less than 85 per cent of the maximum shall read " Passed with dis- tinction"; those whose final multiples are less than 85 per cent but not less than 75 per cent of the maximum shall read "Passed with credit"; and those whose final multiples are less than 75 per cent of the maximum shall read "Passed." (Regulations, U. S. Naval Academy, 1928, art. 192.) * Received 85 per cent of multiple. b Resignation accepted upon graduation due to physical disqualification. c Graduated, but not commissioned on account of unsatisfactory conduct. d Voluntary resignation accepted immediately upon graduation. dd Died. e Did not complete course due to illness; found physically disqualified and required to resign. /Resigned for physical reasons. g Found physically disqualified and required to resign. h Deficient in studies for second term; turned back into next lower class. i Deficient in studies; required to resign. MC Assigned to Marine Corps upon graduation. p Did not complete course due to illness; dropped for refusing to tender resigna- tion on account of being physically disqualified. r Resigned. rr Resigned on account of unsatisfactory conduct. s Deficient in studies for first term; turned back into next lower class. w Turned back into next lower class on account of illness. x Deficient in studies for first term; turned back into this class. f Readmitted with class of 1936. 31 32 MERIT ROLL — GRADUATING CLASS, JUNE, 1932 Merit roll for the four years1 course of the midshipmen of the graduating class (class of 1932), 423 members, of whom 4#1 graduated Order of merit *1 *2 *3 *4 *5 *6 *7 *8 *9 *10 *11 *12 *13 *14 *15 *16 *17 *1S *19 *20 *21 *22 *23 *24 *25 *26 27 28 29 30 31 32 33 34 35 36 37 38 39 40 <f41 42 43 44 45 46 Maxima Mandelkorn, R. S Fawkes, E. E Ruckner, E. A Schultz, F. B Weschler, C. J Mitchell, G. H Frazer, C. L Baker, H. E Waters, O. D., jr Sosnoski, H Van Slyke, F. A Miller, W. R Ward, A. G Hurst, E. W Ernst, S. A Munson, H. G Horner, J. S Mustin, L. M Keyes, C. M Pfingstag, P. WT Jaap, J. A Bowers, T. K Bryan, L. A Lewis, P Hull, H Evans, R. L Wilson, R. L Palmer, C. J Hodge, E. D Weeks, R. H Caley, A. D Brown, W. W Bailey, G. W Reiter, H. L., jr Willard, C. S Brumby, F. H., jr Scott, D. D Gramlich, F. M Kinert, D. F Frakes, D. R Soule, R. A., 3d Brown, S. W Morse, J. H., jr Kelly, W. D Ruhlman, F. L Townsend, W. E First year 100 91. 53 90. 63 88. 14 92. 12 88.24 88. 13 84.22 87.36 88.39 85.35 87.02 88.67 90.39 84.83 86.89 82.73 85.77 83.08 89.07 82.91 83. 72 86.52 86.04 87.67 83.65 85.71 87.50 81.92 80.74 85.36 82.43 84.75 86. 15 85.55 80.30 84 90 75.04 83.67 84.07 81.03 82.71 86.39 83.97 81. 02 80. 63 79. 25 Second year 200 182. 69 178. 22 178. 54 178. 35 176. 19 178. 14 172. 05 170. 90 173. 75 176.01 171. 89 173. 55 178. 81 170. 84 169. 76 165. 66 168. 29 166. 42 176. 72 165. 51 165. 49 171. 13 171. 82 168. 51 166. 47 169. 66 172. 94 166. 94 159. 56 165. 94 168. 92 166. 24 166. 61 162. 15 159. 72 168. 02 162. 75 166. 51 161. 08 163. 03 162. 69 165. 11 162. 01 163. 79 161. 31 159. 08 Third year 269. 65 270. 62 272. 03 270. 45 270. 41 269. 54 269. 07 269. 55 267. 17 262. 49 269. 05 262. 03 260. 11 263. 85 262. 55 262. 64 263. 46 261. 94 257. 26 261. 59 256. 74 258. 96 253. 49 257. 65 255. 53 255. 17 256. 52 259. 38 256. 10 255. 46 256. 35 250. 50 255. 15 252. 25 256. 63 249. 88 261. 19 252. 25 252. 58 251. 62 247. 53 251. 04 254. 19 252. 29 252. 33 257. 86 Fourth year 400 368. 66 368. 15 360. 06 356. 46 357. 51 356. 18 356. 92 353. 87 351. 52 351. 45 342. 42 345. 42 339. 63 349. 28 347. 63 355. 15 346. 66 352. 62 337. 75 350. 25 353. 80 343. 02 348. 05 342. 70 345. 25 339. 87 333. 00 340. 38 349. 47 339. 04 337. 23 343. 19 336. 10 343. 28 345. 49 338. 71 342. 16 336. 34 339. 98 341. 62 343. 78 334.08 335. 80 337. 62 339. 76 337. 69 MERIT ROLL — GRADUATING CLASS, JUNE, 1932 33 Merit roll for the four years' course of the midshipmen of the graduating class (class of 1932), 423 members, of whom 421 graduated — Continued Names Maxima Osier, P. G Lambert, R. H Hummer, H. C Abrahamson, E. P Shaw, S. L Sunderland, M Knoertzer, H. A Coleman, .H. M Franklin, W. R Best, R. H Raring, G. L Brown, L. S Stoner, H. F Jacobs, J. F., jr Bailey, B. L Thomas, D. I Porter, R. R Leitwiler, J. M Underwood, G. W Dale, R. H Wellings, A. A Pletta, F. A Spangler, J. G ReiUy, J. V Dropp, A. H Coleman, W. D Fulton, R. B., 2d Small, S. C Kuhl, J. H_ Dimitrijevic, W. J Kintberger, L. S Murray, E. N Archer, S. M Pavlic, M. F Acker, F. C Leeds, J. R Denig, R. L., jr Simpson, R. T Ford, J. C, jr Prince, H. R Gibson, S. K Dickinson, A. W Lark, J. A Dreany, H. H Corry, J Douglass, F. M First year Second year 200 Third year 300 Fourth year 400 Aggregate for four years 1,000 81.86 83.47 79.93 79.45 78.69 82. 85 85.07 82.79 85.27 84.45 81.24 84.65 80.82 84.89 80. 42 79.01 82.99 82. 39 82. 12 77.06 79.44 79.62 82. 29 81. 17 80.95 83. 14 81.90 83. 13 82. 19 81.31 81. 15 81.98 83.32 79.85 81.78 82.56 76.43 84.91 77.46 83.83 83.06 78.51 79.52 77.22 86.67 80. 95 159. 75 162. 42 167. 81 161. 86 162. 52 163. 46 160. 88 167. 03 168. 02 162. 98 157. 75 160. 50 163. 48 164. 22 157. 25 158. 89 161. 73 157. 37 158. 89 155. 45 157. 42 157. 74 163. 08 154. 39 160. 33 160. 86 157. 14 158. 02 159. 66 162. 82 162. 45 162. 41 161. 73 152. 50 155. 62 155. 72 153. 10 167. 82 154. 50 160. 89 159. 55 157. 95 152. 41 152. 38 162. 85 157. 84 252. 87 252. 80 256. 54 250. 95 251. 58 247. 02 243. 09 249. 87 245. 13 246. 82 246. 11 244. 89 251. 13 245. 98 252. 12 243. 63 245. 50 244. 19 245. 00 245. 96 251. 68 247. 23 247. 33 246. 13 247. 95 243. 66 240. 58 241. 53 244.29 244. 69 242. 96 245. 27 242. 27 245. 59 242. 19 243. 42 243. 03 243. 63 247.51 244. 93 244. 87 246. 73 242. 79 243. 31 242. 83 240. 48 337. 32 332. 93 326. 86 336. 89 334.41 333. 28 335. 62 324. 59 324. 34 327. 59 336. 63 330. 80 325. 04 324. 00 329. 00 337. 03 328. 12 333. 47 329. 57 336. 43 326. 25 330. 13 321.69 332. 67 324. 63 325. 46 333. 12 330. 03 326. 09 322. 27 324. 43 321. 26 323. 12 331. 06 328. 54 325. 90 334. 65 310. 78 326. 89 315. 99 317. 99 321. 89 329. 71 331. 41 311. 21 324. 05 831. 80 831. 62 831. 14 829. 15 827. 20 826. 61 824. 66 824. 28 822. 76 821. 84 821. 73 820. 84 820. 47 819. 09 818. 79 818. 57 818. 34 817. 42 815. 58 814. 90 814.79 814. 72 814. 39 814. 36 813. 86 813. 12 812. 74 812. 71 812. 23 811.09 810. 99 810. 92 810. 44 809. 00 808. 13 807. 60 807. 21 807. 14 806. 36 805. 64 805. 47 805. 08 804.43 804. 32 803. 56 803. 32 34 MERIT ROLL — GRADUATING CLASS, JUNE, 1932 Merit roll for the four years' course of the midshipmen of the graduating class (class of 1932), J+23 members, of whom 1+21 graduated — Continued Order of merit 92 93 94 95 96 97 98 99 100 101 102 103 104 105 106 107 108 109 dllO 111 112 113 114 115 116 117 118 119 120 121 122 123 124 125 d!26 127 128 129 130 131 132 MC133 134 135 136 137 Names Maxima. Silverstein, M Harrington, P. H Wylie, J. C, jr Richards, W. L Munholland, J Campbell, H. J Kehl, G. W__ Odend'hal, C. J., jr Grouleff, P. H Kaufman, J. H Nicholas, N. J Kerr, R. H Bull, W. I Foley, F. D___ Kirn, L. J Gold, C. C Wilson, W. R____ Simmers , C. R Smith, L. O., jr Pitts, R. M Van Evera, J. R White, T. H Hughes, G. E Leverett, T. R Smith, Levering Cook, H. S Woodward, E. C Sargent, H. L Vandling, R. E Fleck, T. M Cope, A. L Carroll, D. L., jr Grider, J. M Williams, Richard C, jr. Knock, D. C, jr Gregory, R. V Zink, W. T., jr Loughlin, J. J., jr Murphy, C. L., jr Slayden, A. W Schroeder, W. P Klinksiek, H. T Bandy, J. I Moore, H. G Greenlee, A. W Sugarman, C. M__ First year 100 77.54 78.94 80. 17 80.05 79.81 75.47 82.83 77.30 81. 89 78. 30 78. 63 80.07 81. 58 81. 78 81. 14 76.44 78.63 80.32 79. 10 81.24 81. 14 79.78 77.54 74. 18 74. 68 76. 83 78.91 79.77 77. 38 82. 39 81.64 77.74 75.90 78.87 79.40 75.23 81.65 80.21 75.98 79. 11 80. 41 79. 66 73. 72 81. 17 79. 58 78. 41 Second year 200 157. 37 161. 92 158. 01 156. 74 155. 20 152. 09 159. 16 154. 10 157. 56 155. 91 156. 40 160. 89 157.77 157. 45 156. 43 157. 08 155. 74 151. 07 151. 49 155. 48 158. 67 157. 76 146. 77 149. 21 155. 08 154. 33 156. 40 154. 12 151. 29 159. 41 154. 00 156. 82 151. 19 157. 08 157. 07 151. 44 160. 67 151. 68 153. 00 151. 05 151. 14 159. 34 152. 18 158. 09 157. 51 154. 24 Third year 300 240. 58 241. 54 241. 33 245. 18 243. 43 242. 26 243. 76 241. 67 245. 15 241. 31 242. 34 244. 71 241. 15 240. 79 241. 07 241. 09 235. 20 240. 90 239. 27 241. 95 238. 84 240. 01 243. 36 239. 18 239. 95 240. 70T 245. 19 239. 14 238. 00 235. 25 241. 83 235. 96 237. 51 236. 56 238. 15 236. 32 233. 64 234. 16 239. 16 243. 18 238. 75 236. 41 235. 34 237. 86 228. 51 234. 97 I Fourth year 400 327. 21 320. 08 322. 88 318. 16 321. 68 330. 07 314. 01 326. 61 314. 05 322. 67 320. 59 312. 29 317. 44 317. 30 318. 09 322. 03 326. 89 323. 42 324. 60 314. 76 314. 45 315. 45 324. 46 329. 16 321. 72 319. 09 310. 08 317. 26 323. 38 312. 29 311. 82 318. 56 324. 01 315. 63 313. 43 324. 77 311. 63 321. 48 319. 34 313. 73 316. 68 311. 10 324. 92 308. 35 319. 63 317. 49 MERIT ROLL — GRADUATING CLASS, JUNE, 1932 35 Merit roll for the four years' course of the midshipmen of the graduating class (class of 1932), 423 members, of whom 421 graduated — Continued Names Maxima Beardslee, G. R Perkins, W. B., jr Wilson, R. M Miller, J. S Craighill, R. S Hendrick, H. L., jr Hayes, J. H__ Short, W. B., jr Weston, W. H Hydeman, E. T Hunter, G. C Myers, J. C Heinlein, O. A., jr Schmidt, M. G Williamson, T. F Asmuth, W., jr Turton, H. J__ Blaisdell, N. E DeLong, H. C Carpenter, T. E Thorn, W. A Nelson, C. P Blair, R. H_.__ Finney, E. P., jr Maulsby, R. J. C Beer, R. 0 Eastwold, E. R Langen, T. D. F Craig, J. G., jr Kemper, J. L Spiers, J. R Outerson, W Van Every, S. A., jr___ Young, R. C Warfield, T. G Lank, T. S Parker, F. M Johnson, R. C Atkins, B. K Little, R. B Lewis, W. H Hodgkins, E. R Everett, J. L., jr Brannon, H. R Hobbs, G. O Fawcett, M. A First year 100 Second year 200 Third year 300 Fourth year Aggregate for four years 1,000 77. 99 80. 17 80.30 78.90 80.43 80.41 80.83 76. 62 75.98 79. 80 77. 30 80.30 81.23 73. 98 77.38 79. 31 78.35 80.54 75. 82 79. 12 78.61 79.27 78.47 76.95 74. 94 78.42 74.71 80. 54 79.92 80. 89 78. 19 74.05 77.37 71.23 79. 12 79. 82 73. 88 76.00 78.24 77.08 79.43 71.27 79.40 77. 12 75.59 77. 19 149. 26 154.77 158. 81 152. 17 156. 20 152. 51 156. 91 150. 53 151. 23 157. 11 153. 89 158. 89 153. 07 152. 05 149. 56 156. 65 151. 01 154. 44 145. 26 154. 05 153. 70 155. 38 152. 76 146. 49 154. 40 153. 29 154. 35 155. 60 154. 77 155. 43 153. 62 149. 78 148. 03 146. 99 151. 08 151. 38 146. 75 151. 63 153. 68 149. 97 153. 54 146. 39 149. 31 148. 97 153. 96 150. 43 235. 61 235. 20 233. 71 228. 89 235. 55 233. 53 234. 48 234. 00 236. 18 235. 27 239. 04 232. 81 237. 5