Tomodachi Life: The TV Series is a Japanese-American anime-influenced computer-animated coming-of-age musical comedy television series based on the 2014 Nintendo 3DS game of the same name. It aired on TV Tokyo in Japan and on Disney XD and Disney Channel worldwide on April 22, 2019.

On February 22, 2024, Thomas Bonilla announced that the eighteen season will be the final season of the show, as he and the production crew will shift focus to the upcoming 2027 Fortnite show titled "Fortnite: Battle Royale".

Genres[]

Computer-animation, anime-influenced, musical, comedy, kids and animated sitcom.

Plot[]

The series is set on a fictional island called "Tomodachi Island", and it follows a young teenage Mii named Thomas, who hosts the show and explains about "Life on the Island", alongside his co-host Jasmine, Thomas calls her Jazi, who tells all the viewers about friendship, best friends, spouses and sweethearts.

Characters[]

Main Characters[]

Thomas Goldberg (voiced by Shunsuke Takeuchi (Japanese) and by Sean Giambrone (English), ever since Adam Goldberg's voice on The Goldbergs) - The main protagonist and the host of the series. He is a smart and happy 16-year-old gingered boy, who prefer to do things on his own way. Alongside, his co-host Jazi who teaches kids life on the island. He and his best friend, Jasmine live in the Mii Apartments. He is also the co-host of Mii News. He wears a breton shirt. He lives in his street apartment.

Jasmine "Jazi" Mitchell (voiced by Miyu Tomita (Japanese) and Meg Donnelly (English), ever since Addison's voice on Zombies) - The deuteragonist in the series and the co-host in the series. She is a cute, happy and bubbly 15-year-old gingered girl who is Thomas's best friend. She is his co-host with Thomas who teaches kids about the islanders. Thomas likes to call Jasmine "Jazi". She is also the co-host of Mii News with Thomas. She wears comfy loungewear. She lives in her sparkle apartment.

Shawn Freeman (voiced by Kumiko Higa (Japanese) and Greg Cipes (English), ever since Beast Boy's voice on Teen Titans and Teen Titans Go) - The tritagonist in the series. Shawn is a nerdy 14-year-old greenie boy who loves inventions. He wears a flight jacket. He lives in his basement apartment.

Chloe Edison (voiced by Tomoyo Kurosawa (Japanese) and Brec Bassinger (English), ever since additional film and television works) - A cutest and smartest 15-year-old brownheaded girl who loves sweets. She is Thomas' love interest and later her girlfriend. He wears a gauze dress. She lives in her sweets apartment.

Donna McReilly (voiced by Ayaka Ohashi (Japanese) and Julie Nathanson (English), ever since additional voice works) - A very cute and wise teenage 16-year-old dark gingered girl who loves to sing and dance. She wears a V-neck top. She lives in her nouveau richie apartment.

Leo Foster (voiced by Manami Numakura (Japanese) and Pierce Gagnon (English), ever since Ethan Woods' voice on Extant) - An energetic 8-year-old gingered white boy who loves making plans and putting into action. He wears a T-shirt and shorts. He lives in his boys' apartment.

Devin Herst (voiced by Daiki Yamashita (Japanese) and Todd Haberkorn (English), ever since Allen Walker's voice on D-Gray Man) - A smart and chipper 15-year-old blonde-haired boy and an entertainer who loves to dance to all kinds of music. He wears coveralls. He lives in his bicycle apartment.

Jennifer "Jenny" Drummond (voiced by Kiyono Yasuno (Japanese) and Laura Bailey (English), impersonating Phoebe Cates) - A sporty 14-year-old teenage black-haired girl who loves sports. She is Devin's girlfriend. She is the first character in the series to impersonate a real-life celebrity. She wears a marble-dots shirt. She lives in her soccer stadium apartment.

Henry Stine (voiced by Asami Shimoda (Japanese) and Candi Milo (English), ever since Dexter's voice on Dexter's Laboratory) - A smart and cute 7-year-old almost vividly yellow-haired boy genius who loves science, he lives in his science laboratory apartment. He loves science inventions and chemistry performances. He also sometimes annoys Thomas who asks him questions about science. He wears a military coat. He lives in his laboratory apartment.

Nick Langley (voiced by Kikuko Inoue (Japanese) and Ben Schwartz (English), ever since Randy's voice on RC: 9GN) - A wise, energetic, chipper and lucky 13-year-old vividly ginger-haired boy who is one of Thomas's friends. He wears a cardigan and harem pants. He lives in his wizard apartment.

Laura Moriarty (voiced by Minami Tanaka (Japanese) and Grey DeLisle (English) in a Scottish accent) - A very cute and wise tween teenage 16-year-old black-haired girl from Glasgow, Scotland who loves to sing and dance, she also loves to play bagpipes, hornpipes and do a lot of riverdancing. She is the first character in the series to be accented. She wears a loose sweater. She lives in her highland apartment.

Will McLeary (voiced by Fuminori Komatsu (Japanese) and Rob Paulsen (English), ever since Brick and Boomer's voices on The Powerpuff Girls (1998)) - A athletic, sporty and clumsy 15-year-old brownish-green-haired boy who loves making plans and putting into action. He wears a jacket and t-shirt. He lives in his relaxing apartment.

Sarah Meier (voiced by Aki Toyosaki (Japanese) and Kristen Li (English), ever since Bubbles's voice on the 2016 Powerpuff Girls reboot) - A cute, bubbly, sweet and loveable 12-year-old pure redheaded girl and an entertainer who loves to dance to all kinds of music, and loves cooking and baking. Her favorite thing to make is melonpan. She also loves flowers. She wears a heart sweatshirt. She lives in her meadow apartment.

Greg Marlow (voiced by Akari Kito (Japanese) and also Todd Haberkorn (English) in a funny Asian-American accent) - A 14-year-old black-haired Asian-American boy who loves martial arts. He is Will's best friend. He wears a tank top. He lives in his Traditional Japanese apartment.

Cathy Davidson (voiced by Megumi Han (Japanese) and Stephanie Sheh (English), ever since the title character's voice on Sailor Moon) - A very cute, kind, energetic, sweet, bubbly and young 14-year-old green-haired and beige-skinned girl who loves to tell stories and she also loves fairytales and fairy gardens. She is Will's girlfriend. She wears a sleeveless shirt. She lives in her fantasy apartment.

Kristen Sullivan (voiced by Sumire Morohoshi (Japanese) and Ava Acres (English), ever since Amy's voice on Clarence) - A cute little 6-year old blackheaded and pink-skinned girl who annoys Thomas sometimes. She wears a leopard-print sweatshirt. She lives in her children's apartment.

Jason Finn-Greene (voiced by Natsuki Hanae (Japanese) and Jeremy Shada (English), ever since Finn the Human's voice on Adventure Time) - A happy-go-lucky 17-year old teenage yellow-haired boy who loves robots. He wears an oversized jersey. He lives in his steampunk apartment.

Leslie Moffat (voiced by Reina Ueda (Japanese) and Mckenna Grace (English), ever since Faith Newman's voice on The Young and the Restless) - A cute and elegant 5-year-old twintailed blonde-haired girl who loves colors and puzzle games. She wears a punk rocker outfit. She lives in her colorful apartment.

Michael Kiebler (voiced by Nobuhiko Okamoto (Japanese) and Robbie Daymond (English), ever since SwaySway's voice on Breadwinners) - A young teenage 17-year-old light green-haired boy, he is a safari explorer who loves to search for wild animals and is Jason's best friend. He wears a camouflage jacket. He lives in his cave apartment.

Jeff Hubert (voiced by Yoko Hikasa (Japanese) and Issac Ryan Brown (English), ever since Booker's voice on Raven's Home) - A handsome 10-year-old African-American white blackheaded boy who loves to skateboard and become a rapper. He wears cargo pants. He lives in his disco apartment.

Chelsea Lauerbach (voiced by Sumire Uesaka (Japanese) and Diamond White (English), ever since Frankie Greene's voice on Transformers: Rescue Bots) - A cute teenage 15-year-old African-American white girl who loves being a cute girl in town. She wears a bubble skirt. She lives in her seabed apartment.

Natalie Goldberg (voiced by Maaya Uchida (Japanese) and Cherami Leigh (English), impersonating Molly Ringwald) - Thomas's older redheaded sister who is a chef. She enjoys making and baking desserts. She wears a cooking apron. She lives in her kitchen apartment.

Carlos Fernandez (voiced by Yoshitsugu Matsuoka (Japanaese) and Eric Bauza (English), Mexican-American accented) - A 15-year old Mexican-American blackheaded boy who loves music, Mariachi, flamenco and latin pop. He is obsessed with food, and he can eat anything, in which gets his hands on the food which he chooses. He wears a boatneck shirt and sombrero. He lives in his fast food apartment.

Gracie Caudill (voiced by Azumi Waki (Japanese) and Kate Micucci (English), ever since Lucy's voice on The Big Bang Theory) - A cute and chipper 16-yeor-old dark moderate magenta-haired girl and the mastermind to projects. She wears a coat & skirt. She lives in her library apartment.

Elias Caldwell (voiced by Eri Kitamura (Japanese) and Ray Chase (English), ever since Roy's voice on Fire Emblem Heroes) - An elegant 15-year-old platinum-haired boy who loves Thomas and Jasmine. He wears a button cardigan and frog hat. He lives in his cartoon apartment.

Daisy Townsend (voiced by Hina Kino (Japanese) and Grey DeLisle (English), ever since Daphne Blake's voice on the Scooby-Doo franchise) - A 16-year old hot pink-haired girl who loves to play songs on her guitar, especially music therapy. She wears a crocheted vest. She lives in her music apartment.

Matteo Ribidanco (voiced by Satoshi Hino (Japanese) and Eric Bauza (English), Tuscany accent) - An Italian 16-year old brownheaded teenager who is born in Tuscany. He wears a boater hat and Italian shirt. He lives in his roman apartment.

Lionel Perkins (voiced by Shinji Kawada (Japanese) and Josh Peck (English), ever since Casey Jones' voice on the 2012 series of TMNT) - An 18-year-old light grayheaded boy who is a vlogger. He wears a fleece jacket and sunglasses. He lives in his polka-dot apartment.

Kaylee Jensen (voiced by Makiko Ohmoto (Japanese) and Hynden Walch (English), ever since Viridi's voice on Kid Icarus: Uprising) - A 14-year-old vivd greenheaded girl who is a storyteller. She wears a sweater-vest. She lives in her cherry blossoms apartment.

Josh O'Malley (voiced by Mamoru Miyano (Japanese) and Jack McBrayer (English), ever since Wander's voice on Wander Over Yonder) - A 16-year-old sky blue-haired teenager who loves to play doctor. He wears a lab coat. He lives in his hospital apartment.

Debbie Schneider (voiced by Ruriko Noguchi (Japanese) and Alyson Stoner (English), ever since Isabella Garcia-Shapiro's voice on Phineas and Ferb) - An 11-year old soft greenheaded girl who loves ballet. She wears a ballerina outfit. She lives in her ballet apartment.

Amy Hartnett (voiced by Yumiri Hanamori (Japanese) and Pamela Adlon (English), ever since Ashley Spinelli, Baloo and Bobby Hill's voices on Recess, Jungle Cubs and King of The Hill) - A 12-year-old light pink-haired girl who is a fan of fairytales. She wears a princess outfit. She lives in her medieval European apartment.

Zac Wilson (voiced by Aya Hirano (Japanese) and Ben Diskin, ever since Numbuh 1 and 2's voices on Codename: KND) - A 16-year old pastel blue-haired boy and Matteo's best friend. He lives in his monochrome apartment.

Casey Edwards (voiced by Karin Isobe (Japanese) and Abby Elliott (English), ever since Janna's voice on Star vs. the Forces of Evil) - A tomboyish 13-year old hunter greenheaded girl who likes rollerblading, She is also a fan of comic books. She wears a front-tied shirt and sunflower barrette. She lives in her lady jet-setter apartment.

Lewis Barbour (voiced by Tomokazu Seki (Japanese) and Jason Marsden (English), ever since Chester's voice on FOP) - An 18-year-old dark medium blueheaded boy who loves to host cosplay events. He wears a leather trench coat and leather hat. He lives in his rock club apartment.

Tia Bailey (voiced by Reina Ueda (Japanese) and Auli'i' Cravalho (English), ever since the title character's voice on Moana) - An extremely kind 16 and a half year old blackheaded Hawaiian, half Polynesian and half American girl who loves Hawaiian, Polynesian and tropical music and hula dancing. She wears a grass skirt and Hawaiian flower barrette. She lives in her tropical beach apartment.

Maddie Dickinson (voiced by Yuki Nakashima (Japanese) and Jessica DiCicco (English), ever since Lynn Loud Jr.'s voice on The Loud House) - A cheerful and peppy 15-year old soft purple lavender-haired girl who is a professional classical pianist. She wears a camisole dress and rose barrette. She lives in her floral apartment.

Bryce Frazier (voiced by Yui Ogura (Japanese) and Dante Basco (English), ever since Jake Long's voice on American Dragon: Jake Long) - A 14-year old strong orange-haired boy who loves to do social networking and jazz music. He wears a tuxedo and top hat. He lives in his bohemian apartment.

Ashlyn Boone-Lutz (voiced by Mayu Yoshioka (Japanese) and Kari Wahlgren (English), ever since Chloe Carmichael's voice on The Fairly OddParents) - A genetle, sweet, caring, wise and helpful 8-year old light yellow-haired girl who loves ice skating and dancing. She wears an ice-skating costume. She lives in her ice apartment.

Stacy Tighe (voiced by Ai Furihata (Japanese) and Debi Derryberry (English), ever since Coco Bandicoot's voice on the Crash Bandicoot franchise) - A 16-year old medium blue-haired girl who loves puzzle games and music. She wears her gauze nightdress. She lives in her English garden apartment.

Andrew Tighe (voiced by Rina Honnizumi (Japanese) and Yuri Lowenthal (English), ever since the title character's voice on the Ben 10 franchise) - Stacy's medium blue-haired 14-year old younger brother who loves skateboarding and drums. He wears a colorful hat and sweatshirt. He lives in his gamer apartment.

Scott Grinstead (voiced by Shun'ichi Toki (Japanese) and Kel Mitchell (English), ever since Kel Kimble's voice on Kenan & Kel) - A 15-year old dark redheaded boy who loves playing keyboards, painting and doing pottery. He wears a corner-store uniform. He lives in his midcentury modern apartment.

Joe Rooney (voiced by Daisuke Ono (Japanese) and Troy Baker (English), ever since additional voice works) - A handsome 18-year old brownheaded college student who loves hanging out with Thomas and Jazi, playing the guitar, video games, science and English. He wears a leather outfit. He lives in his sky apartment.

Katie Rooney (voiced by Tomori Kusunoki (Japanese) and Stephanie Sheh (English), impersonating Kristen Stewart) - Joe's 16-year old yellow-haired sister who is funny, sweet, and sometimes very shy. She loves summertime, which is her favorite holiday. She wears a flower camisole dress. She lives in her tiled apartment.

Bobby del Castillo (voiced by Minori Suzuki (Japanese) and Alanna Ubach (English), ever since the title character's voice on El Tigre: The Adventures of Manny Rivera) - A charming, quick-witted, love-to-sing, funny, sweet and a bit sensitive 10-year old dark gray-haired Mexican-American boy who loves running, singing and video games. He wears a formal shorts suit. He lives in his Mexican apartment.

Samantha Ishibashi (voiced by Rui Tanabe (Japanese) and Janice Kawaye (English), ever since Jenny Wakeman and Ami Onuki's voices on My Life as a Teenage Robot and Hi Hi Puffy AmiYumi) - A 13-year old soft pink-haired middle school student who dreams of being a teenage popstar. She is the only character to keep the voice same, even while singing. She wears a cute pop-star outfit. She lives in her popstar apartment.

Megan Butler (voiced by Hinata Sato (Japanese) and Tara Strong (English), ever since Raven's voice on Teen Titans and Teen Titans Go!) - A kind, wise and sometimes, stubborn and grumpy gothic 15-year old dark purpleheaded girl who sometimes bullies Thomas and Jazi. She likes gothic rock and heavy metal music. She wears a gothic dress. She lives in her gothic apartment.

Allyson Simpson (voiced by Kaede Hondo (Japanese) and Debi Derryberry (English), ever since Diana's voice on Sailor Moon) - A fun-loving 16-year old azure-haired kid who loves seeing and making other Miis happy. She also likes running, beatboxing and summertime. She wears a rainbow dress. She lives in her purple apartment.

Riley Ruiz (voiced by Akeno Watanabe (Japanese) and Kari Wahlgren (English), ever since Robin Sena's voice on Witch Hunter Robin) - A peppy 16 and a half year old blackheaded girl who loves shopping. She wears a striped tunic. She lives in her log cabin apartment.

Dylan Ruiz (voiced by Taiki Matsuno (Japanese) and Tom Kenny (English), ever since the title character's voice on SpongeBob SquarePants) - Riley's soft greenheaded 12-year old younger brother who is brainy and helpful, but not too serious. He loves science, working on chemicals, problem solving, math, working and new experiments. He wears a newsboy cap and knitted vest and tie. He lives in his yellow apartment.

Shelby Fleming (voiced by Rie Takahashi (Japanese) and Michelle Ruff (English), ever since Luna's voice on Sailor Moon) - A little quiet 16 and three quarters office greenheaded girl who loves her racing, perfume and playing board games with her friends. She wears a jacket & skirt. She lives in her galactic apartment.

Jake Hughson (voiced by Noriaki Sugiyama (Japanese) and Ogie Banks (English), ever since Clawd Wolf's voice on Monster High) - A very quiet and reserved 17-year old classic redheaded boy, who is calm and sometimes a little bit of a troublemaker. He likes peace and quiet and outer space. He wears an astronaut suit. He lives in his space station apartment.

Timmy Hill (voiced by Hiro Shimono (Japanese) and Ben Diskin (English), ever since Gonzo's voice on the 2018 Muppet Babies) - A free-spirited 17-year old strong cyan-haired boy who loves rock music, warm weather and video games. He lives in his family apartment.

Isabella Guerrero (voiced by Manaki Iwama (Japanese) and Laura Bailey (English), ever since Tohru Honda's voice on Fruits Basket) - A calm, helpful and pretty smart 15-year old strong purple-haired Mexican-American girl who loves playing card games. She lives in her frontier sunset apartment.

Trevor Burton (voiced by Yuichiro Umehara (Japanese) and Will Friedle (English), ever since Ron Stoppable's voice on Kim Possible) - A charming, mischevious, protective, friendly and honest 16-year old blonde-haired boy who loves paintballing, energy drinks and heavy metal music. He lives in his ring apartment.

Tina Suzuki (voiced by Kaori Maeda (Japanese) and Grey DeLisle (English), ever since Frankie Foster's voice on Foster's Home for Imaginary Friends) - A sweet, caring and fun-loving 18-year old sky blueheaded Japanese-American girl who loves being a nurse. She loves shopping, watching dating shows, reading and writing, and sometimes cooking. She lives in her cinema apartment.

Nathan Haynes (voiced by Kengo Kawanishi (Japanese) and Josh Keaton (English), ever since Sven's voice on Voltron: Legendary Defender) - A care-free, fun-loving, laid-back and relaxed 19-year old blackheaded boy who loves surfing. He loves surfing, the beach, barbecues, swimming, meditation and table tennis. He lives in his art gallery apartment.

Taylor Tyson (voiced by Miho Okasaki (Japanese) and Laura Bailey (English), ever since additional voice works) - A deaf 15-year old soft greenheaded girl who shows Thomas and Jazi how to do sign language. She lives in her classroom apartment.

Bella Aguilar (voiced by Ayaka Fukuhara (Japanese) and Tara Strong (English), ever since Melody's voice on The Little Mermaid II: Return to the Sea) - A fantasy-loving 12-year old orange-haired girl who loves mermaids. She lives in her photo realistic apartment.

Anna Marquez (voiced by Ari Ozawa (Japanese) and Tara Strong (English), ever since Ashi's voice on Samurai Jack) - A short and pixelated young blueheaded Mexican-American girl who loves modern and old-school gaming, and sometimes the color blue. She lives in her scandinavian apartment.

Brad Yateman (voiced by Airi Eino (Japanese) and Laura Bailey (English), ever since Kid Trunks's voice on Dragon Ball Z) - A 10-year old greenheaded boy who loves trains. He wears a train engineer hat and overalls. He lives in his train apartment.

Kelsey Newirth (voiced by Satomi Sato (Japanese) and Danielle Judovits (English), ever since Naru Osaka's voice on Sailor Moon) - An average-sized 14-year old beige tone-haired girl who loves science in middle school. She lives in her tropical resort apartment.

Josie Zhang (voiced by Satomi Arai (Japanese) and Sandy Fox (English), ever since Harmony's voice on Hi Hi Puffy Ami Yumi) - A cute and peppy 11-year old black headed Chinese-American girl who loves racing video games, parties and skateboarding. She lives in her Chinese apartment.

Christopher Daniels (voiced by Yuki Ono (Japanese) and Trevor Devall (English), ever since Elroy Jetson's voice on The Jetsons) - A tall and slender 19-year old vivd yellow-haired boy who loves being an astronauts. He lives in his skyscraper apartment.

Tate Dale (voiced by Ryoto Osaka (Japanese) and Eric Bauza (English), ever since additional voice works) - A tall and thin 17-year old pure white-haired Canadian-American boy who loves techno music and rock music. He lives in his rain apartment.

Daniel Howard (voiced by Chinami Hashimoto (Japanese) and Jason Spisak (English), impersonating Eddie Deezen) - A nerdy 13-year old strong-orange haired boy who loves drawing and video games. He lives in his natural wood apartment.

Jesse Keller (voiced by Kenji Nojima (Japanese) and Taylor Gray (English), ever since Ezra Bridger's voice on Star Wars Rebels) - A tall and lanky 15-year old vivid blue-haired boy who loves beatboxing. He lives in his golden apartment.

Colton Henderson (voiced by Yuma Uchida (Japanese) and Nolan North (English), ever since Nathan Drake's voice on the Uncharted series) - A fairly skinny 18-year old pure cyan-haired boy who loves rock music, warm weather and video games. He lives in his prehistoric apartment.

Marley Nelson (voiced by Suzuko Mimori (Japanese) and Colleen O'Shaughnessey (English), ever since Sora Takenouchi's voice on Digimon Adventure and Digimon Adventure 02) - A carefree, smart, caring and faithful 16-year old brownheaded girl who loves reading, music, parties, summer, swimming, the beaches, gardening, making jewelry and visiting the library with Thomas and Jazi. She lives in her water park apartment.

Elijah Forsythe (voiced by Daisuke Namikawa (Japanese) and Troy Baker (English), ever since Kanji Tatsumi's voice on Persona 5) - A very wise, kind and sometimes rude, short-tempered, competitive, demanding, aggressive and greedy 18-year old blackheaded boy who bullies Will. He lives in his pirate ship apartment.

Lizzie Pruett (voiced by Misato Fukuen (Japanese) and Laura Bailey (English), ever since Emily / Glitter Lucky's voice on Glitter Force) - A tall 15-year old vivd green-haired girl who loves to relax, video games and sometimes goofing off. She lives in her exotic apartment.

Carly Byrne (voiced by Ayaka Suwa (Japanese) and China Anne McClain (English), ever since Jennifer Pierce / Lightning's voice on Black Lightning) - A tall dark medium blueheaded African-American teenage girl who loves to do underwater trips and scuba diving with Thomas and Jazi. She lives in her dressing apartment.

Tori Bernier (voiced by Chiemi Tanaka (Japanese) and Ashly Burch (English), ever since Enid's voice on OK K.O.! Let's Be Heroes) - A short young 14-year old hot pink-haired girl who loves pizza and video games. She lives in her pizzeria apartment.

Dallas Lynch (voiced by Asami Seto (Japanese) and Charlie Schlatter (English), ever since the title character's voice on Kick Buttowski: Suburban Daredevil) - A tall and lanky 17-year old platinum-haired boy who does problem solving, math, working and new experiments. He lives in his math apartment.

Eric Waite (voiced by Tokuyoshi Kawashima (Japanese) and Roger Craig Smith (English), in a British nerdy scientist accent) - A British accented 18-year old hunter greenheaded scientist who loves outer space and stargazing. He lives in his arcade apartment.

Liam Grenner (voiced by Junichi Suwabe (Japanese) and Eric Bauza (English), ever since Tweety Bird's current voice) - A nerdy and skinny 15-year old medium blueheaded boy who does a lot of card playing games. He lives in his country apartment.

Jordan Long (voiced by Akane Kumada (Japanese) and Tara Sands (English), impersonating Alicia Silverstone) - A 14-year old light pink-haired girl who loves ice skating. She lives in her crystal apartment.

Naomi Hirano (voiced by Machico (Japanese) and Michelle Ruff (English), ever since Yuki Nagato's voice on The Melancholy of Haruhi Suzumiya) - A 21-year old light yellow-haired girl who is a part-time employee who listens to all kinds of music. She lives in her horror apartment.

Reese Williamson (voiced by Yukiyo Fujii (Japanese) and Colleen O'Shaughnessey (English), ever since Jazz Fenton's voice on Danny Phantom) - A young, energetic and full of life 17-year old light gray-haired girl who loves milkshakes and going to supermarkets, ice cream and candy shops. She lives in her candy shop apartment.

Jett Stapleton (voiced by Aoi Ichikawa (Japanese) and Travis Willingham (English), ever since additional voice works) - A 22-year old blackheaded man from Australia who explores the outback. He lives in his Australian apartment.

Miles Rinehart (voiced by Yuka Nukai (Japanese) and Debi Derryberry (English), ever since the title character's voice on Jimmy Neutron: Boy Genius and The Adventures of Jimmy Neutron, Boy Genius) - A young 10-year-old redheaded boy who dreams of being a stargazer and planetariums. He lives in his planetarium apartment.

Mia Ehrlich (voiced by Reina Kondo (Japanese) and Cree Summer (English), ever since Numbuh 6's voice on Codename: KND) - An 18-year old pure cyan-haired college girl who loves cupcakes. She lives in her college dorm apartment.

Savannah O'Brien (voiced by Sachiko Kojima (Japanese) and Grey DeLisle (English), ever since Yumi Yoshimura's voice on Hi Hi Puffy Ami Yumi) - A 20-year old young redheaded college woman who dreams of being a lifeguard. She lives in her swimming pool apartment.

Dominic Karr (voiced by Sayaka Senbongi (Japanese) and James Arnold Taylor (English), ever since the title character's voice on Johnny Test) - A 19-year old beige tone-haired boy who loves reading science fiction novels. He lives in his humble apartment.

Vince Gautier (voiced by Kohei Amasaki (Japanese) and Robbie Daymond (English), ever since Peter Parker / Spider-Man's voice on the 2017 Spider-Man series) - A 16-year old blonde-haired French-American boy who shows Thomas and Jazi how to do art. He lives in his Paris apartment.

T.J. LeBar (voiced by Junji Majima (Japanese) and Josh Keaton (English), ever since Peter Parker / Spider-Man's voice on The Spectacular Spider-Man) - A 15-year old auburn-haired boy who always loves enjoying basketball. He lives in his basketball court apartment.

Ava Duncan (voiced by Mao Ichimichi (Japanese) and Grey DeLisle (English), ever since Mandy Jones's voice on The Grim Adventures of Billy and Mandy) - A respectful and funny 12-year old auburn-haired girl who loves stand-up comedy. She lives in her industrial apartment.

Lola Dominiguez (voiced by Makoto Koichi (Japanese) and Tara Strong (English), ever since Daizy's voice on Wow Wow Wubbzy) - A short little 10-year old girl vivid yellow-haired who loves flowers and fashion. She lives in her fashion designing apartment.

Tillie Melman (voiced by Miyu Takagi (Japanese) and Laura Bailey (English), ever since Blaze the Cat's voice on Sonic the Hedgehog) - A 15-year old blonde-haired German-American girl who is very talented at gymnastics. She lives in her gymnasium apartment.

Scarlett LaBrie (voiced by Hisako Tojo (Japanese) and Stephanie Sheh (English), Mexican-American accented) - A 20-year old redheaded Mexican-American girl who who loves martial arts and latin pop. She lives in her Mariachi apartment.

Austin Brandt (voiced by Chika Sakamoto (Japanese) and Scott Menville (English), ever since Ma-Ti's voice on Captain Planet and the Planeteers) - A 20-year old charcoal-haired Scottish-American boy who enjoys fishing and looking at a lot of nature. He lives in his aquarium apartment.

Arielle Lawrence (voiced by Hinaki Yano (Japanese) and Kimberly Brooks (English), impersonating Janet Jackson) - An average-sized pure white-haired 18-year girl who loves being a violinist. She lives in her classical music apartment.

Evan Makuna (voiced by Kaya Okuno (Japanese) and Nadji Jeter (English), ever since Miles Morales / Spider-Man's voice on the Marvel projects) - A 16-year old blackheaded African-American boy who loves reading books and returning library books. He lives in his modern asian apartment.

Isaac Stem (voiced by Daiki Hamano (Japanese) and Rob Pauslen (English), ever since Carl Wheezer's voice on Jimmy Neutron: Boy Genius) - A nerdy 12-year old vivid blue-haired English-American boy who loves cooking and reading library books. He lives in his pumpkin patch apartment.

Gavin Tessier (voiced by Kappei Yamguchi (Japanese) and Jason Marsden (English), ever since Max Goof's voice on A Goofy Movie) - An energetic 14-year old azure-haired French-American boy who loves to speak in a French language. He lives in his painting apartment.

Destiny Sinclair (voiced by Nanako Mori (Japanese) and Kiernan Shipka (English), ever since Sabrina Spellman's voice on Chilling Adventures of Sabrina) - A 17-year old dark moderate magenta-haired girl who loves outdoor sports. She lives in her lady jet-setter apartment.

Gabe Atoms (voiced by Yume Miyamoto (Japanese) and Richard Steven Horvitz (English), ever since Billy Ekerson's voice on The Grim Adventures of Billy and Mandy) - A nerdy 11-year old blonde-haired boy who loves to teach science and robots. He lives in his robot apartment.

Harley Blankenship (voiced by Yuya Hirose (Japanese) and Sandy Fox (English), British accented) - A British 10-year old light pink-haired girl who dreams of being a princess. She lives in her princess apartment.

Leigh Sweetman (voiced by Aoi Yuki (Japanese) and Jessica DiCicco (English), ever since Maggie Pesky's voice on The Buzz on Maggie) - A 14-year old vivid yellow-haired girl with autism who is obsessed with video games, RPG and puzzle games. She lives in her versailles apartment.

Rosie Victini (voiced by Azumi Waki (Japanese) and Abby Trott (English), ever since Nezuko Kamado's voice on Demon Slayer: Kimetsu no Yaiba) - A slender 16-year old hot pink-haired Italian-American girl who loves to be obsessed with candy. She lives in her Italian village apartment.

Parents of the Mii Homes[]

Morgan and Lauren Goldberg (voiced by Tomokazu Seki and Takako Honda (Japanese) and Harland Williams and Wendi McLendon-Covey respectively (English), ever since Fred Z. Randall and Beverly Goldberg's voices on RocketMan and The Goldbergs) - Natalie and Thomas' parents.

Travis and Isia Mitchell (voiced by Kenta Miyake and Kotono Mitsuishi (Japanese) and Ed Helms and Chelsea Peretti respectively (English), ever since Andy Bernard and Gina Linetti's voices on Brooklyn Nine-Nine) - Jasmine's parents.

Trent and Sophie Freeman (voiced by Rikiya Koyama and Aya Hisakawa (Japanese) and Andy Daly and Kari Wahlgren respectively (English), ever since Principal Terrence Cutler's voice on Eastbound and Down and additional voice works) - Shawn's parents.

Ben and Karen Edison (voiced by Koichi Yamadera and Rika Fukami (Japanese) and Daran Norris and Grey DeLisle respectively (English), ever since Cliff McCormack's voice on Veronica Mars and additional voice works) - Chloe's parents.

Samuel and Carolina McReilly (voiced by Rikiya Koyama and Megumi Hayashibara (Japanese) and Christian Slater and Julie Nathanson respectively (English), ever since Clarence Worley and Belle's voices on True Romance and Beauty and the Beast) - Donna's parents.

Nathaniel and Claire Foster (voiced by Mitsuaki Madono and Yui Horie (Japanese) and Diedrich Bader and Kari Wahlgren respectively (English), ever since Tank and Celty Sturluson's voices on Surf's Up and Dururara!!) - Leo's parents.

George and Nicole Herst (voiced by Kappei Yamaguchi and Minami Takayama (Japanese) and Jess Harnell and Grey DeLisle respectively (English), impersonating John Fugelsang and Carrie Ann Inaba) - Devin's parents.

Harold and Megan Drummond (voiced by Akio Otsuka and Ikue Otani (Japanese) and John DiMaggio and Vanessa Marshall respectively (English), ever since Bender and Mary Louise Pizzagut's voice on Futurama and Pig Goat Banana Cricket) - Jenny's parents.

Stuart and Laura Stine (voiced by Kazuhiko Inoue and Masako Katsuki (Japanese) and Jeff Bennett and Lori Alan respectively (English), ever since additional voice works) - Henry's parents.

Joel and Sue Langley (voiced by Jun'ichi Kanemaru and Satomi Korogi (Japanese) and Roger Craig Smith and Stephanie Sheh respectively (English), ever since additional voice works) - Nick's parents.

Kurt and Sandy Moriarty (voiced by Masashi Ebara and Keiko Toda (Japanese) and Graham McTavish and Grey DeLisle respectively (English), Glasgow accents) - Laura's parents.

Gregg and Michelle McLeary (voiced by Mitsuo Iwata and Sachiko Kojima (Japanese) and Rob Paulsen and Tress MacNeille respectively (English), impersonating Regis Philbin and Sally Field) - Will's parents.

Eric and Ruth Meier (voiced by Shinji Kawada and Yu Asakawa (Japanese) and Danny Jacobs and Jennifer Hale respectively (English), ever since King Julien and Ms. Keane's voices on The Penguins of Madagascar, All Hail King Julien and The Powerpuff Girls) - Sarah's parents.

Alex and Heather Marlow (voiced by Yasunori Matsumoto and Yuki Matsuoka (Japanese) and Dee Bradley Baker and Janet Varney respectively (English), ever since additional voice works and Korra's voice on The Legend of Korra) - Greg's parents.

Donald and Wendy Davidson (voiced by Hideyuki Umezu and Urara Takano (Japanese) and Richard Kind and Kelly Hu respectively (English), ever since Bing Bong and Karai's voices on Inside Out and Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles) - Cathy's parents.

Steven and Kerry Sullivan (voiced by Kenyu Horiuchi and Ai Orikasa (Japanese) and Mick Wingert and Kari Wahlgren respectively (English), ever since Po the Panda and Michiru Satomi's voices on Kung Fu Panda and Immortal Grand Prix) - Kristen's parents.

Craig Finn and Shannon Greene (voiced by Kikuko Inoue (Japanese) and Nolan North and Lennon Parham (English), ever since additional voice works and Lennon Walker's voice on Best Friends Forever) - Jason's parents.

Simon and Stephanie Moffat (voiced by Nobuo Tobita and Rei Sakuma (Japanese) and Dee Bradley Baker and Leigh-Allyn Baker respectively (English), ever since additional voice works and Amy Duncan's voice on Good Luck Charlie) - Leslie's parents.

Stuart and Sarah Kiebler (voiced by Nozomu Sasaki and Emi Shinohara (Japanese) and Dee Bradley Baker and Margaret Cho respectively (English), ever since additional voice works and Margaret Kim's voice on All-American Girl) - Michael's parents.

Martin and Natalie Hubert (voiced by Kenichi Ogata and Mami Koyama (Japanese) and Kevin Michael Richardson and Kimberly Brooks respectively (English), impersonating Ossie Davis and Maya Angelou) - Jeff's parents.

Larry and Tara Lauerbach (voiced by Kenta Miyake and Yu Asakawa (Japanese) and James Monroe Iglehart and Renee Elise Goldsberry respectively (English), ever since Lance Strongbow and Evangeline Willaimson's voices on Rapunzel's Tangled Adventure and One Life to Live) - Chelsea's parents.

Ricardo and Fernanda Fernandez (voiced by Daisuke Ono and Ayahi Takagaki (Japanese) and Greg Chun and Mona Marshall respectively (English), Mexican accented) - Carlos' parents from Mexico.

Wade and America Caudill (voiced by Takehito Koyasu and Aya Hisakawa (Japanese) and Clancy Brown and Kerri Kenney-Silver respectively (English), ever since Mr. Krabs' and Trudy Wiegel's voices on SpongeBob SquarePants and Reno 911!)- Gracie's parents.

Duncan and Rosemary Caldwell (voiced by Kenji Hamada and Junko Takeuchi (Japanese) and Charlie Adler and Maile Flanagan respectively (English), impersonating Ed Sullivan and ever since Naruto Uzumaki and Piggley Winks' voices on Naruto and Jakers!) - Elias' single mother.

Hank and Courtney Townsend (voiced by Masakazu Morita and Mika Kanai (Japanese) and Jeff Bennett and Lisa Kudrow respectively (English), ever since the title character and Janice Templeton's voices on Johnny Bravo and The Boss Baby) - Daisy's parents.

Ronald and Diana Ribidanco (voiced by Junichi Suwabe and Romi Park (Japanese) and Tom Kenny and Grey DeLisle respectively (English), Italian accented) - Matteo's parents.

Charlie and Trina Perkins (voiced by Kenichi Suzamura and Yuko Kaida (Japanese) and Maurice LaMarche and Laura Bailey respectively (English), ever since additional voice works) - Lionel's parents.

Walt and Alexandra Jensen (voiced by Mitsuaki Madono and Aya Hisakawa (Japanese) and David Kaye and April Winchell respectively (English), ever since Peg Pete's voice on Goof Troop and Kaye's additional voice works) - Kaylee's single mother, and later her parents

Douglas and Mya O'Malley (voiced by Mitsuaki Madono and Aya Hisakawa (Japanese) and Eric Bauza and Laura Bailey (English), ever since Fozzie Bear's voice on the 2018 reboot of Muppet Babies and additional voice works) - Josh's single father, and later his parents.

Paul and Anne Schneider (voiced by Toshiyuki Morikawa and Maaya Sakamoto (Japanese) and Michael Chiklis and Grey DeLisle respectively (English), ever since Detective Vic Mackey's voice on The Shield and additional voice works) - Debbie's parents.

Flynn and Carmen Hartnett (voiced by Kenji Nomura and Yoko Soumi (Japanese) Eric Bauza and Tress MacNeille respectively (English), impersonating Al Gore and Marilyn Monroe) - Amy's parents.

Drew and Tammy Wilson (voiced by Ryuzaburo Otomo and Mayumi Tanaka (Japanese) and Lex Lang and Mindy Sterling respectively (English), ever since Dr. Neo Cortex and Ms. Endive's voices on Crash Bandicoot and Chowder) - Zac's parents.

Bill and Bonnie Edwards (voiced by Ryotaro Okiayu and Marika Hayashi (Japanese) and Eric Stonestreet and Kate Higgins respectively (English), ever since Duke's voice on The Secret Life of Pets and The Secret Life of Pets 2 and additional voice works) - Casey's parents.

Edward "Eddie" and Cheryl Barbour (voiced by Yuji Mitsuya and Miki Ito (Japanese) and Jason Lee and Jennifer Hale respectively (English), ever since Dave Seville and Katnappe's voice on the Alvin and the Chipmunks franchise and Xiaolin Showdown and Chronicles) - Lewis' parents.

Nat and Kate Bailey (voiced by Yoshito Yasuhara and Rika Fukami (Japanese) and Greg Chun and Ana Gasteyer respectively (English), in Hawaiian accents) - Tia's parents from Hawaii.

Ed and Jessica Dickinson (voiced by Shunsuke Sakuya and Noriko Hidaka (Japanese) and Neil Patrick Harris and Stephanie Sheh respectively (English), ever since Barney Stinson's voice on How I Met Your Mother and additional voice works) - Maddie's parents.

Terry and Maura Frazier (voiced by Shiro Saito and Sayuri Sadaoka (Japanese) and Dee Bradley Baker and Vicki Lewis (English), ever since additional voice works and Deb and Flo's voices on Finding Nemo) - Bryce's parents.

Brian Boone and Ellie Lutz (voiced by Kenta Miyake and Kumiko Higa (Japanese) and Rob Riggle and Kari Wahlgren respectively (English), ever since Doug Clancy's voice on Fancy Nancy and additional voice works) - Ashlyn's parents.

Jeffrey and Gabrielle Tighe (voiced by Takayuki Sugo and Mika Doi (Japanese) and Steve Little and Gwendoline Yeo (English), ever since Doctor Julius Barber and Shinigami's voices on The Marvelous Misadventures of Flapjack and the 2012 Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles) - Stacy and Andrew's parents.

Dan and Carrie Grinstead (voiced by Rintaro Nishi and Mayumi Sako (Japanese) and Terry Crews and Kimberly Brooks respectively (English), ever since hosting America's Got Talent and additional voice works) - Scott's parents.

Phil and Kendra Rooney (voiced by Yohei Tadano and Yu Asakawa (Japanese) and Chris Parnell and Sarah Chalke respectively (English), ever since Jerry and Beth Smith's voices on Rick and Morty) - Joe and Katie's parents.

Darius and Liz del Castillo (voiced by Ryusei Nakao and Masako Katsuki (Japanese) and Peter MacNicol and Jill Talley respectively (English), ever since Doctor Octopus and Karen Plankton's voices on The Spectacular Spider-Man and SpongeBob SquarePants) - Bobby's parents.

Norm and Kristin Ishibashi (voiced by Jouji Nakata and Kotono Mitsuishi (Japanese) and Carlos Alazraqui and Julia Louis-Dreyfus respectively (English), impersonating Ken Watanabe and Naoko Kawai) - Samantha's parents.

Don and Gwendoline Butler (voiced by Koichi Yamadera and Miyuki Sawashiro (Japanese) and Liam O'Brien and Riki Lindhome respectively (English), impersonating Milton Berle and Judy Collins) - Megan's parents.

Tyler and Christina Schwartz (voiced by Rikiya Koyama and Emi Shinohara (Japanese) and Travis Willingham and Laura Bailey respectively (English), ever since additional voice works) - Allyson's parents.

Eddie and Pat Ruiz (voiced by Hiroki Takahashi and Yoko Soumi (Japanese) and Dee Bradley Baker and Natalie Morales respectively (English), ever since Pizza Guy and Wendy Watson's voices on Higglytown Heroes and The Middleman) - Riley and Dylan's parents.

Ric and Sylvia Fleming (voiced by Ryusei Nakao and Mika Doi (Japanese) and Nick Offerman and Tress MacNeille respectively (English), ever since Ron Swanson and Daisy Duck's voices on Parks and Recreation and the Disney franchise) - Shelby's single mother, and later her parents.

Kenny and Bailey Hughson (voiced by Fumihiko Tachiki and Rika Fukami (Japanese) and Chi McBride and Kimberly Brooks respectively (English), ever since Steven Harper's voice on Boston Public and additional voice works) - Jake's parents.

Andy and Carla Hill (voiced by Akio Otsuka and Satomi Korogi (Japanese) and Steven Weber and Misty Lee respectively (English), ever since Brian Hackett and Aunt May's voices on Wings and Ultimate Spider-Man) - Timmy's parents.

Arturo and Leyla Guerrero (voiced by Mitsuru Miyamoto and Ikue Otani (Japanese) and George Lopez and Stephanie Sheh respectively (English), in Mexican accents) - Isabella's parents.

Rodney and Corrine Burton (voiced by Masashi Ebara and Kotoni Mitsuishi (Japanese) and Jim Meskimen and Kath Soucie respectively (English), ever since The Genie and Agent Honeydew's voices on Aladdin and Dexter's Laboratory) - Trevor's parents.

Dave and Charlotte Suzuki (voiced by Show Hayami and Chika Sakamoto (Japanese) and Adrian Pasdar and Kate Higgins respectively (English), ever since Nathan Petrelli and Megumi Oumi's voices on Heroes and Zatch Bell!) - Tina's parents

Mark and Patty Haynes (voiced by Hiroshi Shirokuma and Takako Honda (Japanese) and Jason Mantzoukas and Pamela Adlon respectively (English), ever since Jankom Pog and Brigette Murphy's voices on Star Trek: Prodigy and Milo Murphy's Law) - Nathan's single mother, and later his parents.

Ray and Dana Tyson (voiced by Shinji Kawada and Aya Hisakawa (Japanese) and Randall Park and Vanessa Marshall respectively (English), impersonating Joan Lunden and ever since Louis Huang's voice on Fresh Off the Boat) - Taylor's parents.

Jim and Christine Aguilar (voiced by Yasunori Masutani and Atsuko Tanaka (Japanese) and James Arnold Taylor and Jennifer Hale respectively (English), ever since additional voice works) - Bella's parents.

Percy and Pam Marquez (voiced by Kazuhiro Yamaji and Mayumi Asano (Japanese) and Norman Reedus and Tara Platt respectively (English), ever since Daryl Dixon and Temari's voices on Naruto) - Anna's parents.

Chuck and Nellie Yateman (voiced by Hisao Egawa and Mika Kanai (Japanese) and Scott Porter and Aubrey Plaza respectively (English), ever since Jason Street and April Ludgate's voices on Friday Night Lights and Parks and Recreation) - Brad's single father, and later his parents.

Troy and Veronica Newirth (voiced by Daisuke Namikawa and Mamiko Noto (Japanese) and Dee Bradley Baker and Grey DeLisle respectively (English), ever since additional voice works) - Kelsey's parents.

Eugene and Cyndi Zhang (voiced by Hiroshi Iwasaki and Rika Fukami (Japanese) and Troy Baker and Grey DeLisle respectively (English), in Chinese accents) - Josie's parents.

Rupert and Serenity Daniels (voiced by Tomokazu Sugita and Sakura Tange (Japanese) and Tom Kenny and Jill Talley respectively (English), impersonating Barry Crimmins and Jenny Jones) - Christopher's parents. They are the only characters to be voiced by the spouses who voiced SpongeBob, Gary the Snail, the French Narrator and Karen Plankton on SpongeBob SquarePants.

Bear and Cynthia Dale (voiced by Shin-ichiro Miki and Romi Park (Japanese) and James Marsters and Cindy Robinson respectively (English), ever since Barnabas Greeley and Kiyone Kotetsu's voices on Caprica and Bleach) - Tate's parents.

David and Jen Howard (voiced by Yuji Ueda and Marina Inoue (Japanese) and and Nolan North and Grey DeLisle respectively (English), ever since additional voice works) - Daniel's parents.

Jared and Melora Keller (voiced by Hiroki Tochi and Ami Koshimizu (Japanese) and Brian T. Delaney and Hynden Walch respectively (English), impersonating Kris Kristofferson and Rita Coolidge) - Jesse's parents.

Matthew and Chantal Henderson (voiced by Takuya Kirimoto and Ami Koshimizu (Japanese) and J.P. Karliak and Cindy Robinson (English), impersonating Peter Cetera and Linda Ronstadt) - Colton's parents

Steve and Victoria Nelson (voiced by Toshihiko Seki and Minami Takayama (Japanese) and Sean Astin and Grey DeLisle respectively (English), ever since Oso's voice on Special Agent Oso and additional voice works) - Marley's parents.

Thomas and Jennifer Forsythe (voiced by Tomomichi Nishimura and Chika Sakamoto (Japanese) and Dana Snyder and Stephanie Sheh respectively (English), impersonating Don Rickles and Shelley Winters) - Elijah's parents.

Cole and Suzanne Pruett (voiced by Takeshi Kusao and Megumi Ogata (Japanese) and Steve Blum and Vanessa Marshall respectively (English), ever since additional voice works) - Lizzie's parents.

Sam and Eve Byrne (voiced by Takashi Nagasako and Aya Hisakawa (Japanese) and Wayne Brady and Kimberly Brooks (English), ever since Harold McBride's voice on The Loud House and additional voice works) - Carly's parents

Marcus and Alice Bernier (voiced by Akira Kamiya and Gara Takashima (Japanese) and Steve Blum and Jennifer Hale respectively (English), impersonating Robert De Niro and Sharon Stone) - Tori's parents.

Glenn and Minnie Lynch (voiced by Toshiyuki Morikawa and Yuko Kaida (Japanese) and Roger Craig Smith and Kari Wahlgren respectively (English), ever since additional voice works) - Dallas's parents.

Scott and Teri Waite (voiced by Takayuki Sugo and Wakana Yamazaki (Japanese) and Larry Miller and Nika Futterman respectively (English), ever since additional voice works and Walter Stratford's voice on 10 Things I Hate About You) - Eric's parents.

Beau and Holly Grenner (voiced by Kentaro Ito and Romi Park (Japanese) and Wally Wingert and Nika Futterman respectively (English), impersonating Pauly Shore and Jennifer Aniston)) - Liam's parents.

Daniel and Mimi Long (voiced by Kappei Yamaguchi and Aya Hisakawa (Japanese) and Donovan Patton and Colleen O'Shaughnessey respectively (English), impersonating Joan Jett and ever since Joe's voice on Blue's Clues) - Jordan's parents.

Garrett and Zoe Hirano (voiced by Bin Shimada and Rica Matsumoto (Japanese) and Matthew Moy and Veronica Taylor respectively (English), ever since Lars Barriga, Ash and Delia Ketchum's voices on Pokemon, Steven Universe and Steven Universe Future) - Naomi's parents.

Jon and Eden Williamson (voiced by Banjo Ginga and Chie Kojiro (Japanese) and Bob Joles and Nancy Linari respectively (English), ever since Bill Green and May Parker's voices on Big City Greens and the 2017 Spider-Man) - Reese's parents.

Jonah and Rebecca Stapleton (voiced by Koji Ishii and Rie Tanaka (Japanese) and Kumali Nanjiani and Courtenay Taylor respectively (English), ever since Dinesh and Ada Wong's voices on Silicon Valley and the Resident Evil series) - Jett's single mother, and later his parents.

Victor and Dorothy Rinehart (voiced by Issei Futumata and Mayumi Tanaka (Japanese) and Grant George and Kate Higgins respectively (English)) - Miles' parents.

Tommy and Luci Ehrlich (voiced by Hiroki Tochi and Kumiko Higa (Japanese) and Roger Craig Smith and Stephanie Sheh (English), ever since Chris Redfield's voice on the Resident Evil series and additional voice works) - Mia's single father, and later her parents.

Nolan and Aimee O'Brien (voiced by Daisuke Sakaguchi and Yu Kobayashi (Japanese) and Roger Craig Smith and Cindy Robinson respectively (English), ever since additional voice works) - Savannah's parents.

Luke and Lily Karr (voiced by Soichiro Hoshi and Fumiko Orikasa (Japanese) and Travis Willingham and Laura Bailey respectively (English), ever since additional voice works) - Dominic's parents.

Tracy and Jean Gautier (voiced by Yasunori Matsumoto and Urara Takano (Japanese) and Dave B. Mitchell and Jennifer Tilly (English), ever since Knuckles the Echidna's current voice and Celia Mae's voice on Monsters, Inc.) - Vince's parents.

Peter and Brooke LeBar (voiced by Masashi Ebara and Urara Takano (Japanese) and Wally Wingert and Grey DeLisle respectively (English), ever since additional voice works) - T.J.'s parents.

Larry and Amanda Duncan (voiced by Tsutomu Isobe and Shina Kakinuma (Japanese) and Jim Rash and Jennifer Hale respectively (English), ever since Dean Craig Pelton and Cinderella's voices on Community and the Disney Princess franchise) - Ava's parents.

Max and Jenny Dominiguez (voiced by Daisuke Sakaguchi and Rie Kugiyama (Japanese) and David Herman and Cheryl Hines respectively (English), impersonating John Ritter and Joyce DeWitt) - Lola's parents.

Kevin and Emma Melman (voiced by Kenichi Suzumura and Wakana Yamazaki (Japanese) and Nolan North and Kate Higgins respectively (English), ever since additional voice works) - Tillie's parents.

Everett and Valerie LaBrie (voiced by Akihiko Ishizumi and Mayumi Asano (Japanese) and Horatio Sanz and Grey DeLisle respectively (English), Mexican accented) - Scarlett's parents from Mexico.

Jake Brandt and Joy Sanderson (voiced by Nobuo Tobita and Yuki Masuda (Japanese) and Dee Bradley Baker and Grey DeLisle respectively (English), ever since additional voice works) - Austin's parents.

Emmitt and Cheryl Lawrence (voiced by Mitsuaki Madono and Wakana Yamazaki (Japanese) and Khary Payton and Kimberly Brooks respectively (English), ever since Cyborg's voice on Teen Titans and Teen Titans Go! and additional voice works) - Arielle's single father, and later her parents.

Patrick and Taylor Makuna (voiced by Naoto Fuuga and Fumiko Orikasa (Japanese) and Kevin Michael Richardson and Kimberly Brooks respectively (English), ever since additional voice works) - Evan's parents.

Paulo and Beth Stem (voiced by Hiroyuki Kinoshita and Rika Fukami (Japanese) and Kal Penn and Jennifer Hale respectively (English), impersonating Lily Tomlin and ever since Lawrence Kutcher's voice on House) - Isaac's parents.

Kris and Diamond Tessier (voiced by Kazuyuki Okitsu and Wakana Yamazaki (Japanese) and John Kassir and Tress MacNeille respectively (English), ever since additional voice works) - Gavin's parents.

Bob and Sapphire Sinclair (voiced by Fuminori Komatsu and Sanae Kobayashi (Japanese) and Brian Posehn and Susanne Blakeslee respectively (English), ever since Brian Spukowski's voice on The Sarah Silverman Program and additional voice works) - Destiny's parents.

Ian and Emily Atoms (voiced by Ryuzaburo Otomo and Mika Kanai (Japanese) and Jonathan Adams and Kimberly Brooks resepctively (English), ever since Daniel Goodman's voice on Bones and additional voice works) - Gabe's single father, and later his parents.

Ned and Kellie Blankenship (voiced by Wataru Takagi and Yu Asakawa (Japanese) and Jason Alexander and Cathy Cavadini respectively (English), in British accents) - Harley's parents.

Aled and Gwen Sweetman (voiced by Hiroaki Hirata and Takako Honda (Japanese) and Fred Tatasciore and Kate Higgins respectively (English), ever since additional voice works) - Leigh's parents.

Greg and Faye Victini (voiced by Takahiro Mizushima and Rika Fukami (Japanese) and Nat Faxon and Grey DeLisle respectively (English), ever since Russ Bowman's voice on Married and additional voice works) - Rosie's parents.

Teddy and Kristin Victini (voiced by Naoki Tatsuta and Masako Nozawa (Japanese) and Corey Burton and Susanne Blakeslee respectively (English), ever since additional voice works) - Rosie's grandparents.

Nora Nelson (voiced by Wakana Yamazaki (Japanese) and Susanne Blakeslee (English), ever since Mrs. Turner's voice on The Fairly OddParents) - Marley's auntie.

Phillip and Ann Nelson (voiced by Kenichi Ogata and Mayumi Tanaka (Japanese) and Corey Burton and Tress MacNeille respectively (English), ever since additional voice works) - Marley's grandparents.

Johnny Townsend (voiced by Kenta Miyake (Japanese) and Jim Belushi (English), ever since James "Jim" Orenthal's voice on According to Jim) - Daisy's uncle.

Working Miis[]

Erica Dahlberg (voiced by Saeko Chiba (Japanese) and Jennifer Hale (English), ever since Sam's voice on Totally Spies!) - A young postwoman who delivers mail like letters, cards, packages, envelopes, magazines and other stuff for the Miis.

Tom Luther (voiced by Ryuzaburo Otomo (Japanese) and John DiMaggio (English), impersonating Tom Selleck) - The mayor of Tomodachi Island Town Hall.

Valentina Espinoza (voiced by Kana Hanazawa (Japanese) and Haley Tju (English) in a Spanish-American accent) - The world's famous 15-year-old high school swimsuit model of Tomodachi Island Beach and a professional golfer. She is one of Thomas' childhood friends from Spain.

Mark McCarlin (voiced by Satoshi Hino (Japanese) and Thomas Lennon (English), ever since Lieutenant Jim Dangle's voice on Reno 911!) - The owner of the Tomodachi Island Food Mart. He stocks up food every day.

Sheryl Rodgerson (voiced by Mika Doi (Japanese) and Loretta Devine (English), ever since Gloria Matthews' voice on Waiting to Exhale) - The manager of the Tomodachi Island Clothing Shop. She can deliver clothes to a Mii, whenever they need something stylish.

Ron and Shelley Edgmond (voiced by Yoshito Yasuhara and Keiko Han (Japanese) and Henry Winkler and Tress MacNeille (English respectively) - The spouse owners of the Tomodachi Island Amusement Park. They have a granddaughter named Eloise who is a fashion designer.

Bob Sartucci (voiced by Hiroyuki Kinoshita (Japanese) and Norm Macdonald in seasons 1-8 until his death, and Jess Harnell in seasons 9 and ongoing (English)) - The owner of the Tomodachi Island cafe. He enjoys making coffees.

Colleen Reynolds (voiced by Masako Katsuki (Japanese) and Rachel Dratch (English), ever since Debbie Downer's voice on Saturday Night Live) - The owner of the Tomodachi Island Hat Shop. She is such a good hat maker.

John Barlowe (voiced by Issei Futumata (Japanese) and Jeff Bennett (English), ever since Dexter's Dad's voice on Dexter's Laboratory) - The owner and manager of the Tomodachi Island Parks and Recreation Center and Park. He hosts many events inside the building.

Reggie Koehlmann (voiced by Azumi Waki (Japanese) and Zeno Robinson (English), impersonating Chris Tucker) - A young photographer who is the owner of the Tomodachi Island Photo Studio. He loves to take pictures of the Miis, as well as the scenery.

Mike and Charlie McCaffrey (voiced by Ryotaro Okiayu and Mitsuo Iwata (Japanese) and Yuri Lowenthal and Matthew Mercer respectively (English)) - Two twin brothers who are the owners of the Tomodachi Island Pawn Shop. They always get along with Thomas and Jazi so well.

Kathleen Roberts (voiced by Rie Kugiyama (Japanese) and Maya Rudolph (English), ever since Aunt Cass Hamada and Matilda's voices on Big Hero 6 and The Angry Birds Movie Trilogy) - The owner of the Tomodachi Island Interior Shop. She loves to design every interior for once a day.

Tim Kingsley (voiced by Toshio Furukawa (Japanese) and Jason Isaacs (English) in a heavy Liverpool accent) - The British stage and concert director of the Tomodachi Island Concert Hall. He helps Thomas and Jazi know what song they can sing.

Matthew McKee (voiced by Tomoaki Maeno (Japanese) and Adam Pally (English), ever since Max Blum's voice on Happy Endings) - The owner of the Tomodachi Island Import Wear Shop. He announces every import wear that every Mii can wear.

Lena Schultz (voiced by Yuuko Kurose (Japanese) and Monica Rial (English), ever since Bulma's voice on Dragon Ball) - A young flight attendant of the Tomodachi Island Airlines. She helps attend the flight with her boss, Ali Maher who is a pilot.

Ali Maher (voiced by Takuya Kuroda (Japanese) and Alan Tudyk (English), ever since Dr. Noah Werner's voice on Suburgatory) - An airplane pilot of the Tomodachi Island Airlines. He is Lena's boss.

Charlie Gilroy (voiced by Daisuke Kishio (Japanese) and Patton Oswalt (English), ever since Remy's voice on Ratatouille) - An observation tower engineer and safety inspector of the Tomodachi Island Observation Tower. He is one of Morgan and Lauren's good friends.

Betsy Libowitz-Pitt (voiced by Rie Kugimiya (Japanese) and Kari Wahlgren (English), ever since Tigress' voice on Kung Fu Panda: Legends of Awesomeness) - A young spokesperson of the Tomodachi Island Center. She makes a great friend with Thomas and Jazi.

Dean Witlock and Andrea Walton (voiced by Yutaka Nakano and Mayumi Tanaka (Japanese) and John DiMaggio and Grey DeLisle respectively (English)) - The hotel managers of the Tomodachi Island Hotel. They host many parties where every Mii attends.

Jack and Bethany Lewison (voiced by Tomokazu Seki and Megumi Han (Japanese) and Nolan North and Gideon Adlon respectively (English)) - The father and daughter team who work as a chef and waitress at the Tomodachi Island Fancy Cafe. Jack is the father of Bethany who works as a chef who makes very delicious dishes, and his daughter Bethany is 15 years old, and she works as a friendly waitress who is Thomas and Jazi's good friend.

Alberto Castillo (voiced by Kenjiro Tsuda (Japanese) and Harvey Guillen (English), ever since Guillermo de la Cruz's voice on What We Do in the Shadows) - A young college student who works as a train driver at the Tomodachi Island Steam Locomotive Museum and Train Station.

Nikki Lombardi (voiced by Ai Maeda (Japanese) and Grey DeLisle (English), impersonating Jennifer Jason Leigh) - A character from Swapnote who likes to write letters to everyone, and she is the owner of Nikki's Delivery Center and Store.

Tessa (voiced by Kotono Mitsuishi (Japanese) and Lori Alan (English), ever since Pearl Krabs' voice on SpongeBob SquarePants) - A Tomodachi Island Town Hall secretary.

Cesar (voiced by Nobuyuki Hiyama (Japanese) and Todd Haberkorn (English), ever since Haechi's voice on Avengers Assemble) - An electric engineer.

Kaleb and Bianca Leonard (voiced by Yasuaki Takumi and Ryo Hirohashi (Japanese) and Todd Haberkorn and Mona Marshall respectively (English)) - A couple who work as caterers.

Rosalie (voiced by Sayaka Kinoshita (Japanese) and Romi Dames (English), ever since Lena Luthor's voice on DC Super Hero Girls) - The member of the Tomodachi Island Flower Shop.

Maggie Luther (voiced by Ai Orikasa (Japanese) and Jill Talley (English), ever since Rita Loud's voice on The Loud House) - Tom's wife who works as the Tomodachi Island Town Hall Operator. She is also Becky's mother.

Nora (voiced by Chie Nakamura (Japanese) and Kate Higgins (English), ever since Sakura Haruno's voice on Naruto) - A playground monitor woman.

Allen Powers (voiced by Shinji Kawada (Japanese) and Jim Parsons (English), ever since Sheldon Cooper's voice on The Big Bang Theory) - The store clerk of The Tomodachi Island Food Mart. He is one of Thomas and Jazi's good friends from the food market.

Patrick (voiced by Daisuke Sakiguchi (Japanese) and Eric Bauza (English), ever since Rex's voice on The Loud House) - A ramen chef who works at Tomodachi Ramen and Sushi Restaurant.

Joseph (voiced by Kappei Yamaguchi (Japanese) and Billy West (English), ever since Philip J. Fry's voice on Futurama) - The CEO of the Tomodachi Island Educational Foundation.

Sandra (voiced by Yukari Nozawa (Japanese) and Cheri Oteri (English), impersonating Debbie Reynolds) - A physical therapist.

Chris Bradshaw (voiced by Taiten Kusunoki (Japanese) and Lamorne Morris (English), ever since Winston Bishop's voice on New Girl) - The store clerk of the Tomodachi Island Clothing Shop.

Ella Moore (voiced by Ryoko Shiraishi (Japanese) and Ali Wong (English), ever since Sasha Tran's voice on Always Be My Maybe) - A forest ranger.

Lynn (voiced by Ikuko Tani (Japanese) and Andrea Martin (English), ever since Ms. Fowl's voice on Jimmy Neutron: Boy Genius and The Adventures of Jimmy Neutron, Boy Genius) - A pharmacist.

Garrett Hewitt (voiced by Wataru Takagi (Japanese) and Kevin Michael Richardson (English), ever since Shredder's voice on the 2012 Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles) - The egg farmer.

Trey (voiced by Kentaro Ito (Japanese) and Tom Kenny (English), ever since Valhallen's voice on Dexter's Laboratory) - A shelter worker.

Shaun (voiced by Jun'ichi Kanemaru (Japanese) and Roger Craig Smith (English), ever since Sonic's current voice) - A college student who plays golf. He is one of Thomas and Jazi's favorite golfing friends.

Meghan (voiced by Rika Tachibana (Japanese) and Lilly Singh (English), ever since hosting A Little Late with Lilly Singh) - A museum cruator.

Nicolas (voiced by Kappei Yamaguchi (Japanese) and Eric Bauza (English), ever since Bugs Bunny's current voice) - A lighthouse keeper.

Zach Lambert (voiced by Jun Fukuyama (Japanese) and David Hornsby (English), ever since Fanboy's voice on Fanboy and Chum Chum) - A road worker.

Bryn (voiced by Maaya Sakamoto (Japanese) and Mandy Moore (English), ever since Rapunzel's voice on Tangled and Rapunzel's Tangled Adventure) - An animal control officer.

Dante (voiced by Tsutomu Isobe (Japanese) and Hector Elizondo (English), ever since Ed Alzate's voice on Last Man Standing) - The sheriff of Tomodachi Island.

Elena (voiced by Aoi Yuki (Japanese) and Nika Futterman (English), ever since Sticks the Badger's voice on Sonic Boom) - A laundry worker.

Alfred (voiced by Yoshito Yasuhara (Japanese) and Frank Welker (English), ever since additional voice works) - The Goldberg Family's butler.

Mandy (voiced by Nana Mizuki (Japanese) and Colleen O'Shaughnessey (English), impersonating Kelly Preston)

Demi (voiced by Mayuki Makiguchi (Japanese) and Erica Luttrell (English), in a light Toronto accent) - The store clerk of the Tomodachi Island Hat Shop.

Ross Carlyle (voiced by Showtaro Morikubo (Japanese) and Phil LaMarr (English), ever since the title character's voice on Samurai Jack)

Wayne (voiced by Kazuhiro Yamaji (Japanese) and Bob Joles (English), ever since Mr. Nesmith's voice on Planet Sheen) - Jazi's eye doctor of the Tomodachi Island Eye Vision Center.

Jade Johnston (voiced by Keiko Toda (Japanese) and Jenifer Lewis (English), ever since Flo's voice on Cars) - An acrobat.

Ritchie (voiced by Masashi Ebara (Japanese) and Maurice LaMarche (English), impersonating Alec Baldwin) - The bellhop of the Tomodachi Island hotel.

Canan (voiced by Yu Hayashi (Japanese) and Troy Baker (English), ever since Joel Miller's voice on The Last of Us) - An air traffic controller.

Gabriel (voiced by Yoshitaka Yamaya (Japanese) and James C. Mathis III (English), ever since Black Panther's voice on the Marvel Animated Media) - A professional boxer and Greg's favorite boxing idol.

Vivian (voiced by Yurika Kubo (Japanese) and Aimee Carrero (English), ever since Elena's voice on Elena of Avalor)

Audrey (voiced by Kotono Mitsuishi (Japanese) and Julie Bowen (English), ever since Claire Dunphy's voice on Modern Family)

Brent (voiced by Kenjiro Tsuda (Japanese) and Bumper Robinson (English), ever since Falcon's voice on Avengers Assemble) - A mural artist.

Russell (voiced by Yutaka Aoyama (Japanese) and Roger Craig Smith (English), ever since Captain America's voice on the Marvel Projects) - A professional wrestler and Sarah's favorite wrestling idol.

Susie (voiced by Saori Onishi (Japanese) and Grey DeLisle (English), ever since Kitty Katswell's voice on T.U.F.F. Puppy)

Melvin (voiced by Koji Ishii (Japanese) and Fred Tatasciore (English), ever since Yosemite Sam's current voice) - A tow truck driver.

Alison (voiced by Keiko Han (Japanese) and Candi Milo (English), ever since Madame Foster's voice on Foster's Home for Imaginary Friends)

Reginald (voiced by Mitsuru Ogata (Japanese) and John Kassir (English), ever since Scrooge McDuck's voice on the Disney franchise)

Dove (voiced by Sumire Uesaka (Japanese) and Liliana Mumy (English), ever since Leni Loud's voice on The Loud House)

Eve (voiced by Naomi Ozora (Japanese) and Hynden Walch (English), ever since Penny Sanchez's voice on ChalkZone)

Enrique (voiced by Toshiki Masuda (Japanese) and Trevor Devall (English), Venezulean accented) - A window washer.

Jewel (voiced by Yoshino Nanjo (Japanese) and Sarah Michelle Gellar (English), ever since Buffy Summers' voice on Buffy the Vampire Slayer)

Shawna (voiced by Miina Tominaga (Japanese) and Tress MacNeille (English), ever since Gadget Hackwrench's voice on Chip 'n' Dale Rescue Rangers)

Al (voiced by Kenta Miyake (Japanese) and Travis Willingham (English), ever since Thor's voice on the Marvel franchise)

Mabel (voiced by Mayu Sagara (Japanese) and Abbi Jacobson (English), ever since Katie Mitchell's voice on The Mitchells vs. the Machines)

Stan (voiced by Takuya Kirimoto (Japanese) and Seth Green (English), ever since Mick's voice on Idle Hands)

Gary (voiced by Kazuhiro Yamaji (Japanese) and Matthew Mercer (English), ever since Hit's voice on Dragon Ball Super)

Melinda Salvatore (voiced by Satomi Sato (Japanese) and Cassandra Lee Morris (English), ever since Ritsu Tainaka's voice on K-On!)

Lois (voiced by Rie Tanaka (Japanese) and Dawnn Lewis (English), ever since Jaleesa Vinson-Taylor's voice on A Different World)

Andi (voiced by Yukari Tamura (Japanese) and Cherami Leigh (English), ever since Elizabeth Midford's voice on Black Butler)

Byron (voiced by Kisho Taniyama (Japanese) and Frank Welker (English), ever since Fred Jones' voice on the Scooby-Doo franchise)

Mercedes (voiced by Shizuka Ito (Japanese) and Maria Bamford (English), ever since Shriek's voice on CatDog)

Renee (voiced by Minami Takayama (Japanese) and Kath Soucie (English), ever since Betty DeVille's voice on Rugrats)

Ernest (voiced by Masashi Ebara (Japanese) and John DiMaggio (English), ever since Sandman's voice on The Spectacular Spider-Man)

Polly (voiced by Yu Asakawa (Japanese) and Candi Milo (English), ever since Dr. Nora Wakeman's voice on My Life as a Teenage Robot)

Marisa (voiced by Chie Kojiro (Japanese) and Kath Soucie (English), ever since Princess Sally Acorn's voice on Sonic the Hedgehog)

Rena (voiced by Akiko Yajima (Japanese) and Jeannie Tirado (English), ever since additional voice works)

Carol (voiced by Mami Koyama (Japanese) and Christine Baranski (English), ever since Diane Lockhart's voice on The Good Wife)

AJ Damon (voiced by Akira Ishida (Japanese) and Lucien Dodge (English), ever since Akaza's voice on Demon Slayer: Kimetsu no Yaiba)

Raul Demino (voiced by Shin Aomori (Japanese) and Kevin Michael Richardson (English), ever since Dr. Julius Hibbert's current voice on The Simpsons)

Lucia (voiced by Shizuka Ishigami (Japanese) and Erica Lindbeck (English), impersonating Taylor Swift)

Roberto (voiced by Tsubasa Yonaga (Japanese) and John DiMaggio (English), in a heavy Mexico City accent) - A Mexican camp counselor.

Jeremy (voiced by Takuya Sato (Japanese) and Carlos Alazraqui (English), ever since Lazlo's voice on Camp Lazlo)

Star (voiced by Sayaka Ohara (Japanese) and Lauren Landa (English), ever since Michiru Kaioh / Sailor Neptune's voice on Sailor Moon)

Jody (voiced by Inori Minase (Japanese) and Fryda Wolff (English), ever since additional voice works) - The Mitchell Family's female butler.

Sunshine (voiced by Kana Hanazawa (Japanese) and Charlet Chung (English), ever since Margaret "Echo" Pearl's voice on Fast and Furious Spy Racers)

Tanya McBarr (voiced by Yukiyo Fujii (Japanese) and Christine Marie Cabanos (English), ever since Hotaru Tomoe / Sailor Saturn's voice on Sailor Moon)

Luther (voiced by Ryuzaburo Otomo (Japanese) and Kevin Michael Richardson (English), ever since Captain Gantu's voice on Lilo & Stitch)

Hiromi "Romi" Shinjo (voiced by Grey DeLisle (in both Japanese and English dubs), Japanese accented) - Henry's Japanese-American babysitter. She hails from Okinawa.

Elyse (voiced by Kana Ueda (Japanese) and Mela Lee (English), ever since Rin Tosaka's voice on Fate/stay night)

Skye (voiced by Miku Ito (Japanese) and Isabella Acres (English), ever since Mirabelle Harris' voice on The Kicks)

Neil (voiced by Masashi Ebara (Japanese) and John DiMaggio (English), ever since Aquaman's voice on Batman: The Brave and the Bold) - One of the employees of the Tomodachi Island Bowling Alley.

Rusty (voiced by Show Hayami (Japanese) and Dave B. Mitchell (English), impersonating Randy Savage)

Priscilla (voiced by Masumi Tazawa (Japanese) and Darcy Rose Byrnes (English), Irish accented)

Midnight (voiced by Ayasa Ito (Japanese) and Anjali Bhimani (English), ever since Symmetra's voice on Overwatch)

Autumn (voiced by Asuka Nishi (Japanese) and Quinta Brunson (English), ever since Janine Teagues' voices on Abbott Elementary) - A famous voice actress.

Clay (voiced by Toshihiko Seki (Japanese) and Dee Bradley Baker (English), impersonating Michael Showalter)

School, College and University Teachers and Professors[]

Lucy Witzig (voiced by Keiko Toda (Japanese) and Jane Lynch (English), ever since Sue Sylvester's voice on Glee) - A middle-aged high school music teacher of Tomodachi Island High School. She is Thomas and Jazi's happy, sweet and kind music teacher, who offers them to sing music like pop, rock, country, blues, jazz and many other music.

Steve Kernwell (voiced by Norio Wakamoto (Japanese) and Gary Cole (English), ever since Harvey Birdman's voice on Harvey Birdman: Attorney in Law) - A pugnacious middle school music teacher of Tomodachi Island Middle School. Mr. Kernwell is Sarah's amazing and pugnacious music teacher, he always tells her to sing songs teen pop.

Judy McDougall (voiced by Rie Tanaka (Japanese) and Paget Brewster (English), ever since Della Duck's voice on the 2017 DuckTales reboot) - A pretty, sweet and kind elementary school music teacher of Tomodachi Island Elementary School. Ms. McDougall is Henry and Kristen's music teacher, who offers them chorus and music. She also has a pet hamster named Jonah (voiced by Tara Strong) for which Jonah the hamster is a male.

Paul O'Keeffe (voiced by Yuichiro Umehara (Japanese) and Beck Bennett (English), ever since Launchpad McQuack's voice on the 2017 DuckTales reboot) - A young music teacher of the Tomodachi Island Community College. Paul O'Keeffe is the good, well and kind music teacher of Tomodachi Island Community College, who teaches college students about music from musical theater, jazz instrumental, ballet, classical and non-classical dance, classical and non-classical voice, classical instrumental and acting, to photography and 2D art.

Keiko Watanabe (voiced by Asami Seto (Japanese) and Romi Dames (English), ever since Musa's voice on Winx Club) - A pretty young music professor of the Tomodachi Island University of Mii Learning and Education. She is a sweet, young, kind, cute and bubbly Japanese-American music university professor who likes to teach Arielle how to do classical violin.

Kevin Hopkins (voiced by Hiroki Yasumoto (Japanese) and Sean Schemmel (English), ever since Goku's voice on the Dragon Ball series) - A literacy teacher from Tomodachi Island High School. Mr. Hopkins is a dyslexic teacher and he always helps Shawn to read, write or understand.

Lisa Langstone (voiced by Aya Hisakawa (Japanese) and Jodi Benson (English), ever since Ariel's voice on The Little Mermaid) - A chorus teacher from Tomodachi Island High School. She was formally a choirmistress of the Tomodachi Island Boychoir.

Aaron Frensky (voiced by Daisuke Ono (Japanese) and John DiMaggio (English), ever since Jake the Dog's voice on Adventure Time) - A math teacher from Tomodachi Island High School. Aaron is a professional mathematician of his own show, "Aaron's World of Mathemetics".

David Doggett (voiced by Takashi Kondo (Japanese) and Rob Paulsen (English), ever since additional voice works) - A science teacher from Tomodachi Island High School. He is a famous scientist, and he always helps Shawn with his science including physical, life, earth, space, astronomy, chemistry, geography, environment, medical, cryptology and even veterinary.

Susan Gurbles (voiced by Masako Nozawa (Japanese) and Laraine Newman (English), ever since various comedy roles on Saturday Night Live) - A band teacher from Tomodachi Island High School. Mrs. Gurbles was formally the bandleading conductor of the Tomodachi Island Big Band Ensemble,

Anthony Jeffrieson (voiced by Ryuzaburo Otomo (Japanese) and Jim Cummings (English), ever since Pete's voice on the Disney franchise) - The kind, wise and sometimes, stubborn, aggressive, grumpy and bad-tempered principal from Tomodachi Island High School. Principal Jeffrieson can also be very somewhat aggressive to a bullied Mii.

Nina Dilson (voiced by Sora Tokui (Japanese) and Hynden Walch (English), ever since Princess Bubblegum and Starfire's voices on Adventure Time, Teen Titans and Teen Titans Go!) - An art teacher from Tomodachi Island High School. Nina was a famous artist painter on her own show, "Nina's Joy of Painting". She can help Thomas and Jazi with their paintings or arts, and even clay models and drawings.

Brenda Furchester (voiced by Sanae Kobayashi (Japanese) and Bonnie Hunt (English), ever since Sally Carrera's voice on the Cars franchise) - A story teacher from Tomodachi Island Elementary School. She is a wonderful storyteller and she can tell stories to Henry, Kristen, Jeff and all of the kids.

James Eisenstein (voiced by Katsuyuki Konishi (Japanese) and John Michael Higgins (English), ever since hosting America Says) - A computer science teacher from Tomodachi Island Middle School. James was occassionally a compataibility scientist for the Compatability Tester.

Gina Waverley (voiced by Ai Kayano (Japanese) and Grey DeLisle (English), ever since Princess Azula's voice on Avatar: The Last Airbender) - A career and technical education teacher from Tomodachi Island High School. She formally works as a pizza delivery girl when she was 15. Thomas and Jazi will do lots of volunteering, as Ms. Waverley helps them with their volunteer work and hours.

Dwight Mendelson (voiced by Mitsuru Ogata (Japanese) and Rick Zieff (English), ever since Shusuke Amagai's voice on Bleach) - A ballet and electronic dance music teacher from Tomodachi Island High School. He was occassionally a disco dancer at the Tomodachi Island Disco and Party Club, he will always help Thomas and Jazi with their dance skills.

Sharon Briggs (voiced by Junko Hori (Japanese) and Stephanie Sheh (English), impersonating Florence Henderson) - A history teacher from Tomodachi Island High School. She suffers amnesia and doesn't know her history from the past.

Jonathan Greaves (voiced by Daisuke Namikawa (Japanese) and Tom Kenny (English), ever since the narrator's voice on The Powerpuff Girls) - A ruthless sports teacher and P.E. coach from Tomodachi Island High School. He is a former football player and he shows off Thomas and Jazi with his sports coaching identities.

Heidi Eivaz (voiced by Ayane Sakura (Japanese) and Melissa Villasenor (English), impersonating Jennifer Lopez) - A digital media and film teacher from Tomodachi Island High School. Mrs. Eivaz was formally a photographer and scenery filmmaker and she helps Thomas and Jazi with their movie making.

Rick Jonas (voiced by Yuji Mitsuya (Japanese) and Corey Burton (English), ever since Shockwave's voice on The Transformers) - A health, foods and cooking teacher from Tomodachi Island High School. Mr. Jonas is a professional restaurateur who tries out new foods, and in which he helps Thomas and Jazi cook and bake.

Dawn Santor (voiced by Kotono Mitsuishi (Japanese) and Kate Flannery (English), ever since Meredith Palmer's voice on The Office) - A geography teacher from Tomodachi Island High School. Dawn is a geography educator of the Tomodachi Island Community College, and she can even sometimes help Laura with her geography lesson.

Julia (voiced by Marika Hayashi (Japanese) and Idina Menzel (English), ever since Elsa the Snow Queen's voice on Frozen and Frozen II) - A literacy teacher from Tomodachi Island Elementary School. Julia is also dyslexic at the same time that Mr. Hopkins had.

Leon Mayle (voiced by Toshio Furukawa (Japanese) and Ed O'Neill (English), ever since Jay Pritchett's voices on Modern Family) - The custodian of Tomodachi Island High School.

Calvin Thillen (voiced by Takaya Kuroda (Japanese) and Diedrich Bader (English), ever since Greg Otto's voice on American Housewife) - The guidance counselor from Tomodachi Island High School.

Hector (voiced by Nobutoshi Canna (Japanese) and Carlos Alazraqui (English), ever since Denzel Crocker's voice on The Fairly OddParents) - The guidance counselor from Tomodachi Island Middle School. He was formally a special education teacher for Tomodachi Island Private School.

Opal (voiced by Asami Sanada (Japanese) and Susanne Blakeslee (English), ever since Wanda's voice on The Fairly OddParents) - The guidance counselor from Tomodachi Island Elementary School. She was occassionally a professional cricket player.

Francisco (voiced by Shinji Kawada (Japanese) and Carlos Alazraqui (English), ever since Carlos Casagrande's voice on The Loud House) - The guidance counselor from Tomodachi Island Community College. He was formally a store clerk of Tomodachi Island Mexican Grocery Store.

Richard McCartney (voiced by Hisao Egawa (Japanese) and Rob Paulsen (English), ever since Ichabeezer's voice on VeggieTales in the House and VeggieTales in the City) - The guidance counselor from Tomodachi Island University of Mii and Learning Education. He occassionally works as a stock car mechanic.

Yosef (voiced by Yutaka Aoyama (Japanese) and Maurice LaMarche (English), ever since Tapper's voice on Wreck-It Ralph) - A chorus teacher from Tomodachi Island Middle School. He was formally a choirmaster of the Tomodachi Island Girlchoir.

Jorge (voiced by Nobuo Tobita (Japanese) and Carlos Alazraqui (English), ever since the Taco Bell chihuahua's voice on the Taco Bell commercials) - A chorus teacher from Tomodachi Island Elementary School. He was formally a choirmaster of the Tomodachi Island Children's Choir.

Gemma (voiced by Urara Takano (Japanese) and Nora Dunn (English), impersonating Liza Minnelli) - A math teacher from Tomodachi Island Middle School. She sometimes speaks Italian when she counts.

Derek (voiced by Akio Otsuka (Japanese) and Kevin Michael Richardson (English), ever since Tech E. Coyote's voice on Loonatics Unleashed) - A math teacher from Tomodachi Island Elementary School. He works as a mathemetics student at the Tomodachi Island University of Mii and Learning Education.

Charles (voiced by Hochu Otsuka (Japanese) and BD Wong (English), ever since Captain Li Shang's voice on Mulan) - A science teacher from Tomodachi Island Middle School. He helps Sarah with her chemistry skills.

Denise (voiced by Fumiko Orikasa (Japanese) and Michelle Ruff (English), ever since Rukia Kuchiki's voice on Bleach) - A science teacher from Tomodachi Island Elementary School. She always helps Henry with his experiments.

Erin (voiced by Atsuko Tanaka (Japanese) and Wendie Malick (English), ever since Eda Clawthorne's voice on The Owl House) - A band teacher from Tomodachi Island Middle School. She was a classically trained French Horn player at the Tomodachi Island Community College.

Marie (voiced by Rika Fukami (Japanese) and Telma Hopkins (English), ever since Maybelle's voice on The Casagrandes) - A band teacher from Tomodachi Island Elementary School. She is occassionally an alto or soprano saxophone player at Tomodachi Island High School.

Trisha (voiced by Yumi Toma (Japanese) and Christine Ebersole, in a light Chicago accent) - The lunch lady of the Tomodachi Island High School Cafeteria. Her favorite things to make is tossed salad.

Ann (voiced by Yuko Miyamura (Japanese) and Kate McKinnon (English), impersonating Jodie Foster) - The lunch lady of the Tomodachi Island Middle School Cafeteria. Her favorite things to make is grilled cheese sandwiches.

Georgia (voiced by Keiko Toda (Japanese) and Susanne Blakeslee (English), in a southern Carolinian accent) - The lunch lady of the Tomodachi Island Elementary School Cafeteria. Her favorite things to make is mashed potatoes.

Elizabeth (voiced by Rumi Ochiai (Japanese) and Karen Strassman (English), ever since Rouge the Bat's voice on Sonic the Hedgehog) - The lunch lady of the Tomodachi Island Community College Cafeteria. Her favorite things to make is pizza.

Sherman (voiced by Hisao Egawa (Japanese) and John DiMaggio (English), ever since Flip's voice on The Loud House) - The principal of Tomodachi Island Middle School. He was occassionally a baseball pitcher.

Kenny (voiced by Masashi Ebara (Japanese) and Daran Norris (English), ever since Mr. Turner's voice on The Fairly OddParents) - The principal of Tomodachi Island Elementary School. He was formally the captain of the Tomodachi Island Cruise Line.

Christian Devereaux (voiced by Jin Yamanoi (Japanese) and Tracy Morgan (English), in a heavy Brooklyn accent) - An art teacher of Tomodachi Island Middle School. He always designs a lot of paintings.

Sam (voiced by Toshihiko Seki (Japanese) and Fred Tatasciore (English), ever since Emperor's voice on Planet Sheen) - An art teacher of Tomodachi Island Elementary School. He was formally an art student at Tomodachi Island Art School.

Fred (voiced by Koichi Yamadera (Japanese) and John C. Reilly (English), ever since the title character's voice on Wreck-It Ralph and Ralph Breaks the Internet) - A story teacher from Tomodachi Island High School. He always teaches Thomas and Jazi how to make a story.

Drake Harrison (voiced by Wataru Takagi (Japanese) and Mark DeCarlo (English), ever since Hugh Neutron's voice on Jimmy Neutron: Boy Genius and The Adventures of Jimmy Neutron, Boy Genius) - A story teacher from Tomodachi Island Middle School. He likes to make a poem and even teach stories to Sarah.

Sara Feldman (voiced by Mami Horikoshi (Japanese) and Tress MacNeille (English), ever since Charlotte Pickles' voice on Rugrats) - A computer science teacher from Tomodachi Island High School. She was formally a computer technician.

Moira Danielson (voiced by Karin Takahashi (Japanese) and Kath Soucie (English), ever since Kanga's voice on Winnie the Pooh) - A computer science teacher from Tomodachi Island Elementary School. She was occassionally an oceanographer.

Lawrence Keegan-Keyes (voiced by Ryo Horikawa (Japanese) and Maurice LaMarche (English), ever since Toucan Sam's voice) - The vice principal who works with and is the assistant of Anthony Jeffrieson.

Charity (voiced by Aoi Yuki (Japanese) and Bebe Neuwirth (English), ever since Lilith Sternin's voice on Cheers and Frasier) - A career and technical education teacher from Tomodachi Island Middle School. Her favorite thing to help Sarah with is her lifeguard volunteer work.

Rebecca McIntyre (voiced by Masako Katsuki (Japanese) and Kristin Chenoweth (English), ever since guest starring roles) - A career and technical education teacher from Tomodachi Island Elementary School. She helps Henry work at the Tomodachi Island Critterwood Acres.

Alejandra Alvarado (voiced by Haruka Terui (Japanese) and Sumalee Montano (English), ever since Maria Santiago's voice on The Loud House) - A ballet and electronic dance teacher from Tomodachi Island Middle School. She was professionally a non-classical dancer.

Mike (voiced by Toshihiro Sakurai (Japanese) and Matthew Lillard (English), ever since Shaggy Rogers' voice on the Scooby-Doo franchise) - A ballet and electronic dance teacher from Tomodachi Island Elementary School. He was formally a ballet master at the Tomodachi Island Dance Theater.

Nolan Griffen (voiced by Ryo Horikawa (Japanese) and Howie Mandel (English), ever since being the judge on America's Got Talent) - A history teacher from Tomodachi Island Middle School. Like Mrs. Briggs, he also had amnesia.

Debbra (voiced by Yoko Soumi (Japanese) and Gina Torres (English), ever since Zoe Washburne's voice on Firefly) - A history teacher from Tomodachi Island Elementary School. She often tells Henry how to make his own history.

Phillip (voiced by Hiroshi Naka (Japanese) and Robert Picardo (English), ever since The Doctor's voice on Star Trek: Voyager) - The vice principal of Tomodachi Island Middle School who works with and is the assistant of Sherman Offerman. He was occassionally a pizza maker.

Adele Faulkner (voiced by Mikako Takahashi (Japanese) and Uzo Aduba (English), ever since Suzanne "Crazy Eyes" Warren's voice on Orange is the New Black) - A digital media and film teacher from Tomodachi Island Middle School. She helps out Sarah with her own teen film work.

Beverly (voiced by Ikue Otani (Japanese) and Retta (English), ever since Ruby Hill's voice on Good Girls) - A digital media and film teacher from Tomodachi Island Elementary School. She is an occassional rapper.

Dane Atkinson (voiced by Takashi Kondo (Japanese) and Rob Paulsen (English), ever since Mr. Opportunity's voice on the Honda commercials) - The vice principal of Tomodachi Island Elementary School who works with and is the assistant of Kenny Wheeler. He was formally a car salesman.

Harper (voiced by Miyuki Sawashiro (Japanese) and Jennifer Coolidge (English), ever since Zofia "Sophia" Kachinsky's voice on 2 Broke Girls) - A foods teacher who works at the teaching kitchen.

Duke (voiced by Tessho Genda (Japanese) and J. K. Simmons (English), ever since Mayor Lionheart's voice on Zootopia) - A sports teacher and P.E. coach from Tomodachi Island Middle School. He was formally a softball player at the Tomodachi Island Community College.

Buster (voiced by Fuminori Komatsu (Japanese) and Mick Wingert (English), ever since Po the Panda's voice on Kung Fu Panda: Legends of Awesomeness) - A sports teacher and P.E. coach from Tomodachi Island Elementary School. He was formally a track and field runner at Tomodachi Island Community College.

Wanda (voiced by Fairouz Ai (Japanese) and Jillian Bell (English), in a light Las Vegas accent) - The nurse of Tomodachi Island High School. She often takes care of Thomas or Jazi when they are hurt, sick or injured.

Spencer (voiced by Akihiko Ishizumi (Japanese) and Keone Young (English), ever since Kaz Harado's voice on Hi Hi Puffy AmiYumi) - A stern and somewhat pensively aggressive soldier for military school. He trains every boarding student.

Earl (voiced by Naomi Kusumi (Japanese) and Frank Welker (English), ever since Monty Uno's voice on Codename: KND) - A health, foods and cooking teacher from Tomodachi Island Middle School. He was formally the custodian at the Tomodachi Island Food Mart.

Anastasia (voiced by Rei Igarashi (Japanese) and Rachel Bloom (English), ever since Rebecca Bunch and Silver's voices on Crazy Ex-Girlfriend and The Angry Birds Movie 2) - The nurse of Tomodachi Island Middle School. She primarily takes care of Sarah when she gets hurt or sick.

Dickie (voiced by Katsuhisa Hoki (Japanese) and Fred Tatasciore (English), impersonating Michael Moore) - A health, foods and cooking teacher from Tomodachi Island Elementary School. He was formally a waiter at the Tomodachi Mii Garden Italian Kitchen, which is a parody of "Olive Garden".

Randy (voiced by Yosuke Akimoto (Japanese) and Clancy Brown (English), ever since Doctor Neo Cortex's voice on the Crash Bandicoot franchise) - The nurse of Tomodachi Island Elementary School. He takes care of hurt and sick patients, especially Henry or Kristen.

Jan (voiced by Naoko Watanabe (Japanese) and Cynthia Cranz (English), ever since Chi-Chi's voice on Dragon Ball Z, Dragon Ball GT and Dragon Ball Super) - A geography teacher from Tomodachi Island Middle School. She is a famous inventor of the Super Jan-Globe.

Cassandra (voiced by Yukana Nogami (Japanese) and Dana Davis (English), ever since Monica Dawson's voice on Heroes) - A geography teacher from Tomodachi Island Elementary School. She also loves superheroes.

Buck (voiced by Tessho Genda (Japanese) and Kevin Conroy in seasons 6-12 until his death and Daran Norris in seasons 13 and ongoing (English)) - An English teacher from Tomodachi Island High School. He can be sometimes get very devious at his students.

Vernon (voiced by Daisuke Ono (Japanese) and Troy Baker (English), ever since Snow Villier's voice on Final Fantasy XIII) - An English teacher from Tomodachi Island Middle School. He is diagnosed with ADHD.

Rosella (voiced by Yusuke Kobayashi (Japanese) and Rosario Dawson (English), ever since Valerie Brown's voice on Josie and the Pussycats) - An English teacher from Tomodachi Island Elementary School. She can be a big fan of fantasy novels.

Merle (voiced by Ryusei Nakao (Japanese) and Jim Cummings (English), ever since the title character's voice on Darkwing Duck) - A literacy professor from Tomodachi Island Community College. He was diagnosed with Tourette syndrome at his age of 10.

Annette (voiced by Sayuri Sadaoka (Japanese) and Diane Delano (English), ever since Sergeant Barbara Semanski's voice on Northern Exposure) - An orchestra teacher from Tomodachi Island High School. She is occassionally the classical conductor of the Tomodachi Island Symphony Orchestra.

Roland Tydus (voiced by Masakazu Morita (Japanese) and James Arnold Taylor (English), ever since Tidus' voice on Final Fantasy X) - An orchestra teacher from Tomodachi Island Middle School. He was occassionally a classical cello player.

Kay (voiced by Yumi Toma (Japanese) and Cameron Esposito (English), in a funny Western accent) - An orchestra teacher from Tomodachi Island Elementary School. She was originally a classical violinist.

Nadine Brando (voiced by Misato Fukuen (Japanese) and Felicia Day (English), impersonating Doris Day) - A math professor from Tomodachi Island Community College. She is dyslexic when he has a hard time reading the numbers.

Marlon Lukas (voiced by Soichiro Hoshi (Japanese) and Diedrich Bader (English), ever since Oswald Lee Harvey's voice on The Drew Carey Show) - The janitor of Tomodachi Island High School. He can clean and maintain classrooms when they're destroyed.

Bernard (voiced by Hiroki Takahashi (Japanese) and Alastair Duncan (English), in a heavy Edinburgh accent) - A Scottish graphic designing professor from Tomodachi Island Community College. He was born in his country of Edinburgh, Scotland.

Maurice Barbour (voiced by Jun Fukuyama (Japanese) and Paul Reubens in seasons 5-14 until his death and Maurice LaMarche in seasons 15 and ongoing (English)) - The STEM lab teacher from Tomodachi Island Elementary School. He is always inspired as Pee-wee Herman.

Julius (voiced by Takashi Nagasako (Japanese) and Bill Fagerbakke (English), ever since Patrick Star's voice on SpongeBob SquarePants) - The homeroom 1st Grade teacher from Tomodachi Island Elementary School. He is always a banker.

Theresa (voiced by Sumire Uesaka (Japanese) and Melissa Fumero (English), ever since Melissa Tarleton's voice on M.O.D.O.K.) - The kindergarten teacher from Tomodachi Island Kindergarten. She can help Leslie with her Kindergarten help.

Irene Rodgers (voiced by Aoi Yuki (Japanese) and Cissy Jones (English), ever since additional voice works) - A preschool teacher from Tomodachi Island Elementary School. She helps Tiny become a very good kid.

Ginger Loy (voiced by Ayahi Takagaki (Japanese) and Ilana Glazer (English), ever since Ilana Wexler's voice on Broad City) - The homeroom 2nd grade teacher from Tomodachi Island Elementary School. She loves to stay at home and draw cartoons.

Cindy (voiced by Manaka Iwami (Japanese) and Reagan Gomez-Preston (English), ever since Roberta Tubbs' voice on The Cleveland Show) - The homeroom 3rd grade teacher from Tomodachi Island Elementary School. She was formally a worker at MiiDonald's, a parody of "McDonald's".

Katrina (voiced by Akari Kito (Japanese) and Alyson Hannigan (English), ever since Willow Rosenburg's voice on Buffy the Vampire Slayer) - The homeroom 4th grade teacher from Tomodachi Island Elementary School. Her favorite things to love is scary movies.

Darryl (voiced by Shun Horie (Japanese) and Nolan North (English), ever since Desmond Miles' voice on the Assassin's Creed series) - The homeroom 5th grade teacher from Tomodachi Island Elementary School. He was formally a magazine editor.

Sergio (voiced by Kenji Nojima (Japanese) and Carlos Alazraqui (English), ever since Vito Filliponio's voice on The Casagrandes) - An Italian teacher from Tomodachi Island Middle School. He was born in his country of Rome, Italy.

Barry (voiced by Ryuzaburo Otomo (Japanese) and Dwight Schultz (English), ever since Captain "Howling Mad" Murdock's voice on The A-Team) - The custodian from Tomodachi Island Elementary School. He can clean many floors or any destroyed classroom which causes a storm to destroy.

Leanne (voiced by Shiori Izawa (Japanese) and Tania Gunadi (English), Indonesian-American accented) - The homeroom 6th grade teacher from Tomodachi Island Middle School. She is a big fan of detective radio shows.

Hugh Draffick (voiced by Ryota Osaka (Japanese) and Greg Ellis (English), in a light Lancashire accent) - The British homeroom 7th grade teacher from Tomodachi Island Middle School. He was born in his country of London.

Mel Styrde (voiced by Kensho Ono (Japanese) and Travis Willingham (English), ever since additional voice works) - The homeroom 8th grade teacher from Tomodachi Island Middle School. He always enjoys playing video games.

Ingrid Samuelsson (voiced by Ikuko Tani (Japanese) and Rich Fulcher (English), ever since Frankie Watterson's voice on The Amazing World of Gumball) - The homeroom 9th grade teacher from Tomodachi Island High School. She is the only Mii teacher character to be voiced a male actor.

Nigel Bragg (voiced by Masahiko Tanaka (Japanese) and Alfred Molina (English), in a Northern London accent) - The homeroom 10th grade teacher from Tomodachi Island High School. He is a famous royal guard and he loves royalty.

Boris Brunkov (voiced by Nobutoshi Canna (Japanese) and Jim Cummings (English), ever since the title character's voice on Winnie the Pooh) - The homeroom 11th grade teacher from Tomodachi Island High School. He loves cooking and baking. His favorite thing to make is mochi, he also loves hibachi shows.

Shirley Drivley (voiced by Shinobu Adachi (Japanese) and Amy Hill (English), ever since Yung-Hee Kim's voice on All-American Girl) - The homeroom 12th grade teacher from Tomodachi Island High School. She is a Japanese-American teacher who loves Japanese food, and she can eat anything from sushi to ramen, to boba teas and poke bowls.

Muriel Ramirez (voiced by Yumi Toma (Japanese) and Grey DeLisle (English), Spanish accented) - A Spanish teacher from Tomodachi Island Middle School.

Sheila (voiced by Asami Sanada (Japanese) and Allison Janney (English), ever since Charlene Doofenshmirtz's voice on Phineas and Ferb) - A gaming teacher from Tomodachi Island High School.

Toby (voiced by Kazuya Ichijo (Japanese) and Craig Ferguson (English), ever since hosting The Late Late Show with Craig Ferguson) - A personal finance teacher from Tomodachi Island High School.

Campground Travelers[]

Adam Hawthorne (voiced by Nobuhiko Okamoto (Japanese) and Zach Callison (English), ever since the title character's voice on Steven Universe and Steven Universe Future) - A 14-year-old teenager who is Thomas' kindergarten friend. They seem to know each other since the beginning of the 3DS game.

Faith McIntosh (voiced by Kanon Takao (Japanese) and Amanda Leighton (English), ever since Blossom's voice on the 2016 Powerpuff Girls reboot) - A 10-year-old perfectionist who seems out of troubled mind.

Noah Martins (voiced by Koki Uchiyama (Japanese) and Kyle Mooney (English), impersonating Joey Lawrence) - An 18-year-old boy.

Maya Randolph (voiced by Kana Asumi (Japanese) and Sandy Fox (English), ever since Chibiusa / Sailor Chibi Moon's voice on Sailor Moon) - A 9-year old girl.

Owen Morrelson (voiced by Hekiru Shiina (Japanese) and Antonio Raul Corbo (English), ever since Bryson Jones' voice on the Sarah Lee Jones franchise) - A 10-year-old boy.

Emily Parkins (voiced by Miyuki Sawashiro (Japanese) and Judy Alice Lee (English), ever since Yun Jin's voice on Genshin Impact) - A 12-year-old girl.

Bradley Watkins (voiced by Chiwa Saito (Japanese) and Mona Marshall (English), ever since Izzy Izumi's voice on Digimon: Digital Monsters) - A 13-year-old boy.

Genesis McDonnell (voiced by Saeko Chiba (Japanese) and Lara Jill Miller (English), ever since Kari Kamiya's voice on Digimon: Digital Monsters) - An 11-year-old girl.

Hunter Elliott (voiced by Satomi Korogi (Japanese) and Tara Strong (English), ever since Timmy Turner's voice on The Fairly OddParents) - An 8-year-old boy.

Ian Holmes (voiced by Hiro Shimono (Japanese) and Robbie Daymond (English), ever since Mamoru Chiba / Tuxedo Mask's voice on Sailor Moon) - A 17-year-old boy.

Charlotte O'Hara (voiced by Aki Toyosaki (Japanese) and Stephanie Sheh (English), ever since Yui Ishikawa's voice on K-On!) - A 15-year-old girl.

Dexter Carr (voiced by Yuko Minaguchi (Japanese) and Kari Wahlgren (English), impersonating Jay North) - An 11-year-old boy.

Kim Detmer (voiced by Saki Fujita (Japanese) and Betsy Sodaro (English), ever since Bex's voice on Duncanville) - A 16-year-old girl.

Logan DiAngelo (voiced by Atsushi Abe (Japanese) and Josh Brener (English), ever since Donatello's voice on Rise of the Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles) - A 15-year-old boy.

Grace Henson (voiced by Yui Horie (Japanese) and Ashley Johnson (English), ever since Terra's voice on Teen Titans and its spinoff Teen Titans Go!) - A 16-year-old girl.

Rhys Dmitrovich (voiced by Kana Hanazawa (Japanese) and Candi Milo (English), ever since the title character's voice on the 2003 Astro Boy series) - A 12-year-old boy.

Jessica Albridge (voiced by Satomi Sato (Japanese) and Jenny Slate (English), ever since Gidget's voice on The Secret Life of Pets and The Secret Life of Pets 2) - A 20-year-old young woman.

Sebastian Hertz (voiced by Minami Takayama (Japanese) and Grey DeLisle (English), ever since Wubbzy