Download a PDF Version of United States Navy at War: Final Official Report to the Secretary of the Navy [23.6MB]

[1]

UNITED STATES NAVY AT WAR

Final Official Report to the Secretary of the navy

Covering the period March 1, 1945, to October 1, 1945

by

FLEET ADMIRAL ERNEST J. KING

Commander in Chief, United States Fleet,

and Chief of Naval Operations

[2]

Dear Mr. Secretary:

On 1 March of this year I presented to you my second annual report of the progress of our naval operations and the expansion of our naval establishment during the preceding year.

Since the terminal date of my second report major hostilities on all fronts have terminated victoriously for the nations allied against the Axis powers, and I transmit to you herewith my third and final report of operations of the United States Navy in World War II. This report covers the period 1 March 1945 to 1 October 1945.

The Navy built and manned by the united efforts of this country continued to carry the action to the enemy, engaged him by sea and air, maintained control of the essential lanes of sea communication and transported men and supplies over all oceans to all theaters. The significant role of amphibious operations in this war was strikingly portrayed in the capture of Iwo Jima and Okinawa, which were the outstanding operations of this type during the last months of the war. They exemplify the teamwork of all services which brought victory on both the European and Pacific fronts.

For the officers and men of the Navy, Marine Corps, and Coast Guard, I am happy to report, at the end of the war, that the missions and tasks assigned all of them, singly and collectively, have been successfully accomplished.

Ernest J. King[signature]

Fleet Admiral, U. S. Navy.

Commander in Chief, United States Fleet

and chief of Naval Operations

The Honorable James Forrestal,

Secretary of the Navy,

Washington, D.C.

TABLE OF CONTENTS

Page LETTER OF TRANSMITTAL 2 I- INTRODUCTION 3 II-COMBAT OPERATIONS: PACIFIC 6 The Capture of Iwo Jima 6 Assault on Okinawa and Its Capture 8 Fast Carrier Force Operations in Support of Okinawa Invasion 12 Joint Operations in the Philippines and Borneo 14 Fast Carrier Force Preinvasion Operations Against Japan 17 Contributory Operations 19 The Surrender and Occupation of Japan 20 III-LOGISTICS AND BASES--PACIFIC 22 IV-SUBMARINE OPERATIONS 26 Attack on Merchant Shipping 26 Attacks on Naval Vessels 27 Special Missions 28 V-ATLANTIC OPERATIONS 28 Antisubmarine Operation 28 Tenth Fleet 29 U.S. Naval Forces in Europe 29 U.S. Atlantic Fleet 32 VI-SHIPS, AIRCRAFT AND PERSONNEL 32 Shipbuilding Program 32 Aircraft 33 Personnel 35 Health 37 The Marine Corps 38 The Coast Guard 39 VII-NAVAL RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT DURING WORLD WAR II 40 VII-CONCLUSION 45 APPENDIX A-Status of major combatant ships of the Japanese navy at the conclusion hostilities 48 APPENDIX B-Major combatant ships added to the United States Fleet, 7 December 1941-1 October 1945 56 APPENDIX C-Losses of U.S. Naval Vesels from all causes, 7 December 1941-1October 1945 67 COVER ART--Official U.S. Navy Photographs

[3]

I – Introduction

My two previous reports carried to 1 March 1945 the account of the development of our naval strength and the participation of the United States Navy in combat operations. The present report is intended primarily to cover the period of the succeeding seven months, during which Germany Surrendered and the war with Japan came to an end. This being my last report, however, I am including herein my considered general comment and observation on the war as a whole.

The major strategic decision of the war provided first for the defeat of Germany and then for the defeat of Japan. Both of these tasks have now been accomplished and we can view in clearer perspective the two major campaigns which led to victory. The contrast between them is at once apparent. The war in Europe was primarily a ground and air war with naval support, while the war in the Pacific was primarily a naval war with ground and air support.

In the European war, sea power was an essential factor because of the necessity of transporting our entire military effort across the Atlantic and supporting it there. Without command of the sea, this would not have been done. Nevertheless, the surrender of the land sea, and air forces of the German Reich on 8 May 1945 was the direct result of the application of air power over land and the power of the Allied ground forces.

In the Pacific war, the power of our ground and strategic air forces, like sea power in the Atlantic, was an essential factor. By contrast with Germany, however, Japan’s armies were intact and undefeated and her air forces only weakened when she surrendered, but her navy had been destroyed and her merchant fleet had been fatally crippled. Dependent upon imported food and raw materials and relying upon sea transportation to supply her armies at home and overseas, Japan lost the war because she lost command of the sea, and in doing so lost – to us – the island bases from which her factories and cities could be destroyed by air.

From the earliest days of the war our submarines, operating offensively in the farthest reaches of the Pacific, exacted a heavy toll of Japanese shipping. At a conservative estimate, they sank, in addition to many combat ships, nearly two-thirds of the merchant shipping which Japan lost during the war. Our surface forces – fast task forces composed of destroyers – carried the war to the enemy homeland and destroyed impressive numbers of naval vessels and merchant ships. Our amphibious forces, operating initially behind air offensives and under air cover launched from carriers which made possible the achievements of land-based aircraft carrying devastation to the Japanese home islands. Thus our sea power separated the enemy from vital sources on the Asiatic mainland and in the islands which he had seized early in the war, and furnished us the bases essential to the operations of shore-based aircraft from which the atomic bombs finally were dispatched, and on which troops and supplies were being massed for the invasion of Kyushu and of Honshu. The defeat of Japan was directly due to our overwhelming power at sea.

The destruction of the Japanese Navy followed the Nelsonia doctrine that the Japanese Navy followed up until the enemy fleet is annihilated. Of 12 battleships, 11 were sunk; of 26 carriers, 20 were sunk; of 43 cruisers, 38 were destroyed; and so on throughout the various types of ships, which collectively constituted a ﬂeet considerably larger than ours was before the war began. The few ships that remained aﬂoat were for the most part so heavily damaged as to be of no military value.

In striking contrast is the record of our ships. Although 2 old battleships were lost at Pearl Harbor, 8 new battleships have since joined the ﬂeet. Against 5 aircraft carriers and 6 escort carriers lost, we completed 27 carriers and 110 escort carriers. While we lost 10 cruisers, 48 new cruisers have been commissioned. We lost 52 submarines and built 203. The capacity of the United States to build warships, auxiliary ships and merchant ships, while supporting our forces and our allies all over the world, exceeded all former records and surpassed our most sanguine hopes. It proved to be a vital component of that sea power which Fleet Admiral Chester W. Nimitz has well deﬁned in the following words:

“Sea power is not a limited term. It includes many weapons and many techniques. Sea power means more than the combatant ships and aircraft, the amphibious forces and the merchant marine. It includes also the port facilities of New York and California; the bases in Guam and in Kansas; the factories which are the capital plant of war; and the farms which are the producers of supplies. All these are elements of sea power. Futhermore, sea power is not limited to materials and equipment. It includes the functioning organization which has directed its use in the war. In the Paciﬁc we have been able to use our naval' power effectively because we have been organized along sound lines. The present organization of our Navy Department has permitted decisions to be made effectively. It has allowed great ﬂexibility. In each operation we were able to apply our force at the time and place where it would be most damaging to the enemy.”

In the successful application of our sea power, a prime factor has been the ﬂexibility and balanced character of our naval forces. In the Atlantic the German Navy was virtually limited to the use of submarines, without surface and naval air support. In the Paciﬁc, Japanese sea power was hampered by army control, and Japanese naval officers lacked the freedom of initiative so necessary to gain and exercise command of the seas. On the other hand, while ours was a vast ﬂeet, it was also a highly ﬂexible and well balanced ﬂeet, in which ships, planes, amphibious forces and service forces in due proportion were available for uniﬁed action whenever and wherever called upon.

[4]

It is of interest to note, in connection with formulation of plans for the future strength of our Navy, that our ﬂeet in World War II was not solely engaged in ﬁghting enemy ﬂeets. On numerous occasions a large part of the ﬂeet effort was devoted to operations against land objectives. A striking example is the capture of Okinawa. During the three months that this operation was in progress our Paciﬁc Fleet—the greatest naval force ever assembled in the history of the world—was engaged in a continuous battle which for sustained intensity has never been equaled in naval history: yet at this time the Japanese Navy had virtually ceased to exist—we were ﬁghting an island, not an enemy ﬂeet.

With the possible exception of amphibious warfare, which covers a ﬁeld of considerably broader scope, the outstanding development of the war in the ﬁeld of naval strategy and tactics has been the convincing proof and general acceptance of the fact that, in accord with the basic concept of the United States Navy, a concept established some 25 years ago, naval aviation is and must always be an integral and primary component of the ﬂeet. Naval aviation has proved its worth not only in its basic purpose of destroying hostile air and naval forces, but also in amphibious warfare involving attacks in support of landing operations, in reconnaissance over the sea and in challenging and defeating hostile land-based planes over positions held in force by the enemy. In these ﬁelds our naval aviation has won both success and distinction. Because of its mobility and the striking power and long range of its weapons, the aircraft carrier has, proved itself a major and vital element of naval strength, whose only weakness—its vulnerability—demands the support of all other types, and thereby places an additional premium on the ﬂexibility and balance of our ﬂeet. The balanced ﬂeet is the effective ﬂeet.

In a balanced ﬂeet the several components must be welded together rather than simply coordinated. For example, submarines normally operate “on their own” and hasty consideration might lead to the false conclusion that it would be advantageous for submarines to constitute a separate independent service. However, careful consideration will disclose the fallacy inherent in reasoning from this premise. Actually, the commanding ofﬁcer of a submarine, to ﬁght his ship most effectively, must be familiar with all phases of naval tactics and strategy. It is also essential that ofﬁcers in surface ships understand the capabilities and limitations of submarines. This is accomplished in time of peace by requiring that submarine ofﬁcers alternate periods of submarine duty with duty in vessels of other types. By this means, the point of view of the ofﬁcer corps as a whole is broadened and in the higher echelons of command there are always included ofﬁcers who have had submarine experience.

Aviation, though a specialty, is much more closely interwoven with the rest of the ﬂeet than is the submarine branch of the Navy. It is, in fact, impossible to imagine an efﬁcient, modern ﬂeet in which there is not a complete welding of aviation and surface elements. This is accomplished by requiring aviators to rotate in other duties in the same manner as do submarine ofﬁcers, and by requiring non-aviators familiarize themselves with aircraft operations -not a difﬁcult matter, since not only carriers but also battleships and cruisers are equipped with aircraft aviation is part of the ordinary daily life of the ofﬁcer at sea.

Of course, it is not possible to effect rotation of duties of all submarine and air officers during the war. As a matter of fact, this is true of duty in all classes of ships. It is necessary during Wartime to train certain ofﬁcers—especially the reserves—for one particular type of duty and to keep them at it. However, the long periods of peace-time training, in which an ofﬁcer obtains the ‘rounded experience to ﬁt him for higher command, have been utilized in the past to give ofﬁcers experience in varied duties and the practice will be continued in the future. The wisdom of that system was proved during the war by the efﬁciency of aircraft carriers, commanded by qualiﬁed aviators who also were experienced in handling ships, and, particularly, by the efﬁciency of the high combat commands of the Paciﬁc Fleet. Many of the major units of the Paciﬁc Fleet, com- posed of carriers and vessels of all other types, were commanded by aviators. The strength of the Navy lies in the complete integration of its submarine, surface and air elements.

The epic advance of our united forces across the vast Paciﬁc, westward from Hawaii and northward from New Guinea, to the Philippines and to the shores of Japan, was spearheaded by naval aviation and closely supported by the power of our ﬂeets. In these advances, some of the steps exceeded 2000 miles and the assaulting troops often had to be transported for much greater distances. The Navy moved them over water, landed them and supported them in great force at the beaches, kept them supplied and, particularly at Okinawa, furnished air cover during weeks of the critical ﬁghting ashore.

The outstanding development of this war, in the ﬁeld of joint undertakings, was the perfection of amphibious operations, the most difficult of all operations in modern warfare. Our success in all such operations, from Normandy to Okinawa, involved huge quantities of specialized equipment, exhaustive study and planning, and thorough training as were as complete integration of all forces, under unified command.

Integration and uniﬁcation characterized every amphibious operation of the war and all were such successful. Command was determined chieﬂy by application of the principle of paramount capability. A naval officer was in over-all command of an amphibious operation while troops were embarked and until they had been landed and were ﬁrmly established in their ﬁrst main objectives ashore. Beyond that point, an ofﬁcer of the ground forces was in command and directed whatever naval support was considered necessary.

Unity of command at the highest military level, in Washington, (as an extension of the principle of the unity of command) was never attempted nor, in fact seriously considered. It is a matter of record that the strategic direction of the war, as conducted selectively by the Joint Chiefs of Staff, was fully

[6]

successful as were the operations which they directed. The Joint Chiefs of Staff system proved its worth. There is no over-all “paramount capability” among the Joint Chiefs of Staff to warrant elevating one of their members to a position of military commander of all the armed forces,—nor, in my opinion, is there any known system or experience which can be counted upon to produce the man qualiﬁed for such a position. This war has produced no such man—for the records of the Joint Chiefs of Staff will show that the proposals, or the convictions of no one member were as sound, or as promising of success, as the united judgment and agreed decisions of all of the members.

In connection with the matter of command in the ﬁeld, there is perhaps a popular misconception that the Army and the Navy were intermingled in a standard form of joint operational organization in every theater throughout the world. Actually, the situation was never the same in any two areas. For example, after General of the Army Dwight D. Eisenhower had completed his landing in Normandy, his operation became purely a land campaign. The Navy was responsible for maintaining the line of communications across the ocean and for certain supply operations in the ports of Europe, and small naval groups became part of the land army for certain special purposes, such as the boat groups that helped in the crossing of the Rhine. But the strategy and tactics of the great battles leading up to the surrender of Germany were primarily army affairs and no naval ofﬁcer had anything directly to do with the command of this land campaign. '

A different situation existed in the Paciﬁc, where, in the process of capturing small atolls, the ﬁghting was almost entirely within range of naval gunﬁre; that is to say, the whole operation of capturing an atoll was amphibious in nature, with artillery and air support primarily naval. This situation called for a mixed Army-Navy organization trusted to the command of Fleet Admiral Nimitz. A still different situation existed in the early days of the war during the Solomon Islands campaign where Army and Navy became, of necessity, so thoroughly intermingled that they were, to all practical purposes, a single service directed by Admiral William F. Halsey, Jr. Under General of the Army Douglas MacArthur, Army, Army Aviation, and the naval components of his command were separated entities tied together only at the top in the person of General MacArthur himself. In the Mediterranean the scheme of command differed somewhat from all the others.

All these systems of command were successful largely because each was placed in effect to meet the speciﬁc condition imposed by the Characteristics of the current situation in the theater of operations that emphasize this fact because it is important to realize that there can be no hard and fast rule for setting up commands in the ﬁeld. Neither is it possible to anticipate with accuracy the nature of coming war methods adopted in one may require radical ambition for the next, as was true of World Wars I and II. It was fortunate that the War Department and the Navy Department working together for many years—deﬁnitely since World War I—before the war began, had correctly diagnosed what was likely to occur and had instituted, not rigid rules, but a set of principles for joint action in the ﬁeld which proved sufﬁciently ﬂexible to meet the varying conditions that were encountered during the war.

We now have before us the essential lessons of this war. It is my earnest conviction that whatever else may have been learned as to the most effective relationship of, the ground, naval and air forces the most deﬁnite and most important lesson is that to attempt unity of command in Washington in ill-advised in concept and would be impracticable of realization.

II - COMBAT OPERATIONS: PACIFIC

The ﬁnal phase of the Paciﬁc naval war commenced with the assault on Iwo Jima in February 1945, closely followed by that on Okinawa in April. These two positions were inner defenses of Japan itself; their capture by United States forces meant that the heart of the Empire would from then on be exposed to the full fury of attack, not only by our carrier aircraft but also by land-based planes, the latter in a strength comparable to that which had wreaked such devastation against the better protected and less vulnerable cities of Germany. After Okinawa was in our hands, the Japanese were in a desperate situation, which could be alleviated only if they could strike a counterblow, either by damaging our ﬂeet or by driving us from our advanced island positions. The inability of the Japanese to do either was strong evidence of their increasing impotence and indicated that the end could not be long" delayed.

THE CAPTURE OF IWO JIMA

The strategic situation prior to the assault on Iwo Jima, the command organization for that operation and the forces involved, the landing on 19 February and the ﬁrst ten days of ground ﬁghting, have been included in my previous report and will not be repeated herein. As March opened, ﬁerce ground ﬁghting on Iwo Jima was still in progress. The front line ran roughly parallel to the short axis of the islets to the northeastern third of which was still held by the enemy. Our right ﬂank (4th Marine Division) extended inland from the beach just beyond the East Boat Basin and faced the enemy’s skillfully prepared defense positions in steep and rough terrain, which made progress difﬁcult; our left ﬂank (5th Marine Division) rested on Hiraiwa Bay directly across the island; in the center the 3rd Marine Division had

[7]

pushed a salient along the central Motoyama Plateu occupy Motoyamn village and the near end of Airﬁeld No 3. By nightfall of 2 March this last air-field and the whole of the Motoyama tableland were under our control, leaving the enemy in possession of a diminishing horseshoe-shaped area fringing the northeastern end of the island.

Airfield No. 1 had for some days been in use by light artillery spotting planes. but on 3 March it came into its own when a B-29, after a strike against the Japanese mainland, made a successful forced landing at Iwo Jima. More of such landings followed as the tempo of air strikes against Japan was stepped up on 6 March the ﬁrst land-based ﬁghter planes came in, made patrol ﬂights the following day, and relieved carrier aircraft in close support of troops on the third day after arrival. Airﬁeld No. 2 was operational on 16 March. Progress during the ﬁrst week of March was slow despite daily artillery preparation, supplemented by naval gunﬁre and air strikes before each ground attack. On the night of 7-8 March the 4th Marine Division killed about 1000 enemy troops who had organized major inﬁltration. Subsequently the resistance to our attacks diminished somewhat, and during the next three days control was secured of all the eastern coastline to a distance of approximately 4000 yards south of Kitano Point at the northeastern extremity of the island. On 16 March the northwest shore had been reached and Kitano Point isolated. Much mopping up remained to be done, particularly of a small stubborn pocket of resistance in one of the rugged gluches running southwest to the beaches from Kitano Point; but on 16 March all organized resistance was declared ended as of 1800, and the 4th Marine Division started re-embarking.

On 14 March the ﬂag was raised ofﬁcially and the establishment of military government was proclaimed. On 18 March the 5th Marine Division reembarked. On 20 March the U. S. Army 147th Infantry Regiment of the garrison force arrived. At 0800 on 26 March, responsibility for the defense and development of Iwo Jima passed to the garrison force and the Commander Forward Area, Central Paciﬁc. The capture of the island had taken 26 days of actual combat; over 20,000 enemy troops were destroyed; and our casualties ashore, as reported on 17 March, were 20,196, of whom 4,305 were killed in action. The diminutive size of Iwo Jima and its general barrenness, lack of natural facilities and resources should lead no one either to minimize the importance of capturing it or to deprecate as unreasonable and unnecessary our heavy losses in doing so. It was important solely as an air base, but as such its importance was great. Not only was the pressure of Air attack by our Marianas-based B-29’s materially intensiﬁed by the availability of Iwo for topping them off with fuel and for supplying them with cover from there on, but also there was an increase in combat effectiveness of the B-29’s due to the heightened morale of personnel, heavier bombardment and decrease in abortive ﬂights. There was, more over, a substantial saving in valuable life in the presence of B-29’s which would have been shot down in Japan had there been no ﬁghter cover, and in the number which would have been lost at sea had IWO Jima not been available for emergency landings. It is estimated that the lives saved through this latter factor alone, subsequent to the capture of Iwo Jima, exceeded the lives lost in the capture itself.

This loss of life during the capture resulted inevitably from the strength of Iwo Jima as defensive position and from the readiness of the enemy. Neither strategic nor tactical surprise was possible 'in our landing since, with Luzon and the Marianas in our hands, the seizure of some point in the Nanpo Shoto chain was obviously our next move, and Iwo Jima was by its location and the character of its terrain the most proﬁtable objective. It had no extensive coast line to afford invading troops a choice of landing points where they would meet little opposition, either on the beaches or in subsequent deployments for advance against enemy positions. Landing was feasible on only two beaches of limited extent, and they were so situated that a single defensive organization could oppose an assault against either separately or both simultaneously. The Japanese were, therefore, well prepared to meet us.

The defensive organization of Iwo Jima was the most complete and effective yet encountered. The beaches were ﬂanked by high terrain favorable to the defenders. Artillery, mortars, and rocket launchers were well concealed, yet could register on both beaches—in fact, on any point on the island. Observation was possible, both from Mount Suribachi at the south end and from a number of commanding hills rising above the northern plateau. The rugged volcanic crags, severe escarpments, and steep deﬁles sloping to the sea from all sides of-the central Motoyama tableland afforded excellent natural cover and concealment, and lent themselves readily to the construction of subterranean positions to which the Japanese are addicted.

Knowing the superiority of the ﬁrepower that would be brought against them by air, sea, and land, they had gone underground most effectively, while remaining ready to man their positions with mortars, machine guns, and other portable weapons the instant our troops started to attack. The defenders were dedicated to expending themselves—but expending skillfully and protractedly in order to exact the uttermost toll from the attackers. Small wonder then that every step had to be won slowly by men inching forward with hand weapons, and at heavy costs. There was no other way of doing it.

The skill and gallantry of our Marines in this exceptionally difﬁcult enterprise was worthy of their best traditions and deserving of the highest commendation. This was equally true of the naval units acting in their support, especially those engaged at the hazardous beaches. American history offers no ﬁner example of courage, ardor and efﬁciency.

As a whole the operation affords a striking illustration of the inherently close relation between land, sea and air power. The ﬂeet with its ships and planes delivered and supported the land forces. The Marines took an air base from which our land-based planes could operate with effectiveness far beyond that possible from our other bases in the rear. The

[8]

same general pattern marked our long progress all the way across the vast central and western Paciﬁc.

ASSAULT ON OKINAWA AND ITS CAPTURE

Our capture of the Marianas and Philippines had placed us on a strategic line some 1300 miles from the Japanese homeland and across its direct routes of communication to the south. The occupation of Iwo Jima had advanced this line to within 640 miles of Tokyo at the eastern end. The next step directed by the Joint Chiefs of Staff was to secure a position in the Nansei Shoto chain, which extends in a shallow loop from Kyushu, the southernmost of the main Japanese islands, down to Japanese held Formosa. Okinawa, the largest and most populous island in this chain, offered numerous sites for airﬁelds from which almost any type of plane could reach industrial Kyushu, only 350 miles distant, and attack the enemy’s communications to Korea, to the Chinese mainland, and to the Indo-China and Singapore areas. Since Okinawa also contained several excellent naval anchorages, it was chosen as the objective; the operations against it followed immediately on those for the capture of Iwo Jima.

From many standpoints the Okinawa operation was the most difﬁcult ever undertaken by our forces in the Paciﬁc. It was defended by about 120,000 men including native Okinawans serving with the combat forces with tanks and artillery. As possible reinforcements there were some 60,000 troops in various other positions in the Nansei Shoto chain, plus much larger forces in nearby Formosa, Kyushu, and the Shanghai area. Also of great importance was the large native population, which afforded the enemy an unlimited supply of labor, and which might easily become a serious problem to us by clogging roads and imposing a burden of relief.

The most serious threat to us, however, lay in the very factor for which we had initiated the operation, namely the short distance from Okinawa to the Japanese homeland, where lay the main reserves of air and naval power. Just as we would be able to strike Japan to for better effect after securing Okinawa, the Japanese could strike us while we were attacking that island. Japan’s naval strength had been so reduced that it could not hope for success against our own in a decisive action; but hit-and-run raids, or perhaps forlorn-hope, honor-saving attempts, were a possibility. Air attack, particularly of the suicide variety, was the greatest menace, since the Japanese airﬁelds within easy range of Okinawa were too numerous to permit more than their partial and temporary interdiction by our own air strikes against them. Severe damage and losses, therefore, had to be expected and accepted as the price of our success.

The operations for the capture of Okinawa were under the command of Admiral R. A. Spruance, Commander Fifth Fleet. Major forces participating under him were: the Joint Expeditionary Force (all elements engaged directly in the landings), Vice Admiral (now Admiral) R. K. Turner; the Expeditionary Troops (all ground forces engaged), the late Lieutenant General S. B. Buckner, USA; the Fast Carrier Force, Vice Admiral M. A. Mitscher, (including the battleships and other ﬁre support vessels of the late Vice Admiral W. A. Leeʼs Striking Force, the British Carrier Force, Vice Admiral H. B. Rawlings the Logistic Supply Group (tankers and cargo vessels which serviced the fleet under way close to the combat areas), Rear Admiral D. B. Beary; Service Squadron Ten (the repair, supply and service vessels of all kinds, based on Leyte Gulf, the Marianas, etc.), Commodore W. R. Carter; the Amphibious Support Force (comprising escort carriers, mine sweepers underwater demolition teams, gun-boats. and the gunery ships “assigned to bombardment missions), Admiral W. H. P. Blandy; and the Gunfire Covering Force (the battleships and other vessels not with the fast carriers), Rear Admiral L. Deyo. Numerous other participating task groups and units and their commanders are not mentioned herein. About 548,000 men of the Army, Navy and, Marine Corps took part, with 318 combatant vessels and -1139 auxiliary vessels, exclusive of personnel landing craft of all types. The greater part of the intelligence information required for the operation was obtained from photo graphic coverage. Adequate small scale coverage for mapping purposes was first obtained on 29 September 1944 by B-29ʼs of the XXI Bomber Command from then on until the conclusion of the operation additional photographing was done at frequent intervals by Army planes and planes of the Fast Carrier Force. The prompt developing, printing, and interpreting' of these photos, and the early and wide distribution of the prints and of the information gleaned from them, was an important feature of the operation.

The island of Okinawa, which is about 65 miles long, is roughly divided into almost equal northern and southern parts. The northern area is generally rugged, mountainous, wooded and undeveloped. The southern area, which is generally rolling but frequently broken by deep scarps and ravines, is the developed part of the island, containing the greater number of towns, roads, and cultivated areas the; capital city of Naha, all five of the islandʼs airfields and the strongest defenses.

The preferred plan called for our ground forces to land on six miles of beach on the southwest shore protected from the prevailing northeast trade worlds and closely, bordering the islandʼs Yontan airfields. Four divisions were to landed abreast on these beaches. With the two center divisions advancing directly across the island to the east coast, and with the left and right flank division voting toward the north and south respectively the Japanese forces in the southern part of the island would be isolated by these maneuvers, and were then to be overcome by attack from the north. Coinciding with the main troop attack, there was planned for the southeast coast a demonstration, and an actual landing, if necessary.

Planned operations preliminary to, and in support of the main landings, included the following: The seizure of the islands of the Kerama Retto group 20 miles to the southwest, in order to establish therein a logistics supply and naval repair base and a plane base; the seizure of the small island of Keote Shima, about 20,000 yards from the landing beaches

and 11.000 yards from Naha city, and landing army artillery there to command the lower end of Okinawa: mine sweeping on a scale greater than in any previous operation; the usual work by underwater demolition teams: and the intensive bombardments by air and naval forces.

Cargo and troops were loaded and embarked on the United States west coast. in the Hawaiian Islands, in the southwestern Paciﬁc, the Marshalls, the Carolines, and Leyte. The various elements proceeded to assemble aﬂoat at Ulithi, Guadalcanal, Saipan, and Leyte. Following rehearsals the several forces departed for the objective in the more than 1200 ships of all kinds which the Joint Expeditionary Force contained. Movement of all forces to the objective was carried out without enemy interference. Operational breakdowns enroute were insigniﬁcant, a fact which speaks well for the efﬁciency of our material and our personnel in operation, maintenance, and repair. An indispensable element in the campaign as a whole was the covering operations of the Fast Carrier Force, which are given in some detail in the next section of this report.

The mine sweepers were in the van, and on L-minus- 8 day, 24 March, commenced sweeping under cover of gunﬁre from battleships of the Fast Carrier Force, and continued this work up to L- -day, 1 April. There were 75 sweepers; and the entire coastal perimeter of southern Okinawa was cleared of mines during this pre- -assault phase, in addition to the sweeping necessary for the capture of Kerama Retto and Ie Shima. Including re-sweeping, over 3000 square miles were swept and declared safe prior to L-day. Some 177 mines were swept and about 80 ﬂoaters destroyed. The thoroughness of which is evidenced by the safety with which bombardment and assault ships in great numbers closed the assault beaches without signiﬁcant loss from mines.

On L-minus-6 day the assault On was commenced, and by L-minus-l, 31 March, the islands and also Keise Shima had been occupied against minor resistance. Nets were immediately dropped to protect the anchorages, and the seaplane base was established. Tankers, ammunition Ships and repair vessels were brought directly to this airfield which assumed a progressively more important as the principal haven for ships damaged by kamakaze” attacks of suicide planes.

Since L-minus-7, 25 March, Okinawa itself had been under intermittent bombing and gunﬁre since on L-day, 1 April, preceded by intense naval and air bombardment, the Tenth Army landed according to schedule over the Hagushi beaches on Okinawa against light enemy resistance. The assault then embarked in amphibious vehicles, hit the beach at 0830, moved rapidly inland, and by 1230 had captured both Yontan and Kadena airﬁelds with light losses. Prior to dark the Tenth Army, with approximately 50,000 troops ashore, had gained a beachhead 4000 to 5000 yards in depth. Proceeding rapidly against the initially weak resistance, our troops crossed the island to the east shore, and on 4 April the Yonté Kadena segment of the island was in our hands.

The Japanese had made no serious attempt to stop us at the beaches where we had landed; as the attack progressed from day to day, it was evident that they had withdrawn most of their forces in toward the southernmost part of the island, and had

[11]

established their defenses in depth on terrain admirably for defense and delaying action tactics. The primary defenses Consisted of blockhouses, pillboxes, and caves, protected by double apron barbed wire and mineﬁelds. Here the enemy used his artillery and his defensive tactics were described as artful and fantastic.”

In the north progress was rapid against scattered opposition; on 22 April all organized resistance in the northern two thirds of the island had ceased, through patrolling and mopping up continued. In the south our advance was stubbornly contested. From 4 April to 26 May our lines had advanced only about four miles, and it took from 26 May to 21 June to cover the remaining ten miles to the southern tip of the island. On 21 June, after eighty-two days of bitter ﬁghting, organized resistance was declared to have ‘ended, although mopping up of two small enemy pockets remained to be done.

On 18 June, while observing the attack of the Marine 8th Regimental Combat Team, Lieutenant general Buckner, Commanding General of the Tenth Amy and the Ryukyus Forces, was instantly killed by a shell burst. Command of the ground forces was then assumed by Major General Roy S. Geiger, USMC, until after the capture of the island, when he 'Was relieved by General Joseph W. Stillwell, USA,-on 23 June.

The general pattern of the operation for the captain of Okinawa was similar to those for the capture of Iwo Jima, the Marianas, the Marshalls, etc.; it differed mainly in the size of the air, naval, and ground forces employed, the length of time required to secure it after the initial landing, and the number of naval vessels damaged or sunk at the scene of operations by air attack, mainly of the suicide variety. Having been experienced in previous operations, this form of attack was not new, but the shorter distance from numerous air bases in Japan, and the desperate situation which would threaten the Japanese if our assault on Okinawa were successful, stimulated them to their greatest and most fanatical ' effort.

The time element was closely connected with the extent of our ship losses. By its very nature an amphibious invasion implies advancing a huge number of vessels, both combatant and noncombatant, from a zone dominated by one’s own land-based airforces into one hitherto dominated by the enemy’s. Our vessels are localized by the landing so that the enemy has not the problem of ﬁnding them, but only of hitting them. Thus exposed, their protection depends wholly on their own antiaircraft ﬁre, smoke, and on cover from our own carrier-based air forces, which are to that extent diverted from offensive missions. This precarious situation for shipping continues until progress ashore at the objective results in relief: ﬁrst, by the establishment of our own airforces, air facilities, antiaircraft radars, and ﬁghter-directors ashore in strength sufﬁcient to dominate the area; secondly, and more important, by releasing most of the shipping so that there are fewer vulnerable targets presented to an enemy that gets through. The longer this relief is delayed by the continuance of ground ﬁghting, the higher our shipping casualties mount. The longer the Navy must remain in support of assault troop operations, the more vulnerable it is to attack, and the higher is the proportion of

[12]

personnel and ship casualties. Slow progress on the ground is directly reﬂected, therefore, in naval losses.

The ﬁrst enemy air attack at Okinawa occurred on 24 March when the mine sweepers arrived; the ﬁrst damage was done on 26 March; and by 21 June, when organized resistance had ceased. about 250 vessels of all classes, from battleships and carriers down to destroyers and landing ships, had been hit by air attack. by far the greatest proportion of them in suicide crashes. Some 34 destroyers or smaller craft were sunk. Early warning of impending attacks proved to be the best countermeasure and for this purpose destroyers and other small vessels were stationed as pickets at appropriate distances from the concentrations of heavier shipping. These pickets took the heaviest losses themselves, but in so do' they undoubtedly saved many bigger able vessels during a critical three months.

FAST CARRIER FORCE OPERATIONS IN SUPPORT OF OKINAWA INVASION

After the supporting operations for the Iwo Jima campaign were completed. Vice Admiral Mitscher proceeded with his fast carrier task force in support of the forthcoming Okinawa campaign. First he went toward the Nansei Shoto in order to obtain photo- graphic coverage of that area. Planes were launched on 1 March. and excellent photo reconnaissance was obtained for use in planning the Okinawa campaign. While in this area, cruisers of the force bombarded Okino-Daito-Shima on 2 March. starting numerous ﬁres and providing valuable training for the ships participating. The force then proceeded to Ulithi for a ten-day period of regrouping and logistic replenishment.

On 14 March the task force departed from Ulithi and proceeded toward Japan to carry out its part in the invasion of Okinawa. On 18-19 March. from a position 100 miles southeast of Kyushu. air strikes were launched against airﬁelds on that island in order to eliminate future air-borne resistance to our Okinawa invasion forces. Fleet units at Kure and Kobe were also attacked with considerable success.

On the morning of the 19th the carrier Franklin was badly damaged by ﬁres started when she was hit by two bombs from an enemy plane. Outstanding rescue operations saved 850 men from the water, but the dead and missing totalled 772.

During that afternoon the task force retired southward, launching additional sweeps against enemy airﬁelds to forestall an organized attack on the slowly moving damaged ships and escorts. On 21 March 48 enemy planes were intercepted 60 miles from the force by 24 carrier-based planes. In the ensuing battle all the Japanese planes were shot down with a loss of only two of our ﬁghters.

In a four-day period. Vice Admiral Mitscher’s forces destroyed 528 enemy planes, damaged 16 enemy surface craft, and either destroyed or damaged scores of hangars, factories, and warehouses. Our own plane losses were 116. As a result of this operation, the enemy was unable to mount any strong air attack against our forces on Okinawa for a week after the initial landings.

On 24 March, under the command of Vice Admiral Lee, battleships of the task force bombarded the southeastern coast of Okinawa. This was part of a diversionary move to cover up the actual location of our landing beaches; apparently the ruse was successful.

When the invasion of Okinawa began on 1 April planes from the fast carriers began a series of almost continuous strikes and combat air patrols in direct support of the operation. For a few days enemy air opposition was almost nonexistent, but on 6 April the Japanese ﬁnally struck with fury against over ground and supporting forces. All units of the carrier force performed admirably during the day’s attack, knocking down 248 planes, while losing on the carrier task force then proceeded northward and on 7 April attacked strong Japanese ﬂeet units which had been located in the East China Sea off Kyushu. Heavy weather handicapped our aimen but in spite of this they sank the battleship Yamato, the cruiser Yahagi, and 4 destroyers fires were started on 2 other destroyers, and only 3 destroyers in the entire force escaped without damage.

While our planes were otherwise occupied it striking the Yamato and those ships, the enemy resumed the heavy assaults of the previous against the carrier force. Combat air patrols destroyed 15 planes over the force, and ships’ gunfire knocked down 3 more. One suicide plane penetrated the antiaircraft ﬁre, however, and dropped a bombs on the carrier Hancock; it then crashed on her ﬂight deck, killing 28 men, and badly damaging the carrier.

On 11 April the enemy resumed the air attack on the fast carrier task force. The number of Japanese planes participating was not large, but their pilots were determined to destroy themselves by diving their planes directly on the chosen target. Fortunately there were no direct hits, but 8 near misses caused some damage. During the day our carrier based planes shot down 17 of these suicide plans and ships’ gunﬁre destroyed 12 more, but they still constituted a serious threat to our forces.

The next day the enemy shifted the weight of this suicide attacks to the ships anchored at Okinawa and the combat air patrols from both fast and escort carriers had little difficulty in shooting down 151 enemy planes over the islands.

On 15 April the carriers launched a surprise attack against southern Kyushu airﬁelds, destroying 51 enemy planes on the ground and setting numerous ground installations aﬁre. The Japanese managed to launch some planes in opposition, and 29 of these were shot down before our aircraft returned to the carriers.

Fighter sweeps were again launched against Kyushu on 16 April in an effort to break up an obvious major enemy air attack. They shot down 17 airborne planes and destroyed 54 on the ground. In spite of this success, however, the enemy launched heavy air attacks during the day against our Okinawa forces and the fast carrier task force. All ground support was cancelled, and every effort was concentrated on a successful defense of the task force. The ﬁnal score for the day was 210 enemy aircraft shot down,

[13]

against a loss of 9 of our planes. Heavy damage. was 'caused to the carrier Intrepid when a suicide plane crashed on her ﬂight deck at the height of the battle.

On 19 April Vice Admiral Lee commanded a division of fast battleships in the bombardment of the southeastern coast of Okinawa. This action coincided with the beginning of the Tenth Army’s all-out offensive. The bombardment not only destroyed important military installations, but it assisted in making a feint landing at that point appear authentic.

On 29 April suicide planes again attacked the task force in strength, hitting and badly damaging two destroyers. The enemy paid for them, however, with 25 aircraft knocked out of the air by planes and guns of the task force.

After several days of relative calm, enemy aircraft returned in large numbers on 4 May to attack our land and amphibious forces in the Okinawa area this attack was apparently part of a counter-landing operation to aid their own ground forces. The fast filer task force was not attacked, however, and its fighters were free to defend the Okinawa area, shooting down 98 enemy aircraft, while losing only 5 planes.

On 11 May another major air battle was fought over Okinawa and the ships of the task force. Carrier-based planes shot down 69 enemy aircraft, ships gunﬁre accounted for 3 more, while 2 were destroyed in suicide dives on the carrier Bunker Hill. This ship was badly damaged, and 373 of her person were killed, with 19 missing. The fast carriers moved northward on 12 May and launched additional air strikes against Kyushu airfields on 13-14 May. Few planes were found and virtually no air opposition was encountered over the fields. On the morning of the 14th, however, the enemy managed to launch a force of 26 planes against the ships of the task force. Of these 6 were shot down by “ships’ gunﬁre and 19 by combat air patrol; the remaining plane was destroyed in a damaging suicide crash on Enterprise.

On 24 May the fast carriers launched a clean-up sweep by 98 planes against airﬁelds in southern Kyushu. Except on Kanoya airﬁelds little activity was found, and it was evident that the previous strikes against this area had been very effective. The score for the day was 84 enemy planes destroyed, while our losses were conﬁned to 3 planes lost to antiaircraft ﬁre off Kanoya.

On 28 May the late Vice Admiral J. S. McCain relieved Vice Admiral Mitscher as commander of the fast carrier task forces.

On 2-3 June further long-range sweeps were launched against Kyushu, but bad weather impaired their effectiveness. Only 30 enemy planes were destroyed, while our losses were 16. By 4 June the

bad weather had developed into a typhoon, and the ships of the task force spent the next 24 hours in attempting to avoid the storm’s center. Serious damage to 3 cruisers, 2 carriers, and 1 destroyer resulted.

Operations were resumed on 8 June when a ﬁnal attack was made on southern Kyushu. It was well executed, but previous raids had so reduced Japanese air strength in this area that only 29 planes could be destroyed.‘ Only 4 of our carrier planes were lost. On 8 and 9 June cruisers and battleships from Vice Admiral McCain’s task force bombarded Okino Daito and Minami Daito to the east of Okinawa. These attacks terminated the supporting action of the fast carrier task force, and on 10 June course was set for Leyte Gulf, where they anchored on 13 June for a period of replenishment and repair.

For a period of nearly three months, the fast carriers and their- escorts had operated in and near the

[14]

Okinawa area, giving invaluable support of our occupation forces. During this time the task force had destroyed 2336 enemy planes, while losing 557 of its own aircraft. In addition, widespread damage had been inﬂicted upon shore installations. In Japan, the Nansei Shoto, and upon important units of the Japanese ﬂeet. This remarkable record detracted considerably from the ability of the enemy to oppose our landing forces on Okinawa, thereby contributing notably to our ﬁnal success.

BRITISH CARRIER OPERATIONS

A fast British carrier task force, under the command of Vice Admiral Rawlings, was assigned to Admiral Spruance’s Fifth Fleet to assist in the air support operations for the Okinawa assault. From 26 March to 20 April, and again from 4 May to 25 May, planes from this force rendered valuable service in neutralizing the enemy air installations on Sakishima Gunto, southwest of Okinawa. Carriers of the force were subjected to frequent attacks by suicide planes, but none of them was put out of action. Battleships and cruisers of the force bombarded Miyako Jima on 4 May with satisfactory results.

JOINT OPERATIONS IN THE PHILIPPINES AND BORNEO

The situation in the Philippines on 1 March 1945 found United States forces controlling all of Leyte and Mindoro, most of Samar except a small area in the north, the central part of Luzon from Lingayen Gulf to Manila and certain areas to the south. Isolated resistance was still encountered within a few buildings in Manila and islands in the bay. Guerillas controlled substantial areas of the Visayan Islands and Mindanao. Landings had been made on 28 February at Puerto Princesa on the east coast of Palawan with practically no Opposition. Control was quickly extended over adjacent territory, providing airﬁelds from which enemy sea trafﬁc in waters to the westward and southward could be observed and attacked. Japanese concentrations still existed in many key cities of the Philippines and along certain of the routes which our ships had to travel to bring up vitally needed supplies and munitions. In addition, though their general air strength in the area had greatly diminished, the Japanese still controlled a number of airﬁelds which permitted harassing attacks.

A series of operations was undertaken to gain control of the important straits leading into central Philippine waters in order to cut OH enemy reinforcements and to set the stage for the ultimate reduction of remaining Japanese strongholds in the Philippines. The capture of Palawan provided an effective barrier on the west and gave us a base for naval and air operations which controlled the Balabac Strait entrance from the South China Sea to the Sulu Sea. At the same time we secured the most direct sea lane to Manila with an amphibious assault on Lubang Island, controlling the Verde Island Passage just south of the capital. The islands of Burias and Ticao were seized on 4 March and Romblon and Simara on 12 March. Possession of these islands afforded interaction to our shipping through San Banardino Strait and obviated the need for the roundabout route through Surigao Strait which was still subject to air attacks from the Visayas.

The campaign to complete the reoccupation of the Philippines resolved itself naturally into a series of amphibious landings to seize control of coastal cities and other strongly held Japanese positions. In March three such landing were made by forces of Admiral Thomas C. Kinkaid's Seventh Fleet.

The ﬁrst of these landings was made on 10 March at Zamboanga. at the southwest tip of Mindanao, in order to obtain control of the passage from the Sulu to the Celebes Sea, secure naval and air facilities with which to compress the Japanese remaining in the central Philippines. and provide a further steppingstone down the Sulu Archipelago for future operations towards Borneo. The attack group was under command of the late Rear Admiral F. B. Royal. Light cruisers and destroyers bombarded enemy positions there for two days while mine sweepers made sure the approaches were clear. On 10 March the 4lst Division was put ashore under moderate enemy artillery and mortar ﬁre. The troops quickly overran Zamboanga City and the two airﬁelds nearby, driving the Japanese back into the hills. A further landing was made on Basilan Island on 16 March without enemy opposition.

On 18 March a similar assault force landed at Iloilo on the island of Panay. To clear this island and establish radar and air facilities as well as motor torpedo boar bases, the 40th Division was staged from Lingayen Gulf. Only token opposition to the landings was offered, and naval gunfire preparation was withheld to save the lives of natives. The assault group was commanded by Rear Admiral A. D. Struble Iloilo City was secured on the 20th; the docks and harbor area were found practically undamaged. Subsequent minor operations had by the end of March virtually cleared Panay and nearby smaller islands.

Troops of the Americal Division were used for the landing at Cebu on 26 March. Captain A. T. Sprague Jr., commanded the attack group, which was supported by covering group of cruisers and destroyers under the command of Rear Admiral R. S. Berkley. Although the beaches were well organized for defense, the enemy positions there were found abandoned. Cebu City was captured on the next day, the troops inland developed, requiring extensive ground operations to clear the island.

On 17 April, after naval bombardment and air strikes, the X Corps with two divisions landed at Malabang (On Moro Gulf in southern Mindanao) and moved overland toward Davao Gulf against light opposition. Rear Admiral A. G. Noble commanded the naval task group and Rear Admiral R. S. Riggs the cruiser force which covered the landings. Cotobato and its airfield were secured on the next day. A novel feature of this campaign was the successful use of light landing craft on rivers leading inland Davao Gulf was reached late in April and Davao City was captured on 4 May, followed by further extension of control along the shores of the Gulf. In the meantime,

[15]

troops also advanced northward and effected a junction on 33 May with a regimental combat team which had been landed at Macajalar on the north coast on 9 May. These operations effectively sealed off enemy garrisons in the interior of the island where they could be mapped up at leisure.

The landing at Malabang was the last large amphibious assault necessary for the reoccupation of the Philippines, but a number of minor landings on the small islands were required in order to eliminate their garrison. The most important of these were the crossing of a regimental combat team from Iloilo to Pulpupandan Point on northern Negros on 29 March, to assist in clearing that island of the enemy; the landing of another at Legaspi, Luzon, on 1 April to facilitate the clearing of the Bicol Peninsula; and landings by a third such unit at Sanga Sanga in the Tawi Tawi group on 2 April and at Jolo on 8 April. Such landings were generally supported by naval gunﬁre. as well as by air strikes. Landings were also made at Masbate on 3 April: on Busuanga Island, lying between Mindoro and Palawan, on 9 April; and at Tagbiliran, Bohol Island, on 11 April. Bohol was the only major island in the Philippines on which we had not yet established a ﬁrm hold. From this time until the close of hostilities, most naval operations in the Philippines involved small groups transporting and covering American troops and guerrillas in shore-to-shore movements. The major units of the Seventh Fleet were occupied with the invasion of Borneo to the south.

The operations against Borneo, which began in May. were designed to deny the enemy the fruits of his conquests in the Netherlands East Indies and his use of the approaches to those areas. These included the capture of Tarakan to obtain its petroleum resources and to provide an airﬁeld for support of the Balikpapan operation; the seizure of Brunei Bay to establish an advance ﬂeet base and protect resources in that area; and the occupation of Balikpapan to establish naval air and logistic facilities and to conserve petroleum installations there. Vice Admiral D. E. Barbey was designated the commander of the Borneo attack force.

The ﬁrst Borneo operation was directed against the island of Tarakan, approximately 185 miles southwest of Tawi Tawi, to overcome some 3000 Japanese that were estimated to be on the island, and to develop facilities for future operations. Australian and American cruisers and destroyers began shelling the island on 27 April and continued through 1 May. At the same time the mine-sweeping group cleared the necessary approaches. Numerous neutralizing air raids had been made on airﬁelds in the area. On 1 May the attack group under Rear. Admiral Royal moved in. Units of the 9th Australian Division were landed on schedule with only small arms opposition.

In the second Borneo operation the 9th Australian Division, reinforced, was transported from Morotai to the Brunei Bay area of northern Borneo. Three separate landings were made at Labuan Island and on the mainland at Bintang and Cape Polompong. Air support was furnished by the United States Thirteenth Air" Force and the Australian -First Tactical Air Force. For ten days preceding the target date air strikes neutralized enemy airﬁelds and harassed troop movements and shipping in Borneo, with emphasis on Brunei Bay targets the last three days. Mine sweeping began on 7 June under the protection of Rear Admiral Berkey’s covering force of cruisers and destroyers. The mine sweeper Salute struck a mine and sank with many casualties.

Beginning on 9 June a distant covering group of cruisers and destroyers under Rear Admiral Riggs patrolled 50 miles west of Brunei Bay to prevent enemy surface interference. .

The attack group commander was again Rear Admiral Royal. On 10 June, after an hour of heavy

bombardment which caused the enemy to retreat from the beaches, the assault waves landed without opposition and moved inland against slight resistance.

When the landings had

been sunk off the Malay coast by a British submarine, the, distant cover group was withdrawn on 11 June. Throughout the operation motor torpedo boats rendered valuable assistance straﬁng shore targets and patrolling the area. One hundred twenty miles to the south at Miri-Lutong a supplementary landing was made by combined forces after a week of mine sweeping in which 458 mines were swept.

The operations against Balikpapan were carried out under Rear Admiral Noble as commander of the attack group, and Rear Admiral Riggs as commander of the cruiser covering group. In preparation for the attack heavy air strikes had been made for a month using the Army, Navy and Australian air forces with as many as 100 sorties a day. The target date was set for 1 July. Sixteen days prior to this, mine sweeping and underwater demolition activities began with covering ﬁre from cruisers and destroyers. This was met with intense reaction from enemy coastal guns.

Three mine sweepers were damaged by enemy ﬁre and three were sunk and one damaged by exploding mines. There was some doubt as to whether the target date could be met, (but ﬁnally on 24 June destroyers were able to get close enough inshore to smother the enemy guns before the landing. An escort carrier' group under the late Rear Admiral. W. D. Sample provided day and night air cover, since land planes were based too far distant to assure their presence in the case of bad weather.

The attack force consisted of the largest number of ships used in the Southwest Paciﬁc area since the Lingayen landings. In the cover and carrier groups were 9 cruisers (including 2 Australian and 1 Dutch), 3 escort carriers. and destroyer escorts. The attack group was of comparable scale. After an intense two-hour bombardment on 1 July, the assault waves moved ashore. In spite of enemy artillery, mortar and small arms ﬁre, seventeen assault waves landed without a single casualty. Stiffening resistance was met as the troops progressed inland and ﬁre support was rendered by cruisers both day and night. This support continued through 7 July. A further landing at Cape Penajam was made Without casualties on 5 July. There was no surface or subsurface interference with the attacking forces, and only four light harassing attacks were made by enemy planes with no damage to our ships or personnel.

While the period covered by this report witnessed no single naval operation of the size and scope of the Leyte or Lingayen landings, the numerous amphibious operations in which the Seventh Fleet participated contributed materially to the consolidation of our positions in the Philippines and the wresting of vital resources from the enemy in Borneo.

These numerous amphibious landings were conducted on short notice and in many instances were so closely spaced that for all practical purposes they were concurrent operations. Their successful completion on schedule reﬂects great credit on the commanders responsible for their planning and execution. In addition to the landing operations, unremitting

[17]

and constantly mounting pressure was maintained on the enemy by Seventh Fleet submarines, aircraft, and motor torpedo boats, which by June had brought to a virtual standstill all enemy sea-borne and coastal transport in the Southwest Pacific area.

Of equal importance with the offensive operations mentioned above were the large movements of men and supplies into the Philippines, and the extensive redeployment of men and equipment within the area in preparation for the staging of the protected landings on the Japanese home islands. The control and protection of the large number of ships employed for this task were successfully accomplished with but loss from enemy action, although a considerable strain was placed on the available facilities and forces.

With the cessation of hostilities, the Commander Seventh Fleet was relieved of all responsibilities as senior naval officer in the Southwest Paciﬁc area and with a reconstituted Seventh Fleet assigned the tasks of occupying and controlling the waters of the Yellow Sea, Gulf of Pohai, the coastal waters of China south to twenty degrees north and the navigable portion of the Yangtze River; the landing and establishing of United States Army troops in Korea, and United States Marines in North China; the evacuation of ex-prisoners of war and internees; the support of operations of United States forces in the China Theater; the clearance of mine ﬁelds and opening of ports in the Seventh Fleet area; and the routing and protection of friendly shipping. The planning "for and execution of these tasks in the initial stages were necessarily accomplished in great haste and with certain improvisation. However, the new organization has been perfected rapidly with attendant uniformly satisfactory progress.

FAST CARRIER FORCE PRE-INVASION OPERATIONS AGAINST JAPAN

After nearly three weeks of replenishment in Leyte Gulf, subsequent to their support of the Okinawa operation, the fast carrier forces of Admiral “Halsey’s Third Fleet, comprising the greatest mass of sea power ever assembled, proceeded northward on 1 July toward Japan. This huge armada was to complete the destruction of the Japanese ﬂeet, conduct a pre-invasion campaign of destruction against every industry and resource contributing to Japan’s ability to wage war, and maintain maximum pressure on the Japanese in order to lower their will to ﬁght.

On 10 July the force arrived in the launching area, 170 miles southeast of Tokyo. On that day strikes were made against airﬁelds and industrial plants in the Tokyo area; 72 planes were destroyed on the ground and extensive damage inﬂicted on other targets. No attempt was made to conceal the location of the ﬂeet but, in spite of this, little enemy air opposition was encountered.

Admiral Halsey then moved north to attack northern Honshu and southern Hokkaido on 14-15 July. Aerial strikes dealt a severe blow to critical water transportation facilities between Hokkaido and Honshu, when 5 railroad ferries were sunk and 4 others damaged. Again, little air opposition was encountered by our planes. Simultaneously with these air strikes heavy units of the force shelled Kamaishi' and Muroran, causing damage to the steel mills and oil installations in those cities.

On 17 July the Third Fleet moved south and was joined by units of the British Paciﬁc Fleet under the command of Vice Admiral Rawlings. Admiral Halsey was in over-all command and, on that day, ordered the ﬁrst combined American-British bombardment of the Japanese homeland. Battleships ﬁred 2000 tons of shells into the coastal area northeast of Tokyo and encountered no enemy opposition during the operation,

On the following day American and British carrier-based planes struck at enemy ﬂeet units concealed at the Yokosuka naval base in Tokyo Bay. The Nagato, one of two remaining Japanese battleships, was badly damaged. Numerous shore installations and transportation facilities were also hit.

On 24 and 25 July the combined British and American naval forces launched extensive air strikes against targets in the Inland Sea area. The planes concentrated on the major ﬂeet units still aﬂoat at the Kure naval base. Six major ships were badly damaged and, in all, 22 naval units totaling 258,000 tons were either sunk or put out of action, sounding the death knell of Japanese sea power. Intensive antiaircraft ﬁre was met, and for the ﬁrst time the enemy mounted aggressive, air-borne opposition. A total of 113 enemy aircraft were destroyed during the two-day attack, while only 12 British and American planes were lost.

A follow-up attack was made on Kure and the Inland Sea area by the carrier-based planes on 28 July. Reconnaissance indicated that the enemy ﬂeet units had been effectively reduced by the previous strikes, but additional bombs were dropped for good measure. Extensive damage was also done to merchant shipping and to vital shore installations, particularly railroad facilities. Strong air opposition was encountered once more, but our aircraft knocked down 21 Japanese planes air-borne and destroyed 123 on the ground for a total of 144 for the day, while our forces lost 36.

On 30 July the Tokyo area was harassed for the third time in three weeks by aircraft from the fast carriers, our airmen destroying 121 enemy planes during the day, and inﬂicting severe damage on lighter enemy ﬂeet units found in the region. Meanwhile, the fast battleships were shelling the port of Hamamatsu on the east coast of central Honshu, spreading havoc in that area.

For the ﬁrst eight days of August the harassed Japanese homeland was given a temporary respite while Admiral Halsey’s ﬂeet was riding out a heavy typhoon. On 9 and 10 August, however, the offensive was renewed with another air attack on northern Honshu, It was known that the enemy had withdrawn a large part of his air force to’ ﬁelds in this area, and the strikes were designed to destroy as many of them as possible. The plan was partially successful, for during the two days 397 enemy planes were destroyed and 320 others damaged. Almost

[19]

no air-borne opposition was encountered and all but 10 of the destroyed planes were caught on the ground. The British and Americans lost only 34 planes. While these air strikes were in progress, battleships from the Third Fleet bombarded the coastal city of Kamaishi for a second time, inflicting further heavy damage on the steel mills in the area.

Admiral Halsey’s final blow was delivered against Tokyo on 13 August. Airfields and other military installations were the primary targets, with 46 planes being destroyed on the ground. The Japanese tried to get through to the surface ships, but 21 planes were shot down in the futile attempt. The strong protective screen around the fleet was too much for the fading enemy air strength.

On 15 August the order of Fleet Admiral Nimitz to “cease fire” was received too late to stop the first of the day’s air strikes planned for Tokyo. It knocked 30 enemy planes out of the air and destroyed 10 more on the ground. The second strike had also been launched, but was recalled in time; its pilots were ordered to jettison their bomb s and return to their carriers.

Since 10 July the forces under Admiral Halsey’s command had destroyed or damaged 2804 enemy planes, sunk or damaged 148 Japanese combat ships, sunk or damaged 1598 enemy merchant ships destroyed 195 locomotives, and damaged 109 more. In addition, heavy blows had been struck at industrial targets and war industries, effectively supplementing the bombing by B-29’s. This impressive record speaks for itself and helps to explain the sudden collapse of Japan’s will to resist. Naval air power and Army bombers, had beaten enemy land-based air power besides inflicting critical losses on naval ships and seriously damaging many shore targets.

CONTRIBUTORY OPERATIONS

Although somewhat obscured by the more spectacular amphibious assults and carrier force operations which marked our major advances toward the Japanese homeland, there were many other vital and necessary activities which by their nature had more the form ‘of a continuous pressure than of major individual operations against the enemy. Outstanding parts were played by the submarines (whose achievements are summarized in a later chapter), by the land-based air forces, and, to a lesser extent, by the Northern Pacific forces.

Northern Pacific Forces

Although usually hampered by foul weather, which ran the gamut of fogs, rain, gales, snow, and floating ice fields, naval and air forces of the Northern Pacific continued to exert pressure against the Japanese-held northern Kurile Islands, posing a constant threat o the enemy’s northern flank.

Army and Navy aircraft flew such searches as weather permitted, bombed and rocketed Japanese shipping and bases in the Kuriles several times each month, and maintained photographic coverage to detect any Increase in enemy installations. Light naval task forces, usually consisting of 3 of the older cruisers and iron) 5 to 7 destroyers, bombarded coastal positions in the Kuriles once in March, once in May, twice in June, and once in July, and even penetrated the Okhotsk Sea in search of enemy shipping. On 11-12 August cruisers and destroyers commanded by Rear Admiral J, H Brown Jr, combining a highspeed antishipping sweep on both sides of the central and northern Kuriles with bombardments of enemy shore installations, intercepted two enemy envoys and destroyed 10 trawlers and a subchaser

Land-Based Air Forces

With the exception of the B-ZO’s of the Twentieth Air Force, the principal missions of land-based air forces of the Paciﬁc Ocean Areas were support of the Iwo Jima and Okinawa operations, attacks on Japanese shipping, and continued neutralization of by-passed enemy bases. During the period of this report, the greatest expansion of land-based air forces took place in the Army’s Twentieth Air Force, Airﬁelds in the Marianas were constantly increased to accommodate greater numbers of B-29’s. When Iwo Jima became available for emergency landings, greater bomb loads were carried safely, and ﬁghter support became possible. From that time until the end of hostilities, strategic bombing against vital Japanese industries and cities was constantly stepped up, coordinating with bombing by ﬂeet planes, and many thousands of mines were dropped in Japan’s harbors and sea lanes. Destruction resulting from these raids, and the ﬁnal blows dealt with two powerful atomic bombs, undoubtedly were a major factor in forcing Japanese capitulation.

Of less spectacular nature, yet also important in their effect on the war, were the operations of other land-based air forces against enemy shipping and by-passed islands in the Paciﬁc. With the capture and development of airﬁelds on Okinawa, Army and Marine Corps bombers and ﬁghters of the Tactical Air Force and Fleet Air Wings One and Eighteen were brought within easy range of the China coast, Korea, Shikoku, Kyushu, and even Honshu, and were enabled to bring Japanese shipping in these waters to a virtual standstill. Okinawa, as did Iwo Jima, returned rich dividends for the investment involved in its capture by hastening the war’s end.

Support of the Iwo Jima and Okinawa campaigns, routine searches, and constant neutralizing attacks against the many islands of the Paciﬁc still in the hands of enemy garrisons, were tasks which absorbed much of the time and effort of Army, Navy, and Marine land-based aviators throughout the Paciﬁc, and were well coordinated with the air operations of the fast carrier task forces in the advance toward Japan.

The last night of the war saw the ﬁrst and only offensive mission carried out from Okinawa against Japan by the B-29's of the recently deployed Eighth Air Force, with their target the industrial city of Kumagaya in northern Honshu.

Antisubmarine Warfare in the Pacific

By 1 March Japanese submarines had been nails: driven out of the central Paciﬁc by our countermeasures. Only an occasional supply or reconnaissance submarine ventured into this area. Near the beginning of March Japanese submarines were encountered near Iwo Jima, and during the Okinawa campaign the Japanese made their mam submarine effort around that island. After the fall of Okinawa, most of the Japanese submarines were drawn back to the homeland to aid in the defense against-our expected invasion. In addition to these anti invasion employments, the enemy was building and using a' number of cargo submarines in an attempt to supply by-passed positions. A considerable number of their submarines were also employed for antisubmarine work. Our submarines made many reports of sighting hostile periscopes and torpedo wakes. A number of German U-boats continued to operated out of Penang, even after the surrender of Germany.

In the main the Japanese submarines were ineffective, and our antisubmarine measures, bolstered by the advanced techniques used in the Atlantic, took heavy toll. In return we suffered very light losses, with the exception of the sinking—with heavy loss of life—of the heavy cruiser INDIANAPOLIS, probably by an enemy submarine, on 30 July. In March and April antisubmarine measures executed by screening vessels, by planes from land bases and carriers, and by regular hunter-killer groups, effectively checked the Japanese submarines and accounted for several kills. It is interesting to note that several of these kills were made by our own submarines. Through May, June, July, and August the Japanese put an increased underwater ﬂeet around Okinawa and managed to cause some damage, including the sinking of a destroyer escort in July. For these operations the Japanese were building and operating large numbers of midget submarines and human torpedoes. It is believed that the destroyer escort mentioned above was sunk by ramming a human torpedo. The Japanese submarine" effort was rapidly descending to the suicide level; but by the end of the war it was well under control, as the Japanese shipyards were taking heavy damage from the air and more escorts were being released from the Atlantic after the surrender of Germany.

THE SURRENDER AND OCCUPATION OF JAPAN

With the reduction of Okinawa in June 1945, the campaign against the Japanese Empire was concentrated on the home islands, with intensiﬁed bombing by the Army Strategic Air Force from the Marianas a rapid acceleration of attacks by the Okinawa-base Tactical Air Force, and far-ranging air attacks and bombardments by the Third Fleet. These operations were climaxed by the employment of the atomic bomb against Hiroshima and Nagasaki and, almost simultaneously, Russia’s entry into the war to open a strong three-pronged attack on Japanese forces IN Manchuria and Korea.

On 14 August Japan declared her acceptance of the terms of the Potsdam Proclamation. Which involved complete disarmament and surrender of all military forces and equipment as set forth by the heads of the states of Great Britain, the United States, and China. The instrument of surrender was presented to Japanese representatives by General of the Army MacArthur at Manila on 19 August 1945.

This instrument provided that Commander in Chief. Army Forces. Paciﬁc should receive the surrender of the Imperial General Headquarters, its senior commanders, and all ground, sea, air, and auxiliary forces in the main islands of Japan, minor islands adjacent thereto Korea south of 38° North latitude, and the Philippines: whereas the Commander in Chief of U. S. Paciﬁc Fleet was designated to receive the surrender of the senior Japanese commanders and of all ground, sea, air, and auxiliary forces in the Japanese mandated islands, Ryukyus, Bonins, and other Paciﬁc islands.

For this purpose the Third and Fifth Fleets, which had heretofore been alternative organizational titles for much the same assemblage of ships. were now each assigned approximately equal forces and became separate entities. Correlating the ﬂeet assignments with the various zones of responsibility assigned the various Army commands. Commander in Chief, U. S. Paciﬁc Fleet assigned naval responsibility to the Third Fleet for the zone of the Eighth Army to the northward and eastward of a line crossing Honshu west of Yokohama and Tokyo; to the Fifth Fleet for the zone of the Sixth Army (the remainder of the Japanese home islands to the southward and westward of that line): to the Seventh Fleet for that of the XXIV Corps (Korea south of 38° North latitude). as well as any operations which might be carried out in Chinese waters: and to the Commander, North Paciﬁc. local responsibility for northern Honshu and for Hokkaido.

Similarly, the three amphibious forces were coordinated with the respective ﬂeets and armies: the Third Amphibious Force under the Commander Third Fleet for operations of the Eighth Army; the Fifth under the Commander Fifth Fleet for operations of the Sixth Army: and the Seventh under the Commander Seventh Fleet for operations of the XXIV Corps and of any troops which might require transportation to China. B-day (the date designated by Commander in Chief. Army Forces, Paciﬁc for the initiation of operations) was proclaimed as 15 August 1945. At that time orders were issued to the U. S. Paciﬁc Fleet and to other forces under the command of Fleet Admiral Nimitz to cease offensive operations against the Japanese.

On 28 August a small force of our Army Air Force technicians landed at Atsugi Airﬁeld, 14 miles southwest of Tokyo, to prepare the way for a subsequent large-scale air-borne landing and for the landing at the Yokosuka naval base of Marine and Navy units. Originally it had been planned that this preliminary air-borne force should land at Atsugi on the 26th- and that General of the Army MacArthur should land there personally on the 28th to discuss occupation arrangements members of the Imperial General Staff; simultaneously, Marine and Navy

[21]

units should land at the Yokosuka naval base below Tokyo, as well as at points in Sagami Bay. The beginning of the occupation, however, was delayed 48 hours by a typhoon, which also caused postponement from 31 August until 2 September of signing of the formal instrument of surrender, a copy of which Japanese emissaries had brought back from Manila. Nevertheless, on the morning of 27 August an advanced unit of the Third Fleet, guided by a group of Japanese naval ofﬁcers, harbor pilots, and interpreters, and provided with maps and charts, moved into Sagami Bay, which is just southwest of Tokyo Bay.

On 29 August Fleet Admiral Nimitz arrived from Guam to break his ﬂag in the battleship South Dakota. Aboard the Missouri, Admiral Halsey, Commander Third Fleet, entered Tokyo Bay and anchored off Yokosuka naval base. The following day General of the Army MacArthur arrived at Atsugi Airﬁeld to set up General Headquarters at Yokohama. With him came an aerial armada of troop-carrying planes. At the same time about 10,000 Marines and naval personnel landed and took possession of the Yokosuka base and 'neighboring fortress islands. Working toward a junction, the two forces deployed. The last day of August many American prisoners of war were freed and the area of occupation was expanded; new forces came ashore from transports, some groups reaching the outskirts of Tokyo.

The Japanese naval base of Tateyama, across the bay from Yokosuka, was occupied by Marines on 1 September, as American control spread smoothly and swiftly throughout the 'whole area south of the capital.

The formal surrender of the Japanese Imperial Government, the Japanese Imperial General Headquarters, and all Japanese and Japanese-controlled armed forces wherever located, was signed on board the battleship Missouri in Tokyo Bay at 0908 on 2 September 1945. General of the Army MacArthur signed as Supreme Commander for the Allied Powers, and Fleet Admiral Nimitz signed as” representative for the United States.

Even before the formal surrender of the Japanese government, the Japanese commander of Mille Atoll in the Marshall Islands had surrendered on 22 August aboard the destroyer escort Levy, Mille being

[22]

the ﬁrst of the many Japanese island possessions to capitulate as a result of the Emperor’s acceptance of the Potsdam Proclamation. Nine days later, on 31 August, on board the destroyer BAGLEY, Rear Admiral F. E. M. Whiting received the surrender of Marcus Island.

The largest-scale island surrender, however, came shortly after the senior Japanese Army and Navy ofﬁcers at Truk Atoll had received word of the capitulation of the Imperial government. By the act of signing the terms of the surrender, the Commander of the 1st Imperial Japanese Army committed the following islands under his control to laying down their arms and awaiting United States occupation: Truk, Wake,’ the Palaus, Mortlock, Mille, Ponape, Kusaie, Jaluit, Maleolap, Wotje, Enderby, Mereyon, Rota and Pagan. The afﬁxing of the signature of the Commander of the Imperial Japanese Fourth Fleet further entailed the surrender of the Japanese Navy- controlled bases of Namorik, Nauru, and Ocean. In the case of both Army and Navy surrenders, the actual capitulation by individual islands was effectuated over a period of several days following; however, their submission became only a matter of time after the Truk ceremony.

It was estimated that a total of 130,000 Japanese military personnel were involved in the Truk surrender—on Truk itself a total of 49,000 military and 9,000 civilians; on Babelthuap in the Palaus, 27,000 military and 12,000 civilians; on Ponape 8,900; and additional large groups on Rota and Yap, with the remainder spread thinly throughout the Caroline and Marianas Islands. On 3 September the surrender of the Bonin Islands was received, and four days later the capitulation of 105,000 Japanese Army and Navy forces in some 60 islands of the Ryukyu group was signed at General Stillwell’s Tenth Army Headquarters on Okinawa.

Five days after the formal Japanese surrender, General of the Army MacArthur entered Tokyo, and his troops raised the United States ﬂag over the American Embassy. It was the same ﬂag which had ﬂown over Washington, D. C., on 7 December 1941; which had been hoisted over Rome and Berlin; and which had been flown on the battleship Missouri while the Japanese signed their surrender there.

Our access to the Japanese homeland gave opportunity at last for securing reliable information as to conditions there, both by our own observation and by conversation with Japanese officials who no longer had the incentive or the ability to decieve either their enemies or their own people. It was at once apparent that while the damage to their Cities and production centers by strategic bombing was fully as great as photographic reconnaissance had indicated the strangulation from our less previously relentlessly effective surface and submarine blockade and from our carrier-based air attacks had been a decisive factor in the enemyʼs collapse. Their merchant marine had been reduced to a fraction of its former size; of the few remaining ships, mostly small ones, only half were still operable. Their food situation was critical, and their remaining resources in fuel and all strategic materials were not less, so It had been known that their few “remaining carriers and heavy naval vessels had been damaged, but it appeared that the fury of our carrier strikes had forced them to withdraw all but a handful of men from these ships, practically abandoning them.

Never before in the history of war had there been a more convincing example of the effectiveness of sea power than when a well-armed, highly efficient and undefeated army of over a million men surrendered their homeland unconditionally to the invader, without even token resistance.

True, the devastation already wrought by past bombings, as well as the terrible demonstration of power by the first atomic bombs, augured nothing less for the Japanese than total extinction; yet without sea power there would have been no possession of Saipan, Iwo Jima and Okinawa from which to launch these bombings. True, the Japanese homeland might have been taken by assault in one final amphibious operation of tremendous magnitude, yet without sea power such an assault could not have been attempted.

III- LOGISTICS AND BASE - PACIFIC

Before the conclusion of the war, plans were maturing for the invasion and occupation of the mainJ apanese islands. Two major operations were protected: the first, with the code name of “Olympic” against southern Kyushu; after consolidation there the next—“Coronet”—into the Tokyo plain area which is the industrial heart of Japan. The amphibious. parts of these operations—involving the preparation of landing beaches by mine sweeping, underwater demolition teams, bombardment and bombing ; the transportation of the assault troops ; and initial landings for the establishment of firmly held beachheads were to have been the responsibility of Fleet Admiral Nimitz.

The large scale bombardments and bombings of the Third Fleet that began on 10 July were actually in preparation for operation “Olympic”. In mid August,as the war ended, the United States Nay had in the Pacific 90 percent of its combatant vessels of submarine size or larger and 42 percent of its combatant aircraft. These ships, aircraft, support auxiliaries and landing craft included:

Battleships 23 Aircraft carrier 26 Escort carriers 64 Cruisers 52 Destroyers 323 Escort vessels 298 Submarines 181 Mine craft 160 Auxiliary vessels 1,060 Large landing craft 2,783 Combat airdcraft 14,847 Transport, training and utility aircraft 1,286

All six Marine divisions, or 100 per cent of the Marine Corps combat strength, were also available for Paciﬁc operations. The “Olympic” and “Coronet” operations as planned would have been the largest amphibious operations in history. While the Third Fleet provided strategic cover and support for the amphibious forces making the invasion, the Fifth Fleet was to have executed the amphibious phases of the invasions of Kyushu and Honshu by transporting their troops and equipment to the attack position on shore. By the application of naval force they would have established the necessary ground troops in positions favorable for further maneuvers to complete the destruction of Japanese ground forces.

In discharging its responsibilities for the amphibious phase of the Kyushu or “Olympic” operation the United States Navy would have employed 3033 combatant and noncombatant vessels of a size larger than personnel landing boats. Although the application of our sea power in its various forms proved sufficient to bring Japan to terms without the necessity of invading her home islands, the possibility of invasion on the scale contemplated indicates the amazing progress in matters of supply and support that has been made in less than four years of war.

In this evolution advance bases have played a vital role. The 1940 Navy had no properly equipped advance bases other than Pearl Harbor. More than 400 have since been established in the Atlantic and Paciﬁc areas in order to maintain the ﬂeet and air forces in the forward areas where there was ﬁghting, to be done. As we progressed across the Paciﬁc, islands captured in one amphibious operation were converted into bases which became spring boards for the next advance. These bases were set up for various purposes depending upon the next Operation. At ﬁrst they were mainly air bases for the support of bombers and for the use of protective ﬁghters. This gradually changed to the establishment of staging base-s for the anchoring, fueling and reﬁtting of armadas of transports and cargo ships, and for replenishing mobile support squadrons which actually accompanied the combat forces and serviced them at sea. Further advances made necessary the development of repair and reﬁtting bases for large amphibious forces. As we progressed further and further across the Paciﬁc, it became necessary to set up main repair bases for the maintenance, repair and servicing of larger ﬂeet units. The ﬁrst of such large bases was set up at Espiritu Santo in the New Hebrides and was followed by a main repair base at Manus in the Admiralty Islands. It was then determined that so long as ships were in condition to function in the battle line, minor battle damage and derangements should be rectiﬁed in the forward area, thus eliminating the necessity of returning ships to continental bases or even to the Hawaiian Islands.

These conditions were recognized and steps were taken to support the entire ﬂeet in the Marianas, Philippines and Okinawa areas. A very large base, capable of supporting one third of the Paciﬁc Fleet, was set up at Guam; another large base was established at Leyte-Samar; a third was in process of construction at Okinawa when the war ended. Each of these bases was designed to dock ships, of various sizes, some being able to take ships of the heaviest tonnage. All of the bases could repair major battle

[24]

damage to hull and equipment. Facilities were established ashore with piers, roads and machine shops, in large measure duplicating the type of facilities found at any of our navy yards. There was also provided the replenishment storage necessary to restock every type of vessel with fuel, ammunition and consumable supplies as well as food. The stocks currently on hand at Guam would have ﬁlled a train 120 miles long. The magnitude of the fuel supply alone is indicated by the “total of 25,026,000 barrels of bulk fuel which was shipped to the Paciﬁc in June 1945 for military purposes. At Guam alone one million gallons of aviation gas were used daily. As these bases were gradually pushed forward, assault forces were brought two to ﬁve days’ steaming nearer the enemy. By proper selection of the strategic points necessary to accomplish the advance we were able to bi-pass and ignore many bases established by the Japanese which they could no longer use because of their loss of command of the sea.

But for this chain of advance bases the ﬂeet could not have operated in the western reaches of the Paciﬁc without the necessity for many more ships and planes than it actually had. A base to supply or repair a fleet 5000 miles closer to the enemy multiplies the power which can he maintained constantly against him and greatly lessens the problems of supply and repair. The scope of the advance base program is indicated by the fact that the personnel assigned directly to it aggregated almost one ﬁfth of the entire personnel of the Navy—over half a million men including almost 200.000 Scabees. In the concluding months of the war 82 per cent of the Seabees were in the Paciﬁc, the vast majority of them at work on bases. In the Naval Supply Depot at Guam there were 93 miles of road. At Okinawa alone there were more than ﬁfty naval construction" battalions building roads, supply areas, airﬁelds and ﬂeet facilities for What would have been one of the gigantic staging areas for the ﬁnal invasion of Japan.

In the period covered by this report almost two million measurement tons of materiel were shipped in connection with the advance base program, '

An essential element in the facilities of our advance bases were ﬂoating drydocks, which were capable of receiving vessels ranging from small craft to the battleship Missouri. One hundred ﬁfty two of these docks Were produced. They proved

their special value in the speed with which damaged ships could be returned to combat.

As our advance came nearer to the Japanese islands, the rear areas which had been the scene of combat operations in earlier months were utilized for logistic support. In the South Paciﬁc, for example, more than 400 ships were staged for the Okinawa operation. They received varied replenishment services, including routine and emergency overhaul as required. Approximately 100,000 ofﬁcers and men were staged from this area alone for the Okinawa campaign, including four Army and Marine combat divisions plus certain headquarters and corps troops and various Army and Navy service units. Concurrently with the movement of troops large quantities of combat equipment and necessary materiel were

[25]

transferred forward, thus contributing automatically to the roll-up of the South Paciﬁc area. Similarly in the Southwest Paciﬁc area Army service troops were moved with their equipment from the New Guinea area to the Philippines in order to prepare staging facilities for troops deployed from the European Theater. The roll-up was similarly continued and progress made in reducing our installations in Australia and New Guinea.

This vast deployment of our forces throughout the Paciﬁc required careful planning not only at the front but also in the United States. During the last six months of the war the problem of materiel distribution became of primary importance, and throughout this period our system of logistic support had to be constantly modiﬁed to meet the rapidly changing tactical conditions. War production had shifted the emphasis from procurement to distribution; that is, while production was still of high importance, a still greater problem was that of getting well balanced materiel support to designated positions at certain ﬁxed times. Put another way, motion, not size, had become the important factor. It was, nevertheless, essential in insuring the uninterrupted flow of materiel through the pipe-line of supply to our forces overseas that the reservoir within the United States which kept these pipe-lines full did not become too large. On 1 June 1945 a set of standards for Navy inventory control was promulgated which stressed a balance between procurement and inventory. The attainment of these standards was of primary importance to efficient distribution of materiel within the United States, and particularly on the west coast, which was our major base for the logistic support of the Paciﬁc Fleet.

It has always been a cardinal principle of our Paciﬁc logistic support policy that the west coast be utilized to its maximum capacity. There are two reasons for this: the source of supply must be as close to the point of requirement as possible so that inventories at advance bases may be kept to a minimum; secondly, greater utilization of shipping can be achieved by the shortest haul possible. The integration of these two elements, supply and shipping, was a major task in 1945. When the collapse of Germany was imminent, a review in conjunction with the Army of our policy of maximum west coast utilization was necessary. It was concluded that approximately 68 per cent of the Navy’s predicted logistic requirements would have to be moved from the west coast to bases in the Marianas, Philippines. and Okinawa, as well as to the mobile logistic support forces—Service Squadrons Six and Ten. Bases in the Admiralties, New Guinea, and the Hawaiian Sea Frontier, since they were in nonoperational areas, could be supported from the east and Gulf coasts. In May, after a joint Army-Navy study, a ceiling was set on the amount of material which could be shipped to the Paciﬁc from the west coast by the Army and Navy; this ceiling was based on the estimated capacity of the six major west coast ports. By detailed study of the capacities of port facilities and supply activities, "as well as a complete analysis of the types of commodities shipped by the Navy since the ﬁrst of the year, Commander, Western Sea Frontier (who coordinated' naval logistic matters on the west coast) reallocated the Navy’s. share of west coast capacity among the various ports. Estimated tonnages were set for each port, both by types of commodity and by overseas destination to be served.

In the establishment and execution of this planned employment of west coast facilities, Commander, Western Sea Frontier provided one of the major links between the distribution systems of the continental United States and Paciﬁc Theater. Since the ﬂow of materiel and the ships to carry it are immobilized

[26]

when more ships have sailed to a destination than that destination can receive, the planned employment of west coast ports was a matter of Vital concern.

This was facilitated by the expansion of the functions of the Western Sea Frontier which had taken place in November 1944 when the necessity for coastal defense had assumed relatively minor proportions. The expansion of function included placing every major activity of the-three west coast naval districts under a single command, with a view to coordinating all essential matters of materiel and personnel and to elimi