This movie projects so much British nationalism into Ancient Rome it might as well be called Churchill and Cleopatra. Not only does Shaw's dialogue feel like poor Shakespeare emulation, but he even put an ancient British denizen, a druid with a Victorian attitude, in the story and made him nearly as sophisticated as Julius Caesar, himself ludicrously modern in his value system.

I'm not knocking the film for being inaccurate, historical films always are. However the changes here all feel like propaganda in nature, and never in service of a good story. The Romans, as English historical stand ins, are portrayed as the unquestionably superior culture. Julius Caesar and his advisors are constantly bemused or shocked at Egypt's quaint ways.…

Caesar and Cleopatra is beautiful but dull. The costumes are a marvel - such intricacy in fashion and design. There is a retentive attention to detail - the sand reportedly imported from Egypt to ensure correct tone and texture. This was the most expensive film made in England at the time. All this pomp whilst the world was at war. But the narrative is stage-bound. Despite the lofty themes of global power and Empire it somehow feels small and insular. The actors' outfits should not be the most interesting thing about the film.

This is surprising – as Gabriel Pascal’s previous rendition of Shaw’s Major Barbara is a wonderful film - a true British classic. But here the pacing is…

That reminds me ... I want some money.

Bette Davis said she hardly acted in Technicolor because the studios reserved color for the shittier scripts and you can see that in action here as what starts off promising with Claude Rains talking to the Sphinx on a clear night with a full moon ends up turning slowly into tedium.

Claude Rains remains at full ham throughout the 2 plus hour runtime. Vivien Leigh looks dazzling, going from haughty naive woman to haughty vindictive woman. Their meet cute is probably one of the most cute on screen (or maybe I have a thing for Claude Rains, one of those things). Stewart Granger shows the most leg. His future wife and Vivien…