Choose one among all the films about Cleopatra is complicated: he is such a media figure that he has been the subject of numerous films, including some Hollywood blockbusters. In this post we show you the most famous ones and add the last one to come, which has generated controversy… as everything that surrounded and still surrounds the last great ruler of Egypt.

Cleopatra (1963), with Elizabeth Taylor and Richard Burton

It is, without a doubt, the film about Cleopatra that has achieved the greatest fame. It was directed by Joseph L. Mankiewicz but is best known for the two main actors in the cast: Elizabeth Taylor as Cleopatra and Richard Burton as Mark Antony. The film focuses, of course, on the romantic and dramatic component of the relationship between the ruler and the strong men of Rome, whom she conquered: Julius Caesar and the aforementioned Mark Antony. Tylor’s starring role helped make her character fashionable, as well as her aesthetics, including hairstyle and makeup, causing a worldwide trend.

Other films about Cleopatra you may be interested in

Although the one starring Elizabeth Taylor is the most famous, there are other films about Cleopatra. films about Cleopatrayou may be interested in. This is a list:

The Nights of Cleopatra (1954), starring Sophia Loren

Cleopatra (1917), a silent film starring Theda Baras

Cleopatra (1934), starring Claudette Colbert

Caesar and Cleopatra (1945), starring Vivien Leigh in the role of Cleopatra

Cleopatra (1999), a miniseries of American and German production that was broadcasted on the ABC television channel in the United States. The Chilean Leonor Varela was entrusted with the role of Cleopatra.

In addition to all these films, it should not be forgotten that the last great ruler of Ancient Egypt has also starred in plays of great impact, among which the following stand out

Antony and Cleopatra

by the English writer William Shakespeare.

Cleopatra(?), by Patty Jenkins and starring Gal Gadot

At the time of writing this post, the movie

Cleopatra

by Patty Jenkins is in pre-production. In other words, filming has not yet begun. However, it has already given a lot to talk about. The reason: the choice of its leading lady, Gal Gadot, an Israeli actress known for her roles as Wonder Woman. For some critics, this is a new example of ‘whitewashing’ of the character, who also receives the treatment of ‘Greek-Macedonian’ ruler, detaching the character from the land he ruled. All of this has pained the local Egyptian population, who feel adoration for her and her legacy, as is easy to see at a glance on any trip to the country.