Originally gaining notoriety through television advertising, the Magic Bullet offers a variety of different uses in the kitchen. From chopping to blending and pulsating, the 11-piece Magic Bullet set operates on a 200-watt motor. Both cups and lids are dishwasher safe.

The design allows for food items to be placed in a sealed canister. The canister is placed atop the 200-watt base and pressed down to begin operation.

The lightweight device is a convenience for those of all skill levels preparing food for themselves, friends or family. The Magic Bullet website claims to be “Your Personal, Versatile Kitchen Magician!” but underneath the magic is a hazard to your safety.

When warm food items are used, the canister can build up pressure and can cause it to explode, sending contents flying towards anyone nearby. This can leave users with burns or injuries to their body.

The highly successful Magic Bullet has made $500 million in over 50 countries and is manufactured by Alchemy Worldwide.

The makers of the device are also responsible for manufacturing another dangerous product that’s caused severe injury to consumers: Nutribullet.

Nutribullet has been accused of failing to fix design flaws similar to Magic Bullet. Numerous people have filed lawsuits after sustaining burns, cuts and lacerations, scarring, eye injury and disfigurement.

Nutribullet was recently featured in a FOX 11 Los Angeles investigative video that shows the device exploding during product testing. The video interviews multiple consumers who describe horrific accidents they experienced after using the blender.

Questions About a Magic Bullet Lawsuit? Contact a Johnson//Becker Lawyer for a Free Case Review.

Both Magic Bullet and Nutribullet products have caused serious injury to consumers. If you or a loved one have been injured by either product, you may want to speak with the lawyers at Johnson//Becker. We are currently accepting new blender lawsuits across the country, and you may be entitled to financial compensation.

We offer a Free Case Evaluation. Please contact us using the form below or by calling us at (800) 279-6386.

We would be honored to speak with you and respond promptly to every inquiry we receive.