The music video has more than 35 million views

17 years after the release of High School Musical 2, Zac Efron has revealed a secret about a scene in the iconic film, where he stars as Troy Bolton, alongside Vanessa Hudgens and Ashley Tisdale.

The film is the sequel to the hugely popular High School Musical, released in 2006, where the actor didn't sing. However, things were very different for the two sequels, where Zac performed the numbers throughout, including 'Bet On It'.

Speaking to YouTube channel Still Watching Netflix, Zac explained how the choreography for the scene of 'Bet On It', which takes place on a golf course, was completely improvised, after the director said he had no concept for the scene.

"That was all improv. And we shot it, I think the whole song, in like three hours," Zac explained.

He continued: "When we shot that, we just had no ideas for what to do on the day. The director, he was like, 'Dude, we have no concept for this song. What do you want to do?' I was like, 'I don't know, we're on a golf course'."

Zac appeared in all three High School Musical films, released in 2006, 2007 and 2008, however since the last film, there have been several rumours that there could be a reunion on the way.

High School Musical skyrocketed the careers of the likes of Zac Efron, Vanessa Hudgens and Ashley Tisdale, and since the last film, fans have been sent into overdrive several times when Zac followed Vanessa on Instagram, and Zac, Vanessa and Kaycee Stroh all visited High School Musical's East High separately.

If you fancy a trip down memory lane you can always revisit all the High School Musical films which are now on Disney+.

Take a look at Zac Efron's transformation through the years:

Now read:

Zac Efron's complete transformation through the years

Here's the real reason Zac Efron didn't sing in High School Musical

Will there be a High School Musical reunion? All of the clues and signs 👀

How to listen to Hits Radio:

Turn it up with Hits Radio! Home of Fleur East, Sam Thompson and Gemma Atkinson playing the biggest hits and the biggest throwbacks, alongside the biggest laughs and life-changing competitions. Tune in on FM, DAB, online or ask your Smart Speaker to 'Play Hits Radio'.