Nicole Kidman and Zac Efron give poor Joey King the fright of her life in a first look at their new upcoming rom-com A Family Affair.

It's impressive to see how much drama Netflix has been able to pack in to the first look at the movie, which features in a highlights reel revealing the release dates for a number of new titles coming to the streaming service this year.

The clip features all three of the main characters in A Family Affair, which tells the story of 'a surprising romance' which, according to Netflix, 'kicks off comic consequences for a young woman, her mother and her movie star boss as they face the complications of love, sex, and identity'.

Given both the title and description of the movie, it's clear that it will involves some complicated relationships, but we quickly see those complications play out as we see King's character apparently horrified to walk in on Kidman and Efron as their characters get hot and heavy.

Her efforts to escape the uncomfortable situation result in her walking straight into the door frame and knocking herself backwards - a move which, while not intentional, would at least hopefully distract Kidman and Efron's characters from their smooching session.

The rom-com follows King's previous success in the genre with her role in The Kissing Booth, and comes from another romance expert, director Richard LaGravenese.

LaGravenese is best known for writing and directing the films The Last Five Years and the forever-heartbreaking P.S. I Love You, though hopefully A Family Affair will produce more tears of laughter than of heartbreak.

A synopsis for the upcoming rom-com reads: "Work as the assistant to super mega movie star, Chris Cole, a demanding and womanizing narcissist, is beginning to take its toll on Zara.

"On an impulse she quits her job, only to soon discover that her widowed mother has begun a romance with the famous playboy.”

A Family Affair will see Efron return to Netflix following his work on his documentary series Down To Earth With Zac Efron, the second series of which aired in November.

King revealed in August 2022 that shooting for A Family Affair was set to begin that month, though unfortunately Netflix users will have to wait to we find out exactly what will come of the relationships in A Family Affair as it's not slated for release until 17 November 2023.