One of Zac Efron's most viral acting scenes was a lightning-in-a-bottle moment of improvisation.

The Emmy Award winner, 36, reflected on his infamous 'Bet On It' dance from the 2007 Disney Channel sequel High School Musical 2 as he discussed the scene with Joey King, who recreated one of his moves.

'I thought I invented that dance move, by the way,' he told his Family Affair co-star in an interview for Netflix. 'You know, when we shot that, we just had no ideas for what to do on the day.

'Like, the director, he was just like, "Dude, we have no concept for this song, what do you wanna do?"

'I was like, "I don’t know, we're on a golf course." That was all improv. We shot, I think, the whole song in three hours,' added Efron.

He starred in the movie musical trilogy as high school basketball star Troy Bolton, who embraces his love of theater after falling for brainy new girl Gabriella Montez (Vanessa Hudgens).

In High School Musical 2, Troy breaks out into an angry dance while performing 'Bet On It' on a golf course.

Amid the COVID-19 lockdown in 2020, many recreated the dance in a hilarious quarantine TikTok trend.

Joshua Bassett even re-enacted the dance step-for-step on the season 2 premiere episode of the Disney+ series spinoff High School Musical: The Musical: The Series.

The actor, 23, who played Ricky on the series, told Entertainment Weekly that he re-watched the scene 'way too many times' before filming it.

'I was a little bit intimidated that I was going to not do it justice,' he said in 2021.

'But once I realized that I'm not supposed to be doing it justice and it's really just Ricky trying his best — I'm not trying to live up to Zac Efron's performance or Troy — then I was like, we can just have fun with this one. But it was definitely a little intimidating at first.

'Oh man, he does these weird hand movements, I don't even know,' added Bassett of Efron's original dance. 'Man, he does some weird stuff, I don't know where they came up with that.'

Detailing his preparations, Bassett said, 'I sang that live so I was running on the treadmill for like two weeks before, almost every day. I tried to sing it three to five times on the treadmill so that I would have the stamina.'

After his breakout role in 2006's High School Musical, Efron played Troy once again in High School Musical 2 (2007) and High School Musical 3: Senior Year (2008).

In 2022, he told E! News that he would 'of course' join a reboot of the franchise. 'My heart's still there. That would be incredible. I hope it happens,' said Efron.