ADDING TO THE many wonderful memories Her Majesty the Queen will be recalling as her seventh-cycle birthday approaches in August, an exhibition has just opened in her honour at the Queen Savang Vadhana Museum – in the palace where she and His Majesty the King were married.

The exhibition “Sappatamawat Borom Khattiya Rajininat” – which continues through March 31 – reviews her creative endeavours and their tradition-steeped inspirations.

Srapratum Palace was the home of Queen Savang, His Majesty’s grandmother. On an open-air terrace adjoining her living quarters, Their Majesties took their wedding vows and received her formal blessings on April 28, 1950.

The museum has done a remarkable job of encapsulating the immense amount of work undertaken by Queen Sirikit and the multitude of projects she initiated. To cover all the ground, it’s made good use of modern technology, displaying objects matched to QR (quick response) codes that can be scanned so that explanatory text, photos and video and audio clips can be viewed on tablets that are provided along with audio-tour headsets.

Credit for the wealth of fascinating additional visual and aural information presented electronically goes to Her Royal Highness Princess Maha Chakri Sirindhorn, who chairs the Queen Savang Vadhana Foundation. Chavalee Amatyakul, her deputy private secretary, says with a smile that she works for “the IT princess”.

In the first section, ““Pratumnivasrajapravati”, one wall is covered in photographs documenting Her Majesty’s life and duties and postage stamps bearing Their Majesties’ portraits. Most of these images have a QR code, and among the treasures shared is a short film of the wedding in 1960.

The second section has more about the royal duties and gives testimony to the Queen’s dedication to the people’s wellbeing. It’s notable that Queen Savang chaired the Thai Red Cross Society from 1920 to 1946 and that Queen Sirikit has held that role since 1956.

Her Majesty’s kindness is evident in many displays. Her efforts for the Red Cross extended to lending a hand to the masses of Cambodian refugees who had poured into Thailand by 1979. The QR code here summons an interview with Princess Sirindhorn about her and the Queen’s work at Baan Khao Lan in Trat.

“There were many people starving, injured and dying,” you hear the Princess saying. “Some of the foreign assistance came in the form of instant foods, but we gave them normal meals to help gradually bring them back their health. When they got better, we sent teachers so they could learn work skills and the children could have lessons. We consulted with Rambhai Barni Rajabhat University to bring the people the knowledge they’d need to start again.”

Chavalee was there at the refugee camp with the royal mother and daughter. “They travelled to the camp in Trat as soon as she heard about the situation, on May 26, 1979. I had followed Thanpuying Suprapada Kasemsan and Thanpuying Charungchit Teekara to the camp in advance. We had to go to the market to prepare food for the refugees, such as boiled rice with pork. We did this every day for almost a month, and the children went from being very thin to being stronger and with brighter hope in their eyes.”

Among the video clips are brief interviews with other palace officials sharing their recollections of historical events.

Her Majesty’s royal projects delved into clothing design and environmental preservation, but she is chiefly admired for supporting indigent arts and crafts through her Support Foundation, which since 1976 has been based at the Chitralada Royal Villa and Garden on the grounds of Dusit Palace.

There are startling comparisons of objects from Queen Savang’s time and the “modern” variations produced by the Support Foundation. These include a yan lipao handbag inspired by a venerable betel-nut serving tray, and room partitions – one ornately carved in days gone by and the other, more recent, adorned with panels of hand-stitched bird and floral motifs.

A video clip has Queen Sirikit explaining how she derived inspiration from Queen Savang’s lipao betel box and cupboards decorated with the lustrous wings of beetles.

Replicas of Hanuman and Dhosakan masks from Royal Khon performances are displayed in the centre of the hall with a scanner code for viewing video of both a performance and the process by which the masks were made.

The last segment of the exhibition, “Phra Khun Pisitasapsakol”, examines Her Majesty’s role as Thailand’s “first lady” on the international stage.

The exhibition is as impressive as it is comprehensive. Visitors are well advised to arrive with plenty of time to spend at the museum. There is much to learn – and much to enjoy.

MAGICAL MEMORIES

- The Queen Savang Vadhana Museum is open from 10am to 3pm Monday to Friday. The entrance is near the Siam Kempinski Hotel.

- Attire must be appropriate to the palace. Women should wear skirts. You won’t get in wearing sleeveless tops, shorts or all-black outfits.

- Admission is Bt150 (Bt50 for students). Advance reservations are required. Call (02) 252 1965-7.