Internship details

Medical internships in Athens offer valuable learning experiences in public and private hospitals and clinics, with state-of-the-art technology and modern healthcare practices. Interns shadow and assist local medical professionals and rotate through a range of medical departments to gain practical knowledge and broad experience in European healthcare.

In addition to these Medical internships in Athens, Intern Abroad HQ also offers Medical internships in Thessaloniki. Spaces are limited on both programs, so applicants are strongly encouraged to confirm participation in advance for their preferred internship location.

This is an in-country internship, with accommodation provided.

As an intern, you’ll work closely with experienced medical professionals, such as doctors, surgeons and nurses, to gain genuine understanding of healthcare in action. Internships are fantastic learning environments to gain experience from trained medical staff as they go about their daily duties, across various departments or specialist areas.

Many medical professionals within Greece have studied and/or spent time working abroad (such as in the US or UK). Professionals have excellent English proficiency and interns are unlikely to experience language barriers with their supervisors or within medical teams.

As these internships are educational in nature, interns should not expect to work “hands on” with patients. Your supervisor will always take your current level of experience and abilities into consideration, along with your areas of medical interest, when engaging with you to support and customize your internship experience.

Medical interns will have a rotation roster to diversify the experience and gain understanding across numerous departments. These can include:

Anesthesiology

Cardiology

Dialysis

Emergency Room

Endocrinology

Gastroenterology

General Surgery

Hematopathology

Intensive Care Unit

Nuclear Medicine

Orofacial Surgery

Orthopedic Surgery

Oncology

Pathologic Anatomy

Plastic surgery

Pneumology

Radiology

Interns are able to request an internship schedule that includes particular departments of interest (e.g. orthopedic surgery, cardiology, hematology, etc.). Although requests are always subject to availability, your supervisors within the medical team will do their utmost to ensure your experience is related closely to your studies and goals as a future professional.

Note that supervision on these internships is handled by a range of medical professionals. Interns must expect to work in a multidisciplinary team. Depending on your medical department and variations of your daily roster, this may include nursing teams, doctors, or other department heads. Such team members are in the best position to provide guidance, direction, and answer questions as it will pertain to current duties and responsibilities. Therefore, there is not one sole supervisor throughout, as interns interact with a range of local staff in various positions, deferring to their expertise and instruction.

In all cases, interns should expect that the first week of your experience will focus on settling in and gaining some introductory knowledge, as you will not “hit the ground running”. Rather, you should start with learning about the placement to gain an understanding of what you can build upon, develop, learn, and contribute. Ensure that you ask questions and provide feedback during the introductory period, so that your supervisor understands how you’re progressing. This will help them to better understand important details, such as how quickly you learn, what you find challenging, what you find interesting, etc.

Understand and expect that individual internship experiences vary, as the specific placement that you’re assigned will depend on review of your resume and your current level of studies and experience. Therefore, if you’re at a more introductory level, you should reasonably expect a more introductory internship. Likewise, if you’re interning for a shorter duration, you will have a different experience from someone who is interning for a longer duration. Placement preferences are considered but always subject to availability.

Typical Schedule

Up to 8 hours per day, five days per week. Occasionally your supervisor may invite you to optionally observe a procedure during a weekend, should it be relevant to your interests and internship experience.

Career Benefits

Medical interns learn from a qualified and experienced supervisor, and can be involved in:

Shadowing and assisting local doctors, nurses and medical specialists in Athens.

Observing healthcare across a range of medical departments.

Learning from experienced local medical professionals, using contemporary techniques and state-of-the-art technology.

Professional development opportunities:

Observe medical consultations, treatments and surgeries.

Experience how a modern state-of-the-art hospital works.

Learn how the medical system works in Greece.

Network with experienced doctors & medical professionals.

Gain experience across multiple medical specialties.

Gain practical skills and boost your employability, with guidance from Intern Abroad HQ’s Experiential Learning Curriculum to support your learning and cultural intelligence.

Arrival and Orientation

Internships in Athens begin every Monday. Exceptions may be made to this when start dates are shifted to avoid public holiday disruptions or closed when the program has already reached capacity. Note that there are typically less placements available during August, due to the summer vacation period in Greece. Interns may choose to spend a minimum of 2 weeks, up to a maximum of 12 weeks.

Airport pick up and accommodation are included in the Program Fee. The accommodation is covered from the Sunday night before the Monday start date - interns are required to arrive no later than the Sunday before their Monday start date, as all orientations are held on Mondays. Upon arrival, interns will be met, greeted, and transferred to the accommodation.

The typical port of entry is the Athens International Airport Eleftherios Venizelos (ATH). In order to receive the airport pick up service, interns are required to arrive on the Sunday before their Monday start date, between 9am and 6pm. An extra charge applies to any airport pickups outside this timeframe.

If you are planning to spend time independently in Greece prior to your internship and will not require an international airport pick up, we can discuss alternative arrival logistics with you.

The last night of the accommodation is the Friday night of the final week, leaving interns free to depart on Saturday. Extra nights of accommodation can be arranged in advance, if requested, and are subject to availability.

Orientation covers important details for your internship, including introductions, information about culture, customs, rules, expectations, safety, language lessons, cultural excursions, and more. Your specific internship placement orientation will follow the general orientation, as you’ll be shown how to travel to and from your internship and be introduced to the team you’ll be joining.

Please note that all participants are advised not to book flights until they have first registered to confirm their internship placement.

Accommodation and WiFi

Interns are accommodated in clean and comfortable, fully furnished apartments. Upon the confirmation of specific internship details for each participant, accommodation arrangements are made, taking into consideration the location of internship placements, to ensure that any commute time is as convenient as possible.

Bedding and furnishings are provided, as well as common areas such as lounge, kitchen and laundry facilities. Standard amenities include whiteware (i.e. washing machine, stovetop, fridge, microwave) and clean linen (i.e. bed sheets, pillows, towels). Accommodation includes 24Mbps internet / WiFi access.

In most cases, between two to six guests can be accommodated per apartment, so interns should be prepared to share living arrangements. Each guest will have a single or double bed. Rooming arrangements are same-sex, however the apartments themselves may be mixed gender. Single sex apartments are possible, but this needs to be specified in advance and is subject to availability. If you are interning alongside a friend, please let us know and we can aim to ensure you’re accommodated together (subject to availability). Cleaning is provided ahead of a new occupants arrival. Outside of this, occupants are responsible for respecting common areas, keeping them clean, tidy and comfortable for all guests. Laundry facilities are also available within the accommodation.

Due to the layout of the city’s urban and residential areas, it is normal to expect an approximate commute (to / from an internship placement) of around 30 minutes. Interns should budget approximately 30 Euro per month for transportation (about US$35). The Athens Metro system makes it easy to get around the city and explore. All accommodation for the internship programs is located close to public transportation and large shopping areas.

It is important to note that an accommodation bond will be requested from the accommodation provider. The cost of the bond is US$400, so you must budget for this. However, this bond is fully refundable to you, upon your departure, provided that inspection has been completed to confirm that you have not caused damage to the property.

Please note that the accommodation pictured in the photo gallery of this webpage is provided as an example. Since we work with more than one apartment, the exact accommodation that you’re assigned may differ from the photos. However, you can expect a similar standard and similar amenities, to what is shown here.