M

Malagueña

The malagueña style traces its origins to a local variant of the fandango in the province of Málaga. In the second half of the 19th century, these more traditional popular songs began to mix with flamenco, thus creating the style known as malagueña. Over time, additions such as short guitar solos and relaxation of the typical rhythmic pattern became an integral part of this style of flamenco.

Martinete

Song that belongs to the family of tonás or cantes a palo seco (it does not need guitar accompaniment). They are a cappella songs accompanied by simple percussion, often created by means of the hammer and anvil, which show the connection of this style with the gypsy roots of the working class. It is the melody that makes the martinetes different from other types of flamenco tonás. It comes from the cante of the forgers, boilermakers, etc., who accompany themselves with the hammer.

Minera

A type of Andalusian cante typical of the miners of the Levante area with a dragging and sad rhythm.

N

Nuevo Flamenco

In the mid-1970s, new forms of flamenco began to emerge. It was first a natural and purer evolution under the influence of Paco de Lucía and Camarón de la Isla. While styles of foreign influences began to enter the music, during this time flamenco still kept its roots. Other innovations often came from blending modern music styles, creating flamenco fusion - a stronger mix of flamenco with jazz, Latin music, global music, and rock. Very talented international artists adopted parts of the flamenco styles, while others used their native musical heritage to create the new flamenco.

O

Olé

Word of encouragement often shouted by the public and other artists. It is a common expression in the ruckus of a performance.

P

Palmas

The rhythm in flamenco music played with the hands.

Palos

They describe the different types or styles of flamenco. These styles are known as flamenco styles. Each style has its differences, based on regional and cultural influences, time signature or rhythmic pattern, as well as sentiment. There are three basic palos: cante chico, which is lighter and more optimistic in its mood, cante grande or cante jondo, which is more melancholic, and cante intermedia, which basically contains all the other styles of flamenco that are not They fit into the first two categories.

Paso

The individual movement of a dance. Together, the steps form the choreography of the dance.

Peña

Asociación Cultural Flamenca or the fan club where flamenco is often performed.

Peteneras

The origin of the peteneras is controversial; Many place them in the province of Cádiz as a form that evolved from the traditional Spanish dance known as zarabanda. Others have noted similarities with the songs performed by the Sephardic Jews of Andalusia.

Pitos

The snap of the fingers.

Polo

It is a flamenco style; there is only one known song that is classified as a pole. Similar to the rhythm of the soleá, it is often considered an evolution of the caña, a well-known form of flamenco.