Useful information about The Settlers : Rise of an Empire - History Edition PC

Before you start searching for a cheap The Settlers : Rise of an Empire - History Edition cd key, it’s vital that you learn more about this title. It is developed by Ubisoft Blue Byte, while Ubisoft manage the publication. The Settlers : Rise of an Empire - History Edition release date for PC happened on January 22, 2019. The genre of the game is characterized as strategy. If you're under 18 or purchasing for a minor, we recommend checking The Settlers : Rise of an Empire - History Edition age rating guidelines. In accordance with the European video game content rating system, the game falls under the category of PEGI 12, accompanied by the following descriptions: Violence. ESRB, a U.S. based organization classified the game as ESRB Everyone 10+, highlighting references to Alcohol Reference and Violence. Right now, 718 of GG.deals users wishlisted this game, which can give you a general idea of the level of interest surrounding this product.

If you have very limited amount of free time, it's worth considering that on average it takes 27 hours to finish the main story of the game. Take a moment to examine the The Settlers : Rise of an Empire - History Edition reviews written from the perspective of critics as well as the gamers. In terms of Steam reviews, this product has received 574 gamer reviews, 77% of which are positive. If you're still intrigued by this title, you may be on the lookout for a discounted The Settlers : Rise of an Empire - History Edition Steam key. Fortunately, GG.deals is a great place to find the deals you're looking for.

The Settlers : Rise of an Empire - History Edition PC sale & discount - all in one place

With GG.deals, PC gamers can easily find where to buy The Settlers : Rise of an Empire - History Edition PC key at low cost. This is made possible by our price comparison tools as well as our extensive selection of gaming coupon codes. We've identified the availability of this game in 19 stores and our comparison of 29 offers will help you discover the best deals within seconds. The recommended price is set by the publisher at 11,99€. Thankfully, you won't have to spend as much for this title. Our findings suggest that the best The Settlers : Rise of an Empire - History Edition price on PC is 4,79€, which is 60% off. You can take advantage of this cheap key on Humble Store.

Prices in our comparison include payment surcharges to ensure that both official distributors and keyshops play by the same rules. They are also inclusive of all eligible coupon codes to help you maximize your The Settlers : Rise of an Empire - History Edition discount. It's worth remembering you may be able to reduce the price on the Steam Store by 8% if you top up your account with a discounted Steam gift card.

Cheap The Settlers : Rise of an Empire - History Edition PC key - browse price history, find a historical low, create price alerts

While the 60% discount may look attractive, it's always nice to make sure that you're receiving the best possible value. To help our users shop smartly, GG.deals tracks The Settlers : Rise of an Empire - History Edition price history. All price fluctuations can be seen in the graph on this page. Additionally, GG.deals provides statistics on the cheapest price point in a game's history, a metric which we call the "historical low". The best The Settlers : Rise of an Empire - History Edition PC price of all time was recorded on April 25, 2024 on G2Play, allowing gamers to get the game for just 0,15€.

Observing price trends can give insight into what kind of The Settlers : Rise of an Empire - History Edition sale one can anticipate in the future. This is where price alerts on GG.deals are extremely practical and you can configure one by using the "Create Alert" button.

Where can I download The Settlers : Rise of an Empire - History Edition after the purchase?

Most stores in our The Settlers : Rise of an Empire - History Edition price comparison will provide your code immediately after the payment is approved. The launcher you need to use to redeem your key may differ, depending on the offer you have selected - the game is currently available on Steam and Ubisoft Connect. After you activate your code, you can download The Settlers : Rise of an Empire - History Edition on on your chosen platform and play the game anytime you like.

Can I buy The Settlers : Rise of an Empire - History Edition on Steam?

Yes, you can purchase this title on Steam. Price comparison on GG.deals includes 2 offers with Steam DRM. Select one to ensure that your The Settlers : Rise of an Empire - History Edition download will take place on Valve's platform.

Is The Settlers : Rise of an Empire - History Edition Steam Deck compatible?

Bad luck, it looks like, The Settlers : Rise of an Empire - History Edition is currently unsupported on the Steam Deck. Several factors can contribute towards this status, for instance, anti-cheat systems of multiplayer games or optimization issues.

Is The Settlers : Rise of an Empire - History Edition on Game Pass or other subscription services?

Unfortunately, The Settlers : Rise of an Empire - History Edition is not available on PC Game Pass. While Microsoft’s subscription grants access to a plethora of titles, this specific game is not part of the line-up.