THE WAR ZONE is a vile, ponderous little movie about a serious moral problem - incest. In the movie, directed by acclaimed British actor Tim Roth, 15-year-old Tom is lonely and bored when his father and his pregnant mother move the family from London to the bleak Devon countryside. His new baby sister is born when the family's car wrecks while rushing to the hospital. Although mother and child are okay, Tom discovers that his father is sexually abusing his 17-year-old sister Jessie. Isolated, confused and consumed by anger, Tom is determined to reveal the truth.

Many will praise THE WAR ZONE for dealing with such an important topic, but this relentlessly dull movie contains a graphic scene of incestuous sodomy, explicit nudity and a gratuitous scene where Jessie and Tom hold the flame of a lighter against Jessie's skin. Apparently, this scene is meant to represent Jessie and Tom's feelings of teenage angst about what their evil father is doing. This disturbing, graphic content is surrounded by pretensions of pseudo-intellectual aesthetics, including some shots of the bleak Devon countryside. Such aesthetics, however, are merely an excuse to assault the sensibilities of viewers without really enlightening them

THE WAR ZONE is a vile, ponderous little movie about a serious moral problem – incest. In the movie, directed by acclaimed British actor Tim Roth, 15-year-old Tom is lonely and bored when his father and his pregnant mother move the family from London to the bleak Devon countryside. His new baby sister is born when the family’s car wrecks while rushing to the hospital. Although mother and child are okay, Tom discovers that his father is sexually abusing his 17-year-old sister Jessie. Isolated, confused and consumed by adolescent anger, Tom is determined to reveal the truth.

Many will praise THE WAR ZONE for dealing with such an important topic, but this relentlessly dull movie contains a graphic scene of incestuous sodomy, much explicit nudity and a gratuitous scene where Jessie and an angry Tom hold the flame of a lighter against Jessie’s naked breast. Apparently, this last scene is meant to represent Jessie and Tom’s feelings of teenage angst about what their evil father is doing. This disturbing, graphic content is surrounded by pretensions of pseudo-intellectual, art-house aesthetics, including some truly amazing shots of the bleak Devon countryside. Such aesthetics, however, are merely an excuse to assault the sensibilities of viewers without really enlightening them.