I don’t want to throw around words that are overused when reviewing films. Words like ‘great’ and masterpiece’. The War Zone is certainly a masterpiece but I don’t only want to call it a masterpiece. What the film does is capture a feeling so personal to myself and possibly other people who live in England. It’s a mixture of boredom, loneliness, depression, numbness, shock and anger. Yet the film isn’t really about those things. It’s about something far more darker. Tim Roth (in his directorial debut) tackles the subject matter (which I will not name) in an incredibly mature and intelligent way. The War Zone might just be the most surprising British film you will ever see. Why can’t all…

One of the most chilling, terrifying depictions of child sexual abuse. Tim Roth, who was a sexual abuse survivor himself, melancholically directed this story that clearly spoke to him on a personal level. It's a shame that Roth stopped directing after this because this is just such a potent cinematic experience.

Thanks to an amazing British cast, we get to see such a brilliant showcase of pure evil in its most unfiltered, thrilling form, via the vessels of a regular-looking family. It's brutally honest with its subject matter, focusing on the physical and mental traumas of its helpless teenage protagonists. The foursome cast all did a fantastic job delivering the intensity of a devastating family thriller, and Roth's unflinching shot and stone-cold style are spot-on and cherry on top. Highly recommended.

CW: incest, rape

It's disheartening to see the bad faith approach many of this film's detractors take to its intense subject matter. Tim Roth has not made it a secret that he is a survivor of incestuous abuse, and it's that kind of pathology and barefaced disgust that keeps survivors from speaking out; for so many, there is an ingrained repulsion toward incest that not only includes the perpetrator but the victim -- arguably even more so for children raised as girls abused by their fathers. Ironically the film itself addresses this very type of victim-blaming through Tom's cruel treatment of Jessie upon his discovery, but it's hard to take that message in when one is still in the throes…

Most dramas present us with characters and what they would ideally do in traumatic situations or tragedies. Very few depict the real complexities of the human condition in extreme circumstances. This film is one of the few that does and it's not easy to see. It's like an exposed raw nerve.

The film is about a 15 year old boy, his 18 year old sister, his very pregnant mother and his old dad. The family almost lives in seclusion in a rural part of Devon. That is all the information I think someone should have going into the film other then a warning that it will test the limits of what a person can endure emotionally in a film.

This…

The ultimate (beginner’s) guide to DISTURBING MOVIES

Category 3: Depressing & Misery porn

A truly dark piece of film, and Tim Roth's sole outing as a director observes the seedy underbelly of a family tearing itself apart. Having recently relocated from London to Devon and now with a newborn in the house, Dad Ray Winstone and Mother Tilda Swinton are not getting much peace in their lives. Swinton had just birthed twins in her real life, so the physical appearance of a swollen mother was her reality. Situation normal so far then, but soon it becomes clear that all is not well.

The son of the house Tom is aware of some unnatural behaviours within the family, and as he lets…

Well that was surprisingly messed up!

Somehow Tim Roth's first and only movie as director, and for some reason he decided to adapt a novel telling the incredibly bleak story of a English family, normal-from-the-outside, fucked-up-on-the-inside.

I don't know how much of a secret the actual plot is, but I went in completely blind and it was quite the journey. At no point does this become gratuitous, something I very much respected. It's mostly focussed on characters, specifically the two teenage siblings, son and daughter. And it's rather slowly paced, but from the moment the son is starting to unravel the "dark family secret", I was constantly at the edge of my seat.

And it's such an English movie. Or…