Contrary to a popular misconception, a film's moral character and total dreariness don't have to reflect on its overall quality.

That rule not only holds true for all of those depressing dramas French filmmakers have been turning out and such seemingly unsavory American fare as "Boogie Nights," but also for a movie like "The War Zone," a starkly observant British drama that marks the directorial debut of character actor Tim Roth.

The film practically dares viewers to despise it — thanks to some unflinching glimpses of sexual abuse and incest. Yet it's a terrifically acted piece and one that doesn't stoop to sensationalistic tricks to make its points.

Not that any of this makes the film any easier to watch.

By the way, the movie's title, "The War Zone," appears to be misleading, at least at the outset — as we're introduced to a lower middle-class English family that seems to be getting along pretty well, despite some trying circumstances.

Dad (Ray Winstone) has decided to uproot the family from London, and he moves them to the more tranquil Devon. And even though his pregnant mother (Tilda Swinton) and 17-year-old sister, Jessie (Lara Belmont), are trying to make the best of it, 15-year-old Tom (Freddie Cunliffe) is bored senseless.

However, things return to some semblance of normality after Mom gives birth — in the aftermath of a car crash, no less — and the family has to band together for the sake of its newest member.

Except for Tom, that is. Bound and determined to hate his new surroundings, the teen decides to find his own form of entertainment, such as investigating some curious behavior on the part of the others.

First, he begins to notice something suspicious about his father's behavior. Add that to Jessie's moodiness and general defensiveness, and you have the components for a family tragedy.

What happens next isn't exactly surprising, but it is nonetheless horrifying. And give Roth the filmmaker credit for not softening the material, adapted by author Alexander Stuart from his own novel.

Roth also coaxes superb performances from his cast members. Winstone is good, despite the fact that he is again playing another despicable character (though not quite to the degree of the one he played in Gary Oldman's "Nil By Mouth"). And Swinton makes the most of her limited screen time.

However, it's the teenage newcomers that really make the film work.

Belmont is very believable as she gradually reveals her character's inner turmoil, while Cunliffe admirably meets the challenges of a most difficult role — one that requires him to act more with his facial expressions than with line readings.

"The War Zone" is not rated but would probably receive an R for full female and male nudity, profanity, a scene depicting rape/incest, a brief beating, some sexual fumblings and use of crude slang terms.