Here’s one out of leftfield – comedians Cheech and Chong’s 1974 song, Earache My Eye, featured in their 1978 movie, Up In Smoke.

cheech and chong fax

Richard “Cheech” Marin and Tommy Chong are a Grammy Award winning comedy duo. They were especially popular for their films and stand-up routines in the 1960 – 70s. They parted ways in 1985 but reunited in 2002 and continue to perform to this day.

Chong is a Canadian (though he has since become an American citizen); Cheech moved to Canada in the 1960s to avoid the draft for the Vietnam War – it was in Canadian that the pair met and began working together.

Alongside their stand-up routine, Cheech and Chong produced a number of comedy films, and released a number of novelty songs and albums – including 1985’s Born in East L.A., based on Bruce Springsteen’s, Born in the USA.

Perhaps their best-known movie is Up in Smoke. Released in 1978, it has become a cult classic.

Having parted company in 1985, the pair were guests on a 2011 episode of The Simpsons, and have joined for a number of projects since that time.

earache my eye fax

Earache My Eye is a novelty heavy metal song written by Tommy Chong and Gaye Delorme and recorded by Cheech and Chong – Cheech adopting the persona of a fictitious rock star named Alice Bowie.

The song appeared on Cheech and Chong’s fourth comedy album, Cheech and Chong’s Wedding Album (1974) and later appeared in their first movie, Up in Smoke (1978).

Earache My Eye spent 13 weeks on the US singles chart.

Earache My Eye has been covered by both Soundgarden and Korn (Cheech performing the vocals on the latter), and was sampled on Eminem’s track Untouchable.

Earache My Eye lyrics.

earache my eye – cheech and chong -1974 – video

Sometimes the YouTube links dropout – if this link doesn’t work, please go to YouTube and search for the song – it will be worth it!

follow seventiesmusic on facebook.

You’ll find out when the latest blog is posted (usually about once a week).” Click the Facebook logo to go to the seventiesmusic Facebook page and click “Like.”

Kris Kristofferson, the man who wrote the fabulous Me and Bobby McGee, had his greatest hit with a 1973 gospel country song, Why Me.

kris kristofferson fax

Kristoffer Kristofferson was born in Brownsville, Texas, in the USA; his grandparents were from Sweden, which explains the surname.

Kris is a pretty bright guy. He graduated in 1958 with a Bachelor of Arts in literature and was awarded a Rhodes Scholarship to Oxford University in the UK. At Oxford he was awarded his Blue for boxing and played rugby for his college.

About this time, he began writing and recording songs using the name Kris Carson. He found little success in the music world but graduated with a B.Phil degree in English literature.

Kris joined the US Army and attained the rank of captain. He also worked as a helicopter pilot for a while.

In 1965, he left the army, moved to Nashville, and began pursuing his music career between working various odd jobs. While sweeping floors at Columbia Studios, he met June Carter and handed her a tape which he asked be given to Johnny Cash. Johnny didn’t get around to listening to it for a while and, frustrated with waiting, Kris landed a helicopter in Johnny’s front yard. Apparently, Johnny wasn’t home, but it did get Johnny’s attention. A short time later, Johnny recorded Sunday Mornin’ Comin’ Down, earning Kris the Songwriter of the Year award at the Country Music Awards.

Kris continued writing songs and other artists continued to have success with them – including Janis Joplin (who Kris dated until her death) with Me and Bobby McGee. Kris recorded his own music but with little initial success.

Then, in 1971, Kris’ second album, The Silver Tongued Devil, was released. It was successful, as was his third album, Jesus was a Capricorn.

In 1972, he appeared on The Old Grey Whistle Test in the UK with Rita Coolidge (to whom he was married for a while), singing Help Me Make It Through The Night, a song off his unsuccessful first album. His success as a solo artist was established.

About this time, Kris made his acting debut in in The Last Movie, directed by Dennis Hopper. He enjoyed acting and made the that a focus for a while. He is best known for his starring roles in Alice Doesn’t Live Here Anymore, Heaven’s Gate, and A Star Is Born, the latter of which earned him a Golden Globe Award for Best Actor.

In 1985, Kris joined fellow country artists Waylon Jennings, Willie Nelson, and Johnny Cash in forming the country music supergroup The Highwaymen.

In 2004, he was inducted into the Country Music Hall of Fame.

why me fax

Why Me was written by and recorded on July 8, 1972, by American country music singer and songwriter Kris Kristofferson. It was released as a single in April 1973 – the third single from Kris’ third album, Jesus was a Carpenter.

Why Me was Kris’ greatest hit, peaking at #16 on the US singles chart, but topping the US and Canadian Country singles chart.

Artists to cover Why Me include, Elvis Presley, Cliff Richard, Merle Haggard, Johnny Cash, and Conway Twitty.

Why Me lyrics.

Why Me – Kris Kristofferson – 1973 – video

the why me story – kris Kristofferson – video

Sometimes the YouTube links dropout – if this link doesn’t work, please go to YouTube and search for the song – it will be worth it!

follow seventiesmusic on facebook.

You’ll find out when the latest blog is posted (usually about once a week).” Click the Facebook logo to go to the seventiesmusic Facebook page and click “Like.”