Two versions of the game exist. An American version of the game published by Tradewest and American Technos titled Super Double Dragon (also released in Europe) and a Japanese version by Technos Japan called Return of Double Dragon. Return of Double Dragon is the more complete version of the two, featuring two added areas to the final stages, refined gameplay (such as the ability to switch between weapons on the ground), different enemy ratio and an option mode which allows you to change the difficulty setting and listen to the soundtrack. The US version on the other hand, has a text-only ending not in the Japanese version (although this was not the ending the programmers planned for the game). The soundtrack is played in a different order in the US version (the Double Dragon theme is not played in the title screen like in the previous games, even though it's used in one of the stages).

The game was supposed to include cut-scenes and dialogue (including a full ending) similar to the NES versions of Double Dragon II: The Revenge and Double Dragon III: The Rosetta Stone, along with more obstacles for each stage. However, the developers were pressured to get the game out earlier, so none of the planned scenes were ever included in the game itself (even though all the necessary graphical data was inserted to the ROM). The game's planner, Muneki Ebinuma, revealed in a Japanese fansite, everything that was cut-out from the game:

The character of Marian Kelly, the policewoman friend of the Lee brothers, who is ominously missing from the final game (despite being featured in the Japanese version's manual) was supposed appear in the game. A sprite of her and a patrol car were even put in the ROM. The initial storyline would have Marian investigating the Shadow Warriors criminal mob, who are behind the disappearances of several of Billy and Jimmy's students. It isn't until Stage 4, when she gets kidnapped by Duke's men after her car collides with the Shadow Warriors's truck. Marian would make another appearance at Stage 7, after being rescued from Duke.

Each stage would feature dialogue between the Lee brothers and the stage's boss before and after each battle, as a way of developing the storyline. The fourth stage (the Golden Gate Bridge) would have had a very important cut-scene, in which the player would've found out that the leader of the bad guys, Duke, was a childhood friend of the Lee brothers. In the finished game, Duke and his men appears in Stage 4, but there's no explanation as to why they're there.

After the last fight, the player would had fought against Duke's shadow (who would materialize out of his body) in a long passageway. The background would be covered in flames during the final fight.

The ending would had Duke's soul speaking to Billy and Jimmy after the fight, as he bids farewell. The scene would cut to Billy and the others praying in front of Duke's grave, doing a "clenched fist" and "open palm" gesture of respect.

Kazunaka Yamane, the game's composer, recorded a complete soundtrack for the game, but only certain tracks made it to the game.

A few areas and obstacles were taken out including a warehouse in Stage 5 where the player confronts McGwire before the battle (in the finished versions, the player gets to entrance and is immediately transported to the other side of the building) and a waterfall in the end of Stage 6 which would lead to the entrance of the hideout.