(KXAN) — As excitement builds around the 2024 Paris Olympics, we’re taking a look back in time, 100 years ago to the 1924 Olympics, which were also held in Paris.

The 1924 Summer Olympics were the seventh in modern history, and the second hosted by Paris. The city also played host to the 1900 Olympics.

How many athletes competed?

A total of 3,089 athletes took part in the 1924 Olympics, from 44 competing teams — up from 29 four years prior. The International Olympic Committee said, “The Paris Games signaled the acceptance of the Games as a major event with widespread appeal.” This was the first time an Olympic Village was created to house the athletes.

Here are some photos of the Opening Ceremony. You may notice some athletes doing the Olympic salute, raising their arm with the hand stretched out. The salute also appeared on the official poster for the 1924 Olympics. It has since fallen out of use because of the resemblance to the Nazi salute.

Who won the most medals?

The United States was far and away at the top of the leaderboard, with 99 medals in total, including 45 gold medals. Host France was second, with 41 total medals, including 14 gold.

Get the latest on how our Texans are doing in the Olympics by signing up for push alerts on the KXAN News App and our More Than The Score newsletter.

Of the 44 competing teams, 31 won at least one medal, and 21 teams won at least one gold medal.

What events were featured?

The 1924 Olympics featured 126 medal events in total. The sports featured were athletics, boxing, cycling, diving, equestrian, fencing, football (soccer), gymnastics, modern pentathlon, polo, rowing, rugby, sailing, shooting, swimming, tennis, water polo, weightlifting and wrestling.

Of those, polo is the only one not still featured in the Olympics, having last been an event in the 1936 Berlin Olympics.

KXAN will have full coverage through the 2024 Paris Olympics, on air and online. Click here for our latest coverage.

Copyright 2024 Nexstar Media, Inc. All rights reserved. This material may not be published, broadcast, rewritten, or redistributed.

For the latest news, weather, sports, and streaming video, head to KXAN Austin.