The 1924 Winter Olympics, officially known as the I Winter Games, were a 1924 multi-sport winter festival held in Chamonix, France. Originally arranged in tandem with the 1924 Summer Olympics, the sporting competitions were held between 25 January and 5 February 1924 at the foot of Mont Blanc in Chamonix, and Haute-Savoie, France. The Games were funded by the French Olympic Committee and were originally known as the "World Winter Sports Week." Following the event's success it was retroactively recognised by the International Olympic Committee as the I Olympic Winter Games. The tradition of hosting the Winter Olympics in the same year as the Summer Olympics would continue until 1992, after which in the second year the Summer Olympics began the modern practise of hosting a Winter Olympics. Although Figure Skating was an Olympic event in both London and Antwerp, and Ice Hockey was an event in Antwerp, the winter sports had been limited to season only. In 1921, the IOC conference in Lausanne called for equality for winter sports, and after much discussion it was decided to organise a "general winter sports event" in Chamonix in 1924. A recognition was received for a sport that did not lend itself too well to rivalry at the end of the games: Pierre de Coubertin presented Charles Granville Bruce, the expedition leader who tried to climb Mount Everest in 1922, with a ' alpinisme ' trophy. ' In this situation France, the host country, for the first time in the history of modern Olympics, had failed to win any gold medals, signing off with three bronze medals. This feat will happen later at the next St. Moritz Winter Olympics, where Switzerland won only one bronze medal, the lowest result a host nation has ever seen at an Olympics. Canada at the 1976 Montreal Summer Olympics, and the 1988 Calgary and Yugoslavia Winter Olympics at the 1984 Sarajevo Winter Olympics were later host nations to complete without gold medals. In 1925, the IOC voted to hold the first historical Olympic Winter Games every four years, irrespective of the proper Olympic Events, Olympic Winter Games and approved the Annual Winter Sports Event. In 1974 the last single Chamonix 1924 award was granted. A bronze medal has been awarded to Anders Haugen, who was reported to finish fourth in the ski jumping event up to then. After 50 years an mistake has been found in the ranking of Thorleif Haug. In 2006 the IOC announced that the awards were officially awarded to 1924 curling teams. The IOC acknowledged that curling was legally part of the programme, after a complaint was brought on behalf of the team members by the Glasgow Herald newspaper. Medals were awarded at 16 events in 5 contested disciplines. Many sources do not list as demonstration events, or mark, curling and military patrol. However no such designation was made in 1924. In February 2006 the International Olympic Committee determined that curling was a full part of the Olympic programme and included the medals won on the official list. Competitors from 16 nations competed at first Olympic Winter Games. Germany was removed from the competitions, and instead held a series of competitions, the Deutsche Kampfspiele. At the Bobsleigh competitions a total of nine teams from five countries participated. Two teams withdrawn after the first test and another team retired after the third match. The three Swiss, Great Britain and Belgium teams were medalist. Bobsleigh speeds were hitting up to 115 km / h at the race. Le Tremplin Olympique du Mont was a ski jumping venue to host the 1924 Winter Olympics, built in Chamonix, France. The jumper took off at an altitude of 1189.8 m, flying 79.4 metres before falling to a take-off point of 1152.8 metres in height. The K-point was measured to be 71.5 metres at takeoff.