The Mask Of Zorro (1998) – Filmsack Show Notes

INTRO

Oh hi,

and come right on in Senoritas. I am your party host Capt. Harrison Love and I welcome to you to my humble little abode….. “The Love Shack.” ahhh right.. come on in. Let me take your coat and any sharp pointy sticks you may have…

Now I can see some of you look a little confused. You may be asking yourself “where is that smooth talking, sun kissed god of a guy in the mask” that my soldiers may have promised would be at this party. Obviously, I am not he…no..not this loud splotchy peckerwood you see before you…but don’t fret… I’m about to change all of that….cause we are about to get so hammered that by the end of the night I will have gone from a 2 to a woooo…

Now, would you ladies care for something to drink? I have a tea pitcher full of Tequila with a man’s head in it. No? How about a pickle jar with Three Fingers of Jack…literally…those are the three fingers of jack.

Well boys it looks like it is just another night of angry faces and Settlers of Catan…drink up!…. ptt…pttt… Oh I got a hair..

LINKS

https://www.imdb.com/title/tt0120746/

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Mask_of_Zorro

https://www.justwatch.com/us/movie/the-mask-of-zorro

TWITTER

The Mask of Zorro (1998) – Like hugging a giant cactus with your junk. A bit painful at first but so exciting!

SHOW NOTES

Mask of Zorro

It’s Zorro and Amblin! The Mask Of Zorro

clip clomp clip clip clomp clippity clippity clippity! faster!

Like eye holes in a leather tent thing.

I think they are yelling for Freedom.

“What are you doing cutting holes in my Wagon!? – Senior Lopez!

Senior Lopez makes the funeral boxes.

yay! it’s the leader! We are cheering!

Snuff box…snuff!!

All the Dons get their lands!

The Children want to see! But we don’t want the children to see!

3 peasants pulled at random from the crowd to lure Zorro!

these 2 kids love some Zorrrro

oh no! The ass poke of Zorro.

Zorro is good at making his opponents appear foolish

Balcony full of sharp shooters…no match for these two young men.

Zorro wins because the people love him and support him

Zorro does math and acrobatics!

It was a good day…now give me the pendant…I wear the pendant of Zorro on Tuesday and Wednesdays.

Tornado is the horse. Way better name than Roach…and he has been using the curling wand. Zorro is way to busy with the fancy

Zorro had a baby…and has to settle down. It happens

Zorro is a Prince!

She broke the little clay horse! That little Zorro shit kid.

5 Children…will he make it? Not at that age.

Don Raphel in my home!

Zorro was the Batman of his time.

“Blood never lies…Zorro” Traitor his County and his Class…Class warfare!

Zorro is better with his mask

you shot our love…stab the chunky guy

Your child should have been mine! Too bad

Well I guess he is just taking the baby.

Hairy Banderas

Nobody is tuff as Jack

Horse Thieves! The Murrieta Brothers

When Bulls start wearing …something something.

3 Fingered Jack and his 2 toilet roll fingers

hugging a cactus bush neek’id that ain’t no good

That fella is a pretty good shot.

Spit and shoot yourself in the chest. This ain’t no kid’s move.

Bury the body…Bring the head.

The warden was trying to get some sleep!

Silence I am Zorro! I am Zorro!

Poor record keeping down at the jail

I am Torro! I am Gorro!

I see Zorro has been using his yard time for working out.

Time to play the deadman! Didn’t they do this in the 3 musketeers?

ha! Made me jump when he burst from the grave with that weird cat scream.

Don Hector. Don. Don…oh hi Don.

Can we stop clapping now? This is the best fake clap we got.

How much did they pay for that clap? Is that a 5 peso clap?

Where is your Zorro now? He is among us.

Lets be Californians!

Ready for some blood shed until he sees his daughter.

This flower only grows in California…it’s the Californian.

What about this? Silver!!!

Old man strength

You are trained to drink…ya drunk

Zorro was dead

My revenge is complicated.

“The pointy end goes into the other man.”

The master’s circle is like battle royal

Practice…drink…gymnastics

pushup over candles; boots on the back.

Learn by the whip

Lesson Number 1: Never attack with anger.

Lesson Number 2: come with me..I’ll give you bath

Lesson Number 3: get to lesson number 4

Horse Whisperer

Be careful senorita …there are dangerous men about.

Zorro likes to run to the top of steps and twirl around for one last look before he zips off.

“Listen…I am going to give you the great honor of being my horse.”

This horse is feisty

Son…You done wrecked our clubhouse…get ’em

Always so much fun with the Zorro fight scenes. Which one is your favorite? Clubhouse?

The big guy….shaking up Zorro. Hilarious

mouth full of teeth..spit

Zorro the legend has returned…a simple horse heist turned into a full on assault.

3 days since my last confession. How many sins could you have completed in 3 days.

4th commandment – Dishonor your father

Outsmarted by a horse.

Don’t forget to leave your mark

Ole Zorro likes to smoke and whip. Whip it real good.

Stop undressing me with your whip!

Learning to fight…no worries. Charm…now that is going to take a lot of work

Here hold my tray of drinks while I hack up a lung. Punch

The silly woman routine.

oh crap. He let the Dons get gone while dancing with Zorro’s daughter.

Smoldering dancing!

She was dancing…he was trying.

Real dad is cool with it…kidnap dad is a bit bent.

That is how they are dancing in Madrid these days.

Buy California from Santa Anna . I have gold bars!

El Dorado. Shame on you to cheat Santa Anna

Gold from his own land!

Who me? Just a kid with a basket strapped on my filthy head.

3 fingered Jack.

You steal people’s lives….Damn ya and the horse that brung you. Ahhhhhhh…Suicide by Peckerwood

Peckerwood?

She recognizes her daddy’s voice…isn’t that sweet.

heads in jars and hands in wine pitchers

Pretty sure it would be a horrible idea to drink alcohol from a pickled head jar.

What! that mustache was fake! and apparently held on by spit.

Captain Love!

What do you do with hate? You hide it with a mask.

Hate mask

Captain Love knows then why does he not act.

Zorro in the beams stealing maps

The much debated Zorro

Bend down and touch your toes so I can kick your ass

Such exciting swords play…and when that doesn’t work…gymnastics!

swordplay like a dance…like a making love.

He was young and vigorous…he was very vigorous.

such exciting horse riding.

I don’t think his horse likes him very much.

old Z taught new Z so he could be free to do his own thing

at the tip of the sword a man will apparently do anything

now she knows…

The only way to light a fuse…shoot it

Love is so stupid…he has a gun and sword…he is a great shot…why play Zorro’s game.

Shovel slalom

Love has entered his circle

a most spectacular end to the bad guys.

old Zorro can’t die! Dad gives his blessing. No pressure.

Little Wookie! They named the baby Wookie!

Fighting as safely as possible

Liked it? Take a second to support Brian Dunaway on Patreon!