The San Diego Union-Tribune will mark its 150th anniversary in 2018 by presenting a significant front page from the archives each day throughout the year.

Thursday, September 5, 1946

In 1946 fans thronged Broadway for the premiere of “Gallant Journey,” a film staring Glenn Ford as San Diego aviation pioneer John J. Montgomery, who reportedly made the first controlled heavier-than-air flight at Otay Mesa in 1883, 20 years before the Wright Brothers’ first powered flight.

Montgomery was inducted into the National Aviation Hall of Fame in 1964.

Here are the first few paragraphs of the story:

Thousands See Flight Premiere

By Robert MacDonald

San Diegans by the thousands choked Broadway last night to witness Hollywood pageantry brought here for the world premiere of “Gallant Journey,” the film story of another San Diegan who made the first flight in a heavier-than-air craft.

Klieg lights and movie stars at the New Spreckels theater seemed to try to make up for the obscurity that surrounded the epic of that early birdman, John Montgomery, before the San Diego junior chamber of commerce unearthed the thrilling saga of his adventure.

The premiere was preceded by two other tributes to Montgomery.

GROUND BROKEN

First had come the turning of the first spadeful of earth on the site of a monument to the flier on Otay mesa, where the first glider flight was made. Then a John Montgomery memorial dinner was given in the U.S. Grant hotel, attended by motion picture actors and civic officials.

But the big public display came at night. Through an aisle carved through the crowd, the stars arrived. There came Glenn Ford, who portrays the pioneer flier in the picture; Eleanor Powell, famed dancer and wife of Ford; Hugh Herbert, veteran comedian; Ellen Drew, talented young actress.

OTHERS ON HAND

Ken Curtis and Charles Starrett, western stars, Doris Colleen, starlet, LEe Bowman, veteran actor, and Chris Pin Martin, noted for his portrayals of the Cisco Kid’s partner. Master of ceremonies for the premiere was Harry Von Zell, star of many national radio shows and himself a motion picture actor. Janet Blair, co-star of the production, was forced to cancel plans to be here at the last minute.

In the afternoon at Otay mesa, James Montgomery, 82-year-old attorney and only living witness to the flight by his brother in 1883, thanked members of the junior chamber of commerce for the research which made possible the 22-acre park and monument. He expressed the hope that the chamber’s quest for “international recognition” for his brother would be successful.

Many of the picture stars were on hand for the ground-breaking ceremonies.