The online search from the pages of Machinery Market.

XYZ Minimill 560 Vertical Machining Centre (2003)

...

Cottrill & Co

MM Design

Design Studio service available

Prior Scientific achieves 'revolutionary' leap in accuracy

Cambridge-based Prior Scientific, is launching new products after achieving a ‘revolutionary’ leap in nanopositioning accuracy — with the help of funding from Innovate UK. Its Queensgate brand of nanopositioning solutions for sensors and stages used in the semiconductor, life sciences and additive manufacturing industries enable measurement and positioning to sub-nanometer levels of accuracy.

The business has achieved significant increases in the accuracy of its piezo-actuated nanopositioning stages after working with the National Physical Laboratory (NPL), the UK’s designated institute for measurement standards. As a result, Prior Scientific is launching a new product to manufacturers of atomic force microscopes, semiconductors, and 3-D printers, consolidating its position as a leader in the market.

The project was supported by Analysis for Innovators (A4I), a grant-funding programme run by Innovate UK, the UK’s national innovation agency. The programme helps businesses access cutting-edge R&D and expertise of skills and equipment at nine national measurement centres across the country, while also offering grant funding for some or all of the project costs.

Craig Goodman, Prior Scientific’s product manager, said: “Innovate UK’s A4I programme has enabled us to achieve revolutionary increases in accuracy for our nanopositioning stages. The funded access to NPL’s cutting-edge R&D and expertise has achieved a leap in capability that was previously unthinkable. Its nanometrology and capability to capture data is unmatched and we got to work with their best mathematicians to develop the algorithms to apply to our Queensgate products. This will help us to remain ahead of the curve against our competitors.”

Prior Scientific was established in 1919 as a manufacturer of optical microscopes and has evolved to produce precision automation and optical products. In 2018 it acquired Queensgate, a manufacturer of nanopositioning and measurement solutions used in atomic force microscopy, hard disc testing, lithography and metrology. The company’s Queensgate brand, which was established over 40 years ago, is manufactured at the EPIC centre in Devon and exported globally. It has seen significant growth since the acquisition, increasing turnover, as well as its number of employees.

News category: Research and development