This article is part of the Guardian's World Cup 2014 Experts' Network, a co-operation between 32 of the best media organisations from the countries who have qualified for the finals in Brazil. theguardian.com is running previews from four countries each day in the run-up to the tournament kicking off on 12 June.

Celso Borges

Costa Rica will play at their fourth World Cup in Brazil and ever since their historic debut at Italia '90 the Borges surname has accompanied the Tricolor. Celso's father, Alexandre Borges Guimarães, Brazilian by birth but with Costa Rican nationality, was one of the players who stunned the football world by reaching the knockout stages at the expense of Scotland and Sweden before going out to Czechoslovakia in the last 16. After he had hung up his boots "Guima", as he is known, was the coach of Costa Rica when they qualified for the World cups of Korea and Japan in 2002 and Germany in 2006. Now it is the turn of his son to continue the family legacy at Brazil 2014.

Randall Brenes

Few people know why the striker Randall Brenes identifies himself in such way with his club Cartaginés. 'El Chiqui', as he is known, has always played with this team in the province of Cartago, which is the oldest of club in Costa Rica. Brenes, a son of this province, was born in a poor family in the neighbourhood of Pitaya, when he began playing minor league football with the white and blue club, he had to work on a photocopier to have enough money to travel by bus to get to the stadium and train with his team. The bond that was created from that time between the player and the team of Cartago was very big. Years later when he was one of the most sought strikers of Costa Rica, Alajuelense and Saprissa, the biggest and most successful teams in the country and where all players aspire to play, tried to sign Brenes, but he declined. These football clubs are more powerful economically than Cartaginés and they offered more money to him, but the player chose to stay in his beloved team where he had played for XXX years and where the fans considered him a hero and a representative worthy of their province.

Heiner Mora

In May 2013, the Heiner Mora said "Yes, I thought of killing myself, you know that many are afraid to say this, but I thought about it". A year ago Mora was playing for Honefoss in Norwaybut he was very sad and tired because his kids were in Costa Rica and he started to have suicidal thoughts. He decided to return to Costa Rica, despite the consequences. At present, Mora is still disputing a legal problem in Fifa about his exit from Norway, but on the pitch he became a Costa Rican champion with Saprissa and is a lot happier now he is heading for Brazil and the World Cup.

Jorge Luis Pinto

Until now, a coach has never completed the World Cup qualification process for Costa Rica. Jorge Luis Pinto managed it and qualified for his first World Cup as a result. Pinto got his World Cup finals trip at his third attempt. In the past he tried with Costa Rica in 2004, but was dismissed after qualifying at the end of the hexagonal phase. Then with Colombia in 2007 he was also removed from his positionearly. Pinto finally reached what he called "the dream of a lifetime", to go to a World Cup.

Joel Campbell

The Arsenal striker had a very good season on loan at Olympiakos. He had one little setback, though. In April he revealed that he had bought 100 packets (that's 500 stickers in total) of Panini World Cup stickers but there had been none of himself. He even tweeted a pictures of all the opened packets. Hopefully his World Cup will be more successful than his sticker buying.

Leonardo Pandolfo is a journalist for Costa Rican newspaper Al Día

Follow him here on Twitter

Click here for a profile of Joel Campbell