A new Kim Stanley Robinson novel is always something I look forward to.

He is one of the most important science fiction writers working today.

And although the new novel, Fifty Degrees Below, is not as majestic as his epic Mars books, in which at times you can hear the Gustav Holst soundtrack, it is possibly more adventurous because it looks at a more complex planet, full of life: Earth.

Described by its author as 'a domestic comedy about global catastrophe', Fifty Degrees Below is the sequel to Forty Signs of Rain.

(Will his next book have sixty in the title?)

Their main character, Frank Vanderwaal, works for the National Science Foundation (NSF) in Washington, which is a major funding body, with a budget today of 5.5 billion dollars, providing about a fifth of total US science funding.

Frank is a kind of holy fool, as in the Tarot but literally stepping off cliffs, sad in love and passionate about changing the direction of the NSF, when climate change threatens the world and nobody is interested because urgent action is too hard or politically incorrect.

Although in this book there are spies, ferals, a home-dad senatorial advisor with a toddler that may be the next Tibetan holy leader, homeless Vietnam veterans, scientists and refugees from a low-lying island off Bangladesh – and the NSF is itself a major character – the plot is actually fairly straightforward.

What if global warming should result in a big freeze?

Abrupt climate change: two or three years to disaster.

But that it not all that the book is about.

Kim Stanley Robinson has said that he has researched a great deal of these novels by talking to people and this is one of its chief attractions, the way science is really conducted from day to day: funded, not-funded, politicized, disempowered, subject to powerful industry lobbies, fights paradigm change from both sides, assumed to be left-wing, assumed to be reductionist and right-wing or at least anti-religious, or at least anti-spiritual, directed by an almost mystical drive for understanding and order and a sense of wonder, betrayed, a home for certain personality types, the road to transcendence for poor nerdish bodies – or simply a job.

The style in this novel is informative, clear, but not beautiful or powerful.

Fifty Degrees Below is all surfaces; it's far from superficial, but there is no symbolism which is not brought to the foreground, nothing implied.

In many other novels a forest is described for atmosphere and given expressive, percussive, whispering, grinding poetry; here, though the impact of the forest on humanity and the great world and on our heroes is discussed in some detail, a forest is a forest is a forest.

If all writing is an evolutionary extension of the song, of the dance, if a novel reaches our deepest selves via the only systems both voluntary and autonomic – namely the cadence of breath, of onomatopoeia, punctuation, paragraphs and of chapters in counterpoint and unison, and our somatic identification with the bodies of its heroes – Fifty Degrees Below is, in a sense, an anti-novel.

Kim Stanley Robinson makes a great number of references to the role of the song and the dance in humanity's evolution and Frank Vanderwaal has an obsession with evolutionary just-so stories about all our tendencies, even a stone-age recipe for healthy and happy living – yet the affect of the surface of this novel is flattened.

Not so much as to seem robotic, but enough to make it clear that this is not to sway the reader with anything but his arguments, to let the comedy through, Keaton-like.

It is in analytic language that we share the characters' sensoria, especially Frank Vanderwaal's, but we are still touched by what occurs in their world.

Kim Stanley Robinson's world is as open as his prose, determinedly optimistic and utopian, and whether you agree with him or not, the humour, scope and sheer reasonableness of what is basically a grand, yes, socialist science fiction vision, makes Fifty Degrees Below a great summer read.