Wealden District Council’s Planning Committee has, on Thursday 5th October 2023, given the go-ahead for a further 119 homes as part of Barratt David Wilson Homes’ latest Brookwood Meadows scheme, located off Rattle Road.

Construction of Brookwood Meadows is due to commence shortly, with a show home expected to be ready for viewing onsite in Spring 2024. Today, buyers are encouraged to visit Ersham Park in Hailsham, located a 10-minute drive away, or Meadowburne Place in Eastbourne, just a 10-minute drive away where a selection of properties that will be available at Brookwood Meadows can be viewed.

The wider development will comprise around five acres of open space for play, alongside public open spaces, trim trails and enhanced footpaths throughout, connecting to existing local walkways. Pevensey & Westham Train Station is also just a quarter of an hour walk away from the development, with direct connections into London Victoria (1hr 50 mins), Eastbourne (10 minutes) and Hampden Park (5 minutes).

Onsite, each home has been designed with sustainability in mind, incorporating enhanced radiators, provisions for electric vehicles, photovoltaic panels and wastewater heat recovering units. Following from the previous 199 homes approved last month, this phase of homes will include six homes that will be custom-build. Customers will be able to choose from a selection of cleverly designed layouts that best suits their individual needs.

James Pugh, Development Director at Barratt David Wilson Southern Counties, comments: “This announcement sees the second round of approvals passed by Wealden District Council for Brookwood Meadows, allowing us to proceed at full-steam ahead with bringing this new project to Westham. Our proposals have prioritised sustainability by introducing the latest energy-efficient technology as well as ensuring sufficient investment into the local community through our CIL commitments. We are now looking forward to working on our show homes so we can welcome people onto site to see what Brookwood Meadows has to offer for buyers in 2024.”