On Thursday 17th August, Wealden District Council’s Planning Committee granted approval for Barratt David Wilson Homes’ newest development in Westham. The scheme, named Brookwood Meadows, will be located off Rattle Road, and will provide 199 new homes to the local market, of which 35% will be affordable. A further 119 homes at the site are due for consideration by the council in the next few months.

Construction of Brookwood Meadows will commence in September, delivering much-needed new homes to the community. The development will comprise 3.5 acres of open space for play, alongside public open spaces, trim trails and enhanced footpaths throughout, connecting to existing local walkways.

Barratt David Wilson Southern Counties will oversee the creation of one and two-bedroom apartments as well as two, three and four-bedroom homes. Each home has been designed with sustainability in mind, incorporating enhanced radiators, photovoltaic panels and waste water heat recovering units. Furthermore, 10 homes will be custom-build, where customers will be able to choose from a selection of cleverly designed layouts that best suits their individual needs.

Buyers are able to find out more about the homes that will be available at Brookwood Meadows either by visiting Ersham Park in Hailsham, located a 10 minute drive away, or Meadowburne Place in Eastbourne, just a 15 minute drive away. Buyers will be able to view Brookwood Meadows’ own show homes onsite from early 2024.

As part of Barratt David Wilson Southern Counties’ £3m Community Infrastructure Levy payments, £450,000 will be invested into the local Westham community, with the allocation to be agreed with the local Parish Council over the coming months.

James Pugh, Development Director at Barratt David Wilson Southern Counties, comments: “The latest planning approval by Wealden District Council attests to our ongoing commitment to creating new sustainable places to live. These properties have been designed with future living in mind and in accordance with the latest building regulations, which prioritise a fabric-first approach whilst utilising renewable sources. Our enhanced sustainability measures, which include waste water heat recovering units are designed to ultimately reduce our reliance on fossil fuels, and reduce household energy consumption. With construction due to begin Brookwood Meadows over the coming months, we look forward to helping to deliver new homes in East Sussex.”