Irish independent record label Strange Brew are have become the first Irish based independent record label to sign an AI act, adding the anonymous act KLEM Kolectiv to their roster.

KLEM have also been signed to UK independent record label Alcopop!, receiving an undisclosed advance as part of their deal with both labels.

They released their first single ‘Cyberstalkin’ Queen’ independently in June this year as a free download on Soundcloud where it clocked up more than 1 million streams.

Their next single ‘Oppenhaimer (E.Day-V)’, featuring vocalist Day-V, will be released on Friday September 20 2024 digitally. 'Oppenhaimer (E. Day-V)' will also have a limited physical NFT release through Strange Brew.

KLEM Kolectiv is a not-for-profit project, and the group have revealed that any profits generated from their actions will be donated to Orquesta Juvenil del Sodre Uruguay, a South American youth orchestra.

Advertisement

The reasons behind the choice of the youth orchestra as beneficiary remain unclear.

The enigmatic group have been booked for a public appearance at Output Music Conference in Belfast on November 12 2024. Here, they will allegedly reveal their identity, and describe their process.

Commenting on their work, the Kolectiv say: “Music, stories and art have been the threads that have bound the fabric of society together since time immemorial. Now as we witness the weft and warp of that fabric change irrevocably, as counterfeit threads are shot through the weave, we observe, we learn, we create, and now we choose to act. We are KLEM.”

Strange Brew label manager, Gugai, says of the project: “We’re thrilled and a little scared to welcome our first AI act to the label. It’s a bold step into the future, but with KLEM Kolectiv that step is an ethical one that promises to have a positive impact on the music industry in Ireland and beyond".

He further adds: "We can’t ignore AI music, it’s here, it’s not going away, and it’s changing music as we’ve known it. KLEM are the first act to address this head on, and we’re excited to partner with them in that. We all want to ensure that auto-tune doesn’t develop into an autocracy.”

KLEM are not the only AI music project with Irish connections s Westlife recently used AI technology to craft a new single entirely in Mandarin to crack the Chinese Market.

Check out KLEM's debut single 'Cyberstalking Queen' below: