Blisskrieg is a rock band that already has a pedigree of talented and seasoned musicians in it’s ranks. The band is a culmination of former members from Tantric, Days of the New, Submersed and Eye Empire.

Todd Whitener (guitar/vocals), Donald Carpenter (vocals), Matt Taul (drums) and Jesse Vest (bass) are the driving force behind the music. Their freshman album is not one to glaze over, it is a mixture of really great writing and instrumental composition. There sound brings back the incredible song writing and musicianship of the late 90’s and early 2000’s rock and roll. Todd Whitener (formerly of Day’s of the New and Tantric) brings his balanced and melodic rock vocals to this record. The entire album just screams great rock and roll with songs like “Take It Back”.

The first song off the record called “Inside of Me” showcases the bands talent right off the bat and brings back engaging lyrical story telling that has honestly been missing for several years in the rock music scene. “Inside of Me” brings a mixture of vocal harmonies followed by energized rock tempos and a catchy chorus line that will have you keeping this song on repeat. The rest of the album keeps up with this tempo including songs such as “Wherever you go” and “Remedy” which I have to admit the song “Remedy” is beautifully written and when you hear it you will have to stop what your doing and just listen. It is one of those songs that stops you in your tracks.

The song that really caught my ear was the song “She Cries”. It is one of those songs that you feel the emotion behind the lyrics and get lost in the track. It has been a long time since a song has done that to me. The track “Destination Unknown” is a very classic style rock track. For me at least, it reminded me of a 70’s style sound of rock music which is awesome and the band pulled it off flawlessly.

I think these guys hit one out of the park. The music and lyrical content in the songs really brings back a balanced and enjoyable listening experience. Even though these guys are seasoned musicians and have separately had incredible success in their own right, together as a unit they are really creating some great music. I look forward to hearing more from them and seeing them perform live. If you like great lyrical artistry, blended with powerful vocal performances and overlayed by great musical compositions then this album is for you.

~ Editor Chris Sturk