When the original lineup of Days of the New split up in 1999, guitarist Todd Whitener never expected the Louisville quartet would reunite. And he was ‘OK with that.’ But he’s not sorry he was wrong.

DOTN is indeed back together again, with Whitener, bassist Jesse Vest and drummer Matt Taul – who subsequently formed the band Tantric – back together with frontman Travis Meeks. The group, known for angsty late ’90s rock hits such as ‘Touch, Peel and Stand,’ ‘Shelf in the Room’ and ‘The Down Town,’ is back on the road again, with an EP slated for the fall.

‘I chatted with (Meeks) on the phone one day, and the dialogue continued for several months,’ says Whitener, 36, who now resides in Nashville. ‘He continued to open up about the prospect for us playing music together, and the more I thought about it the more days went by that I’d kind of go to sleep thinking about it and I’d wake up and it’d still be on my mind.

‘I got more and more interested and intrigued and really wanted to pursue this and find out what would happen when we were together. One thing led to another, and after a lot of dialogue and months of emotional preparation, if you will, here we are.’

Whitener acknowledges that there was some wariness when DOTN first reconvened. ‘We didn’t know how things were going to pan out when we all four got in a room together again,’ he says. But any concerns were quickly allayed.

‘It was really crazy; we started to play and I had this magical feeling probably four bars into the first song,’ Whitener recalls. ‘Imagine driving by the house that you grew up in and having those feelings come back to you again – not only driving by and seeing it but being surprised by all the friends you used to play with holding a basketball or whatever, like, ‘Hey man, come out and play.’

‘It was that kind of feeling, really odd. I called it a flood of awesomeness. I realized there really is something to this when we all play together that I miss, and I think we all felt the same way.’