Teacher Profile Todd Whitener

Todd Whitener used to be a quiet teacher, although he is still one of the more laid back guitarists here at Mom's he is constantly sneaking up on me and attempting to frighten me with strange noises.

Aside from sharpening his scare tactics on me he teaches guitar full time and happens to have the cleanest, most zen like relaxing studio room in the store, complete with a bamboo rug and flowers.

Todd has been playing guitar for over 16 years, he started playing in 1992 and just three short years later he started Day of The New with his friends Travis Meeks, Jesse Vest, and Matt Taul.

He's been a Geffen Records recording artist, as well as playing in Tantric and recording an album that sold over 1 million copies on the Maverick records label.

The list of bands Todd has toured and played shows with is incredibly impressive but you would never guess the magnitude of his career by his modest, kind, glass half full attitude. I think that's incredibly refreshing personally.

Like I said, the list is impressive;

Metallica, Aerosmith, Creed, Kid Rock, 3 Doors Down, Staind, Kansas, Steve Miller Band, Nickelback, Stone Temple Pilots, Godsmack, Incubus, 311 and more.

Not only has Todd accomplished a great deal as a professional musician, he's also a devoted father to his little girl who is seen frequently in the store with Todd.

Hands down, Todd is a comfortable person to be around, soft spoken yet hard rockin'.

If you're looking to learn classic rock and modern rock stylings Todd is your guy. His musical influences include Mark Knopfler, Stevie Ray Vaughan, Jimi Hendrix, Marty Friedman, and David Gilmor. Look to Todd for instruction on rock methods on the acoustic guitar as well!

He works equally well with younger and adult students. The kids tend to really enjoy lessons with Todd however.

Todd is great when it comes to student/parent/teacher relations, usually coming to meet the parent before and after every lesson and giving honest updates on the students progress.

Recently married and teaching full time, Todd Whitener isn't going anywhere any time soon and I'm glad. :)

You can also check Todd out at his very own web space.

ODD FACT: Todd is the only person I've ever known that owns designer sweat pants with back pockets.