A law student is thought to have taken his own life in the eighth reported case of suicide at Bristol's universities in just 18 months.

Justin Cheng was a third-year student at the University of Bristol's Law School.

The Canadian was found on Friday evening away from Bristol, and the university says his death is not considered suspicious.

Seven students from the University of Bristol and one from the University of the West of England are thought to have taken their own lives in the last 18 months, the Bristol Post reports.

It comes amid an "unprecedented rise in mental health difficulties amongst young people" in Bristol.

Mark Ames, director of student services at the University of Bristol, confirmed Mr Cheng's death on Sunday night.

He said in a statement: “I am very sorry to confirm that Justin Cheng, a third year law student from Canada, has died.

“The police have told us they believe he took his own life.

"There were no suspicious circumstances and the coroner will hold an inquest in due course. Our thoughts and sympathies are with his family and friends.

“It is immensely distressing for members of our university community to learn that one of our students has died.

“We know that this will be especially difficult for those who knew and studied with Justin.

“If students or staff are affected by this tragic news, we would encourage them to contact university support services as well as seek support from friends or family.

“Information about where to get help can be found on our website under staff and student pages."

Mr Ames added: “We will continue to work with our students, staff and with partners across the city including colleagues from public health and the NHS to enhance our services in response to the unprecedented rise in mental health difficulties amongst young people.

“Justin’s family has requested privacy at this very difficult time.”

Inquests into the deaths of the seven students before found none of them were linked.

Bristol University has been undergoing a review of its health services, putting some £1million into its mental health and wellbeing provision. New advisors have also been appointed.

In the 12 months between October 2016 and in October 2017, five other undergraduate students took their own lives.

First-year student Daniel Green, 18, "took his life" and was found hanging in his room at Goldney Hall on October 21, 2016.

In her narrative conclusion, a coroner said: "Daniel James Green took his own life but the question of intent is inconclusive."

Philosophy student Miranda Williams, 19, suffered paracetamol poisoning on October 10, and died three days later in hospital.

Kim Long, an 18-year-old law student died of asphyxiation at his halls of residence on November 10, and an inquest concluded he committed suicide.

Lara Nosiru, 23, a final-year neuroscience student, was found dead in the Avon Gorge on January 30, 2017.

A coroner concluded "she took her own life whilst under the influence of drugs".

Third-year Elsa Scaburri, 21, was found hanged in a barn at a farm near her home near Salisbury on March 3 2017, after committing suicide, an inquest heard.

First-year student Sam Symons, 19, was studying law at the University of the West of England (UWE), also in Bristol, and was found in his room at a halls of residence.

He died during the night of Sunday, April 30, or in the early hours of Monday, May 1, and an inquest concluded suicide.

James Thomson, 20, a second-year maths student, took his own life on October 25, 2017. The one-time Countdown contestant hanged himself at the home he shared with uni friends.

Inquests into the deaths of the seven students before Justin none of them were linked.