Our top-ranking law degree will give you a solid foundation of legal knowledge and an opportunity for you to explore a wide range of legal topics. You will be taught by world-leading academics actively impacting policy and practice in the vibrant and diverse city of Bristol.

An understanding of more than one legal tradition, language, and culture can open up a world of opportunity. On this four-year, joint honors course you will develop your language and cultural knowledge of France and the francophone world to a degree level alongside core units in civil and common law - the world's most prominent legal traditions. You will have the chance to spend your third year at a French-speaking partner university. To find out more about studying abroad, visit the Centre for Study Abroad.

Choosing the LLB in Law and French at Bristol will enable you to progress onto the Bar Practice Course or prepare, in part, for the Solicitors Qualifying Examination (SQE), helping you to develop core legal skills and understanding of the seven foundations of legal knowledge.

Get a head start in your legal career by gaining Qualifying Work Experience (QWE) through one of our law clinics, alongside free access to career development resources from our partner, BPP University designed to help aspiring solicitors and barristers.

A broader cultural experience, advanced language skills, and the ability to articulate both the distinctive and common features of different legal systems will see you graduate with a valuable skill set, ideally tailored to the globalized workplace.

Accreditation

The routes to qualification for solicitors and barristers have changed. For more information visit the Solicitors Regulation Authority or the Bar Standards Board.

Programme duration

4 year(s) full-time.

The course is structured to help you think, write, reason, and argue like a lawyer with an international outlook while gaining a rich understanding of the French language, linguistics, literature, history, and culture. It will also help you develop key skills in research and analysis.

Second-year units in law provide the opportunity to deepen your legal knowledge and offer increased flexibility to focus on what legal themes interest you most. You will also have opportunities to develop your linguistic skills and to choose optional units that further your understanding of French-speaking countries, their cultures, and their impacts on the wider world.

Typically, you will spend your third year abroad studying units in French law taught in French.

An exciting range of optional units will help you specialize further in your final year at Bristol, alongside your continued study of French language and culture. Inspired by their year abroad, many law and language students choose units suited to global law firms and international organizations, such as business and finance, environmental, human rights, or technology law – subjects that may open doors to prestigious careers across the world. Your Independent Research Project allows you to engage critically with a topic of your choice.

Full details about the course structure and units for this course can be viewed in the program catalog.

Year 1

Law of Contract

Law and State

Constitutional Rights

Law of Tort I: Liability for Negligence

French Language and Cultures 1b

French Language and Cultures 1a

French Cultures in Context

Representations of Francophone Cultures

Year 2

Criminal Law

Comparative Law

Land Law

Law and Policy of the European Union I

French Language 2

Race, Gender, and Intersectionality in Twenty-First Century France: Cultural Production, Politics, and Identity

Introduction to French Cinema

French Thought1

Burning Books: Radicalism Before the Revolution

France during the Second World War: culture, politics and society

French Fiction: from Realism to the 21st Century

Paris 1857–97: Text and Image

Year 3

Year Abroad (Law and French)

Year 4

Issues in Corporate Governance

Information Technology Law

Clinical Legal Studies

Rich Law, Poor Law

Commercial Law

Evidence

Banking Law

Criminology

Law and Government

Legal History

Sex, Gender, and Law

Corporate Law Simulation

Employment Law

International Dispute Settlement

Environmental Law

Human Rights in Law, Politics and Society

Transnational Arbitration

Family Law 2: Child Law

Law and Race

Modern Language units:

Les Miserables: Readings and Receptions

Surrealism: Pleasure and Provocation in 1920s Textual and Visual Culture

Political Cultures of Early Twentieth-Century France

French for Business and Enterprise

Aesthetics of Revolution and Resistance: 21st-Century Images of North Africa and the Eastern Mediterranean

Intellectuals and the Media in France

Francophone Women Directors: Documentary Filmmaking

Me, Myself, and I: The Essais of Michel de Montaigne

Screening the Past: Representing History in Contemporary Italian Cinema

Institutions and Anti-Institutions in Italy in the 1960s and 1970s (TB2)

Dante: Purgatorio and Paradiso

Russia and the World, 1991 - present

Decadence, Decay and Rebirth: Russian & Czech Literature, 1870 - 1914

Theatre and Theatricality in Russian Society

Dress and Identity in Russia through the Ages

Communism in Europe

Liaison Interpreting

Liaison Interpreting

Translating in a Professional Context

Sociolinguistics: Language Variation and Change

Gender, Sexuality and Cinema

Theoretical Approaches to Language Teaching

Studying and Making Early Printed Books

Transnational Narrative in pre-modern Cultures