Amanda Peet Biography

Amanda Peet is an American actress famous as Kate Kurtis in the movie, 2012 who was born and brought up in New York. Her acting career debuted in 1995 and she gained a wider recognition for her role in The Whole Nine Yards (2000).

10 Quick Facts About Amanda Peet

Name: Amanda Peet

Age: 50 years

Birthday: January 11

Zodiac Sign: Capricorn

Height: 5′ 6½” (1.69 m)

Nationality: American

Occupation: Actress

Marital Status: Married

Salary: Under Review

Net worth: $100 million combined with husband

Amanda Peet Age and Birthday

Amanda is 50 years old as of 2022, she was born on January 11, 1972 in New York City, United States. She celebrates her birthday on January 11 every year and her birth sign is Capricorn.

Amanda Peet Height and Weight

Peet stands at a height of 5 feet 6½ inches (1.69 m) and weighs 115 lbs (52 Kg).

Education

Peet studied at Friends Seminary and later joined Columbia University where she graduated with a degree in American history. She decided to become an actress after she auditioned and took Uta Hagen classes.

Amanda Peet Family

Amanda father is Charles Peet Jr, a lawyer and her mother is Penny Levy, a social worker. Her family relocated to London while she was seven years but returned after four years. It is not known is she has any siblings.

Amanda Peet Husband

Amanda married David Benioff on September 30, 2006, in New York City. The couple has three children Frances Pen Benioff, Molly June Benioff and Henry Benioff.

Amanda Peet Children

Amanda and her husband David Benioff are blessed with three children namely; Frances Pen Benioff, Molly June Benioff and Henry Benioff.

Amanda Peet Net Worth

Amanda net worth which is combined with her husband is estimated at $100 million as of 2022. This includes her assets, money, and income. Her primary source of income is her career as an actress. Through her various sources of income, Peet has been able to accumulate good fortune but prefers to lead a modest lifestyle.

Here are some interesting facts and body measurements you should know about Amanda

Amanda Peet Wiki

Full Names: Amanda Peet

Popular As: Amanda Peet

Gender: Female

Occupation / Profession: Actress

Nationality: American

Race/Ethnicity: White

Religion: Not Known

Sexual Orientation: Straight

Amanda Peet Birthday

Age / How Old?: 50 Years(2022)

Zodiac Sign: Capricorn

Date of Birth: January 11, 1972

Place of Birth: New York City

Birthday: January 11

Amanda Peet Body Measurements

Body Measurements: Not Known

Height / How Tall?: 5 feet 6½ inches (1.69 m)

Weight: 115 lbs (52 Kg)

Eye Color: Gray

Hair Color: Dark Brown

Shoe Size: Not Known

Amanda Peet Family and Relationship

Father (Dad): Charles Peet Jr

Mother: Penny Levy

Siblings (Brothers and Sisters): Not Known

Marital Status: Married

Wife/Spouse: David Benioff

Children: Sons ( Frances Pen Benioff and Henry Benioff), Daughters (Molly June Benioff)

Amanda Peet Net Worth and Salary

Net Worth: $100 million combined with husband

Salary: Under Review

Source of Income: Actress

Amanda Peet Seinfeld

Amanda is cast in TV series, Seinfeld as Lanette which stars Jerry Seinfeld, Julia Louis-Dreyfus and Michael Richards. Other cast are Jason Alexander, Ruth Cohen, Wayne Knight, Norman Brenner, Heidi Swedberg, Estelle Harris, Jerry Stiller, Liz Sheridan, John O’Hurley, Barney Martin, Len Lesser, Deck McKenzie, Richard Herd, Peggy Lane, Richard Fancy, Patrick Warburton, Lauren Bowles, Ian Abercrombie, David Blackwood, Danny Woodburn,

Joe Urla, Steve Hytner, Lawrence A. Mandley, Bob Balaban among others.

Amanda Peet Movies and TV Shows

Fatal Attraction

Dirty John

Brockmire

The Romanoffs

Togetherness

What Do Most Americans Agree On?

Sleeping with Other People

Trust Me

The Good Wife

Identity Thief

The Way Way Back

Bent

Gulliver’s Travels

Quantum Quest: A Cassini Space Odyssey

Please Give

How I Met Your Mother

2012

Wainy Days

Important Things With Demetri Martin

What Doesn’t Kill You

$5 a Day

The X Files: I Want to Believe

Martian Child

Battle for Terra

Studio 60 on the Sunset Strip

The Ex

Griffin & Phoenix

Syriana

Entourage

A Lot Like Love

Melinda and Melinda

The Whole Ten Yards

Something’s Gotta Give

Identity

Whatever We Do

Igby Goes Down

Changing Lanes

High Crimes

Date Squad

Jack & Jill

Saving Silverman

Zoe Loses It

Whipped

The Whole Nine Yards

Takedown

isn’t She Great

Partners

Body Shots

Two Ninas

Jump

Simply Irresistible

Playing by Heart

Southie

Origin of the Species

1999

Sax and Violins

Ellen Foster

Touch Me

Seinfeld

Grind

Spin City

Virignity

Winterlude

One Fine Day

She’s the One

C.P.W

The Single Guy

Animal Room

Law & Order

One Life to Live

Freqently Asked Questions About Amanda Peet

Who is Amanda Peet?

Peet is a famous actor who gained extensive recognition for her role as Kate Kurtis in the movie, 2012. Her acting career debuted in 1995 and she gained a wider recognition for her role in The Whole Nine Yards (2000).

How old is Amanda Peet?

Peet is an American national born on 11th January, 1972 in New York City, United States. She celebrates her birthday on January 11 every year and her birth sign is Capricorn.

How tall is Amanda Peet?

Peet stands at a height of 5 feet 6½ inches (1.69 m).

Is Amanda Peet married?

Yes, Amanda married David Benioff on September 30, 2006, in New York City. The couple has three children Frances Pen Benioff, Molly June Benioff and Henry Benioff.

How much is Amanda Peet worth?

Price has an approximate net worth of $100 million that is combined with her husband’s. This amount has been accrued from his leading roles in the entertainment industry.

How much does Peet make?

Details about Amanda’s salary are not yet disclosed. However, information about how much he makes will be updated as soon as it is available.

Where does Peet live?

Amanda is a resident of Manhattan and Beverly Hills, USA, we shall upload pictures of her houses as soon as we have them.

Is Peet dead or alive?

Amanda is alive and in good health. There have been no reports of her being sick or having any health-related issues.

Where is Peet Now?

Amanda is still an active participant in the creative entertainment industry, she is a cast member of Fatal Attraction as Beth Gallagher.

Contacts

You may also like to read the Bio, Career, Family, Relationship, Body measurements, Net worth, Achievements, and more about:

About InformationCradle Editorial Staff

This Article is produced by InformationCradle Editorial Staff which is a team of expert writers and editors led by Josphat Gachie and trusted by millions of readers worldwide.

We endeavor to keep our content True, Accurate, Correct, Original and Up to Date. For complain, correction or an update, please send us an email to informationcradle@gmail.com. We promise to take corrective measures to the best of our abilities.

ncG1vNJzZmihnpu8s7nAraCoppOnrqW4xGeaqKVflrqiusOaZKmdlal6o7XOoKmaqJiueqKzxGafrquSlrulec2eq2avn6fBqXnSnqCnnpWhsW65zq%2BgnqtdlruledOvZKygn6zAcIvUraSYq5%2Bqv6SxnKuqrF6lqbqgucSdoK6lbafAtHLUraSYm5GivaK1xqd0mqWRo7Giec%2BenK1lkp68qL7AqZ%2ByZZGcsm601KyZmqaUYrumwIywpqusmGLAprXNn5ylnF2ivLe1xKxkmqaUYsG3edKhprCr