Investigations are under way after the famous Flying Scotsman was involved in a “slow speed” crash with another train in the Highlands. At 6.15pm on Friday night the collision happened on the Strathspey Railway at Aviemore railway station, in the Cairngorms.

It occurred when the Flying Scotsman locomotive was being shunted into place to be coupled with the Royal Scotsman train’s carriages, which were stationary. Royal Scotsman luxury train operator Belmond confirmed that one passenger and team member were taken to hospital for a “precautionary check-up” after a “minor collision”.

Operators said: said: “At 1815 a minor collision occurred when the Flying Scotsman locomotive was being shunted into place to be coupled with the Royal Scotsman train’s carriages, stationary on the Strathspey Railway. One passenger and one team member are attending hospital for a precautionary check-up.”

ScotRail confirmed its services were able to run normally through Aviemore station as the emergency response was focused on the private railway line. The station is home to Strathspey Railway, a heritage line which takes visitors on steam trains in northern Scotland.

READ MORE: Major response as Flying Scotsman crashes into another train with passengers rushed to hospital

A spokesman for the National Railway Museum said: “We can confirm that steam locomotive Flying Scotsman has been involved in a shunting incident at Aviemore Station. We will provide further information once more details are known.”

Scottish Fire and Rescue Service (SFRS) sent eight appliances to the scene, and Police Scotland said other casualties were treated at the station.

Flying Scotsman was scheduled to be running trips this weekend, with the line expected to be especially busy. In an update to passengers on Saturday morning, Strathspey Steam Railway said that Saturday and Sunday services would run but the Ivatt 46512 would haul the train whilst the Flying Scotsman locomotive awaits inspection.

The railway added: “Due to the current circumstances, we need to cancel the 0900 and the 11.00 Flying Scotsman departure, but we intend to operate the 13.00, 15.00 and 17.00 departure but hauled with our own Ivatt 46512, and therefore Flying Scotsman ticket holders can travel on these services. This is an evolving situation and we will keep you updated.”

The Royal Scotsman carriage set involved in the incident is currently receiving a pre-inspection prior to its movement to shed to avail thorough inspection which will clear Aviemore Platform three for Saturdays services, the railway added.

A spokesman for SFRS said: “We were alerted at 7.10pm on Friday to reports of a collision involving two trains at Aviemore Railway Station. We sent eight appliances to the scene, where firefighters worked to support partners.

“Three appliances remain at the scene. Two casualties have been transported to Raigmore Hospital. Three casualties were treated at the scene but did not require to be taken to hospital.”

A Police Scotland spokesperson said: “Around 7pm on Friday September 29, we received a report of two trains colliding at low speed at Aviemore Railway Station. As a precaution, two people – a man and a woman – were taken to Raigmore Hospital in Inverness by the Scottish Ambulance Service for treatment. Their injuries are not believed to be serious.

“A number of other passengers were assessed by the ambulance service at the scene and did not require hospital treatment. Inquiries are ongoing to establish the full circumstances.”