Bid farewell

Today’s expression is to “bid farewell.” It essentially means to say goodbye, but it’s more formal and elaborate than simply “goodbye.”

To “bid farewell” is to say goodbye to something or someone, either forever or for a long time. If you go out to dinner with friends and you stand up from the table, you don’t bid farewell to one another. You just simply say “goodbye” or “good night.” But if one of your friends is moving overseas and you might not see him or her for a few years, you’ll “bid farewell.” That’s because you won’t see each other for a long time. The “goodbye” is either permanent or for a long time. You might even throw a “farewell party,” which is like a goodbye party for someone who’s moving far away.

There are two adjectives we commonly use with “bid farewell,” and they are “fond” and “tearful.”

Lionel Messi bid a tearful farewell to Barcelona in a press conference on August 8. That was his goodbye to the city, and it was, unfortunately for Barça fans, a permanent goodbye. Never say never, but chances are he won’t be coming back, at least to play. He said a permanent goodbye. And it was a “tearful farewell,” because it was sad. He was clearly emotional during the press conference and it was a sad occasion for all.

I read another sad story in The Guardian newspaper online today. It was about the people in Hong Kong who are leaving for London, probably for good . They’re afraid that they won’t be able to live freely under the new Hong Kong security law , imposed by mainland China’s government. The article described the scenes at the Hong Kong airport, where younger people bid a tearful farewell to their families, not knowing if they’ll ever be able to return to Hong Kong again. The people quoted in the article included a psychology student, an IT professional, and an accountant. It’s hard for them to leave their country and their families, but they want to live a life where they don’t have to live in fear of being arrested for what they say. They bid a tearful farewell to friends and family before leaving the country for good.

The other way to use “bid farewell” is “bid a fond farewell.” You would bid someone a fond farewell when the person is leaving, but you’re happy for their situation. If someone retires at work, you will bid that person a fond farewell. You’d say goodbye to them as a coworker, but you’re not sad; you’re happy that they’ll get to enjoy their retirement. You bid a fond farewell.

We talked a few months ago about how inconvenient life is for people who used to regularly cross the U.S.-Canada border . Some of those people are professional baseball players for the Toronto Blue Jays, the only Canadian team in the Major Leagues. They’ve been playing their “home” games in Buffalo, New York, while the border has been closed. But now, the border is open again and the Blue Jays can start playing their home games at home in Toronto. So, they’ll bid a fond farewell to the stadium they’ve temporarily been using in Buffalo. They’ll say goodbye, but it’s not a sad goodbye. They’re happy to be able to go home to play in their big stadium in Toronto. Canada, no doubt, will give them a warm welcome.

Quote of the Week

It’s Monday, so I have a quote of the week for you in English. Today it comes from a self-help author Robert Collier. He said, “Success is the sum of small efforts, repeated day in and day out.”

We talked about how much money Lionel Messi has made in his career. And he’s been extremely lucky to have made that kind of money. But what we never see is the level of preparation that goes into being an elite athlete like Messi. We see the great moments on the field, but we don’t see the attention he pays to his training, his diet, his sleep, his motor skills, the practice, the studying other teams, studying other players, the time in the film room, all that stuff.

So, keep this quote in mind, “Success is the sum of small efforts, repeated day in and day out,” says Robert Collier.

By the way, if you’re a Plain English Plus+ member, you know that “day in and day out ” means every day for a long time; you know that because it was one of our recent video lessons.

See you next time!

And that’s all for today’s Plain English. Congratulations on reaching the end. I know we have some Argentina football fans; some Lionel Messi fans in the audience. I guess if you’re an Argentina fan, it doesn’t matter too much, since he’ll obviously still play for the Argentina national team. But if you’re a Barcelona fan. I’m sorry!

On the next Plain English: We all know that some movies and TV shows are “based on” or “inspired by” true stories. But what responsibility do moviemakers have to stay true to the real events that inspire their films? It’s not just a theoretical question. The new movie “Stillwater” starring Matt Damon was inspired by the story of Amanda Knox, an American student who was imprisoned in Italy, accused of murder. She was eventually exonerated and released. But the movie tells a much different story than the events of the case, and the real-life Amanda Knox isn’t happy about it. That’s coming up on Thursday. See you then.