As a result of recent technological innovations, there has been a tremendous growth in the Electronic Music Distribution industry. In this way, tasks such us automatic music genre classification address new and exciting research challenges. Automatic music genre recognition involves issues like feature extraction and development of classifiers using the obtained features. As for feature extraction, we use features such as the number of zero crossings, loudness, spectral centroid, bandwidth and uniformity. These are statistically manipulated, making a total of 40 features. As for the task of genre modeling, we train a feedforward neural network (FFNN). A taxonomy of subgenres of classical music is used. We consider three classification problems: in the first one, we aim at discriminating between music for flute, piano and violin; in the second problem, we distinguish choral music from opera; finally, in the third one, we aim at discriminating between all five genres. Preliminary results are presented and discussed, which show that the presented methodology may be a good starting point for addressing more challenging tasks, such as using a broader range of musical categories.

Proceeding of the 5th International Conference on Information & Communication Technology and Systems : 15-20 ; Department of Informations Faculty of Information Technology ITS Surabaya 2009, 4 AugustGenre is a conventional way to classify music. This paper aims to implement an algorithm to classify music files into four different genre, which are classic, rock, pop, and dangdut. Dangdut is Indian influenced Indonesian popular music. An automatic music genre classification system will help music collectors to classify their music collection. The genre classification algorithm is divided into music feature extractor and classifier. The feature extraction of the system is constructed by timbre feature extraction and rhythm feature extraction. The timbre feature extraction is done by mel frequency cepstral coefficients (MFCC). The rhythm feature is constructed by full wave rectification, low pass filtering, down sampling, mean removal, and autocorrelation. The classifier is formed by ba...

As a result of recent technological innovations, there has been a tremendous growth in the Electronic Music Distribution industry. Consequently, tasks such as automatic music genre classification address new and exciting research challenges. Automatic music genre recognition involves is sues like feature extraction and development of classifiers using the obtained features. We use the number of zero crossings, loudness, spectral centroid, bandwidth and uniformity for feature extraction. These features are statistically manipulated, making a total of 40 features. Regarding the task of genre modeling, we follow three approaches: the K-Nearest Neighbors (KNN) classifier, Gaussian Mixture Models (GMM) and feedforward neural networks (FFNN). A taxonomy of sub-genres of classical music is used. We consider three classification problems: in the first one, we aim at discriminating between music for flute, piano and violin; in the second problem, we distinguish choral music from opera; finally, in the third one, we seek to discriminate between al l five genres. The best results were obtained using FFNNs: 85% classification accuracy in the three-class problem, 90% in the two-class problem and 76% in the five-class problem. These results are encouraging and show that the presented methodology may be a good starting point for addressing more challenging tasks.

Music has become the most favorable area nowadays especially in youth. Most of the people tend to listen music of certain genre such as classical, hip-hop or disco and want a user-friendly way to classify the music as per their preferences. Due to this "Music Genre Classification" came into picture. Music genre classification is a complex task in music information retrieval (MIR) due to selection and extraction of suitable features. The Machine learning models have been shown to be capable of solving these kinds of real life problems. Music genre classification can be implemented using various machine learning algorithms. In the proposed system, we are using a deep learning technique .i.e. convolution neural network (CNN) for classifying the music in various genres. CNNs are used to solve image pattern recognition tasks. While analyzing music, acoustic feature extraction is the most crucial task. In proposed system, model is trained over GTZAN dataset.

Classification of music in multiple genres is one the most important part today where the collection of music is growing at a great speed whether it be online or offline. In order to have better access to music we need to organize them accordingly. The music genre classification is used to identify a type of music from large collection of music data. Machine learning concepts are most widely used terminologies in music genre classifications. Here, we present a music dataset that includes ten different genres. In this project, we trained our models over the GTZAN dataset. We have compared the performances of CNN and RNN model and logged their results in terms of prediction accuracies. It is found that the convolutional recurrent neural network model has given the highest accuracy than that of the convolutional neural network mode.