Thirteen years after she played for the women's singles title in Paris, Samantha Stosur will join Australia's Melbourne-based commentary team on the Nine network for this year's second Grand Slam.

The Aussie, now 39, retired from tennis after an 18th and final appearance at her home major in January, and told Tennis Australia's Leigh Rogers this week that she was looking forward to following the action from her "favorite Grand Slam to play at" in "a different way." After the book closed on her career with first-round losses in women's doubles and mixed doubles there, she dabbled in commentary in Melbourne, but said she was excited to go all-in for the first time during the clay-court major.

“I’ve already done a little bit [of commentary] over the years throughout my career, but this is my first time doing it really seriously where you’re there the whole night, not just popping in after your own match," she said.

“It’s going to be an interesting couple of weeks. Working through the night here is going to be a bit different, but I’m really looking forward to it. It’s a sport that I obviously love and played for so long, so it’s still a way to be involved and enjoy what the French Open has to offer.”

Nine Network’s coverage of Roland Garros also includes commentary from Todd Woodbridge and Jelena Dokic.

In addition to finishing as runner-up to Francesca Schiavone in 2010, Stosur reached the semifinals three other times, and won the doubles title with Lisa Raymond in 2006. She made her debut in Paris in 2003, and went 40-16 in singles there in her career for her best winning percentage across the four majors.

“I have many, many great memories there of matches won and lost," she added. “As much as I will, I’m sure, miss being in Paris this year, I do feel like it was the right time [to retire]. I haven’t regretted that decision at all."

Stosur's other endeavors in retirement have included some part-time coaching, as she's worked with Australian players Ellen Perez and Stefani Webb during their recent training blocks in Melbourne. In the future, she added, she might like to coach full-time. Whether coaching or commentating, the Aussie said, she has just one goal: to give back to the sport that gave so much to her.

"If someone asked me tomorrow, I wouldn’t be able to do it, but I never want to rule anything out,” Stosur said. “Tennis has been my whole life. I enjoy playing. I enjoy watching the sport, trying to work out how to win, how to do things better.

“I’m really looking forward to doing more of that when I can and getting as involved as possible.”