Few people on tour know Melbourne, Australia as intimately as the WTA's Aussie Samantha Stosur. If you find yourself making the trek anytime soon, let's say, for instance, during the Australian Open, Sam has suggestions to help you lead a most enjoyable vacation. She says some of her favorite hometown hobbies include mountain bike riding, snorkeling and eating.

SAMS FAVORITE ACTIVITIES

Activity: Snorkel

Location: Coogee Beach, Sydney, New South Wales

Sam says Coogee Beach is her favorite beach in the world, and seeing as how she loves watersports, snorkeling in particular, Coogee is an ideal spot to visit. In addition to witnessing sea life up close, you'll find stunning ocean views while strolling along the coastal walk. If you're feeling a bit lazy, park yourself on the sand and soak up the sun's rays – don't forget to bring an umbrella and sunscreen to prevent sunburn. Coogee Beach is family friendly and has an abundance of cafes, pubs, restaurants and hotels in the local area.

Activity: Mountain Bike

Location: Falls Creek, Northeast Victoria

The proximity to Melbourne, and other popular destinations, makes Falls Creek a worthy option for a mountain bike weekend on the big mountains of a thawed-out ski resort. Cyclists see Victoria’s most stunning scenery, quiet country roads, alpine ascents, friendly locals and a packed events calendar. Rides range from beginner trails along the village aqueducts to more challenging trails like Bogong High Plains. Falls Creek not only offers one of the most complete cycling experience of any destination in Australia, but boasts a breathtaking landscape of ancient mountain ranges, glacial lakes, heritage huts, clear springs and waterfalls, and a plethora of stunning wildflowers in the summer.

SAMS FAVORITE RESTAURANTS

The Pound Cafe

566 Chapel St., South Yarra, VIC

Sam orders: Coffee + Breakfast

Wabi Sabi Garden Japanese Restaurant

17 Wellington St., St Kilda, VIC

Sam orders: Miso black cod

Is it Café

11 Izett St, Praharn, VIC

Sam orders: Banana pancakes

Koko [Asian Cuisine]

Crown Entertainment Complex

8 Whiteman St., Southbank, VIC Crown Casino

Sam orders: Authentic Teppanyaki

SAMS FAVORITE WINE

Goodness Grapeness

Sam Sees Red

Did you know that Australia is the world's fourth largest exporter of wine? With wine being produced in every state, there is no shortage of vino in the land Down Under! The main wine regions are located in the southern, cooler parts of the country, such as Victoria, Tasmania and Queensland. If you plan to partake in a winery tour, the major varieties you'll swirl are Shiraz, Cabernet Sauvignon, Chardonnay, Merlot, Semillon, Pinot noir, Riesling and Sauvignon blanc. Sam says when she sips, she prefers to pour red.