The King of Fighters '95

STORY: It's the year of our Lord, 1995. Once again invitations to the King of Fighters tournament have found their ways to the world's most powerful fighters. And their author is none other than the mysterious "R!" Could the "R" be that of Rugal, who supposedly blew himself up on his aircraft carrier a year ago? Among the contestants for this year's tournament is the newly selected team of Billy, Yagami, and Kisaragi, who sent the American Team packing. But what in the end is Billy's scheme? What ambitions does Kisaragi cradle? And what evil designs for his old foe Kyo Kusanagi spur Iori Yagami on? These new challengers join all of the previous tournament's contestants-except the American Team, of course-both in battle and the all-consuming intrigue that forms the core of King of Fighters '95."

REVIEW: The King of Fighters '95 reunites all contenders from The King of Fighters '94 with the exception of the USA Sports Team (sorry Brian, Lucky, and Heavy D.). The American Sports Team was replaced by the new Rival Team consisting of newcomers: Iori Yagami, Eiji Kisaragi and Billy Kane. KOF '95 is the first game in the series to receive console ports (besides Neo Geo systems), with PlayStation and Sega Saturn versions arriving in 1996.

The most notable gameplay enhancement of KOF '95 is the option to edit your team (which became a staple of the series after this installment). Now, players can team-up any of the 24 characters to make up their own unique team... a novel idea that hasn't been done in the fighting genre. A few new moves and animations were added for returning characters; however, the gameplay was practically unchanged from the prequel.

Visually, The King of Fighters '95 also looks very much like its predecessor, but features a variety of brand new hand-drawn 2D environments to fight in (including the now legendary NEOGEO LAND)! In particular, KOF '95's backgrounds were a pretty big improvement over the prequels, featuring some memorable locales. Like many other SNK fighting games, the hand-drawn backgrounds also feature some impressive animations which compliment the action onscreen.