The political and social upheaval

that resulted from the English Civil War in the seventeenth century [effectively

two conflicts between 1642 -1646 and 1647/48] led to the development of a set of radical ideas centred around

movements known as ‘Diggers’ and ‘Levellers’

The Diggers [or ‘True Levellers’] were led by William Everard

who had served in the New Model Army. As the name implies, the diggers aimed

to use the earth to reclaim the freedom that they felt had been lost partly

through the Norman Conquest; by seizing the land and owning it ‘in common’

they would challenge what they considered to be the slavery of property. They

were opposed to the use of force and believed that they could create a classless

society simply through seizing land and holding it in the ‘common good’.

To this end, a small group [initially 12, though rising to 50] settled on

common land first at St George’s Hill and later in Cobham, Surrey and

grew corn and other crops. This small group defied the landlords, the Army

and the law for over a year. In addition to this, groups travelled through

England attempting to rally supporters. In this they had some successes in

Kent and Northamptonshire. Their main propagandist was Gerard Winstanley who

produced the clearest statement of Digger ideas in ‘The Law of Freedom

in a Platform’ published in 1652. This was a defence and exposition

of the notion of a classless society based in secularism and radical democracy

The relatively small group of followers of Digger ideas was never particularly

influential and was quite easily suppressed by Cromwell and Fairfax.

The most significant of these movements were The Levellers whose revolutionary

ideas resonated throughout the succeeding centuries, mostly notably in the

demands of the Chartists in the nineteenth century.

The Levellers’ ideas found most support in the ranks of the ’New

Model Army’, formed by Oliver Cromwell in 1645 and were largely responsible

for the defeat of the Royalist forces led by Charles I, particularly in the

decisive Battle of Naseby in June 1645.

By the end of the first civil war in 1646 Leveller ideas were particularly

influential and culminated in the Putney Debates where ordinary soldiers debated

revolutionary ideas with their generals; it was at this series of meetings

that Leveller Colonel Thomas Rainborough argued the case for universal suffrage:

“I think that the poorest he that is in England hath a life to live

as the greatest he, and therefore truly, sir, I think it is clear to every

man that is to live under a government ought first by his own consent to put

himself under that government.”

Unfortunately, this outbreak of democracy within the ranks of the army was

relatively short-lived; the outbreak of the second civil war in 1647 allowed

the generals to reassert their authority and Leveller influence began to wane.

An attempted mutiny by Leveller soldiers was brutally suppressed in Burford,

Oxfordshire in 1649; leaders were executed by Cromwell’s soldiers and

others were tried for high treason.

Why this brutal suppression? What did the generals find so threatening about

the Levellers?

Who were the Levellers?

The Levellers were a relatively loose alliance of radicals and freethinkers

who came to prominence during the period of instability that characterised

the English Civil War of 1642 – 1649. The most prominent Levellers were

John Lilburne, Richard Overton, William Walwyn, John Wildman, Edward Sexby

and Colonel Thomas Rainborough.

What bound these people together was the general belief that all men were

equal; since this was the case, then a government could only have legitimacy

if it was elected by the people. The Leveller demands were for a secular republic,

abolition of the House of Lords, equality before the law, the right to vote

for all, free trade, the abolition of censorship, freedom of speech and the

absolute right for people to worship whatever religion [or none] that they

chose. This programme was published as ‘The Agreement of the People’.

These ideas came out of the social classes from which the Levellers originated;

they were mainly skilled workers and peasants and the ‘petty bourgeoisie’.

Since many of them had fought in Cromwell’s New Model Army they were

used to discussion, argument and the free dissemination of ideas; it was this

intelligent debate allied to the need for discipline that had led to the defeat

of the Royalists and the victory of the republic.

The Levellers were essentially radical idealists; their demands could be seen

as a form of early socialism [they were pretty much the same as the demands

of the Chartists some two hundred years later], but they had little or no

understanding of the workings of a capitalist economy. It is unfair, though,

to expect this of them since capitalism as an organised form of social production

would only assert itself much later in the development of Britain as an industrial

nation.

Indeed, it is important to note that their views on the social order were

not particularly progressive; these were rooted in the notion that prior to

1066 and the Norman Conquest a democratic society had existed in Anglo-Saxon

times where the land was held in common by the people [perhaps this is in

line with Karl Marx’s idea of the concept of ‘primitive communism’;

that is, the form of social organisation that existed in pre-industrial society].

The victory of William the Conqueror in 1066 had enabled him to impose a form

of foreign [that is, Norman] domination on the people. [1] This enabled him

to reward his followers with huge swathes of land seized from the formerly

‘free men’ of England. This was particularly so in the North of

England where opposition was brutally suppressed.

The Levellers argued that since God had created all men as equals, the land

belonged to all the people as a right. Their programme was, then, essentially

an attempt to restore the situation that they believed had existed previous

to the Norman Conquest; they wanted to establish a ‘commonwealth’

in which the common people would be in control of their own destiny without

the intervention of a King, a House of Lords and other potential oppressors.

The Agreement of the People was drawn up by a committee of Levellers including

John Lilburne which was to have been discussed at a meeting of the commonwealth

armies at Newmarket in June 1647. In brief this is what they asked for:

· Power to be vested in the people

· One year Parliaments, elected by equal numbers of voters per seat.

The right to vote for all men who worked independently for their living and

all those who had fought for the Parliamentary cause

· Recall of any or all of their MPs by their electors at any time

· Abolition of the House of Lords

· Democratic election of army officers

· Complete religious toleration and the abolition of tithes and tolls

· Justices to be elected; law courts to be local and proceedings to

be in English [not French!]

· Redistribution of seized land to the common people

"[T]here had never been anything like such a spontaneous outbreak of

democracy in any English or Continental Army before this year of 1647, nor

was there anything like it thereafter till Workers’ and Soldiers’

Councils met in 1917 in Russia" [2]

It is hardly surprising, given this programme of demands,

that the rich and powerful felt threatened by the Levellers. This is particularly

so, given that some of the Leveller demands, almost 400 years on, have still

not been met! Since Leveller demands went so much further than Cromwell and

other republican leaders could even begin to meet, then they had to be crushed.

The outbreak of the second civil war gave them the opportunity to do this

and so the movement which would have surely rid the people of the parasitical

classes once and for all was brutally put down.

The final victory of the Parliamentary forces later in 1648 not only led to

the execution of the King, but also the suppression of Leveller ideas for

a time.

Leveller ideas, though, posed a real challenge to the power and authority

of Cromwell particularly with their attitude to the situation in Ireland.

The New Model Army had been set up to defend Parliament at home, not to act

as a mercenary force which would advance the imperialist ambitions of the

English ruling class. The Catholics in Ireland, it was argued, had a claim

to freedom and equality which was just as valid as that which the Levellers

were arguing for at home.

In ‘The English Soldier’s Standard’, it was argued that

military intervention in Ireland would only mean that the Irish would become

a subject people exploited by precisely those who the Levellers were struggling

to overcome in England. The point was that influential levellers were implacably

opposed to the reconquest of Ireland.

When significant elements of the New Model Army refused to embark for Ireland

it was obvious that a crucial point had been reached. Radical elements had

to be crushed in order for Cromwell to assert his authority. This was achieved

at Burford in Oxfordshire where Fairfax and Cromwell surprised the Levellers

and defeated them [albeit it with only a handful of casualties]. From this

time [May 1649] the New Model Army was completely in the control of Cromwell.

This does not mean, though, that Leveller ideas were totally eradicated. On

May Day 1649, the third and final version of the ‘Agreement of the People’

was published. This is the last collective statement of the Leveller leaders

and is their most complete political programme. Its preface stated:

“Peace and freedom is our design; by war we were never gainers,

nor ever wish to be.”

In this version of the Agreement, there is a restatement of essential Leveller

ideas, though there is a divergence between them and the aims of the Diggers

to eradicate the ownership of private property. In all other respects, the

programme is not dissimilar to earlier versions; the emphasis is still on

universal [male] suffrage, accountable government, religious toleration, civil

rights, and so on.

Leveller ideas mainly appealed to the dispossessed in society; that is, those

who were most threatened by what the Levellers were proposing were unlikely

to be persuaded by appeals to the ‘common good’. Since the Levellers

were unable to mobilise their followers to any great degree and, given their

defeat at Burford, they lacked the ability to challenge the army or government,

it is almost inevitable that they were unable to pose any future threat to

the ruling class or [restored] Monarchy.

Nevertheless, this is not to say that Leveller ideas are irrelevant or were

consigned to the ‘dustbin of history’. Both the Levellers and

Diggers are of crucial importance to the development of working class history

since they stand in the proud tradition of English radicalism and challenge

to the ruling orthodoxy.

Like the Tolpuddle Martyrs and the Chartists of a later period, the Diggers

and Levellers posed a serious threat to the ruling class; their direct appeals

to the poor and dispossessed resonate throughout the centuries – whilst

the language and mode of expression may have changed, the essential demands

of these radicals remain as vibrant and necessary today as they were when

they were first put.

Some 450 years after the Diggers established their commune at Cobham, we still

need to establish the common ownership of property and the development of

society based on need, rather than profit. The words of Winstanley echo throughout

the centuries:

“When men take to buying and selling the land, saying ’This

is mine’, they restrain other fellow creatures from seeking nourishment

from mother earth…..so that he that had no land was to work for those,

for small wages, that called the land theirs; and thereby some are lifted

up into the chair of tyranny and others trod under the footstool of misery,

as if the earth were made for a few and not for all men.”

Our task must to be rescue the words of the Diggers and Levellers from obscurity

and to locate them quite firmly in the context of working-class history and

struggle; to seek inspiration from their words and actions; to ensure that

all of these disparate voices are united under the common theme of working

class resistance to poverty and oppression

Jim Fox

From Revolutions Per Minute