In 1922, Crown Prince Frederick (King Frederick IX) of Denmark was engaged to Princess Olga of Greece. They never wed.

Frederick married Princess Ingrid of Sweden in 1935.

Suppose Frederick marries Olga of Greece. What happens then?

The engagement fell apart due to his serious alcoholism.

It seems to have calmed down by the time he became King in the late 1940s but the early years of his marriage to Ingrid were reportedly very difficult, with her returning to Sweden for extended periods, so he was still struggling with it in the late 30s. The marriage was further complicated by Ingrid's difficulties in getting pregnant.

His alcoholism must have been very serious. Given Olga's personal circumstances, a Greek princess by birth, with a Russian Grand Duchess for a mother, for her to walk away from a throne as secure as Denmark's in the early 1920s, says a lot.

Beyond all of this its difficult to say. Olga and Frederick were both capable of producing children, so probably no succession issues. Frederick seems to have been a decent King, although how much of that was due to Ingrid's influence could be debated. Based on her personality and performances as wife of the Prince Regent of Yugoslavia, Olga would have been a perfectly respectable and elegant Queen Consort of Denmark.

Of course the greatest tragedy of their marriage, would be the world would have never known Queen Margrethe II.

Queen Ingrid indeed was a very impressive Lady. I've actually met her as I many years ago worked in the Dept. taking care of maintenance of the Royal Castles.

She is broadly credited for having a very important role in "shaping up" her husband to take on the role as King of Denmark and raising a harmonious family including the present ruling Queen Margrethe II. But Ingrid’s role went beyond that as she probably was instrumental in modernizing Monarchy for a role in post war Denmark. Frederik’s father Christian X (died 1947) almost lost his throne when he was involved in the first steps of what appeared nothing short of a coup d’état (Easter crisis of 1920). Most people saw him as a simpleminded relic of past times, always wearing a military uniform incl. jackboots and spurs.

That very much changed during the German occupation where he quickly became the popular symbol of Danish identity and opposition to anything German. Monarchy was saved for the moment, not at least due to Christian’s very stubborn personality. But when he died in 1947 all that was gone and instead the prospect was a “drunken playboy King” (with no male heir).

We will never know if Olga would have been able to “shape up” Frederik (or he could himself), but even if he/she had been, we still need Ingrid’s contribution to modernising the Monarchy. She very much succeeded in combining the image of a happy almost petit bourgeois family with that of a Royal family with all the traditions and distance that involves – not an easy task and very much a question of very fine balance. Olga might be able to do it too, but at least Ingrid with her Swedish background had a good understanding of the mid-20th century (socialdemocratic) Scandinavian societies. Frederik often was described as “the most prominent socialdemocrat of the Kingdom” and he felt well when among ordinary people (or at least appeared to) – and the people loved him back.

Short of these “Ingrid factors” I guess the mildest consequence would be a Monarchy like the Swedish where all constitutional roles practically are removed, but short of the Swedish de facto totalitarian socialdemocratism as a stabilising factor I think Denmark will be far less stable and not quite as rich. The OTL combination of a creditable Royal family with all the demands of developing into a modern industrial society gave a very strong and stable mix creating accelerating wealth in the post war decades.

Gud bevare Dronningen!