Ingrid of Sweden (Ingrid Victoria Sofia Louise Margareta; 28 March 1910 – 7 November 2000) was Queen of Denmark from 1947 until 1972 as the wife of King Frederick IX.

Born into the House of Bernadotte, she was the daughter of King Gustaf VI Adolf of Sweden and his first wife, Princess Margaret of Connaught. In 1935 she married Crown Prince Frederick of Denmark and they had three daughters, Margrethe, the present Queen of Denmark, Benedikte, now a Princess of Sayn-Wittgenstein-Berleburg, and Anne-Marie, the former Queen of the Hellenes.

In 1947, her husband became king on his father's death. As queen, Ingrid reformed the traditions of Danish court life, abolished many old-fashioned customs at court and created a more relaxed atmosphere at official receptions. King Frederick IX died in 1972, and Ingrid's daughter Margrethe became queen.

She was also a paternal aunt of the present Swedish monarch, King Carl XVI Gustaf.

Sol turns thousands of years of human wisdom from the world’s spiritual traditions into a totally unique personality profile. To get your own profile, check compatibility with friends and much more, download the Sol App today.

Some of their strengths

Queen of Denmark Ingrid has many admirable traits.

Based on spiritual traditions from around the world, they are someone who can be described as Energetic, Independent, Honest, Intuitive, Passionate, Adventurous, and Generous.

Independent and Brave

According to Mysticism’s Astrology tradition, Queen of Denmark Ingrid is someone who is an independent, brave, and honest person who approaches life with energy, intuition, passion, and generosity. A person who is charismatic and resourceful.

Adventurous and Free

Based on Daoism’s Ba-Zi or ‘Chinese Zodiac’ tradition, people who know Queen of Denmark Ingrid well know them as someone who can be talented, wayward and free, like a big river or the ocean.

Active and Ambitious

According to Hinduism’s Jyotisha or ‘Vedic Astrology’ tradition, many would also describe Queen of Denmark Ingrid as someone who is active, ambitious, bold, and courageous.

A person who is driven and organized, is wise with money, who knows how to tell a good story, likes physical activity, and who loves learning.

Wise and Deep

Based on the Mayan Tzolk’in or ‘Mayan Astrology’ tradition, Queen of Denmark Ingrid is someone who tends to have an internal innate wisdom, and who people tend to see as an "old soul".

They are also someone who is intuitive, imaginative, and an agent of change, and who is always dreaming of life's great possibilities and partnering with people to try to achieve those possibilities.

Independent and Dynamic

According to Judaism’s Kabbalah tradition, Queen of Denmark Ingrid tends to be someone who is independent, dynamic, and courageous. Who can be positive, energetic, self-reliant, and adventurous, and who can make friends easily.

Some of Queen of Denmark Ingrid's challenges

While Queen of Denmark Ingrid has many strengths, nobody is perfect. They also have some challenging traits they need to manage.

For example, Queen of Denmark Ingrid can be Impulsive, Aggressive, Short-tempered, Complicated, Brusque, Worrying, and Stubborn.

Short-tempered and Impulsive

One of Queen of Denmark Ingrid's key challenges is that they are someone who can come across as short-tempered and impulsive.

Queen of Denmark Ingrid must also exercise caution as they can be excessive and unrealistic.

Impulsive and Aggressive

Queen of Denmark Ingrid is someone who can be impulsive, aggressive, and confrontational, can have difficulty listening to others, be moody and high strung, have conflict with authority figures, be too judgmental of others, and who can be overindulgent and extravagant.

Aggressive and Domineering

Finally, Queen of Denmark Ingrid also can be aggressive, impatient, impulsive, and short-tempered.