I found a portrait of priceless whiteness, with the color and density of a soft whipped cream!

The young and elegant lady in white is Cecilia Augusta of Baden (1839-1891) who became Grand Duchess Olga Feodorovna of Russia, after her marriage to Grand Duke Mikhail Nikolaevich of Russia, the youngest son of Tsar Nicholas I of Russia.

Cecilia was the youngest daughter of Grand Duke Leopold I of Baden and Princess Sofia Wilhelmina of Sweden.

Although her father was of very liberal political leanings, he showed great severity towards his children, and Cecilia received a rigid education, which she always bitterly regretted, and which led her to have the same severe attitude towards her own children. .

At the age of seventeen, on August 28, 1857, she married Grand Duke Mikhail Nikolaevich in St. Petersburg in the chapel of the Winter Palace. She converted to the Orthodox creed and acquired the title of Grand Princess of Russia. In converting she saw her name change from Cecilia to Olga Feodorovna Romanova.

Fortunately, theirs was a marriage of love and they had seven children.

Grand Duke Mikhail deeply loved his wife and was under her strong influence. Mikhail was a calm, rather boring man who would have been completely happy to devote himself only to artillery and family, and he did not shine with exceptional intelligence. On the other hand, Olga was lively, sharp-tongued, witty and very fond of gossip.

Grand Princess Olga, despite being capricious, had a lively spirit. This vivacity of language often irritated Tsar Alexander III and his wife Maria Feodorovna, so much so that the imperial couple finally decided to limit their acquaintance with Mikhail and Olga.

She was the only member of the imperial family not to take part in state affairs or public functions, devoting herself exclusively to the care of her husband and children. She turned out to be a shrewd, faithful and full of wisdom bride. Towards her children, on the other hand, she proved very rigid, demanding total obedience.

Olga Feodorovna died in the Ukrainian city of Kharkiv on April 12, 1891, at the age of 51.

The portrait made by the German painter Richard Lauchert probably dates back to 1857, the year of Cecilia’s wedding.

In this enchanting portrait, amazing gold and diamond jewels are visible and the wedding ring appears timid in the delicate feminine hands.

White and gold stand out among the foliage of the most classic of backgrounds; everywhere tulle, lace and delicate transparencies wish to give us supreme elegance and romantic sensations.