Ancestors

[sibling(s) unknown]

Descendants

This page has been accessed 1,811 times.

Preceded by

Mohamed Naguib 2nd President of Egypt

23 June 1956 – 28 September 1970 Succeeded by

Anwar Sadat

Biography

Gamal Abdel Nasser (pronounced here) was an Egyptian military officer who led the Egyptian revolution of 1952 and later served as the second president of Egypt from 1954 until his death in 1970.

Gamal Abdel Nasser was born 15 Jan 1918, the son of Abdel-Nasser Hussein and Fahima Hamed. For many years, in an effort to depict their president as a member of the class of rural agrarians, Egyptian government publications gave his birthplace as Banī Murr, the primitive Upper Egypt village of his ancestors. In reality, he was born in Alexandria where his father was in charge of the local post office. Gamal had two brothers, Izz al-Arab and al-Leithi.

From Alexandria, Gamal's father was transferred to Al-Khaṭāṭibah, an impoverished village, where Gamal first attended school. Gamal then went to live in Cairo with his father's brother, Kahlid, who had just been released from a British prison for engaging in anti-British protests. It is said that it was Gamal's uncle Kahlid who first radicalized. As a teen, Gamal often took part in anti-British demonstrations, once receiving a blow on the forehead that left a lifelong scar. In 1928, Gamal was sent to live with his maternal grandfather in Alexandria. Then, in 1933, he joined his father who had recently been transferred to Cairo. After secondary school Gamal attended a law college for several months before entering the Royal Military Academy, graduating as a second lieutenant.

In 1944, Gamal married Tahia Kazem, and settled in Manshiyat al-Bakri, a suburb of Cairo, where they lived for the rest of their lives. Gamal and Tahia had two daughters and three sons: Hoda (b.1945), Mona (b.1947), Abd al-Hamid (b.1951), and Abd al-Hakim (b.1955). Nasser was an observant Muslim who made the Hajj pilgrimage to Mecca in 1954 and 1965.

While serving in the Egyptian army in the Sudan, Gamal met three fellow officers—Zakaria Mohieddine, Abd al-Ḥakīm ʿĀmir, and Anwar el-Sādāt, with whom he planned a secret revolutionary organization, the Free Officers, whose aim it was to oust the British and the Egyptian royal family. On 23 Jul 1952, Gamal and the Free Officers ousted the Egyptian monarchy in an almost bloodless coup d’état. The country was taken over by a Revolutionary Command Council of 11 officers secretly controlled by Nasser, with Major General Muḥammad Naguib as the puppet head of state. Then, in the spring of 1954, Naguib was deposed and placed under house arrest, and Gamal declared himself prime minister. That same year, an Egyptian fanatic tried to assassinate Nasser in Alexandria, later claiming that he had been given the assignment by the Muslim Brotherhood.

In January 1956, Gamal announced a constitution which declared Egypt a socialist Arab state with a one-party political system and with Islam as the official religion. The following June, he was elected President of Egypt with 99.948 percent of the vote. He was the only candidate on the ballot.

On 25 Jul 1956, Gamal announced the nationalization of the Suez Canal. On 29 Oct 1956, Israeli forces invaded the Sinai Peninsula. Two days later, French and British planes attacked Egyptian airfields. In what is now known as the Suez Crisis, the Egyptian air force was virtually destroyed and Israel now occupied the Sinai Peninsula, but Nasser's prestige was undiminished throughout the Arab world.

In 1958, Syria and Egypt formed the United Arab Republic, which Gamal intended to someday include the entire Arab world. Syria withdrew in 1961, but Egypt continued to be known as the United Arab Republic until 1971.

In June 1967, war broke out again between Egypt and Israel. in what became known as the Six-Day War, the Egyptian air force was destroyed on the ground and the Egyptian army was forced to retreat across the Suez. Nasser attempted to resign but was ultimately convinced to remain in office. In 1970, he had tentatively accepted a U.S. plan to begin peace negotiations with Israel when he suddenly died from a heart attack.

Gamal died 28 Sep 1970, in Cairo.

Sources

Wikipedia: Gamal Abdel Nasser

Britanica Gamal Abdel Nasser

Acknowledgements

This profile has been contributed to by the members of the WikiTree 15 Nations Global Tour of 2023