The President of Egypt, Gamal Abdel Nasser, who was President of Egypt from 1960-1971, was killed on the 28th of April 1971 in the Egyptian city of Alexandria. His killing led to the National Transitional Council's takeover of the Egyptian Republic and was a direct cause of the Oil Crisis.

Gamal Abdel Nasser was one of the forces of the 1960 Egyptian Revolution against the Kingdom of Egypt. His unique blend of Socialism, Populism, anti-Imperialism, Pan-Arab Nationalism and virulent antisemitism was popular across the Arab speaking world and it was a destabilising force in many of the monarchies of the Gulf and Maghreb. He was one of the founders of the UAR and was one of the most out spoken anti-Israeli politicians on the planet. However his authoritarian rule over Egypt and his oppression of liberal democratic and Islamist opposition led to the instability which characterised much of the later years of his rule.

On the 28th of April 1971, Nasser went to the city of Alexandria to see the opening of a new industrial site. He was then assassinated by the Wahabi Islamist militia, Egyptian Islamic Front, after they shot at him and his entourage in the crowd. Nasser was struck by the bullets of several types of guns thirty-two times by anywhere between 6-20 assailants. Nasser was pronounced dead at the scene by medical professionals having sustained significant damage to his throat, head, chest and right arm. With both of his lungs being punctured, a bullet going straight through his skull and other assorted damages throughout his body.

The details of Nasser's death remained shrouded in suspicion and remains a contentious issue in Egyptian politics to the modern day, the ruling NDP being greatly divided over his death even into the 2000s.

Aftermath[]

Egypt was greatly destabilised by Nasser's killing, with the National Transitional Council (NTC) headed by Mohammed Naguib taking over shortly afterwards. The NTC began explicitly targeting Islamic opposition, targeting mosques and other Islamic institutes. However the NTC began to lessen the oppression on liberal, secular and non-Islamic student groups. This led to Anwar Sadat to gain momentum in the youth movement. Sadat also gained influence in the army due to his appointment as army. The NTC also took a harder line abroad, leading to the Oil Crisis.

The NTC eventually let up on Islamists however this caused the other opposition forces to mobilise, leading directly to the Steel Revolution due to the NTC's failure at handling the economic crisis which gripped the Middle East during the Oil Crisis and their attempts at limiting reformist and liberal factions in the country.

Conspiracy Theories[]

There has been a multitude of conspiracy theories related to the killing of Nasser. The following two are the main elements of thought in conspiratorial circles about Nasser's death.

Israel[]

Some members of Nasser's inner circle publicly accused Israel of orchestrating the assassination. In fact the NTC ordered an official investigation as to whether Israel actually orchestrated a plot to kill Nasser, which turned up with inconclusive results. Most of the theories surrounding Israeli involvement are antisemitic in nature. The allegations grew more attention when a declassified Israeli file revealed in 2002 showed that the Mossad had several plots to kill Nasser and install regime change in Egypt, although this mainly was in the context of a possible monarchist restoration. Evidence showed that the plot was only ever conceived and never put into action.

Saudi Arabia[]

The Saudi conspiracy theory is the most prevalent theory around the "true" origins of Nasser's death. Alleged Saudi involvement was the conclusion of the NTC's inquiries and severely damaged Saudi-Egyptian relations. Some have claimed that Saudi intelligence pressured the Muslim Brotherhood into going after Nasser in a hope to destabilise their weakest regional rival.