Robert LePage, 87, of Jenkins Street passed away on January 10, 2021 at HopeHealth Hulitar Hospice Center. He was the husband of Dolores (Santos) LePage.

Born in Warren, he was the son of the late Henry LePage and Eva (Boyer) Marcelino. In addition to his wife; he is survived by his daughter Roberta (LePage) Barboza, her husband Peter R. Barboza Jr. and their children Marrisa Lynn Barboza and Justin Lee Barboza; his daughter Brenda (LePage) Child, her husband Philip Child Sr. and their son Philip Child Jr.; his son Robert LePage Jr., his wife Laura LePage and their daughters Lindsey LePage, Shaina LePage and Kayla LePage; his son David A. LePage, his wife Nelia LePage and their sons Jason LePage, Jonathan LePage and Jeffrey LePage; his daughter Dolores Teixeira, her husband Jose Carlos Teixeira, their children Elizabeth Morency, Laura Octaviano, Joseph Teixeira, Michael Teixeira and Thomas Teixeira and their grandchildren Shawn Teixeira, Abigail Gaudet, Christian Octaviano, Ethan Octaviano, Savanna Octaviano, Ella Teixeira, Ava Teixeira, Thomas Teixeira and Adalyn Teixeira. He was the brother of Lawrence LePage, Donald LePage Jeanette Silva and the late Henry LePage, Wilfred LePage, Doris Machak and Arthur Marcelino.

Mr. LePage was educated in Warren and served in US Air Force during the Korean War. He was employed by Carr Fulflex for 27 years before retiring and a shellfisherman for his entire life.

His funeral services will be held Monday, January 18th, at Our Lady of Mt. Carmel Church, 141 State Street with a Mass of Christian Burial celebrated at 11 AM. Visitation will take place in the church prior to Mass from 10 AM to 10:45 AM. Burial will be private. Mass will be live streamed on “Henry Zinno” Facebook page for anyone unable to attend in person.

**Mask use is required and social distancing guidelines will be followed**

Memorial donations may be made to: HopeHealth Hulitar Hospice Center, 1085 North Main Street, Providence RI 02904

Arrangements are with the George C. Lima Funeral Home.