Democratic candidate Thomas Thurston, a Marshalltown native and landscape architect (owner of Thomas Taylor Designs), is running to secure a seat on the Marshall County Board of Supervisors. If victorious, this will be his first time serving as an elected official.

“I always envisioned myself getting involved in local politics. I didn’t know if it’d be on the city council or how it would work out,” he said. “Earlier this year, I was contacted by Rep. Mark Smith, and he thought I would be a good candidate, so he encouraged me to run. I bring some energy and fresh ideas. People tell me they like the idea of having someone young on the board.”

Thurston, a 2005 Marshalltown High School graduate, said he and his family have been devoted to the development of Marshalltown for generations. He and his wife Kelli, a local realtor, recently welcomed the birth of their first child. David Lennox was his great, great-grandfather.

“I think we (myself and the board of supervisors) may have some similarities on some nuts and bolts issues. County roads are very important so farmers are able to get their corn and soybeans and livestock to market. Farmers are the foundation of our Iowa economy, and they need to be treated as such,” he said.

Thurston said protecting the county’s natural resources is a vital component of his candidacy.

“I care deeply about the state of our water and soil, and I would do anything to protect them. I want to work with farmers. I think we could all be doing more to protect and preserve our natural resources,” he said.

Thurston has been involved in tornado recovery efforts, particular focusing on mental and emotional trauma. He said better understanding of mental health issues would be one of his main priorities if elected.

“Mental health doesn’t get talked about enough. There is still some stigma there after decades and decades. I have talked with mental health community stakeholders (and if elected) I would work with the people who already have that knowledge about it and take their advice,” he said.

Thurston said being a small business owner gives him the experience to effectively communicate with constituents.

“I’m a people person. A big part of my business is meeting with new customers of all walks of life, and I feel that communication is really one of my strengths,” he said. “I’m also a creative, artistic person.”