The Pedder Arcade is a new retail concept in Central, Hong Kong. Taking inspiration from historic European shopping arcades, it reimagines the 5th floor of the iconic Pedder Building as a modern shopping destination. The aim of the Pedder Arcade is to be a sanctuary from the intensity of Hong Kong, providing a sophisticated and calm atmosphere for people to enjoy. The shops hosted by the arcade offer a complete shopping experience for the modern gentleman as well as some special items for ladies. Designed and curated by The Armoury and Katherine Wong Design, it features shops, an art gallery and a bar & cafe.

The Armoury is a menswear brand that believes in design, craftsmanship and personal style. Rooted in classic tailoring but with the modern man in mind. The Armoury’s curated selection includes an extensive range of custom and bespoke offerings. We regularly host outstanding tailors, shoemakers and other craftspeople for customers who want not only excellence, but also something unique.

Our goal is to help men develop their own personal style and build a wardrobe that truly expresses themselves.

Established in 2006, Lok Man Rare Books is Hong Kong’s finest antiquarian bookstore, offering a wide range of rare books, first editions and important folios. Genres available include literary fiction, travel, sport, politics, history, food and drink, and children’s books, titles of value can also be sourced on request. Lok Man Rare Books is a professional member of the Antiquarian Booksellers Association (London) and the International League of Antiquarian Booksellers (Geneva).

Phillips is the destination for international collectors to buy and sell the world’s most important twentieth-century and contemporary works of art, design, jewels, watches, photographs and editions. By focusing specifically on the defining aesthetic movements of the last century, they have set themselves apart as the most dynamic and forward-thinking auction house in the world. Their global presence, seasoned expertise and individualized client service lead collectors to seek our guidance on market trends and insights.

Hailed as a cult British designer, Nigel Cabourn has worked in the industry for over fifty years producing collections, which are not influenced by ‘fashion’ trends but driven by inspirational stories of real people in history and vintage military, outdoor and work wear pieces.