DELTONA — At one time, Luis Toledo was the state’s third highest-ranking Latin King, according to a former statewide prosecutor.

He was known as “the warlord” and once held a man down while another gang member wielded a hot pan to burn off the victim’s gang tattoo, said Anne Wedge-McMillen, the former prosecutor who prosecuted Toledo’s former gang boss.

Today, Toledo is accused of killing his wife and her two children. Their bodies have not been found.

Toledo, 32, is charged with second-degree murder in the killing of his wife, Yessenia Suarez, 28, and two counts of first-degree murder in the killings of her children, Thalia Otto, 9, and Michael Otto, 8.

Toledo was the Latin King’s No. 3 in the state, a position known as the enforcer or the warlord, said Wedge-McMillen, a former assistant statewide prosecutor in Orlando who prosecuted a Latin King leader on racketeering and other charges.

“He had a talent for not leaving behind evidence, so much so that unlike other Kings he did not face charges,” Wedge-McMillen said of Toledo. “In other words, there was no DNA, there were no fingerprints, there was nothing at any of these crime scenes that implicated him.”

Suarez and her two children were reported missing Oct. 23, a day after Toledo slapped Suarez at her workplace during a confrontation over an affair she was having with a coworker, according to police reports.

After his arrest, Toledo asked to speak to Wedge-McMillen, who at the time was putting in her last week as an assistant statewide prosecutor and is now a criminal defense attorney with the Umansky Law Firm in Orlando. Wedge-McMillen said Toledo was one of the gang members she called to testify against Jose Perez, aka “King Goofy,” who from 2008 to 2010 was the “Inca” or leader of Florida’s Latin Kings.

Toledo, or “King Semi,” talked about life as a member of the Almighty Latin King and Queen Nation, part of the “People Nation,” an alliance of certain gangs. Toledo talked about a Ghost Tribe of Latin Kings who were known as “Black Knights” and went on secret “Black Rose” missions that often resulted in killing someone, Wedge-McMillen said.

The former prosecutor said Toledo, to show the criminal activity of the gang, described during Perez’s trial holding down an excommunicated gang member while Perez burned off the man’s gang tattoo. The gang also used a knife to cut the tattoo off. Toledo spoke about traveling with other Latin Kings to Melbourne and bursting into a man’s house to dish out a beat down.

Toledo was a true believer in the Latin King Manifesto, the former prosecutor said.

“He believed in that word for word,” Wedge-McMillen said. “He treated it like a bible, so he believed that it was supposed to be this empowerment of brown men and women for the Almighty Latin King and Queen Nation.”

The Kings put the “Nation’s” laws over United States laws, she said. Wedge-McMillen said prosecutors would have liked to have charged Toledo with racketeering but did not have enough evidence. She credited clever law enforcement tactics for convincing Toledo to testify against others, although a defense attorney would have told him that he did not need to take the stand.

She said she was not sure whether Toledo is still a King or not. He claims he is a former Latin King. But the missing mother and her two children reminded Wedge-McMillen of the trial where she put away Perez.

“The theme of my trial was once a King always a King,” Wedge-McMillen said. “So really if I have to look back on it and think about it now, of course, that was just too much who he was — and that lifestyle of violence and entitlement.”

About 181 Latin King gang members are in that lifestyle in Deltona and Volusia County, according to the Volusia County Sheriff’s Office, which declined to provide details about the gang’s activities. Sheriff’s spokesman Gary Davidson said some of those gang members are most likely from out of town and were documented here because they did something or had some contact with law enforcement in Volusia.

Toledo is not the first Latin King to be accused of a heinous crime. Investigators found an “Underworld” scrapbook in Toledo’s house with a clipping about another notorious Latin King: Troy Victorino.

While Toledo was doing time in prison, Victorino recruited three other men and on Aug. 6, 2004, broke into a Telford Lane home in Deltona and beat six people and a dog to death with bats. The men then slashed the victims’ throats.

Victorino is on death row. One of his accomplices, Jerone Hunter, is also on death row for the murders while Anthony Salas and Robert Cannon are serving life sentences for their roles in the killings.

Deltona’s mayor, John Masiarczyk, said that sheriff’s Capt. David Brannon provides updates on gangs in the city.

“I don’t consider it a big problem, but we have concerns always and there is a constant threat of them,” Masiarczyk said.

Masiarczyk said he does not believe there has been an increase in gangs or gang activity in Deltona.

But information provided by the Sheriff’s Office to The News-Journal shows the Latin King gang is only one of 86 documented street gangs in Volusia.

Gang members and associates have been identified all over east and west Volusia and documentation by the Sheriff’s Office shows an increase in their activities — from 24 cases reported in 2004 to 294 cases in 2011 — the latest figures made available.

The Kings in Volusia were run by a man who believed in keeping a low profile, said Wedge-McMillen.

“They have a pretty good presence in Volusia County,” she said.

Flagler County has had “minimal Latin King activity” over the past few years and currently does not have any documented members, said Lt. Bob Weber with the Flagler County Sheriff’s Office. Less than 50 documented gang members are in Flagler County, Weber said.

Wedge-McMillen had a rapport with Toledo because he was a prosecution witness against Perez. She had met Yessenia Suarez. Toledo had never said he was having marital problems, Wedge-McMillen said. Thalia and Michael Otto had been to Wedge-McMillen’s office.

“I had the children in my office coloring pictures,” Wedge-McMillen said.

After the family members’ disappearances, Toledo asked to speak to Wedge-McMillen, who met with him on Oct. 28 during her last week at the Attorney General’s office. The meeting was at the Sheriff’s Office.

“I think everyone was still of the desperate hope at that time that maybe the children were still alive,” Wedge-McMillen said. “And I truly believed that because I had seen him with them. I knew how much he loved them, how much he appeared to love them.”

Toledo told Wedge-McMillen that he killed Suarez but that it was an accident and denied it was premeditated. The gang warlord said he felt “cornered” by the woman whom he claimed was coming at him during a fight.

“He kind of lashed out with his arm and apparently he didn’t even know how it happened, but he thinks he connected with her windpipe,” Wedge-McMillen said, recalling Toledo’s explanation to her.

Toledo said he asked another man who was present to take the kids out of the room so they wouldn’t see their mother die. That person, Toledo said, panicked and killed the children because they were witnesses. Toledo said that person also disposed of the bodies, but Toledo said he doesn’t know where and that’s why he has been unable to tell law enforcement.

The State Attorney’s Office declined comment on Friday when asked about Toledo’s account.

But Wedge-McMillen said Toledo’s story didn’t make sense, adding that no evidence supported it and that she told him it was “ludicrous.”

Wedge-McMillen wouldn’t detail Toledo’s description of how the children died, citing the open investigation, but she said it did not add up.

“I will tell you that it was in a very, very violent manner, a manner that should have had a great deal of blood,” she said.

Investigators found spots of 9-year-old Thalia’s blood in the master bathroom, according to reports. The girl’s blood was also found on Toledo’s left black Timberland boot. Thalia’s blood was also found on the trunk mat for Suarez’s Honda Accord.

Toledo’s neighbor Tyshawn Jackson, 21, contacted law enforcement to tell them about Toledo’s odd behavior starting at 6:11 a.m. Oct. 23. That’s when Toledo knocked on Jackson’s window and asked him to follow in Toledo’s Saturn to a Publix in Seminole County. Toledo drove Suarez’s Honda to the Publix.

Jackson told investigators that Toledo wiped down Suarez’s car. Then he got into his Saturn and with Jackson now sitting in the passenger seat Toledo drove to a garbage bin in Sanford and threw away cleaning supplies, clothing, his boots and the trunk mat from his wife’s car. Jackson took deputies to the Dumpster.

Jackson also declined comment last week at his home, saying “I will talk about it in court.”

Investigators say they believe that the mother and her two children disappeared between 1 a.m. and 5 a.m. Oct. 23 from their home on Covent Gardens Place. Toledo is accused of disposing of the bodies but so far nothing indicates that other Latin Kings helped, Wedge-McMillen said.

“If he didn’t do it himself which, it is kind of hard to imagine that he would have the time to thoroughly clean a crime scene to the extent that crime scene was cleaned and thoroughly and permanently dispose of three bodies,” she said. “So if he somehow did have the time to do that he would know exactly how to do it. He certainly would know how to do it. And if he didn’t do it himself he certainly would have other resources that he could tap into.”

But she added there are no signs he had help.

“There isn’t any evidence as of now that he did have help from them,” she said.

The gang does not approve of killing children, she said.

“That’s never sanctioned by the Kings,” Wedge-McMillen said.

But killing an unfaithful wife would be different in the gang’s eyes, Wedge-McMillen said.

“According to basically the Latin King code, everything being about reputation and respect, to have an affair would obviously be a huge disrespect,” she said. “There’s a lot of Kings in prison who have killed their wives or girlfriends. They are not going to be punished for that (by other gang members) in prison.”

Semi was a family nickname given to Toledo when he was a boy. The gang members put “King” in front of the names, like King Goofy for Perez, the leader who was convicted in September of racketeering, conspiracy to commit racketeering and directing a criminal gang. Perez was sentenced to 20 years in prison.

Toledo joined the gang while in prison doing time for armed burglary, robbery with a gun/deadly weapon and kidnapping out of Broward County in 1999. Toledo, using the alias Michael Garcia, served four years in prison. He gained power in the gang while in prison, Wedge-McMillen said.

“He was kind of someone that was looked up to within the organization and, according to him, he was able to negotiate peace treaties between rival gangs in the prison,” she said. “He was seen as someone who had a lot of authority.”

Toledo was released in 2008, headed to Orlando and went on to gain a “stone” position, or leadership position, in the gang on the outside.

Investigators searching Toledo’s home found Latin King papers and a scrapbook, apparently put together by Toledo. The scrapbook contains pictures of scantily-dressed women along with what appear to be pictures of family and/or friends.

The scrapbook also contained some newspaper clippings from the Tampa Tribune about the Latin Kings and a story from The Daytona Beach News-Journal about Victorino’s murder trial.

There is one picture of a barely dressed woman holding a crown on Toledo’s head.

Toledo took part in gang activities he would later testify about in Orange County court during Perez’s trial. Toledo was there in August 2009 when Latin Kings from Central and South Florida converged on Clearwater to mete out some gang justice.

The Clearwater tribe and its leadership had violated King rules. The other Latin Kings severely beat the Clearwater group, but Perez thought one person in particular was the prime offender and needed to have his tattoo removed.

“(Toledo) is the guy who held down the man over in Clearwater while Jose Perez tried to burn the tattoo off his chest. And he was there when they pulled out the knife and cut through the burned flesh,” Wedge-McMillen said.

Cutting out the tattoo is like excommunication. Sometimes, people are allowed instead to cover up the tattoo with another design. That’s what Toledo said he thought was going to happen then because a Latin King tattoo artist was present with his tattoo gun, she said.

Toledo was also among gang members who in October 2008 attacked a man in Melbourne, the former prosecutor said. The Latin King Inca at the time, Emilio Rosa, felt the man had disrespected his daughter at a wedding.

The plan was to knock on the door and when the man answered pull him outside before beating him. That way the Kings could not be charged with home invasion, Wedge-McMillen said. But in the excitement the Kings rushed in and beat the man with just about any object they could find. Toledo used a child’s scooter that was in the house, she said. An entertainment center was toppled over on the man.

But when the Kings were done, Toledo took the scooter because he didn’t want to leave it behind with his fingerprints. He also ran back to use his T-shirt to wipe down the door frame where he thought he touched it, she said.

Toledo had also been part of what was called a Ghost Tribe or a Black Knight. It’s a hand-selected group that goes on Black Rose missions in which they are sworn to secrecy.

“It’s almost always a homicide mission or it’s a mission to make something or someone disappear,” she said.

— Staff Writer Patricio G. Balona contributed to this report.

A Look At Gangs In Volusia County GANG MEMBERS: From 2007 to today, 629 street gang members have been documented in Volusia County, along with 325 gang associates. WHERE THEY ARE: Gang members have been identified in all Volusia County regions. In Flagler County, there have been gang-related arrests and conviction but no gang activity was being reported this week. MURDERS Murders linked to known gang members: Oct. 23, 2013: Latin King Luis Toledo is accused of killing his wife and her two children in their Covent Gardens Place home in Deltona. Aug. 6, 2004: Latin King Troy Victorino and three other men murdered six people in a Telford Lane home in Deltona. Dec. 9, 2005: Four teens from the Click Tight Gang said they beat a homeless man to death in Holly Hill out of boredom. Nov. 8, 2009: Crips gang member stabs 16-year-old Robin Munsch of South Daytona during a fight at the Oceanfront Bandshell. REPORTING GANGS DAYTONA BEACH: Daytona Beach has unveiled a new anonymous gang hot line, 386-671-5270; text to CRIMES (274637) and messages should begin with DBTIPS. elsewhere in VOLUSIA, AND FLAGLER: In other parts of Volusia County and in Flagler County, gangs can be reported anonymously by calling Crime Stoppers, 888-277-TIPS (8477); text to CRIMES (274637) and messages should begin with Tip231. To speak with Volusia sheriff’s gang investigators, call 386-254-1537 and ask for either Investigator Kyle Powell or Investigator Joel Hernandez. SOURCES: Volusia County Sheriff’s Office, Flagler County Sheriff’s Office, Daytona Beach Police Department

Gang facts compiled by Volusia County Sheriff’s Office