HONG KONG: Hong Kong singer-actress Charlene Choi and her ex-husband singer-actor Ronald Cheng revealed that they were in the midst of divorce proceedings at a joint press conference in Hong Kong on Saturday, said Hong Kong media.

This comes after news that Choi and Cheng had secretly married in Los Angeles in January 2006 surfaced in recent weeks, and Choi’s high-profile disclosure that she is now single in February.

The pair had only recently denied that they were married, even though they admitted that they had not been together for a while now.

“Even though we cannot be husband and wife, we really did share happy times and I wish we can forever be good friends,” said Cheng tearfully, who was seen comforting Choi throughout the event.

“After a while, we had a deeper understanding of each other and found that it was better for everyone if we separate. I hope will give us more space.”

The pair told reporters that they will not be splitting the assets in their divorce settlement which will end their four years of marriage.

Choi explained that they were friends and did not want to turn on each other over money.

Choi commented further on their arrangement at an interview during a Twins meet-the-fans session on Sunday.

“I can afford my own lifestyle and he can afford his”, said Choi. “I can take care of myself.”

Even without a divorce payout, Choi, who is one half of recently revived Canto-pop duo Twins, is still extremely wealthy. She is estimated to have made millions last year from her acting fees, music royalties and endorsement deals. This is not counting the income she receives from renting out her three properties.

Choi’s endorsement deals have also remained unaffected by her secret marriage and subsequent separation.

Choi and Cheng are not the first celebrity couple to have secretly wed.

Hong Kong action star Jackie Chan also secretly married Taiwanese actress Lin Feng Jiao in 1982 and only went public with their relationship 17 years later.

‘Heavenly King’ Andy Lau up till last year, kept the public in the dark about his wife Malaysian Carol Chu whom he married in 2008.

Former bad-boy actor Nicholas Tse was so secretive about his marriage to Hong Kong actress Cecilia Cheung in 2006 that even his mother Deborah Li did not know about it beforehand.

– CNA/ha