Yesterday afternoon, Charlene Choi Cheuk Yin attended the BEAUTY ON DUTY (MEI LAI MUK LING) premiere press conference in Beijing. Also attending were William Chan Wai Ting, Fan Siu Wong, Maggie Lee Man Kwan and director Wong Jing. When the media asked Ah Sa bout news of her marriage to Ronald Cheng Chung Kei, Ah Sa revealed a surprising answer. She said, "We have already been apart for awhile. At the beginning I didn't deliberately want to talk about the relationship between us, but a lot of rumors surfaced about us and now I have to give everyone an answer. We broke up with an understanding, not because of marriage or third party issue. The past beautiful memory will stay within our hearts, now we are still friends."

Meanwhile Cheng Chung Kei who was promoting JUST ANOTHER PANDORA'S BOX (YUET GUONG BO HUP) in Chengdu through his assistant responded, "We have broken up for a long time, but we are not responding to anything else." He also confirmed that they broke up with an understanding. As for the rumored 2006 marriage registration in the U.S., he said that this was a personal issue. He hoped that the outside would stop speculating as currently work came first.

Cheng Chung Kei's former girlfriend Miriam Yeung Chin Wa yesterday attended a new film forum. About her old flame's break up her reaction was curiously large. She asked, "Very sudden, then what? Is it real or fake? (They were rumored to have married in 06?) I am not at liberty to discuss other people's affairs. My identity is so sensitive, everyone please watch LOVE IN A PUFF (CHI MING YU CHUN GIU)!" She also said that she already had very little contact with Cheng Chung Kei so she would not send any text message. She said, "I am not nosy, this is other people's affairs. I am not qualified to say anything or comment."

Her co-star Shawn Yue Man Lok was asked and immediately patted Chin Wa's shoulder, "I pass this important assignment to you." Chin Wa said, "Pass your life!" Yue Man Lok also said, "Your life isn't passed to me, it's already in someone else's hand." Chin Wa suddenly realized, "That's right, I am married. What are you asking so much for? Don't make so much trouble." Ah Lok also said, "She is someone else's old lady, don't mess with her anymore." Ah Lok also did not want to comment on other people's affair.