It turns out the other Twin had a secret, too.

Charlene Choi Tsoek-jin yesterday announced she was divorcing singer-actor Ronald Cheng Chung-kei. It was the first confirmation they had been married.

At a press conference Cheng said he and Choi, affectionately known as 'Ah Sa', had secretly married in Los Angeles in 2006. At the time, Choi's co-star in the acting and singing duo Twins, Gillian Chung Yan-tung, was still seeing on-off boyfriend Edison Chen Koon-hei, whose sexually explicit photos of her were later to land on the internet and derail the duo.

'We were happy about our decision and we had our parents' support,' Cheng said. 'Ah Sa and I always think that marriage is a private matter, and that there is no need to share this with other people.'

The pair called a press conference at Kowloon Bay's Hong Kong International Trade and Exhibition Centre after Chinese-language newspaper Apple Daily yesterday revealed the existence of a marriage certificate in their names.

Cheng, 37, said his marriage with Choi, 10 years his junior, had been a happy one but that they had come to the conclusion they should go their separate ways. He is the son of music industry heavyweight Norman Cheng Tung-hon, the head of record company Gold Typhoon.

'We realised that separation would be good for us,' Cheng said. The separation had nothing to do with a third party, he said. 'It was a rational decision.'

They were in the process of getting divorced, he said.

'Although we cannot stay man and wife,' a tearful Cheng said, 'we will remain friends forever.'

While Cheng was emotional, Choi was expressionless as she spoke briefly. 'From the time we began dating to the present day, we believed we did not have to explain our choices to people, because this is our private life,' she said. 'But artists cannot have any privacy.'

The couple did not take any questions.

Rumours that Choi and Cheng were married began to spread following the recent announcement the Twins would stage a reunion concert in mid-April - their first appearance together on stage since the sex-photos scandal. Choi has enjoyed a successful solo career during Chung's hiatus. She has acted in movies and last year released a solo album whose title, Two Without One, is a reference to the duo's status.

Cheng's early career suffered because of his bad-boy reputation. In 2001, he was sentenced to four months' jail, suspended for two years, by a Taipei court for going on a drunken rampage aboard an airliner. He was found guilty of violating aviation regulations and attacking cabin crew, the co-pilot and pilot on an Eva Air flight from Los Angeles to Taipei. The pilot knocked him out with a flashlight.