sailed from San Francisco for Monterey, and on arrival reported that the “Bay of San Francisco was one of the best he had seen in those seas, from Cape Horn up; and that it was not one port but many, with a single entrance.”

The plan of bridging the Golden Gate had its official inception in 1919. After a series of litigations, the Golden Gate Bridge and Highway District was legally recognized as an incorporated independ­ent agency having the right of eminent domain and the power to make contracts and awards, to incur debts and obliga­tions, to levy taxes, to sue and be sued, and to carry out the functional activities participating counties; this tax to be col­lected at the same time and in the same manner as the general county taxes.

The voters of the Bridge District have approved and authorized, by substan­tial majority, a bonded indebtedness of $35,000,000 to finance the entire bridge project. It is contemplated that these bonds will be redeemed, within a period of less than 35 years, by bridge tolls col­lected from passenger and vehicular traf­fic.

The design of the Golden Gate Bridge, as approved by the Federal Government, measures 4,200 feet between supporting towers, with a width of 90 feet between centers of main cables, and a mid-span vertical clearance above mean high water of 220 feet. Old Fort Scott, on Fort Point, is cleared by a steel arch spanway 319 feet in length and 200 feet high, resting on concrete pylons, its mid-point being 95 feet above the fort. The length of the bridge proper, the center and two back spans, is 6,450 feet. Including the north and south shore approaches the total length of the bridge project is 7 miles.

The north, or Marin, pier is located on the mainland at Lime Point, immediately adjacent to the north shore line of the Golden Gate. Its foundation is 20 feet below sea level with a base dimension of 80X160 feet. The south, or San Francisco pier, is located about 1,100 feet north of the shore line at Fort Point; its foundation being approximately 100 feet below sea level, with a base 90X180 feet. This pier, being in open water of the channel, is surrounded by a protective eliptical shaped re-enforced concrete fender, its channel axis being 300 feet in length as compared with a cross-channel axis of 155 feet. The pier and fender are built on a common foundation but become separate units as they rise to water level. The fender wall is 10 feet in width, rises 15 feet above the water, and is separated from the pier by a 5-foot open water gap. The main towers are secured to the upper level of the piers. Each tower consists of two structural steel columns, 90 feet apart, cross connected with horizontal strut and diagonal bracing; topped with cast steel cable saddles in which will ride the 36 ½- inch suspension cables. The north and south shore anchorages are substantially the same in design and construction, and consist of monster twin blocks of solid concrete built on, and keyed into solid rock foundations. Steel girders to which are attached the suspension cable eyebars are imbedded in the concrete mass. To the exposed or projecting ends of these eye- bars are secured the shoes around which the cable strands are made fast. The gross weight of each anchorage is approximately 120,000 tons. The anchors are of the so- called gravity type and are designed to re­sist the cable pull through their weight factor.

The main span of the bridge will be carried by two cables each 36 ½ inches in diameter and 7,660 feet in length from anchorage to anchorage. These cables are to be of the built-up, parallel-wire, mul­tiple-strand type, consisting of 61 strands of 452 wires each, or a grand total of 27,572 wires per cable.

In the process of building up, each wire is carried across separately, from anchorage to anchorage, and over the towers, by a shuttle or spinning wheel operated on an auxiliary cable having a deflection that will be identical with that of the suspension cables of the bridge. It should be noted that it is the strands of the cable that are secured to the anchorage eyebar shoes. As each strand is completed, the wires composing it are bound together temporarily with thin flat metal seizings- When all strands are finished and property adjusted they are then compacted into the full rounded main suspension cable- The sag of the cable at the center of the main span is 470 feet. The inshore arcs 0 the cable, between the towers and the anchorage, are held at a fixed elevation by means of concrete shafts or pylons.

Statistically the weight of the cable wire is approximately 22,000 tons; cable wire length about 80,000 miles; tension in one cable 63,000,000 pounds; cable supporting capacity 430,000,000 pounds; pull at anchorage 126,000,000 pounds.

The deck of the main bridge is suspended from the main suspension cab by wire rope suspenders spaced 50 feet apart. Each set of suspenders consists four wire ropes 2 ¾ inches in diameter that attach at their lower end to the stiffening trusses of the bridge deck.

The completed approaches will harmonize with the general design of the bridge and be fully adequate to all modern traffic requirements. A toll bridge plaza, 300 by 500 feet, containing 12 toll booths, administration building, and maintenance depot, will be included in the San Francisco approach.

There are several features of the bridge construction, essentially technical in nature, that may be best described by quoting directly from a statement issued by the Bridge District authorities.

As regards deflection, expansion, con­ation oscillation, the statement reads follows:

The theoretical deflection at the center of the bridge due to temperature changes is 16.00 feet. To attain that maximum would require a temperature range far in excess of any ever recorded in the bay area.

Designed to withstand a wind velocity of 90 miles per hour, the bridge can develop a maximum horizontal deflection of 21.25 feet without injury. To reach that maximum the wind would have to be steady and exert a constant pressure over a considerable time. The highest wind velocity recorded in the vicinity of San Francisco was a gust of 50 miles per hour.

Due to the nature of the structure no oscillations can be set up. Each unit would have a different period and synchronism cannot be established as one period would tend to dampen the other. In other words, it is impossible to get all parts swinging in unison. The deck oscillation would be dampened by the suspenders, while oscillation of the suspenders would be contracted by the period of the main cables.

Because of the flexibility of the suspension type of bridge, the structure is far better able to stand earthquake shock than are the modern steel frame buildings.

Differing essentially from the financial plan followed in the building of the Golden Gate Bridge, the Bay Bridge will be constructed without resort to local district taxation, by funds obtained through a major bond issue, supplemented by a loan of $6,600,000 from the State Gas Tax Fund to be used for approach purposes. Complete refundings of both the loan and the bonds are to be accomplished by 1954 from moneys collected as bridge tolls. When completed the operation and main­tenance costs will be defrayed by alloca­tion from State Highway Maintenance Fund.

A typical cross section of this double superstructure reveals two 58-foot road­ways; the lower deck having a 20-foot vertical clearance. Space on the upper deck is divided into six passenger auto­mobile lanes; on the lower deck provision is made for three motor truck and two in­terurban railway lanes. There are no facilities for pedestrian traffic. The total length of the bridge project from terminal to terminal is 8 ½ miles; the total bridge length over the waters of the East and West Bays is 4 ½ miles.

From San Franscisco to Yerba Buena Island there will be two independent suspension spans in tandem with shore anchorages on Rincon Hill and Yerba Buena Island and a single common an­chorage in mid-channel. Each main sus­pension span is 2,310 feet in length with side spans 1,160 feet long. Mid-channel vertical clearance, on each side of central anchorage pier, is 220 feet, decreasing to 176 feet at the harbor lines.

From Yerba Buena Island to Oakland there will be (1) a 1,400-foot cantilever span with two 508-foot anchor arms; (2) five 504-foot through truss railroad type spans; and (3) fourteen 288-foot deck truss spans. Vertical clearance of canti­lever span 185 feet.

Of the 51 piers that support the bridge superstructure, 26 are classified as major units; 8 of which were erected upon sub­merged foundations at depths that exceed all previous records, by methods that have revolutionized submarine concrete construction.

The suspension cables of the West Bay Bridge are supported by four main towers of identical design, each 518 feet high. To the casual observer they appear to have been cut from the same pattern as was used for the Golden Gate Bridge. A closer examination, however, reveals several es­sential differences. Interposed between the upper and lower groups of diagonal braces that tie the vertical columns to­gether are two horizontal braces that will support the double deck roadways. Top­ping the columns are cast steel cable sad­dles in which will rest the 28 ¾-inch suspen­sion cables.

Three entirely different types of anchor­ages are used to hold the four suspension cables of the West Bay Bridges: (1) The San Francisco Rincon Hill anchorage is a single block structure containing 63,000 yards of concrete in which are embedded the cable strand eyebars. (2) The mid­channel center anchorage is a re-enforced concrete cellular structure 508 feet in height, on a rectangular base 92 X197 feet built on bed rock 220 feet below the surface level. This mid-channel monolith, topped with a steel shroud, will be the common anchorage for the two suspen­sion bridges. Its design is such that an unbalanced pull resulting from the de­struction of one of the bridges would not impair the stability of the other bridge. (3) The Yerba Buena anchorage consists of a series of tapering tunnels cut in the natural rock formation of the Island; the strand eyebars are anchored in the tunnel ways by re-enforced concrete.

The four independent suspension cables of the two West Bay Bridges are the same in type and purpose, and differ only in dimensional detail from the cables of the Golden Gate Bridge. Each cable has a diameter of 28f inches, and the sag is ap­proximately 230 feet.

The final plans for the terminal ap­proaches have not been fully determined.

Without question the outstanding fea­ture of the entire Bay Bridge project, one that has revolutionized under-water work, attracted engineering attention throughout the world, eliminated the “sand hog,” and utilized the jaws of huge clamshell buckets for under-water excava­tion, is the use of the compressed air flotation caisson for subsurface work. In an article as brief as this it must suffice to suggestively mention the method rather than to attempt to describe it.

The fabricated caisson used for the central anchorage work in the West Bay was box-shaped, approximately 100X200 feet cross section, and when over the site had been built up to a height of 77 ½ feet and was drawing 20 ½ feet of water. A structural steel cutter 17 ½ feet deep was secured to the lower edges. The interior of the box structure was honeycombed with 55 vertical 15-foot cross-section openings; square at base and changing to steel cylinders. The cylinders were air-tight and dome capped. The addition of concrete outside the cylinder spaces and building up the box structure permitted the caisson being landed on the bottom, undomed, ex­tended, and redomed as the controlled sinking progressed. When the caisson was finally seated on the bottom and its stability assured, the domes were removed and clamshell buckets were dropped through the cylindrical openings to dig out the bottom mud down to bedrock preliminary to placing the solid concrete foundation upon which the tower was eventually built.

Latest reports indicate that both the Golden Gate and Bay Bridges will be completed on or before the scheduled date, at a cost within the original estimate.

Note.—Appreciative acknowledgement is made to the Department of Public Works of the State of California for the Toll Bridge Authority and to the Golden Gate Bridge and Highway District of California for descriptive and statistical data.