Discovery Day of La Robla Green, the world's first biomass power plant with a negative CO₂ balance. Located in La Robla (León, Spain).

It is the response from Reolum, Spanish developer in renewable energy, to a global challenge,

Meeting commitments to curb Climate Change.

Moving towards energy autonomy.

Achieving net-zero CO₂ emissions by 2050.

Decarbonizing the Spanish electricity sector (at least 37% of the energy generated in 2022 came from non-nuclear fossil sources).

Advancing the ecological transition process in industries towards sustainable circular economy models.

Responding to the search for alternatives to fossil fuels in transportation through green e-methanol.

La Robla Green is also our response at the local level,

Promoting a new green economy in territories affected by the end of coal-related activities (these areas are labelled as ‘Transición Justa’ in Spain).

Driving projects with a boosting effect on the local economy.

Halting depopulation in La Robla. The town has lost 35% of its population in recent decades.

Creating quality employment in an area managed as ‘Transición Justa’.

Making better use of renewable agricultural resources in the region and valorizing them for emissions-neutral energy generation.

La Robla Green is the fusion of two projects, ‘Roblum’ and ‘La Robla Nueva Energía’ resulting in a synergistic powerhouse greater than the sum of its parts.

Meet Roblum,

The world's first biomass power plant with a negative CO₂ balance. The CO₂ absorbed by biomass offsets the emissions produced by the facilities, and it will also be captured for use in green e-methanol production.

Meet La Robla Nueva Energía,

The world's first green e-methanol plant. Methanol is highly demanded due to its numerous industrial applications: solvent, antifreeze, paints, construction materials, textile industry, chemical and pharmaceutical industry, as well as fuel production. Green e-methanol is produced from hydrogen generated using renewable electricity (known as green hydrogen) and carbon dioxide captured from biomass combustion. Green e-methanol is a key component in the decarbonization of the chemical industry.