The La Robla Expreso gives you the opportunity to travel on a vintage train, but with all the current comforts, at a very affordable price. The La Robla Expreso unites the classicism of its cars with the modernity of its facilities. A new proposal, for a new route through the north of Spain. Get to know the north of Spain from Bilbao to León along the mythical Robla line on a 3-day trip aboard a luxury train, adapted to all budgets. This train offers routes through the Basque Country and Castilla León in summer, from León to Bilbao or vice versa, 3 days and 2 nights, leaving on Fridays and ending on Sundays. A trip different from the others, with the nostalgia and at the same time the modernity of great train cruises.

Living Rooms

Four spectacular salons cars built more than a century ago are integrated into the Transcantábrico Gran Lujo train. The Tea Room, the Panorama car and the entertainment room are the ideal setting for relaxing with a drink, reading, enjoying live evening entertainment or simply admiring the beauty of the landscape.

Restaurant

Start your morning with a full buffet and a la carte breakfast served in the elegant restaurant wagon of the Transcantábrico Gran Lujo. The waiters will serve you directly at your table, where you can also enjoy the finest dishes of Spanish cuisine prepared by the prestigious chef of the train for dinners or lunches served on board

La Robla Train Room

The spacious Deluxe Suites have a comfortable double bed measuring 1.50 wide x 2 metres long, or two single beds. After the night’s rest, the room is transformed by day into a luxurious private lounge. The bed will be converted into a sofa, from where you can admire the views of the surroundings through the large windows. The private bathroom features a hot shower/steam sauna, a hairdryer and top-notch toiletries. In addition, the suites have wardrobe, luggage compartment, desk, safe and minibar, LED screens, music tuner, individually regulated air conditioning, multimedia computer with free Internet access and an indoor telephone.