Every now and then, remarkable works of art breeze into New York like migrant birds and alight. Who could forget, in 1984, turning a corner in the Lehman Wing at the Metropolitan Museum of Art to find two of Watteau's greatest paintings, resting for a few weeks on their way from Washington to Paris?

At the moment, the museum is host to a convergence of similar visitors in a pocket-size, monthlong exhibition, ''Conversion by Candlelight: The Four Magdalenes by Georges de La Tour (1593-1652).'' The show unites all four of the French Baroque artist's full-length paintings of Mary Magdalene, one of which is in the Met's collection; the others are owned by the Louvre, the National Gallery of Art in Washington and the Los Angeles County Museum of Art.

The gathering is a postscript to the La Tour survey that recently closed in Paris. The Met lent its painting, ordinarily restricted from traveling, for the show and, in a collegial gesture, the Louvre sent its Magdalene to New York for a visit, accompanied by the ineffable and much-loved ''Adoration of the Shepherds,'' another of the artist's candlelit religious scenes.

Although La Tour is best known for his luminous nocturnes, he did not invent the style. (The impetus came from Caravaggio in Rome and filtered north through Utrecht and other art centers.) Nor does it appear in all his work. For example, his painting ''The Fortune Teller,'' owned by the Met and included in the show, is a farcical depiction of petty street crime set in the raking light of day.

''The Fortune Teller'' is thought to be an early piece, though hard information about La Tour's career is scant. He had royal patronage for a time but for the most part stayed away from the glittering hub of Paris. His paintings, in which the mystical and the homely merge, were considered demode even in his lifetime, and were forgotten after his death. We usually think of him as a parsimonious producer, like Vermeer, but no one knows how much of his work has been lost.

The figure of the Magdalene, to which he gave repeated attention, was a staple of Counter-Reformation art. And as shaped by medieval hagiography, she was a composite of several New Testament characters: the repentant sinner who washed Jesus' feet with her tears and hair, the dreamy sister of the efficient housekeeper Martha and the Mary who witnessed Jesus' death and greeted him after the Resurrection.

Thank you for your patience while we verify access. If you are in Reader mode please exit and log into your Times account, or subscribe for all of The Times.

Thank you for your patience while we verify access.

Already a subscriber? Log in.

Want all of The Times? Subscribe.