James Hillier Blunt was born on February 22, 1974. James Blunt is one of the most famous English singer-songwriters and record producer. And also a former officer who served in the British army.

Having received significant success in 2004, Blunt built a musical career thanks to the album Back to Bedlam.

The compilation became famous all over the world thanks to the hit singles: You're Beautiful, Farewell and My Lover.

The album has sold over 11 million copies worldwide. It even reached the top of the UK Albums Chart and reached number 2 on the US charts.

The hit single You're Beautiful charted at number 1 in both the UK and the US. And even hit the top in other countries.

Due to its popularity, James' album Back to Bedlam became the best-selling album in the UK in the 2000s. It was also one of the best-selling albums in the UK charts.

Over the course of his career, James Blunt has sold over 20 million albums worldwide.

He has been honored to receive several different awards. These are 2 Ivor Novella awards, 2 MTV Video Music Awards. As well as 5 Grammy nominations and 2 Brit Awards. One of them was named "British Man of the Year" in 2006.

Before becoming a superstar, Blunt was an intelligence officer for the Life Guards. He also served in NATO during the Kosovo War in 1999. James entered the cavalry regiment of the British army.

James Blunt was awarded an Honorary Doctorate in Music in 2016. It was awarded by the University of Bristol.

James Blunt: The Early Years

He was born on February 22, 1974 to Charles Blunt. He was born at an army hospital in Tidworth, Hampshire, and later became part of Wiltshire.

He has two siblings, but Blunt is the oldest of them. His father is Colonel Charles Blunt. He was a highly respected cavalry officer in the royal hussars and became a helicopter pilot.

Then he was a colonel in the Army Air Corps. His mother was also successful, setting up a ski school company in the Méribel mountains.

They have a very long history of military service, with ancestors who served in England as far back as the XNUMXth century.

Growing up in St Mary Bourne, Hampshire, James and his siblings moved to new places about every two years. And it all depended on my father's military stations. He also spent some time at the seaside as his father was the owner of Cley Windmill.

Despite the fact that in his youth, James constantly moved, he managed to get an education at Elstree School (Woolhampton, Berkshire). And also at the Harrow School, where he graduated in economics, physics and chemistry. He eventually went on to study sociology and aerospace engineering, earning a degree in sociology from the University of Bristol in 1996.

After graduating from high school, James became a pilot like his father, obtaining a private pilot's license at the age of 16. Even though he became a pilot, he always had a significant interest in motorcycles.

James Blunt and wartime

Sponsored at the University of Bristol on a military scholarship, upon graduation Blunt was required to serve 4 years in the British Armed Forces.

After training at the Royal Military Academy (Sandhurst), he joined the Life Guards. She is one of their reconnaissance regiments. Over the course of time, he continued to rise through the ranks, eventually becoming a captain.

After enjoying the service so much, Blunt extended his service in November 2000. He was then sent to London as one of the Queen's guards. Then Blunt made some very strange career choices. One of them was shown in the British television program Girls on Top.

He was one of the Queen's bodyguards. Participated in the funeral procession of the Queen Mother, which took place on April 9, 2002.

James served in the army and was ready to start his musical career as early as October 1, 2002.

The musical career of the artist James Blunt

James was raised in violin and piano lessons. Blunt got acquainted with the first electric guitar at the age of 14.

From that day on, he played electric guitar. James spent a significant amount of time writing songs while in the military.

When Blunt was in the army, a fellow songwriter told him that he needed to contact Elton John's manager, Todd Interland.

What happened next is like a scene from a movie. Interland was driving home and listening to Blunt's demo tape. As soon as Goodbye My Lover started playing, he stopped the car and called the number (handwritten on the CD) to set up a meeting.

After leaving the army in 2002, Blunt decided he was going to pursue his musical career. This is the time he started using his stage name Blunt to make it easier for others to write.

Shortly after he left the army, Blunt signed with music publisher EMI. And also with the management of Twenty-First Artists.

Blunt did not enter into a recording deal until early 2003. This is because record company executives have mentioned that Blunt's voice was great.

Linda Perry began to create her own label and accidentally heard the artist's song. She then heard him play "live" at the South Music Festival. And she asked him to sign a contract with her that evening. Once he did, Blunt traveled to Los Angeles to meet his new producer, Tom Rothrock.

The debut album

After completing the debut album Back to Bedlam (2003), it was released a year later in the UK. His very first single, High, reached the top and hit the top 75.

"You're Beautiful" debuted at number 12 in the UK. As a result, the song took the 1st position. The composition was so popular that in 2006 it hit the US charts.

This is a very big achievement, because with this composition, Blunt became the first British musician to be No. 1 in the USA. This song earned James Blunt two MTV Video Music Awards. She began appearing on television in television shows and talk shows.

As a result, the artist was nominated for five Grammy Awards at the 49th ceremony. The album has sold 11 million copies worldwide. And it went platinum 10 times in the UK.

The next album, All the Lost Souls, went gold in four days. Over 4 million copies have been sold worldwide.

Following this album, the singer released his third album Some Kind of Trouble in 2010. As well as the fourth album Moon Landing in 2013.

While many successful musicians rose to fame and then went out of business, Blunt continued to work. The artist tried to participate in several charitable activities, among which were: holding concerts to raise money and raise awareness about "Help the Heroes", as well as performing at a concert in "The Living Earth".

Personal life of James Blunt

While James Blunt had an amazing musical career, his personal life was almost as impressive. This is mainly due to his wife Sophia Wellesley.

Blunt and Wellesley even attended the wedding of Meghan Markle and Prince Harry. However, this was not much of a surprise. Since Blunt and Prince Harry were friends who served in the military together when they were growing up.

Sophia, who is the daughter of Lord John Henry Wellesley and also one of the only granddaughters of the 8th Duke of Wellington, married on 5 September at the London Registry Office.

On September 19, they flew to Mallorca to celebrate their wedding at Sofia's parents' family home with close friends and family.

Sofia, who is 10 years younger than her husband James, has been in a relationship since 2012. They were soon engaged in 2013 and then had a son in 2016. The name was hidden from the media. The godfather is Ed sheeran.

Sophia graduated from the prestigious Edinburgh University School of Law. He currently works for a successful law firm based in London.

She was promoted in 2016. She became a legal consultant.

James Blunt has had an amazing career that has amassed $18 million. He had a dream woman - Sophia Wellesley, who turned their relationship into a strong and worthy family.