TRAVEL

AAA Travel

Arrow Destination Marketing Group

California State Automobile Association

Days Inn

Disneyland Hotel

Napa Valley Travel Channel

New York Circle Line Cruises + Tours

Nick's Cove + Cottages

Timber Cove Inn

FOOD

Consorzio Flavored Oils (Michael Chiarello)

Consorzio Vignettes (Michael Chiarello)

Cost Plus World Market

Dole Pineapple

Knott's Berry Farm

M & M/Mars Candy (Ethel M Chocolates)

Napa Valley Kitchens

Pinnacle Farms

Napa Valley Mustard Company

Seabear Salmon Company

WINE

BV Winery

Cline Cellars

Estancia Winery

Robert Mondavi Winery (Caliterra

+ Erasuriz Chilean Wines)

Sutter Home Winery

Woodbridge Wines

FASHION + RETAIL

Birkenstock

Lands' End

Macy's and macys.com

Mervyn's

Sears

Spiegel

Sugar Hill

TravelSmith

FUN + ENTERTAINMENT

Dilbert Licensed Products (Cedco)

Disney Licensing (Rubber Stampede)

Lucasfilm Ltd. (Industrial Light & Magic)

New York City Circle Line Cruises

TRX / Fitness Anywhere

24 Hour Fitness

Warner Bros.

NON-PROFITS

Buckelew Programs

Novato Fire Foundation

Zero Breast Cancer

BUSINESS, HIGH TECH + HEALTHCARE

Blue Shield of California

Broderbund Software

Circle Bank

HNTB

Law Offices of John McCaull

Mercy (Catholic Health Works)

Microsoft Office (Mobile App)

Mindscape

Northern Arizona Healthcare Oracle

Safeway

SanDisk

Software Publishing Company

Symantec

VISA (NFL Promo)

Kudos

"Gini worked as a copywriter for us for two months, collaborating with our creative and account teams

on new campaigns, online and print ads, emails and direct mail for our offices here in Palo Alto and in

Phoenix, Las Vegas, Seattle, Sacramento and Vancouver. She is a creative and intuitive writer and

collaborates well with her co-workers.”

Doug DeCarlo, Vice President/Creative Director, Bernard Hodes Group

"Gini was very instrumental in increasing ILM's presence at the major movie studios, and our

clients always commented on her professionalism and can-do style. She's not afraid to

tackle any scale of request, and is innovative and creative in finding solutions."

Rose Duignan, Marketing Director, Industrial Light & Magic

(Lucasfilm, Ltd.)

"Love Gini’s scripts! She did all the research for our AAA Travel Tips spots, including research

on the Seabiscuit script, and was always attentive to the details. She is the best!"

Jan Yanehiro, Bay Area Broadcaster + AAA Travel Spokesperson

"Gini assisted Arrow Marketing on a Travel Channel shoot, and provided excellent advice,

perfect timing and an anticipatory management style that allowed all the details to flow together

seamlessly. We could not have done it without her."

Laura Bourret, President, Arrow Destination Marketing Group, Napa, CA

"Working with Gini is always a pleasure. She brings a refreshing perspective to any

project and is very accommodating about meeting our deadlines. She works

closely with our in-house design staff, and her ability to quickly grasp the scope and copy needs

of a project make it easy for our team to meet our clients' needs."

Carol Callahan, Studio Manager, California State Auto Assn. (AAA Travel)

"Gini is a true professional. She writes consistently great copy at

breakneck speeds, and cheerfully keeps the job organized and focused. She

says what has to be said, with an economy of words, that always fit right

into my layout."

Rita Wood, Art Director, Rita Wood Creative & Art Direction

"Gini was instrumental in helping me develop my marketing strategy, create web site design

and content, prepare an initial mailer, and organize a very successful event. She was

strategic in her thinking, very organized and a pleasure to work with."

John McCaull, Law Offices of John McCaull, Sonora, CA

"Gini's a talented writer and joy to work with. Her submissions needed very little editing, and

she was always conscientious about meeting deadlines."

Donna Devaul, Managing Editor, Catalog Age

To contact Gini:gdavid1100@aol.com

ADVERTISING AGENCIES

Ansible Mobile (Interpublic)

Arc Worldwide (Leo Burnett/Publicis)

Arrow Destination Marketing Group

Bernard Hodes Group

Clinton E. Frank (Chicago)

Haggin Marketing

J. Stokes + Associates Advertising

Nagy Design

Rita Wood Creative