A subsidiary of Ameritech hinted it might take disciplinary action against striking employees who refuse to return to work despite a tentative settlement of their 2-week-old strike against the Midwest regional telephone company.

The Communications Workers of America and two Ameritech subsidiaries -- Ohio Bell and Wisconsin Bell -- announced tentative agreements over the weekend but striking employees at both companies said they would remain out until agreements were reached at Ameritech's companies in Illinois, Indiana and Michigan. Ameritech Services, another subsidiary, also announced a tentative agreement.

Ameritech is one of three struck 'Baby Bells' regional telephone companies.

'It has been the company's point of view that we, in fact, have reached an agreement and what is going on elsewhere should not have an effect on our employees,' Ohio Bell spokeswoman Mary Lou Ringle said. 'There has been no determination if there will be disciplinary action, but it is feasible.'

The CWA represents 10,100 at Ohio Bell, 4,200 at Wisconsin Bell, 580 at Ameritech Services, and about 20,000 at the companies in Michigan, Indiana and Illinois. Unlike the other 'Baby Bell' companies, Ameritech has refused to negotiate a region-wide contract.

'We made it very clear from day one, as far as we were concerned, if we went out, our people would stay out until all the companies settled,' said CWA spokesman Steve Rosenthal. 'We do not want anyone to be left hanging.'

No weekend talks were scheduled at the other two 'Baby Bells' - NYNEX, serving New York and New England, and Bell Atlantic, representing six states and the nation's capital.

Negotiators at Bell Atlantic subsidiaries in Pennsylvania and Delaware are still trying to settle local issues. Last week, Bell Atlantic reached a tentative agreement with the CWA on major economic issues and settled on local issues at its other subsidiaries. Workers have remainded off the job pending settlement at all the subsidiaries.

The CWA represents 41,000 workers at Bell Atlantic, which serves 14 million customers in Delaware, Maryland, New Jersey, Pennsylvania, Virginia, West Virginia and Washington, D.C. Their strike began Aug. 6.

New Jersey Bell's other union, the International Brotherhood of Electrical Workers, rejected the company's 'final' offer last week. The IBEW represents 9,200 linemen and other technicians who work for New Jersey Bell.

NYNEX, the regional company serving New York and New England, and union officials are scheduled to resume contract talks this week aimed at settling their strike.

NYNEX, with 60,000 workers off the job since Aug. 6, provides telephone service to 10.5 million customers in New York, Vermont, New Hampshire, Massachusetts, Rhode Island, Maine and two towns in Connecticut.

Negotiators reached agreement at Ohio Bell on Saturday and at Wisconsin Bell early Sunday. Details of the agreements were not released.

Management personnel will continue manning operator-assisted and directory-assistance calls in Wisconsin and Ohio, officials said.

The walkout by Ameritech's 35,000 CWA members began Aug. 12, and has slowed some operator services and repair and installation work but, due to automation, has had little effect on most phone service.

Four other 'Baby Bells' across the nation, Pacific Telesis, BellSouth, US West and Southwestern Bell, settled with their employees earlier in the month.