Rio Tinto Group derives revenue from mineral exploration, production and processing. The group employs over 49,340 people, operates globally, and is administered from its registered offices in London and Melbourne.

Rio Tinto Group operates under a dual listed companies structure comprising Rio Tinto plc, a United Kingdom-based listed public company headquartered in London, listed on the London Stock Exchange and New York Stock Exchange under the code RIO; and Rio Tinto Limited, an Australian-based listed public company headquartered in Melbourne, listed on the ASX and NZX under the code RIO. The companies are managed as a single economic unit.

Rio Tinto operates mining and mineral projects in around 36 countries worldwide. Rio Tinto operates under the following divisions:

Growth

Aluminium

The company operates fully integrated facilities involved in mining, processing and refining bauxite to aluminium and other products with operations in Australia, Brazil, Canada, France, Guinea, Iceland, New Zealand, and Oman.

Copper & Diamonds

The company produces copper from its interests in Chile, Mongolia, and the USA. As a by-product of mining copper, the company also produces gold, silver and molybdenum from its copper mining operations. The company also mines, refines and markets diamonds from its Argyle Diamond mine in Australia and Diavik Diamond Mine in Canada.

Energy and Minerals

The company mines uranium, borates, salt and titanium dioxide from sites in Australia, Canada, Guinea, Madagascar, Mozambique, Namibia, Serbia, South Africa and the USA.

Iron Ore

The company mines, smelts and transports iron and iron ore globally. The company operates its iron ore assets portfolio in the Pilbara region, Western Australia, and plans to expand the operations further.

Commercial

Rio Tinto sells and markets minerals and metals to the global market primarily to industrial companies for further processing. Through its Marine & Logistics division, the company provides ocean freight and supply chain services to the Rio Tinto group with a fleet of both company owned and chartered ships. Its Procurement division focuses on creating sustainable cost efficiencies and higher productivity, and freeing locked-up working capital for the group.

Growth and Innovation

Rio Tinto invests in technology and innovation across all of its ventures to increase the efficiency and operational capabilities of the company as a whole.

Borates

Borates are crystallised salts that contain Boron