The NBA draft is today, but for the first time in several years, Mike Miller won't have to worry about finding himself on the trading block.

Miller, who was traded to the Minnesota Timberwolves in the 2008 draft and the Washington Wizards in last season's draft, is an unrestricted free agent this offseason, meaning he is in control of his own destiny.

And if he has anything to say about it, part of that destiny will include winning.

"He's hoping to land on a team that has a chance of winning again and getting to the playoffs," Miller's father, Tom Miller, told The Daily Republic Tuesday evening. "He's getting up there in his years, so he's interested in getting a three- or four-year contract of his greatest interest."

Mike Miller, who was the fifth overall draft pick out of the University of Florida in 2000, enters his 10th year in the NBA this season.

Miller, who led the Mitchell Kernels to Class AA state titles in 1996 and '97, has appeared in 20 playoff games with the Orlando Magic and Memphis Grizzlies, but hasn't seen postseason action since 2006.

He has never made it out of the first round, and has won just two postseason contests.

Tom Miller, who lives in Mitchell, wouldn't say who Mike is hoping to play for, but did say that he can't even talk to anyone until after July 1.

"His agent has fielded some calls from interested teams, but he won't be able to talk to them or get any offers until after July 1," Tom Miller said. "That's when the free agency market opens. Up to that point, (teams) are not able to talk to any of the free agents."

Until July 1, Miller will sit and wait to see what happens in the draft and, potentially, what other free agents -- such as LeBron James, DeWayne Wade and Chris Bosh -- do.

No matter where he ends up, Tom Miller said Mike wants to win.

After being traded by Memphis in the '08 draft, Mike Miller made it closer to home, but the Wolves finished the season 24-58 and saw coach Kevin McHale fired before the end of the season. Miller's scoring average hit a career-low at 9.9 points per game and he shot 38 percent from 3-point range.

His luck didn't get much better when he got to Washington as the Wizards, who seemed a promising young team, were put in a negative spotlight when Gilbert Arenas brought guns into the locker room.

Washington finished the 2009-10 season 26-56. Miller averaged 13.8 points and 6.4 rebounds in April, and scored 23 points in a game against the Knicks.

The Wizards won the No. 1 draft pick in the lottery in May, but with his NBA career likely winding down, Tom Miller said his son knows he needs to find a team that can consistently win, and soon.

"That's never a lot of fun when it's midway through the season and it's over," Tom Miller said. "He realizes that right now, he's taking it one step at a time, but he realizes more than likely this is going to be his last longer contract. Three or four years is what he'd like to get."

Tom Miller said he'd like to see his son play closer to home so he can watch more of his games, but he knows that might not fit into what Mike wants and needs right now.

"It would be nice, but he's got to do what he's got to do," Tom Miller said. "That probably won't be a major factor."