Raúl García is the Vice President of Policy and Legislation at Earthjustice. He leads a team of advocates who work with policymakers in Congress, federal agencies, and the White House to advance some of the most consequential policy issues around climate, environmental health, and biodiversity. With an emphasis on Earthjustice’s commitment to partnership, the Policy and Legislation team centers the communities most impacted by these issues and advocates for an affirmative vision for more equitable and climate-conscious policies.

Before becoming Vice President, Raúl served as the Legislative Director for Healthy Communities where he worked on Earthjustice’s advocacy strategies to defend and improve federal safeguards for clean air, clean water, and against toxics exposure. Raúl previously served as a Senior Legislative Counsel at Earthjustice with a focus on protecting the National Environmental Policy Act and advancing environmental, health, and safety protections in infrastructure development.

Prior to joining Earthjustice, Raúl dedicated his career working for the protection of rights of underrepresented communities, including advocating for voting and civil rights, immigration benefits and labor and employment protections. He credits these experiences with informing his own partnership-centered approach to environmental advocacy. Raúl previously was a practicing attorney specializing in family and employment immigration petitions.

Passionate about the socio-political advancement of historically underrepresented communities, Raúl has worked for a number of organizations seeking to empower and defend them. He served as a legal clerk at the Mexican American Legal Defense and Educational Fund and worked at the Mexican Embassy, Laborers’ International Union of North America and the Labor Council for Latin American Advancement.

Raúl is a native of Mexico City and moved to Chicago at age 10 and cites his own lived experience as informing his commitment to justice and equity.

He is admitted to the Virginia Bar and received his JD from American University Washington College of Law in 2013. He is also a Magna Cum Laude graduate of Villanova University, where he majored in Global Interdisciplinary Studies, Honors, and Political Science with a Certificate in International Relations.