I think that if dovetail does decide to add the circle and District line they should do them together as a bundle because the routes are so similar that it wouldn't matter which one you get because the stations are essentially the same and so are the trains and also since the circle and District lines have more stations than the bakerloo line they could more route tasks

The district line and circle line are only similar on that they use SOME of the district line stations and the same trains.

Between Edgware Road and Tower Hill the Circle is on the Metropolitan lines (or for the last bit on it's own) and then the District to Gloucester Road where the Circle goes North but the District does not, though they do join up again after that junction to go onto Edgware Road again

The District extends from Tower Hill eastward another 18 stations to Upminster and Westward from Gloucester Road goes to Earls Court which is it's major splinter station, with FOUR branches from this point totaling another 22 stations

So I would say that with 40 stations NOT used by the circle line, and 18 not used by the District, that's a fair bit of those two systems that are not the same, even if "similar"

If you would like this to be added, only consider the Circle Line. Adding the ENTIRETY of the Circle and District Lines would be a mess. You did not provide enough information about the route, and if someone was not familiar with the system and read this, they would get confused.

If you are, the Circle Line runs from Hammersmith to Edgware Road via the City of London. It used to be an actual circle until 2009. If this was modern day, the rolling stock would be the S Stock, with two variants. The S7 and S8. The S7 Stock is 7 cars long, and the S8 Stock is 8 cars long.

Not a lot of information I provided, but YOU should be the one who's able to provide their route information in your forum, not the viewers.

Maybe, but how would the timtable work with no end points and the service going in a continuous loop?

I definitely agree the District Line would be better more variety of services but saying that 40+ miles isn't the problem it's the 60 stations that would cause problems. But definitely another underground route subsurface District Line would be my first choice with rolling stock C-69 and D78

Attached Files:

f6a5681443ac0be88cf2df87c02cb924.jpeg

File size:

54.9 KB

Views:

2

j63i5p4v5a471.jpg

File size:

308.3 KB

Views:

3

Personally I'd rather have the C 69 than S Stock, as my dad was a driver on the District Line now retired 10 years ago but i always went to work with my dad as he drove the D78 and C 69, mainly C 69 as he was based at Parson's Green

Those first two images are from the long-retired 1983 Stock which ran on the Jubilee Line, not the D78 Stock.

The District Line has a vast history, and yet I see modern-day, modern-day, modern-day. If I were to suggest this line, I would do so in a similar way that I had when putting forward ideas for other Underground Lines and setting them in the past.

The District Line saw electrification between 1903 and 1905, and I would perhaps offer the idea of setting it then and using a different and older train rather than rolling stock from 1938 onwards. Setting the route this early could see the use of steam locomotives as well as the new (for the time) electric-powered trains depending on the year chosen and the different phases of electrification between those years.

I think it would be good if DTG does not ignore the early days of the line, which is something that is applicable to all routes. and not just focus on the present all the time. I am sure the London Transport Museum has more than enough information to set a line this early in its history.

Left: A03 Electric Rolling Stock (1903)

Something like this would be great, though I would settle for something with the skirted R and CO/CP stock. Can still smell that hot Bakelite!