The Circle Line is an underground service of the London Underground circling the center of London. It was first described as such in 1949 and already appeared on the 1947 Underground Map. It had not been built as a separate line, but was merged from different sections of the Metropolitan Line and the District Line. Only two short sections of this line are solely used by the Circle line. These sections are the connecting curves between the stations of High Street Kensington and Gloucester Road and between Aldgate and Tower Hill.

The route would have 27 Stations

The Circle Line Trains to be used on the route could consist of the old A Stock Trains bringing them back in to service once again and re live the older days of the underground.

A60 / C and D Stock Underground Trains

As a future DLC I would suggest the S7 Stock Trains that now run in replacement of the A Stock Circle Trains

This one comes up regularly, would be good and better than the dire WOS/TML iteration. C69 stock era preferred for me.

NB: Your picture shows the C stock which is the correct type for the route. The A60 stock was used on Metropolitan Line services from Aldgate and Baker Street out to Uxbridge, Watford and Amersham.

Thanks for correcting me there

it would be nice to see the fleet of old and new trains.

Brilliant idea!!!

Would the Great Western Main Line indicate more significance in the form of rollingstock, starting with the stretch between London Paddington to Hammersmith. Not to mention the unique places like Baker Street, seeing something like that in TSW 3 graphics is truly amazing:

looking al forward to driving a C stock tube next to a HST departing from London Paddington

If there ever even come an Underground line like these.

True but London Commuter is over 50 miles long and just short of 30 stations so it's not impossible for DTG to do just my opinion

It is possible.

Not as easy as regular train lines' I think. Take a look at other "Underground" line's the Bakerloo had 25 stations and the developers had to make a number of new "assets" from the Underground. In any case, they didn't have to start from scratch scratch as "Just Trains" had to do with the Metropolitan line.

Even if it would be too much work to make this you still have this piece of the Hammersmith & City Line

(29 station's).

I do indeed like Baker Street Tube station as there are many little references to Sherlock Holmes

Thats why I feel this route could actually have potential due to the different trains you can drive

I agree with you there and I think it will be really cool seeing the Mainline trains coming into paddington station as you pass by on the underground line.

Yea the mix of three stock units, each driving in its own way, we can't get any better... To think that the model of the D stock has already been made for this game for the Island Line 2022 (class 484) is already an advantage.

I agree with you they already have the D Stock model so then that way they will get a head start on the development of the train and the route and it will be great to see a return of the underground roundels again

I've said elsewhere that I'd be happy with any sub-surface tube line on the condition that if it's the Circle it will include the Hammersmith part. I'll be even happier if it's set at a time of transition so you've got the choice of traction. The Bakerloo came close but it was disappointing that the silver TS73 and "Bus red" TS 38 with the roundels didn't result in a 1985 transition timetable.

over 17 miles long according to wikipedia

Hammersmith & City line Barking - Hammersmith

15.8 miles

There is also another station called Hammersmith (Piccadilly and District line) it does connect these two. The Hammersmith station on here looks slightly different: But the line does share a piece with the Metropolitan line.

Circle line

Hammersmith - Edgware Road

Metropolitan line

Aldgate - Amersham

The section between Aldgate and Baker Street is shared with the Circle Line between Liverpool Street and Baker Street with the Hammersmith & City Line

District line

Edgware Road - Earl's Court tube station -

Wimbledon station

I think the Met Line is most likely personally. Just Trains have all the info/diagrams/research for the route as it is today and Turbo Networkers are in the game, albeit GWR versions. Hopefully the TSW version would come with A-stock to make it more interesting/challenging than the current TSC version.

More unlikely now given DTG no longer has the Chiltern Railways license (based on such content being removed in TSC recently).

It would be great if they got a second london underground line as the NYC Maps have two subway routes

You are correct as a matter of fact just trains has experience in making S Stock for TSC they can be tasked to make this route for TSW 4 with them rebuilding their TSC S stock for TSW 4 UE4.26 later on UE5

But the older trains have a manual system which the older trains I suggested would be more practical

But to be honest the new S8 stock is in TSC which is run on manual and ATO but they still could just add the new stock but drive it manually like it is in TSC. And /or and ATO which again is featured in the glasgow subway route in TSC. But I would much prefer the new S7/8 stocks

You are correct you can see that on just trains manual for the Metropolitan line they might as well remake it complete with London Heritage collection Class 20 GWR 57xx Duck 4TC

I was thinking about this and what DTG could do is use the older trains that have the manual Dead mans handle controls

I am trying not to. Do not get me wrong the circle line is great but I believe that the service is not frequent enough and there is not much variation. Sorry if it is repetitive

I am just desperate to get a great London Underground route so I an sorry if I am annoying. I will try not to. I would like the South Western railway from Portsmouth Harbour to Waterloo.