SIGNED AND LIMITED FIRST EDITION, one of 325 hand-numbered copies specially bound and signed by the author, Seamus Heaney of which 300 were for sale 8vo, in the original special limited issue binding of gray paper-covered boards backed in black cloth with a printed paper label on the spine, in the matching original slipcase of gray paper-covered boards covered at the top and bottom with black cloth. [xi], 76 pp. A flawless copy, both book and slipcase are as mint. VERY FINELY PRODUCED LIMITED ISSUE SIGNED BY SEAMUS HEANEY, WHO RECEIVED THE 1995 NOBEL PRIZE IN LITERATURE. This collection, DISTRICT AND CIRCLE, won the 2006 T. S. Eliot Prize, the most prestigious poetry award in the United Kingdom. It also won the Irish Times "Poetry Now Award". "[Heaney's] voice carries the authenticity and believability of the plainspoken--even though (herein his magic) his words are anything but plainspoken. His stanzas are dense echo chambers of contending nuances and ricocheting sounds. And his is the gift of saying something extraordinary while, line by line, conveying a sense that this is something an ordinary person might actually say." Brad Leithauser, The New York Times Book Review.

Hardcover. Condition: Fine. Dust Jacket Condition: Fine. 1st Edition. Buyers in Dublin are welcome to view and purchase in store at Parliament Street you do not need to order online, please email PARLIAMENTSTREET at OXFAM dot ORG so we can reserve it for you, if you could reference P212 then we can find it for you quickly * * We are open Mon - Saturday 10 - 5.30; Sunday & bank holidays 1.30 - 5pm * * please contact us for more images, as we can only upload 5 * * The shipping rate shown is based on 1.5kg and dependent on the destination, we will contact you in case of discrepancy. For multiple orders we will contact you with shipping options, as the quoted rate for a 2nd order is a total weight on 3kg, and yours might well weigh less. Signed by Author(s).

Hardcover. Condition: Fine. Dust Jacket Condition: Fine. 1st Edition. First UK edition, first printing (precedes the US edition), signed by Heaney to the title page. Heaney's penultimate collection, District and Circle won the 2006 T. S. Eliot Prize, the most prestigious poetry award in the UK., as well as the Irish Times "Poetry Now Award". London: Faber and Faber, 2006. Publisher's original green cloth boards, spine lettered in gilt; pp. (x), 76. A fine copy in a fine, unclipped dust jacket. As new, protected in archival mylar. Signed by Author(s).

Hardcover. Condition: Fine. Dust Jacket Condition: Fine. 1st Edition. 8vo., 78pp. Beautiful Unread Stated First American Edition, First Printing with full number sequence. Square, tight, and clean throughout with little or no wear. Equally attractive unclipped dust-jacket, ($20.00), is fresh and bright with no chipping, creases, tears or toning. Signed by Heaney on the title page. From the library of noted New Jersey Irish-Ameican author, collector and professor of Irish history and literature, Tom Fox, with his unobtrusive blind-stamp on the title page. Fox was called by Nicholas Basbanes, ", a kindred spirit.assembler of an uncommonly distinctive collection of Irish history and literature". A gorgeous collectable copy.