"Modern Family" has given us more than a few tear-jerking moments, but Andy Bailey (Adam Devine) and Haley Dunphy's (Sarah Hyland) goodbye in "Double Click" is up there as one of the show's most soul-shattering sequences. From Season 5 to Season 7 of the hit ABC sitcom, Andy and Haley shared a tumultuous relationship that began in the episode "A Fair to Remember." Even after breaking up some time later, their attraction to one another never quite deserted them. Eventually, Andy, after an emotional farewell at the airport with Haley, who claims Andy was the first man she ever loved, moves back to Utah to take advantage of a career opportunity.

Thankfully, we haven't had to say bye to fun Adam Devine performances since his departure from "Modern Family." Far from, in fact, as the actor, who before and during his time on "Modern Family" collected credits on notable productions such as "Pitch Perfect," "Ice Age: Collision Course" and "The Lego Batman Movie," has continued to pop up in some noteworthy places. Interestingly, one of his most standout projects since then has even seen Devine reunite with his old "Modern Family" flame.

Since departing from "Modern Family" in 2018, Adam Devine has found himself attached himself to some significant projects. His voice acting career has seen him star in shows such as the Disney Junior series "Vampirina," the Tubi original "The Freak Brothers" and Netflix's "Green Eggs and Ham," the latter of which saw Devine star in the main role of Sam-I-Am. Beginning in 2019, he would also star alongside Danny McBride, John Goodman, and Walton Goggins in the McBride-created HBO series "The Righteous Gemstones" as Kelvin Gemstone, the immature yet passionate Gemstone Salvation Center youth pastor.

But for "Modern Family" fans, one of Devine's more recent projects stands out from the crowd. In 2022, Devine made his return to the "Pitch Perfect" franchise on the Peacock original series "Pitch Perfect: Bumper in Berlin." The show sees Devine reprise the role of Bumper Allen, who appeared in "Pitch Perfect" and "Pitch Perfect 2," as he moves to Germany after one of his songs becomes a hit in Berlin. Along the way, he meets secret songwriter and American army brat Heidi, played by Sarah Hyland. As the show has only completed its first season, time will tell how their relationship develops. Still, it's clear that the two already have the obvious chemistry that made their "Modern Family" pairing so beloved.