"Modern Family" costars Sarah Hyland and Adam DeVine (DeVine played Hyland's character Haley Dunphy's boyfriend Andy Bailey) are reuniting for a "Pitch Perfect" spinoff series called "Pitch Perfect: Bumper in Berlin," which we finally have a first glimpse of.

In the show's trailer, released by Peacock on Nov. 2, DeVine reprises his role as Bumper Allen — the antagonist and leader of all-male a cappella group The Treblemakers in "Pitch Perfect" — after a viral TikTok video makes him a big hit in Germany. The clip, which also shows Jameela Jamil with an almost German accent, teases the hilarious journey Bumper goes on to revive his music career and achieve the fame he's always dreamed of.

If you recall, Bumper (spoiler alert!) left to join John Mayer as a backup singer at the end of the first "Pitch Perfect" film and returned in the sequel to work as a security guard at Barden University, eventually joining the group The Tonehangers. But in the upcoming spinoff series, he's "given a chance to reinvent himself in a world totally foreign to him," executive producer Elizabeth Banks told People, and will have the chance to "grow into a full human in this series."

Reps for DeVine and Hyland did not respond to POPSUGAR's request for comment, but it's clear the former relished the chance to appear alongside his costar once again in "Bumper in Berlin." "I feel we left a lot on the table between our characters in 'Modern Family,'" he told People. "So it was incredible to have an opportunity to give the fans more of what they loved between the two of us."

Ahead, read everything we know about Peacock's "Pitch Perfect: Bumper in Berlin."

"Pitch Perfect: Bumper in Berlin" Trailer

"Pitch Perfect: Bumper in Berlin" Cast

DeVine returns as Bumper, with Hyland appearing alongside him as aspiring singer-songwriter and music executive assistant Heidi, according to TVLine. Jamil stars as German pop star Gisela, Flula Borg plays Bumper's friend Pieter, and Lera Abova plays the role of DJ Das Boot.

"Pitch Perfect: Bumper in Berlin" Plot

"Pitch Perfect: Bumper in Berlin" follows Bumper as he attempts to rekindle his career after a song of his finds success in Berlin. According to People, Banks originally pitched the series as "Loki" meets "Emily in Paris." It will follow "a lovable villain from our films," Banks said, "who gets a chance to be the hero of his own story in a foreign land filled with romance, comedy, strange new characters, and hit songs."

It will also see Bumper team up with German a cappella group Das Sound Machine, Banks revealed, which made waves in the first "Pitch Perfect." "One of our favorite elements amongst all the Pitch Perfect films was the German group, Das Sound Machine," she said. "I hear from fans all the time on social media asking what happened to DSM? So from that came the idea to build a show around Bumper, send him to Berlin, and team him up with Flula from DSM."

"Pitch Perfect: Bumper in Berlin" Release Date

"Pitch Perfect: Bumper in Berlin" premieres on Peacock on Nov. 23.