Young journalists-turned-politicians lost a court case on Sep. 30 as they sought to challenge an official registration for an oligarch to run in the Oct. 26 parliamentary election.

The oligarch in question, former deputy

Prime Minister Valeriy Khoroshkovsky, has lived in Monaco in the past

few years. Under Ukraine’s law, only Ukrainians who have lived

in the country permanently for the past five years are allowed to run

for parliament.

“It is clear the rule of law isn’t

working in Ukraine,” said prominent journalist Serhiy Leshchenko,

who is running in parliamentary election for the first time. “I am

afraid some high ranking Ukrainian officials ordered to

register Khoroshkovsky as part of an unofficial agreement with former

regionals (Party of Regions members).”

Valeriy Khoroshovsky, an ex-prime minister who fled Ukraine for Monaco after a falling out with ex-President Viktor Yanukovych, is back in Ukraine and running for parliament. The election is on Oct. 26.

Khoroshkovsky is one of Ukraine’s

richest men. He recently returned home to run in the Oct. 26

parliamentary election on the party list for Sylna Ukraina headed by

another mogu, ex-Deputy Prime Minister Sergiy Tigipko.

Khoroshkovsky made his fortune in the

metallurgy and media sectors, among others. He served as deputy prime

minister between February 2012 and December 2012 under now ousted

President Viktor Yanukovych.

Former journalists running on the party

list of Ukrainian President Petro Proshenko, Leshchenko and Mustafa

Nayyem, filed a complaint to the Kyiv Appelate Administrative Court

stating that Khoroshkovsky’s registration was in violations of the

Ukrainian law.

Records from the Ukrainian border

service provided by the plaintiffs showed that Khoroshkovsky left

Ukraine in December 2012 after leaving office and did not return

until September 2014.

However, journalist lost the case as

the oligarch was allowed by court to run for parliament.

Khoroshkovsky did not attend the

proceedings, but sent lawyers from the Kyiv Legal Company he owns to

represent them. The registration documents presented to the

Central Election Committee by Khoroshkovsky first stated he was

unemployed before later stating he was employed by the Kyiv Legal

Company and had been on a business trip abroad for the time in

question.

Yaroslav Porokhnyak, one of the men

representing Khoroshkovsky, said he had not seen the contradictory

documents before that day.

Svetlana Chernyuk from the Central

Election Committee’s legal department defended the Committee’s

decision to approve Khoroshkovsky’s candidacy stating that his

documents were in order.

After a long recess the three judges in

the case ruled that the plaintiffs had failed to show that

Khoroshkovsky’s election registration documents were not in order.

Leshchenko and Nayyem vowed to appeal the decision.

“The decision shows you that to the

state and (presidential) administration an oligarch matters more than

journalists,” said their lawyer Tatyana Kozachenko.