WILL.I.AM not only founded one of the biggest hip-hop groups of all time but has also helped launch the career of many other artists.

Here we take a look at the life and career of one of the most successful artists.

Who is Will.i.am?

Born March 15, 1975, William James Adams Jr. was born in Los Angeles, California, and became friends with future Black Eyed Peas member apl.de.ap while still at school.

Ahead of finding fame as a musician, Will harboured an ambition to become a fashion designer and attended the Los Angeles Fashion Institute of Design and Merchandising.

He launched his i.am.angel Foundation in 2009 to help provide financial support and opportunities for young people to go to university.

Speaking to The New York Times in 2011, the singer explained the reason behind his creative name.

He explained: “I liked playing with words. I noticed that my name was a sentence, meaning one with will, who is strong-willed.

“And so I called my mom and said, ‘Hey, Mom, do you mind if I call myself Will.i.am?’ She was like: ‘Whaaa? You’re crazy.’ She was cool with it.”

Who's he dating?

It appears that Will.i.am is currently single.

Speaking about his love life, Will told the Mirror: "I don't have time for girlfriends, and that's why I just keep busy. I keep going because that's what I want to do."

He was previously dating Celebrity Big Brother star Casey Batchelor in 2014.

In the past, he has also been linked to Torn hitmaker Natalie Imbruglia.

Will, whose love life has always remained a bit of an enigma, did reveal he dated an ex for eight years and that they inspired the Black Eyed Peas track Don't Lie.

The future family man exclusively told The Sun in April 2017, that in the future: "I wanna live and I want to be able to do whatever and make sure my kids’ kids don’t have anything to worry about.”

Although there have been rumours that Will.i.am has a secret daughter, The Voice coach doesn't have any children, however, he has hinted that he may one day adopt.

What's his net worth?

According to The Richest, Will.i.am has a net worth of $75 million (£62 million).

He has five albums with The Black Eyed Peas and his own solo musical projects as a source of income.

He is also a partner in Beats Electronics.

In 2016, Will revealed he had donated £600,000 salary from The Voice to the charity The Prince’s Trust.

What are his biggest hits?

In addition to being a lead member of The Black Eyed Peas, Will's successful solo career has earned him a collaborative 10 UK number ones and a whopping 26 top ten singles.

His hit songs include: