Abstract

ENGLISH ABSTRACT: Louis Botha (1862-1919) is a towering figure on the South African historical landscape. Raised as a farmer in Natal and the Free State, he rose to prominence through a combination of military service and government office and became successively the premier Boer combat general and later a British lieutenant general, premier of the Transvaal Colony, and then the first prime minister of the Union of South Africa. Botha’s influence on South Africa, and the wider British Empire, is recorded in the five existing biographies. While these works explain aspects of his life, they do not provide a comprehensive academic study. This dissertation bridges that gap in the discourse. Three of the Botha biographies - those of Harold Spender, Sydney Buxton and Frans Engelenburg – were written by colleagues and contemporaries, while the remaining two biographers – Johannes Meintjes and (more recently) Richard Steyn had no personal connection. Collectively these works are not archival studies, lack the customary academic apparatus, and mostly treat particular aspects of Botha’s life, as do the other studies that focus on Botha’s role during specific periods of his career, including but not limited to the Anglo-Boer War, the political development of the Transvaal and the Union of South Africa, as well as the Afrikaner Rebellion and First World War campaign in German South West Africa. This dissertation bridges this gap by providing a critical examination of the political and military career of Louis Botha, in a full-length portrait. It is, at the same time, a reappraisal, providing a fresh look at the man who helped shape modern South Africa. It offers new insights into his life and highlights both the positive and the negative aspects of his dealings. The man lionised for his military prowess, political nous, and governing competence, was at the same time badly flawed, wavering at times, and making crucial errors, side-lining whole sectors of South African society and sacrificing people of colour on the altar of ‘white’ unity. Botha was very human, imperfect, inconsiderate, and insecure, but he was also charming, attractive, emotionally intelligent, and confident. Botha was thus a complex man, general, administrator, politician, visionary leader, patriarch and racist who lived by the norms of his time, while moulding the agenda for a modernising South Africa. Botha is painted by some as the charming farmer and accidental politician. This dissertation provides an alternate view. He was undoubtedly a successful farmer and he proved to be an effective minister of agriculture. But he had realised too that his personal passion provided a lever of power. His career was founded in the old commando tradition that linked farming and landowning, to military service, government office and economic and further political opportunity. While he excelled at farming, military service and its reward brought territorial aggrandisement and social escalation. From landowner, Botha became a veld cornet, and this led him into the meeting hall of the Transvaal volksraad. From there, harnessing the opportunities presented by the Anglo-Boer War, he rose rapidly in rank to become the Transvaal commandant general, a position that he converted after the war into political office. Towards the end of his career, when South African prime minister, he once again had the opportunity to combine military command and conquest with territorial acquisition but in the name of a greater South Africa.AFRIKAANSE OPSOMMING: Louis Botha (1862-1919) is ‘n lewensgrootte figuur op die Suid-Afrikaanse historiese landskap. Hy het groot geword as ‘n boer in Natal en die Vrystaat, en later prominentheid bereik deur ŉ kombinasie van militêre diens en regeringsampte. In so ‘n hoedanigheid was Botha ‘n prominente Boere veggeneraal, ‘n Britse luitenant-generaal, die premier van die Transvaalse Kolonie, asook die eerste minister van die Unie van Suid-Afrika. Botha se invloed op Suid-Afrika en die breër Britse Ryk is aangeteken in die vyf beskikbare biografieë oor hom. Dié bronne bespreek slegs sekere aspekte van sy lewe, en is nie akademies van aard nie. Hierdie proefskrif vul die leemte in die breër diskoers rondom Botha. Drie van die Botha biografieë – naamlik die van Harold Spender, Sydney Buxton en Frans Engelenburg H. Spender, Lord Buxton – was geskryf deur sy kollegas en tydgenote, terwyl die skrywers van die ander twee biografieë – Johannes Meintjes en, meer onlangs, Richard Steyn – geen persoonlik verhouding met Botha gehad het nie. Nie een van die bronne is gebaseer op deeglike argivale navorsing nie, en bied ook geen akademiese analise nie. Inteendeel bied elk van die biografieë, asook meeste ander bronne, slegs ‘n blik op sekere aspekte van Botha se lewe, byvoorbeeld sy rol in die Anglo-Boereoorlog, die politieke ontwikkeling van beide die Transvaal en die Unie van Suid-Afrika, asook die Afrikaner Rebellie en die Eerste Wêreldoorlog veldtog in Duits Suidwes-Afrika. Hierdie proefskrif vul dus ‘n duidelike leemte, en bied ‘n kritiese analise oor die politieke en militêre loopbaan van Louis Botha as ‘n vollengte skets. Ter selfde tyd is dit ‘n herwaardering van een van die sleutelfigure wat gehelp het om die moderne Suid-Afrika te vorm. Talle nuwe insigte oor Botha se lewe kom na vore, beide positief en negatief. Die man wat opgehef was vir sy militêre bekwaamheid, politieke intellek, en regerings bevoegdheid, was terselfdertyd ook erg gebrekkig, wankelend by tye, het soms kritiese foute gemaak, het groot dele van die samelewing vervreem, en het nie-blankes te na gekom ter wille van blanke-eenheid. Botha was dus menslik, imperfek, onbedagsaam, en onseker, maar hy was ook sjarmant, aantreklik, intelligent, en selfversekerd. Hy was ‘n komplekse man, generaal, administrateur, politikus, visionêre leier, patriarg, en rassis, wat gelewe het volgens die norms van die tyd, alles terwyl hy besig was om die voetwerk te doen vir die modernisering van Suid-Afrika. Vir sommiges bly Botha ‘n sjarmante boer en toevallige politikus. Die proefskrif bied egter ‘n alternatiewe blik op Botha. Hy was ongetwyfeld ‘n suksesvolle boer en later ‘n effektiewe minister van landbou. Hy het egter gou besef dat sy persoonlike passies vir hom mag kon verseker. Sy loopbaan was stewig gevestig op die kommando-tradisie, waar boerdery en grond besit gekoppel was aan militêre diens, regeringsamp, asook ekonomiese en ander voordele. Terwyl Botha ‘n suksesvolle boerdery bedryf het, het hy as beloning vir militêre diens meer eiendom en status bekom. Omdat hy ‘n grondeienaar was, is Botha bevorder tot veldkornet, wat hom toegang gegee het tot die Transvaalse volksraad. Botha het gebruik gemaak van elke moontlike geleentheid tydens die Anglo-Boereoorlog. Teen die einde van die oorlog was hy die Kommandant Generaal van die Transvaal – ‘n posisie wat hy na afloop van die oorlog na ‘n politieke amp verander het. Later in sy lewe, as die Eerste Minister van Suid-Afrika was, het Botha weereens die geleentheid gehad om militêre bevel te kon kombineer met die verkryging van groter grondgebied – maar die keer vir die ideaal van ‘n groter Suid-Afrika.