Derby Academy in Hingham, MA is pleased and honored to announce the appointment of Thomas J. Reid, as Interim Head of School for Derby Academy effective July 1, 2020.

The search for the Interim Head began in January when the Derby Academy Executive Committee and Search Co-Chairs, Trustee Jeff Alexander P'24 and Caroline Counselman P'21,'24, working with Marc Hurlbut and Deirdre Ling of Educators’ Collaborative, reviewed the credentials of numerous candidates from across the country, including experienced former heads of school and experienced interim heads who have had highly successful tenures at other independent schools. After a series of interviews with the top candidates, the Executive Committee of the Derby Academy Board of Trustees voted unanimously to appoint Tom Reid as the Interim Head of Derby Academy for the 2020-21 school year.

Tom Reid brings to Derby an exceptionally strong and successful career as a leader and teacher. He currently serves as the Interim Head of School at The Benjamin School in North Palm Beach, FL. In addition to his interim position at The Benjamin School, he has served as interim head of four other independent schools–Palmer Trinity School (FL), Upland Country Day School (PA), Charleston Day School (SC), and White Mountain School (NH). Prior to his interim work, Tom served as Headmaster of St. Paul’s School in Lutherville, Maryland for eleven years, and Headmaster of Buckley Country Day School in Roslyn, New York for fourteen years. Tom brings a wealth of independent school experience along with great wisdom in shepherding schools through leadership transitions.

Tom began his career as a classroom teacher at Chestnut Hill Academy in Philadelphia after which he served as a teacher and administrator for nine years at Pomfret School in Connecticut. He holds a B.A. in History from the University of Pennsylvania, and an M.A. in Educational Administration from the University of Connecticut. In addition, Tom has served on the Board of Directors of the New York State Association of Independent Schools, the Association of Maryland Independent Schools, and the Maryland Interscholastic Athletic Association. He is also the founding director of Ice Hockey in Harlem, an after-school program that has served young people in Harlem for the past 28 years.

Tom will arrive at Derby along with his wife, Ann, who is an accomplished independent school educator in her own right. She began her career as a teacher and spent many years working in development and admissions at the elementary, collegiate, and secondary school levels. Tom and Ann have two children, Kelly and John. Kelly is the 9th and 10th Grade Program Director at Chapel Hill-Chauncy Hall School in Waltham, and John is the Middle School Athletic Director and a history teacher at Thayer Academy. John and his wife, Heidi, live in Hingham, just a mile or so from Derby, with their two children, Charlotte and Cooper.

Upon learning of his appointment, Tom commented, “Since I first learned of the interim position at Derby, I hoped I would be writing this statement: I am honored and excited to have been selected to be the Interim Head of Derby Academy. I have a great appreciation for Derby’s extraordinary history, and eagerly embrace the responsibilities and opportunities that come with leading Derby Academy. I look forward to getting to know the school and community better and visiting campus in the early spring."

Derby Academy looks forward with great enthusiasm and anticipation to welcoming Tom and Ann to the extended South Shore community.