100th Anniversary of the Battle of Belleau Wood

A commemoration event of the Battle of Belleau Wood (1–26 June 1918) occurred during the German Spring Offensive in World War I, near the Marne River in France. The battle was fought between the U.S. 2nd (under the command of Major General Omar Bundy) and 3rd Divisions along with French and British forces against an assortment of German units including elements from the 237th, 10th, 197th, 87th, and 28th Divisions. The battle has become a key component of the lore of the United States Marine Corps.

*This program is generously underwritten by Synchrony Financial.

WITH GUEST SPEAKER: ANNETTE D. AMERMAN

Branch Head, Historical Inquiries and Research Branch

Marine Corps History Division

Ms. Annette Amerman is the History Division’s head of the Historical Reference Branch and is serving as the Series Historian for the History Division’s World War I Centennial Commemorative publications. Ms. Amerman joined the division in 1995 as a student intern in the Reference Branch from Shenandoah University, was later hired as a civilian clerk in 1996, and served in the branch as a research assistant for a year and a half.

Ms. Amerman returned to the branch in 2003, where she managed the Lineage and Honors Program for the next 10 years, before being reassigned to duties dealing with requests from Headquarters Marine Corps, Congress, and other prominent offices.

In addition to her normal duties, Ms. Amerman edited an updated reprint of Edwin N. McClellan’s The United States in the World War (2015), and compiled and wrote The United States Marines in the First World War: Anthology, Selected Bibliography and Annotated Order of Battle (2016), as well as The Marines Have Landed: Eighty Years of Marine Corps Landings, 1935-2015 (2016).

Ms. Amerman earned a bachelor’s in history from Shenandoah University, a master’s in history from George Mason University. She has published numerous articles in Leatherneck, Marine Corps Gazette, and Fortitudine magazines.