While Rufus King, the American Minister Plenipotentiary to Great Britain from 1796-1803, used his own reading for political ends, he also employed his diplomatic pull in an attempt to guide the reading of others. Most ambitiously, he worked with the anti-slavery Parliamentarian William Wilberforce to influence French actions against the slave trade during peace negotiations in 1801-1802. No doubt, the two leaders met through their mutual friend John Jay who probably recommended they seek each other out upon King’s arrival. They seem to have done so and were on intimate terms by at least April 1797. That month King wrote in his memorandum book that Wilberforce told him that Foreign Minister Lord Grenville, “was a cold, formal character; proud and in that respect quite a Lord – that he knew him well as ‘Billy Grenville’ when a Boy, that he had the seedlings of this Character in him then in like manner as the acorn contains the Oak.”[1] Such rapport demonstrates the basis of trust that the two leaders had for each other, and while no doubt personally gratifying to both, their friendship allowed them to advance their respective interests.

King’s anti-slavery credentials go back to the early 1780s when he fought to keep the institution out of the Northwest Territories. Wilberforce, ever the activist, probably saw King as a useful ally from the start of their friendship. He might have introduced King to his wider circle of anti-slavery partners, including Granville Sharp. King, who was familiar with the Somerset decision of 1771 and Sharp’s role in the famous case, corresponded with Sharp for a short period in 1797. Sharp sent King a letter along with several of his anti-slavery pamphlets, which King appears to have bound into one volume. It is unclear if the two men ever wrote again after this initial exchange.[2] But King and Wilberforce sustained a long-lasting partnership that lasted beyond the former’s years in Britain.

Their primary project involved the translation and dissemination of anti-slavery literature in Paris in order to influence the negotiations for peace in 1801-1802. The pair began their work in early 1800; long before serious negotiations had begun in early 1801. Napoleon Bonaparte, as first consul, had sent out peace feelers since 1799, but both Pitt and Grenville were distrustful of the general and refused to reciprocate. Wilberforce knew negotiations would eventually occur and he wanted to be ready. In early 1800 he wrote to King, saying “I have been reflecting with much Solicitude on the grand project I suggested to you of effecting a general abolition of the Slave Trade by a convention to be made in the negotiations for Peace.” Wilberforce suggested he could make the British government amenable to this plan, and, probably overstating his case, claimed the French have “little apparent interest” in continuing the institution. He pointed out that the French would be essential to counter any move by Spain, Portugal, or Holland to preserve the trade. In order to build French support at the coming peace negotiations, Wilberforce wanted “to lay before Bonaparte the short abstract of the Evidence adduced before the Ho[use]. of Com[mon]s, (espec[ial]ly. that affecting the Slave Trade in Africa, a subject little understood or consider’d) & still more the printed account of 2 debates which took place on my motions, wherein are speeches of Mr. Pitt & Mr. Fox.” Wilberforce asked King to sound out Louis Guillaume Otto, the French commissary for prisoners of war in London since 1799, and an old friend of King’s from the days when Otto resided in America in the 1780s, to see if the Frenchman was willing to help get the printed materials to Paris. Wilberforce was taking a great personal risk doing this, as it was illegal to negotiate on behalf of the nation without proper accreditation, but he saw it as a moral duty to act. To cover himself, he wanted to disguise any correspondence as a simple information exchange, like Sir Joseph Banks’ interventions with Napoleon to protect scientific ventures. King understood the risk and uncharacteristically agreed to join the intrigue.[3]

Shortly after this letter was sent, Wilberforce regretted not finding King at home so they could discuss “the subject of our late intercourse.” He lamented his inability procure any translation of the anti-slavery materials. The manuscript, “tho’ little for a printed Volume, that work will in writing appe[ar] of such formidable Bulk, that I fear it will scarce put in a Claim strong enough to obtain it a reading from a Man whose time must be so much taken up as that of the person whose perusal it is intended [Napoleon] – It has occur’d to me that it might be highly useful if the Proposal were without delay to be started by Mr. O[tto] – When once an Interest should be excited, then even a large Manuscript might not deter.” Wilberforce reported that a friend told him the fastest way to get a translation was to send the manuscript to Paris through French booksellers in London and let them build up a buzz for the work. Once word was out, “Anyone in Paris (the Premier himself) who might wish to see it, in Paris, might be inform’d where in Paris it was to be obtained, & the Translat[io]n by a Word from him might be accelerated in any degree.” King, realizing Wilberforce’s earnestness, wrote back the next day saying that Otto had been contacted and that he would look into the proposal to work with the French booksellers.[4]

The plan seems to have staled at this point. The year from mid-1800 to mid-1801 was filled with complicated maneuvering by King involving negotiations over the prize courts, border disputes, and the stalled commissions of the sixth and seventh articles of the Jay Treaty and left little time for side projects. But neither forgot the scheme. King’s mind was struck by a passage involving the slave trade during his reading of Edward Gibbon around this time. Under the heading “Negro Slavery” King extracted from Gibbon’s Memoirs: “Lord Sheffield having voted agt. the abolition of the Slave Trade, Mr Gibbon asks him in a Letter – ‘Do you not expect to work at Belzebubs sugar Plantation in the infernal Region, under the tender Govt. of a Negro Driver[’]”.[5] In late November 1800, Wilberforce told King he had arranged a dinner where they could meet and discuss their project to abolish the slave trade. A dejected Wilberforce said the matters that they consider of such importance “are not in so good a train as I would wish.”[6]

After another several month hiatus, the two friends picked up the pace of their work after the Pitt ministry fell in February 1801 over the Catholic emancipation issue. The new government, led by Henry Addington and his foreign minister Lord Hawkesbury, had fewer qualms about opening up peace negotiations with Napoleon, and did so immediately. Wilberforce wrote to King soon after these moves were made and desired to enter into direct talks with Otto after receiving permission from Addington to do so.[7] This led to Wilberforce transmitting the manuscripts to King under circumstances of extreme secrecy, and King in turn forwarded them to Otto, who was by now the French Minister Plenipotentiary to Britain.[8] Wilberforce directed King to tell Otto to “address it to the person for whom it is designed – I understand this must in any Case secure it from violation, which for many Reasons you must suppose me to desire – I wish likewise that Mr. O[tto] should not know from whom the packet comes to you – I have been detain’d so long by finding it difficult to get English tolerably translated into French.” Wilberforce desired Otto to not speak of where the manuscripts originated.[9] It is unclear if the parcel ever made its way to the French printers.

Throughout the summer of 1801 Otto and Hawkesbury tried to hammer out a preliminary peace deal in London. Unhappy with the progress at home, Hawkesbury sent Anthony Merry to Paris to negotiate with the French foreign minister Talleyrand. The parcel would have made it to France long before the preliminary peace was signed October 1, 1801. Both sides went right into negotiations for a final agreement with Lord Cornwallis continuously challenged and outmaneuvered by his French counterparts, Joseph Bonaparte and Talleyrand. Wilberforce became dejected almost immediately when the British were given the relatively virgin land of Trinidad in the negotiations. It would be a new focus of British development, which would require massive importation of slaves. Even if the French could be brought around, Wilberforce watched his own footing fall out from under him.[10] At best, the materials sent by Wilberforce and King were an afterthought, which is reflected in Wilberforce’s depressing reading of the diplomatic scene:

Wilberforce told me that he had not much hopes, that the Article abolishing the Slave Trade would be inserted in the definitive Treaty. Lord Cornwallis knew & cared little about it, but wd. act fairly, whereas Malmesbury [a retired diplomat whose advice was often sought], knowing the King’s opinion, like a mere courtier as he was, wd. be sure to defeat any hopes wh. might exist in its favour. Addington was well enough disposed, as well as others of his colleagues, but Hawkesbury partook of his Father’s sentiments on this topic and he had fairly told him that so long as he entertained these principles he W. would never look upon him with the friendship he desired to do. Wilberforce seemed to think (in wh. I believe he is quite mistaken) that Bonaparte was disinclined or lukewarm, on account of his wife, who is a Creole![11]

King was right, Napoleon was disinclined for reasons of politics and economics. Right after the Treaty of Amiens was ratified on April 1, 1802, Napoleon revived the institution of slavery and reintroduced the slave trade into the French Empire. It had never been formally abolished in the aftermath of the Revolution and Napoleon was now allowing his countrymen to operate under the pre-1789 rules of the trade.[12] The emperor then sent an expedition to reestablish French power in the Caribbean, leading Rufus King to express great fears of a renewed French Empire in America. The French would retake Guadeloupe from a band of rebels, but the failure to reassert French control on Saint Domingue in 1802 led to an eventually pull out from America when Europe erupted into war again in 1803.

[1] RK Papers, Vol. 73, N-YHS.

[2] Granville Sharp to RK, 30 June 1797, Box 88, N-YHS. This box contains only one folder. This folder contains manuscript copies of letters Sharp sent to several others on topics like Frankpledge. Sharp said he sent “the Plan for Towns &ca. I have also sent the French Plan Frankpledge … I have also sent 2 papers concerning the true Causes of the Late enormities in France … and a 3rd paper (in the same Cover vizt. the Extract of a Letter to the Govr. of Sierra Leone) urges the necessity of a Test to exclude Papists & Apostates from any share in a free and well constituted Legislature. … I have sent a Copy of the Militia Tract which I promised, with a Tract on Duelling, and also a Copy of my Declaration of the Peoples Right to a share in the Legislature (1st printed on behalf of the People of America) lest the Copy in your possession shd be only the first Edition, which had no index.” King’s library inventory notes he has one volume of “Sharps Tracts.” RK Papers, Vol. 74, N-YHS. The pamphlets have since been unbound and are available at N-YHS.

[3] John Pollock, Wilberforce (London: Lion, 1982), 181; William Wilberforce to RK, undated but before April 1800, Vol. 25, RK Papers, N-YHS. This letter is also in King, ed., The Life and Correspondence, Vol. 3, 510-513. It is erroneously dated “Sept. 1801.” The manuscript has no date and internal evidence contradicts a September 1801 date. At the end of the letter Wilberforce says “I have not forgotten that you expressed a wish to possess the publications mention[e]d in my Letter & have been , I trust successfully, taking steps for getting you copies of them.” At some point he at least partially followed up on this, as the “House of Commons” tract is currently located in the King library at N-YHS. It is bound with Thomas Clarkson’s An Essay on the Slavery and Commerce of the Human Species in a volume called “Slave Trade” in RK Papers, Vol. 74, N-YHS.

[4] Wilberforce to RK, 4 April [1800], RK Papers, Vol. 25, N-YHS. RK endorsed the letter “Ansd 5th That the person had been seen & wd lose no time in communicating the proposal.”

[5] RK Papers, Vol. 102, N-YHS.

[6] Wilberforce to RK, 24 November 1800, King, ed., Life and Correspondence, Vol. 4, 336.

[7] Wilberforce to RK, undated but probably after 17 March 1801, Vol. 25, RK Papers, N-YHS.

[8] Wilberforce to RK, 22 & 27 May 1801, Vol. 25, RK Papers, N-YHS.

[9] Wilberforce to RK, 4 June 1801, Vol. 25, RK Papers, N-YHS.

[10] Seymour Drescher, Econocide: British Slavery in the Era of Abolition (Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 2010), 105-108.

[11] RK Papers, Vol. 73, N-YHS. Also at King, ed., Life and Correspondence, Vol. 4, 21.

[12] Hugh Thomas, Slave Trade: The Story of the Atlantic Slave Trade: 1440-1870 (New York: Simon & Schuster, 1997), 546-547.