The founders of Rome2rio are set for a $40 million payday after selling the travel startup to UK-based booking platform Omio.

The Melbourne-based startup which helps travellers find and compare routes was started by Bernie Tschirren and Michael Cameron nine years ago from the living room of Mr Cameron's parents.

The pair were frustrated that travel websites were focused only on flights with very little information available to plan trips by train, bus and ferry, so, they set about building a platform to help users figure out how to get from places like Budapest to Antwerp using various transport options.

Mr Tschirren and Mr Cameron have built Rome2rio into a team of 80 employees with turnover of over $10 million but decided it was time to sell.

The amount paid by Omio is undisclosed, however, Mr Tschirren and Mr Cameron said it was "life changing" and it is estimated the pair will receive more than $40 million under the terms of the purchase.

"The deal has been in the making for almost a year now," Mr Cameron said. "Omio is a very similar business to ours ... both show users how to get from anywhere to anywhere by different modes of transport."

It makes sense to hand your baby over and maybe start something else one day.

Rome2rio founder Michael Cameron

As Omio's focus is on selling tickets while Rome2rio's expertise is in search, Mr Cameron said "it made sense to join forces".

Naren Shaam, chief executive and founder of Omio, said Rome2rio had a skilled team, great product and innovative technology.

"Together, our two brands will reach half a billion users every year and offer access to thousands of transportation operators globally, helping us to deliver our vision to solve consumer travel globally," he said.

Mr Tschirren and Mr Cameron will both stay on with the business "until some time next year at least".

"When you are an entrepreneur and start a business it makes sense to hand your baby over and maybe start something else one day," Mr Cameron said. "It was always our goal."

The pair have raised $1.6 million from investors over the years and received a $1.2 million grant from Commercialisation Australia.

"I think one of the things you learn to do with a business based in Melbourne is be efficient in your use of capital," Mr Cameron said.

Loading

Mr Cameron said it takes tenacity to build and sell a business.

"I think being in Australia makes it a bit more challenging as well," he said. "You need to get to a certain scale for it to be worth their time to go down the process of acquiring you. It's not a simple process to sell your business and it took almost a year in our case and sometimes it can take longer."

Mr Cameron said the pair brought in board members who had experience in selling businesses to help guide them in the journey, including Tracey Cooper and Hugh Williams of Google Maps.