Domino’s is in big-time denial about cheese. The chain has covered its boxes with some sickening propaganda promoting the dairy industry’s newest campaign slogan: “Undeniably Dairy.” Take a look below:

The top of this box reads, “Domino’s appreciates America’s Dairy Farmers, because no one understands the work that goes into cheese more than they do … except for maybe the cows. So next time you see a dairy farmer, or a cow, give them a high five and say thanks.”

Because Domino’s is blatantly denying the suffering and death that go hand in hand with consuming dairy, people were quick to clap back at the idea of “thanking” cows for the “work” that they put into the production of cheese.

Instead of saying “Undeniably Dairy,” here’s what the logo on Domino’s boxes should look like:

When they’re still very young, many cows are branded with hot irons and their horns are gouged out or cut or burned off—all without painkillers. But you won’t see those things mentioned on Domino’s boxes.

Cows on dairy farms are repeatedly impregnated through artificial insemination in order to keep their milk flowing, and then they’re traumatically separated from their newborn calves. When their bodies wear out, they’re shipped to slaughter.

Undeniably Deadly

In the U.S., more than 30 million cows suffer and die in the meat and dairy industries every year. For context, that’s more lives snuffed out in a single year than the entire human population of Texas—the second most populous state. That’s a pretty sad ending for all those “happy” cows on the back of that Domino’s box.

Those used for their milk are killed far short of their natural life expectancy, because their bodies simply can’t take the stress, wear, and tear that they endure in the dairy industry.

Undeniably Unnatural

As a result of dairy-industry practices, cows today produce more than four times as much milk as members of their species did in 1950. They’re also more likely to suffer from mastitis, a painful inflammation of the udder that’s one of the leading causes of death among adult cows in the dairy industry. According to the U.S. Department of Agriculture, approximately 16.5 percent of cows used for their milk in the U.S. suffer from this condition.

Undeniable Diarrhea

It’s estimated that three out of every four adults worldwide are lactose intolerant, a condition even more prevalent among people of color. A mother cow’s milk is biologically intended for a baby cow, and adult humans who ingest it can experience bloating, flatulence, and even diarrhea. Is diarrhea the “best part of pizza”? Domino’s seems to have glossed over that part.

Vegan cheese, for the record, contains zero lactose.

Undeniably Unnecessary

Nobody needs to support the cruelty of the dairy industry, because milks and cheeses made from soy, nuts, grains, and other plants are delicious and come free of the cholesterol that comes in every glass of cow’s milk and slice of cow’s cheese. And they’re increasingly available in grocery store chains all across the country. Get all the information you need about dairy-free options by checking our guides to plant-based milks and cheeses.

*****

Don’t be in denial about dairy “products.”

Vegan cheeses are the only ones that come free from #UndeniableMisery, and Domino’s has no excuse not to offer them. More than 40 pizza chains in the U.S. carry them, and many offer toppings such as vegan sausage, Gardein’s veggie crumbles, meat-free pepperoni, tofu, and tempeh. Domino’s already offers vegan cheese in some foreign countries, and it’s time for the chain to evolve here in the U.S. You can urge it to do so.

Use Social Media to Tell Domino’s to Add Vegan Cheese to Its Menu