Artist Name: Cale Moon

Hometown: Complicated question…I don’t really have one. Born in Elko, Nevada and partly raised there, partly raised in Benton City, Washington, my mail goes to Enterprise, Oregon, but I live on a bus and travel the U.S year round. So my hometown is basically: America!

What projects are you currently working on?

Currently I’m recording my 3rd studio album, but in my own studio this time so I can take more time with the creative process.

What inspired you to pursue a career in music?

I’ll never forget it. I was 15, an aspiring actor who also sang a little but acting was my main focus. I was on Team USA for the World Championships Of Performing (which is like the Olympics for entertainers) and I made the finals in both singing and acting. When I took the stage to sing in that final night though, and that crowd just came alive at the mention of my name! The energy was intoxicating!! The surge of cheers from hundreds of voices, from Team USA, Team Ireland, Team Philippines, New Zealand, Australia, and even Russia…No one cheered for another country’s acts, but there they were, cheering for ME! I decided then and there that that’s all I wanted to do forever. Whatever it is about my music that brings that kind of joy to that many people, THAT’S what I want to do!! And that’s what I’ve been doing ever since.

If you weren’t pursing a career,what would you do?

Music is my whole life. If I wasn’t singing, I’d be producing,managing, or playing guitar for someone else.

What is your favorite downtime activity?

What’s downtime? Sounds boring and unproductive,haha. In all seriousness, when I’m not working, I love driving, hiking, and shooting. but those days are rare. I love my work so I don’t need much time away from it.

Who is your celebrity crush?

Candace Owens.

What is the last movie that you watched?

Garth Brooks: The Road I’m On.

If you could only listen to 1 album for the rest of your life, what would it be?

Josh Turner– Everything is Fine.

What is the greatest country song of all time?

Livin’ and Livin’ Well – George Strait

What is your favorite city/town that you’ve visited down the road?

The next one! Everywhere I go has something special about it that makes me want to stay there forever, but then that’s what keeps me looking down the road to the next town.

What is your favorite meal?

I don’t really have one. I just…..absorb food. Hahaha.

Who is your dream duet partner?

Kellie Pickler.

What are your ultimate career goals?

Never to retire! I want to make music for country fans as long as I live! No matter how far my music takes me, I’m just happy I’ve been able to make music for a living and I hope I get to keep doing it forever!