Robert Delaney Bramlette is the Creative Director & Founder of Robbers Roost Entertainment Group LLC. (RREG LLC) , a company started in 2004 to develop quality creative projects and launching careers of aspiring artists in the field of film, music and fashion.

It seemed inevitable for Bramlette to fall into this creative business, being related and named after his cousin 70's rock legend Delaney Bramlett (of "Delaney & Bonnie & Friends"; who collaborated with such superstars as Eric Clapton, Jimi Hendrix, Janis Joplin, The Beatles & The Grateful Dead), growing up and hearing stories of his family's musical influences, made Bramlette realize his true calling. Bramlette's Uncle, another family member with incredable musical talant was the one that gave him his first guitar for his birthday as a young teenager & further influenced his taste in music.

Two years ago, Bramlette began managing and producing Mustang Mesa, the highly acclaimed country and rock band headed by lead guitarist and song writer Steve Bowen, out of Nashville, Tennessee. Marketing, promoting and nurturing the band's success, is just a fraction of what RREG LLC is accomplishing. Today, RREG LLC is marketing it's first film, Baron Road, A film directed by Bramlette's childhood friend Randy Stonitch. Bramlette's influences don't stop with music and film; he is enriched with a knowledge of sports and politics as well; he competed in amateur & professional ranks in Collegiate Rugby, Vans Triple Crown Snow Board, NORBA Mountain Bike and AMA Pro Road Racing and understands what it takes to be an accomplished athlete & apply those skills to navigate & dominate the art of business.

Rob Bramlette has also found success in the fashion industry; launching the highly popular fine jewelry company Lana Jewelry with talented designer Lana Fertelmeister, the three year old company has catapulted to stardom by being carried in 100 stores like Neiman Marcus and Fred Segal, featured in films and worn by A-list celebrities world wide. Rob Bramlette has co-found a Not for Profit organization in his home town of Chicago, appropriately called the Chicago Fashion Foundation. Bramlette was the producer on behalf of the Chicago Fashion Foundation for the 2005 Lollapalooza Festival Fashion Show. A show which highlighted an amazing array of the best Chicago Fashion Designers to a crowd of 60,000 over the weekend of the shows. The show also helped establshed the Foundations first Scolorship Fund established with funds raised from the event. Capital Sports & Entertainment & Charles Attel Presents of Austin Texas along with Perry Ferrel were the producers of the 2005 Lollapalooza which chose the Chicago Fashion Foundation to produce the fashion element of the 2005 Lollapalooza. Bramlette's role was critical from securing the deal to producing the event with a talented young board of directors helping lead the way.

Politics are especially important in Bramlette's life, as his family has been involved in it all his life. Bramlette had the honor of working on the 2000 Presidential campaign for Vice President Gore. Rob Bramlette can not be categorized or limited to one specific area, he actually refuses to be known for just one thing. He thrives on exploring, learning and developing talents from every possibility and making them successful. Rob Bramlette resides in Chicago, Illinois with his girlfriend Lana and their golden retriever Rocco.

Cale Carver, Vice President of Business Affairs

Cale’s passion for music runs deep in his veins. From the time he was a young boy, the sounds of music rang threw his ears. From his father he inherited a passion for music. Cale grew up listening to his father’s vinyl record collection & listening to David play the piano. Vinyl records and going to rock concerts with his dad as early from seven years old give Cale the backbone for his school of rock. Finally after several years of asking, Cale’s dad took him to his first KISS show. The KISS Dynasty Tour in 1980 was the best experience that Cale & his father ever shared together. Three days later Cale’s dad was killed in a plane crash. Today the vinyl collection numbers over 3,500 records.