Mrs Henderson Presents (Theatre Royal Bath)

Verdict: Hot under the collar

Rating:

Pass the opera glasses, Perkins. But they might be steamed up at Mrs Henderson Presents, an unashamedly entertaining musical about the old Windmill Theatre in London where young women posed in nude tableaux.

You may recall a film of this story a decade ago which starred Dame Judi Dench and the late Bob Hoskins.

Mrs Henderson is an elderly widow who uses the fortune left by her husband to buy a theatre in Central London in 1937.

When the punters prove resistant to its offer of revue shows, she hits on an idea of stripping her showgirls to their birthday suits. But how to get round the Lord Chamberlain and his censorship decrees?

Simple: she announces that her girls will not wobble a muscle. Not so much as a cheek will jelly-quiver. They will pose entirely still and thus will be as inoffensive as the classical nudes on display at fine-art galleries.

This production, directed by its writer Terry Johnson, has music by George Fenton and Simon Chamberlain and lyrics by Don Black. The tunes may not be in the very highest category but they are more than workmanlike and the lyrics witty. One song, If Mountains Were Easy To Climb, elicits tears.

Janie Dee was originally cast as the intrepid Mrs H but she withdrew early in the process. Her place has been taken by Tracie Bennett who is great fun. She could never be accused of underacting but who could fail to be drawn to this short, husky-voiced ball of mercy? I kept thinking it was Elaine Paige.

The nude shows pack in the audiences but war arrives and the Windmill entertains the troops through London’s bleakest Blitz nights. The theatre’s stage hand, Eddie (Matthew Malthouse) joins the RAF. Will he be missed by the show’s frustratingly chaste leading lady, Maureen? Will Eddie survive?

Ian Bartholomew does a decent turn as Mr Van Damm, the show’s director, and there is a lovely turn — albeit worryingly pink-faced — from Graham Hoadly as the Lord Chamberlain. The show is stolen by the Windmill girls, most of all by Emma Williams as Maureen.

What a voice, I feel bound to say. What stage presence, duty compels me to report. What a hairdo. Yes, yes, yes. But what a figure, too!

Oh, I know we men are not meant to ogle but what can one do but gawp in dry-throated admiration at Maureen and Doris and Vera and Peggy (the last being played by Katie Bernstein, another strong voice)?

They shed their garments and strike Greek poses and it is surely not just old chaps whose eyes will swivel like fruit-machine dials. It is not smutty. It is (pause for pigeon-cooing from your critic) beautiful. And often deliciously funny, even patriotic.

Mark Hadfield does some of his customary comedy stuff — few actors move with greater comic efficiency — and Samuel Holmes has some great moments as gay Bertie, the token boy.