Based on the true story of a wealthy English widower who operated a nude revue on the West End during World War II, director Stephen Frears' Mrs. Henderson Presents is a cheeky look at the special type of wartime fortification that no amount of guns and sandbags can provide. A sort of hodge-podge mixture of Topsy-Turvy, The Full Monty and that old episode of The Golden Girls where ostentatious, entitled Blanche finally meets her male counterpart, the film works chiefly as a sharp, smartly funny two-hander — a delicious showcase for stars Judi Dench and Bob Hoskins — before taking a final act turn that overreaches just a bit in its grasp at grand statement.

Set in World War II-era London (though there's thankfully nary a lion, witch or magical wardrobe in sight), the movie stars Dench as Laura Henderson, a high society lady whose blunt, condescending broadsides (she labels her patronage of the arts as "an attempt to create employment for these delightful creatures") and juvenile eccentricities offset any typical notions of awed reverence one might have for funding artistic benefactors. Alone in the wake of her husband's passing, Mrs. Henderson purchases the Windmill Theatre and entrusts its stewardship to Vivian Van Damm (Hoskins), a d¿class¿ Jew who's just as prideful and stubborn as she. Their first collaboration, a musical variety stage show entitled Revu Deville, is a wild success, but other theaters quickly start copying it and soon ticket sales dwindle.

Driven by a vigor and liberal open-mindedness that belie her advanced years, Mrs. Henderson suggests frontal cast nudity as the next logical step — "Let's lose the clothes," she chirps in her characteristically forward patois — and sets about lobbying Lord Thomas Barrington Cromer (Christopher Guest) with ingratiating flattery for the right to secure a license for such performances. Convincing him that tawdriness is the furthest thing from her mind ("You're thinking bosoms, but I'm thinking breasts"), the compromise they reach dictates that the nude models not move.

Van Damm then sets about selecting a cast and arranging all manner of new, nude numbers, and the Windmill again becomes the talk of the town. When the German bombing of London shuts down all the other theaters and public gatherings are discouraged, the Windmill, situated below street level, never dims its lights, remaining a place of respectful, lusting refuge for visiting soldiers.

Impulse and whimsy are the twin engines that drive this movie, with Mrs. Henderson and Van Damm cast as at-odds, bickering "lovers" in spirit. There is certainly the intimation, though, that Mrs. Henderson thinks at least subconsciously of Van Damm as something more, as she throws a piquant fit when she finally meets his wife. This and other clashes lead to her eventually swearing never to set foot in the theater again, which then in turns spawns several attempts to sneak in under the guise of various costumes. Dench and Hoskins make this dance a delightful one, each embodying strident characters realistically driven or colored by their own dark pasts: she, a son lost to World War I; he, a nuclear family trampled underneath Adolf Hitler's war machine.

Frears' directorial career has been studded with films that have, either glancingly or directly, assayed socioeconomic differences and discord, including most notably My Beautiful Laundrette and Dirty Pretty Things. Here he displays mostly a discreet touch, though the movie doesn't shy away from the collisions between the rarified air of Mrs. Henderson's world and how her opinions and advice don't always jibe with the realities of those of the working class, particularly as it relates to revue player Maureen (Kelly Reilly).

While this strand and others like it might strike some as eventually dour distractions in an otherwise lighthearted affair, it realistically deepens the film's sense of place. While the (dictated by means) blending of black-and-white newsreel footage with the narrative proper comes across as awkward, Mrs. Henderson Presents remains an engaging and surprisingly amusing portrait of sobered but unbowed freedom, and the small silver linings that can grace even our darkest days.

Score: 8 out of 10

The Video

Mrs. Henderson Presents is presented in a 1.78:1 anamorphic widescreen transfer that preserves the original aspect ratio of its theatrical exhibition. Andrew Dunn's cinematography nicely captures the movie's painstakingly recreated theatrical productions, but is sometimes hamstrung by the dark recesses of its interior settings. The transfer here only exacerbates that problem, with slight grain and fuzziness attached to the darker colors of the spectrum and some oversaturation in oranges and reds.

Shadows are additionally problematic at times, with both the renovation of the Windmill and subsequent rehearsal sequences offering cloudy close-ups of the principals. This is fine during Hoskins' fleeting moment of nudity, but more problematic in traditional dramatic and even comedic exchanges.

Score: 6 out of 10

The Audio

An English language 5.1 Dolby mix anchors Mrs. Henderson Presents, and cleanly separates dialogue and music in clear, discrete fashion. The source harmonies for the theatrical stagings are well mixed, and never overwhelm the scene, and George Fenton's solid score is also given ample room to bloom. Subtitles are also available in English and Spanish.

Score: 8 out of 10

Packaging and Extras

Mrs. Henderson Presents comes in a regular Amray case, with an animated menu screen. Its extras are comprised of a series of 25 production photograph stills (sorry guys, no nudie shots included), the original theatrical trailer and a five-part, 1.78:1 widescreen, 25-minute featurette that looks at the real Windmill girls, the casting of the project, the look of the movie, its choreography and the overall production. Dench, Frears, Hoskins (also a producer on the film), Reilly, producer Norma Heyman, costume designer Sandy Powell, choreographer Debbie Astell and many others sit for interviews here.

Several of the original Windmill ladies offer up their reminiscences at a pre-production party in their honor, and British Pop Idol performer Will Young, cast in a supporting role, relates an amusing anecdote about how he went through the entire casting process and chatted with Frears for some time before learning that he was actually the director. Astell and others also make an astute point about the challenge of casting faces and bodies that would fit in that era — overly toned gym physiques wouldn't work.

Frears also contributes a feature-length audio commentary track to the proceedings, and while his self-effacing production remembrances are spot-on, his demeanor is at times weirdly flippant — somewhere at the exact halfway point between genial and gruff.

Score: 7 out of 10

The Bottom Line

Despite its staid name, Mrs. Henderson Presents is a lively and surprisingly funny film. It manages to locate comedy in its characters — particularly its equally headstrong leads — and Hoskins and Dench are a fine pair to watch bring this tempestuous relationship to life. For specialty audiences and open-minded, lighthearted fans of historical drama alike, Mrs. Henderson Presents is a treat.