Mrs Henderson (12A, 102mins) Comedy/Drama. Judi Dench, Bob Hoskins, Kelly Reilly, Will Young, Christopher Guest, Thelma Barlow, Anna Brewster. Released: November 25 (UK & Ireland)

DAME Judi Dench is poised to win a fifth Oscar nomination for her tour-de-force theatrics in this lively true story of wartime heroism and daring.

She attacks the lead role with gusto, relishing the fruity dialogue which includes a hysterical conversation about the female genitalia, causing her male dining companion to bluster, "I prefer you refer to it as... The Midlands."

Stephen Frears's energetic and nostalgic film could win similar plaudits for its immaculate production design and Martin Sherman's delicious screenplay, arguably his finest work since Bent.

And in a sly piece of casting, Mrs Henderson Presents provides Will Young with his big screen acting debut, essaying a song and dance man not too far removed from the Pop Idol himself.

The film has a great deal of heart and soul too, paying tribute to the young men and women whose courage and daring kept the home fires burning across Britain as Hitler's bombs decimated the key cities.

It's a sobering reminder of a bygone era when entire generations were wiped out selflessly protecting their country, and a naked female form could send shockwaves through polite society.

How times have changed.

Funeral

Mrs Henderson Presents opens with a funeral. Socialite Laura Henderson (Dench) bids farewell to her beloved husband Robert and faces up to the terrifying prospect of widowhood.

Her best friend, Lady Conway (Barlow), suggests she finds herself a hobby - embroidery or some such frippery - or failing that, a young lover.

"I'm nearly 70!" shrieks Laura. "You're also very rich," responds lady Conway mischievously, "the one cancels out the other."

During an afternoon drive around Soho, Laura formulates a plan of action.

She purchases the derelict Windmill Theatre and sets about removing the property so the auditorium can play host to a vaudeville revue, to which Robert was partial.

Laura hires Vivian Van Damm (Hoskins) as her artistic director, who quickly secures the services of singer Bertie (Young) and a troupe of dancing girls to headline the capital's first non-stop musical show: Revudeville.

The money pours in until rival theatres copy the Windmill's revolutionary idea.

Then Laura hits upon a tantalising solution: "Why don't we get rid of the clothes. Naked girls... what do you think?"

Dench and Hoskins are a brilliant double act and many of the laughs arise from Laura and Vivian's constant bickering, which begins at their very first meeting: "I'm Laura Henderson" she purrs, "And you're 20 minutes late and rude," he retorts unimpressed.

A running joke about Vivian's supposed Jewish heritage leads to the best one-liner in the entire film, shortly after Hoskins sheds his clothes.

Young impresses, showcasing his silky vocal skills in the various musical numbers, while Barlow (better known as Mavis in Coronation Street) is a riot.

To echo Laura's words: "How delicious!"