Born in Mumbai 150 years ago, Rudyard Kipling’s legacy continues to be contested. The literati is still trying to solve the puzzle — how can an Indophile also be an imperialist?

Not many visitors arrive at Mumbai’s Sir JJ School of Art campus looking for the ‘Kipling bangla’. This fact is made obvious by the guard’s befuddlement. His directions, though, are precise. The dilapidation of the house only amplifies its age. JJ students, neither the ones sneakily smoking in the shadows of the bungalow’s corners nor the ones painting on its porch, seem to have ever heard of Rudyard Kipling. A bust of the author has been prominently placed outside Kipling bangla’s firmly locked doors, but there is little identification that can be elicited from the youth here, not even a knowing nod. Passing mention of The Jungle Book is met with raised eyebrows. While a charge of philistinism might be admittedly severe, the building’s literary legacy appears only incidental at best.

If awards are to be considered a measure for posthumous celebrity, Rudyard Kipling should undoubtedly be given top billing. Having won the Nobel Prize of Literature in 1907, he remains, to this day, the youngest recipient of that high literary honour. Reason dictates that our penchant for appropriation must certainly be retrospective and vicarious enough to claim Kipling as ‘ours’ today. Together with many news reports, an inscription outside the Kipling bungalow suggests that the poet-novelist was “born here” on December 30, 1865. But Mustansir Dalvi, professor in JJ’s architecture department, prescribes a curbing of derivative enthusiasm. He says, “It’s a misnomer that Rudyard Kipling was born here. The house was actually built 20 years after his birth. It is likely, yes, that he was born somewhere on the JJ campus, but there weren’t any buildings at that time.”

Dalvi speaks of Rudyard’s father, Lockwood, who was first a professor of architectural sculpture at JJ and then the school’s principal. He cites “administrative reasons” for the Kipling bungalow’s decrepitude and lack of restoration, not its chance nomenclature. In the end, he implores one to read Charles Allen’s biography Kipling Sahib, a treasure trove of India-related Kipling trivia. Dalvi’s tip-off proves crucial. In Allen’s estimation, “India was where Rudyard Kipling was happiest, where he rediscovered himself through his writing and came of age as a writer.” Much of Kipling’s oeuvre helps justify Allen’s claims, but it is his poem To the city of Bombay that arguably seems most telling.

“So thank I God my birth

Fell not in isles aside —

Waste headlands of the earth,

Or warring tribes untried —

But that she lent me worth

And gave me right to pride.”

Quoted by many as hard evidence of the writer’s unflinching loyalty to all things Indian, it takes only a simple conjecture to unsettle the hypothesised resolve of this Indophile — So, if Kipling were to return to this “no mean city” 150 years after his birth, how would he react to its post-colonial rechristening? Would he ever feel at home in aamchi Mumbai? Literary theory, especially the kind which conveniently ascribes authorial intent to fictional formulations, should help provide ready answers. But in the case of Kipling, any such application only makes cloudier a persistent confusion.

In an 1888 short story called Beyond the Pale, Kipling writes, “A man should, whatever happens, keep to his own caste, race and breed. Let the White go to the White and the Black to the Black.” Coming from the man who had also given us that now clichéd adage, ‘East is East, and West is West,’ it might then be safe to assume that a vada pav diet would only make him belch. But true to form, Kipling is ever capricious. In his novel Kim (1900), he ties to prove false imperialist accusations. “A fair land — a most beautiful land is this of Hind — and the land of the Five Rivers is fairer than all.”

While cultural theorist Edward Said felt Kim’s only success was a further exoticisation of the Orient, writer Nirad C Chaudhuri said, “Kim is great by any standards ever obtained in any age of English literature.” Ranked 34 on The Guardian’s 100 best novels list, the book was also reportedly Pandit Jawaharlal Nehru’s favourite.

Over the years, the pertinence of Kipling’s politics has interestingly been battled for and warred against by the world’s literary greats. TS Eliot, for instance, had written, “I cannot find any justification for the charge that he held a doctrine of race superiority.” Kipling, he felt, “was a writer impossible wholly to understand and quite impossible to belittle.” George Orwell, whose birthplace in Bihar’s Motihari greatly resembles Kipling’s JJ bungalow, took umbrage.

Lampooning Eliot’s defence, the 1984 author disparaged If’s poet in a 1942 essay. “Kipling is a jingo imperialist, he is morally insensitive and aesthetically disgusting.”

Britons will surely disregard Orwell’s scathing criticism of Kipling, the “gutter patriot”, when they hear Benedict Cumberbatch growl as Shere Khan in a 2017 adaptation of The Jungle Book. In India, though, the continuing contentiousness surrounding Kipling does somehow seem warranted. Having twice declined knighthood, the writer could well become an unlikely poster boy for Awards Wapsi, but the erstwhile journalist’s stated dislike of Indians who could read and write in English might just fail to find favour with today’s lit fest fraternity. Speaking to Mirror, historian William Dalrymple said, “I share the ambivalence about Kipling. On the one hand, you have Kipling, the warmonger, who is urging the British Empire on. And then there is this other Kipling who loved India and wrote with great acuity those stories set in Lahore.” Calling the Gunga Din writer “an extreme version of a man of his age”, Dalrymple concluded, “His writing now does seem a little off-putting.”

Kipling, however, appears to have protected his own legacy. “If you can trust yourself when all men doubt you,” he had written, “But make allowance for their doubting too.” If, Kipling Sahib? Oh, if only.