It doesn’t match the grandeur of the Taj Mahal or the Amber Fort, but Rudyard Kipling’s birthplace in India is still open to visitors.

The Jungle Book author was born in Mumbai 150 years ago today and although the bungalow he was born in has since been rebuilt and restored, the mint green-painted wooden cottage that stands in its place today has become a shrine to the writer.

Outside the ‘Kipling Bungalow’ is a slightly weather-worn bust and a plaque commemorating the writer, while the house is surrounded by thick foliage in the middle of the Sir JJ School of Art in central Mumbai.

We arrived on a baking-hot 34-degree November day, and the leafy art school provided welcome shade and quiet away from the hot and hectic Mumbai pavements.

The art school’s other buildings are a mix of old and new architecture – each building different to the next, from neo-Gothic to modern – and some are covered in urban, street art-style murals painted by students.

We’re shown around the site by Mumbai-based tour guide and Rudyard Kipling expert Parvin Mistry, who tells us how Kipling lived in the city – then called Bombay – until he was 10, before he moved in with a foster family in the UK (Southsea, then to a boarding school in Devon), before going to work aged 16 at a newspaper in Lahore.

Kipling used to dress up as an Indian, so he was able to access brothels and opium dens, where he otherwise wouldn’t be welcome, Mistry tells us.

Although he is celebrated in the west for his children’s stories, he remains a controversial figure in India. Kipling’s writing includes many of the imperialist attitudes held in colonial India under British rule, so plans to open a museum on the site have, understandably, had mixed responses.

‘Locals objected to a Kipling museum because of his imperialism,’ says Mistry. But the Mumbai born and bred tour guide is more philosophical.

‘They said he’s racist, and he was so much in favour of British rule – how could we have something which was bad for us?’ she adds. ‘But it’s part of history, invaders come, invaders go, they do good and they do bad. What do you achieve by remembering the bad?’

Despite the controversy – and whether you love him or loathe him – Kipling is in large part responsible for the exotic, colourful and vibrant image most westerners have of India today.

Not to mention the huge-budget Disney remake of his classic story The Jungle Book, which is due out in April, with big stars including Scarlett Johansson, Bill Murray and Idris Elba providing the voices.

Kipling Bungalow remains derelict, though there have been some attempts to turn it into a gallery featuring paintings by local artists. It is padlocked shut, so visitors can’t go inside, but they can peek through the windows.

Kipling describes the bungalow – as he knew it – in To the City of Bombay, while his years living there as a child inspired the main character in his book Kim.

The author’s father, John Lockwood Kipling, was the dean of the art school – who also designed the Lockwood Fountain, which is still standing in the nearby Crawford Market.

There are stalls in the market selling everything from fruit and veg to sweets, beauty products and pets, and the market is heaving.

It’s noisy, intense and colourful – everything I want from a visit to a bustling, working Indian market.

Pineapples are stacked up against the side of the fountain, while fruit sellers sit with their watermelons at its foot.

The time-worn fountain doesn’t run with water anymore but its colours are still vivid, depicting brightly painted crocodiles, dogs and tortoises.

The fountain also bears depictions of jungle scenes and the famous tiger – India’s national animal, which can be spotted in the wild and in nature reserves across the country.

After a wander round the market, we check in to sea-facing suites at The Oberoi on Marine Drive – nicknamed the Queen’s Necklace for the way it lights up like a string of pearls at night.

Each suite has a free-standing bath, from which you can look through huge windows into the bedroom and out to skyscrapers and the Arabian Sea, and the vast lobby is decked out with a striking red grand piano.

We’re lucky enough to be in Mumbai for the Hindu Diwali festival, which I’m told several times during the course of my trip is India’s answer to Christmas. It’s also known as ‘the festival of lights’, so we’re told to expect plenty of fireworks.

Each of us is presented with a party outfit, so after a quick change into my fuchsia-pink salwar (trousers), kurta (top) and dupatta (scarf), we head out into the streets to witness the spectacle.

The celebrations are brighter, louder and more explosion-filled than any bonfire night you’d witness in the UK, and people are lined up on the seafront setting off rockets and Catherine wheels in every direction, while kids in their best clothes draw shapes with sparklers.

It seems the majority of Mumbai’s 22 million population are out on the street celebrating – all ages getting together and giving the city even more of a buzz than it has in the daytime.

It’s a long way from the thick forests Mowgli, Baloo and Shere Khan would be used to, but Mumbai on Diwali is just as bright and colourful – and exciting – as I remember the Jungle Book being as a child.