Joseph Rudyard Kipling was born on December 30, 1865 to John and Alice Kipling. At the time of Joseph’s birth the Kipling’s had recently arrived in India. They had moved to the town of Bombay (now Mumbai) from England with plans of starting a new life and helping the British government run the continent. Young Joseph Kipling loved the exciting life that came with living in India. He often explored local markets with his nanny and sister, he learned the language at a young age, and fell in love with the country and culture. This life he loved was torn away from him when his parents sent him back to England to begin a formal British education at the age of 6. He lived in Southsea, England, where he attended school and lived with a foster family, the Holloways. Kipling struggled to fit in at school, and his new home did not provide a loving environment. Mrs. Holloway was unkind, beating and bulling her young foster son. Kipling found comfort in books and stories. With few friends, he spent his time reading. He esteemed authors such as Daniel Defoe, Ralph Waldo Emerson, and Wilkie Collins. Mrs. Holloway was disapproving of Kipling’s reading, inciting Kipling to sneak his books around her. He even pretended to play in his room by moving furniture along the floor while he read. By the age of 11, Kipling was on the verge of a nervous breakdown. A visitor to the Holloway home noticed the unhealthy condition of the child and immediately contacted his mother. His mother rushed to England and rescued Joseph from the foster family and placed him in a new school in Devon. There, Kipling succeeded and discovered his talent for writing, eventually becoming editor of the school newspaper. Kipling’s parents did not have enough money to send hi... ... middle of paper ... ... of the efforts. In 1915, he travelled to France to report firsthand from the trenches. He encouraged his son to enlist, and when he was rejected for eyesight problems, Kipling managed to get John a position as a second lieutenant with the Irish Guard. Later that year, the Kiplings received word the John had gone missing in France. Kipling set off for France to find John, but nothing came of his search, his son’s body never found. He returned to England to grieve the loss of another child. Kipling continued to write through the last decades of his life, but his days of writing children’s stories had passed. Eventually grief and age took their toll on Kipling and his wife. Kipling suffered from a painful ulcer, and died on January 18, 1936. His ashes were buried next to the graves of authors Thomas Hardy and Charles Dickens in the Poets’ Corner at Westminster Abbey.