TV's "Nashville" will air its final episode on Thursday, and while the show will live on via reruns, syndication and streaming, perhaps no part of it will endure quite like its music.

Over the course of its six-season run, the show produced a staggering number of original songs — more than 300 were released digitally — crafted by some of Music City's most gifted writers.

None of them became country smashes in reality, but the best of them certainly could have, and they're considered classics in the hearts of "Nashies."

What songs will "Nashville" be remembered for? Here, we list just a few of the front-runners.

"If I Didn't Know Better" (Season 1)

The first duet between Gunnar and Scarlett was the song ABC used to entice viewers in commercials for "Nashville's" premiere. The haunting tune sounds like a lost Civil Wars track, and that's no coincidence: It was co-written by John Paul White.

"A Life That's Good" (Season 2)

Written by Ashley Monroe and Sarah Siskind, "A Life That's Good" became the unofficial anthem of the "Nashville" cast, and a perfect set-closer for concerts.

"When the Right One Comes Along" (Season 1, 4)

"Nashville" MVP songwriters Striking Matches (Justin Davis and Sarah Zimmerman) cooked up this killer melody with Georgia Middleman. It was first performed in the show's first season, and brought back in Season 4, when Gunnar and Scarlett performed it at the wedding of Rayna and Deacon.

"Sanctuary" (Season 5)

A late-series highlight, via the most heartbreaking performance in "Nashville" history. Deacon and daughters Daphne and Maddie perform this spiritual ballad to remember their wife/mother, Rayna Jaymes. Written by Sarah Siskind, Jill Andrews and Gary Nicholson.

"Don't Put Dirt On My Grave Just Yet" (Season 2)

"Nashville's" most powerful songs aren't just ballads (but they mostly are). This feisty country stomper bucks the trend, and propelled the show's story forward. It comes as Juliette is expected to apologize on stage for some controversial remarks, but then goes gloriously off-script. An assertive anthem from "Nashville's" most volatile character.

"Black Roses" (Season 2)

Scarlett went solo — and sent a stern message to her abusive mother — with this cathartic piano ballad, a Season 2 highlight that quickly became one of the show's most popular tracks.