News of the death of Lex Davison at Sandown Park has deeply shocked all motoring enthusiasts as "Davo" was one of the most popular drivers with competitors and spectators Australia has ever produced.

He was a great man, who raced motor cars for the love of it, showing a skill exceeded by few other Australian drivers.

His activities in the field of motoring have been vast and varied as, besides winning the Australian Grand Prix four times and the top Australian motor sport award — the Confederation Gold Star in 1957 — he competed in the Le Mans 24 hour race in France and was part of an Australian team which took part in the Monte Carlo Rally. He also was the first Australian to drive Donald Campbell's record breaking Bluebird in trials on Lake Eyre!

He was known as the "gentleman of Australian motoring".

He was the last of the Grand Prix drivers to conform to the rear engined pencil line racer as we know it today, for Davison, brought up in the Alfa Romeo tradition, considered the present day racer as an intrusion on a field reserved for cars of brute force.

Davison's activities were not only reserved for motor racing but with his great wealth as a shoe manufacturer and grazier he was able to support many charities and promote modern art.

Although having announced his retirement three times, the love of motor racing kept calling him back but he was preparing for retirement with the formation of his "Ecurie Australie" team in which young drivers were being supported and taught the driving art so that one day they would be able to take their place on the front row of any grid on any circuit.

This task had been set by Davison himself so that after retirement as a driver he would be able to still remain active in motor racing as a team manager and coach.

Over recent years this great Australian driver has returned much to his sport, inspiring youth with advice and financial support.

His loss is a great one, possibly the worst tragedy ever to occur in Australian motor sport, and all who are even remotely connected with motor sport are sad at the loss of a great champion and an even greater man.