Nadine Gordimer was born on November 20, 1923, in Springs, South Africa (Encyclopedia Britannica). Being from South Africa was a large aspect of her identity and went on to influence and be the backdrop of her work as an author of short stories and novels (“The Nobel Prize in Literature 1991” ). Because of the time and location of Gordimer’s childhood, she became known as an anti-apartheid activist.

Gordimer never received a traditional college education after attending “the University of Witwatersrand for one year”, instead she developed a love of reading and writing at a young age under the encouragement of her parents (Encyclopedia Britannica). At age 15 Gordimer published he first short story in the Johannesburg magazine the Forum and she continued to write until 2012 (British Council Literature ). All of her work focused on themes of alienation and oppression South African people faced at the hands of the apartheid government (Verongos). However, Gordimer never considered herself a political person but her writing illustrates the South African experience during the apartheid (Verongos). Since her writing developed an honest and accurate portrayal of South Africa amid the apartheid claimed that “if there is a message, its what people read from it” (Neary).

Because of the content of her short stories and novels they were read and celebrated around the world. In 1974 her novel The Conservationist gave her international popularity and her fame only continued to grow as she published more of her writing (“The Nobel Prize in Literature 1991”). However, three novels she had published were banned in her own country of South Africa (Verongos). Her novel A World of Strangers which depicts the inequality in South Africa from the perspective of a British man was banned for twelve years after being published in 1958 (Verongos). Later in 1966, Gordimer’s novel The Late Bourgeois World was banned for ten years since it follows the experiences of a woman after her husband dies who was a “traitor to the anti-apartheid resistance” (Verongos). The final novel she wrote that was banned was the Booker Prize-winning novel Burger’s Daughter which focuses on a child who becomes an anti-apartheid activist after her father’s death (Verongos). In a 1987 interview when asked about the prospect of having a book banned Gordimer said that even though it will be published in other parts of the world it frustrating because “you do want it to be read by your people in your own country” (PBS NewsHour).

Despite her books being banned in her own country, they were still world-renowned and she received many awards and accolades throughout her career (British Council Literature ). The first award she received was the WH Smith Literary Award in 1971 and went on to win eleven more awards as her career progressed (British Council Literature ). In 1974 after publishing her most popular novel, Burger’s Daughter, she won the Booker Prize for Fiction (British Council Literature ) Later in 1991 Gordimer won the Nobel Prize in Literature because “through her magnificent epic writing has – in the words of Alfred Nobel – been of a great benefit to humanity” (“The Nobel Prize in Literature 1991”).

I was first introduced to Nadine Gordimer’s work after reading her short story “The Moment Before the Gun Went Off”. After reading this I was immediately interested in her honest writing style and how she used the backdrop of South Africa as the catalyst of her writing. I believe that her work is important because it acts as a literary representation of South Africa during the time of the apartheid. People should continue to read and appreciate her work so that the effects of the apartheid will never be forgotten, and new generations of people can understand and recognize the actions of this oppressive government.

(Feature image courtesy of the Nobel Foundation archive)

Works Cited

“Nadine Gordimer – Academy of Achievement .” Academy of Achievement, 14 Aug. 2018, achievement.org/achiever/nadine-gordimer/.

“Nadine Gordimer.” British Council Literature, British Council, literature.britishcouncil.org/writer/nadine-gordimer.

“Nadine Gordimer.” Encyclopædia Britannica, Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc., http://www.britannica.com/biography/Nadine-Gordimer#ref1231773.

Neary, Lynn. “Writer Nadine Gordimer Captured Apartheid’s Contradictions.” NPR, NPR, 14 July 2014, http://www.npr.org/2014/07/14/331421120/writer-nadine-gordimer-captured-apartheids-contradictions.

NewsHour, PBS. “Nadine Gordimer, 90, Nobel-Winning Novelist Who Spoke out against Apartheid.” PBS, Public Broadcasting Service, 15 July 2014, http://www.pbs.org/newshour/show/nadine-gordimer-90-nobel-winning-novelist-spoke-apartheid.