Christopher Eccleston. born in Salford, is a British actor, with a career in theatre, film and television that spans over 30 years. Join him for this exciting talk about how libraries have supported his life and work.

Christopher’s early television work included roles in Cracker, Hillsborough and Our Friends in The North, for which he received a BAFTA TV Award nomination. Christopher was also nominated in this category for his leading performance in The Second Coming. In 2011, he won the Emmy for Best Performance by an Actor for his role in the TV crime-drama, Accused. Christopher also starred in popular dramas, Flesh and Blood, The Shadowline, Lennon Naked, The Leftovers, The A Word, Come Home, Dodger and True Detective – Night Country which will transmit later this year.

“As an actor words are the tools of my trade. When I was growing up in Salford the local library provided a vibrant lifeline to the wider world. Libraries feed people’s interests and passions and provide access leading to connections being forged. I’m excited to be at Manchester City of Literature’s Festival of Libraries this year to share how I have been inspired and supported by libraries.”

Christopher’s film career was launched in 1991’s critically acclaimed Let Him Have It. Then, in 1994, he collaborated with the Academy Award-winning Director Danny Boyle on Boyle’s first feature film, Shallow Grave which was closely followed by Jude. Other noted appearances include Elizabeth, 24 Hour Party People, 28 Days Later, Legend and the soon to be released The Young Woman And The Sea.

Christopher has appeared in a diverse range of theatrical productions, including Hamlet (West Yorkshire Playhouse), Miss Julie (Haymarket Theatre), Antigone (National Theatre) and the titular role in the RSC’s production of Macbeth. At Christmas 2023 he played to rave reviews for his portrayal of Scrooge in The Old Vic’s “A Christmas Carol”.

Christopher’s memoir “I Love The Bones of You” was published in 2019 and he is an ambassador for The Big Issue.