Zantedeschia 'Majestic Red' or Calla Lily is a variety of brilliantly coloured crimson-red florist's Arum, with flowers that emerge from a beautifully mottled white foliage. Adding a touch of exoticism to the edge of a water feature, this tuberous plant will have the most impact when displayed in a pot immersed in shallow water on a terrace. To flower well and thrive, it requires warmth and a soil that is both moist and very rich. The non-hardy rootstock should be protected from cold and humidity in winter.

Zantedeschia 'Majestic Red' is one of the many hybrids that have been obtained through cross-breeding between two main species native to Eastern and Southern Africa, namely Zantedeschia rehmannii and Z. elliottiana. Vegetation emerges from the ground in spring, in the form of large arrow-shaped green leaves, which are highly decorative outside of the flowering season. They are medium green in colour, shiny, and heavily speckled with white. This Calla Lily is of medium size, measuring between 45 and 55cm (18 and 22in) in height. Like other hybrids, this plant requires specific growing conditions to flower, from June to August. The flower, typical of arums, takes the form of a highly ornamental spathe, nearly 10cm (4in) in diameter, concealing a golden-yellow spadix at its core. The spathe is intensely red in colour and has a satin-like appearance. The thick roots of this Calla Lily penetrate perpendicularly into the growing medium, resembling fleshy and trailing rhizomes. In nature, this plant grows in marshes that usually dry out in summer, under hot climates all year round. The vegetation dries up and the tuber enters a dormant period in a fairly dry soil. This vegetative cycle must be strictly respected in cultivation. Florist's arums can live for many years if the cyclic resting period is well respected.

Zantedeschia 'Majestic Red' is particularly suited for potted cultivation, which allows it to be sheltered in winter and control the moisture of the growing medium. It can also be planted in cool areas, near a water feature, or even partially submerged during flowering. Combine its flowers with chic and colourful bouquets, using fern leaves, freesias, or lilies in harmonious colours, for example.

Plant your bulbs as soon as you receive them, at a depth of 12cm (5in) and spaced 15cm (6in) apart. In pots, they are extraordinary and produce more flowers every year. Suitable for indoor use, as well as on your terraces and balconies. Can be grown in the garden in regions without winter frost.

Plant your 'Majestic Red' Calla bulbs in March-April, at a depth of 12cm (5in), spaced 15cm (6in) apart, in a fresh substrate that is both sandy and humus-rich, with a pH between 6 and 6.5. It prefers a sunny or partially shaded location. When the shoots emerge from the ground, gradually increase watering. Apply diluted fertilizer containing calcium and trace elements at planting and at least once a month. Growing in a large pot is possible, with regular watering to keep the soil moist and monthly fertilizer during the growing season. Mulch them at the first signs of cold and protect them with a bubble wrap, as they are sensitive to winter humidity and frost and are not very hardy in northerly regions. In pots, store them during winter. They will form beautiful flowering clumps from June to August in a few years. You can cut the foliage after the first frost.

Soft rot of rhizomes is a bacterial disease that causes plant death in damp and cool conditions. Some varieties are more susceptible than others. The ideal temperature during the growing period is 18째C (64.4째F) during the day and 12-13째C (53.6-55.4째F) at night. When temperatures rise, it can be useful to mulch the soil to maintain coolness.

This disease is caused by Erwinia, Pseudomonas, and pectobacterium, naturally present in the soil, which attack fleshy storage organs such as rhizomes or tubers and transform the affected organs into a liquid mush with a characteristic and unpleasant odour, thanks to specific enzymes.