Bibi Gaytán can say goodbye to making a television comeback soon as she will be busy raising her newborn twins Manuel and Daniel. The 41-year-old actress gave birth to the boys on Friday, June 20 at the Scripps Memorial Hospital in San Diego via c-section, according to Hola magazine. With the addition of the two infants, Gaytan and her husband Eduardo Capetillo now have a total of five children: Eduardo (19), Ana Paula (16) and Alejandra (14). "Bibi says that one of the babies has a mouth identical to mine," an excited Capetillo told the magazine. Manuel and Daniel were named after their grandfathers, Manuel Capetillo (paternal) and Daniel Gaytán (maternal). Initially the couple was told by doctors in Mexico that the twins would be fraternal, but the doctors in the U.S. informed them that they would be identical twins. Congratulations to the happy married couple of 20 years! Guess this means we will not see Bibi in a telenovela soon and will have to keep content with her Isadora Beans tv commercials.

Bibi and Eduardo signed a lucrative deal with TV Azteca at the end of 2010 with possibilities of major projects like telenovelas and television shows. Although everyone wanted to see Bibi back in soaps, this never materialized and she was only given participations in reality shows. Her first stint was as a co-host of singing competition "La Academia," which she received terrible reviews for her on-screen nervousness and bad command of stage presence. In 2013 she returned to the small screen as the lead judge in a dancing competition titled "México Baila," which was a ratings success. In contrast to his wife, Capetillo was able to return to Mexico's favorite genre and starred opposite Gabriela Spanic in "La Otra Cara del Alma" to moderate success.

The couple broke their ties with Azteca late last year as they never seemed happy with the projects set by the network. However, this new project they are both brewing up should keep them busy for years to come. With their three children already teenagers, it will probably seem like a breeze for Bibi to enjoy the companionship her set of twins will provide for her.