Birth Name: Eduardo Capetillo Vázquez

Place of Birth: Mexico City, Mexico

Date of Birth: April 13, 1970

Ethnicity:

*father – Mexican, including Biscayan/Basque, small amount of African

*mother – Spanish [Andalusian]

Eduardo Capetillo is a Mexican actor and singer.

He belongs to the Capetillo family, who have a long tradition of being bullfighters. His father, Manuel Antonio Capetillo Villaseñor, was a Mexican bullfighter; some of his ancestry was Biscayan/Basque, from Spain. His mother, María del Carmen Vázquez Alcaide, came from Seville, Spain. His stepfather was bullfighter Carlos Arruza. Eduardo is married to singer and actress Bibi Gaytán, with whom he has five children.

Eduardo’s earliest known patrilineal ancestor is Francisco de Capetillo Herrerías, of San Martín de Carral, Biscay, Spain. One of Eduardo’s four times great-grandfathers, Rafael María Calderón Cárdenas, was a “free mulatto”, a “mulatto libre.”

Eduardo’s paternal grandfather was José Guillermo Adalberto Capetillo Villaseñor (the son of Manuel Sabás Capetillo Quevedo and María Josefa Eusebia Ignacia de Jesús Villaseñor Calderón). José was born in Guadalajara, Jalisco, Mexico. Manuel was the son of Antonino José Mariano Capetillo Figueroa, whose father was born in San Martín de Carral, Bizkaia, Euskadi, Spain; and of Carolina Quevedo Rivas. María was the daughter of Juan Bautista Villaseñor Arreola and María Concepción Inocencia Calderón Puga.

Eduardo’s paternal grandmother was María Sahara/Sara Villaseñor Sandoval (the daughter of Enrique de los Ángeles Villaseñor Olasagarre and Sahara/Sara Sandoval González). María was born in Guadalajara, Jalisco, Mexico. Enrique was the son of Ramón Villaseñor Figueroa and Teresa Olasagarre Ocampo.

Eduardo’s maternal grandfather was named Lázaro Vázquez Castaño (the son of parents surnamed Vázquez and Castaño). Lázaro was born in Sanlúcar la Mayor, Sevilla, Andalucía, Spain.

Eduardo’s maternal grandmother was named Encarnación Alcaide de la Oliva (the daughter of parents surnamed Alcaide and de la Oliva Pérez). Encarnación was born in Sanlúcar la Mayor, Sevilla, Andalucía, Spain.

Sources: Genealogy of Eduardo Capetillo – http://www.geni.com

Genealogy of Eduardo’s mother – http://geneall.net