Google Advertising for Local Business Leaders

Google Advertising for Local Business LeadersFront Page Advantage

'Checking the price on Google' has changed how we buy and who we buy from, it is now essential for all business leaders to understand the mechanics of Google AdWords, Pay Per Click and Search Engine Optimisation to connect with customers online and how search creates the opportunity to win more sales. Poor implementation of Search Engine Optimisation techniques and badly built Pay Per Click campaigns deliver appalling results and as your Local Champion of Search we host these sessions to help our local community discover how they can get the most from search marketing. Profit from developing a good understanding of organic and paid search and help grow your business by marketing to customers actively searching for your core products and services. Location is now a critical factor with both organic and paid (PPC Pay Per Clcik) search, the location of your business and the target of your campaign can see you win a higher position in search results over a nationwide company with a hefty marketing budget. I hope you grant us the opportunity to discover if this free session is the catalyst effect your business needs to truly thrive in 2015. *Places are limited so we can have a successful question and answers session at the end of the presentation. Event Outline In this 1.5 hour session we will cover everything you need to know as a business owner. We will talk through both paid and organic search and how location setting allows you to target your ads to only show to people within certain towns and even postcodes. Who should attend Business leaders needing to understand how they can market their business online within a fixed budget to qualified customers looking to select a supplier. Why you should attend So you can confidently take your business forward as digital continues to increase its dominance as the primary market place.

It's your unstructured data: How to get your GenAI app to production (and spe...

It's your unstructured data: How to get your GenAI app to production (and spe...Zilliz

So you've successfully built a GenAI app POC for your company -- now comes the hard part: bringing it to production. Aparavi addresses the challenges of AI projects while addressing data privacy and PII. Our Service for RAG helps AI developers and data scientists to scale their app to 1000s to millions of users using corporate unstructured data. Aparavi’s AI Data Loader cleans, prepares and then loads only the relevant unstructured data for each AI project/app, enabling you to operationalize the creation of GenAI apps easily and accurately while giving you the time to focus on what you really want to do - building a great AI application with useful and relevant context. All within your environment and never having to share private corporate data with anyone - not even Aparavi.

Uncharted Together- Navigating AI's New Frontiers in Libraries

Uncharted Together- Navigating AI's New Frontiers in LibrariesBrian Pichman

Journey into the heart of innovation where the collaborative spirit between information professionals, technologists, and researchers illuminates the path forward through AI's uncharted territories. This opening keynote celebrates the unique potential of special libraries to spearhead AI-driven transformations. Join Brian Pichman as we saddle up to ride into the history of Artificial Intelligence, how its evolved over the years, and how its transforming today's frontiers. We will explore a variety of tools and strategies that leverage AI including some new ideas that may enhance cataloging, unlock personalized user experiences, or pioneer new ways to access specialized research. As with any frontier exploration, we will confront shared ethical challenges and explore how joint efforts can not only navigate but also shape AI's impact on equitable access and information integrity in special libraries. For the remainder of the conference, we will equip you with a "digital compass" where you can submit ideas and thoughts of what you've learned in sessions for a final reveal in the closing keynote.