On World Refugee Day 2017, WOSM launches its new project “Time to be Welcome”. This event is run in collaboration with the European Youth Forum, and implemented thanks to the European Union and the Council of Europe partnership on youth affairs.

This conference brings together key stakeholders including the European Council on Refugees and Exiles (ECRE) and Voices of Young Refugees (VYRE), to share good practices from the ground and give visibility to successful initiatives such as ‘Time to be Welcome’.

“Time to be Welcome” aims at encouraging young volunteers and youth organisations in Europe to support the welcoming of migrants, asylum seekers and refugees and their integration process in both society and their new country through the use of non-formal education and youth work. At the same time, the project encourage Public opinion in Europe to be more respectful and more open towards migrants. Volunteers will be empowered to take action in contributing to welcome refugees and newly arrived migrants into refugee camps and other hosting structures and local communities. They will also facilitate the interaction between refugees and the local community members to set a strong foundation for their future cooperation and mutual understanding.

This ambitious project is led by WOSM and is implemented in partnership with EFIL (Belgium), YEU (Belgium), Soma Hellinon Proskopon (Greece), Scouting Ireland (Ireland), Scouts of Macedonia (FYROM/Macedonia), Centre Chapelle-aux-Champs (Belgium), Red Cross UK (UK), EEUDF (France), SINGA (France), Skatamot (Iceland).

The project is co-funded by the European Commission through the Erasmus + Programme KA3 – Support for policy reform and Social Inclusion.

The conference "Time to be Welcome: youth work & integration of young refugees” will take place on the 20th of June 2017, in the Renaissance Hotel, Rue du Parnasse 19 - Brussels, Belgium from 2 p.m., and will be organised in collaboration with the European Youth Forum.

Please refer to the registration web page for the conference program and registration information.