Maps of Magadan Oblast

Maphill is a collection of map images. This image combines a physical map with the globe centered on Magadan. Use the buttons under the image to switch to different map types.

See Magadan Oblast from a different perspective.

Each map style has its advantages. No map type is the best. The best is that Maphill lets you look at the whole area of Magadan from several different angles.

Yes, this physical location map is nice. But there is good chance you will like other map styles even more. Select another style in the above table and look at the Magadan from a different view.

What to do when you like this map?

If you like this map of Magadan, Magadan Oblast, Far East, Russia, please don't keep it to yourself. Give your friends a chance to see how the world converted to images looks like.

Share this location map.

Use the buttons for Facebook, Twitter or Google+ to share a link to this Magadan location map. Maphill is the largest map gallery on the web. The number of maps is, however, not the only reason to visit Maphill.

Free location map of Magadan.

This physical location map of Magadan is available in a JPEG image format. You can embed, print or download the map just like any other image. Enrich your website with hiqh quality map graphics. Use the Free map button above the image.

Is there anything more than this map?

Sure there is. It has been said that Maphill maps are worth a thousand words. But you can experience much more when you visit Magadan.

Be inspired.

Magadan represent just small part of Magadan Oblast, but still it has a lot to offer and a lot to see. It is not possible to capture all the beauty in the map.

Discount hotel reservations.

If any of Maphill's maps inspire you to come to Magadan, we would like to offer you access to wide selection of hotels at low prices and with great customer service.

Thanks to our partnership with Booking.com you can take advantage of up to 50% discounts for hotels bookings in many towns and cites within the area of Magadan.

Learn more about the map styles

Each map type offers different information and each map style is designed for a different purpose. Read about the styles and map projection used in the above map (Physical Location Map of Magadan, highlighted country, highlighted grandparent region, within the entire country).

Physical map

Physical map illustrates the mountains, lowlands, oceans, lakes and rivers and other physical landscape features of Magadan. Differences in land elevations relative to the sea level are represented by color.

Green color represents lower elevations, orange or brown indicate higher elevations, shades of grey are used for the highest mountain ranges in the world. Underwater topography is represented by blues. Darker blues are used for the deepest water, lighter shades of blue represent shallower water such as the continental shelf.

Map projection of the location map

The location map of Magadan combines two projections: the orthographic azimuthal projection for the globe and the simple geographic projection for the rectangular part of the map. Geographic projection has straight meridians and parallels, each degree of latitude and longitude is the same size over the entire world map.

The orthographic azimuthal projection is a perspective projection from infinite distance. It was already known to the Egyptians and Greeks more than 2,000 years ago. It gives the appearance of the Earth viewed from outer space. Only one hemisphere can be viewed at a time. The globe centered on Magadan appears more realistic than almost any other projection.

Technology

We unlock the value hidden in the geographic data. Thanks to automating the complex process of turning data into map graphics, we are able to create maps in higher quality, faster and cheaper than was possible before.

Forever free

We created Maphill to make the web a more beautiful place. Without you having to pay for it. Maphill maps are and will always be available for free.

Real Earth data

Do you think the maps are too beautiful not to be painted? No, this is not art. All location maps of Magadan are created based on real Earth data. This is how the world looks like.

Easy to use

This map is available in a common image format. You can copy, print or embed the map very easily. Just like any other image.

Different perspectives

The value of Maphill lies in the possibility to look at the same area from several perspectives. Maphill presents the map of Magadan in a wide variety of map types and styles.

Vector quality

We build each location map individually with regard to the characteristics of the map area and the chosen graphic style. Maps are assembled and kept in a high resolution vector format throughout the entire process of their creation.

Experience of discovering

Maphill maps will never be as detailed as Google maps or as precise as designed by professional cartographers. Our goal is different. We want to redefine the experience of discovering the world through the maps.

Fast anywhere

Maps are served from a large number of servers spread all over the world. Globally distributed map delivery network ensures low latency and fast loading times, no matter where on Earth you happen to be.

Spread the beauty

Embed the above physical location map of Magadan into your website. Enrich your blog with quality map graphics. Make the web a more beautiful place.