MAGADAN

Flag of Magadan

Sister Cities & Friendship Cities

Anchorage (United States), Tonghua (China), Jelgava (Latvia)

City PR

1. Museum of Natural History of the North-East Complex Scientific-Research Institute of the Far Eastern Branch of the Russian Academy of Sciences

The total area of the museum is 400m2. There are more than 3500 unique exhibits in the exposition fund. The unique scientific material reflects the complex geological history of the development of the North-East and the history of human culture of this territory.

2. Magadan Regional Local History Museum

Magadan regional local history museum is one of the largest scientific-educational institutions of the North-East. There are some unique materials about the history of the Kolyma region, works of painting, graphics, sculptures, decorative-applied art, the copy of the mammoth Dima and the tusks of the mammoth, the collection of minerals and rocks.

3. The Svyato-Troitsky Cathedral

The Svyato-Troitsky cathedral is the memorial church for the victims of the political repressions. The Svyato-Troitsky cathedral is the largest orthodox church in the Far East and one of the highest churches in Russia (its height is more than 70 meters).

4. The Monument «Mask of Sorrow»

The Monument “Mask of sorrow” is the sculpture of the height of 15 meters. It was built in memory of the victims of the mass political repressions, exiled to Kolyma. Inside the monument is the exact copy of a prison cell. The monument is located at the height of 200 meters above sea level on the Steep hill.

5. The ski resort «Snegorka»

The “Snegorka” is a popular winter recreation place of the inhabitants of Magadan. This ski resort is located in the city, its distinctive features are the beautiful nature and the clean air. There is everything for the fans of the active winter recreation: ski, ski rental and snowboards, rappel, snowtubing, the ice skating rink, the cafes and the playgrounds.

6. Jack London’s Lake

Jack London’s Lake is the most romantic place in the upper reaches of the Kolyma River. This lake is surrounded by small beautiful lakes with islands. One of these lakes has a poetic name – Lake of the dancing graylings. This is a great place for fans of fishing and tourist recreation.

7. Magadan Reserve

Magadan state natural reserve was established in 1982 to protect the northern mountainous landscapes and coastal ecosystems of the sea of Okhotsk. It has a total area of 883 thousand hectares. On the territory of the reserve are saved specific ecosystems, missing outside the North-Eastern Eurasia. There are 608 species of plants, 41 species of mammals, 210 species of birds, 32 species of fishes registered in this reserve.

8. Spa resort «Talaya»

«Talaya» is the spa resort in the basin of the river Talaya. Beautiful surroundings, silence, purity and transparency of air have a beneficial effect on the human, relax the nervous system. On the territory of the resort is a spring with healing water, which treats the diseases of the musculoskeletal system, gastrointestinal tract and liver diseases, diseases of the nervous system and gynecological diseases.

More Information