K1 Speed, America’s Premier Indoor Karting Company, set to open second San Diego facility near downtown.

Irvine, CA – December 6, 2013 – In 2003, K1 Speed – the largest operator of indoor go-kart tracks in the country – opened its first facility in the seaside town of Carlsbad, California, located just north of San Diego. In the ten years since, the company has enjoyed a meteoric rise; it now presides over 18 locations, situated throughout the United States from Florida, Illinois, Texas, Arizona, Washington to California. With the opening of its newest location in downtown San Diego, the company returns to its birthplace. It was in San Diego that K1 Speed first laid its roots, and it is only fitting that the company returns.

Residents of “America’s Finest City” will now be able to enjoy the thrill of indoor karting closer to the city center. With the company’s new downtown location, situated near the historic Gaslamp Quarter and the bustling East Village, K1 Speed is taking step towards embedding itself in the minds of not only enthusiasts, but the general populace as well. The facility will be uniquely equipped, unlike any in the company’s history, to accommodate walk-in guests and groups looking to spend a night out on the town.

Rewriting the Rules Since 2003 – Indoor Go-kart Racing the K1 Speed Way

If your last karting experience was at your local miniature golf course or one of those dirty and dusty outdoor tracks on the fringes of the city, you aren’t likely to find K1 Speed’s new downtown San Diego indoor karting center terribly familiar. And the company likes it that way. This is because K1 Speed’s approach to karting is completely fresh, and has rewritten what is expected in the industry.

How is K1 Speed different? For starters, the anemic, gas-powered karts are out; in their place sit high-performance, zero-emission electric karts capable of speeds approaching 45mph. The cracking asphalt and tire barriers are gone too, replaced with smooth asphalt and concrete, protected by a roof 365 days a year. The picnic tables too have been replaced; instead, you’ll find comfortable black leather couches and plasma televisions. This philosophy, that karting is not merely a gimmick but rather a genuinely thrilling experience, is what K1 Speed has built its reputation – and success – on and its newest center reflects this.

San Diego residents, who have for years been making the half-hour drive up north to Carlsbad, will find a world-class entertainment venue when K1 Speed opens its new downtown center. Inside, veteran and amateur racers alike will find an experience that is designed to satiate even the most ardent adrenaline junkie. The karts offer performance that is far superior to that of their traditional counterparts (powered by lackluster lawn mower engines), and with advanced timing and live telemetry, racers can take an active role in keeping track of their performance while on track – as well as that of their competitors. This is no passive racing environment.

The racing experience, which is overseen by co-owner and successful race car driver Boris Said, is intended to be second-to-none; and yet, the company has made it accessible to racers of all ages and backgrounds. Racers simply need meet basic height and mobility requirements to race – K1 Speed provides the rest.

Private Parties, Special Events, and More

In line with its goal of building not just go-kart tracks but world-class entertainment venues, K1 Speed offers a number of different racing packages that are tailor-made for groups looking to host unique and exciting parties. The company can host parties for groups of eight persons to 100 or more, and has a wealth of experience helping plan bachelor and bachelorette parties, birthday parties, corporate events, product launches, and team building exercises. In addition to unique racing packages, K1 Speed also offers private meeting rooms and catering options to meet groups’ needs. The company’s newest location in downtown San Diego will be the place to host a party in the city.

K1 Speed San Diego is conveniently located in the heart of the city, near the Gaslamp Quarter and East Village. Just 15 minutes from SeaWorld, five minutes from the San Diego Zoo, and 30 minutes or less from North and South County, residents from throughout the city can experience the thrill of indoor karting at any time, day or night. The center is open seven days a week and no reservations are required.