Future stories, past glories - April 2017

From Italy to Germany we arrived in Würzburg, a beautiful historic town with hilltop castle in true Grimm's fairytale tradition. Following a fun gig there, we enjoyed a fabulously feisty show in Offenbach...

And so on to wonderful, wonderful Copenhagen... Where the Amager Bio show was as lively as ever. Amazing flight to Norway, where you could see snow in the trees and frozen lakes beneath. We hugely enjoyed Drammen, a town on the edge of the mountains and close to the fjords. The singing metal balls on the river's edge were particularly intriguing... And yet another terrific gathering of fans at the show.

We were very shocked by the terrible news of the tragedy in Stockholm, which occurred just one day before our arrival. Gigs had been cancelled on the night of the attack, but everything was back up and running by the time we arrived. We saw the barrier on the end of the street where it had happened. A deep sadness pervaded that spot. There was a powerful feeling with a special crowd at the gig that night. It felt important for us all to connect, and particularly poignant for Nad, who lives near Stockholm.

Back in Germany, we continued to play to fabulous audiences in Berlin, Hamburg, Bochum and Leipzig. It was lovely to see friends on the way, such as Angéla and Maurizio Vicedomini who did the fabulous album art photos, and Martina Schindler & family.

On our first day in Zoetermeer, Netherlands, Jo and I with pals Martin and Jacqueline visited the European Space Agency, where our guides Carl and Koen showed us space shuttles from the past and the most incredible cutting edge probes... as well as some massive testing equipment. The ESA is an extraordinary place, involving people from all over the world.

On day two it was great to sign several albums etc for people at the Velvet Music record store in the old town of Delft... And both Zoetermeer shows were totally bubbling with excitement!

Finally now back to Blighty for a few days before the Dublin show on 26 April...