Drammen Yard offers Carousel packages from 150 to 12,000 tons, featuring an innovative design centered around a durable slewing ring or a wheel track solution.

The slewing ring, the core of our design, tolerates loads beyond those of the vessel itself, with minimal moving parts and pre-certification for various sizes. This enables us to quickly assemble equipment packages to meet a wide range of needs, including cable production, storage, laying, or repair.

We efficiently tailor equipment packages for these specific tasks, by either converting vessels at Drammen Yard or by shipping and installing the carousel and necessary components directly at the client’s site.

Portable and stationary Cable Carousels of Basket type for top loading of product require a Loading Tower for loading/unloading of Cable.

Standard Loading Towers includes a hydraulic operated Cable Loading Arm moveable in both the horizontal and the vertical direction, a Cable Loading Tensioner/Hauler and Cable Bend Restrictors for routing the Cable from the Tower down to the deck/ground.

Often the EPU-container for the Carousel is installed at the base of the Loading Tower in order save on required deck space.

Sometimes the Operator’s Cabin for operating the Cable Carousel and the Cable Loading Gear is installed on the Loading Tower itself, other times the Operator’s Cabin is installed on a separate tower structure, i.e. the Control Tower installed opposite the Loading Tower overviewing the Cable Touch-down point in the Carousel as well as the Loading Tower with the Cable Loading Arm and the Cable Loading Tensioner/Hauler.

Smaller carousels may have Offshore rating liftable with product loaded for direct deployment on to the Cable Repair Vessel for Plug and Play. These allow for operating and keeping multiple baskets with cable loaded at hand for cable repairs and long-term storage, available for immediate use.

Larger carousels with multiple compartments for centralized storage of a variety of spare cables.

Available both as our standard carousels rotating on a slewing bearing as well as wheel-based carousels rotating on ring-rails.