Drammen Train Station, Norway car rental map with SIXT locations

For a better visual experience, check all available SIXT rental places on the Google Maps service. You can find the required location with reference to a nearby attraction, hotel, or train station. Click on the desired point to see the distance to the main airport on the ground and proceed to the booking.

What type of car to hire from SIXT in Drammen Train Station, Norway?

It all depends on your travel goals and personal preferences. You can choose from small economy and compact vehicles to large SUVs and minivans. When booking, you actually order a specific car hire type, not make and model. Therefore, in the end, you get a model that is similar in basic technical characteristics to the vehicle displayed on the reservation page. in Drammen Train Station, Norway, you get access to the following auto categories at SIXT: Economy, Van, Minivan, 8 seater, and 9 seater.

Can't decide what you need? Find your desired rental car group in the following list and click on it for more information.

What rental car brand to select in Drammen Train Station, Norway?

SIXT classifies its vehicles into groups. However, when searching on our website, you may see a reference brand and model that belongs to a particular category and is listed at the top of every deal. Thus, you may focus on a car rental specific model and imagine what auto to get at the end when travelling to Drammen Train Station, Norway.

Also, SIXT indicates ‘or similar’ next to the model name. This means the company undertakes to provide a vehicle similar in characteristics to the reference vehicle. According to ACRISS (Association of Car Rental Industry Systems Standards), each category bears a unique 4-letter code that indicates its major specs, including body type, number of doors, transmission and fuel type, and air conditioning availability. That is, you get a vehicle that is equivalent in these features.

However, you may collect a car hire guaranteed model as well. Look for Drammen Train Station, Norway car hire deals with the corresponding inscription in the search results. If your goal is to book a vehicle of a specific brand, find it in the following catalogue.

Car rental review of Rental24.co.uk: SIXT car hire in Drammen Train Station, Norway

Still in doubt about choosing the right company for your upcoming road trip to Drammen Train Station, Norway? Check at least one SIXT car rental review from previous customers in the catalogue below, and you won't hesitate in your choice. They provide an honest and informative point of view that makes it possible to take the decisive step in finding a reliable supplier in Drammen Train Station, Norway.

FAQs - SIXT car hire in Drammen Train Station, Norway

How much is it to hire a car from SIXT in Drammen Train Station, Norway?

The cost depends on the vehicle class of course. Also, the trip duration and seasonal demand matter. The lowest SIXT car rental price in Drammen Train Station, Norway is £53 per day. The average rate for SIXT deals is £72, and the maximum daily price tag can reach £125. When calculating Drammen Train Station, Norway rental rates on a long-term basis, the company lowers its prices.

Therefore, you get even better value from SIXT if you book at least for a week at minimum. The minimum price for such period is £282. The average rate per week is £380. And if you're picking up a high-end vehicle, expect to pay a maximum cost of around £661 per week.

The main tip for the cheapest price is to book in advance. Also, take advantage of the simple car hire Drammen Train Station, Norway price comparison available on our website in order to find the best deals.

What is the cheapest car to hire from SIXT in Drammen Train Station, Norway?

Сheap SIXT car rentals in Drammen Train Station, Norway are real! The cheapest car hire deal is the Economy Ford Fiesta available for £53 per day. While the highest SIXT car rental price you will pay is £125 per day for a Van Toyota Proace.

Is it cheaper to pre-book a rental car in Drammen Train Station, Norway?

Elect SIXT to book a rental car, and plan ahead to get the cheapest rates near Drammen Train Station, Norway. The optimal period for reserving is 1-2 weeks before the pick-up date, although you can start checking the best deals a month in advance.

What is the age limit for hiring a car from SIXT?

The exact Drammen Train Station, Norway legal driving age depends on the specific car hire company. Before confirming the booking, check the details in the Terms and Conditions on the vendor's website. At the same time, you can check the minimum and maximum age limit to hire a car at SIXT in the following card.

Vendor Standard terms SIXT 23-99 years old

What does off-airport car hire mean at SIXT?

Travellers booking a set of wheels for leisure or business purposes in Drammen Train Station, Norway have two pick-up options to opt for:

On-airport. The counter is available at the terminal, within walking distance of the baggage claim area. The car park is in the same building.

Off-airport. The supplier sits outside the terminal but within driving distance of the facility. You can reach the office with the Drammen Train Station, Norway car rental shuttle bus leaving near the terminal.

Is SIXT on-site in Drammen Train Station, Norway?

The following vendors sit on-site, within the terminal: SIXT .

You can find the SIXT counter on-site in Drammen Train Station, Norway. Upon arrival, follow the overhead signs from the baggage claim area and make your way to the arrivals hall where all rental companies are located. Proceed to the appropriate desk to sign the agreement and pick up the keys.

Is SIXT the best car rental company for a one-way trip in Drammen Train Station, Norway?

SIXT offers reliable and cheap one-way car hire in Drammen Train Station, Norway. This option adds flexibility to your ride and can be useful for:

trips between distant destinations or across the country

spontaneous decisions while travelling

saving time by not having to return to the original location

cases when your flight is delayed or cancelled

A large selection of economy, full-size sedans, SUVs, minivans, and pickup trucks are available for car rental one-way in Drammen Train Station, Norway. If you would like to check the availability of a one-way option, please complete the search form for the selected locations on the top of this page.

How to avoid SIXT one-way car hire drop-off fees in Drammen Train Station, Norway?

When you decide to return the vehicle to another location, SIXT applies a one-way charge, also called a drop-off fee. This is a kind of payment for the service the company provides by returning the vehicle to the original pick-up point. In this regard, travellers often ask how to avoid rental car drop-off fees. Are there any ways to do so?

Customers pay one-way charges when travelling between destinations over significant distances. At the same time, there are no associated fees when moving between two locations within the same city.

If you have booked a round trip, but decide to choose another Drammen Train Station, Norway car hire drop-off location, you will pay a one-way charge on top of the total price. However, some corporate locations make it possible to avoid this charge. If you would like to check drop-off rates for selected locations and find discount deals, please fill out the search form at the top of the page.

What is rental car insurance at SIXT company?

SIXT rental car insurance services cover the temporary vehicle you drive on your trip. This protection has multiple components and among all of them, you can find the desired.

Does my car insurance cover international rentals in Drammen Train Station, Norway?

Standard auto insurance provides minimal coverage from third-party claims in foreign countries. Use SIXT rental car insurance in Drammen Train Station, Norway to cover you in case of potential damage or theft.

What does car hire Excess insurance cover?

SIXT car hire Excess insurance protects you from extra charges related to damage or theft of your vehicle in Drammen Train Station, Norway. However, it doesn’t cover damage to third-party property. Also, it doesn’t compensate for medical expenses and the cost of any personal property inside the auto.

What insurance should I get with a rental car?

Actually, you get basic car hire insurance from SIXT when picking up one of their vehicles. If necessary, the company provides additional or comprehensive plans. However, you can also use your personal auto policy if it covers driving a rental vehicle abroad. Other available options are to take advantage of the insurance that comes with a credit card, or use coverage from a third-party company.

How long does SIXT charge you for damages?

You are financially responsible for everything that happens to the vehicle, from the moment of pickup near Drammen Train Station, Norway to closing the agreement upon return. This even applies to damage that occurs after an overnight drop, or before an employee accepts the vehicle after you leave. SIXT car hire company will charge you immediately on the counter for reported damage. However, in the case of unreported damage, the supplier may withdraw compensation within 28 days of the vehicle’s return.

What is the SIXT car rental gas policy in Drammen Train Station, Norway?

According to the SIXT gas policy in Drammen Train Station, Norway, you can refuel yourself. Also, this option is called full-to-full or same-to-same. In this case, you must return the vehicle with the same amount of fuel in the tank as there was upon pick-up. Otherwise, you have to make up for the missing litres at a price higher than the local pump rate.

Another way to refuel is to prepay for it. Prepaid fuel saves you from visiting the gas station and costs almost the same as at the local pump. When comparing available fuel approaches, car hire in Drammen Train Station, Norway with the pick-up-full return-full option is more beneficial due to the cheaper pump price at the gas station.