Catering and banquet facilities

Students, USN staff and other tenants at Papirbredden can pre-book catering and food for meetings for all occasions. This can be collected or delivered to the desired location.

Are you going to arrange a kick-off, birthday, wedding, graduation or other event? We have premises with Drammen's most beautiful views and a full license. Contact us for a non-binding conversation about your event!

How to order:

Use the booking form below to find booking information, menus and prices:

👩🏽‍🍳 Order catering from Kafé Papirbredden 🍪 Café Papirbredden's catering food menu

About the prices:

The prices apply to employees in USN and SSN.

VAT. may apply to certain products or services.

For shipping between buildings, we must have a small reservation.

For offers on other food, products and cakes for special occasions, please contact us!

You find us here:

We are located to the left of the main entrance in Papirbredden 1 at USN Campus Drammen.

A taste of Italy in Drammen

If you fancy really good pasta, head to Café Papirbredden! Of course, you'll find a lot of other dishes to tempt you in the hot counter too.

If you're not in the mood for hot food, you'll always find a delicious salad counter, kiosk items, fruit, hot and cold drinks, home-made smoothies and a variety of sandwiches at Café Papirbredden.

Wisdom from the chef at Café Papirbredden:

"Food made with love is the key to a successful recipe".

Breakfast is served from 7.30-9.30 am

Freshly baked bakery products and rolls with various tasty toppings are ready in our counters, as well as juice, milk, yoghurt and coffee/tea in all varieties.

The buffet is open from 11.00 am-14.00 pm

No days are the same at Café Papirbredden, and that includes the menu. We change the menu from week to week and from season to season. We are committed to providing our students and guests with a nutritious, tasty and varied range. The menu includes everything from traditional Norwegian food, food from all corners of the world and other treats.

Our team

Our team consists of dedicated and skilled chefs with backgrounds from Italian, French and Norwegian cuisine. We live by the motto "Home-made with love" and we strive to give all our guests a tasteful experience.

Save money with the Coffee card

Get 12 cups of coffee (or tea) for NOK 110 with the Coffee card - save NOK 70! Buy it in the Student Sørøst app.

Read more about the Coffee card.