For our fellow citizens who take seriously the taunts of politicians, these have been very sad days.

We all know the source of their discomfort: A small group of Japanese politicians has accused American workers of being lazy and illiterate, despite overwhelming evidence to the contrary.While reasonable people are reminded of a couple of fat terriers barking at a German shepherd from a fenced yard, some Americans have taken offense.

This is unfortunate, and quite unnecessary, for as even the quickest review makes clear, these fellows have no business giving anyone any lip. If anything, their careers are proof that the march from emperor worship toward democracy has not been without its hitches.

What is their primary accomplishment? They have gained office by manipulating an electoral system the Japan Times calls "rotten to the core." We also tend to forget that Japan is essentially a one-party state: the Liberal Democratic Party has ruled the island since 1955.

A brief look at the record of Prime Minister Kiichi Miyazawa is highly instructive. Miyazawa, as we know, is the man who recently said, "I have long thought that they (Americans) lack a work ethic . . . to live by the sweat of their brow." A curious comment, considering the source.

In 1988, the former finance minister and deputy premier broke a significant sweat - but not from overwork. He was driven out of office at the height of the Recruit stock scandal, a typical sham in which politicians received cheap shares in exchange for official favors. The departing Miyazawa denied personal involvement but admitted that two close aides had bought and sold in his name.

Last November, after a few years on the bench, Miyazawa took over as prime minister and immediately assembled an all-star cabinet. Nine members (including himself) had been tainted by the stock scam, one had been convicted of taking bribes, and his minister of health had been involved in a sex scandal.

Aided by their character flaws, some Cabinet members were quick to make international reputations. Foreign minister Michio Watanabe, showing off his diplomatic skills, opined that the Chinese "are still living in caves," and then turned his attention to the United States. "When it comes to bankruptcy," he once explained, "we Japanese take it seriously. But over there (in America), where credit cards are common, there are people who say, `We're bankrupt! We don't have to pay our bills any more, that's all!' "

Last month, at about the time one of Miyazawa's closest confidants was being taken into custody on fraud charges, a respected Japanese political analyst summed up the prime minister's accomplishments to date:

"Although he's only been in power for a short time, Miyazawa has already shown that he lacks the political skills to control parliament, the job of any prime minister."

Yet we are saddened by these outbursts, even if they are nothing more than the fruits of lingering animosities.

We might even dare hope that some good can come of these unpleasantries, which some American experts think may be related to overwork on the part of the Japanese. This may indeed be the perfect time to help our Asian friends learn to relax a bit.

But a change is needed, even if it is limited to a cessation of bragging about how many hours Japanese workers spend in the office.

Already critics are quick to point out Japan basically has excelled in copying products from other countries. Nor is there honor in clock-watching.