Miyazawa Kiichi played a leading role in Japan's government and politics from 1942 until 2003, during which time he served as Prime Minister, and also as Minister of Finance, Minister of Foreign Affairs, Minister of International Trade and Industry, Director General of the Economic Planning Agency, and Chief Cabinet Secretary. In this oral history autobiography, he discusses with candor and detail a wide range of topics, including his 1939 visit to the United States, recovery policies during the postwar occupation, the San Francisco Peace Treaty, and Japan's role in international organizations such as GATT and OECD, and gives a thoughtful insider's view of six decades of Japanese politics, closing with his thoughts on Japan's role in the 21st century.

Miyazawa's testimony contains the unmistakable richness of the words of one who was present as history was being made. The political candor, unmatched scope, and largely first-person narrative make this book unique.

The Importance of Miyazawa Kiichi: Translation Editor's Introduction

Preface

1. Early Life/ On Completion of the Interviews

2. Experiences before and during World War II: The Japan-America Student Conference and the Heading of Tax Offices

3. The Ministry of Finance after Defeat in World War II

4. Negotiations with GHQ: The Dodge Line and the Shoup Tax System

5. Attending the San Francisco Peace Conference

6. The Beginnings of Kochikai, and the Anpo Protests

7. Ikeda's Visit to America and His Meeting with President Kennedy

8. The Japan-U.S Textile Negotiations

9. From the Plaza Accord to the Bursting of the Economic Bubble

10. Miyazawa as Prime Minister

11. Considering 21st Century Japan

Epilogue: On Completion of the Interviews

Chronology of Miyazawa Kiichi's Life and Related Events

Index

What is included with this book?

The New copy of this book will include any supplemental materials advertised. Please check the title of the book to determine if it should include any access cards, study guides, lab manuals, CDs, etc.

The Used, Rental and eBook copies of this book are not guaranteed to include any supplemental materials. Typically, only the book itself is included. This is true even if the title states it includes any access cards, study guides, lab manuals, CDs, etc.