To Faculty, Staff, and Students of Kyushu University

"Yuho-Bunko Collection" and "Documents related to Kiichi Miyazawa" is now available.

Yuho-Bunko Collection

This is the online database of Yuho-Bunko Collection, which held by The Research Institute for Oriental Cultures Gakushuin University. It contains a large number of valuable materials on Korea during the colonial period. The collection includes memos, reports, and other internal documents left behind by bureaucrats and officials of the Governor-General's Office of Korea, which provide a glimpse into the actual state of colonial rule policies.

Part 1: Materials related to the budget of the Governor-General's Office / Watanabe Nobuo documents

Part 2: Materials on the Main Office and Local Offices of the Governor-General of Korea

Part 3: Materials of the Central Korean Association and Other Organizations, and Materials of the Colonial Economy and Industry

Part 4: Materials related to postwar repatriation and overseas assets

Access

Click here and access to the database.

Documents related to Kiichi Miyazawa

This is the database of materials holded by Kiichi Miyazawa (1919 - 2007), the 78th Prime Minister of Japan.

The collection covers the period when Miyazawa held important positions, and consists of original materials such as unpublished diaries and memos, diplomatic documents, ministry and party policy materials, and correspondence with key figures in Japan and abroad.

Part 1: Secretary to Minister of Finance Hayato Ikeda / a Member of the House of Councillors Period (1949-1962)

<Topics>

Historical documents related to Hayato Ikeda's visit to the U.S. / Peace negotiations between Japan and the Allied Powers / Ikeda-Robertson meeting / Colombo Plan / Ikeda-Kennedy meeting / Japan-U.S. Joint Committee on Trade and Economy

Access

Click here and access to the database.

It is reported that off-campus access may have some troubles depending on web browsers. In this case, please access on campus. Recommended browser: Microsoft Edge

Inquiry