Former Prime Minister, Kiichi Miyazawa, died on 28 June 2007.

The next morning I went to pay my respects.

He has lost a lot of weight and become much smaller, but his face showed the gentleness and tranquility of a man who had accomplished all he set out to do, and as I returned home, my thoughts turned to the Jiyu Shakai Kenkyu-kai.

It was 30 years ago, in 1977, that Akio launched the group as Chairman, calling on the Liberal Democratic Party of the time to come together with future leaders from the world of politics, business and culture, and forsaking political factions, work together for the good of Japan’s place in the world. Akio told me that his ideal was to concentrate the nation’s strength, bringing together organizations regardless of political affiliations, ministries or old boy's networks.

“I wish to spend the rest of my life accomplishing things that only I, in my position, can accomplish. That may take time away from you and the family, but I hope you will be behind me,” he said. On 17 August 1977 the Jiyu Shakai Kenkyu-kai began.

Every month, a breakfast meeting was held that brought together many busy representatives from all sectors to discuss measures that would profit the nation. This report was shared with the cabinet and business leaders of the time, but there was a tacit agreement not to share it with the media.

Sometimes meetings were held to coincide with a visit to Japan from some leading figure that was a friend of Akio’s and they would share the latest developments from other countries.

One such visit that I remember well was from Doctor Henry Kissinger. Akio laughed when he recalled that, “Henry said I didn’t need to thank him for attending the meeting—he gets plenty of that elsewhere. He said I could ask him anytime as he actually enjoys taking part”.

Another time, I'm not sure if it was a coincidence or not, but a meeting had been scheduled the day before an election, but instead of a drop in attendance, all the members showed up.

Of the group members, Noboru Takeshita, Toshiki Kaifu, Tsutomu Hata, Ryutaro Hashimoto, Keizo Obuchi, Yoshiro Mori and Kiichi Miyazawa all went on to become Prime Minister. Unfortunately, starting members Shinaro Abe and Ichiro Nakagawa also hoped to become Prime Minister, but they passed away before they could take on the post.

In 1993, after Akio became unwell and unable to resume his role, I visited Kiichi at his office and requested that he dissolve the group. “This kind of group doesn’t happen twice. Please let us continue as it is,” he replied. I therefore said that he should ‘do as he sees fit’.

The Jiyu Shakai Kenkyu-kai, shortened to Jiyuken, still continues thirty years later with Shoichiro Toyoda acting as Chairman. More than half of the former members have passed away, with new leaders taking their place, although I do not know many of them.

My feelings now are that Japan is not strong in the way that Akio had hoped and it saddens me to see the disparate way that it has taken. However, I do what I can, which is to attend elections without fail, and add my vote to the candidate that I have carefully chosen. That is our duty as citizens and our way of speaking out.

I found this photo of the Jiyu Shakai Kenkyu-kai in one of Akio’s albums a few days after Kiichi Miyazawa’s funeral.

At that time the world looked bright in the futures of these two men.

Yoshiko Morita, 5 July 2007