Kensington Theatre Company presents the world premiere of “Princess Academy,” an original musical based on the Newberry Award winning novel by Shannon Hale.

The production, directed by Artistic Director Toni Butler, was adapted to the stage by Katherine P. Brown, with musical orchestration by Michelle Willis.

Candice Kugler is the musical director and Michelle Willis conducts the music.

“Princess Academy” runs through Dec. 21, and features former Park City resident Maggie Scott as the lead, Miri Larendaughter.

High on the side of rocky Mount Eskel, far from the valleys where gardens are green and lush, where lowlanders make laws, Larendaughter’s family has lived forever, pounding a living from the stone of the mountain itself.

For as long as she can remember, she has dreamed of working alongside the other villagers in the quarries of her beloved mountainside, but has never been allowed to work there, perhaps, she thinks, because she is so small.

Then word comes from the valley that the king’s priests have divined Mount Eskel to be the home of the prince’s bride-to-be: the next princess.

The prince himself will travel to the village to choose her, but first all eligible girls must attend a makeshift mountain academy to prepare themselves for royal lowlander life.

At the school, Larendaughter soon finds herself confronted by bitter competition among the girls and her own conflicting desires to be chosen by the prince. Yet when danger comes to the academy and threatens all their lives, it is Larendaughter, named for a tiny mountain flower, who must find a way to save her classmates — and the one chance to leave the mountain each of them is determined to secure as her own.

“Princess Academy” also features Trenton Conover as Peder, Larendaughter’s best friend since childhood. Lydia Butler and Geoff Beckstrand play Britta, Larendaughter’s best friend at the Academy, and Prince Steffan, respectively.

Candice Kugler portrays Peder’s mother Doter. Rob Abney is Larendaughter’s Pa, and Katherine P. Brown is Olana Mansdaughter, the Academy tutor.

They are joined by a talented cast and live orchestra at Kensington Theatre’s new venue in South Jordan.