Derek Fisher was never a player that wowed fans with blinding quickness or stunning athletic ability. Fisher was never grouped with the elite crop of point guards in the NBA, and he never sent fans into a frenzy with crafty dribbling moves or monster slam dunks.

His modest career averages of 8.3 PPG, 3.0 APG, 2.1 RPG, 40% FG and 37.4% from behind the arc indicate that he was a solid role player whom was capable of making the three point shot pretty consistently. He was never the superstar or main cog on any of his respective teams, but he was a always a reliable figure when the opportunity to emerge victorious dangled in front of the Lakers or any other team.

As a Lakers fan, my love and admiration for Derek Fisher does not simply just run, but zooms passionately throughout my veins. One of my greatest triumphs as a basketball fan is getting to witness a player with the professional, confident and reliable play of Derek Fisher. No statistics could measure Fisher’s importance in the production of the Lakers five championship titles since 2000.

In the 2009 and 2010 championship seasons, Derek Fisher stood firmly in the backcourt with superstar Kobe Bryant, as Bryant terrorized the league with his brilliant talent.

Even playing with a player the caliber of Kobe Bryant, there are bound to be flared tempers, arguments and disagreements throughout the juncture of an NBA season. Any championship team will experience these missteps, as they are imperative in building trust and togetherness that will eventually land a franchise a championship.

When Bryant began to get crippled by doubt and frustration, Derek Fisher was there to ease that calamity. It speaks volumes for Derek Fisher that he’s possibly number one on the list of players Bryant has trusted throughout his career.

If you are familiar with Kobe Bryant, you know that his “trust” list is most likely very brief.

Part of the reason why Fisher described his and Bryant’s relationship as a “brotherhood” is the fact that when Bryant barked, Fisher chirped right back. Some guys would refrain from stepping up to Kobe Bryant, who’s status as one of the greatest could cause some to be intimidated. Derek Fisher never was fearful of Bryant, and that’s where that trust and respect stems from.

When Kobe would hiss and holler for the ball, Fisher would look him off, with a care in the world. He never let Bryant’s thinking or demands compromise his thoughts or actions on the basketball court.

Derek knew that no matter how great or talented the individual, the goal remains the same: a championship. It takes an important commitment from the superstar to the bench warmers to become an elite and championship caliber team. Simple gestures such as that would build that championship continuity.

Also, in the most trying times the younger guys could step to Derek Fisher, who’s calm, cool and suave demeanor made it easy for those to open up to him.

Kobe Bryant’s authoritative ways are well documented, and that can be overwhelming for a younger player, or simply a player that does not match the skill set of a Kobe Bryant, Pau Gasol, Andrew Bynum or Lamar Odom. A players confidence can be left in shambles, and their psyche can be rattled after getting barked at by someone that is considered one of the best to ever play the game of basketball.

When Bryant’s unique leadership ways began to fluster any player on the Lakers roster, Fisher was able to relax their spirits and soothe their souls. He knew all too well about the challenging climb from unheralded college basketball player to a lifer as a Laker and a five time world champion.

He was able to restore confidence that Bryant’s words may have stripped the youthful or unsure players of. Kobe Bryant may have been the most vocal and aggressive Laker leader, but Fisher’s reserved yet compassionate approach to the team provided them with a much important different dynamic.

Fisher was a highly reliable figure. Not just in the Lakers locker room, but the Jazz, Warriors and Thunder too. Fisher led by example. He was a figure that many kept close eyes on, especially when things went awry because it was likely he knew how to conduct himself in the most trying of times.

Fisher’s great dependability in the locker room made him such a lovable figure, but his heroics on the court is what led many to become infatuated with the point guards game.

Derek had a tendency to deliver in the games waining moments, with anxiousness at an all-time high and the adrenaline pumping at it’s zenith.

In Game 5 of the 2001 NBA Finals, Derek Fisher nailed 6 of his 8 three pointers and helped Los Angeles defeat Philadelphia and capture their second straight world championship.

In Game 4 of the 2009 NBA Finals, Fisher swished a three point bomb in regulation to send the game into overtime, then proceeded to connect on another three pointer in the extra session to give the Lakers the lead.

In Game 3 of the 2010 NBA Finals, Fisher was up to his valiant antics again, trying to steer the series in Los Angeles’ favor after Boston had snatched home court away from the Lakers with their win in Game 2.

In the 4th quarter of Game 3, Derek scored 11 of his 16 points, including a courageous layup that helped bury the Celtics in that game.

But, Derek Fisher’s most memorable and miraculous moment took place on May 13, 2004 in Game 5 of the Lakers second round series against the San Antonio Spurs.

After Tim Duncan hit an absurd falling runner over Shaquille O’Neal, many assumed the contest was all but over even though 0.4 seconds remained on the clock. The Lakers stood in awe of the awesome shot Duncan hit, and the Spurs could begin to sniff the sweetest of victories.

The Lakers had one opportunity left to conquer the Spurs in Game 5, and Derek Fisher delivered the surprising blow that was beyond devastating for Spurs fans and insanely exciting for LA fans.

Fisher has yet to formally announce any retirement plans, as he intends to mull over his options for next year. The Oklahoma City Thunder were bounced in the Western Conference Finals in six games by the Spurs, and Fisher has some critical decisions to make.

Whatever Derek Fisher decides to do, the NBA should never severe ties with a praiseworthy figure such as Fisher. He’s the consummate pro on and off the court, the fiercest of competitors and someone that many of his cohorts respect immensely.

Fisher has been a fixture in the NBA for the last decade, and it would be a shame if he didn’t have a presence in this league for the decade coming up. Derek Fisher is a highly commendable individual and is someone that more people should attempt to emulate.

His bravery, kindness and smarts has left an imprint on this game that many will fail to match. Statistics will never tell the story of Derek Fisher, and quite honestly he may be okay with that. His story is much more than a bunch of numbers grouped together.

If Fisher decides to add another chapter to his story, I wish him nothing but success in all future endeavors. If this is where the story ends, it was one filled with inspiration, heartache, jubilation and glory.

Hollywood couldn’t have scripted it any better.