This has got to be the worst alternate universe ever. -Spider-Man

Hey! Article is a stub. This means that it is short and needs more information, or should be expanded with up to date information, if there is any new information. You can help the Spider-Man Wiki by expanding it. Thanks!

Remember users, remove this template ONLY if the article has been expanded enough.

Spider-Man Unlimited Genre(s): Action/Adventure

Rating:

TV-Y7 Created by: Stan Lee, Steve Ditko

Voices of:

Rino Romano, Brian Drummond, Michael Donovan, Garry Chalk, John Payne II, Rhys Huber, Christopher Gaze and Jennifer Hale

No. of seasons:

1

No. of episodes:

13

Running time:

22 minutes

Original run:

October 2, 1999 – March 31, 2001

Network(s):

Fox (Fox Kids)

Spider-Man Unlimited is an American animated series featuring the Marvel Comics superhero Spider-Man. Spider-Man: Unlimited premiered in 1999.

Series takes place in Earth-751263.

Plot[]

While covering the launch of John Jameson's one man mission to Counter-Earth (another Earth located on the far side of the Sun), Spider-Man attempts to stop his two symbiote adversaries Venom and Carnage from boarding the shuttlecraft. Blamed for Jameson losing contact with our Earth, Spider-Man becomes a target of persecution by the media and the public.

Believed to be dead after saving a person's life in a fire, Peter Parker uses the ruse to embark on a mission to retrieve John Jameson on Counter-Earth, using nanotechnology borrowed from Reed Richards to design a new suit that incorporates stealth technology and sonic weaponry.

Making his way to the planet, Spider-Man learns that Jameson has fallen in with a band of freedom fighters opposed to the High Evolutionary whose Beastials, hybrids of animal and humanoid attributes, are the dominant species whilst humans are the second-class minority. With Jameson reluctant to return until all of the Beastials are defeated, Spider-Man elects to remain on Counter-Earth, blending in as best as he can as Peter Parker, and fighting the High Evolutionary and his Knights of Wundagore alongside the rebels as Spider-Man. It is soon discovered that Venom and Carnage are also on Counter-Earth, and are following orders from a being known as the Synoptic.

See Also[]

Spider-Man: Unlimited (1999 TV series)/Gallery

Episode 1[]

The episode starts with the announcer "John" engaging in a speech about one of the most recent destruction to the solar system. Peter Parker is taking pictures of the speech, also talking with his boss.

Peter Parker gets aware of danger, going to change into his Spider-Man attire. As two henchmen with the symbolism inside of the two outfits drop down and it is revealed to be Venom and Carnage. Spider-Man soon becomes aware and crawls down to the scene.

The astronaut starts the countdown for the rocket to blast up into the air.

Spider-Man begins to make his way up onto the rocket-ship, as Carnage transforms into his full form and gives Spider-Man a malicious stare. Venom grabs Spider-Man behind, then telling Spider-Man the plan, Spider-Man throws him over into Carnage and they both sweep away.