Spider-Man Unlimited is an animated television series featuring one of the popular and most beloved Marvel comic superheroes, Spiderman. Set in an alternate universe called Counter-Earth, this series showcases the many adventures of Peter Parker who embarks on a daring mission to rescue his lover Mary Jane. With the help of other inter-dimensional heroes, Spiderman fights against the tyrannical rule of the High Evolutionary and strives to protect both Earth and Counter-Earth. If you haven’t watched this series yet, don’t worry you can now watch Spider-Man Unlimited online.

Here’s where you can watch Spider-Man Unlimited online.

Where can you watch and stream Spider-Man Unlimited?

You can watch and stream Spider-Man Unlimited on Disney Plus.

The voice cast of Spider-Man Unlimited brought the characters to life with their performances. Some of the key members of this voice cast include Rino Romano as Peter Parker, Jennifer Hale as Mary Jane, Paul Dobson as High Evolutionary, and several others.

How to watch Spider-Man Unlimited and stream online

People interested in watching Spider-Man Unlimited online can access it by subscribing to Disney Plus through their web browser or by downloading the streaming service application.

You can watch the series via Disney Plus by following these steps:

Visit DisneyPlus.com

Select ‘Sign Up Now’

Enter your email and password

Select a subscription plan

$7.99 per month (Basic)

$13.99 per month or $139.99 per year (Premium)

Enter your payment information

The Disney Plus Basic plan allows users to stream the service’s content with ads, while the Premium plan lets users stream with no ads and download content to supported devices. There are also a variety of bundle packages, scaling from Bundle Duo Basic, which pairs Disney Plus with Hulu for $9.99 per month, to the Disney Bundle Trio Premium for $19.99 per month, which bundles Disney Plus, Hulu, and ESPN Plus.

The official synopsis for Spider-Man Unlimited reads:

“Spider-Man travels to Counter-Earth to rescue a Terran shuttle crew trapped there and discovers a tyrannical & warped version of his world.”

For more Disney Plus-related information, check out the streaming release schedule for the platform in November. Check out where to watch Spidey and His Amazing Friends.