Lauree Austin

Midday Talent, K-LOVE

< MOMENTUM HOST >

Even though Lauree is originally from Boring, Oregon, she has lived and traveled to over 50 countries and is always excited to discover a new city, a new culture and a new expression of God’s amazing creation! She flew all the way to Iceland for just 12 hours.

Her first radio job (‘job’ might be generous, it wasn’t paid) was when she was 19 years old at a YWAM school in Northern Ireland.

Lauree loves adventures and has had some crazy ones in her life: tour manager for Tony Hawk and So You Think You Can Dance, missionary to the Czech Republic, skydiving-bungee jumping adrenaline junkie, leadership development consultant, being at gunpoint 12 times…online dating.

Seventeen years after those four shows in Northern Ireland a friend told Lauree, “I think you could do radio.” A PD in Dallas took a chance to teach her how to do radio. Lauree is celebrating 5 years as a radio personality and loves doing middays at K-LOVE.

EJ Gaines

Senior VP of Marketing at Capitol CMG & Co-Executive Director of Motown Gospel

< INSPIRATIONAL >

Keeping the Gates of a Holy City

Be encouraged and challenged as we refocus our collective missions to include the idea of “gatekeeping” according to God’s intended design for it. We’ll explore what stewardship of platforms can spiritually and practically look like, and we’ll dive into how we can best honor God and one another as we serve in the Christian media industry.

EJ Gaines is Senior Vice President of Marketing at Capitol CMG and Co-Executive Director of Motown Gospel, divisions of Capitol Records/Universal Music Group. An entertainment lawyer and former artist manager with 20 years of experience in the music business, EJ Gaines has guided the careers of GRAMMY® Award-winning recording artists, producers and songwriters, as well as producers and talent in film, TV and other forms of media and content.

EJ Gaines serves as a National Trustee for the Recording Academy, and sits on the Board of Directors for several organizations, including Music Health Alliance, the Gospel Music Trust Fund, and the Gospel Music Association. In 2021, EJ was named a Change Agent by Billboard and, most recently, was appointed Chairman of the U.S. Board of Hope for Justice, a global nonprofit organization which aims to end human trafficking and modern slavery.

EJ Gaines currently resides in Franklin, TN with his wife, recording artist and public speaker Janice Gaines, and their two sons.

Peter Greer

President & CEO, HOPE International

< LEADERSHIP, INSPIRATIONAL >

Rooting for Rivals

Faith-based organizations are sometimes known for what we’re against–and, all too often, that includes being against each other. But followers of Jesus have a unique opportunity to link arms across our organizational boundaries and pursue a calling higher than our own agendas. Rooting for Rivals reveals how your organization can multiply its impact by cooperating rather than competing. This session celebrates case studies illustrating the power of collaborative partnership in pursuing the power of openhanded leadership.

Peter Greer is the president and CEO of HOPE International, a global Christ-centered economic development organization serving throughout Africa, Asia, Latin America, and Eastern Europe. Prior to joining HOPE, Peter worked internationally in Cambodia, Zimbabwe and Rwanda and received an MPP in political and economic development from Harvard’s Kennedy School. Peter’s favorite part of his job is spending time with the entrepreneurs HOPE serves—whether harvesting coffee with farmers in Rwanda, dancing alongside savings groups in Haiti, or visiting the greenhouses of entrepreneurs in Ukraine. As an advocate for the Church’s role in missions and alleviating extreme poverty, Peter has co-authored 14 books, including Mission Drift, Rooting for Rivals, The Gift of Disillusionment, and The Spiritual Danger of Doing Good. More important than his role at HOPE is his role as husband to Laurel and dad to Keith, Liliana, Myles, and London. While his sports loyalties remain in New England, Peter and his family live in Lancaster, PA.

Daniel Harkavy

CEO & Executive Coach, Building Leaders

< LEADERSHIP, INSPIRATIONAL >

Living a Life of More

Many of us feel called to live a life of more – more impact, more meaning, more purpose. But if we’re not careful, we can get stuck in The Drift and find ourselves living a life of mediocrity – or worse regrets. Daniel will share a time-tested model from the best-selling book, Living Forward, so you can use your life as a platform to make an even greater impact in those around you.

Daniel Harkavy has been coaching business leaders to peak levels of performance, efficacy, and fulfillment for more than 25 years.

In 1996, he harnessed his passion for coaching leaders and teams to found Building Champions, where he serves as CEO and Executive Coach. Daniel and his team of coaches have worked with thousands of clients and organizations to improve the way they lead and live.

Daniel is a sought-after author and speaker, most recently authoring The 7 Perspectives of Effective Leaders which was released in October 2020. His book Living Forward, a national bestseller, was published in March 2016. Daniel also authored Becoming A Coaching Leader: The Proven Strategy for Building Your Own Team of Champions in 2007.

As an executive coach and trusted confidant, Daniel works with high profile leaders to improve their leadership, decision-making, influence, and overall effectiveness. Daniel’s emphatic belief is that self-leadership precedes team leadership, and his goal is to help his clients optimize how they lead themselves first, then focusing on how to best work with their executive teams and all key constituents in their organizations. He engages with clients in many forms including one-on-one executive coaching sessions, executive retreats, speaking engagements and custom experiences.

Some of the clients he has worked with include: Daimler, Nike, Chick-fil-A, Bristol-Myers Squibb, Pfizer, Infineum (an ExxonMobil and Shell company), Bank of America, Wells Fargo, MetLife, PrimeLending, US Bank, Northwestern Mutual, Morgan Stanley, Prudential, Merrill Lynch and many others.

Daniel lives just outside Portland, Oregon, where he and his wife and family enjoy a little space for gardening and play. Daniel actively serves his community as a member of nonprofit boards and a mentor to those seeking his guidance. His other passions include surfing, snowboarding, and spending time with his family.

Todd Henry

Author & Speaker

< LEADERSHIP, CREATIVE >

Creativity, Bravery, and Impact

Most of our cultural reference points for bravery involve heroic actions like storming a beach, risking everything on an unlikely business deal, or casting caution to the wind on a massive career change. When organizations are willing to confront uncertainty with clear and decisive action, greatness emerges. Discover the two key factors that must be present for habitual bravery to occur and how leaders and creative pros can cultivate “the brave habit” in their daily lives to grow both their platform and impact.

Positioning himself as an “arms dealer for the creative revolution,” Todd Henry teaches leaders and organizations how to establish practices that lead to everyday brilliance. He is the author of five books (The Accidental Creative, Die Empty, Louder Than Words, Herding Tigers, The Motivation Code, Daily Creative) which have been translated into more than a dozen languages, and he speaks and consults across dozens of industries on creativity, leadership, and passion for work.

With more than fifteen million downloads, his podcast The Accidental Creative offers weekly tips for how to stay prolific, brilliant, and healthy. Todd’s book Die Empty was named by Amazon.com as one of the best books of 2013.

His latest book, Daily Creative, offers daily sparks of inspiration and practical advice for creative pros.

Neal Hopson

Afternoons, BOOST RADIO / Middays, NGEN / Evenings , Pulse 101.7

< MOMENTUM HOST >

Neal “Neallytime” Hopson is a man driven by family and faith. He is a husband of 13 years to his beautiful wife, Kim and father to their 4 year old daughter, Gabriella. He’s a lover of Jesus and Chipotle. Throughout his exciting career, Neal has held titles as a nationally ranked professional tennis player, and an award-winning sales professional with Mercedes Benz.

Today, Neal reaches multitudes across the nation as the afternoon show host on BOOST RADIO, middays on NGEN Radio, and evenings on Pulse 101.7. Whether on-air, on the turntables as a live DJ, or through his sought after talents as dance choreographer or emcee, he has a passion for impacting people.

Neal’s company ‘One Goal Global’ serves a who’s who roster of clients through creating excellent experiences on world stages. He adds value in a way he’s only uniquely designed with the “Neallytime Touch”. For many years, Neal has had the opportunity to impact the next generation in stadiums and in small groups. His One Goal remains the same; to lead people to God and help them discover His purpose for their life.

Wade Kingsley

Founder, The Creative Coach

< LEADERSHIP, CREATIVE >

The Core Strengths of Creative Champions

Everyone is creative but not everyone believes they are. Learn how to build your confidence using the three Core Strengths of Creative Champions: curiosity, connections, and courage. Unlock the creativity you and your team have that is waiting to be used.

Wade Kingsley is a Creativity Coach and Consultant from Australia. He is currently the Australian Ambassador for World Creativity & Innovation Week.

Over the past 25 years he has worked in the radio, media and marketing industries with leadership responsibilities at Nova Entertainment, dentsu, and SCA.

In 2017 he founded ‘The Ideas Business’ which helps brands use creative thinking to solve problems. In 2021, The Ideas Business was named one of Australia’s Top 100 fastest growing start-ups.

He created the ‘Creative Champions’ Course, taking his experience in one-on-one coaching to help people learn how to be better creative problem solvers. Wade believes everyone is creative and focuses on giving people the confidence to unlock and share their creative ideas with the world.

Wade lives outside Melbourne, Australia with his wife Suze, two children Joshua and Emma; Cavapoo and low-allergy cat.

Carey Nieuwhof

Best-Selling Author

< LEADERSHIP, INSPIRATIONAL >

Resisting Burnout = Embracing More Platform

Burnout is an epidemic in the workplace. According to some surveys, as many as 90% of people experience symptoms of burnout every year. Clearly, something’s got to give as we try to influence more people in more places for Christ. Learn strategies for not only overcoming but staying out of burnout for good.

Carey Nieuwhof is a best-selling leadership author, speaker, podcaster, former attorney, and church planter.

Carey speaks to leaders around the world about leadership, change and personal growth. His podcast, The Carey Nieuwhof Leadership Podcast, has 18 million downloads and features interviews with many of today’s top leaders.

In addition, Carey writes one of today’s most influential leadership blogs at CareyNieuwhof.com. His online content is accessed by leaders over 1.5 million times a month. He holds degrees in law, theology, and history.

Carey’s mission is to help people thrive in life and leadership. He has extensive experience helping organizations lead through change, develop high-capacity teams, deepen their personal growth along with their health.

His best-selling book, At Your Best: How to Get Time, Energy, and Priorities Working in Your Favor, is designed to help every leader escape stress and begin living at a sustainable pace and has been profiled by Forbes, Fast Company, and Business Insider.

His other books include Didn’t See It Coming: Overcoming the Seven Greatest Challenges That No One Expects But Everyone Experiences, Lasting Impact: 7 Powerful Conversations That Will Help Your Church Grow, Leading Change Without Losing It and Parenting Beyond Your Capacity, co-authored with Reggie Joiner.

Carey and his wife Toni live north of Toronto, Ontario and have two grown sons. In his spare time, you’ll catch him barbecuing on his Big Green Egg, cycling, or boating.

Matthew West

Artist / Songwriter / CEO of Story House Collective

< BRANDING, STRATEGY >

The Power of MORE PLATFORM [ PANEL ]

It’s time to pursue more. We all have a mission to reach more people, and it’s becoming increasingly difficult to do that in a saturated, competitive market. Let’s look at the forward-thinking opportunities across all media platforms that will lead to more brand awareness, more influence, and ultimately more impact. Let’s give more platform to the Gospel message so that more people, in more places, are being reached for Jesus.

Matthew West is a five-time GRAMMY® nominee, a multiple ASCAP Christian Music Songwriter/Artist of the Year winner and a 2018 Dove Award Songwriter of the Year (Artist) recipient. In 2022, Matthew was given the prestigious Songwriter of the Year award from the Nashville Songwriter’s Association International (NSAI). He is only one of two Christian artists to ever win, and is the first to win it in over 20 years.

He has received an American Music Award, a Billboard Music Award, a K-LOVE Fan Award and named Billboard’s Hot Christian Songwriter of the Year. A recipient of the Rich Mullins Impact Award, West also received a Primetime Emmy® Award nomination for Original Music & Lyrics for the title track for the feature film “The Heart of Christmas.” He has been awarded a RIAA Gold certification for his single “Hello, My Name Is” and RIAA Platinum certification for the song “The Motions.”

In addition to his own recording career, he has co-hosted the K-LOVE Fan Awards five times and has more than 130 songwriting credits to his name, including cuts by Rascal Flatts, Scotty McCreery, Michael W. Smith, Amy Grant, Mandisa, Danny Gokey and others, along with back-to-back No. 1 songs by Casting Crowns including their recent single, “Nobody,” which West is featured.

Adding author to his list of accolades, West has written six books to date: Give This Christmas Away, The Story Of Your Life, Forgiveness, Today Is Day One, Hello, My Name Is, and his latest, The God Who Stays. He is also passionate about providing hope and healing through the power of prayer and story. Along with his father, Pastor Joe West, they founded popwe, a non-profit ministry helping others to craft, share, and live a more meaningful life. In what little spare time he has left, he is also creator and host of the Matthew West Podcast which is a part of Annie F. Downs’ That Sounds Fun network.

WHAT’S INCLUDED?

Full registration includes lunch, dinner and snacks Wednesday, May 31 – Friday, June 2 (breakfast not included) as well as all educational sessions, music performances and a ticket to one of the Universal Studios parks (must attend Momentum Worship on 5/31 to receive your ticket).

CMB MEMBERSHIP

CMB members have access to the best rates for all CMB events, as well as exclusive members-only benefits. Learn more & become a member today!

Gold Membership – $1289 • Silver Membership – $289

OTHER REGISTRATION OPTIONS:

Spouse/Child 10+ – $599

International Attendee – $599

Full Time College Student – $299 *includes Silver Membership with Momentum registration

College students – Momentum Mentors are for you! You will be paired with a leader in our industry that will help show you the ropes, invest in you, and introduce you to others throughout the conference. You can sign up for a mentor when you register or send a request to info@cmbonline.org.

College Professor – $299 with the Carl Fletcher Scholarship • Apply Now >>

Momentum On Demand – $99 Momentum Attendees // $399 Non-Momentum Attendees

Includes videos from the main stage speakers and audio from all of the breakout sessions for both Thursday and Friday. Please note that this does not include workshops or performances and is not live. We believe that attending in person is the BEST way to experience Momentum and get the full experience of all that’s offered.

SCHOLARSHIPS

Scholarships are available for those who need financial assistance. Learn more >>

NEED HELP CONVINCING YOUR BOSS?

If you need help convincing management to send you to Momentum, click here to download our proposal letter!

**MAY 19 – registration CLOSES. No walk up registrations will be accepted.**

Thursday Breakouts

Supporting Artists Beyond The Songs

Sandi Brown – President, JOY FM/Boost (KLJY & KXBS)

Dave Cruse – Program Director and Morning Host for The JOY FM Network

Corey Mann – Mornings / PD / Podcast Host, Family Broadcasting Corporation / Pulse FM (WHPZ)

Kenny Rodgers – VP, Capitol Christian Music Group

In an era where music fans can hear the songs everywhere, radio has the unique opportunity to expose the HEART of the artists. Through partnering with artists and labels to create unique events and promotions, there is opportunity to make listeners superfans of artists as well as your station!

2023 Why Listen Survey

Chuck Finney – President, Finney Media

In this just-released nationwide survey of Christian radio listeners, veteran consultant Chuck Finney shows why and how CCM listeners listen, why they give and why they leave—and what’s changed since the last survey. Come ready to engage with key insights and strategies you can use next week at your station.

Brand Intersection Tool Kit: Tools to Tell Your Station’s Story Alongside the Artist Brand

Leigh Holt – CEO / Manager, Maddjett

Ever wonder how to weave what matters to your audience while promoting the songs your station is playing? Let’s discuss how to integrate your station’s brand while partnering with the artist’s story to build a stronger narrative that your audience will want to engage with. Learn tools that you can use to simplify multiple messages and create content that is on point with your vision.

Unlocking the Power of Digital: Creating New Revenue Streams for Your Radio Station

Trey Morris – Vice President / Senior Consultant, The Center for Sales Strategy

Learn about the importance of offering digital marketing solutions to partners in order to increase revenue for your station. Trey will explain how to leverage a station’s content and talent to create new revenue streams and capitalize on the fast-growing digital marketing category. Leave with a deeper understanding of the benefits of offering digital solutions and practical strategies for implementing them.

Can We Reach More People Through Spanish Radio?

Brenda Aguila – Director of Spanish Ministries/Fuzión On-Air-Host, Encouragement Media Group-Fuzión

Marcos Barraza – Director of Broadcast Operations, Inspiracom/Manantial FM

Sadiel Castro – Program Director Spanish Brand Viva Unida, Hope Media Group

Hispanics are the fastest growing minority in the US. Many of them are first generation migrants. Learn what tools are available to your ministry as well as how to develop a community outreach program. Walk away with proven strategies to reach more people through Spanish Christian radio.

The Surprising Shift in Generational Giving

Rick Dunham – Founder/Chairman, Dunham+Company

Let’s unpack Dunham+Company’s latest research on Generational Giving (published as a Special Report by the Giving USA Foundation). Walk away with a better understanding of how each generation is shifting in its giving behaviors, as well some surprising findings about the younger generations.

Friday Breakouts

What Your Listener’s Heart Longs to Hear Using the Enneagram

Denise Harper – Program Director, The Bridge (WKNZ)

Ben Sorrells – Director of Community Engagement, The Bridge (WKNZ)

What if you could engage with your target listener in such a personal way that you could speak directly to what her heart longs to hear? Using the knowledge of the Enneagram, learn how to craft daily on-air breaks that transition into songs that speak to how she sees the world and the ones she loves.

Creative Champions Workout

Wade Kingsley – Founder, Creative Champions

This is going to be like a workout…a mental one! In this highly intense training session, you will practice the ‘Core Strengths of Creative Champions’ discussed on the main stage such as how to be more inquisitive, care about more things and use them as inputs to fuel the creative process.

Navigating your Social Strategy in Radio: Making Sure Your Content Generates Exceptional ROI

Heather Heuman – CEO/Digital Missionary, Sweet Tea Social Marketing

Feeling frustrated that the social media trends are constantly shifting and yet you are seeking to grow your radio station’s visibility and achieve your business goals? Let’s explore exactly what to focus on in your digital strategy using her signature S.O.C.I.A.L. Framework and give tactical things you can do each week to continue to have a thriving and engaged audience.

Hey, Is that Legal?

Scott Hunter – Vice President and Senior Legal Counsel to Salem Media Group

Jerry Woods – Morning Show Host/Director of Marketing, WGTS 91.9

So you’ve dreamed up the perfect contest, remote, or stunt. It’s going to get the listeners excited, and it’ll be great for ratings, too. Then the boss rolls through and asks, “Are we covered legally?” You could fake it and hope you’re okay, but that’s probably not the wisest course. Let’s walk through what works and what doesn’t, as we break things down with a broadcast lawyer. It’ll be the most fun allowed by law.

Unifying in a Diverse Culture

Melissa Montana – CEO/President, STAR 88.3 (WLAB)

Josh Raines – Director of Outreach & Director of Strategic Partnerships, STAR 88.3 (WLAB)

In a world that is becoming more diverse, we have to be able to speak to everyone in the building and to our audience. It’s important to be inclusive in our outreach as well. Not just one conversation and not just one event, but to make it a part of the world we live in as Christian broadcasters. Let’s talk about practical ways to be unified in a diverse world and how to have open discussions.

How Artificial Intelligence is Changing the Industry

Danielle Rice – Chief Technology Officer, Dunham+Company

Technology is changing so fast. It can seem daunting, especially when it comes to AI. Hear about how AI is now available to everyone and how the ethical use of AI can help you achieve your mission in radio. Whether you’re using it to make informed decisions about content, improve processes and systems, or better engage your listeners, AI has many applications that you need to know about and have a plan for.

Scott Herrold

Chief of Programming, Hope Media Group

< BRANDING, STRATEGY >

The Power of MORE PLATFORM [ PANEL ]

It’s time to pursue more. We all have a mission to reach more people, and it’s becoming increasingly difficult to do that in a saturated, competitive market. Let’s look at the forward-thinking opportunities across all media platforms that will lead to more brand awareness, more influence, and ultimately more impact. Let’s give more platform to the Gospel message so that more people, in more places, are being reached for Jesus.

Scott Herrold is Chief of Programming for Hope Media Group (WayFM, KSBJ & Vida Unida). He was also the Program Director & Morning Show Host for SOS Radio Network for 15 years. Scott was named one of “Radio’s 10 Best Program Directors” by Radio Ink. Edison Media also listed Scott as one of “Radio’s 30 Under 30 Shining Stars,” two different times before his hair was gray. In addition, his morning show consistently rated in the top 5 in Las Vegas, according to Nielsen. Through the years he’s worked in CHR, Hot AC & Christian radio with stations like 96.3 WDVD/Detroit, 93.1 DRQ/Detroit, Sos Radio/Las Vegas, 106.9 K-Hits/Tulsa, 102.5 WIOG/Saginaw, 100.3 The Kross/Tulsa & SOS Radio/Las Vegas. Scott is a Cum Laude graduate of Eastern Michigan University’s business school, and he was inducted into the Nevada Broadcasters Hall of Fame in 2021.

Under Scott’s leadership, SOS Radio was awarded the CMB “Station of the Year Award,” in both 2020 & 2016. In addition, SOS Radio was honored with community service awards from both Christian Music Broadcasters and the Gospel Music Association, for the inventive service projects the SOS team has created with Hope for Prisoners, Project 150, TSA, Clark County Schools, The City of Las Vegas Faith Initiative & Henderson Hospital.

Paul Jacobs

VP/GM, Jacobs Media / President, jacapps

< MUSIC & PROGRAMMING >

The Most Important Findings From The 2023 CMB Techsurvey

The annual CMB Techsurvey is a comprehensive look at the way listeners are engaging with media, technology, and more. Hear just-released findings and provide context and recommendations to help programmers and digital leaders grow all aspects of their stations.

Paul Jacobs is the Vice President/General Manager of Jacobs Media, which for thirty-eight years has provided programming, digital, sales, and social media consulting to commercial and public radio stations, including stations owned by Beasley, Hubbard, NPR, PRI, and many Public Radio stations. The company is credited with the creation of the Classic Rock radio format for commercial radio, and its breakthrough research studies, including its Techsurvey studies for commercial, Christian, and Public Radio.

Jacobs has become a leading spokesperson for the radio industry regarding the changing in-car audio experience and the necessity for the digital transformation of the radio industry. Along with presentations for broadcasters on these important trends, Jacobs helped create the DASH Conference – a gathering of broadcasters and leaders from the automotive industry designed to foster understanding and cooperation – and has consulted the National Association of Broadcasters Connected Car Committee.

In a career in broadcasting and consulting that spans four decades, Jacobs began his career on the sales side of the business and WNIC and WRIF in Detroit, ultimately serving as a General Manager at radio stations in Dallas and Detroit. In 1991, Jacobs joined his brothers Fred and Bill at Jacobs Media.

In 2008, Jacobs also became the President of a startup mobile application development company – jacapps. The company was formed to create mobile apps for radio stations, and has since broadened out into multiple categories, including construction, legal, and others. It is one of the largest mobile application developers, with over 1,300 apps developed worldwide.

Paul is a frequent speaker at various conventions around the world, including the NAB/RAB Radio Show, CMB’s Momentum, Canadian Music Week, and at public radio conferences including PRPD, the Super Regional, and PMDMC.

Paul just concluded six years on the Board of Greater Public, spending the last three years as Board Chair. Greater Public is a service organization dedicated to growing revenue for public radio and television stations across the United States via underwriting, development, and other fundraising endeavors. He is also the past Board Chair of the Michigan Association of Broadcasters Foundation.

He was inducted into the Michigan Broadcasters Hall of Fame in 2016, received the Rockwell Lifetime Achievement Award from The Conclave in 2019, and was awarded the Outstanding Alumni award from Michigan State University’s ComArtSci Department in 2021.

Paul is a graduate of Michigan State University with a Bachelor’s degree in Advertising.

Steve Reynolds

CEO, Reynolds Group

< MUSIC & PROGRAMMING >

A Station’s Success Is Centered In Its Story

Any compelling brand is defined by its fans by the story it tells. Stories are powerful mechanisms to differentiate brands from competitors and develop believers. Rooted in history, truth, and its values, your story is what humanizes you, makes you relatable, and turns listeners into evangelists. As a PD, you are the catalyst for spreading the power of your station’s story and how that strategic decision is at the center of being a unique radio brand listeners will always remember.

Steve Reynolds hosted morning shows then realized the industry would need strong coaches to help keep talent relevant and additive to the build out of the radio station.

Steve coaches high profile talent in major markets of the US looking to level up and new programs needing to launch strategically. Steve is the Top Ten Talent Coach, working with the biggest shows in America, Canada, and The Netherlands, helping them stay fun and relevant on all content platforms so they continue their ascent to building radio brands that are impenetrable in competitive environments.

Strategy, great content, innovation, connecting with an audience, and building strong cultures for radio’s biggest wins are Steve’s passions.

Nils Smith

Head of Innovation, Dunham+Company

< DIGITAL >

Innovating With History: Learning Lessons From The Past For Our Future

Keeping up with technology trends can feel overwhelming and confusing for radio stations! What do we do with AI, AR, VR and all of the other “technologies of the future”? We’ll take a look back at history and learn from the lessons of organizations that both thrived and died during key technological shifts and how we can lean into the opportunities and soar into the future rather than get left behind in the midst of confusion.

Nils joined the Dunham+Company team in 2016. With his extensive background in social media, innovation, and communication, Nils helps Dunham+Company clients create more impact through the latest social media and online best practices.

Before coming to Dunham+Company, Nils worked as the Innovation Pastor at Community Bible Church in San Antonio, Texas, one of the largest and fastest-growing churches in the country. While there, Nils led a talented team that grew their church’s online engagement. He pioneered their use of mobile apps and TV apps, and built the online church platform that now reaches 12,000 people in 400 cities each week.

He is the author of The Social Media Guide: Insights for Effective Engagement and Crypto for Good: Demystifying Cryptocurrencies for Nonprofits. His work has been featured in a wide range of publications. Nils is regarded as a world-leading expert at the crossroads of social media and nonprofit strategy, and his expertise serves Dunham+Company clients every day.

Nils has a Business Management degree from Texas State University and holds a Masters in Ministry Leadership from Rockbridge Seminary. He lives in New York City with his wife and two daughters.

Lisa Williams

Network Talent Coach, Northwestern Media

< MUSIC & PROGRAMMING >

Amp Up Your Air Check Session: Tools Every PD Needs

Program Directors have a lot on their plates. Sometimes, we back burner air-checks due to packed schedules, but this decision has long-term consequences. Air-talent matter. Relationships matter. Connection matters, on and off the air. Let’s discuss the “why” of air checks and then the “what” or the “coaching clock” that allows you to make the time together meaningful, talent focused, and beneficial for radio skills.

Lisa Williams is the Network Talent Coach for Northwestern Media, a ministry of University of Northwestern – St. Paul, serving Faith Radio, KTIS Minneapolis, Life 100.7 Omaha, Life 101.9 Waterloo, Life 102.5 Madison, Life 107.1 Des Moines, Life 88.5 Kansas City, Life 96.5 Sioux Falls, Life 97.3 Duluth, Life 97.9 Fargo, 107.1 KSLT Rapid City, Spirit FM Camdenton, WBGL Champaign, and WCIC Peoria. Lisa currently co-hosts the podcast Wow God Stories at WowGod.com. In her 33 years on Christian radio, she has served on-air at K-LOVE, Z88.3, Star 99.9, KCVO, and KCWN as well as hosting the syndicated show Life with Lisa Williams for 6 years in 15 states. Lisa lives in Denver with her sons JD and Jesse. You can find her at www.godsradiogirl.com.

Tim Schmoyer

Chief Creator Coach, vidIQ

< DIGITAL >

How Traditional Media Is Leveraging YouTube For Growth…And Radio Can, Too

Traditional media outlets are becoming more savvy in how to leverage YouTube to grow their media empires. Everything from taped TV shows like Jimmy Fallon, Ellen, and Survivor, to live broadcasts of professional sporting events are using YouTube as an intentional part of their growth strategy. It makes sense because their online content often reaches far more viewers than the TV show ever will. Although their approach requires a shift in how content is generated, it’s a relatively simple shift to understand. Radio is perfectly positioned to take advantage of leveraging YouTube just like big Hollywood production studios do, but with a fraction of the budget.

Since 2011, Tim Schmoyer has been one of the leading YouTube strategists in the online video industry. His agency, Video Creators, has worked with industry giants such as Disney, Warner Brothers, HBO, eBay, and even YouTube itself. Through his agency’s guidance, they are responsible for their clients amassing over 20 billion views and 100 million subscribers on YouTube.

In 2021, vidIQ acquired Video Creators, where Tim now serves as Chief Creator Coach as he develops a robust coaching team to support the company’s extensive network of two million YouTube creators.

Today, he resides in Cincinnati, Ohio, with his wife and their seven children.

Maria Kestner

National Account Manager, Futuri

< DIGITAL >

Creating Human Connections With Artificial Intelligence

When ChatGPT launched in late November 2022, it quickly became the fastest-growing internet app of all time, gaining more than 100 million users in just over a month. It enabled the average person to get hands-on experience with artificial intelligence (AI) that was previously used mainly by technology developers, and it showed the world how far the development of AI has come. Hear fascinating insights into how AI can be used to help you create, distribute, and optimize your content to reach the widest possible audience — and increase the impact of the work you and your teams do.

Maria Kestner is National Account Manager at Futuri, the leading provider of AI-driven content, audience, and monetization technology for media companies and creators. Prior to Futuri, she spent 16 years at Cox Media Group, where, working with properties like the ACM Award-winning K99.1 FM, she built genuine relationships with business owners by focusing on audience data, marketing trends, and a personalized approach to branding and growing market share. Kestner, who has a passion for the intersection of media, content, and technology, is based in the Dayton, Ohio area with her husband, four athletic kids, and the family dog.

James Cridland

Editor, Podnews.net

< FUTURIST >

The Radio of the Future – Reaching More Listeners in More Places

Your listeners are changing how they listen to the radio and connecting with your stories and message. James, an international radio futurologist, brings ideas from across the world, showing how radio stations have taken advantage of new tools and technology to reach audiences wherever they are and however they want to listen. Get new ideas on how to level up your radio game and get the most value from your content, both on and off the air.

James Cridland is Editor of Podnews, the daily podcast newsletter. He is a radio futurologist – a writer, consultant and public speaker on radio’s future.

James has worked in audio since 1989 as an award-winning copywriter, radio presenter, and internet strategist.

He launched the world’s first streaming radio smartphone app in March 2005, for the original Virgin Radio in London, launching daily podcasts earlier that year.

In 2007 he joined the BBC working on the BBC iPlayer for radio, achieving a dramatic increase in the service’s audio quality.

Part of the team that laid the foundations for the UK Radioplayer, he has since worked for a variety of businesses across the world, including Canada’s Vista Radio, receiver and silicon manufacturers Pure and Frontier Silicon, talkSPORT, the ABC, and a variety of media companies in Europe, North America, Asia and Australia; helping them focus on the benefits and challenges that new platforms bring to their business. He was an advisor to podcast host Captivate, which was acquired by Global in December 2021.

One of the organisers of Next Radio, the UK radio ideas conference, James has worked with the world’s largest radio conference, Radiodays Europe, since its inception. He’s also part of the programming team for Radiodays Asia and Podcast Day 24.

A founder of the hybrid radio technology association RadioDNS, he is an Associate Member of the International Academy of Digital Arts and Sciences, and was made an Honorary Life Member of the UK’s Student Radio Association.

Born in the UK, James lives in Brisbane, Australia with his wife and daughter.

Grant Skeldon

Next Gen Director, THINQ Media

< LEADERSHIP | GEN Z >

Decoding Gen Z for Radio

Gen Z and Millennials are the most studied generations in human history. Yet, we still don’t seem to understand them. How do we reach them through radio? What matters most to them, and how do we “meet” them there? It’s evident that we must engage them urgently and strategically. We will dive into how young people think, how to engage them with our platforms, and how they can play a vital role in radio moving forward.

Grant Skeldon has a passion for finding and uniting diverse, dynamic young leaders to reach this generation. He serves as the Next Gen Director for THINQ Media with Gabe and Rebekah Lyons. THINQ educates and equips Christians to engage our cultural moment.

He has written for The Wall Street Journal, Relevant, The Gospel Coalition, and is the youngest leader to be featured on the cover of Outreach Magazine. His book, The Passion Generation has helped thousands of pastors and leaders to reach, raise, and retain the next generation.

Grant and his wife Cheyanne reside in Nashville, Tennessee, where he serves on the preaching team at Way Church.

Tracy Johnson

President/CEO, Tracy Johnson Media Group

< MUSIC & PROGRAMMING >

Power Up The Music: Put Your Finger On the Pulse

Radio stations in general, and especially Christian stations in particular, are making three critical mistakes in collecting data and applying research to their music mix. Learn the three critical reasons your station may be limiting your appeal to a larger audience and effectively chasing listeners away from your station. Hear clear, actionable steps to get more people, including Gen Z, involved with your music research.

I’ve loved influencing audiences since I turned on a microphone in Central Nebraska as a 14-year-old with no idea what I was doing. At 21, I hosted the morning show and programmed a top-rated station (KFRX) in Lincoln, Ne.

I’ve been a music director, Program Director, Consultant, Operations Manager, Market Brand Manager, and Director of Audience Engagement (Triton Digital).

I was named Best Radio Programmer in America by Radio Ink magazine.

I earned multiple PD and Station of the Year awards from media trade publications.

I led two brands in San Diego from worst to first in three years.

My book Morning Radio is described as The Bible of Personality Radio and is used by media personalities worldwide.

But one thing has been the backbone of my career: We help personalities and programmers find their voice and reach their potential by helping them see the forest for the trees and meeting listeners where they are, not where we would like them to be.

Pat Bryson

CEO, Bryson Broadcasting International

< REVENUE >

Finding “Why”

Understanding the psychology of sales is key to fostering lasting relationships with donors, underwriters, or advertisers. Dive into the motivations of supporters, the interplay of emotion and logic in decision-making, and the pivotal role of storytelling. Ideal for anyone on the revenue side of radio.

Pat Bryson has worked in the radio industry for over 25 years. During that time, she was one of the highest billing salespeople in the radio industry in her market. She was promoted to General Sales Director, managing and training both experienced and inexperienced salespeople. Her career advanced to General Director where Pat created a culture of over- achievement for her stations.

Pat is a graduate of the University of Tulsa with a degree in Mass Communications-Radio/TV. She was also the recipient of two prestigious educational fellowships from the Education Foundation of the National Association of Broadcasters: a fellowship to the Executive Development Program, held at Georgetown University in 2004 and a fellowship to the Broadcast Leadership Training Program in 2005.

Since founding Bryson Broadcasting International in 2006, Pat has worked with broadcasters in Kazakhstan, Albania, Ukraine, Bulgaria, Uzbekistan, Bangladesh, Pakistan, Poland, Canada, Malta, Australia and has been a featured speaker at Radiodays Europe in Dublin, Radiodays in Denmark, Radiodays in Sweden, Radiodays Asia, Radio Conference Poland, Krakfilm Festival, EGTA in Zurich, the Gospel Music Association of Canada, the Ontario Association of Broadcasters, Asian Broadcast Union, the Australian National Radio Convention, the Broadcast Education Association during the National Association of Broadcasters Convention in Las Vegas, and the Consultant’s Corner at the National Association of Broadcasters’ Radio Show. She has also conducted training seminars for the many of the State Associations in the United States.

Pat is one of Radio Ink’s Most Influential Women in Radio for 2023. This is the third time she has been so designated.

She is the author of “A Road Map To Success In High-Dollar Broadcast Sales” and a new book released in November 2020, “Successful Broadcast Sales: Thriving in Change.

Janet Cherry

Principal, JC Leadership Group

< LEADERSHIP >

Understanding and Leading Through Change

Whether you are a leader by title or by influence, understanding and leading through change is an essential skill for your toolbox. Explore why change is hard and how gaining insight into yourself and others simplifies the process. We are all better leaders by understanding the keys to communicating change.

Janet Cherry is the Principal of JC Leadership Group, enjoying a successful 25-year career marked by her expertise in developing thriving and profitable organizations, particularly during times of growth and significant change. With an extensive background encompassing diverse industries and Chief level positions, she brings invaluable insights into effective organizational and people strategies and a track record of successful execution.

At the core of Janet’s leadership philosophy is the belief that the most effective leaders strike a balance between people and results. This approach goes beyond merely achieving objectives and driving outcomes; it entails prioritizing the cultivation of strong relationships with team members while ensuring personal well-being. Although implementing this balanced leadership style presents challenges, it can yield numerous benefits, including an enriched and inspired workforce, heightened job satisfaction, and sustained organizational success.

Janet’s impact within organizations is evident through tangible returns on investments, such as a deeper leadership bench, reduced turnover rates, and impressive culture ratings. Moreover, she places a strong emphasis on enjoying the process and fostering a sense of comradery and fun throughout the journey of leadership.

Clay Scroggins

Author, Speaker, How to Lead, Inc.

< LEADERSHIP >

How to Become an Emotionally Healthy Leader

There’s more noise in the world than ever before. However, you don’t have to be a victim to it. Healthy leaders learn to turn down the noise low enough and long enough to be ruthlessly curious of what’s going on inside of themselves and their teams. Learn how to level up as a leader in a world of distraction for the sake of those whom you have the privilege of leading.

Clay is the author of the best-selling books How to Lead When You’re Not in Charge, How to Lead in a World of Distraction, and The Aspiring Leader’s Guide to the Future. He holds a degree in Industrial Engineering from Georgia Tech as well as a Master’s degree and Doctorate with an emphasis in Online Church from Dallas Theological Seminary.

For almost 20 years, Clay Scroggins served in many pastoral roles at North Point Ministries, a multisite church started in Alpharetta, Georgia led by Andy Stanley. Most recently, Clay served as the lead pastor of Buckhead Church, one of North Point’s largest campuses.

Clay is now speaking and writing about leadership, faith, and golf. He’s making a career out of the first two and actively trying to convince his wife that the latter has potential.

Clay lives in Atlanta, Georgia, with his wife, Jenny, and their five children.

James Poulter

CEO, Vixen Labs

< RADIO | TECHNOLOGY >

The AI Enabled Broadcaster – Rewiring Your Organization for the AI Age

Is AI a threat or a tool for radio? How can it be used to move forward your organization’s mission? Explore how broadcasters can embrace AI rapidly, practically, and ethically. Discover the next steps to integrate this emerging technology into your broadcasting, social media, and operations to rewire your organization for the age of AI.

James Poulter is a distinguished digital marketing professional and technology expert, with a particular emphasis on Conversational AI strategy. As the CEO and Co-Founder of Vixen Labs, James has been instrumental in establishing the company as Europe’s leading full-service Voice Agency. Vixen Labs specializes in voice consultancy and design, assisting brands in leveraging voice-first technology and conversational interfaces for effective communication and promotion.

A recognized authority in Conversational AI Technologies, James has extensive experience in the ethical use of AI, corporate deployment of advanced AI systems such as ChatGPT and GPT-4, and the integration of conversational AI into marketing and business strategies.

In 2018, James founded Poulter Ventures, a strategic consulting firm providing start-up and scale-up advisory services, focusing on innovation, culture building, and the metaverse. As Principal Advisor, he shares his insights on integrating Conversational AI technologies into various industries, ensuring ethical and responsible AI practices.

As a part-time Start-Up Advisor for Strategy & Innovation at Impact Central since 2020, James offers guidance to social impact start-ups and scale-ups dedicated to creating businesses that contribute positively to society and the environment. His expertise spans innovation, culture, marketing, and digital transformation, with a special focus on integrating Conversational AI solutions ethically and sustainably.

Before founding Vixen Labs, James served as the Head of The LEGO Group’s Emerging Platforms & Partnerships team, where he successfully identified and collaborated with innovative technologies and partners, bolstering LEGO’s digital engagement globally.

James has an extensive background in marketing, advertising, and public relations, having worked with esteemed agencies such as Edelman and Ogilvy. He has managed digital marketing, mobile, and social campaigns for a diverse clientele, including Diageo, Unilever, Bose, PayPal, HP, and Adobe, both in the EMEA region and globally. His expertise in Conversational AI strategy has played a pivotal role in driving results for these clients.

In addition to his professional pursuits, James is an advisor to the Church of England’s digital board and offers support to various charities, entrepreneurs, and start-ups, often providing insights on the ethical implementation of Conversational AI technologies.

Curt Swindoll

Certified EOS Implementer, EOS Worldwide

< LEADERSHIP >

Get a Grip On Your Business: Solving the People Problem

What would it look like if 100% of your team comprised of the right people in the right seats in your organization? It is possible! Using the tools and disciplines from EOS (the Entrepreneurial Operating System), you will walk away with a process you can use immediately to solve people issues, create greater clarity, and produce the “dream team” you’ve always wanted.

Curt Swindoll’s career has spanned six industry sectors where he has served in multiple C-level roles and consulted in operations, strategic planning, business development, fundraising and marketing, board development, and more.

He has provided advisory council to dozens of Christian ministries and senior leaders, and was Chair at WAY-FM when the decision was made to merge with KSBJ/Hope Media Group. He plays the bass guitar in his church worship band which offers many lessons on leadership.

In 2000, Curt earned a Presidential/Key Executive MBA at the Graziadio (GRAHTS-zee-ah-DEE-oh) School of Business and Management at Pepperdine University, and taught for several years in BIOLA University’s Masters in Organizational Leadership program on nonprofit leadership and management. He posts regularly on business and leadership issues, based on his personal journey and integrating his faith with his work.

Mark Hunter

CEO, The Sales Hunter

< REVENUE >

Creating Value-Added Partnerships

Partnerships are our lifeblood. Built upon a level of understanding, we help them achieve objectives they wouldn’t think were possible. To do this, it takes a level of conversation that goes well beyond what we might be comfortable with. Our partners have options about where to invest their time and money; it’s our job to ensure they see radio as the best option.

Mark Hunter, “The Sales Hunter” is recognized as one of the top 50 most influential sales and marketing leaders in the world. He is author of multiple books, including “High-Profit Prospecting” and “A Mind for Sales.” Mark can also be heard on The Sales Hunter Podcast and Sales Logic Podcast.

Mark has spoken in more than 30 countries on 5 continents and travels more than 150 days per year working with people helping to show them how to find and retain better clients.

Best of all, Mark gets to wake up each morning thanking the Lord for his family and the ability to serve Him.

Mandy Young

Vice President of Radio, Educational Media Foundation

< REVENUE >

3 Secrets for Becoming a Better Fundraiser

Becoming a better fundraiser starts when you are not fundraising. How can you use your everyday show to prepare you for the next pledge drive, sharathon, fundraiser, etc? Using demonstrations and audio examples, walk away with three practical tools to help you become a better and more confident fundraiser.

Named one of Radio Ink Magazine’s Top 50 Program Directors in America, Mandy Young has been in radio for nearly 25 years.

She started her career in Grand Rapids, Michigan at WJQK as Promotions Director and eventually found her way to the Morning Show.

After 10 years in West Michigan, Mandy took the role of Morning Show Co-Host at Air1 and has been with EMF since 2009. Serving in roles with the ministry such as Music Director, APD and Program Director, Mandy is currently the Vice President of Radio for both K-LOVE and Air1.

Mandy has been helping stations across the country fundraise for 20 years. She’s currently a top fundraiser on K-LOVE and Air1 and also helps talent achieve success in this field.

Mandy is a graduate of Cedarville University with a degree in Communications and Music.

Young and her husband Rod reside in Nashville, TN. They have 2 sons in college (Jack and Owen) and a 10 year old daughter (Mamie).

Sandy Rees

Chief Encouragement Officer, Get Fully Funded

< REVENUE >

Put the FUN Back in Fundraising: 3 Steps to Raise the Money Your Station Needs

You CAN raise the money you need to cover your station’s expenses without begging, feeling pushy, or stepping too far outside your comfort zone. It just takes the right message to the right people at the right time. Learn the basics of donor-based fundraising and how simple raising money can be when you free yourself from outdated techniques. Explore how to find ideal donor prospects, how to craft a heart-warming, wallet-opening message, and do it all with perfect timing so people never feel over-asked.

Sandy Rees is the founder and director of Get Fully Funded where she shows passionate nonprofit leaders how to fully fund their big vision so they can spend more time changing lives instead of worrying about money. She got her start raising money for a homeless shelter and a food bank and since then has gone on to help thousands of small nonprofits go from “nickel-and-dime fundraising” to adding 6 figures to their bottom line. As a trainer, she shows her students how to find ideal donors, connect through authentic messaging, and build relationships that stand the test of time, so that fundraising becomes easy and predictable. Find out more at GetFullyFunded.com.

Brian Dishon

Owner, Prime Dialogue

Performance Based Resume

The first goal for many college graduates is to find a job and, if possible, have that first job be the first step in creating a career. But before you can get that job, you need to apply for that job and, before that, you need to build a resume that will get you noticed. Find out how to build a performance based resume that is sure to make you an attractive candidate.

Brian is passionate about leadership and culture while creating paths for people and organizations to achieve their dreams. While working in the music industry for about 25 years, he cultivated his desire for these things. Brian now leads Prime Dialogue – focusing on creating best in class people and organizations through relationship. He has created the Cycle Of Belonging – a training on how to create a culture of belonging. Brian also teaches leadership one-on-one, with teams, or larger organizations to help people move from expert player to expert leader. His PRIME concept helps create a winning plan for starting or growing a business, product development or brand creation. In his spare time Brian is also an official Disney Trip Planner!

Mandy Young

Vice President of Radio, K-LOVE & Air1

Art of Interviewing

Christian music listeners love the music that CCM artists create. As an on-air talent, how do you help connect them to the artist themselves? Learn how “the art of interviewing” can create impactful content for your station and create a memorable experience for your listener. Topics to be covered include how to prepare for an interview, what questions to ask and when, and how to create an environment for the artist (and you) to shine.

Named one of Radio Ink Magazine’s Top 50 Program Directors in America, Mandy Young has been in radio for nearly 25 years.

She started her career in Grand Rapids, Michigan at WJQK as Promotions Director and eventually found her way to the Morning Show.

After 10 years in West Michigan, Mandy took the role of Morning Show Co-Host at Air1 and has been with EMF since 2009. Serving in roles with the ministry such as Music Director, APD and Program Director, Mandy is currently the Vice President of Radio for both K-LOVE and Air1.

Mandy has been helping stations across the country fundraise for 20 years. She’s currently a top fundraiser on K-LOVE and Air1 and also helps talent achieve success in this field.

Mandy is a graduate of Cedarville University with a degree in Communications and Music. Young and her husband Rod reside in Nashville. They have 2 sons in college (Jack and Owen) and a 10 year old daughter (Mamie).

Brian Dishon

Owner, Prime Dialogue

< LEADERSHIP • BREAKOUT >

Cycle of Belonging

Do you know what it feels like to belong? The feeling of finding your people? This is apparent in our personal lives, but what about inside the place you work? We are in a perpetual cycle of joining something, trying to find our place, feeling entitled, trying to own our lane, and feeling like we fit in somewhere. Understanding this cycle and putting language to what we are feeling can help you and your organization build a culture of belonging.

Brian is passionate about leadership and culture while creating paths for people and organizations to achieve their dreams. While working in the music industry for about 25 years, he cultivated his desire for these things. Brian now leads Prime Dialogue – focusing on creating best in class people and organizations through relationship. He has created the Cycle Of Belonging – a training on how to create a culture of belonging. Brian also teaches leadership one-on-one, with teams, or larger organizations to help people move from expert player to expert leader. His PRIME concept helps create a winning plan for starting or growing a business, product development or brand creation. In his spare time Brian is also an official Disney Trip Planner!

Rob Dempsey

Station Manager, HIS Radio

Transitioning from College to the Pros

Graduating from college and moving into your career can be challenging. What can you do now to prepare for that next step? Hear from General Managers at industry leading stations as they share what they’re looking for in candidates, what kind of experience they like to see on a resume, and what their advice might be for students preparing to work at a radio station.

Rob’s career began in 1987 as a volunteer at a small station in New Port Richey, Florida. In 1988, he was hired by The Joy FM in Tampa Bay, Florida for a weekend airshift. It was there Rob rose through the ranks. Within two years, he became Production Director. Soon after, Rob was promoted to the Afternoon Drive announcer and Program Director.

In 2000, Rob accepted a position as Program Director and Morning Drive Host at their sister station, HIS Radio in Greenville, South Carolina. In 2002, Rob was promoted to Operations Director. At that time, HIS Radio served three markets in the Carolinas. Today, he is the Network Station Manager overseeing nine markets throughout the Carolinas and Georgia, and he serves on the RTN Executive Committee.

Jordan Smith

Marketing DIrector, K-LOVE & Air1

What? Like It’s Hard?

Legally Blonde’s Elle Woods said it best: Finding a job in marketing or promotions doesn’t have to be hard! You’ll walk away from this breakout session with a better understanding of what it takes to be successful in promotions, marketing, and community engagement.

Jordan Smith has 18 years of experience in the record and radio industries, that all started in Portland, OR at Salem Communications. After 5 years of leading the marketing and promotions team for KFIS and KPDQ, a job posting caught her eye that would put her on the other side of the radio industry. Never one to shy away from moving across the country for a job, she headed to Nashville, TN to work on the record label side of the industry at both Tooth & Nail Records and Capitol CMG as a National Promotion Manager. After 7 years of building great relationships with programmers across the country and working together on countless #1 singles, Jordan decided to head back to radio in 2017, joining the team at KSBJ and NGEN in Houston, TX. After wrapping up her time as the Director of Promotions and Marketing at 89.3 KSBJ and 91.7 NGEN, Jordan headed back to Nashville where she now works for EMF as Marketing Director for K-LOVE and Air1.

Kyle Reed

Reed Digital

< LEADERSHIP • BREAKOUT >

Navigating Tomorrow: How Technology Can Empower Strategy, Marketing and Your Team

Technology is rapidly changing, and how we utilize it is an essential question every leader must wrestle with. Should we incorporate AI to support our teams? If so, then how do we do it effectively? What resources are available to help us accomplish our mission? Join us for a time to look at some of the leading technological tools at our disposal and how they can increase the efficiency and productivity of your team.

Kyle lives in Franklin, TN with his wife and 2 daughters. One of his favorite things, other than golf, is helping people succeed. Over the past 15 years he’s focused on helping brands excel in digital marketing through content execution and marketing strategy. Currently, he holds the YouTube Strategy Director position at Business Made Simple, where they help and resource small business owners. He’s worked with artists such as David Crowder, for KING & COUNTRY, Jeremy Camp, Casting Crowns, We The Kingdom, Tye Tribbett, Hannah Ellis, Sarah Reeves, and many more.

Jeremy Henry

Morning Show Host, WCSG

A Unique Path to Radio Success

Join us for “A Unique Path to Radio Success” as we explore entering the world of radio broadcasting. We’ll discuss the importance of forging your distinctive journey, whether through traditional or unconventional means. Discover how hospitality fosters meaningful connections with your audience and how recognizing your leadership potential, even as a newcomer, can propel your career. From starting at the grassroots level and working your way up to embracing change as a positive force, we’ll emphasize the value in these experiences. Throughout, we’ll highlight the shared humanity between broadcasters and their audience, showing that your path to radio success is as unique as you are.

Jeremy has impacted the West Michigan airwaves for almost two decades. As part of a top-rated morning show in the Grand Rapids, Michigan market, Jeremy has worked alongside his co-host (and wife) Amanda, to form meaningful connections with their audience. His passion for the radio, combined with his recent completion of a master’s degree in organizational leadership from Cornerstone University, showcases his commitment to both personal and professional growth. With a bachelor’s degree in communications from Grand Valley State University in 2003, Jeremy is equipped with a solid foundation in effective communication and on-air expertise, supported by hospitality and ongoing faith.

Amanda Henry

Morning Show Co-Host / Music Director, WCSG

A Unique Path to Radio Success

Join us for “A Unique Path to Radio Success” as we explore entering the world of radio broadcasting. We’ll discuss the importance of forging your distinctive journey, whether through traditional or unconventional means. Discover how hospitality fosters meaningful connections with your audience and how recognizing your leadership potential, even as a newcomer, can propel your career. From starting at the grassroots level and working your way up to embracing change as a positive force, we’ll emphasize the value in these experiences. Throughout, we’ll highlight the shared humanity between broadcasters and their audience, showing that your path to radio success is as unique as you are.

Amanda has been in Christian radio since 1999 and has co-hosted Your Family Friendly Morning Show on WCSG since 2012. In addition to her role on the morning show, she also serves as the music director for the station and assists several other stations through voice tracking (SOS Radio, FamilyLife, Joy Worship, and Pulse 101.7). She and her husband/co-host, Jeremy, share an office, a house, six kids, and a Bernedoodle named Mae, in addition to also sharing a passion for serving their listeners. In her spare time, Amanda enjoys being outside, baking, and watching their kids at all the things. She’s also working to get her master’s degree in nonprofit leadership, which she hopes to complete next December.

Jeremy Louis

PD, JOY FM

Music & Programming: Guiding the Airwaves

The Music & Programming Director plays a vital role at a radio station. This position guides the staff in effectively communicating the station’s mission, offering hope and encouragement to the listeners every day. Explore the core responsibilities and the art of creating engaging and inspiring radio. Discover the skills and qualities needed to succeed in this pivotal position.

Growing up in the Chicago suburbs, Jeremy’s life was forever changed from listening to the radio, literally. From inviting Jesus into his life after hearing a radio program to catching the radio ‘bug’ while listening to stellar radio dramas, he was always listening to whatever radio he could find. He loved recording his own “radio shows“ and dreaming of the ways God would use this technology to reach people with a message of hope. The last 20+ years, his radio journey has taken him from Chicago, to Nebraska, Oklahoma, NW Arkansas and for the last 9 years in St. Louis. He currently serves as Program/Music Director for 99.1 JOY FM (KLJY).

Fun facts: He met his wife at Moody Bible Institute where they both studied radio broadcasting, which even led to them working at a station together several years later. They have four kids (adopting their 2 oldest from Ethiopia in 2013) and as a family they have a great time cheering on St Louis CITY SC as season ticket holders!

Mark Ramsey

Mark Ramsey Media

< RADIO | RESEARCH >

Yes, You Can Grow Your Audience. Here’s How…

Radio is shrinking, that we know. So is it still possible to grow your audience? Yes, it is. We will show the two types of future listeners and how to attract each. Are your future listeners in Church? Don’t bet on it! Learn storytelling strategies that speak to each group and show what types of content and financial support you must explore if you really aim to grow and remain relevant in the lives of listeners with infinite choices and scarce attention.

Mark Ramsey is proud to do a ton of research for Christian broadcasters in markets large and small across America. He has probably been at the decision table for more strategic presentations at more Christian radio stations than any other research company in America. He has invested much of his career helping our stations reach more listeners while staying true to our mission and values. He is proud to call many of the stations in this room clients and many of you his friends.

Mark is also at the forefront of the podcast space, not in research but on the creative side. He has several series that ranked in Apple’s top five with Wondery. He produced a dramatic series that starred David Harbour and Jeffrey Dean Morgan. He wrote and created two series – FADE IN and DARK SANCTUM – that received numerous award nominations. Currently he is working on projects with Margaret Atwood, author of The Handmaid’s Tale, and he is the creator of the all-new faith-forward dramatic podcast version of A Christmas Carol for Hope Media Group, starring Sean Astin as Ebenezer Scrooge.

Research may be his specialty, but creating content that moves hearts and souls and helping his clients to do the same is his passion.

Dwan Hill

Speaker/Songwriter/Producer/Artist, The Choir Room

< COMMUNITY | INSPIRATION >

When We Sing Together: Life Lessons from the Choir

Our world seems more divided each day, and few people find flourishing community amidst so many competing worldviews. But the solution is not found in uniformity or conformity but in genuine unity despite differences. And love has a sound. That’s what Dwan Hill learned in the choir, and the choir is back. Learn how lessons from the choir can impact the strategy of your station both internally and externally.

Dwan Hill is a 3x GRAMMY award-winning, 2x Dove award-winning, 2x ASCAP Rhythm and Soul award winning, singer-songwriter, producer, musician, writer, and church leader based in Nashville, TN. In addition to completing his Bachelors of Music Education and Masters of Composition degrees at Belmont University, Dwan has toured worldwide as the music director for CeCe Winans, as well as with renowned artists such as Lauren Daigle, Jonny Lang, Drew Holcomb & The Neighbors, Tauren Wells. Most recently, he spends much of his time in Music City writing songs for Integrity Music in partnership with his own publishing companies, Big Buddy Music and Let Them Hear. His chart-topping songs as songwriter, publisher, or producer include two #1 gospel radio hits “Believe For It” by CeCe Winans and “He’s My Rock” by Bri Babineaux. Known for his creative approach and quirky style, Dwan delivers a sound that is wonderfully nostalgic and yet refreshing, combining 70’s influences with a modern flare. At the heart of his creativity and inspiration is Dwan’s love of teaching others. Whether leading a small group of young men, speaking to creatives on his “Hey Wise Guys” podcast, or serving in his home church, Dwan enjoys riveting conversation and the challenge of making complex ideas simple. He has had the honor of being a featured speaker and special guest performer for InQuiker, NAMM, WorshipLife (LifeWay), GMA Immerse Conference, and TEDx Talks. Dwan’s most prized treasures are his wife Laura and their children Tobin and Nyla.

Rick Dunham

Founder+Chairman, Dunham+Company

< RADIO | RESEARCH | REVENUE >

P1 Listeners: Insights Into Who They Really Are

Rick Dunham will unveil yet-to-be-released findings from the latest Dunham+Company research study on P1 listeners to Christian music radio. These findings will be compared to findings from the groundbreaking P1 study they conducted in 2021. In this second-ever study of its kind, you will be the first to see the results of who your P1s are, what media these super fans consume, how they differ from other listeners, and why they do or don’t financially support their favorite station.

For over four decades, Rick Dunham has been at the forefront of marketing and fundraising for Christian nonprofits. In 2002, he founded Dunham+Company, which has become a global leader in providing multi-channel strategies across some of the world’s most influential sectors. Through radio and television, local churches and overseas missions, medical relief and philanthropic initiatives, Dunham+Company is multiplying the reach of the gospel. The company currently serves nearly 100 clients in the United States, Canada, United Kingdom, Australia, and New Zealand – whose collective effort is reaching nearly every corner of the globe.

Rick holds a BA from Biola University and a ThM from Dallas Theological Seminary. From devotionals to blogs, webinars to books, Rick’s personal faith in Jesus and his biblical training are the driving conviction of his communication. Rick is the author of Secure: Discovering True Financial Freedom and If God Will Provide, Why Do We Have to ask for Money? He serves as a member of the board of The Giving Institute and is a former chair of the Giving USA Foundation, which publishes the most widely respected annual report on giving in the U.S. He has been published and quoted in the Wall Street Journal, USA Today, Washington Post and more.

Rick is married to his childhood sweetheart, Judi. Together they have 3 children and 9 grandchildren.

Adam Christing

Master of Ceremonies, Interactive Comedian, Keynote Speaker

Adam works with organizations who want to experience how the magic of laughter can open doors and hearts in business and in life. ExxonMobil executive Mark Green dubbed him the “Tom Brady of Emcees.” Adam has delighted corporate, association, and nonprofit audiences in 49 of the 50 U.S. states, Canada, Europe, and China. In 2021, he received the Best of Los Angeles Award as the #1 Event Master of Ceremonies.

He has appeared on more than 100 radio and TV shows, including CNN, Fox News, Entertainment Tonight, and NBC Nightly News. He’s also been featured in national magazines and newspapers, including USA Today, FORTUNE, and The New York Times. He is the author of three personal growth and humor books published by Random House and Markin Books. His forthcoming book is called We Got You: How to Gather Your Group, Galvanize Your People, and Grow Your Results.

“My goal is not to be the star of the event. I love being the ‘glue’ that joins all the pieces—the theme, the leadership, the attendees—together.” – Adam Christing

Joel Muddamalle

Director of Theology and Research, Proverbs 31 Ministries

< LEADERSHIP | INSPIRATION >

The Hidden Peace: Embracing Weakness as The Way

In a world that champions power, strength, and control to gain the peace you long for, the outcome is often just deeper levels of angst, anxiety, and frustration. In a society that is obsessed with platform and position, we are plagued with greater insecurity than ever before. Not an ounce of this feels like peace. But the Bible points us to how we can experience true peace, regain self-awareness without the entrapment of self-obsession, and live the life of Jesus – Humility. Unexpected? Yes, but it is absolutely essential for the Christian life. It is in fact, the very way of Jesus.

Joel Muddammalle holds a Ph.D. in theology and serves as the director of theology and research at Proverbs 31 Ministries. He is a co-host of the “Therapy & Theology” podcast with Lysa TerKeurst and licensed counselor Jim Cress.

Joel serves on the preaching team at Transformation Church in Indian Land, SC, and is a frequent speaker for conferences and events. He just released his first book, “The Hidden Peace: Finding True Security, Strength, and Confidence Through Humility”. Based in Charlotte, North Carolina, Joel and his wife enjoy a full house with their four children and two dogs. If he doesn’t have a theology book in hand, you can be sure he’s coaching one of his kids in a sport, or doing his best to keep up his hoops game on the basketball court.

Myrka Dellanos

Co-host on Vida Unida’s “Myrka en La Manana”, Hope Media Group

< RADIO | SPANISH >

Christian Radio: A Lifeline in Our Communities

Christian radio has been an indispensable part of communities for years. Yet, in an ever-changing landscape of content consumption, how is radio uniquely positioned to level up its connection with the listener? From storytelling to community building to spiritual guidance, Christian radio is able to create a sense of belonging and provide valuable resources for those seeking connection with their faith with the greatest message ever shared.

Myrka is an internationally renowned journalist who is best known as the first anchor for the top-rated news-magazine program on Univision Network, Primer Impacto. She has also hosted her own interview prime-time show titled “Exclusively with Myrka Dellanos.” She has won two Emmy’s among many other recognitions in her career which spans almost two decades. She has been recognized as one of the Most Powerful Women in Television by People Magazine.

Myrka has also received recognition for her humanitarian work with underprivileged children and youth in the US and Latin-America and she travels extensively as a speaker offering a message of hope, renewal and faith in Jesus. She also served for a time as an adjunct professor of Journalism at her Alma Mater, the University of Miami and is a published author.

For all of her accomplishments, Myrka is most grateful for her role as a daughter of God and mother.

Fred & Paul Jacobs

Fred Jacobs is founder and president of Jacobs Media, launched 40 years ago this September as a consultancy providing programming, digital, sales consulting and research to broadcast radio stations and media brands.

Fred is credited with the creation of the Classic Rock radio format in the mid-80’s, still going strong more than a quarter century later.

Over the decades, the company has become known for its innovative Techsurveys, providing important insight into the ways radio listeners access entertainment and information on the broadcast and digital platforms. The surveys started in commercial radio in 2005, and created a version for public radio four years later.

Not surprisingly, Fred’s background is in audience research, working for the legendary Frank N. Magid and Associates as its director of research for the radio and publishing divisions. Fred went on to ABC Radio as WRIF/Detroit’s research director before serving in the same capacity for the company’s Owned FM Stations in New York. He returned to Detroit for a successful run as program director of WRIF in 1981.

Paul Jacobs is Vice President/General Manager of Jacobs Media, specializing in revenue generation for Jacobs Media’s clients. In 2008, Paul headed up a new startup – jācapps – the industry’s first mobile application development company. Over the past 15 years, jācapps has become the largest mobile application developer for the broadcast radio, creating more than 1,300 apps worldwide, including many leading Christian broadcasters.

Paul has earned a reputation for educating sales staffs and their clients about the marketing power of radio broadcasting and the industry’s digital future. He began his career on the sales and management side of the business, working in sales and management positions at WNIC, WRIF, and WDFX in Detroit, as well as for KZEW in Dallas before joining his brothers Fred and Bill in 1991 at Jacobs Media.

The Jacobs brothers are frequent speakers at industry conferences, which include state broadcasting association events. In recent years, they have begun advising broadcasters on strategic planning and digital transformation.

Paul and Fred have become industry thought leaders focused on the changing in-car audio experience, and championing innovation in radio through their executive tours each January at CES in Las Vegas.

Lysa TerKeurst

NY Times Best Selling Author & Speaker, Proverbs 31 Ministries

< INSPIRATION >

Loving Others Well While Navigating Life’s Challenges

We spend so much emotional energy pouring hope and encouragement into our listeners each week. That may be a challenge even on the best of days. When we are exhausted or are going through trials, how do we continue to inspire our audience and live in obedience to who God has called us to be? Establishing healthy boundaries in our personal and professional lives can help us learn how to support our listeners at a higher level without losing the best of who we are in the process.

Lysa TerKeurst is president and chief visionary officer of Proverbs 31 Ministries and the author of six New York Times bestsellers, including Good Boundaries and Goodbyes, Forgiving What You Can’t Forget, and It’s Not Supposed to Be This Way. But to those who know her best, she’s just a simple girl with a well-worn Bible, who proclaims hope in the midst of both good times and heartbreaking realities.

Lysa loves spending time with her family, playing (and often winning) new board games, studying God’s Word, and pursuing healing with friends like you.

Corey Mann

Mornings & Program Director, Pulse FM

< RADIO | ON-AIR >

The Epitome of Leveling Up

Toby McKeehan, better known as TobyMac, is an iconic figure in our industry. Get a peek behind the curtain of his journey, from his college days at Liberty University to his current role of writing and producing top radio hits, performing at sold-out concerts, plus nurturing new talent with Gotee. He continues to build a compelling brand as he embraces unexpected paths guided by God. Toby is the epitome of leveling up. This is TobyMac like you’ve never experienced him before.

Corey Mann has been reaching people through radio broadcasting for 36 years now and showing no signs of stopping. His career started in Michigan, but eventually he moved to Indiana in 1991. After a few years at a local church working with student ministry, Corey found an opportunity with Pulse FM as a morning show host, Program Director, and podcast host! Corey and his wife have an adult daughter who is teaching 7th grade and a teenage son who works part time as a lifeguard. Corey is an author of a children’s joke book, and when time allows, he’s chasing stand up comedy.

About Paul Martin

Paul Martin brings decades of experience in donor engagement and business development in both radio and digital media to nonprofit organizations. Paul helps donors and business partners discover the joy of participating in ministry through giving.

Paul recently led the development work for Hope Media Group as Chief of Development. He founded Advocace Media (which combined with DickersonBakker in 2019) to help Christian radio grow funding from corporate sponsors, mid-level and major donors. He also was a leader of founding teams at KLTY (twice), Salem Media Representatives, Salem Radio Network, Popmail (a digital media solution for radio), Separate Account Solutions (a financial services firm for High Net Worth households), and Christian Broadcasting Network.

As a Certified Fund Raising Executive, Martin sees great opportunity to grow biblical stewardship with donors through Hope Media Group. “More people can enjoy a deeper walk with Christ by living a life of stewardship and generosity. “

Paul encourages people to amplify their impact through thoughtful growth, action and innovation. He seeks ways for people to prayerfully commit to a God-sized vision and pursue it.

Paul and his wife Paula have three adult daughters and have a heart for the disadvantaged and disabled.

Thursday Breakouts

Utilizing Research for Sales and Underwriting

Kent Phillips – President & Managing Partner, FMR Associates

FMR Associates, a leader in media research for over 40 years, will present a 2500- person multi-market study on Christian radio listening and the correlation to sales and underwriting. The study aims to provide insight into key listening patterns for programming and key consumer behaviors. The qualitative data will index multiple categories compared to all radio listenership with a goal of growing grant opportunities and radio sales for your station.

The Art of Interviewing

Mandy Young – Vice President of Radio, Educational Media Foundation

Matthew West

Christian music listeners love the music that CCM artists create. As an on-air talent, how do you help connect them to the artist themselves? Learn how ‘the art of interviewing’ can create impactful content for your station and create a memorable experience for your listeners. Topics to be covered include how to prepare for an interview, what questions to ask and when, and how to create an environment for the artist and you to shine.

Voices of Unity: Harnessing the Power of Communication for Reconciliation

Pascal Losambe – Chief Content Officer, Synergy Consulting Co.

Explore the power of communication through the lens of neurobiology and practical techniques. How does the human brain process language and emotions? How can radio use this knowledge to effectively build trust and connect with diverse audiences? Learn what tools are needed to use your voice as a force for unity and reconciliation in a divided world by unlocking the potential of your words in bridging gaps and healing communities.

Find the One Thing You Are Called to Do

Will Mancini – Founder and CEO of RunFree.Co / Creator of the Younique LifePlan System, Younique

It’s been said that your job is what you paid for but your calling is what you are made for. But what if your job and your calling could be aligned with breathtaking clarity? This breakout will reveal the four break-thru practices to get you there. Don’t miss the opportunity to find more meaningful progress in your 9-5 while you fulfill why God put you on earth!

Getting Reel About Short Form Video

Olivia Yetman, Social Media Consultant, Killer Bee Marketing

Everywhere you turn you’re hearing about the importance of video content. Dive headfirst into the wild world of short-form videos on social media! We’re spilling the tea on the hottest trends that’ll make your content pop and make sure you’re getting the most out of your videos. Whether you’re already killing it or just dipping your toes in, you’ll walk away with practical tips to step up your game on Facebook and Instagram. And hold up, should Christian Radio be on TikTok? Buckle up, you’re about to find out.

Taking a Deeper Dive into the Brand New P1 Research

Rick Dunham – Founder/Chairman, Dunham+Company

How do you understand P1s better, what motivates them, and what insights do you need to effectively engage them to support your station? You’ll learn more about the findings from Dunham+Company’s latest study of P1 listeners to Christian radio. Ask questions as we compare and contrast these new findings to the groundbreaking P1 study conducted in 2021.

Friday Breakouts

Making Music Decisions on a Budget

Rob Morris – Programming Consultant, Radio Animal Media Strategies

Programming in a streaming, data-driven, TikTok-obsessed world can be challenging. However, the amount of consumer data is now even more plentiful. On-demand streaming research can assist broadcasters when resources are no longer in the budget. This information provides a more accurate reflection of true consumption behavior, enabling programmers to interpret the data for their specific situations. It serves as a guide to light the way to more confident programming decisions and more satisfied listeners. When resources are limited, you can make music decisions on a budget and build a better playlist.

Meeting Makeover: Remodeling a Cornerstone Business Tool

Curt Swindoll, Certified EOS Implementer, EOS Worldwide

On a scale of 1-to-10, how effective are your internal meetings? If we are honest, most organizations would say there is LOTS of room for improvement. The average mid-level manager spends a third of their time in meetings. CEO’s spend 73% on average! Yet nearly half of employees say “meetings” are their largest waste of time. Learn how a weekly, quarterly, and annual “meeting pulse” can change that. This pulse is used by leadership teams in tens of thousands of companies around the world. Let’s fix your meeting mess, and solve one of the biggest frustrations you experience every day.

Trends in Today’s Audio Listening Landscape

Megan Lazovick – Vice President, Edison Research

Edison Research has chronicled the changes in the U.S. audio space for almost 30 years through research such as “The Infinite Dial,” “Share of Ear,” “Edison Podcast Metrics,” and a variety of other custom studies. During this time, trends have emerged – ones that have been consistent over time and promise to continue to affect listening habits and behaviors. See the latest updates on radio listening, streaming, podcasting, subscribing, and in-car usage, and how these trends are expected to continue to affect the audio space in the future.

Creating a Great Podcast

Meridith Foster – Mid-days and Host of The Unfolding Podcast, WBGL/Northwestern Media

As a Christian broadcaster, you are already creating great content every day. Why not utilize those skills to go deeper with your audience through podcasting? Learn from the creative team behind the 2023 CMB Radio Podcast of the Year, The Unfolding. Discover what they’ve learned through their 200 episodes and more than three million downloads. Where to start? What makes a great idea for a podcast? How can you improve your podcast? Find inspiration to start your next great podcast.

Level Up Your Street Team Brand

Harilyn Macosko – Fun Patrol Director / Afternoon Co-host, HIS Radio

Great radio stations know the street team hustle is key to staying local. Big or small stations can shine bright with their very own street squad. Your street team is like your hype squad, elevating your brand, getting you noticed, and vibing with your audience to level up your game. So, turning up the street team power is a game-changer. Walk away with fresh ideas to build up and pump up your street team!

Fundraising Best Practices

Rick Dunham – Founder/Chairman, Dunham+Company

Jason Parker – Chief Strategy Officer, Dunham+Company

Julia Taylor – Fundraising Host & Coach, Dunham+Company

Blanca Vega – Fundraising Host & Coach, Dunham+Company

This interactive breakout session will equip you with immediately actionable takeaways regarding fundraising best practices presented by Dunham+Company’s Media Strategists. This fast-paced session is for anyone in radio leadership, development, programming, or listener engagement looking for useful, timely intel. Pre-session caffeination recommended. A working phone is required to participate.

TobyMac

Capitol CMG artist; Co-founder, Gotee Records

< RADIO | ON-AIR >

The Epitome of Leveling Up

Toby McKeehan, better known as TobyMac, is an iconic figure in our industry. Get a peek behind the curtain of his journey, from his college days at Liberty University to his current role of writing and producing top radio hits, performing at sold-out concerts, plus nurturing new talent with Gotee. He continues to build a compelling brand as he embraces unexpected paths guided by God. Toby is the epitome of leveling up. This is TobyMac like you’ve never experienced him before.

With more than 16 million units in career sales and a whopping seven GRAMMY Awards, TobyMac’s career continues on the fast track. Each of his six studio solo projects have achieved Gold certification, a first for any artist in the history Capitol Christian Music Group. He is also the CEO of Gotee Records, an boutique record label founded in 1994 whose independent spirit is maintained through a steady focus on artist development and diversity. Gotee is currently home to artists such as Ryan Stevenson, Cochren & Co., Terrian, Jon Reddick and more.

< FUTURE OF RADIO BREAKOUTS >

Texting Your Way to the Future of Radio: Proven Strategies For Infinite Impact • Brian Audia

To effectively build community, radio must continuously adapt its communication tactics. As we look to the future, advancing technologies like MMS, Text Drip, RCS, and AI-assisted texting are reshaping the landscape. How can embracing these advanced texting strategies today revolutionize radio’s future? Discover how leveraging these tools can enhance engagement, fundraising, and listener relationships.

The Future of the Vehicle • Juan Galdamez

Screenification. Pillar-to-Pillar. Hybrid Radio. Personalization. Autonomous. Monetization. These terms describe the evolving vehicle experience. What does this mean for your stations and listeners’ in-car content? How can your team prepare for the future and seize new opportunities?

Embracing Data and Innovation as We Look to the Future • Samuel Zniber

How can radio evolve in 2024, 2029, 2034, and beyond? We can prepare for the future by examining how data and analytics are revolutionizing music broadcasting. We’ll uncover practical insights on how traditional radio can look ahead by adapting to compete with streaming platforms through personalized playlists, advanced analytics, and real-time data. We’ll also delve into the role of AI in enhancing listener engagement and envision a future where quantum computing transforms our auditory experiences without losing the timeless charm of radio.