The Reluctant Nobel Laureate: Discussing Samuel Beckett with Dr Hannah Simpson

Dr Simpson is the Rosemary Pountney Junior Research Fellow in British and European Drama at the Faculty of English, St. Anne’s College, University of Oxford. One of her primary areas of study is Samuel Beckett, literature Nobel laureate in 1969.

Beckett studies have often down played the importance and relevance of the Nobel prize. Yet it remains useful in understanding his works since they are so diametrically opposed to the historical framework of the prize. It is strange he was even awarded the prize. He was a strong contender in 1968, and possibly in 1964, but his works were considered too dispiriting. Beckett’s works are bleak whereas the Alfred Nobel stipulated the prize be awarded to “the person who shall have produced in the field of literature the most outstanding work in an ideal direction”. Ideal can mean many things, though the Nobel committees have taken this in the religious sense of high standards of morality that uplifts behaviour. Therefore, Beckett was “repackaged” as an idealist when he was awarded the prize.

Prior to winning the Nobel prize in 1969, Beckett was already an established and respected writer of international standing. His new works were immediately translated upon publication. He had received other literary prizes and were not opposed to such honours. He had no problems with his works being recognized. Beckett’s issue with the Nobel prize was its sheer power. The mass recognition, the intense media scrutiny and that his works got categorized and explained. Labelling him an idealist was a justification for his winning. The Nobel is accorded without the writer’s agreement, who then gets swallowed up by the institution that is the Nobel prize. Beckett’s decision to not turn down the prize, unlike Sartre in 1964, was because the act of refusal would have most likely attracted as much, if not even more publicity.

Catastrophe was commissioned by the A.I.D.A. (Association Internationale de Défense des Artistes) to show support for Václav Havel. The play has a very explicit political message which is quite unusual for Beckett. But Beckett’s works have multiple meanings. The central message in Catastrophe is resistance to categorization and manipulation as portrayed by the Protagonist. Censorship can be from external forces such that imposed by the Communist party on Havel, or it can be covert as in the structure an institution like the Nobel imposes. It’s an internalised censorship for the writer to produce idealised works.

The tyrannical behaviour of the Director in Catastrophe mirrors how Beckett himself behaved when he directed the plays he wrote. To him actors were tools of the script and he demanded extreme precision. Actors consent to being “tortured” and “oppressed” by the roles they play and the stage directions. The ability of actors to submit to these directives is a form of creative agency; his/her work is turned over to the public, likewise for the playwright. As a genre theatre uses the human body as a material form.

Gao was very much influenced by Beckett and there are parallels between them. Gao stated that the ideal performance comes from the “neutral actor’, that is the one who is between the self and the character. Beckett was also opposed to actors becoming immersed in their roles. He never gave actors more information about the character than what was already in the script.

Interest in Gao came after he won the Nobel in 2000, funding for research came from this prestige. Whereas for Beckett, he was already well established before the Nobel in 1969. In both cases the Nobel makes the writer a bit of a celebrity. The Irish government has co-opted Beckett’s celebrity status to promote its tourism.

Outline

01:40 – The Role of the Nobel Prize in Samuel Beckett Studies

04:41 – The “Ideal Tendency”

07:50 – How Did Beckett View the Prize?

12:35 – Beckett in Context: Fame and Fear

18:49 – The Catastrophe: Václav Havel and Totalitarianism

23:30 – On Censorship

25:53 – Inside the Theatre of Beckett: Acting and Individuality

30:30 – Comparison with Gao Xingjian

39:37 – Single-author studies