Pre-Code Hollywood was the era between 1927 and 1934 when the Hays Code was enforced in the American film industry. It was a campaign by American Roman Catholics who found American cinema promoting immoral values which were considered to create a negative impact in the society.

As a result, several films were subjected to censorship for including the themes of implied sexual innuendo, romantic and sexual relationships between white and black people, mild profanity, illegal drug use, promiscuity, prostitution, infidelity, abortion, intense violence, and homosexuality.

Several of these films also involved the themes of women engaging in taboo relationships and deviant behaviors, the portrayal of which was considered inappropriate in the 1930s. These 11 pre-Code era films show us how far films have evolved in confronting social taboos and representation.

11 Call Her Savage

Call Her Savage was released in 1932 and was directed by John Frances. The film starred Clara Bow and William Robertson and was one of the first films to portray homosexual relationships on screen. The plot involves Nasa, the daughter of a Native American father, and a white woman who rebels against her father. She defies her father by marrying the wrong man and getting into more trouble as a rebellion. Later, once she realizes her mixed ancestry, she embraces her wild self and follows her heart.

The film involved the themes of prostitution, race diversity, cross-dressing, animal fights, and bohemian artists which defined the pre-code era and attracted over 900,000 audiences in 42 cities. Bow was applauded for her performance, and the film was restored in 2012 by the Museum of Modern Art for its artistic dissent in films.

Related: Hays Code: The Most Important Pre-Code Hollywood Movies, Ranked

10 Smarty

Directed by Robert Forey, Smarty was released in 1934 and starred Warren Willian and Joan Blondell. The film was adapted from Hugh Herbert's play by screenwriter Carl Erikson, which revolved around the theme of divorce. Blondell plays a confident woman who files for divorce after her husband slaps her. She pursues her lawyer friend named Vernon and begins to make him uncomfortable by wearing raunchy clothes and invites her ex-husband for dinner.

The comedy-drama involves similar themes of woman-gone-wild, as the film explores the not-so-hunky-dory lies of monogamy and flips the idea of the domesticated naive woman. The characters are unlikable, and the premise feels offensive, which makes it speak of the pre-code era satirizing the sanitized spaces of the bourgeois.

9 Massacre

Massacre, directed by Alan Crosland, is adapted from a novel by Robert Gessner that spoke against the ill-treatment of Native Americans by White people. Richard Barthelmess and Ann Dvorak play the Native American protagonists in a story that details the ordeal of the ghettoized community. Joe, played by Barthelmess, is the son of a Native American chief who has lived away from the reservation and has lost touch with his roots. However, he is discriminated against for his ethnicity and feels exploited by his girlfriend. One day, Joe receives a telegram informing him that his father is dying, who does not recognize him anymore. Joe travels back to the reservation, where he witnesses the atrocities faced by the people. Joe takes the matter into his own hands and exposes the crimes committed by government officials.

The film takes a political stand that the Code era was against, as the code believed social realism in films could have led to disruption.

8 The Sign of the Cross

The Sign of the Cross directed by Cecil B. DeMille is a pre-Code era epic film which was based on the play of the same name written by Wilson Barrett. It stars Fredric March, Elissa Landi, Claudette Colbert and Charles Laughton. The film is set in ancient Rome ruled by Emperor Nero, who is played by Charles Laughton.

The film is a violent and seductive tale between emperors in ancient Rome and is the third installment in DeMille's biblical trilogy, the first two being The Ten Commandments and The Kind of Kings which has gained a cult status over time. Apart from its religious themes, the film is a perfect example of a pre-code-era film. The director was pressurized to censor the scenes involving violence, nudity, and depiction of dead bodies and animals killing its characters by W.H. Hays. However, all scenes were restored.

7 The Scarlett Empress

The Scarlett Empress is a historical drama directed by Josef von Sternberg, which was loosely based on the diary of Catherine the Great. Marlene Dietrich plays Sophia Federica, who marries into the Russian royal family. The film explores how Sophia becomes Catherine the Great, which affects her personal life and her family. She eventually eyes for power to overthrow her own husband. There are several historical inaccuracies in the film, but the film is applauded for its art direction. The film was released just before the Hays Code was enforced and included scenes of violent rulers, tortures, murders, and nudity.

6 Love Me Tonight

Love Me Tonight is a musical comedy directed by Rouben Mamoulian which stars Maurice Chevalier as a tailor named Maurice Courtelin who poses as a baron who falls in love with a princess played by Jeanette MacDonald. As the couple gets close, Courtelin ponders losing his identity for the princess. The music was composed by Rodgers and Hart, who were praised for their work on the film. The film is considered to be a masterpiece and has been nominated in several lists by American Film Institute’s Lists for comedy and music. After 1934, the film was re-released and was reduced to 96 minutes where around eight minutes were censored for containing explicit content of nudity which went against the Code.

5 Man’s Castle

Man’s Castle is a Depression-era drama released in 1933 which was directed by Frank Borzage and starred Spencer Tracy as a homeless man named Bill and Loretta Young as Trina, who plays a destitute. They both fall in love and desire to start a family, but their financial constraints push them to make wrong decisions. In the re-release of the film in 1938, the duration of 75-minute of the film was cut down to 66 minutes for censoring scenes with provocative dialogues and nudity. The actors were applauded for their performance even when the film was a box-office failure. The film was nominated for the American Film Institute’s list of AFI’s 100 Years … 100 Passions in 2002.

4 The Divorcee

The Divorcee is a pre-Code comedy-drama directed by Robert Z. Leonard which was based on the novel Ex-Wife written by Ursula Parrott. The film starred Chester Morris as Ted, who is married to Jerry played by Norma Shearer but has an affair with another woman. Jerry engages in revenge sex with her husband’s close friend to get back to her husband. The film explores the tumultuous relationships that unfold between the characters as they seek perfection in their marriage while destroying their relationships.

Leonard was nominated for an Academy Award for Best Director, and Shearer won the Oscar for Best Actress. The film’s themes of extramarital affairs and questioning the double standards of monogamy made it a quintessential pre-code era movie that ages exceptionally well.

3 Three on a Match

Three on a Match is a crime drama released in 1932 directed by Mervyn LeRoy and stars Joan Blondell as Mary, Ann Dvorak as Vivian and Bette Davis as Ruth who play old friends catching up. However, things turn ugly when Vivian depends on drugs and her son gets kidnapped by a mobster. The film broke several codes in 1930. The film was released when the Lindbergh baby kidnapping case was under investigation and the themes of the film were considered to be controversial.

The film was released under the assumption that the kidnappers are arrested in the film, and the studios later signed the agreement with the Hays Office that plots relating to kidnapping will be avoided in future films. Joan Blondell’s raunchy poster where she sat on a chair nude also stirred controversy. However, the film ages well for the performances and the dramatic storytelling for its unique genre of mingling female friendships with the genre of crime thriller.

2 Red-Headed Woman

Red-Headed Woman shares similar themes of problematic women prevalent in the pre-code era. The film is a romantic comedy based on the novel of the same name written by Katherine Brush and directed by Jack Conway. Jean Harlow plays Lillian, who uses sex to climb the social ladder and ruins her boss’s marriage as she aims for wealth and corporate success.

The film involved the themes of extra-marital affairs, pre-marital sex, and attempts of murder, which was considered scandalous in the 1930s film industry. The film was entirely banned in the United Kingdom for the depiction of taboo themes. However, it also mostly received positive reviews for its performances, dialogue, and satire, which proves the film is at least an entertaining watch.

Related: Why We Need More Black and White Movies

1 Safe in Hell

Safe in Hell is a pre-code melodrama directed by William A. Wellman starring Dorothy Mackail as Gilda who is taken to an island of fugitive men by her boyfriend played by Donald Cook. The film was based on a play by Houston Branch. The film was unconventional for its time for having two African-American actors as the only positive and reliable characters in the film.