This '70s adventure flick, based on the popular action hero of 1930s and '40s pulp fiction, is a whole lot of fun. It's not an origin story; you're just expected to know who Doc Savage is and what his powers are. I didn't have a clue, and I doubt many viewers of the '70s would have known much about him either. From what I can tell, Savage is a superior athlete, a scientific genius, and seems to possess some knowledge of the occult as well. In one scene he's bulletproof, and it's never explained why. I didn't know, and I didn't care. I just enjoyed the ride from start to finish.

The title character is played by former TV Tarzan…

I think the most interesting thing about Doc Savage is what it isn’t. It’s not a movie that came out after Star Wars. It’s not the product of the IP-plundering waves that followed Lucas’s space epic, or Superman, or Indiana Jones, or Burton’s Batman. It’s not just the output of studios digging through their archives for whatever old pulpy crap they can get the rights to.

And what it’s not becomes abundantly clear pretty quickly, because they obviously have no idea what they’re doing here. They must’ve seen the 60s Batman as the only prerequisite for what they were trying to do, and kinda half-assedly took a swing at camp. But it’s less of a swing and more of a bunt.…

"Ol' Doc gets the girls every time."

"Yeah. That is one good reason not to neglect daily exercise, my friends."

A couple months back I called Peter Bogdanovich's At Long Last Love the squarest movie ever made. I realize now how wrong I was since this one out-squares it at nearly every turn. From its Sousa-derived score (and theme song which is heard no less than three times) to its 1930s setting (with only the modern hairstyle on Savage's would-be love interest betraying when it was made) and square-jawed pulp hero, The Man of Bronze evokes the cliffhanger serials of the '30s and '40s without truly getting a handle on the form. (For one thing, it's incredibly slow off the…

One of the pre-Spielberg/Lucas attempts to bring back the pulpy 30s kids serials but unfortunately with none of the ambition. Not without the occasional bizarre charm of the material like cartoonishly self-righteous speechifying, hilariously hyper-specific gadgets, mustache-twirling villains in giant baby cribs, murderous electric snake assassins, etc. But the style is just done in that kind of deliberately lazy TV camp I find irritating. So much flat visual coverage, scenes padded out with endless improv "jokes" for 8-year-olds, super chintzy looking sets and action.

If you can't get the money or talent to do something like Raiders the least you could do is the goofball psychedelic design work of like Flash Gordon or throw in some actual cartoon looney tunes…

Between the ages of 10 and 15, I devoured every single Doc Savage paperback I could get my hands on. I was riveted by author Lester Dent's pulpy super-science adventures and artist James Bama's photorealistic cover paintings depicting The Man of Bronze's torn shirt and ripped physique. In fact, I read so many of them that my 5th grade teacher raided my desk, took all the books I had stashed there, and locked them up, forcing my mother to come in to the classroom and tear my teacher a new asshole for being such an asshole.

When the film version was released, I rushed to the theater, expecting to be thrilled by the amazing adventures of Doc and his Fabulous…

As a fan of the original Doc Savage stories, I was excited to see this film adaptation, however, while the movie does capture some of the excitement and adventure of the source material, it falls short in a number of areas. One of the main issues with the film is its pacing because, despite the fact that there are plenty of action scenes and thrilling set pieces, the film often feels rushed and disjointed. It jumps from one scene to the next without giving the audience enough time to fully absorb what’s happening on screen. Another issue is the film’s special effects. While the practical effects are decent for the time period, the visual effects are often clunky and unconvincing…

Viewed on TCM

Tagline: His body...a physical phenomenon. His mind...a mental marvel. His fight...to right all wrongs. His name...enough to strike terror into the hearts of the most hardened criminals!

When I came across Doc Savage: Man Of Bronze (1975) sometime ago on Letterboxd, I was very surprised I'd never heard about it before, and became instantly intrigued.

At this point in my life, I'm coming to realize when I come across a movie almost as old as I am, and it's completely unknown to me, that's not a good thing.

The origin of Doc Savage, are a series of pulp fiction novels, over 200 of them, made in the 1930's and 1940's, but Doc Savage: The Man Of Bronze…