>>Weather by month // weather averages Tyumen

>>Climate graph // Weather by Month Tyumen

>>average temperature by month Tyumen

>>Weather Tyumen

The climatic conditions prevailing in Tyumen are characterized by cold and temperate weather. The precipitation levels in Tyumen are noteworthy, as there is rainfall even during the most arid month. The Köppen-Geiger climate classification identifies this particular weather pattern as belonging to the category of Dfb. The mean yearly temperature recorded in Tyumen is 2.2 °C | 36.0 °F, as per the available data. In a year, the rainfall is 545 mm | 21.5 inch.

The specified area is located in the northern hemisphere of our planet. The onset of summer commences towards the conclusion of June and culminates by September. The season is characterized by a sequence of months, namely: June, July, August, September.

Climate graph // Weather by Month Tyumen

The month characterized by the lowest precipitation levels is February, exhibiting a mere 19 mm | 0.7 inch of rainfall. The month of July experiences the highest amount of precipitation, with an average value of 86 mm | 3.4 inch.

average temperature by month Tyumen

On average, the month of July experiences the highest temperature with an average value of 18.9 °C | 66.1 °F. The month of January is characterized by the lowest temperatures, which have an average reading of -16.2 °C | 2.9 °F.

Weather by month // weather averages Tyumen

<>

Avg. Temperature °C (°F) Min. Temperature °C (°F) Max. Temperature °C (°F) Precipitation / Rainfall mm (in) Humidity (%) Rainy days (d) avg. Sun hours (hours)

January February March April May June July August September October November December

Data: 1991 - 2021 Min. Temperature °C (°F), Max. Temperature °C (°F), Precipitation / Rainfall mm (in), Humidity, Rainy days. Data: 1999 - 2019: avg. Sun hours

There is a notable fluctuation in precipitation, with 67 mm | 3 inch variance observed between the month of least rainfall and that of highest downpour. The fluctuation of temperatures over the course of a year is referred to as temperature variation.

It has been observed that November exhibits the highest relative humidity, with a percentage of 82.31. On the other hand, May experiences the lowest relative humidity at an approximate rate of 60.79. According to the data, July is observed as the month with maximum rainy days (12.23) while February has recorded minimum rainfall during its tenure (5.50).

Tyumen weather and climate for every month

Hours of sunshine in Tyumen

avg. hours of sun

Total hours of sun

Within the region of Tyumen, the month that experiences a maximum number of daily hours with bright sunshine is June exhibiting an average duration of approximately 12.5. In totality, there are about 374.98 hours worth of sunlight throughout this particular period.

On average, the location of Tyumen experiences the least number of daily hours with sunshine during January. The total duration of sunlight in this period is recorded as 70.23, while an average of about 2.27 hours are received per day.

Throughout the year, Tyumen experiences approximately 2564.48 hours of sunshine. The average monthly duration of sunlight is estimated to be around 84.13.

Airport close to Tyumen

The closest Airports of Tyumen are: Roshchino International Airport (TJM) 12.00km,Koltsovo Airport (SVX) 290.71km,Chelyabinsk Airport (CEK) 323.39km

You can reach Tyumen from this Cities by Plane: Paris (CDG), Beijing (PEK), Kyiv (KBP), Minsk (MSQ), Hurghada (HRG), Novosibirsk (OVB), Samara (KUF), Kazan (KZN), Ufa (UFA), Saratov (RTW), Krasnodar (KRR), Nizhny Novgorod (GOJ), Bishkek (FRU), Tashkent (TAS), Dushanbe (DYU), Astana (TSE), Dubai (DXB), Sochi (AER), Rome (FCO), Yerevan (EVN)