Tyumen weather in October (Tyumen Oblast, Russia)

Is Tyumen a good destination in October, weather-wise? See what weather conditions to anticipate this month with our guide.

Temperatures

The month of October in Tyumen typically includes low temperatures and moderate snow/rainfall. As the day progresses, temperatures can peak at 8°C. Luckily at nightfall, they typically drop to -0°C.

Precipitation

Tyumen in October usually receives moderate snow/rainfall, averaging around 43 mm for the month. Historically, approximately 14 days this month are expected to have snow/rain.

Average sunshine

With about 101 hours of sunshine, the area enjoys a nice balance of sun and clouds, creating a pleasant environment.

If you're looking for dry conditions and comfortable temperatures, October may not be the ideal month to visit Tyumen. June, July and August generally stand out with the best circumstances. While January, February, March, April, October, November and December tend to showcase less optimal conditions.

For an in-depth look at the yearly conditions, visit our specialized Tyumen climate page with graphs.

Tyumen, monthly averages in October

Min Temperature -0°C

Max Temperature 8°C

Chance of Rain 46%

Precipitation 43 mm

Rainy days 14 days

Humidity 77%

Sunshine 101 hours

Percentage Sunshine

Where to go in Russia in October

Find out more about the weather in Russia and which places have the best travel conditions in this month.

Map not visible? Whoops sorry! Please refresh the page.

Legend perfect weather pleasant tolerable unpleasant poor

Perfect weather is subjective. On this map perfect weather has been defined with temperatures between 20°C and 29°C and not too much precipitation (less than 90 mm a month).

So, what should you wear in this month?

Wear a base layer in cold weather; this is the #1 thing you can do to increase your overall body temperature.

What To Do

We rated the following activities from 1 (least suitable) to 10 (best) to do.

Swimming 5/10

Cycling 4/10

Walking 4/10

Camping 2/10

Outdoor sports 4/10

Interested in more climate information?

This site provides you with all the information you need about the climate in Tyumen.

Our site offers climate and forecast data for every country in the world. Are you going to Russia? On this website you can find historical weather averages for many cities in Russia. Not sure yet where to go? We now have a tool which recommends destinations that suit your ideal travel conditions. Find out where to go with our weather planner.