DEATH: Hugh Stancliffe, 8 Slí na Coille, Gurtinard, Listowel, Co. Kerry and late of U.K. Peacefully, on June 28th, 2021, at his home. Sadly missed and lovingly remembered by his wife Ann, brothers John and Paul, sisters-in-law Elizabeth Ann and Adele, nephews, niece, extended family, his wonderful carers, neighbours and friends.

My sincere sympathies to the family on your loss.

Danny Healy Rae

Confolences to Hughs family at this sad time may he reat in peace.

He was a gentleman and will be dearly missed x

Siobhan Harrington

condolences to Mary and Hugh’s brothers ,Hugh was a true man of books

Brenda Woulfe

Hugh was a thorough professional and a pleasure to do business with. I will miss seeing him regularly in Allos. My sincere sympathy to all who mourn him.

Mary Cogan

Hugh thank you very much for your support over so many years collaborating together, I’ll miss your advice and your humor. A true gentleman has gone. God keep you in his glory.

Elena Martinez de Morentin

My deepest sympathy to Ann, his bothers,, and the entire family and to Mary his carer.. May He Rest in Peace.

Aidan Campbell

To Ann and family I’m very sorry for your great loss at this sad time

Michael Healy Rae

We were saddened to hear of Hughs passing.. He was a gentleman and will be missed. Our sincere condolences to Ann, John, Paul and the extended Stancliffe family.

May Hugh rest in peace

Paul and Norma Stack, Bunagarha

A total treasure of a man.. a privilege to have known you

Love always Trevanne

Trevanne Chute

So sorry to learn of the death of Hugh. He helped me with the publication of my book in 2016. An thorough professional and an absolute gentleman. We have lost a great man. May he rest in peace. My sincere sympathy to his dear wife and extended family.

Maurice O’Mahony, Ballydonoghue, Co Kerry

Hugh, you were a real gentleman, a true friend and a great champion of the arts. I am glad to have known you. May you rest in peace.

Gabriel Fitzmaurice

“For what is it to die but to stand naked in the wind and to melt into the sun?

And what is it to cease breathing but to free the breath from its restless tides, that it may rise and expand and seek God unencumbered?

Only when you drink from the river of silence shall you indeed sing.

And when you have reached the mountaintop,then you shall begin to climb.

And when the earth shall claim your limbs,then shall you truly dance.”

A true gentleman that I was blessed to call my friend. Thank you,Dear Hugh

Caroline.

Caroline Fraher Colbert

=============================

DEATH of Michael Scannell, Dromin, Listowel, Co. Kerry. Peacefully, on June 26th, 2021, at the Bon Secours Hospital, Tralee. Predeceased by his sisters Evelyn and Mary and his brothers John, Patrick and Jeremiah. Sadly missed and lovingly remembered by his wife Joan, son Fergus and daughter-in-law Emma, grandchildren Billy, Evan and Elizabeth, brothers-in-law Frank, Tim and Michael, sister-in-law Noreen, nephews Declan and Paudie, nieces Margaret and Pia, and extended family.

———————————–

Our sympathy to Frank Declan,Margaret, Padraig and Mary Pia and all the extended Scannell families on Michael’s passing may he rest in peace

The Byrne family Duagh and London and Maureen Mcauliffe

My sympathy to family on passing of Michael. May he rest in peace.

Tim O’Leary

My sincere condolences to the Scannell family on your sad loss.

Cllr Michael Foley

Deepest sympathy to Joan,Fergus and all the family on Michael’s death. He was a pleasure to know and call to.

Sean and Peggy Treacy

Our Deepest sympathy to you Joan,and family, and all the extended scannell & O Sullivan Families. May Michael soul rest in peace.

Dan & Breeda O Leary stagmount

Sincere sympathy to Joan, Fergus and Scannell family on the death of Michael RIP

Cait and Nealie Murphy, Woldlawn Park, Killarney

Sincere sympathy to Joan and family on the death of Michael RIP

Jerome & Bernie O’Sullivan , Glantane, Mallow

Sincere sympathy to the Scannell and O Sullivan families on the death of Michael

Gerald & Peggy Landers

My deepest sympathies to Joan Fergus and all the Scannell family on the passing of Michael. May his gentle soul rest in peace.

Aoife Thornton

Our deepest condolences to the Scannell & Thornton families on the passing of Michael.

May he rest in peace.

Martin & Eileen Mc Carthy, Greenville, Listowel

Sincere sympathy to all the Scannell and Thornton families. Rip.

Noreen and Paddy Wallace

Sincere condolences to Joan Fergus Emma and Billy, may he rest in peace.

Margaret o Connor Coolard school

Our deepest sympathy to Joan, Fergus, Emma and family on the sad passing of Michael.

May his dear soul rest in peace.

Miceál & Bridie Murphy Lissivigeen

Sincere condolences to Joan and family and all the extended Scannell and O’Sullivan families on the loss of Michael rip.

Breda Slattery and family Carrigeen Headford

Sincere condolences to all the Scannell family on the passing of Michael.

John Scannell , Derrindaffe ,Duagh

Deepest sympathy to the Scannell family on the death of Michael. May he rest in peace.

Tommy, Bernie and Sheilanne Curtin

Sincere Sympathy To Joan and Fergus and family on the passing of Michael May he rest in peace

Mary Brosnan and Morgan Flaherty

Our deepest sympathies to The Scannell and Thornton Families on the sad passing of Michael. May he rest in peace.

Joseph & Mary B Curtin & Family, Coolaclarig, Listowel

Deepest sympathy to the family.

Dominic and Peggy Hilliard

Our deepest sympathies and condolences to Joan, Fergus, Emma, Billy, Evan, Elizabeth and the extended Scannell family on the death of Michael. May he rest in peace.

Keeping you all in our prayers and thoughts at this sad time.

Siobhán and Michael O Sullivan, Ballymacelligott

Sincere sympathy to Joan Fergus Emma and family on the sad loss of Michael. May he rest in peace.

Liam & Eileen Murphy, Kilquane

Our deepest sympathy to Joan, Fergus and family on the sad passing of Michael. May he rest in peace.

Willie and Christine Stack Carrueragh, Kilmorna

MY DEEPEST SYMPATHY TO THE SCANNELL FAMILY ON THE DEATH OF MICHAEL.MAY MICHAEL REST IN PEACE R.I.P.

TOM MC CARTHY LISROE DUAGH

Sincere sympathy to Joan and the Scannell family on the death of Michael. May he rest in peace..

Tim and Ann Cooper, Droum, Headford

Sincere sympathy to Fergus and family on the passing of Michael. May he rest in peace.

Myra and Brendan Lynch

To Joan, Fergus and Emma and family, and to the extended Scannell family, I extend my sincere sympathy. May Michael rest in peace.

Margaret Kissane Coolard School

Sincere sympathy to Mrs. Scannnell, Fergus, Emma and all the Scannnell family on the passing of Michael. May he rest in peace.

Norma Leahy ,Coolard NS

Sincere sympathy to Joan Fergus Emma &extended Scannell family on the sad loss of Michael may he rest in peace

Dermie & Noreen Murphy & family Kilquane

Sincere sympathy to the Scannell & Thornton families on the passing of Michael.

May He Rest in Peace.

Dominic & Marie Scanlon

Deepest sympathy to Joan Fergus and Emma. Also to the extended Thornton families on the sad passing of Michael. May he rest in peace.

Mary Flaherty Kenny Heights

Sincere sympathy to Joan and Fergus on the passing of Mike Rip

Mary Kissane Cloontubrid

Our sincere condolences to Joan Fergus Emma and family Also the Scannell and Thornton families on the death of Michael at this very sad time

Denise and Mike McKenna

Deepest Sympathy to Joan and all the Scannell family on the passing of Michael. May he rest in peace.

Josephine Cronin & Johnny Ryan

Sincere sympathy to Michael’s family and condolences to Frank and the Thornton family on the death of Michael. May he rest in peace.

Hugh & Mary O’Donnell, Lisselton

Sincere sympathy to the Scannell family on the passing of Mike. May he rest in peace

Denis Keane, Slievecahill

my deepest sympathy to all the family

DAN KIELY

Sincere condolences to Joan, Fergus and family. Also to the extended Scannell and Thornton families at this sad time.

May Michael Rest in Peace.

Ted & Margaret Murphy

Our sincere condolences to Fergus and all the family on the passing of Michael. May he rest in peace

Eamonn and Aisling Stack Carrueragh

Deepest sympathy to Joan,Fergus and all the Scannell and Thornton families on the sad passing of Mike.May he rest in peace.

Paddy and Eileen Halpin Ballygologue Park

My sincere sympathy to the Scannell family on your loss.

Danny Healy Rae

Deepest sympathy to the Scannell and Thornton families on the passing of Michael. May he rest in peace.

Jim and Betty Beasley, Listowel

Sincere sympathy to Joan and family on Michaels passing may he rest in peace remembering the good days in Kilqaune Colm

COLM AND MARY NAGLE

Sincere condolences to the Scannell and extended family on the death of Michael may he rest in peace

Moran family Lenamore

Sincere sympathy to Fergus and family on the passing of Michael.

May he rest in peace.

Jerome Leen

Condolences to the Scannell family at this sad time. RIP.

Jimmy Moloney

Sincere Sympathy to the Scannell family Rip .

Tom griffin Knocknagoshel

Deepest sympathy to Joan, Fergus all the Scannell and Thornton families at this sad time Rest In Peace.

Timmy and Mary Flavin Coolard Listowel

Sending you my sincere sympathies, Joan, Fergus, Emma & family. May Mike rest in peace

Lorraine Boyle

Deepest sympathy to Mrs. Scannel. Fergus Emma & family on Michael’s passing. May his gentle soul rest in peace.

Michael and Mary O’Donoghue Coolaclarig Listowel

Deepest sympathy to Mrs. Scannell, Fergus and the Thornton family on the passing of Michael – Rest in Peace.

Jerry Hannon, Charles Street

Sincere sympathies to Joan, Fergus, Emma and family, and the extended Scannell and Thornton families on the sad passing of Michael, a lovely man. May he rest in peace.

Paddy Lynch

Sincere sympathy to the Scannell family on the passing of MICHAEL rip

Denis Curtin Coolaclarig

Our sincere sympathy to Joan & family on the sad passing of Michael. May he Rest in Peace.

Chas & Mary Curtin Coolaclarig & Moyvane

Deepest sympathy to Fergus & family on Michael’s passing. May he rest in peace.

Dermot O’Connor, Coolard NS

Sincere sympathy to the Scannell family on the death of Michael. May he rest in peace.

John & Peggy O Carroll Clountubrid Listowel

Joan Fergus Emma and the extended Scannell family. Condolences on the passing of Michael ye are in our thoughts may his soul RIP.

Donal,,Aine Doyle and family Dromin

Sympathy to you on the passing of Michael , if Ma could see me now . Great memories .

John Nagle Limerick

Sincere condolences to Joan Fergus Emma and the extended family.

Paddy and Brigid Hegarty Lixnaw

Deepest sympathy to Fergus & family on Michael’s death, may he rest in peace…

Joe Galvin & Kathleen Listowel

My sincere condolences to Joan, Fergus, Emma and all the family on Michael’s passing. May his soul rest in peace.

Cecelia Lyons

Deepest sympathy to all the Scannell family on the death of Micheal. May he rest in peace.

Damien Galvin

Very sorry for ye’re loss may he rest in peace.

Margaret o Connor

Sincere condolences to all the Scannell family on your sad loss, may Michael R.I.P.

Sean and Louise Moriarty

Sincere sympathy to Joan and Fergus on the passing of Michael. May his gentle soul rest in peace.

Vincent & Chris Moloney Knockane

Sympathy to you all on the passing of Michael, may he rest in peace

Kay Halpin and family Ballygologue Park

Sincere sympathy to Fergus and Scannell family for your great loss at this time

Mike Mcelligott

Deepest sympathy to the Scannell family on the passing of Michael, may he rest in peace.

PJ and Olive Relihan

Sincere sympathy to Joan. Fergus .and Emma on the passing of Michael .May he Rest In Peace

Dermot Sheila Michael Jeremiah Murphy old road

Sincere sympathy to Joan and Fergus and family on the death of Michael Rip

Mary and Anthony Godfrey and family

Sincere sympathy to the Scannell family May Michael rest in peace . Ger & Breda O Donoghue Kilquane

Breda O Donoghue

Sincere sympathy to Joan, Fergus, Emma and Grandchildren on the death of dear Michael. To the Thornton family Listowel our deepest sympathy , may his gentle soul rest in peace.

Michael and Monica O Neill Tralee

Sincere Sympathy to Joan, Fergus, and Emma on the passing of Micheal. May he rest in peace

Toddy & Mary Carey

Sincere condolences to Joan, Fergus, Emma and extended family.

Don, Kathleen & Jack Kelly, Ballyvourney

To Joan Fergus Emma and all the family my sincere sympathy for your great loss at this sad time

Michael Healy Rae

Sincere sympathy to the Scannell family .May Michael rest in eternal peace

Frank and Eileen Greaney Woodford

Sincere sympathy to the Scannell and Thornton families on Michael’s passing. May he rest in peace.

Mary Murphy, Knocknagoshel

Our Sincere sympathy to Joan, Fergus Emma and extended Scannell family on the passing of your dear husband, father and grandfather. A TRUE GENTLEMAN. Rest in peace Michael.

Mossie and Josie Molyneaux

Sincere sympathy to the Scannell family on the passing of Michael May he rip

Larry & Michelle Buckley

Sincere sympathy to Joan and all the Scannell family on Michael’s passing. May he rest in peace.

Pat and Breda Lyons, Gurtinard, Listowel

Sincere sympathy to Joan and all the Scannell family on Michael’s passing. May he rest in peace.

Pat and Breda Lyons, Gurtinard, Listowel

Sincere sympathy to Joan, Fergus and Emma on the death of your beloved Michael.

May Michael rest in eternal peace.

John and Grace Murphy, Aghada

Sincere Sympathy to the Scannell family on the death of Michael may he Rest in Peace

Mc Elligott family Greenville

Sincere Sympathy to the Scannell family. May Michael rest in peace.

D J & Marie Mulvihill Cahirdown Listowel

Sincere Sympathy to the Scannell family on the death of Michael May he rest in Peace

Batt and Margaret Flavin

Deepest sympathy to the Scannell family on the passing of Michael

Declan & Ann Finucane Moyvane

Sincere sympathy to the Scannell and extended family on the death of Michael. Always a gentleman. May he rest in peace

Brendan & Bernie Daly, Bridge Road

Deepest sympathy to Scannell family on passing of Michael may he RIP

Julie & Sean Gleeson Ballygologue

My condolences to Fergus and all the Scannell family. May Michael Rest In Peace.

Edward Keane

Sincere condolences to

Mrs. Scannell, Fergus, Emma and all the extended Scannell family at this very sad time. May his gentle soul rest in peace.

Teresa and Paddy Larkin

Our deepest condolences to Joan, Fergus, Emma & the Scannell family on the sad passing of Michael. May he Rest in Peace.

Pat & Elaine O Carroll, Derra West Listowel

Sincere Sympathy to the Scannell family on the passing of Michael. May he rest in peace.

Lawrence and Kathleen Costello Kilflynn

Sending our condolences to the Scannell family. May he rest in peace, from the Brownes.

Annette Browne

Sincere sympathy to you on your recent loss Rip

Collette & Seamus Stack & Greenville Listowel

Our deepest condolences to Joan, Fergus, Emma and all Michael’s extended family, may he rest in peace

Joe& Pat Lyons Ballygologue Park Listowel

Sincere sympathy to the Scannell family on the passing of Michael, may he rest in peace

Denis and Margaret Curtin Clounmacon

Our sincere condolences to Emma Fergus and family on the passing of Michael .May Michael rest in his eternal peace xxxxx

Margaret and Eddie O Keeffe Bedford

Sincere condolences to the Scannell family on the sad passing of Michael May he Rest in Peace

Con McCarthy, William Street, Listowel

Deepest condolences to the Scannell family on the sad passing of Michael. May he rest in peace.

Tony Carey, Greenville, Listowel

==========================================================

========================================================

Michael (Mike) O’Connor, Ballyduhig, Six Crosse’s, Listowel and late of Keylod, Moyvane. Peacefully, on June 27th, 2021, surrounded by his loving family and staff of the Palliative Care Unit, University Hospital, Kerry. Sadly missed and lovingly remembered by his wife Irene, daughters Kayo, Fiona and Sandra, grandchildren Clíona, Katie, Seán, Aoife, Maebh, Nessa, Jill and Ruth, brother Tom, sister Mary, sons-in-law Tony, John and Brian, brother-in-law Timmy, sister-in-law Maria, nephews, niece, cousins.

——————————-

To Fiona, and family. Deepest sympathy for the loss of your Dad. RIP

Susan Geraghty, Celbridge

Sincere sympathy to you all on the death of Mike. May he rest in peace.

Pat, Josephine Francis and family

Deepest sympathy to kayo Tony the Galvin and O Connor family on the passing of your father

The O Connor family the square Dromcollogher

Our sincerest condolences to you Fiona and all the O’Connor family at this such sad time . May your beloved father rest happily in peace .

MacCurtain Family Celbridge

Sincere sympathy to Mary, Timmy and family on the sad passing of Mike. May he Rest in Peace.

Margaret Kissane & family, Glouria

Deepest sympathy to Irene and family, Tom & Marie and Mary & Tim on the sad passing of Michael. May Michael rest in peace.

Leo & Anne Finucane Moyvane

Sincere sympathy to Irene and the O Connor family on Mike’s passing. A true gentleman may he rest in peace

Mary, Tom and family

Mary Hartnett Castleisland

Sincere sympathy to the O’Connor families on the death of Mike. May he Rest in Peace

Jim and Maura Nolan Moyvane

Deepest sympathy on the sad loss of Mike. May he rest in peace

John & Anne Fitzmaurice Kilshinane

Deepest sympathy to Kayo, Tony, Cliona, Katie, Sean and Aoife. May he rest in peace.

Milford Camogie Club

Our deepest sympathies to Irene, Kayo, Fiona, Sandra, and your extended families on the death of a husband and father. Our condolences also to Tom and Marie, Mary and Timmie and families. Mike was a gentleman to the core. May he rest in eternal peace.

Liam & Mary Walsh, Tarbert

Sincere sympathy to the O’Connor family, and extended families, on the passing of Mike. May he Rest In Peace.

P J ,Rose Houlihan and family Ballyduff

Sincere sympathy to the O Connor families at this very sad time. A gentleman may he rest in peace

Jim Moore Keylod Moyvane and Castlebar

Deepest sympathy to kayo and family

Ned Kiely Carraward Dromcollogher

Sincere sympathy to the OConnor family

Ambrose & Eileen Sheridan

Deepest sympathy to Irene and family on the passing of Mike, may he rest in peace.

Billy & Lal Doran, Rathea

Sincere sympathy to Kayo, the Galvin and O Connor family on the sad loss of your dad Mike. Thinking of you all at this difficult time. May he rest in peace

Aileen, Cj, Dónal, Cathal, Gearóid Shine, Dromcollogher

Deepest sympathy to Kayo, the O Connor and Galvin family on the sad loss of your dad. May he rest in peace

Lisa and Tommy Gallagher, Milford

Sincere sympathy to Kayo, the Galvin and O Connor family on your fathers passing. May he rest in peace

Johnny Dillane Milford

Deepest sympathy to Kayo and the Galvin and O Connor family on the sad passing of Mike. Thinking of you all at this time. May he rest in peace

Mary and Mike Healy, Milford

Sincere sympathy to Kayo and the O Connor family on the passing of Mike. May he rest in peace.

Peggy, Pat and Agnes Lenihan, Croagh

So sorry to learn of the death of Mike. My sympathy to Irene, Kayo, Fiona and Sandra; to Mike’s sister, Mary (and Timmy), his brother, Tom; his sons-in-law; his dear grandchildren and the extended O’Connor Family. May he rest in peace

Maurice O Mahony, Ballydonoghue

So sorry to hear that Mike has lost his battle. One nice man gone too soon. Sincere sympathy to his immediate family, to Tom and Marie, Mary and Timmy and their families. Keep the memories alive. Rest in peace.

Timmy & Anna Maria Kennelly

Our deepest sympathy to the O Connor and Flavin families on the death of Mike rest in peace

Tom and Mary Moran Ballyduff

Sincere sympathy to the O’Connor and Flavin families on Mike’s passing. A gentleman. RIP

Josephine and Patsy Broderick, Gortdromagouna

Kayo, so sorry to hear of the passing of your dear Dad. May he rest in peace.

Peter Cosgrove, Ennis

Sincere condolences to Kayo and all the O’Connor family at this sad time. May Mike rest in peace.

Kevin Whittle

My thoughts and prayers are with Kayo and the O’Connor family at this sad time. RIP

Maureen O’Meara, FBD

Deepest sympathy to Irene and family on the passing of Mike

Joseph & Nellie Galvin

Sincere condolences to Sandra and family on your sad loss. May your Dad rest in peace.

Ann Murray, Ballina

Sincere sympathy to all the O Connor family and condolences to Mary & Timmy Flavin and family on the death of Mike RIP

Gerard & Liz Mulvihill and family Aughrim Moyvane

Sincere sympathy to all the family . RIP

Tom and Margaret Mason

Sincerest sympathy on the sad death of Mike, to Fiona, Irene, Kayo ,Sandra and Family. We were so sad for you Fiona, your Mom and Family when Sinead told us the news. May He Rest In Peace.

Tony and Maeve.

Tony and Maeve O’ Connor, Pollnarooma Salthill, Galway

Deepest sympathy to all the O Conner family on the passing of Michael

Marjorie Farrell (nee Lynch)

Marjorie Farrell ne Lynch

My deepest sympathy to you Irene & all the O’Connor family, to Mary & Timmy on the sad passing of Mike. May his soul rest in peace.

Mary Flaherty Kenny Heights

Deepest sympathy to all the O’Connor family on the sad passing of Mike. May his gentle soul rest in peace.

John & Mary Holly, Tarmons

Our sincere sympathy to Sandra and all the O’Connor family. May he rest in peace.

Deirdre & Hubert Brennan, Maree

Sincere Sympathy to Irene and family his brother Tom sister Mary and extended family on the sad passing of Mike May he Rest in Peace.

Pat and Joan Carmody

Deepest sympathies to all of the O’Connor family and condolences to Mary and Timmy on Mike’s passing. May he Rest In Peace.

Donna Ahern

Deepest sympathy to all the O’Connor family on the sad passing of Mike. May he rest in peace.

Norma Chapman O’Connor & Noel O’Connor, Abbeyfeale

Deepest sympathy to Irene, Kayo, Fiona, Sandra and families on the sad passing of Mike, R.I.P. who was a true gentleman. Also to Tom and Marie, and Mary and Timmy. Thinking of everyone in this sad time.

Pa & Teresa Flavin, Coolard

Deepest Sympathy to Irene and all the O’Connor families on the passing of Mike. May he rest in peace.

Mary & Tom Hanrahan, Moyvane

My sincere condolences to the O’Connor family on your sad loss

Cllr Michael Foley

Our deepest sympathy to Irene & all OCONNOR family on sad passing of Michael. Our thoughts with you @this time. May he Rest in peace

Sean & Julie Gleeson Ballygologue

So sorry to hear of the passing of Mike. Sincerest sympathy to Irene, Kayo, Fiona, Sandra and family. May he rest in peace.

Shane Somers

Sincerest sympathies on the passing of Michael . May he rest in peace.

Rory and Marian Flannery

Sincere condolences to the O Connor family and to Mary, Timmy and family.

Liam and Mary Foley

Deepest Sympathy Irene and Family on the sad passing of Mike may he rest in peace,

Pat Fidelma Trant

Sincere condolences to Irene, Kayo, Fiona, Sandra and all Mike’s extended family. Mike was such a lovely soft spoken gentle gentleman. May he rest in peace.

Aidan and Lorraine Murray Rindifin Gort

Sincere Sympathy to Irene, Kayo, Fiona Sandra and all the O’Connor Family on the sad passing of Mike. May his gentle soul rest in peace.

Tom & Mary Thornton Gortnaminch Listowel

Deepest sympathy to you Kayo also Irene ,Fiona ,Sandra and extended family on the death of your beloved Dad . May he rest in peace .

Dan and Noreen Kearney Asdee and FBD

Our deepest sympathy to Irene and all the O Connor families at this sad time may Mike rest in peace

John and Eleanor Cronin

Deepest sympathy to Irene and all the O’ Connor family, to Mary and Timmy and the Flavin family on the sad passing of Mike. May he rest in peace.

Pat & Angela Dowling Coolard

Sincere sympathy to the o Connor and Flavin families on the passing of Mike may he rest in peace

Des and Bridie o Sullivan Bedford Listowel

Sincere condolences to Irene and all the family on the sad passing of Mike. May he rest in peace

Aoife Thornton

Sincere Sympathy to Irene and family Tom and Marie Mary and Timmy on the sad passing of Mike May he Rest in Peace.

Batt and Margaret Flavin

Sincere sympathy to Irene, Tom, Mary & family on the passing of Mike. Ar dheis De go raibh a anam

Brendan & Mary Keane Bunagara Listowel

Sincere condolences to Irene and the family, on the passing of Mike. May he Rest in Peace.

Joe and Carmel Kelly & family, Killocriim

Deepest sympathy to the O’Connor family of the passing of Mike.

May he rest in peace.

Danny Lyons

Gale Cross.

Danny Lyons

Sincere sympathy to all The O’Connor family on the passing of Mike.

May Mike Rest In Peace.

Eddie & Teresa Langan

Our sincere condolences to Sandra Brian Jill Ruth your Mum Irene and all of the O’Connor family. We are very sad to hear of the passing of your lovely Dad Mike. Our thoughts and prayers are with you all at this sad time. May his gentle soul rest in peace x

Noreen & Paraic Hanniffy & family Maree

Sincere condolences to Irene and all the O Connor family on the passing of Mike. May the sod rest lightly upon him.

Bob Walsh

Bob Walsh

We are so sorry to hear of the loss of Mike Christopher. Thinking of you all… Irene, Kayo, Fiona, Sandra and all who loved him. May he rest in eternal peace.

Aoife O’Connor, Ennis

Sincere sympathy to Irene, Kayo, Fiona, Sandra, Mary and Timmy, Tom and Maria and the extended O Connor and Flavin families on the sad passing of Mike. May he rest in peace.

Mike & Dolores O Connor

Deepest sympathy to Irene and family, his brother Tom and sister Mary on the sad passing of Mike. Have some lovely memories of him. May he rest in peace.

Patsy and Mena O Connell

Deepest sympathy to Irene, Kayo, Fiona and Sandra and extended O Connor family, and to Mary and Timmy. May Mike’s gently soul rest in peace.

Katie & Brendán Purcell, Guhard , Lisselton

Deepest sympathy to Kayo and all the family on your sad loss. May Mike have eternal rest.

Hugh, Catherine, Aodán & Aisling Brennan, Dromcollogher

My Condolences to Fiona, John and and all the O’Connor family.

Cathal, Katharin and family.

Cathal O’Connor

Sincere Sympathy Irene Kayo Fiona Sandra Mary Tom extended Family on the sad passing of Mike.May he rest in peace.

Eileen Trant

Sincere Sympathy Irene Kayo Fiona Sandra Mary Tom extended Family on the sad passing of Mike. May he rest in peace.

Eileen Trant

My deepest sympathy to the all the o Connor family.. so sorry for your loss

Anne Egan Rathea

Our deepest sympathies to the O Connor family on the passing of Mike.

May he rest in peace.

Martin & Eileen Mc Carthy, Greenville, Listowel

Sincere sympathy to Irene, Fiona Sandra & Kayo at this sad time.

Dan & Siobhan Broderick

Sincere sympathy to the o Connor family on the sad passing of Mike may his gentle soul rest in peace RIP

Seamus and Mary Burns Listowel

Very saddened to hear of Mike’s passing. He was a lovely man. May he rest in peace. Thinking of all the family at this difficult time.

Helena & Darragh Musgrave, Duagh

Sincere sympathy to all the immediate and extended family on the sad passing of Mike. May he rest in peace.

Derry & Eileen O Carroll, Duagh

Sincere sympathy to Irene and family on Michaels passing. May he rest in peace.

Margaret Carmody and family Ballyduhig

Very sorry to hear of the passing of Mike. Sincere sympathies to all the family. May he rest in peace.

Marie O Connor and girls, Celbridge

Sincere Sympathy to all the O’Connor Family on the passing of Mike. .May He Rest in Peace..

Eileen & Jimmy Kelly Athea

Sincere sympathy to the O Connor family On Mike s passing a gent always May he rest in peace

Paddy Guiney

Sincere sympathy to all the O’Connor family and condolences to you Mary and Timmy on the death of Mike. May he rest in peace.

Hugh & Mary O’Donnell, Lisselton

Our deepest sympathy to Irene and all the family and extended families. May Mike rest in peace .

Jane Mike Behan and family Rathea Listowel

Sincerest sympathies to all the O’Connor family on the passing of Michael

May he rest in peace

Richard and Marguerite Lanigan & Family

Sincere sympathy to the O Connor family on your loss.

Andrew Mc Carthy

Sincere sympathy to all the o Connor family on Mike’s passing may he rest in peace

Patrick Fitzmaurice Kilshinane Listowel

Sincere sympathy to Irene & girls, Mary & Timmy, John Bolger & extended families. May Mike Rest in Peace.

James & Vourneen Kissane

Sincere sympathy to Irene kayo Fiona and Sandra on the sad passing of Mike a Gentleman may his gentle soul rest in peace

Paul and Margaret Cahill Kilshinane Listowel

Sincere sympathy to Irene, Kayo, Fiona, Sandra and the extended O Connor families on the sad passing of Mike may he rest in peace

Timmy & Betty O Sullivan Tanavalla Listowel

Sincere sympathy to Irene ,Kayo, Fiona and Sandra and the extended O Connor family on the sad passing of Mike. Always a gentleman.

May his gentle soul rest in peace.

Esther and Fintan Barrett, Greenville

Sincere sympathy to Irene and family, brother Tom, Marie and family, sister Mary, Timmy and family on the sad passing of Mike. May he rest in peace.

Brendan and Phil Gildea Tarbert

Sincere Sympathy to the O’Connor family on the sad passing of Mike RIP.

Shane Hanrahan Moyvane

Sympathy to Irene & Family on the death of Mike. You are in our thoughts and prayers. May his gentle soul rest in peace.

Tessie Holly Ned & Mary Holland

Dear Sandra and all your family. So sorry to hear about your father’s passing. May he rest in peace. Thinking of you. Una and Ed

Una Finn

Deepest Sympathy to Irene and all the family

Ann and Kiaran Rohan

Sincere sympathy to Irene and family on your great loss. May his soul R.I.P.

Con and Maureen Nolan Farnastack

Sincere sympathy to Irene Kayo Fiona & Sandra on the death of Mike also Mary, Timmy, Maria & Timmy,& Tom & Maria. Thinking of you all at this very sad time .May Mike’s gentle soul rest in peace .

Mike & Liz O’Sullivan Moyvane

Sincere Sympathy to Irene and family

Joan Buckley and Willie Bambury

Deepest sympathy to Irene Kayo Fiona & Sandra on the death of Mike also his sister Mary and brother Tom .May Mike’s gentle soul rest in peace.

Ella o Sullivan & family Coilbee

Sincere sympathy to the O’Connor family on the passing of MIKE rest in peace always a very helpful workmate while working in Kerry Group

Dave Fleming Currow

Deepest sympathy to Irene and family, Tom, Mary and extended families on the sad passing of Mike. May he rest in peace.

Liam and May Nolan Moyvane

So sorry to hear of mikes passing, may he rest in peace xxx

Margaret and Kevin Glouria

Condolence to all the O Connor family and extended family on the sad passing of Mike.

Eilish Walsh & Timmy Kelly

Sincere condolences to Tom Maria & all the O’Connor family on the sad passing of Mike, may he rest in peace. Our thoughts & prayers are with you at this sad time.

Liam & Mary Reilly, Co Waterford

Mary Reilly

Deepest sympathy to Kayo, Tony ,the extended Galvin and O’Connor families on Michael’s sad passing, May he rest in Peace

Tom and Mary Theresa O Callaghan Dromcollogher

Our deepest sympathy to you Kayo and Tony and to your Mum and sisters and extended family on the death of your Dad Mike.. May his gentle soul rest in heaven. RIP

Tom and Marian Noonan Granagh

Deepest sympathies to all the O Connor family on Mike’s passing. May his gentle soul Rest In Peace.

John & Mary Hennessy

Rathea

Listowel

John & Mary Hennessy

Sincere sympathy to Irene Kayo Tony Fiona Sandra & families on the passing of Mike.

May he Rest in Peace

Pat & Breda Keane Lyreacrompane

Sincere sympathy to Irene and the o Connor and Flavin family on the passing of mike May he Rest In peace

Pat and Ann Woulfe Kilmorna

Deepest Sympathy to The O Conner Family on the Passing of Mike. May he rest in Peace.

Danny Foley and Family

Deepest Sympathies to the O Connor Family and Mike’s extended Family. May Mike rest in Peace.

Tom and Martina Kennelly

Sincere sympathy to Kayo, Tony, Cliona, Katie, Sean, Aoife and O Connor family on your sad loss. RIP

Sheila Thompson

So sorry to hear about mikes passing , sincere sympathy to Irene, Kay, Fiona, Sandra and family

Tracey Moran, Lyreacrompane

Sincere sympathy to Irene and family, sister Mary Timmy and family, brother Tom Marie and family on the sad passing of Mike , May he rest in peace

Tom and Kay Fitzgerald ,Lisselton

Our sincere condolences to Irene and family, Tom, Maria and family and Mary, Timmy and family on Michael’s passing, a true gentleman. May your wonderful memories bring you all comfort at this very sad time and may He rest gently in peace.

Teresa and Mary Lynch, Glin Road, Moyvane

Sincere sympathy to Irene &kayo and the extended o Connor and Galvin family on mikes passing may he rest in peace

Michael Noreen Billy & Michael

Deepest sympathy to Mike’s Wife Irene his daughters & family, sister Mary Timmy & family, brother Tom Marie & family on the sad passing of Mike. May he rest in peace.

Brian & Ellen Mulvihill Derry Listowel

Deepest Sympathy to all the O’Connor family on the passing of Mike. Such a lovely man we knew him from the golf club a man you would love to meet so pleasant, and always had a good word to say. Mike is going to be missed by everyone who had to pleasure of knowing him. May his Gentle Soul Rest in Peace.

Donie & Helen O Shea Currow

Deepest sympathy to Kayo your Mam & Sisters on the passing of your Dad Thinking of you at this sad & difficult time May he Rest In Peace .Mike Marian Ahern

Ahern Family Knockfierna

Deepest sympathy to Irene and family and extended families on the passing of mike may he rest in peace

Tom holly Tarbert

Sincere condolences to Irene and family also Tom, Mary and extended family circle on your sad loss, A true gentleman. Rest in peace Mike.

Mossie and Josie Molyneaux

Sincere sympathy to the O’Connor family on the passing of Mike. May he Rest In Peace.

Mike & Helen Corridan Moyvane

Sincere sympathies to all the O’Connor family on the sad passing of Mike. Our thoughts and prayers are with you all at this difficult time. May he rest in peace

Ita and Tadgh Buckley Moyvane

Sincere sympathy to Irene and family Mary and Timmy and all the O’Connor family on the sad passing of Mike may he Rest in Peace.

Stephen & Pa O’Carroll Lisselton

Our deepest sympathy to all the O’Connor family on the sad passing of Mike. Our thoughts and prayers are with you all at this time. May he rest in peace

Bridget, Louise and Timmie Keane Moyvane

Deepest sympathy to Irene and family on the passing of Michael

Thomas and Nora Costello Ballyhorgan Lixnaw D

Sincere sympathy to all the O Connor family on the sad passing of Michael. May he rest in peace.

John & Kathleen Walsh Glenoe

Deepest sympathy to kayo and family on the sad passing of mike. May he rest in peace

Kevin and Elaine Giltinan

Sincere sympathy to the O’Connor family.

Ann & John McNamara Guhard

Condolences to the O’Connor families on the sad passing of Mike may he rest in peace

Mary & Mike Nolan Bunagarha Listowel

Sincere sympathy to Irene, Kayo, Fiona, Sandra and the extended O’Connor Family on the passing of Mike. Rest in peace

Michael & Cathryn Carmody

Deepest sympathy to Irene and family to Mary and Timmy and Tom and Marie his cousins relatives on the death of Mike may he rest in peace

Mary Moroney Halpin and Mossie Ballylongford and Greenville

We were saddened today to hear of Mike’s passing. May he rest in peace. Sincere sympathy to his wife Irene, his daughters, grandchildren and the extended O’Connor family on the loss of your beloved Mike. It was always a pleasure to be in his company on and off the golf course. Leaba I measc na Naomh go raibh aige.

Marian and Jim Crowley

Deepest sympathy to Irene and family and all the O’Connor family at this very sad time. May Mike’s soul rest in peace.

Kitty & Mike Kelly, Lisroe, Duagh

Deepest sympathy to all the O’Connor family. May Mike Rest in Peace.

Teddy and Olive Keane,

Sincere sympathy to Kayo and all of the Galvin and O’Connor family on the passing of your Dad Mike. May he rest in peace.

William & Niamh O’Leary Milford

Sincere sympathy to Kayo and the O’Connor family on the passing of your Dad. May he Rest In Peace.

Noelle Ryan FBD

Deepest Sympathy to the

O Connor Family on the Sad Passing of Mike May He Rest in Peace

Roger and Ann O Connor

Deepest sympathy to Irene & family on the passing of Mike, may he rest in peace

Tim loughnane

Deepest sympathy to Keyo and Tony and the O Connor family

Paul and Fiona Biggane

Sincere sympathy to Irene, kayo, Fiona, Sandra and their extended families on the sad passing of Mike.

Such a lovely man to chat with.

May his soul rest in peace.

Kay Galvin

Our sincere sympathy to Irene, Kayo, Fiona, Sandra and families; to Tom, Maria and Family; Mary, Timmy and Family and extended O Connor family on the sad passing of Mike. May his soul Rest In Peace

Der and Mary Mulvihill Keylod

Sincere sympathy to Kayo and family and extended O Connor family on the passing of yer dad Mike rip

Noel Breda Shane Fitzgibbon Milford

Deepest Sympathy to Kayo and the O’Connor family. May he rest in peace

Amanda Dunne FBD Tullamore

Our deepest sympathies to the O’Connor Family on the sad passing of Mike. May he rest in peace.

Listowel Coursing Club

So sorry to hear of the passing of Mike. I worked with Mike in Kerry, such a gentleman and great person. Rest in peace Mike.

Denise Costello

Deepest sympathy to Kayo, Tony and all the Galvin & O’ Connor families on the sad passing of Michael. May his soul Rest In Peace.

Michael Boyce, Milford

Deepest sympathy to Irene, Kayo, Fiona, Sandra and the extended family on the sad passing of Mike. May his gentle soul rest in peace

Teresa and Jack Browne and family

Sincere sympathy to the O Connor family on the death of Mike.

Jerry o Donoghue, Two Gneeves, Brosna

Sincere sympathy to Irene and family on the sad passing of Mike

May his gentle soul rest in peace .

Peggy & Jerry Brick Clieveragh

Deepest sympathy to Mary, Tom, Maria and all the O’Connor family on the death of your brother Mike. May he rest in peace.

James & Helen Kenny Greenville

Deepest sympathy to the O Connor family on the sad passing of Mike. May He Rest in Peace.

Dermie Moynihan Rathmore

Sincere Sympathy To Irene Kayo Fiona and Sandra Tom and Maria and Mary and Timmy and family on the passing of Mike May He rest in peace

Mary Brosnan Coilagurteen and Derry Listowel

Please accept my sincere condolences at this sad time at Mike’s passing to his wife Irene and family and his sister Mary and brother Tom

May he rest in peace amen

Paddy lane

Deepest sympathy to the family.

Dominic and Peggy Hilliard

Sincere sympathy to you all at this sad and difficult time. He was a true gentleman and it was always lovely to have a chat with him.

John and Bernie Daly Knockane Listowel

Deepest sympathies to kayo and all the Galvin family on the death of Mike o Connor. May he rest in peace.

Pat and Ita o Connell

Sincere condolences to Irene & family on the death of Mike. May he rest in peace.

Bridie & John Carroll Killocrim Listowel

Sorry for your loss

May Michael rest in peace

Thinking of ye

Peter & elaine Lyons

Deepest sympathy to the o Connor family on the passing of mike rip

Mary and lizzie lane Beenanasbig Kilmorna

Sincere condolences to Irene and the girls, to Tom and Mary and Mike’s beloved grandchildren and the extended O’Connor family.

May Mike Rest in Peace.

Catriona and Sean O’Neill, Bunagarha, Listowel

Deepest sympathies to Irene and all the O’Connor family at this time, may Michael Rest In Peace.

Liz Whyte

Liz & Christy O’Connor, Ballyduff

Condolences to Irene and all the family: RIP

Sean and Peggy Treacy

Deepest sympathy to Irene and family, also Mary, Tom and extended families on the sad passing of Mike. R I P Mike.

John and Martha Brosnan Bunagarha

Sympathy to Irene and the O Connor family, to our neighbours Mary, Timmy, Marie and Timothy thoughts with you all at this difficult time.

Mary so sorry to hear your loss.

Maria & Kieran xxx

Maria O Connor Glouria

Sincere sympathy to the

Connor family on the sad

passing of Mike , a gentleman

May he rest in peace .

Miichael Moloney

Sincere condolences to the O’Connor and Bolger families. May he rest peace.

Eamon & Nora Kissane, Lacca, Lisselton

Deepest sympathy to you Irene & family, sister Mary Timmy & family, brother Tom Marie & family on the sad passing of Mike. May he Rest in Peace.

Christy & Margaret Dillon Ballydonoghue

Our deepest sympathy to Irene, Tom, Mary and extended families on the sad passing of Mike. May he rest in peace.

Willie and Christine Stack Carrueragh, Kilmorna

Sincere sympathy to the O’Connor family, on the sad passing of Michael, May he rest in peace.

Pat Shanahan Aughrim

My sincere sympathy to the O’Connor family, May Mike rest in peace

Ted Ahern, Athea

Sincere sympathy to Mike’s family on his passing. It was always a pleasure to meet him

May he rest in peace

John & Mary Cremin Lisselton

Sincere sympathy to Kayo and the extended O Connor families on the passing of Mike. May he rest in peace.

Norma & Pat Carroll

Sincerest sympathy to Irene and all the family on the sad passing of Michael – a true gentleman. We had some wonderful days playing golf in Castleisland. Trust that you are all in our prayers and thoughts at this time of great loss.

Tony & Mairead Hanlon & Family

Sincere sympathy to Irene and family at this sad time. RIP Michael.

Mary and Sean Comerford

Deepest sympathy to Irene, girls and families and extended family on the sad death of Mike. May his gentle soul rest in peace.

Kennelly family , Rathea

Sincere sympathy to Mike’s family, to Tom and Maria, Mary and Timmie on the sad passing of Mike. May he rest in peace

Davy and Lily Morris, Coilbee

We extend our sincere sympathy to Irene, Kayo, Fiona & Sandra and to your families and to all the extended O’Connor families and relatives at this sad time on the passing of your beloved Mike. Suaimhneas síoraí ar a anam uasal.

Jackie, Josephine & Karen Walsh

Sincere sympathy to Irene and all the o Connor family at this very sad time

Willie Enright Ballygologue pk

Deepest sympathy to Irene & family brother Tom Marie & family sister Mary Timmy & family on the sad passing of Mike may he rest in peace

Tadie & Kathleen Flaherty Kilmorna

Condolences to Irene and Family and Tom and Mary on Mikes passing Rest in peace.

Listowel Branch Kerry Hospice

Sincere sympathy to Tom, Maria & family and the extended O’ Connor families on the death of Michael. May he rest in peace.

Brian & Marian Hilliard, Dungarvan

Our deepest sympathy to you Irene and the girls, your grandchildren and extended family on the very sad passing of Michael, we often had a chat after mass in Irremore, he was a lovely mild mannered man a real gentleman May his gentle soul rest in peace.

Bridie Finnerty and Family Pallas Listowel

Deepest sympathy to the O Connor family on the sad passing of Mike, May he Rest In Peace

William and Mary o Sullivan, Currow

Deepest sympathy to the O’Connor family on Mike’s passing. May he rest in peace.

Aidan & Fiona Linnane

Deepest sympathy to Tom, Maria & all the O’Connor family on your great loss. May Michael Rest In Peace.

Nóirín Quinlan Cahirdown

Our sincere sympathy to the O Connor family on the passing of Mike. May he rest in peace.

Finnerty family, Banemore

Deepest sympathy to Irene, daughters, brother Tom, sister Mary and extended family on the death of Mike.

William and Josephine Lyons

Sincere sympathy to the O’Connor family. Rest in peace Mike

Anne & Joe Doran

My deepest Sympathy to the O’Connor family on the death of Michael thinking of you all at this tine may he Rest in Peace

Margaret Lynch Croom

Sincere sympathy to Irene, and all the O’Connor family on Mike’s passing. May he rest in peace.

Pat and Breda Lyons, Gurtinard, Listowel

Sincere sympathy to all the O Connor family on the passing of Michael. May he rest in peace.

Norma and Willie Leahy, Carrueragh

Deepest sympathy to Irene and the O Connor family on your sad loss may Mike rest in peace.

Thomas and Helen Lynch

Sincere sympathy to all the O’ Connor family on the death of Mike. May he Rest In Peace

Denis Canty

Sincere sympathy to Irene and family also Mary and Tom and families on the loss of your beloved Mike

Maria & Timmy Kennelly

Sincere sympathy to Irene and family on the sad passing of Mike. May he rest in peace.

John and Breda Maguire Listowel

My sincere sympathies to Cliona, Irene and Kayo and to the extended Galvin and O’Connor families on the passing of Michael. He was an absolute gentleman. May he rest in peace.

Siobhán Sexton, Milford

Sincere condolences to Irene, Kayo, Sandra, Fiona and extended family on the death of Michael. May he Rest in Peace.

Michael, Kathleen & Claire Molyneaux, Woodford, Listowel

Sincere sympathy to the O Connor and Flavin on their sad loss, Rest in Peace Mike you were a gentleman.

Richard, Rosarie Lyons, Lisselton

Deepest sympathy to the O Connor family on Mike passing may he rest in peace

Kit Horan and family Moyvane

Sincere sympathy to the O’Connor family on the sad passing of Mike. May he rest in peace.

Paddy, Mairead & Patricia Lynch, Gortdromagouna, Moyvane

To Irene and family so sorry to hear of mikes death rest in peace mike

Mgt and pat Browne kilflynn

Our sincere sympathy to Irene. Tom. Mary and all extended family on the passing of Mike May his gentle soul Rest In Peace

John and Susie Foley Tarbert

Sincere sympathy to the O’connor family on the sad passing of Mike.

May he rest in Peace.

Mike Finucane Helen Dowd Urlee Lisselton

My sincere sympathy to the O’Connor family on the passing of Mike. May he Rest In Peace.

Con Lynch Gortdromagouna, Moyvane

Deepest sympathy

Marie Aherne Brassil

Deepest sympathies to Irene, Kayo, Fiona, Sandra and the extended family at this very sad time. Mike was a lovely man, always with a smile and a friendly chat. May he rest in peace. David, Mairead and family.

David Murray, Clarinbridge

Sincere sympathy to the O’Connor family on the passing of Michael.

May He Rest in Peace.

Dominic Scanlon

Sincere sympathy to all of you on the sad passing of Michael. Our thoughts and prayer are with you at this time.

Michael & Eileen Somers & Family

Sincere Sympathy to Irene and the O’Connor family on your sad loss may Mike rest in peace

Denis & Noreen OMahony

Our sincere sympathy to Irene Kayo Fiona and Sandra and all your families on the death of Mike -our thoughts and prayers are with you at this very sad time Rest in Peace Mike

Maurice and Angela Reidy

Sincere sympathy to the O’Connor family may his gentle soul rest in peace

Sean and Margaret Kelly

Sincere sympathies to Irene and family on the passing of Mike may he rest in peace

Mike & Mary Cox Ballyline Ballylongford

Sincere sympathy to Kayo and family on the sad passing of your dad. May he rest in peace.

Brendan and Anne Marie White

Sincere sympathy to Irene Mary Tom and all Mike’s family at this very sad time a lovely gentleman may Mike rest in peace

Joe & Agnes McCarthy Listowel

Sympathy to all the o Connor family on Mike’s passing. a nice gentleman always. rip mike

Eamonn Walsh lyreacrompane

Sincere sympathy to Irene, Kayo and extended O Connor and Galvin families on the death of Michael. May he rest in peace.

Gerard & Annette Sexton Milford

Sincere sympathy to the °Connor family on the death of Mike may he rest in peace

Seamus &Noreen Cronin Family Loobridge Clonkeen Killarney

Sincere sympathy to the O’Connor family on the death of Mike May he Rest in Peace

Mike and Mary Nolan Trieneraghh

Sincere sympathy to Kayo & all the family on the passing of your Dad Mike. May he rest in peace.

Johnny & Michelle O’Gorman Milford

Dear Irene, so sad to hear about the death of Michael. My deepest sympathy to you and the girls, also to Tom, Mary and their families. I have fond memories of Granny Kathleen who worked for us in William St for so many years and of my many visits to Moyvane. May Mike’s soul rest in peace. Ann

Ann Lavan nee Crowley 17,The Meadows, Listowel

Sincere sympathy to all the O Connor family on the sad passing of Mike. May he rest in peace. Eddie Fitzgerald. Kerry Agribusiness.

Eddie Fitzgerald

Deepest Sympathy to Irene & Family on the sad passing of Mike also to Mike’s Sister Mary & brother in law Timmy.

Our prayers are with you all at this sad time.

May his gentle soul rest in Peace.

Kathleen & Tommy Stack Dromerin

Sincere sympathy to Irene and all the family will miss him in Ballybunion. Rest in Peace.

Carmel and Sean Harnett

Condolences to Irene, Tom and Mary and all the extended O’Connor family on the passing of Mike. May he rest in peace.

Brian & May Griffin

Sincere sympathy to the O Connor family on the death of Mike RIP

Margaret Doyle Ballyouneen ss

Sincere Sympathy to Tom, Maria and all the O’Connor family on the death of Mike. May he rest in peace. Our thoughts and prayers are with you at this very sad time.

Listowel Bridge Club

Sincere sympathy to all the O Connors on the sad passing of Mike he was a gentleman always had time to chat thinking of you all at this very sad and lonely time

Margaret & Martin Kennedy Tullahinell Asdee

Deepest SYMPATHY to Irene and family Mary Timmy and family Tom Marie and family on the passing of Mike may he rest in peace

John Gould , Kilgarvan Ballylongford

Sincere condolences to the family may he rest in peace.

Patsy and Noreen Daughton and family Kilflynn

Please accept our sympathies on your sad loss. Had many a game of golf with Mike, great laughs & banter, happy memories indeed. May his gentle soul Rest In Peace.

Cyril & Mary Jo Quigley

He was a pleasure to meet and chat with in Castleisland golf club, very sad day for all fellow golfers who knew Mike . Our sincere condolences.

Liam and Carol Martin

Deepest Sympathises to Irene, Kayo, Fiona, Sandra and extended family on the sad passing of Mike. May his kind and gentle soul rest in peace.

Denis & Sue McElligott Tournageehy

Sincere sympathy to Irene and family also Mary and family on the sad passing of Mike R.I.P.

Tom & Breda Molyneaux

Sincere sympathy to Irene & family on the passing of Mike. Thinking of you all at this difficult time. May Mike’s gentle soul rest in peace.

Patricia O’Connor & Family, Finuge

My sincere condolences to Irene and family on the death of Mike. May he rest in peace

Kathleen MEEHAN Six Crosses

Sincere Sympathy to the O’ Connor family on the death of Mike may he rest in peace

Donie Reen Rathmore

Sincere Sympathy to Irene, Kayo, Fiona and Sandra also Tom and Mary and their extended families on the death of Mike. May he rest in peace. Our thoughts and prayers are with you at this very sad time.

Kathleen and Jerry Houlihan Tralee and Keylod

Sincere sympathy to Irene and family on the sad passing of Mike. May he rest in peace

Patsy Relihan Gneeveguilla

Deepest sympathy to Mary & extended O’Connor family on your sad loss.

Tommy Moriarty, Ballylongford

Sincere sympathy to all the O’Connor family on your sad loss. May Mike Rest in Peace.

Pat Scanlon Moyvane

My sympathy to O’Connor Family on passing of Mike. He was always a sociable person. May he rest in peace.

Tim O’Leary Listowel

Deepest sympathy to the O’Connor family on the passing of mike . Rest in peace mike .

John stack and family Ballyduhig Listowel

Condolences to the O’Connor Family on Mike’s passing, May he rest in peace. Our thoughts and prayers are with you at this difficult time

Mary O’Connor and Family Gurtinard

Irene Deepest Sympathy to you on the sudden passing of your wonderful husband, RIP ,also I like to extend my Sympathy to your daughters, Grandchildren, Son-in-laws and to Mike’s Sister Mary and his brother Tom. Our Prayers are with all of you right now. Mike R.I.P

Mike Nd Maria Curtin Toornageehy Listowel

The Lord bless you all & comfort your hearts at this time of sorrow. He was a lovely, kind man; that will be missed by many.

Condolences to all the O’Connor family.

Eileen Lyons & Tomasina Lyons

Our deepest sympathy to Irene, Kayo, Fiona, Sandra, Tom, Mary and all the extended family on the sad passing of Mike. A gentleman who always greeted you with a smile. May He Rest In Peace.

The Pellican Family

Sincere sympathy to Katie and all the Galvin & O’Connor family at this very sad time. May he rest in peace.

Sinéad Cotter & Kevin O Donnell Bealnamorrive

Sincere Sympathy to Irene & Family also his brother Tom, sister Mary & the extended O Connor families . May Mikes gentle soul rest in peace.

Johnny & Helen O Connor & family Dromclough

Sorry to hear of your Dad’s Passing Kayo, sympathy to all your family. May he rest in Peace

John, Martina Molyneaux Dromcollogher

Sincere sympathy to Kayo and the O’Connor family on the passing of your Dad. May Mike Rest In Peace.

Sarah Godley

Sincere Sympathies to Irene , Kayo , Fiona , Sandra & to Mary & Tom and all the extended family on the sad passing of Mike , May his gentle soul Rest In Peace .

Siobhan & Paul Walsh Rathea

Sincere sympathy to the O’Connor family, brother Tom & sister Mary on Mike’s passing – May he rest in peace.

Pat Flavin, Tralee

My deepest sympathies on the death of Mike. May he Rest In Peace. Thinking of you all at this hard time. Valerie (Quinlan)

Valerie Stack

So sad to hear of the death of Mike. Our deepest sympathies to Irene and all the family.

Nora Carey & Family, Greenville

Sincere sympathy to the O’Connor family on the death of Mike. May his gentle soul rest in peace.

John Fox, Tarbert

Sincere sympathy to Irene, Kayo, Fiona, Sandra and brother Tom and sister Mary ,brother in law Timmie sister in law Maria, on the death of Mike. May he rest in peace.

johnnie and Margaret Mc Elligott, Coolard

Sincere sympathy to Irene & family on the passing of Mike

Jim & Maura Kennelly Gortacloghane

Rest in peace mike. A gentleman.

Deepest sympathy to Irene girls and extended family at this sad time

Marian Sheehy Finuge

Dear Fiona, Irene, Sandra, Kayo and families, our deepest sympathies. It was so sad to hear of Mike’s passing. He was such a wonderful man, a true gentleman who always had time for everyone. May he rest in peace. Our thoughts and prayers are with you at all at this sad time.

Ann Marie, Tom, Ella and Odhran Gethings

Sincere sympathy to all the O’Connor family on their sad loss. We had many chats with Mike on the golf course .He was always good company. “What a lovely man. May his gentle soul rest in peace.

Pat and Bertha O Sullivan Castleisland

Sincere sympathy to Irene and family.

JJ Maureen Quilter Irremore

To the extended O’ Connor Family our sincere sympathy to you all at this very sad time. Mike was a lovely man and will be sadly missed by you all.

Pat & Bernie Hallahan Dublin

So sorry to hear your Dad passed Kayo sincere sympathy to all your family. May he Rest In Peace

Paddy & Mary o Friel

Our sincere condolences to Irene, Kayo, Fiona, Sandra and the extended family on the sad passing of Mike. May he rest in peace.

Conor & Martina Moore

Sincere sympathy to the O’Connor family may Mike rest in peace.

Tony stack Loughill

Sincere sympathy to Sandra, Brian, Jill and Ruth and all the O’Connor family on Mike’s passing.

May he rest in peace.

Tom and Laura, Oranmore

Our condolences to The O’Connor Family. RIP

Michael and Caroline Kennelly Ballyduhig

Deepest sympathy to the O Connor family on the passing of Mike

Declan & Ann Finucane Moyvane

My sincere sympathy to you Fiona, John , Sandra, Kayo and your Mam Irene and extended families on the passing of your dear dad, husband and granddad, May he rest in peace.

Deirdre Kissane

Ah, my sincere condolences to Irene ,Kayo ,Fiona and Sandra and also to Mike’s brother Tom and sister Mary and extended families. Ah Irene, your lovely husband and life companion and a great dad to the girls and granddad and a friend to many. Always loved meeting Mike and God my childhood memories are full of great memories with you all. Very sad and shocked to hear this news today. He will be much missed. I will always remember him with great fondness. May the light of Heaven shine on his soul . You are in my thoughts at such a sad time. Much love x

Judith Fitzgerald

Sincere sympathies to Cliona and all the Galvin and O’Connor families at this difficult time. May Michael rest in peace x

Becky Hand, Bruree

Sincere sympathy to the O Connor family on the passing of Mike. May he rest in peace.

Denis Keane, Slievecahill

Sincere sympathy to the O’Connor and Flavin families on the passing of Mike. May he Rest In Peace

Kathleen Nolan & Family Moybella Lisselton

Our Sincere Sympathy to Irene, Kayo, Fiona, Sandra his sister Mary brother Tom and all the extended families on the sad passing of Mike. May his gentle soul rest in peace.

Anne Whyte and Family Rathea

Sincere Sympathy to the o Connor and the Flavin families on the sad passing of Michael. May he rest in peace.

Ned Joe Kennelly, Kiltean, Lisselton

Sincere sympathy to Irene and all the O Connor family on the sad passing of Mike may Mike rest in peace

Denis & Eileen Flaherty Moyvane

Sincere sympathy to the O’Connor Family on the sad passing of Mike. It was a pleasure to meet him at the golf club always a true gentleman.

Jimmy O’Connell, Castleisland

Sincere sympathy to Irene and family, on he sad passing of Mike. May he rest in peace.

Tom & Teresa Canty

Deepest sympathy to all the Galvin and O Connor families on the sad passing of Mike. Always a joy to meet on his trips to Milford. May he rest in peace.

Jim Donegan Milford

Deepest sympathy to Irene, Kayo, Fiona, Sandra & your families, thoughts and prayers are with you at this sad time. A true gentleman may he rest in peace.

Padraig & Marian McAuliffe

Sincere condolences to Kayo and to all the O Connor family on Mike’s passing, May he rest in peace

Haulie Kerins, Tralee

Sincere sympathy to the O’Connor and extended family

Eileen Mulvihill, Gortnaminch and Glin

Sincere sympathy to the O’Connor family.

May Mike Rest in Peace

John Croghan Listowel

Sincere sympathy to the O, Connor family.

May Michael Rest in Peace.

Kathleen and Noel Doyle

Sincerest Condolences to Irene, Kayo, Fiona & Sandra also to his brother Tom & sister Mary on the death of Mike. also to his sister in law Maria and brother in law Timmy .May his gentle soul rest in peace.

Denis & Maureen O’Connor, Bunagarha, Listowel

Sincere sympathy to all the O’Connor family on the death of Michael. May he rest in peace.

Ned & Maureen O Hanlon, Tarbert

Sincere condolences to Irene and family also to Tom and Mary and the extended O’Connor, Flavin and O’ Connell families at this sad time.

May Mike Rest in Peace.

Ted & Margaret Murphy

Sincere sympathy to Irene, girls & extended O’Connor family on the passing of Mike.

May He Rest in Peace.

Brigid & Angela O Connor, Finuge

Deepest sympathy to Tom and all the O’Connor family on the sad passing of Mike. May he rest in peace.

James and Angela Sheehy, Moyvane

Deepest Sympathy to Mary & the extended O’ Connor Family on the passing of Mike. May he rest in peace.

Betty Rigney Roscrea

Deepest Sympathy to Mary, Timmy, Maria & Timothy and the extended O’ Connor family on the passing of Mike. Thinking of you all at this time.

James & Margaret Mulvey Roscrea

Sincere sympathy to Irene & family Tom Mary & families at this sad time. May Mike rest in peace

Tom & Brigid Moore Keylod Moyvane

Our sincere sympathy to Irene, Kayo, Fiona, Sandra and extended family on the sad passing of Mike. Our thoughts and prayers are with you . May he rest in peace

Michael & Josephine Whelan Lisahane

I am very sorry lo learn of Mike’s passing and offer my sincere sympathy to Irene, Kayo, Fiona, Sandra and all the O’Connor family circle on your sad loss. It was always a pleasure to meet Mike. May he find peace and rest in Eternal Life.

Willie Wixted, Ballinruddery, Listowel

Deepest sympathy to Irene and all the O Connor and extended families on the sad passing of Mike, a true gentleman. May he rest in peace.

Paddy and Eileen Halpin Ballygologue Park

My sincere sympathy to the O’Connor family on your loss.

Danny Healy Rae

Deepest sympathy to all the family.

John Looney

Our sincere sympathy to Irene and family on the death of Mike. May he rest in peace.

(Maureen Carmody Stack Kerry Group).

Gerard and Maureen Stack Gullane Asdee

Sincere sympathy to the O Connor and Flavin families on the sad passing of Mike. May he rest in peace.

Joan Lynch & family, Affoulia, Lisselton

Sincere sympathy to all the O Connor family, especially Tom & Maria on the untimely death of Mike, may he rest in peace.

Mary O Sullivan, Ballylongford

To Irene and all the family sincere condolences for your huge loss. Michael was a lovely man and will be greatly missed.

Donal Daly

Deepest sympathies to all the O’Connor family on my former classmate, Mike’s passing.

Mike and Marie Moriarty, Bunagarha, Listowel

Sincere sympathy to Kayo and extended O, Connor families on Michael passing Rest in peace.

Jimmy and Joan Brennan Milford

Deepest sympathy to Irene and the O’Connor family on the passing of Mike. May his gentle soul rest in peace.

Nancy O Connor formerly Lynch, Upr Dirreen Athea

Deepest sympathy to the O’ Connor family on the passing of Mike. May he rest in peace.

Maurice, Nora Curtin & family

Deepest Sympathy to the O’ Connor Family rest in peace.

Mary J O Connor Kilbaha Moyvane

Sincere Sympathy to the O’ Connor Family rest in peace.

Jim and Bridie Foley, Kilbaha Moyvane

Deepest sympathy to all the O’Connor family on the sad passing of Mike. May he rest in peace.

Mary Lynch Moyvane, Kerry

My sincere sympathy to Mike’s wife Irene his daughters his sister Mary and brother Tom and their extended families on his sad passing. A real gentleman may his gentle soul rest in Peace

Margaret Carmody Knockanure Moyvane

Deepest sympathy to Mike’s wife

Irene, children and gr children also to his brother Tom and Maria, his sister Mary and Timmy and Families…..God Rest his Soul

Eileen, Jeremiah Kennelly Knockanure

Deepest Sympathy to Tom, Mary, Marie and the O Connor family on Michael’s sad passing. May he rest in peace

Jerry & Ann Woods Knockanure

Sincere sympathy to Tom and the extended O Connor family on the sad passing of Michael. May he rest in peace.

Dermot and Joanne Clancy, Knockanure

We wish to express our deepest condolences to Irene on the passing of Mike, to his daughters , his brother Tom , sister Mary we offer our sympathy to you , may time ease your pain at this sad time in your lives , god rest his gentle soul ,

Jimmy & Eileen Jones, Moyvane

Sincere condolences to Irene, Kayo, Fiona, Sandra, Tom and Mary and the extended family on the passing of Mike RIP

Bernadette and Joe Enright Keylod

Sincere sympathy to the O’Connor family on the passing of Mike. May he rest in peace.

Bryan & Monica Quille

Sincere sympathy to Irene and family , Tom and Mary on the death of Mike.RIP.

Kathleen O Connell ,Cahirdown

Deepest sympathy to Kayo, Tony and family on the death of kayo father. May he rest in peace

Sean and Helen Giltinan

To Mrs. O Connor Kayo Fiona and Sandra and all the extended families our sincerest sympathies on the sad passing of Michael.. May he now Rest In Peace..

Donal and Marie O Callaghan Broadford

My sincere sympathy to the O’Connor family on the passing of Mike. May he rest in peace.

Noreen Healy, Moyvane

Sincerest sympathies to the family on the passing of Mike , a true gentleman , may his gentle soul Rest in Peace

Willie and Margaret Galvin

Sincere sympathy Irene, Kayo, Fiona, Sandra and extended family on the passing of Mike. A true gentleman. May he rest in peace.

James & Marie Keane Rathea

My deepest sympathies to Irene, Kayo and all the O Connor family on Mike’s passing.

May he rest in peace.

Paul Stack, Bunagarha

To Irene and all the O’Connor family I’m very sorry for your great loss at this sad time

Michael Healy Rae

Our sincere sympathy to the O Connor family on the sad passing of Mike. May he Rest in Peace.

Chas & Mary Curtin Coolaclarig & Moyvane

Sincere sympathy to Irene and all the family on the passing of Mike a great friend may he rest in peace

Margaret and Donie Sullivan Trien Kilmorna

Sincere sympathy to the O’Connor family on the passing of Mike. R.I.P.

Danny Faley, Listowel

My Sincere sympathies to Irene and family. Rest in peace Mike.

Lorraine Boyle

Sincere sympathy to the O’Connor family on the sad passing of Michael.

May he rest I peace.

Robert & Mary Stack Moyessa

Sincere sympathy to Irene and the girls to Tom and Mary and the extended families on the death of Mike . May he rest in peace.

Mary and Sean O Connell Rathea

Irene we are so sorry to hear of Mike’s passing RIP. Sincere sympathy to you and your daughters and grandchildren. Also condolences to his sister Mary and brother Tom and to their extended families. Mike was a true gentleman. May he rest in peace

Margaret and Joe Boland

Sincerest Condolences to all the Family on the sad passing of Mike RIP

Eileen Ashman

Deepest Sympathy to Irene and the extended O’Connor family on the passing of Mike.

May he rest in Peace

Paddy and Noreen Mulvihill, Listowel

To Irene and family sincere sympathies on Michael’s passing What a gentleman RIP Michael

John & Katsy McGuire

On behalf of all at Dromclough NS, I wish to extend our deepest sympathy to Irene, Kayo, Fiona, Sandra & your families, to Tom & Maria and to Mary & Timmy on the death of your beloved Mike – a devoted family-man, an absolute gentleman and a loyal supporter of this school. I was very pleased to meet him in town some months ago. We had a good chat. Our thoughts and prayers are with the family at this sad time – especially when we cannot sympathise with you all in person. May Mike rest in peace.

Mary O Connor, Principal, Dromclough NS, Listowel

My sincere condolences to you Irene to Mary and Tom all your family and extended family on the death of your husband Mike ..May he rest in peace.

Margaret Healy Payne

We wish to express our sympathy to you Irene and family on the death of mike also to his brother Tom and family sister Mary and family Had a great personality .May his good deeds go with him and may his gentle soul rest in peace

Billy and Joan Moloney Moyvane

Deepest sympathy to Mikes wife and family. also to Mary, Tom and the extended family. May he Rest In Peace.

Mike and Betty Guerin Ballyduff

Sincere condolences to all the family at this sad time. Rest in Peace.

Olivia Hilliard

Sincere condolences to the O Connor family at this sad time. It was always a pleasure to be in his company on or off the Golf Course, a true gentleman. Rest in Peace Mike.

Dan Neligan, Knocknagoshel

Sincere condolences to all the O’Connor families. Mike was a lovely gentle man, I will miss his visits to the salon, May he Rest In Peace

Martin and Mairead Sheehy Lisselton

Ar dheis De go raibh a h-anam dilis

Liam Galvin NCW

Sincerest sympathy to the O’Connor families on the passing of Michael. May he rest in peace.

Mike and Anne Donegan Ashfield

Sincere condolences to Irene, Kayo, Fiona, Sandra and all the extended family on the sad passing of Mike. Our thoughts and prayers are with you at this difficult time. May he rest in peace.

Eamon and Maura Whelan

Deepest sympathy to Irene and family on the death of Mike, may he rest in peace.

Marjorie Daughton and family

Deepest sympathy to Irene and girls and the extended O’Connor family on the sad passing of Michael.. May he rest in peace.

Rose McElligott, Ballinagare, Lixnaw

Sincere sympathy to Mike’s family and the extended O’Connor families at this sad and difficult time. Ar dheis Dé go raibh a anam.

Teddy Madden, Mary & William

Sincere sympathy to Kayo and all the O’Connor family on the sad passing of Michael. May he rest in peace.

Mairead & Aiden Guirey

Deepest sympathies to Irene and family on the sad passing of Mike, a true gentleman. May he rest in peace

Paddy Lynch

Sincere sympathy to Irene and the girls. Also to Mike’s brother Tom ,sister Mary and extended families. May Mike rest in peace.

Joan Meehan Listowel

Sincere sympathy to the O’Connor & Flavin families on the death of Mike. May his gentle soul Rest In Peace.

Robert & Eileen Bunyan, Ballydonoghue

Deepest Sympathy to Irene and all the O Connor family on the passing of Mike. A true gentleman may he rest in peace.

Josephine Cronin & Johnny Ryan

Condolences to all the family on the passing of Mike may he Rest in Peace

Tony Rosie Jack Cody and Ben Collins Lacca Duagh

Deepest sympathy to Irene, Kay, Fiona and Sandra on the passing of Mike. A good friend and a good neighbor . May he Rest In Peace. John, Mary Moran and family

John Moran

Sincere sympathy to the O Connor family on the passing of Mike may he rest in peace

Tom Joy and families Mountcoal

Sincere sympathy to Irene and family on the sad passing of Mike. May his gentle soul rest in peace.

Brendan & Maureen O Keeffe, Ballyconry Lisselton

My deepest sympathy to the O’Connor family and extended family.

Thoughts and prayers are with you at this sad time.

May he rest in peace.

Declan, Siobháin & Dylan Galvin Mountcoal

Deepest sympathy to Kayo Tony all the Galvin and O Connor families on the sad passing of

Michael May he Rest in Peace

Ina & Patricia O Callaghan Milford

Since sympathy to Irene, kayo, Fiona and Sandra on the passing of Mike, a gentleman taken far too soon, rest in peace Mike

The Kelly family Behins

Sincere sympathy to the O Connor family on the sad passing of Michael. May he rest in peace

Nelius and Margaret Clancy Knockanure

My sympathy to the O Connor family on the death of Mike.

JEREMIAH O CARROLL Six Crosses

Sincere sympathy to Irene, Kayo, Fiona, Sandra and Grandchildren on the sad passing of Mike.

Sympathies also to Mary and Timmy, Tom and Marie and the extended O’Connor family.

Mike and I spent many years as colleagues driving with Kerry Co-Op.

Rest in Peace in Mike.

Gabe and Noma O Connor, Asdee

Sincere sympathy to the O Connor family on Mike’s passing. May he rest in peace.

Tony Keane Coolnaleen

Sincere condolences to the extended O’Connor and Flavin families on Mike’s sad passing. RIP.

Noelle Hegarty

Sincere sympathy to all of Mike’s family on his sad passing. A true gentleman. May he rest in peace

Brendan, Bernie Daly and family

Sincere condolences to Irene & family, also Tom & Mary on the passing of Mike. May his gentle soul rest in peace.

Matt & Mary Kennelly Ballygrennan Listowel

Sincere sympathy to Irene and family and to Mary and Tom on the passing of Mike. May he rest in peace.

Jim and Maria Cronin, Bealkilla, Lixnaw

Sincere sympathy to Irene & family also extended O’Connor family. May Michael rest in peace.

Gerard & Mary Buckley Tarbert

sincere sympathy to all the o Connor family rest in peace mike

Tom and Carmel Mcmahon Toor Duagh

Our deepest sympathy to Irene and family, Tom, Marie and family, Mary, Timmy and family on the sad passing of Mike. Our thoughts and prayers are with you all. May he rest in peace.

Gerard & Mary Buckley Knockanure

Rest in peace Mike,, my sympathy to all the family regards Denise Joy

Denise Joy ,Listowel,

Sincere sympathy to ye all on the sad passing of Mike. Rest in Peace.

Mike and Anne O’Connor, Lisselton

Sincere condolences to all the family. May he Rest in Peace

Doreen & Mike Buckley Duagh

Deepest sympathy to the o Connor on the passing of Mike may his gentle soul rest in peace

Mary Ann Mcelligott Duagh

Deepest condolest to Irene Kayo Fiona & Sandra& The O Conor family on the passing of Michael a good friend &good neighbour May he rest on peace, ie

John & Mary Moran & Family

Deepest sympathy to Irene and family, Tom & Maria and family, Mary & Timmy & Family. Thinking of ye at this sad time. May Mike rest in peace.

Denis & Majella Mc Carthy, Kilbaha, Moyvane

We were saddened to hear of the death of Mike, my former colleague in Kerry Agribusiness. Sincere sympathy to you Irene, to your daughters, to Tom, Mary and all the O Connor family. Suaimhneas síoraí dá anam uasal.

Gerard and Julienne Donegan, Moyvane

I am very sorry to hear of the sad passing of Mike. Sincere sympathy to Irene, Kayo, Fiona, Sandra and families. A lovely neighbour and gentleman always. May Mike rest in peace

Lelia Blake, Blarney

Sincere condolences from the Seniors at Maine Valley Golf Club, Killorglin to the O’Connor family on the passing of Mike, a true gentleman. May he rest in peace

Pat Lynch Killorglin

Sincere condolences at this very sad time. may he rest in peace.

Liam Speedy Nolan MOYVANE

Irene, Kayo ,Fiona, Sandra you are foremost in our thoughts and prayers at this time. We were so sorry to hear about Mike’s death. We extend our deepest Sympathies to all of the Family

Pauchie and Martina

Our sincere condolences to you Irene ,Kayo ,Fiona and Sandra also to Mike’s brother Tom and sister Mary and extended families. . May the light of Heaven shine on his soul .

Oliver and Ena Kearney Asdee

Sincere sympathies to the O’Connor and Flavin family on the passing of Michael

May he Rest In Peace

Paul Fiona and the Rigney family Roscrea

Paul Rigney Roscrea

Dearest Fiona, Irene, Kayo and Sandra, our heartfelt condolences on the loss of Mike, a father, husband, grandfather. He was a true gentleman and always had a smile. May he rest in peace. Our thoughts and prayers are with you all.

Pat, Edel, Robbie and Cian Bolger.

Pat, Edel, Robbie and Cian Bolger

Deepest sympathy to the O’Connor family. May he rest in peace.

Michael, Briana Keane and family Greenville Listowel

sincere sympathy to the O’Connor Family on the passing of mike. May he rest in peace.

Maurice & Margaret Dowling Lyrecrompane

Sincere sympathy to Irene and family on the passing of Michael, may he rest in peace. Our thoughts and prayers are with you all at this difficult time.

Mairead & Tony Hanlon, Asdee Village

Sincere sympathy to Kayo and all the O Connor and Galvin family on the sad passing of Michael, may he rest in peace

Michael and Mairead Murphy, Newcastlewest

Sincere sympathies to the O Connor family, What a lovely man and great fun to play golf with. May he Rest in Peace

Paul Geaney Castleisland

Heartfelt sympathy to Irene, Kayo, Fiona and Sandra and extended families, on the passing of your beloved husband and Dad, Mike, also to his sister Mary and family, and brother Tom and family. Thinking and praying for you all. May Mike rest in peace.

James and Kathleen O’Connor Lixnaw

Sincere Sympathy to the O Connor family on Mike’s sad passing. May he rest in peace.

Toddy & Mary Carey

Our sincere sympathy to Irene, Kayo, Fiona, Sandra and all your families on the very sad passing of Mike. May his gentle soul Rest In Peace.

Tony & Tess Carroll, Irremore, Listowel

Condolence to the O’Connor. family on the passing of mike. rest in peace mike

Tim j Sheehan Moyvane

Deepest sympathies to Irene, Kayo, Fiona and Sandra and extended families on the passing of Mike. May he rest in peace .

Ger and Bernie Loughnane, Coolard

Deepest sympathies to the O Connor family on the passing of Mike, I had the pleasure of playing many games of golf in Castleisland with Mike and what a gentleman. Rip.

John O Connell Cordal

Condolences to Irene and family on the passing of Michael may he rest in peace

Patsy Sweeney Golf

Deepest Sympathy to the O’Connor family. May Mike Rest In Peace.

D J & Marie Mulvihill Cahirdown Listowel

Heartfelt condolences to Irene, girls and the extended O Connor family.

Suaimhneas siorai da anam dilis.

Rest In Peace Mike.

Eric & Mary o Neill

Our deepest sympathy to Irene & Family; Tom, Maria & Family; Mary, Timmy & Family on the sad passing of Mike. Our thoughts and prayers are with you all. May he rest in peace.

Pat & Mary Leahy, Clounbrane, Moyvane

Deepest sympathy to the o Connor family , may Mike rest in peace

Mike Moore Kilmorna

Sincere sympathy to the O Connor Family on the sad passing of Mike. May he rest in peace

Patrick & Breda Lyons, Lisselton

Irene, we are so sorry to hear of Mike’s passing. Our thoughts and prayers are with you and your family at this sad time. May Mike rest in peace. Nuala and Maurice O’Carroll, Asdee.

Maurice and Nuala O’Carroll

Deepest condolences to Irene and all the O’ Connor family on Mike’s sad passing. May his gentle soul rest in peace

Marian & Pierce Walsh Grenville

Sincere Sympathy to all the Family

Pat Doody Tralee

Sincere condolences to all the O’ Connor family on the passing of Michael .May he Rest In Peace

John Molyneaux Newcastle West

Rest in peace to a true gentleman, Mike I hope you are having a great catch up with my dad, thinking of all your family at this very sad time xx

Kay Halpin and family Ballygologue Park

Our sincere sympathy to you all at this sad time. May Mike’s gentle soul rest in peace.

Stevie and Bernie Donegan Lisselton

Sincere Sympathy to Irene & the O’Connor family at this sad time. May Mike gentle soul rest in peace.

Jer & Joan Moriarty Cahirdown Listowel

Sincere sympathy to all the O’Connor families on the passing of Michael.

May He Rest in Peace.

Tim & Siobhan Nolan, Greenville Listowel

Deepest sympathies to Kayo and all the O’Connor & Galvin families on the passing of Michael.

He was in the best hands.

May he rest in peace.

Tomás & Bronagh, Owenahincha

To Irene, Sandra, Kayo, Fiona and all the family. So very sorry to hear the sad news of Michael’s passing. We loved meeting up and having great chats at all the family occasions. I know your hearts are broken, he was a true gentleman. May his gentle soul rest in peace. Fiona and Jerry. X

Fiona Murray

Sympathy to Irene and family RIP Mike

Jerry and Maureen Flavin

Sincere sympathy to Kayo ,Tony and the Galvin and O Connor families on the sad passing of Michael. Ar dheis De go raibh a anam

Michael ,Ellen Ann Geary

Deepest sympathy to the o Connor on the passing of Mike may his gentle soul rest in peace

Phil Sheehy and family

Sincere sympathy to you all at this time. May he rest in peace

John and Margaret Flavin Knockbrack Abbeyfeale

Sincere sympathy to Irene and family to Tom Mary and their family may God rest dear Mike

Con and Margaret O’Regan Bedford

Our deepest sympathy to Irene, Kayo, Tony Cliona, Katie, Aoifa ,Sean & the extended O’Connor Families on the sad passing of Michael. May he Rest In Peace. A great supporter of the Milford Camogie Teams.

Tony, Ann, Maria, Emer, Aine & Anthony Watson

Irene, Kayo ,Fiona, Sandra and all your families I am so saddened to see that your beloved husband and dad and granddad has passed away . My sincere condolences to you all .It was always lovely to bump in to ye Irene in Ballybunion and Kate Browne’s .. Such a lovely couple .. Hope all the memories will be of great comfort to you Irene and the fun with the grandkids and your girls will give you many more years to live on and enjoy .. Thinking of you … Phil O Dowd, Knopogue, Ballyduff.

Phil O Dowd

Deepest sympathy to Irene , and the girls and extended Family on the sad passing of Mike . May he rest in peace.

Madeleine Brendan Allman

Sincere sympathy to Irene and the O Connor family on the death of Mike May he Rest in Peace

Helen and Gerry Enright Glenoe

Sincere sympathy to the O’Connor family on the loss of Mike Rip

Betty & Collette & Seamus Stack Greenville

Sincere sympathy to Irene Kayo Fiona and Sandra & families on the death of Mike. A lovely neighbour and a gentleman. May he rest in peace.

Peggie & Thomas O ‘ Connell Irremore

Deepest sympathy to the O’Connor family on your sad loss.

Maurice & Dolores O Connor

Our sincere sympathy to Irene, Kayo, Fiona, Sandra and families on the passing of Michael. May he rest in peace.

Solas na bhFlaitheas ar a anam uasal.

Leaba i measc na Naomh go raibh aige.

Donal and Betty Murphy, Milford

Sincere sympathy to Irene, Kayo, Fiona, and Sandra, to Tom, Mary and extended O’Connor families on the passing of Mike. May he rest in peace.

Margaret Leahy O’Connor Abbeyfeale

Our sincere sympathy to Irene and his brother Tom and all the family. Mike was a lovely man.May he rest in peace.

Frank and Eileen Greaney Woodford

Deepest sympathy to Irene & extended O’Connor Family on the passing of Mike,

A true gentleman,

may his gentle soul rest in peace.

Con & Noreen o Keeffe, Lixnaw

Sincere sympathy to Irene and family his sister Mary and brother Tom on the passing of Mike. I was shocked when I heard the sad news a true gentleman. May his gentle soul rest in peace

Kathleen McCarthy Coolnaleen Listowel

Sincere sympathy to Irene, Kayo, Fiona and Sandra to Tom, Mary and all the O’Connor family on the sad passing of

Mike may he rest in peace

Mike O’Connor Hospital and Keylod

My Sincere Sympathies to all the O’ Connor family on the passing of Mike .May he rest In peace

Paddy Larkin, listowel

Sincere condolences to Irene , Kayo , Sandra ,Fiona and the extended family on the sad passing of Mike.

Anita and Kieran Fitzgerald Kilkenny and Billeragh

Sincere sympathy to Irene and family on the sad passing of Mike R.I.P. always a real gent and a great friend in our youth

Mike and Peig O’Connor Hospital

My most Sincere Sympathy To Irene, Kayo, Fiona Sandra, and Michael’s brother Tom and Sister Mary and to the extended O’Connor Family. May he Rest in Peace.

Francis O’Connor Tralee and Keylod Moyvane

Sincerest condolences Irene and family on the death of Michael. May he rest in peace. A lovely man always.

Kieran Marcella and Darragh Mulvihill Killsinon Listowel

Mike O’Connor Keylod and Listowel

========================================

======================================

=================================

Seán Casey, London and formerly of Knocknasna, Abbeyfeale, Co. Limerick who passed away peacefully in The Homerton University Hospital London on June 21st 2021., sadly missed by his brothers Dan (Abbeyfeale), Pat (Ardagh), sister Sheila (London), brothers-in-law, sisters-in-law, nieces Corina, Laura, Karen, Julie, Melanie and Vanessa, nephews Kevin, Mark, Thomas, Kieran, Brendan, Conor, Daniel and John, grandnieces, grandnephews, friends and neighbours at home and in London, especially his friends of 34 years, Barry and Pauline Jones.

https://rip.ie/death-notice/se%C3%A1n-casey-abbeyfeale-limerick/462322

=======================================================

Sr. Anne Daye, Presentation Convent Castleisland, Co. Kerry and formerly of Lispole, Dingle, Co. Kerry .Peacefully, on July 9th 2021, in the wonderful care of the staff at Willow Brooke Care Centre Castleisland. Deeply regretted and lovingly remembered by her Presentation Community, her beloved brother Patrick (Marlton Road, Wicklow Town), sister-in-law Anne, nephews Conan, Senan and Cillian, all extended family, relatives and a wide circle of friends.

————————–

Tributes

Sincerest sympathy to Patrick, Anne, Conan, Senan. Killian, and the Presentation Sisters on the death of Anne.

Nothing but the fondest memories of a very special person.

May she rest in peace.

Michael and Anne Prendeville

Sincere sympathy to the Presentation Sisters and the Daye family at this very sad time. May Sr.Anne rest in peace.

Norma Foley

Deepest Sympathy in the passing of Anne rip

Eileen & Mary Galvin, Lispole

Deepest sympathy to Patrick and family and The Presentation Sisters on Sr. Anne’s passing. Anne was dedicated and enthusiastic in her teaching. As a colleague I enjoyed her wonderful sense of humour. May God embrace her with all of his being.

Eileen and Jimmy Kearney

Sincere sympathy to Patrick and family and the Presentation Sisters on the passing of Sr Anne She was a regular visitor to Island View with her good friend Sr Mary Anne we had some great chats over the years. Leaba imeasc na Naoimh go raibh ag Anne. Suaimhneas.siorrai da h-anam dilis.

Jackie Sugrue Island View Ballinskelligs

Sincere sympathy to Patrick and the Daye family and to the Presentation sisters on the passing of Sr Anne. She was a lovely work colleague who always had a ready smile and lively sense of humour. May her gentle soul rest in peace.

Breeda and William O Connor

Sincere sympathy to the Presentation Sisters and to the Daye family. It was an honour to have known such a lovely person. Many fond memories to cherish.

May Sr. Anne rest in peace.

Elizabeth Carmody

Deepest Condolences. Sr. Anne will always be remembered for her sincerity and kindness.⚘⚘⚘

The Murray Family in Farranfore

Anne was beloved of her family and community. May her authentic, gentle soul rest in peace.

Agnes and William Keane, Currow

Deepest sympathy to presentation sisters Castleisland and Sr Anne’s brother and family may she rest in peace

Sean John and Marie O’Brien New Road Killarney

Sincere sympathy to the Presentation order and the Daye family

Donie and Gertie Sugrue Cloughjordan

Sincere sympathy to the Presentation Sisters and the Daye family on Sr. Anne’s death. May she rest in peace.

Sheila Horan Caherslee

We wish to send sincere sympathy to Sr. Anne’s brother Patrick and to the Presentation Community in Castleisland on the death of dear Sister Anne, R.I.P.

Anne was a vivacious member of the Congregation, dedicated to Community and to the work of the Lord…always a gracious lady who carried a significant health- challenge for many years and still retained her smile!

May flights of Angels escort her to eternal rest. Sincerely. Sr. Placida

Presentation Sisters Youghal

Deepest sympathy to Sr Anne’s family and Presentation sisters may she rest in peace.

Brian Walsh Cordal

Sincere sympathy on the death of Sr. Anne – a lovely person to know.

Joan Mulvihill Presentation Primary Listowel

Deepest sympathy and prayers to the Daye family on the death of Sr Anne May she rest in peace Fr Dan O Connor and staff Dublin Diocesan Education Secretariat

Fr Dan O Connor

Deepest sympathy to the presentation sister’s Castleisland on the death of Sr Anne. May her gentle sole rest in peace.

Mary and Martin Conway Cahereen Heights Castleisland

Sincere sympathy to Sr Anne’s relatives and community. May her gentle soul rest in peace.

Maureen McCarthy, Cliddaun

Sincere Sympathy to Patrick and family on the sad passing of Ann

Fond memories of school days in Lispole

May her gentle soul Rest in Peace

Teresa Griffin Goulin & Killarney

Sincere sympathy to the Daye family and the Presentation Sisters on the death of Sr Anne. She will be missed by all whose lives she touched. May she rest in peace.

Stephen and Joan Cashman

Sincere sympathy to all the family , Happy memories of Sr Anne in Lispole & Dingle schools, RIP Anne

Kathleen & P J O Connor Annascaul

Deepest sympathy to Sr Anne’s family and Presentation sisters on the death of Sr Anne .May her soul rest in eternal peace.

Mairead and Paddy Flynn and family

Sincere sympathy to Pat, Anne, Conan, Senan, Cillian and the Presentation Sisters on the sad passing of Sr. Anne. May she Rest In Peace.

Tom & Maureen Byrne, Wicklow

May Anne now rest in peace after a life well-lived. Her gentleness and her sense of humour will always be remembered by those who knew her. My sympathy to Anne’s Community in Castleisland, to her brother Patrick and family as well as to her many friends.

Sr Maureen O’ Connell, Tralee

To pat Anne and the presentation sisters of the late sr Anne Daye I’m very sorry for your great loss at this sad time

Michael Healy Rae

Deepest sympathies to Patrick and all the Daye family and also the Presentation Sisters on the death of Anne. Fond memories of her calling to the Bridge on her regular visits home. Suaimhneas síoraí dá hanam dílis.

Colm & Claire Murphy Tubber Lispole

Deepest sympathy to the Daye family on Sr Anne passing RIP

Eamonn Galvin Lispole and Dublin

Deepest sympathy to the Daye family & the Presentation Sisters on the sad loss of Sr Anne. May she rest in peace.

Sinead & Nora O Keeffe Doon Kiskeam Co Cork

Sincere Sympathy to the Presentation sisters and Anns family we knew her when we visited Sr Virgilius at the convent she was such a lovely person May She rest in peace.

Batt and Margaret Flavin

Deepest sympathy to pat , Anne and all the presentation sister’s in Castleisland . May Sr Anne rest in peace

Sheila Costello Castleisland

Dear Sisters in Castleisland we are deeply sorry to hear of Anne’s death. Our deepest sympathy to you and all the Presentation Sisters.

Sincere sympathy to Patrick ànd all the Daye family.

Anne was such a lovely funny lady and I have many happy memories of my time in Oak park with her.

May Anne now rest in God’s peace.

John and Eileen Mc Kennedy

Deepest sympathy and sincere condolences to the Daye Family and the Presentation Sisters on the sad passing of Sr. Anne. May she rest in peace.

Pádraig Kelliher, Presentation Sec School

Deepest sympathy to the Presentation Sister’s on your loss. Rip.

Bill and Annamaria Prendiville Ballymacelligott

Deepest sympathy to the family on the death of Sr. Anne.

She was a lovely person with a great faith which she lived out in her deeds and actions.

Gerry Curran, Dingle

On the passing of Sister Anne, we extend sincere sympathy to Paddy, Anne and all members of the Daye family, immediate and extended. Ar Dheis Dé go raibh sí.

Leo and Eileen Finnegan, Williamstown, Co Galway

Our sympathies on the passing of Sister Anne.

It was always lovely to have her visit..

Brian & Mary Keane & Family , Deerpark, Lispole

My deepest sympathies to Sr Anne’s family & to her sister’s in the Presentation Convent. Her wit, charm, innate decency and Christianity is a great loss to all. May She Now Enjoy Her Eternal Heavenly Reward.

Michael Kennelly

Sincere sympathy to Patrick and the Daye Family and to the Presentation Sisters on the passing of Sr Anne .She was a wonderful work colleague full of fun and mischief , and a loyal and trusted friend -one in a million .May she rest in peace.

Francis &Mary Frances O’Shea

Deepest condolences to the Presentation Sisters and the Daye family on the sad passing of Sr. Anne. May her soul rest in peace.

The Holy Trinity Prayer Group

Sincere sympathy to the Presentation Sisters and to Sr. Anne’s family on her sad passing. May her gentle soul rest in peace.

Tom and Kathleen McAuliffe

Sincere sympathy to Pat, The Daye family and Presentation Sisters on the passing of Sr. Anne RIP

Bernard and Helen Cronin Milltown Castlemaine

Sincere sympathy to Presentation Sisters Castleisland and to the Daye Family on the death of Sr Ann.

May she rest in peace

Bernadette O Riordan Boherbue Co Cork

Sincere sympathy to the family of Sr Anne and presentation Sisters, Anne always had a warm welcome when I worked in the convent.

Norma O Connor Flynn

Sincere sympathy to the Castleisland Sisters and the Daye family on Anne’s death.

Solas na bhfaitheas go bhfeice sí

Glórtha na naingeal go gcloise sí.

Ar dheis Dé go raibh a h-anam dílis.

Sr Marie Wall

Sincere sympathies to Anne’s brother Pat and sister in law Anne and to all her friends, the Sisters from the Presentation.

Such a sweet, wonderful lady, may she rest in peace.

Imelda Burke, Willow Brooke

Deepest to the Presentation Sisters and the Daye family. May Sr Anne rest in peace.

Babs and Donal Kelliher

Sincere sympathy to Pat and family and Presentation sisters on the passing of Sr Anne. May she rest in peace.

Elizabeth Farrell Devane Ballinaboula

Sincere sympathy to Patrick, Anne, Conan, Senan and Cillian on the death of Sr. Anne, RIP.

Seamus and Noirin Hickson

Sincere Sympathy to the Presentation Sisters and The Daye Family on the death of Sr Anne,May her gentle soul rest in peace.

Lorna Curtin and Family

Deepest sympathy on the death of Sr Anne, May she Rest In Peace. Anne spread joy wherever she was. God bless, I will unite with funeral on Monday. Anne

Sr Anne Mc Loone, Stranorlar, CoDonegal

Sincere sympathy to all her family and the Presentation Sisters. May she rest in peace.

Joan & George Glover Ballymac Tralee

Deepest sympathy to the family of Sr Anne and the presentation order on their great loss may she rest in Peace

Peggy Mccarron

Sincere condolences to the Presentation Convent Community and Sr Ann’s family. May her gentle soul rest in eternal peace.

Con and Margaret O Connor, Knockeen

Deepest sympathy to Patrick, Anne, Conan, Senan, Cillian, The Presentation Sisters and the extended Daye family on the death of Sr.Anne.Will miss her wit and that rougish smile but the memories will last forever. May Sr. Anne’s gentle soul rest in peace.

Breda Con and Connie xxx

Breda O Connor Castleisland

Sincere condolences to the Daye family & the Presentation Sisters at this very sad time. Happy memories of meeting Sr Anne walking at An Riocht town park. May her gentle soul rest in peace.

Joe Walsh, Knockanalig

Our sincere condolences to Pat, Anne ,Conan, Senan, Cillian, and the Presentation Sisters at this difficult time. It was an honour to know such a gentle and wonderful lady. May she Rest In Peace.

Martin & Marie Keane

Sincere sympathy to the Presentation Sisters and to the Daye family on the sad passing of my good friend and colleague Sr. Anne.

May her gentle soul rest in peace.

Denis Griffin

Sincere sympathy to Pat, Anne, Conan & Killian and all in the convent in Castleisland. The late Sr. Anne was a very special lady, friendly, pleasant and fun loving. Sr. Anne handled her sickness with great courage and resignation.

Leaba i masc na naomh duit a chara dílis, Tadhg

Tadhg Garvey

Deepest sympathies to Sr Anne’s family and the Presentation Sisters at this sad time. Rest in peace

Michael and Maura Conway

Deepest sympathy to Patrick, the Daye family and the Presentation Sisters.

Sean & Nora O Sullivan Graigue Lispole

Sincere condolences to Patrick and family and to the Presentation sisters in Castleisland. Sr. Anne was a wonderful colleague and a dedicated teacher in Muire gan Smal. We enjoyed her wicked sense of humour in the staff -room. She will be missed by all whose lives she enriched. Rest in peace, Sr. Anne.

Eileen and David Breen

Sincere sympathies to Sr. Anne’s brother Patrick and family and her beloved Presentation community. May her gentle soul rest in peace

Catherine and Mike Nash Brosna

Sincerest sympathy to Patrick and his family and to the Presentation Sisters on Anne’s death. Anne fought the good fight. I have many cherished memories of her numerous visits to Hicksons. She was a constant and loyal friend to all the family her whole life through. Suaimhneas síorai tabhair di a Thiarna.

Rita Chambers ,Hickson, Dublin and Lispole

Sincere Sympathy to Patrick, the Presentation Sisters and all her friends in Lispole and beyond.

She was a family friend when growing up in Lispole.

Ar Dheis Dé go raibh Anam Dílis Anne

Maria and Fiona Kavanagh, Tubber, Lispole

Maria Kavanagh

Our sincere sympathy to you Patrick and family at the Presentation Community of the death of Sr. Anne . May she rest in peace in her Heavenly home

Paddy and Kathleen Sheehy Ballyristeen , Dingle

Deepest sympathy to the Presentation Sisters and the Daye family on the sad passing of St. Anne. May St. Anne Rest in Peace . Betty Walsh and family..

Betty Walsh, Castleisland

Deepest sympathy to the Presentation Sisters and to Sr Anne’s brother and family at this sad time. It was a honour to have known such a gentle and wonderful lady, may her gentle soul rest in peace

David & Mary & Bill Costello, Castleisland

Condolences to the Presentation Sisters & to Sr Anne’s family.

May her gentle soul rest in peace.

Kathleen Myers College Rd

Deepest sympathy and prayers: to the Presentation Sisters and the Daye family.

May Sr. Anne rest in peace.

Sr Ena Lehane

Sincere sympathy to Sr Ann’s Presentation sisters and family. May her gentle soul rest in peace in gods arms .

Sean O Donoghue Ballycasheen Killarney

It is with deep sadness and sincere sympathy that we offer our condolences to Sr Ann’s Presentation sisters and family. We were honoured and our lives enriched to have had her as part of our family..Our kids will forever have fond memories of all the special times we spent with you. You will always be missed and forever loved. Rest easy in gods arms x

Killian Lorraine Fionn Saoirse & Oisin Sheehan Killarney

Sincere Sympathy to the Presentation Sisters and all family on the sad passing of Sr Ann May Her Gentle Soul Rest In Peace

Susan Galvin Bawnaglanna Currow

Sincere Sympathy to the presentation sisters and all her family on the sad passing of Sr Ann she was a wonderful lady May Her Gentle Soul Rest in Peace

Margaret Foran Dromulton Scartaglen

Sincere Sympathy to the presentation sisters and all her family on the sad passing of Sr Ann she was a wonderful lady May Her Gentle Soul Rest in Peace

Margaret Foran Dromulton Scartaglen

Deepest sympathy to Patrick and all of the Daye family and the Presentation Sisters.

John Hickson Fermoy and Lispole

Sincere sympathy to Patrick and family and the Presentation Community on this very sad time.

I remember Sr Ann visiting the Grummell family Ballinasare some years ago.

May she Rest in Peace.

Leaba i measc na Naomh a raibh aici.

Mary Flahive ,Ballinasare

So sorry to here of the passing of St Ann to her family and to the Presentation Sisters. many the cup of tea I had with her. May she rest in peace.

Tricia Donegan Causeway

Sincere sympathy to Patrick and family and to the Presentation Sisters on the passing of Sr Anne. A wonderful colleague and friend. May she rest in peace.

Marie and Denis O Connor Bawnaskehy

Deepest sympathy to all on the passing of Sr Ann RIP

Shy and Nor Nolan

My deepest sympathy to the Presentation sisters on the sad loss of Sr Anne may she rip

Ellen Barrett

Deepest sympathy to the Presentation Sisters and the Daye family on the sad passing of Sr.Anne. May her gentle soul rest in peace

Barbara O’Connor Abbeyfeale

Sympathy and prayers to the Presentation Sisters and to Sr. Anne’s family. Sr. Anne was a lovely person with a lovely smile. May she rest in peace .

Mary ,Orla & Tara O Connor ,Knockananlig, castleisland

Sincere sympathy to Patrick and family on the death of Sr Anne. May she rest in peace.

Deirdre Sayers

Such a lovely lady. Rest In Peace Anne xx

Leona O Mahony

“The souls of the virtuous are in God’s hands…” May Sr. Anne now enjoy the fullness of God’s presence. My sympathy to her Presentation Community and the Daye family.

Flor O’Callaghan o s a

Sympathy to her brother Patrick and family on your loss of Sr.Anne .Rest in peace 🙏.

Anne and Donie McGrath Glin

Sincere condolences to the Presentation Sisters and to all of her family. I will always have the most wonderful memories of Sr Anne. It was an honour to have known her.

Ar dheis Dé go raibh a hanam.

Maura Browne, Castleisland

Deepest sympathy to Sr. Ann’s family and to the Presentation Sisters. She was a beautiful gentle person. May she rest in Peace

Rose and Darren Cotter, Cordal

Sincere condolences to the Presentation Sisters and to the Daye family on the passing of Sr Anne. She will be forever remembered by all at Muire Gan Smál for her dedication and kindness towards the children in her care. Those of us who have had the pleasure to call her both a colleague and a friend will hold on to precious memories full of fun and laughter.

Ar dheis Dé go raibh a hanam dílis

Muire Gan Smál Presentation Primary School, Castleisland

Deepest sympathy to the presentation sisters on the passing of Sr Ann Rest in Peace.

Nora& Anthony Nolan

Sincere sympathy to the Daye family and the Presentation sisters on

the sad passing of Sister Anne. May she rest in peace.

Mary Horan & family ,Tralee Road, Castleisland

My deepest sympathies & 