To Dragma of Alpha Lhraaxjn P

FALL 2000 FALL 2000

VOL. LXVIII, NO. 8 VOL. LXVIII, NO. 8

1

XI

fI

i

Our Missions:

To Dragma ofAlpha Omicron Pi

The mission ofTo Dragma ofAlpha Orrkron Pi is:

to inform, educate and inspire our readers on subjects relevant to our Fraternity, our chapters, our mem- bers, or Greek life; to encourage lifetime AO! I involvement to salute excellence; and to servt as

a permanent record of our Fraternity's histoiy.

mint 2000 200J

Alpha Omicron Pi Fraternity; inc. Alpha Omicron Pi is an international

AU11 >\iii launch this, exciting new framing program next sprint foj eolleeiate menibers.

16

Leadership Institute 2000

A L.C.p>ialltiniu11and ul ul I.I 2000.

21

AOII Foundation

H ie I W 9 - 2 0 0 0 AOI1 Fbundation Annual Report and Donor List.

37 Convention 2001

women's fraternity promoting friendship for a lifetime,

Dr

C7nf 41nVi<i

of Alpha Omicron Pi

•

^ Ifll II ^

5

The 2000-2001 AOII

Chapter Consultants

Meet the new team ul AOlls (ravelling ton the hdtti iiiu

inspiring academic excellence and lifelong

learning and developing leadership skills through service to the Fratem'ity and community.

Alpha Omicron Pi Foundation, Inc.

The mission of trie Alpha Omiavn

fund programs, which promote the intellectual, ethical

and leadership development of membes of Alpha

Omiavn Pi Fratem'ity and, through its philanthropic efforts, benefit the lager society. The vision of the Alpha Omicror, Pi Foundation is to ensure the continuation

ofAlpha Omicron Pi Fraternity as we look ahead to

the challengesof the 21st Century.

Pi Foundation is tc

6

History in the Making

Ih> AOII archives help kt, the excitement about oui u and pxeseni. ciuvc

Join us iii Palm Springs n*xt June foi Convention 2 0 0 ]

14

15

Leadership Academy

AOli Officer Directory

A hand) abbreviated version ol the A( Ml officer directory is included in litis issue.

ToDragma/FALL 2000

40

Collegiate News

In this issue our chapters share successful alcohol-free social events.

43

Collegiate Bulletin Board

This nrw feature is the place to highlight news from our colic "iate chapters and members

44

Alumnae News

(Kir alumnae chapters sha1 sisterhood stories invoJh ins their chapter or members.

48

Alumnae Bulletin Board

Our Uumnae Chapters or members can share stones and accomplishment^ ir this new featuxi

49 50 52

•

Iress oil editorial/'omm'jniratir,nt

Our New Home

Make an investment m the fittlire of coimtless women who will one (lav share m our Iavpilill sjsterh'Kid

Fraternity News

Read this new section (or quarterly news and announcements.

AOII Emporium

Preview a portion of the new 2000-2001. Emporium catalog.

To Dragma ofAlpha Omirrm Pi

Pi ihlishpd since Ion* :<ory

1

tyAfoho Ornicron Pi Fraternity, Inc.

Editor

Mahellen Perkinson Sasseen Alpha Helta (U of Alabama)

Graphic Design

Rebecca Brown Oavis Delta Delta (Auburn U)

Add,

it the same address

<-,( Alnhn Or^iTr>r Pi fl KP^rV'-^

ffir« Su

Postmaster: SenH address changes to:

moling

0

To Drawn? ofAfciha Ornicron Pi. 91TM O«riook Blvd, Brenty/ood.TN 37027. -

IS) u m

€ offkjol organ ofAlpha Orrknon Pi is published quarterly b xj TN Periixir.nl doss postage paid at Brentwood TN, and additional

y $3.00 per year. Life subscription: $85.00.

Founded it Remand College in New York City January 1 1897. by

|essie Wallace H1 igfpn.Hel^n St CMr Mullan,Stella George Stem Perry & Elizabeth Heywood Wyman

International President

Carol*- >| irep|<n |ones Alpha Delta (I' of Alabama)

Executive Director

t i^lppjf- Mjvon Doyle ' ^rnKia Sgm*3 (t ' of Gergia)

International Headquarters

9CQ-\ n ^ r l o o k Boulevard. rV^ntNA/oodJennessee 37077 phone: 615/370-0920 foe 615/371-9736

E-m=* ^oi'hdSJalDh^orniorinpi org W eb Ste Address wwwalphaomicronpi org

S^nrl MailingAddress Updates to: i.iDd?tp(5ia|pi-nom.iriTinp! org

To Dragina/FAI I 3000

Carole Jurenko Jones International President

A O I I perspective

This will be an

exciting

year for AOII.

As we begin a new academic year 1 am pleased to introduce to you five young women who will serve as members of the 2000-2001 Collegiate Advisory Board (CAB). These collegiate chapter presi- dents have been chosen by the Executive Board to represent AOII and help keep Fraternity leaders in touch with the needs of our collegiate women.

The members of this year's CAB are Carrie Brady, Lambda Sigma Chapter (U of Georgia); Aimee Burch, Chi Psi Chapter (California Polytechnic State U); Nicole Chinadle, Alpha Phi Chapter (Montana State U); Stephanie Judy, Delta Omega Chapter (Murray State U); and Carrie Piraino, Lambda Lipsilon Chapter (Lehigh University).

During our time together this summer while attending Leadership Institute in Los Angeles, I had the privilege to meet with these outstanding young women. An exciting observation I made was the com- mitment these ambassadors of AOII have to our Fraternity. They are committed to building stronger relationships among chapter members, motivating chapter leaders to strive for the best and strength- ening advisory support

Not only are they committed to effec- tively leading their own chapters, but also they are excited to have the opportunity to work lor the betterment of AOII International Fraternity. As we meet together in September, the CAB will have an opportunity to meet with the Education and Training Committee in order to offer ideas on training sessions for Leadership Academy 2001, give insight about today's hot topics on college cam- puses and recommend educational pro- grams pertinent to college students.

It is refreshing to me to see the commit- ment many of our collegiate members, such as this vear's CAB members, have to AOII. It is the kind of commitment I hope they carry with them upon graduation. Today's young women are the future of AOII and it is the responsibility of alum- nae like you and me, to instill in our colle- "lians a lifetime commitment to our beloved Fraternity.

There are many levels of commitment alum nae can offer regardless of age or loca- tion. Whether it's serving as an adviser, fill- ing out a Membership Information Form, or making a financial contribution, you are making a significant gift to our collegians and to the future of AOII. You are sharing your time, talents and money but, most importantly, you are portraying the liletime connection you maintain as an alumnae member of Alpha Omicron Pi.

This will be an exciting year for AOII as we dedicate a new home for our Fraternity, present our first Leadership Academy for collegiate chapter presidents, and further refine our volunteer structure. It will be a year of ongoing commitment at ail levels, from collegiate members to alumnae volunteers, as we continue to strengthen the ties of AOII.

Fraternally,

Carole Jurenko Jones International President

To Dragma/FALL 2000

Meet the 2000-2001AOII Chapter CoriSultailtTeam

This group of terrific young women will spend the next nine months traveling for Alpha Omicron Pi. Whether visiting collegiate chapters or working with new colonies, these women will be providinga valuable service to our chapters. Each has completed two extensive training sessions at AOII Headquarters and attended an NPC sponsored leadership training program. The Fraternity genuinely appreciates the commitment each of these women has made to Alpha Omicron Pi. When one of these consultants visits your chapter during the next few months, please make her feel welcomed.

Ethnie Groves

Chapter:

Chi Delta, U of Colorado- Boulder, English Major Hometown:

Rapid Gty, South Dakota

Chapter Offices: Chapter President, Recording Secretary, Preference Head (Recruitment), Spirit/Suggestion Chairman, Philanthropy Comm., Public Relations Comm.

Activities:

Marching Band, Flute, Campus Band, Order of Omega

Awards:

Scholarship Award, Best Senior Attendance, Mortar Board Outstanding Junior Hobbies:

Spending time with fam- ily and friends, aerobics, movies, hiking, reading

JiU Soost

Chapter:

Gamma Omicron, U of Florida, Sport Management Major Hometown:

Orlando, Florida

Chapter Offices:

New Member Educator, Philanthropic Chairman, Dance Marathon Chairman, Fundraising Chairman

Activities:

Panhelenic AVP and Intramural Director, Student Alumni Assoc., Rho Lambda, Florida Blue Key,SGA-Director of Environmental Awareness, Intramural Football Officials Coordinator

Awards:

Ruby A Award, LC Member of the Year, Panhellenic Director of Y ear

Hobbies:

Playing sports, playing with nephews, reading, cross stitch and crafts

Melissa Parsons

Chapter:

Omega, Miami U, Social Work Major

Hometown:

Defiance, Ohio

Offices:

Chapter President, Scholarship Chairman, Recruitment Chairman Activities:

Panhellenic FVesident, U Honors Program, Golden Key NHS, Butler County Child Assault Prevention Project, U Appeals Board, Mortar Board Awards:

AOII 1998 Woman of Leadership Award, 1999 Perry Award, Miami U Outstanding Chapter President, Greek W oman of the Year -2000, Summa Cum Laude, MGGV Outstanding Area VP

Hobbies:

Reading, spending time with family & friends, working out, shopping

Kealie Frazier

Chapter:

Rho Omicron, Middle Tennessee State U, History Major Hometown:

Jackson, Tennessee

Offices:

Philanthropic Chairman, Social Chairman Recruitment Comm., Chapter Relations Comm., Awards Chairman

Activities:

Rho Chi, Student Ambassador, Student Orientation Assistant, "Up Til Dawn" Director Awards:

Who's Who, Greek Woman of the Year, Outstanding Greek Ambassador, MTSU O.S.CAR Recipient, 2000 AOII Collegiate Woman of leadership Hobbies:

Travel, sight seeing, read- ing, enjoying new things

Megan Ehrisman

Chapter:

Iota, U of Illinois Urbana- Champaign, Advertising Major

Hometown:

Naperville, Illinois

Offices:

COR Chairman, Philanthropy Recruitment Event Co- Chairman, Panhellenic Delegate

Activities:

American Advertising Federation, Greek Intervarsity, Homecoming Comm., SERVE Illinoisfacilitator, Panhellenic Vice President-Development, Board of Sorority Affairs Awards:

Dean's List, 2000 Most Outstanding Greek Nominee

Hobbies:

Running, listening to music, movies, reading, travel, spending time with close friends

Are you interested in becoming a Chapter Consultant? Applications will be mailed to all chapters in October. The application deadline is January 15, 2001. For more information, contact Jennifer White, CC Administrator (615)370-0920 or [email protected].

To Draema/FALL 2000 5

i

•

y

^^^^^^^^

The AOII archives... around Headquarters that term refers to boxes of files piled to the ceiling. The archives also houses dozens of rose tea cups, sterling silver punch bowls, old To Draginas, treasured scrapbooks, and Stella's trunk. Add a couple of baby grand pianos, a crystal chandelier, a library full of books, a jewelry collection, thousands of photos, artwork and you can only begin to envision the vastness of the memoribilia we have stored in our archives. Before the end of the year, AOII will move into our new fraternity home with expanded room for archival storage and display. It's an exciting time for us as we have more opportunity to properly preserve and protect AOII's heritage. Many great ladies have served as International Historian of our Fraternity. Certainly one of the greatest remains our first, Stella George Stern Perry. We are publishing Stella's inspiring 1936 convention speech as an example of one of the countless treasures we have on hand. Past International President, Nancy Moyer McCain, has been leading our archival preservation for the past 20 years and will turn over the position to Past International President Joan Deathe MacCallum in January 2001. Their excitement about our fraternity's past, present and future is contagious. We invite you to visit our new home and tour AOII's history in the making.

To Dragma/FALL 2000

BY NANCY MOYER MCCAIN INTERNATIONAL HISTORIAN, RHO (NORTHWESTERN U )

The Founders of AOII had not met one another that fall day in 1894 when they entered Barnard College. During the next two years, these classmates became devoted friends and determined to perpetuate their friendship in the form of a new woman's fraternity. Thus it was on December 23, 1896, they pledged each other and on January 2, 1897, founded Alpha Omicron Pi.

Stella was the Fraternity's first Historian, a lifelong responsibil- ity she faithfully fulfilled. Her home in Brooklyn Heights was the repository for AOII's early memorabilia. Among those treasures is a notebook bearing the tide "Alpha Omicron Pi." The first page is dated January 2, 1897. AOII's Constitution begins on that page and contin-

ues on the following ones. Perhaps this is AOII's first arti- fact This collection in Stella's care grew to include an assort- ment of documents, records, photographs and delightful oddments that reveal day-to- day activities and pleasures of those early years. Stella made a significant contribution to this collection. In recognition of AOII's Twenty-fifth Anniversary she, an accomplished author in her own right, wrote The History of Alpha Omicron Pi, 1897-1923, a detailed and won- derfully readable account of the Fraternity's first quarter century. Stella's stewardship of this early archival collection ended at her death in 1956. Her collection

was transferred to Headquarters.

It always was Stella's desire that as many AOIIs as possible be

Opposite page, Sigma Chapter (V of California-Berkeley). Below from left to right: a sisterhood camping trip in 1920, AOIIs having fun in the 1920s, sisters wading in 1935, and our current International Historians, Joan Deathe MacCallum and Nancy Moyer McCain.

able to see the artifacts of the Fraternity's beginning years. Her solution was to take some of the items to conventions where she would set up an exhibit She transported them in a steamer trunk. "Stella's Trunk" and its contents became an eagerly anticipated feature of conventions. Just when the custom began has not been determined but we do know it was well established by the 1930s. These historical exhibits at conventions continued until the fragile artifacts showed signs of deterioration. For this reason and also, the possibility of fur- ther damage to artifacts or the

possible loss of the collection, the custom was discontinued after the 1987 convention.

All the while Stella was accu- mulating and caring for her collection, archival items were piling up at Headquarters. From time to time they were packed and kept in commercial storage. That situation changed in November 1981 when the Fraternity's Headquarters was moved to the first AOII-owned building on Cleghorn Avenue in Nashville, Tennessee. Boxes of archives came from storage and filled a large portion of the cavernous storage space in the

It top left, an Omega (Miami I ) May Queen; above, a 1052 Frontier Nursing Service visit - AOH's first philanthropy: opposite page. Stella Perry at the 1919 convention.

new building. At long last, all of AOH's archives were under one roof. Organizing these diverse collections began in the early

1980s and continued into the 1990s. Archives were invalu- able for planning both the extensive historical exhibit mounted in the Overlook Boulevard Headquarters in conjunction with the 1993 Nashville Convention at Oprvland Hotel and in prepa- ration for AOH's Centennial

Celebration in 1997.

Although the basic organiza- tion is complete, much remains to be done. Since early in the organization process, we have made use ot the amazing archival supplies which preserve, protect and safely store artifacts. New products and processes are being introduced and we are reviewing them with an eye to their use for our collections.

Planning a new Headquarters has provided the opportunity, at time of construction, to incorporate essential require- ments to assure correct display

and storage facilities. The areas of concern are the Museum and Library on the Main Level and the large storage area on the Lower level. Museum/archives consultants have worked closely with ii- concerning (he s|>ecific requirements lor these areas.

Now that Headquarters is the established repository lor AOII archives, there is need to pro- vide on-going attention to the collections as well as to oversee the use of artifacts. To satisfy both of these needs, Alpha Omicron Pi Foundation has provided a grant to underwrite stall time for the Archives Administrator for 2000-2001. \ portion of the exhibits will be permanent Others will be specific and change from time to time. The Library will fea- ture books written by AOII authors and books about members of our Fraternity. Bound issues of To Dragma dating to the first issue in 1905 make fascinating reading.

Remember... a visit to AOII IIcadquartcrs includes a trip in

time to the beginning of AOII!

8

To Dragma/FALL 20(10

WRITTEN BY STELLA GEORCE STERN PERRY FOR THE OHIO VALLEY DISTRICT CONVENTION, 1 9 3 6 . AMENDED AS REQIIREU IN 1 9 3 9 .

To Dragma/FALL 2000

9

Ihere's so much difference between telling you the story of the early days and writing it to you! I had gready hoped to be with you and to sit in a family group and talk these tilings over. But now that I've only the half-comfort of imagining myself there, I'll try to tell you some of the intimate things about our beginnings, although, of necessity, sketchily.

Those of you who have met the Founders know that we're just "regular folks", and will understand, in spite of the glamour that your devotion throws about us and that other radiance thrown, as I write, by our own memories of youth, that back there in the '90s we were just lour regular college girls, very like yourselves.

Remembering our young days, with their many unheroic phases, it amuses us and makes us feel apologetic, too, to appear before you so often as on pedestals.

1 used to say diat, if the clock could turn back and put us four on your campus as students, you'd know the difference only by our clothes. But even the style of our clothes is coming back into fashion (though I hope sleeves will not again get so large that you can carry your luncheons in them, nor skirts so long that they have to have brush-bind- ing to sweep the streets!) They're so much like ours that perhaps you'd accept us without question, and I hope you would bid us to Alpha Omicron Pi.

But you wouldn't do that if you happened to be looking for anything ostentatious, for we were very simple, not one weahhy and not one valuing very highly the show-window superficialities of life.

Wewereexceedinglyfrankand merry, very much alive to enjoy the golden years we were living, vitally interested in every phase of our college life, and in the life around us, men- tally inquisitive and ardently, enthusiastically devoted to one another, to our chosen group of friends, and to the Class of

Thai Class, still known - to its members, at least - as "the great and glorious Class of '98", explains much of our audacity in starting a new fraternity. It was, and still is, outstanding for its solidarity, its pride in itself, good fellowship and especially, initiative. The Dean said that other classes might get more out of college, but no class could ever put more in than ours did. No space here to tell you the many Barnard tradi- tions and institutions that '98 started; nor would they interest any but Barnardians.

the classes preceding ours felt themselves to be pioneers and took themselves very, very VEBY seriously. And, as few prep schools were ready with the severe entrance require- ments - and you'd gasp if' I out- lined them to you - most of those students were older than college girls generally are.

But we in '98 were young. We were the first class of college girls as we now see them to enter Barnard. So, even as freshmen, we were a sensation to our sedate superiors as we

s

3=

You see, Barnard College was the first separate college for women to be affHiat-

ed with a great men's . . . . . university, oflering

the same entrance examinations, the same University courses under the same faculty and granting the degree not of the College but of the Lniversity. So

went ahead and merrily made our own traditions, customs and practices with a happy buoyancy.

However, we could not be friv- olous, for there were few, if any, rich girls in the entire class,andwehadallgoneto college with definite and prac- tical purposes and an ardor of intention that put earnestness and aspiration in the back- ground of our gay, friendly, advenmrous, varied days, when we were your age.

So much for the setting.

JNow, we have reason to know well that more than one prominent "national" would have eagerly entered Barnard at that time, would have eager- ly welcomed a local group, as ours. Indeed, one such had been at Barnard from the beginning and had taken in all the members of the first tiny, sedate classes.

Why, then, you will be asking, did we four choose rather to make a new fraternity of our own - surely a more dangerous and difficult task?

I will try to tell you.

In those days many of the evils still sometimes complained of in fraternity life and many others now happily past or passing - this due, in part, we dare believe, to Alpha Omicron Pi's own attitude - many of those evils were distincdy obvious in the already existing societies. I do not mean to imply for a

'<»%

I 1 1

Hi

To Drapna/FALL 2000

moment that they were known to be in all of them, or even that we believed diem to exist in all. But they certainly were pretty general. And how to be sure?

We knew exactly what we wanted and the way to be sure of getting it was to make it, if we could.

We wanted a society that should continue our compan- ionship through life, and extend the like joys to others, usefully, unselfishly, and with- out pettiness. We wanted to enshrine, sublimate and per-

We wanted to be sure of a democratic fraternity, democ- ratic in choosing members, democratic in internal govern- ment, so that all members to come must share our responsi- bility and feel bound to exer- cise for themselves the motives that impelled the Founders.

We especially wanted one with no snobbery, no ostentation, no extravagance, no exclusiveness, no silly "superiorities", no triv-

tion to some worthy end, some object of loving kindness that should make our organization to its members an enduring bond of happy mutual labors and to their environment an enrichment.

Therefore, having decided to make that sort of fraternity if we could, we had also to decide,

always unfailing in its results. Under that sign we were sure of success, and we felt that the aspect of it most lacking and most needed lay in our motto and would give us the means desired to make our secrecy, in its highest usage, not a mystery but a modesty.

Oh, 1 do not want you to believe that we ourselves always lived up to our ideal, or that we never failed to act according to our intention. Of course, we fell down some- times. Of course, we made many mistakes. By no means perfect, we had to learn a lot by trial and failure. But we did keep the purpose before us as an end, and I know that Alpha Omicron Pi has ever done so.

Neither do I want you to think for a minute that we saw and foresaw the future that has so wonderfully blest us, that we envisioned the growth in 42 years from four members to almost three times that many thousands. We were not prophets and not really the founders of all this.

The only True Founder found- ed our purpose and saw the harvest He was to bless from the little seed He Himself had planted. His alone was the vision and to Him alone be your thanks.

Opposite page top left, "Just Married" in the 1920s; below left. Delta Delta (Auburn U) AOIIs in 1997; above top, the Columbia University Library; and above, Omegas leap fragging in the 1920's.

petuate our love and our unity through service worthy of these blessings, deserving to persist. We wanted a fraternity that should carry on the delightful fellowships and cooperations of college days into the workaday years ahead and do so magnanimously, both in school and afterwards.

ial limitations, nothing based only on "society" in the narrow sense, nothing good excluded on financial, religious, or other factitious grounds, one with its members chosen for character.

Above all, we wanted a high and active special purpose to justify existence, a simple devo-

"What have we in our hearts to give that the world most lacks and most needs? And in what aspect of it is it most lacking and most needed?"

You know the answer.

There had been vouchsafed to us for one another the one thing always needed and

To Dragma/FALL 2000

I 1

But I will say that, if we did not foresee the future, neither did we fear it. And when in the early years of national life stag- gering difficulties which I can- not now relate, confronted us, they could not frighten nor deter us.

Now, having determined to make this democratic, unos- tentatious, simple society, we climbed up a little winding stair into the stackroom, a small upper chamber of old Columbia Library, a beautiful Gothic building, now demol- ished. This was a little tower room, rarely used, where Anglo-Saxon tomes and ancient vellum manuscripts were stored. We sat in a deep seat built under a mulhoned window of that quiet room, pigeons outside and snow lightly falling, and there, with what emotion you can imag-

ine, we pledged one another, at the very beginning of the year f897. (And you were all there,

though we did not know it!)

Soon afterwards, we used the initiation ritual for the first time on our classmate, Anne Richardson Hall of St. Joseph, Missouri, now Mrs. R. J. Curdy of Kansas Gty.

You will want to know about our badge.

One of the first decisions we

made was to have one emblem

onlv and that a direct reminder

J

of our essential purpose. We felt that that would give us enough to live up to, and would identify us at least as well as would numerous supplementary- devices. We felt that synthetic coats of arms (besides being mediaeval and out of accord in societies called Greek), shields, sub-mottoes, fraternity jewelry of a general nature, stamped toilet goods and what not, and all other trifles bearing shields

/ 7-

12

To Dragma/FALL 2000

77"

and coats of arms, were cheap, childish, and undignified in comparison with one austere, though rich, badge. And we felt that many societies had these things not for intrinsic usefulness but just because others did. By avoiding this foolish conformity we could from the start indicate our determined simplicity.

One motto, one badge, one bond - and singleness of heart!

We did not want a design that showed some little object and resembled a breast-pin or brooch or lace-pin, and we did not want one that looked like a school pin or could be mistaken, if not scrutinized, for the badge of many anoth- er society. We wanted a badge that told us why we wore it We therefore chose our monogram.

Theodore B. Starr was the "Cartier" of that period and tire Starr designer of insignia the foremost artist of his kind. We engaged Starr and his designer to arrange the pro- portions. We went to see them about it on our bicycles. (Fancy girls going down Broadway and Fifth Avenue on bicycles today!)

Our first step in expansion, which made us "national" was the installation of Pi Chapter in New Orfeans. At Newcomb almost identical conditions pre- vailed as at Barnard when we began, that is to say, one entrenched fraternity there and all the others eagerly interest- ed. Pi Chapter's ideals and

reasons for the courageous course of joining a brand-new fraternity were the same as oursinfoundingitWe.cannot overestimate Pi's bravery and loyalty. It was in the summer; only three girls were pledged to begin the new chapter; but these were highly influential girls who were confident of their following. Of these, two were out of town, during an epidemic, when the day of installation came. So I instafled Pi Chapter through one girl, Katherine Reed. We cannot overvalue Katherine andwhatshedidforus.Sheis now head of the French

Bres came back to town and Katherine initiated them; and when Newcomb opened we had a real chapter ready. Years ago, lovely Leigh joined our Alpha Omega Chapter, but we have in our ranks her gifted, charming and loyal daughters. In 1939 our bright Adele also became a member of our sacred memorial chapter. These three were indeed on our frontier.

Thus, Alpha Omicron Pi start- ed little more than forty years ago with four members and

Humanly speaking, you are all founders of Alpha Omicron Pi today, quite as truly as we were in the beginning. We know that you will always lay the same eternal foundations and that you will build upon them with constancy, patience and unfaltering faith.

May you have the joy in itall, dear children, that we have had alltheway! Mayyoulove one another as happily always as we four have done in a life- long fellowship without a break! Aid may your descen- dants in Alpha Omicron Pi bring to you the glory that you

yourselves are to us today!

Yours, with gratitude and love,

Alpha, Historian

AOILArduval Fee

In an effort to maintain ongoing costs of lite fraternity archives for all chapters, AOII has added

a new annualfeefor our collegiate and. alumnae diopters. Tins fee will be used as an investmentfor preserv ation and protection ofAOITs lieritage. StartingSprijig 2001, all chapters will be billed

$2 per member

as of the February 1st roH. Tltisnewfee willbebilled along with the otlier annual- fees. Ifyou liave Cjuestions, contact your dutpter adviser or nettcork speciidist.

To Dragma/FALL 200(1

13

«I ••

•

.Z'

AOITs first two chapters: opposite page, the Alpha chapter room (Barnard College/Columbia U); above, Pi Chapter charter members (Sophie

Newcomb/Tulane

Department at Akron University. I hope all of you may some day get to know her. I can see her now, a small blond child, thoroughly realiz- ing the grave responsibility she had undertaken, her eyes shin- ing and her chin firm, as I installed Pi Chapter in her bedroom at the old Reed fami- ly home in New Orleans. As soon as the quarantine was lift- ed, Adele Mercier and Leigh

V) in 1898.

became national through the installation of one. The bless- ings following you know.

We are told, we believe and we have proved that in that which makes our bond is promise certain of success. Let us fol- low our ensign devotedly, utterly and bravely. For our Purpose cannot fail.

it

4

Come to Convention. The ultimate sisterhood experience!

Desert Springs Marriott Resort Palm Springs, California

Celebrities frequent Palm Springs for rest and relaxation. The atmosphere is so serene and the weather is perfect.

Springs. Just look for the brown dome-like house on the side of a beautiful mountain. And "Old Blue Eyes", Frank Sinatra, loved this area and is buried in the Cathedral Gty Cemetery right outside of the Palm Springs area. Many, many more celebrities fre- quent Palm Springs for rest and relaxation. The atmosphere is so serene and the weather is perfect

As for as what AOII has planned, i.e. din- ners, themes, and sessions, that will be revealed when you get there! It may prove to be more entertaining than the karaoke skits at Leadership Institute 2000. If you missed that great AOII moment in Los Angeles, then attend Convention 2001 so you will be in on all the priceless stories!

Convention 2001 Registration Packets will be mailed in October 2000. Expect more detailed information to be included in this packet, including your registration fee, resort reservations, hours and cost for all the resort's amenities, transportation from the resort and at the resort, and who to call to book your flight AOII Convention 2001 official dates are set for June 27 -July 1.

For a better look of what's ahead go to www.desertspringsresort.com.

You will absolutely want to be a part of AOIIs Forty-sixth Biennial Convention at the Desert Springs Marriott Resort and Spa in Palm Springs, Clalifornia. With a moun- tain view that stops you in your tracks,

two championship golf courses, seven restaurants on-site, and several large swim- ming pools, you will not want to miss this Convention, June 27- July 1,2001.

And hence the name - Desert Springs Marriott Resort and Spa - this resort offers

an on-site spa that is listed as one of the top five in the country. There are more than thirty spa options including facials, massages, scrubs, therapeutic baths and wraps galore.

The facility offers a 6-minute gondola boat ride to familiarize you with all these won- derful amenities.

In addition to all of the resort amenities, Convention sessions and our traditional

Rose Banquet are planned to be tremen- dous experiences. The square footage of the resort is amazing, yet small enough for easy walking. Upon arrival, attendees will appreciate that the resort's check in and AOII registration will be on the same floor, just around the corner from one another!

For fun during your free time, Destinations Tour Company by Marriott is planning some wonderful trips off site for all who attend Convention. Just to give you a tease, one will be a "Shop 'Til You Drop" tour to El Paseo, better known as the "Rodeo

Drive of the Desert". Another option will be a ride on the Palm Springs Aerial Tramway up the 8,500-foot, San Jacinto Mountain. On the way you can see celebrity homes and a breathtaking view.

Did you know that Bob Hope lives in Palm Springs? You can see his home, depending on where you are seated, flying into Palm

II

To Dragma/FALL 2000

'1

Leadership Academy March 2-4, 200

1.'A

Alpha Omicron Pi is pleased to announce plans for an exciting new training program for our collegiate mem- bers. Next spring, the inaugural Leadership Academy will target training to all our collegiate chapter presidents in the Training center of our new International Headquarters in Brentwood, Tennessee. This expansive training facility is currendy under construction and our chapter presidents will be the first group to utilize our beautiful new home for training. In future years, other chapter offices will be added, and chapters will have input into the process of determining which areas to strengthen within their chapter.

Leadership Academy will provide chapter officers the opportunity to learn more about themselves, to develop leadership skills, and share ideas with other leaders in our organization. Most importandy, it will assist in providing the necessary tools to become more effective leaders.

Alpha Omicron Pi is excited to be able to host this training program in our new fraternity home. This is just the first of many ways we plan to make our new Headquarters facility a valuable resource forallour members.

To Dragma/FALL 2000

15

Leadership

Institute 2000

LeadersLIGHT theWay

16

ToDragma/FALL2(>0<)

Leadership Institute 2000 was held June 23rd through 25th at the Los Angeles Airport Marriott, Los Angeles, California. Themed "Leaders Light the Way,"the event was designed to develop leadership skills both personally and profes- sionally. Emphasis was placed on training of collegiate Chapter Presidents, Chapter Advisers, Chapter Treasurers, Stellar Starters and alumnae volunteers.

Leadership Institutes are conferences held in the even numbered years

[^Leadership

between conventions. They have proven to be enormously popular with alumnae and collegians because the atmosphere is fun and casual, and the focus is on education, training and sisterhood.

In its second year, the Stellar Starter program was a resounding suc- cess. Chapters are asked to send a sophomore member identified as an emerging leader, or "Stellar Starter." to LI for training. Their training included "Leading with Style," in which they learned the basic dynam- ics of leadership method- ologies and how to use them in everyday life. Additionally, the basics

of goal mapping were addressed to assist them throughout their college career, professional, and personal life.

Specific programmirig included a general ses- sion on AOII Ritual and religion. A panel discus-

Integrity G r o w t h I lonor "fraditionj

sion explored the link between our Ritual and various religious beliefs and how Ritual meshes with everyday life.

Other sessions focused on etiquette, meeting management, conflict resolution, ethics and values, balancing life and work, and keeping alumnae members moti- vated. A n informative Alphalink training was another major focus as officers were trained to better utilize AOH's web based reporting system.

Elise Moss, Tau Delta (Binningham Southern College). Delivered an inspiring keynote address motivating everyone to live life to its fullest As part of our conference tradition. AOII donated 500 stuffed pandas to representatives of Vista Del Mar Child and Family Services and the Orange County/Long Beach Branch of the Arthritis Foundation.

Leadership Institute provides leadership and education training for our members.

This was fabulous and I am thoroughly impressed. Not

only did I receive much helpful information, but I felt I was challenged as a person.

New friends: Rho Omicron (Middle Tennessee State U), Sigma Phi (California State U - Northridge), Gamma

Alpha (George Mason U) and Sigma (U of California - Berkeley) chapter

presidents.

Our collegiate

ing the presidents' training session.

chapter

presidents

were " t i e d - u p in knots" dur-

To Dragma/FALL 2000

17

AOIIs were all smiles, whether arriving by airport shuttle (left) or making friends during the weekend (above). Opposite page:

1997-98 Chapter Consultants Sarah Pewitt and Hannah Jacobs reunite at U.

A group hug during the "Forever Friends" reception.

I feel much better about my office. I have more ideas and I feel motivated all over again to make a difference.

AOIIs enjoying a lunch break in the California sunshine.

i--»

\

Members take a break in the pool during free time with twoAOII legacies.

I am excited about next year; and I am excited about the opportunity to make my chapter stronger!

J

1

Kappa Alpha (Indiana State U) chapter members.

The t-shirt swap has become an Li tradition. Each member who brings a newAOli t-shirt is eligible to participate. Many members bring original designs from their chapter

functions.

Upsilon Lambda (U ofTexas San Antonio)

members.

!

18

To Dra«ma/FALL 2000

Kelly Hahn receives the Perry Award from Perry Award Committee Chairman Joan MacCailum.

Friendships that last a lifetime are often made

at AOII

conferences.

A photo

opportunity'.

The PerryAwardis

the highest distinction given to a collegiate member of Alpha Omicron Pi. This award honors the most out- standing collegiate chapter president by virtue of out- standing service to her chapter, and recognition

by the administration of her university.

The 2000 Perry Award recipient is Kelly Hahn, Kappa Kappa (Ball State U). Her Leaders' Council listed 12 changes for which Kelly was responsible, including such things as: integrating

all chapter operations and officer responsibilities onto a computer program for all to access, and budget changes to de-emphasize social activities and re- emphasize educational

and sisterhood activities. She led the chapter during a difficult time, turning what could have been negative experiences into positive ones. She is described as "a pillar of strength" and truly lived the AOII Ritual. The Perry Award Committee and the Executive Board whole- heartedly agree that Kelly Hahn represents excellence in leadership.

Elaine Ellis and Nancy Shaheen during the

"Forever Friends"

reception.

The atmosphere at U is always fun and casual.

AOII donated 500 stuffed pandas to representatives ofVista Del Mar Child and Family Services and the Orange County/Long Beach

The Marriott

members wore their LI t-shirts on Saturday.

Emphasis this year was on training our

Chapter Presidents. Chapter Advisers. Chapter Treasurers, Stellar Starters and alumnae volunteers.

International President Carole Jurenko Jones and Keynote Speaker Elise Moss.

was a sea of blue as most

Branch of the Arthritis

Foundation

For collegians, Leadership Institute is an opportunity to learn leadership skills both personally and professionally.

Dragma/FALL 2000

19

Smiles, smiles and more smiles from Zeta Pi (U of Alabama - Birmingham).

Excellent! The weekend has been very effective, and has provided me immeasurable ideasto help

my chapter grow.

When it comes to having a good time, no one does it better than the AOII PIPs!

Susan Danko, Carole Jones and Renee Smith in costume just after the Executive Board's karaoke skit.

Gamma Alphas (George Mason U) take a break.

Alumnae volunteers are the backbone of Alpha Omicron Pi.

AOII Foundation members enter- tained everyone with a karaoke sk/t.

Numerous skits provided light hearted entertainment and a time was allocated for chapter and team meetings.

Individual Award Winners

Stella George Stern Perry Award •Kelli Hahn.

Kappa Kappa Ball State U

Collegiate Women of Leadership •Leanne Austin.Tau Omicron,

U ofTennessee-Martin

• Kealie Frazier Rho Omicron,

Middle Tennessee State U •Candace Ross Kuby, Zeta Pi,

U ofAlabama-Birmingham

Alumnae Women of Leadership • Patti Annen Broggi, Nu lota,

Northern Illinois U, Chicago

West Suburban Alumnae Chapter

•jenny Neal Duffey

Lambda Sigma U of Georgia,

Atlanta Alumnae Chapter •Martha (Marty) Leonard Harrison, Lambda Sigma

U of Georgia Orlando Area

Alumnae Chapter

•Melanie Nixon Doyle, Lambda

Sigma U of Georgia, Nashville Alumnae Chapter

Two AOIls smile for o photo after donating their pandas.

20

ToDra f ;ma/FALL 20(10

"I Heard It Through the Grapevine" sung by the AOII Network

Directors.

FOUNDATION BOARD

Jean Marcy Sells, ZETA,

FOUNDATION PRESIDENT

Barbara Daugs Hunt, PHI DELTA,

VICE-PRESIDENT, MAJOR GIFTS AND ENDOWMENT CHAIR

Dot Waters Williams, LAMBDA SIGMA,

SECRETARY, MARKETING CHAIR

Carol Miller Stevenson, OMEGA,

TREASURER, FINANCE CHAIR

Marilyn Rose Herman, UPSILON, SCHOLARSHIP CHAIR

Audrey Hoenshell Hopkins. UPSILON,

RUBY FUND CHAIR

Carole Jurenko Jones, ALPHA DELTA,

INTERNATIONAL PRESIDENT

Frankie Frazier Roberts, Nu BETA,

GRANTS CHAIR

FOUNDATION COMMITTEES

FINANCE

Carol Miller Stevenson, CHAI R Frankie Frazier Roberts

Jean Marcy Sells

GRANTS

Frankie Frazier Roberts, CHAIR Jean Marcy Sells

Carol Miller Stevenson

MAJOR GIFTS.' ENDOWMENT

Barbara Daugs Hunt, CHAIR

Mary Ann Jenkins

Charlene Rennoe

Frankie Frazier Roberts

Blanche Franklin Chilcote, ADVISORY Jacquelyn Struble Dinwiddie, ADVISORY MARKETING

Dot Waters Williams, CHAIR Rebecca Brown Davis Marilyn Rose Herman Carol Miller Stevenson Natalie Adkins, ADVISORY RUBY FUND

Audrey Hoenshell Hopkins, CHAIR Elizabeth Romine Coffey

Tricia High Conover

Dian Poole Volkmer

SCHOLARSHIP

Marilyn Rose Herman, CHAIR Kerry Rutemiller Ates

Gayle Fitzpatrick

Cynthia Swartzfager Visot

MEMBER MEMBER

VISION STATEMENT

The vision of the Alpha Omicron Pi Foundation is to ensure the continuation ofAlphaOmicronPiFraternityaswelookaheadtothechallenges ofthe21stcentury.

MISSION STATEMENT

The mission of the Alpha Omicron Pi Foundation is to fund programs, which promote the intellectual,ethicalandleadershipdevelopment ofmembersofAlphaOmicronPiFraternity and, through its philanthropic efforts, benefit the larger society.

PRESIDENT'S MESSAGE

Dear AON Sisters and Friends,

Your Foundation has had a very good year thanks to your support! The Foundation granted about $140,000 in awards made possible with your gifts during 1999-2000.

• $51,200 for Educational and Leadership Grants to the Fraternity.

• $22,250 for Scholarships to A01I collegians, graduate students and alumnae. • $43,500 Arthritis Research and the American Juvenile Arthritis Organization. • $23,800 for Ruby Fund Grants to your sisters in dire need.

The Foundation appreciated your commitment to continue your generous annual gifts while also supporting our new Headquarters Campaign. Annual giving is our opportunity to keep our successful programs strong, and to ensure that AOII is a Fraternity for the 21st century, as well as a Fraternity with a long and cherished history.

Two years ago the Foundation Board developed our three-year strategic plan. We continue to meet the many goals set by that plan. The support of AJAO (American Juvenile Arthritis Organization) was one of our new goals. We wanted to make AOIIs and others aware that arthritis is not just an "old person's" disease.

With your chapter fundraising efforts in addition to individual gifts, w e have been able to send 6 families to the Arthritis National Education Conferences, as well as young adults aged 18-25. We have also under- writtenseveralyoungadultbreakoutsessions. Thisyearwewillbeginofferingarthritismini-grantsso chapters can get donation credit tlirough the Foundation and still designate their funds to local arthritis chapters.

The President's Club, recognizing leadership in annual giving, was instituted. The 1897 Club, recognizing new graduates and young alumnae donors' annual support, also was instituted.

Our Ambassador Program enables the Foundation to reach sisters i n all parts o f the country b y sending representatives to local chapters. You can request an Ambassador to attend your Founders' Day, State Day or chapter meeting for a short Foundation presentation.

The Foundation will be celebrating its Silver Anniversary in 2002! Our goal is to increase the size of our unrestricted endowment to one million dollars and our grant dollars by 100%. We can't do this without your continued support. In addition to your annual support, become a member o f our Second Century Society or make a millennium pledge to our Endowment Fund. Or consider all three!

"To keep a lamp burning, you have to keep putting oil in it." Mother Teresa. That is a good message to remember as we look at financial needs for the coming years. The members of the Foundation thank you for helping to keep the lamp burning and ensuring AOll's financial future.

MEMBER

SISTERS HELPINGENSUREAOII'S FUTURE Dragma/FALL 2000

21

Fraternally,

Jean E.Sells. Zeta

Alpha Omicron Pi Foundation President

22

ToDragma/FALL 2000

BENEFACTORS

The Foundation salutes these alumnae that have supported the Foundation over many years and have attained the top cumulative giving levels.

ALPHA BETA

Florida Atlantic University

FRIEND

Pamela Masucci

ALPHA BETA TAU

Thomas More College

SPONSOR

Buffie Rains

SUSTAINING MEMBER

Julie Metzger

FRIEND

Angie Diebold Ziegelmeyer

ALPHACHI

Western Kentucky University

ROSE CLUB

Rachel Allen

Jennifer Waddle Greulich Elaine James Kennedy-Morrow

WHEAT CLUB

Flowers Morgan

Susan Ward Nally

SPONSOR

Darragh Moffat Bailey Marsha Bird Bordas

Jerrie Caney Bradshaw Juanita Overhults Brown Michelle Martin Graham Cassandra Henry Gray Ronda Finley Harmon Jennifer Williamson Severns Bianca Browning Warner

SUSTAINING MEMBER

Cynthia Stark Hines Tracy Maxwell Debra Jones Rieke Weimar Yepsen

FRIEND

Beth Bantly

Wendy Carnahan

Christina Cunningham Kelley Kearney Dodd Rhonda Doyel Dotson Jenny Heidbrink

Leigh Ann Bristol Koch Nancy Lottes Luetkehans Lana Frensley Molnar Miekeye Morehead Murphy Martha Sharp

Leslie Spencer

Kasey Thomas

Anne Marie Moore Volkert Kelly Daniel Whitsell

ALPHA DELTA

University of Alabama

PI CIRCLE

Carole Jurenko Jones

RUBY CLUB

Janet Jurenko Brown

ROSE CLUB

Dolores White Rhodes

WHEAT CLUB

Laura Smith Courter Sherri Tucker Freeman Linde Tucker Pflaum Connie Pickett

Carol Bruno Rumorc

SPONSOR

Tamara Brown Atkins Debbie Brewion Dailey Patricia Lavin Kisling Dana Swindal Ray

Joy Lewis Rhea

Deborah Hood Riddle

Susan Jones Rohrer

Susan McCuIlough Shenefield

SUSTAINING MEMBER

Ginger Manasco Busby Dorothy Gardner Gambill Leatha Gilbert

Leigh Hardwick Hardy

Maritzabel Rodriguez Hyde Lisa Lorino

Linda Curry Miller

Lynne Beason Rhodes Therese Rhodes

FRIEND

Kendra Bridwell Jennifer Peel Cullen Leigh Cobb Ellis Jenny Fleege

Christy Donald

Beth Eley

Mandy Williams Emley Marissa Fodera

Lisa Garceau

Kerry Gibson

Alissa Hanion Hanlon Kimberley Wagner Hays Jennifer Leach

Lindsay Lisoski

Kelly Michael

Lindsay Neuweiler

Lisa Pinnero

Katie Smith

Michelle Smoker

Karen Hodges Stanfield Meggin Van Hook Sheifa Weddon

PEARL CLUB

Founders' Roll (S100.000 and above) Joyce Baca Lacerte, LAMBDA BETA

Ruby Club IK.OOO 10$9,999) *Norma Marshall Ackel, KAPPA THETA

Anne Witt Allison, OMICRON

Jane Beard, CHI DELTA

Eleanor King Blank. OMEGA

June Greer Bogle, Nu OMICRON JanetJurenkoBrown,ALPHA DELTA Liz Romine Coffey, CHI LAMBDA Mary Batman Converse, PHI KAPPA CarolineCraig,LAMBDA BETA

Patricia Kooken Golgart. BETA PHI Martha Garrahan Hazard, CHI KathrynJensen, THETA OMEGA

Janet OsgoodLawson. OMICRON PI Lee, Danner & Bass. Inc. EleanoreDietrichMacCurdy,IOTAALPHA LeahHardcastleMacNeil,DELTA SIGMA Marriott International Inc. KimCarsonMcGowan, PHI PeggyThomas Mclntire.BETA PHI

Mimi Decker Mortensen, EPSILON ALPHA LisaNiedenthal.BETA PHI IreneWagarOestrike,BETA GAMMA Margaret DorrSchutt, RHO

Dorothy Donlen Shepard. THETA JanJohnson Slagowski. KAPPA KAPPA Renee Pugh Smith, PHI UPSILON JoanLottStarikaPhD.CHI DELTA CarolMillerStevenson,OMEGA ElizabethShinnThornton,KAPPATHETA AdrianE.Wilhoite MaryMcCammonWilliams, PHI MaryAnnBeckman Zabel, BET* PHI

*Denotes Deceased Member

Alpha Circle ($50,000 to $99,999) Anonymous

Blanche Franklin Chilcote, ALPHA JohnA.andRuthR.Jurenko

PHI

Kayra Gibbs

Kim Ginn

Kimberly Jaynes Henson

Peggy Alanzo Hoekenga

Heather Honeycutt

Mary Beth Thompson Joiner

Linda Rice Maples

Elizabeth Large Moore

Alison Brinkman Presley

Stephanie Anderson Sheppard ALPHA OMICRON Misty Shears Stamper

Dana Stephens Travis

Melissa Kuzucu Vickers

Omicron Circle ($25,000 to$49.0001 *Angela Griley Creed, ALPHA Pi

MargaretDamonGoodlund,TAB *Frances Stillman Hodges, UPSILON

Pi Circle is 10.00010 $24.9991

Ginger Banks. Pi KAPPA JulieBrining.GAMMA DELTA

Helen Anderson Chown, ALPHA SIGMA Catherine Daugherty Cifers. OMICRON Peg Kramer Crawford, IOTA

Jacque Struble Dinwiddie, EPSILON ALPHA GayleFitzpatrick.ALPHA RHO JoBethWallingHeflin,Pi KAPPA Barbara Daugs Hunt, P H I D E L T A RuthMueller Kleymeyer. BETA PHI Carole Jurenko Jones. ALPHA DELTA TheJurenko Foundation

June Miller Lighty, LAMBDA MBNA

Sandy McPeeks

EliseMoss, TAU DELTA WindyPerkins,DELTA DELTA FrankieFrazierRoberts, NuBETA KarenThomasTucker.DELTA DELTA Phyllis ArnerWesterman, RHO DotWatersWilliams.LAMBDA SIGMA

ALPHA OMICRON P I FOUNDATION 9025 Overlook Boulevard

P.O. Box 395

Brentwood.Tennessee 37024-0395

Tel (615) 370-0920 • Fax (615) 370-4424 E-mail: [email protected] Web: www.aoiifoundation.org

FOUNDATION STAFF

Bobby Ann Stanton. EXECUTI VE DI RECTOR

Grace Turner Day, ASSISTANT DIRECTOR Elizabeth Chariton Lindsey, CONTROLLER Laurie Taylor. ADMINISTRATIVE ASSISTANT

For information on donating to the Foundation, please see the enclosed envelope. Make your gift andbeincludedinthedonorlistnextyear!

Thank you.

Louisiana State University

GIVING

LEVELS

Founders'Roll...$100,000+

$50,000+ $25,000 + $10,000 + $5,000+ $2,500 + $1,000+ $500+ $250 + Sustaining Member.... $125+

AlphaCircle Omicron Circle Pi Circle RubyClub Pearl Club Rose Club Wheat Club Sponsor

Friend .Upto$124

* Denotes Deceased

Member

BETA

ALPHA GAMMA

Washington State University

ROSE CLUB

Sue Wayenberg Hinz

WHEAT CLUB

Trudy Roberts Abrams Linda Broeekel-Fry Opal Jenkin Hill Peggy Moss Ostrander Sue Daiger Schell

SPONSOR

Shama Bergquist Albright Stephanie Daley-Watson Judy Stein Falk

Linda Panasuk Seibold Denise Novacoff Sprague Pamela Ahlf Teglovic

SUSTAINING MEMBER

Jennifer Colwell

Suzanne Peterson Jaynes Julie Beckel Johnson Sharon Dinning Salzberg

FRIEND

Bonnie Johnson Aim Julie Babcock

Michelle Bircher Melissa Mudgett Borel Jamie Hills

Janelle Milodragovich Wendy Porter

Michele Weinman

Jen White

ALPHA KAPPA

University of Worth Alabama

ROSE CLUB

Laura Brush King

WHEAT CLUB

Theresa Collins Davis

SPONSOR

Mary Louise Barnes Ogle

SUSTAINING MEMBER

Carol Gundlach Hall

FRIEND

Karen Howington Snow

ALPHA LAMBDA

Georgia Southern University

SUSTAINING MEMBER

Buffie Johnson Jubard

Katie McDonald

FRIEND

April Bugg Leigh-Anne Burgess Jennifer Cole Christina Cooler Melissa Crider

Amy Dewease Megan Dodson

Elaine DeFranees Ellis

Marjorie Hunt Sanders

WHEAT CLUB

H ! Margaret Abshire

Lyle Maier Bayle

Bonnie Dunlap

Louise Smith Hall

Gayle Ahern Keller

Norma Nash McClure Sheila Vanderbrook Trahan

SPONSOR

Marilynn Larson Bordelon Vijean Piazza Burden Virginia Maddox Shepherd Jane Marker Snook

SUSTAINING MEMBER

Alice Reese Cooney Susan Parry Leake Kathleen Williams Meek Nancy Shaw Shahcen

FRIEND

Janet Looby Morgan Gladys Whilfield Murphy Barbara Helms Stone

ALPHA PHI

Montana State University

ALPHA CIRCLE

Blanche Franklin Chilcote

PEARL CLUB

Kathleen Vaughn Holm

ROSE CLUB

Diane Booth Granger Katherine Kane Helppie Margaret Moser Wallace

WHEAT CLUB

Jean Lenham Hansen Helen Wolf Hoffman Jacqueline Miner-Bean Mary Francesca Palffy Amy Pound

Martha Wright Suter

Marion Amos Wainwright

SPONSOR

Jane Liquin Ahrendes Margrette Gray Brown Margaret Olson Crennen Gretchen Thornton Frisby Sheri Luft Larsen

Dorothy Dell Lough Margaret Simpson Nolan Patricia Erickson Odell Gyla Marmont Smith Lorene Stranahan Marillyn Pearson Thomas Daryl Davis Todd

Carol Raffl Vorpahl Ginger Stanley Walter

SUSTAINING MEMBER

Janis Anderson Armondo LaDonna Preuninger Bergman Laurie Galle Green

Vicki Sherick Hawkesworth

Sisters

-ttfifptfrff Eftsttr*

Laura Hermansen

Martha Pope Hutchison Eunice Hunt Hutton

Deni Jacobson

Lou Ann Vaijacic Montgomery Mildred Balzhiser Olsson Patricia Rend Orlich

Janet Russell

Audrey Scifres Skinner Shirley Northam Stevens Freda Chamherlin Toner

FRIEND

Julie Peterson Christensen Maxine Martin Conver Diane Gomer Dailcy

Jane Doering Gumprecht Kerry Hanson

Sarah Hickman

Kerin Johnson Kemmerer Jennifer Lane

Kim Matwiejow

Erlene Biggs Mazuranich Kimberli Hart McCullough Lea Anderson Moore

Lorri Walden Nelson

Cori Gilman Roush Theresa Simpson

Nicole Stein

Edith Johnston Wright

ALPHA PI

Florida State University

OMICRON CIRCLE

*Angela Griley Creed

ROSE CLUB

Pam Mathis Thomas

WHEAT CLUB

Marjorie Carter Dillingham Karen Glendinning Givens Bobbie McFee James

Renie Hall Lehman

Carol Membert

SPONSOR

J o y c e H i x D a n n e c k e r Robyn Kimble Green Katharine Martin Guajardo Nancy Goldberg Henning Nan Cecil Rankin

Sara Parise Ridolph

Marjorie Parker Wessel

SUSTAINING MEMBER

Lucinda Homko Filomio Virgie Melton PatTord Ailsa McKelvey Tjaden

FRIENO

Sharon Shores Danyluck Sarah Wilkinson Hereford Anne Weber Home

Nancy Danneman Isenberg Catherine Nott McClellan Nancy Hill Rivard

Janet Crosby Rou

ALPHA PSI

Bowling Green State University

FRIEND

Kristin Tomasko Brennan Lara Lee Hartman

Nikki Herman

Tina Hite

Kelly Pratt

Catherine Aiple Smith

ALPHA RHO

Oregon State University

PI CIRCLE

Gayle Fitzpatrick

ROSE CLUB

Carol Clark

Carol Cooper Jeannette Rice Hewitt Barb Bierer Long

WHEAT CLUB

Sarah Battelle

Molly Taylor Jackson

SPONSOR

Shirley Abrams Davis

SUSTAINING MEMBER

Carol Wrausman Berwald Jo Steagall Clark

Ann Peterson Overmyer Meredith Thomson Walters

FRIEND

Alvilda Pearson Hogansen Janice McDonald Wendolyn Hongo Peace Caroline Brown Pickering Marlene Johnston Read Colleen Hise Tilney

ALPHA SIGMA

University of Oregon

PI CIRCLE

Helen Anderson Chown

WHEAT CLUB

Joan Herbranson Agerter Maxine Martin Cramer Edith Clement La Borde

SPONSOR

Jeanette Harbert Anderson Joanne Maxfield Anderson Elinor Sakrison Bjorklund Mary Sexton Gordon Cheryl Fifer Hallquist

Jane Abriel Jones-Hansen Carrol Pageler Kirk Vauna Pipal

Marie Keller Squires

SUSTAINING MEMBER

Hildur Warner Bailey

Carol Emmons Rose

Mary Contreras Vaillancourt

FRIEND

Maggie Lague Koch Colleen Dunn Lowe Katie Keller Vilale

ALPHA TAU

SUSTAINING MEMBER

Jennifer Martin Steiningcr

FRIEND

Mollie Beard Tina Bentz Ann Rogers

BETA CHI

Kentucky ttesleyan College

SUSTAINING MEMBER

Sandra Dalton Hoover Elizabeth Lyons Roy

BETA DELTA

V'illanova University

SPONSOR

Nina Mirabile Noska

Debra McGarry Ritchie

SUSTAINING MEMBER

Linda Norton

FRIEND

Kristine Hartley

SUSTAINING MEMBER

Judy Ormsby Bradley Carolyn Berry Brown Marilyn Gruhl Brownell Helen Samaras Coukoulis Alice Radford Haarup Marilynn Heim

Joanne Attwood Kettles Judy Miller Kruger Carol Rans Marsh Marcia Rowbottom

•Elizabeth Muzzall Scott Mary Ann Kidder Smith Dorothy Pickett Suchner Marilynn Italiano Ward Gloria Green Wurdock

FRIEND

Susanne Ofiaro Banks Janet Crenshaw

Irma Weimer Dunton Janet Englehardt Freeman Elizabeth Baker Fritz Heather Hubbard Galecka Susan Kernel

SPONSOR

Carroll Mites Bross

Jeanne Hays Crippin

Suan Guess-Hanson Stephanie Hobson

Judith Harding Jay

Linda Wulff Norton

Sandra Wefenstette Thornton Diane Brown Thorstenson Karen Schmitt Young

SUSTAINING MEMBER

Patricia Tripp Blair Elizabeth Formentini Mary Sluiter Giger Jean Inner Goldenstein Nancy Kolontouros Megan Lovell

Judy Freundt Zawacke

FRIEND

Amy Adams

Stacy Bailerton Katie Brandt Jennifer Britton Mandie Cornelius

ROSE CLUB

Mildred Frazee Allen Melissa Courson Carson Mona Dees Clare

Hud Slagle Clark

Marcia Courson

Jacqueline Uecker Guiser Doris Schory Hazelwood Janice Graves Keucher Mary Spurgeon Kitchel Betty Rutherford Kuntz Rita Mendenhall Mengon Roberta Halvorson O'Neal Liz Thompson Sawicki Ruth Thompson

WHEAT CLUB

Joan Davis Bach

Pat Vioni Benson

Max Lapin Farnsworth Daisy Hinkle Garton

Sally Gray

Lyn Keasbey Green

Marie Hlavacek Holbrooke Venilia Harpster Johnson Mary Helen Seipel Kilman Mazie Kilgus Kreicker Diane Schultze Leland Josephine Walsh McConnell Nona Neff Oesterle

Jamie Mittiga Powell

Mary Mcllveen Rose

Gwen Sharp

Helen Hughes Smeltzer Joanne Bowlby Speyer Anita Ritter Watkins

SPONSOR

Lynn Mensing Adamson

Lynn Anderson Bayman

Mary Griffiths Cross

Rosalie Hasewinkle Dellinger Virginia Steele Fauber

Joan Van Buskirk Goen Jane Teeple Guthrie Audrey Smith Hiller Catherine Davis Kennedy P e g g y H e r n i c z K i l m e r Sara Reeves Kinnaman Jane Barr Kohr

Marjorie Boyd Lind

Sandra Hanna Liston Rebecca Mott Littell

Lucy Townsend Long

Mary Parkes Marx

Sarah McMahon Mason Donna Phelps Meyerhoven Kathy Atkins Morningstar Mary Mahon Munehak Janet Neely

Mary June Cave Nordhoff Dorothy Baker Patton

Liz Hafner Pietsch

Juanita Barwick Ringer Mary Shroyer Riser

Ann Edens Sanderson Betty Funk Sepanek Marjorie Merckx Stump Jeanne Duffield Thomas Rae Davis Walk

Lisa Snouffer Warren

SUSTAINING MEMBER

Portia Abbett

Mary Yeager Backer

June Nettleship Barnes Janice LeDrew Besson Lorene Edmunds Biberdorf Teresa Simonin Burt

Mary Evans Dewey

Ann Butler Harrison Melissa Persohn Holman Kristin Hori

Marilyn King Irvin

Vivian Hurst Kistler

Kay Gilbert Linson

Dolores Herron Miller

Denison

ROSE CLUB

Janet Pierce

Dorothy Hartshorn Kortepeter B a r b a r a E a s t e r d a y S c h w a r t i n g Jane Cockerill Sweeder

WHEAT CLUB

Jean King Brown

1999-2001 Board of Directors:

Carol Miller Stevenson, Omega; Barbara Daugs

University

Conway

Natalie Hasbrook Del Porte Bentidji State University Lillian King Nicholl

Natalie Cowan Scharre Diane Sekura Snyder Margaret Vanhorn Stearns Jane Wonders Stitt

Wilda Wiest Webster

SPONSOR

Virginia Bell

Mary Hering Coe Ginny Garnham Detzel Phyllis Dininger Freed Grace Smith Greene

Jo Ann Taylor Lister Beverly Berman Mack Susie Shelton Shawkey

SUSTAINING MEMBER

Laura Harshbarger Coble Marty Deckman Cramer Joanne Kunz

Doris Gregg Smith

Joan Hess Wolsiefer

FRIEND

Jean Mitchell Green Susan Kellogg

Mildred Borger Prentice

ALPHA THETA

Coe College

SPONSOR

Peggy Hoffmann Fermier Janet Osborne

Jennifer Potter Teget

SUSTAINING MEMBER

Theresa Simon

BETA GAMMA

Michigan State University

RUBY CLUB

Irene Wagar Oestrike

PEARL CLUB

Helen Lee Foster

ROSE CLUB

Pat Velliquette Koproski Marylyn Hileman Neuder Char Brown Rennoe

WHEAT CLUB

Molly Howell

Arley Berwald Hulstrand Ann Reed Meredith

Milly Schiele Neuder Joanne Nelson Nowak Donna Messenger Rowe Sandra Obeshaw Slee Carol Des Jardins Wilcox

SPONSOR

Jane Engel Allen

Bonnie Scudder Baker Marjorie Dinan Bouck Anne MacMillan Clule Jeanne Gamble Hillmer Sally Vegors Janis

Wilma Helfrich Malarik Barbara Spehar Millington Suzann Price Norton Constance Quigley Overby Marcia Ruhling

^

Front row, l-rf Hunt,PhiDelta;JeanE.Sells,Zeta;DorothyWatersWilliams, LambdaSigma. Backrow,l-r,Audrey HoenshellHopkins,Upsilon;MarilynRoseHerman, Upsilon;CaroleJurenkoJones,AlphaDeltaand

International President; Frankie Frazier Roberts, Nu Beta.

BETA EPSILON

Leslie Haack Kuizema

Irma Shumway Martinson Vicky Evans Piatt

Virginia McAfee Richmond Brande Schaefer

Cari Suchan

Kristen Aversa Turner

Anne LeMense Walker

BETA KAPPA

University of British Columbia

WHEAT CLUB

Lillian Johanson Holeton

SPONSOR

Shirley Venables Hammond

SUSTAINING MEMBER

Dorothy Breeze Trisha Home Marjorie Stevens

FRIEND

Jill Roycroft Johncox

BETA LAMBDA

Illinois Wesleyan University

PEARL CLUB

Ingrid Latimer Schulz

ROSE CLUB

Sheila Starkey Kaurin Lorrie Johnson Leahigh Lisa Setlak Roth

WHEAT CLUB

Lorie Bergstrom Bleyer Jacqueline Susie Koustrup Cyndy Ritzier Pulick

Lisa Dieter

Stephanie Fong

Betsy Frick

Kelly Grady

Abbey Haag

Heather Hume

Samantha Janci

Kim Karger

Kori Keel

Melissa Keysor

Catherine Roberts Lavigne Sarah Lessick

Nancy Idoux Lonsdale Debbie Mackoway Marilee Muirhead Elizabeth Notz

Jaimi Pauley Teresa Phillips Megan Richards Sarah Sechrest Suzanne Shields Sharon Stowe Diane Tasic Jennifer Wilson Stephanie Wilson Ginger Yarger

BETA PHI

Indiana University

PI CIRCLE

Ruth Mueller Kleymeyer

RUBY CIRCLE

Patricia Kooken Golgart Peggy Thomas Mclntire Lisa Niedenthal

Mary Ann Beckman Zabel

To Dragma/FALL 2000

23

Diana Hamann Ruschhaupt Ruth Vedell Schaaf

Angie Scott

Cheryl Regan Sharps

FRIEND

Karen Dunn Blosser

Nancy Bardonncr Bossert

Ann Burton Bubar

Mary Crouse

Paula Davenport

Jennifer Dewees

Beverly Hurst Erdmann

Carol Makielski Flora

Donna Bolt Hoover

Billie Jean Marsh Hurt Michelle Method Jacobs Roberta Taylor Kilborn

Judith Howard McCarty Kerrie Hoaglin Meyer

Julia Speer Miley

Maxine Roberts Mitchell Sheri Seigneur Phelps

Becky Rasteiter

Leah Mitchell Rohrbach

Kay Ward Salisbury Antonietta Femminella Scalzo Deborah Packard Tarn

Alice Clark Thode

Marcy Watson

Yvonne Beavin Welty

Somer Wilson

BETAPI

Eastern Michigan University

WHEAT CLUB

Cynthia Given

Barbara Zolnierczak

SPONSOR

Ingrid Blom Sheldon

Mary Ann Kirr Stephens

SUSTAINING MEMBER

Linda Heaton Grates Sandra Sklar Pollock Joyce Zielinski Szymanski Sally Gustavson Taylor

FRIEND

Lynn Collins Charron Sharon Ward Ross

BETA RHO

University of Montana

ROSE CLUB

Kathryn Timra

WHEAT CLUB

Barbara Wilson Ifft

FRIEND

Susan Whitney Kurtz Erica Melander Liput

BETA SIGMA

Boise State University

SPONSOR

Karen Kuhn Ralstin

BETA TALi

University of Toronto

WHEAT CLUB

Heidi Slusar Harris

Margaret McKee Pattison

SPONSOR

Diana Speaight Pilsworth

SUSTAINING MEMBER

Susan Corben Byram Jean Snider Hoadley Helen Boston Kennedy Wilma Purdy Warriner

FRIEND

Megan Archer

Karen Baxter

Jeanne Craig

Diann Scrutton Evans Michelle Farris Brenda Lum

•.

Alumnae enjoy visiting at a Foundation donor brunch during Leadership Institute 2000.

Front, l-r,ElizabethHummel, Zeta; RebcTraber, Upsilon; Dorothy Robinson,NuLambda. Back,l-r,JeanieSells,Zeta, Foundation President; MarilynHerman, Upsilon, ScholarshipChair; Peg Crawford, lota,PastInternationalPresidentandmember ofthe FoundationSecondCenturySociety.

Judith Keck Hutchison Nancy Setter Karl Margie Arbaugh Lamar Susan Anderson Parma Mary Lee Dierker Reiter Mary McElwain Sewell Sharon Van Fleet

SUSTAINING MEMBER

Deborah Henderson Arney Eleanor Yockers Becher Cheryl Blasdel

Yvonne Tobias Burry Dawn Cedervall

Crystal Paine Compese Patricia Smith Ewen Carolyn Sukla Faulkner Joan Dorau Hohorst Pamela Jones

Elaine Sterling Lindquist Gerry Prince Parker

Rila Phelan

Millicent deBelle Whitwell

FRIEND

Ada Smith Anderson Frances Ladwig Benson

Christine Roberts

Dana Cantarano

Allison Dever

Gia DiStefano

Gretchen England

Payton Frey

Amanda Friedland

Heather Frisbie

Julie Gallegos

Margaret Brady Garmaker Cecilia Falgien Green Kathrynne Green

Ethnic Groves

April Hebard

Joy Henika

Gina Inzana

Jennifer Johnson Chelsea Jordan

Karri Karsh

Nicole Branch King Tamsen Moreland Megan Potochniak Catherine Rawlinson Netti Riggs

Katy Rossiter

Amy Rubin

Abby Schroeder

Heather Sciambia Ashley Shepardson Katie Southwick Melissa Speaker Erin Stephens Natasha Strokan Lisa Walk

Katie Ward

Elizabeth Williams Heidi Wise

Karen Wolf

CHI EPSILON

The Ohio State University

SUSTAINING MEMBER

Jenny Ellis Powell

FRIEND

Leigh Demshar Sarah Schantz Ellis Brooke Enderle Alissa Glickman Abigail Rosenberger Amy Troxel

CHI LAMBDA

University of Evansville

RUBY CLUB

Liz Romine Coffey

ROSE CLUB

Toni Reitz

Anne Buechlein Wilmes

WHEAT CLUB

Rebecca Admire Herman Cecile Klamer

Linda Capin Paine

Lois Ryon Schmidt Victoria Johnson White

SPONSOR

Billie Stirn Borders Anita Horn

Margaret Kinkel

Karen Holscher Maudlin Anne Powell

Susan Sander Riggs

Pamela Lindsey Raster Marjorie Zurstadt Soyugenc Sue Blaine Wehrman

SUSTAINING MEMBER

Virginia Beesley

Jane Mengon Bernhardt Shana Stuntz Brownlee Maria McQueen Keppler Carolyn Ruschmeier Marcus Rebecca Creech Nimnicht Lynn Foshee Reed

FRIEND

Ashley Ball

Jeanne Carter

Angie Crawford Cristen Gazlay-Loeb April Harris

Nicole Loveless

Kelly Pedigo Maddux Julie McDonald Jennifer Moore

Julia Norris

Heidi Pell

Karla Petit

Johonna Pollack Jamie Porter

Anne Reed

Suzette Russo Rickert Cyndi Rowley

Laura Russ

Laura Searcy

Angie Smith

Christy Steimel Lindsey Stout

Dina Seib Willming Julie Wood

Stacy Yeater

CHI OMICRON

Central State University

PEARL CLUB

Linda Peters Collier

ROSE CLUB

Linda Patterson Braden

Mary Jennings Katschke

WHEAT CLUB

Pat Howard-Peebles

CHI PSI

California Polytechnic State University SPONSOR

Andrea Dill

Sally Lawler Ducklow

SUSTAINING MEMBER

Juliet Wilson Freeland

Kirstie Macpherson

FRIEND

Julie Bonner Aimee Burch

Ali Doyle Kristie Ewing Renee Hoffner Julie Johnston Dana Longinetti Alysen Mayes Stacy McKisson Marci Murphy Caryn Pedrotti Lesa Perry

Heidi Jo Hutchens Phillips Carisue Proctor-Bench Michele Scott

Norma Fleming Stark Christina Underwood Sarah Walker

Leslie Wilburn Erika Wolf

CHI SIGMA

Centenary College

FRIEND

Gloria Foster Quinlan

CHI THETA

Northeastern State University

FRIEND

Michelle Clifton Cooper Anita Hylton

BETA THETA

Butler University

ALPHA CIRCLE

Anonymous

ROSE CLUB

Mary Alice Burch Fizer

WHEAT CLUB

Virginia Sheely Thompson

CHI

Syracuse University

RUBY CIRCLE

Martha Garrahan Hazard

ROSE CLUB

Lorraine Chanatry-Howell

Adell W oessner Meacham

WHEAT CLUB

Barbara Ernst Bruening

Lee Colangelo

Carolyn Oliver Collier Ada May Marshall Fearon Helen Bogosta Gilbert Ruth Marsh Haggerty Mary Brodbeck Peterson

SPONSOR

Marie Harcharufka Dixon Margaret Wootton Dow Jane Ann Flynn

Wynn Baker Kamps

Alice Watson Marcy

Joyce Santa Maria Martin

Shirley Sears Mills

Jo Ann Wallace

SUSTAINING MEMBER

Helen Marriner Eldredge Marjorie Tonks Pacino Dawn Penniman

Rose Milwick Riley Francie Dean Steiner Joan Wallick Vanzo

FRIEND

Jean Karcher Eldred

Jane Brooks Kaskela Shana Novak

Amy Spagnole

CHI ALPHA

SPONSOR

Theresa Workman Jones

SUSTAINING MEMBER

Sarah Christo!

Janet Jensen Dallas Kathy Shephard Weiner Barbara Wiswell

FRIEND

Krista Conover

Wendy Gallup Geis Nicole Gould

Christine Weber Hale Carol Landry

Krishnia Parker Jennifer Kahsen Pearce Audrey Potts-Hess Darla Bayer Rosenthal Elizabeth Shapiro

CHI BETA

University of Virginia

SUSTAINING MEMBER

Shelly Nielsen Christine Smith

CHI DELTA

University of Colorado

RUBY CIRCLE

Jane Beard

Joan Lott Starika Elizabeth Shinn Thornton

PEARL CLUB

Becky Shook Weinberg

ROSE CLUB

Sue Reid Mattern

Karin Gustafson Nelson Elizabeth McCarver Tolson

WHEAT CLUB

Martha Idell Anderson Marcia Hunt Brewer

Jane Mannweiler Cardea Ruth Ann Olson Gatchell Ann Morgan Hayslip Dolores Oparil Jones Beth Lewis Milam Beverly Lutz Morse Norma Yankocy Riffel

SPECIAL RECOGNITION OF COLLEGIATE AND ALUMNAE CHAPTERS FOR FOUNDATION GIVING IN 1999-2000:

Boone

24

To Dragma/FALL 2000

University of California Davis SPONSOR

PEARL CLUB

Kathy Tribbey Fitzgerald

ROSE CLUB

Karen Norene Mills

Gail Englehart Bromgard Amelia Brown

Carole Krez Foran Carolyn Kober Howerton

Diane Panagakis Mary Rose White

Rouman

COLLEGIATE CHAPTERS

Top chapters in total giving:

Lambda Sigma Delta Delta Rho Omicron

Top chapters in per capita giving:

Kappa Kappa Lambda Sigma Iota Sigma

ALUMNAE CHAPTERS

Top chapters in total giving:

Southern OrangeCo.,CA Phoenix, AZ

St. Louis,MO

Top chapters in per capita giving:

Macomb Co,Ml

Greater Los Angeles, CA Southern Orange Co.,CA

Stst^PS

M*J/?tSH? Efrsitrp <M tiff's F&ttt'rt

FRIENDS

OF THE FOUNDATION

1999-2000

iGive.com. inc.

John A. & Ruth R. Jurenko

Danielle Kallaher

Kerry Agency, Inc.

Koproski Family Foundation

Lee, Danner & Bass, Inc. *LendLease Real Estate Investment Marriott International Inc.

*May Dept Stores Co. Foundation MBNA

Memphis Panhellenic

Dorothy Metzger

E. ClarkMorrow

Dolores Obirek

California Panhellenic Council

Phi Kappa Tau Foundation

Phi Mu Fraternity

plaNETJAM.com Inc.

Greg L. Reed

Dorothy Roberts

Jill Kennedy

Nancy Strow Sheley Sara Thompson Wawrin

FRIEND

K a c e y B u c h a n a n

Heather Burkeen

Cathy Davenport Cavanah Kathy Chitty

Michelle Clayton

Jill Collignon

Kris Crichton

Emilee Dale

LeAnne Deck

Erica Emmons

Sara Jane Ginn

Sarah Hawkins

Barbara Heflin

Heather Howell

Rachel Hutson

Erika Johnson

Kimberly Jones

Kelly Jordan

Mary LizLafferty

Jennifer Kimbell Lusk Keisha Lusk

Michelle Martini

Sarah McNeil

Alyson McNutt

Kim Moody

Christine Nichter

Julie Orr

Joanna Payne

Natalie Peek

Amber Reed

Alison Rhein

Kelly Hale Scruggs

Dottie Slemmer

Amber Strickland

Jill Tucker

Lindsay Tuggle

Sara Bernhardt Umbach Amberly Wallis

Amy Joiner Watkins Amanda White

Laura Wild

LeeAnn Willett

Keenan Williams

Keri Zoll

DELTA PI

Central Missouri State University

ROSE CLUB

Sharon Martin

WHEAT CLUB

Kristen Mysen Riley

SPONSOR

Linda Mansur

Quinetta Kateman Rutledge

SUSTAINING MEMBER

Lita Richtermeyer Jimenez Sherry Reeter Jones

Lisa Pohl Prenger

Julie Christian Zvacek

FRIEND

Jessica Covert

April Reed Giesmann

Amy Forsythe Herman Carol Bruce VanRyckeehem Joyce Vaughn Younk

DELTA PSI

Carolyn Adams

•Allstate Giving Campaign

Alpha Omicron Pi. Inc.

•Arthur J. Gallagher Foundation The AycoCharitable Foundation William Bender

Bill Hudson & Assoc.

Carol Branscomb

Ann WilhoiteBrilley

Nancy S. Brubaker

*Coca-Cola Co.

Community Health Charities William CrouchJr.

Donna Deatsch

Becky Derrow

Detroit Alumnae Panhellenic Assn. *Glaxo Wellcome, Inc.

Jay & Nadine Greene

The Griffith Family Foundation IBM Fund for Community Service

Wondal

Steven E. Short

Mabelle T. Slosson

Bobby Stanton

Beth Swartz

Marvin Taylor

The Cornerstone Co.

•The Home Depot

The Jurenko Foundation

UAB Panhellenic Council

*US West Foundation

Carol Valentine

*W. W. Grainger Inc. •Washington Mutual Foundation Dawn Weathers

•Wells Fargo Bank

Adrian E.Wilhoite

Jane T.Williams

DELTA SIGMA

San Jose State University

RUBY CLUB

Leah Hardcastle MacNeil

PEARL CLUB

Marilyn Myers Lieber

ROSE CLUB

Marlene Peterson Adams Nancy Schlosser Dunn Marguerite Crawford Lloyd Barbara Halvorsen O'Brien Irene Woodworth Shephard

WHEAT CLUB

Bette Jo Belda LaRea Wells Caneer Joyce Osborn

SPONSOR

Mary Bihler Bacigalupi Dorothy Ucovich Banker Beverly Bergstrom

Dorothy Krieger Hassur

Jo Ann Tartaul Hawley Mary Louise Olscn Nolde Marilyn Vasey San Martin Carol Thompson Silliman Isabel Navarro Steffan Marianne Thornton Tharratt

SUSTAINING MEMBER

Winifred Brooks Desch

Christina Hopkins Patricia Welch Newton Marie Giancoli O'Rourke Karen Youngman Ryan Mary Carli Smith

FRIEND

*Nancy Granewich Adams Nisha Ahluwalia

Melissa Barreto

Micfaaela Black

Leslie Brown

Laura Bushell

Aimee Heap Dugan Belen Felix

Fran Atkins Harkess Susie Hayne

Susie Jost

Carol Pedersen Jury Orva True LaMar

Alicia Mankins

Lisa Martin

Laura Menvielle

Lisa Raff Neitzel Kristina Palos

Beth Clarke Russell Stefanie Stevens Singer Sandi Smith

Heidi Stanfill

Jaime Stoeckle

Shirley Anthony Swasey Christina Tillman

DELTA THETA

Texas Woman's University

ROSE CLUB

Lisa Dutt

SUSTAINING MEMBER

Paula Covington

Teresa Rogido Cramer

Shellhorse

SUSTAINING MEMBER

Kristen Theus Cage

Kim Mason McCollom

FRIEND

Kimberly Doyle Dean Ali Dust

Heather Dewey Wagner

Ellen Cogen Lewis

Evelyn Adams Lindquist

Ruth Dresser Metcalfe

Blanche Downing Penniman at Lafayette

DELTA DELTA

Auburn University

PI CIRCLE

Windy Perkins

ROSE CLUB

Merrilyn Cook

Nancy Carr Garrett Katberine Trafton Leaver Virginia West

WHEAT CLUB

Reta Allen McKannan

Adrianne Smith Wallace

SPONSOR

Louise Jackson Cole Dorothy Doten

Judilyn Brooks Horton Emalyn Leathers Johnson Jean Howard Lowe Eileen Ferrell McVeigh Cynthia Weinberg Russo Lori Szczecina

Toni Thompson Turpen

Terri Freeman Wetherbee

SUSTAINING MEMBER

Julia Smith Alexander Amy Coates Brabham Mary Adams Burger Paula Jordan Camp Lori Hart Ebert

Dianne Routon Horn Mary Anne Phillips Long Jan Pierce

Pattie Neill Ragsdale Liesl Reiners Schutt Alison Harris Wedgworth Ann Crowe Wright

Vicki Pate York

FRIEND

Laura Bentley

Bonnie Boles

Julie Borders

Allison Bradley

Alyce Buchanan

Ardine Armistead Buchanan EHsha Burge

Charlotte Van Valkenburgh Byrd Caitlin Carey

Natalie Carlton

Gerrie Maria Chambliss Melina Cole

DeAnn Dennis

Janice McLeod Fuqua Katie Gallina

Ansley Hanson

Carolyn Healey

Elizabeth Jackson

Dina Kanellos

Vicki Rinks Kretzschmar Lindsay Lewis

Susan Lindsey

Gabriela Lovshin

Claudia Riddlehoover Mathews Martha Nichols Mathews Laura Moore

Jennifer Neel

Marie Carlile Newberry Tracy Nix

Katie Patterson

Laura Powers

Tricia Ramage

Marj Murrell Roate

Tiffany Robertson

Melissa Lane Russell

Betty Nichols Ryberg Heather Seay

Catherine Dauphin Settle Margaret Smith

Peggy Lindsey Sprague

Leah Sproull

Katie Thompson

Martha Williams Thompson Ashley Walker

Erin Walsh

DELTA OMEGA

Murray State University

PEARL CLUB

Mary Matarazzo Bryant

ROSE CLUB

Susan Pace Brodnan

WHEAT CLUB

Jo Heibert Fields

Deborah Hunter

SPONSOR

Carrie Joy Welborn Brookshire Laura Melugin Herndon Angela Hester Lawrence Carolyn Evans Olivcr-Broder Ginna Curling Simpson

SUSTAINING MEMBER

Sherri Lynn Skelton Baker Cheryl Simmons Broster Theresa Dover Chandler Jennye Long Curtis

Diane Drake

DELTA

Tufts University

ROSE CLUB

Constance Clark Blanchard

Annabelle Robbins

WHEAT CLUB

SPONSOR

Caryl Magnus Boyden

Caroline Dyer Norrington

SUSTAINING MEMBER

Ellen Lunden Angus

Laura Gavrelis Blomquist Barbara Clarke

Emilie Farnsworth

Sandra Giordano

Diana Bentley Grenier Norma Reed Heinold Fairlee Towsley Hersey Marie Kean Hewey

Toni Glasser O'Brien Elizabeth Soule Schroeder Sharon Wainright

FRIEND

Lisa Baxter

Beth Bergman

Jessica Branco

Kelly Carmody

Winis Chane

Sue Cobern

Alyssa Dubin

Christie Johnson Leesa Jones

Tatum Kobayashi

Eva Kvedar Kodis Stacy Kramer

Marie Herlihy Ledden Sarah Methe

Maria Schiff

Janet Siegel

Pamela Sinel

Meigan Thompson Carolin Topelson

Nina Varanelli

DELTA ALPHA

University of Missouri Columbia

WHEAT CLUB

Rochelle Rasnic Wait

ROSE CLUB

Nancy Tuttle Boisture

WHEAT CLUB

Karen Willis Bernard

Florence Sanders Jones

SPONSOR

Bette Lewis Armentor Carol Bonnet Smith-Neal Tyra Caire Treadway

SUSTAINING MEMBER

Joan Brooks Landry

FRIEND

Elizabeth Darnare'

Gail Jindra Dugas

Jenny Bower Fair

Mary Elizabeth Hamilton Sue Arbsland Sowell Summer Steib

DELTACHI

University of Delaware

WHEAT CLUB

Andrea Hausner Lehman

SPONSOR

Ruth Souders Bissot Tricia Tobiasz Brink Kimberly Altemus Carroll Pamela Falle Clay

Lisa Ritthaler Eck Virginia Hutting

Kathy Phillips

Nancy Gallo Speake

SUSTAINING MEMBER

Sarah Connolly Stewart

Margaret Ann Stoddard

FRIEND

Hilary Cornell

Diane Nissen Gamgochian Amiee Herbert Gold

Robin Seidenstat Haack

State University of New York FRIEND

DELTA BETA

University of Louisiana

• = Matching

Gift

ToDragma/FALL 2000

25

FRIEND

Kathryn VanBramer Melissa Vesely

DELTA RHO

DePaul University

FRIEND

Dana Balzano

Erin Blaszkowski Anna Dynia

Nicole Milen

Michelle Orth

Heidi Speckman Shannon Stacey Aleksandra Wlodarska

Emily Anguiano

Charity Copeland

Kathleen Budnick Hopman Laura Miller

Gwen Mitchek

Stephanie Espinoza Rendon

DELTA UPSILON

Duke University

ROSE CLUB

Suzanne Inabnit Bowman WHEAT CLUB

Marybeth Levin Lapham Judith Wagoner Pahren Wendy Erlenbach Ransbury

SPONSOR

Ellen Brady Alben Beth Peters Fagg Karen Semper Yolanda Smith

SUSTAINING MEMBER

Stephanie Green

Anita Walter

FRIEND

Sharon Cummings

Paula Litner Friedman Amy Steinberger Kishter Hoi lace Shantz Le Lievre Alisa Nave

Delaney Steele

Margaret Stewart

EPSILON

Cornell University

ROSE CLUB

Margaret Weekes Hendrickson

WHEAT CLUB

Bonnie Kauffman DeLaMater

SPONSOR

June Jacobi Gillin Patricia Haller Harbach Elinor Baier Kennedy Kathryn Altemeier Yohn

SUSTAINING MEMBER

Wendy Breckenridge

Joan Unkelbach Bruns Mabel Klisch Deal

Sandra Stroope Dupcak Arlene Loede Hanley Rosalie Weiss Hemingway Alice Quinn Lee

Joan Minnock

FRIEND

Clarissa Dedrick Carabateas Marci Levine

Virginia Dahm Myles

Lisa Herron Oros

Katrina Peck Overton Alicia Schwartz

Eva Stern Steadman Joyce McClusky Zweibel

EPSILON ALPHA

Pennsylvania State University

PI CIRCLE

Jacque Struble Dinwiddie

RUBY CLUB

Mimi Decker Mortensen

PEARL CLUB

Barbara Engstrom Schumacher

ROSE CLUB

Shirley Camp Belke Nancy Baier Gilbert Mary Anderson Hilton

WHEAT CLUB

Carolyn Leworthy Bachmann Inga Scheyer Book

Marilyn Minor Haas

Dorothy Jennings

Betty Widger Johler Marion Eberts Johnson Barbara Torrence Nelson Alyce George Schnabel Madge Terwilliger

Louise Everitt Zimmerman

SPONSOR

Elizabeth Eagelman Alexander Barbara Mattern Babb

Mary Dubin Donahue

Dawn George Eichelberger Anne Patterson Fitzpatrick Nancy Penrod Forrest

Doris Rumage Hellmund Ann Morris Hibbard

Jenny Knauer Johnson Barbara Frederick Junker Janet Holmes Linsenmaier Kelley Lynch

Barbara Moser

Elaine Miele Pasmore

Mildred Isenberg Russell

Terese Moslak Sutor

SUSTAINING MEMBER

Connie Quesenberry Anderson Edra Rubinkam Bechtel Elizabeth Semon Bonczar Alice Marshall Borland

Traci Perkins Caplan Emma-Jean Way Cole Molly Larkin Dallmeyer Lizann Davis

Marilyn Dumm Dickinson Kay Regan Estock

Phyllis Herr Grobert Laurie Heaslip Johnson Mary Beth Parrish Kester Liselotte Weihe Kinaman Jane Schlosser Martindell Judy Ott McGlynn

Nikki Miceli

Myrrel Rewbridge Overdorff

Jean Hofmeister Purdy Jeannette Spangler Snider Kristin Woerth Sullivan Judith Shaubach Thompson Deborah Ellis VandenBerg Geraldine Thomas Wandel Helen Wise Wylie

Sarah McKean Young

Sue Abell Ziegler

FRIEND

Tammy Andruchowitz Margaret White Biederman Miriam Gaige Blaisdell Becky DeLong

Nancy Nelsen Evers

Elizabeth Mellor Graul Courtney Kane Elizabeth Lewis

Leah Mallas

Christie Miller

Jessica Miller

Adele Miskie

Rebecca Anderson Morgenson Dolores Stark Moyer

Patricia Terrell Mutolo Cara Novick

Jennifer Pax

Dorothy Hull Reinhart Jamie Simon

Jennifer Simon

Glynnis Johns Siskind Rebecca Sobel

Sarah Stanley

Jennifer Steele

Jennifer Stern

Marie Vizza

Rachel Wellen

Alexis Wetzel

Carlajo Adkins Weyandt Elizabeth Williams Karla Thas Williamson Karen Wright

EPSILON CHI

Eton College

SPONSOR

Monique Caron McAdams

Jessica McCauley

SUSTAINING MEMBER

Nancy Thornhill Nicks

FRIEND

Tracy Cournoyer Denise Denkinger Jessica Floyd

Lisa Fort

Emily Gatewood Amanda Harrington Amy Hedrick

Lori Johnson Amanda Knouse Amy Kozlowski Sarah Maccubbin Lisa Maestin

Missy McAleer Jennifer McCumber Rachel McPhillips Heather Myers

Jennifer Oehlke

Lesley Siler

Donna Pirozzi Temples Tracy Tetterton

Ashley Varney

Amanda Vos

Christy Waterman

EPSILON GAMMA

Universify of Northern Colorado

FRIEND

Rue Elmore

Erin Paul

Desiree Williamson

EPSILON IOTA

Eastern Illinois University

SUSTAINING MEMBER

Dixie Alms

The Moore family of Memphis, Tennessee, attended a 1999 AJAO conference thanks to family scholarships

provided by the AOllFoundation.

FRIEND

EPSILON OMEGA Pamela Boley Eastern Kentucky University Kelly Carson

PRESIDENT'S

CLUB 1999-2000

SPONSOR

Allison Allgier

Carol Freytag

Rebecca Greer Rogers

FRIEND

Whitney Clay

Amy Brumfield demons Tammy Gee Curtis

Angie DcSensi

Leslee Hamilton

Lori Hummel

Kimberly Jones

Krista Stuntz Ledington Maria Maile

ETA

University of Wisconsin

SPONSOR

Elizabeth King Ellen

C a r o l S c h m i t t W o e r p e l

F R I E N D

June Dhein Ninnow

GAMMA

University of Maine

ROSE CLUB

Jennifer Patel Cousins

WHEAT CLUB

Annette Simoneau Bliss Barbara Higgins Bodwell Joan Drake

Catharine Rowe

SPONSOR

Mildred Haney Berdeen Phyllis Jordan Hanson Wilma Brown Miller Valerie Smith Stimpson Ruth Holland Walsh

SUSTAINING MEMBER

Alicia Coffin Corea Thelma Crossland Robie Elizabeth Barker Taverner

FRIEND

Frances Sawyer Alford Nancy Pistaki Chard Leslie Keith

Kara Lauze

Marjorie W oodman Miller Jo-Anne Shibles

GAMMA ALPHA

George Mason University

WHEAT CLUB

Ann ConJon Griesmer Janet Haher Rawl Dawne Bennett Ward

SUSTAINING MEMBER

Jennifer Riegel McGown Gay Trumbull Porter

Beth Clements Ami Cwalina liana Demko Tien Do-Suarez Angie Goff

Amy Knutsen

Crystal McCaJl

Sarah Ruhnke McVay Megan Miller

Kelly Vossler Morris Kim Braun Nisco Erin Ogburn

Erin Pauling

Pam Richmond

Talia Saez

Liz Schoonover Jaimee Stringer

GAMMA BETA

Indiana University of Pennsylvania ROSE CLUB

Karen Weigel

SPONSOR

Laurie Slenker Stauffer Cathy Connelly Wieand Phyllis Zaremba

SUSTAINING MEMBER

Lori Bigham Walters

FRIEND

Karen Fredericks Robin Pilardi Gibson Kathryn Kresge Carol Irish Smith

GAMMACHI

Carieton University

FRIEND

Dee Campbell

Ann Cobbe

Kristina Hunt

Karen Anderson Santos

GAMMA DELTA

University of South Alabama

PI CIRCLE

Julie Brining

PEARL CLUB

Robin Mansfield Wright

WHEAT CLUB

Judi Foster Gulledge

SPONSOR

Joanna Garner Burleson

Susan Kennedy Yonehiro

SUSTAINING MEMBER

Beth Hardy Katy Sapio

President's Club members donate $1,000 or more annually to the Foundation.

'Norma Marshall Ackel Mildred Frazee Allen

Anne Witt Allison

Elizabeth Craig Amundson Mary Hibbett Andrews Helen Gogela Austin

Ginger Banks AliceAraiVaughan Floyd Barge Jane Beard

Bill Hudson & Assoc. Eleanor KingBlank

June Greer Bogle Suzanne Inabnit Bowman JulieBrining

Janet Jurenko Brown Mary Matarazzo Bryant MelissaCoursonCarson Marianne Davies Carton PhyllisHobbsCauffiel Lonaine Chanarry-Howell LisaAckerman Cheeley Blanche FranklinChilcote HelenAndersonGrown Elizabeth RomineCoffey Marcia Courson

Caroline Craig

Peg KramerCrawford Thelma Culverson

Susan Danko

Tamee Dark

Jacquelyn StrubleDinwiddie 'Marguerite Ford Drees ElaineDeFrancesEllis KathrynTribbeyFitzgerald ReneStrata Fitzgerald

GayleFitzpatrick

Bonnie Frank

Linda Hendrixson Fuson

Patricia Kooken Golgart

Margaret Damon Goodlund

Jacqueline Ueckcr Guiser

Joan Moore Hancock

Beverly Haver Harris

MarthaGarrahan Hazard

Doris Schory Hazehvood

Jo BethWallingHeflin

Marilyn Rose Herman

Barbara Alexander Herring

MaryAnderson Hilton

'Frances Stillman Hodges

Barbara Daugs Hunt

RitaConwayHunt

MaryAnnDavies Jenkins

KadirynJensen

Carole Jurenko Jones

JohnA.&RuthR. Jurenko Ruth Thompson MaryJennings Katschke RuthMuellerKleymeyer

Lois Henning Kroeger

BettyRutherfordKuntz

Joyce Baca Lacerte

Manama McAllister LaRue Virginia Weadock JanetOsgood Lawson

Lee, Danncr&Bass,Inc.

June Miller Lighty

Sky Ruhlman Louapre

Joan Deathe MacCalluin

Eleanore DietrichMacCurdy MarriottInternationalInc.

Susan Reid Mattem

MBNA

Kimberly Carson McGowan Margaret Thomas Mclntire Rita Mendenhall Mengon Muriel Decker Mortensen Karin Gustafson Nelson Roberta Hahorson O'Neal Doriel Goltz Parkinson

Liz Chaffin Ramsey Charlene Rennoe FrankieFrazier Roberts Marjorie Hunt Sanders Ingrid Latimer Schulz KathrynThiele Searight Jean Marcy Sells

Steven E. Short ReneePugliSmitli

Carol Miller Stevenson TheCornerstone Co.

The Jurenko Foundation

ElizabethShinnThornton RebaShannon Traber Rudi Estes Trager SheilaDyeWard Carolyn Wartinbee

DorothyWatersWilliams MaryMcCammonWilliams Carol Ann Leslie Wilson Lucile Wright

Mary Ann Beckman Zabel

* Denotes Deceased Member

ToDragma/FALL 2000

Sist&rs -MtJ/ifrj Efrs&rt r^Of/'s Fitter*

FRIEND

Hol lie Ambler

Jamie Breaux

Donna Hare Cunningham Brittany Donald

Holley Ford

Kellie Galloway

Joanne Hayden

Christin Hopkins Whitney Huff

Lauren Hunt

Danielle Jones

Allison Langus

Jessica Litton

Holly Carnes Nichols Julie Norton

Sabrina Simmons

Cece Byrd Thorne

Leslie W ebb

GAMMA IOTA

Southern Illinois University

WHEAT CLUB

Audrey Herbster Lueth

SPONSOR

Karyn George Angstadt

SUSTAINING MEMBER

Paulette Ranieri DiGiannantonioj

GAMMA OMICRON

University of Florida

PEARL CLUB

Sandra Fuller Jewell

WHEAT CLUB

Charlotte Burton Bray Candy Kohler Driscoll Dana Baumgardner Kluft Lisa Malcski Parker Connie Swan Stevenson Marilyn Rogers Thomas Georgina Siberio Wiborg

SPONSOR

Heidi Sturmer Anders

Janet Sioddard Andres Mary Plescia Fumea

Lori Korn Goede

Prudence Brown Kerry Maureen Campbell Nemcik Evelyn Kulp Noblit

Pamela Rehm

Marilyn Krekel Walton Rosie Soltesz Zingarella

SUSTAINING MEMBER

Joyce Wray Alford Kelly Burnett Angelo Mary Cox Boerner

Fran Greenwald Brower Carolyn Burt Cerny Norma Fraser Dunn Lois Page

Penny Giragosian Ritenbaugh

Kimberly Ferri Watkins

FRIEND

Cynthia Abbagnaro Andrea Anderson Mary Gaskins Andrew Kari Burgess

Dana Busciglio

Valerie Plumb Carter Carly Clemence

Beth Cornelius

Julie Donaldson

Kristen Erwinski

Christina Ezzo

Cara Grider

Sarah Jefferson

Amy Damore Jurgensen Alexis Lambert

Jamie Linden

Sheada Madani

Lynn Newberger Martinez Maurine McCulloch

Alicia McKee

Lauren Turner Mehalik Laura Miller

Jennifer Morton

Kristen Nimnicht

Stacey Penn

Pirkko Peterson

SECOND CENTURY SOCIETY

Membership i n the Second Century Society is open to a special group o f alumnae and friends w h o have made provisions f o r the Alpha Omicron Pi Foundation through a planned gift commitment. Members o f the Second Century Society recognize the need for the AOII Foundation to build long range financial stability by including the Foundation in their estate plans. Planned gifts can include insurance, will bequests, and trusts.

For information about howyoucanjoin the Second Century Society, and leave a legacy forfuture generations of sisters, please contact the Foundation office at (615) 370-0920.

The AOII Foundation further honors sisters and friends as PATRONS of the Second Century Society, whoin addition to their planned gift, contribute $300 or more to the Foundation on an annual basis. We are deeply grateful for their commitment and contributions to the future of Alpha Omicron Pi. A heartfelt thank you to these 1999-2000 SCS Members.

To Dragma/FALL 2000

27

Anonymous

Angela Bonds Alexander. RHO OMICRON Mildred Frazee Allen. BETA PHI

Michelle Angel. KAPPA OMICRON

Judith Bagby, LAMBDA SIGMA

Ginger Banks. Pi KAPPA

Rosalie Gorham Barber. SIGMA OMICRON Edith Bates, CHI LAMBDA

Ruth Wentisch Beglin. THETA Psi

Bonnie Somers Berger, TAU

Beverly Bergstrom. DELTA SIGMA

Shala Schweitzer Berry. KAPPA LAMBDA Evelyn Bird. LAMBDA SIGMA

June Greer Bogle. Nu OMICRON

Nancy Perry Bowers. Nu OMICRON

Jo Anne Breilmeyer. Pi KAPPA

Julie Brining.GAMMA DELTA

Laura Brush Burcham-King. ALPHA KAPPA Nancy Perko Bussing. PHI UPSILON

Barbara Eskew Cannon. PHI OMICRON t-Katherine Davis Carter. THETA

Marianne Davies Carton. UPSILON

Gloria Hitt Cauble, UPSILON

Phyllis Hobbs Cauffiel. THETA PI

Carolyn Burt Cerny. GAMMA OMICRON Lorraine Chanatry-Howell. CHI

Blanche Franklin Chilcote, ALPHA PHI Catherine Daugherty Cifers. OMICRON

Carol Clark. ALPHA RHO

Liz Romine Coffey. CHI LAMBDA

Suzanne Colgan. ALPHA GAMMA

Linda Peters Collier. CHI OMICRON

Louanne Watson Condreay. PHI UPSILON Tricia High Conover, Pm UPSILON

Lori Conti. LAMBDA BETA

Mary Batman Converse. PHI KAPPA Caroline Craig. LAMBDA BETA

Peg Kramer Crawford. IOTA

*Angela Griley Creed. ALPHA PI

Tamee Dark, LAMBDA TAU

Theresa Collins Davis. ALPHA KAPPA Jacquelyn Struble Dinwiddie.EPSILONALPHA *Mila Parker Divers. ALPHA PHI

"Frances E. Dodds. ALPHA SIGMA

Melanie Nixon Doyle. LAMBDA SIGMA "Marguerite Drees. RHO

Joanne WilliamsonEarls. ZETAPsi

Elaine DeFrances Ellis. ALPHA OMIC RON Gayle Fitzpatriek. ALPHA RHO

Margaret Damon Goodlund. FAB Cynthia Graves, UPSILON ALPHA

Melissa K. Hammel. Nu OMICRON

Patricia Cowley Hardy. GAMMA SIGMA Marion Force Haswell. SIGMA

Patricia Helland. RHO OMICRON

Anne Hickey.RHO

"Martha Hilands. ALPHA RHO

June Derry Hodge. SIGMA

*Frances S. Hodges. UPSILON

Vicki Ray Holloway. DELTA OMEGA Audrey Hoenshell Hopkins. UPSILON Barbara Daugs Hunt. PHI DELTA Marjorie Ikle. ZETA

Mary Ann Davies Jenkins. KAPPA ALPHA kathryn Ann Jensen. THETA OMEGA Jennifer Jenson. KAPPAOMICRON

Irene L. Johnson. LAMBDA BETA

Mary Johnson. ZETA

Winona Johnson-Harding. LAMBDA BETA Jennifer Jones. Pi OMICRON

Mary Ann Kenney. LAMBDA BETA

Diane Johnson Killingback, KAPPA ALPHA Dawn Krotje Kilpatrick. ALPHATHETA Dorothy Kortepeter. ALPHA TAU

Christina Hill Koukola. THETA

Barbara Owens Kramer. BETAPHI

Carole Frank Kropschot. OMICRON PI Judith Lacina, OMICRON PI

Ann Schmidt Lampe, PHI

Lois Smart Lehner, THETA

Jane Campion Leininger. KAPPA THETA Sharon Crouch Liddell. PHIALPHA

Laura Geldhoff Liefer. KAPPA RHO Marjorie Boyd Lind. BETAPHI

Marguerite Crawford Lloyd, DELTA SIGMA Sky Ruhlman Louapre. Pi

Joan Deathe MacCallum. KAPPA PHI Eleanore Dietrich MacCurdy. IOTAALPHA Becky Berman Mack. ALPHATAU

Linda Mansur. DELTA Pi

Ruth Matson Matchette. UPSILON

Barbara Andre Maxwell. IOTAALPHA

Angela Hustedt Mitchell. KAPPAALPHA Dana Moreland. DELTA ALPHA

Karen Morauski. Pm DELTA

Muriel Mortensen. EPSILON ALPHA Elise Moss. TAU DELTA

Janis Tremble Nelson. UPSILON ALPHA Kathy Nelson-Small. GAMMA BETA *Dora Deane Childress Newman. Xi Irene Wagar Oestrike. BETA GAMMA Louise Benton Oliver. UPSILON

Ami Orcutt. LAMBDA BETA

Joyce Osborn. DELTASIGMA

Marjorie Palmer Passler, UPSILON

Candace Pierson-Charlton. ALPHA RHO Charlene Rennoe. BETA G A M M A

Mary Hamilton Rhodes, KAPPA TAU

Frankie Frazier Roberts. NUBETA Marjorie Hunt Sanders. ALPHA OMICRON Barbara Engstrom Schumacher. EPSILON ALPHA Laura Cima Seidman. IOTA

Jean Marcy Sells. ZETA

Nancy Shaw Shaheen, ALPHAOMICRON

Lucile Hendricks Spencer, ZETA

Carol Miller Stevenson. OMEGA

Deborah Harper Stillwell, Nu OMICRON Eddice Dochterman Sullivan,TAU

Kay Hansen Sutherlin, THETA

Sandra Keymer Temple, KAPPA Pm

Kathryn Timm, BETARHO

Jean Whorley Tripp. Nu OMICRON

Catherine Evans Vasquez. UPSILON

Thelma Coen Waigand. THETA Psi

Becky Shook Weinberg. Cm DELTA

Phyllis Arner Westerman, RHO

Cathy Connelly Wieand. GAMMA BETA

Dot Waters Williams. LAMBDA SIGMA

Mary McC'ammon Williams. PHI

Lucile Wright. BETA THETA

Robin Mansfield Wright. GAMMA DELTA Gretchcn Zollendeck. PHI DELTA

* Denotes Deceased Members Italics - Denotes new Members

Bold - Denotes Patron Members

Natasha Phillips

Traci Porter

Missi Register

Maren Repp

Shawn Russell

Valerie Schneider-Christians Kirstcn Schwarz

Martha Shonter

Jill Soost

Patricia Cilley Southward Cori Rae Strobel

Ali Wallack

Dina Weil

Mary Mullarky Weir

Leslie Salmon Wetzel Nicole Whalcy

Ursula Yadav

Catherine Shuster Zane Sena Hinnant Zane Victoria Zingarelli

GAMMA SIGMA

Georgia State University

ROSE CLUB

Pat Cowley Hardy

WHEAT CLUB

Luz Vizurraga Dingledy

Cvnthia Young Spence

Polly Hollenbach Willis

SPONSOR

Carrie Barnes

Betty Wright Dyer Laurie House

Diane Tippens Kennedy

SUSTAINING MEMBER

Hannah Walker

FRIEND

Holly Cochran Dorrie Davis Katie High Rebecca Weidler

GAMMA THETA

University of South Florida

ROSE CLUB

Jane Breckenridge Tessmer

WHEAT CLUB

Gina Warr-Lawes

SPONSOR

Kathryn Haywood Barry

SUSTAINING MEMBER

Jennifer Carito Aquino Keri Nelson Deweese Erin Golub Gaddis

Heather Harris

Mickey Alexander Lyons

FRIEND

Karen Jones Chastain Alison Crane Kimberly Dreyfuss Jennifer Fowler

Jean Charlton Greene Becky Hanna

Andrea Perry

Ann Muenzmay Phillips Stacey Richards

GAMMA UPSILON

St Leo College

FRIEND

Helene Colon-Raphael Jeanette DeCamp Murray

IOTA

University of Illinois

PI CIRCLE

Peg Kramer Crawford

PEARL CLUB

Kathy Rippel Holmes

ROSE CLUB

Rachel Broeren Jamerson Virginia Bairstow Schroeder Harriett Dugan Veach

WHEAT CLUB

Robin Lee Beltramini Jan Hiser Bowsher Wilma Allen Bredar Joan Freitag Finch Aileen Hagan

Cynthia Marchigiani Kennedy Michelle Kohnen

Kathy Romano Mayer Barbara Lesch McMillin Betty O'Hern Muhlke

Alice Jo Ellis Rainville Diana Klugiewicz Reed Katherine Wilson Schultz Joan Zagar Severns Marjorie Lang Shipley Barbara Stehno

SPONSOR

Helen Carter Alison Winifred Timmons Baker Cathy Guthrie Benjamin Linda Weingartner Brown Lucile Arnold Denker Barbara Bassie Dunnivant Audrey Shaw Dusendschon Jene Fellows Eckenfelder Judy Gambrel Flessner Shirley Bradshaw Gillette Mary Otwell Hall

Joanne Glaeser Harman

FRIEND

Sarah Arnold

Jaime Baldner

Erin Bell

Victoria Castle Biarnesen Molly Bollman

Karen TrimpI Brewer Deirdre Brueggen

Farrah Cerrentano

Natalie Chan

Jenny Charbonneau

Alicia Cook

Jill Curtis

Mary Eckert

Erica Ecklund

Megan Ehrisman

Susan Faulkner

Melissa Galla

Jen Gertsma

Preeti Ghuman

Meghan Giel

Erin Grabski

Kristie Guiney

Barbie Harner

Monique Medawar Harvey Cristina Quillin Hebreard Katie Hedrick

Suzanne Hoffman

Lisa Janas

Lori Jesberg

Beth Johnsen

Melissa Johnson Joanne Kern

Mary Ellen Lee Mary Beth Lord Heather Marshall Meredith McCombs Sarah Meier

Megan Meyer

Amy Mikel

Kristen Milos

Erin Murphy

Sara Pearsau]

Chris Piatek

Becky Ralston

Betty Hoyt Reynolds Marianne Rice

WHEAT CLUB

Sarah Ihde Dore

Kathy Mahoney Janvrin

SPONSOR

Kim Portz Curtis

Heather Harrington Martin

SUSTAINING MEMBER

Rhonda Stevenson Bjornsen Melinda Strank Coogan Pamela Kuiper Flom

Nancy Tjalsma James Aimee Knipper

Joni Lytle Larsen Nancy LeCompte Slack Tara Altemeier Warren

FRIEND

Jennifer Holm Dunlay

K r i s t i n F u n k

Diana Isaacson

Julie Mommsen Peters Renee Roffi-Howard Mary Scallon Rush JoAnn Eischeid Schrantz Jessica Trowbridge

SUSTAINING MEMBER

Darla Deer-Hanford Lorraine Frederickson Renee Schuelz Pesavento

FRIEND

Aleda Schuetz McArdle Delores McCullick Parker Nancy Rauhut Van Heel

KAPPA

Randolph-Macon Woman's College

ROSE CLUB

Jane Mylander Wainwright WHEAT CLUB

Elizabeth Valentine Daudt SPONSOR

Adair Lovin Williams

The

fundraising plansfor the upcoming year.

L-r:BarbaraHunt,PhiDelta,Chair;JacqueDinwiddie,EpsilonAlpha; MaryAnnJenkins,KappaAlpha;CharRennoe, BetaGamma; and FrankieRoberts,NuBetaandGrantsCommitteeChair.

SUSTAINING MEMBER

Donna Fosnaugh Bockover Millie Cole Boring

Lois Gatchell Brown Kathryn Webb Burris

Randi Shields Carmichael Angela Blackwell Evans Sue Riney Galloway Elaine Miller Geeting Tonia Markel

Ruth Osborne Melvin

Carol Loudenback Sommers Jannene Maclntyre Southworth Victoria Barr Willis

FRIEND

Carla Bochenek-Hodge Allison Creekmore Kathleen Dailey

Kim Ford

Amy Francis

Andrea Fulda

Tara Renee Garrett Melanie Grills

Kelli Hahn

Kim Semler Hamilton Alice Van Voorst Harrison Marilyn Hart

Carly Hathcoat

Kimberly Indelicato

Randi Koontz

Natalie Leakey

Tiffany Mullen

Heather Mysliwiec

Alicia Pease

Traci Petrucciani

Anne Runden

Katie Stickler

Jenny Strzelecki

Sarah Truett

Jill Unger

Meredith Wertz

Tracy Yedinak

Yourgenerosity enabled ustoaward $30,000 for Arthritis Research and another $13,500 to help children through the American Juvenile Arthritis Organization.

Annick Brais Grover

SUSTAINING MEMBER

Angela Judd Scoble

FRIEND

Shala Schweitzer Berry Virginia Lundy

Kim Moyer

KAPPA OMEGA

University of Kentucky

SUSTAINING MEMBER

LeaAnne Schnellenberger Box

Michele Stephens

FRIEND

Margaret Andrus Angela Ashley Elizabeth Barnett Samantha Bechtold Shannon Busby Kelly Cecil

Anne Rockwell Healy Donna Brehm Healy Barbara Morris Johnson Linda Brownfield Liermann Carole Schmitt Meyer Diane Kellogg Pellettiere Janis Reiter Peters

Lorraine Zillner Rodgers Wanda King Sabien Aileen Wright

SUSTAINING MEMBER

Kelly Rosenbohm Adamitis *Dorothy Miller Crouch

Cheri DiGiovanni

Jean France Ellis

Susan Spanier Gavin Nancy Lawrence Gehlbach Michele Gemskie

Laura Hansen Kaplan Dorothy Dolan Kelly Sharon Kern

Lucie Meyer Kreidler Dolle Heun Nichols Susan Street Ricklefs Marjorie Osborn Roeder Wendy Rogowski

Lori Simon

Zoe Nelson Todd Cheryl Wiekstrom Natalie Wieber Jennifer Erler Willis

Tara Salisbury Russell Kate Schweikart Sandra Senneke Jennifer Smith

Lisa Hackbart Snyder Carrie Summers

Alice Ross Taylor

Betty Westerbeck Wurtzell Ronni deCamp

IOTA ALPHA

Idaho State University

RUBY CLUB

Eleanore Dietrich MacCurdy

WHEAT CLUB

Mary Daly Enwall

SPONSOR

Cheryle Geesey Barker

Cheryl Hack Zaladonis

SUSTAINING MEMBER

Joan Miller Smith

FRIEND

Karen Stanturf Furu

IOTA SIGMA

Iowa State University

ROSE CLUB

Shirley Pinneke Knipfel

SUSTAINING MEMBER

Ann Warren Fletcher

KAPPA ALPHA

Indiana State University

PEARL CLUB

Mary Ann Davies Jenkins

ROSE CLUB

Rita Conway Hum

Carol Hammond Schnyder

WHEAT CLUB

Mary Beth Brown Hasselbrinck Carla Showers Jochitn

Cathy Campbell Parker

Jill Zschau Stock

Karla Keller Trout

SPONSOR

FRIEND

Elizebelh Page Carter Carol Fountain Jennifer Smith Hayes Marcia Dill Stegmann

KAPPA KAPPA

Ball State University

RUBY CLUB

Jan Johnson Slagowski

ROSE CLUB

Kelli Fitzpatrick Burrill Louise Bennett Lingner Pamela Jordan Wolf

WHEAT CLUB

Linda McRae Becker Deborah Nelson Brunei- Deborah Jennings Ernst Karen Gesell Ripberger Jane Ann Vigus Steiner Carmen Lewman Suess

SPONSOR

Betty Isza Bairn

Julie Robbins Burns

Judith Charnley

Pamela Pratt Curtis

Kim B u m Douglass

Janet Oestrike Gerstenecker

Susan Hughes Long

Carolann Laskowski Mikesell Christy Kail Phyllis Reeder Mueller

Susie Trent O'Maley

Barbara Johnson Ottinger

Paula Adams Peterson

Zenet Knapp Schissler

Jane Crampton Weakley

IOTA TAU

Major

Gifts/Endowment

Committee

develops

SUSTAINING MEMBER

Patricia Light Bates University of Wisconsin Stout Monica Conrad

KAPPA DELTA

Wright State University

Susan Giffel Douthit

Twaunette Fellwock Eberhart Michelle Hoskins Edelbrock FRIEND

Christine Pence Ellis Jeanne Forsythe Freeman Helen Edington Gambaiani Patrice McKenzie Liebler Julia Morris Malson Annette Hall Martinson Angie Hustedt Mitchell Carol Torie Pettit

Kate Hulman Schoffstall Orva Sinclair Schramm Patricia Uhde Spencer Christina McDaniel Sunkel Marsha Gaisser Wingo

FRIEND

Michelle Abbott Christina Barnhart Megan Bowers

Lisa Brames

Phyllis Espy Brtnegar Karen Cargal

Sarah Clark

Karen Armstrong Edwards Lisa Elkins

Stacy Eskew

F a i t h E v a n s

Paula Fehrenbacher Shirley Olivero Green Sarah Harmon

Kelly Stultz Hartzler Carisa Heffernan

Nicole Himsel

Emily Hurst

Crystal Kemper

Jill Knapp

Carolyn Baker Mears Denise Newland

Angie Newton

Monica Ramey

Lacy Rowland

Gwen Schultheis

Janet Schultz

Lindsey Schultz

Renee Seger

Linsey Smith

Kelley Stall

Laura Vallee

Shirley Wible

Stacy Wright

Stacey Zigler

Susan Arnold Targove Kathy Shakro Carder

KAPPA GAMMA

Florida Southern College

WHEAT CLUB

Karen Krieger

SPONSOR

Joan Burr Cre