92 Stranger (Than Usual) Things To Do in Seattle This Week: Oct 15-20, 2019

The Halloween Pet Parade, the Punk Rock Flea Market, and More Unusual Events

Our arts critics have already recommended 45 great things to do this week and our music critics have picked the 60 best music shows, but there are still tons more events happening. To prevent some of the quirkier and more extraordinary ones from slipping through the cracks, we've compiled them here—from a Minecraft Exhibition Opening Weekend Celebration to the Georgetown Haunted History Tour , and from the Punk Rock Flea Market to CrimeCon: CrowdSolve . For even more options this week, check out our complete Things To Do calendar. Jump to: Tuesday | Wednesday | Thursday | Friday | Saturday | Sunday

TUESDAY

FILM

Meaningful Movies: Knock Down the House

Catch a screening of Knock Down the House, a documentary that follows four women (Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez, Cori Bush, Amy Vilela, and Paula Jean Swearingen) who ran for office in 2018.

FOOD & DRINK

Author Talk: Sourdough on the Rise by Cynthia Lair

Does fall fill your head with visions of being the kind of person who bakes your own rustic sourdough loaves? Local author and Bastyr University's Department of Nutrition & Exercise Science faculty member Cynthia Lair will sign copies of her new book Sourdough on the Rise and school you in how to make your own starter, so you can make your dream a reality.

Beer with Zane! Seattle

Chat with Zane Lamprey (a travel host for National Geographic, Travel Channel, and Food Network and creator of the ADV3NTURE hoodie travel jacket) over a beer from Lowercase Brewing. He'll be joined by Bob Guiney of The Bachelor.

Spirits in the Night

Take a tour of the Fremont Mischief distillery and sample spirits and hors d'oeuvres in support of the Wallingford Community Senior Center.

READINGS & TALKS

Making an Impact through Sustainable Fashion

Fashion industry experts will discuss the impacts of the industry on our planet, which organizations are working to make clothing production more sustainable, and what you can do to help.

Space Needle Redux: Knute Berger and B.J. Bullert Eye the Needle

Crosscut's Editor-at-Large, Knute Berger, and documentary filmmaker B.J. Bullert are both experts on the Space Needle. Tonight, they'll share stories about the flying saucer-shaped city icon.

TUESDAY-WEDNESDAY

VISUAL ART

Braden Duncan: Cats & the Macabre

Duncan's signature style transforms kitties into superheroes, fantastic beings, and other fanciful beings. In this exhibition, see cats as horror icons like Hellraiser and Pyramid Head.

TUESDAY-SUNDAY

PERFORMANCE

The 25th Annual Putnam County Spelling Bee

This musical by Rachel Sheinkin and William Finn dramatizes the fierce competition among middle schoolers vying to be champion of the regional spelling bee.

Weasel Productions presents George A. Romero’s Night of the Living Dead LIVE!

This staged reimagining of George A. Romero's Night of the Living Dead will borrow elements from the classic horror flick (like a "desaturated grayscale" set) and pay tribute to the impact it had on the genre.

WEDNESDAY

COMMUNITY

Seattle City Council Candidates Forum on Police Accountability

In 2017, Seattle City Council unanimously passed a landmark Accountability Ordinance that made Seattle a "national leader in rebuilding community trust and confidence in police officers." But recently, the city signed contracts with two police unions that may weaken officer oversight and accountability. Hear what your district candidates have to say on the issue at this forum.

FOOD & DRINK

Author Talk: When Pies Fly by Cathy Barrow

Food writer Cathy Barrow will talk about how to employ flaky pastry dough to whip up tasty galettes, tarts, empanadas, strudels, knishes, turnovers, poppers, kolaches, and other portable, crusty delights.

Mochi Madness

Craft your own chewy rice treats stuffed with fresh mango, fresh strawberry, or red bean paste.

Taco & Tarot Night: A Fundraiser for Seattle Lit Crawl

Raise money for Seattle Lit Crawl by grazing from a taco bar, sipping margaritas, getting your future prophesized by a tarot reader, and mingling with this year's featured authors.

MUSIC

One Night Choir ~ The Time Warp ~ The Rocky Horror Picture Show

Wear your best Rocky Horror getup and sing and dance along to the "Timp Warp" with acoustic accompaniment.

PERFORMANCE

Ghastly Glamour: A Vintage Halloween Affair

Morbid-minded hotties Carmen Caliente, Isabella L Price, La Petite Mort, Lily VonTrapp, and others will show off vintage moves and styles at this fundraiser for the Noire Pageant burlesque show.

The Mocktober Democratic Debates

If you're wound up from Tuesday's Democratic presidential debates, allow local stand-up comics to alleviate your tension with funny takes on climate change, health care reform, and more serious topics tied to the 2020 election—as well as the general pageantry of the debates themselves.

Performance Lab: In the Round

On the Boards will perpetuate its long tradition of gathering emerging and seasoned artists for an evening R&D cabaret of dance, theater, and music, and other experimentation and audience feedback. KT Kusmaul of Body Home Fat Dance will co-curate along with OtB's Charles Smith.

READINGS & TALKS

Emily Thuma: All Our Trials

In her latest work, UC Irvine Professor Emily L. Thuma explores the '70s roots of anti-incarceration feminism and who its leaders are today. She'll be joined in conversation by UW Law Professor Angélica Cházaro.

Melanie Mitchell: A Thinking Human's Guide to AI

As comedian Eddie Izzard has put it, you either have "techno-fear" or "techno-joy." Computer scientist Mitchell, a collaborator of Douglas Hofstadter, addresses the frightening and exciting possibilities of artificial intelligence in her book Artificial Intelligence: A Guide for Thinking Humans. Whether you're worried that robots will take over the world, or you just want to get past the media sensationalism, this talk should give you a better idea of where we stand with our AI.

SPORTS & RECREATION

Daybreaker SEA // Boogie Down: A Zombie Disco

Start your mid-week with an early-morning disco dance party with Stayin' Alive DJs, followed by a yoga session with Shannon Eyre. It's Halloween-themed, so wear a stretchy costume.

WEDNESDAY-FRIDAY

COMMUNITY

Seattle Interactive Conference 2019

Entrepreneurs and online business professionals in areas ranging from storytelling and branding to PR and social media will assemble for a two-day conference to share their work and build connections. This year's speakers include Formidable designer Savannah Adams and creative director Joe Alterio, Lululemon executive director Julie Averill, Battle Tactics for Your Sexist Workplace podcast host Eula Scott Bynoe, and many others.

WEDNESDAY & SATURDAY-SUNDAY

PERFORMANCE

Ghost Party: Remastered

Dacha Theater will re-up their immersive theater experience about a group of ghosts who keep reliving the same ill-fated party. You, the audience, will get to play a part in setting them free by solving puzzles.

THURSDAY

COMEDY

Mary Santora

Named "Best Female Comedian" by Cleveland Scene in 2016 and "Best Undiscovered Comedian in Ohio" by Thrillist in 2018, Mary Santora will bring her quick wit to Seattle.

COMMUNITY

Gender Justice Awards

The Gender Justice Awards recognize community leaders who fight for gender equality in Seattle and beyond. This year's event will feature a keynote speech from Washington State Supreme Court Justice Mary Yu and a catered dinner from That Brown Girl Cooks.

FALL

5th Annual Heirloom Apple Tasting

Taste apple treats made from this season's fresh crop grown from hundred-year-old Washington trees.

2019 City Fruit Celebrates

Before harvest season is over, taste freshly picked Pacific Northwest apples in the form of cider from over a dozen local cideries, plus plates prepared by Tom Douglas' Etta's and Seatown Market Diner featuring fruit from City Fruit's harvest.

Hunter Moon Dinner

Just after the full moon, London Plane's head chef Zarah Duncanson will prepare a feast fit for Artemis, goddess of the hunt, with wild game from Nicky USA and foraged Pacific Northwest mushrooms.

MUSIC

The Totally '70s Sing Along

Belt out all your favorite '70s hits by the decade's finest—ABBA, Donna Summer, the Bee Gees, David Bowie, Elton John, and many more—with the help of subtitled music videos and live performances. If you have bangs, they'd better be feathered.

Twin Peaks Night: Hotel Stella, Goodwin, Hourglasses

Dust off your trusty log and your wooliest knitwear for a Twin Peaks-themed party with live music from Hotel Stella, Goodwin, and Hourglasses.

READINGS & TALKS

Megan Phelps-Roper: Unfollow

Now an advocate for equal rights, Megan Phelps-Roper grew up participating in anti-gay rallies in her hometown of Topeka, Kansas, with other members of the Westboro Baptist Church—an organization founded by her grandfather that gained international attention for its pickets at military funerals. In her memoir, she recounts her departure from the extremist church and her subsequent "moral awakening."

Paul Theroux: On the Plain of Snakes

The acclaimed travel writer Theroux will read from On the Plain of Snakes: A Mexican Journey, his firsthand account of driving along the US-Mexico border and his explorations of Chiapas and Oaxaca, where he encountered such people as Zapotec mill workers, Zapatistas, and families of migrants. If you're sick of US media stereotyping of Central and South Americans as either victims or villains, Theroux's talk should be a good corrective.

Susan Schneider: AI and the Future of Our Minds

In her new book Artificial You, Susan Schneider dives into theories about the future of artificial intelligence (including one that predicts AIs will soon advance to human-level intelligence) and calms nervous humans by contending that we have the power to make sure the bots don't take over our lives. Join her for a Town Hall talk.

THURSDAY-SATURDAY

HALLOWEEN

Georgetown Haunted History Tour

Discover the creepy secrets that lurk behind the street corners of Georgetown at this ghostly tour.

PERFORMANCE

Sagittarius Ponderosa

A young trans man caring for his ailing father encounters a local botany student studying the Ponderosa pine tree. This staged reading is presented by Albatross Theatre Lab's 2018 Play Reading Series.

THURSDAY-SUNDAY

GEEK

CrimeCon: CrowdSolve

Remember Nancy Moyer, the Washington woman who disappeared without a trace in 2009 and has yet to be found? Now's your chance to re-examine the case with real-life investigators at this four-day convention.

PERFORMANCE

Assassins

In Assassins, the Stephen Sondheim musical, everyone from John Wilkes Booth to John Hinckley Jr. gets a chance to explain themselves: Some are driven by insanity, some by politics, some by a desire to be remembered. Their motives and circumstances vary, but their common bond is that they all grasped for power by taking shots at some of the most powerful men on earth. The cast members of Assassins face the exhausting task of identifying with killers and trying to convince the audience to take their side. MATT BAUME

Devil in the Deep Blue Sea

Cabiri will present a collection of spooky tales through a mix of contemporary circus arts, giant puppets, theatre, and dance.

Kimberly Akimbo

In Pulitzer Prize-winning playwright David Lindsay-Abaire's dark comedy Kimberly Akimbo, a teenager suffers from a rare condition that causes her body to age faster than it should. When she and her family flee Secaucus under dubious circumstances, Kimberly experiences even more changes pertaining to her family, her love life, and her own mortality.

FRIDAY

FESTIVALS

Zoo BOOze & Bites 2019

Support the Zoo Society by enjoying wine, whiskey, beer, and food tastings from local restaurants. There will also be Halloween-y games, raffles, and more. Costumes are highly encouraged.

FILM

Palace Halloween Party with Collide-o-scope

Created and hosted by Michael Anderson and Shane Wahlund, Collide-O-Scope is the cavalcade of curated video delights that takes over Re-bar twice a month. Join the video weirdos for a Halloween special and enjoy free popcorn and treats.

Spooky Films: House on Haunted Hill (1959)

William Castle's 1959 film follows the spooky encounters of five strangers who are each offered $10,000 to spend the night in a haunted house. Watch it for free as part of SPL's Spooky Films series.

MUSIC

Emo Nite

Bring back the early-mid 2000s with your deep passion for gauged ears, flat-ironed hair, and Pete Wentz's smirk. Emo Nite, presented by Emo Night LA, is the new sensation of reliving your MySpace glory in the form of a high-energy, passionately emo DJ night.

Greenriver Thrillers, Grim Earth, Sorcia, LáGoon

Noise-rock trio Greenriver Thrillers will get very loud with support from Olympia's Grim Earth, Seattle stoner-metal outfit Sorcia, and Portland's LáGoon.

Heartbeat Silent Disco - Mystery Train Masquerade

Get yourself a cool-looking masquerade number and wear it aboard this dance car-turned dance party venue.

Petty Thief and Friends

Petty Thief will revive "Free Fallin'" and all your other favorites by legendary rocker Tom Petty.

The Shirtless Violinist Concert & Album Release

The Shirtless Violinist will forgo his top for an easy-breezy classical performance in the Old World Tasting Room.

PERFORMANCE

Clue! The Drag Show!

Bear witness to a wild night of mystery and lace-fronts at this Clue-inspired drag show with Skarlet Dior Black and Jane Don’t. The puzzle at hand: Who killed Mr. Boddy?

NXT Live!

See the burly stars of this World Wrestling Entertainment show pummel each other onstage.

Old Witch’s Mastercreep Theater

Scary queen Old Witch will give you goosebumps during what looks like a screening of the '90s video game horror movie Brainscan.

READINGS & TALKS

David Williams: Stories in Stone

David Williams's Stories in Stone: Travels Through Urban Geology takes readers on a tour of city streets around the world to discover underlying geology. Among the marvels he writes about: a "3.5-billion-year-old rock that looks like swirled pink-and-black taffy, a gas station made of petrified wood, and a Florida fort that has withstood three hundred years of attacks and hurricanes."

Kitsap Uncensored: A Banned Book Affair

Support uncensored reading with a night of local bites, drinks, live music, craft activities, a scavenger hunt, and more, all inspired by classic books that have been banned around the country at some point or another. For instance, you can get your picture taken on an Iron Throne, sip a signature cocktail in a Gatsby Bar, and sit in a mini version of the Great Hall at Hogwarts.

Paul Tumey: Screwball

Illustrated with over 600 rare cartoons and photos, Paul C. Tumey's new book Screwball! will resonate with anyone who loves the funny section of the newspaper. Join the Eisner Award nominee in Seattle with former Stranger writer Paul Constant.

Richard Alumbaugh: Elmer’s Tribal War

Richard Alumbaugh takes a close look at the lethal shootout between Elmer McGinnis and Colville Tribal Police that took place in August of 1986 and prompted a lengthy murder case (of which the author's late wife was the presiding judge).

FRIDAY-SATURDAY

FESTIVALS

Nadafest

Catch a variety of local acts ranging from alt-rockers to electro-poppers to experimental hip-hoppers at this two-day festival brought to y'all by NadaMucho.com, a free music and culture publication that has been supporting local musicians since 1997.

PERFORMANCE

Evil Dead the Musical

Last Chance Productions presents this R-rated, comedic live stage show that's based on cult classic horror films. There's even a "splash zone," where getting bloody is likely.

Kat Robichaud's Misfit Cabaret Presents Night Terrors Seattle

The Voice finalist Kat Robichaud and her cohorts promise a romp through '80s horror, set at a sleepover party that goes hideously wrong.

FRIDAY-SUNDAY

FESTIVALS

Seattle Butoh Festival 2019: (Re)evolution

The local DAIPANbutoh Collective will celebrate its 10th birthday at this year's Seattle Butoh Festival, which kicks off with a series of workshops with Natsu Nakajima, a prominent contemporary figure in the ancient Japanese art form.

PERFORMANCE

White

A frustrated white male artist hires an actress of color to present his work under her own name to take advantage of diversity initiatives, a scheme that backfires when the actress begins to truly embrace her role. James Ijames's dark comedy will be staged by Theater 22.

VISUAL ART

John Keatley: Uniform II

Photographer John Keatley—who has done portraits of Anthony Hopkins, Annie Leibovitz, and Macklemore—explores individuality and perception in his Identity series.

Opening Friday

SATURDAY

COMEDY

Comic Aid: Benefit to Support Rod Long

Hear jokes and raise money for comedian Rod Long, who's been diagnosed with pancreatic cancer.

Friends of Dorothy

Queer improvisers from around Seattle, including the wonderful Shannon Bass of Fat Cats, will show off their theatrical chops.

COMMUNITY

Chuck It! National Fetch Day

Humans and dogs can win free swag at this National Fetch Day celebration. What is Fetch Day, you may ask? The progenitors of the new holiday say, "Does your dog fetch? Run? Chase? Play?! Do you like to hang out with friends? Meet new friends? All of the above? Then National Fetch Day is for you!"

FESTIVALS

Arts Gumbo: Samoa

Arts Gumbo will screen two family-friendly animated short films about Samoan myths and legends: Ryan Woodard's "The Turtle and the Shark" and Doveton Live's "Sina and the Eel." Island Breeze Catering owner Theresa Sausau will be cooking up sweet and savory Samoan dishes like pineapple BBQ chicken, oka (poke), sapasui (rice noodle with beef), panikeke (deep-fried doughnuts), and poi fa'i (blended banana and coconut smoothies). Plus, kids can make their own leis and kukui nut bracelets at a craft station.

FOOD & DRINK

2019 Cascadia Cheese Festival

At this fromage-filled festival, Northwest cheesemakers like Beecher's Cascadia Farmstead, and Mt. Townsend Creamery will showcase their wealth of handmade goods in the form of free samples.

Fall Feast with Pike Place Fish Market

Taho Kakutani and Ryan Yokoyama of the beloved Pike Place Fish Market will prepare a five-course, seafood-centric meal matched with seasonal produce. Tickets include wine, beer and non-alcoholic beverage pairings.

Issaquah Goes Apples

Local Issaquah farmers will set up shop at the Historic Shell Station with a bounty of farm fresh produce. Fill your bags with fruits and veggies, then leave them with a concierge (fancy!) while you enjoy fall activities like pumpkin-picking and cider-pressing at various downtown spots.

Taste of Queen Anne

Bring an appetite to this fundraiser for Queen Anne Helpline—you'll get to taste signature dishes from over 20 local restaurants, enjoy live music from the Tim Kennedy Trio, and bid on items in a live auction.

Taste of the Region Event at Sea-Tac Airport

Experience the Sea-Tac Airport in a new, stress- and luggage-free light at this tasting event featuring samples from over 16 Northwest restaurants, live cooking demos, wine tastings, and more. All proceeds will benefit the Washington State Council of Fire Fighters Burn Foundation.

GEEK

Minecraft Exhibition Opening Weekend Celebration

Join in the fun at the opening of Minecraft: The Exhibition with talks, treats, photo ops, LEGO® Minecraft activities, build challenges, storytelling, costume contests, and more.

HALLOWEEN

Halloween Pub Crawl 2019

Give your Halloween costume a test run at this downtown pub crawl that lasts 14 hours. Spots like Blarney Stone, Hard Rock Cafe, and Xtadium will dole out drink specials and prizes.

KawaiiWeen 2019

Halloween will get a dose of extreme cuteness—with a special focus on witches—at this Kawaii cosplay party, fashion show, and crafting event. There will be lots and lots of candy.

MUSIC

Bachtoberfest

The Seattle Bach Choir's 15th annual Bachtoberfest will feature a German-style buffet, and open bar, live and silent auctions, and, of course, a performance from the Seattle Bach Choir.

Original Music Inspired by Stephen King's On Writing

The lit-loving musicians of Bushwick Book Club will perform original songs inspired by Stephen King's On Writing.

The Undercover Hippie Gathering

Live Love Now presents a one-day local retreat filled with workshops, vendors, live music, and refreshments geared toward proud hippies.

PERFORMANCE

Dark Violet Productions Presents: Nightshade: Vanguard

Enjoy a spread of classic and neo-burlesque from Northwest performers Isaiah Esquire, Sandria Dore', Ruby Mimosa, Al Lykya, and Lavish Leone. Don't forget to tip!

My OCD

Womxn of all ages will share their personal experiences with Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder at this fundraiser for OCD Washington.

Tragic Kingdom: A Drag Tribute to No Doubt & Gwen Stefani

WEIRD drag queens will pay tribute to the music and aesthetic of '90s pop band No Doubt—specifically its leader, Gwen Stefani.

READINGS & TALKS

Ian Urbina: The Outlaw Ocean

Hear stories of the wild, unpoliced ocean from a Pulitzer Prize-winning reporter and author who's witnessed this secret frontier of crime, corruption, and abuse.

Physics Slam

Five physicists will be given 10 brief minutes to spit out—in terms the scientifically curious layperson can understand—explanations of various complex topics in their field.

SHOPPING

Punk Rock Flea Market!

"Seattle's favorite underground shopping experience" will feature over 70 vendors, food trucks, live DJs, and bottom-shelf booze.

VISUAL ART

Empowerment Through Photography: 25 Years of Youth in Focus

Admire stills of films made by selected Youth in Focus students at this pop-up exhibit.

SATURDAY-SUNDAY

MUSIC

Seacompression 2019: Forgotten Futures

The self-proclaimed official "Burning Man Decompression" of the Puget Sound will return for two days of music and art stretched out across a Georgetown city block.

PERFORMANCE

AVID: Search History

Improvisational dance troupe AVID presents a new dance about "curiosities, tangents, longings, and connections gathered along the imaginary road to answers."

VISUAL ART

Fiber Fusion Northwest

Prepare yourself for the cold winter by snatching up fleeces and knitwear at this two-day showcase, which also promises tons of demonstrations, workshops, and a fiber arts show.

Poetry in the Park

This display will pay tribute to classic poets born in October. Stroll along the cobblestone and read famous works by such autumn babies as Denise Levertov, Wallace Stevens, John Keats, and e.e. cummings.

SUNDAY

FESTIVALS

Halloween Pet Parade

As if pets weren't cute enough on their own, this event gives you the chance to dress them up in Halloween costumes and parade them around for the ultimate cuteness overload. Then, you can thank them for putting up with you with vendor booths, prizes, and more.

FILM

The Scarecrow Video Weirdo Horror Triple Feature!

Bring your appetite for the "weirdest, cheapest, unbelievable trash cinema ever to get mercilessly crammed into your gummy, juicy brain" to this triple feature, which will include three secret movies chosen by Scarecrow Video's Matt Lynch.

FOOD & DRINK

Chicken & Waffles V2: A Sisters & Brothers Collaboration Brunch

Enjoy the Guy Fieri-approved Nashville-style hot chicken tenders of Sisters and Brothers along with Lowercase Brewing's waffles made from repurposed spent grain and maple syrup made from their ESB ("extra special bitter").

MUSIC

3rd Annual Emerald City Beatbox Battle

Local beatboxers will impress you and a panel of judges with their mouth sounds.

The Australian Bee Gees

The Australian Bee Gees will do what they do best, which is play the hits by '70s disco sensation the Bee Bees.

READINGS & TALKS

Loreen Lee: The Lava Never Sleeps

Loreen Lilyn Lee shares what it was like growing up in a traditional Chinese family in Honolulu during the 1950s and '60s in her memoir The Lava Never Sleeps: A Honolulu Memoir. Hear her read.

SHOPPING

Mourning Market

Need to make your living space a little more ghoulish? Find everything you need from local vendors, and wear your gothiest outfit while you shop.