The war of the exes continues as Tameka Foster (pictured left) and her ex-hubby crooner, Usher (pictured), reportedly head back to court over co-parenting issues, according to TMZ. RELATED: Usher Retains Custody, Hugs Ex-Wife After Emergency Hearing [VIDEO] Foster and Usher, who were married for two years and have two sons together, have publicly battled each other […]

Usher Raymond’s (pictured right) son, Usher V (pictured), who nearly drowned a week ago, is out of the hospital and reportedly back to playing like his old self, according to TMZ. RELATED: Usher Retains Custody, Hugs Ex-Wife After Emergency Hearing [VIDEO] The 5-year-old boy was rushed to a hospital, after he dove in to the pool to […]

The ex-wives of mega-stars Usher Raymond (pictured top left) and Cee Lo Green (pictured bottom) are reportedly in talks with VH1 to do a reality show similar to the cable station’s current “Hollywood Exes” but based in Atlanta, according to Radar Online. Usher’s former missus, Tameka Foster (pictured top), and Green’s ex lady-love, Christina Johnson (pictured […]

Tameka Foster (pictured), the former wife of R&B crooner, Usher Raymond, has reportedly lost a court battle with the landlord of three of her commercial spaces and now has to fork over more than $200,000 in back rent, according to TMZ. RELATED: Usher Evicts Ex-Wife Tameka From Georgia Mansion Foster’s money woes began last October when […]

Usher Raymond (pictured left), whose messy divorce then custody battle for his two children with his ex-wife Tameka Foster (pictured) became fodder for entertainment sites, has now placed his Georgia estate up for sale, which means the former Mrs. has to vacate the premises, reports the Daily Mail. SEE ALSO: Posters In Sweden Feature Rihanna’s Battered […]

In yet another twist in the child custody case between pop star Usher Raymond and ex-wife Tameka Foster, things got more than uncomfortable after a lawyer accused the pop star of sleeping with Tameka’s bridesmaid during their marriage. RELATED: Usher Sheds Tears In Court Over Tameka’s Bad Dad Allegations During court proceedings on Wednesday, Usher […]

The latest development of crooner Usher Raymond‘s volatile custody trial is that the entertainer was brought to tears on Monday, when he was accused by ex-wife Tameka Foster of loving partying more than his children, reports TMZ. RELATED: Tameka Begs Usher Not To Leave Her Homeless Foster’s legal team cut into the award-winning performer on […]

How humble we’ve become. After attempting to strip singing-sensation Usher Raymond of his parental rights, now ex-wife Tameka Foster (both pictured) seemingly has only one request: a permanent home for both her and her kids on Usher’s dime, reports TMZ. SEE ALSO: Watch: Jaden Smith’s New Video ‘Give It To ‘Em’ For the past few […]

Pop star Usher Raymond (pictured) isn’t the only one having bitter fights over his children. Now, half-brother James Lackey is also having a messy child support squabble with his baby mama, and she isn’t buying his claims that he can no longer afford his child support payments because, in part, of his association with Usher, […]