Deheubarth

Deheubarth (‘the south part’), one of Wales's larger medieval kingdoms. Formed during the reign of Hywel Dda (died 949/50) by combining, through marriage, Seisyllwg and Dyfed, it covered the west and south-west of Wales and sometimes extended into Brycheiniog. Hywel's line ended with Rhys ap Tewdwr's death (1093) in the early years of Norman advances. The Welsh victory near Cardigan (1136) enabled his son Gruffydd to recover part of the kingdom; but the invaders were never expelled completely from the south (Dyfed), even by Rhys ap Gruffydd, the Lord Rhys (d. 1197), under whom Deheubarth was one of the three great kingdoms of 12th-cent. Wales. Its capital, Dinefwr, acquired legendary status, and Rhys's achievements enhanced Deheubarth's traditional significance. It disintegrated after his death, and the princes of Gwynedd extended their influence over northern Deheubarth until it was replaced (1277–87) by Edward I's new counties of Cardigan and Carmarthen; the marcher lordships of Pembrokeshire and south Carmarthenshire continued to occupy the southern portion. The descendants of Deheubarth's rulers declined into obscurity. The name and concept of Deheubarth has not been revived, unlike Dyfed and Ceredigion.

Ralph Alan Griffiths

Cite this article

Pick a style below, and copy the text for your bibliography.

MLA

Chicago

APA

"Deheubarth ." The Oxford Companion to British History. . Encyclopedia.com. 15 Aug. 2024 <https://www.encyclopedia.com>.

"Deheubarth ." The Oxford Companion to British History. . Encyclopedia.com. (August 15, 2024). https://www.encyclopedia.com/history/encyclopedias-almanacs-transcripts-and-maps/deheubarth

"Deheubarth ." The Oxford Companion to British History. . Retrieved August 15, 2024 from Encyclopedia.com: https://www.encyclopedia.com/history/encyclopedias-almanacs-transcripts-and-maps/deheubarth

Learn more about citation styles

Citation styles

Encyclopedia.com gives you the ability to cite reference entries and articles according to common styles from the Modern Language Association (MLA), The Chicago Manual of Style, and the American Psychological Association (APA).

Within the “Cite this article” tool, pick a style to see how all available information looks when formatted according to that style. Then, copy and paste the text into your bibliography or works cited list.

Because each style has its own formatting nuances that evolve over time and not all information is available for every reference entry or article, Encyclopedia.com cannot guarantee each citation it generates. Therefore, it’s best to use Encyclopedia.com citations as a starting point before checking the style against your school or publication’s requirements and the most-recent information available at these sites:

Modern Language Association

http://www.mla.org/style

The Chicago Manual of Style

http://www.chicagomanualofstyle.org/tools_citationguide.html

American Psychological Association

http://apastyle.apa.org/

Notes:

Most online reference entries and articles do not have page numbers. Therefore, that information is unavailable for most Encyclopedia.com content. However, the date of retrieval is often important. Refer to each style’s convention regarding the best way to format page numbers and retrieval dates.

In addition to the MLA, Chicago, and APA styles, your school, university, publication, or institution may have its own requirements for citations. Therefore, be sure to refer to those guidelines when editing your bibliography or works cited list.

More From encyclopedia.com