I’ve tried for most of my life to restrain my fondness for Hugh Grant, but as a mortal human woman, I simply can’t resist his floppy-haired, oh-so-British charms, which were arguably at their zenith in the 1999 film Notting Hill. I hadn’t actually seen the movie since I was 13, though, so would the Grantian X factor hold up on a rewatch? Read on to find out.

We open on a paparazzi frenzy awaiting Julia Roberts, a.k.a. Anna Scott (bad fake celebrity name), and I must admit that casting Julia, one of 1999’s top stars, as a top star in this movie was pretty clever.

Aw, I love Julia with a chin-length bob!

I think I just realized in this moment that this is a different film from America’s Sweethearts.

Hey, Hugh Grant said “Notting Hill” ! Everyone drink!

God, I love the way British people say weekend.

Literally every lesbian I know would envy Hugh Grant’s hair in this movie.

Imagine turning a profit on a travel bookshop! I miss the ’90s. (Yes, I was a toddler for most of them, but that doesn’t preclude nostalgia.)

Hey, it’s Julia Roberts in a beret browsing at the travel bookshop! You can tell she’s incognito because she’s wearing transition lenses.

Personally, if I were an internationally famous celebrity, I would not go to the house of a random stranger even if he had just foppishly spilled coffee on me—but then I guess there would be no movie.

There is no more Hugh Grant move than offering a woman apricots soaked in honey. (Say yes, Julia! Those sound delicious!)

Damn, I love Julia’s bad-bitch little crop top.

Kiss!

God, the way people from the UK say yogurt (yoghurt?) is so viscerally horrifying to me.

LOL at Hugh pretending to be from Horse and Hound in order to flirt with Julia during a press junket.

Man, there really was a floppy-hair epidemic among young, straight white men in 1999.

And Hugh Grant was patient zero!

As someone who has interviewed celebrities at several press junkets, I must chime in here to say that the celebrity rarely falls in love with you (in my experience, at least).

Wow at Julia in menswear! Très chic!

I have to admit that Hugh blagging his way through a fake interview is very me coded.

Literally, this entire sequence of Hugh being forced to talk to the other stars of Julia’s film is all too familiar to any journalist who’s ever been unprepared for an interview.

Hey, it’s child actor Mischa Barton!

Do British people really cook guinea fowl?

For that matter, did Hugh really bring Julia over to his sister’s place without providing a spoiler alert that he was inviting a famous actress to dinner? Major party foul!

Much like a real dinner party, this dinner-party scene is taking forever.

Some gross bros are talking shit about Julia, so Hugh goes over to handle business, and it’s...pretty hot, TBH, even though he ends up getting laughed out of the café.

Celebrities: They’re just like us! They get their feelings hurt!

Oh, shit, Julia has a boyfriend? And it’s Alec Baldwin?

And he’s a total dick who cracks fat jokes about his girlfriend? Ugh.

Why have we not seen Hugh’s little wire-framed glasses before?

OMG, it’s my girl Emily Mortimer in an extremely small cameo!

Are we really only...an hour into this movie? With an hour to go?

Oh, God, I forgot about this whole plotline involving Julia’s nudes being sold. This movie really was ahead of its time, unfortunately.

Well, that Mel Gibson reference didn’t age well.

Not to be crude, but do Hugh and Julia ever have sex in this movie? Or is it just angsty kissing?

Oh, wait...it’s implied that, yes, they do. Complaint retracted.

Oh, no, the paparazzi show up to bother Hugh and Julia after their big night together!

If one thing is true about British men, it’s that they’re going to offer you a cup of tea when you’re upset.

All these shots of Portobello Road are making me desperate to hit up a farmers market.

“Ooh, sexy cardi” is simply the most English phrase I have ever heard uttered.

Julia is mad at Hugh because she thinks his friend tipped off the paps, and he’s extremely floppy-haired and sad about it.

Did Hugh’s sister just propose to his weird roommate out of nowhere?

Julia wants to get back together, but Hugh isn’t into it. Really, Hugh? She’s hot and famous! Though I guess therein lies the problem, as he’s worried about her leaving him again.

At yet another press junket, Hugh comes to his senses and professes his feelings. Cue love, marriage, pregnancy, romantic garden scene, et cetera. Yay!