Hugh Grant's reinvention from Hollywood heartthrob to 'slimy villains': How actor best known for his charming romcom roles has swapped to 'revolting' characters in horror films

He's known for romcoms such as Love Actually - so it's no wonder fans of Hugh Grant's have been left shocked at the British actor's latest part in a 'spine-chilling psychological horror'.

Who's who in the Royal Box at Wimbledon? Day 12 sees the Duchess of Gloucester join A-listers Rami Malek and Hugh Grant as star-studded guests

Today saw the Duchess of Gloucester, the Prince and Princess Michael of Kent and the Earl of Snowdon in attendance along with A-listers Stanley Tucci, Rami Malek and Hugh Grant.

Pregnant Margot Robbie exudes glamour at Wimbledon's Centre Court nine years after she had to watch the tournament from the field outside during her Clapham house share days

The actress, 34, who made her first public appearance since announcing the couple were expecting their first child.

Hugh Grant and his leggy wife Anna Elisabet Eberstein enjoy a day date at Wimbledon while Vick Hope and Lauren Silverman make the most of the sunshine after weeks of rain

After days of wet weather, stars attending the Wimbledon Championships were finally treated to some sunshine on Friday, as stars descended on SW19 for the men's semi-finals.

Pippa Middleton makes her first public appearance since sister Kate's cancer diagnosis as she steps out at Wimbledon in a floral jumpsuit

Dressed in an elegant jumpsuit, Kate's younger sibling, 40, attended day 12 of Wimbledon today in London.

Margot Robbie distracts from the tennis as Barbie star packs on the PDA with husband Tom Acklerey and cradles her blossoming baby bump at Wimbledon in first public appearance since announcing her pregnancy

The actress, 34, led the stars at Wimbledon on Friday as she made her first public appearance since announcing she is expecting her first child.

Renee Zellweger films Bridget Jones in the torrential rain after angering A-list stars Harry Styles and Rami Malek by asking them to leave their homes during filming

The actress, 55, is back in action as her famous character in the latest film in the franchise Mad About The Boy.

Bridget Jones 'leaves stars including Harry Styles and Rami Malek furious as they are asked to leave their homes during filming nearby'

Renee Zellwegger is back in action as her famous character in the latest film in the franchise Mad About The Boy.

Look Hugh's back! Exclusive Mail Plus-only pictures of Grant's steamy on-set smooch with Renee as he returns as caddish Cleaver in Bridget Jones - with THREE shirt buttons undone

Daniel Cleaver is back again, apparently still trying to win the singleton's heart in the forthcoming fourth film in the series, Mad About The Boy. See our exclusive photos...

Secrets of the Midwinter Ball: PETER VAN ONSELEN reveals what REALLY happens when politicians hit the cheap wine... and how a Channel Nine legend embarrassed them all

Beyond cheap wine, bad food and invariably even worse speeches by the PM and Opposition Leader, it is all in the name of charity, which is one of the event's few redeeming features.

Taylor Swift responds to Hugh Grant's viral tweet calling herself 'a longtime Hugh Grant stan' after he praised her for her London shows

Taylor Swift has identified herself as a ' Hugh Grant stan' after the beloved British actor praised the singer after her sold-out London shows.

Hugh Grant reveals 'incredible' night knocking back tequila shots with Taylor's Swift's 'gigantic boyfriend' Travis Kelce in VIP box at Wembley gig

The actor, 63, has spoken out about his 'incredible' night in the VIP box at Taylor Swift's Wembley show on Saturday.

Taylor Swift's fans go wild as clip emerges of Tom Cruise doing an 'awkward shuffle' as he dances the night away with Travis Kelce in VIP box at Wembley gig

Swifties have gone wild after a clip emerged on social media of Tom Cruise dancing the night away in the VIP box at the singer's Wembley gig on Saturday.

Noel Gallagher's daughter Anais parties all night with Travis Kelce at Taylor Swift's Era's Tour show

Saturday night saw the second show of Taylor Swift's Eras tour come to London.

Travis Kelce spotted partying with Tom Cruise at Taylor Swift's Eras Tour show... but fans warn Chiefs star to be 'careful' around controversial actor

Travis Kelce appeared to bond with Tom Cruise in the VIP tent at Taylor Swift's Eras Tour. The Top Gun: Maverick actor was among an A-list lineup of guests at London's Wembley Stadium.

Hugh Grant is spotted eating carrots and wearing EAR PLUGS as he takes his wife and daughter, 8, to watch Taylor Swift at Wembley concert - before sending the Eras star a gushing message

The Notting Hill actor He attended the show with his wife Anna Elisabet Eberstein and eight-year-old daughter.

Why do men with children seem more attractive? 'Dilfs of Disneyland' effect may tap into women's desire for a caring life partner - as a new study finds first scientific evidence for the phenomenon

It isn't just Hugh Grant in About a Boy who believes women are attracted to men with kids, as scientists now say being seen with children makes men more appealing.

Cellist who teaches music at Alan Rickman and Hugh Grant's £24,000-a-year private school 'stalked auction house executive by sending him pictures and gifts'

Helen Neilson, 45, Head of Strings at a private school renowned for producing Hollywood stars, allegedly bombarded an executive at a prestigious auction house with unsolicited pictures and gifts.

Elizabeth Hurley reveals she and her ex Hugh Grant are still close and will be 'best friends forever'

Elizabeth Hurley has revealed that she has stayed good friends with her ex Hugh Grant - and the pair remain close despite their busy lives.

The 'Hackneyfication' of Tom Holland: How Romeo and Juliet's leading man has ditched his straight-laced, boyish image for baggy jeans and trainers - as fans go wild for his 'scaffolder from Essex' look

The British actor, 27, has turned heads and won hundreds of new adoring fans with a very different image as he stars in Romeo and Juliet at the Duke of York's Theatre in London.

Jerry Seinfeld says he misses the era of 'dominant masculinity' in American pop culture and society: 'I like real men'

Despite admitting that he ironically does not channel that himself in his own career, the 70-year-old comedian stressed the importance of what it means to be a 'real man.'

More chaos on the roads as drivers suffer long queues heading out of London and at the Port of Dover - after Hugh Grant led frustration over bank holiday gridlock

It was the start of the bank holiday, but Saturday saw traffic jams as Brits headed out of London and towards the Port of Dover.

Renee Zellweger, 55, is seen wearing trademark Bridget Jones's mini-skirt as she continues filming Mad About The Boy

Renée, who has played the titular character in the past three films, is currently shooting the fourth instalment, Mad About The Boy, in the capital.

Hugh Grant gets stuck in five-hour queues during bank holiday getaway chaos - with 20 million journeys set to clog up Britain's roads

The Bank Holiday getaway has begun with some motorists, including actor Hugh Grant, stuck for up to five hours in an 'almost stationary traffic jam' (traffic on the M25 today pictured).

Bridget Jones star Renee Zellweger, 55, shares first kiss with hunky toyboy screen lover Leo Woodall, 27, while filming romantic scenes for Mad About The Boy

The actress, 55, who has played the titular character in the past three films, is currently shooting the fourth instalment, Mad About The Boy, in the capital.

Amy Nuttall's love rival Leila Fazard cuts a sombre figure as she's seen for the first time on the set of Bridget Jones 4 movie after ex 'lover' Andrew Buchan was taken back by wife

The actress, 42, cut a sombre figure as she was spotted filming outdoor scenes with lead Renée Zellweger who's returning to the role of the beloved journalist for the fourth instalment.

Rage on the red carpet! After Kelly Rowland's outburst at Cannes, we reveal the biggest outbursts when A-list tempers were running high at glitzy events

Kelly Rowland made headlines as she appeared to furiously scold a security guard at Cannes on Tuesday - but she's not the only celebrity to have lost their temper on the red carpet.

Renee Zellweger, 55, sports Bridget Jones's trademark mini-skirt as she shoots Mad About The Boy in Camden

Renée, 55, who has played the titular character in the past three films, is currently shooting the fourth instalment, Mad About The Boy, in the capital.

Hugh Grant, 63, is joined by glamorous wife Anna Eberstein, 41, as they make an appearance at the Formula One Grand Prix in Italy

The actor, 63, was spotted at the annual racing event held in the Italian city and looked suave in his casual get up as he chatted to fellow fans.

Tziporah Malkah is rushed to hospital after suffering severe pain and sickness

The former model, 50, previously known as Kate Fischer, has had surgery after her appendix ruptured and has been closely monitored for possible bowel damage.

JAN MOIR: Damian Hurley's new film is not terrible, it's not awful, it's not bad - it's worse than all of that

Hugh Grant and David Furnish were among those at the premiere of Damian Hurley's debut film. What did they think as the full horror of Strictly Confidential unfurled before them?

'I'm only human': Britain's 'kindest' plumber issues grovelling apology amid claims he faked stories about helping vulnerable people - but denies spending public donations on a house and car

Britain's 'kindest plumber' who allegedly exploited vulnerable people for millions of pounds today apologised for 'mistakes' but insisted he wasn't trying to scam people.

Britain's 'kindest' plumber damaged my home - then boasted about it online: Disabled man says trader left him £12,000 out of pocket with 'bodged' work on his shower

Michael Culshaw, 40, (pictured) claimed James Anderson caused thousands of pounds worth of damage to his home after reinstalling an old faulty shower unit.

Britain's 'kindest' plumber 'exposed': Trader who received Pride of Britain award and pocketed £10k donation from Hugh Grant is accused of faking stories about helping vulnerable people and spending cash from the public on house and a car

James Anderson, 56, has received plaudits including letters of thanks from the King and the late Queen and a Pride of Britain award for his 'selfless acts'.

Five amazing style lessons from a beloved British rom-com that should inspire your summer wardrobe

Remarkably, 30 years later, the Four Weddings And A Funeral costumes are still as immeasurably chic as they were then, not even near approaching that much-feared fashion label - 'dated'.

Bridget Jones' babies! Renee Zellweger is seen for first time filming scenes in London park with young actors who will play her children by Colin Firth's Mark Darcy in much-anticipated fourth film

Bridget Jones star Renee Zellweger has been spotted filming with the young actors who will play her children in the much-anticipated fourth film Mad About The Boy.

Elizabeth Hurley, 58, admits son Damian, 22, made her feel comfortable on set during THAT lesbian sex scene: 'It is good to know no one is going to exploit you'

The actress, 58, stars in her son's directorial debut, which shows her appearing in several steamy lesbian sex scenes.

As Liz Hurley parties with Hugh Grant at son Damian's film premiere, the other celebs and royals who are still very friendly with their former flames

These famous faces seem to pride themselves on staying the best of pals with their exes - including British actress Liz Hurley and Hugh Grant,

Elizabeth Hurley, 58, and son Damian, 22, step out in style while plugging his movie debut... after stating they would 'never' discuss his love life (despite him directing her racy sex scenes!)

Elizabeth, 58, and Damian Hurley, 22, stepped out in style on Thursday in the midst of the promo trail for his directorial debut, Strictly Confidential.

Liz Hurley laughs off son Damian shooting her in intimate scene in his new film, telling The One Show: 'I gave him his first camera when he was about ten, and he's been filming me ever since'

The actress, 58, said that she was first filmed by her son when he was ten and had been 'filming her ever since', and said that she would often force Damian to take photos of her all the time.

It's gets MORE awkward! Elizabeth Hurley, 58, and son Damian, 22, are supported by her mum Angela, 84, (and her TWO exes!) to watch her racy lesbian sex scenes in his debut movie

Glamorous matriarch Angela, 84, attended to show her support for her daughter and grandson and proved exactly where her good genes stem from

Apple's new iPad advert blasted by critics including actor Hugh Grant

The one-minute clip shows a collection of artistic objects - including paints, books and musical instruments - being crushed by an industrial press.

Bridget is BACK! Svelte Renée Zellweger is spotted on set of fourth Bridget Jones movie for FIRST TIME... after bosses revealed 'obsession' with character's weight will be dropped

The actress, 55, who has starred as the unlucky-in-love diarist in all three of the movies, beamed while strolling the streets in a layered look.

Apple's new iPad advert featuring musical instruments being crushed is SLAMMED by critics - as actor Hugh Grant deems it the 'destruction of the human experience'

The one-minute clip shows a collection of artistic objects - including paints, books and musical instruments - being crushed by an industrial press.

Glam Elizabeth Hurley parties with her exes Hugh Grant and Arun Nayar at son Damian's film premiere in London

Elizabeth Hurley was supported by ex partners Hugh Grant and Arun Nayar at her latest film Strictly Confidential screening in London on Wednesday.

What's stranger than appearing in a lesbian sex scene directed by your son? Watching it with TWO of your exes! Liz Hurley joins son Damian and her former partners Hugh Grant and Arun Nayar at London screening of Strictly Confidential

Elizabeth Hurley was joined by none other than her two exes Hugh Grant and Arun Nayar for the screening of her film project with son Damian - which shows her in lesbian sex scenes.

The price George Osborne pays for being in the Notting Hill Set... a romcom filming on his doorstep

Mr Osborne, 52, came across the making of Netflix series Too Much - which is being directed by American actress Lena Dunham, featuring Richard E Grant and White Lotus actor Will Sharpe.

I didn't want Hugh Grant to be in Four Weddings and a Funeral, writer Richard Curtis admits - as producer says Liz Hurley in THAT dress was responsible for film becoming a massive hit 30 years ago

Three decades after the premiere of Four Weddings and a Funeral, screenwriter Richard Curtis said British actor Hugh Grant, then 32, was too 'glamorous' for the character he had in mind.

Jerry Seinfeld's Netflix film Unfrosted is blasted by critics

Jerry Seinfeld's new Netflix film and directorial debut Unfrosted has been blasted by critics as 'one of the worst movies of the decade' in scathing first reviews.

Jerry Seinfeld's Netflix film Unfrosted blasted by critics as 'one of the worst movies of the decade' as jabs are taken at cast's lack of energy and 'flat jokes' in scathing first reviews

Jerry Seinfeld's new Netflix film and directorial debut Unfrosted has been blasted by critics as 'one of the worst movies of the decade' in scathing first reviews.

Elizabeth Hurley, 58, shows off her incredible figure in a leopard print bikini as she indulges in a floating breakfast while in the Maldives

Sharing a video of her relaxing experience to social media, Elizabeth was sure to flaunt her slim frame and ample cleavage in the animal print swimwear set

RICHARD EDEN: Princess Diana's hatmaker Marina Killery wears headwear decorated with marijuana leaves to society event

Princess Diana's favourite milliner, Marina Killery, turned up for a charity luncheon in New York City wearing a hat decorated with marijuana leaves.

Elizabeth Hurley, 58, showcases her age-defying figure in a black bikini as she soaks up the sun at the beach during trip to the Maldives

The Bedazzled actress, 58, displayed her toned figure in a black bikini as she went for a stroll near the shore.

You're going to need a bigger Diary, Bridget! She'll juggle THREE suitors in new movie as Leo Woodall and Chiwetel Ejiofor vie with heartthrob Hugh Grant's Daniel Cleaver for her affections

She will be in a love tangle with Hugh Grant, One Day heartthrob Leo Woodall , and 12 Years A Slave star Chiwetel Ejiofor's character, PE teacher Mr Walker.

Damian Hurley reveals he nearly got his mother Elizabeth ARRESTED when he made her chase his godfather Hugh Grant around an airport

Damian Hurley has revealed his famous mother Elizabeth nearly got arrested in Switzerland during the making of one of his short films.

Bridget Jones star Renée Zellweger will 'date hunk 28 years her junior played by Leo Woodall' in the fourth film as storyline details are 'revealed'

The main storylines for the fourth Bridget Jones film Mad About the Boy have been revealed, according to a new report.

Jerry Seinfeld says 'movie business is over' as he promotes new film

The comic-actor, 69, mused on what he felt was a lost relevance in Hollywood amid a lessened impact with its current slate of silver screen offerings.

Jerry Seinfeld says Hollywood has lost relevance as movies no longer 'occupy the pinnacle in the social, cultural hierarchy that it did'

The comic-actor, 69, mused on what he felt was a lost relevance in Hollywood amid a lessened impact with its current slate of silver screen offerings.

Hugh Grant reveals the Bridget Jones 4 script 'has him in tears' as he opens up about the new film and confirms major plot twist

Hugh Grant has confirmed some upsetting news for Bridget Jones fans as he opened up about the upcoming fourth movie.

Prince Harry 'may drop his case against The Sun over the possible cost of the legal bill'

David Sherborne, lawyer for the Duke of Sussex, said his client faced an 'impossible' threat of high legal costs by continuing the case.

Hugh Grant settles High Court claim against the publisher of The Sun for 'an enormous sum of money'

Grant had been suing News Group Newspapers alongside Prince Harry claiming the newspaper used landline tapping, burglary and 'blagging' to obtain confidential information about them.

Will Gen Z audience boycott the new Bridget Jones? Younger audience have switched off early films due to 'racism', body-shaming and sexual harassment

As the fourth installment of Bridget Jones has been officially confirmed, the Gen Z audience have already 'switched off' because of racism- so will they watch the new flick in 2025?

Inside Renée Zellweger and Hugh Grant's rocky friendship as a fourth Bridget Jones movie is finally confirmed

Bridget Jones 4 has been officially confirmed - with Renée Zellweger and Hugh Grant set to reprise their iconic roles.

A-list actress turned down lead role in Bridget Jones' Diary but insists she has 'no regrets' - as fourth film is confirmed

Renee Zellwegger accepted the part and the film became a huge success, spawning two sequels and another set to begin filming in May .

Will the new Bridget Jones film finally drop the fat-shaming? Renee Zellweger 'piled on the pounds' twice to play the character who worried about 'dying fat and alone' despite being a size 12

As Bridget Jones 4 has been confirmed FEMAIL looks at the murkier side to the franchise-Bridget's weight.The character was routinely fat-shamed for appearing as an average-sized woman

Bridget Jones fans vow to boycott new film if main character doesn't appear amid fears he will be killed off: 'He's the only reason I watched!'

Adapted from Helen Fielding's novels, the movies saw Bridget navigate several love triangles, mainly with Mark [Colin Firth] and Daniel Cleaver [Hugh Grant].

Leo Woodall fans go wild for his casting announcement in Bridget Jones 4 as they predict which role he will play: 'I'm going to throw up!'

Leo Woodall's fans were sent into a frenzy following the announcement he has been cast in the fourth installment of rom-com classic, Bridget Jones Mad About The Boy.

Bridget Jones 4 confirmed! Renée Zellweger officially returning in fourth installment - and will be joined by Hugh Grant and a hunk from The White Lotus

Bridget Jones 4 has been officially confirmed - with Renee Zellweger and Hugh Grant set to reprise their iconic roles.

Damian Hurley hits back at nepo baby criticism as he insists he's been working 'exceptionally hard' since he was a teenager and the only thing he steals from his mother Liz is her designer wardrobe

Damian Hurley has grown up with Elizabeth Hurley as a mother and Elton John and Hugh Grant as godfathers but he insists he is far from a nepo baby.

These are the most attractive grey-haired celebrities in the world according to the golden ratio

It is becoming increasingly fashionable for women to embrace their grey hair. But who are the most attractive so-called 'silver vixens'?

Hugh Grant is branded 'a pain in the a*s to work with' by co-star Jerry Seinfeld as he details their boozy dinner after working on Netflix film

The Notting Hill star, 63, is set to play Frosties mascot Tony the Tiger in the upcoming comedy, which tells the origin story of the iconic pop tart.

Hugh Grant is seen for the first time as Frosties mascot Tony the Tiger in trailer for Jerry Seinfeld's new comedy about the pop tart's origin story

The Notting Hill actor, 63, stars in the upcoming flick, called Unfrosted, as a struggling Shakespearean actor who plays the Frosties character.

Unfrosted trailer: Jerry Seinfeld, Amy Schumer and Melissa McCarthy are seen in the movie about the creation of the Pop-Tart

The first trailer for Unfrosted dropped on Thursday. The Netflix movie stars Jerry Seinfeld, Amy Schumer and Melissa McCarthy. The drama is about the creation of the Pop-Tart.

Hugh Grant reveals possible shock career change despite 'terrifying and really extreme' abuse

Hugh Grant has revealed he could be tempted into a shock career change despite receiving 'terrifying' abuse when delving into it in the past.

That IS a good enough offer for me! Colin Firth and Hugh Grant agree to reprise their roles alongside Renee Zellweger in fourth Bridget Jones film

Colin Firth and Hugh Grant, both 63, have agreed to be part of the fourth - and probably final - Bridget Jones film which begins shooting in London in May and will again star Renee Zellweger.