Hugh Grant says he pulled a "Christian Bale" when describing bad behavior he had on the set of Dungeons and Dragons: Honor Among Thieves.

By Charlene Badasie |

Hugh Grant says he threw a few tantrums on the set of Dungeons & Dragons: Honor Among Thieves. “I did a Christian Bale,” he told the Mail Online, referencing his British counterpart who is known for his angry outbursts. Recounting an incident while filming Dungeons & Dragons in Northern Ireland two years ago, the 62-year-old said he lost his temper with a woman in his eye line on the first day.

“I assumed she was some executive from the studio who should have known better,” Hugh Grant told the publication. “Then it turns out that she’s an extremely nice local woman who was the chaperone of the young girl,” he continued. Describing his outburst as terrible, the actor said it was followed by a “lot of groveling” on his part.

This isn’t the first time Hugh Grant lost his temper at work. Similar to Christian Bale, the actor previously admitted to throwing tantrums at least once a year. He was banned from the Daily Show with Jon Stewart after the host dubbed him the worst guest he’s ever had. After giving the staff and crew a hard time, the British star was later banned from the talk show.

But Hugh Grant admitted to the outburst, telling The Los Angeles Times that, unlike Christian Bale, his bad attitude was a result of roles drying up. This led him to take a break from acting. “I developed a bad attitude from about 2005 onwards, shortly after Music and Lyrics,” he said via the Mail Online. “I just had enough. Then I went back in 2009 and made another film.”

He said it wasn’t that he had given up on acting. Instead, Hugh Grant felt that Hollywood had given up on him. He blamed the reception on Did You Hear About The Morgans?, a film he starred in with Sarah Jessica Parker. “After that, the days of being a very well-paid leading man were suddenly gone overnight. It was slightly embarrassing, but it left life free for other things,” he told the publication.

Much like Hugh Grant, Christian Bale famously apologized for an explosive tantrum while filming Terminator: Salvation in 2008. At the time, the Batman alum unleashed an expletive-filled rant at an unsuspecting cinematographer who adjusted a light during a scene. An audio clip of the footage of the brutal rant was leaked online shortly after the incident.

Meanwhile, filming on Dungeons & Dragons: Honor Among Thieves wrapped in August 2021. Billed as a fantasy action adventure, the movie is directed by Jonathan Goldstein. Along with Hugh Grant, the film stars Chris Pine, Michelle Rodriguez, Regé-Jean Page, Justice Smith, and Sophia Lillis. Adapted by John Francis Daley and Michael Gilio, it is based on the tabletop role-playing game of the same name.

The story follows a charming thief who teams up with a group of unlikely adventurers on a quest to retrieve a long-lost relic before it falls into the wrong hands. But their journey takes a dangerous turn when they run into the wrong people. Dungeons & Dragons: Honor Among Thieves, starring Hugh Grant, will premiere at the SXSW film festival on March 10.

Released by Paramount Pictures, the Hugh Grant and Chris Pine feature will hit theaters on March 31.