Hugh Grant is owning up to his bad behavior on the set of his new movie, Dungeons & Dragons: Honor Among Thieves. The actor admitted he had a "tantrum" while shooting the film in Ireland and lashed out at an innocent bystander on set when he got angry at her for being in his way. "I lost my temper with a woman in my eyeline on day one. I assumed she was some executive from the studio who should have known better," he told Total Film magazine in their April 2023 issue. But, that actually wasn't the case and Grant has since apologized. This isn't the first time he's expressed rage on a set. Read on to learn more about the unprovoked incident and how many other times the 62-year-old has misbehaved while filming.

Hugh Grant Explains Who He Screamed At

The Notting Hill actor is opening up about why he unleashed on a woman who was on set while he was shooting. "I lost my temper with a woman in my eyeline on day one," he explained. "I assumed she was some executive from the studio who should have known better. Then it turns out that she's an extremely nice local woman who was the chaperone of the young girl. Terrible." He said he did "a lot of groveling" after "I did a Christian Bale."

Why Grant Referred to Christian Bale

The 62-year-old referenced the Dark Knight star in the interview with Total Film magazine because of an explosive tirade directed at cinematographer Shane Hurlbut. In 2009, Bale was on the set of Terminator Salvation and famously screamed at Hurlbut in a lengthy expletive-laden rant for walking into the scene to check lighting. "AM I GOING to walk around and rip your … lights down, in the middle of a scene? Then why the … are you walking right through — ah-da-da-dah, like this — in the background? What the … is it with you? What don't you … understand? It's … distracting having somebody walking up behind Bryce in the middle of the … scene! Give me a … answer!" After the audio of the intense outburst leaked, Bale publicly apologized.

Grant Has Had Several "Tantrums" Including One Where Jon Stewart Dubbed Him the "Worst Guest"

While promoting the romantic comedy Did You Hear About The Morgans?, on The Daily Show with Jon Stewart in 2009, Grant wasn't so pleasant and Stewart called him out on his behavior. During an interview with Stephen Colbert in front of a sold-out audience in Montclair, New Jersey as a fundraiser for the Montclair Film Festival, Stewart said that Grant spent the majority of his time complaining. "He's giving everyone [a tough time] the whole time, and he's a big pain in the [backside]," Stewart recalled. Grant also didn't like the clip of Did You Hear About The Morgans? that was aired on the show and complained to the staff, but it was a clip his publicist supplied. Stewart recalls Grant angrily asking "What is that clip? It's a terrible clip." "Well, then make a better … movie," Stewart said, adding that he would "never" have Grant back. Grant later took to Twitter taking accountability for his actions. "Turns out my inner crab got the better of me with TV producer in 09. Unforgivable. J Stewart correct to give me kicking." He also told Vanity Fair regarding the issue with Stewart, "I did have a tantrum backstage. About once a year, I have a really mega-tantrum, and sadly he witnessed one." ae0fcc31ae342fd3a1346ebb1f342fcb

Grant Admits to Having a "Bad Attitude"

The Love Actually star hasn't always been happy with Hollywood and felt the industry had given up on him, which caused some of his unethical ways, the star admitted. He told the Los Angeles Times, "I developed a bad attitude from about 2005 onwards, shortly after Music and Lyrics. I just had enough. Then I went back in 2009 and made another film." He added, "At that point, it wasn't me giving up Hollywood. Hollywood gave me up because I made such a massive turkey with that film with Sarah Jessica Parker [Did You Hear About The Morgans?]. Whether I wanted to or not after that, the days of being a very well-paid leading man were suddenly gone overnight. It was slightly embarrassing but it left life free for other things."

Why Grant Joined the Cast of Dungeons & Dragons: Honor Among Thieves