Oompa loompa doopity downer. Perennial grump Hugh Grant apparently did not have a jolly good time playing a little orange man in Warner Bros.’ Willy Wonka and the Chocolate Factory musical prequel Wonka, opposite Timothée Chalamet’s ambitious chocolatier. In a recent press conference, Grant did not mince words when describing his feelings about playing an Oompa Loompa: “I couldn’t have hated the whole thing more.”

Part of Grant’s gripe came down to the shooting process. Wonka director Paul King used motion capture technology in order to shrink Grant down to Oompa Loompa size, which required the Undoing actor to wear a special suit to capture his body movements. “It was like a crown of thorns, very uncomfortable,” said Grant, according to Metro. “I made a big fuss about it. I couldn’t have hated the whole thing more.”

Not only was it physically uncomfortable, but Grant says that he was also somewhat at sea emotionally, as he was never entirely sure how much the camera was capturing. He wasn’t sure, he said, whether to “act with my body or not, and I never received a satisfactory answer.” In his classic self-deprecating fashion, Grant said that “what I did with my body was terrible,” and quipped he’s convinced it’s all “been replaced with an animator.”

You might be wondering why Grant agreed to be a part of Wonka in the first place, given his aversion to basic aspects of the gig. “I slightly hate [making films], but I have lots of children and need money,” he said at the press conference. While his evident distaste for Hollywood is quite clear from his recent spate of public appearances, Grant had some specific complaints about the use of CGI in the film, and the use of CGI in the entertainment industry more broadly. “It’s very confusing. With CGI now, you can’t tell what’s going on,” he said. Grant went on to share an anecdote in which his father turned to him during his previous film collaboration with King, Paddington 2, and asked, “Is that a real bear?”

For the record, according to King, Grant was cast in the Wonka film because of his wicked sense of humor. In Roald Dahl’s Charlie and the Chocolate Factory, the Oompa Loompas are “incredibly sarcastic and judgmental and cruel,” the director said. “So I was really just thinking about that character; somebody who could be a real shit, and then—ah, Hugh!”

So, in spite of—or perhaps because of—his sour attitude, Grant delivers a performance that ultimately works. Vanity Fair’s chief critic Richard Lawson found Wonka, starring Grant, Chalamet, Olivia Colman, Keegan-Michael Key, and Sally Hawkins to be “surprisingly scrumdiddlyumptious,” with Grant “impressively maintaining his dignity” as an Oompa Loompa. Does Grant feel that the pain was worth the final, critically well-received product? “Not really,” he said at the press conference. But he was able to admit that he had at least a little fun improvising on set, saying it was “quite fun, messing around and trying new lines.” Whatever Grant may have you believe, it clearly wasn’t all bad.

Television

House of the Dragon’s Tom Glynn-Carney Thinks King Aegon Is a “Tragic Case”

In episode five of House of the Dragon’s second season, Team Black mourns the loss of a matriarch, while Team Green decides who will temporarily rule King’s Landing. Tom Glynn-Carney drops by Still Watching to chat about Aegon’s “boyish vulnerability” and the joy of dragon riding.

Movies

The 25 Best Movies on Netflix to Stream Right Now

From comedy classics to recent Oscar winners, these are the titles you don’t want to miss.

Movies

Paul Mescal vs. Pedro Pascal: A First Look at the Epic Gladiator II

In Ridley Scott’s sequel, a new generation of warriors clashes in a savage Rome: “It’s pretty gnarly.”

Television

House of the Dragon’s Ser Simon Strong Is “The Only Gentleman in an Ungentlemanly World”

As violence abounds in Westeros, Rhaenyra arranges a secret meeting with Alicent and tries to broker some kind of peace. Plus, Simon Russell Beale drops by Still Watching to discuss the introduction of his new character, the Lord of Harrenhal.

Television

How Princess Diana’s Funeral Inspired House of the Dragon’s Somber Procession

It’s brother versus brother in “Rhaenyra the Cruel,” which sees Ser Arryk and Ser Erryk come to fatal blows. Plus, House of the Dragon director Clare Kilner drops by to discuss staging the funeral procession and the trickiness inherent in working with identical twins.

Royals

With Princess Kate and King Charles Battling Cancer, the Monarchy Has Never Felt More Fragile

Trooping the Colour brought a hugely welcome appearance, but does the royal family need a deeper bench?

Royals

After Splitting From Charles, Princess Diana Wanted to Celebrate Her Independence. The Summer of 1994 Was When Her New Life Began

It’s been three decades since a crop of new friends, a designer wardrobe, and an enormous amount of good press helped the late Princess of Wales blossom into the woman she wanted to be.

Television

House of the Dragon’s Ewan Mitchell Is Channeling Tony Soprano and Robert De Niro

Mitchell, who plays the one-eyed Prince Aemond, drops by Still Watching to chat about his character’s motivations and surprising vulnerability.

News

Ketamine’s Long, Strange Trip: The Cred of This Miracle Med Has Gotten Murkier and, Somehow, More Promising

An assessment of K by a science writer who has used the drug to combat depression and long-haul COVID.

Politics

RFK Jr.’s Family Doesn’t Want Him to Run. Even They May Not Know His Darkest Secrets.

A shocking photograph. Blowback from a Trump meeting. Alleged sexual assault. The Kennedys have voiced support for Joe Biden, but certain aspects of Robert F. Kennedy Jr.’s character are only just now coming to light.