Hugh Grant, Marisa Tomei, J.K. Simmons, Bella Heathcote

Directed by Marc Lawrence

Rating: B

Sleeping with a student is not a good way to start the first day of teaching.

Keith Michaels (Grant) is a one-time hit Hollywood screenwriter who takes a teaching position at a northeastern university because he can’t get any other work. He arrives at a Wendys in Binghamton, New York, jetlagged and overwhelmed when college students recognize him for his Oscar-winning movie. Karen (Heathcote) is a young college sophomore, eager to be accepted in his screenwriting class. She uses her charm to find her way into his bed… and class.

Michaels is a jaded screenwriter who can’t get past his fame for the one movie everyone loves, even though he had written two other movies. He doesn’t take his teaching seriously because he doesn’t know the first thing to cover. It takes a helpful student, a mom working two jobs with a passion for writing, to help bring Michaels back to life. He soon discovers that his students have a knack for writing and desires to help them succeed.

For a movie with low advertising, The Rewrite was pretty inspiring. Watching a group of students get through a writing class reminded me of the days I was taking creative writing in college. From the rough draft at the beginning of the semester to the polished final copy, it reminded me how good it felt to have something written down that came out of your own head.

Keith Michaels is a mess. He’s lost his inspiration, his family, and his job. It takes a fresh start and a new atmosphere to make him remember what he loved about writing in the first place. He doesn’t make the best decisions in the beginning of his teaching career when he sleeps with a student. As he matures throughout the film, he realizes that teaching has helped his students learn about themselves as well.

Albeit, The Rewrite isn’t bound to earn awards for its clever writing or dramatic plot, however, it’s a hopeful movie about growing up and re-discovering your passion. Whether those watching are writers or not, it might inspire you to think about something you used to love doing and that’s why I think it deserves a “B”.

Daniel Radcliffe, Rupert Grint, Emma Watson, Kenneth Branagh, Richard Harris, Maggie Smith

Directed by Chris Columbus

Rating: A+

This sequel to the magical Harry Potter series is a close favorite of mine. Between the mystery surrounding a Chamber of Secrets and the new, but terribly full-of-himself Professor of the Dark Arts, the second Harry Potter movie is as fun as the first.

Despite a meddling house-elf that tries to stop Harry from going back to Hogwarts for his second year, Harry flies a car to school instead of taking the normal mode of transportation: the train. His school year doesn’t get any easier after almost being expelled. Students are being petrified left and right, and Harry always seems to be at the scene of the crime at the wrong time. Add that he reveals his gift for speaking parseltongue (Snake speech) to the whole school at a bad moment and now he has become a social outcast. Everyone is freaking out about the Chamber of Secrets being opened and talk of the school being shut down really puts a damper on Harry’s second year.

Nothing tests true friendship like going through hardships. Ron and Hermione believe Harry can’t be the one petrifying students, even if they think his talking to snakes is scary. They break rules while trying to figure out who opened the Chamber of Secrets and what is attacking their fellow students.

Hermione, who has been an established stickler for rules, thinks of a way to go undercover to question Malfoy, someone who always has it out for Harry at school. She makes a Polyjuice potion which will allow the trio to transform into Slytherins and get into their common room to ask Malfoy if he opened the chamber. The potion is difficult to make and is an illegal substance because of how it can go wrong in many ways (like accidentally turning yourself into a cat instead of another human being).

Ron faces his fear of spiders with Harry as they delve into the deep parts of the Forbidden Forest to talk to a giant spider. This spider, Aragog, may hold the key to revealing what the monster of the Chamber really is and prove Hagrid’s innocence in it all.

Then there’s Lockhart, the newest professor at Hogwarts who claims he is the best wizard of all for his adventures. He has written numerous books which he makes his students buy for his class, like “Gadding with Ghouls”, “Holidays with Hags” and “Wanderings with Werewolves”. His popularity comes down to his good looks because only the girls have really fallen for him. Hermione, who usually keeps a cool head, gets weak-in-the-knees when she has him for class. Kenneth Branagh does a great job playing this empty-headed egomaniac. Hugh Grant was originally cast to play this professor but due to scheduling conflicts, had to turn the role down. I think Grant would have been perfect but Branagh’s Lockhart is pretty amusing to watch.

Even though Chamber of Secrets is a long film (it’s run-time is 2 hours, 40 min), it stays remarkably true to the books. Yes, it’s disappointing that not everything from the book was included but if it was any shorter, important scenes would have been cut out. I would have liked to see Nearly Headless Nick’s deathday party and more of Borgin and Burke’s dark arts shop, but that’s what the deleted scenes are for. Compared to the future movies, however, Chamber of Secrets is still a good one to watch if you’re looking for accuracy and mystery.

Picture credits:

http://www.imdb.com/media/rm3332343552/tt0295297

http://www.fanpop.com/clubs/rupert-grint/images/17220324/title/harry-potter-chamber-secrets-screencap

Colin Firth, Liam Neeson, Hugh Grant, Bill Nighy, Alan Rickman, Emma Thompson, Laura Linney, Martin Freeman, Keira Knightley, Martine McCutcheon

Directed by Richard Curtis

Rating: A

“Love is actually all around,” – Hugh Grant.

As an ensemble movie with a huge cast, Love Actually tells the loves stories of different characters during the Christmas holidays. Jamie Bennett (Firth) finds out the hard way that his girlfriend is cheating on him -with his brother- and he takes to France during the winter holidays to write. Daniel (Neeson) just lost his wife and has a young stepson who refuses to leave his room all day. And Hugh Grant plays the British Prime Minister (he doesn’t have a proper name in this movie) and is distracted from his job by the one of the household staff, Natalie (Martine McCutcheon).

Love Actually is my favorite Christmas movie to watch every year. It doesn’t bore you with one straight plot line. Although it might take a re-watch to understand how everyone is connected, you can usually find a new joke you may have missed the first time. There are so many elements to love in this movie. Throughout the film, there are many examples of love through friendships and growing romance. Not everyone has a happy ending but the struggle is what makes the movie realistic. These characters are relatable; whether you’re the one falling in love for the first time, in a relationship that’s going wrong, courting that special someone, or spending your Christmas alone.

Part of why I love this movie so much is that the cast is so perfect. There’s the character you root for, cry for, and just laugh along with. The jokes never get old and there are many quotable moments. Whether you watch this alone or with friends, at the end you’ll feel like this movie has given you a hug.

While I like to save Love Actually for the holidays, it’s really a great movie to watch for any occasion. This film isn’t the average cheesy romance that we tend to see in the U.S. It has substance, humor, a great cast, and yes, romance. Give it a chance, it might just open your eyes to the love that’s all around.

While it doesn’t mean they are Christmas movies, I’ve always felt myself drawn to pulling these DVDs out as soon as Thanksgiving ends and December begins. It’s so nice to sit on the couch, wrapped in a blanket, and hot chocolate at your side with one of these movies on. With the holiday decorations up, it adds to the atmosphere of enjoying a good movie with friends or family.

Below is my list of absolutely must-watches this holiday season!

Bridget Jones’s Diary

A hilarious British rom-com involving a 30-something-year-old. Bridget is trying to kick her dirty vices of smoking and drinking for the New Year. Meanwhile, she gets wrapped up in an office romance that turns sour. On the side, an old acquaintance is eyeing her but their awkward encounters leave them clueless as to how they really feel for each other. Two of the biggest appeals for this movie: Hugh Grant and Colin Firth. Also, who doesn’t want to see these two ruffle and tussle in the snow in a fight over Bridget? Would recommend spiking your hot chocolate with Bailey’s to go along enjoying this movie!

Harry Potter and the Sorcerer’s Stone

In the very first of a series following Harry Potter’s adventures, the Sorcerer’s Stone is a great holiday movie because it introduces us to the magic of Harry’s new world. Young Harry is so innocent to magic and what he can do. Everyone loves him, we discover Hogwarts for the first time, and we can watch as his friendships blossom after fighting a troll and saving the sorcerer’s stone from an evil dark wizard! My favorite scenery is when the castle is alight with snow and Harry, wrapped up in a Gryffindor scarf, is out with his owl, Hedwig.

Elf

No Christmas holiday is complete without seeing Elf! In this cute family-friendly movie, Buddy the Elf travels to New York to find his real father. Seeing Buddy adjust to our world with his extremely positive attitude is so fun. He has an awkward encounter with a department store Santa, brings the Christmas spirit to those around him, and shows us a new way to eat spaghetti (maple syrup anyone?). It’s a fun movie for everyone!

Love Actually

For those of a suitable age, Love Actually is the first and last movie I have to see this holiday season. Come December 1st and December 25, I will be popping this movie in my DVD player to enjoy! What isn’t there to love about love? We get glimpses of love in the form of friendships and romance, not all of which are successful but it does have a heartwarming ending. There’s humor spread throughout and it feels like getting a hug from your favorite actors. Hugh Grant, Colin Firth, Keira Knightley, Andrew Lincoln, Rowan Atkinson, Bill Nighy, Alan Rickman, Emma Thompson, and so much more make this wonderful ensemble!

Picture sources:

http://harrypotter-pix.blogspot.com/2008/12/chrismas-in-poudlard.html

http://imgfave.com/collection/254878/funny

http://www.filmdiliveedebiyati.com/2014/10/gunun-film-tavsiyesi-love-actually.html