A blue-collar worker who dreams of fame for himself and his daughter has a chance encounter with a local pop star - and he seizes the opportunity armed with sleeping pills in a thermos of tea. I can't think of any other comedies that incorporate Stockholm syndrome, rape, and a little blackface into the plot, but the Oscar-nominated Everybody's Famous! is the exception. Despite a few moments of genuine tenderness and humor, the film's treatment of incredibly unfunny subjects is hard to look past.

Dominique Deruddere’s Everybody’s Famous! (Iedereen Beroemd! in his native Flemish) is a rather charming little movie, though without enough of a sense of detachment from the dream of pop music fame which it otherwise makes fun of. Some will say it is condescending, but I don’t think it condescending enough, at least in this sense. Nothing is easier in the world than poking fun at the eagerness of our contemporaries to become famous, but, like Hollywood “satire,” Mr. Deruddere’s proves quite as star-struck as the simple folk whom it purports to satirize. We get the idea, actually, that the kind of fame they lust after is almost unproblematic, and its presentation of the extraordinary lengths to which they will go…

I'm a big fan of Raising Arizona, so don't have a problem with the levity in a kidnapping comedy, despite the obviously grave nature of the story. This film has a cute premise but never quite got off the ground for me. That being said, it was easy to buy into these characters and the setup. I think part of my problem was that I was enjoying the story of the victim much more than the kidnapper, so when we lose track of her story for the last half of the film, I was less interested. I get it – it's not her film, but for a film like this to work, you really have to get hooked right away…

Allot more bleak then I remember it being which is kind of it's saving also. Has a very slow start but when the kidnapping scheme begins it goes deep into some great black comedy in a depressing setting of endless c-rank talent shows in Belgian small towns and Josse De Pauw depressing but good meaning father endless failures in trying to help his family in his own vision. The great cast does the rest; a great mix between Dutch and Belgian actors that all gel well together.

Good mix of drama and comedy throughout this all while keeping it surprisingly low stakes which helps it a fair bit with setting a good tone for this kind of movie.