Lottie Ellen Ward Williams was born May 21, 1943 in Seiling, OK to Willis Dowel and Francis Alice (Plummer) Ward and passed away January 30, 2018 in Enid. In 1961, she graduated from Enid High School. Over the years, Lottie worked at various places including being the manager for Lot-A-Burger for some time. But her passion was always being a caregiver for others. She was blessed by being a blessing to those that needed her. Lottie enjoyed fishing and her favorite furbaby will always be her dog, Pudgy. She was preceded in death by her parents; son, Irby Williams; daughter, LeAnn Williams; brother Buddy Ward and sister, Toni Miskell. Lottie leaves behind her daughter, Angela Williams; five siblings, Alice, Viola, Kathy, Shila and Polly; seven grandchildren, Michael, Jackie, Forest, Corey, Amber, Kenzie and Matthew; two great-grandchildren, Peyton and Kia as well as several nieces and nephews. Graveside service for Lottie will be 2:00pm Friday, February 2, 2018 in Paradise Cemetery, Breckenridge, OK. Services are under the direction of Henninger-Hinson Funeral Home. Memorial contributions may be given through the funeral home to the charity of ones choice. Condolences can be made online at www.enidwecare.com

Published on January 31, 2018

Plant a Living Memorial

In Memory of LottieHow does it work?

Send Flowers: When Is the Ordering Deadline?

Next-Day Delivery

ANY DAY OF THE WEEK

Order any time up till the day before

Same-Day Delivery

MON-FRI Order by 2:00PM

SAT & SUN Order by noon

Morning Delivery

TUES-SAT Order by 3:00PM

The day before

SAT & SUN Order by Saturday

Note: These are general guidelines; some florists may not be able to operate within these timelines. During peak periods such as Valentine’s Day, Memorial Day and most holidays, florists are not always able to keep up to demand. Tribute will contact you if there are any issues.

Plant a tree: How does it work

When your purchase is complete, a post will be made on the tribute wall of the deceased signifying the planting of a memorial tree.

An official certificate recognizing your purchase will be included with your email receipt. You can then forward the email to the family or print it and give it to them personally.

After an order is placed, our forestry partners will plant the tree in the area of greatest need (nearest the funeral home), according to the planting schedule for the year.

Due to seasonal conditions, the tree planting takes place during the spring and summer.

Tree Planting Timeline

Orders placed in:

January - May

Planting will take place in Spring or Summer of the same year.

June - December

Planting will take place in Spring of the following year.

Hide Detail

In Memory of Lottie

Plant a tree How it Works Plant a tree