Lottie's obituary

Mrs. Lottie F. Mayberry

On Friday, January 13, 2023, Lottie F. Mayberry, beloved and adored mother and grandmother, peacefully passed away at the age of 93, at her home in Gaffney, SC.

Lottie was born on September 19, 1929 in Gaffney, SC to the late Roger and Vera Williams. Lottie was the middle child of her late sisters, Frances Littlejohn and Blanche Williams. The sisters shared such a strong and beautiful bond that will never be broken, “For love is as strong as death is…” - Song of Solomon 8:6.

Lottie was the widow of her husband T.C. Mayberry. Lottie had three children; Glenn W. Foster, the late Audrey Carol “Cookie” Foster and her beloved stepson Thomas “Buddy” Mayberry. She lovingly raised her children to be kind, diligent, and respectable individuals. Lottie was a hard worker but loved even harder. She could make anyone feel as if they were her own child. She was affectionately referred to as “Grandma Lottie” by many, whether they were related to her or not. She was undoubtedly, the highly esteemed matriarch of our dear family and will truly be missed.

Lottie was a member of the Concord Baptist Church in Gaffney, SC where she was known for her generosity. She loved and revered our Heavenly Father, often praying to and praising him, even in her later years.

Lottie had an endearing manner, she could often “tell it like it is”, but still fix you a plate of her good home cooking. She was known by her friends and neighbors for her deliciously baked cakes. She had an industrious spirit, you could never get her to sit down and you knew once she put her mind to something, there was no going back. Our dear grandmother was a joy to be around. Her smile was infectious and her laugh could lift your spirits! She always knew what to say; her conversation was always encouraging and balanced with the right amount of quick wit and humor.

In her later years, as her health started to take a turn, she was cared for at home by her grandson, Larry Michael Foster and his family. She expressed her desire to be in the comfort of her home until the end.

Lottie was preceded in death by her parents, Roger and Vera Rice Williams, her daughter Audrey Carol "Cookie" Foster, her sisters, Blanche Williams and Frances Littlejohn, her nephews Roger Wayne Williams and Glenn Littlejohn Jr. and her husband, T.C. Mayberry.

Lottie is devotedly survived by her sons, Glenn W. Foster (Alicia) of Crofton, MD and Thomas “Buddy” Mayberry of Gaffney, SC. Her niece, who was raised like a daughter, Sheran Ann Littlejohn (Charles) of Hyattsville, MD. Her cousin Madison “Lee” Watts (Lula) of Gaffney, SC; Her grandsons, Larry M. Foster of Gaffney, SC; Cosby L. Foster (Patrina) of Blacksburg, SC and Edward Dunn-El (Dorene) of Greensboro,NC. Her granddaughters Chiarra M. Foster of Crofton, MD and Glenda A.Trotter (Derrick) of Baltimore, MD. Her great-nephews Charles “Chuck” Littlejohn of Annapolis, MD, and Kevin Littlejohn of Columbia, MD. She is also survived by 18 great grandchildren, a host of other relatives and many friends.