If you've ever traveled to Greece, chances are you'll enjoy a movie showcasing some of the places you saw when you were over there, right? Not necessarily. "My Life in Ruins" is likely to disappoint both world travelers and stay-at-homes, and visions of Greece have nothing to do with the disappointment.

This is simply a dumb film. The script incorporates tourist cliches, sappy dialogue and puppet-like characters into what amounts to the worst romantic comedy of the season.

Clearly, Nia Vardalos is trying to draw in the same crowds that flocked to her surprise hit "My Big Fat Greek Wedding" a few years back. Even if you thought that film was sappy, you had to admit it had stirred in a few new ingredients to its familiar Cinderella/makeover plot.

Rated: PG-13 for sexual content

Cast: Nia Vardalos, Richard Dreyfuss, Alexis Georgoulis, Alistair McGowan

Director: Donald Petrie

Run time: 98 minutes

On the other hand, almost nothing in "My Life in Ruins" is fresh. The script encourages you to recognize all the annoying-traveler stereotypes you've already encountered at one time or another, then forces you to hang out with them again. Whereas Vardalos could weave in some unique family stuff in the earlier film, the only novelty here is Richard Dreyfuss, as Irv, a philosophical joker who dearly misses his dead wife.

Vardalos plays Georgia, a tour guide who regularly gets mediocre ratings from her tourists. You're supposed to believe she's an unemployed college professor, according to screenwriter Mike Reiss, who also wants you to believe she's too intellectual for her clientele. She gives them Googled scholarship, but what they really want is ice cream, dirty stories and a free pass to the Hard Rock Cafe.

• Listen to this week's New Movies Podcast

Georgia's rival guide, Nico (Alistair McGowan), provides all those things to his group, then boasts of his success as he and Georgia travel the same route. Irv prevents her from sinking too far into depression, but her teethy grin gets brighter only after bushy-faced bus driver Poupi (Alexis Georgoulis) takes an interest in her.

Although the film seems to have been shot on location, neither the ancient land nor modern Greek culture come into play here. You can get a better feel for classical heritage at big city museums. What "My Life in Ruins" mostly provides is an hour and a half with annoying tourists, one of whom, in fact, is a thief whom you're encouraged to like.