NEIL Harris was pleased and relieved by Millwall’s win over Birmingham City – but has warned his players that there is still more work to be done.

The Lions boss now has three wins from four games and remains unbeaten since returning to the The Den to help rescue Millwall from relegation.

A late goal by Japhet Tanganga was enough for a critical three points over Birmingham and Harris commended his players for finding a way to win.

He said after the game: “That’s Millwall-like isn’t it? That’s so Millwall in being so good in one half and poor at times in the other. But finding a way to win a game has always been what this club has been about. The most important thing is the result and ultimately we got it in a real pressure situation.

“I tried to take the pressure off the players this week but we all knew the importance of the game today against a team that had been struggling. We knew the importance of trying to get three points, and certainly not losing the game at the very worst. And I tried to take that responsibility on from the players and asked them to go and express themselves and enjoy themselves.

“I think if you break the game down, first 40 minutes I thought we were excellent. If we score early or score from one of the set-plays we should score from, then I think we probably run over the top of Birmingham in that first half. So delighted with the first half but disappointed to not be in front.

“I knew Mark Venus [Birmingham caretaker manager, filling in for Tony Mowbray] would get into the players at half-time and they would come out second half. I thought we just went back to a little bit too much like [at] Blackburn where we just turned the ball over too cheaply at the top end of the pitch, I thought we made some poor decisions. But we hung in there, we defended really well, was resilient and we grew back into the game.

“And good Millwall centre-halves like Jake Cooper, Murray Wallace, Shaun Hutchinson, Paul Robinson, Stuart Nethercott, Darren Ward, just to name a few over the years, have been brilliant in one penalty area but they’ve also been really effective at the other end as well and Japhet Tanganga comes up with the moment to win us the game and ultimately it’s a priceless moment in the season.”

While the win is crucial and the gap to the bottom three important, Harris has reminded his players that they still need to grab more points.

He said: “The remit coming in was to galvanise the football club and see where it takes us, no huge pressure. Again, what an atmosphere today. Even second half when we a little bit disappointing. The fans were brilliant with the players, absolutely brilliant. And that’s what we need.

“And that patience and respect to the players was repaid 10-fold with the goal and that’s what we have to be as a football club.

“We’ve been in a difficult moment, we’re still in a difficult moment, but it’s a lot healthier than it was. I’ve just told the players that to get 10 points in four games after not winning for so long is testimony to the spirit and camaraderie and the passion in the group, but we’ve achieved nothing. It was a huge win today and I thought [before the game] our next victory was vital so I’m delighted.”