http://pl.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wierzchos%C5%82awa_Ludmi%C5%82a

Wierzchosława Ludmiła

Wierzchosława Ludmiła (ur. przed 1152, zm. zap. 1223)

Ojciec: Mieszko III Stary

Matka: Elżbieta, króla Węgier

Mąż: Fryderyk I Lotaryński

Potomstwo: dziewięcioro dzieci, pięciu synów i cztery córki (Zobacz wersję angielską)

http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wierzchoslawa_Ludmilla_of_Greater_Poland

Wierzchoslawa Ludmilla of Greater Poland

Polish: Wierzchoslawa Ludmiła Mieszkówna

Wierzchoslawa Ludmilla of Greater Poland (b. bef. 1153 - d. bef. 1223), was a Polish princess member of the House of Piast, by marriage Lady of Bitsch and during 1205-1206 Duchess of Lorraine.

She was the second daughter and fourth child of Mieszko III the Old, Duke of Greater Poland and since 1173 High Duke of Poland, by his first wife Elisabeth, daughter of King Béla II of Hungary. Her name was probably given after High Duchess Viacheslava of Novgorod, wife of Bolesław IV the Curly, the ruling High Duke of Poland; with this gesture, Duke Mieszko III maybe showed an expression of warming relations between him and his brother the High Duke.

LifeAround 1167, Wierzchoslawa Ludmilla married with Frederick, Lord of Bitsch, second son of Duke Matthias I of Lorraine. The union was arranged by Frederick's maternal uncle Frederick I, Holy Roman Emperor during a visit to Poland; thanks to this wedding, Mieszko III gained important allies among his western neighbors.

During her marriage, Wierzchoslawa Ludmilla bore her husband nine children, five sons —

Frederick (who succeeded his father as Duke of Lorraine),

Matthias (later Bishop of Toul),

Philipp (Lord of Gerbéviller),

Thierry (Lord of Autigny) and

Henry (Lord of Bayon)— and four daughters —

Agatha (Abbess of Remiremont),

Judith (Countess of Salm),

Hedwig (Countess of Zweibrücken) and

Cunigunde (Duchess of Limburg)—.[1]

Wierzchosława Ludmilla became in the contact between the French and Polish artistic representatives. One of the theories about the build of the famous Gniezno Doors stated that thanks to her efforts, around 1180 the Doors came to her father's court.[2]

After years of disputes between Frederick and his brother Duke Simon II of Lorraine, in 1205 he finally abdicated and entered in a monastery. Then Frederick became in the Duke of Lorraine and Wierzchosława Ludmilla in his Duchess consort. However, their reign was short-lived: one year later, in 1206 Duke Frederick I died. Wierzchosława Ludmilla returned to Poland after the death of her husband, and remained there until her own death, around 1223.[3]

Her husband:

Frederick I, Duke of Lorraine

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Frederick inherited it all nevertheless, but died a year later and it went to his son by Wierzchoslawa Ludmilla (1150–1223), daughter of Mieszko III the Old, duke of Greater Poland and high duke of all Poland, and Elisabeth, daughter of Prince Álmos. Their children were:

Frederick, his successor in Lorraine

Thierry the Devil (le Diable), lord of Autigny

Henry the Lombard, who built the castle of Bayon

Philip (d. 1243), lord of Gerbeviller

Matthias (1170-1217), bishop of Toul

Agatha (d. 1242), abbess of Remiremont

Judith, married Henry II, Count of Salm

Hediwge (d. 1228), married George, Count of Zweibrücken

Cunigunda, married Waleran III of Limburg

FMG: The Chronicon Polono-Silesiacum refers to, but does not name, the daughters of Mieszko III, naming (third in the list) "dux Lothoringie Fredericus, nepos imperatoris" as his son-in-law. The Chronicle of Alberic de Trois-Fontaines names "Virgotslavia" as one of the sisters of "duces Guenesie Odoiscius…Logeslaus", specifying that she was mother of "ducis de Nanceio". This marriage was arranged by Ferry's maternal uncle Emperor Friedrich "Barbarossa" during his visit to Poland in 1167. She returned to Poland after her husband died.

aus dem Hause der Piasten