Cisco Systems said Wednesday it agreed to acquire PipeLinks, a closely held maker of data routers that can also handle telephone calls, for about US$126 million in stock.

PipeLinks, based in San Jose, California, makes a router that can simultaneously shuffle traditional, circuit-based telephone traffic and Internet-protocol traffic. Cisco, the world's biggest computer networking equipment maker, will fold the technology into its own products and offer it to service providers to improve performance on older networks.

To cover the acquisition costs, Cisco (CSCO) will take a one-time charge of between 3 and 6 cents a share against second-quarter earnings.

Cisco's stock dropped $1.25, about 2 percent, to $78.50 in morning trading on the Nasdaq.

- - -

Microsoft invests in Thomson unit: Microsoft and four other companies each bought a $80 million stake in Thomson Multimedia to bolster their positions in the interactive television market.

Thomson Multimedia, a French company, is the world’s fourth-largest television maker. More important, the company has recently ventured into interactive services and products.

In the past year, Microsoft, the world's largest software company, has taken an interest in the television industry. It has been pushing cable-TV operators, television makers and set-top box manufacturers to adopt its Windows CE operating system as the foundation of advanced television systems.

Alcatel, Hughes Electronics' DirecTV, and NEC also took stakes in Thomson. Each company bought 3.45 million shares of Thomson, equal to a 7.5 percent stake, at 130.59 francs, or $23.26, a share, the companies said.

- - -

Intel's video phone ringing: Intel unveiled its first video phone software made for cable modems on Wednesday at the Western Show in Anaheim. The product, which promises full-motion, real-time video over a high-speed connection, will be available early next year.

Other versions of Intel's Video Phone work over traditional Net connections, standard phone lines and ISDN. Intel officials said cable's higher bandwidth means better pictures.

In the past, pictures over plain old telephone wire was typically jerky with a lot of frame droppage. Moving to ISDN or cable modem, the frame rate increases and the picture improves.

Intel (INTC) plans to distribute this version of Video Phone through cable Internet providers, as installed software on new PCs and bundled with its video camera. This month, Intel will test its software over cable Internet lines in Wild Dunes, a suburb of Charleston, South Carolina.

Reuters contributed to this report.

Donald Trump and Silicon Valley's Billionaire Elegy

Venture capitalists Ben Horowitz and Marc Andreessen claim the tech industry, California, and the country are doomed if we don’t embrace the former president.

RealPage Says Rental Pricing Tech Is Misunderstood, but Landlords Aren’t So Sure

The software company has pushed back hard against claims that its algorithms helped make rent in the US too damn high. Property owners and managers aren't entirely convinced.

Apple, Nvidia, Anthropic Used Thousands of Swiped YouTube Videos to Train AI

Creators claim their videos were used without their knowledge.

OpenAI Slashes the Cost of Using Its AI With a ‘Mini’ Model

With competing models—including many free ones—flooding the market, OpenAI is announcing a cheaper way to use its AI.

How to Get Rich From Peeping Inside People’s Fridges

Forget the S&P 500. Look at the ice cream. This investor visits homes around the world to see where diets—and economies—will go next.