MENLO PARK, Calif., March 3, 1993 -- Cisco Systems, Inc., the leading worldwide supplier of internetworking routers, has movedto strengthen its customer support in the Mexican marketplace byopening a subsidiary company, Cisco Systems de Mexico, S.A. deC.V. The subsidiary will be responsible for managing therelationships with distributors in Mexico such as Consorcio RedUno, Cisco's authorized distributor in Mexico City, and RSD (Redesy Systemas de Datos), a systems integrator.

Heading the expansion of the company in Mexico, Cisco hasbrought in Carlos Pareja as country manager for the newsubsidiary. Mr. Pareja holds an M.B.A. from the University ofPanama and joined Cisco in November 1992 after spending eightyears at Dataproducts de Mexico as marketing and sales directorand member of the board of directors. He had previously beenmarketing and sales director and member of the board of directorsof CEISA a joint venture company between Wang Laboratories, Inc.and a Mexican group of investors. Mr. Pareja also spent five years as director general of Wang de Panama, from where he establisheda network of over 16 distributors for Wang in the same number ofcountries in Latin America.

Currently, Cisco Systems has a two-year agreement withBancomer, Mexico's second largest commercial bank, to provide thefinancial institution with the company's latest IBMinternetworking technology. When completed, the Bancomer Ciscointernet will include some 1,000 Cisco routers, making it one ofthe world's largest multiprotocol router-based networks.

"The opening of this new office in Mexico is significant fortwo reasons," said John Morgridge, president and CEO of CiscoSystems. "First it supports Cisco's continuing commitment tomaintaining our position as the leading global provider ofinternetworking solutions. Second, this office will furtherstrengthen Cisco's penetration of the Mexican market."

Cisco Systems, Inc., is the leading worldwide supplier ofhigh-performance, multimedia and multiprotocol internetworkingproducts, including routers, bridges, communication servers androuter management software. Cisco technology can be used to buildenterprise-wide networks linking an unlimited number ofgeographically dispersed LANs, WANs and IBM SNA networks. In theUnited States, Cisco is traded over the counter under the NASDAQsymbol CSCO.