Dynetics, a wholly-owned subsidiary of Leidos, provides responsive, cost-effective engineering, scientific, and IT solutions to the national security, cybersecurity, space, and critical infrastructure sectors.

The company’s portfolio features highly specialized technical services and a range of software and hardware products, including components, subsystems, and complex end-to-end systems.

Their customer, the U.S. Army, required the migration of a large IBM Rational Rhapsody UML model to NoMagic’s Cameo Enterprise Architect.

Larry J., the Evaluation Engineer who was responsible for performing the model migration process, described their challenge:

"The model consisted of 37,331 files in Rhapsody UML format with 812,405 elements and 703 diagrams. Up until today, this kind of transformation, if done manually, would normally take at least one man-year to complete.”

Sean F., the Project Manager and Lead Systems Architect on this project, needed a solution for his customer. “The customer requires a one-time migration to MagicDraw. Further development will be done in MagicDraw.”

Once the customer’s business challenges were clearly identified, Sodius Corp. provided the customer with the Publisher for Rhapsody. The Publisher has already been used by many Department of Defense programs, and has enabled them to automate the migration from Rhapsody UML models to Cameo/MagicDraw SysML models.

The solution, the Publisher for Rhapsody, generates complete MagicDraw models from Rhapsody, including all model elements, structure, and hierarchy thereby saving engineering time, retaining data integrity, and reducing costs.

“Following the provided instructions, we were able to execute the conversion of the model in just under 9 hours.We found that quite impressive. Had we tried to recreate this model manually, it is estimated that it would have taken at least one man-year to complete the work, not counting our extensive data model. If we had to recreate that manually as well, it would have taken at least another man-year. Some manual re-work will be required on our end requiring a few weeks of effort, but it is minimal compared to the time we will be able to save.” Larry added.

“This did in 2 months what could have taken 2 years,” says Sean.

Larry summarizes his experience:

“We did encounter some issues during the conversion but were pleased with the responsiveness and knowledge of the Sodius team in helping us. For the issues we had, they were already aware of them, and either had a fix or already had it scheduled as an item to be addressed in a future release. They are continuously improving the product and were eager and appreciative of the feedback they received from us. We strongly recommend that we buy this product. It will pay for itself many times over for this project.”