In this developing IT age, in order to quickly realize user needs, it is necessary to develop software with high quality as well as flexibility and expansibility while attempting to shorten software development time and/or reduce development costs. In order to achieve this, the installment of a software development process based on object orientation technology and the recycling of software components, fulfills an essential role. "OOT Community", aims to raise the skills and enhance productivity of the entire software development industry by aggressively offering and transmitting object orientation technology. This development environment integrates various development tools including everything from the lower to the upper reaches of the development process. Information such as know-how regarding software component distribution to software development engineers are also included.

The three companies, which have agreed on the establishment of the "OOT Community", will participate in the development of the same said site based on the points below.

NTT COMWARE: will offer a new age software development environment, which the company is scheduled to jointly construct with RATIONAL SOFTWARE U.S.A., to the "OOT Community" site and will support the installment of a development process based on the latest object orientation technology.

NIHON RATIONAL SOFTWARE: will actively introduce the latest information regarding object orientation technology, promoted by RATIONAL SOFTWARE U.S.A., or software development methods to the "OOT Community".

COMPONENT SQUARE: Apart from developing programs for popularizing technology models necessary for the distribution of software components and standard distribution specifications, COMPONENT SQUARE will actively introduce know-how and examples regarding the recycling of software components developed based on object orientation technology to the "OOT Community" and will support the circulation among community participants.

At "OOT Community", in order to further enhance its activity contents, will actively recruit companies that support the activities of this said community site. Furthermore, ATMARKIT CORPORATION (Head Office: Shibya-ku, Tokyo, President: Atsuo Fujimura), which constructs and operates web sites targeted to software development engineers will collaborate as a supporting company.

(*1) Object Orientation Technology

A technology based on the way of thinking of regarding data processing and operation as a relationship of object association and not as a procedure flow.

(*2) Component Base Software Development Methods

A method of developing applications by combining recyclable software parts (components) based on standard specifications.

(Reference)

NTT COMWARE CORPORATION http://www.nttcom.co.jp

NTT COMWARE, with its human resource of over 8,000 IT engineers as its foundation, has many achievements starting with the large-scale mainstay business processing system of the Japanese information communication market as well as the consistent providing of construction / maintenance / operation service of information processing systems, at all of which demand superior transactions, high quality, and high efficiency. In addition to such large-scale system construction know-how, NTT COMWARE aggressively promotes total solution as an IT service provider from consulting to outsourcing services to the IT market with a background of reliability backed by high technologies relating to network technologies, security technologies, UNIX / Linux, and Java.

NIHON RATIONAL SOFTWARE CO., LTD. http://www.rational.co.jp

NIHON RATIONAL SOFTWARE CO., LTD. was established in 1997 as the Japanese subsidiary of the US RATIONAL SOFTWARE CORPORATION, which promotes software development products. NIHON RATIONAL SOFTWARE, with "The Software Development Company" as its slogan, promotes the development of retail e-business application development support products as well as conducting related technological consultation.

COMPONENT SQUARE, INC. http://www.c-sq.com/

COMPONENT SQUARE, INC. was established in January, 2001 with investments from 13 influential companies involved in OOT, Java, and/or component base software developments. COMPONENT SQUARE is engaged in merchandizing, the distribution, retail of software components as well as related services. By promoting software components and its reuse, the company contributes to the enhancement of the productivity and reliability of software development as well as to the modernization of the software production process.