Advocating for New approaches to increase awareness and resources for mental health, understanding of the emotional and mental health struggles of children, teenagers and young adults in memory of Ankit Alvin Toppo.

Ankit was a son, brother, student, and friend in the Lafayette and West Lafayette community of Indiana. He left the people he let into his life with a greater meaning of compassion, care and purpose.

Preparing, Saving and Empowering Future Generations

Ankit Foundation Corp. Presents

2nd annual Candlelight Tribute and Concert for

Mental Health Awareness

In memory of Ankit Toppo

This event will include a free Concert (Spontaneous Hopeful Monster) at Riehle Plaza with mental health messages followed by a Candlelight Tribute at John T. Myers Pedestrian Bridge. Light snacks and giveaway goodies will be available. The purpose of this event is to spread mental health awareness, increase empowerment, and resilience in our youth, and young adults in our community and provide mental health resources in our community.

Saturday July 27th, 2024

7pm -9 pm Concert at Riehle Plaza.

9 pm-10 pm Candlelight Tribute at John T. Myers Pedestrian Bridge at Sun Dial.

200 N. 2ND Street, Lafayette IN-47901

Ankit Foundation Corp created this app to provide community mental health resources to individuals especially youth and young adults in Indiana. It offers help with finding resources and treatment facilities based on location within the state of Indiana. In addition, it provides a way for users to complete a daily mental health screening, which can help users monitor and tracking progress their mental health.

The Ankit Foundation was created by Pushpa and Rachel Toppo, mother and sister to Ankit Toppo. With the loss of our loved one in the battle against depression and mental health, we decided we wanted to make a difference and help others just like Ankit. The Ankit Foundation closely takes into consideration of Ankit's struggles and gives back to support what supported him through out his life.