Hulk Hogan shocked fans over the festive period when he revealed he had been baptized at the age of 70 - but he is far from the only famous face turning to Christianity as an adult.

Kat Von D famously renounced witchcraft and the occult and was baptized into Christianity at a ceremony attended by her inked pals this year, while Blac Chyna was reborn as a Christian on her 34th birthday in 2022.

Keke Palmer's ex Darius Jackson - who has been accused of domestic violence towards her - recently revealed he had the chance to 'repent and be baptized'.

While Kim Kardashian and her children were baptized during a 2019 trip to Armenia with the reality star documenting the Orthodox Christian ceremony online.

As more stars turn to religion, DailyMail.com looks back at the most shocking celebrity baptisms...

KAT VON D

Back in October Kat Von D was shockingly baptized into Christianity a year after renouncing witchcraft and the occult.

The tattoo artist and former make-up mogul, 41, shared a video of the church ceremony attended by scores of her tattooed friends - with the clip captioned with a simple cross.

The video saw Kat - who has been known for her gothic and macabre signature style throughout her career - dressed in a simple white robe as she took part in the immersion baptism.

The pastor said: 'Katherine von Drachenberg, upon your profession of the Lord Jesus Christ, and in obedience to His Divine command, I baptize you, my sister, in the name of the Father and the Son and the Holy Spirit.'

The star - who famously hooked up with Jesse James in the wake of his split from Sandra Bullock in 2010 - was then completely submerged in water before coming out of the water and hugging her pastor.

Last year, the star opened up about her 'spiritual battle' and her desire to change her beliefs and lifestyle.

Sharing a post showing books on witchcraft, tarot and the occult she was throwing out, she wrote: 'I don’t know if any of you have been going through changes in your lives right now, but in the last few years I’ve come to some pretty meaningful realizations — many of them revolving around the fact that I got a lot of things wrong in my past.

'Today, I went through my entire library, and threw out books that just don’t align with who I am and who I want to be.

'I’ve always found beauty in the macabre, but at this point, I just had to ask myself what is my relationship with this content? And the truth is, I just don’t want to invite any of these things into our family’s lives, even if it comes disguised in beautiful covers, collecting dust on my shelves.

'In no way is this post designed to put anyone down if you’re into this stuff, because I think we are all on our own journey, and I love everyone regardless of where they might be at. But right now, it’s never been more clear to me that there is a spiritual battle taking place, and I want to surround myself and my family with love and light.

'With that being said, I want to send extra love to everyone out there, and hope through some of these trying times, you are making meaningful changes in your life, too!

Back in October 2021, Kat jumped to her main Instagram page to reveal to her fans and followers that she and her family had made the decision to leave California.

The family have relocated to the city of Vevay, Indiana and purchased another mansion for around $1.5 million, per the New York Post.

BLAC CHYNA

In March Blac Chyna posted a throwback photo from her May 2022 baptism on her birthday.

In the snap, Chyna donned an all-white ensemble while a priest in a white robe performed the baptism ceremony.

The two appeared to be in a swimming pool in a backyard as her loved ones gathered around to document the special moment on her 34th birthday.

Since declaring she wanted to start fresh and transform her life, the reality TV star embarked on a journey to dissolve her facial fillers as well as remove her butt and breast implants.

'I was reborn on my birthday 5-11-22,' the entrepreneur wrote in her caption. 'God is Good'.

Her latest social media post appeared to be a grab from a clip she previously shared on her birthday.

'Born again on my birthday 5/11/22 #newbeginnings,' she captioned the video.

Her mother, Tokyo Toni, also posted a video from Chyna's birthday and wrote: 'Having your mother around brings great change. Being humble is only one lesson learned being a part of God is all you need to know'.

KEKE PALMER'S EX DARIUS JACKSON

In December Jackson revealed he had been baptized, as the actress received a temporary restraining order against him last month amid allegations of domestic violence.

Jackson, 29, took to Instagram with a clip of himself during various stages of a gym workout, explaining in the caption how he's focusing on his religion and physical wellness amid the tumultuous time.

'There's A LOT I can say but not allowed to say,' Jackson said. 'And at this point, don't even want to say.'

Jackson spoke about his refocused mindset after Palmer, 30, obtained a temporary restraining order against him amid the allegations she made; and filed for sole legal and physical custody of their 10-month-old son, Leodis.

He continued: 'I will say, however, that God is & will always be your greatest ally. I have put my trust, patience, timing & entire life onto him so that I can continue to get through the days.'

Jackson, who has past denied the abuse allegations, said that 'Lord Jesus has been with me throughout & has strengthen me to the point where I am continuing to push forward & not looking back.

'He's surrounded me with friends & family that has always been there as well as sending me love from many individuals who have reached out. And for that, I thank you.'

Jackson concluded in saying he was 'extremely blessed to have repent & be baptized in the name of our Lord Jesus.

'But the work doesn't stop, there's so much I have to do in order to be fulfilled. Saving myself was the 1st step.'

He posted the name of the bible verse Acts 2:38, which states: 'Then Peter said unto them, "Repent, and be baptized every one of you in the name of Jesus Christ for the remission of sins, and ye shall receive the gift of the Holy Ghost."'

JOSHUA BASSETT

In February 2023, Joshua Bassett, 23, revealed he had been baptized at California megachurch, Bethel Church in Redding.

He shared a video giving a speech in front of a crowd and religious leaders saying: 'Long story short, I grew up Christian and I ran the other way, as far as I could go in pursuit of truth and that only ended in addiction, depression, suicidal ideation, eating disorders, et cetera

'And no other teacher gave me anywhere near the peace that Jesus Christ did.'

A further video showed him being dunked in water as his baptism was carried out.

The ceremony attracted criticism as the church has been slammed before for allegedly supporting conversion therapy and its views on the LGBTQ+ community.

Following the backlash, Bassett took to X, writing: 'i visited this church and happened to get baptized here- i was unaware of some of their policies and beliefs, and do not endorse all of them. my heart is for Christ and Christ alone!'

HULK HOGAN

WWE legend Hulk Hogan, 70, revealed he was baptized at Indian Rocks Baptist Church in Florida as he shared snaps and video from his ceremony to his Instagram account on December 20.

The video captured Hulk being submerged in a small pool of water before he emerged and flashed a smile.

'Total surrender and dedication to Jesus is the greatest day of my life. No worries, no hate, no judgment… only love!' he captioned the post.

His wife Sky Daily Hogan - whom he married in September- was also baptized, and Hulk assisted in her ceremony.

Just before he was christened, he helped dip his wife into the water. She surfaced with a smile and gently clapped her hands.

Both Hulk and his wife were wearing white for the ceremony.

Hulk wore his trademark bandana - this time in white - along with a matching T-shirt and silver cross necklace.

The photos also captured Hulk serenely bowing his head as he appeared to share a prayer with his family in the pool.

Indian Rocks Baptist Church shared the moment on their own Instagram account, posting a photo of the baptism to their Stories.

'God is doing amazing things at Indian Rocks,' they wrote in bold font.

It comes several months after Hulk opened up about his faith on X, formerly Twitter.

'I accepted Christ as my savior at 14yrs old, and the training, prayers and vitamins kept me in the game but now that I am one with God,the main event theme of surrender,service and love makes me the Real Main Event that can slam any giant of any size through the power of my Lord and Savior and so it is,even now brother,AMEN!' he tweeted back in April.

JUSTIN AND HAILEY BIEBER

Back in August 2020, the couple celebrated their love and devotion to God by being baptized together.

The pop superstar, 29, took to Instagram to shares intimate photos from their spiritual experience, calling it 'one of the most special moments' of his life.

'The moment @haileybieber my wife and I got baptized together!' the devout Christian wrote to his 143million Instagram followers. 'This was one of [the] most special moments of my life. Confessing our love and trust in Jesus publicly with our friends and family.'

Justin and Hailey decided to bath in God's glory while visiting Idaho during a road trip last month. The couple got down to their swim attire for the religious rite, which was performed by pastor Judah Smith.

Smith put his hand on Bieber's back to bless him before holding hands with the couple and praying to Christ.

Then, the man of God let Hailey and Justin float down and submerge themselves in the healing waters.

Justin was grateful to be able to have the experience with family and friends.

E! host Jason Kennedy seemed to reveal that he was there, commenting: 'One of the top moments of my life doing this with you.'

One of Justin's other spiritual mentors, pastor Carl Lentz, also commented, telling the Biebs: 'Amazing. love you.'

Justin's Idaho baptism with Hailey was very different from a previous blessing Carl performed upon him and later recounted to GQ.

After having a spiritual epiphany, Bieber begged the Lentz to baptize him on the spot.

Justin and Carl were joined by Judah, then quickly headed to Hillsong Church's NYC home, where both pastors used to preach, but when they arrived legions of fans were there waiting.

Thinking on his toes, Lentz reached out to NBA center Tyson Chandler, who is one of his VIP parishioners and was playing for the New York Knicks at the time.

They first tried the pool at Chandler's VIP building, but found it was closed.

Then, thinking on their toes Carl and Judah figured they could bless Justin in the basketball pro's supersized bathtub.

Bieber reflected on his faith journey earlier this year during an interview with Zane Lowe, explaining how he 'took a deep dive in[to] faith' after hitting a low-point in his life.

'The way I look at God and my relationship with Jesus is I'm not trying to earn God's love by doing good things,' Bieber told Lowe.

'God has already loved me for who I am before I did anything to earn or deserve it. It's a free gift by accepting Jesus, giving your life to him, and what he did is the gift. The forgiveness is the thing that we look at and we go, you know, I'm going to worship you, God, because you gave me something so good.'

KIM KARDASHIAN

Kim Kardashian was baptized while on her trip to her family's ancestral homeland of Armenia in 2019.

Pictures from the Orthodox Christian ceremony showed Kim covering her hair with a traditional head scarf, while wearing a high necked and long sleeved, full-length dress.

'So blessed to have been baptized along with my babies,' wrote the reality star on Instagram.

Four years ago, Kim and Kanye travelled to Jerusalem to have North baptised, with Khloe Kardashian there to be the youngster's godmother.

On this occasion Kanye was not present to witness his wife and children's baptism, however her sister Kourtney and her children were in attendance.

In her post, Kim referenced the historic nature of the cathedral in which the ceremony occurred.

''Thank you Armenia for hosting my family and I on such a memorable trip.

'So blessed to have been baptized along with my babies at Mother See of Holy Etchmiadzin, Armenia's main cathedral which is sometimes referred to as the Vatican of the Armenian Apostolic Church. This church was built in 303 AD.'

While Kim was raised as a Christian and attends church weekly, it seems her parents did not have her officially welcomed into the faith, as the sacrament of baptism only occurs once in a lifetime.

Baptism in the Orthodox church consists of three immersions into a baptismal font filled with holy water, differing from the Roman Catholic church, in which the priest pours the water over the head.

Other parts of the ceremony are similar in both. Both Orthodox and Catholic churches recognize baptisms performed by one another, along with Protestant baptisms.

Kim's Armenian heritage comes from her father's side. The late OJ Simpson lawyer Robert Kardashian was the grandson of Armenian migrants, who emigrated to the United States in the late 19th century

DEMI LOVATO

In October 2019, the pop star - who suffered a near-fatal drug overdose in July of 2018 - took a trip to Israel and was 'baptized in the Jordan River.'

'There is something absolutely magical about Israel. I've never felt such a sense of spirituality or connection to God…something I've been missing for a few years now,' the then 26-year-old wrote in the caption of four photos taken during her experience that she shared on Instagram.

In the first picture from her pilgrimage, Lovato was seen getting a hug moments after she was dipped into the holy waters, with a big smile of contentment on her face.

It is a common practice for pilgrims to come from all over the world, like Lovato, and visit Israel to get baptized in the Jordan River.

'I was raised Christian and have Jewish ancestors,' the Get Back singer wrote.

'When I was offered an amazing opportunity to visit the places I'd read about in the Bible growing up, I said yes.'

The New Mexico native went on to talk about how important it was for her to be baptized in the same place Jesus Of Nazareth was baptized, adding that she's 'never felt more renewed in my life.'

Lovato also shared a few other photos of her in the Old City Of Jerusalem, including one where she touched the Western Wall. Made of ancient limestone, it has also been called the Wailing Wall due to the practice of Jews weeping at the site over the destruction of the Temples.

The Western Wall is considered the holiest place where Jews are permitted to pray, though the holiest site in the Jewish faith lies behind it.

'This trip has been so important for my well-being, my heart, and my soul,' Lovato concluded in the caption.

'I'm grateful for the memories made and the opportunity to be able to fill the God-sized hole in my heart. Thank you for having me, Israel.'

JANA KRAMER

In January 2022 the star got baptized during a ceremony that she documented with photos and a video on Instagram.

The country singer was visibly emotional when she walked into the proceedings at the Crosspoint Church in Franklin, Tennessee, which included a live band playing soothing gospel tunes, and made her way into a tub of water.

After a few brief moments, Kramer was dunked backward into the water, with the help of a woman, and then quickly remerged with a big smile on her face.

'I don't have the words yet …I will…but for now…"In the name of Jesus there is healing". #faith #baptism,' she initially wrote in the caption of the video.

It's at this point that she began to find the words to what the baptism meant to her at this point of her life at age 38.

'This is my battle cry," the I Won't Give Up singer shared in the caption, adding, 'This is the day I stopped walking alone. The beauty is …I was never alone. He was always walking with me…I just didn't think I deserved that.'

The mother of two, who went through her third divorce, ex-husband Mike Caussin, this past year, confessed that she 'didn't know how to trust it or trust it at all.'

'Looking up to a "father figure" with my past was hard to believe or have comfort in. I didn't think he would stay. That he wouldn't hurt me. So I pushed God away for years.'

Kramer continued, 'But last year in the brokenness and [quiet] moments alone, I realized I wasn't truly alone. That HE was there. That HE never left. God was just waiting for me to come to him. And I have…and today I made my faith public and it feels really good to know no matter what happens next on this journey of life, HE is next to me walking with me.'