Agriculture Minister Oded Forer is promoting a multi-year program for the development of the city of and region around Eilat as an international center for research and development of food from the sea and the desert.

The program will focus on international research and application in the fields of food from the sea and the desert, marine biotechnology and aquaculture while promoting economic growth and increasing employment diversity, as well as strengthening Israel's food security. Projected to be completed in 2026, the program has a budget of NIS 170 million.

"The region has all the potential characteristics and elements to become a global hub for food from the sea and the desert. Therefore, the program has far-reaching national strategic implications, and the ability to secure future food sources for the population,” Forer said.

"In light of the planned government incentives, within five years about 900 jobs are expected to be added to the area – and within 10 years, with the maturation of the high-tech industry in the area, about 250 more," he said. "The total economic impact in the area is expected to be NIS 15.3 billion gross over 30 years."

The world population is expected to grow from about 8 billion to 9.9 billion by 2050. This increase, along with climate change and rising sea levels, will reduce water resource availability and agricultural land, creating a new reality in terms of how agriculture grows and drastically impacting food diversity, quality and availability.

Another global challenge for food production is desertification – the process by which land that was once used for agriculture becomes arid, causing the soil to no longer be fertile.

In view of the challenges of climate change and desertification processes and for the purpose of strengthening the food security of Israel, the Agriculture minister has been promoting the program, which aims to significantly improve the quality of life of the area's residents through the development of growth engines, innovation and production capabilities of food from the sea and the desert and the transformation of the region into a national and international center for research and development in the fields of marine biotechnology and water and desert agriculture.

The plan builds on the area's relative advantages, including its unique arid or semi-arid desert climate and the great depth of its shoreline, which allows researchers to easily take environmental factors into account.

A new study led by the World Meteorological Organization has revealed that the chance of at least one of the next five years exceeding 1.5°C above pre-industrial levels is now about 50:50 (48%).

The 1.5°C target is the goal of the Paris Agreement, which calls for countries to take concerted climate action to reduce greenhouse gas emissions in order to limit global warming.

“This study shows – with a high level of scientific skill – that we are getting measurably closer to temporarily reaching the lower target of the Paris Agreement on Climate Change,” said WMO Secretary-General Petteri Taalas while referencing the peer-reviewed study.

“The 1.5° figure is not some random statistic,” he said, but “rather an indicator of the point at which climate impacts will become increasingly harmful for people and indeed the entire planet.”

Taalas has warned that as long as countries continue to emit greenhouse gases at the same rate they do now, temperatures will continue to rise.

“And alongside that, our oceans will continue to become warmer and more acidic, sea ice and glaciers will continue to melt, sea level will continue to rise and our weather will become more extreme," he said. "Arctic warming is disproportionately high – and what happens in the Arctic affects all of us.”

Temperatures in 2022 are likely to be higher than the 1991-2020 average in almost all regions exceptparts of the Southern Ocean, South Atlantic and the Pacific Ocean. Alaska, western Canada, andIndia are likely to be cooler. Skill (forecast accuracy) is estimated from hindcasts to be medium or high in most regions, giving medium to high confidence in the forecast.

In 2021, the global average temperature was 1.1°C above the pre-industrial baseline, according to the provisional WMO report on the State of the Global Climate. The final report will be released on May 18.