Once you've seen one submarine film you've seen at least 92% of them.

We Dive at Dawn is very much one of the 92% as well. But as someone who likes a submarine film, I'm more than happy with that. Familiarity is always nice when you're watching something going off about three hours of sleep.

So, as is usually the case with British sub films especially, we get all the mostly pointless personal life stuff out of the way relatively early on before we can concentrate on the depth charges and periscope shots. The domestic stuff here really only adds depth to Eric Portman's character. A hard-faced coxswain having marriage troubles, he was such a great actor that he was…

An otherwise rudimentary British war drama with the expected elements of propaganda given the conflict was still ongoing during production, but it rises above being merely adequate at the hands of a gifted and still underappreciated director who I continually champion as being one of the best this country has ever produced.

Asquith's careful and intelligent staging of scenes is a big factor in We Dive at Dawn maintaining interest even during its less engaging moments and with uncredited script contributions from Frank Launder, it's also very well written from a dramatic standpoint—almost immediately we're introduced to a plethora of recognisable accents, from John Mills' grating RP and Eric Portman's native Yorkshire to Scottish and Irish lilts, really hitting home…

Anthony Asquith directs this fact-based Second World War drama about a mission to hunt and destroy a dangerous German battleship. Starring John Mills, Ronald Millar and Eric Portman.

In the middle of the Second World War, the squad of the maritime HMS Sea Tiger finds their long-anticipated shore leave postponed when they're specified a fresh assignment. Germany's brand-new battleship, the Brandenburg, is journeying open waters on its path to the Baltic Sea, giving forceful officer Lt. Taylor (John Mills) and his team an opportunity to damage it. But when the boat arrives at the well-fortified Baltic, Taylor has no choice but to choose whether to go after their mine, not having any idea if they can manage to survive.

John…

Quite a wonderfully constructed script lies at the heart of all that is good with We Dive at Dawn, a superior British WWII drama by Anthony Asquith that rivals even perhaps Pygmalion and Browning Version as the peak of his near forty year career.

For the the first act we are introduced to the men of submarine P61 first as they look forward to their week's leave, then glimpses of their home life - both bad and good - followed by the urgent recall to duty for a top secret mission to sink a new German ship, the Brandenburg. You get a sense of what these men have given up already, the havoc the war has played on their lives,…

REALISTIC & SOMBER SUBMARINE STORY...ACTION-FILM FROM BRITAIN MADE DURING WAR TIME...ABOVE AVERAGE

Directed by the Respected British Director Anthony Asquith, who Made Over 40 Films from the Late-20’s, Until the Mid-60’s.

Here He Brings to the Screen a Very Realistic, Very Somber Sub-Movie with a Substantial Amount of Fantastic Images Inside the “Sub” (Underneath) “Marine” (Water), as One Mate Explains (for the kiddies, or some levity).

For Once None of the Armaments, Hardware, and Vessels Don’t Look Like Little Models, and the Verisimilitude is one of the Movies Main Strength.

John Mills Sober as Ever, Until the End, as a Submariner has to be During the Hunt. Because, for Success, Everything Rides On Zero Mistakes.

The Film Takes Quite a While…

Now that is what I call a submarine adventure film. It might be dated but it still stands up as an excellent British war film made during WW2. The life aboard the sub and at home was brilliantly told. There was an intelligent script (J.B. Williams and Val Valentine), artful direction (Anthony Asquith), excellent cinematography (Jack Cox) and a superb cast of British actors, there was not one who was under par. The dialogue in the control room during the torpedo attack and the scenes in the engine room during the manoeuvre to get through the nets were outstanding and totally authentic. It must have been really difficult for Britain to make films about the war during WW2 but…