In February of this year, BQ, the European technology company, launched the Aquaris E4.5 Ubuntu Edition, the world´s first smartphone featuring the Ubuntu operating system

This latest model, the Aquaris E5 HD Ubuntu Edition, marks the second handset collaboration between Canonical and BQ; now working together on the launch of a convergent device.

BQ and Canonical today jointly announce the launch of the Aquaris E5 HD Ubuntu Edition which follows on from the successful launch of the Aquaris E4.5 Ubuntu Edition earlier this year.

The new device comes with a host of impressive features including a 5’’ display with IPS HD technology, HD screen resolution of 720 x 1280 pixels and 380 cd/m2 maximum brightness. It also includes a MediaTek Quad Core Cortex A7 processor that runs at up to 1.3 GHz, an internal memory of 16 GB and 1 GB RAM. Additionally, it features a 5 megapixel front camera and 13 megapixel rear camera, equipped with high quality Largan lenses and BSI sensors. Other features of note include dual flash and Full HD video recording (1080p).

As with all BQ smartphones, the Aquaris E5 Ubuntu Edition comes fully unlocked with dual SIM functionality so that users have the freedom to select their operator of choice and can use SIMs from two different operators.

The success of the Aquaris E4.5 Ubuntu Edition coupled with the commitment to the operating system, has inspired BQ to launch the new Aquaris E5 HD Ubuntu Edition. According to Alberto Méndez, CEO of BQ, “We have devised the BQ-Canonical collaboration as a long term project. Our next objective, which we are already working on, is convergence. We firmly believe in Ubuntu and the philosophy behind it”.

Cristian Parrino, VP Mobile at Canonical, remarks “Bringing a new operating system to market requires partners who are willing to challenge the status quo of the mobile industry. BQ is a fearless innovator whose risk with Ubuntu has already paid off – the launch of this second device in Europe marks an amazing milestone for both companies.”

“Working with Canonical on bringing the Aquaris E5 Ubuntu Edition has been very satisfying. We share the same philosophy as them along with the same commitment to the Open Source Initiative. At BQ, our goal is to help people understand technology, encourage them to use it and inspire them to create it. That´s why the opportunity for creation that Ubuntu affords is fundamentally important to us”, notes Alberto Méndez.