1960s Italian Westerns are commonly viewed as postmodern undertakings, emptying the genre of ideological undertones and leaving stylised violence in their place. Indeed, the “Spaghetti” Western arose from processes of transatlantic borrowing in post-war Italy which, while emulating American models of modernity, appropriated and re-formulated symbols of US popular culture. From this hybrid genre in turn emerged a sub-category endorsing armed insurrection against Occidental capitalism; nowhere, it would seem, could the appellation ‘Western’ be more incongruously employed. This article, however, asserts that this militant sub-genre merely adapted the preoccupations of the Hollywood paradigm, identifying therein appropriate means for disseminating such ideologies. Violence was an issue inherent both to the Western and to contemporary Italy, when radical protests and terrorism preoccupied the nation. If the Italian Western indeed drained the genre’s brutality of all meaning, this is not a charge that can be levelled at Damiano Damiani and Sergio Corbucci; such films as ¿Quien sabe? and Compañeros instead constitute populist manifestations of contemporary militant debates concerning armed insurrection. That such transposition was effected with little thematic subversion displays the ideological malleability of what Robert Warshow called the Western’s “serious orientation to the problem of violence”.

In 1964, Italian film director Sergio Leone forever influenced the western genre with his landmark film Per un pugno di dollari (A Fistful of Dollars). With its stylized violence, barren landscapes, endless deserts, crafty villains, and rogue hero with no name, this film established a new kind of western: austere, stylish, cynical, and violent. Complementing this new style was an eclectic and abrasive music track by composer Ennio Morricone. His unique orchestration, timbres, and pacing defined a style of film composition that would influence innumerable films to come. A Fistful of Dollars grossed over $4.3 million in its domestic run, and acted as the launching point for two more immensely successful spaghetti Westerns, Per qualche dollaro in più (For a Few Dollars More, 1965), and Il buono, il brutto, il cattivo (The Good, the Bad and the Ugly, 1966). These films also featured scores by Morricone, and all three together are frequently referred to as the Dollars trilogy. In his Dollars trilogy, Leone emphasizes dramatic episodes through careful musical placement. The cues created by Morricone and utilized by Leone help accentuate the plot line of each film by using material developed in the main title theme throughout the movie. This method is referred to as developmental scoring, a compositional type first described by Roy M. Prendergast in Film Music: A Neglected Art. There, he defines the “developmental score” as a compositional method of unification where the title theme serves the function of an exposition in a classical sonata-allegro form, presenting material to be used throughout the score. Naturally a developmental score cannot contain the same musical functions as the classical sonata or rondo form, as there are not any preconceived formal musical expectations in a film’s soundtrack. There are, however, similar generic characteristics. The episodic nature of a Western aligns itself well with that of a sonata or rondo; different zones and action-spaces are carefully placed into an overarching dramatic line that set forth important ideas, repeats them over time, provides contrast and tension, and finally builds toward a triumphant return of thematic material to close out the work. Using the title music as a starting point, this document aims to address the local and longterm dramatic structures created by the soundtracks of the Dollars trilogy. Drawing on two important bodies of analytical work—Philip Tagg and Bob Clarida’s Ten Little Title Tunes and William Caplin’s Classical Form—each title theme is shown to contain micro-cells of musical gestures that carry associations of other musical forms, particularly pop songs, folk tunes, and television and film themes connected to the Old American West. Fragments of these titles carry coded messages of the West, as well as important information regarding the protagonists, villains, and locations of the three films. These musical cells—as well as their instrumentation, timbres, tonal areas, and melodic shape—are then used to generate the remaining tunes of the soundtrack. The result is a highly inter-connected score that shapes the dramatic episodes of the Dollars trilogy films while magnifying the mythology of Leone’s American West.

Across many of the travelogues on the Italian South produced by northern European writers, both the prickly pear and the agave emerge as coextensive, in identitarian terms, with the South. Both the prickly pear and the agave are, in fact, plants indigenous to the Americas and they only made their way to the Italian South following the colonisation of the New World. In this essay, I examine the effaced history of colonial economies of occupation, plunder and commercial transport that underpins the existence of these two plants in the Italian South. I then proceed to examine the complex and interlayered systems of signification that, in turn, inscribe these plants in the context of Sergio Leone’s Spaghetti Westerns. Leone’s Spaghetti Westerns, I contend, must be read as metafigural allegories that bring into focus the complex entanglement of colonialism, race, civil war and contradictory identitarian politics.

The title of this article, “What is Italian cinema?,” intentionally recalls Bazin (I refer also to Deleuze and “world cinephilia”), but an additional clause might read, “and how do we think we know?.” In this article I analyze the means and priorities that have been employed to study Italian cinema in the Anglophone academy. The success of films like the Oscar-winning La grande bellezza (The Great Beauty, Paolo Sorrentino), the family-friendly comedy Sole a catinelle (Buckets of Sunshine, Gennaro Nunziante) and the poetic documentary Sacro GRA (Sacred GRA, Gianfranco Rosi), all released in 2013, confirmed the continued and perhaps surprising vitality and variety of Italian cinema. This variety tended to be ignored in what might be called the Standard Model of Italian cinema history, which emphasized the realist and auteurist traditions in Italian cinema, even if it allowed a notional ‘best’ of genre cinema access to an otherwise exclusive canon. The second half of the article considers the contents of three edited companions to Italian cinema (two recently published and one forthcoming) in order to grasp the current concerns of Italian cinema studies and so to signpost the state of knowledge about Italian cinema, at least as it exists in English. I suggest throughout some methods and approaches, especially that of ‘distant reading’, for better grasping the various forms of cinema in Italy over its history. But I finish by noting that the Pantheon of World Cinema has also tended to distill cinema in Italy to neorealism and the “golden age” auteurs and so has obscured both the range and the particularity of Italian cinema.