The Seafood Stewardship Index ranking, produced by the World Benchmarking Alliance, ranks Nueva Pescanova first fishing company in the world and second overall in the seafood sector for its contribution to a more sustainable and responsible industry.

The organisation published an assessment of the performance of the industry’s main players in terms of governance and strategy, social responsibility, ecosystems, and traceability.

Vigo, 3 April 2024 – The Nueva Pescanova Group has been ranked as the first fishing company in the world and second overall in the global seafood sector for its contribution to a sustainable and responsible seafood industry, according to the Seafood Stewardship Index 2023. It is the only Spanish company to be included in this ranking, produced by the non-profit organisation World Benchmarking Alliance (WBA), which measures the contribution of the 30 most influential companies in the seafood sector to a more sustainable future.

This organisation published an assessment of the performance of the main players in the industry in terms of governance and strategy, social responsibility, ecosystems, and traceability. In particular, the Nueva Pescanova Group achieved the best results in terms of product traceability. In addition, the WBA highlights the fact that the Group places sustainability at the heart of its business model and overall strategy, and that it has set targets and deadlines and provides information on progress on issues such as climate, social inclusion, and nutrition, among others.

The report also highlights the company’s independent environmental and biodiversity studies, which identify strengths and opportunities to define new mitigation and compensation measures to further improve its sustainable and responsible performance.

The Nueva Pescanova Group is also ranked in the top 20 of the WBA’s Food and Agriculture Benchmark 2023, which assesses the commitment of the world’s 350 most influential food and agriculture companies and their ability to promote a more sustainable food system. The company is also ranked in the top 30 in the Nature Benchmark Index, which assesses which companies have reduced their environmental impact and in turn contributed to the protection and restoration of ecosystems.

Accordingly, the Nueva Pescanova Group states: “We make great efforts to ensure best practices throughout our value chain and we are pleased to receive recognition for this. We have aligned our strategy with the lines set out in the UN 2030 Agenda and have developed a model of sustainability and responsibility based on setting targets, implementing plans, measuring our progress and transparency. This WBA performance assessment methodology is key to continuing on this path.