Feb 8, 2016; Brooklyn, NY, USA; Denver Nuggets guard Mike Miller (3) dribbles the ball in front of Brooklyn Nets forward Chris McCullough (1) during the first half at Barclays Center. Mandatory Credit: Vincent Carchietta-USA TODAY Sports

Mike Miller may not be the go-to scorer, but it’s important to recognize that he can still burn teams from deep; he is not just a mentor for the Denver Nuggets.

Mike Miller’s best years are behind him, but that doesn’t mean he can’t have a positive role on a team. Miller is the “wise old man,” of the Nuggets and provides great mentor-ship to the young players.

While Miller may not get heavy minutes anymore, he is still a feared dead-eye shooter. Miller is a solid asset for Denver and can serve as the old veteran that keeps the young guns in check when they get out of hand, ala Kevin Garnett in his final years.

Just to clarify, I’m not saying Mike Miller is as good as Garnett, I’m saying their roles are very similar past their prime.

Want your voice heard? Join the Nugg Love team!

While fans won’t see much of Mike Miller this year, he will be a vital of part of the team. Even though he is well past his prime, players should not sleep on Mike Miller and fans should not take him for granted.

Jan 25, 2016; Denver, CO, USA; Denver Nuggets guard Mike Miller (3) dribbles the ball against Atlanta Hawks forward Mike Scott (32) in the fourth quarter at the Pepsi Center. The Hawks defeated the Nuggets 119-105. Mandatory Credit: Isaiah J. Downing-USA TODAY Sports

Miller saw a drastic decrease on much of his production last year

Mike Miller’s prime is well behind him. He barely got into the rotation last year, and we did not get to see much of Miller as some fans would’ve liked.

His average win shares from last season of 0.3 is nowhere near his career average of 60.7. Although, he still did maintain efficient shooting percentages.

More from Nugg Love

Miller still shot an effective field goal percentage of 50.8% and shot 36% from deep. While his 35% shooting is nowhere near what he is accustomed to, it is vital to keep in mind that he did not get in much at all last year which means there were less opportunities for him.

Miller only received a combined 62 field goal attempts which is drastically reduced when compared to the 2011-12 season when he played with Miami. In this year, when the Heat took the title by the way, Miller shot a combined 209 field goal attempts.

This proves he does not carry the same role he once did in his career. You may be wondering where I am going with all this and the point is that Miller is not going to be the star of the team. He is here to provide mentor-ship and clutch shooting whenever the team needs it.

Miller is not going to be the Sixth Man of the Year like he was in 2006, but he will still have a necessary role with the Nuggets.

Feb 21, 2016; Denver, CO, USA; Denver Nuggets guard Mike Miller (3) dribbles the ball against Boston Celtics forward Jonas Jerebko (8) in the fourth quarter at the Pepsi Center. The Celtics defeated the Nuggets 121-101. Mandatory Credit: Isaiah J. Downing-USA TODAY Sports

Miller is nearing the end of the tunnel, but it would be unwise to believe he doesn’t have something left in the tank

Miller will not see much time on the floor again this year. He is nearing the end of his successful career but he will be called on for a key score, when the Nuggets may need a shooter to send them to overtime or win in the final seconds of a game.

As eluded to already, Mike’s main role will to be provide veteran experience and expertise to the core to assist in developing the young players. He is a great mentor for anyone who may need help, particularly with shooting.

Keep in mind he assisted Mudiay with his jump-shot last year and that had something to do with Mudiay’s field goal percentage rising after the All-Star Break.

While we may not get to see much of the 3-point marksmen, it is important to realize he will have a big impact in the locker room and behind the scenes.

This article originally appeared on