FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE

Kalamazoo, Mich. – The Kalamazoo Growlers have announced the signings of Duke University freshman Mike Miller and Sam Harris. The duo’s summer will mark the seventh consecutive summer that a Blue Devil will be in KZoo.

Other notable Durham to Kalamazoo connections are Astros Minor League Player of the Year Joey Loperfido, Cubs Minor League Player of the Year Matt Mervis, and Luke Storm. A part of the 14th ranked freshman class according to D1Baseball, Miller and Harris look to be headliners come June.

Mike Miller was rated as the No. 1 right-handed pitcher in the state of Minnesota and the No. 2 overall prospect. He was also honored as a three-time Perfect Game All-American. The six-foot-four, 220-pounder played for both Canes National and the New York Mets Scout team during the summers. Along with his prowess in baseball, Miller participated in both hockey and boxing at St. Thomas Academy in Mendota, Minnesota. A captain in his senior season, Miller saw his velocity jump up to 90-91 during his final year with the Cadets and offers a pair of offspeed options.

Sam Harris was also a common name to the Perfect Game All-American list, receiving preseason honors four times in his high school career. The No. 4 rated first baseman in the country and No. 1 overall prospect in the state of Iowa prepped at Urbandale High School just outside of Des Moines. Harris led the state of Iowa in home runs with 13 his senior season despite not playing for the final month of the year due to starting summer college classes. He was also named to the Iowa All-State team after slashing ​​.475/580/.1.000, driving in 29 RBI and scoring 37 runs. Harris has already notched himself in some record books, recording the second highest exit velocity ever at a Perfect Game showcase, hitting a 107 mph home run to right.

The #GrowlersPipeline continues to grow stronger across the ACC and beyond. The 2024 Northwoods League season is right around the corner. Just 102 days away until the Growlers begin their season on a four-game home stand against the Rockford Rivets beginning on May 27th. Buy Zoo Crew tickets now at https://northwoodsleague.com/kalamazoo-growlers/zoo-crew/.

Privacy Policy for Northwoods League (northwoodsleague.com, northwoodsleague.net, & the NWL mobile app)

If you require any more information or have any questions about our privacy policy, please feel free to contact us by email at Send us your privacy questions.

At the Northwoods League we consider the privacy of our visitors to be extremely important. This privacy policy document describes in detail the types of personal information is collected and recorded by northwoodsleague.com, northwoodsleague.net, & the NWL Mobile App and how we use it.

Log Files

Like many other Web sites and mobile apps, northwoodsleague.com, northwoodsleague.net, & the NWL Mobile App make use of log files. These files merely logs visitors to the site – usually a standard procedure for hosting companies and a part of hosting services’s analytics. The information inside the log files includes internet protocol (IP) addresses, browser type, Internet Service Provider (ISP), date/time stamp, referring/exit pages, and possibly the number of clicks. This information is used to analyze trends, administer the site, track user’s movement around the site, and gather demographic information. IP addresses, and other such information are not linked to any information that is personally identifiable.

Cookies and Web Beacons

northwoodsleague.com, northwoodsleague.net, & the NWL Mobile App use cookies to store information about visitors’ preferences, to record user-specific information on which pages the site visitor accesses or visits, for analytics and marketing, and to personalize or customize our web page content based upon visitors’ browser type or other information that the visitor sends via their browser. We use cookies from third-party partners such as Google for marketing purposes. Google offers an Opt-Out Browser Add-On to provide website visitors the ability to prevent their data from being used by Google Analytics.

DoubleClick DART Cookie

→ Google, as a third party vendor, uses cookies to serve ads on northwoodsleague.com, northwoodsleague.net, & the NWL Mobile App.

→ Google’s use of the DART cookie enables it to serve ads to our site’s visitors based upon their visit to northwoodsleague.com, northwoodsleague.net, & the NWL Mobile App and other sites on the Internet.

→ Users may opt out of the use of the DART cookie by visiting the Google ad and content network privacy policy at the following URL – http://www.google.com/privacy_ads.html

Our Advertising Partners

Some of our advertising partners may use cookies and web beacons on our site. Our advertising partners include …….

Google Ads

AdMob (including use of the Android advertising identifier and Apple advertising identifier)

While each of these advertising partners has their own Privacy Policy for their site, an updated and hyperlinked resource is maintained here: Privacy Policies.

You may consult this listing to find the privacy policy for each of the advertising partners of northwoodsleague.com, northwoodsleague.net, & the NWL Mobile App.

These third-party ad servers or ad networks use technology in their respective advertisements and links that appear on northwoodsleague.com, northwoodsleague.net, & the NWL Mobile App and which are sent directly to your browser. They automatically receive your IP address when this occurs. Other technologies (such as cookies, JavaScript, or Web Beacons) may also be used by our site’s third-party ad networks to measure the effectiveness of their advertising campaigns and/or to personalize the advertising content that you see on the site.

northwoodsleague.com, northwoodsleague.net, & the NWL Mobile App has no access to or control over these cookies that are used by third-party advertisers.

Third Party Privacy Policies

You should consult the respective privacy policies of these third-party ad servers for more detailed information on their practices as well as for instructions about how to opt-out of certain practices. northwoodsleague.com, northwoodsleague.net, & the NWL Mobile App privacy policy does not apply to, and we cannot control the activities of, such other advertisers or web sites. You may find a comprehensive listing of these privacy policies and their links here: Privacy Policy Links.

If you wish to disable cookies, you may do so through your individual browser options. More detailed information about cookie management with specific web browsers can be found at the browsers’ respective websites. What Are Cookies?

Children’s Information

We believe it is important to provide added protection for children online. We encourage parents and guardians to spend time online with their children to observe, participate in and/or monitor and guide their online activity.

northwoodsleague.com, northwoodsleague.net, & the NWL Mobile App do not knowingly collect any personally identifiable information from children under the age of 13. If a parent or guardian believes that northwoodsleague.com, northwoodsleague.net, & the NWL Mobile App has in its database the personally-identifiable information of a child under the age of 13, please contact us immediately (using the contact in the first paragraph) and we will use our best efforts to promptly remove such information from our records.

Online Privacy Policy Only

This privacy policy applies only to our online activities and is valid for visitors to our website and regarding information shared and/or collected there.

This policy does not apply to any information collected offline or via channels other than this website.

Consent

By using our website, you hereby consent to our privacy policy and agree to its terms.

Personal Information We Collect

You may access many elements of northwoodsleague.com, northwoodsleague.net, & the NWL Mobile App without disclosing any personal information about yourself. However, should you choose to engage with certain advanced features (e.g. submit a form, make a purchase, take a survey) available on the northwoodsleague.com, northwoodsleague.net, & the NWL Mobile App, you may be asked to share certain personal information so those elements function properly. The personal information we collect may include, but is not limited to:

Full name

Email address

Password

Street address

Telephone number(s)

Payment card information

If we collect your information, in most instances, the applicable page(s) within the northwoodsleague.com, northwoodsleague.net, & the NWL Mobile App will include statements regarding what information is required and functionality for you to submit the required or requested information.

Update

This Privacy Policy was last updated on: Friday, December 7, 2018.

Should we update, amend or make any changes to our privacy policy, those changes will be posted here.