According to Miller’s complaint that has been drawn up but not yet filed, a Heat employee introduced Miller to Zafar, and Zafar used $700,000 of the money he stole from Miller to pay for courtside Heat tickets. Settlement talks between Miller and the Heat have stalled. Miller asked for that $700,000 back from the Heat, plus attorney’s fees, but “the parties were far apart,” Miller’s attorney, Andrew Fine, said. In the potential lawsuit, Miller is seeking a lot more: the entire $1.7 million that he lost in Zafar’s scam.

Mike Miller, a popular and contributing piece of two Heat championship teams before the team released him in July, is strongly considering filing a lawsuit against the team because he believes the franchise bears some responsibility for him being swindled by a con man, his attorney tells us. Miller, who now plays for the Memphis Grizzlies, lost $1.7 million in a scam allegedly orchestrated by Haider Zafar, a South Beach bling king who presented himself as a member of a wealthy Pakistani family.

Heat forwards James Jones and Rashard Lewis also were defrauded by Zafar and suffered undisclosed losses, but neither is pursuing claims against the team. Fine said Miller “has good feelings for the organization. He just feels like they should accept their share of responsibility for this situation.”

“When I saw the doctors in Miami after the first championship things looked bleak, they really did,” Miller said to HOOPSWORLD. “I found one doctor, Dr. Barth Green, who really revitalized my career and gave me a regiment that has me feeling great. Knock on wood, but I haven’t felt this good. Even last year I didn’t play a lot in the regular season because they wanted to save me. But I’ve felt great the whole year, right now I’ve felt as good as I have in five years and hopefully it’ll stay that way.”

Miller is expected to provide a boost to a team that ranked 27th scoring 93.4 points per game and 24th beyond the arc shooting 34.5 percent. Quincy Pondexter was the Grizzlies’ most accurate shooter from 3-point range, hitting 39.5. Miller offers an immediate upgrade. “And it’s great to add another NBA champion that’s for sure,” center Marc Gasol said. “Mike another voice, veteran voice in the locker room, it really does help. Now we have three NBA champions that can teach all the little things that it takes to get there.”

“She was the rock behind him at this very low point in his career,” observed Mike Miller, Mr. Haslem’s former Gator as well as Miami Heat teammate, now a member of the Memphis Grizzlies. With that support, Mr. Haslem rebounded quickly, accepting a position with the Élan Chalon basketball team in Chalon-sur-Saône, France, while Ms. Rein remained in Gainesville to complete her bachelor’s degree in business administration. They communicated by Web chat twice a day for a year and visited several times. They say they never had a disconnect or considered dating anyone else. That March, when Ms. Rein called him sobbing after she tore a hamstring — forcing her to drop track — he comforted her by saying, “It’s O.K.”