The bad news is that Mike Miller's career as a basketball player is officially over.

The good news is that his time as a coach has just begun.

Miller is joining the staff at the University of Memphis under first-year head coach Anfernee "Penny" Hardaway, another former NBA standout who is trying to revive a program that reached the NCAA championship game in 2008.

Hardaway was hired last month to replace Tubby Smith, whose teams went 40-26 over the past two seasons.

More: Argus Leader First/Second Five: Meet the state's best in boys basketball

"Mike always figured he would get into coaching or management," said older brother Ryan Miller, an assistant coach at Texas Christian University. "He probably didn't think it was going to happen this quickly."

It's a natural transition for the 38-year-old Mitchell native, who played 17 NBA seasons but has been out of action since being waived by the Denver Nuggets last summer.

Miller, a two-time NBA champion and former Rookie of the Year, lives with his family in suburban Memphis, where he spent two stints playing for the Grizzlies. He hoped to catch on with an NBA team this season but entertained coaching roles when no offers rolled in.

The invitation came from Hardaway, a two-time All-American at Memphis who went on to become a four-time NBA All-Star with the Orlando Magic. He knew Miller from their shared connection to the city of Memphis and tapped his basketball knowledge to become assistant coach.

"There's definitely a transition process from player to coach," said Ryan. "But Mike spent the last three years as a mentor for younger players coming into the NBA, so it's not going to be as much."

As for the star power of Hardaway and Miller walking into living rooms to recruit talent, rival programs are going to have to take notice.

"They're going to be a disruptive force on the recruiting trail," said Ryan with a chuckle. "They're going to shake up the business a little bit."

In addition to both playing for Orlando and sharing a Memphis link, Hardaway and Miller have another connection. In high school, Miller broke Penny's tournament scoring record with a 54-point effort at the Glaxo-Wellcome Holiday Invitational in Raleigh, N.C.

More: Whitney: Is this really the end for Mike Miller?

Miller's hiring is expected to be officially announced later today, sealing his retirement after a playing career that made him one of the greatest athletes in South Dakota history.

He silenced doubters who lingered even after he helped lead Mitchell to two state titles, became the state’s first and only McDonald’s All-American and sparked the University of Florida to an NCAA finals appearance as a sophomore in 2000.

Drafted fifth overall by the Orlando Magic later that year, Miller was named Rookie of the Year to kick off a career that saw him play 1,032 games and tally 10,973 points for a scoring average of 10.3.

He was named Sixth Man of the Year with Memphis in 2006 and had his best statistical season the following year, averaging a career-high 18.5 points.

But after appearing in just 20 playoff games with Orlando and Memphis and enduring cellar-dwelling stints with Minnesota and Washington, he was ready to chase postseason success.

As a free agent in 2010, Miller joined friend LeBron James in Miami and ended up winning a pair of NBA rings with the Heat in 2012 and 2013.

"We consider him to be the finest perimeter shooter in the NBA,” Miami president Pat Riley said after signing Miller.

As back issues and other injuries took their toll, Miller became less of an open-court threat and more of a spot-up shooter with reliable range. He ranks 20th all-time in the NBA record books with 1,590 made 3-pointers and 22nd in 3-point accuracy with a percentage of .407.

His shining moment came during the 2012 Finals against Oklahoma City, when he came off the bench to score 23 points on seven 3-pointers in a decisive Game 5, limping every step of the way to clinch his first crown.

"It's been a roller coaster ride for everybody," Miller said when the subject of retirement was raised after that game. "Everyone is dealing with something. Through the injuries, I'm just glad they didn't take me back to the barn and put me down. I'm just happy to be here."

MIKE MILLER FILE

High school: Mitchell

College: University of Florida

Age: 38

Years pro: 17

NBA teams: Orlando, Memphis (twice), Minnesota, Washington, Miami, Cleveland, Denver

Career stats: Has appeared in 1,032 games (570 starts) and has 10,973 points for a scoring average of 10.3. His career 3-point percentage of .407 ranks 22nd in NBA history.

Honors: NBA Rookie of the Year in 2001, Sixth Man of the Year in 2006.