The Knickerbockers play their best game of the course with 6 players in double figures in scoring

The New York Knicks gave themselves a good tribute at the expense of the Atlanta Hawks who have lost five in a row. The team led by interim Mike Miller surpassed them and amassed a lead of up to 31 points at the beginning of the third period to win 120-143.

Rookie RJ Barrett scored the highest score of his NBA career with 27 points; to which he added 6 rebounds, 1 assist and 1 steal with an outstanding 10/13 in field goals and 2/3 in triples. The Knicks have improved to 3-3 under Miller after losing ten in a row and confirming the dismissal of coach David Fizdale after a year and a half on the job.

“We are heading in the right direction,” admitted Marcus Morris. «I'm not going to come out and say that we are going to make the playoffs, but that is what we are fighting for. That's the goal. We are trying very hard. Hopefully we'll make it. And if we continue to play like this and stay together, we will have a great opportunity," he added.

Center Mitchell Robinson also achieved his career-high scoring record with 22 points along with 13 rebounds; The aforementioned Morris contributed another 22 points, and up to six players in total would achieve double figures in scoring: Julius Randle and Knox (17) and Bobby Portis (11).

«We were quite tired of how the season was going. Just decided we needed to make some changes. We did that in terms of energy and we came out and competed very well,” Robinson said.

In the Atlanta Hawks, not even Trae Young's 42 points and 8 assists were enough to avoid the fifth consecutive defeat. Lloyd Pierce's men have a record of 6-22 and are currently last in the East behind the Cleveland Cavaliers (6-21) and New York Knicks (7-21).

"As expected, we had a very frustrated locker room," Pierce admitted. «It is very difficult when you come out of a great effort on Sunday against the Lakers and then you get here… We couldn't hit first. We let many things impact our effort. That is the most important. Our competitive spirit. Right now we don't have it," he added.

Collins, about to serve sanction

The doping sanctioned John Collins is very close to returning to the playing field, having missed his 23rd consecutive match last night. It is expected that he can return on December 23. The power forward has collected 14,6 points, 8,4 rebounds and 1,6 assists per day this season.

Match notes

Knicks: The injured Reggie Bullock (cervical surgery) has been medically cleared and can now participate in team training. For their part, Wayne Ellington (Achilles) and Allonzo Trier (concussion) were absent again.

Hawks: The Knicks account indicated that on February 16, 1999, the eternal Vince Carter debuted at Madison Square Garden. Almost 21 years later he returned to the hardwood of the legendary stadium with 15 points and a 4/7 in triples.

(Cover photo: Emilee Chinn/Getty Images)