Janet Paige Thompson Wilson

April 11, 1953 - August 1, 2024

Janet passed peacefully into eternal life on August 1 after a long struggle with dementia.

She was born in Oak Ridge, Tennessee, as the second of five children to James and Claire Thompson. The family moved several times, with one stop in Nassau Bay, Texas, where Janet graduated from Clear Creek High School in 1971. After a move to Decatur, Georgia, she obtained her teaching degree from Georgia State University and taught elementary school in Gwinnett County, Georgia until her retirement.

Janet was a wonderful artist and also loved photography. She and her husband Frank (“Sparky”) and their beloved dog Prince moved to Foley, Alabama in 2016 to enjoy their retirement years. Here Janet took many pictures of the beach, moon and sunsets, her favorite subjects.

Her many friends describe her as one of a kind … fun … adventurous … loving … a beautiful smile … a huge heart … generous …. a lover of animals … a quick Irish temper! … good at everything she did … But most of all she loved her daughter and her two grandchildren to the moon and back!

Janet is survived by her husband Frank Wilson of Foley, AL; the Ferguson family of Chicago, IL - her daughter Teresa, son-in-law Kevin and beloved grandchildren Gwen and Wade; her sisters Pamela Dunn of Pelham, AL, and Katie Heusel (Lawrenceville, GA); her brothers Jim (Debbie) Thompson of Jacksonville, FL and Patrick (Eleanor) of Suwanee, GA; and many nieces and nephews. She is predeceased by her parents James and Claire Thompson.

A celebration of life will be held at a later date.

Janet’s great grandmother Mary came over to America from Ireland in an arranged marriage. In their honor we say this Irish blessing.

“May the road rise up

to meet you. May the wind be

always at your back.

May the sun shine warm upon

your face; the rains fall soft

upon your fields and until we

meet again, may God hold you

in the palm of His hand.

Amen”

Rest in peace. You are loved and missed.

To order memorial trees or send flowers to the family in memory of Janet Paige Thompson Wilson, please visit our flower store.