Now, I must confess, I’ve got a soft spot for Goodwill treasure hunts in Cape Coral. I try and go at least once a week. I’ve been surprised a few times by the things I find there. Once I even stumbled upon a stuffed Bullwinkle. That really made my day. But never have I had a surprise encounter with an urn!

According to NBC2, Lee County deputies found themselves in urn drama at a Goodwill store. Yes, you heard it right, an urn…. Like one that could contain someone’s Grandma. Not exactly the usual thrift store find like a vintage sweater or a odd looking lamp.

The strange find came to light at the Goodwill store off Island Park Road in Fort Myers. An employee stumbled upon a white and floral urn in the donation bin. Forget about the old VHS tapes or pots and pans, this Goodwill got a donation straight from the afterlife.

Now, I’m thinking I love the Goodwill store and all, but not enough to spend eternity there. I’m sure the employee agreed and decided to call the The Lee County Sheriff’s Office. Deputies soon rescued the urn from a potential second-hand afterlife. Just another day in the life of Lee County law enforcement.

But there is one problem. They don’t know who this urn belongs to! If you’ve got any information on this urn, give the LCSO a ring at 239-477-1000 and ask for the Evidence department. Who knows, you might just be the key to a very strange family reunion.

In the meantime, let’s hope this doesn’t start a new trend in the world of Goodwill donations. Please donate your old furniture, clothes, and, stuffed cartoon characters. We like those kinds of things. But please leave Grandma at home.

Lakeland Florida Woman Makes Jewelry Out Of Breastmilk And Cremation Ashes

Meet Budman, dynamic host of Marconi Award winning radio station WXKB's WiLD Bunch Morning Show, on B1039. Budman likes to write about funny news, a good Florida man story, stupid criminals or anything involving a superhero. Budman, a comic book and pop culture enthusiast, even named his daughter Kara Zor-El, after Supergirl. His only child is his true passion beyond the mic. Being a dad is his favorite role. Budman, a true family man, balances his love for radio with quality time spent with loved ones and his trusty dogs.