‘They came in peace. They left in pieces.’

Inbred is a 2011 British-German comedy horror film directed by Alex Chandon (Drill Bit) from a screenplay co-written by Paul Shrimpton.

Plot:

Youth offenders sentenced to community service with their supervisors are taken out into the countryside to a remote Yorkshire village.

After a minor incident with some inbred kids occurs, the group are soon hunted by the grotesquely evil townspeople in a nightmarish fight for survival…

Our review:

Alex Chandon’s first film for ten years is a gory, gloopy post-pub treat. Its nasty zeal enables it to transcend the usual comedy-horror limitations as it becomes a demented Straw Dogs homage. It stops rather than ends but the journey along the way is peppered with enough bad taste and general loopy behaviour to make it well worth your while.

Will Holland, MOVIES and MANIA

Other reviews:

“Solid characterisation, crisp storytelling, glorious

production design (by Melanie Light), hilariously straight-faced

performances and unstinting gore combine to create a hugely

enjoyable film […] O’Neill has an absolute ball as the pub landlord and village ringleader.” MJ Simpson, 21st Century British Horror Films, Volume 2: White Settlers and Women in Black, 2021

“The one thing that the film does very well is presenting most of the group as so thoroughly unlikeable that when the (totally unsurprising) first death does come you wish it had happened earlier. After that point, the film grinds to a half pace and it becomes merely uninteresting and slightly embarrassing. In truth, the only really offensive thing about this film is how poor it was….” Flickering Myth

“The warped variety show the kids stumble into – with its trouser-less organist “Clayderman” and grim forms of 3D entertainment – owes too much to Python, The League of Gentlemen and Channel 4’s late-night gem Focus North; co-writer/director Alex Chandon may also be the first person since That’s Life!‘s Doc Cox to find phallus-shaped carrots so funny.” The Guardian

“No, I won’t compare it with Shaun of the Dead or Tucker & Dale, because Inbred is in its own brilliant league. It’s darker, gorier and has a Monty Python-esque Grand Guignol atmosphere. I’m of course too young to have experienced real Grand Guignol, but I’m sure Inbred is pretty close to that once was the hottest entertainment in Le Gay Paris.” Ninja Dixon

“Awfully mean-spirited and often sickeningly gory, I would normally never recommend the likes of Inbred. But the technical virtues of filmmaking on display here, coupled with a roster of well-played incredible characters, go far in redeeming the film. So if you have the stomach for it I do urge you to check this out.” Screen Anarchy

“There’s a show put on in a barn for a group of inbreds that is so demented it feels surreal, and the utterly nihilistic, colorful and filthy brutality brings to mind Devil’s Rejects. One nasty death involves the use of a manure spreader. Flaws include some really stupid scenes where they abandon a vehicle for no good reason, or the really obvious one where a victim can obviously escape but doesn’t.” The Worldwide Celluloid Massacre

“From the same genre as Simon Sprackling’s deliriously demented Funny Man, Inbred offers death by chopper, death by horse, even death by faeces. Chandon embraces old-style visual effects to lend the proceedings a distinctive ‘80s vibe as the film enters Grand Guignol territory. And it works perfectly.” Tony Earnshaw, The Yorkshire Post

Cast and characters:

Jo Hartley as Kate

Seamus O’Neill as Jim

James Doherty as Jeff

James Burrows as Tim

Neil Leiper as Gris

Chris Waller as Dwight

Nadine Rose Mulkerrin as Sam

Terry Haywood as Zeb

Damien Lloyd-Davies as Rats

Derek Melling as Greg

Mark Rathbone as Ron

Dominic Brunt as Podge – Attack of the Killer Babies

Emily Booth as June

Simon Coomes as Toby

Filming locations:

Thirsk, Yorkshire

MOVIES and MANIA provides previews of new films, our own movie reviews/ratings, and links to other reviews from trustworthy recommended sources - all in one handy web location. Plus, links to legitimately watch 1000s OF MOVIES FREE ONLINE via platforms such as Amazon Prime, Plex, Roku, Tubi and on YouTube. As an Amazon Associate, we earn a very tiny amount from any qualifying purchases.