Jonathan Knight

Men's Ice Hockey 10/28/2021 12:12:36 PM Written by: Dominic Hennig, CCHA

CCHA Feature: Lakers writing present-day success

Follow @CCHAHockey

The Lake Superior State Lakers have been recognized as having one of the most successful histories in collegiate hockey at the Division I level, recording NCAA National Championships in 1988, 1992 and 1994.

Head Coach Damon Whitten and the Lakers are writing their own success in present day, winning the 2021 Western Collegiate Hockey Association (WCHA) playoff championship last March, en-route to a bid as one of only 16 Division I programs to make the NCAA Tournament.

Back in the Central Collegiate Hockey Association (CCHA) where Lake Superior State called home for 41 years from 1972-2013, the Lakers are off to a 2-0 start in league play, and a 5-3 overall record.

“We learned and grew as a program those first two weeks on the road,” said Lake Superior State Head Coach Damon Whitten. “It was a challenging start to the schedule but there was a lot to learn from and grow on. There’s a lot of positives to take away from so far this season.”

Notable Links:

CCHA Schedule

Live Scores & Results

Standings

Player & Team Stats

CCHA TV Highlights

CCHA Merchandise Store

LSSU started the season on the road for the first four games with a difficult schedule, splitting with then 17th-ranked Omaha, prior to dropping two decisions in Ann Arbor at third-ranked Michigan. Both programs are combined 10-2 currently. Since then, Lake Superior State has posted back-to-back weekend sweeps, winning four consecutive games against St. Thomas and Union.

“These last two weekends have been good for our group and really important because of our youth,” added Whitten. “We found a way to come together and be successful in different situations. Last weekend, we were up 5-2 in the first period Friday, but then down two goals in the first period Saturday. For our guys to come back and get a win, that says a lot.”

Lake Superior State now holds the three top leaders in points in the CCHA and five of the top six skaters. They boast an impressive 30% conversion rate on the power-play, scoring 13 goals with the man-advantage, which is good enough for third out of 59 teams competing at the NCAA Division I level.

“It’s been consistent over the past few years, systematically our style of play is working,” added Whitten. “The job our Associate Head Coaches Mike York and Zack Cisek have done, recruiting and identifying players, leads to these results. We’re continuing to build and move forward.”

Junior forward, and team captain, Louis Boudon (pronounced Lou-EE, boo-DOAN) enters this weekend riding a six-game point streak, dating back to Oct. 8 at Michigan. The Grenoble, France native is second in the nation with 13 points (3G, 10A) in just eight games.

Along with Boudon being second in the country in points, both Brandon Puricelli and Harrison Roy are tied for fifth in the nation with 11 points each and Josh Nixon is tied for fourth in the country in freshman scoring with seven points (1G, 6A) in eight games.

Lake Superior State’s balanced attack through the first eight games of the season is making the difference. 19 Lakers have notched at least a point this season and eight players have already recorded five or more points. The Lakers also return 43.0% of last season's goal scoring (31 of 86 total goals), and 46.2% of the total points recorded (110 of 238 total points).

Now in their 56th season, Lake Superior State has served as a bedrock of college hockey. The Lakers have been a prominent program ever since, and are continuing to build on their rich tradition now back in the CCHA.

This weekend, the Lakers will play their final non-conference series of the season, hosting St. Lawrence at Taffy Abel Arena for a pair of games in Sault Ste. Marie, Mich.

For media inquires, contact:

Dominic Hennig

Director of Strategic Communications & Brand Advancement

Central Collegiate Hockey Association

Hennig@ccha.com

(586) 925-6095