MirrorMask

Directed by Dave McKean

Written by Neil Gaiman

Starring Stephanie Leonidas, Gina McKee, Jason Barry

Classification: PG

Rating: **&fac12;

Love the premise: Helena, a spunky teenage girl, wants to run away from the circus and join the normal world. Fat chance, however, since the movie that follows, MirrorMask, arises from the teeming imaginations of two acclaimed graphic novelists working under the auspices of the Jim Henson Company. In other words, expect strange narrative doings, expect surreal visual dazzle, expect computer-generated renderings of monkeys that fly and cats sporting human faces and sphinxes with dangerous designs. Just don't expect normal.

Co-created by director David McKean and writer Neil Gaiman, the collaborators on the Sandman comics, this oddest of odysseys starts with an argument. Helena is forcefully informing her circus-artist mother that, sick to death of the jugglers and the clowns, she wants out. Harsh words are exchanged but, as coincidence and plot demands would have it, Mom suddenly falls ill. She's hospitalized, leaving our callow heroine to nurture her guilt and us to enter her curious dream, where everyone remains for the lion's (and other assorted creatures) share of the picture.

There, Helena (Stephanie Leonidas) finds herself in a Dali-esque realm replete with bizarre happenings and exotic sights - see the list above and, since we've all stepped through the looking glass, add a plentiful supply of grainy mirrors and grotesque masks. There too, of course, Helena must embark upon a quest. It seems, in this nether-place, that a crucial balance has been upset between the "city of light and the land of shadows." That probably explains why the White Queen is sleeping while the Black Queen is up to no good. (Both, inevitably, bear a striking resemblance to the girl's ailing mother, leaving Gina McKee to tackle all three roles.)

But back to the quest. Aided by a hunky if somewhat unreliable guide (Jason Barry), Helena must restore the lost balance. So, to the accompaniment of a moody jazz score, she wanders through the fantasy in search of the keys and charms that are proverbially required for such mythic chores. Occasionally, the princess - for so she is now acclaimed - peers through a strategically placed window to catch a glimpse of her real self, huddled back in the circus of the real world, asleep and grappling with this real dream.

That's when the penny drops, and the metaphor springs to life. What we're seeing here is an extraordinarily elaborate depiction of an altogether ordinary (yes, even normal) predicament: The struggle of all volatile teenagers, poised to leave the nest, to restore a tense relationship with their parents to its own state of harmonious balance, to view Mom or Dad through a more mature lens that neither demonizes them as perniciously Black nor exalts them as lily White. That's Helena's true quest.

Leonidas walks this tightrope quite engagingly, showing us a girl on the cusp of womanhood, torn between two competing needs - to become an adult, to remain a child, to vilify, to revere. The choices seem extreme, the perils look endless, but a safe middle road is as hard to find as it is to navigate.

This is all splendid. What's not is the sheer elaborateness of the fantasy. The computers have done their work too well. The surreal visuals are relentless, overpowering the narrative much as they do in the frames of comic books (sorry, graphic novels). Consequently, trapped overlong in Helena's fevered dream, we have to fight the temptation to nod off ourselves. Where's the precious balance the script keeps talking about? MirrorMask is a clever movie, but apparently not clever enough to practise what it preaches.