David Burtka

On 29-5-1975 David Burtka (nickname: David) was born in Dearborn, Michigan, United States. He made his 3 million dollar fortune with The Gay Christian Mingle, Worldly Possession, Neil's Puppet Dreams. The actor & chef is married to Neil Patrick Harris, his starsign is Gemini and he is now 49 years of age.

David Burtka Facts & Wiki

Where does David Burtka live? And how much money does David Burtka earn?

Birth Date 29-5-1975 Heritage/origin American Ethnicity White Religion - believes in God? Non-religious Residence He lives together in a house in Los Angeles, California, United States.

David Burtka Net Worth, Salary, Cars & Houses

Estimated Net Worth 3 million Dollar Celebrity Net Worth Revealed: The 55 Richest Actors Alive in 2024 Yearly Salary N/A These Are The 10 Best-Paid Television Stars In The World Colleagues David Furnish

Houses

house (Swimming Pool • )

Cars

RELATED:These 10 Whopping Homes & Cars Of Celebrities Look Amazing!

David Burtka: Husband, Dating, Family & Friends

Who is David Burtka dating in 2024?

Relationship status Married (Since 2014) Sexuality Gay (Homosexual) Current Husband of David Burtka Neil Patrick Harris

Ex-boyfriends or ex-husbands Lane Janger Has any kids? Yes, father of: Harper Grace, Gideon Scott

Will the marriage of American actor & chef David Burtka and current Husband, Neil Patrick Harris survive 2024?

These Are The 15 Hottest Wives And Girlfriends Of Hollywood!

Family

Family photo of the actor & chef, married to Neil Patrick Harris, famous for The Gay Christian Mingle, Worldly Possession, Neil's Puppet Dreams. Names of father, mother, kids, brothers & sisters:

Daniel Burtka (Father) Deborah A. (Zajas) (Mother)

Height, Weight, Body Measurements, Tattoos, Skin, Hair & Eye Color

This enchanting conceited attractive actor & chef originating from Dearborn, Michigan, United States has a thin body & square face type.

Hair color Black Hair type Straight Hair Length short hair Hairstyle alternative Distinct feature eye color Skin Tone/Complexion Type I: Light skin Skin Type Combination Beard or Mustache Beardless Eye Color Dark Blue Height 179 cm Weight 75 kilo Feet size N/A Does David Burtka smoke? No, never Caught Smoking: These Are The 60 Most Shocking Celebrity Smokers Does David Burtka have a tattoo? No

These 50 Celebrity Tattoos Went Horribly Wrong

David Burtka - 2024 Black hair & alternative hair style. Does David Burtka have official Social Media profiles?

Follow this page to stay up to date about the latest gossip and rumors (plastic surgery, scandals, new photos or videos and so on) of David Burtka!

Trending

Lo and behold, this is our Top 60 of celebrities that have been caught smoking or

Celebrities don’t always wear makeup anymore. In fact, many of them lately like to show off

40/ 40Cardi B’s dream mansion in Atlanta rap-up.com After two years of house hunting Cardi B

55/ 55Sean Penn – $70,000,000 via bz-berlin.de Sean is a dinosaur in Hollywood, but he manages

A lot of celebrities do not know what to do with their money anymore in 2022.