Alexandra Orlando: In Pursuit of Victory, the first book in a new series Celebrating Canadian Athletes by BookLand Press, is the story of the rhythmic gymnast who set a world record by winning six gold medals at the Commonwealth Games 2006 in Melbourne, Australia, and now has her sites set on the 2008 Olympics. Alex The Great, as she is known, has had the Olympic dream since she was seven. She was born with great energy and a desire for recognition, and she discovered a love of competition as soon as she got into the competitive stream of rhythmic gymnastics. Coming from Canada, where her sport is relatively new, Alex has had to overcome incredible odds to join the elite of rhythmic gymnastics internationally.

Alexandra Orlando is the reigning Canadian champion, our national champion for the past five years, and the number one rhythmic gymnast in North America. Beautiful and strong, Alex is ready to take on the world. At 21, she is poised to peak just in time for the next Olympics. Could her pursuit of victory lead to an Olympic medal for Canada in Beijing in 2008?

With over 400 books, Martin Avery (1955 -) B.A., B.Ed., M.F.A. in Writing, A.Q. Drama, OTC, Hons. Spec. English, OTC, ATC, BCTC, Zen teacher and Reikimaster, is one of the most prolific writers in the world! He studied with W.O. Mitchell, Clark Blaise, Eli Mandel, Dave Godfrey, W.D. Valgardson, and others at the University of Victoria, York University, the Banff Centre School of Fine Arts, New College Writers Workshop, Vermont College of Norwhich University, Queen's University in England, UT/OISE in Stratford. For 25 years he taught Writers Craft in high schools around Ontario, for two years in Alberta, and now in China. He had 5 books published by Oberon Press by age 30 and his first 2 books, Cottage Gothic and Northern Comfort, were nominated for the Leacock Award for Humour. He was a founder of A Novel Marathon, in Owen Sound, the Muskoka Novel Marathon, at the Huntsville Festival of the Arts, and The Great Canadian Winter Novel Marathon, while Writer in Residence at the Pickering Public Library, and the Toronto Novel Marathon. He completed a 100 book sequence called The Human Comedy and is now working on a 100 book sequence called The Great Wall Of China Books Series. One of his goals is to write 250 books and crack the top 20 list of most prolific authors.