Alexandra Orlando: In Pursuit of Victory, the first book in a new series Celebrating Canadian Athletes by BookLand Press, is the story of the rhythmic gymnast who set a world record by winning six gold medals at the Commonwealth Games 2006 in Melbourne, Australia, and now has her sites set on the 2008 Olympics. Alex The Great, as she is known, has had the Olympic dream since she was seven. She was born with great energy and a desire for recognition, and she discovered a love of competition as soon as she got into the competitive stream of rhythmic gymnastics. Coming from Canada, where her sport is relatively new, Alex has had to overcome incredible odds to join the elite of rhythmic gymnastics internationally. Alexandra Orlando is the reigning Canadian champion, our national champion for the past five years, and the number one rhythmic gymnast in North America. Beautiful and strong, Alex is ready to take on the world. At 21, she is poised to peak just in time for the next Olympics. Could her pursuit of victory lead to an Olympic medal for Canada in Beijing in 2008?

"synopsis" may belong to another edition of this title.

About the Author:

Born in Bracebridge, Ontario, Martin Avery studied at the University of Victoria, Banff Centre School of Fine Arts, York University New College Writers Workshop, Vermont College of Norwhich University (USA), the University of Toronto, Herstmonceux Castle of Queen' University (England), and the Stratford Campus of UT/OISE, earning a Hons. B.A., B.Ed., Hons. Spec. English, M.F.A. In Writing, A.Q. Drama. He has taught Creative Writing for York University, Georgian College Centauri Arts Retreat, Bridgewater Arts Retreat, TWUC's Writers In The Schools Program, and the WCDR. For two decades, he was a full-time teacher at secondary schools in Ontario -- teaching Writers Craft, English, and Drama -- and was Arts Department Head at a small school in Muskoka. In 2004/2005 he was the first Writer In Residence for the Bracebridge Public Library and is now the Writer In Residence for the Pickering Public Library in Ontario.

Alexandra Orlando is the reigning Canadian rhythmic gymnastics champion who won six gold medals at the Commonwealth Games in Australia in 2006 and got the honour of being Canada's flag bearer in the closing ceremonies. A graduate of Havergal College, now attending the University of Toronto, she is currently training at Ritmika Gymnastics Centre in Toronto. Alexandra will compete for Canada at the 2008 Olympic Games in China.Coached by Mimi Masleva, she was Canadian Rhythmic Gymnastics National Novice Champion in 1999, Junior Champion in 2000 and 2001, and Senior Champion in 2002, 2003, 2004, 2005, 2006 and 2007. She was Pan American Junior Champion in 2000, Four Continents Junior Champion in 2002, and 2006 Commonwealth Games Champion. Her six gold medals at the Commonwealth Games equal the record for most gold won by an athlete at a single Commonwealth Games and made her the first woman to claim six gold medals in the sport. She follows the footsteps of Canadian rhythmic gymnastics champions Erika-Leigh Stirton, Camille Martens, and Lori Fung.

"About this title" may belong to another edition of this title.