Alfred Nobel, on 27 November 1895 signed his last will and testament and gave his largest share of fortune to be converted into a fund for awarding five annual prizes "to those who have contributed during the preceding year on the benefit of mankind". Nobel Prize is one of the most prestigious awards given for intellectual achievement in the world. Let us solve some interesting quiz on Nobel Prize and winners.

Nobel Prize is awarded in 6 fields namely Chemistry, Physics, Medicine, literature, Economics and Peace prize.

In which year first Nobel Prize was awarded?

A. 1893

B. 1895

C. 1898

D. 1901

Ans. D

Explanation: The first Nobel Prize was awarded in 1901. The first Nobel prize winners were given 150,782 SEK.

Who won Nobel Prize in Physics in 2019?

A. James Peebles

B. Michel Mayor

C. Didier Queloz

D. All the above

Ans. D

Explanation: James Peebles is given for the theoretical discoveries in physical cosmology, and Michel Mayor and Didier Queloz for discovering an exoplanet orbiting a solar-type star.

Peter Handke received the Nobel Prize of 2019 in which field?

A. Physiology or Medicine

B. Literature

C. Peace prize

D. Economic Science

Ans. B

Explanation: Peter Handke wins Nobel Prize 2019 in Literature for an influential work with linguistic ingenuity which has explored the periphery and the specificity of human experience.

Abiy Ahmed Ali won Nobel Peace Prize 2019 for...

A. His efforts to achieve peace and international cooperation.

B. For his decisive initiative to resolve the border conflict with neighbouring Eritrea.

C. Both A and B

D. Neither A nor B

Ans. C

Explanation: Abiy Ahmed Ali wins Nobel Peace 2019 for his efforts to achieve peace and international cooperation and in particular for his decisive initiative to resolve the border conflict with neighbouring Eritrea.

Name the youngest Nobel Laureates who got the Peace Prize in 2014?

A. Malala Yousafzai

B. Arthur Ashkin

C. James P. Allison

D. Yoshinori Ohsumi

Ans. A

Explanation: Malala Yousafzai is the youngest Nobel Laureates who got the Peace Prize in 2014 at the age of just 17 years.

Name the Nobel laureate who has been awarded the Nobel prize in Physics twice?

A. Bob Dylan

B. Angus Deaton

C. John Bardeen

D. Hiroshi Amano

Ans. C

Explanation: John Bardeen is the only Nobel Laureate who has been awarded the Nobel Prize in Physics twice, in 1956 and 1972.

Name the only woman who has been honoured with Nobel Prize twice in different areas?

A. Gerty Cori

B. Marie Curie

C. Elinor Ostrom

D. Barbara McClintock

Ans. B

Explanation: Marie Curie is the only one woman who has been honoured twice, with the 1903 Nobel Prize in Physics and the 1911 Nobel Prize in Chemistry.

Who received the Nobel Prize 2019 in Chemistry?

A. John B. Goodenough

B. M. Stanley Whittingham

C. Akira Yoshino

D. All the above

Ans. D

Explanation: Nobel Prize in Chemistry 2019 winners are John B. Goodenough, M. Stanley Whittingham and Akira Yoshino "for the development of lithium-ion batteries”.

The Sveriges Riksbank Prize in Economic Sciences in Memory of Alfred Nobel 2019 is given to:

A. Abhijit Banerjee

B. Esther Duflo

C. Michael Kremer

D. All the above

Ans. D

Explanation: Abhijit Banerjee, Esther Duflo and Michael Kremer won The Sveriges Riksbank Prize in Economic Sciences in Memory of Alfred Nobel 2019 for their experimental approach to alleviating global poverty.

Who won the first Nobel Peace Prize in 1901?

A. Henry Duant

B. Frederic Passy

C. Both A and B

D. Neither A nor B

Ans. C

Explanation: The first Nobel Peace Prize was awarded in 1901 to Henry Dunant (Switzerland) and Frederic Passy (France).

Above given questions are based on Nobel Prize winners 2019, and about Nobel Prize.

19 most interesting facts about Nobel Prizes

Lists of Nobel Prizes and Laureates 2019

Get here current GK and GK quiz questions in English and Hindi for India, World, Sports and Competitive exam preparation. Download the Jagran Josh Current Affairs App.