Braille Translation Software – Duxbury DBT 11.2 SR4

Duxbury DBT 11.2 SR4 contains support for the languages of India. Includes all major languages including Indian languages: such as Hindi, Marathi, Gujarati, Punjabi, Haryanvi, Bengali, Bangla, Tamil, Telugu, Kannada, Assamese, Oriya, Nepalese, Sinhala, Urdu, etc.

Runs on 32-bit and 64-bit versions of Windows (including Windows Vista, Windows 7, and Windows 8).

Supports all commercial braille embossers.

Accurate contracted braille formatted the way you want.

Localized into English, French, Spanish, German, Danish, Italian, Russian, and others. Translators support over 130 languages.

Imports files from HTML, Word 2003/2007/2010/2013, Open Office, and other formats.

Math translation available for Nemeth, BAUK, UEBC, and French Braille.

DBT can also import from many other word-processors and other kinds of files from various sources.

DBT can also perform similar functions for Moon, a raised-line tactile system that can be used as an introduction to braille or as an alternate reading method in some limited circumstances.

Technical Specifications:

Simple to use: beginners learn in just minutes. Yet its depth, power and accuracy are such that it is used by most of the major Braille production centres throughout the world.

Built-in interline printing: to have ink-braille and text together. This makes an easy proofing and teaching tool. Great for the Braille-impaired too!

Tactile Graphics: The ability to include tactile graphics files for mixed text-and-graphic documents

Imports from popular Word Processors: including Microsoft Word and WordPerfect, HTML, ICADD,

DAISY (NISO/ NIMAS), formatted and plain ASCII and more.

Multiple Languages on same page: Allows languages other than the principal language to be

embedded in the same file and treated as appropriate for the context.

Bi-directional Translation: text-to-braille and reverse translation of braille-to-text

Customizable Views: Accurate presentation of both text or braille in either WYSIWYG (what-you-see-is-what-you-get) or coded (how-you-get-what-you-want) views in the word-processing screen, with easy switching between views

Translated View: A “translated line” showing the “other” form in either print or braille files

Instant Help: with help screens throughout the program

User-extendable template library: for even more flexibility

Spell-checker: with 300,000 word dictionary

“Quick Find Misspelling” feature: for increased speed and ease of use

Supports all major Braille printers

Cover Page Title: Allows the first page to have a title in letter graphics for job identification by personnel who don’t know Braille

Duxbury Braille Font: for viewing Braille dots within other programs

Compatible with JAWS Screening Reading software for easy access by the visually challenged using the program for producing Braille

Duxbury braille translator

Duxbury braille translator

Manufactured by: Duxbury Systems

Available in India

Karishma Enterprises

Karishma Enterprises was instrumental to change this deplorable situation by introducing Assistive Technology products to enable them to develop computer skills as well as have access to printed text books, receive supply of Braille books and master the most important tool in an office environment ie Computers.

132 Maker Tower B, Cuffe Parade, Mumbai

Maharashtra – 400005. India

Phone: 022-22181853

Mobile: 9867310297 and 9321539290

Fax: 022-22153291

Email: contact@karishmaenterprises.com

Website: www.karishmaenterprises.com

USA

Duxbury Systems, Inc.,

270 Littleton Rd., Unit 6, Westford, MA – 01886-3523 USA

Phone : +1-978-692-3000

fax : +1-978-692-7912

Email : orders@duxsys.com

Related