Speech and text is the significant intermediate for human communication. The Braille encoding system represents textual documents in a readable format for the visually challenged person. This paper projects a model to assist visually impaired or blind person in reading the text present on southern Indian Language text image by converting the text into corresponding Braille script. The experimentation of the algorithms was carried out on southern Indian Language text image dataset. Experimental results show that the projected method has a good performance on converting the extracted text regions in an image to corresponding Braille Script.

Braille is a form of written language for visually impaired people, in which characters are represented by patterns of raised dots that are felt with the fingertips. The discerning person can not usually read Braille information without training. Therefore, many parents have difficulty in educating their blind children. Next, teachers that are engaged in special education have to depend on Braille translator when marking Braille papers or assignments. Therefore, this system proposed are aiming to help the people who have zero knowledge in Braille code to learn the code. This system will also have better prospects for application, shorten the time taken to translate and provide assistance to the beginners in learning Braille characters.

Braille is the only system to visually impaired people for reading and writing. However, general people cannot read Braille. So, teachers and relatives find it hard to assist them with learning. Almost every major language has software solutions for this translation purpose. However, in Bengali there is an absence of this useful tool. Here, we propose Braille to Text Translator, which takes image of these tactile alphabets, and translates them to plain text. Image deterioration, scan-time page rotation, and braille dot deformation are the principal issues in this scheme. All of these challenges are directly checked using special image processing and geometric structure analysis. The technique yields 97.25% accuracy in recognizing Braille characters.

Different countries of the world have adopted the Braille System to suits their language. The main focus of the paper is the conversion of Tamil to Braille Conversion System. The paper provides a detail description of a system for Tamil Braille and different grades of Braille contraction. The Tamil Braille is designed to facilitate Tamil-speaking visually impaired people interaction with computers, as well as helping sighted users to communicate with the visually impaired person.

Braille is a tactic writing system that has been used by blind. This paper presents a brief survey of character recognition and transliteration works on Braille system so as to design a system that will transliterate Malayalam scanned books and magazines in to Braille. The proposed system deals with a printed Malayalam text to Braille transliteration system which includes a Malayalam optical character recognition system (OCR) and Malayalam to Braille mapping. Braille for Indian language is called Bharathi Braille. The beauty of Bharathi Braille is that it is based on phonetics. Bharati Braille is the adaptation of the six dot system for the languages of India. The history of Bharati Braille dates back to the period prior to India&#39;s independence. At a conference held at Beirut in 1951, a body of world scholars examined the possibility of a phonetically derived system of six dots that could be used for most of the languages of India, pakistan and Sri Lanka. Bharati Braille was a r...