Wilmington, DE (February 20, 2024) --- Carl M. Freeman Foundation (CMFF) is proud to again support Delaware’s largest day of giving, Do More 24 Delaware, on March 7-8, 2024. Thanks to CMFF, eligible nonprofits located in and serving Sussex County will share up to $25,000 through this year's Sussex County Donation Incentive Bonus prizes. These prizes will be awarded by Carl M. Freeman Foundation to those eligible nonprofits that raise money through the www.domore24delaware.org website over the 24-hour fundraising period.

Proceeds from CMFF funds will be awarded to the top 10 participating and eligible nonprofits that receive the most donations over the course of the Do More 24 Delaware event. This year's prizes range from the top prize of $6,000 to the 10th place prize of $1,000. Similar to the Foundation’s FACES (Freeman Assists Communities with Extra Support) program, the Sussex County Donation Incentive Bonus prizes are designed to find and fund the smaller organizations serving Sussex County neighborhoods. Eligibility for these prizes will be limited to those nonprofit organizations with offices in Sussex County, Delaware and with operating budgets of less than $500,000 annually.

Patti Grimes, Executive Director of the Carl M. Freeman Foundation is excited for the potential that the Sussex County focused prizes have for the giving day event and how these funds can impact those nonprofits on March 7-8 and beyond. “In 2023, these Sussex County prizes helped generate almost $240,000 from more than 2,200 donors for those nonprofits that were eligible,” says Grimes. “We envision this year's prizes will help motivate even more giving to our smaller and important grassroots organizations serving Sussex County.”

The Carl M. Freeman Foundation is committed to facilitating, supporting and promoting innovative community-based leadership and giving, particularly in the communities where customers, employees, and vendors of Carl M. Freeman Companies work, live, and play. The partnership with Spur Impact, United Way of Delaware, and the Do More 24 Delaware planning team provides a great opportunity to work together and foster individual philanthropy toward Sussex County nonprofit organizations.

More about this prize and other details about the event can be found at www.DoMore24Delaware.org.

###

About Carl M. Freeman Foundation

The Carl M. Freeman Foundation commits its time, talent, and treasure to facilitate, support, and promote innovative community-based leadership and giving. We seek to honor our founders’ legacies and passions by endorsing excellence and leveraging resources. Generally, we limit donations to communities where the customers, employees, and vendors of Carl M. Freeman Companies work, live, and play. Please visit www.carlmfreemanfoundation.org for more information about the Carl M. Freeman Foundation.

About Do More 24 Delaware

Founded by United Way of Delaware in 2016, Do More 24 Delaware is a one-day event during which nonprofits across the state participate in an around-the-clock friendly competition to raise incremental funds that go directly to participating agencies. In 2019, Spur Impact joined the effort in hosting Delaware’s largest giving day. Nonprofits create their own outreach activities to engage supporters and compete for additional cash incentives funded by corporate and foundation donors. In March 2023, Do More 24 Delaware raised more than $2.3 million in 24 hours for 524 nonprofits. All 501(c)(3) nonprofits serving Delaware are eligible to participate in Do More 24 Delaware, and individuals can also create personal fundraising pages to support their favorite nonprofit as part of the event. During the giving day, donors can search for their favorite nonprofit and donate. Many nonprofits will have their own match prizes in addition to being eligible for the event stretch pool and other prizes. For more information, visit the website or the individual nonprofit’s fundraising pages.

About United Way of Delaware

Founded in 1946, United Way of Delaware (UWDE) works to advance the common good by focusing on three key areas: Grade Level Reading, Career and College Success, and Financial Empowerment. UWDE is engaged in a long-term strategy to eliminate the root causes of the most pressing social problems in New Castle, Kent, and Sussex counties. UWDE is also responsible for the United Way brand in Salem County, New Jersey. For more information or to support UWDE, visit www.uwde.org, follow us on Twitter @UnitedWayDE, or Facebook at UnitedWayofDelaware or call (302) 573-3717.

About Spur Impact Association