The Delaware County Education Foundation raises funds to enhance the educational experience of the more than 15,000 students served by the organization. The Foundation, a 501(c)3 non-profit organization, provides funding for classroom teachers and administrators to enrich student learning through creative approaches along with innovative equipment and materials. Although the Foundation supports DCIU students through classroom and program grants, the Foundation is its own entity, totally separate from DCIU.

Delaware County Education Foundation Educational Grant Procedures

Eligibility: Grant applicants MUST be employed by either the Delaware County Intermediate Unit or the Delaware County Technical Schools, as a director, supervisor or classroom professional. Applications can be received by contacting any supervisor.

Criteria: The Delaware County Education Foundation will consider:

Proposals that positively impact student learning and promote innovation and best practices in teaching and learning.

Proposals for projects and programs that otherwise would not be included in a program’s budget.

The following proposals will not be considered:

Proposals requesting funding for supplies and materials, such as technology, that are funded in the program’s general budget

Proposals requesting hardware such as PCs, laptops or cell phones or anything requiring the purchase of ongoing service plans

Proposals requesting payment of fees to current DCIU employees

Incomplete applications

Note: This is a highly competitive grant process and proposals should be well thought out, organized and thorough. All proposals must include a summary briefly describing the grant’s purpose.

Adriene Irving

DCIU Director, Legislative and Community Services

610.938.9000 ext. 2061

Donate to the Delaware County Education Foundation

Anyone can donate to the Delaware County Education Foundation. You can also designate your gift to go to a specific program or project of the DCIU.

All donations are tax deductible to the extent that it exceeds the value of any goods and services you received from the Foundation in exchange.

Please mail a check, made payable to the Delaware County Education Foundation, to 200 Yale Avenue, Morton, PA 19070.