Are you building a new home in Lewis Center with a basement and need a foundation poured?

Are you doing an addition to your Powell home that will require a concrete slab to be poured?

Whatever your foundation needs, we have you covered!

Being based out of Delaware, OH, we at Delaware Powell Concrete are experienced in concrete installation services including concrete foundations, concrete slabs, patios, and other types of concrete services.

We stay up on all the newest technology and standards, as well as carry all of the best quality tools to carry out the job.

Delaware Powell Concrete is your go-to concrete experts for homes or commercial properties in central Ohio.

Whether you need a foundation for a large commercial building or for a 2,000 square foot home, we want to be the contractor you depend upon.

We will build a foundation that will last.

What types of concrete foundation work might you need?

Storage Shed Pad

Having a storage shed placed or built on your property?

Delaware Powell Concrete can install a concrete pad for your shed so lay a solid foundation.

Depending on if you are placing a movable shed or having a permanent shed built, you may have to get a building permit.

Either way, you will need a foundation.

Let the experts handle your concrete foundation needs!

Let us be part of getting your storage set up on level ground.

Garage Slabs

Whether it's a one stall, two or three-stall garage, detached or attached, Delaware Powell Concrete can handle your garage slab needs!

​

Home Foundation

What are some of the different types of foundations a builder will use when constructing houses?

Some are built on a concrete slab.

Some houses might be built on stilts because of their location to water.

Most Ohio homes are built with a basement, which requires a much different type of knowledge and skills to install.

Delaware Powell Concrete is extremely experienced with building basement foundations in Central Ohio.

Free Quote

Call us today for your Free Quote today! 740-272-4535

We would love to earn your business!

Let us show you why we are the #1 Preferred Concrete Contractor in Delaware.