The Delaware FFA Foundation, Inc. was incorporated in March 2003 as a 501(c)3 non-profit organization. Headquartered in Dover, Delaware, the Foundation works with business and industry, organizations and individuals to raise funds to provide opportunities to students enrolled in Agriscience Education. The Delaware FFA Foundation’s mission is to seek and provide financial support for members and chapters of the Delaware FFA Association to develop student potential for premier leadership, personal growth, and career success.

An Investment in the Future

There is no better way to say it. Pledging your support to the Delaware FFA Foundation will afford middle and high school students leadership and personal growth opportunities. In essence, you are making an investment in the future of our youth. Our students are not only learning career skills, but they are gaining opportunities to hone leadership abilities. Such skills are necessary in today’s highly technical business world. Won’t you take part in shaping a student’s life through this opportunity to give?

General Fund donors help to support chapter and individual incentive awards, career development events and awards, motivational materials, travel for national and international events and endowed programs.

Special Project Fund donations are targeted towards a specific FFA project that parallels your personal business or organizational objectives. You can even direct your investment to a middle or high school Agriscience Education program in your local area. Several examples of Special project areas include, but are not limited to the following: State and National Leadership Conferences, State Officer Leadership Training, FFA High School Chapter Recognition Awards, Scholarships, Public Speaking, Poultry Judging, Nursery/Landscape, Job Interview, Horse Judging, Floriculture, Dairy Showmanship and Judging, Dairy Foods, Agricultural Mechanics or Agronomic and Vegetable Crops Career Developments.

Memorial Scholarship Fund is designed to honor the memory of a relative, friend, or colleague through a Memorial Scholarship. Help FFA members achieve their educational goals through scholarships to two-year or four-year colleges, technical schools or for other educational opportunities.

[wpedon id=617]

Ways to Give:

Delaware FFA Foundation Scholarship| Dr. Karen C. Hutchison Scholarship

Thank you to our Sponsors

Submit Scholarship