This Year’s Events and Initiatives

The Del-One Foundation is proud to support the following organizations in 2024:

Special Olympics

The core values of Special Olympics Delaware embody our culture, spirit, and commitment to do our best at all times. These values guide and inform our collaboration, our innovative programming, the design and delivery of meaningful opportunities, and our promotion of understanding, acceptance, and inclusion for the benefit of people with and without intellectual disabilities.

Central Delaware Habitat for Humanity

Central Delaware Habitat for Humanity (CDHFH) is an affiliate of Habitat for Humanity International, a non-profit, ecumenical housing ministry that seeks to eliminate poverty housing from the world.

CDHFH works to transform lives and revitalize our Kent County communities by building and repairing quality homes in partnership with families in need. Since our founding in 1990, CDHFH has built and renovated more than 50 homes, housing more than 200 adults and children. Through this homeowner partnership, families are able to achieve their dreams of homeownership and break the cycle of poverty.

Autism Delaware

Autism Delaware is a nonprofit, advocacy organization devoted to serving people and families affected by autism. They serve the entire state through offices in Newark, Lewes and Dover.

Autism Delaware provide the following services:

1. Individual and Systems Advocacy

2. Parent Support and Mentoring

3. Information and Referral

4. Family and Teen Social Events

5. Adult Services through Productive Opportunities for Work & Recreation (POW&R)

6. Public Awareness and Media Outreach

7. Quarterly Newsletter

Delaware Breast Cancer Coalition

The Delaware Breast Cancer Coalition (DBCC) helps those who are underserved and underinsured to receive free or reduced-cost care. In addition, the DBCC helps navigate residents to screenings across the state of Delaware.

The Delaware Breast Cancer Coalition is not nationally funded. The majority of funding comes from local Delaware businesses and partners.

Driven to Support our Community

Over $62,000 was donated to various charities in 2023, including those listed below. Funds were raised through Foundation member dues, selling candy at the branches, and employee “jeans day” contributions. Click here to view the bylaws of the Del-One Foundation.

Local Delaware Causes we have Supported

Brain Injury Association of Delaware

Channie P Bradley Senior Services

Compassion for Cats of Delaware

Council of Wildlife Rehabilitators and Educators of Delaware

Dover Art League

Inner City Cultural League, Inc.

The Ministry of Caring, Inc.

Modern Maturity Center

Our Daily Bread Dining Room of MOT, Inc.

Pancreatic Cancer Action Network of Delaware

Tender Hearts Inc.

The Way Home, Inc.

Our Foundation’s Board Members

Board President

Amy Resh

Vice President

Ryan Bowman

Treasurer

Jennifer Ellis

Secretary

Amy Draper

Director

Justin Smith

Director

Christina Reilly

Director

Sean Kemp

YOU MAY ALSO BE INTERESTED IN…