Vermont summer readers can explore insights into community and heritage, while enjoying a compelling story. That's because The Vermont Book Shelf is linking Southern Vermont authors Laura Stevenson, Jessie Haas, and F.D. Reeve with other fiction writers throughout the state.

Available online as http://vermontbookshelf.blogspot.com, the newly formed author collaborative is also bringing together authors in person for events. Residents can meet some of the writers at the Vermont History Expo in Tunbridge on June 16 and 17.

Check the Vermont Book Shelf for Laura Stevenson's remarkable story of love and family allegiances in her novel “Return in Kind,” a tale involving a house and the land over 100 years.

Look for new work by Jessie Haas, whose popular middle-grade readers led to the historical work she's now doing for her hometown of Westminster from the recent “Revolutionary Westminster” to a new novel due later this month.

F. D. Reeve's novella “Nathaniel Purple” is a tale of adultery and arson set against a fictional but very real-life Vermont village that serves as the leading character in the story.

Beth Kanell's young adult novels set in the Northeast Kingdom feature local landmarks and controversial historical moments. David Stahler's newest novel “Spinning Out” pits teens against wind turbines.

Other books range from Howard Frank Mosher's classic “Northern Borders” (a feature film is about to be released) and his “The Great Northern Express” to Leda Schubert's picture book “Feeding the Sheep” and R. A. Harold's moody and suspenseful historical mystery set on Lake Champlain (with a cameo appearance by Teddy Roosevelt).

This summer, Jenny Land's first novel will come out from Voyage Books, the new literary imprint of Brigantine Media. “The Spare Room” is a story about the Underground Railroad in Vermont. Mystery author Nancy Means Wright will soon present her new title, “Walking Into the Wild.” An autumn publishing date is scheduled for Natalie Kinsey-Warnock's tale of Vermont-style courage, “True Colors.”