Review

Nathaniel Purple, librarian, lover, and volunteer fireman, is a man of many sources. He muses his way among Musil, Swendenborg, Balzac, Thoreau and Rabelais as easily as the Bible, Shakespeare and the town's Chamber of Commerce brochure. F.D Reeve catalogs the different ways in which memories of things read and things lived intrude on familiar conversations. Here is a love story of man and woman growing up together, of man and horse in silent appreciation of nature, of man and dog getting drunk together, of man reigning over and tending his cows. This Vermont Grade A Medium Amber eclogue is full of flavor, and not only the sweetness of long love and living close to nature. In juxtapositions of the events of a small town and the classics from its library we discover the bawdy, the bucolic and the tragic. Parts of the story are almost pure dialog, thrusting us into the local diner and pub where we remain outsiders, ignorant of the village's complex history but immersed in its voices. We recognize the village vices: land greed, sexual envy, blind rage, spite; and are a bit surprised, along with Nathaniel, to meet its virtues of tolerance, kindness, and humor. Reeve's poetic powers of description convey the transition from the freshness of something seen anew, like scarlet, mandarin and translucent canary maple leaves; to those same leaves gone sour after a flash of anger, curled brown, red and yellow; He gives us the town's odors: sacks of grain in the general store are astringent, not sour, as if sunlight were being releasedThe morning's fresh manure still gave off a hint of molasses. Our narrator slides through the seasons from funeral to dancehall, from ruffians and fisticuffs to a kind of divine retribution, vividly colored and scored, in an astonishing eight page scene of a barn burning. Nathaniel Purple speaks of his library as an observatory and, finally, as a treasury, as is this book. --Meredith Bergmann Poetry Editor, American Arts Quarterly. In his poetry and in his fiction as well, the poet and translator F. D. Reeve's descriptive powers amplify and illuminate the human drama:;...imagining flames leaping out of the cans with a roar like the wrath of Jehovah, the gas shining in rainbows and snaking under the doors, burning blue in the warm, wet places. Sparks would shoot skyward and the fire would thunder and burn and burn and burn until everything collapsed on itself Nathaniel Purple, the objective, warm-spirited narrator, is to be trusted at every turn in every sentence, especially the ones richly invested in pointed irony. --Barry Wallenstein, Associate Editor of the American Book ReviewWhere could you find, in a short novel, a bucolic Vermont village with adultery brought to life, a crazed husband fonder of his cows than of people, a murder, a barn-burning, told to us by a librarian who is equally at home with, and has the language to evoke, the pastoral beauty of the place, drinking with rowdies in the village tavern, and bringing to life the sins and sinners whose ambition, envy, fear, hatred vivify the tale? It takes the poet F. D. Reeve to give intensity to these passions in Nathaniel Purple, a book one wants to read twice over. --Daniel Hoffman, Poet. In his poetry and in his fiction as well, the poet and translator F. D. Reeve's descriptive powers amplify and illuminate the human drama...imagining flames leaping out of the cans with a roar like the wrath of Jehovah, the gas shining in rainbows and snaking under the doors, burning blue in the warm, wet places. Sparks would shoot skyward and the fire would thunder and burn and burn and burn until everything collapsed on itselfNathaniel Purple, the objective, warm-spirited narrator, is to be trusted at every turn in every sentence, especially the ones ri --Daniel Hoffman, Poet

In his poetry and in his fiction as well, the poet and translator F. D. Reeve's descriptive powers amplify and illuminate the human drama:"...imagining flames leaping out of the cans with a roar like the wrath of Jehovah, the gas shining in rainbows and snaking under the doors, burning blue in the warm, wet places. Sparks would shoot skyward and the fire would thunder and burn and burn and burn until everything collapsed on itself" Nathaniel Purple, the objective, warm-spirited narrator, is to be trusted at every turn in every sentence, especially the ones richly invested in pointed irony. --Barry Wallenstein, Associate Editor of the American Book Review

Where could you find, in a short novel, a bucolic Vermont village with adultery brought to life, a crazed husband fonder of his cows than of people, a murder, a barn-burning, told to us by a librarian who is equally at home with, and has the language to evoke, the pastoral beauty of the place, drinking with rowdies in the village tavern, and bringing to life the sins and sinners whose "ambition, envy, fear, hatred" vivify the tale? It takes the poet F. D. Reeve to give intensity to these passions in "Nathaniel Purple," a book one wants to read twice over. --Daniel Hoffman, Poet