The other identity, which any fan of heavy music knows all too well, is that Canada goes fucking hard. As long as punk and metal have existed, Canada has played a vital part in their development, and has produced some of each genre's best acts. This is also reflected in their fans: Canadians can drink more beer, shout louder at full-contact sports, and melt the eardrums of listeners harder than citizens of most other countries.

In honour of Canada Day, we've put together a list of the country's most awesome bands. But rather than celebrate the country's classic heavy artists – make no mistake, we love Anvil, Voivod, Kataklysm, Cryptopsy, and Strapping Young Lad – we decided to focus on lesser-known acts who are just as deserving of the spotlight. We also took an electoral college approach to adding bands from each Canadian province by population, to make sure the entire country is represented, rather than just listing a dozen bands from Toronto and Montreal.

Here are the 20 heavy Canadian bands you need to know…

The beauty of Vancouver’s Black Wizard is the middle ground they ride between doom and thrash. At times, the tracks on the band’s 2018 barn burner Livin’ Oblivion are slow, thoughtful, and ecclesiastical with their vocals. But at any given moment, the Wizard will ramp up those tasty NWOBHM riffs to a speed metal pace and create an evil gallop that sounds deeply old-school and at the same time totally modern. As such, the band don’t fall into the trap of trad-metal, giving contemporary fans a taste of classic riffage without coming off like a tribute band.

The full weight of technical death metal’s evolution over the past decade can be felt in the work of Vancouver’s Archspire. The instrumental work behind the quintet's songs is alien enough to at times be an acquired taste, with the inclusion of vocals so speedy they can sound like rapping and the occasional breakdown that adheres to only the most unusual of time signatures. Meanwhile, their tendency towards melodic riffs and evolving alongside tech-death as a whole has gotten them tons of underground acclaim and won them spots on some impressive tours. A band whose ascendancy is perpetual and deserved.

Yikes. Channeling all the doubt and menace of being human, Winnipeg noise artists KEN mode have staked out a claim for themselves as one of Canada’s coolest – and scariest – heavy bands. Their music’s frenetic, panicked profile makes one feel irritated and anxious to the point of physical aggression. Meanwhile, their aesthetic shifts cover all the bases of artistic horror – 2016’s Nerve is all oranges and purples, while 2018's Loved features a shadowy embodiment of perversity grinning hungrily at the viewer. A rare example of band who are as vital and important as they are straight-up killer to listen to.

Bearing a name not meant to be understood by mere mortals, Chthe’ilist’s technical death metal is deeply rooted in the lore crafted by famed horror writer H.P. Lovecraft. The Longueuil-based band’s sound is so dense, atmospheric, and heavy, it feels as though it comes from an aeons-old cavern with an inter-dimensional portal at its core. There’s nothing flashy about the band at all: they crash through the listener's ears with haunting tales presented as skin-crawling death metal. Even with their young age, Chthe’ilist are proving to be one of the talents to look out for.

Maybe it’s the speedy technicality of Sutrah’s music that caused the band to take so long before dropping their debut, Dunes. Though they’ve been around since 2011, the Montreal three-piece only released their first studio album in 2017. That said, the wait was worth it: Dunes’ use of both brilliant technical death metal and yearning spiritual melodies makes it a powerful listen from start to finish. Fans who love Gorguts and Obscura but have always wanted a little more heart from the get-go need to get into these guys.

Few bands are as starkly terrifying as Edmonton’s Revenge. For most metal acts, writing about warfare and humanity’s flaws involves some level of indulgent poetry; for this bristling two-piece, it’s all casualty numbers and scorched earth. 2015’s Behold.Total.Rejection – just one of their many three-words-separated-by-periods titles – is a non-stop assault of war metal that sounds like the harsh realities of a roof collapsing in and killing everyone in the house below. Definitely fun to listen to on your commute as you wish death upon everyone.