Character history

Paloma Lopez-Fitzgerald is the youngest of the five children of Pilar Lopez-Fitzgerald and Martin Fitzgerald. After Martin ran off with Katherine Barrett, Paloma's oldest brother Antonio abandoned the family, leaving Pilar and Luis to manage the household. Pilar sent Paloma to live with her sister Maria in Mexico. There, a surgically altered Martin Fitzgerald and Katherine Barrett, going by the names Bob and Ellen Wheeler, were her neighbors.

Paloma wanted nothing to do with her Harmony family because of her being left in Mexico. Despite this, Luis convinced Paloma to come back with him and Sheridan to Harmony, where their mother was very ill. She mellowed on her stance with her family and cared about them. Paloma had a boyfriend named Roberto. She has also become close friends with Simone Russell and Jessica Bennett.

In 2006, Paloma became a major player in the Monk storyline in Rome. After returning to Harmony, she turned down Roberto's marriage proposal. She wasn't sure if she wanted to spend the rest of her life with him, and she couldn't abandon her family. She quit college and her job at the Book Cafe to become a cop. This move worried Paloma's big brother, Luis, a cop himself.

Paloma graduated from the Police Academy and became Noah Bennett's girlfriend. The police uncovered some of Jessica's dead johns, some of which she had disposed and destroyed evidence, making her an accomplice. Thanks to the magical misdeeds of witch Kay Bennett, Spike Lester was revealed to be the actual murderer and was arrested by Paloma. Noah and Paloma nearly wed in August 2007, but it was interrupted. The two are planning to wed sometime in the future, and enjoyed a romantic dream waltz courtesy of Endora Lenox.

Since 2008, Noah and Paloma have grown further apart as Roberto has moved next door to them. Noah was forced to kiss Fancy Crane while she was being mind controlled. He was caught by Paloma and her brother, Luis Lopez-Fitzgerald. This caused stress between the two of them. Paloma and Noah were married on July 29, 2008 surrounded by friends and family. On the series finale, Paloma told Noah that she was pregnant, and the two looked forward to starting a family.

Hidden Passions