Paloma Lopez-Fitzgerald Portrayed by Silvana Arias (2004–2007)

Hannia Guillen (2007–2008) Status Alive First appearance May 17, 2004 Last appearance August 7, 2008 Profile Full name Paloma Francisca Lopez-Fitzgerald Gender Female Born Nov. 28, 1986 (Sagittarius) Age 22 (2008)

38 (2024) Occupation High School Student (formerly grad. 2004)

Police Cadet (currently) Residence Mexico (until 2004)

Lopez-Fitzgerald House at 462 Railroad Street (current)

Relationships Parents Martin Fitzgerald (father)

Pilar Lopez-Fitzgerald (mother) Siblings Antonio Lopez-Fitzgerald (older brother)

Luis Lopez-Fitzgerald (older brother)

Theresa Lopez-Fitzgerald (older sister)

Miguel Lopez-Fitzgerald (older brother) Spouses Noah Bennett (2008-present) Romances Roberto (ex-boyfriend) Children Miranda Bennett (daughter with Noah) Grandparents Brian Fitzgerald (paternal grandfather; deceased)

Kathleen O'Leary (paternal grandmother; deceased)

Antonio Lopez (maternal grandfather)

Maria Lopez I (maternal grandmother) Aunts and uncles Kevin Fitzgerald (paternal uncle)

Liam Fitzgerald (paternal uncle)

Patrick Fitzgerald (paternal uncle)

Duncan Fitzgerald (paternal uncle)

Alan Fitzgerald (paternal uncle)

Andrew Fitzgerald (paternal uncle)

Brandon Fitzgerald (paternal uncle)

Donovan Fitzgerald (paternal uncle)

Dwayne Fitzgerald (paternal uncle)

Jack Fitzgerald (paternal uncle)

Neil Fitzgerald (paternal uncle)

Sean Fitzgerald (paternal uncle)

Florencia Lopez (maternal aunt)

Francisco Lopez (maternal uncle)

Maria Lopez (maternal aunt)

Alejandro Lopez (maternal uncle)

Fernanda Lopez (maternal aunt)

Lorenzo Lopez (maternal uncle)

Vicente Lopez (maternal uncle) Nieces and nephews Ethan Winthrop II (nephew via Theresa)

Jane Winthrop (niece via Theresa)

Marty Lopez-Fitzgerald (nephew via Luis)

Phoebe Lopez-Fitzgerald (niece via Luis)

Maria Lopez-Fitzgerald (niece via Miguel) Other relatives Sam Bennett (father in law via her marriage to Noah)

Grace Bennett (mother in law via her marriage to Noah; deceased)

Ethan Winthrop (brother in law via her marriage to Noah and Ethan's marriage to Theresa)

Kay Bennett (sister in law via her marriage to Miguel and Noah's marriage to Paloma)

Jessica Bennett (sister in law via her marriage to Noah)

Sheridan Crane (sister in law via her marriage to Antonio)

Julian Crane (former brother in law via his marriage to Theresa)

Alistair Crane (former brother in law via his marriage to Theresa)

Jared Casey (former brother in law via his marriage to Theresa)

Fancy Crane (sister in law via her marriage to Luis)

Paloma Francisca Lopez-Fitzgerald Bennett (born Nov. 28, 1986) is a fictional character on the NBC/DirectTV soap opera Passions.

Character History[]

Paloma Francisca Lopez-Fitzgerald was born in Harmony on Nov 28, 1986. She is the fifth and youngest child of five children and the younger daughter of Martin Fitzgerald (b. Apr. 6, 1947) and Pilar Lopez-Fitzgerald (b. Aug. 13, 1950). She has four older siblings: Antonio (b. May 5, 1970), Luis (b. Feb. 29, 1972), Theresa (b. July 3, 1982), and Miguel Lopez-Fitzgerald (b. Dec. 14, 1983). After Martin ran off with Katherine Crane who was Alistair Crane's wife, Paloma's oldest brother Antonio abandoned the family as well, leaving Pilar and and her second oldest brother Luis to manage the household and take care of the family. Because of serious financial struggles within the family, Pilar sent Paloma to live with her sister Maria Lopez in Mexico. There, a plastic surgically altered version of her husband Martin and Katherine Barrett-Crane, going by the names Bob and Ellen Wheeler, were her neighbours.

Originally, Paloma wanted nothing to do with her family in Harmony because of her being left in Mexico all her life. She felt unloved and abandoned by her family, especially by her mother Pilar. Despite this, Luis was able to convince Paloma to come back with him and Sheridan to Harmony, where their mother was very ill and possibly dying. Paloma was shocked to discover that Bob Wheeler, the man that had been with her during her entire childhood while she was growing up, was really her father Martin Fitzgerald. Though initially shocked by this revelations she still loved and appreciated her father and took his side over Pilar's and Luis' despite their constant proclamations that Martin had lied to them and abandoned his family in favour of running away with another woman (Katherine). Paloma was so antagonistic from the rest of her family that she refused to believe that they sent her away to Mexico out of love. Paloma openly declared to Pilar and Luis that they weren't her family and that Martin and Katherine were her family because they were the ones who raised her since she was a baby and a child. Paloma has shown that she is a devoted daddy's girl and she greatly loves and respects her father despite his mistakes. Martin, in return, openly admits that Paloma is his favourite child and that she is his heart and his "baby girl". As time went on, she mellowed on her stance with her family and truly came to care about them. Paloma had a boyfriend named Roberto. She has also become close friends with Simone Russell and Jessica Bennett.

In 2006, Paloma became a major player in the Monk storyline in Rome. After returning to Harmony, she turned down Roberto's marriage proposal. She wasn't sure if she wanted to spend the rest of her life with him, and she couldn't abandon her family after all they had been through lately by leaving for Mexico with him. She recently quit college and her job at the Book Cafe for a more exciting job, as a cop. This move has worried Paloma's big brother, Luis, a cop himself.

Paloma has shown that she is capable of being a cop; she recently graduated from the Police Academy. She has currently become the lover of Noah Bennett. Her job is in jeopardy now that the police have uncovered some of Jessica's dead johns, some of which she had disposed of their bodies and destroy evidence, making her an accomplice. Thanks to the magical misdeeds of novice witch Kay Bennett, Spike Lester was revealed to be the actual murderer and was arrested by Paloma. Noah and Paloma nearly wed in August 2007, but it was interrupted. The two are planning to wed sometime in the future, and enjoyed a romantic dream waltz courtesy of young Endora Lenox.

Since 2008, Noah and Paloma have grown further away from each other as Paloma's ex-boyfriend Roberto has moved next door to them. Noah has also been forced to kiss Fancy Crane while she was being mind controlled. He was caught by Paloma and Paloma's brother Luis Lopez-Fitzgerald. This has caused tremendous stress between the two of them. Paloma and Noah were finally married in the July 29, 2008 episode surrounded by friends and family. On the series finale, Paloma told Noah that she was pregnant, and the two looked forward to starting a family.

Overall Character Summary[]

Paloma is the youngest child of Pilar Lopez-Fitzgerald and Martin Fitzgerald. She was born shortly before her father disappeared, and was less than a year old when her mother sent her to Mexico to live with her sister because she couldn't put the burden of raising an infant on Antonio, who was already having to raise his younger siblings. She has not come back to Harmony since 1985, and was seldom mentioned.

When Pilar became ill, Miguel finally decided to call Paloma when their mother was on her death bed. Upon meeting Paloma in Mexico, it was soon apparent that she wasn't overly concerned with the happenings in Harmony. After being sent away, Paloma just didn't care what happened to the family she felt that they didn't care about her. Paloma returned to Harmony with Luis and Sheridan, along with Bob and Ellen Wheeler, who had raised her. She was shocked but pleased to learn that Bob Wheeler was really her presumed dead father, Martin Fitzgerald, and even when Ellen was revealed as Katherine Crane, Paloma did not waver in her love for the two people who had been there her entire life.

Paloma soon built a relationship with her mother, and it wasn't long before she had two best friends in Harmony - Simone Russell and Jessica Bennett. She accepted Simone's sexuality unconditionally, never wavering in her support of her friend, and together she and Simone helped cover Jessica's tracks when it looked like Jessica had been killing johns in Harmony. Together, the three girls went to Rome in search of some priceless paintings, and discovered a connection to an ancient chalice that Alistair Crane was also looking for.

Hidden Passions[]

In the book Hidden Passions, Paloma's great-grandmother was named Teresa. She also had a great-uncle Carlos and great-aunt Marta on her maternal grandfather's side. Information in the book has not been confirmed on-screen and is not considered to be official since the information seen on the show contradicts much of what was said in the book.

Crimes Committed[]

Slapped Spike [Jun 17, 2005]

Slapped Fancy Crane [Nov 28, 2007]

Slapped Noah Bennett [Dec 3, 2007]

Health and Vitals[]

Beaten up by a man [Jan 27, 2005]

Got high on stickers [Mar 2-3, 2005]

Trivia[]