Infobox soap character

name = Kay Bennett Lopez-Fitzgerald

series = Passions

portrayer = Taylor Anne Mountz (1999 — 2000)

Deanna Wright (2000 — 2003)

Heidi Mueller (2003 — 2008)

Gina Marie May (2000; temporary)

first = July 5, 1999

last = August 7, 2008

cause =

creator = James E. Reilly

caption1 = Heidi Mueller as Kay Bennett Crane

caption2 = Deanna Wright as Kay Bennett

caption3 = Taylor Anne Mountz as Kay Bennett

nickname = Kay

alias =

gender = Female

born = 1983

death =

age = 16—25

occupation = Executive assistant to Fox Crane (prior to his death)

Cannery worker (2004 — 2006)

title =

residence = Tabitha Lenox's home

parents = Sam Bennett

Grace Standish (deceased)

siblings = Noah Bennett

Jessica Bennett

Ethan Winthrop

spouse = Fox Crane (2007; widowed)

Miguel Lopez-Fitzgerald (married 2008)

romances = Miguel Lopez-Fitzgerald (2004; 2006 — present)

Fox Crane (2005 — 2007)

children = Maria Ivy Lopez-Fitzgerald (with Miguel)

grandchildren =

grandparents = Samuel Bennett (deceased)

aunts/uncles = Hank Bennett

Faith Standish (deceased)

nieces/nephews = Samuel Bennett

Ethan Crane

Sarah Winthrop (stillborn)

Jane Winthrop

Jonathan Winthrop

cousins = Charity Standish

relatives =

color = #D8BFD8

color text =

Kathleen Elizabeth "Kay" Lopez-Fitzgerald (née Bennett; previously Crane) is a fictional character on the NBC/DirecTV soap opera "Passions". Kay has been played by Taylor Anne Mountz (July 5, 1999 - August 2, 2000), Deanna Wright (September 25, 2000 - October 6, 2003), and Heidi Mueller (October 24, 2003 - present) since being introduced to the show in 1999. She was also played temporarily by Gina Marie May from August 3 until September 20 of 2000 while producers searched for a replacement for Mountz. Stephanie Patton also portrayed Kay in various flashbacks in 2003 at age nine.

Character history

Kay was born the second child of Sam and Grace Bennett in the small New England town of Harmony. Growing up, she was a bit of a tomboy, and had a major crush on her baseball teammate Miguel Lopez-Fitzgerald, one of her closest friends. During the summer of 1999, a teenage Kay's hopes of finally revealing her feelings to Miguel were suddenly dashed by the arrival of Charity Standish (her cousin), a mysterious new girl in town who quickly caught Miguel's eye at the town carnival. Kay's feelings toward Charity didn't soften when she discovered Charity was her cousin, for Grace Bennett and Faith Standish, Charity's mother, were identical twins whom both thought the other had died in a fire years ago.

Throughout the next five years, Kay plotted and schemed her way to be Miguel's one true love, a title that was quickly taken by Charity. Kay, relentless in her pursuit of Miguel, used magic to make Miguel believe she was Charity. By this illusion, Kay was able to trick Miguel into sleeping with her and became pregnant with Miguel's child. Kay went into premature labor and gave birth to a girl named Maria Ivy after Miguel's grandmother and her father's former girlfriend. Maria nearly died in the hospital, but when Death came to take her Charity offered to end her relationship with Miguel if Maria would live. Death accepted the deal. Eventually, a distraught Charity left Harmony. Miguel, refusing to accept that their relationship had ended, left Kay alone to raise baby Maria so that he could go in search of Charity. Kay was struggling as a single mother, working double shifts at the cannery. With Miguel out of Harmony, Kay fell in love with the rich Crane heir Fox Crane during a tsunami that hit Harmony. The two moved into their neighbor-witch Tabitha's house. Tabitha and Kay already had a rapport as that Kay had briefly tutored under Tabitha to learn magic, but her powers never really surfaced. After a Cinderella-esque romance, Kay and Fox became engaged.

Kay's storyline soon shifted to her struggle to remain faithful to Fox. Ivy Winthrop, Fox's overbearing mother, was able to trick Miguel into returning to Harmony. Ivy, due to Theresa's betrayal of her favorite son Ethan Winthrop, is distrustful of most women who become interested in her sons. Ivy is particularly hostile towards Kay because Kay knows Ivy's darkest secret-- that Ivy had blackmailed David Hastings into pretending to be Kay's mother Grace's first husband so Ivy could get Kay's father Sam, her first love, back. Kay, who thought she had overcome her feelings for Miguel, soon realized that her old feelings were resurfacing. However, Kay refused to be with Miguel even after he declared that he had given up on Charity and wanted to be a family with Kay and Maria.

Kay was dealing with her jealousy over Miguel's relationship with Siren, a mermaid-turned-human. However, Endora zapped Siren into a fish tank after Fox complained that she was complicating his relationship with Kay. Despite the chaos regarding Fox and Miguel, Kay married Fox on January 10, 2007. Fox lied that he had a terminal illness to get Kay to stay with him and compounded his lies by accusing Miguel of running him down with his car and trying to kill him. Miguel was convicted in a sham trial and sentenced to life in prison without the possibility of parole; the judge was blackmailed by the same blackmailer taking control of Theresa's life.

Kay planned on telling Fox, from much urging by Miguel, that she is leaving him for Miguel. She tried once, but he pretended that he was asleep. But Julian Crane struck a deal with Kay: that if he could get Miguel out of prison, she must stay with Fox. Kay agreed and now she waits for Fox to die of his "terminal illness" so she can be with Miguel forever.

In June 2007, Kay accompanied Tabitha to another realm to rescue Tabitha's daughter Endora from two evil witches. The witches proved to be too much for Tabitha and Endora, and it looked as though they were going to lose. However, Kay used her love for her friends to summon the magical powers deep within her and vanquished the two evil witches. She is now excited about her newly released powers and is experimenting with them ... with disastrous results.

One evening Fox caught Kay and Miguel and started to fight with him. Kay used her magical powers with the help of the demon elf she released when looking for her kidnapped sister Jessica. She saw that Fox had faked his illness and left him. She and Miguel then had a commitment ceremony and are presently happy together. Kay's divorce from Fox was set to be finalized but was instead dissolved when he was murdered. Tragedy also ensued when Miguel found out a few months earlier about the truth that Kay, Tabitha, and Endora were witches. The "Boys in the Basement" retaliated and kidnapped Endora. When Miguel tried to save her they were both sucked into another dimension.

Both Kay and Tabitha tried to rescue Endora and Miguel by seeking them out in other dimensions but, to no avail. Both later received a ransom note from the "dark side" ordering the two witches to blight Harmony with evil acts or else never see their loved one's ever again. A desperate Tabitha went back to her evil ways much to Kay's reluctance. Kay also has become a main suspect in the murder of her ex-husband Fox, and has been accused by Ivy of being a serial killer.

Both Kay and Miguel, and Tabitha and Endora were reunited on Christmas. Miguel made Kay and Tabitha both take a solemn oath never to do magic again, much to Tabitha's dismay. The newly acquainted couple also begin planning a double wedding with Miguel's sister Paloma Lopez-Fitzgerald, and Kay's brother Noah Bennett which eventually turned into a quad wedding with Miguel's brother Luis Lopez-Fitzgerald and Noah's former girlfried Fancy Crane and Ethan Winthrop and Gwen Hotchkiss joining in.

Kay, Miguel, and Maria briefly traveled to another dimension in order for Kay to find a way to stop the disaster that's destined to destroy Harmony, but she was unsuccessful.

Kay married Miguel in the July 21, 2008 episode.

"Hidden Passions"

In the book "Hidden Passions", Kay's maternal grand parents were Zachary Sutter and Mercy Standish. Her paternal grand parents were named Benjamin Bennett (on the show it was Sam) and Margaret Joyce. She also had at least two more uncles in addition to Hank. Information in the book has not been confirmed on-screen and is not considered to be official since the information seen on the show contradicts much of what was said in the book.

Awards