Anne Charles Basset de Montaigu, born 10 June 1751 in Versailles, died 8 May 1821 at Lunéville was a general of the French Revolutionary and Napoleonic wars. Tainted by his association with Charles Pichegru, he was cleared by a courts-martial in 1797, and served subsequently in the Army of the Danube and in the Grande Armée until his retirement from military service in 1811.

Anne Charles Basset Montaigu was born on June 10, 1751, in Versailles, Île-de-France, France. Her birth geographical coordinates are 48° 48’ 13” North latitude and 2° 8’ 3” East longitude. Anne Charles Basset Montaigu passed away at the age of 69 in 1821.

Astrologically, Anne Charles Basset Montaigu falls under the Sun sign of Gemini, with Virgo as her Ascendant, Capricorn as her Moon sign, and Scorpio as her Black Moon Lilith sign.

Planets

Planets represent different aspects of personality, life themes, and energies within a birth chart, influencing individual characteristics, motivations, and experiences.

Planets in Signs

Planets in a zodiac sign denote how the energies and qualities associated with those planets express themselves within the context of the themes and attributes of that particular zodiac sign.

Sun Gemini Moon Capricorn Ascendant Virgo Midheaven Gemini Mercury Gemini Venus Cancer Mars Pisces Jupiter Taurus Saturn Sagittarius Uranus Aquarius Neptune Cancer Pluto Sagittarius Ceres Leo Chiron Scorpio Eros Cancer Hygiea Aries Juno Capricorn Pallas Virgo Vesta Gemini Black Moon Lilith Scorpio North Node Sagittarius South Node Gemini Part of Fortune Aries Vertex Pisces

Sunin Gemini19° 7’ 20”

The Gemini Sun in the Natal Chart makes you friendly and lighthearted. You are curious and creative. You enjoy learning new things and need continual […] Read more »

Moonin Capricorn4° 41’ 35”

The Moon in Capricorn in the Natal Chart makes you old-fashioned and emotional. You are compassionate and use your empathy to connect with others. You […] Read more »

Ascendantin Virgo21° 26’ 57”

Virgo Ascendant in the Natal Chart makes you thoughtful and discerning. You have an intellectual and analytical personality. You may have a bookish appearance and […] Read more »

Midheavenin Gemini19° 12’ 32”

The Gemini Midheaven in the Natal Chart indicates you are creative and imaginative. You are curious and need change and variety in your career. Your […] Read more »

Mercuryin Gemini28° 7’ 10”

Mercury in Gemini in the Natal Chart makes you thoughtful and eager to share your vision. You are idealistic and can be intelligent and social. […] Read more »

Venusin Cancer24° 33’ 23”

Cancer Venus in the Natal Chart makes you generous and affectionate. You are compassionate and can be empathetic and loving. You are sincere and can […] Read more »

Marsin Pisces5° 31’ 12”

Pisces Mars in the Natal Chart makes you imaginative and dreamy. You are expressive and loving, showing your unique talents through the arts and humanities. […] Read more »

Jupiterin Taurus25° 50’ 45”

Jupiter in Taurus in the Natal Chart is a generational placement that relates to having a materialistic vision. You are part of a generation that […] Read more »

Saturnin Sagittarius9° 33’ 41”

Sagittarius Saturn in the Natal Chart brings stability and security through your visionary nature. You are part of a progressive generation. You find ways to […] Read more »

Uranusin Aquarius29° 24’ 7”

Aquarius Uranus in the Natal Chart indicates you are part of a generation born to bring technological breakthroughs and social change. You are part of […] Read more »

Neptunein Cancer28° 7’ 12”

Cancer Neptune in the Natal Chart is a generational placement that impacts people born within fourteen years. You are born to help society awaken to […] Read more »

Plutoin Sagittarius4° 59’ 31”

Pluto in Sagittarius in the Natal Chart makes you part of a generation ready to delve deeper to discover new beliefs. Your generation is fascinated […] Read more »

Ceresin Leo22° 27’ 12”

Ceres in Leo in the Natal Chart is an ideal placement for a generation obsessed with comforting others. You bring excitement and passion into others’ […] Read more »

Chironin Scorpio15° 53’ 7”

Chiron in Scorpio in the Natal Chart makes you eager to gain the power and perspective to conquer your past traumas. Your desire for healing […] Read more »

Erosin Cancer12° 12’ 29”

Cancer Eros in the Natal Chart brings a traditional and plain sexual appetite. You are inhibited sexually, yet you can become more open to expressing […] Read more »

Hygieain Aries19° 14’ 40”

Hygiea in Aries in the Natal Chart makes you passionate about health and wellness. You are health-conscious and have an active, rigorous routine that maintains […] Read more »

Junoin Capricorn17° 29’ 5”

Juno in Capricorn in the Natal Chart makes you a supportive partner. You prioritize your family and work diligently to provide for your loved ones. […] Read more »

Pallasin Virgo2° 22’ 17”

Pallas in Virgo in the Natal Chart makes you sincere and authentic. You speak your mind about health issues and can persuade others to follow […] Read more »

Vestain Gemini4° 37’ 43”

Vesta in Gemini in the Natal Chart makes you talkative and insightful. You are outgoing and can be playful. You find fulfillment by exercising your […] Read more »

Black Moon Lilithin Scorpio19° 36’ 28”

Scorpio Black Moon Lilith in the Natal Chart is passionate about bringing transformation and empowerment. You are hedonistic and seek sexual expression and freedom. You […] Read more »

North Nodein Sagittarius12° 28’ 11”

Sagittarius North Node in the Natal Chart makes you determined and headstrong. You overcome being scattered and develop a passion for your mission. Your destiny […] Read more »

South Nodein Gemini12° 28’ 11”

Gemini South Node in the Natal Chart indicates you have the potential to lead others as a creative and independent thinker. You are comfortable with […] Read more »

Part of Fortunein Aries7° 1’ 12”

Part of Fortune in Aries in the Natal Chart makes you daring and expressive. You can be athletic and use your gifts to inspire others. […] Read more »

Vertexin Pisces9° 40’ 56”

Pisces Vertex in the Natal Chart indicates you are imaginative and driven by a spiritual mission. Your sense of purpose and destiny makes you encouraging […] Read more »

Planets in Elements

Planets in elements denote how the fundamental energies and qualities associated with those planets interact with the elemental nature of the signs they inhabit, shaping an individual’s overall temperament and approach to life.

Water Element

Astrologers and other occultists study the water element to understand emotional healing. This element relates to love and compassion. Numerous planets in water signs in […] Read more »

Air Element

The air element in astrology corresponds to three signs; Gemini, Libra, and Aquarius. This element is associated with new insights and perspectives. The air element […] Read more »

Fire Element

The fire element in astrology is associated with passion and motivation. This element brings creativity and intensifies planets and natal houses. Your competitive nature comes […] Read more »

Earth Element

The earth element in astrology is associated with practicality and grounding. This element is associated with career and wealth. Taurus, Virgo, and Capricorn are signs […] Read more »

Planets in Qualities

Planets in qualities signify how the inherent attributes and tendencies of those planets align with the modalities of the signs they occupy, influencing an individual’s style of action, decision-making, and engagement with the world.

Mutable Quality

The third Quality astrological signs are grouped into is mutable. Mutable Signs come at the end of a season. Mutable Signs are associated with flexibility […] Read more »

Cardinal Quality

The Cardinal quality in astrology is associated with new seasons and initiative. Cardinal signs mark the equinoxes and solstices. The Cardinal modality represents the extremes […] Read more »

Fixed Quality

The second Quality in astrology is the Fixed modality. Fixed Signs follow the Cardinal Signs, bringing strength and endurance. These signs build upon the foundation […] Read more »

Planets in Houses

Planets in a zodiac house signify where in life’s areas and experiences the energies and influences of those planets are predominantly focused and expressed.

Sun Ninth House Moon Fourth House Mercury Tenth House Venus Tenth House Mars Sixth House Jupiter Ninth House Saturn Third House Uranus Sixth House Neptune Eleventh House Pluto Third House Ceres Eleventh House Chiron Third House Eros Tenth House Hygiea Eighth House Juno Fourth House Pallas Twelfth House Vesta Ninth House Black Moon Lilith Third House North Node Third House South Node Ninth House Part of Fortune Seventh House Vertex Sixth House

Aspects

Aspects reveal the dynamic relationships and interactions between planets within a birth chart, influencing the way their energies combine and manifest in an individual’s life experiences and personality traits.

Within this birth chart, there are 23 major aspects, alongside 8 minor aspects, as well as 2 extra aspects.

Major Aspects

Major aspects highlight significant connections between planets, providing insights into key dynamics, challenges, and potentials shaping an individual’s life journey and psychological makeup.

Sun Conjunct Midheaven Moon Sextile Mars Mercury Trine Uranus Venus Sextile Jupiter Mars Square Pluto Uranus Quincunx Neptune Sun Square Ascendant Ascendant Square Midheaven Jupiter Sextile Neptune Venus Sextile Ascendant Jupiter Trine Ascendant Venus Conjunct Neptune Mars Square Saturn Jupiter Square Uranus Moon Sextile Uranus Venus Quincunx Uranus Saturn Conjunct Pluto Mars Conjunct Uranus Uranus Square Pluto Moon Opposite Mercury Mercury Square Ascendant Mercury Trine Mars Neptune Trine Pluto

Explore detailed articles on the major aspects in this birth chart, gaining deeper insights into this cosmic identity. Dive into each aspect and uncover how it shapes Anne Charles Basset Montaigu’s life journey.

Sun Conjunct Midheavenorb: 0°

The Sun conjunct Midheaven makes you outspoken and authentic. You openly share your talents and align your unique abilities with your public status. You are […] Read more »

Moon Sextile Marsorb: 1°

What happens when the Moon is sextile Mars? If you’ve got this aspect in your Natal Chart, you are likely a highly energetic and warm […] Read more »

Venus Sextile Jupiterorb: 1°

Venus sextile Jupiter in a chart typically indicates that a person is generous, kind, and loving. They are optimistic, especially when it comes to their […] Read more »

Uranus Quincunx Neptuneorb: 1°

Uranus quincunx Neptune in a chart creates conflict between Neptune’s idealism and Uranus’ eccentricity. They may feel they are being pulled back and forth by […] Read more »

Sun Square Ascendantorb: 2°

The Sun square Ascendant in the Natal Chart creates friction between your identity and outer appearance. Your first impressions don’t align with your authentic self. […] Read more »

Venus Conjunct Neptuneorb: 4°

Venus conjunct Neptune in the Natal Chart makes you sensitive and romantic. You are empathetic and loving, wearing your heart on your sleeve and making […] Read more »

Moon Sextile Uranusorb: 5°

When the Moon is sextile Uranus in a Natal Chart, this typically means that a person is free-spirited, unique, and a bit rebellious. Someone with […] Read more »

Venus Quincunx Uranusorb: 5°

Venus quincunx Uranus in a chart typically indicates that someone might have commitment issues, even though they often want to have a relationship and eventually […] Read more »

Saturn Conjunct Plutoorb: 5°

Saturn conjunct Pluto in a Natal Chart typically indicates that a person has faced, or will face, some intense hardships. These might be experienced while […] Read more »

Mars Conjunct Uranusorb: 6°

Mars conjunct Uranus in a chart typically brings creativity and a vibrant, attractive energy. People with this conjunction in their Natal Chart are passionate, rebellious, […] Read more »

Moon Opposite Mercuryorb: 7°

Someone with the Moon opposite Mercury in their Natal Chart might feel like they are in a constant tug-of-war between their heart and mind. A […] Read more »

Mercury Trine Marsorb: 7°

Mercury trine Mars in a chart typically means a person is intelligent, confident, and decisive. A person with this trine in their Natal Chart can […] Read more »

Minor Aspects

Minor aspects represent subtler connections between planets, offering additional nuances and layers of interpretation to understand more detailed influences on an individual’s personality and experiences.

Sun Sextile Hygiea Sun Quincunx Black Moon Lilith Moon Quincunx Vesta Hygiea Sextile Midheaven Black Moon Lilith Quincunx Midheaven Saturn Square Vertex Pluto Opposite Vesta Mars Square Vesta

Discover additional layers of meaning with this collection of articles on the minor aspects found in Anne Charles Basset Montaigu’s birth chart. Delve deeper into these cosmic nuances to gain a richer understanding of this astrological profile.

Sun Sextile Hygieaorb: 0°

The Sun sextile Hygiea in the Natal Chart is a minor aspect, but it can bring heightened attention to hygiene and cleaning routines. You are […] Read more »

Black Moon Lilith Quincunx Midheavenorb: 0°

Black Moon Lilith quincunx the Midheaven in the Natal Chart makes you insecure about your career path. You hide dissatisfaction with your career and stifle […] Read more »

Extra Aspects

Extra aspects, though less emphasized than major or minor aspects, contribute subtle nuances and intricacies to the overall astrological interpretation, offering additional insights into an individual’s personality traits and life experiences.

Eros Quincunx North Node Hygiea Quincunx Black Moon Lilith

Explore how these extra aspects contribute to the intricate tapestry of Anne Charles Basset Montaigu’s life path through subtler influences. Dive into each extra aspect and uncover the hidden gems that shape a unique cosmic identity.

Houses

A house starting in a zodiac sign indicates the area of life where the qualities and themes of that sign are particularly emphasized and influential within an individual’s birth chart.