The Recording Industry Association of Japan (RIAJ) has announced its latest batch of official certifications!

In 2020, the RIAJ implemented a new certification system for online streaming of songs, as an addition to its pre-existing certification systems for physical album shipments and digital download sales. According to the new system, songs are certified silver once they reach 30 million streams, gold at 50 million streams, and platinum at 100 million streams.

In the RIAJ’s newly announced batch of certifications, NewJeans’ 2022 hit “Ditto” became their first song ever to go double platinum in Japan after surpassing 200 million streams.

Meanwhile, TWICE received no less than three separate RIAJ certifications for streaming this month.

The group’s 2018 summer smash “Dance the Night Away” was certified platinum for reaching 100 million streams in Japan alone, while their more recent Korean track “SET ME FREE” and their Japanese title track “Hare Hare” were both certified gold after surpassing 50 million streams each.

Congratulations to both NewJeans and TWICE!

Watch NewJeans’ variety show “NewJeans Code in Busan” with subtitles on Viki below:

Watch Now

Source (1)

What are Cookies?

When you visit any web site, it may store or retrieve information on your browser, mostly in the form of cookies. This information might be about you, your preferences or your device and is mostly used to make the site work as you expect it to. The information does not usually directly identify you, but it can give you a more personalised web experience. Because we respect your right to privacy, you can choose not to allow some types of cookies. Click on the different category headings to find out more and change our default settings. However, blocking some types of cookies may impact your experience of the site and the services we are able to offer.

Always on

Site Functionality Cookies

We use cookies to provide you with the features and intended user experience of the Sites (e.g. these cookies can help Us with keeping track of user preferences). We use cookies to enable our security features and to help Us detect activities that violate our policies (e.g. these cookies can help Us prevent spam). We use cookies to verify your account and personalize your experience (e.g. these cookies can help Us keep you logged in as you navigate between Site pages).

Performance, Analytics and Research

We use cookies to collect information on how the Sites are used and to report on the Sites usage statistics for the improvement of Our services (e.g. these cookies can help Us count visits, page views, traffic sources, and better understand how you and other users use Our Sites, and identify features that could be improved).

Social Media

We use cookies that are set by a range of social media services that We have added to Our Sites to enable you to share Our content with your friends and networks. They are capable of tracking your browser across other sites. This may impact the content and messages you see on other websites you visit (e.g. these cookies can help the social media services up a profile of your interests).

Advertising and Remarketing

We and our advertising partners may collect information using cookies to help make the advertising you see on the Sites and elsewhere on the internet more relevant to you, and to measure the effectiveness of the advertising on the Sites (e.g. these cookies can help Us and our advertising partners show you useful and relevant ads more effectively).