Eric Bartholomew's mother, Sadie, took on waitressing work to pay for her young son's dance lessons. He did not appreciate the classes, but they stood him in good stead later as one half of Britain's most successful light entertainment act: Morecambe and Wise.

This summer the angular, oddly graceful form of Eric Morecambe, as he became known, will be portrayed on the stage in the first play to tell the story of his life and long show business career.

The new play, Morecambe, focuses on little known details of the comedian's struggle to the top, but will also celebrate the eccentric wit that established Morecambe as a household name in the 1960s and saw him voted, more than 30 years later, as the funniest British star of the 20th century - ahead of Tommy Cooper and John Cleese. "The fact people are still interested in Eric, 25 years after his death, shows what kind of a performer he was," said William Cook, author of the books Eric Morecambe Unseen and Morecambe and Wise Untold

The Morecambe family have allowed the playwright Tim Withnall to use an emotional letter written to the 21-year-old Eric by his devoted mother. In an uncanny turn of phrase, she wishes her son "sunshine", well before the song "Bring Me Sunshine" had become one of the double act's theme tunes.

Throughout adult life, Morecambe battled poor health and suffered a series of heart attacks. During the war, he had been conscripted to serve in the mines, as a so-called Bevin Boy, and many of his medical problems stemmed from this time. He made no concessions to his ill-health in his time as an entertainer, though, and he and his comic partner, Ernie Wise, continued to perform taxing routines on their television shows.

"The Bevin Boy stuff knocked him out, as it would have done anyone. And it was hard for him doing the rounds as a performer in his early career," said Cook, who believes the slow rise to fame was key to the wide appeal of Morecambe and Wise. "The fact that it took so long to get to the top is part of what made them special. A lot of their material was sending up the corny acts they had seen when they were bottom of the bill."

Morecambe's widow, Joan Bartholomew, told Cook she did not notice her husband become famous because it happened so gradually. Morecambe will be played by Bob Golding, who was picked for the role by the director, Guy Masterson, best known for his hit production of Twelve Angry Men and for directing the comics Bill Bailey and Alan Davies in The Odd Couple. Golding, 39, says he feels honoured to take the part. "The play goes right back to when Eric was 10. There were some tough times and people forget that. When the double act first came to television, it was panned by the critics," he said. One newspaper review infamously suggested that the new definition of television was: "the box in which they buried Morecambe and Wise". By the late 1960s, their shows were the most popular on television, but Morecambe always kept a cutting of the review in his wallet.

Withnall believes Morecambe was almost telepathically connected to Wise because they had worked together so long. "I know they did not socialise much, but they didn't need to," he said. "They spent 43 years together and were totally attuned to each other as partners."

In 2001 a hit West End show, The Play What I Wrote, paid tribute to the double act. Each performance featured a different celebrity guest, including Kylie Minogue, but the characters of Morecambe and Wise did not appear. Morecambe will have its premiere at Edinburgh in August.

Playing the fool

Kenneth Williams

The comic actor was played by Michael Sheen in the 2006 BBC4 drama Fantabulosa! He was also portrayed by Robin Sebastian in the West End revivals Round the Horne Revisited and, earlier this year, Stop Messing About!

Tommy Cooper

The fez-wearing, incompetent magician was played on tour from 2003 by actor Jerome Flynn, of Robson and Jerome fame, in Jus' Like That!

Tony Hancock

The lugubrious comic was played last year by Ken Stott in the BBC4 drama Hancock & Joan and by Alfred Molina in BBC1's 1991 production, Hancock

Frankie Howerd

He was played last year by David Walliams in the BBC4 biography Rather You Than Me.