Wondering where to head for your next European city break? Been there, done that in London, Venice, Paris and Rome? Already seen the sights of Split and Dubrovnik? Then you might be in the market to make Pula your next city break. Laidback and cosmopolitan, Pula is home to some impressive Roman ruins, and retains a refreshing sense of authenticity. It's also the ideal base from which to explore Istria — an awe-inspiring area of Venetian towns, olive groves and forests. Read on to find out more.

What to see in Pula, Croatia

Pula’s hands-down highlight is its first-century Roman amphitheatre. Boasting imposing outer walls that are second only to Rome’s Colosseum, it plays host to a huge range of events through the summer months.

Beyond the ampitheatre, Pula's old-town streets present a fascinating mix of styles. Here Byzantine chapels sit shoulder to shoulder with elegant Venetian townhouses and handsome Hapsburg palaces.

Meanwhile, graceful Roman ruins stand in the Forum. Pula’s main square for over 2000 years, this is one of several ancient sites involved in Pula's annual Spectacvla Antiqva. Look out for the tall Corinthian columns, and the Temple of Augustus.

Editor's tip: new to this part of the world? Read our tips for first-timers to Croatia.

Where are the best beaches in Pula?

Done the antiquities? Hire a bike and head to the forested Verudela peninsula. It's just five kilometres south of Pula.

Here you'll find a series of white-pebble Adriatic beaches that are just as popular with locals as tourists.

Look for the Holy Rock at the peninsula’s western tip. It's a dreamy vantage point for sunsets, and great for dolphin spotting, too.

Longing for a beach break? Be inspired by Croatia's best.

What to do in Pula, Croatia

Need a stretch of beach all to yourself? Hop a ferry at nearby Fažana and sail to Veli Brijun. This is the Brijuni archipelago's main island. Protected as a national park, it's ringed by a pristine coastline and boasts blissfully clear waters.

History buffs, note that the Brijuni islands have links to Josip Broz Tito, former President of the Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia. There's even a "Tito on Brijuni" photo exhibition at Veli Brijun’s ferry dock, with images of Tito entertaining everyone from Fidel Castro to Sophia Loren.

Beyond its beach and Tito connections, Veli Brijun also has Roman ruins, and splendid cycling routes and forest trails.

Want more Croatia inspiration? Browse our customisable Croatia itineraries,or talk to a local expert.

What to eat and drink in Pula

Istrian food

If you're into food, there's pretty much no question that Pula should be your next city break. Great local produce and a strong Venetian influence make eating in Pula an utter joy.

First up, Istrian truffles are famously rich and moreish — try them simply grated over pasta.

Secondly, Istria is the top olive oil producer in the world, with the oil created here noted for having a warm, spicy kick. Long-living locals swear by enjoying a daily spoonful of the stuff.

In addition, local chefs claim Istrian waters are home to Croatia's densest concentration of seafood.

Typical dishes around these parts include brodet sa palentom (fish stew with polenta) and stuffed squid and crni rižoto (risotto with cuttlefish ink).

Crazy about uncovering cuisine on your travels? Discover Croatia's best foodie experiences.

Istrian wines

Istrian wines range from crisp Malvazija whites to rich Terrano reds. We recommend pulling up a stool at Brajda wine bar and working your way through the 40 plus tasting menu.

Love your grub? You'll find tasty food for thought in our customisable Culinary Secrets of Croatia trip, and our multi-country Gourmet Tour.