Ysgol John Bright is an exceptional school filled with young people who are gifted, inspiring, talented, and caring. We understand that every child is an individual and as such requires individual learning, care, and guidance to enable them to thrive.

We want every student to feel that they belong, are learning new information, developing new skills and benefiting from new experiences. Underpinning all we do are our core values of equity, well-being, and excellence. We consider these to be our priorities in how we provide for our students and develop our committed staff.

As a school community, we are justifiably proud of our students and their success. We extend a warm welcome to you to Ysgol John Bright and look forward to sharing your child’s journey toward a successful future.

Ysgol John Bright is situated in the heart of the North Wales resort town of Llandudno. It is the only English medium high school to serve the town and its hinterland. The school is named after the Victorian radical politician John Bright who came to the town for respite and whose young son was buried here. After almost one hundred years the school had outgrown its previous premises and in September 2004 the new school opened on a 25 acre site with excellent facilities. It was built as part of a PFI project and a facilities management company handles caretaking, cleaning and catering.

Ysgol John Bright is situated in the heart of the North Wales resort town of Llandudno. It is the only English medium high school to serve the town and its hinterland.

High expectations and inspirational teaching and learning are central to my educational beliefs. The working world is becoming increasingly demanding and competitive and young people need to be even more prepared and qualified for future progression. The school has a very strong platform with which it can continue to improve. The Estyn judgement last November was very positive and results this summer have continued the trend of improvement so there is much to celebrate.

Road and rail links along the North Wales coast are excellent and in one hour or less you can be in Chester, Liverpool, Manchester airport, the Holyhead ferry port to Ireland or within the grandeur of the Snowdonia National Park and its mountains.

The school is named after the Victorian radical politician John Bright who came to the town for respite and whose young son was buried here. After almost one hundred years the school had outgrown its previous premises and in September 2004 the new school opened on a 25 acre site with excellent facilities. It was built as part of a PFI project and a facilities management company handles caretaking, cleaning and catering.

Ysgol John Bright has a very varied catchment area. There are nine designated primaries which range in size and type. We serve two of the most deprived wards and two of the most prosperous wards in the town. Indeed inspectors have previously described us as a “truly comprehensive school”.

Our Vision: