Inspectors recognise outstanding curriculum provision in new Ysgol John Bright inspection report

A newly published inspection report shines a light on the excellent work of Ysgol John Bright, Llandudno. Following an inspection by ESTYN (Education and Training Inspectorate for Wales) in November, the school has been described as “ a supportive community of learning where leaders and staff encourage all learners to reach both their academic potential and personal goals. “

The breadth of the school’s curriculum is singled out as a notable strength; as a result YJB has been invited to prepare a case study to be shared with other schools across Wales. This recognises the impact of the wide range of courses on offer in years 10-13 and the school’s work to engage students and raise aspirations of all.

Inspectors considered the school to be “a community that celebrates diversity, encourages individuality and welcomes all.” The positive working environment within classrooms, student behaviour and the strong care and support were all praised in the report. The progress of students with additional learning needs was noted as a strength in the report, as well as the culture of safeguarding that enables all students to thrive.

Someone who experiences the great provision at YJB day in and day out is year 10 student Tilly, who said '”My lessons are enjoyable and fun and my teachers are always happy to help me and give me feedback that helps me improve. I am an active member of the Senedd (school council) and I really like that we've been able to influence some of the changes the school has put in place to improve things for students.”

Headteacher, Hywel Parry, commented “To be recognised for the strengths in our teaching, care and support, curriculum, safeguarding and leadership is a remarkable achievement. It gives public recognition to the dedication of our staff who ensure the best possible support and outcomes for all of our students”

Chair of Governors Carla Forfar echoed these comments “I am delighted that the hard work of the whole school community, students, staff and governors has been recognised and validated by Estyn”

Families of learners in primary schools across the area are encouraged to visit the us to see for yourselves our exceptional community of learning. Those in year 11 currently considering their next steps will receive a warm welcome at our sixth form open evening on Tuesday, February 6th.