Ysgol John Bright Sixth Form is extremely proud of its students' achievements.

Staff and students alike take great delight, in particular, in the fact that the sixth form's A-level outcomes have, for the past five years, rightfully placed them in the top 10-25% of schools in the UK.

“Aspirations are usually limited, or liberated, by expectations; people will usually do what we expect of them. As such, we need to make sure that we expect great things of our students and enable them to achieve these things," said Chris Davies, head of sixth form at Ysgol John Bright.

With 41% of grades in 2023 being A*/A and 65% of grades being A*-B, students’ attainment is significantly above the national average and is better than private schools in the region.

The school works effectively in partnership with Oxford University on a project to raise the aspirations of pupils in the sixth form. Staff believe that equity, wellbeing and excellence are the cornerstones of a quality education and try to live by these core values in all that they do:

Not all students are afforded the same privileges in life, so the job of the sixth form is to make sure students get the personalised support and the experiences they need in order to reach their full potential

Good mental and physical well-being is underpinned by good pastoral support from a well-trained and experienced sixth form team

Excellence in everything they do, collectively as students and staff, is a fundamental priority for all in this sixth form

Above all else, sixth form should be a happy time where students grow from dependence on the support necessary in childhood to the independence required in adulthood. The sixth form looks forward to helping you find out who you are, where your talents lie and how to craft a successful future for yourself in an ever-changing world.

In November 2023, Estyn, the education and training inspectorate for Wales, reported: “Sixth form pupils are excellent ambassadors of the school…they are mature, sensible and well-spoken young people who take substantial responsibility for their academic and personal development.”

Whilst staff are proud of their track record of sending around two thirds of students to university, many to Russell Group, they are just as proud of those who choose to start their own businesses, enter the world of work or embark on an apprenticeship. 92% of those

applying to university secured a place at their first choice, which is 20% higher than the national average.

Growing independence through providing leadership opportunities is important to Ysgol John Bright. Through joining one of ten student committees, you will have the chance to make a significant contribution to school improvement and grow your skills of communication and project management.

Staff expect you to be active citizens at the school, making a wider contribution to school life through volunteering and representing Ysgol John Bright in all parts of school life.

"There are ample opportunities for pupils to develop their communication and leadership skills and this is a notable strength of the school," the Estyn report continued. “Effective transition arrangements enable pupils to settle well when they join Ysgol John Bright and in their integration into sixth form or further study.

“Staff in Ysgol John Bright ensure that supporting and nurturing pupils is at the heart of all their work. Leaders have created an inclusive and caring environment where most pupils are proud to be part of a community that celebrates diversity, encourages individuality and welcomes all.”

In joining Ysgol John Bright, you can expect a comprehensive enrolment and induction programme to help you settle in quickly.

The ambition is that the sixth form cements its growing reputation as a centre of excellence in the region, where students can be sure that, because of its high expectations, broad curriculum and outstanding pastoral support, that they will go on to achieve extraordinary things whoever they are, and whatever the barriers they may face along the way.