Lane College, located in Jackson, Tennessee on approximately 55 acres, is a small, private, co-educational, church-related institution that provides a liberal arts curriculum leading to baccalaureate degrees in the Arts and Sciences.The College admits persons regardless of color, gender, religion or national origin.

The future of Lane is intimately tied to its historic past. The College was founded by individuals who were committed to assuring that newly freed slaves would be able to "read, write, and speak correctly." The vocational goals of the first students to enroll at the College were in the areas of teaching and preaching. It was the view of the founders that neither group would be able to influence the more learned individuals in society unless they had academic, spiritual, cultural, and economic qualifications that were equal to their counterparts.

Lane College played a significant role in reducing the rate of illiteracy among blacks in the South in fewer than fifty years. The pool of Lane College graduates has expanded to include alumni who have entered a multitude of professional disciplines. The College is confident in its future because of its exceptional progress — due in large measure to the advocacy and commitment of its faculty and staff, alumni and friends — all of whom have supported an ambitious agenda of high academic standards, robust support services, new capital improvements, strong financial management, and strict administrative accountability.

While Lane enjoys the solid advantages accruing from a 133-year tradition of educational progress, the College is more confident in its future than ever before. The faculty and staff, under the leadership of President Logan Hampton, have employed a collaborative approach to establishing a revived culture of student-centered, technology-enhanced teaching and learning. This involves viewing students as clients, life-long learners and future leaders, and viewing faculty as life-long learning facilitators who utilize technology as an integral part of the teaching and learning process.

With strong ties to the Christian Methodist Episcopal Church, the College’s Mission is to develop the “whole student.”Academic excellence is the institution‘s top priority, and it is achieved through a student-centered and nurturing approach to learning supported by excellent teaching, teaching-related research, and service. The College believes that one’s intellectual capability coupled with social and spiritual growth is essential to the development of a well-rounded individual. In keeping with this Mission, the College offers creative and enriching academic programs to prepare students for their chosen careers; and encourages active student engagement to cultivate life-long learning.

Lane College provides a liberal arts curriculum leading to baccalaureate degrees in the Arts and Sciences.The College accepts persons regardless of race, color, gender, religion, age, or national origin.

Lane College guides students through programs of intellectual experiences that enable them to identify and develop their Power of Potential ® to meet the demands of decision-making situations through thoughtful, rational, and creative thinking. Students are exhorted to continuously pursue their potential by becoming lifelong learners.

Lane College develops the “whole student.” The College fosters academic excellence. The College is also concerned about the student’s spiritual, social, and ethical development. The College believes that spiritual growth is an important part of the development of the individual. Spiritual life at the College is viewed as a quality-filled experience rather than a specific and narrow range of separate activities. Spiritual programs of learning, worshipping, and service have the purpose of illuminating life and making life more meaningful.

Students are encouraged and assisted in developing inner strengths and resources needed to follow through and complete tasks, fulfill responsibilities, and live by a workable system of values. The College seeks to help all students achieve self-discipline.

Lane College offers a balanced liberal education and seeks to continue adding to the variety of its curricular offerings in order to become even more innovative in organization and methodology and continue to develop the mature, educated individuals needed in an ever-changing society.

Lane College is grounded in the belief that improvement is a life-long endeavor. Furthermore, it believes democratic participation in American society in an intellectual manner is designed to improve society and its members’ opportunities.In a world of continuous change, the College offers programs that develop the attitudes and understandings necessary for leadership and effective participation in a democratic society. The College helps its students become open-minded and tolerant while developing sensitivity for, and commitment to, ways of improving the human condition.

The mission of Academic Affairs is to prepare students upon graduation to compete successfully with their counterparts from other institutions of higher learning, and, at the same time, to exhibit characteristics of the ideal Lane College graduate through each student. The area of Academic Affairs is dedicated to providing an academic environment which is sensitive and nurturing, as well as to challenge the student to achieve new levels of excellence. This is done with primary emphasis on excellent teaching and advising, an enriching curriculum, and an exemplary Academic Support Services.Academic Affairs also proactively endorses the rituals, the traditions, and the overall Mission of the College.

In 1882, one of the nation’s early Black Church denominations founded what has since evolved into Lane College. Now referred to as The Christian Methodist Episcopal (CME) Church, the organization was originally named the Colored Methodist Episcopal (CME) Church in America when it formed in 1870. Among its top priorities was the establishment of schools to educate the newly freed Negroes following the Civil War. This enterprise of building a school in Tennessee was conceived as early as November 1878 at the CME denomination’s Tennessee Annual Conference. The CME church’s first Bishop, William H. Miles, presided over the meeting which convened at the old Capers Chapel CME Church in Nashville, Tennessee. A most pivotal moment of the conference occurred when Reverend J.K. Daniels presented a resolution to establish a Tennessee school. Amid much applause, the resolution was adopted, and a committee was appointed to solicit means to purchase a site. Reverends C.H. Lee, J.H. Ridley, Sandy Rivers, Barry Smith, and J. K. Daniels constituted this committee.

From its humble beginnings, Lane College has been a source of inspiration for countless numbers of youth and adults throughout this nation. Today, it stands as a symbol of Christian education for persons of all faiths, creeds, colors, and nationalities.