Normal weather for Yekaterinburg in September

It's cool to moderate in September in Yekaterinburg with an average temperature of 16°C. Temperatures this month range from a low of 10°C to a high of 20°C. At night, you can expect temperatures between 2°C and 9°C.

In September, there is an average of 16 mm of precipitation, spread over 13 days days. Of the total precipitation, about 1,0 cm falls as snow in September. The wind speed is around 4 Bft, mostly coming from the Southwest.

The UV index is a maximum of 5 this month. That's a moderate value on the intensity scale of 1 to 11. Unprotected skin can burn in about 30 minutes.

The highest recorded temperature on September in recent years was 29°C in 2015. The lowest daytime temperature on this day was 1°C in 2022. The extreme night temperatures ranged from a low of -8°C to a high of 15°C.

Want sun and warm weather? September isn’t a good month to visit Yekaterinburg. The temperature is too low for a warm stay this month.

Check out the climate of Yekaterinburg for all months and discover the best travel time

Average daily weather in September

Click on a day for more details about the average weather on that day in September.

Daily Temperature in September in Yekaterinburg

This chart shows the average daily high temperatures in September in Yekaterinburg, measured in degrees Celsius. The bottom of the chart shows the days of September. Based on historical data, it shows the average daily temperatures for this month.

Daily Rainfall in September in Yekaterinburg

This chart shows the average daily rainfall in September for Yekaterinburg, measured in millimetres over the past years. Rainfall is always measured as water, even if it’s snow or hail. The bottom of the chart shows the days of September. Based on historical data, this chart gives an idea of how much rain you can expect each day.

Daily Snowfall in September in Yekaterinburg

This chart shows the average daily snowfall in September in Yekaterinburg, measured in centimetres. The bottom of the chart shows the days of the month. The data is based on historical measurements and gives an idea of the average snowfall in September.

Daily UV Index in September in Yekaterinburg

This chart shows the average daily UV index in September in Yekaterinburg, with the UV index ranging from 0 to a maximum of 11. The bottom of the chart shows the days of the month. Based on historical data, this chart provides an idea of the daily UV radiation levels you can expect.

Temperature in September in Yekaterinburg Over the Years

This chart shows the average temperature in September in Yekaterinburg, measured in degrees Celsius, over the past years.

Total Rainfall in September in Yekaterinburg Over the Years

This chart shows the average rainfall in September in Yekaterinburg, measured in millimetres over the past years. Rainfall is always measured as water, even if it’s snow or hail.

Snowfall in September in Yekaterinburg per year

This chart shows the average snowfall in September in Yekaterinburg, measured in centimetres, over the past years.

Weather experiences in September in Yekaterinburg

Have you been to Yekaterinburg in September?

Share your weather experience in September in Yekaterinburg.

When were you here?

How was the weather?

Describe your weather experiences:

What's your name?

What's your email?

Your email will not be shown in the review and will not be shared with others.

Average Weather in Yekaterinburg by Month

Click on a month below to see detailed weather info for Yekaterinburg. Based on historical weather data, you can see the average temperature, rainfall, wind, and UV index for each day of the month.

Or check out the climate of Yekaterinburg for all months at once