Sochi dwellers get to enjoy the last warm days on the Black Sea coast, while, in Moscow and Kazan, the late fall begins. But, over by the Urals, winter has already arrived.

Happy first snow! Brrr!

Residents of Yekaterinburg saw the first snow back on September 26, although it usually starts snowing in the Urals in early October.

In Siberian cities, the first snow usually begins in the second half of September and, by November, it is well and truly winter. However, real frosts come later.

In Novosibirsk, the first snow fell on September 28.

In Bratsk, Irkutsk Region, it also fell on September 28.

The first snow has already surprised residents of Kemerovo and Krasnoyarsk (southern Siberia), some areas of Yakutia (Far East), Murmansk (North) and even Bashkiria and Kostroma Region (central Russia).

In the mountainous regions of Altai (Siberia), fresh snow fell back in mid-August. But, in general, last year’s snow is still there.

Many parts of the Russian Arctic also have snow left over from the previous year. Additionally, it was quite snowy in Chukotka even in August.

What about Moscow and St. Petersburg?

There is a traditional Russian holiday called ‘Pokrov Day’ on October 14.

The Russian Orthodox Church celebrates the Intercession of the Holy Virgin on this day and, in Slavic beliefs, it is interpreted as the day of the meeting of fall and winter. And, often, the first snow is noticed in mid-October. However, this is more relevant to the central part of Russia.

Below is the first snow in the town of Kineshma.

In Moscow, snow falls most often at the end of October, but quickly melts. The permanent snow only starts to cover Moscow in December.

In St. Petersburg, snow falls in November and winters there are usually without hard frosts. But with a lot of icy cold rain. However, the winter of 2021 was very snowy!

Waiting for winter

In the Far East (Vladivostok, Yuzhno-Sakhalinsk, Petropavlovsk-Kamchatsky) locals enjoy the first snow in November.

But, in the southern cities of Russia, the first snow falls closer to the end of December, sometimes as late as January. And, in some years, it may not fall at all, but we can’t say that the locals are too upset. Well, palm trees in the snow is a very unusual thing to see.

But when does winter end in Russia, you ask? Well, find out here!

Dear readers,

Our website and social media accounts are under threat of being restricted or banned, due to the current circumstances. So, to keep up with our latest content, simply do the following:

Subscribe to our Telegram channels: Russia Beyond and The Russian Kitchen

Subscribe to our weekly email newsletter

Enable push notifications on our website

Install a VPN service on your computer and/or phone to have access to our website, even if it is blocked in your country

If using any of Russia Beyond's content, partly or in full, always provide an active hyperlink to the original material.