The Breath of Suspension

Alexander Jablokov. Arkham House Publishers, $20.95 (318pp) ISBN 978-0-87054-167-4

These 10 short stories by Jablokov ( Carve the Sky ) won't be new to most SF devotees, since versions of each have appeared in Isaac Asimov's Science Fiction Magazine over the past nine years. But reading them together is an exciting experience. Tales of widely differing lengths address various alternative near futures. All share a reverence for myth and remembrance, from the title story, about an ancient and ambivalent monk whose patron saint is the never-dying astronaut blasting away from Earth at light speed, to the tale of a lunatic dolphin messiah ``swimming'' through the atmosphere of Jupiter (``A Deeper Sea''). A 20th-century mathematician in the early stages of Alzheimer's imprints his personality, with its moral qualms and aesthetic indulgences, on a computer so that it may remember his values and survive his dissolution (``Living Will''). In a comic vein, interstellar time-travelers track down ``Religion Pushers'' by jaunting through the centuries in pursuit of an Artifact Junkie (``Many Mansions''). And in yet another universe, trench warfare continues in France for much of the 20th century as soldiers refuse to give up combat (``Beneath the Shadow of Her Smile''). Jablokov's canvas is broad, but through it all there runs a tint of lyricism and a regard for mind and spirit that could extend the collection's appeal. (July)

close

Details

Reviewed on: 05/02/1994

Genre: Fiction

Mass Market Paperbound - 343 pages - 978-0-380-72680-6

Amazon

Apple Books

Barnes & Noble

Bookshop

Share

Tweet

Copy Link

Print

More By and About this Authorchevron_right

Lucius Shepard

A lethargic Louisiana backwater with roots sunk deep in supernatural legend provides an atmospheric backdrop for this sultry tale of bayou hoodoo and doomed love. Every 20 years, in obeisance to a Continue reading »

Dominick Cancilla

Cancilla's haphazardly plotted first novel reads like an extract from a larger, more coherent work. Coalchester, Calif., has a dark secret: more than a century before, the leader of a wagon Continue reading »

Bradley Denton

When a videotape catches meek college teacher Danny Clayton uncontrollably laughing after a terrorist massacre in Denton's provocative new novel, Danny becomes a reviled celebrity: Continue reading »

Tim Powers

In this taut, eerie novella from Powers (Three Days to Never ), used-book hunter George Sydney finds he can summon a beautiful poet when he discovers a signed Continue reading »

Connie Willis

Some high school kids would do anything to be an IASA space cadet, but not Theodora Baumgarten in Willis's cheerfully tongue-in-cheek SF novella. "There's no air, you're squashed Continue reading »

James P. Blaylock

Long recognized as a master of steampunk fiction, Blaylock (The Man in the Moon ) collects four short stories and two novels featuring indefatigable and Continue reading »

Kage Baker

This steampunk novella, set in 1844 London, follows the exploits of the harlots of the exclusive establishment known as Nell Gwynne’s, where they gather intelligence for the shadowy Continue reading »

James P. Blaylock

Explorer-scientist Langdon St. Ives and narrator Jack Owlesby (familiar from 2008'sThe Adventures of Langdon St. Ives ) embark upon a new steampunk Continue reading »

James P. Blaylock

Blaylock ( The Paper Grail ) returns to the Victorian setting of his award-winning novel Homunculus in this tale of obsessive grief, time travel, mad scientists and gentlemanly adventure. The first Continue reading »

John Kessel

Kessel is hardly prolific--since 1980 he has produced perhaps two dozen short stories, written one novel ( Good News from Outer Space ) and coauthored another ( Freedom Beach , with James Patrick Continue reading »

Robert Silverberg and Lucius Shepard headline this above-average anthology of five short fantasy stories. Silverberg's ""The Prisoner"" is an effective exploration of Twilight Zone themes; his Continue reading »

Poppy Z. Brite, Popy Z. Brite

Like the aging Elvis who succumbs to self-destructive indulgences in the title tale, the 12 stories in this collection of transgressive fictions are adrift in a sea of excess. Cannibal zombies, Continue reading »

Dennis Etchison

HThis collection of a dozen short stories explores the disturbingDand usually urban, Southern CalifornianDterrain of what really scares us: not serial killers and vampires, but loss of identity, the Continue reading »

Clive Barker

Published last year in Britain as three paperback originals, these short narratives garnered impressive reviews. This edition, Barker's first hardcover appearance in America, gathers together 16 Continue reading »

Ramsey Campbell

Etchison is one of our best horror short story writers, achieving his chilling effects by weaving together almost disparate sinister elements: a barely heard sound, the look of a street, a memory. Continue reading »

Ramsey Campbell

The marrow-chilling tales in this comprehensive, chronologically arranged collection, selected from Campbell's 30-year career, demonstrate the ways this sophisticated British writer inspires fear Continue reading »

Kage Baker, Kathleen Bartholomew

Even a month-long seaside holiday can’t keep the spy-mistresses of the exclusive Nell Gwynne brothel away from trouble in this comic steampunk novella. This time trouble arrives in the form of Continue reading »

Tim Powers

A rare book dealer and a forgotten beat poet save the world in this charming time-travel tale from liminal fantasist Powers (Hide Me Among the Graves). As far as Richard Blanzac is concerned, the Continue reading »

James P. Blaylock

Blaylock’s usual steampunk hero, Langdon St. Ives (last seen in The Aylesford Skull), plays only a minor role in a Caribbean expedition led by Gilbert Frobisher to retrieve a fortune’s worth Continue reading »

Tim Powers

Powers builds on his 1983 novel The Anubis Gates with this novella of Victorian ghosts and vengeance. Harriet is beset by her dead husband’s ghost, which is trying to kill her. She’s rescued Continue reading »

James P. Blaylock

Steampunk pioneer Blaylock returns to Victorian England with this compendium of five novellas (three previously published) starring his titular scientist-adventurer and detailing St. Ives’s battles Continue reading »

Alexander Jablokov

Serial-killer murder mystery, artificial intelligence bildungsroman, a celebration of Americana diner schtick-Jablokov's return to science fiction after a decade-long absence is all of these and Continue reading »

Alexander Jablokov

In the 21st century, our solar system has been radically transformed by the presence of 11 different alien races. Some have come to colonize, others to trade and still others for reasons too Continue reading »

Alexander Jablokov, Alexander Tabbolka

Jablokov's first novel is a stellar performance that places him squarely in the first circle of science fiction authors. Anton Lindgren, seneschal for Lord Monboddo and lieutenant of internal Continue reading »

Alexander Jablokov, Alexander Tabbolka

This stellar performance by Jablokov features espionage, cult religions, interplanetary war and a 24th-century protagonist's search for a priceless treasure. Continue reading »

Alexander Jablokov

The author of A Deeper Sea keeps readers glued to the page while also providing some thought-provoking ideas in a tale of intrigue set in the near future. Brain modification has become as common as Continue reading »

PW EDITORS’ PICKS FOR

THE BEST NEW BOOKS

PW EDITORS’ PICKS FOR THE BEST NEW BOOKS