SHE conquered Hollywood had three marriages and dated film stars including Yul Brynner, Anthony Quinn and Laurence Olivier.

But British actress Claire Bloom has finally hinted her most passionate feelings were for Welsh actor Richard Burton.

Describing her love for the Port Talbot-born star in an interview this week in the Big Issue, Bloom – best known for her role in Brideshead Revisited – said: “I was very naïve about romantic relationships.

“But I did have one wonderful relationship, with Richard Burton, and it went on for many years. But he was married so he wasn’t mine.

“I first met him when I was 18. He was 24, just out of Wales. He was just a boy.

“I played the young girl opposite his young boy. There was an immediate bond between us.”

Bloom and Burton met on the set of the West End play The Lady’s Not for Burning.

At the time, Burton was married to his first wife Sybil, but Bloom described him as “an extraordinarily beautiful young man – certain of his powers and sure of his sexual self”.

Bloom added she found Burton “hypnotic”.

She later explained: “It was partly due to the mesmerising beauty of his eyes but also a quality he had that was quite indefinable and that I have never seen in any other face.”

The pair had a platonic friendship after their first meeting but four years later, at the age of 22, while playing Ophelia to his Hamlet at the Old Vic, they embarked on an affair.

She said: “’We made love quietly in my room – with my mother sleeping upstairs.”

Bloom was married firstly to actor Rod Steiger, who she divorced in 1969, in the same year marrying producer Hillard Elkins.

The couple divorced in 1972.

Bloom’s third marriage in April 1990, was to writer Philip Roth. The couple divorced in 1995.

Steiger first met Bloom on the tour of The Lady’s Not For Burning and even he noticed the chemistry between the woman who would become his wife and Welsh lothario Burton.

Steiger, who died in 2002 later recalled: “That voice of his – well that would seduce any woman.

“They didn’t touch and he was only just married. I don’t know what he was looking for but they fell in love on that tour.”

After the beginning of Bloom’s affair with Burton at the Old Vic, the pair had an on-off romance which lasted around five years.

But in 1958, during the screen version of John Osborne’s Look Back In Anger, in which they co-starred, their romance died.

Bloom suspected Burton of having affairs with other women.

She said: “This suspicion proved only too well-founded when I opened his door one day without waiting to knock.”

She found the Welsh star passionately kissing the American actress Susan Strasberg, seven years her junior.

Bloom said: “’I was left with a profound sense of loss, panic and humiliation. We never said goodbye, but parted on terms of mutual animosity.”

Seven years later in 1965 Bloom, now 81, endured an off-putting experience with Burton’s new wife Liz Taylor when she was reunited with her former lover on the set of the movie The Spy Who Came In From The Cold.

She said: “Things had changed enormously. He was 40 by then and married to Elizabeth. He was very nervous of her thinking he was in any way interested in me, which he wasn’t.

“She’d sit on the steps and watch like a vulture and then there was this terrible voice, saying, ‘Richard!’ And he’d go running to her. The situation was difficult.

“The other thing was that he’d really begun to drink. He’d always drunk but he began to show it so there was a slight trembling of hands until he got his first brandy in his coffee. “He wasn’t the strong miner’s son I’d known. I had the best of him – I knew him when he was young and pure-hearted.’

Burton died in 1984 of a cerebral haemorrhage.