Regent University, founded in 1978 as CBN University by Pat Robertson, founder and president of the Christian Broadcasting Network (CBN), became Regent University in January 1990. Regent has campuses in Virginia Beach, Virginia, and Washington, D.C. campus near the Potomac River. [1]

The first class began in 1978 and the first class graduated in May 1980. In the fall of 2000, Regent introduced an undergraduate degree-completion program "to give working adults opportunities to complete bachelor's degrees in an accelerated format." [2]

Regent University, which bills itself as the nation's academic center for Christian thought and action, states on its website that it is a "graduate school dedicated to combining quality education with biblical teachings" and "continues to produce Christian leaders who will make a difference, who will change the world." [3]

Graduates serving in the Bush administration

According to Regent University "Quick Facts", there are "150 graduates serving in the Bush Administration."

"The Regent law school was founded in 1986, when Oral Roberts University shut down its ailing law school and sent its library to Robertson's Bible-based college in Virginia. It was initially called 'CBN University School of Law' after the televangelist's Christian Broadcasting Network, whose studios share the campus and which provided much of the funding for the law school. (The Coors Foundation is also a donor to the university.) The American Bar Association accredited Regent 's law school in 1996," Charlie Savage wrote April 8, 2007, in the Boston Globe.

"Not long ago, it was rare for Regent graduates to join the federal government. But in 2001, the Bush administration picked the dean of Regent's government school, Kay Coles James (bio), to be the director of the Office of Personnel Management -- essentially the head of human resources for the executive branch. The doors of opportunity for government jobs were thrown open to Regent alumni," Savage wrote.

Accreditation

"The school is accredited by major academic governing bodies such as the Southern Association of Colleges and Schools (SACS), the Association of Theological Schools (ATS), and the American Bar Association (ABA), the American Psychological Association (APA) and the Council for Accreditation of Counseling and Related Educational Programs (CACREP)." [4]

1000 Regent University Drive

Virginia Beach, VA 23464

Phone: 800 373- 5504 / 757 226-4127

Website: http://www.regent.edu/general/about_us/

Contact Us

Related SourceWatch Resources

Bush administration U.S. attorney firings controversy

John Ashcroft (Regent University "Distinguished Professor of Law and Government")

Monica Goodling

The Bush Theocracy