Godzilla (ＧＯＤＺＩＬＬＡ Gojira?) is a 1998 American science fiction monster film produced by TriStar Pictures. It is the twenty-third Godzilla film in the series and the first American Godzilla film. The film was released to North American theaters on May 20, 1998 and to Japanese theaters on July 11, 1998.

Godzilla was directed by Roland Emmerich, produced by Dean Devlin and director Roland, among many others. The film was written by Dean and Roland as well. Godzilla's plot follows the mutation of a marine iguana who then goes on to cause havoc across the South Pacific, before making landfall in New York City.

Godzilla was intended to be the start of a trilogy of Godzilla films, however, a sequel was canceled shortly after it began development due to poor critical reception and fan feedback. An animated sequel series was created by Jeff Kline and Richard Raynis and then distributed by TriStar, and went on to receive a warmer reception than its film counterpart. This would be the only American produced Godzilla film until Legendary Pictures' 2014 film, Godzilla.

While plans for a trilogy fell through, Toho revived the Godzilla series early in Japan, and created the Millennium series of films, which ran from 1999 to 2004, starting with Godzilla 2000: Millennium, and ending with Godzilla: Final Wars.

The film's events were mentioned in Godzilla, Mothra and King Ghidorah: Giant Monsters All-Out Attack, making it part of the GMK Timeline.

Plot[]

Following a nuclear test in French Polynesia, a marine iguana nest is exposed to the fallout of radiation. Thirty years later, a Japanese fishing vessel is suddenly attacked by an enormous sea creature in the South Pacific ocean, with only one seaman surviving. Traumatized, he is questioned by a mysterious Frenchman in a hospital regarding what he saw, to which he only replies "Gojira."

Dr. Niko Tatopoulos, an NRC scientist, is in the Chernobyl exclusion zone in Ukraine researching the effects of radiation on wildlife, but he is interrupted by the arrival of an official from the U.S. State Department. Escorted by the military, he is sent to Panama and Jamaica to observe a trail of wreckage across land leading to the recovered Japanese fishing ship with massive claw marks on it. In Jamaica, the Frenchman is also present, observing the scene, and introduces himself as Philippe Roaché, a so-called "insurance agent." Aboard a military aircraft, Dr. Tatopoulos identifies skin samples he discovered in the shipwreck as belonging to an unknown species. He dismisses the military's theory that the creature is a living dinosaur and instead deduces that it's a mutant created by nuclear testing.

The large reptilian creature travels to New York City leaving a path of destruction wherever it goes. The monster is lured to Flatiron Square with 20,000 pounds of fish when the military begins attacking it. The city is evacuated as the military attempts to kill the monster but their initial attempt fails. Tatopoulos later collects a blood sample and learns that the creature is pregnant; it reproduces asexually and is collecting food not just for itself, but also for its offspring.

Eventually, Dr. Tatopoulos meets up with his ex-girlfriend, Audrey Timmonds, a young news reporter who wants to find a story. While she visits him, she uncovers a classified tape in his provisional military tent which concerns the origins of the monster and turns it over to the media. She hopes to have her report put on TV in hopes to become famous, but her superior and boss, Charles Caiman, claims the tape as his discovery. The tape is broadcast on television by the media, who dubs the creature "Godzilla." Dr. Tatopoulos is thrown off the team for his inadvertent carelessness and says goodbye to Audrey. Tatopoulos is then kidnapped by Philippe Roaché, who reveals himself to be an agent of the DGSE, the French foreign intelligence agency. He and his colleagues have been keeping a close watch on the events and are planning to cover up their country's role in the creation of Godzilla. Suspecting a nest somewhere in the city, they cooperate with Dr. Tatopoulos to trace and destroy him.

Following an encounter with the military near Central Park, Godzilla dives into the Hudson River to evade the military, where he is attacked by two Ohio Class Nuclear-Powered Subs and a Los Angeles-Class Nuclear Attack Submarine. After colliding with torpedoes, the subs fired at him, Godzilla sinks. Believing he is finally dead, the authorities celebrate.

Meanwhile, Dr. Tatopoulos and Roaché's team, covertly followed by Timmonds and her cameraman Victor "Animal" Palotti, make their way through subway tunnels to Madison Square Garden. There, they find over a hundred eggs. As they attempt to destroy them, the eggs suddenly hatch. Perceiving the human intruders as food due to them smelling like fish, the hatchlings begin attacking. Dr. Tatopoulos, Palotti, Timmonds, and Roaché take refuge in the stadium's broadcast booth and send a live news report to alert the military. A prompt response involving an airstrike is initiated as the four escape moments before the arena is bombed.

The adult Godzilla, however, is revealed to have survived the torpedo attack earlier underwater and emerges from the Garden's ruins. Discovering all of his young dead, he vengefully chases the group through the streets of Manhattan. With Godzilla in pursuit, the group lures him to the Brooklyn Bridge. Godzilla becomes trapped in the steel suspension cables, making him an easy target. After being directly hit by missiles from three F-18 Hornets, Godzilla falls to the ground and slowly dies. Roaché and the rest of the team part ways, and the people of New York celebrate.

Meanwhile, back in the smoking ruins of the Garden, a lone egg hatches.

Staff[]

Staff role on the left, staff member's name on the right.

Directed by Roland Emmerich

Written by Dean Devlin, Roland Emmerich, Ted Elliott, Terry Rossio

Produced by Dean Devlin, Roland Emmerich, Ute Emmerich, William Fay, Cary Woods, Robert Fried, Kelly Van Horn, Peter Winther

Music by David Arnold, Michael Lloyd

Cinematography by Ueli Steiger

Edited by Peter Amundson, David Siegel

Production design by Oliver Scholl

Special effects by Patrick Tatopoulos

Cast[]

Actor's name on the left, character played on the right.

Matthew Broderick as Doctor Niko Tatopoulos

Jean Reno as Philippe Roaché

Maria Pitillo as Audrey Timmonds

Hank Azaria as Victor "Animal" Palotti

Kevin Dunn as Colonel Hicks

Harry Shearer as W.I.D.F. Anchor Charles Caiman

Vicki Lewis as Doctor Elsie Chapman

Michael Lerner as Mayor Ebert

Lorry Goldman as Mayor's Aide Gene

Arabella Field as Lucy Palotti

Doug Savant as Sergeant O'Neal

Malcolm Danare as Doctor Mendel Craven

Christian Aubert as Jean-Luc

Frank Bruynbroek as Jean-Pierre

Philippe Bergeron as Jean-Claude

Francois Giroday as Jean-Philippe

Nicholas J. Giangiulio as W.I.D.F. Engineer Ed

Robert Lesser as Murray

Ralph Manza as Elderly Fisherman Joe

Greg Callahan as Governor

Chris Ellis as General Anderson

Nancy Cartwright as Caiman's Secretary

Richard Gant as Admiral Phelps

Stephen Xavier Lee as Lieutenant Anderson

Jack Moore as Leonard

Brian Farabaugh as Arthur

Steve Giannelli as Jules

Kurt Carley as Godzilla (Suit)

Frank Welker and Gary A. Hecker as Godzilla (Voice)

Appearances[]

Monsters[]

Godzilla

Juvenile Godzilla

Development[]

The idea for an American Godzilla project began in 1983 when Steve Miner proposed Godzilla: King of the Monsters 3-D to Toho. Not long after they greenlit it, however, Miner gave up on the project for several reasons, including no company wanting to back the project up. In 1992, Sony acquired the rights to Godzilla and its subsidiary TriStar Pictures was to begin production on a film written by Ted Elliot and Terry Rossio.

A teaser for this film was released in Japan in 1994. Jan De Bont was to direct the film, which was to have Godzilla fight a new monster called the Gryphon, but the project was sent to development hell after De Bont left due to budget disagreements with studio executives. TriStar then tried to get Roland Emmerich and Dean Devlin to make the film, which they turned down several times. After the two read Ted Elliot and Terry Rossio's script, however, they realized that an American version of Godzilla could be done and accepted TriStar's requests, on the condition that they could discard the original script and handle the film however they wanted.

Marketinge[]

The marketing campaign for Godzilla was multi-pronged in its execution:

Crushed cars were dotted around London as a part of a guerrilla advertising campaign. In the month or so before its release, ads on street corners made references to "Godzilla"'s size in comparison to whatever medium of advertising the advertisement was on. Examples: "His foot is bigger than this bus," "His head is bigger than this billboard," etc. Bits and pieces of different body parts of Godzilla were shown on TV commercials and posters, but never the entire body; this was to add a bit of mystery as to the design of the creature, ideally prompting people to see the film because that was the only way to see the whole creature. However, the toy line was released before the film and spoiled everything.

Taco Bell had tie-ins such as cups and toys that promoted the film. The Taco Bell chihuahua was also at the height of its popularity in Taco Bell's television commercials. During the summer of 1998, several commercials pairing Godzilla with the Taco Bell mascot were produced and aired, including several with the chihuahua trying to catch Godzilla in a tiny box, whistling and calling, "Here, lizard, lizard, lizard." When Godzilla appears, the chihuahua says, "Uh-oh. I think I need a bigger box."

Theatrical releases[]

United States - May 18, 1998 (New York City)

United States - May 20, 1998

Japan - July 11, 1998

Canada - May 20, 1998

Singapore - May 26, 1998 (Premiere); June 4, 1998

Australia - June 3, 1998 (Premiere); June 11, 1998

Hong Kong - June 18, 1998

New Zealand - June 18, 1998

Russia - June 18, 1998

Taiwan - June 19, 1998

South Korea - June 27, 1998

Uruguay - July 3, 1998

South Africa - July 3, 1998

Indonesia - July 4, 1998

Philippines - July 8, 1998

Argentina - July 16, 1998

Brazil - July 17, 1998

Estonia - July 17, 1998

UK - July 17, 1998

Ireland - July 17, 1998

Mexico - July 17, 1998

Thailand - July 17, 1998

Israel - August 6, 1998

Iceland - August 21, 1998

Hungary - August 27, 1998

Serbia - August 27, 1998 (Belgrade)

Spain - August 28, 1998

Poland - August 28, 1998

Romania - August 28, 1998

Italy - September 4, 1998

Switzerland - September 9, 1998 (French-speaking region)

Germany - September 10, 1998

Slovenia - September 10, 1998

Austria - September 11, 1998

Switzerland - September 11, 1998 (German-speaking region)

Denmark - September 11, 1998

Finland - September 11, 1998

France - September 16, 1998

Slovakia - September 17, 1998

Bulgaria - September 18, 1998

Greece - September 18, 1998

Norway - September 18, 1998

Turkey - September 18, 1998

Portugal - September 25, 1998

Sweden - September 25, 1998

Netherlands - October 1, 1998

Box office[]

Godzilla's budget was $125 million in both production and advertising costs. Financially, the film did well in its initial release with a gross of $55 million, but poor word of mouth from both fans and critics caused the film's profits to drop 40% after the first week. Domestically, it made $136,314,294 and drew in another $242 million overseas, totaling $379,014,294 worldwide. Contrary to popular belief, Godzilla wasn't a flop, but it was not the blockbuster the studio was looking for.

Sony's contract with Toho stated that Sony had the option to produce a trilogy of American Godzilla films so long as the first sequel was released within five years after the first film. Sony green-lit a sequel shortly after the film's release, while an animated series made as a continuation of the film began to air later in 1998. During that time TriStar released Toho's Godzilla 2000: Millennium in U.S. theaters.

Because of the poor reception of the film, a lack of retailer interest, and the underwhelming financial performance of the first film, Sony ultimately decided not to make another Godzilla film and their license to the Godzilla franchise expired in May 2003.

Reception[]

The history of the 1998 film and its monster has been a rather mixed and negative one. The initial reaction to the 1998 release was mostly a negative one spanning from both movie critics and the Godzilla fanbase alike. Critically it was blasted for uninspired acting, random plots that don't fit, unnecessary use of rain, inconsistent size of the monster, shoddy special effects (even for its time), and the constant themes and actual scenes it was accused of ripping off from Jurassic Park. TriStar's Godzilla was accused of heavily borrowing concepts such as the asexual development of eggs. Multiple scenes had the main characters running for their lives from the baby Godzillas which look much like the Velociraptors in Jurassic Park, although the directors insisted this was not intended.

Some scenes were virtually frame-by-frame the same as Jurassic Park, like the Velociraptor shadow scene, jump attack sequence or the door opening sequence. At the end of the film when Godzilla was killed by the F-18 Hornets, audiences were confused as to whether or not they should have felt sorry for the creature or cheer much like the New York citizens and military celebrated to Godzilla's demise, whereas in the original film audiences were meant to feel sympathy for both Godzilla and the martyr who gave up his life to destroy him. The Godzilla fanbase criticized the film for lacking Godzilla's theme, personality, and key characteristics.

The monster's design was criticized as being more like the Rhedosaurus from The Beast From 20,000 Fathoms as opposed to the real Godzilla's traditional design. The origin of the monster was also changed from being a mutant fictional prehistoric reptile to a marine iguana mutated by nuclear fallout from a French nuclear test.

The heaviest criticism, though, came from the creature's lack of similarities and personality to the original monster. The monster lacked Godzilla's trademark atomic breath, as well as his strength and durability, testified by his easy destruction at the end by the F-18s at the Brooklyn Bridge. Dean Devlin tacked in a last-minute power breath even though he had no plans on adding any powers whatsoever. Whereas Godzilla was previously always depicted as a male creature and given the title "King of the Monsters," TriStar's Godzilla reproduced asexually and laid eggs. For these reasons, fans refused to equal the two monsters and differentiated by giving the creature nicknames such as "Notzilla," "Trizilla," "Deanzilla" or "Patzilla," because of its creators, Dean Devlin and Patrick Tatopoulos, and "G.I.N.O.", an acronym for "Godzilla In Name Only." Ryuhei Kitamura, the director of Godzilla: Final Wars, as well as Shogo Tomiyama, the man in charge of the Godzilla franchise at that time, finally responded by including the TriStar Godzilla in the film as a separate character named "Zilla," accusing TriStar of taking the "God" out of "Godzilla."

Toho, in particular, criticized the film for ruining Godzilla's image and "taking the 'God' out of 'Godzilla'" in addition to mandating that all future incarnations of the 1998 creature be called Zilla, they produced the film Godzilla 2000: Millennium as a direct response, in an attempt to return the traditional Japanese Godzilla to the big screen.

Godzilla received two Golden Raspberry awards in 1998: Worst Remake or Sequel and Worst Supporting Actress (Maria Pitillo). The film later received the Saturn Award for Best Special Effects in 1999.

Sequel[]

The film spawned an animated series that continued the storyline of the movie. In this series, Nick Tatapolous accidentally discovers the egg that survived the destruction of the first Godzilla's nest in Madison Square Garden. The creature hatches and imprints on Nick as its parent. Subsequently, Nick and a group of friends form an elite research team called H.E.A.T., investigating strange occurrences and defending humankind from numerous other monsters with the help of the new Godzilla. Unlike the film upon which it was based, the animated series garnered a relatively positive reception from Godzilla fans, due to returning some of the Japanese Godzilla's characteristics to the titular monster and featuring plots similar in nature to many of the late Showa era Godzilla films.

A novelization was released for the film, written as a retrospective by Nick Tatopolous. Nick always refers to the monster as "Gojira" in the text.

A sequel to the film was planned and received an entire screenplay written by Tab Murphy, and would have involved the monster that hatched at the end of the film battling a giant insect called the Queen Bitch. However these plans for a sequel were ultimately scrapped when Sony and Roland Emmerich could not agree on a budget, and Emmerich went on to make The Patriot instead. Sony later considered producing a new reboot to the series unrelated to the 1998 film, but decided against it and allowed their rights to revert to Toho in May of 2003.

Trivia[]