Crayon Physics Game 2.5

Continue to app

Free Version

Publisher Description

Crayon Physics Game - Draw on the screen to guide the dot to the cup and complete the level

Crayon Physics Game is educational game features more than 54 physics problems suitable for all ages for you and your family to practise your problem solving skills, creative thinking and reflexes.

*** HOW TO PLAY***

- Draw on the screen to guide the dot to the cup U and complete the level

- Draw as many lines, polygons, and shapes as you need

- The ball and everything your draw react to the law of gravity... but gravity sometimes is reversed!

Crayon Physics Game is a fun way of practising physics... download it and try!

About Crayon Physics Game

Crayon Physics Game is a free app for Android published in the Arcade list of apps, part of Games & Entertainment.

The company that develops Crayon Physics Game is 88mag Studio. The latest version released by its developer is 2.5.

To install Crayon Physics Game on your Android device, just click the green Continue To App button above to start the installation process. The app is listed on our website since 2019-12-16 and was downloaded 3 times. We have already checked if the download link is safe, however for your own protection we recommend that you scan the downloaded app with your antivirus. Your antivirus may detect the Crayon Physics Game as malware as malware if the download link to com.mag.crayonphysicsgame is broken.

How to install Crayon Physics Game on your Android device:

Click on the Continue To App button on our website. This will redirect you to Google Play.

Once the Crayon Physics Game is shown in the Google Play listing of your Android device, you can start its download and installation. Tap on the Install button located below the search bar and to the right of the app icon.

A pop-up window with the permissions required by Crayon Physics Game will be shown. Click on Accept to continue the process.

Crayon Physics Game will be downloaded onto your device, displaying a progress. Once the download completes, the installation will start and you'll get a notification after the installation is finished.

Program Details

General

Publisher 88mag Studio Released Date 2019-12-16 Languages English

Category

Category Games & Entertainment Subcategory Arcade

System requirements

Operating systems android

Download information

File size Total downloads 3

Pricing

License model Free Price N/A

Version History

Here you can find the changelog of Crayon Physics Game since it was posted on our website on 2019-11-06. The latest version is 2.5 and it was updated on soft112.com on 22 April, 2024. See below the changes in each version:

version 2.5

posted on 2019-12-16

bug fix

RELATED PROGRAMS

Our Recommendations