Do you have broken crayons? Turn those broken crayons into a work of art and make Wax Paper Melted Crayon Art.

My mom recently bought the kids a new book, The Day the Crayons Quit, and after spending a few nights giggling about the story the kids and I decided it would be fun to make a crayon inspired craft.

Melted Crayon Art

Do you remember making wax paper melted crayon art as a kid? I decided to pull this classic craft out from the childhood archives and dust it off for my little ones. We had such a blast making our wax paper melted crayon art. Also, it was a fun way to tie in the book, The Day the Crayons Quit, lately, we’ve been reading this book on repeat at bedtime.

If you haven’t heard of the book The Day the Crayons Quit you should definitely find it at your local library or grab a copy here. It’s an adorable story that follows a group of crayons who each have their own reasons for going on strike.

Green is mad he’s only used for grass, pink is mad she is never used, and blue is tired of only coloring in the sky, and so on. It’s a playful and imaginative story that makes my kids giggle every time we read it.

Plus, we’ve found all kinds of learning opportunities and teaching moments to talk about. Like why it’s important not to quit, how you can make others feel useful and important, being creative, thinking outside of the box, and so much more.

When my kids got home from school I asked them each to tell me their favorite color. Then I told them to go upstairs and change into something that had their favorite color and to meet me back downstairs for a party with the crayons.

After reading the story we decided the crayons simply couldn’t quit, what would we do if we had nothing to make our stories more colorful and our homework more fun?!? So we decided we would use all of our crayons to make pretty artwork to convince the crayons not to quit.

How to Make Wax Paper Melted Crayon Art

Supplies:

Crayons

Wax Paper

Cheese Grater (I bought small handheld ones from the DollarStore)

Old Dish Towel

Iron

Marker

Scissors

Steps to Create Your Own Wax Paper Melted Crayon Art

Peel the wrapper off of the crayons.

Help your kids grate their crayons onto a sheet of wax paper with the cheese grater.

After you have created a colorful masterpiece lay another piece of wax paper on top of the shaved crayons.

Place the wax paper on top of an old dishtowel and then cover the top with another dishtowel. With your iron on low gently press and iron the wax paper until the crayon shavings begin to melt.

Set aside and let it cool, once it is cool draw your favorite shape with a magic marker. Use scissors to cut out your wax paper crayon art.

All of our crayons were super happy to be included in this fun art project and my kids thought this simple craft was awesome! So crayons, if you are listening “Don’t Quit, We Love You!”

It’s easy to create your own melted crayon art project with broken crayons and a little heat. Get creative with the color combinations and be sure to pick up a copy of the book The Day the Crayons Quit to read with your kids.