A24 has made a name for themselves over the past seven years, soon becoming known for their consistent output of quality independent films. They’ve given a voice to young, creative independent filmmakers and have helped them on their journey into the cinematic landscape. It’s safe to say that they have transformed that landscape since they were founded in 2012. As the decade comes to a close, I teamed up with fellow writer Jack to rank the twenty best films that A24 has distributed since their debut years ago.

But first, some honorable mentions: Gaspar Noé’s psychedelic nightmare Climax (2019); Sean Baker’s heartbreaking drama The Florida Project (2017); Bo Burnham’s generational anthem Eighth Grade; and Jeremy Saulnier’s gripping thriller Green Room.

20. The Lobster (2015), dir. Yorgos Lanthimos

“It is more difficult to pretend that you do have feelings when you don’t than to pretend you don’t have feelings when you do.”

Yorgos Lanthimos’ surreal dark comedy The Lobster is a peculiar look at societal norms and how we ignore our instincts and feelings to play by the rules, confining ourselves to fit in with everyone else. Set in a bleak, claustrophobic hotel where strangers must find love in the most uncomfortable of ways is a concept that could’ve gone in many directions. However, Yorgos puts his focus on Colin Farrell’s character, David, a man desperate for love who is constantly faced with rejection and cruelty from almost everyone he meets.

In Yorgos’ dystopian world, people have to belong to survive, to face the risk of being turned into an animal if they can’t find someone who they belong with. This seems to be Yorgos’ strange look at an odd obsession society has with being part of a relationship. His outlook on things may seem far from reality, but it’s probably one of the most honest portrayals of society’s cruelties that I’ve seen put to film. In our world, it almost seems like lonely people are viewed as animals or strange creatures that don’t fit in. And this film opens our minds to think about those ideas of modern relationships and established social institutions. Yorgos is able to mold those heavy-handed ideas into making something that’s marvelously bizarre and wholly unique. It’s a film only Yorgos Lanthimos could’ve made. – JC

19. Mid90s (2018), dir. Jonah Hill

“A lot of the time, we feel like our lives are the worst. But I think if you looked in anybody else’s closet, you wouldn’t trade your shit for their shit.”

Jonah Hill’s directorial debut Mid90s is a heartfelt and nostalgic story propelled by strong central performances and a captivating emotional core. It’s an endearing movie that radiates warmth and life, taking inspiration from directors such as Harmony Korine and telling a singular narrative that captures many feelings of growing up. I remember the very first time I landed an ollie on my skateboard years ago; that feeling of building up so much emotion in your blood that you might explode, missing the land over and over. But once I landed it, I felt like I was on top of the world.

Mid90s is natural and beautifully portrays the highest highs and lowest lows of our lives. Every scene is meticulously crafted; even if the viewer can’t fully connect to Stevie (Sunny Suljic), his actions and emotions remain authentic in some form or another. Hill’s sharp writing is exuberant as it is emotional, bursting with life and charm amongst the darkness in Stevie’s world. But it’s Na-Kel Smith that’s the true standout as Ray, one of Stevie’s friends, who delivers one of the most memorable dialogue exchanges of the decade. From the sprawling emotional beats to the unique cinematography, this is a genuine and heartbreaking slice-of-life picture, and one of the finest coming-of-age films of the past few years. – OB

18. First Reformed (2018), dir. Paul Schrader

“I can’t know what the future will bring. We have to choose despite uncertainty.”

Paul Schrader’s First Reformed was a return to form of sorts for this veteran writer-director, going back to his roots to direct a thought-provoking and unsettling character study of a disturbed man. It’s a challenging film that dives deep into religion and environmentalism, bringing up genuinely profound statements throughout the film’s journey. This is a dialogue-driven slow burn that completely relies on the performances of its lead actors to grip you, and it didn’t disappoint.

Ethan Hawke gives a career-best performance as the multi-faceted Reverend Toller: a man that everyone sees as a symbol for hope and kindness in this cruel world. However, as the film progresses, the walls begin to close in on him and we see the facade he’s built finally begin to crack. Toller sees through the faux cheerfulness of contemporary Christianity and finally rejects those ideologies that have taken him down a path in which he’s become ignorant to the world’s true problems. Reverend Toller is someone that’s supposed to find hope in this world, but is there really hope for us? Can God forgive us for what we’ve become and for what we’ve done to this world? Those are the questions that First Reformed wants us to reflect on, questions that none of us are able to answer. – JC

17. The Farewell (2019), dir. Lulu Wang

“It’s not the cancer that kills them, it’s the fear.”

Lulu Wang’s second feature The Farewell is both heartwarming and heartbreaking. It’s an introspective look at all members of a tight-knit family as they grapple with the various emotions that come with loss. For a film like this, Wang took her real-life story that the film is based on and transferred it to the screen in a lovely way. The way she imbues both humor and heart into her film without losing focus of the themes is perfect, and the way she examines the inner collapse of emotions as we reckon with grief is impeccable.

Wang breaths so much life into these characters, enabling you to deeply care about their emotions and feel the life seeping through every line of dialogue. Families are quirky, and there are so many of the little imperfections on display here that enable us to realize that that’s why we love our families so much in the first place. It’s such a heartwarming story that reminds us of the people in our lives that truly affect us most, and our desire to connect with them as much as we can within the time that we have. Wang crafted a remarkable film like no other, filled with memorable performances and dialogue exchanges that reflect the best in us in a touching, poignant manner. – OB

16. Krisha (2016), dir. Trey Edward Shults

“He didn’t even want you to come, because he was scared. The whole family was scared!”

What may be the most overlooked film in A24’s library, Trey Edward Shults’ directorial debut Krisha is a raw and unnerving character study of a troubled woman reuniting with her family during Thanksgiving. It’s a brave feature debut that prides itself on showing the self-destructive nature of its lead character. Using long takes, aspect ratio changes, and harrowing close-ups to transport us into the chaotic nature of Krisha’s mind. The film tackles addiction, forgiveness, and familial relationships all in the span of 83 minutes to ensure a riveting and concise feature that doesn’t overstay its welcome.

Setting the film during Thanksgiving makes for an interesting dichotomy, as it’s seen as a holiday of coming together with your family and celebrating love, making the twist all the more effective when the film progresses into utter madness. The internal turmoil between these characters is palpable; you’re just waiting for the inevitable catastrophic event that lights the spark, causing the family to explode with anger. This relentless film is a true display of talent for Shults, who used elements of Krisha for his next two features. We will look back on this film years from now as one that began the career of a major talent in evocative filmmaking—a filmmaker whose work will impact the world in the same ways Robert Altman and John Cassavetes have. – JC

15. The Spectacular Now (2013), dir. James Ponsoldt

“You think beauty’s in some classroom or some textbook, and it’s not. That’s not what it’s about. This right here. This is beautiful. All of this. That’s all you need.”

When it comes to coming-of-age films, A24 seems to have it covered. But many viewers seem to have forgotten about this overlooked gem. James Ponsoldt’s The Spectacular Now is one of the greatest coming-of-age films of the decade, a wholly immersive experience that completely understands every defining aspect of modern teenage life. It doesn’t stoop to a level that devalues teenage experiences like other films this decade, choosing instead to follow a raw and personal story that feels ripped right from the memories and emotions of this generation as a whole. Ponsoldt’s singular focus on the relationship at the heart of the film is unwavering in its complexity, and Miles Teller and Shailene Woodley’s perfect chemistry elevates the narrative. It’s an already heartbreakingly grounded story, but the realism they bring to their roles is unmatched by practically every other movie couple of the decade.

There isn’t much that needs to be said about just how authentic every scene and line of dialogue feel. It’s already impressive that it tackles issues like alcoholism and parental separation this effectively, but it goes even further and becomes even more resonant through its depiction of the divide between those who are going to college and those who aren’t (a primary stressor for teens, regardless of the generation). That’s what makes this film so special: its themes represent the current generation, but they also reflect past generations and will remain just as distinct and prevalent for future ones. – OB

14. High Life (2019), dir. Claire Denis

“The sensation; moving backwards, even though we’re moving forwards; getting further from what’s nearer.”

Claire Denis made her English language debut with High Life: an esoteric, singular work of art that will leave you in a trance. Denis dives into a genre she’s never tackled before, science-fiction, and makes one of the greatest and most unique in the genre. Denis brings her enigmatic and poetic filmmaking to a genre that truly needed something fresh. She grounds a genre built on spectacle by crafting an intimate and hypnotic mind-bender in the vein of Tarkovsky’s Solaris or Kubrick’s 2001: A Space Odyssey. Denis tackles themes she’s covered previously in her other brilliant films: the dangers of desire, the mystifying nature of the human body, and the notion of being an outcast.

However, in this environment with these mysterious characters that are all on the brink of self-destruction, the themes are able to blossom into something that will perplex audiences. High Life may not be for everyone due to its sexually-charged and philosophical way of displaying a world looming destruction, but there is beauty to discover under the eroticism and allegories; there is purpose within what some believe to be a meandering and empty film. Through Denis’ existential meditations on our universe, we’re able to uncover her views on the meaning of existence and the inescapability of our judicial system. She traps her characters within the confines of a spaceship and the eternal emptiness of space is the only thing awaiting them once they leave the blank walls that surround them. These criminals seemingly have no purpose, they’re just awaiting the dark demise that will come soon enough: just like us. – JC

13. The Lighthouse (2019), dir. Robert Eggers

“Bad luck to kill a seabird.”

Robert Eggers’ gripping 19th-Century set horror film The Lighthouse is certainly no sophomore slump. Starring Robert Pattinson and Willem Dafoe as a pair of lighthouse keepers stranded on an island during a brutal storm, the film wouldn’t work as well as it does without the strength and charisma of its two leads, who play off of each other with such flamboyant confidence that I could personally watch for hours on end.

Eggers’ script is fascinating to watch unfold—it’s rife with tension and has a looming sense of dread that overshadows the viewer’s perception of the film’s events. He takes classic mythology and blends it with his own twisted narrative. This is a powerful example of a film that utilizes atmosphere in deep and magical ways, but never prioritizes it over anything else. Its style goes hand-in-hand with its substance, with Jarin Blaschke’s claustrophobic cinematography working wonders in this regard. It’s one of the most unique films of the year, and continuously takes unexpected turns that veer the story in a completely new direction than what was initially anticipated. It ultimately builds up to a marvelous crescendo of a climax that’s as tightly-written as it is off-the-wall insane. Eggers is able to communicate thrilling themes of power dynamics, redemption, and even homo-eroticism. If you couldn’t tell, this is one special film. – OB

12. Under the Skin (2013), dir. Jonathan Glazer

“T…D…S…Z…Th…B…T…V…H…T…D…K…G…S…Z…P…B…“

Jonathan Glazer’s brilliant Under the Skin is a chilling and surreal film loaded with dense symbolism and visceral themes. On the surface, the story seems simple: a mysterious alien comes to Earth and seduces easily susceptible men. However, the thematic core within the film ponders deeply on the human experience, specifically the female experience. It’s a parable of sex, love, and seduction; one that intoxicates the viewer to follow this enticing alien as she discovers what it’s like to be a female in the modern world.

Glazer touches on sexism and gender roles to give way to an effective piece on society’s treatment of women, using the science fiction genre as a compelling way to express those themes. We follow Scarlett Johansson’s unnamed alien along a journey of self-discovery as she learns about humanity and its faults. She first came to Earth looking to feast, but as we follow her along this path she learns to love and have compassion. Perfectly capturing the curious alien’s headspace is Mica Levi’s hauntingly beautiful score. Her score verberates through your soul, elevating the dreamlike images onscreen. Under the Skin undoubtedly feels like a nightmarish fever dream, but it’s also a beautiful love-letter to humanity; a love-letter that realizes the beauty and the brutality of being human. – JC

11. Good Time (2017), dir. Josh and Benny Safdie

“Are you feeling this? Are you feeling as good as I’m feeling right now?”

Josh and Benny Safdie, New York’s favorite art house filmmaker brothers, took a deep dive into the city’s seedy underworld with their electrifying crime thriller Good Time. And while on the surface, it may look like your typical crime film, the brothers’ filmmaking gives way to something deeply sad. The way the Safdies capture the essence of New York City throughout Connie’s (Robert Pattinson) fast-paced adventure throughout one fateful night. It’s the Safdies’ answer to Stanley Kubrick’s Eyes Wide Shut, a relentless pursuit of the light at the end of a very dark tunnel. Except nobody ever reaches that light, do they?

The Safdies take you on a hypnotic journey that uses its vivid imagery as a facade among communal desperation, and their script serves as an empathetic commentary on familial relationships. Somehow Pattinson manages to make you feel sorry for a character that’s filled with so much self-interest and greed. The visual flair traps you in the movie’s grasp, giving you the opportunity to either root for Connie or loathe him, questioning your own sanity in the process. By the end, hopefully you’ve made up your mind: the ruse is gone; the night is over, and all you’re left to do is reflect on the fates of everyone involved in the narrative’s events. Good Time is the textbook definition of cinematic euphoria, a pulse-pounding ride that never lets up. – OB

10. It Comes At Night (2017), dir. Trey Edward Shults

“You can’t trust anyone but family.”

Trey Edward Shults’ It Comes At Night is not your typical horror film. It’s a horror film that pushes all genre tropes aside to make a film that tackles the dangers of collective paranoia and corrupting influence parents can have on their children. It Comes At Night is an incredibly personal film for Shults. He wrote the film as a result of the exploring and processing of regret and grief after his father’s death. Unfortunately, this personal film was subject to horrific mis-marketing.

Shults’ second feature was panned by horror fans who expected something more traditional. Instead, Shults’ take on the horror film is one built on the droning dread we all face as the lights go out. Our minds are supposed to be a safe place, but when the world outside of the mind is dangerous and full of disease, our minds begin to corrupt; there’s no escape from the dark, and soon the fear and paranoia will begin to take over. The home you sought as refuge is now a danger in and of itself. Where can you go? Who can you trust? There’s truly nothing scarier than that. It Comes At Night is a slow-paced, humanist and existential horror film; it’s free from the self-indulgence and ostentatious nature of what some would call “art house horror,” making for a true landmark in horror cinema and furthering the themes of familial terror that Trey Edward Shults has so brilliantly used throughout his work. – JC

9. Swiss Army Man (2016), dir. Daniel Kwan and Daniel Scheinert

“But maybe everyone’s a little bit ugly. Maybe we’re all just dying sacks of shit, and maybe all it’ll take is one person to just be okay with that, and then the whole world will be dancing and singing and farting, and everyone will feel a little bit less alone.”

There is truly nothing like Swiss Army Man. Right from the opening scene, the viewer knows that they’re in for something deeply affecting—and incredibly weird. It’s almost impossible to put into words just how weird this film actually is. Despite its extreme quirkiness, however, it never seems like it’s trying too hard to push boundaries. It’s a hilarious, touching look at subjects like depression and loneliness that perfectly balances on the line between melodrama and slapstick comedy. Paul Dano is phenomenal here, but it’s Daniel Radcliffe who really steals the show, giving a performance that is both heartwarming and heartbreaking at once.

The way director duo “Daniels” (Daniel Kwan and Daniel Scheinert) utilize a combination of vibrant visuals and a sharp script to craft a story that is almost guaranteed to make you laugh out loud more than once and leave you emotionally gutted by the end. It’s more profoundly creative than any film of the past decade, and subversive in its story beats. It’s refreshing to watch a film like this and be reminded of the undying creativity that the cinematic art form has to offer. This is easily one of A24’s most underrated films, one that is completely unconventional and unique in every respect and absolutely deserves more recognition than it’s gotten since its release. – OB

8. American Honey (2016), dir. Andrea Arnold

“You know what Darth Vader looks like inside his suit? He’s a skeleton, just like the rest of us.”

Andrea Arnold takes us out of our routine, mundane lifestyles to transport us into the world of young, dumb, and broke teenagers in American Honey. A harsh but truthful commentary on poor adolescents within a rich nation. When we meet our lead character, Star (Sasha Lane), she’s in a situation of utter dependency as she bears the responsibility of raising her two younger siblings. She knows this isn’t the life a teenager deserves and desperately craves liberation. Hungry for this freedom, she meets Jake (Shia LaBeouf) and his troupe of high spirited magazine sellers. Immediately, Star is attracted to the erratic and liberating nature of life on the road.

Arnold easily could’ve viewed these teens as unlikable scum, but she views them through an empathetic lens. These teens and this depiction of marginalized youth feel authentic. It’s an honest portrayal of the drifter lifestyle; a portrayal that doesn’t shy away from the sociopolitical aspects that come along with it. Arnold showcases the harsh realities of income disparity throughout the film as we follow these characters on a journey through urban sprawl. The audience gets to see the detrimental effects of economic decline in areas throughout the American Midwest. We truly need more artists like Andrea Arnold to tell stories of the less fortunate: artists that are willing to tell these stories through an empathetic lens, rather than the exploitative manner in which many others portray the poor. Arnold is telling stories that truly matter and I’m glad we have her unique talent within this current cinematic landscape. – JC

7. Lady Bird (2017), dir. Greta Gerwig

“Hey, mom, did you feel emotional the first time that you drove in Sacramento? I did, and I wanted to tell you, but we weren’t really talking when it happened. All those bends I’ve known my whole life, and stores, and the whole thing. But I wanted to tell you I love you. Thank you.”

You may know Greta Gerwig’s 2017 directorial debut Lady Bird as that one movie that no one on Twitter ever shuts up about, but it truly deserves every ounce of the praise and hype that it has received over the past few years. Gerwig told an up-close and personal story that feels wholly fresh and original compared to so many other coming-of-age films. Gerwig’s sharp and refined script provides beautiful insight into the life of the character of Christine “Lady Bird” McPherson (Saoirse Ronan), who might honestly be the most relatable character of the decade. Christine is witty, short-tempered, and selfish, like all of us were (and maybe still are) at some point in our lives. She consistently gets into fights with her mother Marion (Laurie Metcalf) over stupid things, but Gerwig uses their arguments as focal points to the narrative to show just how alike Christine and her mother really are. This is a film built on relationships and shows how necessary they are at certain points in our lives.

Lady Bird is a masterpiece at showing the defining aspects of teen life because of the delicate touches Gerwig imbues throughout her script, allowing viewers to relate in some way or another, and to more than one character as well. When Christine is driving through her town on her own for the first time, seeing it differently, the viewer takes it in with her, as she steps out alone into the world for the first time and views the streets she drove with her family from a new perspective. It’s a film made for families to bond over, to heal generational gaps and allow parents and children to connect to a beautiful collection of fragile moments worth treasuring. – OB

6. A Ghost Story (2017), dir. David Lowery

“We build our legacy piece by piece, and maybe the whole world will remember you, or maybe just a couple of people, but you do what you can to make sure you’re still around after you’re gone.“

David Lowery’s beautiful exploration of love and loss is a visual experience that wholeheartedly portrays the magnitude of existence. It’s a film that easily could’ve come off as outlandish—Rooney Mara eats a pie for 5 minutes straight and Casey Affleck walks around in a bed sheet for almost the entire film—but in reality, it’s a poetic and minimalist drama crafted with such delicacy. Lowery masterfully captures the profound nihility and complexity of death, and the eternally tedious life of a soul without unity. Lowery’s interpretation of life after death shows that even after we part from this world, we still wander around looking for purpose. As souls, we’re put in a box where we must watch as everything that we built around us comes to a crumble. The special bond you built with someone…gone; the home you shared with this loved one…gone. You can only watch as people move on to forget you and the special moments you’ve shared.

Hidden beneath each frame, you can feel that longing for human connection and the aching sense of isolation. The film allows for moments of self-reflection where our own experiences with loss, love, and grief can come to the forefront, allowing for a more immersive experience. A Ghost Story is a quiet but transcendent piece of cinema that takes you on a captivating spiritual journey. It’s truly a film that will never leave you. – JC

5. Uncut Gems (2019), dir. Josh and Benny Safdie

“This is how I win.”

The Safdie Brothers followed up Good Time with Uncut Gems, another energetic, electrifying crime thriller. It’s anchored by a powerful, captivating performance from Adam Sandler, who delivers possibly his best work yet as Howard Ratner, a jewelry dealer in NYC’s Diamond District who also happens to be a compulsive gambling addict, resulting in him owing debts to loan sharks and struggling to pay them off. With this film, the Safdies broke a new record for tense, anxiety-driven filmmaking by delving headfirst into Howard’s life, combining frenetic visuals with a pulse-pounding score from Daniel Lopatin, all at the pace of a bolt of lightning. Darius Khondji’s stunning cinematography serves as an exciting accompaniment to the psychological framework of the film.

Despite all of the energy it radiates, however, it’s actually a deeply depressing character study. The Safdies show that we can never outrun the fate that we have written for ourselves. Howard’s selfish tendencies seem to haunt him at every turn, but he never learns. It’s only when faced with a true win that the prospect of being brought down is completely evaporated, until viewers are thrown for one final loop and reminded that this is not a fantasy. With actions come consequences, and it’s ultimately up to us to choose whether those consequences are good or bad for us in the long-run. Taut and unpredictable, Uncut Gems is a riveting masterwork. Plus, it’s got Adam Sandler fighting The Weeknd while “Swimming Pools (Drank)” by Kendrick Lamar plays in the background, which is pretty much everything one can ask for in a movie. – OB

4. Spring Breakers (2013), dir. Harmony Korine

“This is the fuckin’ American Dream, y’all.”

Harmony Korine has never been afraid to shock audiences when delivering his message. With Gummo, he disgusted audiences while exploring poverty and alienation, and in Julien Donkey-Boy he overwhelmed them while telling the heartbreaking story of a schizophrenic teenager. His films always seem to be met with mixed reactions, and that was especially the case with Spring Breakers. His provocative and neon-drenched feature gives a satirical but honest look at the generation who’ve grown up on reality TV and its lies. It’s a film that shows this generation’s warped view of the pursuit of happiness, and the nihilism & debauchery that come along with it. You never know when to laugh, cry or feel disgusted while watching this hypnotic fever dream.

The booze, boobs, and barbarity may distract viewers from Korine’s ultimate message for our youth; that this is a film about people searching for purpose, searching and then discovering these lifestyles portrayed on TV aren’t what they seem from the outside. All of the depravity onscreen is ultimately a gateway for Korine to deliver a message that so many choose to ignore. We really weren’t ready for such a film that made us look inside ourselves and question the materialism and selfishness that has taken over our minds while showing how the consumption of lifeless entertainment has impacted our way of living, as well as portraying the consistent deterioration of importance for what we want to leave behind. Spring Breakers isn’t dubstep-fueled soft-core porn. It’s a brutally honest portrayal of youth, one that most filmmakers would be too scared to tackle. But as we all know by now, Harmony Korine isn’t scared of anything. – JC

3. The Last Black Man In San Francisco (2019), dir. Joe Talbot

“We built these ships. Dredged these canals. In the San Francisco they never knew existed.”

With The Last Black Man in San Francisco, director Joe Talbot and writer Jimmie Fails gifted the world a moving story overflowing with beauty. It’s beautifully authentic and immersive, only made more stunningly real by the fact that it’s based on Fails’ life. Every frame is stunningly vibrant, filled to the brim with so much life and love. It’s hard-hitting on every level, asking the viewer to question whether believing in something that isn’t real is better than believing in nothing at all. The film delivers a thought-provoking, heartfelt story that is truly larger than words can convey. It tackles a wide range of subjects such as gentrification, toxic masculinity, and racial identity, balancing these themes with utter perfection. It’s indescribably exultant, filled with gorgeous shots and landscapes that capture the heart of San Francisco.

Fails’ performance is heartbreaking, and newcomer Jonathan Majors also shines in a masterfully performed supporting role that oozes warmth and compassion. The amount of care, empathy, and intimacy imbued into every line of dialogue is ineffable, reminding us of where we came from and where we’re going in our lives. This is a film that speaks to the viewer and allows them to resonate with the narrative and complex characters as if they too are a part of the story, a tribute to family and friendship. There’s nothing quite like it, and it’s without a doubt the most dually heartwarming and heartbreaking film of the year. – OB

2. Waves (2019), dir. Trey Edward Shults

“Love is patient…love is kind…love is not rude. It doesn’t boast. Love also…forgets wrong.”

Trey Edward Shults’ personal and lovingly crafted film, Waves, is one half a relentless assault on the senses, and the other, a poignant and delicate family drama. With a pulsating soundtrack, vivid visuals and frenetic pacing, Waves is a bold film within a genre full of uninspired works. Shults dives deep into the complex ramifications of toxic masculinity by following a father that emotionally suffocates his son, pushing him to his limits. It’s a dynamic that anyone can relate to regardless of race, gender, or social class. The film is unwavering in its portrayal of a toxic father-son relationship, understanding that there’s love where there’s hate in familial relationships. Shults has depicted the trials and tribulations of life throughout his work, but here, the passion and humanity that seep from the screen make for his most personal film yet.

I’ve never seen a film that portrays the tumultuous life of a teenager quite like Waves. Shults captures the confusion and anxiety of teen life so brilliantly, tapping into the personal experiences of his lead actors to ensure a story that feels real. Shults not only tackles the ups and downs of being a teenager, but he also explores how youth cope after a tragedy, showing the sorrowful but optimistic ways they look at loss. Waves shatters the hearts of audiences only to mend it together again with a cathartic final scene; a scene that’s the culmination of emotion we’ve collectively felt throughout the film. It’s a crushing film that’s full of hope and beauty, and it’ll be something special for many generations to come. – JC

1. Moonlight (2016), dir. Barry Jenkins

“Who is you, Chiron?”

Barry Jenkins’ Moonlight is not a film. It is a cinematic experience like no other, a life-changing work of art that pushed the boundaries of narrative storytelling by intimately portraying the life of Chiron, a black man growing up in Miami. By splitting the story up into three different (and equally defining) stages of Chiron’s life, Jenkins is able to delicately balance emotion throughout each scene, layering it in a way that allows the viewer to grow with Chiron as he begins to experience defining events in his life.

Moonlight is a tribute to our lives, a tribute to the people, sights, sounds, moments, and feelings that shape us as humans. Jenkins’ script, adapted from Tarell Alvin McCraney’s play In Moonlight Black Boys Look Blue, is rife with fluid emotion, as emphasized by the waves that rush across the screen, beautifully free-flowing. James Laxton’s gorgeous cinematography lends itself to the allure of the film, joined by the terrific, heartbreaking performances from Mahershala Ali, Naomie Harris, Trevante Rhodes, Ashton Sanders, and Alex Hibbert, among others. These performances feel real because everyone has felt the feeling of insecurity in their emotions, the uncertainty of how our futures will turn out. That’s what makes Moonlight so absorbing; it’s a stunningly relatable portrait of a young man coming of age in an unforgiving world where it’s impossible to feel at home in your own feelings. Moonlight isn’t just the best film in A24’s catalog. It’s also quite possibly the best film of the decade. – OB

What’s your favorite A24 film? Let us know on Twitter @simplycinephile or in the comments below!

A filmmaker, much like any other creator, has a certain need to address specific topics. Finding that common denominator and expressing it in bits and pieces can either result in a stale piece of art or a never-ending, but exciting, challenge. Rémi Allier, for instance, is a director who prefers exploring the world through a child’s point of view. With short films such as Zinneke and Little Hands, he strives to depict reality from a child’s innocent viewpoint. Fascinated by the lack of prejudices and this overall pure instinctual version of life, Allier seeks to investigate subjects through this standpoint in order to provide a fresh perspective.

Being shortlisted for an Academy Award, Allier and I dive into a discussion about Little Hands to unpack certain moments in the film:

Ioanna Micha: Obviously, the first thought that comes to mind in this film is the welfare of the child actors. How did you ensure they were protected during the key scenes in the film that are quite intense and energetic?

Rémi Allier: I love kids in real life before loving them on the screen, so this wasn’t an option for me. Also, the rules are very strict in France when you are working with children. Working with child actors has been the core of my research for many years now (I did other films with kids, as a director/coach). Working with a baby for Little Hands, I had to re-invent everything I knew in order to reorganize the film-set and schedule around the welfare and safety of the baby. Emile, the child actor, is very close to me, I have known him since his birth, and his parents are some of my closest friends: his father, Martin Moulron, was the props master, and his mother, Lise Lejeune, was the Costume Designer. Then we had to build the relationship with other actors, especially with Jan Hammenecker (Bruno, the worker), so that they could get along and play. Once we had that bubble of trust and confidence around the babies (Emile, main actor, and Camille, the body double) we could explore safely.

As soon as we knew everybody was ready, our job as a film crew and my job a director was to make you, the audience, believe that the baby was going through a traumatic and violent experience, encountering those energetic and intense scenes, while in reality, he was just playing in the arms of his “friend”. The most violent thing he encountered was playing “helicopter” while running in the forest. It is all a matter of focal length, blocking, sound editing, and point of view. Most of the time when things appear the most violent, there is actually no baby involved, but just a dummy! I talked with many specialists of childhood, such as childcare workers, psychiatrists, stuntmen, actors, and directors to really understand what I would be able to do.

IM: Following on from that, how did you get the child to cry on cue?

RA: The kid was able to understand lots of things, but, of course, he wasn’t able to cry on cue. So, we had to organize our schedule in order to use the little accidents of a normal day, and record them. Throughout the day, a baby that age normally cries a few times, when hungry or tired, or upset because he dropped something. For example, after the “fall” in the forest, the baby cries loudly, in shock. In fact, he was just waking up from the afternoon nap, so he was a bit grumpy and confused, as he usually is when he is looking for his mother.

IM: Tell us about the background and context of the story which chronicles the closure of a factory. Was this based on a real-life incident?

RA: Closing factories are sadly something that happens a lot these days in France or Belgium, and I have seen it during my entire life. The film was inspired by many different actual events during which things went crazy. In 2015, a manager of Air France got his shirt ripped off during a protest. In 2014, the manager of Goodyear in Amiens was detained. Those events were signs that fear and anger against managers can lead to extreme violence. I was shocked by this, and moreover, I wanted to question that violence, where is the source of it, why do people feel such a strong pressure that they believe they have nothing to lose? Violence always has a source and it’s important to keep that in mind.

IM: Tell us about your cast.

RA: Emile Moulron Lejeune a.k.a. Léo is the baby that I have been watching growing up during the writing of the film. He had such a strong personality and generosity for a 2-year-old, and it was as if he had understood what we were doing. We had some really magical moments with him. Moreover, because he knows me and most of the crew, he knew he could be fearless. Jan Hammenecker a.k.a. Bruno, the worker abductor, is a famous actor in Belgium. I had the chance to work with him on an exercise during film school. It was one of those encounters that really change you. I think about him a lot when I write, so offering him the part of Bruno was more than natural to me. Also, he is a father and knows a lot about working with kids, so his generosity and overall involvement made him a strong ally. All the extras are actual workers from the area, whom we met there. They were so involved and professional.

IM: Where did you shoot and for how long?

RA: We shot the film in October 2016 for 2 weeks, 9 shooting days. In Aquitaine region in the South West of France, in 2 separate places, the forest in the Landes near the Atlantic ocean, and the factory in Lot et Garonne, further in the land.

IM: How did you get financing for the project?

RA: The film is a co-production between Belgium and France. (Wrong men and Films Grand huit). We received money from the Belgian and French sides. Public money from governments, Federation Wallonie Bruxelles, French CNC, Bourgogne Region, Aquitaine Region, Landes and Lot et Garonne funds, Arte TV channel, RTBF (Belgian National TV), Be TV, tax shelter. The budget was quite impressive because working with babies increases the shooting time and logistics, also everybody was paid.

IM: You came from an Editing background before you headed over to Belgium to study Directing. How do the two disciplines feed into your story-telling style?

RA: As an editor, I write in images more than words, so those shots, scenes, are already edited in my mind when I write them. This helps me a lot to feel the rhythm, the pace of my films. I think about films as if they would be one single shot, with only a string of emotion and tension. Also, my editing background helps me a lot on set to understand the way the space would be mapped or abstracted; the way the characters would be seen. I started to say I wanted to make films when I was 8, so I’m now trying to dig into that point of view I had as a kid. The idea of point of view guides my writing and my directing all the way to the editing room.

IM: How do French and Belgian culture differ in their filmmaking approaches, and do you appreciate the style of each when structuring your own work?

RA: France is a bigger country, and we can think of film as an industry there. Also, we, as French tend to take our work and ourselves very seriously, as artists, auteurs… sometimes a bit too seriously! In Belgium, film is more like arts and crafts; the audience is so tiny, as the country is. Also, there is in the mind of the population, a strong sense of humor, distance, and a way not to take things too seriously. So, I tend to mix the two cultures, trying to build casts and crews on two sides. It is a way to balance things out: having a very serious and engaged way of working with distance and questioning, and humor when needed. A set with two toddlers really changes the game because you have to juggle with making a film and changing diapers, or playing in muddy puddles!

IM: It is said that your work focuses on youth and childhood. What issues would you like to explore in the future using these as points of reference?

RA: I think our adult world is quite questionable. My next project is a feature film about a 10-year-old girl facing the end of the world as we know it. Exploring our world through the eyes of young kids is something that I find fascinating. It allows me to explore the darkest areas of our lives, but always keep the eyes towards light, hope, and can be humorous when needed.

IM: Salaud Morriset, who won the Oscar with Skin for Best Live Action Short in 2019, is representing your film. What are your hopes for it in the future?

RA: Skin is an amazing short, so having the same journey with Little Hands sounds crazy! Of course, the adventure we are having with Little Hands, with the César and all, is already crazy. I am so happy and excited whenever I think that we have new opportunities for the film to be seen by many people, and film professionals in the US. The response around the film in Telluride was incredible. The right goal for me is for the film to be seen by everyone. Plus I know that this might create opportunities for new encounters and projects, so I am very excited!

IM: Finally, would you consider expanding this short film into a feature?

RA: Definitely! I worked on a feature version of Little Hands. I think this will be my second feature! It’s a very ambitious project, and I love challenges. Also, I am always excited by creating new stories and images that I have never seen on a screen. So, yes! I’d be happy to!

The 2010s has been one of the most revolutionary decades for all things cinema. Technology has advanced, a slew of promising new actors have been introduced in Hollywood, and there are more exciting films to look forward to than ever before. As we segue into 2020—the start of a new decade to be full of new films to enjoy—the writers of The Simple Cinephile talk about their favorite films of the past decade:

If Beale Street Could Talk (2018)

Cast: KiKi Layne, Stephan James, Regina King

Director: Barry Jenkins

Where to watch: Amazon Prime Video

While many place Barry Jenkins’ Moonlight on their best of the decade lists, I also include If Beale Street Could Talk. Described by the director as a series of “memories, dreams, and nightmares,” this film holds me from start to finish every time. Nicholas Britell’s score and James Laxton’s cinematography evoke just as much emotion as the story and characters do themselves. This combination brings sound and color to Baldwin’s novel, inviting viewers to truly live the experiences of Tish and Fonny. Jenkins crafts Beale Street with such sensitivity that it’s impossible not to find yourself emotionally-invested and yearning for the young couple’s happiness.

Black love is a rare thing to see on screen with it usually being side-lined, but Beale Street dives deep, and that’s one of the reasons I love it so much. Their love is celebrated. The camera dwells; we have time to study the faces of our characters, we feel every touch and are warmed by the gentle, intimate moments. Their bodies are portrayed in a way that doesn’t feel exploitative, but true. One particular scene feels so private that I held my breath the first time I witnessed it, afraid to disturb the characters I cared for so much. If Beale Street Could Talk helped me learn to love myself more and will always remain incredibly important to me.

Honorable Mention: Little Women (2019)

Written by Yazz

The Wind Rises (2013)

Cast: Hideaki Anno, Hidetoshi Nishijima, Miori Takimoto

Director: Hayao Miyazaki

It has been a decade of swan songs (or at least films with the feeling of finality), with films such as Twin Peaks: The Return, First Reformed, Amour, or more recently The Irishman. We see artists who have been admired for many decades take a took at themselves and their accomplishments up to this point—how their latest work ties in with the themes they’ve investigated throughout their careers. No film displays this like Hayao Miyazaki’s beautiful and bittersweet The Wind Rises.

Focusing on a lifelong love of flight, Japanese aviation engineer Jiro Horikoshi’s storied career includes the creation of the A-6M World War II fighter plane, Miyazaki choosing to never choose a side of anti or pro-war, but the love of creation. Jiro’s drive to design is eclipsed by the morality of eventually what the aircraft are used for. The romance between Jiro and Naoko acts as a parallel to Jiro’s career—knowing the end is near but making the most of it. Despite being Miyazaki’s first foray into real-life adaptations, it’s never bound by the limitations of trying to remain accurate to the real like engineer. Instead, it fits perfectly into the catalog of Miyazaki’s masterworks, just a little wiser. It’s a movie that is gorgeous in every frame, from the sophisticated color palette to the master sound design from Koji Kasamatsu. Joe Hisaishi’s score is melancholic and romantic, especially the theme, which is able to exist as a piece of music both for the film and on its own. It’s clear from the very beginning that this is craft shaped from many decades.

Honorable Mention: The Florida Project (2017)

Written by Jack

The Hateful Eight (2015)

Cast: Samuel L. Jackson, Jennifer Jason Leigh, Kurt Russell, Walton Goggins, Tim Roth

Director: Quentin Tarantino

Where to watch: Netflix

That’s right, The Hateful Eight, largely considered by critics as one of Quentin’s Tarantino’s lesser films, is my favorite film of the 2010s. It’s a crying shame that the film is not considered in the same league as Tarantino’s most popular and acclaimed works such as Pulp Fiction or Inglorious Basterds because, for this cinephile, not only is it his favorite of the decade, but it is also his favorite of Tarantino’s entire oeuvre. That’s because The Hateful Eight is Tarantino at the top of his craft. Filmed on glorious 70mm, every composition in every frame receives rigorous attention to formal detail. Through careful staging, use of off-screen space, camera placement, framing, movement, and particularly the evolving utilization of foreground and background, creating those delicious deep space compositions, Tarantino can imbue his suspenseful confined take on the mystery genre, drawing from The Thing and The Great Silence, with a sophisticated formal elegance. An elegance which primarily manifests using layered wide screen composition. Each composition is filled to the brim with so much visual information consistently revealing and withholding crucial narration: an approach that would make Akira Kurosawa blush. As a result, the audience is constantly encouraged to scan the screen and unravel the layered mise-en-scène presented for any hint of subterfuge.

The Hateful Eight doesn’t stop at just virtuous visuals and compositions. Sound, particularly Ennio Morricone’s original score, plays such an important role in this audio-visual. Morricone’s fantastic score evokes a sense of suspenseful looming dread that could manifest and burst violently onto the screen at any moment. Speaking of violence, Tarantino through this tale of these hateful, sadistic, misogynistic, and racist strangers confined to this limited space in the aftermath of the civil war has much to say about the violent, selfish, and turbulent nature of America then and now. Tarantino intelligently juxtaposes moments of warmth and potential understanding with depravity calling for compassion in the middle of a wailing storm and a boiling poisoned pot of coffee. It is a cynical cold perspective on America’s political and social landscape—a nation founded on violence. However, none of this would work if the performances were in any way lacking, and boy oh boy, they sure aren’t. Walter Goggins, Jennifer Jason Leigh, and Samuel L. Jackson are clear highlights, and all involved eat up the ebb and flow of Tarantino’s signature witty dialogue at every turn.

Honorable Mention: Silence (2016)

Written by Lachlan

Frank (2014)

Cast: Michael Fassbender, Domhnall Gleeson, Maggie Gyllenhaal

Director: Lenny Abrahamson

There are few films from this decade that comment on performance, identity, and modern masculinity as aptly as Lenny Abrahamson’s Frank. Based on the real story of papier mâché head-wearing musician “Big Frank” Sidebottom—Abrahamson’s fictional adaptation brims with offbeat humor, strange instruments and a real appreciation for the weird and contradictory experiences that come with being human.

Jon (Domhnall Gleeson) is an aspiring musician who gets a gig working with an experimental, dead-end band run by the elusive, mask-wearing Frank (Michael Fassbender). Frank follows the disjointed process of the band as they work on their first album, as well as getting a sudden skyrocket to fame, thanks to the internet. But amidst the cartoonishness of Frank’s big head (metaphorically speaking, as well as his literal papier mâché head) and absurd songs, Frank is surprisingly moving and vulnerable. There are petty band disagreements and relationship dramas abound, sure, but there are deep sorrows and moral reconciliations just beneath the fanfare. At its core, Frank gets at the personal cost of building up walls and putting on masks. More importantly, it asks a compelling question of its characters and its audience: what happens when you’re deathly afraid of what’s underneath all of that?

Honorable Mention: Raw (2016)

Written by Cody

The Grand Budapest Hotel (2014)

Cast: Ralph Fiennes, Tony Revolori, Saoirse Ronan, Willem Dafoe, Adrien Brody, Bill Murray

Director: Wes Anderson

Choosing one of so many great films brought to the public this decade was an extremely difficult task. Add to this the fact that, as a millennial young woman, probably 80% of my movie baggage was built just this decade. So, in order to get to my chosen one, I set some criteria: the film should be technically as good as its narrative—including editing, visual effects, etc.; its director’s style should definitely be present throughout the film; the acting of the cast should convince viewers that these characters were real within that story; and it should be as memorable to me as a bedside book.

Finally, I came to the conclusion that​ The Grand Budapest Hotel, directed by Wes Anderson, is my favorite movie of the decade. Bringing together familiar faces from previous Anderson films such as Owen Wilson, Bill Murray, Edward Norton, Jason Schwartzman and Adrien Brody—and notable new additions—Tilda Swinton, Léa Seydoux, Jude Law, and Saoirse Ronan, to name a few.​ The Grand Budapest Hotel not only meets all the requirements listed above, but also has everything one could wish for in a great story—from drama to romance, mystery, and comedy—without ever losing its essence. Besides its delightful visual aesthetic—one of Anderson’s trademarks, along with his talent for storytelling—​The Grand Budapest Hotel takes supplements of classic genres, like the chase films from the First Cinema Era, the jailbreak films and the noir films, something that honors the history of the Seventh Art, and serves as a full plate for all cinephiles.

Honorable Mention: Get Out (2017), Mommy (2014), Palo Alto (2013), Columbus (2017)

Written by Leticia

Palo Alto (2013)

Cast: Emma Roberts, Jack Kilmer, Nat Wolff, James Franco

Director: Gia Coppola

Where to watch: Amazon Prime Video, Netflix, Kanopy

Palo Alto, Gia Coppola’s directorial debut, came out in 2013—a year known for its surge of teen movies, such as The Bling Ring, The Spectacular Now, the Carrie remake, and The Kings of Summer. Among all of these (and more), Palo Alto seemed to jump out at me and resonate with me so much that I just had to pick it as my movie of the decade. The simple plot line (but complex in the characters’ eyes) is quite niche as a whole, but so many of the character’s traits and side plots pull me in and almost mirror my own relationships and feelings. It’s like a comfort movie—seeing all these high school students struggling, but ultimately the main characters getting their happy ending. The beautiful cinematography makes you almost feel like you’re in a dream, or as if you’re an onlooker onto these seemingly mundane but twisted happenings. The soundtrack is also the finishing touch to the movie, filled with melancholy songs to add as a backdrop to the characters’ ennui and dark teenage angst.

Honorable Mention: Lady Bird

Written by Maddie

Ex Machina (2014)

Cast: Alicia Vikander, Oscar Isaac, Domhnall Gleeson, Sonoya Mizuno

Director: Alex Garland

Where to watch: Amazon Prime Video, Netflix, Kanopy

A staggeringly beautiful and innovative story of technological testing from the last 10 years which holds up as one of my absolute film favorites. Alex Garland makes a grandiose debut led by the star-making turn of the truly entrancing human-esque robotics of Alicia Vikander. Ex Machina is a captivating, chilling, blue-toned science fiction feature that has a lot to say—and if that’s not enough, there’s that spectacular dance moment starring Oscar Isaac.

Honorable Mention: Sing Street (2016)

Written by Troy

Phantom Thread (2017)

Cast: Daniel Day-Lewis, Vicky Krieps

Director: Paul Thomas Anderson

Where to watch: Crave (Canada)

Phantom Thread isn’t just an intriguing title. This is a ghost story—of the past returning to haunt the present, of letting go, and the trouble with breaking a curse. In his supposedly final performance, Daniel Day-Lewis is Reynolds Woodcock, ‘50s London’s most in-demand and highly-strung dressmaker. In absentia from work, Reynolds meets waitress Alma and embarks on a love affair that threatens to shake up the prestigious House of Woodcock for good. If only she can show him how to relax a little. This is a gorgeously conceived, seductive film with a huge appetite (for both people and food) and often belly-aching in its humor, tossing screwball energy at a twisted romance that’s far weirder and more subversive than you’re expecting. Frankly, Vicky Krieps, the film’s devilish anti-muse, was robbed. Imagine a decade without a new Paul Thomas Anderson masterpiece.

Honorable Mention: The Guest (2014)

Written by Luke

Frances Ha (2012)

Cast: Greta Gerwig, Mickey Sumner, Adam Driver

Director: Noah Baumbach

Where to watch: Netflix

Perhaps better films than Frances Ha have come out this decade, but there is certainly no movie from the past ten years that has filled me with the same amount of happiness and warmth. Watching Frances Ha is like wearing your favorite sweater, or drinking a nice cup of tea, or chatting with an old friend. To me, it is pure comfort. The film follows a 27-year-old dancer, Frances (Greta Gerwig), as she meanders through apartments, relationships, and jobs. Frances, it is clear, isn’t quite sure of who she is. “I’m so embarrassed,” she says in one scene, “I’m not a real person yet.” This quote is, in many ways, central to the film.

Frances Ha is about people in different stages of becoming—people who aren’t quite fully formed human beings yet. Far from shying away from the scary idea of being in your 20s without knowing where you’re headed, the film is a celebration of the state of being a work-in-progress. Its nostalgic black-and-white cinematography and charming performances time and time again ease my fears of the future, gently reminding me that it’s okay to be a little lost.

Honorable Mention: The Florida Project (2017)

Written by Saru

Arrival (2016)

Cast: Amy Adams, Jeremy Renner, Forest Whitaker, Michael Stuhlbarg

Director: Denis Villeneuve

Where to watch: Amazon Prime Video

Arrival is a masterpiece—it’s a deeply introspective rumination on human nature, our desires, our fears, and our faults. The score and cinematography are incredibly haunting, and the screenplay and use of language as a plot device is brilliant. Arrival hits you like a gut punch and stays with you long after the credits roll. Am I forgetting anything? Oh, right, Amy Adams gives one of the best performances of all time. We will never forgive and never forget that The Academy snubbed her.

Honorable Mention: Lady Bird (2017)

Written by Meg

How to Train Your Dragon (2010)

Cast: Jay Baruchel, America Ferrera, Gerard Butler, Kristen Wiig, Jonah Hill, David Tennant

Director: Chris Sanders, Dean DeBlois

Where to watch: Amazon Prime Video, Netflix

The thing about How to Train Your Dragon is that it’s a perfect movie. I’m sorry if you don’t agree with this, but then I have to ask: what don’t you enjoy about an underdog story? Hiccup, the unlikely hero of the story and our fateful protagonist, is constantly trying to prove himself—whether that be trying to make his Viking father proud, or attempting to hold his own against the dragons that systematically invade his village of Berk. When he captures a dragon of his own, Hiccup feels that killing him is the only way to finally convey to the rest of his village that he’s not a coward—and yet, he can’t do it.

From then on, Hiccup’s relationship with his new dragon—named Toothless—is the core of the film, demonstrating acceptance and what it means to come into one’s own. Hiccup carried me through my gawky teenage years and well into young adulthood, because there’s nothing more comforting than seeing your own awkwardness mirrored onscreen and realizing that maybe, just maybe, things will get better. For those of us that never feel like the heroes in our own lives, the ones who look in the mirror and wonder if we’re ever going to conquer whatever beasts we’re fighting: take a look inside your heart, and maybe you’ll see Hiccup staring back.

Honorable Mention: Brooklyn (2015)

Written by Gaby

First Reformed (2017)

Cast: Ethan Hawke, Amanda Seyfried, Cedric the Entertainer, Philip Ettinger

Director: Paul Schrader

Where to watch: Amazon Prime Video

If any film captures the unique yet universal feeling of existential dread that came with the 2010s, it’s Paul Schrader’s First Reformed. Schrader immerses his audience in a cold and harrowing world of unanswerable questions. Through a very specific tale of existential dread, First Reformed subtly digs at blind evangelism and the damage that religious denial has aided in causing. At the start of the film, Ethan Hawke’s Reverend Ernst Toller quotes Thomas Merton as he states “I know nothing can change, and I know there is no hope.”

Although the film presents many queries, First Reformed is about the horrors that transpire when we as individuals lose hope. As bleak as Paul Schrader’s latest is, it functions as a plea to open our eyes and harden our hearts, because the damage humanity has caused will not be undoing itself anytime soon.

Honorable Mention: Carol (2015)

Written by Ella

Open up your windows and hark at the sounds of screaming teenagers! Do you know what day it is? Why, yes. It’s Jason’s day—Friday the 13th!

Friday the 13th, through stellar makeup, gnarly kills, and delightfully corny franchise gimmicks, prevails as a seminal piece of the slasher craze puzzle, spawning a long-enduring franchise and one of the most recognizable horror icons of all time. Regardless if you’ve seen them, you know who Jason is; he’s a figment, like most 80s slashers, of the moral-fixturing, Reagan-era cinematic folklore. Slay the air-headed teens on the cusp of adulthood, while leaving the headstrong, quick-thinking good girl, who abstains from passed-around paraphernalia and other promiscuous proclivities, and lives to see another day.

The Friday the 13th films may not be as immediately well regarded for its very 80s sub-textual layering, amid the creative slaughtering of hormone-infused teenagers, of other slashics like John Carpenter’s Halloween or Wes Craven’s A Nightmare on Elm Street, but it means a lot to me as a formative piece of my long-standing love affair with horror. I learned from a young age who Jason was, yet had never seen any of the films, that is, until I stumbled upon the 8-film DVD box set at a pawn shop. For years, I hid the collection from my folks, waiting until they went to bed to watch them. I still own that set and have no plans to ever get rid of it; I owe way too much to it.

The series is currently strung up in a seemingly never ending legal kerfuffle between Friday scribe Victor Miller and director Sean S. Cunningham claiming true ownership of the property, essentially prohibiting another movie from getting off the ground until the dust clears. Who knows when Jason will don the mask once again? But in the meantime, we have 12 films, each of varying quality, to look back on.

In the midst of smashing mirrors, walking under ladders, or getting a novelty tattoo, why not take a few moments to scroll through another ranking of the Friday the 13th films? And I’d be tickled blood red if you did. We wouldn’t want to upset our machete-wielding slasher of ceremonies, now would we? Note that these rankings change almost every year in my head, so consider this my in-the-moment ranking. With that out of the way, *SPOILERS AHEAD*.

12) Jason Goes to Hell: The Final Friday

Jason Goes to Hell is a great example of stellar marketing for an awful film. Jason melting away in a New York sewer hardly seemed like a proper (second) finale for such an iconic villain. Where Jason Goes to Hell goes wrong is its opening prologue. A hoodwinked Jason (Kane Hodder) rummaging through the woods of Camp Crystal Lake is ambushed by the FBI who essentially lure him out into the open by exploiting his own formula against him (a beautiful woman making herself comfortable in an isolated cabin). The squadron then proceeds to blow him to kingdom come until all that’s left is a still-beating heart. What a finale! Oh, there’s a whole movie left? Wait, he’s not “Jason” Jason, he’s a slimy slug monster that possesses one body after the other until he inhabits the body of, let’s see if I’m reading this correctly, another Voorhees? Okay…

You know you’re in trouble when your horror movie peaks within the first ten minutes. I suppose it was a bold decision to suppress the franchise’s icon in favor of taking a bizarre new turn for the character, but the majority of Jason Goes to Hell struggled in bringing me over to its side of the table. New additions like Steven Williams’ Creighton Duke, an insightful bounty hunter type who constantly unleashes Jason intel out of his ass, and Steven, played by John D. LeMay of Friday the 13th: The Series fame, are stiff additions to the series even for Friday the 13th standards. All the talk of a Voorhees prophecy only makes Jason significantly less interesting and/or intimidating. Just ask Michael (see Halloween 6: The Curse of Michael Myers).

New Line Cinema’s first entry of the series after acquiring the rights from Paramount really fumbles with super lame characters, a botched attempt at mythology, and the worst crime of all—endowing the definitive Jason, Kane Hodder, with one of the character’s coolest looks (mask grafted onto his face) only to immediately can it for, I repeat, a slime worm. Surprise Freddy tease or not, this one’s a dud.

Most Memorable Kill—Deborah’s impaling in the tent is a solid gore effect on its own, but the Jason-possessed coroner (Richard Gant) immediately splitting her in half with the rod is the icing on the cake.

11) Friday the 13th: A New Beginning

It only took a year after The Final Chapter, but Friday the 13th emerged with another franchise black sheep that ultimately ranks towards the bottom of my list with A New Beginning—the film that proves that slasher villains only stay dead if their box office does. The film’s inciting incident isn’t someone disappearing in the woods or even a teenage Tommy Jarvis (John Shepherd), reserved as ever, arriving at the forest halfway house for troubled youths, but rather one of the home’s inhabitants, the comically adult-sized Vic (Mark Venturini), cleaving fellow resident Joey (Dominick Brascia) with an ax after a meaningless dispute about wood chopping and candy bars. The kids go missing, there’s a killer on the loose and it must be Jason, you know the drill.

A New Beginning is the first Friday film since the original to incorporate a mystery killer, and despite the honest attempts at setting paths for multiple red herrings (Tommy plagued by visions of Jason looming over his shoulder, mysterious drifter, etc.), the suspicious close-up of the distraught paramedic Roy (Dick Weiand) standing over Joey’s body lingers way too long for a supposed throwaway character we’ve just met. As it turns out, he’s our killer, masquerading as Jason with blue stripes instead of red ones. The revelation that Joey was his son is a different change of pace, but its unveiling only makes you question Roy’s motivation to slaughter innocent teens instead of focusing all his efforts on Vic. The idea is to make everyone believe Jason did it, but with Vic already imprisoned, there’s no clever method to his revenge scheme. And I’m not even going to get into the egregiously obnoxious Ethel (Carol Locatell) and her dim-witted son Junior (Ron Sloan) whose personas are reduced to yelling and screeching until they’ve exhausted all the oxygen out of the scene (“You big dildo, eat your f***ing slop!”). Their deaths are easily the most cathartic of the bunch.

Once the Roy nonsense is dispatched of, A New Beginning attempts to provide a reason to continue forward with a final scene including Tommy that ultimately proved as influential as Halloween 4’s finale set-up—not very. It also doesn’t help that director Danny Steinmann was notoriously recognized as a sleaze. Otherwise, the only real contribution A New Beginning brings to the series, besides the energetic Reggie (Shavar Ross) and a prologue with the only glance of Corey Feldman post-The Final Chapter, is the reaffirmation that Tommy really has the worst luck.

Most Memorable Kill—The kills of A New Beginning are largely unimpressive, save for the leather strap Roy wraps around Eddie’s eyes against a tree, tightening it until it inevitably crushes his skull.

10) Jason X

Welcome to Jason X, the tenth installment of the Friday series in which director James Isaac (Skinwalkers) asks ‘what if we took the foreboding threat aboard a claustrophobic space convoy structure of Alien, and made it mind-numbingly stupid?’ Indeed, this is the one where Jason goes to space. It’s almost a rite of passage for the slasher villain stretched far beyond their initial intent. Eight movies prior, Jason was a sack-covered hermit in the woods, and now, with his chrome-plated upgrade, he could go toe-to-toe with the Terminator if he really wanted to. Pinhead (Hellraiser: Bloodline) and Leprechaun (Leprechaun 4: In Space) already took that leap years ago so it makes sense that Jason would aim for the stars while New Line figures out how to get their then ‘in production hell’ Freddy vs. Jason off the ground.

In the far off future of 2010, we’ve reached the Crystal Lake Research Facility stage of Jason’s rampaging because he’s just so enigmatically unkillable, there’s really no other option than to dedicate an entire building just to study his decades-long endurance. Of everything that could be remembered about this entry, it’s that Jason X, nevertheless, holds the distinct honor of awakening its titular antagonist from cryogenic freezing—not by any sort of futuristic resuscitation, but the sonic waves of an intergalactic orgasm halfway across the spaceship; welcome to the 25th century! The standout, by default, among a sea of some pretty lackluster performances is Lisa Ryder’s KM-14—a sentient, fully capable AI who, in addition to wanting to be treated as if she were human, spends the film’s most entertaining bits in an altercation with Jason (pre and post-chrome upgrades) with some mildly amusing bits of humor thrown in the mix.

For the longest time, Jason X ranked towards the absolute bottom. I dreaded rewatching it, and while it’s bad (like, really bad), I have to admit I found myself settling into its cheap 90s movie groove a bit more this time. You can’t help but laugh at the absurd scenarios it pushes Jason into. It even finds a way for the still-frozen Jason to hack off a limb without moving a literal muscle. It’s an immediate step up from New Line’s first Friday venture if only for a pretty rad David Cronenberg (The Brood, Videodrome) cameo as an unimpressed superior who attempts to free 2010 Jason for his own means only to have that backfire in the ‘spear through the chest’ way. When he’s not doing his thing, however, Jason X plods.

Most Memorable Kill—Jason + Adrienne + liquid nitrogen + counter *SMASH* =

9) Friday the 13th: Part III

Friday the 13th: Part III is the ‘nothing more, nothing less’ stage of the series, setting the template that would remain a constant for the years the Friday films were produced under the Paramount banner. Part III rode the waves of the 80s 3D revival, Jaws 3D and Amityville 3-D following suit, utilizing the effect to hurl as many objects towards the camera in the hopes that they would make audiences jump—a yo-yo, a laundry pole, apple juggling in the living room, detached eyeballs, etc. Funnily enough, of all the tricks that would only really work if you had the glasses, the best 3D effect was Jason (Richard Brooker) harpooning Vera (Catherine Parks) from across the dock. Even without the 3D, the way it whizzes by the camera makes me instinctively flinch every time.

Part III’s most notable contribution to the series, however, is endowing Jason with his iconic hockey mask by way of the insufferable Shelley (Lary Zerner), one of the most reviled characters of the Friday series, if not number one. In addition to his whining when the group shares their mutual animosity towards his pranks, Shelley often turns to incel-ish behavior when Vera shows no interest in sleeping with him (“Being a jerk is better than being a nothing.”). Jason takes what’s rightfully his from the annoying prankster, and steps out for the first time onto the docks with a confidence that would define the slasher for years to come; still an amazingly simple reveal.

As a collective, the group dynamic of Part III, despite most of them being friends prior to their arrival at Higgins Heaven, is lacking. Nothing particularly stands out about final girl Chris (Dana Kimmell) either, besides her backstory with Jason prior to the film’s events. Jason aside, the characters that were the most fun to watch were the trouble making, leather-clad bikers (Gloria Charles, Nick Savage, and Kevin O’Brien). I always love that little smile Nick Savage gives before smashing Shelley’s driver’s side window. As a sequel to Part 2, it pales in comparison, but takes on its own gimmicky accords, Friday the 13th: Part III is an average, enjoyable entry of the Friday canon.

Most Memorable Kill—Performing an impressive handstand feat while Jason’s about proves fatal. I especially love the brief perspective shot underneath when Jason swings the machete down on Andy… and his crotch.

8) Friday the 13th Part VIII: Jason Takes Manhattan

Hear me out before you hang me out to dry. At one point, I would have found it sacrilege to rank Friday the 13th Part VIII: Jason Takes Manhattan above any of the previous Fridays, let alone Part III, but this re-watch made me appreciate it a little bit more. Let me repeat—a LITTLE bit more. After securing another hockey mask complete with the ax gash from Part III for some reason, I like to imagine Jason (Kane Hodder), as he’s grabbing hold of the anchor, thinking to himself, “yeah, you know what? I think I’ve earned a little vacation.” I always thought the S.S. Lazarus—the massive ship that somehow docked in the shallow Crystal Lake—was a fun, claustrophobic set (complete with a disco dance floor) that gave Jason plenty of room to play as he tortured Rennie (Jensen Daggett) and her graduating classmates of Lakeview High.

You’re essentially getting two Friday films for the price of one with Jason Takes Manhattan. The issue is that by the time the remaining survivors abandon ship and make their way into a New York City harbor, a full hour into the movie who’s poster featured Jason looming over the city, it’s easy to feel exhausted before some of the film’s most iconic developments even get going. I always found it amusing how Jason is more of a casual nuisance to New Yorkers than a looming threat. He looks amazing in the center of Times Square (Hodder thought so too while fans shouted to him during production), and the one thing he does in the famed tourist attraction (kick a boombox owned by some ‘tough’ street punks) is one of the series’ funniest bursts of humor.

Not a fan of the finale in which Jason is ultimately defeated by the toxic sludge of the NY sewer system, highlighting the character’s goofiest makeup design. It’s probably best that the Friday series took a much-needed break after this one. Considering its lesser stature among the Paramount films, Friday the 13th Part VIII: Jason Takes Manhattan is a *little* better than it’s reputation would suggest.

Most Memorable Kill—The death of Julius plays like a well-told joke. Over and over, he throws blows to an otherwise unfazed Jason who only really takes the ‘beating’ out of pity. Julius is the only Friday victim, if I recall, that actively submits to a Jason punishment (“Take your best shot”). Voila, the scene arrives at a literal PUNCHline as Jason knocks his block off, tumbling down the side of a building and into a dumpster. *chef’s kiss*

7) Friday the 13th (2009)

Of the heavily saturated Platinum Dunes remake-era, the 2009 addition of Friday the 13th doesn’t exactly stand up to Marcus Nispel’s previous Texas Chainsaw Massacre remake from 2003, but it’s a decent Friday film in its own right. The re-imagining shares the same issue with Jason Takes Manhattan in that it does feel like two different Friday films back-to-back. The difference being that the lengthy prologue heavily plays into the momentum of the actual plot even if that stretch of the film never matches the sheer urgency and ferocity of its opening. I really appreciate how the narrative structure is slightly akin to Psycho. The prologue hoodwinks us by having us believe Whitney (Amanda Righetti) will be the film’s sole survivor only to have her disappear after Jason’s opening rampage, prompting a loved one, her brother Clay (Jared Padalecki), to search the area for any sign she’s still alive. And then you have your usual brand of college-aged mischief-makers ringing Jason’s dinner bell, rounding out to a pretty significant body count.

It’s difficult to label this version as an outright remake because it really isn’t. Nispel conceives this stuffed amalgamation of the first three films as a “best of” display of the series’ most iconic beats (i.e death of Mrs. Voorhees, Part 2’s sack, and, of course, Part III’s discovery of the hockey mask). The best part about a Friday the 13th re-imagining is that, with core franchise elements intact, it slips in nicely as an extension of the Paramount films, slightly altering an integral development in Jason’s mythology. There’s nothing too drastic here besides the unconventional structure and inner workings of Jason’s underground dominion. It assumes you get the gist of what these movies are and doesn’t pretend to be anything but.

Derek Mears embodies a relentless, ruthless Jason who swings his trademark machete and other sharp instruments with ease. Make no mistake, the kills are brutal. The 2009 remake of Friday the 13th is a gruesome return-to-form that, while feeling extraordinarily lengthy, reignites the flame of Jason’s bulking menace. I recommend sticking to the Killer Cut for extended sequences that really accentuate the ferocity of the gore effects.

Most Memorable Kill—Almost went with the prologue’s ‘sleeping bag roasting on an open fire’ setup, but it’s ultimately more satisfying to see Jason giving Trent, the movie’s resident prick, his grisly comeuppance, utilizing his trusty machete and the back of a tow truck.

6) Friday the 13th Part VII: The New Blood

The New Blood abandons its tongue-in-cheek approach from Jason Lives, yet replaces it with an overall “let’s get nuts” vibe where it asks ‘what if Jason went one-on-one with Carrie?’ Traumatized by the accidental death of her abusive father caused by her telekinesis, the shy Tina (Lar Park Lincoln) takes a trip out to her old home out by Crystal Lake with her mother (Susan Blu) and the duplicitous Dr. Crews (Terry Kiser) to try to get her gift under control. Of course, when Tina takes out her frustrations after a bad session, she couldn’t have known that the rotting Jason was lying at the bottom of the lake. Cue the party kids at the house next door, and you have yourselves a decent slasher with a slight sci-fi bent.

What makes The New Blood a monumental slice of Friday history is the glorious, intimidating introduction of stuntman Kane Hodder donning the hockey mask for the first time. He’s the favorite for a reason, despite appearing in some of the series’ lesser entries. The man can take hours of makeup, falling through stairs, being set on fire, having a roof dropped on him, and make it look like just another day at the office. And to think, once the mask is disposed of in the finale, his excellent facial makeup gives the character a whole new intimidation factor.

The film’s most glaring detriments are its limited gore and off-screen kills, an issue largely attributed to the flawed ratings system. Other Friday films were butchered by notes from the ratings board, but none as heavily as The New Blood. Director John Carl Buechler shot some gnarly kills, no more gruesome than what was depicted in previous films, only to have the pinheads at the MPAA, ironically, slash this movie to pieces in order to secure an R rating. It doesn’t help that the extra bloody cuts of these death scenes are only available in poor quality, rendering an unrated director’s cut pointless. It’s extra sad considering that Buechler sadly passed earlier this year in March.

Nevertheless, The New Blood claims the #6 spot if only for the finale in which Tina unleashes the full extent of her repressed telekinetic abilities to ward off Jason at every turn. And then, to top it all off, the battle royale concludes with one hell of a mighty in-camera house explosion by Crystal Lake. What a sight. While the final product was heavily botched in the editing room, Friday the 13th Part VII: The New Blood is still a worthy, if not watered down, extension of Jason’s evolution post-Part VI.

Most Memorable Kill—Ah, the sleeping bag—a Friday staple. Jason’s a simple beast. He sees a sleeping bag, he bashes the poor person inside of it against a tree.

5) Freddy vs. Jason

It took near forever for the two slasher titans to go toe-to-toe with one another but Freddy vs. Jason somehow managed to pull it off. From the perspective of the opening prologue, this is no doubt a Nightmare feature with Freddy (Robert Englund) plucking the dormant Jason (Ken Kirzinger) from the bowels of hell to do his bogeyman bidding on the unsuspecting children of Springwood, that is, until the machete-wielding mama’s boy gets a little too carried away. When you get down to it, this movie is essentially the lazy half of a group project outsourcing the work only to discover the overachiever getting all the credit, but the project is slashing teenagers for slasher supremacy.

Freddy vs. Jason is by no means a great movie. Bar Englund and Kirzinger, the lead performances, 20-somethings masquerading as teenagers, range from passable to laughably terrible. There’s even a double hitter exchange in the otherwise rousing finale that features distracting casual racist/homophobic comments revolving around Kia (Kelly Rowland) and Freddy’s ultimate confrontation. Otherwise, the fun remains prevalent throughout. Luckily this isn’t a case of saving the goods for the ending. This is a slasher movie, after all. Kirzinger’s silent, slightly pitiful (as one can be for an infamous serial murderer) Jason receives an arc that essentially makes Freddy look like even more of a ghoulish dream exploiter than he already is.

The entire foundation of Freddy vs. Jason is the promise of a spectacular slice-and-dice showdown between these two reigning horror heavyweights, and on that front, it’s as glorious as any gore hound could ever dream of. Each slash, punch, stab, and impale is spectacularly brutal, especially when they utilize each other’s signature weapon of choice on one another. And the best part is that the final altercation isn’t the only time the two titans square off. There’s plenty of bodies to go around. Freddy vs. Jason’s aspirations to entertain at all costs, amid the drawn-out drama within the group of slasher fodder, ensures its re-watchability and its placement on this list.

Most Memorable Kill—Jason shoving Freddy’s signature through the serial murderer’s chest, followed by Lori’s decapitation maneuver, would have occupied this spot had Freddy ACTUALLY died and not, you know, give a knowing wink to the camera. So we’re going with Jason’s first kill on Elm Street. Post-coital Trey (Jesse Hutch) doesn’t even get a chance to finish his beer before Jason repeatedly plunges his machete through the bed before (back)cracking a cold one of his own.

4) Friday the 13th: The Final Chapter

You see, this is where it gets tricky. Arranging these next four slots is like asking which child I love more. I unequivocally adore the remaining four Friday films in the same manner; they’re easily interchangeable depending on which week you ask me. However, it would happen that Friday the 13th: The Final Chapter lands in fourth place, ironically enough, this week. The opening recap indicates that this was to be the film where Jason (Ted White) involuntarily hangs up his mask after one last slaughter of some promiscuous teens renting a house in the vicinity of Camp Crystal Lake for the weekend. They should be fine.

From start to finish, The Final Chapter is loaded with memorable moments, most of which belong to the alleged ‘dead fuck’ Jimmy (Crispin Glover). It’s no wonder Jason has it out for him. Glover steals every scene he’s in. His enigmatic, possession state dance in the living room could provide enough material for an entire essay in and of itself. Corey Feldman is also fantastic as a young Tommy Jarvis, the quick-thinking neighbor kid with an affinity for crafting intricately detailed masks, puppets, etc. He’s the only character besides Jason himself that keeps up with appearances despite the heavy rotation of actors between films. What the remaining teens lack in fully-fledged personalities, they more than make up with an immense sense of likability. Well, not Ted (Lawrence Monoson), the designated prick of the assemblage.

Of all the ways to momentarily incapacitate Jason prior to his zombification in later installments, having the killer land on his proverbial sword, face first, after Tommy takes a good whack, is a great way to ‘kill’ him for the time being. After the slightly lackluster kills of Part III, effects wizard Tom Savini returns to put a little oomph back into some of Jason’s slayings. The FINAL bit of the Friday the 13th: The Final Chapter may mean jack in context of the series’ future, but the remarkable cast, amusing deaths, and satisfying conclusion altogether establishes this entry as an exceptional 80s slasher.

Most Memorable Kill—Crispin Glover, yet again, lands another Friday achievement with a humorous, well-timed death scene involving Jason’s machete and a corkscrew.

3) Friday the 13th (1980)

It appears that, as the years have passed, the original Friday the 13th from 1980 has slowly started creeping towards the bottom of some lists. I was fully prepared to knock it down a few spots after this recent viewing. And not only did it rank among my favorites, it even made me appreciate its low-budget simplicity that much more. Friday the 13th, for all its unintentionally goofy eccentricities brought on by some of the lead performances, is an effectively moody slice of horror cinema that relies on the long stretches of silence to create a foreboding atmosphere that, while never reaching Hitchcockian heights, remains consistently eerie.

Harry Manfredini’s Psycho-inspired composition, a reliable constant throughout most of the series, brings the film to life, maintaining the uneasy significance of the unseen looming threat just off the corner. It’s as sharp as the bloody instruments themselves. The twist regarding Betsy Palmer’s Pamela Voorhees obviously doesn’t hold the same weight on repeat viewings. But the way she flips on a dime, reciting the story of her drowned son, Jason, to a shaken Alice (Adrienne King) in the form of one of the great screen villain monologues, is chilling stuff.

And just when you think Alice is safe, she’s struck by one of the quintessential jump scares, the decaying Jason (Ari Lehmen) arising from the lake to avenge his fallen mother, that’s still pretty freaky even by modern standards. Friday the 13th may have been born out of the attempt to make a quick buck off of the post-Halloween slasher craze, yet its engrossing atmosphere, tangible characters, and killer revelation is always a perfect reminder of why I fondly regard this series so dearly.

Most Memorable Kill—Mrs. Voorhees’ decapitation, complete with Tom Savini’s hairy knuckles, is an all-timer, but the inaugural Friday slaying award goes to Kevin Bacon’s gushing arrow through the throat from beneath the bottom bunk. Nasty stuff.

2) Friday the 13th: Part 2

While structurally similar to the first film, there’s something about Friday the 13th: Part 2 I find more to love with. There’s a scene early on with all of the counselors of Camp Packanack gathered around the campfire as Paul (John Furey) recounts the legend of Camp Blood’s unofficial mascot himself. If there were one scene to embody the spirit of Friday the 13th, this would be it. Bar a few exceptions laden throughout the films, this is the first Friday feature where anticipating the deaths, except for Scott (Russell Todd), actually disheartened me, notably the blossoming connection between Mark (Tom McBride) and Vickie (Lauren-Marie Taylor). You just can’t catch a break when you’re slasher fodder in a Friday the 13th film. Friday the 13th’s Alice (Adrienne King) learns this the hard way in a prologue that wraps up the last loose end of the previous film.

Part 2 also contains the series first match cut that indicates a wry sense of humor behind the camera showing a small dog walk over by Jason’s boots with an immediate hard cut to sizzling hot dogs on a grill. It’s simple, yet effectively funny. The sack Jason wears, despite his similar appearance to the slasher from The Town That Dreaded Sundown, is a good look on him (complete with pitchfork) as the first step in the series’ continuing trend of Jason’s gruesome upgrades/transformations with each new film. The early Friday films are a pleasant reminder that, yes, there really was a time where Jason was vulnerable.

Of the Friday final girls, Amy Steele’s Ginny is, without a doubt, my favorite. The only reason why the cat and mouse game between her and sack Jason (Steve Dash) lasts as long as it does is because Ginny can really think on her feet, deceiving Jason by putting on Pamela’s blood-stained white sweater to momentarily distract him. If Jason were headed in my direction, Ginny is the Friday MVP I’d want by my side. Friday the 13th: Part 2 refines everything that worked about the previous film, offering an array of likable, mischievous camp counselors, creative deaths, and the expansion upon the legend of the infamous Jason.

Most Memorable Kill—Nearly went with Sandra (Marta Kober) and Jeff (Bill Randolph) being shish kebab-ed to the bed, but then I thought about poor Mark (Tom McBride) minding his own business. Next thing you know, he receives a machete to the face before rolling backwards down a flight of stairs about as steep as the Exorcist steps.

1) Friday the 13th: Part VI – Jason Lives

At last, we’ve arrived at the absolute pinnacle of the entire Friday saga—Friday the 13th Part VI: Jason Lives. In the character’s final appearance, adult Tommy Jarvis (Thom Matthews) is on a mission to properly dispose of the hockey mask menace once and for all. Little does he know that his little stunt, impaling the maggot-infested corpse with a graveyard fence post, revives the zombified Jason (CJ Graham) à la Frankenstein when a bolt of lighting falls from the sky. Oops.

Predating the self-aware Scream wave of the late 90s, director Tom McLoughlin gets a head start, employing a much needed sharp, satirical edge to the Friday series that only pushes the level of meta parody so far. Jason Lives was very much ahead of its time in regards to lampooning the tried-and-true tropes that dominated most horror films around that time without sacrificing the bare necessities of a Friday feature. It’s extremely funny from start to finish. “I’ve seen enough horror movies to know that a weirdo in a mask is never friendly,” the concerned Lizabeth (Nancy McLoughlin) says before foolishly bargaining with Jason through the promise of her American Express card. Clever match cuts (“Do they think I’m a farthead?”/“Yes!”), darkly comical deaths, breakneck pace; you name it, Jason Lives has it in spades.

There’s nary a moment wasted. From Jason’s resurrection onward, Jason Lives maintains a breakneck pace in which the danger is always present and its humorous sensibilities are consistently on point. I always appreciated how this was the only Friday that actually featured children in the crossfire at Camp Crystal Lake (or Camp Forest Green). There comes a point where a few of them accept that, yeah, there’s a likely chance they’re about to die in a horror movie (“So, what were you going to be when you grew up?”) All in good fun, the film features a bevy of laughs directed towards Jason to the point where even he’s in on the joke. I’ll never forget the sheer awe and confusion upon seeing Jason’s 007-inspired gun-barrel sequence.

And lest we forget, Alice Cooper’s The Man Behind the Mask is easily the greatest 80s rock ballad Jason could ever hope for. After the unimpressive proceedings of Part V, Friday the 13th: Part VI – Jason Lives is a thoroughly excellent slasher flick that never squanders the opportunities presented before it, humorous or otherwise.

Most Memorable Kill—Sheriff Garris bent over backwards for a heroic death scene, but it’s Hawes who takes the glory. When you’re Jason and you’ve been resurrected by the lightning bolts of Zeus himself, you’ve gotta get back to work, and so Jason does, brutally ripping Hawes’ heart out of his chest within the first two minutes of reanimation.

And we’ve made it to the end! You survived! As a reward, may I present my personal favorite moment in all 12 films. It’s so pure and Hodder’s body language sells it beautifully:

What’s your favorite movie in the Friday the 13th franchise? Let us know in the comments!

Isn’t life just a series of moments with different weather conditions along the way? Lucio Castro’s feature debut, End of the Century, is a film about summer days in Barcelona. The film focuses on the character of Ocho (Juan Barberini) and the life-changing experience of meeting Javi (Ramon Pujol)—twice. Looking into these two different encounters, the film sheds light on the weight that our life choices carry, and how timing is a key component of that equation. Unable to find each other at a more appropriate time, Ocho and Javi choose to stay apart on both occasions, even if each moment leaves an impression on both men.

In an Autumn moment of my life, I had the chance to meet up with Lucio Castro and discuss End of the Century during Film Fest Gent 2019!

Ioanna Micha: What made you want to write this particular story?

Lucio Castro: Well, it basically started when I thought of the title (laughs). The truth is that that title just stuck with me. I was intrigued by it, and I needed to discover what it was all about. So, I started in a very simple way. I thought ‘okay, a character arrives in a city he doesn’t know. He goes to some tourist sites and then he sees this guy on the streets. He gets interested in him and they end up having sex.’ It’s after, when they started talking in my script, that I thought ‘okay maybe they know each other.’ So, I went to the past and I started thinking about their first encounter. If you really think about it, I wrote it almost in the way you’re watching it! I was discovering the story as I was writing it. Maybe you could say that I was writing it as if I was watching it! (laughs)

IM: So you’re saying it was basically an instinctual process?

LC: Yeah! It was about what felt good!

IM: Were the actors chosen in the same way then? By following your instinct?

LC: Well, you could definitely say that! I gave the screenplay to my casting director (Maria La Greca) who mainly does theater, and she knew both actors. First, she recommended Juan because she had worked with him before. I decided to meet with Juan, so I watched his movies and I discovered something that I really liked about him! Juan feels very confident at first, but then once you get to know him, he’s quite insecure! I liked that about him because I feel that it gives him a duality that works very well for the character of Ocho. And here is where Ramon connects perfectly to the story; he’s the opposite! He feels very insecure in the beginning. He’s almost sensitive and a bit scared. But then, once you get to know him, there’s a very strong cord in him that’s actually quite confident. So, yes! I chose these actors because they felt like a good addition to the film. After all, they are almost complementary and opposite to each other! The one is darker, the other is lighter. Of course, one of them is handsome and it’s good to have a handsome guy (laughs)! All these things came together and kinda worked I guess.

IM: Well, every decision brings about a different end product. So, how come you started the film with such a long take that has no dialogue?

LC: Yes, It’s a very long intro. It’s almost 13 minutes with no dialogue. I did that for a few reasons. Firstly, when I am in a city that I don’t know, and I’m walking alone, I’m very aware of the city, its buildings, the wind, even the people walking around me. I like listening to what they’re saying. I enjoy watching everyone’s faces. For me, it’s almost as if time sort of slows down when I’m by myself in a new city. When I’m with somebody else, however, the city kind of disappears because we’re always talking. And this is what happens with these characters; after they start talking that’s all they do! So, I wanted to show how one feels when you’re alone in a new city in relation to how it is when you’re with somebody else. I also like the gradual flow. First Ocho is kind of lost in the city with no particular aim, but then once he sees Javi, he gradually starts to focus his aim on him, and I thought that this was a nice juxtaposition: from focusing on the beauty of a city to the beauty of a person.

IM: You have definitely succeeded in bringing the city to life in that initial silent sequence. Actually, it feels as if the city becomes a character in itself because we get to experience it so vividly even though we’re never really there! Plus, it’s their meeting point, so time doesn’t really matter; it’s more about the space.

LC: Yeah, that’s also true! The film is a lot about space. First, it’s the city; it carries a lot of meaning, even if Ocho is not initially aware of it, because that’s where they met before. Then, there’s the space of the Airbnb which is so strange. It’s a weird transient space. It’s not a hotel and it’s not someone’s home; it’s something in the middle. Now, when I stay in an Airbnb, I always look at the books, if there are any, because they give you an idea of the owner. But then of course, you’re not sure if it’s the owner that’s left them behind; it could be other guests that left them there. What’s more important about the film’s setting, however, is that no one has any roots in this space, and to me that was a nice background or place for this thing to happen. You know things are a little more volatile and a bit looser. If I had made a movie about their whole lives, I feel that it would have been very different. On vacation, you have a temporary space. You go there for a few days and then you leave. I feel that this is something that went well with this story.

IM: It’s like a neutral space because they don’t have specific roles to conform to! Is there a particular reason you chose Barcelona?

LC: Yeah! I chose Barcelona for many reasons. Firstly, Barcelona has a lot of tourism and it definitely brings out that feeling during the film. Plus, I wanted a summer city. A city that had a beach, but also one that is a city by itself, not one that’s just about summer vacation. And Barcelona is exactly like that! People live there all year round! Of course, there were also some practical reasons such as weather. Barcelona is known for its good weather conditions and I thought that it would be a great and easy place to shoot. Of course, it rained the whole 12 days that I shot there (laughs). There were also financing issues as it’s quite expensive to rent space in summer cities. So, I wanted a place that was more approachable! Lastly, I wanted to tell the story in a city that I didn’t know personally. I wouldn’t have done it in Buenos Aires, for example, because I know that city too well, and it would have been hard for me to write a movie on someone who just arrived. When I wrote the movie in Barcelona, I didn’t know it at all. I actually wrote it with like Google Maps and top ten attractions! (laughs)

IM: Well that is exactly what a tourist would do! Why did you decide to let Ocho remember the whole interaction with Javi on his own? How come Javi doesn’t say anything earlier on?

LC: I think that Javi’s intrigued. I think that he would feel vulnerable to just say it. When they’re in the beach I think he realizes that Ocho didn’t recognize him because he doesn’t say ‘hi,’ he just goes into the water. So, I feel that in this moment he starts thinking ‘he doesn’t remember me, so what’s the point in telling him? Oh, we met 20 years ago, remember?’ So, I feel he’s a little bit shy, or that he doesn’t want to intrude too much. And, once they start talking and have sex, he never finds the right time because he really likes him and the moment they’re sharing. And I feel that he doesn’t want to ruin that with the weight of the past; the weight of the ‘we actually know each other.’ It’s a thing that changes the subtlety of flirting and, no matter who you are, it’s almost like a political war, you know? Everything you say will illicit a reaction. You have a lot of back and forth. So, adding to the equation a shared past would have destroyed the whole thing; it would have transformed into something else. I think that