Four Million in the Camps, Two Million Elsewhere

To make matters worse, there were two Eichmanns at the Reichssicherheitshauptamt, Adolf and Ingo. On several occasions in the 1950s, the Eichmann hunters got the two cases mixed up.

In reality, at the end of the war Eichmann was hiding with a few fellow SS members in the mountainous landscape of Austria's Altaussee lake, where his family lived. But his presence made the others nervous, prompting him to leave the group and head north. A US patrol arrested him near Ulm in southern Germany, and he was eventually interned in a prisoner-of-war camp in the Franconia region of northern Bavaria. He used a false name and said that he had served as an officer with the Waffen-SS.

His situation only became precarious when investigators working with the Nuremberg war crimes trials interrogated Wilhelm Höttl, a close friend of Eichmann. US investigators had learned that Höttl, in the POW camp, had talked about a 1944 meeting with Eichmann in Budapest. Together, the two men had downed a bottle of Hungarian schnapps. "Tell me Adolf, how many Jews were really murdered?" Höttl asked Eichmann, according to his testimony. Four million in the extermination camps and two million by other means, Eichmann replied. This response was later read out loud in court. It was the first reliable assessment of the scope of the Holocaust, and it made headlines in the New York Times.

When Eichmann learned that the Americans were looking for him in the POW camps, he turned to the highest-ranking former SS member in the camp, identified himself and asked for his help, as described by Eichmann biographer David Cesarani. On Feb. 5, 1946, Eichmann escaped from American captivity and promptly obtained papers that identified him as one Otto Henninger. According to BND documents, Eichmann's false papers were obtained through a network of southern German and Austrian Nazis that included Josef Urban, a former expert on Hungary at the Reichssicherheitshauptamt who probably knew Eichmann from Budapest.

Hoping to Disappear

After Hitler's downfall, Urban joined the United States Counter Intelligence Corps (CIC) and later worked for the Gehlen Organization, the postwar German intelligence agency that preceded the BND. The affable native of the Sudetenland region of Czechoslovakia boasted of having helped Eichmann escape -- a perfectly plausible claim given Urban's reputation as an expert in supplying false documents to Nazis hoping to disappear.

Like Eichmann, many war criminals went into hiding. They blended in with the large numbers of Germans on the move through a devastated country; the expellees from Eastern Europe, decommissioned soldiers and people who had lost their homes in Allied bombing campaigns. The murderers could also depend on the discretion of their former comrades, and on the support of relatives and friends, who provided them with places to stay or transportation, no questions asked.

The sister of an SS leader who knew Eichmann from the POW camp took him to northern Germany. Another former SS member, also an acquaintance from the camp, had told Eichmann to contact his brother, a forester in the town of Altensalzkoth near Celle.

In the spring of 1946, Eichmann's escape came to a temporary end in the Lüneburg Heath. He found a job as a forestry worker and then built a small chicken farming business.

Over the Mountains to Argentina

The village residents later claimed that they had not known who the taciturn, reserved man was. Unlike them, he was not a drinker. But even if they had known, it probably would have made little difference; radical right-wing and right-leaning parties captured about half of all votes in the Altensalzkoth area in local elections. Like most Germans at the time, they had little interest in Hitler's crimes and their victims.

It was eventually forgotten that Eichmann's name had been mentioned in the Nuremberg trials. He was mentioned only six times in the pages of SPIEGEL prior to his abduction from Argentina in 1960.

The Americans, however, kept an eye on his family in Altaussee and his parents in the Austrian city of Linz, where they conducted house searches and recruited informants. In 1949, when it was rumored that Eichmann was coming to Altaussee, the Israeli consul in Vienna paid an Austrian police officer 50,000 Austrian schillings to begin a search and offered a million schillings for his arrest. A few police officers and Israeli agents took up positions in snowy Altaussee. But Eichmann never turned up.

Instead, he remained undiscovered in Altensalzkoth under his new name, Henninger.

The pressure to find the Nazi war criminal eventually subsided when the anti-Hitler coalition of the British, Americans and Soviets fell apart and the Cold War began dominating geopolitics. "The prosecution of war criminals is no longer considered of primary interest to US authorities," the CIC wrote in a memo on Eichmann in the early 1950s.

Suspicious of the Lull

Even the Israelis were no longer that interested in the case. The small country needed its people for development at home and withdrew many agents from Austria. One of the US interrogators from the Nuremberg trials reported to the FBI that he had spoken about Eichmann with "various Americans, Russians and Israelis" in Vienna, but that "no one was interested in locating Eichmann."

Eichmann, for his part, was suspicious of the lull and went to Argentina in 1950, partly because he wanted to be reunited with his wife Vera and their three sons, who were still living in Altaussee and who he expected to join him in Argentina.

The fact that an almost penniless Nazi criminal with false papers could travel halfway around the world undetected would later give rise to colorful conspiracy theories about a secret "Organization for Former SS Members " (or ODESSA). British novelist Frederick Forsyth wrote a global bestseller about the supposedly omnipotent ODESSA and its plans to build a fourth Reich.

But most of the former SS members had few political ambitions. They helped each other out of necessity, but that was the extent of their cooperation. Some even charged for their services. Eichmann later complained that he had had to "pay dearly." In SS circles, the escape route through the ports of Hamburg, Bremen or Scandinavian cities was now considered too risky. The easiest way to get out of Europe was through Italy.

Eichmann told his hosts in Altensalzkoth that he was emigrating to Scandinavia. Instead, Alois Schintlholzer, a former SS major from the Austrian city of Innsbruck, drove him "in his car from Celle to the Austrian border," according to BND documents. Schintlholzer knew a Nazi sympathizer and BND agent who went by the code name V-54 026. She told the BND that Schintlholzer was part of a group of former SS and SD (the SS intelligence agency) leaders from Innsbruck who had "smuggled Eichmann to Argentina."

Familiar with the Route

There are many indications that this group was a network of former Nazis, known to experts, from the western Austrian region of Tyrol. Together with Schintlholzer, they had already begun harassing Innsbruck Jews before the war and many of them became murderers during the Holocaust. Several had since fled to Argentina -- they were familiar with the route.

Eichmann later said that the organization of his escape had gone "like clockwork." First he had to wait in a small hotel at the border before a trafficker came to take to him to Austria. From the border town of Kufstein, he took a taxi to Innsbruck, where he had two contact addresses.

His next stop was the Vinaders Inn, which belonged to one of the SS members of the Innsbruck group, in Gries, an Austrian town on the Italian border near the Brenner Pass. From there, Eichmann walked along a narrow path through Alpine meadows to the Italian side of the border.

The town pastor in the nearby Italian town of Vipiteno, a Nazi sympathizer, hid the Holocaust organizer in a monastery. Because of the Lateran Treaties between the Vatican and the Italian republic, raids in monasteries were extremely rare.

Many priests helped him "without asking questions," Eichmann reported while in prison in 1960. "In their eyes, I was merely one of many who needed their help."

Plenty of Helpers

At the time, hundreds of thousands were using the Alpine route to leave Europe. They included people from the Baltic republics, Czechs and Ukrainians who had escaped from Stalin's empire, ethnic Germans from Romania and Poland, Holocaust survivors on their way to Palestine -- and Nazi war criminals and foreign collaborators with the Nazis.

According to a recent account of their exodus by the historian Gerald Steinacher ("Nazis on the Run: How Hitler's Henchmen Fled Justice"; Oxford University Press; English translation to be published in June), the Red Cross, the Argentinean authorities and Catholic priests worked "hand-in-hand."

Refugees like Eichmann initially needed passports from the International Red Cross, which were being issued to stateless individuals. German-speaking natives of the South Tyrol region of Austria and Italy were generally considered stateless, and because government offices in South Tyrol had largely retained their pre-1945 staff, escaping Nazis quickly found the helpers they needed.

One of the towns that proved particularly helpful to Nazis was Termeno sulla Strada del Vino. In addition to Eichmann, Josef Mengele, the notorious SS doctor at Auschwitz and other Nazi murderers later presented documents that had originated in Termeno in 1948. It is no longer possible to determine who submitted the applications, because all records from 1948 are missing from the town's archives.

Eichmann was now using the name Riccardo Klement and was supposedly from Bolzano in northern Italy.

A Visa for Argentina

Now he had to find a priest who would vouch for him at the Red Cross. This too proved to be unproblematic. The Vatican had installed an aid commission to address the dire refugee situation in Italy. Bishop Alois Hudal, a known Nazi sympathizer, attended to the needs of refugees from Austria.

The only potential obstacle for Eichmann, who was born a Protestant and later became an atheist, was that Hudal preferred to support Catholics. So Eichmann promptly declared himself a Catholic, and a priest working with the aid commission quickly approved his passport application. He picked up the valuable document in Genoa on June 1, 1950.

All that he needed now was a visa for Argentina. Fortunately for Eichmann, then Argentine President Juan Perón, an admirer of Hitler and the Wehrmacht, wanted to modernize his country's economy and military with German help. Perón was looking for specialists. It is still disputed whether he deliberately brought in Nazi war criminals or merely tolerated their immigration.

Horst Carlos Fuldner, a colorful businessman, secured the necessary documents. Fuldner, who had grown up in Buenos Aires and the central German city of Kassel, had had a somewhat checkered career as a member of the staff of SS chief Heinrich Himmler, and after the fall of the Third Reich he returned to his native Argentina. A former SS captain, he arranged for the office of the Argentine immigration authority at the consulate in Genoa to issue Eichmann a visa. In the summer of the 1950, the Nazi war criminal sailed for Argentina on board the steamer Giovanna C.