Today is the 130th birthday of Charlie Chaplin, and there is perhaps no other figure in film history as important as him. The filmmaker, comedian, actor and composer had a career that spanned three-quarters of a century, from the first short he directed, Caught in the Rain in 1914, to his last feature, A Countess from Hong Kong in 1967. He’s best remembered for his on-screen persona during the era of silent film, the Tramp: A mischievous but good-hearted gentleman with a bowler hat, a cane, a stout mustache, baggy pants, and a bow-legged walk. He remains one of the most popular entertainers of all time, despite controversies including his supposed Communist sympathies and his tendency to date much younger woman.

You don’t need me to tell you this. Anyone’s who’s taken an Intro to Film class knows Chaplin’s a big freakin’ deal. But it’s one thing to know that, and another to see his famed visual gags and heartfelt storytelling for yourself. Luckily, with the newly-launched Criterion Channel, that’s now easier than ever. The Channel currently hosts 17 Chaplin-directed features and shorts, including many that are considered some of the greatest films of all time like City Lights, Modern Times and The Great Dictator. And what better way to celebrate the anniversary of Chaplin’s birth than with a movie marathon?

If you’re intimidated by the idea of a black-and-white silent film, trust me, I get it—but don’t be. These films are not intended as puzzles to decode. They are not incomprehensible to anyone without a degree in literature or cinema, as so many arthouse films today tend to be. Chaplin is an entertainer through and through, and he wants you to laugh above all else. There’s even a fart joke in Modern Times. This is not high brow stuff.

At the same time, his films have a heart and sincerity to them that so many other terrible slapstick comedies lack. This weekend, the Criterion Channel is highlighting one that does that particularly well: The Kid (1921). Chaplin’s first full-length feature was also one of the first films to combine comedy and drama. In it, Chaplin’s character reluctantly takes in an orphaned child, whom he grows to love, despite his questionable parenting tactics, which include rigging up a kettle on a string in lieu of a bottle.

Later, when as the kid grows, he becomes a mini-Chaplin, dressed in similarly baggy clothes. The two are partners in crime: The kid breaks windows with his ball, then Chaplin, a window-repair man, swoops in and makes a buck.

It’s clever, charming, sweet and at times, truly heartwrenching. It’s a quick watch—only 53 minutes—and the Criterion Channel pairs it with commentary from Chaplin scholar Charles Maland, archival footage of Chaplin himself conducting a new score for the film in 1971, 1980 interviews with stars of the film including Jackie Coogan and Lita Grey Chaplin (also Chaplin’s second wife), and more.

Beyond The Kid, you can also stream these 16 Chaplin films and shorts on the Channel:

A Dog’s Life (1918)

Shoulder Arms (1918)

Sunnyside (1919)

A Day’s Pleasure (1919)

The Idle Class (1921)

Pay Day (1922)

The Pilgrim (1923)

A Woman of Paris (1923)

The Circus (1928)

City Lights (1931)

Modern Times (1936)

The Great Dictator (1940)

The Gold Rush (1942)

Limelight (1952)

Monsieur Verdoux (1947)

A King in New York (1957)

It should be noted that if you don’t have a Criterion Channel subscription, many of Chaplin’s films are public domain and can be found for free on publicdomainmovies.net. Some, like The Kid, are also available with a Prime Video subscription. However, if you want all the good supplements and behind the scenes material—as well as high-quality video and audio—we recommend Criterion Channel.

Happy watching!