Note: This is the seventy-eighth in a series of historical/critical essays examining the best in film from each year. Essentially, I am watching films from the beginning of cinematic history that interest me and/or hold some critical or cultural impact. My personal, living list of favorites is being created at Mubi, showcasing five films per year. All this being explained, what follows is an examination of my third favorite 1914 film, CAUGHT IN THE RAIN, directed by Charlie Chaplin.

As I’ve had to repeatedly caution in this series, cinematic “firsts” usually have some sort of caveat attached to them. CAUGHT IN THE RAIN (1914) is technically the first film directed by Charlie Chaplin, but TWENTY MINUTES OF LOVE (1914) was ostensibly co-directed by Chaplin and Joseph Maddern. Chaplin is generally considered the driving creative force between the film, however, and he certainly contributed to the films in which he starred before CAUGHT IN THE RAIN. But this film should really be considered his full directorial debut, not only because of technicalities but because of Chaplin’s immediate ability to set himself apart from his Keystone kollaborators.

“Antics in the park” films were a large part of Keystone’s body of work, and therefore the early part of Chaplin’s. At just over ten minutes long, only a couple minutes of CAUGHT IN THE RAIN’s opening fit this “subgenre,” which often involve amorous affairs. Chaplin’s Tramp, a much more rascally and aggressive character than later iterations, spots a woman that he fancies, played by Alice Davenport. Her husband, played by Mack Swain of THE GOLD RUSH’s (1925) Big Jim fame, is off at a concession stand, and Chaplin begins flirting with the wife. Immediately, Chaplin’s commanding performance style is evident. His Tramp is staggering and clumsy, offering some sympathy and amusement, but as mentioned, this early version of the character has more of a mean-spirited side. It offers a different sense of comedy that is just as hilarious if not necessarily emotionally resonant.

It becomes clear some time after Chaplin is rebuffed by the husband, gets drunk, and enters a hotel at which, coincidentally, the husband and wife are staying. These quick transitions represent the directorial debut of Chaplin as a greatest hits of Keystone’s tropes at the time. They made park pictures, bar pictures, and hotel mix-up pictures, all of which Chaplin himself had starred in already. He used these already familiar concepts, however, to great effect almost sheerly through his comic persona.

When the Tramp flirts with girls in the hotel lobby, it’s hard (for me at least) to stifle a sense of glee at the character’s ridiculous grins and giggles. When he steps on the foot of a gout-ridden gentleman, beginning a hilarious bullying of the old guy, his careless reaction is surprising and, therefore, kind of funny. And when Chaplin inexplicably starts to make his trademark Tramp hop-run up the stairs and pratfalls down the stairs, it’s a culmination of comedic tension drawn through the admittedly short flirt session.

I mean, I’m not over exaggerating when I say that CAUGHT IN THE RAIN is really funny. It’s 104 years old, but the manic energy of the film keeps it alive. The recurring gag of the Tramp’s monumental, malicious kicking of the old man is brilliant. And while the weakest element of the film is the old “room mix up with someone else’s wife” trope that was so prevalent during the era, Chaplin’s pratfalls and undressing are loose and drive the sequences.

CAUGHT IN THE RAIN is an important film, not only as Chaplin’s true directorial debut, but also as a comedy short that in some ways elevates the go-to Keystone scenarios of the time. It’s quick and it’s funny, and although it obviously doesn’t carry the pathos Chaplin would become famous for, it is significant in its ability to find a little time in the slapstick action to develop a persona that would rule the comedy world in short order. CAUGHT IN THE RAIN was the start of something new, something that would soon make Chaplin the most successful film actor the world had yet seen.