Surendranath in English dictionary

Sample sentences with "Surendranath"

Declension Stem

After graduation, he and his friends accompanied Surendranath Banerjee in his lecture tours throughout India and, under the latter's influence, opened centres of social service.

Surendranath took five for 115 in 47.1 overs.

In autumn 1928, he sailed for Calcutta to study Sanskrit and philosophy under Surendranath Dasgupta, a Bengali Cambridge alumnus and professor at Calcutta University, the author of a five volume History of Indian Philosophy.

In Bengal, with Barin's help, he established contacts with revolutionaries, inspiring radicals such as Bagha Jatin or Jatin Mukherjee and Surendranath Tagore.

On the notion of the Brahman in the history of Indian thought, the History volumes by Surendranath Dasgupta, S.

Their son Surendranath and daughter Indira , both handsome and versatile , were favourite playmates of Rabindranath when he first went to England for studies , Indira Devi lived to be a grand old dame of Bengali letters and a recognised authority on her uncle ' s musica handsome and gracious figure who carried her years as lightly as she carried her many accomplishments until her death in August 1960 , at the age of eighty - seven .

"Surendranath Evening College".

Upon his return to India in June 1875, Banerjee became an English professor at the Metropolitan Institution, the Free Church Institution and at the Rippon College, now Surendranath College, founded by him in 1882.

In 1883, Surendranath Banerjea organised a national conference - the first of its kind in 19th century India.

India batted poorly against Trueman and Statham and only a late partnership of 58 for the eighth wicket between Tamhane and Surendranath brought any comfort.

“Though the earliest Upaniṣads were compiled by 500 B.C., they continued to be written even so late as the spread of Mahommedan influence in India.”—A History of Indian Philosophy, Surendranath Dasgupta, Indian edition 1975, Volume 1, page 39.

A History of Indian Philosophy, Surendranath Dasgupta, Indian edition 1975, Volume 1, page 43.

Speaking on the subject at the fifth session of the Congress ( Bombay , 1889 ) , Surendranath Banerjee sajid : " If you get that , you get everything else .

His dearly beloved nephew Surendranath had died in Calcutta .

Once the three friends invited the celebrated nationalist leader , Surendranath Banerjea , to Kodalia and arranged a meeting for him .

surendranath banerjea claimed to have been the first to use the method of Swadeshi vows in temples.

Surendranath Banerjee, a moderate and veteran leader of Congress were in favour to accept the Montagu-Chelmsford Reforms.

Public Works Minister Rampal Singh, Member of Parliament Alok Sanjar, MlA Rameshwar Sharma, Surendranath Singh, Bhopal Mayor Alok Sharma, BJP office-bearers, media representatives and other representatives took part in the ceremony.

Most of the newspapers took a moderate line led by Surendranath while Bipin Chandra Pal and Arabinda led the extremists.

MlA Surendranath Singh said that campaign is underway to make Bhopal slum-free under leadership of the Chief Minister.

He was a close friend of Gokhale and Surendranath Banerjee and highly respected by Sir Phirozeshah Mehta, all of whom represented moderate views of independence movement.

As a result, stringent laws were put on the statute book. Surendranath Banerjea, one of the founding fathers of the national movement, became the first Indian to go to jail in performance of his duty as a journalist.

Available translations

Bangla

Marathi

Authors