[ PHILOSOPHY ] DASGUPTA, Surendranath (Ph.D.).

A History of Indian Philosophy ( Five volumes ).

Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press, 1932, 1932, 1940, 1949, 1955. Mixed Editions. Hardcover. Large octavos. Five volumes. xvi + 528pp & xii + 620pp & xiv + 616pp & xiv + 484pp & xiv + 204pp. Original navy blue cloth with gilt titles, etc. to spines, each volume has extensive index. Surendranath Dasgupta (1887 - 1952) was a scholar of Sanskrit and philosophy who wrote a number of books including: "General Introduction to Tantra Philosophy", "A Study of Patanjali", "Yoga Philosophy in Relation to Other Systems of Indian Thought", "A History of Sanskrit Literature" , "Rabindranath: The Poet and Philosopher" and "Hindu Mysticism" (1927) along with this massive study of Indian philosophy which is the first comprehensive attempt to trace a continuous history of Indian thought from earliest times, and is based throughout on a direct and and first-hand study of all available texts and manuscript sources. The contents include The Vedas, Buddhist Philosophy, Jaina Philosophy, Mimamsa Philosophy, The Sankara School of Vedanta, The Philosophy of the Yoga-Vasistha, Speculation in the Medical Schools, The Philosophy of the Bhagavad-Gita, The Bhaskara School of Philosophy, The Pancaratra, The Arvars, The Visistadvaita School of Thought, The Philosophy of Yamunacarya, The Ramajuna School of Thought, The Nimbarka School of Philosophy, The Philosophy of Vijnana Bhiksu, Philosophical Speculations of some of the Selected Puranas, The Bhagavata Purana, Madhva and his School, Madhva's Interpretation of the Brahma-Sutras, A General Review of the Philosophy of Madhva, Madhva Logic, Controversy between the Dualists and the Monists, The Philosophy of Vallabha, Caitanya and his Followers, The Philosophy of Jiva Gosvami and Baladeva Vidyabhusana, Followers of Caitanya, The Literature of Southern Saivism, Vira-Saivism, Philosophy of Srikantha, among others. Some light chafing, spotting & fading to cloth, spine ends rubbed, some corners bumped. Vols. 1 through 3 have pencilled owner's name etc to front endpapers, and some pages with heavy pencilled notes and underlining - but text is otherwise unmarked. Overall a solid complete Good set - perfect for student on a budget. No dust jackets. Scarce in a complete set. Item #32389