Men's Basketball 11/12/2014 10:45:00 AM

2014-15 Season Outlook: BYU Cougars

Quick Links

BYU Basketball Homepage

2014-15 BYU Schedule

2014-15 BYU Roster

BYU basketball enters the 2014-15 season with eight returning letterwinners. The experienced core will be bolstered by a talented group of newcomers.

Since Dave Rose took over the program in 2005, the Cougars have averaged 26 wins and have earned a postseason bid in nine straight seasons. Last season, the Cougars finished 23-12 overall, 13-5 in the WCC, and received an at-large bid to the NCAA tournament.

First-team All-WCC honorees Tyler Haws and Kyle Collinsworth anchor BYU's backcourt. Haws was an AP Honorable Mention All-American and the 2014 WCC Player of the Year. Collinsworth is a versatile point guard who led the team in rebounding and assists and was second in scoring.

Seniors Anson Winder and Skyler Halford and sophomore Frank Bartley IV add experience in the backcourt. Winder finished the season strong, averaging 12.1 points over the last seven games. Halford averaged 7.0 points and hit 29 threes while Bartley displayed a varied skill set as he posted season highs of 16 points, seven rebounds and six assists. Junior Jordan Ellis, a member of the practice squad last season, is a steady floor general who will compete for time at the point.

Junior Chase Fischer leads a talented group of newcomers in the backcourt. A prolific outside shooter, Fischer came to BYU last fall after transferring from Wake Forest but had to sit out due to NCAA transfer rules.

Freshmen Jordan Chatman and Jake Toolson will compete for time on the guard line. Chatman is a versatile player who can play on the wing and at the point while Toolson was one of the top scorers in Arizona as he averaged 27.3 points per game last season.

Returning frontcourt players include senior Nate Austin, who started all 35 games last season, senior Josh Sharp and sophomore Luke Worthington. Austin led the team in blocks, while Sharp and Worthington started three games apiece and provided valuable contributions on the defensive end.

Sophomore Jamal Aytes and freshman Isaac Neilson have been with the program since January 2014. Aytes, a strong post scorer, transferred midseason from UNLV and Neilson, a shot blocker and shooter, enrolled after returning from an LDS mission in Alabama in December 2013.

Freshmen Ryan Andrus and Dalton Nixon are local products from American Fork and Orem, respectively. Both led their high schools to deep state tournament runs.

Freshman Corbin Kaufusi is a surprise addition to the roster. The Provo, Utah, native originally signed to play football for the Cougars. After growing several inches while serving a two-year mission in Korea, Kaufusi chose basketball this summer. He brings a strong and athletic 6-10 frame to BYU's frontcourt. Utah State Kyle Davis, a 6-foot-8 junior forward, also joined BYU during the offseason. He will sit out due to NCAA transfer rules.

BYU takes on San Diego State in the fourth game of the Championship Round on November 24 at 11:30 p.m. ET on ESPN2. BYU and San Diego State join Arizona, Kansas State, Missouri, Pittsburgh, Purdue and Tournament host Chaminade at the Lahaina Civic Center in Maui from November 24-26.

You can follow live updates and interact with the Tournament on Facebook, Twitter and Instagram at @EASPORTSMauiInv and with the Tournament's official hashtag, #mauihoops.

Next up: 2014-15 Season Outlook: San Diego State Aztecs