Julius J. Epstein, a screenwriter of sharp, sardonic dialogue who won an Academy Award for the script of ''Casablanca,'' died here on Saturday. He was 91.

Mr. Epstein wrote more than 50 movies in a 50-year career. He and his identical twin, Philip, were responsible for the wit and cynicism of ''Casablanca,'' while Howard Koch, who shared the 1943 Academy Award with them, provided much of the film's ardent patriotism.

The usual wages of screenwriting in Hollywood are money and oblivion, but Mr. Epstein's career stretched from 1934 to 1984, when he received his fourth Oscar nomination for screenwriting, for ''Reuben, Reuben,'' a comedy with Tom Conti adapted from a Peter De Vries novel about a self-destructive poet.

In a 1984 interview, Mr. Epstein provided a glimpse of what it was like to write under the studio system, even if what he was writing turned out to be one of the country's most enduring movies: ''There wasn't one moment of reality in 'Casablanca.' We weren't making art. We were making a living. Movies in those days were prevented from reality. Every leading man had to be a great sexual athlete. Every boy and girl had to 'meet cute,' and the girl had to dislike the hero when they met. If a woman committed adultery, she had to die. Now the woman who commits adultery is your heroine.''

Mr. Epstein earned his first Oscar nomination in 1938 for ''Four Daughters,'' the movie (based on a Fannie Hurst story) that introduced John Garfield. After Julius and Philip began their collaboration in 1939, their screen credits -- mostly adaptations of plays and novels -- included ''The Strawberry Blonde,'' ''The Man Who Came to Dinner,'' ''Arsenic and Old Lace'' and ''Mr. Skeffington,'' a 1944 Bette Davis film that touched on the taboo subject of anti-Semitism.

Jack Warner was so pleased with ''Casablanca'' that he made the twins the producers of ''Mr. Skeffington,'' as well as the writers.

Thank you for your patience while we verify access. If you are in Reader mode please exit and log into your Times account, or subscribe for all of The Times.

Thank you for your patience while we verify access.

Already a subscriber? Log in.

Want all of The Times? Subscribe.