Background

EA Origin Electronic Arts’ online gaming platform, similar to Valve Software’s Steam. With an Origin account, users can access their collection of games, receive automatic updates, and connect and play with their friends online. Origin is both a digital storefront (origin.com) and a downloadable PC application. At the time, EA wanted to expand Origin to become a cross-platform gaming service, spanning mobile, console, and PC. To do so, it sought to create a standardized login and account service across all of these platforms. I was part of a team of a design team of four to create this experience on mobile.

Origin Mobile was built as an in-game web view. This was back in 2012, when the iPhone 4 was popular and mobile web app performance was usable, at best. We were given a UI look and feel from a previously-existing Origin mobile login interface, and were tasked with creating a base set of features to deliver for the initial release.

Projects

Origin Mobile User Profile

The user profile was the first project I worked at as part of the Origin Mobile team. I worked closely with a product manager to create the designs and workflows necessary to meet product requirements.

Game Achievements

The Origin Achievements initiative was a project to aggregate achievements earned across all of EA’s games. Users can view and browse achievements they have earned across their games through the Origin UI. I created variations of what the platform could look like on the web and mobile. I was the lead designer for this project, designing the interaction and layout of the pages.

We brought users in for usability testing to evaluate their understanding of game achievements and to gauge their interest in the topic. Our findings indicate that users were much more interested in comparing their achievements with their friends. I worked with product management to then prioritize and build a view that displays a users' achievements in comparison with a friends'.

Origin Promotions

In addition to interaction design, I created new layouts and high-fidelity mockups for many pages on the Origin platform.