About Time Magazine's Bias Rating

Time Magazine is featured on the AllSides Media Bias Chart™.

Time Magazine is a news media source with an AllSides Media Bias Rating™ of Lean Left.

Note: This rating is for TIME's online content only, not its print magazine content.

What a "Lean Left" Rating Means

Sources with an AllSides Media Bias Rating of Lean Left display media bias in ways that moderately align with liberal, progressive, or left-wing thought and/or policy agendas. A Lean Left bias is a moderately liberal rating on the political spectrum.

Learn more about Lean Left ratings

TIME Rated Lean Left in May 2023 Blind Bias Survey

TIME’s AllSides Media Bias Rating™ was confirmed as Lean Left in our May 2023 Blind Bias Survey.

Respondents who rated their own bias as Left, Lean Left, Center or Lean Right rated TIME as Lean Left; respondents on the Right rated its bias as Left. The average rating was Lean Left, confirming AllSides' existing media bias rating for TIME.

A total of 1,009 people across the political spectrum took the survey, including 102 respondents with a self-reported Left bias; 223 with a Lean Left bias; 309 with a Center bias; 299 with a Lean Right bias, and 76 with a Right bias.

Feb. 2022 Independent Review

AllSides conducted an independent review of TIME magazine in Feb. 2022. We found its bias remained on the left; the reviewer saw some evidence that TIME's bias is close to Left.

TIME displayed a Lean Left story choice. Some top stories the day of review were issues typically deemed important by progressives, with a heavy focus on COVID-19, labor, mental health, and transgender individuals:

A Remote Himalayan District's High COVID-19 Vaccination Rate

Inside Facebook's African Sweatshop

Nasal Vaccines Could Help Stop COVID-19

Pediatricians Who Serve Trans Youth Face Increasing Harassment. Lifesaving Care Could Be on the Line

A Photographic Diary of One Man's Struggle with Mental Illness Across Two Decades

The reviewer noted that calling medical treatment for transgender youth "gender-affirming care" is terminology used on the left; the site's "Featured Voices" section featured mostly voices on the left, including Some of Us Don't Have the Luxury of Moving On From COVID-19, How to Stay Grounded in the Uncertainty of the Pandemic. Meanwhile, other news outlets at this time were focusing on the pandemic ending.

Sept. 2018 Editorial Review: TIME Shifts from Left to Lean Left

AllSides conducted an extensive Editorial Review of TIME in Sept. 2018. We decided to shift TIME's AllSides Media Bias Rating™ from Left to Lean Left.

During the Sept. 2018 Editorial Review, the AllSides team noted that TIME magazine's news pieces were written in a narrative-based way: rather than simply stating hard facts, TIME often painted a picture in its writing. TIME magazine occassionally included some Center perspectives. During our review, we saw a number of "puff pieces" favorable to Democrats featured prominently on the site's main pages. The AllSides team noted TIME was not as sensationalist and did not employ as much emotional language as other Left outlets, though it still did employ these tactics from time to time.

Top of Page

Community Feedback

Feedback does not determine ratings, but may trigger deeper review.

As of August 2024, people have voted on the AllSides Media Bias Rating for Time Magazine. On average, those who disagree with our rating think this source has a Lean Left bias.

Confidence Level

Confidence is determined by how many reviews have been applied and consistency of data.

As of August 2024, AllSides has high confidence in our Lean Left rating for Time Magazine. Two or more bias reviews have affirmed this rating or the source is transparent about bias.

Additional Information

Bias of TIME Readers

In December 2015, TIME readers voted for Bernie Sanders, a Democratic Socialist, as Person of the Year. The amount of TIME readers who voted for Sanders surpassed Malala Yousafzai and Pope Francis.

Previous TIME Media Bias Rating and Community Feedback

Prior to Sept. 2018, the AllSides Media Bias Rating™ for TIME Magazine was Left. However, as of April 2017, a majority of AllSides users who voted on this bias rating disagreed. Community feedback suggested the bias rating should be closer to the Center. When those who disagreed with our bias rating of Left were asked what the rating should be, the average of their votes was on the border of Center and Lean Left, but closer to the Center. AllSides conducted an Editorial Review of TIME in Sept. 2018, and moved TIME's media bias rating to Lean Left.

About TIME Magazine

TIME Magazine is an American weekly news magazine published in New York City. It was founded in 1923 and for decades was dominated by Henry Luce, who built a highly profitable stable of magazines. A European edition is published in London and also covers the Middle East, Africa and, since 2003, Latin America. An Asian edition is based in Hong Kong. The South Pacific edition, covering Australia, New Zealand and the Pacific Islands, is based in Sydney. In December 2008, TIME discontinued publishing a Canadian advertiser edition. TIME has the world's largest circulation for a weekly news magazine, and has a readership of 25 million, 20 million of which are in the U.S.

Top of Page

Time Magazine Ownership and Funding

Funding and ownership do not influence bias ratings. We rate the bias of content only.

Owner: Time, Inc.

Who Owns and Funds TIME

Time Magazine is owned by Time USA, LLC. Time USA, LLC is owned by Marc Benioff, who is the CEO and founder of Salesforce.com.