by Sail Canada on 3 Apr 2013

CST Laser Sailor, Robert Davis Sail Canada / Voile Canada http://www.sailing.ca/

Canadian Sailing Team Laser sailor Robert Davis was in the office Wednesday, he shared with us his plans for the year and gave us some insight on the international Laser scene.

Davis, who is a local Kingston boy, was home for a short spurt after sailing in Florida from just before Christmas until the end of February. He currently works for mechanical engineering firm Ehvert Mission Critical (along side team mate Evert McLaughlin) run by President Vello Ehvert based out of Toronto. Davis was working on site in Barrie for the month, to balance out his sailing and employment nicely.

Sailing in fleets of around 70- 80 boats Davis ticked off the Senior Orange Bowl in Miami and Laser midwinters. While in Florida he spent three weeks training with US Sailor Charley Buckingham, coached by 2012 Olympic Bronze Medalist, Rasmus Myrgren.

'Myrgren was mostly coaching Charley but we got to pick up a few tips here and there, it was cool.' explains Davis. 'My goal for this winter was to qualify for a senior card and be in the medal race at Miami OCR, meeting both of those goals in one was pretty fun.'

Davis credits his improved results on practice, 'Being through school means I have more time on the water, in the boat. Previously I've had only a few weeks to prepare for events and now I have basically all winter. It makes a huge difference.'

Mexico bound later this month, Davis plans on training at the International Sailing Academy in Puerto Vallarta for three weeks with Tom Ramshaw and Evert McLaughlin, then making a brief appearance home before hopping a flight to Europe for the EUROSAF in Garda, followed by the Delta Lloyd Regatta in Medemblik.

Looking forward to a home field advantage this summer, Davis has plans for CORK, Laser NA's and training in Toronto.

'It's really cool now that I've started getting pretty good results how other guys on the scene want to start training with you. Right now the top Italian guy offered us time to train with him if we're early in Garda, and we try to encourage other international sailors to come to CORK and regattas in Kingston.'

Robert's results and blog can be found here.

http://www.sailing.ca/" target="_blank">Sail Canada website

If you want to link to this article then please use this URL: www.sail-world.com/108065