The 30-year-old Yorkshireman went into the race at Qingdao as favourite, knowing that Swede Rasmus Myrgren would have to win and he himself finish last of the ten boats in order to be denied the gold.

Goodison played safe, shadowing Myrgen while the rest of the field sailed ahead.

It was a tactic that meant that Myrgren fell from the silver medal position at the start to sixth.

Goodison had been Ben Ainslie's training partner in Sydney eight years ago when he had won this class - the first of his three consecutive gold medals - and then missed out on a medal in Athens four years ago when he fnished fourth.

At the end after he sailed back to the quayside Goodison was carried out of the water in his boat by team-mates and Britain's coaching staff.

He said: "It just feels fantastic to come in with a medal this time and the fact that it's gold is just amazing.

"I always knew it was going to be a bit of an up and down regatta.

"I didn't start great in the first race but bounced straight back and then from there I was always within reaching distance and sailed a superb day yesterday to give myself the cushion I needed for today.''

The Briton admitted that his own efforts denied Myrgren a medal, and he offered his opponent sympathy after the race.

He said: "I really feel for Rasmus.

"I think that if the winds here had been a little bit stronger and the racing had been normal then I would have just sailed my race because I would have been more confident that I wasn't going to lose.

"But because the wind was so light and so random, the only way to guarantee winning was to do what I did.

"My heart feels for him, I feel sorry for him, but at the end of the day you have to do what's best for you."

Goodison is already allowing his thoughts to turn towards 2012 when the sailing events will be held in Weymouth, his home waters.

He said: "It just feels unbelievable and it’s going to take a while to sink in, it’s just amazing.

"With London 2012 just around the corner, it would be an amazing opportunity to represent Great Britain at an Olympic Games in Britain.”

Yorkshire could claim a double victory as the winner of the equivalent women's event was Anna Tunnicliffe, a 25-year-old who was born in Doncaster and first learnt to sail in England before she moved with her parents to Ohio in the United States when she was 12.

She is now an American citizen and won their first gold medal of the sailing regatta by finishing second in the double-points medal race to Lithuania's Gintare Volungeviciute, but still had enough points to easily hold on to win the gold.