Last Action Hero. 1993. Dir. John McTiernan. With Arnold Schwarzenegger, Austin O’Brien, F. Murray Abraham, Art Carney, Charles Dance, Frank McRae, Tom Noonan, Robert Prosky, Anthony Quinn, Mercedes Ruehl, Ian McKellen, Professor Toru Tanaka, Joan Plowright, Michael V. Gazzo, Danny DeVito (voice). Screenplay by Shane Black & David Arnott, story by Zak Penn & Adam Leff.

Badness:

Enjoyment Factor:

Because filmmaking is a business, sometimes it is unfairly assumed that if a film is a financial failure, that means that the film is not of artistic value. Sometimes that is the case but not always. Last Action Hero was a huge gamble that did not pay off (the Internet Movie Database estimates its budget at eighty-five million dollars). It was panned by critics, and was nominated for several Razzies, including Worst Picture. Time has revealed Last Action Hero to be a well-made blend of satire and action, with a strong performance by Arnold Schwarzenegger at its center (he was nominated for a Razzie for Worst Actor).

Bad timing was definitely a factor in Last Action Hero‘s failure at the time of its original release. Not only did it come out one week after Jurassic Park, but it’s self-referential and sarcastic tone turned off audiences who were expecting a more standard Arnold Schwarzenegger film. This was three years before Scream, so Last Action Hero‘s knowing understanding of movie tropes and cliches was a little ahead of its time.

The story is well known by now: Danny, a young film fanatic played by Austin O’Brien, is given a magic movie ticket that was once Harry Houdini’s, and he is transported into an action movie, featuring the action movie character Jack Slater, played by Arnold Schwarzenegger. The plot device, borrowed from both Sherlock Jr. and The Purple Rose of Cairo, plunges Danny into his dream fantasy world, where he knows all of the rules.

The first two acts of the film, where Danny and Jack Slater have to team up, are funny and fresh; it works both as comedy and action. The third act, however, where Jack is now in the ‘real world,’ drags a bit, and definitely could have been cut down. It is pretty clear that the film could have benefited from some editing after its disastrous test screening.

This is a movie that works, though, the more familiar you are with movies. It is a film nerd’s dream, with many great cameo performances (including Sharon Stone, Tina Turner and, in a great bit, Maria Shriver). Schwarzenegger gives, ironically, one of his more layered performances, and is ably assisted by O’Brien, Frank McRae as his scenery chewing police chief, Anthony Quinn as an easily confused gangster and the great Charles Dance as the villainous Benedict.