One of the things I found most distressing about "Last Action Hero," aside from all those complaints that were in my review of the film, was the woeful misuse of two of my favorite actors.

We can only hope that this Arnold Schwarzenegger vehicle, an exercise in excess if ever there was one, might prompt younger moviegoers to seek out some of the work of these former stars on video:- Art Carney gets the worst treatment in this carnival of carnage. In "Last Action Hero" he plays a relative of the fictional hero Jack Slater, Schwarznegger's character in the films-within-the-film.

Carney's comic death scene, which is both crucial to the plot machinations of "Jack Slater IV" and amusing as it winds down, was nonetheless rather sad. The old Carney charm shines brightly for just a brief moment as his character kicks the bucket, which prompted me to feel I'd been cheated.

He has only two brief scenes (despite prominent billing in the credits) and for most of them simply sits, tied to a chair, his face bloodied and battered, after his character has been tortured by the bad guys.

But Carney is capable of much more. Indeed I'd say he's one of our best-kept acting secrets, despite his Oscar for "Harry and Tonto."

Most people know him as a winning comic, primarily as the hilarious Norton, sidekick to Jackie Gleason in those classic TV "Honeymooners" programs. But he can also handle his dramatic oats quite well. If you doubt, rent "Going in Style," "Harry and Tonto" or "The Late Show.")

Frankly, I came to "Last Action Hero" looking forward to seeing Carney again, since it has been nearly a decade since he's popped up in a mainstream movie.

Sadly, Hollywood doesn't know what to do with someone who is talented and appealing and older, especially in a movie that is really all about explosions, special effects and dead bodies.

- Anthony Quinn, a two-time Oscar-winner, plays an Italian mobster - the kind of role he's had so many times he could probably do it in his sleep . . . and come to think of it, he seemed to be doing just that in "Revenge," opposite Kevin Costner, a few years ago.

And he has quite a few scenes in "Last Action Hero" but he is mostly served up as a bombastic buffoon, providing straight lines for the racist jokes uttered by his character's henchman (Charles Dance).

We last saw Quinn opposite Maureen O'Hara in a few lovely romantic scenes that enlivened the otherwise dreary "Only the Lonely," which was a comic vehicle for John Candy.

O'Hara and Quinn were so good together that some of the audience - the older segment who came to see O'Hara and Quinn - probably wished their story had been the central focus of that film instead of an infrequent subplot.

Quinn is another actor who has been continually misused by much-younger filmmakers in such recent cinematic garbage as "Ghosts Can't Do It," "Mobsters," the aforementioned "Revenge," etc.

Those too young to remember Quinn's glory days are advised to seek out these titles at your local video store - "Zorba the Greek," "Lawrence of Arabia," "Lust for Life," "Viva Zapata!" "The Guns of Navarone" or "Requiem for a Heavyweight."

All of them are 10 times more entertaining than most of what Hollywood serves up these days.

- WHILE WE'RE COMPLAINING of mistreatment by Hollywood, let's also comment on some of our recent female characters in the movies.

We won't count Mercedes Ruehl, though she doesn't have anything much to do in "Last Action Hero," because that movie actually has no female characters of any consequence - which is probably fodder for another column.

And besides, you can see Ruehl in "Lost in Yonkers," which is currently playing in local "dollar" movie houses. She shines brightly in one of the few recent movies with a strong female leading character.

Sharon Stone in "Sliver" and Rebecca DeMornay in "Guilty as Sin" play sadly weak, male-dominted women who are misrepresented in both the films' theatrical previews and in the early scenes of the films themselves.

But before long, book-editor Stone is weak in the knees because playboy William Baldwin pays attention to her, and attorney DeMornay is nearly in tears during cross-examination because gigolo defendant Don Johnson has made veiled threats toward her.

Similarly, "Made in America" has Whoopi Goldberg seeming strong and secure in her life until Ted Danson makes a vulgar pass at her - and then she's willing to fall into bed with him immediately.

And in "Cliffhanger," Janine Turner is shown to be strong-willed and independent in the film's early scenes but is soon hanging on to Sylvester Stallone - literally - for dear life. (The real key to her character comes in a cave filled with bats. Stallone warns her to be quiet and leave the creatures undisturbed. Of course, she screams and sends them flying!)

Lately Hollywood has been very vocal about changing the way women are treated in movies - but we have yet to see any real results.

But there's hope. "Sleepless in Seattle," which opens next week, does better by Meg Ryan's character.

And there's a good reason for that.

"Sleepless" is co-written and directed by Nora Ephron, who represents a real behind-the-scenes minority in Hollywood.

She's a woman.