Description

Product Reviews

Description

Last Action Hero DVD 1993 Az Utolsó Akcióhős / Directed by John McTiernan / Starring: Arnold Schwarzenegger, F. Murray Abraham, Art Carney, Charles Dance, Frank McRae

UPC 5999010443486

REGION 2 PAL DVD

MADE IN HUNGARY

AUDIO: ENGLISH 5.1, German 2.1, Italian 2.1, French 2.1, Spanish 2.1

SUBTITLES: English, Hungarian, French, German, Polish, Czech, Hindi, Turkish, Arabic, Danish, Swedish, Finnish, Icelandic, Dutch, Norwegian, Portugueses, Greek, Hebrew, Spanish, Italian

RUNTIME: 125 MINUTES

English Summary:

Last Action Hero is a 1993 American fantasy action comedy film directed and produced by John McTiernan.[5] It is a satire of the action genre and associated clichés, containing several parodies of action films in the form of films within the film.[6] The film stars Arnold Schwarzenegger as Jack Slater, a Los Angeles police detective within the Jack Slater action film franchise, while Austin O'Brien co-stars as Danny Madigan, a boy magically transported into the Slater universe, and Charles Dance as Benedict, a ruthless assassin from the Slater universe who escapes to the real world. Schwarzenegger also served as the film's executive producer and plays himself as the actor portraying Jack Slater.

Danny Madigan is a teenager living in a crime-ridden area of New York City with his widowed mother, Irene. Following his father's death, Danny takes comfort in watching action movies, especially those featuring the indestructible Los Angeles cop Jack Slater, at his local movie theater owned by Nick, who also acts as the projectionist. Nick gives Danny a golden ticket once owned by Harry Houdini, to see an early preview of the latest Jack Slater film before its official release.

During the film, the ticket stub magically transports Danny inside the fictional world of the film, interrupting Slater in the middle of a car chase. After escaping their pursuers, Slater takes Danny to the LAPD headquarters, where Danny points out the fictional nature of the world, such as the presence of a cartoon cat detective named Whiskers, and that Slater's friend John Practice is played by the same actor who was the antagonist that killed Mozart from Amadeus and shouldn't be trusted; Slater takes these as part of Danny's wild imagination. Slater's supervisor, Dekker, assigns Danny as his new partner, and instructs them to investigate criminal activities related to mobster Tony Vivaldi.

Hungarian Summary:

A tizenkét éves Danny nagy mozirajongó. Legjobban Jack Slaterért, a filmvászon rettenthetetlen nyomozójáért lelkesedik. Egy napon a varázslat kedvenc hősének világába repíti. Miközben ideáljával a gátlástalan bűnözőket hajszolják, át-átlépnek a fikcióból a valóságba és fordítva. A kis Danny számára csalódás, hogy Slater a filmvászonról lelépve korántsem az a magabiztos és legyőzhetetlen figura, akit eddig bálványozott.

Cast / Szereplők:

Arnold Schwarzenegger as Jack Slater / Himself[8]

Austin O'Brien as Danny Madigan[9]

Charles Dance as Benedict, Vivaldi's right-hand man, a supporting antagonist in Jack Slater IV who becomes the antagonist of the main film.

Robert Prosky as Nick the projectionist

Tom Noonan as the Ripper (the main antagonist of Jack Slater III) and himself (the actor who plays the Ripper).

Frank McRae as Lieutenant Dekker, Slater's immediate supervisor, who is always screaming at him.

Anthony Quinn as Tony Vivaldi, the main antagonist of Jack Slater IV until Danny's interference changes events.

Bridgette Wilson as Whitney Slater (Jack's daughter) and Meredith Caprice, the actress who plays her in the Slater films

F. Murray Abraham as John Practice, Jack's friend, revealed to be a traitor. Danny says not to trust him, saying he killed Mozart, referring to Abraham's Oscar-winning role as Antonio Salieri in Amadeus.

Mercedes Ruehl as Irene Madigan, Danny's mom

Art Carney as Frank Slater, in his last film role

Professor Toru Tanaka as Vivaldi and Benedict's bodyguard (the Tough Asian Man).

Ryan Todd as Andrew Slater, Jack's son who is killed in Jack Slater III by the Ripper.

Bobbie Brown as Video Babe (credited as Bobbi Brown Lane)

Cameo appearances

Franco Columbu's name appears during the opening credits as director of Jack Slater IV. Columbu is a fellow bodybuilder and a close friend of Schwarzenegger.

Tina Turner appears at the climax of Jack Slater III as the mayor of Los Angeles.

Sharon Stone and Robert Patrick appear outside the front door of LAPD as Catherine Tramell (from Basic Instinct) and the T-1000 (from Terminator 2: Judgment Day), respectively. Stone and Patrick had earlier co-starred with Schwarzenegger in Total Recall and Terminator 2, respectively.

Mike Muscat, who played Moshier in Terminator 2: Judgment Day, appears as a cop in the LAPD headquarters. Muscat was also Edward Furlong's acting coach for Terminator 2.

Sylvester Stallone as the Terminator is on a poster promoting Terminator 2: Judgment Day. This appears to be a playful jab at Schwarzenegger's close but friendly rivalry with Stallone.

Angie Everhart as a video store clerk

During the premiere of Jack Slater IV in the real world, several celebrities appear as themselves. These include Schwarzenegger's then-wife Maria Shriver, Little Richard, Entertainment Tonight host Leeza Gibbons, James Belushi (who starred with Schwarzenegger in Red Heat), Damon Wayans, Chevy Chase, Timothy Dalton (James Bond at that time), and Jean-Claude Van Damme (who worked with John McTiernan on the Schwarzenegger film Predator as the original Predator before dropping out).

As Jack and Danny enter the movie theater to find Arnold Schwarzenegger, MC Hammer asks Slater about a deal to do the Jack Slater V soundtrack.

Wilson Phillips appears singing during the funeral scene

Ian McKellen as Death emerges from Ingmar Bergman's film The Seventh Seal.

Danny DeVito is the voice of Whiskers, the cartoon cat police detective. He and Schwarzenegger played twin brothers in 1988's Twins and co-starred again in 1994's Junior. DeVito was uncredited for the role.

Joan Plowright is the English teacher who shows her class the 1948 film adaptation of Hamlet, which starred and was directed by Plowright's husband Laurence Olivier.

Directed by John McTiernan Produced by

John McTiernan

Steve Roth

Screenplay by

Shane Black

David Arnott

Story by

Zak Penn

Adam Leff

Starring

Arnold Schwarzenegger

F. Murray Abraham

Art Carney

Charles Dance

Frank McRae

Tom Noonan

Robert Prosky

Anthony Quinn

Mercedes Ruehl

Austin O'Brien

Ian McKellen

Music by Michael Kamen Cinematography Dean Semler Edited by

Richard A. Harris

John Wright

Production

companies

Columbia Pictures[1]

Steve Roth Productions[1]

Distributed by Columbia Pictures[1][2]

Release date

June 13, 1993 (Westwood)

June 18, 1993 (United States)

Running time

125 minutes Country United States Language English

Product Reviews

No reviews yet Write a Review