Davenport Republican

Davenport, Scott, Iowa

Saturday, June 15, 1901

AN OLD SETTLER'S DEATH

Henry C. Moorhead Was Second Oldest Settler

Came to Iowa in 1835, Settling at Rockingham -

Built the First Steam Mill in the County - Helped

to Make Early Surveys of the State - Funeral Will

Be Held This Afternoon

The passing of Henry C. Moorhead of Buffalo township, whose death was mentioned briefly in these columns yesterday morning, was the passing of one of the very oldest settlers not only in the county but in the state. Capt. Clark of Buffalo is the only one of these very early settlers left, and he is the oldest living settler in the state of Iowa, a statement that has been made time and again without being refuted.

Henry C. Moorhead was 86 years old last February. He was born at St. Clairville, O., Feb. 15, 1815. When he was but six weeks old his parents moved to Zanesville, O., and he attended school there until he was 16 years of age. Then he took the position of bookkeeper in the mill of his brother-in-law, J.B. Cushing.

In 1835 Mr. Moorhead came to Iowa and located at Rockingham, where with Col. John H. Sullivan he established the first store in that place. In 1836 he retired from the firm and engaged in the dry goods and milling business with S.S. Brown, the firm name being Brown & Moorhead. They built a mill which was famous for being the first steam mill in the county. In 1840 Mr Moorhead moved to Buffalo township, where he had purchased the farm upon which he resided to the day of his death.

Mr. Moorhead was married in 1847 to Mrs. Mary A. Waggoner,and eight children were born to them, five of whom are now living. They are Moses E., at Blue Grass, Ella, now Mrs. D.B. Morehouse of Davenport, Annie M., now Mrs. M. Biehler of Tacoma, Wash., William C., living on a farm near Buffalo and Samuel H., of Buffalo.

Though given more to home life than public life, Mr. Moorhead held several important offices of trust. He was identified closely with the early days of Iowa, having been a member of a surveying party that surveyed a great deal of this part of the state. In religious faith his family was from Episcopalian stock.

The funeral will be held this afternoon at 2 o'clock instead of Sunday afternoon as was stated yesterday. Interment will take place in the Buffalo cemetery.

Davenport Morning Star

Davenport, Scott, Iowa

Saturday, Feb. 7, 1905

TRACHOFSKY, Mrs. Elizabeth. The funeral was held yesterday morning with services at St. Peter's church in Buffalo at 10 o'clock and interment in the Buffalo cemetery.

The Rev. W.L. Hannon of Buffalo celebrated requiem high mass, pronounced the absolution ceremony, preached the funeral sermon and officiated at the grave. The pallbearers were Theodore Kautz, Robert Nugent, Joseph Scharter, Fred Rinnert and Peter Willi.

The Daily Times (Davenport, IA); Thursday March 18, 1909:

Reinhardt Obituary

The death of Jacob Reinhardt occurred this afternoon about 1 o’clock at the home of Mr. and Mrs. W. [sic] Rauch of Buffalo, Ia. The deceased was about 82 years old and has for a number of years resided in Buffalo. He was a veteran of the civil war and has for the past few years been so enfeebled that he was unable to do work of any sort. He was a member of the German Lutheran church of Buffalo. The funeral will be held Sunday afternoon.

Submitted by Lynnea Dickinson

The Davenport (IA) Democrat & Leader; Friday March 19, 1909:

Old Veteran Dies At Buffalo

Buffalo, Ia., March 19. (Special to The Democrat) - Jacob Reinhard, a resident of this city since 1865 [should be 1855], died at 1 o’clock Thursday afternoon at the home of his daughter, Mrs. V. Rauch, from old age. He was born at Rheinplatz, Germany, March 28, 1826, making him almost 83 years of age.

He came to America in 1850, fought in the civil war, being with Sherman’s army in its march to the sea, and came to Buffalo in 1865. His wife died 21 years ago, and he is survived by one daughter, Mrs. Rauch, and nine grandchildren and seven great grandchildren.

The funeral will take place Sunday at 2 o’clock with services at the Methodist church, Rev. H. P. Greif of Davenport officiating, and interment in Rose Hill cemetery.

Submitted by Lynnea Dickinson

The Davenport Democrat & Leader; Friday Evening June 21, 1918:

Aged Butcher Hangs Himself Back of Shop

Town of Buffalo Shocked Over Rash Act of Valentine Rauch

Cause is not known

Although 82 Years Old, Dead Man Had Been in Good Health

Valentine Rauch, 82 years old, committed suicide late Thursday afternoon by hanging himself to a block and tackle arrangement in a slaughter house in the

rear of his butcher shop in Buffalo.

His body was found at 4:30 p.m. by Marie Clark and Esther Christensen, 12 and 13 years old, relatives of his son. They had been sent to hunt for him.

He had been dead only a few minutes when his body was found. Relatives of the dead man are unable to give any cause for his rash act.

Although advanced in age, they say he was in good health. The only theory mentioned is that he was worried over the war situation.

Retired Years Ago

Mr. Rauch had not had active charge of his butcher shop in Buffalo for the past four years, his son, Louis, conducting the business.

The shop was the only one in Buffalo, and was started nearly half a century ago by the elder Rauch. When he retired and turned the reins of business

over to his son, he continued to work about the shop.

Recently, friends say, he had appeared very cheerful. He did not complain about his health and did not appear to be worried about anything.

Disappears At Noon

At noon, or shortly afterward,, Thursday, he disappeared. His absence was noticed, but caused no alarm until between 4 and 5 o’clock.

Then the little girls were sent to find him. They searched all the buildings in the vicinity, finally locating his body hanging to the rafters of the

slaughter house.

The Daily Times (Davenport, Iowa]

Valentine Rauch Suicides

Valentine Rauch, aged 80, a butcher of Buffalo, Ia., for nearly a half century, took his own life yesterday afternoon at 4:30 o’clock when he hanged himself from a rafter in his slaughter house. Discovery of the act was made by Marie Clark and Esther Christensen, who had gone to look for him. His son, Louis Rauch, was preparing to do some killing and was met by the girls who told him of their discovery. No reason has been found for the act.

Rauch was born in Germany and came to this country fifty years ago, settling in this locality. He entered the butchering business and ran a slaughterhouse for nearly a half century. He leaves his wife, five sons, George, Louis, Carl, Harry of Buffalo, and Clarence of Davenport, and three daughters, Mrs.L Ochsner, Mrs. W. Oshsner and Mrs. Preston Gold, all of Buffalo.

The funeral will be held Sunday.

Submitted by Lynnea Dickinson

Davenport Democrat and Leader

Davenport, Scott, Iowa

Tuesday evening, January 24, 1922

Thomas

David Thomas died at his home on South Howell street Monday afternoon at 3 o'clock following a short illness.

He was born in Wales, Scotland, on Feb. 2, 1863, and came with his parents to America when he was a child. The family settled near Buffalo, where Mr. Thomas made his home until recent years when he was removed to Davenport. He was in the employ of the city.

Surviving are two sons, Harry and Arthur Thomas of Davenport, two brothers, Edward and William Thomas of Buffalo, and two sisters, Mrs. Rachel Fridley of Buffalo and Mrs. Esther Murray of St. Davis, Ill.

Funeral services will be held Wednesday afternoon at 2 o'clock from the Nissen & Hartwig parlors and burial will be in Rose Hill cemetery, Buffalo.

The Pahl Funeral

The funeral of Eggert Pahl was held Monday afternoon at 3:30 from the home of the daughter, Mrs. Edward James, one-half mile south of Blue Grass road. Miss Inez Batchelor, who officiated, sang a sacred song. Miss Egger also sang. Burial was in Rose Hill cemetery, Buffalo.

Pallbearers were Fritz Kautz, Ed Zinger, Perry Rose, Samuel Moore, Elwood Clark and William Kearney.

Davenport Democrat and Leader

Davenport, Scott, Iowa

Friday evening, March 17, 1922

David Thomas Succumbs at Jamestown Home

David Thomas passed away at his home in Jamestown, Scott county, Thursday evening at 8:30 after several months of ill health.

He was born in Carmonthenshire, South Wales, and came to America in 1866, settling near Jamestown. Fifty-one years ago he married Miss Martha Gettens who preceded him in death Jan. 15, 1915.

The following children survive: Henry, Robert and Mrs. Annie Twigg of Buffalo township, and Mrs. Mary Lehnhardt of Walnut, Iowa.

Services will be held Sunday afternoon at 1 o'clock from the Nissen & Hartwig parlors, Davenport, and interment will be made in Rose Hill cemetery, Buffalo.

Davenport Democrat and Leader

Davenport, Scott, Iowa

Friday evening, May 12, 1922

W.J. EGGER IS DEAD AT HOME IN BUFFALO, IOWA

One of Leading and Popular Business Men of His Home Town

William John Egger, a well-known and prosperous business man of Buffalo, Iowa, died at 6:10 o'clock this morning at his home at that place, death terminating a three-year illness borne with rare patience and fortitude.

Mr. Egger was proprietor of a bottling works, ice house and coal yard at Buffalo and was one of the progressive and substantial citizens of the Community. He leaves a host of friends who will sincerely miss him and will mourn his departure.

Deceased was born in Davenport, Sept. 1, 1872, and was 49 years old. On March 24, 1915, he was united in marriage to Miss Barbara Tate and seven years ago moved to Buffalo. He was a member of the Court of Honor.

Surviving are the bereaved wife and one son, George Tate Egger. Other survivors are the parents, Mr. and Mrs. Matthias Egger of Buffalo; one sister, Mrs. Roy Reed of Libertyville, Iowa; and five brothers, Peter A., Leroy G of Bettendorf; August M and Harry J of Davenport and E.A. Egger of Buffalo.

The funeral will be held from the family home at 2 o'clock Sunday afternoon. Interment will take place in Rosehill cemetery.

Davenport Democrat and Leader

Davenport, Scott, Iowa

Tuesday evening, May 16, 1922

W.H. CRAWFORD DIES AFTER A LONG ILLNESS

Was Postmaster at Buffalo for Years; Retired Several Years Ago.

William H. Crawford, former Buffalo, Iowa, postmaster, and for many years owner of a drug store, died at 2 o'clock this morning following an illness extending over a period of ten years. He retired from active business a number of years ago.

He was born in Ohio on Oct. 4, 1838, and came to Buffalo when a small boy. After the death of his first wife, 16 years ago, he married Miss Anna Mendy at Buffalo. Mr. Crawford was a member of the Friends church and the G.A.R., he having served with the Union forces during the Civil war with the 16th Iowa infantry, receiving a wound in the hand.

Surviving are his wife and an adopted daughter, Mrs. Tillie Braun of Buffalo. The funeral will be held Thursday afternoon at 2 o'clock from the Friends church, and interment will be made in Rose Hill cemetery, Buffalo.

Davenport Democrat and Leader

Davenport, Scott, Iowa

Wednesday evening, Aug 9, 1922

MRS. W.J. EGGER DIES AT HOME IN BUFFALO, IA.

Grief Over Death of Her Son in May a Contributory Cause.

Grief over the death of her son, William J Egger, on May 12, 1922, resulted in the demise of Mrs. Mary Egger at her home in Buffalo at 8:40 Tuesday evening. She was 77 years of age and was the wife of Matthias Egger, who survives.

Mrs. Egger, whose maiden name was Miss Mary Willie, was born in Switzerland, April 10, 1845, and came to America with her parents when she was six months old, the family settling in Davenport. In 1863 she was united in marriage to Matthias Egger in Davenport, the couple removing to Buffalo 12 years later. They celebrated their Golden wedding anniversary in 1913.

Mrs. Egger was a member of the St. Peter's Catholic church of Buffalo and of the Altar and Rosary Society. Loved by all, she was visited by every friend coming from Davenport to Buffalo, and many stories are told of her hospitality.

Surviving besides her husband, who is 83 years of age, are one daughter, Mrs. Ray Reed of Libertyville, Ia, and five sons, P.A. and L.G. Egger of Bettendorf, H.J. and A.M. Egger of Davenport, and E.A. Egger of Buffalo.

The funeral will be held Friday morning from the home, with services at St. Peter's church at 9 o'clock, at which hour a solemn requiem high mass will be celebrated. Interment will be made in St. Peter's cemetery, Buffalo.

Davenport Democrat and Leader

Davenport, Scott, Iowa

Aug 11, 1922

BUFFALO WOMAN DIES AFTER 30 DAYS' ILLNESS

Mrs. Henry C. Schroder Has Resided in Buffalo for 25 Years.

Mrs. Susie C. Shroder, wife of Henry E. Schroder of Blue Grass, died Thursday evening at 7:15 at her home after an illness of 30 days.

She was born in Bismark, N.D. August 31, 1885, her maiden name being Miss Susie Hoffbauer, and came to Buffalo, Ia., with her parents at the age of 2 years.

On Oct. 14, 1908, she was united in marriage by Rev. N.J. Peiffer to Henry E. Schroder at St. Peter's church of Buffalo, and the couple have since resided there. Mrs. Schroder was a member of the Altar and Rosary society of St. Peter's church and was exceedingly popular in the parish to which she belonged by reason of her lovable personality.

Her husband, two daughters, Kathrine and Florence, one brother Edward J. Hoffbauer, of Blue Grass, and two half brothers, Henry Strohbehn and Benjamin Strohbehn of Blue Grass, survive.

A solemn requiem high mass will be celebrated Monday morning at 9 o'clock at St. Peter's church in Buffalo, following services at the home at 3 o'clock and interment will be in St. Peter's cemetery, Buffalo.

Davenport Democrat and Leader

Davenport, Scott, Iowa

Friday evening, May 4, 1923

YOUNG MATRON PASSES AWAY AT HOME NEAR CITY

Mrs. Edith Roggenkamp Is Survived by Two Weeks Old Babe.

Mrs. Edith Roggenkamp, well known young matron of the community, died at her home, six miles northwest of Davenport, Thursday afternoon, after an illness extending over the past two weeks. She leaves an infant daughter, two weeks old.

Miss Edith Thomas was born in Scott county, Oct. 26, 1901, and was united in marriage to Louis Rogenkamp, July 26, 1922. The couple settled on a farm north of the city and have resided there since their marriage. Mrs. Roggenkamp was well known among the young people of the community in which she lived and had a host of friends who will mourn her untimely death. She is survived by her husband, Louis Roggenkamp; her infant daughter, Ruth Edith; her parents, Mr. and Mrs. Robert Thomas of Scott county; three sisters, the Misses Anna, Ima and Verna Thomas; two brothers, Harry and Wilbur Thomas and her grandmother, Mrs. Katherine Sieh.

Funeral services will be held Sunday afternoon at 2 o'clock from the home with interment in Rose Hill cemetery, Buffalo, Ia.

Davenport Democrat and Leader

Davenport, Scott, Iowa

Monday evening, October 22, 1923

BROWN FUNERAL TO BE HELD AT BUFFALO TUESDAY

Funeral services for Louis F. Brown, who was killed in the railroad accident Saturday, will be held from the home in Buffalo Tuesday afternoon at 2:30 o'clock. Interment will be made in Rosehill cemetery, Buffalo.

Rev. Mark A. Getzendamer, pastor of St. Mark's English Lutheran church, will officiate.

Davenport Democrat and Leader

Davenport, Scott, Iowa

Monday evening, March 3, 1924

The Franklin Funeral

Mrs. Mary Elizabeth Franklin died at the home of her daughter, Mrs. Clyde Lettleton in Montpelier, Iowa, at 6 o'clock this morning. She was born September 25, 1874 in Muscatine and received her education in the schools there.

She was married November 26, 1890 in Muscatine. She was a member of the Methodist Episcopal church of Montpelier and of the Pythian Sisters of that town. Surviving are the husband, George Franklin, two daughters, Mrs. Clyde Lettleton and Mrs. Florence Welsch, and one granddaughter.

Funeral services will be held Wednesday afternoon at 1:30 o'clock from the M.E. church in Montpelier and interment will be made in Rosehill cemetery, Buffalo.

Davenport Democrat and Leader

Davenport, Scott, Iowa

Thursday evening, March 6, 1924

The Franklin Funeral

Wednesday afternoon at 1 o'clock funeral services were held for Mrs. George Franklin, from the home of her daughter, Mrs. C.N. Nettleton of Montpelier. Later services were held at the M.E. church, with Rev. Mark A. Getzendamer officiating. He also officiated at the grave in Rosehill cemetery, Buffalo. The Pythian Sisters of Buffalo of which the deceased was a member were in attendance and officiated at the grave.

Mrs. G.C. Leach and Mrs. Fred Bear sang two songs and the pallbearers were Fred Seih, Peter Seih, Joe Richter, Cyril Franklind, Merrill Thomas and Roy Lobdale.

Davenport Democrat and Leader

Davenport, Scott, Iowa

August 15, 1924

The Thompson Funeral

Funeral services for Burl J. Thompson, who was killed Thursday morning while on the Buffalo road, will be held Saturday afternoon at 2:30 o'clock from the Stapleton Funeral Home. Interment will be made in Buffalo cemetery.

Lousa S. Braun

Mrs. Lousa S. Braun passed away at 6 o'clock this morning at her home two miles west of Buffalo. She was born Feb. 2, 1855, at Wettenburg, Germany, and came to this country in the year 1890. On Feb. 6, 1901, she was united in marriage to Louis Braun in Rock Island.

Surviving are her husband and two brothers in Germany. The funeral will be held Sunday afternoon at 2:30 from the Lutheran church at Buffalo. Rev. Carl Holterman will officiate. Interment will be at Rose Hill cemetery.

Davenport Democrat and Leader

Davenport, Scott, Iowa

Sunday morning, August 17, 1924

The Thompson Funeral

Funeral services for Burl Thompson were held Saturday afternoon at 2 o'clock from the Stapleton Funeral Home, and Rev. M.A. Getzendamer of St. Mark's Lutheran church officiated at the home and the grave in Rose Hill Cemetery, Buffalo.

Casketbearers were Cleve Houten, Sim Meyers, Charles Moore, Harry McCulley, William Roe and Edward Strotes.

Davenport Democrat and Leader

Davenport, Scott, Iowa

Tuesday evening, Feb. 10, 1925

The Rostenbach Funeral

Funeral services were held for Mrs. Emma Rostenbach from the late home, 2802 Jefferson avenue, Monday afternoon. Rev. M.A. Getzendaner had charge of the services at the home and at the burial in Rosedale [sic] cemetery, Buffalo.

Pallbearers were Carl, William, Edward and Ernest Henning, Joe Zurcher and David Murray.

Davenport Democrat and Leader

Davenport, Scott, Iowa

Tuesday evening, May 12, 1925

MRS. WRAGE SUCCUMBS TO LONG ILLNESS

Was a Well Known and Popular Resident of Buffalo, Ia.

Mrs. Anna Elizabeth Wrage, wife of Rudolph Wrage of Buffalo, Iowa, died at 7:15 o'clock this morning at Mercy Hospital, Davenport, after a lingering illness. She had been confined to the hospital over the past three weeks.

The deceased, whose maiden name was Anna Fiedler, was born in Germany, Dec. 10, 1867, and when a mere baby was brot [sic] to Buffalo with her parents, Mr. and Mrs. Mathias Fiedler. On June 5, 1888 she was united in marriage with Rudolph Fiedler [sic- Wrage], the ceremony performed by Rev. J.T. A. Flannagan at St. Peter's Church in Buffalo.

Soon after marriage they came to Davenport, remaining here until 1895 when they returned to Buffalo and have resided here for the past 30 years.

Mrs. Wrage was a devoted wife and mother and leaves many friends to mourn her passing. She is survived by the bereaved husband and the following children: Arthur R., Charles C., Elmer W., Mrs. O.E. Schroder, Mrs. John Inhelder and Miss Edna Wrage, all of Buffalo. There are also two sisters and a brother as follows: Mrs. Clement Bogelbaugh, Davenport; Mrs. John Porstmann, Kansas City, Mo., and Charles Fiedler, of Buffalo.

The body was removed to the Fred N. Ruhl funeral home where it will remain until Wednesday morning when it will be returned to the family home in Buffalo. The funeral will be held from here at 8:30 o'clock at St. Peters church and interment at Rose Hill cemetery, Buffalo.

Davenport Democrat and Leader

Davenport, Scott, Iowa

Sunday morning, June 7, 1925

INFANT SON OF MR. AND MRS. G. SECOY IS CALLED

Mr. and Mrs. George Secoy, 3238 Diehn street, Davenport, are mourning the loss of an infant son, who passed away Saturday at 10:30 a.m. at the age of four days.

Seven brothers survive beside the parents. They are Raymond, Wayne, Rollin, Warren, Edwin, Frank and LaVern.

Funeral services are being held from the E.A. Horrigan & Son funeral parlors this morning at 9:30 o'clock with interment at Rose Hill cemetery, Buffalo.

Davenport Democrat and Leader

Davenport, Scott, Iowa

Monday evening, Nov 2, 1925

PIONEER SCOTT COUNTY WOMAN CALLED TO REST

Mrs. Mary Buchmeyer of Buffalo Township Passes Away Today.

Mrs. Mary Buchmeyer, pioneer resident of Scott county, passed away at 3:30 this morning at the home of her son, John Buchmeyer, RR2, Walcott. The deceased was born on March 25, 1847, in Moelen, Tyrol. At the age of 7 she was left an orphan by the death of her parents and went to live in Wertenburg, Germany, where she stayed until she was 21 years of age.

In 1867 Mrs. Buchmeyer sailed for this country, coming directly to Scott county. On Jan. 12, 1868, she was united in marriage to Casper Buchmeyer by the late Monsignor Niermann at St. Joseph's church, Davenport. The husband preceded her in death 21 years ago.

Surviving are one son, John; one daughter, Mrs. Sullivan Mosier of Davenport RR No 6; ten grandchildren, and five great grandchildren. One daughter, Mrs. Henry Kluever, died 34 years ago.

Mrs. Buchmeyer was a faithful member of St. Peter's church, Buffalo. The body was removed to the Fred N. Ruhl Funeral Home where it will remain until Tuesday morning. Then it will be taken to the home of the son, John, RR No 2, Walcott, from where the funeral services will be held at 8 o'clock Wednesday morning and at 9 o'clock at St. Peter's church, Buffalo. Interment will be made in Rosehill cemetery, Buffalo.

Davenport Democrat and Leader

Davenport, Scott, Iowa

Sunday morning, Feb 27, 1927

Pagel

Gertrude Dorothy Pagel, 4-year-old daughter of Mr. and Mrs. Raymond B Pagel of Buffalo, died Saturday at 1:15 a.m. at Mercy hospital after a week's illness.

She was born at Buffalo, Oct. 29, 1923, and surviving besides her parents are one sister, Arlene, and the grandparents, Mr. and Mrs. Emuel Muth and Mr. and Mrs. Ben Pagel.

The remains were removed to the Runge mortuary. Funeral services will be held Monday afternoon at 2:30 o'clock from the home west of Buffalo. The Rev. Mark Getzendener will officiate and interment will be at Rosehill cemetery.

Davenport Democrat and Leader

Davenport, Scott, Iowa

Tuesday evening, Nov 1, 1927

The Strohbehn Funeral.

Funeral services for Ben L Strohbehn were held this morning from the home, two miles west of the city on the Blue Grass road, at 8:30 o'clock with services at St. Peter's church at Buffalo at 9 o'clock.

The Rev. P.J. O'Reilly celebrated requiem high mass, gave the burial absolution and preached the funeral sermon. He also officiated at the services at the grave in Rose Hill cemetery.

The pallbearers, cousins of the deceased, were R.B Pagel, Robert Muth, Paul Ralfs, Clarence Beh, Frank Beh and Joe Bernick.

Davenport Democrat and Leader

Davenport, Scott, Iowa

Sunday morning, Nov. 6, 1927

BELL

Mrs. Mathilda Bell, 807 Concord street, passed away at her home at 3:15 p.m. Friday, after a lingering illness.

The deceased was born in Fairport, Ia., Aug. 25, 1842. She has been a resident of Scott county for the past 55 years. She was united in marriage to William Bell in 1860 at Muscatine, Ia. Mr. Bell preceded her in death 25 years ago. She was a member of the Methodist church.

Surviving are four daughters, Mrs. Hannah Carstens, Davenport, Mrs. Mary Ord, Buffalo, Ia., Mrs. Marie Dyer, Davenport, Mrs. Gustave Rostenbach, Buffalo, and one son, John Bell, Davenport; 26 grandchildren, 29 great grandchildren, and four great-great-great grandchildren.

The body was removed to the Horrigan funeral home and was returned to the late home where funeral services will be held this afternoon at 2:30 o'clock. The Rev. Dr. Frank Court will officiate. Interment will be in Rose Hill cemetery, Buffalo.

Davenport Democrat and Leader

Davenport, Scott, Iowa

Friday evening, Jan 20, 1928

AGED BUFFALO RESIDENT DIES IN DAVENPORT

Thos. Webster Succumbs at Home of Daughter, Mrs. J.C. Wylie

Thomas Webster, 79, a resident of Buffalo for more than 40 years, passed away at the home of his daughter, Mrs. J.C. Wylie, 1230 West Fourth street, Davenport, after an illness of a year's duration.

Mr. Webster was born in Liverpool, England, on Sept. 29, 1848. He came to America at the age of 18, settling in Pennsylvania and later came to Scott county where he has since resided. He was a member of the Knights of Pythias lodge of Buffalo. His wife preceded him in death eight months ago.

Surviving are seven daughters, Mrs. Peter Drumm, Muscatine, Ia., Mrs. Jesse Wylie, Davenport, Mrs. Henry Hartman, Holt, Ore., Mrs. Julius Gadient, Davenport, Mrs. Henry Groce, Davenport, Mrs. George Wiese, Buffalo, and Mrs. Frank Padeskie of Davenport; three sons, Robert and Ralph, Buffalo and Frank, Davenport; 14 grandchildren and one great-grandchild.

The body was taken to the Runge mortuary where it will remain until Sunday morning when it will be taken to the Lutheran church at Buffalo. Services will be held at 2:30 o'clock Sunday afternoon at the church. Interment will be in the Buffalo cemetery.

Davenport Democrat and Leader

Davenport, Scott, Iowa

Sunday morning, Feb. 3, 1929

The Bishop Funeral

Funeral services for Jacob Bishop were held at 2:30 p.m Friday at the Horrigan home for funerals. The Rev. C.W. Harrop officiated at the services at the home and at the grave in Rose Hill cemetery, Buffalo.

Mr. and Mrs. T.E. Dyer and Miss Catherine Stormer sang "Beautiful Isle of Somewhere" and "Rock of Ages."

Pallbearers were Rev. Wayne, Rolland, Warren and Edward Secoy and Kenneth Brann [or Braun].

The Daily Times (Davenport, IA); Monday, November 15, 1937

Funeral Rites for Mrs. Mary F. Rauch At Buffalo Tuesday

Funeral services for Mrs. Mary F. Rauch, 87, resident of Buffalo, Ia., where she was well known since 1885 (should be 1855), who died at her home there at 8 p.m. Saturday after an illness of 10 days, will be held from the German Lutheran church there at 2 p.m. Tuesday. Burial will be in Rosehill cemetery.

Mrs. Rauch was born in Sparkelbach (sic), Germany, June 18, 1850, and came to the United States with her parents when she was 11 weeks old. They first settled in New Orleans, La., and later removed to Evansville, Ind. When she was five years of age they moved to Buffalo, where she received her education.

She was married to V. Rauch, Nov. 21, 1872. Her husband, two daughter and one son preceded her in death. She was a member of the German Lutheran church.

Three daughters, Mrs. L. T. Ochsner, Mrs. P. T. Gold and Mrs. W. F. Ochsner, all of Buffalo; five sons, George, Carl and Harry, all of Buffalo, and Louis and Clarence of Davenport; 17 grandchildren and five great grandchildren survive.

The body was taken to the Runge mortuary and was returned to the family home late Sunday.

Submitted by Lynnea Dickinson

Davenport Daily Republican; Davenport, Scott, Iowa; Wednesday, December 18, 1901

The death of Blasie Richlin occurred early yesterday morning at the family home, east of Buffalo, at the age of 86 years. Mr. Richlin was born on June 16, 1816, and came to Davenport in 1854. In 1859 he removed to Buffalo with his family, having been married in the fatherland nearly 54 years ago. His wife, Katherine, survives, besides the following children: Frank, now residing in Arkansas, Anthony, Isidor, and Mrs. Martin Sherrer, besides a number of grandchildren. The funeral will be held Thursday morning with services at St. Peter's church in Buffalo, where interment will also be made.

Mr. Richlin was in excellent health a few days prior to his death and no one expected the sad blow. Monday evening he was perfectly well and entertaining his grandchildren with reminiscences of pioneer life. In the morning he arose from his bed and immediately fell back upon it and expired without warning only calling to his wife.

Davenport Democrat and Leader; Davenport, Scott, Iowa; Thursday, January 17, 1929

FUNERAL SERVICES FOR STOVE BLAST VICTIM AT BUFFALO

Funeral services for Miss Margaret Roop who died from injuries received when a laundry stove exploded last Monday, were held at 2 p.m. Wednesday at the Friends' church in B uffalo. The Rev. George Evans officiated at the services at the church and at the grave in Rose Hill cemetery.

Mrs. Charles Prignitz and Miss Mildred Egger, accompanied by Mrs. A. Meach, sang "The Heart of God" and "Sometimes We'll Understand."

Pallbearers were William Long, Elmer Wrage, Opal Gregory, George Cross, Ed Mason and L.H. Moorhead.

Davenport Democrat and Leader; Davenport, Scott, Iowa; Sunday, March 21, 1926

The Sanders Funeral

Funeral services for Isaac Sanders were held from the late home in Buffalo at 8:30 a.m. today to St. Peter's church at 9 o'clock. The Rev. Father Dolan celebrated a requiem high mass, pronounced the burial absolution and preached the funeral sermon. The services in Rose Hill cemetery were also conducted by him.

The mass was sung by Mrs. E. Burtis, Mrs. L. Huber, and Mrs. L. Sticher. The pallbearers were Louis Huber, C. Neumeister, Ed McCullough, Sim Meyers, Rubert Kautz and Ross Roseman.

Davenport Weekly Leader; Davenport, Scott, Iowa; Tuesday, May 26, 1896

KAUTZ

At 12 o'clock last night at his home in Buffalo occurred the death of Frederick Kautz, one of the most prominent citizens of Scott county. The deceased was born in Germany and had he lived until next October he would have reached the age of 75 years.

Mr. Kautz was born Oct. 21, 1821 in Baden, Germany. He entered the German army when twenty years of age and served six years. Receiving his discharge he came to America, arriving Sept. 15, 1848. He remained in New York three weeks and then went to Milton, Mass., and worked for three years on a farm at that place. He then went to Germany on a visit returning to this country in 1853. He repaired to Detroit, Mich., where he obtained employment in a wholesale queen's ware store where he remained for two years. On May 17, 185? [may be 1853 or 1858], he married Barbara Lutz a native of Baden, Germany. Her parents were Nicholas and Victoria (Heckle) Lutz.

In April 1855 the deceased came to Buffalo where he purchased 250 acres of land in partnership with Theo. Heckle, forty of which they laid out in town lots, being in this the founder of the town of Buffalo. Mr. Kautz has held the offices of county supervisor for years, school director and township justice for a number of years.

The deceased had been ill but a short time, his death being due to erysipelas. He is survived by eight children - Theodore, William F, Mary (sister Mary Mathilda), Max, Minnie, Bernard, Sophie, George W.

Davenport Weekly Leader; Davenport, Scott, Iowa; March 1, 1898

Moore.

(From Monday's Daily Leader)

Sunday morning at 9 o'clock at her home near Buffalo in this county, occurred the death of Mrs. Levy Moore, one of the oldest residents and most respected ladies of that part of the county.

Deceased was 70 years of age and has resided in this county for the past 60 years, coming here when but a mere child, with her parents and locating upon the farm where her death occurred, about one and a half miles east of Buffalo.

Deceased is survived by eleven children, six sons, E.A. Moore, F.E. Moore, E.E. Moore, C.E. Moore, E.L. Moore, and E.A. Moore, the latter a resident of this city and a member of the police force of the city. Also the following daughters: Mrs. William DeLag [DeLap] of Buffalo, Mrs. W. White near the chapel on the middle road, Mrs. J.A. Lynumn of Menlow, Mrs. F. Mosier of Buffalo, and Mrs. C.A Gould of this city. The funeral will be held Tuesday at 2 o'clock in the afternoon at Buffalo.

Davenport Weekly Leader; Davenport, Scott, Iowa; March 1, 1898

Heirseman

(From Monday's Daily Leader)

Feb. 26, 1898, at 10:30 a.m. occurred the death of Mrs. J.H. Heirseman. The deceased was born in Buffalo in 1851. Early in the seventy's she was married to J.C. Heirseman who was a blacksmith by trade. They afterward moved to a farm in Montpelier Township where her husband died some seven years ago. In 1896 she came to Buffalo and built a home for herself and children. She is survived by her aged mother, Mrs. M. Bald who is 84 years of age, and seven children, four daughters and three sons, Josephine, Katie, Clara at home and Mrs. Frank Kautz of Rock Island and Charles, John and George at home, she has two sisters and two brothers who survive her, Mrs. Bender of Kansas, Mrs. Brown of Durant, George of Mexico and Charles of Buffalo. The deceased was highly respected and will be mourned by all who knew her.

The funeral takes place today from St. Peter's church.

Davenport Daily Republican; Davenport, Scott, Iowa; Tuesday, May 20, 1902

KAUGER

Early Sunday morning occurred the death of Christian Kauger, at the home of the family in Buffalo township, one mile above Buffalo. He was a native of Germany and resided in this county for the past 40 years. He was 81 years of age at the time of his death. He is survived by his wife, Kate, born Kautz, and four children. The funeral will be held Wednesday afternoon at 2 o'clock

Davenport Daily Leader; Davenport, Scott, Iowa; December 4, 1894

Christian Pahl and old and respected citizen of Buffalo township, Scott co., Iowa, died Thursday, Nov. 29, after an illness of about three weeks. He was born in Holstein, near Lendsburg, Germany, Jan. 25, 1819, where he served for several years in the Standeversammburg. He emigrated with his family to America in 1866 and afterward settled on a farm in Buffalo township where he breathed his last. He has been for many years the president of the German Mutual Fire Insurance company which will greatly feel his loss; and also served as justice of the peace. The funeral took place Dec. 2 from his son's residence with interment at the Buffalo cemetery. He leaves to mourn, six daughters and five sons; Mrs. Merns who lives at the old home, Mrs. Deukman of Davenport, Mrs. Telsrod of Stockton, Mrs. Branch of Durant, Mrs. Kautz of Buffalo, Mrs. Joeckek of Stockton, and Eggert, Christian, Henry, William and Louis. His wife died about sixteen years ago.

Davenport Democrat and Leader; Davenport, Scott, Iowa; Tuesday, January 24, 1922 pg 13

Thomas

David Thomas died at his home on South Howell street, Monday afternoon at 2 o'clock following a short illness.

He was born in Wales, Scotland, on Feb. 2, 1863, and came with his parents to America when he was a child. The family

settled near Buffalo, where Mr. Thomas made his home until recent years when he removed to Davenport. He was in the employ of

the city.

Surviving are two sons, Harry and Arthur Thomas of Davenport, two brothers, Edward and William Thomas of Buffalo, and

two sisters, Mrs. Rachel Fridley of Buffalo and Mrs. Esther Murray of St. Davis, Ill.

Funeral services will be held Wednesday afternoon at 2 o'clock from the Nissen & Hartwig parlors, and burial will be

in Rose Hill cemetery, Buffalo.

Davenport Democrat and Leader; Davenport, Scott, Iowa; Friday, January 27, 1922 pg 11

The Thomas Funeral

Services for David Thomas were held Wednesday afternoon at 2 o'clock from the Nissen & Hartwig parlors. Dr. Frank W.

Court of the St. John's Methodist church, spoke at the parlors and at the grave in Rose Hill cemetery.

Pallbearers were John Bell, John Blackwell, James Machim, Frank Winfield, S.A. Gault, and Al Dyer.

Davenport Republican; Davenport, Scott, Iowa; Tuesday, May 7, 1901

BOLT OF LIGHTNING STRUCK AND KILLED A BUFFALO CITIZEN

Well Known and Highly Respected Resident of Scott County Meets Death As He Was Going Home In Thunderstorm Sunday Afternoon

A stroke of lightning killed George Kuhn, a well known resident of Buffalo, Ia., on one of the streets of that place Sunday afternoon. He and Charles Hirsemann were leaving the hall where a special meeting of Banner lodge, Knights of Pythias, had been held. With others they were making for their homes in the hope of reaching them before the threatened storm broke. When it began to rain so hard they both started to run, Mr. Hirseman being 200 feet in advance, when lightning struck them both to the ground. Mr. Kuhn was instantly killed, his skull being fractured and one leg and his clothing and one shoe burned by the electric fluid. Mr. Hirsemann was stunned but soon recovered.

Mr. Kuhn was a very prominent citizen of Buffalo, at one time a member of the town council, and an enterprising man in many ways. He was a veteran of the civil war, and was with Sherman on the march to the sea. He was 53 year old and leaves a wife and five children.

The funeral will occur at 2 o'clock tomorrow afternoon, with interment in the Buffalo cemetery. The services will be conducted by Banner lodge, No. 16, K. of P.

Davenport Democrat and Leader; Davenport, Scott, Iowa; Friday evening, January 4, 1929

W.J. KEARNEY, BUFFALO, DIES OF PNEUMONIA

Succumbs Today at Home After Illness of Few Days

William James Kearney, 68, a life resident of Buffalo township, died at 10:30 a.m. today at his home, one mile north of Buffalo. Death was caused by pneumonia after a short illness.

Mr. Kearney was born May 1, 1860 in Buffalo township. He lived his entire life on the homestead where he died. On Nov. 2, 1891, he was united in marriage to Miss Addie Moore at Davenport. Mr. Kearney was one of the best known farmers in Buffalo township.

Surviving besides the widow are one son, Paul, at home; two daughters, Mrs. William Anderson and Mrs. Demick, both of Buffalo and one brother, Edward, Deep River, Iowa.

The body was removed to the Hill & Fredericks mortuary and will probably be returned to the late home Saturday afternoon. Funeral services will be held at 2 p.m. Monday at the Friends' church in Buffalo with burial in Rose Hill cemetery.

The Chief Reporter; Perry, Dallas , Iowa ; May 6, 1908

OBITUARY

Mrs. Jerome Ruby died at Colfax , Ia. , April 24, 1908. Sarah Pauline Page was born in Meegs County , Ohio , March 24, 1840, at the age of thirteen she removed with her parents to Danvigs Landing, where she lived for several years and from which place she was united in marriage to Jerome Ruby of Buffalo , Iowa . To this union were born two children, Spencer, who died at the age of five, and Sherman, who departed this life at the age of three years.

She resided at Buffalo , Iowa , until March 1896, when her husband died, since that time she has made her home at Angus , Iowa . Three weeks ago she went to Colfax to visit a nephew.

Thursday noon she suffered a stroke of apoplexy, a second stroke soon followed and she rapidly sank until death came to her relief at 9:10 p.m. Friday.

Abut the time of her marriage deceased united with the Latter Day Saints Church and from that time has lived a consistent Christian life.

The remains were taken to Buffalo , Iowa , where the services were conducted by Rev. Davis Latter Day Saint Minister basing his remarks from John, 12 chapter 24th verse. Interment was made in Rose Hill cemetery. She leaves to mourn her loss, two nieces, Mrs. Geo. Daly, Angus , Iowa , Mrs. Jas. Orman, Odgen , Iowa . Three nephews, Wm Bell, Pilot Mound, Arthur Bell and Jas. Bell, Colfax, Iowa.

Davenport Democrat and Leader; Davenport, Scott, Iowa; Friday, August 24, 1928

THEO. KAUTZ, BUFFALO, DIES IN DAVENPORT

Well Known Farmer Succumbs at Mercy Hospital; Funeral Monday

Theodore Kautz, 73, well known farmer residing one mile west of Buffalo, died at Mercy hospital at 8 o'clock Thursday night. He had been ailing for the last year and had been at the hospital since Monday preparing for an operation for an intestinal obstruction. Death was due, however, to a sudden heart attack.

Mr. Kautz was born in Detroit, Mich., Nov 1, 1854. He came to Buffalo with his parents, the late Frederick and Barbara Kautz, when a year old and since that time has resided on the farm west of the city.

Having lived in this vicinity for 72 years he was probably one of the most widely known farmers in Scott county. On Sept. 26, 1875, he was united in marriage to Miss Caroline Bartberger by the late Msgr. Flavin at St. Peter's church in Buffalo.

Surviving besides the widow are three daughters, Mrs. George Noth and Mrs. John DeCock, both of Davenport; and Miss Clara Kautz, at home; four sons, John of Davenport; Rupert and Edwin Kautz, at home, and Carl of Rochester, N.Y.; three brothers, Fred of Buffalo; Bernard, Jackson, Mich; and George Kautz of California; one sister, Mrs. G. Zwicker, Rock Island and five grandchildren. Two sons preceded him in death, Albert in 1913 and Theodore Jr., in infancy.

The body was removed to the Fred N. Ruhl funeral home and will be taken to the family home one mile west of Buffalo, Saturday morning from where the funeral will be held at 8:30 a.m. Monday with services at 9 o'clock at St. Peter's church in Buffalo. Burial will be made in Rose Hill cemetery.

Davenport Democrat and Leader; Davenport, Scott, Iowa; Tuesday, August 28 1928

MRS. ORRICK SUCCUMBS AT WATERLOO, IA

Was Daughter of Capt. and Mrs. W.L. Clark, Buffalo Pioneers

Mrs. Florence Clark Orrick, former resident of Buffalo and of Davenport, died Monday at the home of her son, H.T. Orrick in Waterloo, Ia., after an illness of many months' duration.

The body arrived in Davenport this morning and was taken to the M.V. Boies Co chapel and later to the home of her sister, Mrs. E.M. Harrison at Buffalo where services were to be held at 3 o'clock this afternoon with the Rev. Rowland Philbrook officiating. Burial was to be made in Rose hill cemetery.

Mrs. Orrick was born at Buffalo, Ia., 79 years ago, the daughter of Captain and Mrs. W.L. Clark, early settlers in that community. After her marriage to W.W. Orrick the couple moved to Dubuque where Mr. Orrick entered the wholesale grocery business. She came to Davenport after the death of her husband and later moved to Waterloo where she had resided for the last three years.

Surviving are two sons, H.T. and W.W. Orrick; and one sister, Mrs. E.M. Harrison.

Davenport Democrat and Leader; Davenport, Scott, Iowa; Tuesday, April 17, 1928

MRS. M'CULLEY, BUFFALO, IA, IS CALLED TO REST

Summoned at Mercy Hospital After Lingering Illness

Mrs. Mary Elizabeth McCulley, a resident of Buffalo, Ia., for more than 60 years, passed away at Mercy hospital at 1 p.m. Monday after a lingering illness.

Mrs. McCulley was born in St. Louis, Mo., on July 29, 1885. Her maiden name was Miss Mary Sauer, and she was united in marriage to John H. McCulley on Nov. 24, 1877 at Buffalo. She was a member of the Baptist faith.

Surviving besides the husband are three sons, Charles R., Buffalo; Edward W., Davenport; and Harry L., Tucson, Ariz; two sisters, Mrs. Sam Light, Omaha, Neb.; and Mrs. H. Green, Baldwin, Ia; and one brother, Charles Sauer, Fort Morgan, Colo.

The body was removed to the Hill & Frederick's mortuary. Funeral services will be held at the Union Lutheran church at 2 p.m. Wednesday at Buffalo. Burial will be in Rose Hill cemetery.

Davenport Democrat and Leader; Davenport, Scott, Iowa; Wednesday, April 4, 1928

AGED BUFFALO RESIDENT DIES AT DES MOINES

Lawrence Clark, 73, Succumbs at Home of Son After Long Illness

Lawrence Elwood Clark, aged Buffalo resident, passed away at 8:10 p.m. Monday at the home of his son, Rueben C. Clark, Des Moines, Ia. Mr. Clark had been in ill health for several months and had been making his home with his son.

The deceased was born at Buffalo, Ia., on Oct. 19, 1854. He was resident there practically his entire life and had been engaged in farming. He was united in marriage to Miss Emma Sidney Moore in 1880. Mrs. Clark preceded him in death on Dec. 16, 1920.

Surviving are one son, Rueben E. Clark, Des Moines; one brother, L.M. Clark, Fairbanks, Alaska; one sister, Mrs. Mary E. Thompson, St. Louis, Mo.; and a grandchild, Mary Harp of Buffalo.

The body arrived in Davenport Tuesday afternoon and was taken to the Hill & Fredericks mortuary. Funeral services will be held at 2 p.m. Thursday at the Community church at Buffalo with the Rev. Dr. Frank Court officiating. Burial will be in Rose Hill cemetery.

Davenport Democrat and Leader; Davenport, Scott, Iowa; Wednesday, February 8, 1928

FRANK MOORE, BUFFALO, IA., ANSWERS CALL

Had Been Resident of Buffalo for More Than 65 Years

Frank David Moore, life resident of Buffalo, Ia., passed away at 5: 30 p.m. Tuesday at his home after a lingering illness.

Mr. Moore was born March 22, 1860 in Buffalo township. He was married to Miss Amanda Myers who preceded him in death 25 years ago. In 1908 he married Mrs. Christina Huber at Buffalo. For many years Mr. Moore was employed at the Buffalo quarry as a driller. He was the son of Mr. and Mrs. Samuel Moore, pioneer settlers in that community.

Surviving besides the widow are two sons, Clarence, Davenport; and Francis, Buffalo; two daughters, Mrs. John Stalder, Buffalo; and Mrs. James Matthews, Denver, Colo; four stepchildren, Charles Enhelder, International Falls, Minn.; Louis Huber, Buffalo; Mrs. William Hockmuth, Danville, Ill; and Mrs. Herman Lindamann, Greenwood, Wis.; two brothers, Samuel and Charles Moore, and two sisters, Mrs. David Peacock, and Mrs. William Kearney, all of Buffalo.

The body was removed to the Hill & Fredericks mortuary and was returned to the late home this afternoon. Funeral services will be held at 2 o'clock Friday afternoon at the Christian Union church of Buffalo with the Rev. M.A. Getzendaner officiating. Burial will be in Rose Hill cemetery.

Davenport Democrat and Leader; Davenport, Scott, Iowa; Sunday, February 12, 1928

HOLD SERVICES FOR FRANK MOHR AT BUFFALO, IA.

Funeral services for Frank D. Mohr were held at the Union Christian church at Buffalo, Iowa, at 2 o'clock Friday afternoon. The Rev. M.A. Getzendaner officiated at the services at the church and at the grave in Rose Hill cemetery.

Miss Stella McCullough, Miss Celesta Wendland and William Ochsner, accompanied by Mrs. C.J. Neumeister sang "It is Well With My Soul" and "No Disappointments in Heaven."

Pallbearers were William Peacock, James Brown, R.E. Clark, Paul Kearney, Warren Mohr and Charles Mohr.

Davenport Democrat and Leader; Davenport, Scott, Iowa; Tuesday, February 7, 1928

BUFFALO COUPLE SUFFER LOSS OF SON AFTER BIRTH

Earl L. Pagel, two-day old son of Mr. and Mrs. Walter Pagel of Buffalo, Ia., died Monday noon at the home of its parents.

Surviving besides the parents are a brother and sister, Howard and Dorothy Pagel.

Funeral services were held at 11 o'clock this morning at the Fred N. Ruhl funeral home. Burial was made in Rose Hill cemetery.