Based on the best-selling novelist Kahlil Gibran’s poetic book, and with a beautiful original score from Middle Eastern duo Nadim Naaman and Dana Al Fardan, this moving production of new musical Broken Wings starts performances at the Charing Cross Theatre tomorrow (11 February). We spoke to Lucca Chadwick-Patel who plays the Young Kahlil Gibran in the piece.

Tell us about Broken Wings.

The show focuses on Gibran on his return to Beirut to discover more about his homeland, in order to understand himself and his new life in America. Whilst there he experiences what he describes as his first true love, and how the tradition and attitudes at the time meant that love was lost.

How does a book of poetry translate to the stage?

Gibran’s style of writing is so descriptive and detailed in the novel, and through Nadim’s adaption the shared language and style really helps to paint the beauty of Lebanon. The text transports you through Older Gibran’s vivid memories, and the relationships and more romantic moments are made much more meaningful.

How are rehearsals going ahead of your run at the Charing Cross Theatre?

We are well into rehearsals now, the talent and passion of everyone involved really is very special. The space that is created in the room is so warm, and it’s been a true joy to work with everyone.

What is it like working with Nadim Naaman who wrote the music and lyrics but also stars in the show?

Having Nadim working on the show with us helps so much with his insight into the story and Gibran personally for me - in creating the show he has such a vast knowledge of the time and context which helps to further build our story. He’s also a top guy so that’s a plus!

Gender inequality, immigration and home are just a few topics addressed in the piece. Do you think these themes will resonate with a modern audience?

The story is set in the early 1900’s, but the themes in the show are still present in Lebanon and across the world right now. Our story will represent the story of so many today, having loved someone and being forced to part due to class or religion to name but a few, it’s hugely important to tell these stories in the hopes that it helps to make the changes for the future.

Does it hold a lot of importance being part of a full MENA and SA cast?

As soon as I saw that this show was coming back to London and was also only looking to cast the production authentically, it represents the continued positive change that our industry is going through right now. The props have to go to Bronagh, Katy and Jane for creating that space - to have authentic voices telling a diverse story is so important. I never saw anything like that when I was growing up, and the thought that our show could inspire someone who may never have considered the arts as a viable career due to their ethnicity or circumstance, it’s something that means a lot me personally.

Do you feel that developing the piece into a fully staged musical is a reflection of increased support for new writing?

Most definitely, one of the few positives to take from the pandemic meant that coming out of it there is such a clamour for theatre and a championing of new talent and work. Katy has been giving new shows the limelight for a long time now - I remember watching her productions at Hope Mill Theatre in Manchester when I was growing up. There are so many new wonderful diverse stories to be told, Broken Wings being one of them. The show already had a following from its last outings, but especially now with the full production being the first new musical of 2022 in London, it’s such an exciting prospect.

You recently performed in The Magician's Elephant at the RSC. Did you enjoy your time in Stratford upon Avon?

Performing in Stratford with the RSC was one of my proudest moments - the company and cast were just incredible and I felt like I learnt so much working alongside them. Creating a role within a new show is always something I’ve wanted to do so to get that chance to work with the team taught me a lot. Stratford is such a beautiful place and the theatre itself so full of history, it was a very very special few months.

You only graduated last year and you've already achieved so much. What are your ambitions going forward?

I’ve been lucky enough to perform at the end of last year and now to working be on Broken Wings. Graduating during COVID, I never expected to have the chance to achieve what I have so I’m eternally grateful to the team at RSC for giving me that first opportunity, and now to Bronagh and Katy for trusting me with this wonderful role. I’ve loved working on these new pieces, and I guess the hope is that I’m lucky enough to get the chance to work on some more exciting shows in the future.