Angelique Vasquez

Professor Scala

WGS 4100

I recently saw the documentary, The Invisible War (Kirby Dick, Amy Ziering). The Invisible War exposes the epidemic of rape and sexual assault in the U.S. military, and by using personal stories and the government’s own figures and statistics from Department of Defense reports over the years, the film demonstrates what it means to serve in the military if you’re a woman. I had no idea what I was about to witness while watching this documentary about rape in the military, but I was not prepared for the full story The Invisible War presents.

The documentary outlines some of the hard facts: 20% of service women have been sexually assaulted while serving. Women who have suffered what they call ‘Military

The procedure for reporting an assault or rape in the military is to report it to your commanding officer. Every survivor fully described how their commanding officer did not treat the reports seriously, sided with the perpetrator, or retaliated against them for reporting. With policies like “zero tolerance” originating from senior military authorities there's an incentive at each level to not report that sexual violence is an issue in a unit. It makes sense that this then means pressure on the surviour to drop the report. One soldier was told by their commanding officer while reporting an assault to “stop crying over spilt milk." Survivors who report the crime are told repeatedly that they misunderstood the situation or that they are lying or even ignored. It was discussed throughout the film that rape kits have gone “missing. It looks bad for a unit to have convicted felons, which implies they diminish the cases to these lesser offenses (if any charges are brought whatsoever), and subsequently these culprits are not enlisted on any sex guilty party

Among the reasons so many do not report an assault, 33% said the commander they were to report to was a friend of the rapist. 25% said the commander to report to was the rapist. Major General Mary Kay Hertog, who took over as head of SAPRO, fervently defends the military judicial system’s chain of command process and insists that “there is no conflict of interest.” Major General Hertog suggests to women who feel they were not given a fair and just investigation? Contact your congressman. And she somehow says that with a straight