Sibila de Fortià was a young widow when she became the mistress of the recently widowed Pedro IV of Aragon. Her relationship with the king was well known to the court and to his subjects, and her unofficial status did nothing to dent her popularity. Thus, as the “concubine-queen” of a widowed monarch she drifted into the roles typically played by queens. She served as an intercessor between the king and his subjects. Those who sought the king’s favor, including members of the administration and the aristocracy —even members of the royal family— gave presents or money to Sibila and asked her to help them in their various causes. The birth of a daughter, Isabel, was a boon for Sibila, who was now not merely a concubine, but the mother of the king’s daughter. It was at this point that she and the child were assigned permanent accommodation at his royal palace in Barcelona.

Sibila was remarkable because she represents one of the few examples of an illiterate member of the lower nobility who ascended to the rank of queen after having served her future husband openly as a concubine. The king had nothing to gain. His marriage to Sibila would bring him no dowry and would establish no new alliance. The only apparent motives were his great love for her, his determination to fully legitimize their daughter, and his desire to protect them. But these were hardly reasons for a king to marry. This was certainly how Pedro’s most important subjects felt.

The upper nobility roundly rejected the notion of Sibila as queen, undoubtedly feeling slighted that an illiterate child of the lowest provincial nobility should rise above them in such a manner. The king’s efforts to transform Sibila into an educated woman —the queen was immediately assigned two nuns to teach her to read and write—would have done nothing to appease their sense of righteous indignation. Naturally, the fiercest resistance to this union came from within the royal family itself. Pedro’s children, Juan, Martín, and the infanta Countess Juana of Empúries were particularly vocal in their rejection. On the contrary, it was those people who stood to gain from Sibila’s new station who were happiest with the union. Foremost among these were members of her family, who suddenly saw their own status rise as a consequence of acquiring membership to the royal family.

Sibila enjoyed the resources necessary to maintain the luxurious lifestyle befitting a queen. But she did not spend all of her income on herself and her court, she also understood that the power of a queen lay in the extent and prestige of her network of patronage, and thus she was careful to generously reward her faithful dependents, to support members of her own family, as well as to patronize the Church. The presumptuousness of other members of Sibila’s family not only aggravated tensions between the queen and the aristocracy, but pushed the kingdom into war.

The king died on 5 January 1387 at the venerable age of sixty-eight and having ruled his sprawling empire through war, plague, and rebellion for half a century. By that point Sibila was no longer at her husband’s side. Pedro had been ill for some time before his death, and it was clear for Sibila and her entourage that he was not long for the world. Fearing retribution at the hands of the soon-to-be-king Juan, two weeks before his death she packed up all of her belongings, including her clothing and jewelry and, gathering her family members, most trusted servants and a few loyal followers, fled. Sibila’s decision to abandon her husband must be considered in this light; she was about to lose her sole protector and be left at the mercy of her sworn enemies.