Spanish History:

Sibila of Fortià

She was daughter of Berenguer of Fortià and his wife Francesca of Palau. Sibila belonged to the lineage of Fortià, the lower nobility, with possessions in the rural Empordà, in the county of Ampurias. Sibila was a natural beauty in her early adulthood, but her education had been pitifully neglected, even it said she was illiterate. She married Artal of Foces on an unknown date. Upon her widowhood, Sibila became a lady- in- waiting to Eleanor of Sicily, the third wife of Peter IV of Aragon, during the royal couple’s stay in Sibila’s home of Empordà. Queen Eleanor died in 1375, she had left Peter two surviving sons and one daughter.

King Peter IV received the proposal for the hand of the famous Queen Joanna of Naples. But the marriage proposal came too late. The king was in love with a young and beautiful plebeian. Sibila de Fortià became his mistress. Sibila was in her twenties and Peter was fifty six. Her influence and dominion over Peter IV was great. In 1377, Sibila married Peter IV of Aragon, thus becoming the fourth wife of the sovereign. Sibila was in her twenties and the King had fifty six. The Peter’s sons, John and Martin, were opposed the idea of their father marrying Sibila; the marriage could cause dynastic problems that could imperil their rights in the line of succession. The King’s children did not attend to the coronation of Queen Sibila in Zaragoza four years later, provoking the indignation of Peter IV.

Sibila had two sons with Peter but both did not survive to adulthood. They had a surviving daughter, Isabella. King Peter surrounded himself after this wedding of nobles of Empordà and relatives of Sibila, a fact which caused distrust and enmity of a important party of the court, led by the heir John and his second wife Violant of Bar. The Queen’s brother, Bernat de Fortià, got many favors. Sibila loved the luxury and jewelry, but also she made her charitable works and she protected the poor. Sibila has been portrayed as a perverse stepmother, intriguing, ambitious, upstart and witch.

King Peter was still in agony when his wife fled secretly of the palace with her brother and some friends and servants, fearing reprisal of her stepsons. Sibila went to Sitges and after took refuge in the castle of Sant Martí Sarroca. Peter IV the Ceremonious died on January 1387 and so John and Violant became King and Queen of Aragon. The new King’s brother, infante Martin, Duke of Montblanc, received orden to depart without loss of time in persecution of the fugitives and bring them to justice immediately. King John I detained her for a time in the castle of Moncada (Valencia). Accused of leaving the king, as well as theft in the royal palace and witchcraft, Sibila of Fortià was sentenced to death. But before she was subjected to torture.

John and Violant, however, did not execute Sibila. They reached an agreement thanks to the pressures of the little nobility, the bourgeoisie, some prominent nobles as count Hug Roger II de Pallars Sobirà, and Pope Benedict XIII. Sibila quit the donations she had received from her deceased husband, King Peter, for a pension. Sibila was sent to live in Barcelona, where she stayed for the rest of her days. Sibila was treated with respect, but she was kept under close surveillance. King John died in 1396, and Martin succeeded him. Sibila of Fortià died on 24 November 1406 in the convent of San Francisco in Barcelona, where she was buried. By order of King Martin, Sibila had a state funeral. She was later transferred to the pantheon of Poblet. When the convent was demolished, in the nineteenth century, Sibila and others were buried on 20 April 1852, at the Cathedral of Barcelona.