Sibila in English dictionary

Sibila

Sample sentences with "Sibila"

Declension Stem

Her predictions were published in Santa Ana's newspapers, where she's referred to as "la sibila santaneca".

17] Bulgaria stated that furthermore, they have developed an electronic system called SIBILA "to assess the impact on the Bulgarian economy of the resources allocated from the Structural and Cohesion Funds."[ 18]

His other notable religious works include Auto Pastoril Castelhano ("Castilian Pastoral Act") written in 1502; Auto dos Reis Magos ("Act of the Magi Kings") written in 1503 for Christmas celebrations; and Auto da Sibila Cassandra ("Act of the Sibyl Cassandra") written in 1503, a play which announced the Renaissance ideals in Portugal.

Records show that in 1359, Bernat Alemany d'Orriols, cousin to queen Sibila of Fortia, came into discord with the count John I of Empúries starting an open war to the point that the count besieged the castle.

On 11 October 1377, in Barcelona, Sibila married Peter IV of Aragon, becoming his fourth wife.

The linguist Manuel Veiga points out the difference between “the linguistic status of the two languages” on the blog Sibila [pt]:

On September 6, 1246, to avoid battles and litigation, Pere de Montcada and his wife Sibila proceeded to muddle these terms, although in exchange for the improvements granted to the fragatinos, respecting the terms of their municipalities, the men of the town of Fraga are forced to pay the Montcada hundred maravedís of gold.

Sibila belonged to the family of Fortià, of the lower nobility, with possessions in rural Empordà, in the County of Empúries.

Beside his compositional and pianistic activities he also has written for diverse publications, such as the New Grove (Solare 2001), La Sibila Sevilla, Doce Notas and ABC Madrid, Pauta and L'Orfeo (Mexico), Tempo (UK), as well as for the radio stations Deutsche Welle and Südwestfunk (SWF).

17] Bulgaria stated that furthermore, they have developed an electronic system called SIBILA "to assess the impact on the Bulgarian economy of the resources allocated from the Structural and Cohesion Funds."[

Plant development and cell differentiation are studied ( Sibila Jelaska , Marijana Krsnik-Rasol , Dunja Leljak-Levanić ) in in vitro culture of crop , forest and other model-plant species .

His last marriage, on 11 October 1377 in Barcelona, was to Sibila (? – 4 or 24 November 1406), daughter of Bernat of Fortià and widow of Artal of Foces, who was previously his mistress.

Her husband remarried to Sibila, a girl that was over thirty years his junior.

The book [Hourglass] by Igor Isakovski has been translated to Croatian (excerpt) by Sibila Petlevski and published under the Pješčani sat by Meandar Media in Zagreb. project partners

3. name and surname, address, VAT ID No. indicated as the data for which the sales document is to be issued are sent to the Tax Office of Joanna Sibila (VAT ID No. PL9720091484)

Sibila: Hourly weather forecast

SIBILA – Development of an econometric model for assessing the impact of Structural and the Cohesion funds of the EU World Bank

• Sibila Vlaykova: Partnership and investment in the railway sector

As a soloist and chamber musician Sibila has performed extensively throughout Europe in venues such as the Barbican Centre and the Queen Elizabeth Hall in London, the Grand Hall “Bulgaria” in Sofia and the Delft Chamber Music Festival, Grachtenfestival Amsterdam and the Festspiele Europäische Wochen Passau.

Authors