The Western Connecticut Youth Orchestra (WCYO) will present its 2022 - 2023 Season Finale Concert on Sunday, June 4th in the beautiful Veronica Hagman Concert Hall at the Visual & Performing Arts Center on WCSU's westside campus in Danbury, CT.

The concert will feature the musicians of the WCYO Wind Ensemble, String Orchestra, and Symphony Orchestra, some of the area’s most advanced youth musicians performing a selection of jazz, concert band and classical repertoire.

The concert opens with WCYO’s Jazz Ensemble performing Mambo Inn, made famous by Tito Puente, then its full winds, brass and percussion sections will perform Lincolnshire Posy, Lisbon, by Percy Grainger, Folk Suite for Band, Deep River by William Grant Still, and close the set with Laputa: Castle in the Sky by Joe Hisaishi, arranged by Morita. The Wind Ensemble conductor is Malin Carta.

Then the String Orchestra takes the stage with performances of Summer Dance by Alan Lee Silva, Prelude from Holberg Suite by Edvard Grieg, and Symphony Op. 11, No. 2 (II. Adante & III.Presto) by Joseph Bologne, Chevalier de Saint George (arr. Meckler) and conducted by Joanna Giordano. Ava Cronin of Katonah, NY is concert master.

The WCYO finale will feature the full symphony orchestra performing a classical masterpiece, Symphony No. 1, Op. 68 by Johannes Brahms. WCYO’s Music Director, Eric Mahl, will be conducting, with Joseph Klettner of South Salem, NY as Concert Master.

“Our musicians have been working hard in rehearsal and are both eager and ready to perform for our community. These young people are talented and dedicated musicians. The finale concert always brings with it a sense of celebration of who these musicians are and what they have accomplished on and off the stage over the year. It’s always a magical day for WCYO and our audience,” says WCYO Executive Director Ruth Feldman.

General Admission tickets are $20 and $10 for seniors and students and may be purchased in advance via the WCSU box office with this link or via cash or credit card at the door.