The Western Connecticut Youth Orchestra (WCYO) will present its winter concert this Sunday, March 3, 2024 at 4:00 PM at David F. Clune Auditorium at Wilton High School in Wilton, CT. The concert, titled “LOVE”, will feature performances by the WCYO’s Symphony Orchestra, String Orchestra, Wind Ensemble and Jazz Ensemble.

“This season WCYO ensembles are exploring one of the most meaningful and universal rituals throughout human history; storytelling” says WCYO Music Director and Symphony Orchestra Conductor Eric Mahl. “The focus of the winter concert program is to experience, through music, how composers have told stories of love or how love is expressed through music.” The artistic leadership of the WCYO ensembles, along with Mahl, includes String Orchestra Conductor Joanna Giordano and Wind Ensemble/Jazz Ensemble Conductor Malin Carta.

Pieces to be performed on the 3rd by the Jazz and Wind Ensembles include Splanky by Neal Hefti, Toccata for Band by Frank Erickson, Harvest Hymn by Percy Grainger and La Oreja de Oro by Mariano San Miguel. The WCYO String Orchestra’s program of music includes The Lover's Waltz by Jay Unger and Molly Mason, Inverno by Antonio Vivaldi and “Troika” from Lieutenant Kije by Sergei Prokofiev. To close the concert, the Symphony Orchestra will perform “Ruslan and Ludmila” Overture by Mikhail Glinka, Romeo & Juliet Overture-Fantasy by Pyotr Ilyich Tchaikovsky, and the first movement of Double Bass Concerto No. 2 by Giovanni Bottesini, featuring 2024 WCYO Concerto Competition winner Wilbert Sullivan.

Wilbert won the competition held in early January and has been rehearsing with the orchestra to perform this extremely challenging piece in concert. Wilbert started his musical journey at age five with the piano. When he became drawn to the deep, low tones of the double bass, Wilbert started taking lessons with Joe Russo. He first joined the WCYO String Orchestra before becoming Principal Bass of the WCYO Symphony Orchestra in 2020. He has also participated in the Charles Ives Music Festival (CIMF) summer program and the CIMF Winter/Spring Chamber Music Intensive. In 2022, Wilbert was accepted into the Manhattan School of Music (MSM) Precollege program where he studies with Mark McCormick. He was Principal Bass of the Repertory Orchestra in his first year at MSM and is now Principal Bass of the Symphony Orchestra.

For more information on the upcoming WCYO concert titled “LOVE”, view the complete concert program HERE.

To purchase concert tickets, click HERE. (Music educators – private teachers and school music teachers – attend free of charge!)

Based in Ridgefield, but made up of youth musicians from 26 towns in Connecticut and southwestern New York State, the Western Connecticut Youth Orchestra encourages youth musicians to audition for participation in one of the organization’s ensembles. Entry into the ensembles is offered at select times during the school year early in each of the concert cycles, with primary auditions held in early June for the following year. For audition information, click HERE.

The mission of the Western Connecticut Youth Orchestra is to educate and inspire young musicians through the study and performance of classical and contemporary musical works, participation in enrichment activities, and engagement with the community. Our program provides an opportunity to develop artistry and technique, as well as a profound understanding and appreciation of instrumental music. Our members are challenged not only to perform at the highest level, but also to build character, creativity and self-esteem, with music as their guide.