RIDGEFIELD - The Western Connecticut Youth Orchestra (WCYO) announces that auditions for middle and high school musicians are available for the 2017-18 school year.

Two local musicians have already been accepted into the program. Violinist Matiya Tessy Kouassi of Newtown is joining WYCO's String Ensemble and violinist Aidan Cushing of Sandy Hook is a member of the orchestra's Symphony Orchestra.

"The WCYO is gearing up for an exciting year with the addition of our composer-in-residence program " said Executive Director Kim Bova. "Our musicians will have the opportunity to work with composer Paul Frucht and premier commissioned works."

Mr Frucht is an emerging composer whose work has been hailed for its "sense of lyricism, driving pulse, and great urgency" (WQXR). Currently a doctoral of music arts candidate at Juilliard, he is the recipient of numerous honors and awards in composition. In 2015, Mr Frucht launched the Danbury Chamber Music Intensive, a summer festival of which he is the artistic director.

Auditions for string, woodwind, brass, and percussion players will be held by appointment on August 31. There are ensembles for intermediate and advanced players and financial aid is available. Forms and audition requirements are available at wctyo.org/auditions.

Rehearsals are weekly, and generally take place at Scotts Ridge Middle School in Ridgefield.

"We are very fortunate to have Tristan Rais-Sherman as the new conductor for the String Ensemble," said Ms Bova. "He joins music director and Symphony Orchestra conductor Eric Mahl and Wind Ensemble conductor Al Montecalvo on our artistic leadership team."

Ridgefield Symphony Youth Orchestra was founded 15 years ago to provide talented young musicians in the regional Connecticut and New York areas with exceptional learning and performance opportunities while fostering an awareness and appreciation of the enjoyment and power of music. This group, now known as the Western Connecticut Youth Orchestra, currently consists of nearly 100 auditioned musicians ages 10-18 in the String Ensemble, Wind Ensemble, and Symphony Orchestra.

The mission of Western Connecticut Youth Orchestra is to educate and inspire young musicians through the study and performance of classical and contemporary musical works, participation in enrichment activities, and engagement with the community.

WCYO provides an opportunity to develop artistry and technique, as well as a profound understanding and appreciation of instrumental music. Members are challenged not only to perform at the highest level, but also to build character, creativity, and self-esteem, with music as their guide.

The 2017-18 season currently has four performances scheduled. On Sunday, November 19, at 4 pm, all three groups will perform at a location to be announced.

On Sunday, February 25, 2018, all three ensembles will perform at Wilton High School at 4 pm.

Tickets for these recitals are $20 adults, $10 seniors and students, and will be available at the door.

The String Ensemble and Wind Ensemble will perform at Western Connecticut State University's Visual and Performing Arts Center on Saturday, June 2, at 4 pm. The Symphony Orchestra will follow with a concert at the same location, 24 hours later.

All tickets for the June 2018 performances will be $20 and will be available through wcsuvpac.eventbrite.com, and also at the door the afternoon of each concert.