The first Godzilla movie came out in 1954, and since then, everyone’s favorite nuclear lizard has become a star in both American and Japanese films. Godzilla has appeared in 38 movies (of varying quality) and is set to make it 39 when Godzilla x Kong: The New Empire premieres in March of 2024. Both American and Japanese studios are still making Godzilla films. Just last year, Toho Studios released Godzilla Minus One. Godzilla movies have gone through different eras and directors. However, all the films feature Godzilla, a kaiju or “strange creature” in Japanese, as he attacks cities, fights other monsters, and sometimes even raises a son. Many directors have contributed to the franchise, including Ishirō Honda, Roland Emmerich, Jun Fukuda, Yoshimitsu Banno, and many more. The Godzilla franchise can be daunting. The Guinness Book of Records named it the longest-continuously-running movie franchise, but there is a way to watch all 38 films in order.

Godzilla Movies In Order Of Release

1. Godzilla (1954)

The first Godzilla film, simply titled Godzilla, is a must-watch. While the practical effects might seem a little cheesy to a modern audience, the film delivers a powerful message about the dangers of nuclear bombs in post-WWII Japan. Directed by Ishirō Honda, Godzilla follows the now-famous kaiju as his home and family are destroyed by an American hydrogen bomb, leading him to cause mayhem in Tokyo.

This film is a classic for a reason and holds a 93% rating on Rotten Tomatoes. This film also kicks off the Shōwa era of Godzilla films, which lasted until 1975 and included 15 films. Movies from this era are mostly continuous in their storytelling. Notably, for most of this era (from 1954 to 1972), Haruo Nakajima played the titular monster in a physical suit. Godzilla is currently available to stream on Tubi TV, Max, and Pluto TV.

2. Godzilla Raids Again (1954)

Work on Godzilla Raids Again began weeks after the release of the first film. This sequel introduces a trope that will endure in the series: the monster battle. In this film, Godzilla reawakens and fights Anguirus, a dinosaur-like creature with a spiked back. Anguirus returns several times in the franchise, in films, TV and even comic books.

The film was directed by Motoyoshi Oda due to scheduling conflicts with Honda as he was working on the romance film Lovetide. The film isn’t as fondly remembered as the first film in the franchise and holds a 64% on Rotten Tomatoes. It is currency available for streaming on Pluto TV, Sling TV, Max, and the Roku Channel.

3. Godzilla, King of the Monsters! (1956)

Godzilla, King of Monsters! isn’t exactly a fully new movie for this list. It is an “Americanization” of Godzilla (1954). The film uses most of the footage from the original Godzilla but dubs it in English, re-edits the original, and adds 21 minutes of new footage. Director Terry O. Morse added an American journalist to the narrative, played by Raymond Burr.

This film consistently gets worse reviews than the Japanese original but notably introduced American audiences to Godzilla and a worldwide audience after it garnered an international release. Many outside Japan may remember this version of the film as the 1950s Godzilla since the original 1954 version was not released in American theaters until 2004. Godzilla, King of Monsters! is currently available to stream on Pluto TV, Sling TV, Amazon Prime, Max, and the Roku Channel.

4. King Kong Vs. Godzilla (1962)

Honda returned to the franchise to direct King Kong Vs. Godzilla. In this film, Godzilla battles King Kong, who had his own franchise of films, starting with the American movie King Kong in 1933. The film culminates in a battle on Mount Fuji. The movie was popular with both audiences and critics in Japan and garnered an American release in 1963.

The film was originally started as an American project by stop-motion animator Willis O'Brien, who had worked on the first King Kong. The film was originally going to feature King Kong fighting Frankenstein but was changed to Godzilla when the film was given to Toho. It is currently available on the Internet Archive.

5. Mothra Vs. Godzilla (1964)

Mothra had already been introduced to Japanese audiences in 1961 and to American audiences in 1962 with her own film simply titled Mothra. The giant moth-like deity appears in many Godzilla films and several of her own.

The film follows Mothra as she tries to regain her stolen egg and fight Godzilla in the process. Mothra Vs. Godzilla explores themes of greed, morality, and of course, nuclear annihilation. The film is one of the higher rated in the series, with a 92% on Rotten Tomatoes. It is currently streaming on Pluto TV, Sling TV, Amazon Prime, Max, and the Roku Channel.

6. Ghidorah, The Three-Headed Monster (1964)

The first film in the franchise that doesn't feature “Godzilla” in the title, Ghidorah, The Three-Headed Monster, came out just months after Mothra Vs. Godzilla. Also directed by Honda, this film marks a turning point in the characterization of Godzilla.

In Ghidorah, The Three-Headed Monster, Mothra has to convince Godzilla to help her protect the world against the alien threat of Ghidorah, a three-headed dragon from outer space. This film also introduces Rodan, a kaiju Pteranodon who debuted in the film Rodan in 1956, to the franchise. The movie is currently available to stream on Pluto TV, Max, and Sling TV.

7. Invasion of Astro-Monster (1965)

Ghidorah returns in this American-Japanese collaboration. This time, two astronauts, played by Akira Takarada and Nick Adams, run into the monster on Planet X, where it is terrorizing the Xiliens. The alien race asks the astronauts to borrow Godzilla and Rodan to fight Ghidorah once more.

The film was released in America five years after its release in Japan under the name Monster Zero, technically making this either the 7th film in the series or the 12th based on the release date. Invasion of Astro-Monster garnered mixed reviews and sits at 50% on Rotten Tomatoes. The movie is currently available to stream on Tubi, Pluto TV, Amazon Prime, or Sling TV.

8. Ebirah: Horror of the Deep (1966)

Jun Fukuda stepped in to direct Ebirah: Horror of the Deep after a string of films directed by Honda. The film begins after the space battle with Ghidorah, which leaves Godzilla drained and resting on a Pacific island. However, his rest is interrupted by a man searching for his brother — as well as an evil corporation using slave labor to produce weapons, and the lobster-like monster, Ebirah.

The film was also released as a TV movie in America in 1968 under the name Godzilla vs. the Sea Monster. The film is the fourth Godzilla movie to feature Akira Takarada in a staring role. However, it is the first in the series not to include special effects led by Eiji Tsuburaya. The movie is currently available to stream on Tubi, Pluto TV, and Sling TV.

9. Son of Godzilla (1967)

In Son of Godzilla, a team of scientists accidentally detonates a radioactive balloon made to control the weather, leading to giant mantises. These Kamacuras dig up an egg and hatch Minilla, the son of Godzilla. Godzilla comes to collect his son when giant mantises and spiders attack him.

Minilia is far from the only Godzilla Jr.; another young Godzilla was introduced in later films. Minilla also served as the main influence for Godzooky, a juvenile kaiju featured in the late 1970s Hanna-Barbera TV series The Godzilal Power Hour. Son of Godzilla is available to stream on Tubi, Pluto TV, Sling TV, Amazon Prime, Max, and the Roku Channel.

10. Destroy All Monsters (1968)

Destroy All Monsters takes place in the distant future of 1999 when all Earth’s monsters have been sequestered to a UN-run containment island called Monsterland. The monsters escape and start to attack cities all over the world. Godzilla comes to New York City to rampage while other monsters attack Paris, Moscow and London.

While all of the early Godzilla films come with a level of cult nostalgia, Destroy All Monsters has been especially remembered as a cult masterpiece. The film is part Jurrasic Park, part Avengers, and overall fun. The film is currently streaming on Tubi, Pluto TV, Amazon Prime, Max, and Sling TV.

11. All Monsters Attack (1969)

The last film in the run of movies directed by Honda, All Monsters Attack, follows an unlikely psychic friendship between a latchkey kid in Kawasaki and Minilla. Both Minilla and the boy, played by Tomonori Yazaki, have issues with bullies. Minilla has to stand up and fight his bully, Gabara, with some help from his father, Godzilla.

The film is one of the lowest-rated films in the series, with only 29% on Rotten Tomatoes, and is currently available to stream on Tubi, Pluto TV, and Sling TV.

12. Godzilla vs. Hedorah (1971)

In this film, Godzilla becomes an environmentalist when he fights Hedorah, a sea monster made from pollution. The film was released in America in 1972 under the name Godzilla vs. the Smog Monster. In the film, Godzilla can also fly, a power left out of the general Godzilla canon.

Godzilla vs. Hedorah is the only Godzilla film directed by Yoshimitsu Banno. While the film garnered lackluster reviews upon release, some have revisited it and praised it for its darker tone, trippy feel, horror influence, and environmental message. Hedorah is a unique villain as well. The squid-like alien monster shoots acid and replaces the 1950s fear of nuclear armageddon with the 1970s burgeoning trepidation over climate change. The film is available to stream on Tubi, Pluto TV, Sling TV, Max, and the Roku Channel.

13. Godzilla vs. Gigan (1972)

While Gigan, an alien cyborg with a buzzsaw-like chest, is introduced in this film, he isn’t the only villain Godzilla must fight. An alien race of cockroaches devises a plan to summon Gigan and old favorite King Ghidorah after puppeteering the bodies of the recently deceased. Godzilla steps up to protect the world against these space kaijus.

The film is the last time Haruo Nakajima plays Godzilla, a role he had in all the previous films. However, Jun Fukuda returned to direct the film. Longtime Godzilla producer Tomoyuki Tanaka wanted the film to return to the golden age of Godzilla films, but it isn’t remembered as a classic in the series. Godzilla vs. Gigan also relies heavily on reusing action scene footage, which can create some unfortunate deja vu. The film is available to stream on Tubi, Pluto TV, Max, Sling TV, and the Roku Channel.

14. Godzilla vs. Megalon (1973)

After nuclear testing causes environmental disasters for the underwater city of Seatopia, the residents of the once-thriving empire release the sea-dwelling beetle, Megalon. The film introduces Jet Jaguar, a mecha-robot hero who helps Godzilla defeat Megalon and Gigan.

While the film got a cinematic release in the US in 1976, U.S. viewers may remember it better by a poorly-cropped late 1980s VHS release. Godzilla vs. Megalon was also broadcast on NBC in 1977 but was cut down to fit in a 60-minute time slot. The telecast was hosted by John Belushi, who donned a Godzilla suit to add sketches to the broadcast. The film was also featured in an episode of Mystery Science Theater 3000, giving it a cult status. The film is streaming on Tubi, Pluto TV, Sling TV, Amazon Prime, Max, and the Roku Channel.

15. Godzilla vs. Mechagodzilla (1974)

A priestess has a vision of the long-heroic Godzilla destroying the island of Okinawa. However, unbeknownst to her, it’s not actually Godzilla. Rather, it is a robotic Godzilla made by a race of aliens hoping to take over Earth.

While the movie garnered mixed reviews and many didn’t love Fukuda’s directing choices, the addition of a Mech 10 years before the Transformers franchise debuted feels forward-thinking. Mechagodzilla also became a favorite and returns in many other future films. Godzilla vs. Mechagodzilla is streaming on Tubi, Pluto TV, Sling TV, Amazon Prime, Max, and the Roku Channel.

16. Terror of Mechagodzilla (1975)

Honda returned a final time to direct the last film of the Showa era, Terror of Mechagodzilla. The film picks up directly after the events of Godzilla vs. Mechagodzilla. In the film, a scientist reconstructs the recently vanquished mech, which leads the aliens to unleash Titanosaurus. Godzilla must fight the robot again, and also deal with the even stronger Titanosaurus.

The film was written by a woman, Yukiko Takayama, and is one of the rare Godzilla films to feature nudity. The film was released in the U.S. in 1978; however, it was heavily edited and released under the name The Terror of Godzilla. The film is streaming on Tubi, Pluto TV, Sling TV, Amazon Prime, Peacock, and the Roku Channel.

17. The Return of Godzilla (1984)

The first film of the Heisei era (which would last until 1995), The Return of Godzilla is a reboot and direct sequel to Godzilla (1954). Directed by Kōji Hashimoto, the film ignores the heroic tone of Shōwa era Godzilla. Instead, Godzilla attacks the Ihama nuclear power plant before heading towards Tokyo.

The American release was renamed Godzilla 1985 and featured scenes with Raymond Burr reprising his role from Godzilla, King of the Monsters! The Return of Godzilla is available to stream on Internet Archive.

18. Godzilla vs. Biollante (1989)

Godzilla vs. Biollante is a direct sequel to The Return of Godzilla. The film picks up five years after Godzilla’s last destructive run. However, the monster rises again after a scientist uses Godzilla’s DNA to keep a plant-human hybrid (who is also the scientist’s daughter) alive. Godzilla fights the hybrid-rose plant in a plants vs. reptiles kaiju battle.

Directed by Kazuki Ōmori, the film garnered generally positive reviews and has a 71% on Rotten Tomatoes. It is available to stream on Internet Archive.

19. Godzilla vs. King Ghidorah (1991)

Ōmori returned to direct Godzilla vs. King Ghidorah. The film reintroduces King Ghidorah to the franchise; however, this time in cyborg form. In the film, an alien race from the future comes to warn 1990s Japanese scientists about nuclear power. Together, they travel back to the 1940s to stop the creation of Godzilla, but ripples in time lead to complications as they accidentally create a second Godzilla.

The film was controversial for its depictions of WWII and the relationship between America and Japan. Honda even criticized the film for a scene including Godzilla stomping on an American G.I. However, notably, the film was the first since 1975's Terror of Mechagodzilla to include a newly orchestrated score by Akira Ifukube. The film is available to stream on Internet Archive.

20. Godzilla vs. Mothra (1992)

While this movie is called Godzilla vs. Mothra, the big baddie is actually a monster deity named Battra. When pollution awakes Battra, he goes on a rampage to destroy humans. A group of liliputian islanders call on Mothra to save humankind, and Godzilla awakens to get in on the action.

While the film is the fourth in the Heisei era, it is far more evocative of the earlier Shōwa era films. The film got a direct-to-video release in the States in 1998 under the name Godzilla and Mothra: The Battle for Earth, which may be a more true to plot name. The film won several awards in Japan, including a Best Leading Actor for Tetsuya Bessho at the Tokyo Sports Movie Awards, and two 1993 Best Grossing Films Awards, the Golden Award and the Money-Making Star Award. This is also the last Godzilla movie released during Honda’s life. Unfortunately, the film is not currently available for streaming.

21. Godzilla vs. Mechagodzilla II (1993)

While the name suggests otherwise, this film isn’t a direct sequel to the 1970s Godzilla vs. Mechagodzilla. Instead, it picks up after the events of Godzilla vs. King Ghidorah (1991) and the UN creating a Mechagodzilla and anti-Godzilla gun plane from Mecha-King Ghidorah's remains.

This film reintroduces Rodan and the son of Godzilla (however, this time, he is called Godzilla Jr. or baby Godzilla instead of Minilla.) Originally, this film was set to be the last of the Heisei era as the American reboot was on the horizon with a remake of Godzilla vs. King Kong. However, when the American films were delayed, and the studio couldn’t get the rights to King Kong, they pivoted. The film is available to rent on Amazon, YouTube, and Google Play.

22. Godzilla vs. SpaceGodzilla (1994)

After Godzilla’s DNA was brought to space in Godzilla vs. Biollante and Godzilla vs. Mothra, his cells are exposed to space radiation and create SpaceGodzilla. While introduced in the ‘90s, the idea of a SpaceGodzilla had been around since 1978.

The film only has a 57% on Rotten Tomatoes from critics, but an audience score of 79%. The film also notably is the first on-screen appearance of ​​M.O.G.U.E.R.A. (Mobile Operations G-Force Universal Expert Robot: Aero-type) since 1957’s The Mysterians. The film is available to rent on Amazon, YouTube, and Google Play.

23. Godzilla vs. Destoroyah (1995)

The last film in the Heisei era sees the death of Godzilla (spoilers!). However, in this film, he also passes the mantle to his son, Godzilla Jr., After being hit with a uranium beam — creating a fire Godzilla — and battling Destroryah, Godzilla succumbs to the damage and transfers his powers to baby Godzilla, who is set up to take over the franchise.

Akira Ifukube returned to score this film after refusing to work on Godzilla vs. SpaceGodzilla. The film was also released around the same time as many popular Godzilla video games. Godzilla vs. SpaceGodzilla was well regarded by critics and holds a 100% on Rotten Tomatoes with a 93% audience score, making it one of the highest-rated films in the series. The film is available to rent on Amazon, YouTube, and Google Play.

24. Godzilla (1998)

Starring Matthrew Brodrick and directed by Roland Emmerich, Godzilla is the first truly American production in the series. This film creates a new backstory for the iconic monster after French scientists expose an iguana nest to nuclear fallout. Notably, in this film, Godzilla also attacks New York City and not Tokyo.

The film went through several rewrites, which led to what many critiqued as a non-sensical plot. The film also changed the monster from one of practical effects to CGI. The film won two Golden Raspberry Awards and garnered mainly negative reviews. The film currently holds a 20% on Rotten Tomatoes. Godzilla is available to stream on MGM+.

25. Godzilla 2000: Millennium (1999)

While America’s Godzilla reboot was floundering, Japan was also rebooting the iconic lizard. Godzilla 2000: Millennium fittingly started the Millennium era of Godzilla films in Japan. Takao Ōkawara returned after directing two films of the Heisei era: Godzilla vs. Mechagodzilla II and Godzilla vs. Destoroyah.

The rebooted Millennium era favors stand-alone films instead of the continuous stories of the previous eras. The film is also the last Japanese Godzilla film to receive a wide North American theatrical release until Godzilla Minus One (2023). The film blended practical and computer-generated effects and has the first fully computer-generated shot of Godzilla in a Japanese production. The film received mixed to low reviews. It is currently streaming on Hulu.

26. Godzilla vs. Megaguirus (2000)

While this film uses the same Godzilla suit as Godzilla 2000, it is not directly connected to the previous film. Godzilla vs. Megaguirus has a prologue that references the 1954 film, however, the film creates a new subsequent timeline. In the movie, Godzilla must battle a space dragonfly-like monster, Megaguirus, after an egg crash lands in Japan.

While the film received mixed reviews, Vulture included it as their pick for the 11th-best Godzilla film. The film is currently available to rent on Amazon, YouTube, Apple TV+, and Google Play.

27. Godzilla, Mothra and King Ghidorah, Giant Monsters All-Out Attack (2001)

This film imagines a timeline where Godzilla dies at the end of the 1954 film. In this movie, he is resurrected by ghosts of fallen WWII soldiers in the present day. The Japanese Self-Defense Forces team up with Mothra and King Ghidorah to bring down the reanimated Godzilla. The film also sees the return of Baragon, who was originally introduced in Honda's 1965 film Frankenstein vs. Baragon.

The film has a darker and even creepier tone than many other films in the series. It currently has a 65% critics score on Rotten Tomatoes but a 78% audience score. The Godzilla, Mothra and King Ghidorah, Giant Monsters All-Out Attack is available to rent on Amazon, YouTube, Apple TV+, and Google Play.

28. Godzilla Against Mechagodzilla (2002)

While the film is called Godzilla Against Mechagodzilla, the robotic Godzilla is mostly called Kiryu in the film, which differentiates him from past version of the character. In this film, the character is also piloted from an internal cockpit by Lieutenant Akane Yashiro, played by Yumiko Shaku.

The film did not receive a theatrical U.S. release. However, it played 20 years later for one day in select theaters on November 3, 2022, with Fathom Events for “Godzilla Day.” It is currently available to rent on Amazon, YouTube, Apple TV+, and Google Play.

29. Godzilla: Tokyo S.O.S (2003)

While most of the movies in the millennium era are stand-alone films, Godzilla: Tokyo S.O.S is a direct sequel to Godzilla Against Mechagodzilla. Masaaki Tezuka returned to direct the film. He also wrote the movie after disagreeing with scripts proposed by Toho.

In the movie, Godzilla rampages because the Mechagodzilla is made out of the bones of the 1954 Godzilla. If Japan returns the bones to their rightful resting place, Godzilla will rest and Mothra will become Japan’s protector, but it means giving up their robotic powersuit, creating tension for the defense forces. The film is currently available to rent on Amazon, YouTube, Apple TV+, and Google Play.

30. Godzilla: Final Wars (2004)

The final film of the Millennium Era, Godzilla: Final Wars takes the reboot a step further. While other Millennium era movies only use the 1954 movie as canon, Godzilla: Final Wars also happens outside of the events of the first Godzilla.

While the film ignores the canon, its release coincided with the 50 anniversary of the series and, in some ways, is a love letter to the kaiju genre. The film invited back many actors from famous kaiju films, including the iconic Akira Takarada. The film also returned to mainly practical effects over the use of CGI. While the movie has garnered mixed reviews, it won best feature film at Neuchâtel International Fantasy Film Festival. In the lead-up up to the film, Godzilla also received a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame. The movie is currently streaming on Hulu.

31. Godzilla (2014)

The second American reboot, Godzilla (2014) ignores the events of Godzilla (2004). The film stars Bryan Cranston, Juliette Binoche, and Aaron Taylor-Johnson and Elizabeth Olsen a year before their reunion for Avengers: Age of Ultron. This is the first film in the “Monsterverse,” a Legendary Pictures and Warner Bros. Pictures media series featuring Toho-owned movie monsters.

The film, directed by Gareth Edwards, starts in the 1950s with a nuclear test in the Bikini Atoll and ends with a rampage through San Francisco. The film was well received in Japan; Godzilla illustrator Yuji Kaida even said that the film was “a real kaijū eiga (monster movie) that honored the original in that Godzilla was presented as a force beyond human understanding that maintained the Earth's natural balance.” The film also allegedly caused Quentin Tarantino to cry at a blockbuster. The film is currently available to rent on Amazon, YouTube, Apple TV+, and Google Play.

32. Shin Godzilla (2016)

Godzilla took 12 years off in Japan before being rebooted in the present Reiwa era with Shin Godzilla. The reboot gives Godzilla a new origin story reminiscent of the 2011 Fukushima disaster instead of the previous atomic bomb based canon. The film also includes farcical and satirical takes on Japanese government bureaucracy.

Directed by Hideaki Anno and Shinji Higuchi, the film was ranked the No. 1 Godzilla film by Vulture, and Mark Hughes ranked it as the third-best Godzilla film in 2023—reviews of the film were also generally favorable at the time. The film also marks the first time a fully CGI Godzilla was used in a Japanese film. The film is currently streaming on Amazon Prime with a Crunchyroll subscription.

33. Godzilla: Planet of Monsters (2017)

The first animated feature-length Godzilla film, Godzilla: Planet of Monsters, takes place in the distant future when Earth has become overrun with giant monsters. The film was produced by Toho Animation and Polygon Pictures in association with Netflix and was directed by Kōbun Shizuno and Hiroyuki Seshita.

While many have praised the film’s beautiful animation, the movie earned lackluster reviews. Godzilla: Planet of Monsters also set up a sequel in a post-credits scene and is the first movie in the animated trilogy. The film is currently streaming on Netflix.

34. Godzilla: City on the Edge of Battle (2018)

This direct sequel to Godzilla: Planet of Monsters starts after Godzilla’s defeat. However, he is reawaked and must stop MechaGodzilla. Kōbun Shizuno and Hiroyuki Seshita returned to direct the picture.

The film received poor reviews, including a 34% audience score on Rotten Tomatoes. It is available to stream on Netflix.

35. Godzilla: The Planet Eater (2018)

Kōbun Shizuno and Hiroyuki Seshita directed the third movie in the animated trilogy, Godzilla: The Planet Eater. The film reintroduced old favorites King Ghidorah and Mothra.

Godzilla: The Planet Eater closed the Tokyo International Film Festival, and many reviewed the trilogy's final chapter far better than the first two films. The final film leans more into themes of survival and humanity and has an emotional payoff. It is also available to stream on Netflix.

36. Godzilla, King of the Monsters (2019)

Not be confused with the 1950s film of the same name, Godzilla, King of the Monsters is a direct American sequel to Godzilla (2014). The film was directed by Michael Dougherty and stars Kyle Chandler, Vera Farmiga, Millie Bobby Brown, Bradley Whitford and Sally Hawkins. The movie also reintroduces favorites like King Ghidorah, Mothra, and Rodan.

The film divided critics and fans with a 42% critic score and 83% audience score on Rotten Tomatoes. The film also underperformed at the box office. Scott Mendelson chalked up the box office woes to competition with Avengers: Endgame and Aladdin as well as the five-year gap between installments. The film is currently available to stream on Hulu.

37. Godzilla vs. Kong (2021)

Godzilla vs. Kong marked the first time in 59 years for the two iconic kaijus to fight. Directed by Adam Wingard, the film serves as a sequel to the 2014 and 2019 Godzilla films as well as 2017’s Kong: Skull Island. The film stars Alexander Skarsgard, Rebecca Hall, and sees the return of Millie Bobby Brown.

The movie introduces a land at the center of the earth where Kong and Godzilla hail from and plays up lore between their species. The film also reintroduces Mechagodzilla. The COVID-19 pandemic interrupted the film's theatrical release and led to postponed release dates in Japan. In America, the film saw a theatrical release and a concurrent streaming release exclusive to HBO Max in March of 2021, which led to legal issues. However, the film became a box office smash hit, earning $470 million worldwide. It is now streaming on Max and Hulu.

38. Godzilla Minus One (2023)

Taking place in 1945, in some ways this Japanese prequel is the first Godzilla film. The film follows an ex-kamikaze pilot, Kōichi Shikishima, played by Ryunosuke Kamiki. After he crosses paths with Godzilla and survives, he returns to the mainland to learn that his parents were killed in the bombing of Tokyo. Two years later, he finds himself on a redemption arc and fighting Godzilla on the high seas.

Directed by Takashi Yamazaki, the film had a much smaller budget than the recent American films. However, it has been called a masterpiece and shockingly good by critics, has earned a 98% on Rotten Tomatoes and won the 2024 Academy Award for Best Visual Effects. Godzilla Minus One was also released in Japan on November 3, the same date as the first Godzilla film's wide release in 1954, to celebrate the franchise’s 70th anniversary. Toho also released a black-and-white version of the film in Japanese theaters on January 12, 2024. The black-and-white version is also set to release in AMC theaters on January 26, 2024. Godzilla Minus One is not yet available for streaming.

39. Godzilla x Kong: The New Empire (2024)

Released on March 29, 2024, Godzilla x Kong: The New Empire is the fifth film in the Monsterverse shared franchise, and picks up after the events of Godzilla vs. Kong. The movie is directed by Adam Wingard and stars Rebecca Hall, Brian Tyree Henry and Dan Stevens. It is not yet available for streaming.

New Godzilla Movies To Look Out For

The Godzilla franchise includes not only nearly 40 films, but also cartoons, specials, comic books, streaming TV shows, video games, toys, and even more. For the last 70 years, he has been a franchise juggernaut, and there is no sign of him stopping.

On the Japanese side, Toho has not announced any new Godzilla projects; instead, they are working on an Untitled Detective Pikachu sequel and a live-action version of the 2016 anime Your Name. However, with the success of Godzilla Minus One, there may be a call for more Toho Godzilla films.

Bottom Line

There are a lot of Godzilla films. Between Japanese and American productions, it can be a lot to take in, from rubber suits to Hollywood blockbusters. However, many of these films are iconic and more than worth a watch, especially for those preparing to see Godzilla x Kong: The New Empire.