The Institute of Railway Studies is a partnership between the National Railway Museum and the University of York, offering numerous opportunities for full-time and part-time study at a number of different levels.

Founded in 1995 and officially re-launched in October 2014, it undertakes joint research and shares expertise and training. The Institute also brings in a broader range of disciplines to help our understanding of railway studies.

The Institute aims to be at the forefront of academic study, with the goal of broadening the audience for railway history and research and developing a deeper understanding of the history of British Railways. Since the Institute's inception, the University has awarded 12 PhDs, 40 Master's degrees, three Postgraduate Certificates and 71 Graduate Certificates in Railway Studies.

Locomotion No 1 report

The National Railway Museum commissioned a report by Dr Michael Bailey and Peter Davidson to establish the true history of Locomotion No 1.

The report—published 198 years after Locomotion's debut run on 27 September 1825—reveals fascinating details of the vehicle's construction and explores how many original parts remain.

Locomotion No 1: An Assessment of its History and Modifications Through Archaeological and Archival Study goes into incredible depth through its 225 pages. You can download the report, which is split into two parts, here:

Locomotion report part 1 (pages 1-107) PDF

Locomotion report part 2 (pages 108-225) PDF

First World War

Our website dedicated to Ambulance Trains and the First World War has now closed, but you can still find all of the information you need here.

Fallen Railwaymen database

Search through our archive of over 20,000 fallen railway workers who lost their lives in the First World War.

Explore the database.

Ambulance Trains

Find out more about the exhibition located near the turntable inside Great Hall on the page within What's on.

Discover how railways were used to transport injured servicemen to safety in our story Ambulance Trains: Bringing the First World War Home.

Current projects

Home on the rails: the design, fitting and decoration of train interiors in Britain c.1920-1955, (National Railway Museum/Open University)

Amanda's work looks at the design and decoration of railway interiors. She has recently been making use of the drawings and material in the archives at the museum, but also travelled to other archives and museums further afield and has presented at conferences.

Literary cultures, social networks and the railway worker, 1840–1920 (National Railway Museum/University of Strathclyde)

Digging into the origins of railway company magazines, Elizabeth has blazed a trail through those held in Search Engine. She has also gone on to explore the pre-history of such texts in the earlier part of the 19th century. She is currently working on structuring the thesis and deciding which critical questions she will explore.

Railways and Commemoration: Anniversaries, Commemorative Cultures and the Making of Railway History (National Railway Museum/University of York)

In the final year of her studies, Sophie is focused on writing and late-stage research. Exploring the early commemorations of the railways (those 50- and 100-year anniversaries of early events such as the opening of the Stockton and Darlington and the Rainhill Trials), she has been linking objects and archives in the museum collection with material from online databases and in other libraries and museums.

The Railways and the Making of Upland Britain: The Lifecycle of an Envirotechnical Regime (National Railway Museum/ University of Northumbria)

This new partnership with Professor Matthew Kelly at the University of Northumbria will examine the rise, fall, and afterlives of industrial railways in Britain’s upland regions. Extraction railways once criss-crossed landscapes like Dartmoor—now more famous as areas of outstanding natural beauty—but have since faded in often surprising ways into the landscapes. A student is currently being recruited for this Phd.