GARDENA, CA (February 2, 2021) — Lodestar Technologies Inc., a data and technology services leader, announced today that it has signed an agreement with Northrop Grumman Federal Credit Union ($1.4 billion; 64,600 members; Gardena, CA) to enable the credit union’s data strategy initiative.

Northrop Grumman Federal Credit Union (NGFCU), after a comprehensive search for a single, fully integrated and accurate source of truth for all data, as well as intelligence and analytical capabilities on one platform, chose the Lodestar Enterprise Data Store for its data transformation initiative. Lodestar’s solution is designed to accurately aggregate all the credit union’s strategic data resources, and offer to all levels of staff a comprehensive source of data for reporting and visualization. Planned application will encompass research, reporting and analysis to address risk management, sales and marketing campaigns, and member experience and engagement.

“We are excited about our partnership with NGFCU,” says Steve Mott, VP Sales at Lodestar Technologies “With more than 47 fully-integrated sources from all the key providers within the financial services eco-system and a proven implementation path, we will have a deep and rich solution in place for NGFCU in mere months.”

“The value of harnessing and harmonizing diverse data is one of the biggest keys to leveraging the power of advanced analytics, machine learning, AI, and data science-led innovation,” said Kevin Yebuah, NGFCU’s director for Data Analytic and Business Intelligence.

About Northrop Grumman Federal Credit Union

NGFCU was formed in 1946 to serve Northrop Aircraft Corporation employees. Today it serves employees of the Northrop Grumman Corporation, as well as those from the Los Angeles Metropolitan Transit Authority (Metro) and MetroLink. As of December 31, 2015, the Credit Union had over 49,000 members and over $1 billion in assets. This places NGFCU in the top 2% of the nation’s credit unions for assets per member.

About Lodestar

Lodestar is a technology leader in data services and analytics for credit unions and banks in North America. The Lodestar Enterprise Data Store provides a turn-key data source solution with all necessary integrations in the financial services ecosystem. The solution comes with fully integrated, out of the box interfaces, to more than 40 sources such as credit card, loan origination, wealth management, third party suppliers and most importantly core banking systems. Coupled with a complete data warehouse, Lodestar offers a wide range of tools to support all business lines in both strategic initiatives and planning as well as day to day activities. For more information, visit www.lodestartech.ca.