Lodestar Minerals: a strategy aligned to achieve success with quality landholdings

Lodestar Minerals (ASX:LSR) has been working hard to get all aspects of its strategy aligned in order to position the junior exploration company for success.

From bolstering its management team, to inking strategic tenement and joint venture (JV) partnerships, to executing a financing deal, Lodestar seems to have things aligned.

Lodestar Minerals Managing Director Ed Turner, who is slated to present at next week’s Mines and Money Connect Melbourne was appointed as Managing Director on 28 February 2023.

Read more >>

Mines and Money: Pure Asset Management unlocks the secrets of funding for small-caps

Junior mining companies have been able to access to capital over the past few years although the market has been somewhat of a rollercoaster in recent times.

In a wide ranging interview with Mining.com.au, Daniel Porter, Portfolio Manager at Pure Asset Management discusses ahead of Mines and Money Connect Melbourne on 14-15 June the state of the capital markets for junior resources companies.

Read more >>

Westgold Resources lobs $177 million bid for Musgrave Minerals

Gold explorer and developer Westgold Resources (ASX:WGX) has made a play for fellow ASX-listed Musgrave Minerals (ASX:MGV) in a potential $177 million deal.

Westgold on Tuesday 6 June 2023 announced its intent to launch the all-scrip takeover bid, offering Musgrave shareholders 1 WGX share for every 5.37 MGV shares held. This offer implies an undiluted equity value for Musgrave of $0.30 per share or $177.3 million.

Musgrave insists it has not yet received an official Bidder’s Statement and, as such, its board is in no position to make a formal recommendation on the potential takeover to shareholders. The company urges shareholders to ‘take no action’ in relation to Westgold’s offer.

Read more >>

Related stories

Bellevue Gold secures final permits for tailings facility and water storage at namesake WA project (link)

Future Battery Minerals charges into phase two RC drilling at Nevada Lithium Project, US (link)

Blackstone Minerals to include Metso as tech supplier at Ta Khoa Refinery in Vietnam (link)

Kincora Copper enlists Cerberus Advisory to conduct review of assets in Mongolia

ASX-listed Kincora Copper (ASX:KCC) has appointed Cerberus Advisory to undertake a strategic review of its asset portfolio within the Southern Gobi copper-gold belt in Mongolia.

The company reports the review is being conducted to maximise shareholder value by considering a range of potential partnering, funding, and other asset initiatives.

The review follows the receipt of several unsolicited enquiries from corporate and other entities expressing interest in Kincora’s wholly owned Mongolian asset portfolio.

Read more >>

S2 Resources inks binding agreement to sell 2 exploration licence applications in Finland

S2 Resources (ASX:S2R) has signed a binding agreement with Kinross Gold Corporation (NYSE:KGC) subsidiary KG Finland Oy to sell 2 exploration licence applications (ELA) held by S2’s subsidiary Sakumpu Exploration Oy in Finland.

The company reports the ELAs are part of a series of tenements which Kinross has a right of first refusal (ROFR) under the terms of a farm-in agreement with S2.

Kinross has elected to exercise its ROFR following the receipt by S2 Resources of an offer from a third party.

Read more >>

Future Battery Minerals (ASX: FBM)

Technical Director Robin Cox discusses the 'exciting' phase two drilling campaign now underway at the company's lithium project in the US

Listen now >>

Kincora Copper (ASX: KCC)

President and CEO Sam Spring discusses the strategic review being undertaken on the company's assets in Mongolia

Listen now >>

Helix Resources (ASX: HLX)

MD Mike Rosenstreich discusses newly returned drilling results that will underpin a MRE at Canbelego

Listen now >>

Astro Resources (ASX: ARO)

General Manager Exploration Matthew Healy discusses the grants awarded to the company for exploration at its IOCG project in the Northern Territory