Ukraine, in the wake of its Orange

Revolution, has earned the image of a leading post-Soviet country

regarding the pace of liberal reform. However, this perception of

the country is to a large extent a kind of payment in advance

rather than a reflection of actual results. Kyiv would not likely

be in this leading position if one looks at the current integral

index that draws together the indicators of political

democratization and economic reform, both of which are of crucial

significance when measuring the rate of the so-called ‘democratic

transition.’ Moreover, Ukraine is lagging behind some of its

regional neighbors in several aspects of the transformation (see

Table 1). Yet it is rightfully and unambiguously in the lead in

terms of expectations.

On the one hand, Ukraine still says

that it is committed to change along the Central European model, a

factor making it radically different from other former Soviet

republics where tendencies toward political and economic

centralization have prevailed. Ukrainian politics is based on

plurality; elections have turned into an instrument for settling

political differences and presidential power is greatly restricted

by the Constitution and parliament.

Unlike in Moscow, the political leaders

in Kyiv have come to a consensus on joining the World Trade

Organization and launching talks with the European Union on more

extensive free trade. This proves that Ukraine has accepted a

universal method of engaging in international economic relations

and feels confident of its own ability. Finally, Ukraine has made a

choice in favor of full integration into European and

North-Atlantic organizations instead of selective cooperation with

them.

On the other hand, if one compares

Ukraine to other post-Soviet countries with similar types of

domestic and foreign policy – Moldova and Georgia – it naturally

has a greater potential for implementing its plans. It has a

relatively large and developed economy, and since its declaration

of independence Ukraine has managed to avoid ethnic tensions and

has kept a balance of interests between regions and political

groups.

How did Ukraine manage to assume the

role of the engine of the democratic – and not just

market/capitalistic – transformation in the territory of the former

Soviet Union? It seems there were no prerequisites for this at the

start. The country has a large percentage of ethnic Russians (22

percent in 1989 and about 18 percent in 2001) and a still bigger

share of the population are Russian speakers, which implies

Russia’s strong political and cultural influence. Like other CIS

countries, Ukraine’s Soviet-era party and economic elite remained

in power by and large after independence. The initial reforms were

more than just painful – they were so ineffective that Ukraine

received the status of a market economy later than Russia

did.

A system based on clans and oligarchies

gradually took shape in the country. The authorities mastered

manipulative technologies to reproduce themselves – an illustrative

example of this is the 1999 election, in which President Leonid

Kuchma was “placed” to run against a Communist contender in the

runoff, which automatically guaranteed him victory. By 2000,

Ukraine had become a country with a governable democracy and

virtual politics where the ruling elite could only emulate reforms.

The main thing is that Ukraine did not have very many possibilities

for becoming a full-fledged member of the EU at that time (and does

not have any now either), while this very promise served as the

main stimulus for and a trigger of transformation processes in

Central European and Baltic countries.

There must be an answer – albeit an

ambiguous and multifold one – to this question of “how.” Some of

its elements are axiomatic and lie at the surface, while others are

theoretical and obviously disputable. It seems, though, one can

single out three main components.

The first one is the logic of

independence. There has been a drift away from Russia after it

became impossible to build a structure of alternative leadership

within the CIS. This has led to an ever-increasing need to accept

Western norms and rules.

Second, there is Ukraine’s

polycentrism. If constructs of this kind do not fall apart at once,

they become flexible and pluralistic. It is against this background

that the Western Ukrainian region of Halychyna plays a very special

role and factors like this are not found in any other

country.

Third, there was a chain of

circumstances. This means that Kyiv’s choices could not have been

predicted in 1992, but they can be explained in 2008.

A DRIFT AWAY FROM RUSSIA TOWARD THE

NORTH ATLANTIC CHOICE

The basic impulse that determined the

course of Ukraine’s development was set in many ways by the 1991

referendum, where nine-tenths of the population voted in favor of a

divorce from the Soviet Union. For Ukraine, genuine independence

could only mean independence from Russia and that is why Russia

almost immediately found itself in the position of the main – if

not the only – challenger to Ukrainian statehood. Moscow’s

immediate territorial claims to the Crimea aggravated the

situation.

The majority of the then-ruling

Ukrainian elite viewed independence as an instrumental and not as

an all-sufficient goal. Those people treasured sovereignty because

of the economic opportunities and power inherent in it, and not

because it meant a victory over a foreign or even “occupational”

force, as the Baltic countries saw it. Yet this factor does not

matter much since the defense of power and property is no less a

motivating factor than one’s self-identity or ethnic/religious

incentives.

Moscow and Kyiv were embedded in

arguments over the splitting of the Black Sea Fleet and the

deployment of the Russian part of the fleet in Sevastopol, over

supplies and payment for natural resources and over humanitarian

problems. The two countries have still not resolved these

issues.

The perception of Russia as a

challenger and of Ukraine’s geo-strategic situation as being highly

vulnerable could not but have prompted a search for interaction

with Western institutions as a counterweight to Russia’s influence.

That is why Ukraine signed an agreement on partnership and

cooperation with the European Union already in 1994; it became the

first CIS member-nation to join NATO’s Partnership for Peace

program in 1995; and it signed a Special Partnership Charter with

the alliance in 1997. In general, Kyiv was in favor of NATO’s

eastward expansion, and this added to the Ukrainian-Russian

divisions. The logic of building partnership relations with the

North-Atlantic Alliance paved the way to signing a number of

documents with the goal of Ukraine joining NATO. They were signed

at the time when Leonid Kuchma was president and Victor Yanukovich

was a first-term prime minister. Ukraine officially requested a

Membership Action Plan for itself in 2008. All of this took place

while the very idea of such membership was supported by a very

small portion of Ukrainians.

It is worth noting that the West has

never initiated a policy of drawing Ukraine into NATO. It is true

that in the 1990s, the U.S. and NATO espoused Zbigniew Brzezinski’s

idea that Russia would never be an empire again without Ukraine and

they gave direct or tentative support to Kyiv. But they would

rather consider making Ukraine a buffer zone than including it in

the Western security zone as such. This purely geopolitical

approach was counterbalanced by a perception of Russia as the

flagship of transition in the region and the realization – to a

certain extent – that Moscow, with its traditions in state-building

and resources, could take on the responsibility of maintaining

stability and preventing a collapse of post-Soviet countries. All

the more so that Ukraine, which was reluctant to carry out real

reforms and aroused suspicions that it was supplying weapons to

regimes unfriendly to the U.S. and the EU, caused serious

disenchantment in the Western ruling milieu.

The situation changed in 2003 and 2004,

however. After a number of East European countries joined the EU

and its borders reached Ukraine, Brussels was forced to consider

ways of stabilizing its new frontier. Simultaneously, Russia made

an unambiguous claim to revise the status quo and launched a

tougher and more conflict-oriented policy toward Ukraine. As a

result, the West’s policy toward Ukraine became complicated and

multifaceted and offered more flexible responses to the calls

coming from Kyiv. Still, the EU’s reaction did not go beyond the

format of the so-called European ‘neighborhood policy.’ Its very

name speaks of its anti-integration essence, and yet it would not

be correct to ignore the potential for a rapprochement embedded in

it.

Interaction with the EU and the U.S.

was not the only resource that Ukraine tried to make instrumental

in its search to counteract Moscow’s influence. It conscientiously

sought the position of leader in the territory of the former Soviet

Union. In 1992-1994, Ukraine procrastinated with a renunciation of

nuclear weapons, although its inability to maintain the status of a

nuclear power and the fact that this scenario was unacceptable for

the West was obvious. The same reason was behind its willingness to

take the reins of power in GUAM – an association of countries

having serious problems with Russia.

But as betting on the alternative

leadership in the CIS became more and more of an illusion and the

plans for regional integration in Central Europe turned out to be

unworkable after Ukraine’s western neighbors joined the EU and

NATO, Ukraine had no other options than the limited cooperation

offered by the West.

At the same time, NATO’s own experience

shows that a rapprochement stimulated by geopolitical factors and

taken per se does not imply a democratic change. EU membership is a

different story in this sense. It looks like Ukrainian society and

the political class shifted their accent to the “European choice”

at the beginning of this decade. This shift envisions acceptance of

reforms along European standards.

Polls taken over many years by

Ukraine’s Razumkov Center for Economic and Political Research show

that since 2002 more Ukrainians are in favor of the country joining

the EU. In the fall of 2002, when the EU was preparing its final

decision on incorporating Ukraine’s neighbors, the positive

attitude toward a United Europe hit 65 percent.

It is also true, however, that

Ukrainians have been much more critical of the European Union in

the past few years. In the first place due to the EU’s reluctance

to respond to Kyiv’s aspirations to become integrated in Europe.

Still, the majority of respondents younger than 59 years old – and

especially those younger than 39 years – answer with assuredness

that they personally, and the country as a whole, stand to gain

from EU membership. The huge changes in neighboring countries and

the millions of Ukrainians who have left the country to find jobs

in the West have furnished Ukrainians with the invaluable

experience of assessing the advantages of the European model. The

process did take some time, but most Ukrainians acknowledge the

benefits of integration today, and the national debate on this

problem has evolved toward a realization that reforms should be

viewed as an internal necessity and not as a ticket for admission

to Europe.

It is still an open question whether

Moscow could prevent or at least slow down the drift of its

southern neighbor. Theoretically such a possibility existed – for

instance, as part of the concept “To Europe with Russia!” which

Kyiv put forth at the beginning of this decade – but in reality

this option was scarcely possible. Moscow failed to accept the

principle of equality and its policies boiled down to bribery and

forceful pressure. Nor did it find ways to attract partners for

cooperation without sinking into full-scale subsidizing, which the

partners used quite skillfully – and which Belarus is still doing

to this day.

A transition to genuine interstate

relations between Russia and Ukraine began only after the Orange

Revolution in Kyiv. Moscow had to admit that the opportunities for

coexistence with Ukraine in a single economic and political space

and with Moscow retaining its role of the leader have been

exhausted, while Kyiv had to recognize that reforms require a

renunciation of privileges in the field of energy

resources.

UNITED IN DIVERSITY

The main trait of Ukraine’s internal

structure is polycentrism. Not a single center of power found in

that country is capable of monopolizing all the power and resources

or even holding the top position for a long time. Political

plurality matches this type of structure best of all. This

structure has not been stable, as centers of power have alternately

appeared and disappeared, or at times they become stronger or

weaker.

The competition between the centers of

power is more pronounced in the regional factor. Russia has

traditionally spoken of a contention between the so-called

Left-Bank Ukraine and Right-Bank Ukraine – a reference to the banks

of the Dnieper River. Yet the current breakdown of electoral

preferences actually reflects a division between the “historical”

and “newly populated” (i.e., populated after the 18th century)

parts of the country. Although the full picture is far more

complicated, this does not change its essence.

Regional leaders are not seeking a

breach of the state – they put the emphasis on coming to power in

the center and proliferating their influence through the capital

city and the central agencies of power. To achieve this, even the

strongest ones need allies and the skills to make arrangements with

others. Attempts to preside over all others rather than being the

first among equals soon lead to a political defeat – as the

representatives of the largest – Donetsk-based – regional group

could perfectly see in 2004 and 2007.

In addition, conflicts between regions

and regional elites have an element that plays a unique role in

settling the question of the European choice – the Halychyna

[Eastern Galicia – Ed.] factor or, in a broader sense, all of

Western Ukraine as a political phenomenon.

Halychyna is smaller and weaker than

Eastern Ukraine, but it has an advantage – a homogeneous vision of

the world and a cohesive self-identity. For Western Ukrainians, the

country’s independence is a value in its own right and the return

to Europe is as natural as for the Poles, Estonians, Latvians and

Lithuanians, since the western parts of what is now Ukraine were

incorporated in Soviet/Russian imperial territory only in

1939-1945. By contrast, Eastern Ukrainian leaders view independence

as an instrumental thing. They are unable to create a new ideology

for the new state or to explain to their Russian-speaking voters

their own choice for existence outside of the Russian state, and

this compels them to rely on the political leaders from the western

regions in that sphere. While the “Halychyans” can configure their

nation state with the European choice, Eastern leaders are unable

to combine their country’s independence and its integration with

Russia (a logical end to that option would be subordination, if not

territorial incorporation) and hence they have to call on their

proponents to exercise an amorphous “cooperation” and

”rapprochement” with Moscow.

There is ample observation to

illustrate the homogeneity and consistency of Western Ukrainian

politicians. Some Eastern Ukrainian leaders have joined the

country’s Western power-wielding quarters on quite a number of

occasions after 2004. The last person in that resounding sequence

was Raisa Bogatyryova, a key figure in the Regions party, who

agreed to take the post of Secretary of the National Security

Council in President Victor Yushchenko’s administration. There are

practically no instances of a reverse West-to-East movement. One

can hardly imagine, for example, that Borys Tarasyuk, leader of the

People’s Movement of Ukraine, or Rukh, would accept the post of

Security Council Secretary in the administration of a President

Victor Yanukovich.

Western Ukraine is thus winning the

ideological competition step by step. Suffice it to recall

presidential elections where the candidates would be associated

either with the “Western” or “Eastern” set of values.

The nationalist daydreamer and Rukh

leader Vyacheslav Chornovil received only 23 percent of the votes

in December 1991 in a contest with Soviet-era party bureaucrat

Leonid Kravchuk who received 62 percent. The latter got only 45

percent of the votes in a runoff election in 1994 as he tried to

lean on slogans close to the hearts of Western Ukrainian voters. He

lost to Leonid Kuchma – a representative of the Eastern regions who

promised among other things to make Russian an official language –

and got 52 percent of votes. Since Kuchma reneged on his electoral

promises, he could not run as a representative of Eastern Ukraine

in the 1999 election and the campaign took place under the slogan

of “preventing a Communist relapse.” In the repeat runoff in 2004,

Victor Yushchenko, who was viewed as an advocate of the nationalist

democratic ideology, got 52 percent against the 44 percent taken by

Prime Minister Victor Yanukovich, a native of Donetsk [the cradle

of the Eastern political elite – Ed.] whom Leonid Kuchma had chosen

as his successor.

Since the divisions among regions are

getting narrower, it cannot be ruled out that this election was the

last one in which the issues of language, culture and foreign

policy will play a significant role. One could predict that the

2009 election will focus on social and economic issues and have

stricter requirements for the personalities of the

candidates.

The nature of Ukraine’s oligarchic

system was directly linked to the mutual positioning of different

geographic and administrative regions – and not so much along the

West-East line. Business empires not only embedded themselves in

the country’s polycentric construction, they magnified this

polycentricity. Financial and industrial groups based in Donetsk,

Mariupol, Dnipropetrovsk, Kharkiv, Zaporizhia and Kyiv have

incessantly looked for models of coexistence that would match the

present-day reality. No guarantees of their mutual loyalty – and

all the more so subordination – have ever existed. It is well known

that some of the clans gave feeble support to the seemingly common

candidate Victor Yanukovich. They feared that he would facilitate a

steep rise of his own group.

On the other hand, big business, which

from time to time overtly sponges on the government, has never been

strong enough to subjugate it. The clans did recognize Leonid

Kuchma’s role as an arbiter in the fighting within their own ranks,

but his personal closeness to the Dnipropetrovsk group (his

son-in-law, Victor Pinchuk, is one of the richest people in

Ukraine) made it difficult to draw a line of division between the

presidential and business aspects of his activity. Still, the

financial and industrial groups proved strong enough to survive

after the Orange Revolution, although protests against oligarchies

were one of its driving forces. The repartitioning of property

ended with a re-privatization of the Krivorizhstal steel mill,

which international steel major Mittal Steel bought from

businessmen close to Kuchma.

A possible explanation for this

situation is that the interests of Ukraine’s big business and

reformist authorities overlap today. Unlike in the mid-1990s,

Ukrainians can make huge fortunes now in areas other than the

selling of Russian natural gas. Liberation from “oil and gas

addiction” pushes businesses to search for new markets and

international legitimization of their revenues, while a gradual

slimming of Russian energy subsidies makes them think of a

transition to civilized rules of conducting business and

modernization programs at large. It was not accidental that Victor

Pinchuk became a major lobbyist for Ukraine’s pro-European choice

on the international scene.

Finally, systemic rivalry between the

president and parliament also played a role in the rise of

Ukrainian polycentrism. The head of state has never had an

opportunity to resort to forcible policies since the very

declaration of independence, however dismal the repute of various

sessions of Ukraine’s parliament – the Verkhovna Rada – might have

been.

Against this background, the positions

of the president have been gradually weakening. The 1995

Constitutional Agreement gave the president more powers than the

1996 Constitution. Kuchma’s attempt in 2000 to beef up presidential

power by introducing constitutional changes through a referendum

failed. The referendum did take place, but the authorities did not

find any legal mechanisms for enforcing its results, which once

again exposed the weakness of the head of state. Next came

constitutional amendments adopted during the Orange Revolution.

They made the cabinet of ministers unaccountable to the president

and turned Ukraine into a mixed parliamentary/presidential

republic. A new redistribution of authorized powers may take place

in the next few years, but full subordination of executive power to

the office of president has been simply ruled out, and this feature

objectively brings Ukraine closer to the Central European models of

state governance.

THE POWER OF CIRCUMSTANCE

The aforesaid external and internal

political environment may not have been enough for choosing and

maintaining Ukraine’s democratic course had it not been for an

entire chain of events and circumstances, which were mostly

accidental (although lovers of conspiracy theories will likely

disagree with this). Let us mention a few of them.

In the first place, there was the 1994

election. What matters here is the fact that Leonid Kravchuk agreed

to an early election. As a result, state power went over to the

opposition – a factor that was critical for the country’s future

developments. Even more important was the fact that the losers

stayed in the political arena. In spite of the scale of the

standoff, Kravchuk returned to national politics and eventually

emerged as a leader of the pro-Kuchma forces in 2002–2004. Thus a

tradition of tolerance to opposition was created, opportunities for

cooperation between former adversaries emerged, and the

totalitarian principle “the winner takes all” was

dumped.

Pressure was exerted on former Prime

Minister Pavlo Lazarenko, Yulia Tymoshenko (who was closely linked

with him in the mid-1990s) and on businesses affiliated with them,

but this was more the exception than the rule. Yet those two people

had an opportunity to take part in the 1999 election, with

Tymoshenko eventually taking the post of a deputy prime minister in

Victor Yushchenko’s cabinet. Thus political differences did not

become synonymous with personal animosities, and this laid the

foundation for a flexible and steady political system.

It is worthwhile in this context to say

a few words about Leonid Kuchma’s personality – a most ambiguous

one that still awaits a biographer to explore it. During the Orange

Revolution most Ukrainians passed negative judgments on his stay in

power and rejected his successor. Yet it is important that several

of his decisions – whether taken by instinct or upon scrutiny –

were in line with the country’s general ideological and political

evolution and did not contradict it.

First, Kuchma learned to speak

Ukrainian and used the language in public, thus reasserting his

willingness to be a president of an entire Ukraine and not just one

part of it. This was a profoundly symbolic precedent that compelled

Victor Yanukovich to do the same.

Second, Kuchma refused to use

force to suppress political protests. He took this line during the

escalation of tensions in the Crimea in 1994 and 1995. The

peninsula reverted to Ukraine’s legislative realm through

agreements.

Third, Kuchma had enough

resolve to publish a book called Ukraine Is Not Russia that said

the divergence between the two countries is unavoidable. He did it

in spite of his frequently stated eagerness to bridge positions

with Moscow and to pursue a multifaceted foreign policy.

Fourth, Kuchma did much to

streamline Ukraine’s relations with the West. In 2002, when his

reputation in the West had already collapsed, he went as far as to

suffer personal humiliation as he took part in a conference of the

Euro-Atlantic Partnership Council in Prague to confirm the

sincerity of his country’s Euro-Atlantic choice. The participating

heads of state and government were then purposefully seated

according to the French alphabet, not the English one, so that the

U.S. president and the British prime minister would sit at a

specific distance from the Ukrainian president.

Last but not least, Kuchma

dispelled fears when he resigned as required by law.

The next critical episode after the

1994 election came in 2001 when Major Mykola Melnychenko, a former

presidential bodyguard, published his audio recordings. Although

the outburst of oppositionist activity it produced subsided quickly

enough, the ‘cassette scandal’ changed the context of Ukrainian

politics. People started looking at the Kuchma regime as not simply

immoral, but as criminal. Public opinion interpreted those

recordings as proof of Kuchma’s involvement in the assassination of

opposition journalist Heorhiy Gongadze – even though the details of

the crime, which had a serious impact on Ukraine’s development, are

still not clear to this date.

The scandal had specific political

repercussions. As rightfully noticed by Ukrainian political

scientist Mykhailo Pohrebinsky, then liberal Prime Minister Victor

Yushchenko, the West’s enfant cheri, lost his chance of becoming

Kuchma’s successor. Pohrebinsky says that the campaign demanding

Kuchma’s resignation made sense only for as long as the power could

go over to the prime minister, who was popular with the opposition.

As Kuchma rescued himself, he had to fire Yushchenko.

The dismissal of Yushchenko, a person

who was completely loyal to the president, provided the opposition

with a leader and a banner at the same time. It also forced Kuchma

to lean more on the oligarchs, shift the balance of forces toward

the Donetsk clan, and seek ways of rapprochement with Moscow. But

most Ukrainians and their political leaders did not support either

of these steps.

The West, on its part, paid more

attention to developments in Ukraine in general and to the 2002

parliamentary election in particular. Since Kuchma did not really

want a fight with the West – it would produce greater dependence on

Russia eventually – he did not use his administrative resources in

that election very actively. As a result, the election propelled to

parliament the radically anti-Communist Yulia Tymoshenko Bloc (7.3

percent of the votes on the party ticket). Tymoshenko thus obtained

immunity and access to the public rostrum. Yushchenko’s Our Ukraine

party received 23.6 percent – even more than the Communists did,

and became the tentative winner in the election. This circumstance

made regional bureaucracies disorganized and they lost confidence

in the ruling party’s ability to keep the situation under control.

The political process was no longer “successfully

governable.”

The road to the Orange Revolution was

open now. Its outcome was logical and the causes of the events in

the fall of 2004 have been described in great detail. However,

given the polarization of electoral preferences and the approximate

parity of forces at the start of the campaign, Yanukovich’s victory

was not altogether impossible. Two factors eventually seem to have

tipped the scales in Yushchenko’s favor:

The attempt to poison him in September

2004 that evidently gave him the people’s sympathy and made

behind-the-scenes arrangements impossible for him

personally;

Russia’s interference in the election

campaign on Yanukovich’s behalf.

The latter factor caused an

unparalleled protest, above all in Kyiv, where a new generation of

Russian-speaking proponents of Ukrainian statehood had matured by

that time.

WHAT’S NEXT?

Ukraine’s democratic transition may

have been reversible before the Orange Revolution, but that is

hardly possible now considering the events in the years after it

consolidated the nation’s choice.

First, Ukraine will continue

its step-by-step integration into Europe, both economically and

politically. Ukraine’s “European choice” will remain the core of

the country’s foreign policy. A breakthrough may be possible by the

introduction of broader free trade between Ukraine and the EU –

although this will not take place earlier than 2012 or 2014 – and a

major liberalization of travel restrictions may come in its wake.

Ukraine’s self-adjustment in the European system of energy security

will continue. Ukraine will co-host the European Football

Championship in 2012 along with Poland and this will give a boost

to Ukraine’s infrastructure, raise the level of its compatibility

with Europe and, most importantly, will help the country foster the

image that it is an inalienable part of Europe.

All of that will not furnish Kyiv with

sufficient grounds for making guaranteed claims to a full-fledged

integration in the EU and relevant influence inside it, yet it

could open up the prospects for a Norwegian style of integration,

suggesting incorporation in the European economic space combined

with NATO membership. It looks like Ukraine would be quite happy

with this.

Second, the country will not

discard political plurality and the democratic electoral system.

After three successive opposition victories in the elections of

2004, 2006 and 2007 the situation apparently pleases all political

forces, as it leaves them a chance to regain power.

Third, external conditions,

including a growth in prices for energy resources, will continue to

dictate the need for economic reforms.

Developments in Ukraine pose a serious

challenge for Russia, since the historical paths of the two

countries are diverting. While previously the case in hand was

confusion and the sorting of economic issues between political

leaders, today one can speak of a growing misunderstanding between

the two societies which still speak one language and have similar

customs, but have different values and view their future

differently.

Currently, this challenge is confined

to sporadic outbursts – compensation for devalued Soviet-era bank

deposits, paying child benefits that exceed those paid in Russia by

several hundred percent, and an upcoming military reform that will

abolish mandatory military service – that are easy to cushion off.

But if the reforms facilitate Ukraine’s transition to European

social policies in general and, correspondingly, improve people’s

lives, the challenge will take on a systemic character. As people

in both countries continue to keep close contacts, contrasting the

two “verticals of state power” and “electoral democracies” will be

inescapable. This factor may appear more crucial than the now

hypothetical shifting of the borders of the Euro-Atlantic zone

toward Ukraine’s eastern frontiers.

It does not pay to make far-reaching

forecasts though. The rate of Ukraine’s further transformation may

be too slow and it is too early to judge its overall success. It is

unclear where the limit of the Ukrainian economy’s adaptation to

new prices for gas lies. Polycentrism may degenerate into endless

blocking among political forces and a desire to untangle all the

knots through elections may breed populism. A liberal political

system does not guarantee efficient governance, while systemic

corruption can reduce the reformers’ efforts to naught. Also, it is

equally unclear now if the EU can offer Kyiv a policy that will

correspond to the progress of reforms.