He was born on July 17, 1943, in Surrey, south-east England, and was the youngest son of the 15th Baron Inchiquin, Irish-born Fionn Myles Maryons O’Brien, who had married Josephine Bembaron in 1939. World War II was at its height and Conor’s father was in the Royal Air Force at the time.

Educated at Eton College, O’Brien joined the British Army in 1962, training at Mons Officer Cadet School. He was commissioned into the 14th/20th Kings Hussars in 1963 and commanded troops at such diverse locations as Benghazi, Tripoli, Cyprus, Singapore, Paderborn in Germany, and Tidworth in Wiltshire. He became aide-de-camp to the Commander of British Forces Gulf in Bahrain and retired in 1975 with the rank of captain.

He went on to spend several years in places such as Hong Kong and Singapore, running his own trading company and working in financial services.

On the death of his uncle Phaedrig, the 17th Baron Inchiquin, on May 20, 1982, Conor succeeded him. Baron Inchiquin was one of two titles created on July 1, 1543, for Murrough O’Brien, Prince of Thomond, a descendant of Brian Boru who had been killed during the Battle of Clontarf in 1014.

In an interview Conor O’Brien gave in 2021 to the oral history archive “Irish Life and Lore”, he said that when he got the news “it was a bit of a shock”. He left Hong Kong and moved to the family estate in Co Clare which involved initially sorting out some legal issues that had arisen over the property.

He told interviewer Maurice O’Keeffe: “There are records in existence of my descent direct from Brian Boru — 32 times removed.

“After Brian Boru was killed, the O’Briens remained on in office as High Kings of Ireland until 1118 and as Kings of Munster and Kings of Thomond until the mid-1500s when the last Earl submitted to [King] Henry VIII and we became the Earls of Inchiquin and Lord Inchiquin, as opposed to Murrough, the last King of Thomond.

“He was the last King of Thomond in 1543, went over to Greenwich and submitted to Henry VIII.” ​

O’Brien recalled in the interview that, although born and brought up in England, he was a regular visitor to the land of his forebears. “When I came back here in 1982-83 I applied for an Irish passport, which I have held ever since, so I am dual nationality if you like,” he said.

“As the local people would tell you, we’re not an Irish family, we’re a Gaelic family — and the reason that we remained reasonably popular was because we didn’t evict our tenants: we were good, fair landlords during the Famine times and that’s how we continued to be.”

A few older people in the local village in Clare addressed him as “your lordship”, but he said: “I never stood on any ceremony, I was always Conor O’Brien and if they were comfortable calling me ‘your lordship’, that’s up to them, I didn’t expect anyone to do that, because those days had really more or less disappeared.

“My Uncle Donough, who died in 1968, was asked by [Éamon] de Valera to become ‘Prince-President of Ireland’ in 1937... a huge honour, but he decided he wouldn’t do that... I just don’t think he wanted to get involved in politics, which he would have had to do. I know the President of Ireland is supposed to be above politics — but you know what Ireland is like! So he didn’t, but that was an extreme honour for the family to have been asked that by a republican”.

It signified recognition of “the importance of future generations working with descendants of the old aristocracy”.​

Dromoland Castle at Newmarket- on-Fergus, Co Clare, was the O’Brien family home until 1962 when it was sold by his Uncle Donough; within a year US businessman Bernard McDonough turned it into a luxury five-star hotel.

When Conor moved to Ireland he lived in nearby Thomond House, built in 1963, turning it into a five-star guesthouse which he ran from 1984 to 2008 and which was on the substantial Dromoland estate.

In 1988 he married Helen O’Farrell from Longford and they had two daughters, Slaney and Lucia, and two grandsons, Conn and Jack.

Following an illness, he died peacefully at Thomond House on June 3, a month before his 80th birthday.

His funeral took place on June 10 at Our Lady of the Rosary Church, Newmarket-on-Fergus, followed by a private cremation. His passing was mourned by a wide circle of family and friends.