Advertiser disclosure

Links on this page, including products and brands featured on ‘Sponsored’ content, may earn us an affiliate commission. This does not affect the opinions and recommendations of our editors.

Read more

The currency in Equatorial Guinea is the Central African CFA franc. As the official legal tender in Equatorial Guinea, the Central African CFA franc is officially recognized by the Equatorial Guinean government, meaning you can use it to settle all financial obligations in the country, including paying for goods, services, taxes, and debts.

Although the CFA franc is pegged to the value of the euro (€1 = fr.CFA 655.957), the euro itself isn't accepted in Equatorial Guinea. However, bureaux de change can commonly be found in larger cities like Bata and Malabo.

There are a couple of reasons why you might be interested to find out the currency in Equatorial Guinea. Click on the reason that best applies to you below to find out more:

I'm travelling to Equatorial Guinea

I'm sending money to Equatorial Guinea

I want to follow the Central African CFA franc exchange rate

I'm just curious

Travelling to Equatorial Guinea

With its different currency, banking system, and money customs, figuring out the best way to pay in Equatorial Guinea if you travel there can be tricky. Fortunately, many forms of payments have become ubiquitous around the globe, including:

Credit cards: Cards from VISA and Mastercard are accepted in Equatorial Guinea, especially in touristy establishments.

Debit cards: Debit cards linked to your bank account let you make purchases at point-of-sale terminals and withdraw cash.

Cash: Having some Central African CFA franc banknotes could help for small purchases, tipping, and emergencies. You can typically exchange currency at a bank or exchange bureau before or upon arrival.

Mobile payments: Mobile payment services like Apple Pay, Google Pay, or Alipay are an increasingly popular way to pay, but you'll need to check beforehand how available these methods are in Equatorial Guinea.

Prepaid travel cards: A reloadable debit card with a Central African CFA franc balance can give you good value, security, and convenience.

Of these methods, using a prepaid travel card is almost always the best way to pay in Equatorial Guinea because they generally incur lower fees on Central African CFA franc currency exchange than credit cards or bank debit cards do. Moreover, many prepaid travel cards let you hold multi-currency balances, allowing you to dodge DCCs and other sneaky fees while travelling — all while providing the same level of security and convenience as you're used to from your credit or debit card!

Depending on where you're from, you may be able to find a prepaid travel card from your bank. Still, we recommend using a global provider like Revolut because it offers excellent exchange rates, multi-currency balances, and a travel debit card that allows you to spend on your holiday like a local and enjoy peace of mind after each tap, swipe, or cash withdrawal.

Revolut is only available in the United States, the United Kingdom, the EU/EEA, Australia, Japan, Singapore, Azerbaijan, Sri Lanka, Brazil, and Chile. If you live in Canada or New Zealand, the Wise Account is another excellent option to consider. If you're from any other country, we recommend checking out what multi-currency cards are available in your country or whether your bank offers any similar products.

Sending Money to Equatorial Guinea

Every year, many people send money to Equatorial Guinea for all kinds of reasons. These include supporting friends or family, paying for someone's tuition, settling business transactions, purchasing or upgrading property, and many others. If you want to send an international money transfer to a Central African CFA franc bank account in Equatorial Guinea, then you should be aware of the high fees and exchange rates that go along with global money transfers with your international bank (these fees often constitute more than 10% of your transfer amount — you can read all about this in our dedicated explainer here).

Fortunately, international money transfers are a competitive market with many trustworthy alternative providers jostling to offer you the best exchange rates (rates which almost always far outdo those you'll find at the bank!). However, because the cheapest provider to send money abroad differs depending on factors such as where you're sending from, the amount you're sending, the payment method and others, we recommend skipping the hassle and finding the cheapest provider in real time with Monito's live comparison tool below 👇

Find the best deal when sending money to Equatorial Guinea:

Country from

Select a country

Arrow down

Country to

Equatorial Guinea

Arrow down

You send

Arrow down

To

Arrow down

Central African CFA Franc Exchange Rates

The Central African CFA franc is one of around 180 currencies worldwide. This means that the Central African CFA franc trades against all other official currencies around the globe, giving us exchange rates: a measure of how much of one currency we can exchange for another.

Exchange rates can fluctuate over time due to various economic, political, and market factors. A higher exchange rate means that the value of one currency has increased compared to another, while a lower exchange rate means the opposite. Exchange rates are essential when travelling to, buying goods and services from, or sending money to Equatorial Guinea.

With Monito's currency pages, you can follow the live exchange rate to the Central African CFA franc, see which providers offer the best deals, and set up smart email alerts to follow fluctuations:

You can also use the above tool to enter your currency to see its exchange rate with the Central African CFA franc or set up email alerts to be notified when the exchange rate passes a certain value.

Key Facts About the Central African CFA Franc

Currencies and foreign money can be interesting, unique, fun to learn about because they offer a glimpse into a country's culture, history, and economics. If you're just curious the Central African CFA franc and how it's used as the currency of Equatorial Guinea, here are a few key facts:

Equatorial Guinea Currency Name

Central African CFA Franc

Equatorial Guinea Currency ISO Code

XAF

Currency Symbol

fr.CFA

Banknote Denominations

500, 1000, 2000, 5000, 10,000

Minor Unit

Centime

Central Bank

BEAC

Equatorial Guinean Currency Since

1985

Alternative Currencies

None