Sarah Hyland is embarking on an exciting new adventure – and her former TV mom is right by her side to cheer her on.

The Modern Family alum is currently starring in Little Shop of Horrors on Broadway alongside Andrew Feldman. Over the weekend, Julie Bowen was able to catch a show — and she was more than impressed.

"I always knew my baby girl was good, but even after 11 years together on Modern Family, I didn’t know she was THIS good," Bowen, 54, wrote in a June 30 post on Instagram as she shared a selfie with Hyland, 33, who plays Audrey, and Feldman, 22, who plays Seymour.

"As Audrey, Sarah made me cry with the impossible complexity she brought to a role I’ve seen many times before. I couldn’t be more proud if she was my real daughter. I loved seeing the hysteria at the stage door when she and @andrewbfeldman_ exited. So so so well deserved!"

"Don’t make me cryyyyyy 🥹," Hyland wrote in a comment on the post. "I’ve missed you so so much!!!! I love you."

Jesse Tyler Ferguson — who played Bowen's brother and Hyland's uncle, Mitchell, on the sitcom — commented, "Yay! You made it!!!!"

Ferguson and his husband Justin Mikita attended Hyland's opening night performance on June 12, and she wrote on Instagram that she was "feeling SO grateful and loved to have two of my favorite people on this planet attend my opening," referring to the couple.

Despite her love for her former costars, the notion of returning to Haley Dunphy, the character she played for 11 seasons, is not necessarily a concrete "yes" for Hyland.

"I would want to see a script first," she told PEOPLE of whether she'd reprise her role for a reboot of Modern Family.

“I think creatively for me, I would want to know what was going on with Haley. I want to see her career back and stuff and her creativity and I want her to be able to do both," she said.

The prospect of getting back on set with the cast — which also included Ty Burrell, Ariel Winter, Sofía Vergara and Eric Stonestreet — is definitely an appealing one, though.

"I love Modern Family so much. I love the cast with my entire heart and soul," she said. "I mean, Jesse and I are so close, and his husband Justin and my husband Wells, the four of us vacation together. I would love to be back with everybody.”

Never miss a story — sign up for PEOPLE's free daily newsletter to stay up-to-date on the best of what PEOPLE has to offer​​, from celebrity news to compelling human interest stories.