ACTRESS Sarah Hyland is known for playing Haley Dunphy in the ABC sitcom Modern Family.

Hyland received critical acclaim and numerous accolades for her role in Modern Family, including four Screen Actors Guild Awards for Outstanding Performance by an Ensemble in a Comedy Series.

Who is Love Island host Sarah Hyland?

Hyland is 31 years old and was born in New York City.

She is best known for portraying the role of Haley Dunphy in the ABC sitcom Modern Family from 2009 to 2020.

The star began dating Wells Adams in 2017, and the couple eventually got engaged in July 2019.

The 38-year-old was actually a contestant on season 12 of The Bachelorette.

The two first met on social media when Adams first messaged Hyland on Instagram, according to Us Weekly.

"Have you seen those memes of ‘Slide Into the DMs’? That. He slid into my DMs," shared Hyland on Jimmy Kimmel Live! in January 2018.

"I thought he was funny, and he was a fan of [my] show. I saw him as the bartender and I was like, 'That’s really cute!'"

What is Hyland's net worth?

Hyland has amassed a $14million net worth, according to Celebrity Net Worth.

When Modern Family first debuted, Hyland was earning a salary of about $70,000 per episode.

This remained the norm from 2013 to 2018, and from that point on, Hyland earned a sum of $130,000 per episode until the series ended in 2020.

When did Sarah Hyland marry Wells Adams?

Three years after getting engaged, Wells and Sarah tied the knot on August 20, 2022.

Their wedding was at Sunstone Winery near Santa Barbara, California, in an outdoor ceremony.

Previously, there were speculations about when they were set to marry.

For example, Hyland and Adams halted their wedding plans due to the coronavirus pandemic.

At a point, it was unclear exactly when the celebrity couple would tie the knot.

Hyland previously told PEOPLE that she and Adams "definitely want to get married one day and have the wedding of our dreams and have everybody that we love there."

She continued: "But we postponed wedding planning because we want to be able to focus on what's important right now.

"There is a lot going on in the world right now and that's what we should be focused on."

They were supposed to tie the knot during the summer of 2020, but the Covid-19 pandemic forced them to postpone the big day indefinitely.

The Modern Family star did have her bridal shower in June 2022, according to E! News.

"Soooooo I finally had my bridal shower yesterday," shared Hyland on her Instagram Story on June 5.

The photo showed a custom enamel box clutch with the words 'Mrs. Adams' in gold lettering.

The bridal shower featured Hyland's close friends, including Vanessa Hudgens, GG Magree, Kimberly Daugherty, Natalie Joy, Ashley Newbrough, Jesse Tyler Ferguson's husband Justin Mikita, and Hyland's maid of honor, Ciara Robinson.

"Hosted by the most amazing maid of honor."