Sarah Hyland, a native New Yorker, currently stars in the Golden Globe and Emmy-winning hit comedy, ABC's "Modern Family" as the ditsy yet independent 'Haley Dunphy,' opposite Ty Burrell and Julie Bowen. Hyland is a true triple threat, who is trained in all areas of dance from the age of three and vocally trained from the age of seven, including attending the Professional Performing Arts School in New York City.

Hyland has been working in stage, television and film since the age of four. She has starred in numerous plays and musicals, both off and on Broadway, making her official Broadway debut in a production of Grey Gardens. Hyland's numerous television appearances include reoccurring roles on the daytime soap opera ABC's One Life to Live, and NBC's Lipstick Jungle, and guest-starring roles on NBC's Law & Order, NBC's Law & Order: SVU, and TV Land's Hot in Cleveland, to name a few. Recently, Hyland could be seen in Bonnie and Clyde: Dead and Alive, a four-part TV mini-series for Lifetime/History Channel as 'Blanche Barrow.' The project is the first of its kind to air on both AETN networks.

Hyland's film roles date back to 1997 when she got her start as Howard Stern's daughter in the comedy Private Parts. She went on to appear in a variety of films including making her Tribeca Film Festival debut alongside Rebel Wilson and Christina Hendricks in Struck by Lightning, a coming-of-age comedy written by Chris Colfer. She went on to star in the Lifetime original movie Call Me Crazy: A Five Film alongside Brittany Snow, Jennifer Hudson, Melissa Leo and Octavia Spencer. She played the role of 'Grace' whose character explores bipolar disorder through the experience of a teenage daughter whose mother grapples with the condition. Recently, Hyland could be seen in the Weinstein film Vampire Academy.

Hyland has been nominated for a 2012 TV Scene Stealer and 2010 Breakout Talent at the Teen Choice Awards. Her charitable causes include being a Youth Ambassador for The Lopez Foundation as well as Share Our Strength's No Kid Hungry campaign (spearheaded by actor Jeff Bridges). She was honored at Variety's Power of Youth (2012) for her work with The Lopez Foundation.