I’m going to tell you about some more famous character voices you may enjoy. There are several actors that Walt Disney used repeatedly in his live-action and animated movies. Last week I told you about my favorite voice; Sterling Holloway. This week I’m going to tell you about two more: Phil Harris and Kathryn Beaumont. Neither of these names sound familiar, but I’m sure the characters they voiced will be familiar to you.

First, Phil Harris, did the voice acting for both Baloo in The Jungle Book, Thomas O’Malley (the alley-cat) in The Aristocats, and Little John in Robin Hood. Harris was also a bandleader in the 1940’s, an actor in radio, television, and films. He was a pretty good singer too; singing keys songs in The Jungle Book like “Bare Necessities“, and joining Louis Prima in “I Wanna Be Like You“. He joined Scatman Crothers in The Aristocats in singing “Everybody Wants To Be A Cat“. In Robin Hood he sang “The Phony King Of England“. In 1989, Harris returned for a few episodes in the cartoon series TaleSpin as Baloo, before being replaced by Ed Gilbert. His last role was in 1991 in the film Rock-A-Doodle (not a Disney film) as the laid-back basset hound Patou. He died in 1995.

Kathryn Beaumont was an English actress, singer and school teacher who also did the voice of Alice for Alice In Wonderland and as Wendy in Peter Pan. Beaumont reprised her roles as Alice and Wendy in subsequent reappearances until 2005 when her roles were taken over by Hynden Walch. Beaumont is still living and is 76-years-old.

Most people aren’t aware of the talent behind the voice actors. Their faces aren’t seen, but they are certainly a huge part of making the films so enjoyable and memorable.

Roly(son)

Hello. I recently watched one of my favorite Disney movies, the ‘Aristocats.’ This movie follows four cats, who are stolen from their rich owner by her evil butler, Edgar. The first cat is the mother, named Duchess. The kittens go as follows, Marie, Toulouse, and Berlioz. The butler stole them and ditched them on a farm. He did this after finding out that the rich old woman who owned the cats was leaving all her possessions to them, not him. The cats seek to find their way home. On the way they meet an alley cat, whose name is very long; so I will call him Thomas O’Malley. The man who voices O’malley also voiced Little John from Robin Hood (see previous articles about movie), and Baloo from Jungle Book.

It seems strange to me that the only one of the cats at WDW meet and greets is Marie. It also seems strange that for a movie as popular as Aristocats, Edgar is not recognized as a Disney villain. Edgar is up there in evilness with Cruella Deville for trying to kill kittens. First, to get the cats out of the picture, he puts sleeping powder in their food. A mouse friend of theirs, Roquefort (who is voiced by Sterling Holloway, whom we posted on this week) also eats some. The cats all go to sleep, and then Edgar dumps them in a field. In the field Edgar has a run-in with two dogs. Later in the film, when Edgar sees the cats again, he tries to kill them.

The dogs offer great comic relief and are to me, the best part of the movie. They are voiced with the thick Southern accents of Pat Buttram and George Lindsey (Goober Pyle from the Andy Griffith Show). Lines like, “Where’s my beddy-by basket!?” and “That’s just a little ‘ol cricket bug” never fail to make me laugh. I am sure that they don’t sound very funny out of context, but in the movie they are hilarious.

The music for this movie is fun and memorable. It has one of my favorite songs, “O’Malley the Alley Cat.” It is sung by my favorite Disney singer, Phil Harris (the voice of Thomas O’Malley). Another great song is “Scales and Arpeggios,” sung by all the kitties. The other main song in this movie is “Everybody Wants to be a Cat” sung by famous jazz musician Scatman Crothers.

Aristocats is from my favorite era of Disney movies. The era from 101 Dalmations to The Fox and the Hound. Over all, this movie is a great Disney movie. It is for sure a classic!

**A bit of trivia about this movie: It was the first movie to be made after Walt Disney‘s death. I personally can’t tell any difference.

Roly, teen son

I have recently read what is now my favorite book. It has even surpassed The Hobbit, which I have for years thought nothing could compare to. You may be thinking, “But Roly, this book is not Disney. It’s just a book Disney made a movie after.” Yes, I know that is true; but if you read the book you could see how Disney could make a movie after this without even trying. Some Disney movies are based after books with very un-Disneyish things in them (Pinnochio with Jiminy Cricket dying, Cinderella with the sisters eyes getting pecked out[hey, they deserved it.]) This book though, has the same upbeat, carefree tone as the movie. It’s no wonder why it’s called The (Merry) Adventures of Robin Hood.

Each chapter centers around some adventure that Robin Hood goes on, which involves either him being foolish and getting himself in trouble, or him making an utter fool of someone. It has the same feel as the movie, with different adventures that are not exactly connected to one another, but doesn’t include the storyline with Prince John in it. The main villain in the book is the Sheriff of Nottingham.

Now you may not feel the same way I do, since this is not a “masterpiece,” but it is a very fun book and is definitely worth reading. I will go more deeply into this book at a later time, telling about my favorite parts of it and why. First I will give you a warning. If you are really into the book and really love the characters or are just determined to read every word (like I was,) don’t read the epilogue. I won’t give the ending away, but the ending is very sad. The book itself still has a satisfying ending. Personally, I don’t like endings. Even though there never was a second book, I wish it would have been left open. In the movie however, he goes away to who knows where, and could easily continue his adventures. That ending suits me better. There is also no Oo-de-lally, or bunnies in the book. Sad.

I will give my thoughts on the movie at a later time, as this blog was mostly about the book. I will probably get it posted this week, but don’t count on it. I will also give my thoughts on Song of the South, which I managed to watch (despite the very best efforts of protesters all around america) next week. See ya real soon.

Roly