Description

Product Reviews

Description

Aristocats Special Edition DVD 1970 Macskarisztokraták Extra Változat / Directed by Wolfgang Reitherman / Starring: Phil Harris, Eva Gabor, Hermione Baddeley, Gary Dubin, Dean Clark

UPC 5996514012903

REGION 2 PAL DVD

MADE IN HUNGARY

AUDIO: English 5.1, Hungarian 2.0

SUBTITLES: English, Hungarian, English HOH

Runtime: 76 minutes

English Summary:

The Aristocats is a 1970 American animated romantic adventure musical comedy film directed by Wolfgang Reitherman. It was produced by Walt Disney Productions and released by Buena Vista Distribution.

In Paris 1910, mother cat Duchess and her three kittens, Berlioz, Marie and Toulouse live with retired opera diva Madame Adelaide Bonfamille, and her English butler, Edgar. One day while preparing her will with lawyer Georges Hautecourt, Madame declares her fortune to be left to her cats until their deaths, and thereafter to Edgar. Edgar hears this through a speaking tube, and plots to eliminate the cats. Therefore, he sedates the cats by putting sleeping pills in a milk mixture intended for them, and enters the countryside to abandon them. There, he is ambushed by two hounds named Napoleon and Lafayette, and the cats are stranded in the countryside, while Madame Adelaide, Roquefort the mouse and Frou-Frou the horse discover their absence.

Hungarian Summary:

Széltől is óvott, tündéri macskacsalád él a századforduló Párizsának egyik fényűző otthonában. Boldogságuk azonban csak addig tart, amíg a ház úrnője közzé nem teszi végrendeletét: halála esetén a cicákra hagyja vagyonát, ha azonban ők már nem lennének, a komornyik örökölne mindent. A sanda szolga azonnal kész az ármányra és a cicák hamar az utcán, jobban mondva egy messzi réten találják magukat. A szerencse azonban a segítségükre siet és a Párizs utcáin, kertjeiben, háztetőin élő macskák, cicák, cicusok és Roquefort, a családhoz hű egér segítségével visszaküzdik magukat otthonukba.

Cast / Szereplők:

Eva Gabor as Duchess – Madame Adelaide's cat and mother of three kittens, forced to choose between loyalty to Madame and her own attachment to Thomas O'Malley at the end of the film. Robie Lester provided the singing voice for Duchess.

Phil Harris as Thomas O'Malley (full name: Abraham de Lacy Giuseppe Casey Thomas O'Malley) – A feral cat who befriends Duchess and her kittens, becoming a father figure to the kittens and falling in love with Duchess. For cultural reasons, the Italian dubbing of the film changes him to “Romeo, er mejo der Colosseo” (Roman dialect for "The best [cat] of the Colosseum"), an Italian cat from Rome, speaking with a strong Roman accent. The reason of the Italian version of O'Malley as a cat from Rome is that in Italy is a popular fact that until recent times in the Colosseum there were lots of alley cats.

Gary Dubin as Toulouse – the oldest kitten, who idolizes all alley cats and especially Thomas. He is also a talented painter and is loosely based on French painter Henri de Toulouse-Lautrec.

Liz English as Marie – middle kitten; often imperious or snobbish to her brothers, but her mother's special companion. Something of a singer.

Dean Clark as Berlioz – the youngest kitten. He is somewhat timid and shy, named after the French composer Hector Berlioz. This Berlioz is a talented pianist.

Roddy Maude-Roxby as Edgar Balthazar – Madame Adelaide's dim-witted butler who tries to get rid of the cats in order to inherit her fortune.

Scatman Crothers as Scat Cat – Thomas' best friend and leader of a gang of jazz-playing alley cats. Scat Cat plays the trumpet.

Paul Winchell as Shun Gon – a Chinese cat in Scat Cat's gang. Plays the piano and drums that are made out of pots.

Lord Tim Hudson as Hit Cat – an English cat in Scat Cat's gang. Plays acoustic guitar.

Vito Scotti as Peppo – an Italian cat in Scat Cat's gang. Plays the accordion.

Thurl Ravenscroft as Billy Boss – a Russian cat in Scat Cat's gang. Plays the double bass.

Sterling Holloway as Roquefort – A house mouse and also a friend of the cats, who assists in the expulsion of Edgar.

Pat Buttram as Napoleon – a Bloodhound who attacks Edgar when he intrudes in the farm where Napoleon lives. Napoleon insists, whenever cohort Lafayette makes a suggestion, that he is in command, then adopts Lafayette's suggestion as his own.

George Lindsey as Lafayette – a Basset Hound and Napoleon's companion. He sometimes proves smarter than Napoleon, but is also more timid.

Hermione Baddeley as Madame Adelaide Bonfamille – a former opera singer and owner of Duchess and her kittens.

Charles Lane as Georges Hautecourt – Madame Bonfamille's lawyer: an eccentric, lively old man

Nancy Kulp as Frou-Frou – Roquefort's horse companion, who subdues Edgar. Ruth Buzzi provided her singing voice.

Monica Evans as Abigail Gabble – a goose who befriends the cats.

Carole Shelley as Amelia Gabble – Abigail's twin sister.

Bill Thompson as Uncle Waldo – the drunken gander uncle of Abigail and Amelia.

Peter Renaday as French Milkman/Le Petit Cafe Cook/Truck Movers (uncredited)

Directed by Wolfgang Reitherman Produced by Winston Hibler

Wolfgang Reitherman Story by Ken Anderson

Larry Clemmons

Eric Cleworth

Vance Gerry

Julius Svendsen

Frank Thomas

Ralph Wright Based on "The Aristocats" by Tom McGowan and Tom Rowe Starring Phil Harris

Eva Gabor

Hermione Baddeley

Gary Dubin

Dean Clark

Sterling Holloway

Roddy Maude-Roxby

Liz English Music by George Bruns

Production

company

Walt Disney Productions

Distributed by Buena Vista Distribution

Release date

December 11, 1970 (premiere)

December 24, 1970 (United States)

Running time

76 minutes Country United States Language English

Product Reviews

No reviews yet Write a Review