A founding member of the Albany Artists Group, participating from 1947 to at least 1977.

Edwin W. Becker was born on 10 December 1912 in Brooklyn. He moved to the Albany area in the 1930s, eventually living on Nathaniel Boulevard in the suburb of Delmar, and enlisted in the Signal Corps during World War II. An employee of the New York State Department of Civil Service, he was an agency artist for four decades. The Civil Service Mural he completed in 1962 was located where he worked: the Harriman State Office Building Campus just outside the city. In 2006, when Civil Service workers relocated into the Alfred E. Smith State Office Building across from the State Capitol, they brought the mural with them. It has been on display in the Department’s reception room ever since.

(Source: https://fredschrock.com/2014/10/22/why-a-presidential-assassination-is-proudly-displayed-in-a-government-building/ )

Along with three other Delmar artists, Edwin Becker was part of a group called “The Village Four.” They held local art showings and contests in the 1950s and 1960s. The Albany Institute of History and Art exhibited some of his works as well, where he taught art classes in his spare time. Becker also painted murals for the mastodon display at the New York State Museum as seen in this black and white image from a 1957 issue of the Knickerbocker News. His 1960 mural depicting the history of Schenectady can still be seen in the First Niagara Bank on State Street in that city. Becker died on 6 February 1989 at the age of 76.

(Source: https://fultonhistory.com/Fulton.html )

AAG Member 1986-2009

Raymond Decker was an avid painter; a passion he enjoyed for more than 30 years. He was also a member of Saratoga Arts, the Bethlehem Arts Association, Greene County Arts Council and the Niskayuna Brush and Palette.

The following is from his Albany Times-Union Obituary:

Decker, Raymond A. ALBANY Raymond A. Decker, 93, died on Thursday, November 28, 2013 at the Teresian House. Born in Albany, he was the son of the late Anthony F. and Loretta E. (Neubauer) Decker. Mr. Decker worked as a credit analyst for the Mobil Oil Corporation for more than 30 years. He was a longtime communicant of St. Thomas the Apostle Church in Delmar. Mr. Decker was an avid painter; a passion he enjoyed for more than 30 years. He was a member of numerous art organizations including Saratoga Arts, the Bethlehem Arts Association, Greene County Arts Council and Niskayuna Brush and Palate. Mr. Decker was predeceased by his wife, Rena (Bator) Decker and his sister, Delores Sponable. He is survived by nephews, Paul and Thomas Sponable and their families and his longtime, dear friend, Betty Vent. Funeral services will be held Tuesday, December 3, 2013 at 8:45 a.m. in the Daniel Keenan Funeral Home, 490 Delaware Ave., thence to the Chapel of St. Thomas the Apostle Church, Delmar where a Mass of Christian Burial will be celebrated at 9:30 a.m. Relatives and friends are invited and may also call at the funeral home on Monday, December 2, 2013 from 3 to 5 p.m. Entombment, St. Anthony's Cemetery, Schenectady. Online condolences may be offered at danielkeenanfuneralhome.com .

Member of AAG 1972-2009

(Dan may have been a member before ’72, but our group is currently missing all written records between 1962 and 1971)

Dan was definitely one of the hardest working, devoted members in the history of the Albany Artists’ Group. During his years with the group, Dan was incredibly active as a member of the board and as an officer. He worked constantly to promote the group’s presence in the Capital region by securing venues for shows, promoting shows, recruiting new members, finding artists to demonstrate and speak at monthly meetings, helping to choose the High School student scholarships, and involving the group in local events. He also submitted regular articles and art reviews to the monthly newsletter, from its early days as the “Pigment Patter” to its later days as the untitled Newsletter.

“Dan graduated from Albany High School in 1951 and received a Bachelor of Architecture degree from Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute in 1955. He served a total of 21 years, active and reserve, with the U.S. Navy, first as a helicopter pilot and later with the Civil Engineering Corps (the Seabees) rising to the rank of Commander. He was particularly proud of the many construction projects his reserve unit successfully completed for local non-profit agencies. He joined the NYS Department of Social Services in 1961 and completed a 27 year career working on children's institutions and later in the administration of the Medicaid program. He was a licensed architect and a lifelong artist sharing his abilities with many local organizations: the Albany Artists Group, Sand Lake Center for the Arts, Center Gallery, the Mended Hearts, Gilda's Club, Trout Unlimited, Society of Architectural Historians, Best Luther Fire Department and was a volunteer tour guide for the Albany Visitor's Center. Dan conducted many workshops that allowed children to experience how architects thought and worked. His favorite place on earth, besides his West Sand Lake home, was Star Island, the Isle of Shoals, New Hampshire.” (from the Albany Times/Union obituary)

In honor of his work and commitment to the Sand Lake Center for the Arts, Averill Park, NY, the Art Gallery there is now called, in his honor:

The Dan Sekellick Visual Arts Gallery

Fumi died June 1, 2018. We will always remember her as a dynamo of energy, creating huge paintings reminiscent of van Gogh and Munch, but totally Fumi. Her encouragement of other artists was boundless, yet she always remained humble about her own work.

Fumi, as she was known by all who knew and loved her, was born in 1931 in the Kumamoto Prefecture, Kyushu Island, Japan. She was awarded a doctoral degree in Geology from Tokyo University in the field of metamorphic petrology. In the late 1960s, she and her husband, Dr. Miyashiro, worked for Columbia University, and in the early 1970s joined the Department of Geological Studies at SUNY Albany. Upon her retirement, she enrolled in the Nursing Program at Hudson Valley Community College and received her RN degree.

Then, she decided to devote her retirement years to painting, creating hundreds of large, insightful canvases reflecting her love of the work of Vincent Van Gogh, Edvard Munch, and Charles Burchfield. Here are a couple statements about her work in her own words:

“My paintings are my personal diary in which I do not have to pretend to be

otherwise. Sometimes they are joyous, contemplative, longing for the higher order,

and sometimes sentimental. Painting is my medium of dialogue with the general

public who are sensitive, but not especially trained in the art field. My paintings

are representational, because I want a dialogue between viewer and painter to

be fairly coherent.”

“Painting has never been easy for me. It often causes a feeling of miserable

failure and discouragement. However, I am gradually realizing that during my long

recesses in painting, I am unhappy and voiceless, and I feel spiritually empty if I do

not paint obsessively. Also I have gradually come to feel that I do not have to be

defensive or embarrassed about what I produce if I sincerely feel the need to

paint it. This is what keeps me painting.”

She once wrote that her wish was that “All will treasure many pleasant memories of her and not feel too much sorrow and emptiness.”

Betty is the only member, past or present, of the AAG who has a Wikipedia entry specifically relating to being a professional artist.

(NOTE: In respect to her name, this from her son, Michael Lancaster: “She was never named Elizabeth, or Elisabeth. She stopped using her first husband's last name soon after moving to the Albany area and they were divorced in the late 1940's. Her legal name for much of her life was "Baby Girl" as it was not corrected on her birth certificate by her parents Jack & Dorothy Warren. In the late 1970's or early 80's she legally changed it to the only name she had ever known: Betty. Upon her death her husband (My stepfather) Jake Herzog began calling her "Betty Warren Herzog." As a painter she was professionally known by her maiden name: always Betty Warren.”

Distinguished portrait artist of many names, she first appears (in our available records) as Betty W. Jones in the Albany Artists’ Group (AAG) First Annual Christmas Show of Nov. 3 through Dec. 5, 1948. By 1950, she is the editor of the AAG Newsletter “Pigment Patter” going under the name of B. Warren Jones and continues in that position until 1951, when she is last listed as B. W. Jones. In the AAG Christmas Show of 1949, she goes by Betty Warren Jones, and this appears to be the name she usually uses in most subsequent AAG shows.

However, in the membership list of January 1, 1954, she is listed as Betty W. Jones Lancaster (Mrs. S.) and her address is in Sarasota, Florida. Currently, our AAG records, which are basically missing from 1954 to 1974, do not show how long she remained a member and continued to show.

In the Johnson Collection (of Spartanburg, South Carolina) she is listed in the Directory of Southern Woman Artists with this information:

Herzog, Betty Warren Lancaster b. 1920, New York, NY; d. 1993, Albany, NY (“associated with”:)FL/LA

http://thejohnsoncollection.org/directory-of-women-artists/

One of her most noted achievements is the portrait of Hugh L. Carey, the 51st Governor of the State of New York, which hangs in the “Hall of Governors” in the State Capital Building in Albany. It is also featured on the webpage of the Empire State Plaza: https://empirestateplaza.ny.gov/hall-governors

She also painted long-time Albany mayor, Erastus Corning II twice

She painted Norman Rice, art historian and curator of the Albany Institute of History and Art, where several of her works are in the permanent collection.

She painted portraits of some of the associate justices of New York's highest court, which remain on display at the New York Court of Appeals courthouse [7]

The following items are from the Wikipedia entry for Betty Warren Herzog:

• known for her bright colorist portraits and was one of the top paid female portraitists of the 20th century. Her last formal portrait was of Governor Hugh Carey for the State of N.Y. in 1991. {2}

• her father, Jack A. Warren was the co-creator of the mid-20th century comic strip “Pecos Bill”…Jack’s biography is well worth checking out, too!

• she studied art with her father, as well as with Henry Hensche in Provincetown, and at the National Academy of Design

• Betty was the youngest woman to be given a solo exhibit at a major United States Museum (the Berkshire in 1940) when she was 20 years old.

• She started an art school in Malden Bridge, New York [1][3]

• In 1987, the Albany Institute of History and Art featured a major retrospective of four decades of her work [3]

• She was married to Stuart Lancaster in 1949 and later divorced in 1960[4], she married Jacob Herzog in 1960, a prominent attorney in Upstate New York [2] For over 25 years they wintered in Mexico, where Warren painted some of her most acclaimed paintings.

• Some of her notable students have been Rob Longley, Susan Goetz, Nelson Shanks, Barbara Harnack (who married Betty’s son, Michael Lancaster), Lorraine Lans, and Philip Gianni. [8],[9]

References

1. "Betty Warren Herzog, noted portrait artist, art school owner". The Daily Gazette. November 9, 1993. p. B11.

2. Churchill Wright, Peg (November 11, 1993). "Albany Lost One of its Best Artists with Death of Betty Warren". The Daily Gazette. p. B10.

3. Brickman, David (January 11, 1987). "Betty Warren Wearing Well and Long as Albany Artist and Teacher". Albany Times Union. Archived from the original on July 13, 2013. Retrieved July 11, 2013.

4. "Ringling, The Last Laugh". The Historical Society of Sarasota County. November 27, 2012. Retrieved July 11, 2013.

5. "Hall of Governors: Hugh L. Carey". New York State. Retrieved July 13, 2013.

6. "Under Canvas". Albany Institute of History & Art. Retrieved July 11, 2013.

7. "Court of Appeals Hall: The Portraits". Judiciary of New York. Retrieved July 11, 2013.

8. "Artist Lorraine Lans". Fine Art Studio Online. Retrieved July 11, 2013.

9. "Philip Gianni". Fine Art America. Retrieved July 11, 2013.

John Gallucci (1918-2009) was an early member of AAG, first listed as participating in their shows in 1948. By April 1950, he was president of AAG, and profiled in that month’s Pigment Patter newsletter. Here is an excerpt: “John has exhibited often, having had one man shows in Lake Placid and at the Albany Institute of History and Art, as well as hanging in the Upper Hudson Regional and all the AAG Annual shows. He studied all phases of Fine Arts at The University of Syracuse and received his Masters at N.Y.U.”

the following is from: https://saundersgalleryoffineart.blogspot.com/p/ohn-gucci.html

“He was born on Dec. 26, 1918, in Albany, N.Y., the son of Louis and Lucy (Schivane) Gallucci. John's interest in painting began during his four years of classical fine arts training at Syracuse University, where he received his BFA in 1942, after being awarded a four year scholarship and he then went on to receive a M.A. from N.Y.U. He spent one year in Rome, Italy as a Ford Fellow. (1953-54)

John taught art at Lake Placid High School where he met his future wife, the former Osnif Serbian, who at the time was a French teacher. He also taught watercolor at the Lake Placid School of Art, went on to teach at Albany High and retired as an art teacher from Glens Falls High School.

“John became a signature member of the American Watercolor Society in 1953. He was also a member of the Hudson Valley Watercolor Society and was one of the four artists chosen for the 1980 winter Olympics

Painting scenes of the Adirondacks and Southern Maine coastal area, he has exhibited in AWS annuals, the National Academy of Design and the Adirondack National Exhibit of American Watercolors. One of his sculptural pieces, "Sermon on the Mount," has adorned the facade of the Church of the Messiah for almost fifty years now.” (another source lists this as “Blessed Are the Peacemakers” on the facade of the Church of the Messiah in Glens Falls, NY)