Nasir bin Olu Dara Jones, also known as Nas, was born in Queens, New York, on September 14th of 1973. His father, Olu Dara, was a jazz musician with family that can be directly traced to the Vikings. Olu Dara is a well-known jazz cornetist, guitarist, and singer, who grew up in rural Mississippi. Nas’s mother’s name was Fanny Ann Little. His mother passed away in 2002 after a long battle with cancer. Nas’s maternal great, great, great grandmother was Pocahontas Little, whose existence was found from looking into the Little Plantation, where a “bill of sale,” or receipt, was found of the ownership of Pocahontas Little. Calvin Little’s existence was discovered in the white slaveowner Thomas Little’s will, which listed Calvin Little, Nas’s great, great, great grandfather, as his property. Both of Nas’s maternal grandparents were Littles, dating back to the name given to Nas’s ancestors on the Little Plantation. Nas was raised in Queensbridge, a housing project that inspired stories, narrating what it was like to grow up in the projects. Despite his interests in writing, Nas dropped out of school in eighth grade. This narration of his life continued onto his music, and Nas later became known as the “chronicler of inner-city life” (Editors of Encyclopædia Britannica, “Nas: American Rapper and Songwriter”). Nas also partook in occasional film appearances, such as Belly (1998), a crime drama, and Black Nativity (2013), an adaptation of Langston Hughe’s gospel play. In 2005, Nas married R&B singer Kelis until 2010.

Nas has a fellowship at Harvard University by the hip-hop archive and research institute and the W.E.B. Du Bois Research Institute. His hip-hop fellowship grants scholars and artists the opportunity to “build on achievements of those who demonstrate exceptional capacity for productive scholarship and exceptional creative ability in the arts, in connection with hip-hop.” The Nasir Jones Fellowship’s mission is to seek projects that will build on hip-hop through both personal and academic projects, such as manuscripts, performance pieces, album work, etc. The fellowship was named after Nas because he tackled political and inner-city issues, and by doing so, has inspired a generation. The fellowship thus honors Nas and his past work by supporting other scholars and artists. Other artists have also been credited for their work in activism in educational institutions, such as Paul Robeson’s building at Rutgers University.

Nas has also been awarded the W.E.B. Du Bois Medal in 2015. The award has been issued since the year 2000 and is Harvard’s highest honor in the field of African and African American Studies. The award is given to people worldwide in recognition of their contributions to the African American community and culture. Some past recipients include: Muhammad Ali, Maya Angelou, Shonda Rhimes, and Oprah Winfrey.

The Editors of Encyclopædia Britannica. (2016, May 14). “Nas: American Rapper and Songwriter.” Retrieved from here.

Biography.com Editors. (2016, November 2016). “Nas Biography.” Retrieved from here.

Thornton, C. (2014, October 3). “Ten Facts About Rapper Nas.” Retrieved from here.

“Nas’ Interactive Family Tree,” (2014, October 29). Retrieved from here.

“Announcing the Nasir Jones HipHop Fellowship,” (2013, July 12). Retrieved from here.