After last week’s post veered (quite literally) into literary entertainment, I’ll do my best to keep things on the straight and narrow of video gaming today.

What better way to do this than with the return of a figure head PS3 title, MotorStorm. This is a game released at the birth of the PS3, that many criticized for missing features. Since then it has been fleshed out with a slew of PSN updates including new vehicles, tracks and modes.

For all its faults, I loved the original game. But Motorstorm: Pacific Rift substantially fleshes out the experience. Not only are there more vehicles and environments, but now I can race against friends and family on the same console. Early plays in my house have already attracted attention from the kids and my other other half. It’s the sort of game that’s great to watch.

The new split screen mode means we can now race together. The whole family was soon involved in the action – and without kicking Dad off his favourite game. Local multiplayer options like this may seem a little outdated in an era of XBox Live and PSN, but for me there’s nothing quite as sweet as beating the person sat next to you.

Here’s my Parents’ Guide for MotorStorm: Pacific Rift:

MotorStorm: Pacific Rift is the follow-up to the original game, hastily released with the launch of the PS3. Four player local multiplayer, new environments and vehicles aim to bolster the experience that some found a little light on variety and challenge first time around.

What Sort of Game is This?

Racing games, although sometimes seen as a sporting sub category, are a well established video game genre in their own right. They can feature a variety of driving styles ranging from the fantastical arcade racing focusing on thrills and spills, to the super realistic simulations that recreate every aspect of real life driving.

What Does This Game Add to the Genre?

Although very much racing of the four wheeled variety, MotorStorm is unique in that the driver is required to glide, slide and surf their way around the varied levels. This is no surprise as the team were previously responsible for the critically acclaimed snow boarding game SSX.

New since the first game is the ability to race locally against up to four friends, as well as the extension of the challenge, festival and online modes. On top of this there are also new terrain effects (themed around the water, earth, fire and air courses) – with water splashes impressing most.

Again with a nod to snow boarding, the environments visibly and physically change as the competitors complete each lap. Grooves and mud patches develop in low lying land, forcing lighter vehicles up onto ridges and higher routes.

It is this changing course, and the variety of routes available that make understanding how to handle the different vehicles key to success. Over eight types can be driven, from motorbikes, sand buggies, jeeps, track cars, pick-ups, big rigs and the new monster trucks. Each vehicle handles differently and demands its own particular route round each course, something that gives the game legs as you revisit old courses in different vehicles with often surprising results.

What do People Play this Game To Experience?

The thrill of heading off into the wilderness with a pack of cars, trucks and motorbikes is something that drew players to the original, and will bring them back to this sequel. No game better creates that Paris-Dakar man and machine against the elements feel than MotorStorm.

The original was famed for placing its courses on perilous cliff edges that would send players into the abyss with even the slightest error. To race in Pacific Rift is to experience this knife edge experience drawn out through a varied island settings. Breath taking drops, misty mountain heights, wetland beachy tracks and jungle tundra stick to MotorStorm’s formula while adding some much needed variety to the experience.

How Much Free Time is Required to Play It?

MotorStorm races are adrenalin filled sprints to the finish and as such don’t usually take much over five minutes. The nature of the game and the desire of the player to improve their time (or podium standing) means that sessions often last a long time.

This is real just-on-more-go territory, and those that have the time to dedicate to the game are rewarded with new courses and vehicles.

What Factors Impact on Suitability for Novice/Expert Young/Old Players?

Very young players will struggle with the precise left/right controls required to get around the track. This is a lot less forgiving than the likes of Sega Rally 360.

Those a little older and intermediate gamers will be both exhilarated and engaged by the experience. A few goes should be enough to connect with the basic premise that the right route through the terrain is key.

Experts will rise to the challenge (both locally and online) of perfecting their abilities with the various vehicles. Each course should warrant multiple plays as they hone their times and identify short cuts and perfect cornering.

WIRED Automotive quagmire creation.

TIRED Photos are a poor man’s replay.

Price/maker: $59.99 (PS3)

Rating: 9/10