In Loving Memory Of

Earl Thurston

Earl Thomas Thurston was born January 7, 1952 in Worthington, MN, the son of the late Leonard and Irene (Ditch) Thurston. He graduated from Brewster High School in 1970 and Pipestone Vo-Tech in 1972 with a degree in Carpentry. Earl was united in marriage to Kathy Salentiny on June 24, 1972 at St. Mary’s Catholic Church, Dundee, MN. The couple made their home on acreage near Fulda. He owned and operated Thurston Construction for many years and then began working for Southwest Minnesota Housing Partnership in Slayton until his health forced him to retire. In March of 2021, he moved to Ecumen Meadows in Worthington. He was a member of St. Gabriel’s Catholic Church, Fulda, MN. He enjoyed spending time with his family. He enjoyed fishing, playing cards, watching local and NASCAR races, and watching Vikings Football. Earl passed away Thursday, June 13, 2024 at the age of 72 at the Ecumen Meadows in Worthington.

Earl is survived by his children: Bryon (Amy) Thurston, Fulda, MN; Keith Thurston, St. Cloud, MN; Angela (Dirk) Wehking, Fulda, MN; Kimberly (Joshua) Rahn, Grafton, ND; Daniel (Megan) Thurston, Elk River, MN; grandchildren: Sebastian Baker, Kelsie, Rebecca and Wyatt Thurston, Tylar Thurston, Kaitlyn and Jared Wehking, Gillian and Aiden Rahn and Nikolai, Dominik and Braeden Thurston; brother, Robert (Joanne) Thurston, Spicer, MN; sister Mary Ann’s special friend, Skip Kane. Several nieces and nephews also survive. He was preceded in death by his parents, brothers: Bill (Mary) Thurston and Larry (Gretchen) Thurston and sister, Mary Ann (Larry) Cromwell.

Funeral Services

St. Gabriel’s Catholic Church Fulda, MN at 10:30 AM on Tuesday, June 18, 2004 with Fr. Peter Schuster officiating. The organist is Dana Hogan. The song leader is Tiffany Sanow. The pallbearers are Bryon Thurston, Keith Thurston, Daniel Thurston, Sebastian Baker, Tylar Thurston, Aiden Rahn, Joe Ranum and Shannon Risacher. Honorary pallbearers are his grandchildren. Interment at Sacred Heart Catholic Cemetery Brewster, MN.

Visitation will be one hour prior to the service at the church on Tuesday. The Totzke Funeral Home in Fulda is assisting the family with arrangements.