“John Thurston came to Fitchburg from Rowley, Mass., about 1765, with his wife, Lydia, and seven children. He settled on the farm … in the easterly part of the city, and entered with enthusiasm into the pursuit of agriculture, raised the finest apples in this region, and owned a cider mill.”

“He had been a soldier in the French and Indian war, and was enrolled as a minute man in 1775. He was also one of the first deacons of the first church in Fitchburg.”

“His fifth son was Thomas (generally called Captain Tom Thurston), who grew up on the farm until he was of an age to leave the paternal roof, when his father apprenticed him to a Mr. Brown of Concord, Mass., to learn the shoemaker’s trade.”

“The homestead of Captain Thomas Thurston was … in the northwest part of Fitchburg, at the end of the Thurston road, leading from the Ashby West road”.

“Here Asa Thurston was born on the twelfth day of October, 1787, the fourth child and second son of Thomas Thurston, and here he grew up in a large family of good New England stock, in a typical New England home. His brothers and sisters were Thomas, Hannah, Elizabeth, Ebenezer, Polly, Cyrus, Sylvania, Mahala and Maria.”

“When he reached the age of fourteen years there was a change in his life. He was apprenticed for seven years to John and Joseph Farwell, scythe makers (a long curving blade to cut grass/grain), whose shop was on the south side of what is now West Main street, a short distance above the River street bridge, and he boarded with Joseph Farwell”.

“He enjoyed life and action. Always fond of active sports, he early became proficient in wrestling, and seldom was there found an antagonist who was his superior.”

“In those days wrestling was one of the principal diversions of the young men, and these trials of strength and agility were of common occurrence at the store, or after work at the shop, or at any place of general gathering.”

“As he grew older, Asa’s temperament led him into social life and made him a leader there. At dances and social gatherings he was brim full of life, and if there was any young man in Fitchburg who thoroughly enjoyed life it was probably Asa Thurston.”

“But disease and death are factors to be reckoned with in this world. In the autumn of 1805 typhoid fever was prevalent in Fitchburg, and to quite a number it proved fatal. Asa contracted the disease and for some time his life trembled in the balance.”

“It is related that his elder brother, Thomas, who was studying for the ministry, watched with him one night, and that he spent a greater part of the time in prayer. The next morning, when asked about his brother, he said: ‘Asa will get well and be a missionary, but I shall not live long.’”

“Mrs. Thurston nursed her son with a mother’s care and devotion, and he recovered, but she was taken down with the same disease and died January 19, 1806. This sad loss to him was quickly followed by the death of his brother Thomas, February 15, and thirteen days later by the death of his sister Elizabeth, both of the same disease.”

“These sad events had a powerful and lasting effect upon him. Now Asa Thurston began to feel the effect of character and environment. With a deeply affectionate disposition, fond of music, a natural lover of pleasure, and possessed of a keen sense of humor, he had also a tender conscience and a vein of strong and serious feeling.”

“For years his mind had been at times turned to the subject of religion; members of his family had urged him to profess a Christian life, and now, again, his thoughts turned in that direction, and most seriously. But it was hard for him to give up worldly pleasures and take only the will of God for his guide.” (Bailey)

Asa wrote some words of his life … “I lived almost entirely unconcerned about my precious soul till I was past sixteen years of age. I sometimes thought that religion was of importance and that I would attend to it at some future period, but I felt disposed to put off repentance to a more convenient season.”

“I thought that after I had become old I should have nothing else to do but to attend to religion, but could not bear the thought of attending to the concerns of eternity so young. I thought that I was as good as many others, and that I should fare as well.”

“When I was about sixteen years old it pleased God to send his Holy Spirit to convince and convict many in this place of their sins, by which I was alarmed.”

“I began to think religion was of some importance, that I would attend to it. Seeing some of my young friends and connexions embracing the Saviour and singing the wonders of redeeming love, I thought I should like to be one of the happy number.”

“I felt somewhat anxious about being prepared for death and eternity, but I had very little if any conviction of sin by the law. I knew that I was a sinner, but I had no realizing sense of the opposition of my heart to God and holiness.”

“I knew that I must repent of my sins or perish forever, but notwithstanding all this knowledge, I soon lost all my serious impressions and anxious thoughts about myself and became as careless as ever. But I could not go on in sin with so calm a conscience as before.”

“Some of my friends and connexions that formerly had been my most intimate companions in sin became faithful witnesses against me, and in particular my sister. She would often reprove me for my folly.”

“And thus I went on in my own chosen way till at length God appeared in judgment against me and visited me with sickness, at which time few, if any, expected I should recover; but God, being rich in mercy, saw fit to for bear, and restored me to health.”

“I felt somewhat rejoiced, but had no heart to sing praises to God for his mercy. My spared life, which ought to have been devoted to God, was spent in the service of Satan. I expected I should have no more to trouble me, but I was soon arrested by a most solemn providence.”

“God was pleased to take from me a most affectionate and loving mother. This, indeed, was a most solemn scene to me. To think that but a few weeks before she was in sound health, and I, to all appearance, on the verge of eternity, and then to look back and behold the hand of God in restoring me to health, while she was called into the eternal world!”

“Twenty-two years of my precious life had been trifled away … I was brought, as I humbly hope and trust, to feel willing to say,

with my heart, to my God, ‘Glorify thyself with me, do with and for me that which shall be most for thine honor and glory.’”

“I thought I felt willing that God should take the throne that I had been long contending with him about, likewise I was willing to cast myself down at the foot of sovereign mercy.” (Thurston; Bailey)

“Asa Thurston now felt that he must become a minister of the gospel, and to that end he must obtain a suitable education. He entered Yale college in 1812. … He graduated in 1816, and immediately entered Andover Theological Seminary, from which he graduated in 1819, ready to enter upon his chosen career of a missionary.”

On October 23, 1819, Asa Thurston was in the Pioneer Company of American Protestant missionaries from the northeast US that set sail from Boston on the Thaddeus for the Hawaiian Islands. They landed at Kailua-Kona on April 4, 1820.

“After forty years of missionary work he was stricken with paralysis, and was obliged to go to California for health and rest. He was there in 1863, but soon returned to Honolulu, where he passed the remainder of his life.”

“The disease made progress, till at last it affected his brain. At times he would seem to behold crowds of people, and pointing, would exclaim, ‘Ke Aupini, Ke Aupini,’ (the kingdom, the kingdom).”

“For the last two days of his life he could not speak, and he passed quietly away on the eleventh day of March, 1868, at the age of eighty years, – a veteran in the service of the Lord.” (Bailey)

Follow Peter T Young on Facebook

Follow Peter T Young on Google+

Follow Peter T Young on LinkedIn

Follow Peter T Young on Blogger

© 2018 Hoʻokuleana LLC