Katie Thurston while holding up a final rose called for Thomas Jacobs, but only to eliminate him in a surprise twist on Monday's episode of The Bachelorette.

The 30-year-old series star during a rose ceremony shocked her other suitors when she summoned Thomas, 28, a real estate broker from Poway, California, for the final rose.

Instead of giving him the coveted rose, Katie instead lashed out her emotions against Thomas that had been building the whole episode and ultimately sent him packing.

'You told me things you wanted me to hear,' Katie told him. 'What I learned tonight was you are selfish, unkind, and a liar. Your bachelor audition ends tonight, so get out.'

Earlier in the season 17 episode, the men in the house turned against Thomas after he told them that when he initially joined the show that he thought that maybe he could be the next star of The Bachelor.

The men decided that Katie needed to be informed and Quartney Mixon, 26, a nutrition entrepreneur from Dallas, told Thomas that he dug his own ditch.

Katie had planned a fun group date activity for the men and said she wanted to make the men 'squirm a little bit.'

Tayshia Adams, 30, and Kaitlyn Bristowe, 36, showed up to organize the 'Truth or Dare' date.

The men were divided into groups and given maps and cameras to take pictures to prove they did the dares.

Katie said the date was about having a sense of humor because that was important to her in a man.

The men appeared to be up for the challenge.

Mike Planeta, 31, a gym owner from San Diego accepted a dare at the 'carb station' to eat everything on a platter. The platter turned out to contain approximately 20 Twinkies and Mike tried to stuff them in.

'I haven't had carbs in ten years,' Mike said while eating.

Christian, 26, a real estate agent from Boston, was dared to wax the hairiest part on his partner Tré Cooper's body and worked on his butt. Tré, 26, a software engineer from Covington, Georgia, said this was not what he was expecting when the date card said Katie was ' looking for daring and love.'

Katie enjoyed watching her suitors perform the tasks and said later that they all participated and seemed to be having fun.

'The guys really impressed me with leaning into it and having fun and being uncomfortable,' Katie said later in a confessional.

The last challenge dubbed the 'pepper challenge' was where each guy had to eat two habanero peppers and then get down on their knees and mock propose to Katie.

For Greg Grippo, 27, a marketing sales representative from New Jersey the peppers were so hot that he started crying during his proposal.

By evening, Katie told the men that this part of the group date was going to be about 'the truth.'

Andrew Spencer, 26, was the first to pull Katie away where he was waiting with a tray of Taco Bell for her.

'You've made an impact on me,' Andrew told her. 'I've never had a woman understand me. I value every moment with you. They are so brief but so impactful.'

Greg during his alone time with Katie said his emotions were all over the place and he felt like he was in high school.

Katie said she understood and told Greg that she was 'starting to fall for him.'

In his confessional, Greg said he felt that it could be love between the two of them even though it was so early and admitted he 'felt amazing' being around her.

Tré told the men while waiting for his one-on-one time that he wanted to tell Katie about Thomas.

Andrew said he worried telling Katie about Thomas would affect her negatively.

Tré decided though that he had to tell her about Thomas and said he was willing to sacrifice his time to tell her.

He told her he didn't think that Thomas was 'here for her' and revealed Thomas told them that morning that he admitted that when he came to the show that he wanted to be the next star of The Bachelor.

Katie was devastated when she was told that Thomas admitted that to the other men.

'I feel devastated,' said Katie in a confessional after Tré used his date time to tell her about Thomas. 'To come here wanting to be the next bachelor means you were never open to falling in love.'

Katie then told a producer that she was really disappointed because she had developed feelings for Thomas.

She then broke down crying and hugged a producer. She came out a\nd wanted to hear from the rest of the men, who backed up Tré's statements about Thomas not being there for the right reasons.

Ultimately Katie gave Tré the group date rose and he told the rest of the men that he was on cloud nine and 'buzzing.'

Before the evening's rose ceremony, the men sat around and continued to discuss Thomas.

Katie was in her room still reeling from Tre's revelation about Thomas.

It turned out the situation with Thomas wasn't going to be Katie's only surprise during the two-hour episode.

Tayshia went to Katie's room and told her she had someone from her past who reached out to her who 'truly believes' that he would be an amazing match with Katie.

The man, it turned out, was Blake Moynes, 30, from Tayshia's season.

'To see you here is a dream or a nightmare?' said Katie.

She told him it was concerning that Blake had already dated two bachelorettes and that he was here for a third time.

'You check boxes that no one else has,' Blake told her.

He said would always be thinking 'what if' if he didn't do this.

Katie told him she didn't now what she was going to do, because she had already formed relationships with other men in the house.

Blake then promised her that if it came down to the end and they had the feelings that he expected that 'we would be engaged at the end of this.'

'Wow,' said Katie. 'You're a troublemaker.'

Katie said she needed time to think leaving Blake in limbo.

She changed for the cocktail party and then Tayshia and Kaitlyn showed up to see how she was feeling.

Katie told them about what she learned about Thomas.

'At the end of the day, he was thinking about himself, and he was thinking about how he was going to use you to propel himself,' Tayshia said to Katie.

Katie told them she had pictured going to hometowns with Thomas.

That night at the cocktail party, the men hoped that they would have more time with Katie.

Thomas didn't show initially at the party and it turned out he went to see Katie. Thomas told her he understood that the other men in the house were talking to her about him. He said he was not going to walk away and that he was going to fight for her.

Katie asked him about saying that he was going to be the next bachelor.

Thomas said when he came on the show that he was 'open for anything.'

He said now that he wanted to prove to her that their relationship was real and Katie said she didn't know what to believe.

'I've struggled so much when it comes to you,' Katie told Thomas. 'Then to have multiple people come to me that question your integrity is a lot to consider…It's devastating for me right now.'

The men had hoped that Katie sent Thomas home, but then he showed up at the cocktail party. Thomas told the men that he went to have a hard conversation with Katie prior to the rose ceremony.

Katie then came out to meet with the rest of the men before the rose ceremony.

Many of the men used their time with Katie to talk about Thomas.

'Everyone wants to talk about the elephant in the room and that's Thomas,' said Katie, in a confessional.

Michael Allio, 36, a business owner from Akron, Ohio, though didn't waste his time with Katie. He told her that his feelings for her have grown.

'You are in the person I have been seeking,' Michael told her.

As the men gathered for the rose ceremony, several were angry that they didn't have enough time with Katie because of the drama with Thomas.

Aaron Clancy, 26, an insurance agent from Walnut, California, said in a confessional that Thomas was a 'cancer' in the house and that he would be really insulted if Thomas managed to get a rose.

Before Katie could begin handing out roses, Thomas stepped up and said 'Katie, I'd like to openly acknowledge and apologize for any thought or moment that I wasn't here for the right reasons.'

Thomas also apologized to the rest of the men.

Katie stunned the other men when she called out Thomas, but it was only to send him packing.

'My jaw was on the floor,' said Justin Glaze, 26, an investment sales consultant from Ellicott City, Maryland, when Katie called Thomas' name. 'Is this actually happening.'

Christian Smith, 26, Conor Costello, 28, and David Scott, 27, also did not get roses.

Katie said in a confessional after the ceremony that she was not settling.

'Be here for me, be here for love, be here for an engagement and if you are not please leave' she said.

She went straight to Blake's room after the ceremony and told him she wanted him to stay and join.

Blake, who stepped out of his room wearing boxer shorts and sweatshirt, said yes and she told him to pack his room because he was moving into the house with the other men the next morning.

After Katie left Blake realized that his hotel room door had shut and he was locked out in the hall.

The Bachelorette will return next week on ABC.