After topping the box office for yet another week, the highest grossing music biopic of all time may be straight outta facts. After journalist Dee Barnes rightfully assassinated Dr. Dre’s angelic on-screen character, girl group J.J. Fad says that’s not the only thing the critically acclaimed film got wrong.

For those of you not familiar with the '80s rap group, J.J. Fad was one of the original groups signed to Eazy E and partner Jerry Heller’s Ruthless Records. The group’s smash hit, "Supersonic" allegedly provided the revenue to fund the iconic N.W.A album. However, Straight Outta Compton failed to mention the girls’ relevance in the story.

In a candid interview with the Los Angeles Times, members of the original group shared their thoughts on the overall film as well as their omission from it.

Talking about her time with the all-male rap quartet, Dania "Baby D" Birks of J.J. Fad has only bittersweet memories with the guys she called "family." “They were like brothers," she said. "We go to sleep with them, wake up with them. 'Let's go to the studio' — work with them. It was everything. It just seemed like, you don't forget about people that easily. I mean, I didn't."

J.J. Fad co-founder Juana “MC JB” Sperling, who saw the movie in its opening weekend walked away from the film feeling like most of us. “I want to see it again and again. It's just that it would have taken literally two seconds to say our name.”

Not sure of why the ladies were not mentioned, Sperling said she believes “there was a certain image that they wanted to put out there, and I don't think they wanted us to soften that.” Despite their missing cameo in the movie, members of the group insist that there are no hard feelings against Dr. Dre and Ice Cube.

BET.com is your No. 1 source for Black celebrity news, photos, exclusive videos and all the latest in the world of hip hop and R&B music.

(Photos from Left: Jason Kempin/Getty Images, Lynn Goldsmith/Corbis)

By clicking Subscribe, you confirm that you have read and agree to our Terms of Use and acknowledge our Privacy Policy. You also agree to receive marketing communications, updates, special offers (including partner offers) and other information from BET and the Paramount family of companies. You understand that you can unsubscribe at any time.