When Ferdinand Marcos Jr. was sworn in as president of the Philippines on June 30, he took his oath in front of the former legislative building where his father entered politics and swore on the same Bible used by the elder Mr. Marcos at his 1965 inauguration.

For victims of Mr. Marcos’s tyrannical reign, it was an insulting homage to the dead dictator. But it came as no surprise.

The younger Mr. Marcos rode to a landslide election win with a campaign that leaned heavily on the fiction of a triumphant golden age under his father. It was promoted by a well-oiled disinformation machine that brazenly ignored the thousands of people jailed, tortured or killed by the regime and the estimated $5 billion to $10 billion siphoned off by the Marcos family.

No, truth and accountability will not be hallmarks of Marcos 2.0, and we Filipinos fear what comes next. The world has already seen the consequences of autocrats and their false narratives.

Donald Trump’s “Make America Great Again” dog whistle appealed to delusions of lost white privilege, eventually leading to the deadly assault by a pro-Trump mob on the U.S. Capitol. Prime Minister Narendra Modi of India invokes a mythical golden age of Hindu glory that has worsened communal violence. Vladimir Putin’s repression and military adventures are driven by rose-tinted memories of the Soviet Union and czarist Russia.

Now it’s the Philippines’ turn, and it comes at a vulnerable moment for our country.

Philippine democracy is already under threat after the six-year term of Mr. Marcos’s predecessor, Rodrigo Duterte, a bully who spews hatred and insults, and belittles and threatens the press, and whose brutal war on drugs has resulted in thousands of people killed.

Thank you for your patience while we verify access. If you are in Reader mode please exit and log into your Times account, or subscribe for all of The Times.

Thank you for your patience while we verify access.

Already a subscriber? Log in.

Want all of The Times? Subscribe.