PDF Playlist

Yours Fatally

Big Brovaz

Year:

2007

3:41

108 Views

Watch: New Singing Lesson Videos Can Make Anyone A Great Singer

[Chorus] I thought that this was for real I thought that you were the one Believe every word you said and now it's come undone It's got so complicated I know I can't explain it Your all i need and I'll always be Yours fatally (Lost) Lost for a while in denial How you fooled me played with my mind Why did you it? What did I do to deserve this? Hurt from pain over and over and over again You know you've got me weaker Intoxicated now So I'll just keeping playing the games you laid out Ooh what about us? I just can't gige you up Even though it's hurting baby I'll do anything to feel your touch [Chorus] Damn How did I let it get this? I shouldda never kissed or got intamate wit this chick I wish she would see that our affair is over with She's telling me her hearts broken she'll never get over it My girlfriends like who's that texting is? Why you go outside and check your messages? I couldn't tell her I was messing this chick But she called back and made it obvious Screaming this You know you've got me weaker Intoxicated now So I'll just keeping playing the games you laid out Ooh what about us? I just can't gige you up Even though it's hurting baby I'll do anything to feel your touch [Chorus] Man I felt I put a chick down why did I stray? Why did I play? Now what do I say? Her names every day on my caller display Telling me she all in love and I can't get away So I called her begging her to leave me alone I said I got a wife and we in the zone Right then I could sense a change in her tone that's when she started crying all crazy on the phone Saying [Chorus]

Become A Better Singer In Only 30 Days, With Easy Video Lessons!

0 fans

Sheet Music PDF Playlist

Written by: Cherise Alana Roberts, John Paul Horsley, Michael Claudius Brown, Nadia Yutinda Shepherd, Peter Martin, Thelma Charmaine Howell, Thelma Charmaine Fiona Howell

Lyrics © BMG Rights Management, Kobalt Music Publishing Ltd.

Lyrics Licensed & Provided by LyricFind