To quote one of the biggest hits out of the Tri-State, French Montana is going “all the way up.”

Last week, the Bronx Bomber crossed his t’s and signed on the dotted line as the newest signee to Epic Records via Bad Boy Entertainment. The new deal doesn’t only mean new music for the “Pop That” rapper, but also the start of a brand new chapter. “It’s time to rewrite history,” he tells REVOLT.

Now officially under the same musical powerhouse as his peers Puff Daddy and Rick Ross, Montana describes his addition to the fold as a long-awaited homecoming. “Me being able to be in the same house with them… is different than just having [Ross] at Def Jam, I’m in Interscope, now we all live in one mansion and it’s about to be a gangsta party.”

To commemorate the new deal, French released the video to his latest single “Figure It Out,” a song that finds assistance from a few legends by the names of Nas and Kanye West.

According to French, the song is just the tip of the iceberg, as far as collaborations go between him and Kanye. “We had did like other joints that we’re still trying to figure out what to do with,” he admits, revealing that the pair have about “five” records currently in the stash. But for right now, it’s all about “Figure It Out.”

The new record, which originally appeared on French’s Wave Gods project, is set to appear on the soundtrack for “The Land,” the Nas-produced film that centers on a group of aspiring teenage skateboarders who get caught up in a drug operation. “It’s the right record for the right moment,” French adds. “It’s historical for me, because that’s two legends I looked up to coming up.”

In addition to the record, French also discussed the accompanying music video, which is inspired by the 1997 film “Con Air.”

“I call it “Con Air” because that’s the only thing that was shot there before.”

As things appear on the up and up, French is focused on taking things a step further than before. “I feel like this is the biggest dream team we have,” he says of joining L.A. Reid and Sylvia Rhone at Epic Records. “Epic is winning.”