Background

Prior to the 2023 contest, Finland has participated in the Eurovision Song Contest fifty-five times since its first entry in 1961. Finland has won the contest once in 2006 with the song "Hard Rock Hallelujah" performed by Lordi. In the 2022 contest, "Jezebel" performed by The Rasmus managed to qualify Finland to the final and placed twenty-first.

The Finnish national broadcaster, Yleisradio (Yle), broadcasts the event within Finland and organises the selection process for the nation's entry. Yle confirmed their intentions to participate at the 2023 Eurovision Song Contest on 23 May 2022.[1] Finland's entries for the Eurovision Song Contest have been selected through national final competitions that have varied in format over the years. Between 1961 and 2011, a selection show that was often titled Suomen euroviisukarsinta highlighted that the purpose of the program was to select a song for Eurovision. However, since 2012, the broadcaster has organised the selection show Uuden Musiikin Kilpailu (UMK), which focuses on showcasing new music with the winning song being selected as the Finnish Contest entry for that year. Along with their participation confirmation, the broadcaster also announced that the Finnish entry for the 2023 contest would be selected through Uuden Musiikin Kilpailu 2023.[2]

Before Eurovision

Uuden Musiikin Kilpailu 2023

Uuden Musiikin Kilpailu 2023 will be the twelfth edition of Uuden Musiikin Kilpailu (UMK), the music competition that selects Finland's entries for the Eurovision Song Contest. The competition will consist of a final on 25 February 2023, held at the Logomo in Turku and hosted by Samu Haber.[3] The show will be broadcast on Yle TV1 with a second audio program providing commentary in Finnish by Mikko Silvennoinen, in Swedish by Eva Frantz and Johan Lindroos, in English by Jani Kareinen, in Russian by Levan Tvaltvadze, in Ukrainian by Galyna Sergeyeva, in Finnish Sign Language by Miguel Peltomaa, in Northern Sami by Linda Tammela and in Inari Sami by Heli Huovinen. The competition will also be broadcast online at Yle Areena and via radio on YleX, Yle Radio Suomi and with commentary in Swedish on Yle X3M.[4]

Competing entries

A submission period was opened by Yle which lasted between 1 September 2022 and 5 September 2022. At least one of the writers and the lead singer(s) had to hold Finnish citizenship or live in Finland permanently in order for the entry to qualify to compete.[5][6] A panel of nine experts appointed by Yle selected seven entries for the competition from the 363 received submissions. The experts were Tapio Hakanen (Head of Music at YleX), Aija Puurtinen (vocal coach), Amie Borgar (Head of Music at Yle X3M), Anssi Autio (UMK producer), Johan Lindroos (Head of Music at Yle Radio Suomi), Jussi Mäntysaari (Head of Music at Nelonen Media), Juha-Matti Valtonen (television director), Katri Norrlin (music journalist at YleX) and Samuli Väänänen (Senior Editor at Spotify Finland).[4] The competing entries were presented on 11 January 2023, while their lyric videos were released between 12 and 20 January 2023.[7]

Final

The final will take place on 25 February 2023. The results will be decided by 75% televote and 25% international juries.[8] In addition to the competing entries, Eurovision Song Contest 2022 Finland representative The Rasmus, UMK 2022 third-place finisher Bess and the host Samu Haber will perform as interval acts.[9]

At Eurovision

According to Eurovision rules, all nations with the exceptions of the host country and the "Big Five" (France, Germany, Italy, Spain and the United Kingdom) are required to qualify from one of two semi-finals in order to compete for the final; the top ten countries from each semi-final progress to the final. The European Broadcasting Union (EBU) split up the competing countries into six different pots based on voting patterns from previous contests, with countries with favourable voting histories put into the same pot. On 31 January 2023, an allocation draw was held, which placed each country into one of the two semi-finals, and determined which half of the show they would perform in. Finland has been placed into the first semi-final, to be held on 9 May 2023, and has been scheduled to perform in the second half of the show.[10]