Dr. Janet Asimov is a New York psychoanalyst who is the widow of Isaac Asimov, the late renowned science fiction writer, and an author/editor in her own right. (She edited his autobiography, It's Been A Good Life). Her 17 pieces range from entertaining personal anecdotes and letters offering insights into her and her husband's identities, to musings on the nature of writing and mortality. The book also contains family photos and several of her short stories that have not been appeared together previously. Annotation ©2006 Book News, Inc., Portland, OR (booknews.com)

Contains personal anecdotes and letters offering insights into Janet and Isaac Asimov's identities, and includes musings on the nature of writing and mortality.

This charming book is a series of entertaining and thought-provoking musings, mainly about the imagination, the sense of identity, the compulsion to write, and Isaac Asimov—who, as Janet Asimov says, was good at all of them. Dr. Janet J. Asimov, a psychiatrist and celebrated fiction writer, has penned this delightful memoir with insight, poignancy, and wit on topics that she and her husband, Isaac Asimov, found especially meaningful over the years. From profound issues such as religion, philosophy, sex, personal identity, and mortality, to lighter subjects such as traveling together, camping, the golden thirties, and the problems and joys of writing, Asimov reveals many new and fascinating details about two engaging and creative people whose greatest creation—in addition to their writings—was the life they made together.

Replete with new information about Isaac Asimov and never-before-published excerpts from his witty letters to her, in addition to family photos, this collection of personal reminiscences complements Isaac Asimov’s highly acclaimed one-volume autobiography, It’s Been a Good Life, which Janet Asimov edited. The Times Literary Supplement praised it as "an excellent introduction to his vision and his personality."

Janet Asimov concludes this singular memoir with her own short stories, many published in magazines, but never before collected together in one book. Notes for a Memoir is guaranteed to delight, entertain, and inspire.