During the third and final year of the presidency of John F. Kennedy (1917–1963), international issues had overwhelmed domestic concerns. Herblock’s sharp pen addressed the need for a nuclear weapon test ban and supported Kennedy’s trip to Europe, where the U.S. president encouraged European leaders to collaborate on defense issues. Herblock’s cartoons also focused on Asia, as China developed its own style of communism. He took the administration to task for approving the assassination of South Vietnam’s corrupt President Ngo Dinh Diem, as it struggled against communism in Southeast Asia.

But it is the assassination of President Kennedy on November 22, 1963, that dominates the memory of American history fifty years ago. Herblock admired Kennedy and drew numerous cartoons that conveyed the widespread grief over the death of the popular president and the sense of a lost hope for a better world. A longtime advocate of gun control, Herblock also vented his anger at the ease with which guns could be obtained to wreak enormous tragedy.

Exhibition dates: September 21, 2013–March 29, 2014

In 1963, during the third and final year of his presidency, John F. Kennedy (1917–1963) faced repeated opposition to his legislative initiatives. Republicans rebuffed his calls for a lasting peace and argued against the signing of a nuclear test ban treaty with the Soviet Union. When he wanted to offer tax cuts to reduce economic stagnation, Kennedy fought with his own political party in the Democrat-controlled Congress. His efforts to increase resources for schoolchildren and to protect the wilderness met with resistance from both political parties. Congress resisted most strongly, however, Kennedy’s attempts to improve the lives of African Americans.

Herblock, the nationally syndicated editorial cartoonist for the Washington Post newspaper, had a front row seat on the Civil Rights Movement, which gained momentum through the March on Washington that took place on August 28, 1963. Emphasizing that the United States was built and maintained on documents that called for equality, he chastised whites who used violence to reinforce a second-class status for African Americans. Herblock insisted that progress depended on improvement for everyone.

Exhibition dates: March 30, 2013–September 14, 2013