Kosh Solutions is committed to providing 5-star IT managed services in Albuquerque. We know that some problems require a technician to go to your location and we're ready! As a local ABQ IT provider we have technicians ready to dispatch to solve your technical issue fast.

Our skilled team is ready to assist you with everything from firewall installation to Microsoft issues. We provide support for on-premise servers and networking equipment.

Maximizing uptime

We have developed an industry-leading 30 point checklist that proactively fixes and responds to issues and threats before they become major problems that affect your productivity.

7 years ago, Josh Fristoe, co-owner of Kosh, ensured a transition without disruption from our previous provider.

Now 7 years down the road, Kosh maintains the same level of commitment to our relationship.

Kosh delivers personalized service, responsiveness, willingness to be onsite, and is always available to answer questions and engage with our team.

What does Kosh Solutions do?

In short, Kosh manages your organization's technology.

We know that fast response time to an IT issue is the #1 requirement of every business. Kosh Solution’s WorkPlace 30/30 is designed to deliver the best customer experience possible for both you and your clients. Whether you have a standard or emergency request, we activate within 30-minutes to get you back on track. Every month, we execute 30 touch-points across your systems to ensure optimum business continuity. Workplace 30/30 uses time as the foundation and the lever to drive maximum impact on your company’s business efficiency, stability and growth.

We managed your technology environment. From networking to computer/laptops to cybersecurity! We provide onsite and remote support.

​

How much does IT management services cost?

As you can imagine there are many factors that will affect your monthly bill but in general Kosh charges based on the number of users your organization has. Other items that contribute to the cost are number of servers, firewalls, switches, and Microsoft licensing needs. It really is best to speak with one of our sales staff to get a more accurate and detailed quote.

​

What technology and managed services does Kosh provide?

Beyond monthly technology services, we provide:

• HaaS (Hardware as a Service), our hardware rental product

• Echo, our backups and Disaster Recovery product

• Kosh Cloud, our private cloud infrastructure

• Helpdesk, our product for MSPs who want to outsource their helpdesk

Kosh has expertise in virtually all areas of business technology, so feel free to get in touch with any questions you may have!

​

Is Kosh in my area?

We provide remote support across the United States and Canada. Our onsite IT service is available primarily to the Southwestern United States.

Our amazing staff is located in New Mexico, Southern Colorado, and Orange County, CA.

If we do not service your area, we are able to recommend excellent managed services through our TrustX Partners.

​

What industries does Kosh work with?

We work with a wide range of industries. Here is a partial list:

Healthcare

Real Estate

Professional Services

Local and State Government

Education

Non-profits

Oil and gas

Manufacturing

Industries we typically do not work with are:

Hotels

Hospitality

Retail

What is the onboarding process like?

There are four basic steps:

Discovery: we talk with you about your unique organizational needs and how Kosh can support your goals.

Signing the Agreement: talk through all the details of what to expect from Kosh and the monthly cost.

Planning: we prepare and layout the onboarding project so that everyone is on the same page.

Project execution: our design and project team get to work!