The sophistication of Windows Server architecture calls for an IT consulting group with hands-on background and broad technical skill in planning and implementing cohesive business technology solutions. Progent's veteran Microsoft-certified engineers, with an average of more than a decade of field experience in Microsoft technology support, ensures your company's results implementing Microsoft Windows Servers in ways that fully support your business goals. Progent's consultants can help your Albuquerque, New Mexico company with planning, installing, administering, and repairing Windows Server-based solutions that enhance the strategic value of your information system.

New Mexico State Contact Information:

Progent offers consulting services and onsite technical support throughout New Mexico.

Progent locations in New Mexico State

City Address Phone Link Albuquerque 6300 Riverside Plaza Lane NW, Suite 100

Albuquerque, NM 87120

United States (505) 814-6900 Albuquerque Network Support Services

Progent has assembled an expert team of Microsoft-authorized support engineers available to help your company to troubleshoot Microsoft Windows Server problems rapidly through Progent's Help Desk. This can cut service expenses and minimize productivity loss by utilizing Progent's time-tested online remediation processes. Progent has provided remote service to small and medium-size businesses in every state in the United States and in many countries across the globe. (Visit Progent's nationwide customer commendations).

Progent's Cisco CCIE network engineers can provide assistance with tough infrastructure problems that impact Windows Server performance. Progent's group of Cisco certified CCIE network experts is one of the largest ever assembled to provide emergency CCIE remote service to small businesses.

Progent's CISSP and CISA certified security experts can help your organization to defend against or clean up after security breaches. Progent's security specialists can perform a comprehensive security audit of your company-wide protection and can propose improvements to your security architecture and processes to safeguard your information environment.

Progent's Windows Server consulting and troubleshooting experts can help your organization to plan and execute efficient migrations from outdated environments to a current Windows technology. In addition, Progent can provide round-the-clock security and performance monitoring to ensure your company's critical servers are always working efficiently, and Call Center Support or Co-managed Help Desk Services for rapidly escalating server problems to certified experts. Progent can assist your company you to design, deploy and administer Windows Server ecosystems that combine physical and cloud-based infrastructure. (Find out about Progent's Azure enterprise hybrid cloud solutions.)

Windows Server platforms supported by Progent's engineers include:

Microsoft Windows Server 2022 Planning and Integration Support

Windows Server 2022 expands on the architecture of Windows Server 2019 and related products to provide enhancements in critical areas such as security in depth, native support in Microsoft Azure for popular Windows Server applications, centralized administration for hybrid datacenter and multiple-cloud deployments, plus greater availability for Azure-based virtual machines. Progent's certified Windows Server 2022 experts can help your business to plan and carry out an efficient migration to Microsoft Windows Server 2022 based on your current network architecture or a modified on-premises, cloud-centric, or hybrid architecture. Progent's experts can help you to assess the strategic benefits of moving to Microsoft Windows Server 2022 and can help you implement Windows Server 2022's latest features including Hotpatching, DNS-over-HTTPS (DoH), and Storage bus cache for standalone servers. For more information, visit Windows Server 2022 solution design and integration services.

Microsoft Windows Server 2019 Migration Support

Windows Server 2019 delivers significant improvements in capacity, speed, manageability, virtualization, cybersecurity, hybrid on-prem plus cloud integration, resilience, and container support. Top enhancements with Windows Server 2019 include Windows Admin Center for centralizing management across local and cloud-based environments, container support for Kubernetes, Cluster Sets for creating and managing large-scale high-availability clusters, and Storage Migration Service for simplifying the transition from outdated Windows servers. Progent's certified Windows Server 2019 experts can help your company to design and implement an efficient migration to Windows Server 2019 using your current system architecture or a cloud-based or hybrid deployment model. (For details, visit Active Directory and Azure AD planning and implementation consulting.) Progent's Windows Server 2019 cluster set consultants can assist you to plan and deploy a a high-availability environment built around Microsoft's modern Failover Clustering technology.

Microsoft Windows Server 2016 Migration Support and Hybrid Cloud Solutions

Progent's Microsoft-certified IT experts can provide Windows Server 2016 integration consulting to assist businesses of all sizes to design and implement a smooth upgrade to Windows Server 2016 and Hyper-V 2016 based on a local, cloud-centric, or hybrid architecture. Progent can help your company to assess the value of Windows Server 2016 for your environment and can help you with any aspect of designing, configuring, managing or troubleshooting your Windows Server 2016 and Windows Hyper-V 2016 solution. Progent can assist your organization to take advantage of the many new high-availability and information assurance capabilities of Windows Server 2016 and Hyper-V 2016 such as Windows Containers for isolating applications, Shielded Virtual Machines, Credential Guard and Remote Credential Guard, JIT Privileged Access Management, Virtual Machine software load, Storage Replica for zero-data-loss disaster recovery, plus workgroup and multi-domain failover clusters. Progent's Windows Server 2016 disaster recovery/business continuity experts can assist you to plan and deploy a disaster recovery system based on Microsoft's advanced Failover Clustering tools.

Windows Server 2012 R2 Design and Deployment

Windows Server 2012 R2 is based the successful technology of Windows Server 2012 and incorporates additional capabilities that reduce operational costs, deliver more availability, slash storage system storage cost and improve storage throughput, and make it more convenient for mobile workers and telecommuters to access line-of-business applications. Progent's Microsoft-certified Windows Server 2012 R2 experts can help you to determine the benefits of Windows Server 2012 R2 for your company, design and carry out pilot and production installations, develop an appropriate Cloud computing plan, educate your IT support team, assess and refine your information security profile, solidify your connectivity architecture, and provide disaster recovery and business continuity planning expertise.

Windows Server 2012 Design and Deployment

Windows Server 2012 is a powerful cloud-optimized version of Microsoft Windows Server. Progent's Microsoft-certified consultants can assist you to assess the advantages of Microsoft Windows Server 2012 for your company, create pilot systems and rollout strategies, optimize your network for local, multi-site, cloud-based, and partial-cloud datacenters, educate your IT management, staff, create an enterprise-wide security strategy, automate IT administration, and help with creating applications. Find out more details about Progent's Windows Server 2012 planning and integration consulting services.

Windows 2008 Server R2 Integration Services

Microsoft Windows Server 2008 R2 offers high levels of performance, security, availability, extensibility, and versatility that accelerate productivity of local, remote, and mobile workers. Progent's Microsoft-certified professionals can provide cost-effective online consulting, technical support, and education services to assist your company to design, implement, and manage Windows Server 2008 R2 to add significant business value to your network. Find out more information about Progent's Microsoft Windows Server 2008 R2 help.

Microsoft Windows 2008 Server Consulting Support

Microsoft Windows Server 2008 offers all of the benefits of previous versions of Windows Server and adds powerful improvements like virtualization, expanded web support, tighter security, and easier management. Progent can help your company to support Microsoft Windows Server 2008 or migrate to Microsoft Windows Server 2008 R2 with SP1 in order to improve the reliability, security, efficiency, and capability of your information network while lowering support expenses and management hassle. Learn additional information about Progent's Microsoft Windows 2008 consulting services.

Windows 2003 Server Integration Service

Microsoft's Windows 2003 OS remains popular because it provides a reliable, world-class computing environment that brings dramatic improvements compared to its predecessor, Windows 2000 Server. These features build on the core reliability, fault-tolerance, expandability, and security incorporated in Windows Server 2000, making Windows Server 2003 a standard for speed, stability, and protection. Learn more details concerning Progent's Microsoft Windows 2003 Server help.

Windows 2000 Server Migration Services

Windows 2000 is a legacy server that builds on the strengths of Windows NT's revolutionary technology, incorporating Active Directory, web, communications, and other key services with high reliability, efficient management, and compatibility with advanced networking hardware to offer a tested foundation for integrating your business processes with the Internet. Progent's Microsoft premier engineering experts can help your company in upgrading to current versions of Windows servers. Find out more details about Progent's Microsoft Windows 2000 upgrade support.

Windows Server Upgrade Consulting

Progent's consultants can assist your organization to move from any Microsoft Windows Server system or legacy operating system to the current version of Microsoft Windows Server. Progent can assist you in every facet of your upgrade. Progent offers on-demand consulting to help you handle the most complex phases of your upgrade, or Progent can provide full project management support services to ensure you follow industry best practices in designing and deployment and avoid expensive backtracking. Whatever way you utilize Progent's support, you will have the advantage of Progent's broad experience to realize the highest possible business benefit from your Windows Server environment. Find out more about Progent's Windows 2019 Server Upgrade and Migration Consulting Support.

To contact Progent about professional support for Microsoft Windows Server in Albuquerque NM, phone 1-800-993-9400 or visit Contact Progent.

Progent's Consulting and Support Services for Microsoft-powered Technology

For businesses of any size in Albuquerque New Mexico, Progent's Microsoft-certified consultants can provide low-cost online computer help and professional consulting support for the whole family of Microsoft .NET Enterprise Servers. Progent offers Windows Server 2022 solution design and integration services, Windows Server 2019 migration expertise, Windows Server 2016 hybrid cloud solutions, Microsoft Windows Server 2012 R2 design and deployment support, Microsoft Windows Server 2008 expertise, and Windows Server 2003 upgrade help. Progent's planning, integration, optimization, and consulting capabilities cover network design, deployment, and management help for project management and documentation, local and off-site IT help and network repair, Help Desk Outsourcing Support, comprehensive security consulting, turn-key outsourcing, and ProSight Virtual Hosting solutions.

Progent's System Center 2016 consulting experts include System Center 2016 Operations Manager experts, System Center 2016 Configuration Manager (SCCM 2016) consultants and System Center 2016 Virtual Machine Manager (SCVMM 2016) consultants who can help you to design and deploy Microsoft's solution for unified management of hybrid networks that incorporate physical datacenters and cloud services.

Progent also can deliver a full range of online PC desktop support such as Windows 11 planning and migration consulting, Windows 10 integration assistance, Windows 8.1 consulting, Windows 7 technical support, preparing for to 64-bit computing, upgrading to 64-bit computing, integrating Microsoft 365, and streamlining workstation deployment.

If your Albuquerque New Mexico company needs urgent remote help from a Microsoft certified consultant, refer to Progent's Urgent Remote Technical Help.