1. Introduction

Beginning in 1975, in Albuquerque, New Mexico, Microsoft has developed and risen to turn into one of the veritable mammoths in the IT business. In 2000, it was the world's biggest provider of computer programming, and utilizing more than 63,000 individuals the world over. Today, Microsoft, the monopoly in the industry of software, is the most profitable company, with a record number of 286 million dollars of profit in the fiscal year of 2001, overshadowing its previous record of 229 million dollars set just the past year. This progress and profit, however, was not consistently the story of Microsoft. 2001 marked the year that Microsoft stock, consistently one of the market's best performers, did not meet its standards. With just a 2.44% increase, less than half of the next closest competitor, it was a wake-up call to the company that in order to stay profitable in the ever-changing industry that it dominates, some change was necessary. The importance of organizational design is paramount in understanding the way in which a company is to function in turn to be successful. With both internal and external factors at play, it is the understanding of 'what is now' and 'what needs to be' to supply a given demand, that will move a company to alter the way that they are doing things currently, and in turn increase overall efficiency and perform at a higher standard. To understand this necessity of change is something that is ongoing and developing, but is recognized when a configuration of an organization does not yield the desired outcomes. This is the situation that Microsoft finds itself in today, but to understand why a change is needed, we first must understand the way in which Microsoft functions today.

1.1 Background of Microsoft Corporation

The multinational company, Microsoft Corporation, is a company that was founded by Bill Gates and Paul Allen on April 4, 1975, in Albuquerque, New Mexico. The two men were childhood friends who shared a common interest in computer programming. Together, they formed a computer software company and set the company's vision as "a computer on every desk and in every home, running Microsoft software." To achieve this vision, the company is committed to making long-term investments and continuous innovation to improve current products and identify new ways to solve technology problems and improve product quality. In 1978, Microsoft Corporation relocated to Washington State. At that time, the company had 13 employees, and it grew with the addition of more than 5,000 people from 1978 until 2005. Microsoft Corporation's organizational design has gone through three stages and has continued to change over the years. This rapid growth caused the company's leaders to recognize the need for a new organizational system. During its early stages, the company's organizational design was divisional. This kind of organizational design separates the company's workers based on their specific skills or expertise. This system was appropriate for the company at that time because there were only a few products being developed and a small number of workers. The division of workers can aid in the specialization of products and help enhance product quality.

1.2 Importance of Organizational Design

The importance of organizational design to an organization is immeasurable, as it affects the organization's ability to achieve its mission and vision, its business success, and its future survival. It determines the organization's capacity to effectively implement and integrate its strategies, as your organizational design is your process. Organizational design is used as an effective approach to improving performance and it also provides a framework on which decisions are based. It involves translating strategic goals and objectives into a unified structure that will effectively support those goals. This is achieved by thoroughly understanding, analyzing, and revising the various aspects of organizational design. It is important to consider both internal and external factors that can influence the design of an organization. Microsoft Corporation has also realized the importance of organizational design and has continuously evaluated and made changes to its structure. An important milestone was in 2005 when Microsoft undertook a large organizational restructuring in an attempt to compete in a rapidly changing technology industry. The corporation felt the need to change their organizational design to better enable development of new products and to compete more effectively in the marketplace. This restructuring involved organizing the company into three divisions: the Platform Products and Services Division, the Entertainment and Devices Division, and the Business Division. Each division would focus on utilizing and unifying new and existing resources, talent, and technology to improve overall synergy and to capture emerging market opportunities. In 2008, Microsoft reverted back to a more familiar organizational structure with the purpose of driving operating excellence. This involved consolidating groups and realigning selected teams. As of late, the company has made announcements of significant changes to its organization again. With the launches of Windows 8 and the Microsoft Surface, the corporation is realigning teams to better execute their strategy and focusing on delivering new and innovative solutions to the many challenges that consumers face today. Microsoft's actions of continuous organizational change show that they understand the importance of organizational design in order to achieve their strategic goals. By continually making changes to their structure, they are determining the best possible ways to achieve their mission and vision. This ongoing process of organizational design allows Microsoft to evaluate its effectiveness and make changes where necessary. This will go a long way in ensuring the company thrives into the future.

1.3 Purpose of the Essay

The comprehensive aim of this article is to evaluate Microsoft's organizational design and propose how their approach could be advanced using organizational design perception. It is meant to serve as a primer to any course on organizational behavior or as an expectation on the part of a reader who needs to be reminded what it's all about. I begin by defining organizational design and exploring some models and key concepts, and then move on to assess Microsoft's design in the context of the organizational culture. Finally, it makes use of learning from decision-driven evidence to advocate a new design for Microsoft and judge the hurdles that this proposal will face. The last portion on change and the entire essay are infused with thoughts and opinions. By focusing on the final impact of the learning process and the limits on our ability to model and create, it ends up serving as a pretty good example of decision-driven evidence all the way through. To prepare for the analysis, we were given a Harvard Case study "Microsoft: Multimedia Publications (A)" which delves into the state and issues surrounding Microsoft's attempt to modify its established print-based culture to one hospitable to online publishing. From analyzing this case, it is palpable that Microsoft tends to be restricted by an organizational culture which has been a key factor in its past success. The decision-making processes and duty assignment of that culture are now being asked to rationalize themselves in the face of different products and possibly an across-the-board redefinition of Microsoft itself. This case and its corresponding issues are easily relatable to what we have learned in our OB course, and so assessment of Microsoft as a variable actor using actual models and data is both feasible and practical.

2. Organizational Structure of Microsoft Corporation

Microsoft has a divisional structure that is in the shape of a pyramid. At the top of the pyramid is Steve Ballmer, followed by his managers who are responsible for major company divisions (about 8-10). Those managers hire more managers in the next level who manage smaller areas of their division. This process is repeated until the lowest levels of management. At the very bottom of the pyramid are the employees. A major advantage of a hierarchical structure is the tight control it maintains over the organization (Daft, 2009). This control is won by the tightness of specifies as to about what needs to be done by each level. Microsoft's divisional structure is largely based on a functional structure. For instance, divisional managers and managers in the levels immediately following are usually marketing managers, development managers or managers in one of the various technical fields. Microsoft has such a functional structure because each division needs to be able to cater to the vast requirements of its customers. This requires a functional structure due to its high level of control and coordination in the conduct of narrow specialists in a low cost approach (Daft, 2009). The various technical teams are functional groupings as it is a relatively small group of people working in the same field.

2.1 Hierarchical Structure

Microsoft utilizes a few hierarchical structures throughout the worldwide organization. Schuster (2008) stated that, "structure is involved in how organizational activity is divided, how unified it is, and the methods used to coordinate activity." The main organizational structure in Microsoft Corporation is a divisional structure. A divisional structure is a common type of organizational structure for large companies. This type of structure can be effective in the development of markets, products, and geographic areas. This is important to Microsoft because of their wide range of products and their continuing pursuit to access new and emerging markets. Microsoft divides the company into three main divisions: the Platforms and Services Division, the Microsoft Business Division, and the Entertainment and Devices Division. Each of these divisions is responsible for its own set of products, sales, and support. The management of each division reports directly to the CEO, Steve Ballmer. Each division operates like its own individual business with its own functional units including finance, marketing, development, research, and support. Each division's independence is a result of the value given to responsibility and accountability for results. The functional structure is the approach used in identifying specific roles of a business. It is concerned with responsibilities associated with the importance of how tasks are accomplished based on the company's goals. The functional structure is most suitable for Microsoft because of their background in software development. In breaking down a software into parts, it is easier to assign functional roles whether they be coding, testing, documentation, or support. Microsoft has had a few good ideas for software projects but as a whole, the idea is fragmented and incredibly chaotic to try to organize and eventually lead to the abandoning of the project. Using a functional structure to assign a team to specific sections of the project can prove effective and inefficient components can be easily identified.

2.1.1 Divisional Structure

One of the divisions at Microsoft utilizing a divisional structure is the Microsoft Business Division. This organization is in charge of creating software related to productivity and different business functions. They provide financial management and are separated into several smaller teams that focus on the different aspects of the software. Every unit within the division is responsible for the entire business cycle of the product it creates, this means every unit is self-supporting. Making all of the products expected to work independently. This divisional structure is ideal for the Business Division as they have a direct focus on one type of product, they want to keep planning and making improvements of the software, this structure allows for easy coordination between the team working on the product and the leader on which direction the product should head. Finally, the readiness to keep producing different versions of the software until the best one is found, a division structure allows for easy conclusion and start of new units depending on the success of another product. Microsoft's Windows division is in a transition between functional and divisional structure. Before in its timeline it was organized with a divisional structure, contrasting the business division, each with its own P&L responsibility. However, with newer organizational moves it seems to have a more functional structure, splitting the windows team into technical subject groups. This could be a push to evolve the team into a more functional work environment, while keeping a divisional structure in what it has been historically successful. The groups separate the development of windows into well-defined tasks, while still looking to have a central expertise on the side effect of the software. Windows has seen success with both structures, any decision will depend on future success of the software and its direction in the market according to competitors.

2.1.2 Functional Structure

The functional structure groups specialized staff based on functions performed within the organization. These might be engineering, human resources, finance, etc. The functional structure exists from the very top of the organization right down to its lower levels. The staff are united by their skills and their expertise, which they share even across business divisions. Each function will have its own leader who is responsible for strategy and operational matters. Microsoft uses a mixture of divisional and functional structures. In my opinion, the functional structure is most important because it shares skills and expertise across different parts of the organization. This can help in terms of cost savings, evaluation of experience and expertise, but most importantly it creates a knowledgeable sharing culture, which in an industry that is fast-changing and requires constant innovation, is a crucial success factor. The main motivation behind this kind of structure is to build and maintain competitive advantage. The reason Microsoft uses a mixture, I will get to later. Each individual function becomes a miniature version of the organization. For example, the finance function needs its own accountants, marketing personnel, IT to support the function itself, and so forth. This looks very similar to the divisional structure but where it differs is the centralized strategic and operational leadership and the sharing of expertise across the broader corporation. Coming out of university, I worked a finance-specific role within Microsoft and I can personally attest to the fact that the finance department is its own functional unit.

2.2 Matrix Structure

Matrix structure is one of the departmentalization structures in the organization. One of the characteristics in this style is to combine both functional and divisional structure simultaneously in the same units. This structure can be more complex and also involves more coordination because it needs to deal with dual authority and dual discipline. An example of a company that has been using the matrix structure is Microsoft Corporation. Microsoft Corporation has been employing the matrix structure since the company was built. According to Davis (2008), matrix structure involves the division of specialists into product and function categories and the creation of a dual hierarchy. In Microsoft Corporation, the specialists and talented employees, whether in finance, HR, R&D, and production, will be combined from various divisions and focus together on one project headed by a project manager. The project manager will be at the same level as the finance, HR, R&D, and production managers and will report to his functional manager. Meanwhile, the finance, HR, R&D, and production managers will be headed by a team leader. This situation will involve dual authority because the employee will have two bosses, which are the project managers and the functional managers. There are several key aspects of the matrix structure that are reflected in Microsoft Corporation. The first is the spread of functional specialists globally that will be assigned by the project. In this case, Microsoft Corporation has been implementing global projects such as the development of new windows, new releases of the office, and server development. This project will involve the spread of finance, HR, R&D, production, and other functional specialists from various divisions and countries to combine and work together.

2.3 Advantages and Disadvantages of the Structure

Functioning in a strong matrix structure, Microsoft utilizes its employees from their functional departments to work on projects which can be managed by project managers. This approach to work has advantages and disadvantages which profoundly affect the organization because of Microsoft's strong matrix structure. The advantages of the this structure is that the project managers are able to integrate various functional areas needed to solve complex problems more directly. For example, a project to publish a new text processing program would utilize the expertise and skills of software engineers, user interface designers, technical writers, and product support specialists. These different functional areas all have to work together to produce the product, and a project manager has the authority to direct their work and unify their efforts. The project manager will provide the link between the project and the rest of the organization, initiate and coordinate resources, and have a greater organizational scope. With this structure, project managers have a clear product or functional responsibility. All of these are things that Microsoft has been working to achieve with the strong matrix structure. Each division at Microsoft has a distinct product and functional area, the product teams are formed from the various functional areas, and Microsoft hopes to begin using the project teams to serve as the link between the product teams and the rest of the organization. This is a proud attribute of the strong matrix form which is not achieved through the other matrix forms. The disadvantages of the matrix structure are not going to be too far off from the advantages. The same things that are an advantage to some are going to be a disadvantage for others, it's just a shift in perspective. Although it is considered an advantage for a project manager to be able to integrate various functional areas more directly, this could be considered a disadvantage to a functional manager. The functional manager's authority is diluted with a project manager being the boss of his employees while they are on project. This could lead to a situation where the employee has to decide between what the project manager or the functional manager told him to do. This direct influence by project managers on various functional areas is what allows them to unify the efforts of those areas and it is an essential part of what the project manager is supposed to do, but may cause unhappiness among some functional managers. A simulation model to test the influence of project managers on unifying various functional efforts to solve a complex problem gave these results, "That the above is crucial to complex problem solving, yet the disturbances it causes to established routines can create ill feelings and resistance to the new way." This could be a problem at Microsoft and is something they will have to deal with because the simulation also showed that the disturbances were only temporary as the various areas. Another disadvantage cited by Huczynski A. et Buchanan D.A. (1991) in Organizational Behaviour: An Introductory Text, is that there is a potential increase in conflicts due to dual authority and a possible increase in using power and politics to get things done. This is a rather political issue, and what organization doesn't want to avoid it. Dual authority and increased power/politics are things that all matrix structures must grapple with and come to a resolution to move forward, and they are Microsoft's most dangerous pitfall with the strong matrix structure.

3. Organizational Culture at Microsoft Corporation

Microsoft Corporation holds innovation distinctly high on the agenda and therefore recruits people who are not simply able to implement current best practice, but imagine, launch, and deliver new solutions to complex problems. Timeliness in decision making, rapid development cycles, as well as close working relationships with Microsoft's diverse customers and partners, have made the emphasis on software innovation an increasingly challenging goal. A major driver of this is to produce 10x (an order of magnitude) improvements in the cost, performance, and functionality of software products and components. 10x change is driven by the rethinking and re-engineering of the tasks a software component supports in a way that brings a very high benefit to the customer when it comes to simplicity and effectiveness. Finally, the desire to have an impact on the world will often lead Microsoft and its employees into new market spaces and to address problems that have not been solved with software technology.

3.1 Core Values and Beliefs

The core values and beliefs of an organization are those elements of an organizational culture which are central and are held for a long time. A well-defined and well-communicated set of core values and beliefs is the foundation of a strong organizational culture. An organizational culture of a company is defined by a detailed set of core values and beliefs. These values and beliefs are to some extent shared by the employees of an organization. A summary of core values and beliefs of Microsoft would be: Microsoft as a company has the goal of a computer on every desk and every home. It has a commitment to the highest standard of product quality and the belief that the customer should get the most out of the products they purchase. Microsoft was built on the value of innovation and has the belief that a company should stay young and maintain the flexibility, nimbleness, energy, and passion of a start-up company. Microsoft has a passion for its products and truly believes that in its products it offers the best value and highest level of satisfaction to its customers. Although some Microsoft critics may say that the core values and beliefs are a thing of the past, it is undeniable that strong core values and beliefs have got Microsoft to where it is today. At Microsoft, there is an official document which details the company mission with a set of aspirational goals. This is supported by a Microsoft Success framework which outlines the success Microsoft and its customers through the success of the product. All of these are supported by a set of corporate strategies which are intended to help people understand what they value, their area of focus, and how they wish to differentiate the company. However, a company's core values and beliefs are often not what is documented, they are the underlying assumptions and beliefs brought over from the founder(s) and these are what drive an organizational culture.

3.2 Employee Engagement and Empowerment

High level of employee engagement and empowerment is supported by Microsoft's organizational culture which believes in being open and inclusive. Employee engagement is the state of emotional and intellectual involvement that motivates the employee to do his job which is the primary need for Microsoft. ("Employee Engagement and Empowerment" from Creating Organizational Core Competence, by Daved Barry and David B. Gordon) Microsoft practices various formal and informal methods to engage its employees in direct dialogue. At least once a year, employees at every level have a chance to ask questions directly to top management on any topic during a webcast Global All-Hands meeting. This is probably the most visible evidence of Microsoft's deep commitment to getting input from employees, but the most widespread and systematic process for engaging employees at the major divisional level is the yearly Employee Survey. The survey process is owned and driven by the division leaders, and the division management teams utilize the wealth of feedback gathered to shape and communicate plans that respond to and address employee feedback on where the company is doing well, and where it needs improvement. The process is followed throughout the year by action planning, progress reporting and a mid-year pulse-check to verify that progress against identified issues is on track. Informal methods of engagement revolve around work team- and community-based activities and events that allow employees to connect humanly with one another across boundaries and learn more about the motivations, talents and passions that their colleagues bring to the company. In work teams where employees are the most tightly connected to one another, most engaged in their environments and most productive toward shared goal, the potential for growth and leadership is the highest and this is where empowerment can be most effective. Empowerment is the process of enabling or authorizing an individual to think, behave, take action, and control work and decision-making in autonomous ways. High level of successful empowerment results in employees taking more personal ownership and pride in their work, and greater innovation in the ways they and their teams can realize success. Microsoft has a highly decentralized competitive business environment with a free market economy where every team is a silo competing for resources to realize its defined measure of business success. At Microsoft, about the only thing close to a command-and-control top-down management approach is found with efforts to enforce company wide standards for software excellence and security. Empowerment is a way of being for Microsoft where decision-making on execution and strategy is owned much more deeply by leaders closest to the customer, and each year there is a growing body of software tools and systems to support resource allocation and decision-making that puts more control in the hands of these leaders.

3.3 Innovation and Collaboration

The research article, "Microsoft Corporation Organizational Design," describes the organizational restructuring of Microsoft Corporation. Microsoft Corporation is an American transnational corporation which has its headquarters in Redmond, Washington. The article was written by James P. Martin, a professor for business organization at Santa Clara University. It was revised on 22 May 2016. He covers an in-depth analysis of the internal structure and design of Microsoft Corporation. In this section of the report, the author illustrates how Microsoft Corporation has its share of innovation and collaboration. The organization had been focusing on innovation and collaboration in the years following the radical organizational restructuring that took place in 2015. It can be said that most of the information about innovation and collaboration was targeted after the leadership changes, which were led by the change of Chief Executive Officer. In this case, it was effective by Satya Nadella's promise and a clear vision of a change in innovative and collaborative culture in Microsoft Corporation. He emphasizes that the CEO can be viewed as having a non-economic or social motive, as it can be concluded that the CEO is striving to push for a change of culture rather than focusing on profits. This is clearly conveyed by his employee with his statement stating that he's changing the world through Microsoft.