Hit ’em where they’re soft.

“I hope Carmelo Anthony signs a contract extension with the Nuggets, because, quite frankly, the team is nothing without him. If Anthony genuinely wants to win a championship, however, he will walk at the end of this season. I canceled my season tickets, because I don’t think franchise owner Stan Kroenke will pony up to bring the needed big man. Without a presence in the middle, this team is a perennial first- round loser in the playoffs.”

Tom, Parker

Kiz: Kroenke loves basketball but hates the idea of dropping $100 million on a team with no guarantee of winning a championship. This talk I’ve heard of trading for Golden State center Andris Biedrins, paid $9 million to average eight points per game? I don’t want to hear it. For that kind of money, the Nuggets could go after a big man with big talent, like Minnesota’s Al Jefferson, who can give you a double-double on any given night. Jefferson, who makes $12 million, has been whispered to be on the trade block. What’s more, the Timberwolves’ president of basketball operations is David Kahn, who used to be a sportswriter. So how hard could it be to fleece him in a trade?

Putting the “Me” in Melo.

“Is Denver too mellow for Melo? Let him go. Good riddance. Anthony is all ‘O’ and no ‘D.’ He’s uncoachable. His defense is offensive. He folds like a cheap suit in the playoffs, when teamwork really counts. Melo has Larry Bird talent but couldn’t spell the word ‘team’ if you spotted him a ‘T,’ ‘E’ and ‘A.’ “

Paul, Centennial

Kiz: So if Anthony leaves town before Christmas, are you saying he’s off your card list?

He gets no help.

“The idea that the only thing holding the Nuggets back is Anthony must become a better defender and leader? That’s a joke. The truth is other Denver core players are not good enough. Kevin Garnett learned this the hard way before being traded from Minnesota to Boston.”

Rip, Melo’s main man

Kiz: Chauncey Billups describes Melo best when saying, “That’s the franchise.”

NoDak hoops fan.

“Kiz, are you trying to ruin the Nuggets? You are a downer concocting the worst-possible scenarios for Anthony getting traded. How could Melo not be the team’s nucleus? Who else on earth would we want? LeBron James or Chris Bosh? Yeah, like they’ve done so much more than Anthony.”

Logan, Minot, N.D.

Kiz: If we’re picking the greatest basketball coach to come out of North Dakota, are you going with Phil Jackson, Lute Olson or crazy Dale Brown?

The time is now.

“You fail to acknowledge that next year’s changes to the NBA’s collective bargaining agreement increase the likelihood Anthony will sign a contract extension worth $65 million now, compared to next year when the amount he can get will likely decrease.”

Kevin, does the math

Kiz: If Anthony cares more about money than winning, he will sign the deal on the table.

Managing expectations.

“Kiz, your column that we should demand more from USA Soccer was spot on. I’m a huge soccer fan and feel we can and should be a player on the international stage.”

Greg, Arvada

Kiz: I’m not listening to the garbage that U.S. soccer culture needs another 50 years to mature before Americans can make real noise at the World Cup. If coach Bob Bradley had started Maurice Edu instead of Ricardo Clark in the midfield against Ghana, it’s 50-50 the country would be buzzing right now about a semifinals match against the Netherlands.

Cinderella, just the same.

“I am writing on behalf of all those who are offended by what you wrote about soccer teams representing the United States and Ghana at the World Cup. Your criticism brought not only surprise, but anger and shame. Statements like ‘Team USA has no business losing to Ghana’ have no business in newspapers available for all people to see.”

Taylor, underdog lover

Kiz: The Black Stars of Ghana were to this World Cup what Gonzaga used to be to March Madness. Gotta love a feisty team without pedigree. But the young country of Ghana has recorded only four victories in the 80-year history of soccer’s most prestigious tournament, and two of those victories have been against a U.S. side blessed with far superior resources.

Level of play matters

And today’s parting shot picks on the brain trust at Kickin’ It Headquarters for having the nerve to suggest a U.S. team that got zero goals from strikers at the World Cup could have used Conor Casey, a graduate of Denver South High School.

“Are you really trying to compare Casey to Jozy Altidore? Altidore played in the English Premier League. Casey plays for an MLS team. Compared to one of the toughest leagues in the world, the MLS is like a YMCA recreational league.”

Cody, Arvada West grad