INDIANAPOLIS — Al Jefferson spent July 1 thinking about one team: the Indiana Pacers. It was the first day of the NBA's free agency period and, although Jefferson had played the past three seasons with the Charlotte Hornets, he was intrigued by the Pacers' acquisitions of Jeff Teague and Thaddeus Young in trades a week earlier.

Jefferson, 31, revealed Friday that he did not have serious discussions with any other team before agreeing to sign a three-year, $30 million deal with the Pacers. Once team President Larry Bird showed his interest, Jefferson was convinced he could boost the Pacers’ chances of being contenders in the Eastern Conference.

“To me, there was no other team out there that I could probably fit better than with the Pacers,” Jefferson said Friday when he was formally introduced by the team. “It was just a no-brainer to me.”

In their quick negotiations, Bird asked Jefferson if he was comfortable being the Pacers’ backup center. Jefferson said yes. Could he mentor Myles Turner? Yes, Jefferson said. And could he provide leadership in the looker room as the oldest player on the roster? Sure, Jefferson responded.

Jefferson should also provide a specific skill that the Pacers lacked last year: low-post scoring.

At 6-10 and 285 pounds, Jefferson has bullied opponents under the basket with his strength and crafty moves during his 12-year career.

“He was a nightmare for us, really, the last couple of years, even when big Roy (Hibbert) was here,” coach Nate McMillan said Friday about Jefferson, who had consecutive games of 34, 28 and 30 points in 2014 and '15. “He is a proven scorer in the low post. He’s a guy that forces teams to have to double-team and if you are trying to guard him with single coverage, he has shown that he can score.”

Even as the Pacers plan to run in an up-tempo style, McMillan said Jefferson allows the team to have a presence in the paint when games slow down in the halfcourt. Jefferson will be slowest Pacer whenever he is on the court, but McMillan said that should not stop the team from playing fast at times.

“We will take advantage of his ability to post up,” McMillan said of Jefferson. “I’m not sitting here saying we’re the Showtime Lakers, but they had a big man by the name of Kareem (Abdul-Jabbar) and they were a running team.”

Jefferson’s skill set should be most effective for the Pacers in truncated minutes against opposing backups.

Last season, Jefferson excelled in such a role with the Hornets. He was moved to the bench in February and averaged 10.8 points and 6.3 rebounds in 21.5 minutes as a reserve. He continued to play well when the Hornets faced the Miami Heat in the first round of the playoffs. Jefferson averaged 13.3 points and 6.1 rebounds per game and shot 50.6 percent from the field.

“I don’t see too many backup centers in the league who probably want to face me healthy,” Jefferson said smiling. “I didn’t mind coming off the bench last year. That’s something I used to do when I first got into the league. I used to like coming off the bench because I get a chance to see how the game is going.”

Perhaps where Jefferson could have his biggest impact on the Pacers is in his interactions and relationship with Turner.

The Pacers plan to have Turner be the starting center after his impressive rookie season last year. Jefferson plans to mentor Turner and help him become more confident in scoring around the basket. The two plan to train together the next few weeks before Turner goes to Las Vegas to participate as a member of the USA Men’s Select Team. Bird said those workouts with Jefferson should help Turner.

“I think Myles is a sponge,” Bird said. “He likes anything you can help him with, especially in the low post. We know Myles can score out on the court, but down in the post he can probably get some tricks and some angles and how he sets up his man from Al.”

Turner will not be the first player to receive guidance from Jefferson.

Throughout his career, Jefferson has taught younger players how to improve and what it takes to be successful in the NBA. He helped Derrick Favors and Enes Kanter become serviceable players during his time with the Utah Jazz. In Charlotte, Jefferson pushed and encouraged former Indiana University standout Cody Zeller enough to the point that Zeller eventually replaced him in the starting lineup.

Jefferson plans to ensure that Turner reaches his full potential as a future All-Star.

“That’s just a part of my DNA,” Jefferson said of mentoring young players. “I remember coming into this league at 19 years old and I had some veteran guys that were willing to help me and work with me. That's just kind of one of the things they always told me, to pay it back and do it for the next guy. Myles has a bright future.”

The biggest concern for the Pacers is that Jefferson remain healthy throughout next season.

He played in just 47 games last season, the fewest in any season in his career, because of an injury to his right knee. In December, Jefferson had arthroscopic surgery to repair a tear in the lateral meniscus. When Jefferson returned in February, he missed only one game for the remainder of the season.

Jefferson said Friday that he is fully healthy. He expects his role of coming off the bench will allow him to remain effective throughout next the season for the Pacers.

“I feel really good,” he said. “The surgery I had this past year on my knee was something I should have did two years ago, but better late than never. For the first time (since then), I feel like my old self.”

Call IndyStar reporter Nate Taylor at (317) 444-6484. Follow him on Twitter: @ByNateTaylor.