INDIANAPOLIS – Near the end of a recent Indiana Pacers practice, Al Jefferson blocked a shot.

That does not happen every day, because Jefferson has never been known for his vertical leap. The reaction to Jefferson’s block triggered a mock celebration amongst his teammates.

Jefferson was too amused to be insulted. It’s part of the atmosphere he loves about this year’s Pacers.

“Treated me like that was my first blocked shot I ever had,” said Jefferson. “The only thing I don’t like about this team is that they call me old. I got to live with that.”

The Pacers are glad that Jefferson — their oldest player at 33 — is still living with them, and producing for them. His name was discussed in potential deals at the trade deadline. However, Pacers president Kevin Pritchard did not part with Jefferson, partly because of his importance off the bench, and partly due to his value as a locker room mentor.

Our best deal of 2018: Get a year’s subscription to IndyStar for just $9.99!

The first half of the Pacers’ victory over the Brooklyn Nets on Wednesday proved Jefferson has not lost his low-post moves. Simply put, he took Nets center Jarrett Allen to school for 8 minutes. On one play, Jefferson pump-faked Allen, made him jump like a pogo stick, then went past him for a dunk. On another play, Jefferson froze Allen with a ball fake, then made a fadeaway jumper.

When Jefferson’s flurry ended, he had scored 13 points during an 8-minute stretch, while shooting 6-for-6 from the floor. Pacers guard Cory Joseph was not surprised. He thought of a nickname for Jefferson years ago, when Jefferson was playing for the Utah Jazz.

“Instant Buckets,” said Joseph. “That pump fake? When I was in San Antonio, we played Utah in the playoffs. I’d always be on the bench like, ‘Don’t jump.' "

Wednesday night was a satisfying way for Jefferson to enter the All-Star break, and he planned to relax and regroup for the home stretch. His playing time has increased over the past two weeks, and Jefferson has found a nice offensive rhythm. He could be an X-factor for the Pacers moving forward, particularly when Myles Turner or Domantas Sabonis encounters foul trouble.

Jefferson does not want the Pacers (33-25) to lose focus when they return from the break, and he relayed that message to some teammates after Wednesday’s game. That is one reason Pritchard called Jefferson one of the team’s most important players, despite appearing in just 29 games. Jefferson felt grateful that in his 14th NBA season, his behind-the-scenes influence on teammates has been recognized.

“Coming into this season it was a new role for me,” said Jefferson. “I tried to attack it head on.

“I’m very comfortable. This NBA don’t owe me anything. This NBA has been great to me. Whatever role I have to play to stay in this league as long as I can, I will play it. I love to help the young guys, mentor, be that glue in the locker room. Nate (McMillan) and the coaches do what they do, but they’re not around the team as much in the locker room. I got to be that voice in the locker room. And the good thing about it, the guys listen to me. No one takes nothing negative. No one takes it ‘Well you’re picking on me.’ Because they know if I say something, or correct something, it’s coming from a good place.”

“I’ve never seen a group of guys like this that are so happy for one another. When guys have success, this whole locker room is so hype. Young guys don’t learn that right away. I knew then, OK this team will have a lot of success.”

Does Jefferson’s rapport with players and knowledge of the game make him want to be a coach after he retires? He isn’t sure.

“I’m not doing no scouting report,” Jefferson said. “(But) I’m not shutting no doors. I had guys that I played with over the years say they’re going to be coaches or GM’s. When they bring the back-to-the-basket game back, and y’all want a big man coach to come in and help these guys, look me up. I love to teach. If that happens for me, I’d be glad to do it.”

In the meantime, the Pacers are glad to have Jefferson in his current role, especially on a young team that appears headed for the postseason. They need his valuable experience. And when he plays, they love Jefferson’s instant buckets.

Follow IndyStar sports writer Clifton Brown on Twitter @CliftonGBrown