! Non-canon alert

The subject of this article originates from non-canonical sources.

To learn about what is considered "canon", see LOTR:Canon. !

This is a list of the upgrades available in The Lord of the Rings: The Return of the King video game.

The upgrades are divided into 'Fellowship upgrades' and 'Character upgrades' as the player can buy a 'Fellowship upgrade' with any of the characters he is using, he can only buy the 'Character upgrades' with the corresponding character.

A 'Fellowship upgrade' can be bought for only the current character, meaning it will less expensive but it will only apply to the current character. So that it will have to be bought again if the player wants it for another character.

It can also be bought for the entire fellowship, meaning that it will be more expensive but that when any character reaches the neaded level, it will also benefit from the upgrade.

Fellowship upgrades[]

Strength of Stone: Permanently increases your health.

Orc Hewer: An effective combo for taking out unshielded foes.

Final Judgment: Wound, knock down, then finish off powerful enemies with this combo.

Rising Revenge: Attack as you regain your feet, taking enemies by surprise.

Balrog's Gambit: Wound, knock down, and strike your enemy with this combination attack

Strength of Iron: Permanently increases your health.

Dark Deliverance: Effective for rapidly dispatching enemies.

Shield Cleaver: Use on powerful foes to smash a shield, knock him to the ground and then strike.

Bane of Sauron: Parry, then instantly kill an attacking enemy.

Lightning Strike: A series of quick and powerful strikes that will take down one or more unshielded enemies.

Fighting Frenzy: Increases the amount of time during combat that you remain in perfect mode.

Strength of the Fellowship: Strength of Iron Permanently increases your health.

Valinor Strike: A deadly combination to shatter enemy shields and strike again.

Swift Justice: A fast combination deadly against unshielded enemies.

Character upgrades[]

Gandalf[]

Fog of War: This attack knocks enemies from their feet.

Wizard 's Power: The magic shield causes increased damage and persists longer.

Light of the Pilgrim: This lightning bolt projectile causes increased damage.

Wrath of the Valar: A more devastating attack that creates a ring of lightning.

Light of the Forges: This magical projectile lights enemies on fire.

Flame of the Eldar: A more devastating attack that creates a ring of flame that sets foes on fire.

Power of the Palantír: This magical shield deflects enemies further and persists longer.

Enchantment of the Havens: This magical shield knocks enemies to the ground and persists longer.

Power of the Istari: Increases the damage of your ranged and devastating Attacks.

Light of the Valar: This projectile of light passes through multiple foes.

Aragorn / Faramir[]

Ranger Fury: A devastating attack that causes poison damage.

Dúnedain Arrows: These blessed arrows cause additional damage.

Sword Master: Increases damage and get to Perfect Mode more quickly with this special ability.

Wilderness Rage: A devastating attack that causes lightning damage.

Wrath of Númenor: A devastating attack that sets enemies on fire.

Ithilen Arrows: These arrows emit a poison arc on impact.

Kingmaker: Increases damage and get to Perfect Mode more quickly with this Special ability.

Númenor Arrows: These arrows emit a lightning arc on impact.

Strength of the Evenstar: Permanently increase your health.

Sword Mastery of Kings: Increases the damage of your Speed Attack.

Legolas[]

Mirkwood Arrows: These blessed elven arrows cause additional damage.

Light of Lothlórien: Increases damage and get to Perfect Mode more quickly with this special ability.

Elven Fury: A devastating attack that causes lightning damage.

Galadrim Arrows: These arrows emit a light arc on impact.

Arrows of the Valar: These arrows emit a lightning arc on impact.

Galadriel's Gift: Increases damage and get to Perfect Mode even faster.

Elrond's Rage: A devastating attack that sets enemies on fire.

Gimli[]

Dwarven Fury: A devastating attack that does severe damage.

Dwarven Lore: Increases damage and get to Perfect Mode more quickly with this special ability.

Mountain Rage: A devastating attack that causes lightning damage.

Iron Axes: These axes cause additional damage.

Wrath of Erebor: A devastating attack that sets enemies on fire.

Broad Axes: These axes emit a lightning arc on impact.

Axe Mastery of Kings: Increases damage and get to Perfect Mode even faster.

Strengtht of Glóin: Permanently increase your health.

Strength of Durin: Permanently increase your health.

Dwarven Axe Mastery: Increases the damage of your fierce Attack.

Frodo / Sam / Merry / Pippin[]

Poison Blade: A devastating attack that causes continuing damage.

Cloak of Haldir: Increases the time that a hobbit is hidden by using his cloak.

Cloak of Shadow: Generate a poison cloud that causes continuing damage.

Poison Daggers: Each dagger that hits a foe causes continuing damage.

Cloak of Celeborn: Increases the time that a hobbit is hidden by using his cloak.

Morgul Daggers: The hobbits' most damaging ranged attack.

Halfling Strength: Permanently increases your health.

Strike of Rage: A most devastating poison cloud that causes continuing damage.

Cloak of Galadriel: Increases the time that a hobbit is hidden by using his cloak.

Strength of Gaffer: Increases the damage of all sword attacks when attacking an enemy from behind.

Baggins Strength: Permanently increase your health.

See also[]