Sharon was born in London (September 17, 1923) to an English mother and Latvian-born father. He emigrated to the United States in early 1954, becoming a naturalized citizen five years later.

Ralph Sharon made his professional debut with Ted Heath in 1946, then moved on to Frank Weir's orchestra before leading his own sextet. He moved to the U.S. in 1953, where he initially worked as an accompanist to Chris Connor. In 1957, he became musical director and pianist for Tony Bennett, the start of a more than 50 year working relationship as Bennett's "man behind the music" on many Grammy-winning studio recordings, and touring with Bennett for many years.

He found "I Left My Heart in San Francisco" for Bennett, a year after placing it in a bureau and forgetting about it. Sharon discovered the manuscript while packing for a tour that included San Francisco. While Bennett and Sharon liked the...

Read more

Sharon was born in London (September 17, 1923) to an English mother and Latvian-born father. He emigrated to the United States in early 1954, becoming a naturalized citizen five years later.

Ralph Sharon made his professional debut with Ted Heath in 1946, then moved on to Frank Weir's orchestra before leading his own sextet. He moved to the U.S. in 1953, where he initially worked as an accompanist to Chris Connor. In 1957, he became musical director and pianist for Tony Bennett, the start of a more than 50 year working relationship as Bennett's "man behind the music" on many Grammy-winning studio recordings, and touring with Bennett for many years.

He found "I Left My Heart in San Francisco" for Bennett, a year after placing it in a bureau and forgetting about it. Sharon discovered the manuscript while packing for a tour that included San Francisco. While Bennett and Sharon liked the song, they were convinced it would only be a local hit. The tune became Bennett's signature song.

Sharon and Bennett split up in 1965, but they got back together in 1979 and played together in the following years.

Best known as one of the finest accompanists who backed up popular singers, including Bennett, Robert Goulet, Chris Connor and many others, Sharon was a great jazz pianist in his own right, recording a series of albums as leader.

Retiring to Boulder, Colorado, from on-the-road work with Bennett when he reached 80, Ralph Sharon continued to perform in the Denver metropolitan area until shortly before his death. He and the Ralph Sharon Trio performed at various jazz venues, including Dazzle Restaurant & Lounge in Denver. He died from natural causes at his home on March 31, 2015 at the age of 91.

https://en.wikipedia.org

Read less