Create the setting of your dreams in the heart of the Yadkin Valley.

Coley Hall at The Liberty's rich history is felt throughout the space. It has a rustic industrial feel with century old exposed beams overhead, weathered wood and distressed brick. The hall is your blank canvas, it can be tailor-made to fit your style. Keep things simple by utilizing the existing beauty of the space, or dress it up with elegant sheer fabrics draped overhead.

Even if you are not DIY savvy, our staff is here to provide inspiration to ensure your vision come to life! We are here to help you create memories to last a lifetime.

Have questions? Check out our FAQ Page! Want to book a tour? Fill out our Contact Info! Want tips for your special day? Check out our Blog! Curious about our vendors? We have a page for that too!

A century ago, Elkin's downtown was home to a large tobacco warehouse at the East end of Main Street. Today that warehouse has been renovated into the prestigious venue called The Liberty. Unknown to owner Cicely McCulloch, by purchasing the historic Liberty tobacco warehouse, she was buying a bit of family history.

Found among papers from the 1930s was the deed of the building listing her own grandmother as a past owner. Coley Hall provides a spacious venue that is easily customized to your taste and is the perfect wedding venue for wedding receptions, rehearsal dinners, banquets and events. With its exposed beams overhead, century old weathered wood and distressed brick, Coley Hall is the definition of rustic chic. You can create a wonderfully customized atmosphere for your special day, giving you memories to last a lifetime.

The main reception hall has 9,000-square-feet for seating up to 550 guests, ample parking, in-house catering and full alcohol service, including beer from our in-house brewery and local wines from the Yadkin Valley. A unique NC Wedding Venue, you will find Coley Hall at The Liberty in downtown Elkin, NC, just an hour north of Charlotte off I-77.

Contact us today to schedule a tour!

Coley Hall isn't just a wedding venue, we have the perfect space for any occasion!

If the Main Hall is more than you desire, we have additional options to accommodate you. Our smaller event venue within The Liberty provides a charming setting for rehearsal dinners or any other celebration.

With on-site catering options, take your event to the next level with food prepared by our exclusive caterer, The Liberty Catering Company. Whether you're looking for Banquet Halls or Reception Spaces, we offer a wide array of cuisine styles to set the tone of your event by planning the perfect menu for you and your guests!

Lance Newman, owner of Sophisticated Southern Event and Floral Design, is the newest addition to Coley Hall's team. With an office in the basement of the venue, Sophisticated Southern is a professional, easy, and personable option for your event design at Coley Hall.

Throughout his career, Lance has worked for many great event venues such as Biltmore Estate, Crest Pavilion Center, Hilton Hotels, American Heart Associations Heart Ball, and Dean & Deluca.

​

This level of experience sets Lance apart form other event designers. He knows just how to give your event the look it needs. Come by for a tour and talk to Lance while you're here.