Since many streets are closed for move-in, we provide residence-hall specific driving directions to get you to the unloading zone for check-in. Please use these and not GPS to drive into campus for move-in.

Note: There will be NO ACCESS to Liberty Street from King Street.

From I-26: Take exit 221B and turn RIGHT onto Meeting Street. Turn RIGHT onto George Street, then turn LEFT onto St. Philip Street. Turn LEFT onto Liberty Street.

From Highway 17 North: After you cross the Ashley River, bear RIGHT onto the ramp and follow Lockwood Drive South/ Visitor’s Center. Turn LEFT onto Calhoun Street, LEFT onto Coming Street, RIGHT onto Vanderhorst Street, then RIGHT onto St. Philip Street. Turn LEFT onto Liberty Street.

From Highway 17 South: As you cross the Cooper River, follow signs for Meeting Street. Bear RIGHT onto the Meeting Street ramp, then turn LEFT onto Meeting Street. Turn RIGHT onto George Street, then turn LEFT onto St. Philip Street. Turn LEFT onto Liberty Street.

You will be directed to unload your vehicle on Liberty Street, in front of Liberty Hall.

Unattended vehicles in the unloading area are subject to towing.

Your helpers can start unloading while you get your key and parking map.

We have more than 1,000 students (and their helpers) moving in each day. Unloading areas are limited and we all need to work together for a safe and efficient move-in. Please be aware of the following:

Limit the amount of time you’re stopped in a designated unloading-only zone.

Unattended vehicles are subject to towing.

You cannot park in an unloading zone nor leave it unattended even for a few minutes. Please also do not park or leave your vehicle unattended at a bagged parking meter.

Unload your vehicle and then move it to a designated move-in parking area.

You will pick up your key across Liberty St. from Liberty Hall (8 Liberty St.).

Only students can pick up their key. You will need to provide a government-issued ID (e.g., a driver’s license) to get your key, and to get your Cougar Card if you did not get one during orientation. Make sure you get your parking map/dashboard flier when you get your key.

Students will be given a parking map when they get their key. The flip side must be on your dash, and include the vehicle-driver's phone number, when you are on campus.

Follow the parking instructions for your hall below. Note that each student will be given a 3-hour garage voucher when they get their key. Although vouchers are valid in multiple garages (Aquarium Garage, George Garage, St. Philip St. Garage or the Visitor’s Center Garage), pay attention to which surface lot or garage your hall indicates.

After unloading, you will be directed to park in GG Garage where you can park for a maximum of three hours. You must find parking off campus after three hours.

Parking in GG will require you circling the block due to road closures: From Liberty unloading, take a RIGHT onto King Street; a RIGHT onto Wentworth Street; a RIGHT onto Coming Street; a RIGHT onto Calhoun Stret; and a RIGHT onto St. Philip Street. GG will be on your LEFT after you cross George Street.

If GG is full, you may proceed to another move-in surface lot or garage indicated on the map provided with your key during check-in. The same three-hour time limit applies to remaining parked, unless you park in the Aquarium or Visitor’s Center Garages. If you park in one of these two garages, you do not have to move your car after three hours; however, you will need to pay for any time parked beyond then.

You may also park in the Queen St. Garage (93 Queen St.) for their hourly fee (the voucher does not apply) and you will not have to move your vehicle after three hours.

Do not leave your vehicle in the unloading zone – you will be subject to towing.