About University of the East Ramon Magsaysay Memorial Medical Center

The University of the East Ramon Magsaysay Memorial Medical Center, Inc. (UERMMMCI or UERM) is a college in Quezon City, Philippines. Established in 1956, the college is one of the three grounds of the University of the East. UERMMMCI is a non-stock, non-benefit establishment and a remembrance to President Ramon Magsaysay since 1957. UERMMMCI has a few degrees that are certify by the Commission on Higher Education as Centers of Excellence and furthermore has level IV accreditation by the Philippine Accrediting Association of Schools, Colleges and Universities (PAASCU). The College of Medicine is in the rundown of top performing schools for having a general passing level of 96.03% as of August 2011 Licensure Examination. The University Of The East Ramon Magsaysay Memorial Center Address in Philippines: Office of the Dean, 2nd Floor JMC Building, UERM Campus, Aurora Blvd Quezon City, Philippines.

The College of Nursing has been authorized Level IV by PAASCU and has 98.13% passing rate as of January 2011 Licensure Exam. The College of Physical Therapy (presently College of Allied Rehabilitation Sciences) additionally has level III accreditation and has 100% passing rate as of January 2011.

The middle has five scholarly units, the College of Medicine, Nursing, Physical Therapy, Medical Technology, and Graduate Program, in the request they were established.

The University of the East Ramon Magsaysay Memorial Medical Center College of Medicine

The College of Medicine has level IV accreditation, Innovative Curriculum, Recognized as a Center of Excellence in Research by the Department of Science and Technology.

The school had 97.78% passing rate in the August 2015 Licensure Exam.

The focal point of The University of the East Ramon Magsaysay Memorial Medical Center is the College of Medicine. Perceived as a Center of Excellence in Research by the Department of Science and Technology and has Level IV Accreditation by PAASCU, Innovative Curriculum. The sole private Medical School with a PAASCU Accredited Program, Level IV.

All the Medicine alumni of 1996 breezed through the Medical Licensure Examination given last February 1997. The Professional Regulation Commission granted the Center a plaque in acknowledgment of the accomplishment, the fifth time for the middle since 1993.

The University of the East Ramon Magsaysay College of Medicine graduate was remembered for the Top Ten examinees of the August 2009 Physician Licensure Examination held last August 2009.

Public Passing Average for the August 2009 assessment is 71.3%. The College of Medicine was in the rundown of top performing schools for having a general passing level of 92%.

The University of the East Ramon Magsaysay Memorial Medical Center College of Nursing

The College of Nursing has PAASCU level IV accreditation, FAAP level IV accreditation, and is certify by the Commission on Higher Education as Center of Excellence. It had a 98.13% passing rate as of January 2011 Licensure Exam.

The College of Nursing is one of only a handful few nursing schools in the nation with the most elevated accreditation status gave by the Philippine Accrediting Association of Schools, Colleges and Universities (PAASCU).

The school was remembered for the rundown of 20 top performing Nursing schools delivered by the Commission on Higher Education covering a 5-year time frame. For the long term canvassed in the positioning, the CHED recorded the UERM College of Nursing with a rating of 93.08% passing rate. It had a passing pace of 95.63% from November 2009 to July 2011.

The University of the East Ramon Magsaysay Memorial Medical Center College of Physical Therapy

The College of Physical Therapy has level III and licensed by the Commission on Higher Education as Center of Excellence. The school is the solitary level III Physical Therapy certify program in the nation. It had 100% passing rate in the February 2015 licensure test

The University of the East Ramon Magsaysay Memorial Medical Center School of Allied Rehabilitation Sciences

The College of Allied Rehabilitation Sciences (CAReS) was known as the College of Physical Therapy until December 2011. Under this school, there are presently two courses to offer: (1) BS Physical Therapy, and (2) BS Prosthetics and Orthotics.

In association with the Nippon Foundation and Exceed (previously the Cambodia Trust), the University of the East Ramon Magsaysay Memorial Medical Center Inc. opened the Philippine School of Prosthetics and Orthotics (PSPO). The first of its sort in the nation and just the twelfth of its sort on the planet, the PSPO is equipped towards preparing, administration, and exploration on the creation, improvement, and clinical utilization of versatility gadgets for people with handicap (PWD).

The PSPO was formalized in 2010 by means of the marking of a notice of comprehension (MOU) by UERMMMCI President Romeo Divinagracia, the Nippon Foundation Chairman Yohei Sasakawa and Exceed Chief Executive Carson Harte. The MOU covers a 10-year, $7 Million award for the PSPO educational plan.

The PSPO depends on the World Health Organization rules and International Society of Prosthetics and Orthotics principles.

The PSPO's Bachelor of Science in Prosthetics and Orthotics course offering, which involves five school years, was opened in SY 2011–2012.

The University of the East Ramon Magsaysay Memorial Medical Center Graduate School

The seeds of the Graduate School were planted at UERMMMC in 1999 when high ranking representatives of the UERM Memorial Medical Center imagined the foundation as a college. It was not until August 14, 2001, notwithstanding, that the Graduate School was officially made by a demonstration of the Board of Trustees. Its first contribution was the Master of Science in Internal Medicine, major in Diabetology, a program made by Dr. Ricardo E. Fernando, the chief diabetes expert in the nation. Perceived by the CHED, this degree program was at first subsidiary with the UE Manila Graduate School however was moved to UERMMMCI which could give "vertical degree program arrangement."

Throughout the long term, the organization had graduated specialists, who dealt with the nation's diabetics.

The University of the East Ramon Magsaysay Memorial Medical Center Contact Number

The University Of The East Ramon Magsaysay Memorial Medical Center email address

The University Of The East Ramon Magsaysay Memorial Medical Center email address: com@uerm.edu.ph

The University Of The East Ramon Magsaysay Memorial Medical Center email address: / uermmed@yahoo.com

The University Of The East Ramon Magsaysay Memorial Medical Center Address

The University Of The East Ramon Magsaysay Memorial Medical Center Address in Philippines.

Office of the Dean

2nd Floor JMC Building,

UERM Campus, Aurora Blvd Quezon City, Philippines

Telefax: (632) 8-713-3302; (632) 8-715-0861 loc.385

The University Of The East Ramon Magsaysay Memorial Medical Center email address Email: com@uerm.edu.ph

The University Of The East Ramon Magsaysay Memorial Medical Center email address: uermmed@yahoo.com

The University Of The East Ramon Magsaysay Memorial Medical Center Address: Hospital Address

Address: 64 Aurora Boulevard, Barangay Dona Imelda, Quezon City, 1113

Country: Philippines

The University of the East Ramon Magsaysay Memorial Medical Center Tuition Fee Structure 2023-24

Bachelor's Courses

Master's Courses

Doctorate Course

The University of the East Ramon Magsaysay Memorial Medical Center Admission Procedure

Achieve the application structure on the web Guarantee that you append your signature.

Send achieved application structure to admission@uerm.edu.ph including filtered duplicate of the accompanying archives:

Birth declaration from the Philippine Statistics Authority (PSA)

Endorsement of Secondary Scholastic Record endorsed by the Principal or Registrar or Report cards from grades 9 to 12, whichever is accessible

Confirmation or Certificate of graduation

Authentication of good character

Guidelines on the best way to pay the application expense will be shipped off your email address.

Pay the application charge and submit confirmation of installment to cashier@uerm.edu.ph

Check the status of your application in the UERM Applicants Portal.

Documents Required for the University of the East Ramon Magsaysay Memorial Medical Center Admission

Filipino Applicants

A duly accomplished form

Certification from the High School Principal/Guidance Counsellor/Registrar that the applicant belongs to the graduating class

NSO birth certificate (original and photocopy)

passport size (2x2) pictures

One long brown envelops and one long folder

Application fee

Foreign Applicants

Transcript of records and diploma authenticated by the Philippine Embassy or Consulate in the applicants' country

Personal History Statement accomplished and signed by the applicants

Notarized affidavit of support and proof of financial capability

Police clearance from the place of origin

Birth certificate

Passport

Eligibility Criteria the University of the East Ramon Magsaysay Memorial Medical Center Admission

NEET: Yes

IELTS: NA

TOEFL: NA

For “General Category” students, they should have minimum 50% marks in PCB i.e. Physics, Chemistry & Biology in 12th standard. For “SC / ST / OBC Category”, students should have minimum 40% marks in PCB

The student should complete minimum 17 years by 31st December of the year he is seeking admission

Advantages of Studying in the East Ramon Magsaysay Memorial Medical Center

Creating pioneers for the 21st century in the fields of examination, instruction and clinical act of the wellbeing callings

Planning understudies for greatness by guaranteeing the exhibition of characterized center capabilities.

Supplementing the central subjects with different instructive occasions to aid their advancement in their picked profession

Creating and supporting instructive projects which permit each understudy to take an interest in a quality and important instructive experience

Continuously upgrading the educational plan by consolidating new material, encouraging strategies and assessment methods to improve the instructive experience.